*  I. 

•  X 

i 


^W  OF  pb;*c~^x. 

V  C 


2. 


THE  \Z     .^\ 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE: 


QB( 


ANECDOTES,  SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLUSTRATIONS,  EXPOSITORY, 

SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGRAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND  HOMILETIC, 

GATHERED    FROM    A    WIDE    RANGE    OF    HOME    AND 

FOREIGN  LITERATURE,  ON  THE  VERSES 

OF  THE  BIBLE. 


REV.  JOSEPH   S.  EXELL,   M.A. 


EXODUS. 


NEW  YORK: 
ANSON  D.  F.  RANDOLPH  &  COMPANY, 

182  FIFTH  AVENUE. 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 

Exodus:  a  Sequel  to  Oenesis. — This,  the  second  part  of  the  Pentatench,  is  a 
sequel  to  Genesis ;  it  is  joined  on  to  Genesis  by  the  conjunction  and,  and  bears  a 
remarkable  resemblance  to  it.  In  Genesis,  the  earth  rises  out  of  darkness  into 
light;  in  Exodus,  Israel  emerges  out  of  the  darkness  of  Egyptian  bondage  into 
light  and  liberty.  The  beginning  of  Genesis  speaks  of  intestine  struggles  which 
preceded  the  creation  of  the  earth  in  its  present  state  ;  such,  also,  was  the  condition 
of  Israel,  "  without  form  and  void,"  before  the  Exodus.  At  the  Creation  the 
earth  was  brought  forth  out  of  the  water,  on  the  face  of  which  the  Spirit  moved. 
And  surely  it  was  not  without  a  meaning  that  the  great  leader  of  Israel,  its 
mediator  and  lawgiver,  the  type  of  Christ  Himself,  Moses,  was  drawn  out  of  the 
water,  and  thence  received  his  name.  Surely  it  was  not  without  a  meaning  that 
Israel,  whose  children  had  been  merged  in  water  (as  the  prior  earth  was),  rose  to 
new  life  out  of  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  over  which  the  Spirit  brooded  in  the 
cloud,  and  "they  were  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."  In 
Genesis  the  earth  is  bom,  by  the  Spirit,  out  of  the  water ;  in  Exodus,  Israel  is  bom 
anew  by  the  Spirit  out  of  the  water ;  and  both  these  are  figures  of  the  new  birth  in 
Christ  by  water  and  the  Spirit.  Here  is  an  inner  analogy  between  Genesis 
and  Exodus,  and  this  treatment  of  the  two  great  subjects  bespeaks  an  vmity  of 
authorship.  It  bespeaks  the  presence  also  of  the  Divine  Mind,  guiding  the  hand  of 
the  writer.  (Bishop  Chrittopher  Wordsworth.)  Exodus  is  not  the  full  counterpart 
of  Genesis.  That  venerable  document  is  matched  in  grandeur  of  scope  not  even 
by  the  rest  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  only  by  the  remainder  of  the  volume  of  revela- 
tion. It  opens  with  a  creation,  of  which  man  forms  the  prominent  object  ;  the 
Old  Testament  closes  with  the  anticipation  of  a  new  creation  (Isa.  Ixv.  17),  in 
which  also  man  will  hold  the  conspicuous  place  ;  and  the  New  Testament  records 
the  atoning  obedience  of  Christ,  and  the  quickening  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as 
the  guarantee  and  earnest  of  that  new  creation,  the  consummation  of  which  it 
again  announces  to  the  Church  (2  Pet.  iii.  13).  Genesis  also  touches  upon  the 
history  of  the  whole  race  of  man,  and  even  after  the  call  of  Abraham  traces  the 
peaceful  intercourse  subsisting  between  the  chosen  family  and  the  rest  of  mankind. 
Exodus  marks  the  full-grown  antagonism  between  the  chosen  nation  and  the 
heathen  world,  records  the  violent  separation  between  the  two,  and  then  confines 
itself  mainly  to  the  history  of  the  party  that  remained  in  communion  with  God. 
Its  distinguishing  event,  the  Exodus,  is  accordingly  the  prototype  of  that  great 
event  in  the  experience  of  the  individual,  in  which  he  comes  out  from  the  bondage 
of  the  flesh  into  the  freedom  of  the  Spirit,  as  well  as  of  those  great  occasions  in 
the  history  of  the  Church  in  which  it  reasserts  its  spiritual  life  and  liberty,  and 
passes  with  all  the  determination  of  new-bom  principle  from  the  wilful  service  of 
sin  into  the  conscientious  obedience  of  holiness.  This  coming  out  is  a  process 
continually  going  on  doring  the  history  of  the  Church  until  all  have  come  out,  and 
the  doomed  world  is  given  over  to  everlasting  destruction.  It  is  the  manner  of 
Scripture  to  signalize  the  primary  event  in  any  given  series  as  a  lesson  and 


INTB0DUCTI02J  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


example  to  all  future  generations.  In  Genesis  are  recorded  all  kinds  of  origins 
or  births,  and,  among  others,  the  birth  of  Isaac,  the  seed  of  promise.  In  Exodus 
is  recounted  the  deliberate  action  of  the  new-born,  in  coming  out  of  the  land  of 
bondage.  The  wilderness  between  this  land  and  the  land  of  promise,  the 
troubles,  temptations,  and  failings  of  such  a  state  of  life,  the  giving  of  the  Law  to 
a  new-born  and  emancipated  people,  the  setting  up  of  the  ordinances  of  a  holy 
religion,  are  all  typical  events,  prefiguring  others  of  a  like  nature,  but  of  still 
grander  and  grander  import.  They  do  not  stand  alone  on  memory's  tablet,  but 
embody  a  principle  of  constant  value,  which  comes  out  in  a  series  of  analogous 
events  in  the  course  of  human  affairs.  They  are  standing  monuments  in  the 
great  field  of  the  past,  written  in  legible  characters  on  the  page  of  history  for  the 
instruction  of  coming  days.  The  scope  of  the  Book  of  Exodus,  however,  is  not 
to  be  limited  to  the  mere  fortunes  of  the  chosen  people.  Even  if  it  stood  alone, 
its  communications  could  not  be  confined  to  so  narrow  an  area.  It  details  a 
certain  stage  of  that  momentous  process,  by  which  the  covenant  of  God  with  man 
is  to  be  upheld,  and  its  benefits  secured  for  a  growing  proportion  of  our  fallen  race, 
until  at  length  the  main  body  at  least  of  aU  kindreds  and  tongues  returns  to  God. 
(Professor  J.  G.  Murphy.) 

Descbiption  of  the  Book.— Recollection,  "  remembrance,"  of  the  great  original 
works  of  God  in  creation  and  redemption  is  the  appropriate  appointed  means  of 
originating  and  sustaining,  in  the  heart  and  life  of  men,  that  righteousness,  and 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  which  constitute  His  true  kingdom  in  individuals 
and  in  communities.  The  Pentateuch,  as  the  instrument  of  God  in  that  recollection 
of  the  Beginnings,  is  thus  evermore  in  a  fontal  relation  to  the  true  new  life  of  man- 
kind in  the  Creator  and  Redeemer.  And  the  vast  importance  of  Exodus  begins  to 
appear  when  it  is  seen  to  be,  thus,  the  central  vitally  essential  part  of  a  whole, 
whose  importance  is  so  vast  as  a  feeder  of  that  life  which  is  unseen  and  eternal.  For 
Exodus  is  not  only  a  continuation  of  the  narrative  in  Genesis  on  to  the  last  three 
Books  of  Moses.  Our  translators,  when  they  make  the  V,  at  the  opening  of  this 
book,  to  be,  not  "and,"  as  in  Lev.  i.  1,  but  "now"  mean  that  here  there  is 
something  more  than  simply  continuation  of  the  narrative.  And,  in  fact,  there  is  here 
a  decisively  new  reach  of  the  stream.  It  is  not  merely,  as  when  the  Nile  rushes 
down  its  cataract  from  Ethiopia,  a  sudden  transition  into  a  new  manner  of  move- 
ment, amid  new  surroundings.  It  is  as  if  a  new  and  mighty  river  had  sprung  out 
of  a  smitten  rock,  or  poured  down  from  heaven  in  effusion  Pentecostal.  For 
instance,  on  the  face  of  the  movement  there  is  that  very  great  new  thing,  the  first 
appearance  among  mankind  of  a  visible  kingdom  of  God;  a  kingdom  destined  to 
unfold  into  that  Christendom  which  is  the  only  real  civilization  of  the  peoples  in 
human  history.  And  at  the  heart  af  the  movement,  as  the  very  life  and  soul  of  it 
all,  there  is  the  new  supernatural  revelation  of  God  now,  for  the  first  time  since 
the  Flood,  going  forth  to  mankind  as  a  public  instruction  which  is  gospel  preaching 
(Heb.  iv.  2).  It  is  accompanied  by  the  first  appearance  of  credential  evidence  of 
miracles  and  prophecy.  And  in  especial,  that  revelation  takes  the  practical  form 
of  an  actual  supernatural  redemption  and  consecration  ;  in  the  accomplishment  of 
■which  there  are  brought  into  view,  fo.  ihe  instruction  of  mankind  in  all  nations 
through  all  ages,  those  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  regarding  His  character, 
and  moral  government,  and  gracious  purposes  towards  mankind,  which  are  the 
principia  of  the  only  true  religion  that  is  ever  to  live  upon  the  earth.  These  are 
main,  plain,  unquestionable  characteristics  of  the  Book.  The  first  part  of  it,  the 
redemption  from  Egypt,  has  a  place  like  that  of  the  Gospels  in  the  New  Testament 
Scripture ;  and  the  second  part  of  it,  regarding  the.consecration  in  Sinai.'has  a  place 
like  that  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  along  with  the  Epistles  to  the  Hebrews,  to 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


the  Galatians,  and  to  the  Eomans.  What  greater  thing  could  be  said  in  illustra- 
tion of  the  importance  of  it?  In  some  obvious  respects,  it  is  the  most  funda- 
mentally important  book  ever  given  to  mankind.  And  the  study  of  it  is 
essential  to  a  real  and  scholarly  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  man. 
(J.  Macgregor,  D.D.) 

Divisions  of  the  Book. — The  Book  consists  of  two  distinct  portions.  The 
former  (chap,  i.-xix.)  gives  a  detailed  account  of  the  circumstances  under  which  the 
deliverance  of  the  Israelites  was  accomphshed.  The  second  (chap,  xx.-xl.) 
describes  the  ^ving  of  the  Law,  and  the  institutions  which  completed  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  people  as  "  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  holy  nation."  These  two 
portions  are  unlike  in  style  and  structure,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  difference 
of  their  subject-matter-;  but  their  mutual  bearings  and  interdependence  are  evi- 
dent, and  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  substantial  unity  of  the  Book.  The  historical 
portion  owes  all  its  significance  and  interest  to  the  promulgation  of  God's  will  in 
the  law.  The  institutions  of  the  Law  could  not,  humanly  speaking,  have  been 
established  or  permanently  maintained  but  for  the  deliverance  which  the  historical 
portion  records.  {Canon  F.  C.  Cook.)  The  first  part  of  Exodus  is  predominantly 
historical ;  the  second  essentially  legislative  or  dogmatical ;  but  yet  the  former  con- 
tains three  important  laws ;  and  the  latter,  the  history  of  a  flagrant  breach,  on  the 
part  of  Israel,  of  the  promises  made  concerning  the  faithful  observance  of  the 
Law,  the  erection  of  the  holy  Tabernacle,  and  the  consecration  of  Aaron  and  his 
descendants.    {M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D. ) 

Mosaic  Authorship. — 1.  One  argument  is  drawn  from  the  representation  of  the 
personal  character  and  qualifications  of  Moses.  In  its  most  important  features  it 
is  such  as  could  never  have  been  produced  by  a  writer  collecting  the  traditional 
reminiscences  or  legends  of  a  later  age  :  not  such  even  as  might  have  been  drawn 
by  a  younger  contemporary.  To  posterity,  to  Israelites  of  his  own  time,  Moses  was 
simply  the  greatest  of  men  ;  but  it  is  evident  that  the  writer  of  this  Book  was  un- 
conscious of  the  personal  greatness  of  the  chief  actor.  He  was  indeed  thoroughly 
aware  of  the  greatness  of  his  mission,  and  consequently  of  the  greatness  of  the 
position,  which  was  recognized  at  last  by  the  Egyptians  (see  chap.  xi.  3)  ;  but  as  to 
his  personal  qualifications,  the  points  which  strike  him  most  forcibly  are  the 
deficiencies  of  natural  gifts  and  powers,  and  the  defects  of  character,  which  he  is 
scrupulously  careful  to  record,  together  with  the  rebukes  and  penalties  which  they 
brought  upon  him,  and  the  obstacles  which  they  opposed  to  his  work.  Such  & 
representation  is  perfectly  inteUigible,  as  proceeding  from  Moses  himself ;  but  what 
in  him  was  humility  would  have  been  obtuseness  in  an  annalist,  such  as  never  is- 
found  in  the  accounts  of  other  great  men,  nor  in  the  notices  of  Moses  in  later 
Books.  2.  This  Book  could  not  have  been  written  by  any  man  who  had  not  passed, 
many  years  in  Egypt,  and  who  had  not  also  a  thorough  knowledge,  such  as  could 
only  be  acquired  by  personal  observation,  of  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula.  But  it  is- 
improbable  that  any  Israelite  between  the  time  of  Moses  and  Jeremiah  could  have- 
possessed  either  of  these  qualifications;  it  is  not  credible,  or  even  possible,  that  any 
should  have  combined  both.  3.  A  weighty  argument  is  drawn  from  the  accounts- 
of  the  miracles,  by  which  Moses  was  expressly  bidden  to  attest  his  mission,  and  by 
which  he  was  enabled  to  accomplish  the  deliverance  of  his  people.  They  are  such 
as  no  later  writer  living  in  Palestine  could  have  invented  for  Egypt.  From 
beginning  to  end  no  miracle  is  recorded  which  does  not  strike  the  mind  by  its 
peculiar  suitableness  to  the  place,  time,  and  circumstances  under  which  it  was. 
wrought.  The  plagues  are  each  and  all  Egyptian  ;  and  the  modes  by  which  the 
people's  wants  are  supplied  in  the  Sinaitic  Peninsula  recall  to   om-  minds'  the 


Vili  INTRODUCTION  TO  TBE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


natural  condition  of  such  a  journey  in  such  a  country.  4.  The  portion  of  the  Book 
which  follows  the  account  of  the  departure  from  Egypt  has  characteristics  marked 
with  equal  distinctness,  and  bearing  with  no  less  force  upon  the  question  of  author- 
ship. It  is  not  merely  that  the  length  of  each  division  of  the  journey,  the  numerous 
halting  places,  are  distinctly  marked ;  for,  although  such  notices  could  not  possibly 
have  been  invented,  or  procured  at  any  later  period  by  a  dweller  in  Palestine,  the 
fact  might  be  accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that  some  ancient  records  of  the 
journey  had  been  preserved  by  written  or  oral  tradition ;  but  the  chapters  which 
belong  either  to  the  early  sojourn  of  Moses,  or  to  the  wanderings  of  the  Israehtes, 
are  pervaded  by  a  peculiar  tone,  a  local  colouring,  an  atmosphere,  so  to  speak,  of  the 
desert,  which  has  made  itself  felt  by  all  those  who  have  explored  the  country.  And 
this  fact  is  the  more  striking  when  we  bear  in  mind  that,  although  the  great  general 
features  of  the  Peninsula,  the  grouping  of  its  arid  heights  and  the  direction  of  its 
innumerable  wadys  are  permanent,  still  changes  of  vast  and  scarcely  calculable 
importance  in  matters  which  personally  affect  the  traveller  and  modify  his  im- 
pressions, have  taken  place  since  the  time  of  Moses.  At  present  one  great  difficulty 
felt  by  all  travellers  is  the  insufficiency  of  the  resources  of  the  Peninsula  to  sup- 
port such  a  host  as  that  which  is  described  in  the  narrative ;  a  difficulty  not  wholly 
removed  by  the  acceptance  of  the  accounts  of  Providential  interventions,  which 
appear  to  have  been  not  permanent,  but  limited  to  special  occasions.  But  facts  can 
be  adduced  which  confirm,  and  indeed  go  far  beyond,  the  conjectures  of  travellers, 
who  have  pointed  out  that  the  supply  oi  water,  and  the  general  fertility  of  the 
district,  must  have  been  very  different  before  the  process  of  denudation,  which  baa 
been  going  on  for  ages,  and  is  now  in  active  progress,  had  commenced.  We  have 
now  proofs  from  inscriptions  coeval  with  the  pyramids,  both  in  Egypt  and  in  the 
Peninsula,  that  under  the  Pharaohs  of  the  third  to  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  ages 
before  Moses,  and  up  to  his  time,  the  whole  district  was  occupied  by  a  population 
whose  resources  and  numbers  must  have  been  considerable,  since  they  were  able  to 
resist  the  forces  of  the  Egyptians,  who  sent  large  armies  in  repeated  but  unsuc- 
cessful attempts  to  subjugate  the  Peninsula.  Their  principal  object,  however,  was 
effected,  since  they  established  permanent  settlements  at  Sarbet  el  Khadim,  and  at 
Mughara,  to  work  the  copper-mines.  These  settlements  were  under  the  command  of 
officers  of  high  rank,  and  are  proved  by  monuments  and  inscriptions  to  have  been 
of  an  extent  which  implies  the  existence  of  considerable  resources  in  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood.  Taking  summarily  the  points  in  this  part  of  the  argument, 
we  find  the  following  coincidences  between  the  narrative  and  accounts  of  travellers. 
Absence  of  water  where  no  sources  now  exist,  abundance  of  water  where  fountains 
are  still  found,  and  indications  of  a  far  more  copious  supply  in  former  ages  ;  tracts, 
occupying  the  same  time  in  the  journey,  in  which  food  could  not  be  found  ;  and 
in  some  districts  a  natural  production  similar  to  manna,  most  abundant  in  rainy 
seasons  (such  as  several  notices  show  the  season  of  the  Exodus  to  have  been),  but  not 
sufficient  for  nourishment,  nor  fit  for  large  consumption,  without  such  modifications 
in  character  and  quantity  as  are  attributed  in  the  narrative  to  a  Divine  intervention. 
We  have  the  presence  of  Nomad  hordes,  and  an  attack  made  by  them  precisely  in 
the  district,  and  under  the  circumstances  when  their  presence  and  attack  might  be 
expected.  We  have  a  route  which  the  late  exploration  of  the  Peninsula  shows  to 
have  been  probably  determined  by  conditions  agreeing  with  incidental  notices  in 
the  history ;  and  when  we  come  to  the  chapters  in  which  the  central  event  in  the 
history  of  Israel — the  delivery  of  God's  Law — is  recorded,  we  find  localities  and 
scenery  which  travellers  concur  in  declaring  to  be  such  as  fully  correspond  to  the 
exigencies  of  the  narrative,  and  which,  in  some  accounts  (remarkable  at  once  for 
scientific  accuracy  and  graphic  power),  are  described  in  terms  which  show  they 
correspond,  so  far  as  mere  outward  accessories  can  correspond,  to  the  grandeur  of 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


the  manifestation.  In  addition  to  the  positive  arguments  thus  adduced,  a  negative 
argument  at  least  equally  conclusive  demands  attention.  No  history  or  composi- 
tion in  existence,  which  is  known  to  have  been  written  long  after  the  events  which 
it  describes,  is  without  internal  indications  of  its  later  origin  ;  contemporary  docu- 
ments may  be  interwoven  with  it,  and  great  pains  taken  in  ages  of  literary  refine- 
ment and  artifice  to  disguise  its  character ;  but  even  when  anachronisms  and  errors 
of  detail  are  avoided,  which  is  seldom,  if  ever,  effectually  done,  the  genuine  touch 
of  antiquity  is  invariably  and  inevitably  absent.  Whether  we  look  at  the  general 
tone  of  this  narrative,  the  style  equally  remarkable  for  artlessness  and  power,  or 
at  the  innumerable  points  of  contact  with  external  facts  capable  of  exact  deter- 
mination, we  are  impressed  by  the  weight  of  this  internal  evidence,  supported,  as 
it  has  been  shown  to  be,  by  the  unbroken  and  unvarying  tradition  of  the  nation  to 
whom  the  narrative  was  addressed,  and  by  whom  it  was  held  too  sacred  not  to  be 
preserved  from  wilful  mutilation  or  interpolation.  5.  Another  argument  is  drawn 
from  the  account  of  the  Tabernacle.  The  following  facts  are  demonstrated :  (1) 
In  form,  structure,  and  materials  the  Tabernacle  belongs  altogether  to  the  wilder- 
ness. The  wood  used  in  the  structure  is  found  there  in  abundance  The  skins  and 
other  native  materials  belong  equally  to  the  locality.  The  metals — bronze,  silver, 
and  gold — were  those  which  the  Israelites  knew,  and  doubtless  brought  with  them 
from  Egypt.  The  names  of  many  of  the  materials  and  implements  used  were 
Egyptian.  The  arts  required  for  the  construction  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  for  all 
its  accessories,  were  precisely  those  for  which  the  Egyptians  had  been  remarkable 
for  ages — such  as  artizans  who  had  lived  under  the  influence  of  Egyptian  civiliza- 
tion would  naturally  have  learned.  (2)  The  peculiar  way  in  which  the  history  of 
the  erection  of  the  Tabernacle  is  recorded  suggests  another  argument,  which  has 
not  received  due  attention.  Two  separate  accounts  are  given.  In  the  first  Moses 
relates  the  instructions  which  he  received,  in  the  second  he  describes  the  accom- 
pUshment  of  the  work.  Nothing  would  be  less  in  accordance  with  the  natural 
order  of  an  history  written  at  a  later  period  than  this  double  account.  It  has  been 
represented  as  an  argument  for  a  double  authorship,  as  though  two  sets  of  docu- 
ments had  been  carelessly  or  superstitiously  adopted  by  a  compiler.  It  is,  how- 
ever, fully  accounted  for  by  the  obvious  hypothesis  that  each  part  of  the  narrative 
was  written  at  the  time,  and  on  the  occasion,  to  which  it  immediately  refers. 
When  Moses  received  these  instructions  he  wrote  a  full  account  of  them  for  the 
information  of  the  people.  This  was  on  all  accounts  probable  and  necessary: 
among  other  obvious  reasons,  it  was  necessary  in  order  that  the  people  might  learn 
exactly  what  amount  of  materials  and  what  amount  of  work  would  be  required  of 
them.  ^Tien,  again,  he  had  executed  his  task,  it  was  equally  proper,  and  doubtless 
also  in  accordance  with  the  habits  of  a  people  keen  and  jealous  in  the  management 
of  their  affairs,  and  at  no  time  free  from  tendencies  to  suspicion,  that  he  should 
give  a  formal  account  of  every  detail  in  its  execution — a  proof,  to  such  as  might 
call  for  proof,  that  all  their  precious  offerings  had  been  devoted  to  the  purpose ; 
and,  what  vas  of  far  more  importance,  that  the  Divine  instructions  had  been  com- 
pletely and  Uterally  obeyed.     (Cancn  F.  C.  Cook.) 

Character  of  the  Exodus  movement. — 1.  In  its  inward  spiritual  nature  the 
movement  was  one  of  faith  in  God.  Though  "  exodus  "  be  a  common  word  for 
exit  or  departure,  it  has  come  to  have  an  appropriate  special  meaning  in  reference 
to  such  a  movement  as  that  in  question  was.  And  we  may  profitably  here  for  a 
little  consider  what  is  meant  by  such  an  exodus?  (See  in  Seeley's  "  Expansion  of 
England.")  A  true  exodus  is  not  a  mere  migration  of  a  people,  such  as  we  read  of 
in  the  history  of  primaeval  Celts  and  Germans,  occasioning  so  much  uneasiness  and 
trouble  to  "  civilized  "  Eomans  and  others.     Such  a  movement  might  be  merely 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


blind  instinct,  like  that  of  bees  in  swarming ;  or  it  might  be  mernly  the  result  of 
some — so  to  speak — mechanical  pressure,  from  within  or  from  without.  Again, 
those  colonizing  movements  of  individuals,  through  which  new  nationiilities  are 
coming  to  be  formed  in  the  British  empire,  differ  from  a  true  exodus  in  thuir  motive 
impulse  and  spirit,  as  going  to  market  on  business  differs  from  going  to  church  for 
worship  of  God.  But  one  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  America  said  that  they  had 
gone  thither  across  the  ocean  "to  seive  God."  And  there  he  expicssed  the  true 
spirit  of  an  exodus.  It  is  a  migration  for  the  purpose  of  serving  God.  Such  was 
the  purpose  of  Israel's  departure  from  Egypt,  Even  the  three  days'  leave  of 
absence,  which  was  all  they  asked  at  first  (chap.  v.  3),  was  for  an  act  of  high  ser- 
vice to  "  the  God  of  the  Hebrews."  The  Egyptians  no  doubt  (chap.  i.  10)  under- 
stood whither  this  was  purposely  tending.  And  (chap.  iv.  18,  29-31 ;  cf.  iii,  12)  the 
Israelites  themselves,  from  their  first  though*  about  the  movement,  had  thought 
of  it  as  one  for  final  abandonment  of  Egypt,  "to  serve  God  "  in  the  promised  land. 
Their  movement  not  only  was  religious,  it  was  religion  :  religion  was  not  a  means, 
but  the  end ;  as  in  temple-building,  religion,  which  is  the  end  of  the  work  (finis 
operis),  ought  also  to  be  {finis  operantis)  the  end  in  view  of  the  worker.  Now  such 
was  the  character  of  Israel's  movement  Canaanward.  When  we  look  close  into  the 
history,  we  perceive  that  the  Hebrews  were  in  large  measure  not  in  the  true  spirit 
of  the  movement  (Heb.  iii.  12).  Among  them  there  was  much  of  ungodly  selfish 
worldliness  (Heb.  iii.  9)  ;  so  that  in  the  end  they  as  a  people  perished  in  the  wilder- 
ness through  unbelief  (Heb.  iii.  16-18).  Yet  a  nation  entered  Canaan.  And  they 
were  not  all  unbelievers  who  died  in  the  wilderness ; — Miriam,  for  instance,  and 
Aaron,  and  Moses.  Even  at  the  worst  (cf.  1  Kings  xix.  18  and  xx.  41),  there  may 
have  been  in  Israel  as  large  a  proportion  of  Calebs  and  Joshuas  (Isa.  i.  9)  as  would 
have  sufficed  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  Sodom.  What  we  seek  to  see  in  this 
movement  is  its  characteristic  impulse,  the  spirit  of  its  true  life.  And  that,  no 
doubt,  is  faith  in  the  Uving  God,  as  revealed  supernaturally,  in  positive  covenant 
promises  of  redemption.  Such  had  been  the  distinctive  nature  of  Abraham's  life 
on  earth  (Gen.  xv.  6).  And  it  continued  to  be  the  characteristic  of  his  covenant 
seed  (Rom.  iv.  3,  11).  The  people  cried  to  God,  They  followed  Moses,  because 
they  believed  that  he  was  Jehovah's  messenger.  They  went  through  the  Red  Sea, 
looking  for  salvation  in  Abraham's  God  Almighty,  "  By  faith  "  they  passed  the 
Bed  Sea;  and  "by  faith"  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down  (Heb.  xi.  29,  30).  Such 
was  the  distinctive  nature  of  the  movement  from  first  to  last.  Not  only  the  history 
shows  this  ;  this  is  what  the  history  shows,  2.  It  was  a  movement  into  brother- 
hood of  man.  On  the  face  of  it,  it  was  into  nationality  of  social  condition.  At 
the  original  settlement  in  Goshen  (chap.  i.  1-5),  the  sons  of  Israel  were  passing 
from  the  simply  domestic  condition  under  patriarchy,  into  the  distinctly  tribal. 
As  their  numbers  grew  into  national  dimensions,  the  continued  influence  of 
patriarchy,  as  an  ideal,  still  kept  the  separate  tribes  in  a  unity  of  outward  con- 
nection, as  of  Swiss  cantons  under  the  Hapsburgs.  But  the  unity,  which  at  last 
found  its  full  expression  in  the  nation  full  and  independent,  had  its  true  root,  or 
living  foundation,  in  a  constitution  that  is  not  of  nature — the  new  constitution  of 
redeeming  grace,  which  (chap.  xix.  6)  makes  the  nation  to  be  Theocracy,  holy  to 
the  Lord,  and  of  which  the  citizens  are  to  be  a  brotherhood,  united  in  the  common 
bond  of  a  filial  relationship  to  God  (chap.  iv.  22,  23).  This  idea  is  involved  in  the 
nature  of  a  spiritual  patriarchate,  such  as  Abraham's  was.  The  noble  custom  «f 
adoption  (chap.  xii.  48,  49)  made  statutory  in  Egypt  at  the  foundation  of 
Israel's  national  existence,  provided  for  expanded  application  of  the  idea,  for 
blessing  unto  all  the  families  of  the  earth  (Gen.  xii.  3).  But  what  we  clearly  see  in 
Exodus  is  the  realization  of  the  idea  in  the  foundation  of  the  Israelitish  kingdom 
of  God,    It  was  a  nation,  arranging  into  compact  order  (chap.  xiti.  18,  xiv,  8), 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


that  formed  at  the  Eed  Sea,  to  pass  on  to  the  trysting-place  (chap.  iii.  12)  of 
Covenant  with  God.  And  it  was  a  nation  (chap,  xix,  6),  specifically  a  Theocracy, 
or  kingdom  of  God,  that  in  that  covenant  was  vested  with  title  to  Canaan. 
{J.  Macijregor,  D.D.) 

Moses  and  his  mission. — 1.  Survey  him,  first,  mentally.  His  was  an  organ- 
izing mind  ;  recall  how  he  took  a  nation,  or  rather  horde  of  ignorant  bondmen,  and 
moulded  them  in  his  own  Ufetime  into  a  compact  and  vigorous  nationality  ;  or  how 
he  took  the  elements  of  theology  and  morality  and  jurisprudence  and  sociology,  and 
organized  them  into  that  majestic  series  of  institutes  which  we  style  after  his  own 
name,  the  Mosaic  Code.  Again,  his  was  an  expressive  mind :  recall  how,  notwith- 
standing his  modest  disclaimer  of  the  gift  of  eloquence,  he  was  Jehovah's  greatest 
prophet,  mighty  in  his  words  as  well  as  in  his  works,  chanting  in  nobler  strains 
than  Homer  ever  sang  his  triumphal  ode,  his  patriarchal  hymn,  his  dying  songs. 
Again,  his  was  a  prophetic  mind :  endowed  with  extraordinary  range  of  vision,  his 
mental  eye  pierced  immensely  beyond  the  limits  of  contemporary  ken,  surveying  as 
from  the  observatory  of  his  own  Pisgah  height  of  prophecy  the  far-off  Promised 
Land,  wherein  he  discerned  the  vast  outlines  of  a  profound  theology,  an  exquisite 
morality,  a  beneficent  jurisprudence,  a  perfected  society.  Again,  his  was  a  practi- 
cal mind  :  while  prophetically  descrying  in  the  far  off  distances  of  time  stupendous 
orbs  and  nebula  of  truths  hidden  from  all  eyes  but  his  own,  he  at  the  same  time 
remained  in  this  tiny  world  of  ours,  distinguishing  the  minutest  duties  and  subtilest 
distinctions,  beholding  in  the  microscopic  world  of  daily  hfe  a  universe  as  vast  as 
that  which  broadened  before  his  telescopic  sweep,  legislating  alike  broadly  for  all 
human  time  and  minutely  for  all  human  space,  with  one  hand,  if  I  may  venture  to 
say  it,  weighing  the  mountains  in  scales,  and  with  the  other  hand  counting  the 
small  dust  of  the  balance.  Once  more,  his  was  a  constructive  mind :  instead  of 
wasting  his  mental  forces  in  ill-timed  attempts  to  overthrow  existing  bad  institu- 
tions, he  ennobled  his  great  gifts  by  a  supreme  effort  to  build  up  a  new  human 
society,  constructing  out  of  the  very  ruins  of  the  past  the  everlasting  temple  of  the 
future.  In  brief,  if  ever  there  was  a  man  who  could  be  strictly  called  a  genius, 
that  man  was  Moses.  2.  And  now  survey  him  morally.  He  was,  indeed,  a 
saintly  character,  a  prodigy  of  goodness.  Not  that  he  was  faultless.  His  naturally 
impetuous  temperament  brought  him  more  than  once  into  serious  trouble,  as  in 
the  affair  of  the  Egyptian  homicide,  and  the  smiting  of  the  rock  of  Meribab. 
But  it  is  to  the  infinite  credit  of  Moses  that  he  sought  to  overcome  this  constitu- 
tional infirmity  of  temper,  and  succeeded  in  getting  his  powers  into  placid  balance, 
in  his  very  patience  winning  and  possessing  his  soul.  Sympathetic,  as  when  he 
entered  into  the  woes  of  his  enslaved  countrymen  in  Egypt ;  self-denying,  as  when 
he  refused  to  be  longer  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  ;  conscientious,  as  when 
he  chose  rather  to  be  evil  entreated  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  plea- 
sures of  sin  for  a  season ;  discriminating,  as  when  he  accounted  the  reproach  of 
Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt ;  far-sighted,  as  when  he  looked 
beyond  unto  the  recompense  of  reward ;  enduring,  as  when  he  saw  Him  who  is  in- 
visible ;  brave,  as  when  he  confronted  Menephtha's  court,  and  Israel's  tumultuous 
demands  ;  stately,  as  when  he  wielded  the  sword  of  outraged  authority  ;  patient,  as 
when  he  endured  in  gratitude,  insolence,  and  rebelhon ;  magnanimous,  as  when  he 
offered  to  die  in  place  of  his  apostate  people ;  lowly,  as  when  his  face  shone  with 
Jehovah's  glory,  and  he  knew  it  not ;  trustful,  as  when  he  climbed  lonely  Abarim  to 
die  :  Moses  was  indeed  religion's  great  saint.  Brave  as  Achilles,  without  Achilles' 
petulance;  heroic  as  Hercules,  without  Hercules'  savagery ;  judicial  as  Minos,  vnth- 
out  Minos'  gloom ;  constructive  as  Vulcan,  without  Vulcan's  grotesqueness ;  wise 
as  Mercury,  without  Mercury's  strategy :  eloquent  as  Apollo,  without  Apollo's  deceit ; 
patient  as  Prometheus,  without  Prometheus'  stoicism ;  devout  as  Numa,  without 
Numa's  superstition;  imperial  as  Jupiter,  without  Jupiter's  weakness  : — Moses  was 
indeed  history's  ideal  character.  Verily,  there  hath  not  risen  in  all  humanity  a 
prophet  Like  unto  Moses,  whom  Jehovah  knew  face  to  face.  3.  Having  thus 
glanced  at  the  outlines  of  Moses'  unique  career  and  the  outlines  of  Moses' 
unique  personality,  let  us  now  glance  at  the  outlines  of  Moses'  unique  mission. 
That  mission  was  manifold.  First:  It  was  a  part  of  Moses'  mission  to  outline 
a  theology,  or  doctrine  of  religion.  Thus,  while  the  surrounding  nations  were 
worshipping  a  plurality  of  gods,  Moses  proclaimed  that  there  is  but  one  God, 
a  God  who  is  self- existent,  eternal,  unchangeable,  spiritual,  true,  just,  holj. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


gracious,  merciful,  long-suffering,  in  a  word,  infinitely  perfect.  Again,  it  was 
a  part  of  Moses'  mission  to  outUne  a  morality  or  doctrine  of  character.  While 
the  morality  of  the  surrounding  nations  was  debased  by  gross  misconcep- 
tions and  positive  vices,  Moses  proclaimed  a  morality  that  was  exquisite  in  its 
distinctions,  just  in  its  dealings,  brotherly  in  its  spirit.  Again,  it  was  a  part  of 
Moses'  mission  to  outline  a  jurisprudence  or  doctrine  of  state.  While  the  sur- 
rounding nations  were  governed  by  irresponsible  monarchs,  whose  caprices  made 
and  unmade  laws,  Moses  proclaimed  a  commonwealth,  over  which  ruled  no  human 
king,  whose  citizens  were  peers,  whose  ofiScers  were  elective.  Again,  it  was  a  part  of 
Moses'  mission  to  outline  a  sociology  or  doctrine  of  man.  While  the  surrounding 
nations  regarded  each  other  with  distrust  and  hate,  repelling  all  immigration  which 
did  not  follow  in  the  retinue  of  conquest,  Moses  proclaimed  the  brotherhood  of 
mankind  inviting,  it  is  true,  all  men  to  become  Jews,  but  in  order  that  all  men 
might  become  cosmopoMtes.  Again,  it  was  a  part  of  Moses'  mission  to  outline  a 
ritual  or  doctrine  of  worship.  While  the  surrounding  nations  were  worshipping 
their  own  images  and  ceremonies  and  sacrifices  and  priests  as  being  the  end  of  re- 
ligion, Moses  proclaimed  a  liturgy  as  being  the  means  of  religion,  bidding  his 
people  discern  in  the  ritual  of  the  Tabernacle  a  type  of  the  worship  in  the  temple 
not  made  with  hands.  Once  more,  and  in  summary,  it  was  the  mission  of  Moses 
to  outline  a  Theocracy,  or  doctrine  of  God-rule.  While  every  other  nation  regarded 
itself  as  its  own  law  and  end,  Moses  proclaimed  that  the  Hebrew  people  was 
divinely  raised  up  to  be  a  means  to  an  end,  namely  this,  to  serve  as  the  symbol  and 
prophecy  of  the  universal  and  everlasting  Church,  or  Jehovah's  kingdom  on  earth. 
Thus  the  mipsion  of  Moses  was  the  mightiest  mission  ever  assigned  to  statesmen, 
reformer,  philanthropist,  or  theologian.  And  nobly  did  Moses  fulfil  his  mighty 
mission.  How  nobly  he  fulfilled  it  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  although  more  than 
three  thousand  years  have  passed  since  Moses  lived,  his  code  is  still  the  basis  of 
modern  theology,  modern  morality,  modern  jurisprudence,  modem  sociology,  modern 
worship :  in  a  single  word,  modem  civilization.  The  world  has  outgrown  the 
Analects  of  Confucius,  the  Vedas  of  Brahm,  the  Soutras  of  Boodh,  the  Zendavesta 
of  Zoroaster,  the  Koran  of  Mohammed,  even  the  Positivism  of  Comte.  But  the 
world  has  not  outgrown  the  institutes  of  Moses.  The  lawgiver  of  Sinai  is  to  this 
day  history's  commanding  figure,  all  that  is  worthy  of  the  name  of  civilization  sit- 
ting reverently  at  his  feet.  And  how,  let  me  ask  in  passing,  do  you  account  for  all 
this?  For,  considering  his  circumstances,  the  character  and  work  of  Moses  was  a 
positive  moral  anachronism.  Remember  for  example,  that  he  framed  his  civil  code 
some  two  thousand  years  before  Justinian  collected  his  Pandects,  a  thousand  years 
before  the  Twelve  Tables  were  suspended  in  the  Roman  Forum,  eight  hundred  years 
before  Solon  legislated  for  Athens ;  remember  also  that  Moses  himself  lived  in  a 
time  of  profound  moral  apostasy,  fifteen  hundred  years  before  the  Divine  Man 
taught  us  bow  to  live.  Can  you  account  for  this  striking  anachronism  in  any  better 
way  than  by  accepting  the  Scriptural  statement  that  Jehovah  was  wont  to  speak 
unto  His  prophet  Moses  face  to  face,  not  in  dark  speeches,  but  as  a  man  speaketfa 
unto  his  friend  ?  4.  Having  thus  glanced  at  the  outlines  of  Moses'  unique  career 
and  character  and  mission,  let  us  now  glance  at  some  of  the  lessons  suggested  by 
Moses'  unique  personality.  And,  first,  a  lesson  of  Divine  adjustment.  The  story 
of  Moses  illustrates  in  a  striking  way  the  truth  that  God  ever  adjusts  men  to  crises. 
For  example  :  When  the  wickedness  of  men  had  become  so  great  that  Jehovah 
determined  to  sweep  him  from  the  earth,  he  raised  up  Noah  to  become  the  second 
father  of  the  race;  again,  when  the  second  humanity  had  relapsed  into  heathenism, 
and  a  great  chnracter  was  needed  to  restore  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  Jehovah 
raised  up  Abraham  to  become  the  father  of  the  faithful;  again,  when  Moses  had 
completed  his  legislative  mission,  and  a  soldier  was  needed  to  conquer  the  Pro- 
mised Land,  Jehovah  raised  up  the  martial  Joshua  to  succeed  the  peaceful  Moses. 
Secondly  :  A  lesson  of  Divine  providence.  Recall  how  the  infant  Moses  was  saved ; 
he  was  not  saved  by  a  miracle  or  anything  extraordinary  in  itself  ;  he  was  saved 
by  a  sympathetic  woman's  natural  instinct.  Thirdly :  A  lesson  of  Divine  warning. 
If  any  one  of  all  the  hosts  of  Israel  had  the  right  to  enter  the  Promised  Land,  it 
was,  we  would  have  thought,  their  emancipator  and  lawgiver  and  prophet.  Never- 
theless, saintly  though  he  was,  he  was  not  allowed  to  enter  it.  And  we  know  the 
reason :  it  was  because  the  Children  of  Israel  had  angered  him  at  the  waters  of 
Meribah,  by  rebelling  against  him,  and  provoking  him,  so  that  he  spake  unad- 
visedly with  his  lips.  Beware,  then,  oh  friends,  of  what  you  call  little  sins ;  for 
they  may  cost  you  the  promised  Canaan.     (G.  D.  Boardman,  D.D.) 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS.  xiu 

The  Magicians  of  Egypt. — The  magicians  of  Egypt  did  in  like  manner  with 
their  enchantments.  In  like  manner,  but  in  unUke,  too.  Of  course,  men  can 
imitate  God  and  God's  doings  in  a  great  many  ways,  because  man  himself  has  an 
imitated  relationship  to  God,  and  is  endowed  with  powers  hke  to  those  which  God 
has  and  nses.  Indeed,  the  direct  path  to  all  our  possible  growth,  progress,  and 
ennoblement  lies  in  that  line  and  effort  of  imitating  God.  We  may  do  what  He 
doeth  and  as  He  doeth  in  many  things.  Possibly  human  beings  may  accomplish 
works  and  effect  results  which  other  human  beings  inspecting  and  pronouncing  on 
shall  be  perplexed  to  decide  whether  to  refer  them  to  God  or  to  men.  But  there 
is  this  one  rule  of  right  and  wisdom  always  to  be  rigidly  obeyed.  Whenever  man 
attempts  to  imitate  God  in  method  or  means,  in  acts  or  devices,  he  must  do  the 
work  with  a  view  to  the  same  purposes  as  those  for  which  God  works.  We  may 
imitate  God  in  what  He  does  merely  for  our  enjoyment,  our  pleasure,  to  amuse  us, 
or  to  add  to  our  means  of  happiness.  We  may  make  musical  instruments  to 
inaitate  the  music  of  the  air,  the  sea,  the  bird,  the  happy,  gleeful  child,  or  the 
harmonious  strains  of  heaven's  own  choir.  We  may  make  flowers  of  wax  or  paint 
them  on  the  canvas.  We  may  chisel  the  marble  into  human  forms.  We  may  draw 
on  the  canvas  the  lineaments  of  the  human  features,  landscapes  of  field,  meadow, 
valley,  or  mountain,  or  scenes  of  sky  and  ocean.  We  may  make  the  sun  do  our 
painting  for  us.  We  may  use  all  our  skill  and  inventiveness,  which  are,  in  fact, 
but  God's  own  workings,  to  copy,  adorn,  or  imitate  His  doings.  Yet  none  of  these 
things  is  it  right  or  safe  for  us  to  do,  in  order  to  beguile  or  deceive  our  fellow-men, 
to  cheat  their  senses  in  order  to  pervert  their  understandings,  to  play  on  their 
credulity  and  make  them  superstitious,  to  tell  them  pious  fables  in  the  service  of 
religion,  or  ever  to  mislead  them  by  false  imitations  in  means  or  effects  of  the  ways 
in  which  Divine  power  can  alone  honestly  work.  The  moment  the  purpose  of 
deception  or  of  artful  effect  is  introduced  into  any  imitative  work  of  men  folly  and 
mischief  follow  with  their  train.  But,  notwithstanding  all  the  enlightenment  and 
all  the  prevailing  credulity  of  our  times  and  communities,  imitations  and  counter- 
feits for  the  sake  of  deception  abound  and  multiply  with  infinite  ingenuity  and 
variety  in  all  the  affairs  of  human  life.  It  is  difiScult,  indeed,  to  say  of  any  honest 
work  or  product  of  God  or  of  men  that  there  is  no  sham  imitation,  no  adulterated 
specimen,  no  false  semblance  of  it,  palmed  upon  the  world.  Some  wise  and 
humane  persons  who  are  aware  of  the  extent  of  this  deception  in  medical  practice, 
and  of  the  number  and  sacrifices  of  its  victims,  have  suggested  the  expediency  of 
procuring  the  enactment  by  the  legislature  of  a  very  severe  law  against  such  triflera 
with  the  miseries  and  the  credulity  of  their  fellow-creatures.  But  it  is  very  doubt- 
ful whether  legislation  on  the  subject  would  be  either  wise  or  effective.  And  over 
how  many  of  the  shops  and  warehouses  and  manufactories  of  our  busy  world 
might  be  inscribed  as  a  motto  designating  the  character  of  the  tricks  and  frauds 
practised  in  them  the  old,  frank  Bible  sentence  !  "  And  the  magicians  of  Egypt, 
they  also  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchantments."  AU  God's  products  are 
honest  ones.  All  His  materials  are  what  they  purport  to  be.  He  does  indeed 
please  our  senses  with  a  few  illusory  phenomena,  such  as  the  ocean  mirage,  the 
rainbow,  the  double  moon,  and  the  falling  star,  which  is  no  star.  But  He  never 
makes  wool  out  of  cotton,  nor  coffee  out  of  beans,  nor  sugar  out  of  sand.  The 
magicians  do  those  things.  Yet  it  would  be  a  nobler  comfort  if  we  could  get  back 
to  the  original  honest  basis  and  show  of  things  as  they  come  from  the  hand  of  God. 
Oh  that  things  were  and  that  people  were  what  they  pretend  to  be  1  Veneering, 
varnish,  lacquer,  imitation,  play  just  as  demoralizing  arts  upon  us  as  we  do  with 
them.  No  one  can  substitute  sham  for  reaUty  in  anything  outside  of  him  without 
doing  the  same  by  something  inside  of  him.  So  sometimes  we  feel  an  immense 
craving  to  get  back  to  nature  in  everything,  to  get  out  of  the  hands  of  the  magicians 
with  all  their  tricks  and  shams,  and  to  be  able  to  say  devoutly  of  all  that  addresses 
our  senses  or  our  hearts,  "  This  is  from  the  finger  of  God."  But,  whenever  we 
draw  a  moral  from  the  Sacred  Book,  we  are  bound  to  lead  it  up  to  its  highest 
appUcation.  The  especial  work  of  God  is  that  which  serves  the  agency  and  pro- 
duces the  fruits  of  true  religion.  Yet  the  magicians  come  in  here  to  try  the  art  of 
imitations  both  as  to  means  and  effects.  We  want  now  the  real  thing,  the  work  of 
God,  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that 
believeth.  We  must  look  sharply  at  all  our  devices  and  methods,  all  our  appliances 
and  plannings.  We  must  commit  religious  work  to  religious  men  and  women,  and 
to  religious  means :  we  must  use  no  arts  in  it,  and  accept  no  substitutes  for  it. 
There  Lave  been  eras  and  intervals  recurring  in  the  history  of  Christendom,  of 


xiv  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EXODUS. 


marked  revivals,  quickenings  and  deepenings  and  strong  reactings  of  the  power  of 
Xion.  And  there  have  been  imitated  semblances  of  these  things  promises  or 
hopes  of  them,  not  realized  tokens  mistaken  for  theni,  cries  o  "Lo.  l^erel  Lo, 
there!"  It  is  "  the  finger  of  God  "which  in  all  things  "^"^^V'S^  n  D^  ^' 
whatever  the  magicians  may  do  with  their  enchantments.    (O.  E.  Ellts,  D.n.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOK. 

EXODUS. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Veks.  1-5.  Tlie  children  of  Israel  which  came  Into  Egypt. — Israel  in  Egypt  :— 
L  A  RETROSPECTIVE  VIEW.  1.  Tliese  verses  lead  us  back  to  the  time  when  Jacob 
came  with  his  family  to  Egypt.  (1)  It  was  a  time  of  great  distress  from  famine  in 
Canaan.  (2)  It  was  a  crisis-time  in  the  history  of  the  chosen  family  (Gen.  xlv. 
17-28  ;  xlvi.  1-4).  (3)  It  was  a  time  of  great  encouragement  from  what  had  been 
disclosed  in  Joseph's  history.  2.  These  verses  summarize  the  history  of  the 
children  of  Israel  from  the  time  of  Jacob's  emigration  to  Egj-pt  till  the  bondage 
of  the  Israelites — about  115  years.  (1)  This  was  a  time  of  great  happiness  and 
prosperity  for  the  Israehtes.  (a)  The  entire  period,  from  the  call  of  Abraham  to 
the  Exodus,  was  430  years,  (h)  Up  to  the  descent  into  Egypt,  a  period  of  215  years, 
the  family  had  increased  to  only  "  seventy  souls."  (c)  From  the  going  down  to 
Egypt  to  the  Exodus — 215  years — the  70  had  multiplied  to  600,000  males,  giving 
a  population  of  nearly  2,000,000.  II.  The  change  of  adhinistration  (ver.  8). 
Not  merely  another,  but  a  "  new  "  kmg,  implying  a  change  of  dynasty. 
Now,  probably,  commenced  the  rule  of  the  "  shepherd  kings."  2.  The 
phrase,  "  who  knew  not  Joseph,"  suggests  the  prestige  of  Joseph's  name  to 
the  former  Pharaohs.  A  good  man's  influence  dies  not  with  the  death  of 
his  body.  III.  The  change  of  government  policy  (vers.  9-14).  1.  The 
nature  of  this  change.  From  being  a  fostering  government  to  being  cruel  and 
repressive.  Unwise  policy,  because  suicidal.  2.  The  reason  for  this  change  (ver. 
10).  3.  The  result  of  this  change  (ver.  12),  (1)  Such  a  result  is  according  to  God's 
law  of  nations.  Working  classes  always  more  fruitful  tban  others.  (2)  Such  a 
result  was  according  to  God's  covenant  law.  Lessons :  1.  God's  children  in  Egypt 
a  type  of  God's  children  in  the  world.  2.  The  policy  of  the  new  king  a  type  of  the 
godlessness,  sel6shness,  and  inhumanity  of  those  who  work  from  a  worfdly  stand- 
point. 3.  The  frustration  of  this  poUcy  a  type  of  God's  overruling  power.  (D.  C. 
Hughes,  M.A.)  God's  knowledge  of  man's  domestic  life: — I.  He  knows  the 
children  of  the  family.  "  Eeuben,  Simeon,"  &c.  1.  He  knows  the  character  of 
each.  2.  He  knows  the  friendly  relations,  or  otherwise,  existing  between  them,  and 
the  intentions  of  each.  H.  He  watches  the  journeying  of  the  family — "which 
came,"  &c.  Do  not  journey  into  Egypt  without  an  indication  of  the  Divine  will. 
All  family  changes  should  be  under  the  instruction  of  heaven.  This  insures  safety, 
protection,  development — though  sometimes  discipline.  III.  He  jlu!ks  the  death 
OF  THE  family  (vcr.  6).  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Israel  in  Egypt: — With  Israel  in 
Egypt  begins  a  new  era  in  the  world's  progress.  Biography  becomes  history. 
Instead  of  individuals  or  a  tribe,  God  has  now  a  nation  with  which  to  work.  He 
has  undertaken  a  vast  purpose.  This  people — united  by  common  parentage, 
common  faith,  and  common  hope — He  is  to  weld  still  more  compactly  by  fellowship 
in  disaster  and  deliverance  into  a  nation  which  shall  be  the  miracle  of  history,  as 
intensely  and  persistently  individual  as  its  founder.  With  this  nation  He  enters 
into  covenant  and,  through  its  faith  and  experience,  reveals  to  the  world  the  one 
holy  God,  and  brings  in  its  Redeemer.  Such  a  mission  costs ;  its  apostles  must 
suffer.  Yet  this  relief  intervenes  :  personal  blessing  is  not  lost  in  national  pains. 
The  strong  word  covering  this  process  is  discipline  :  the  development  of  character 
and  efficiency  under  rigorous  conditions.    The  first  element  is — I.  Faith  :  taking 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

as  real  what  cannot  be  seen,  accepting  as  sure  what  has  not  come  to  pass. 
Seemingly,  this  fruit  of  heaven  cannot  grow  on  earthly  soil  unless  it  be  wet  with 
tears.  II.  The  second  word  of  blessing  is  DiSENTANOLEiiESiT.  The  hope  of  the  ages 
lay  in  freeing  Israel,  not  from  Egypt,  but  from  what  Egypt  represents.  Heathenism', 
is  a  bitter  and  bl)ody  thing.  But  heathenism  filled  the  world  outside  the  chosen 
nation.  Only  stern  guidance  could  lead  away  from  it,  for  over  its  deformities  were 
spread  distortions  of  natural  needs  and  blandishments  of  sanctioned  lust.  God 
can  accomplish  vast  things  with  a  soul  wholly  consecrated  to  Him  ;  but  how  rarely 
He  finds  such  a  soul,  except  as  He  leads  it  through  affliction  to  make  it  loose  its 
hold  on  all  but  Him  1  III.  With  this  even  partially  gained,  comes  that  strong  word 
EFFICIENCY.  The  nation  which  was  Jacob  the  Supplanter  passes  its  Peniel  and 
becomes  Israel  the  Prince  of  God,  having  power  with  God  and  men.  Into  its  hands 
are  put  the  direction  of  earth's  history  and  the  hope  of  its  redemption.  The  dis- 
tresses of  those  early  generations  are  as  the  straining  and  rending  of  the  crust  or 
the  grinding  march  of  glaciers,  unsparing  but  beneficent,  preparing  a  fertile  soil  on 
which  at  last  men  shall  dwell  safely,  lifting  thankful  hands  to  heaven.  (C.  M. 
Southgate.)  Egypt  a  type  of  the  icorld  : — Sodom  is  associated  in  our  minds 
with  wickedness  only,  though  no  doubt  it  was  a  great  place  in  its  day  ;  but 
Ej-ypt  stands  out  before  us  as  a  fuller  and  more  adequate  type  of  the  world, 
with  her  glory  as  well  as  her  shame.  And  from  Israel's  relation  to  Egypt 
we  may  learn  two  great  lessons :  one  of  counsel  how  to  use  the  world,  the 
other  of  warning  against  abusing  it.  From  God's  purpose  in  regard  to  Israel 
let  us  learn  that  just  as  Egypt  was  necessary  as  a  school  for  His  chosen  people,  so 
the  world  ought  to  be  a  school  for  us.  We  are  not  to  despise  its  greatness.  No 
word  of  contempt  for  Egypt's  greatness  is  found  in  the  sacred  records.  The  nation 
was  intended  to  learn,  and  did  acquire,  many  useful  arts  which  were  of  much 
Bervice  to  them  afterwards  in  the  Land  of  Promise.  Moses,  the  chosen  of  God,  was 
learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  and  was  thereby  qualified  for  the  great 
work  for  which  he  was  called.  In  these  examples  we  may  see  how  to  use  this 
world,  making  it  a  school  to  prepare  us  for  our  inheritance  and  the  work  the  Lord 
may  have  for  us  there  to  do.  On  the  other  hand,  let  us  beware  of  so  yielding  to  the 
seductions  of  this  evil  world  as  to  lose  our  hold  of  God,  and  His  covenant,  and  bo 
incur  the  certainty  of  forfeiting  our  eternal  birthright  and  becoming  the  world's 
slaves,  helping  perhaps  to  rear  its  mighty  monuments,  with  the  prospect  possibly 
of  having  our  names  engraved  in  stone  among  the  ruins  of  some  buried  city,  but 
without  the  prospect  of  having  them  written  "  among  the  living  in  Jerusalem,"  the 
eternal  city  of  God.  Earth's  great  ones  belong  to  the  dead  past ;  but  heaven's 
great  ones  have  their  portion  in  a  glorious  future.  {J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  Making 
history  : — We  are  making  history  when  we  least  think  of  it.  That  which  seems  a 
little  matter  to  us  may  be  a  link  in  a  chain  that  binds  the  ages.  What  we  do  to-day 
or  to-moiTow  is  done  for  all  time.  It  cannot  be  undone.  It  and  all  its  countless 
results  must  stand  entailed  to  the  latest  generations  ;  and  we  are  to  have  honour 
or  shame  according  as  our  part  is  now  performed.  The  poor  boy  who  drives  the 
horse  along  a  canal  tow-path  may  think  it  makes  little  difference  whether  he  does 
that  work  well  or  poorly.  But  forty  years  after,  when  he  is  m  nomination  for  the 
presidency  of  a  great  nation,  he  will  find  that  men  go  back  to  his  boyhood  story  to 
learn  whether  he  was  faithful  in  that  which  was  least,  as  proof  that  he  would  be 
faithful  also  in  that  which  is  much.  There  is  no  keeping  out  of  history.  We  have 
got  to  be  there.  The  only  safe  way  of  standing  well  in  history  is  by  doing  well  in 
all  things.  You  are  just  now  going  to  Boston,  or  to  New  York,  or  to  Chicago,  or  to 
Savannah,  or  to  London — will  the  record  of  your  spirit  and  conduct  as  you  go 
there  read  well  ten  years  hence,  or  a  hundred  ?  That  depends  on  what  your  spirit 
and  conduct  are  at  the  i^resent  time.  And  if  you  stay  at  home  your  place  in 
history — in  God's  record  of  history — is  just  as  sure  as  if  you  went  to  Egypt  or  to 
the  Holy  Land.     That  record  is  making  up  to-day  :  "  Now,  these  are  the  names  of 

the  children  of  ,  which  came  into  ,  or,  which  stayed  at  ."    If  you 

want  a  record  which  shall  redound  to  your  honour,  and  of  which  your  children's 
children  shall  be  proud,  you  have  no  time  to  lose  in  getting  things  straight  for  it. 
{H.  C.  Trumbull.) 

Ver.  6.  Joseph  died,  and  all  his  brethren. — The  death  of  a  whole  family  : — I.  It 

WAS   A   VERY   LARGE    FAMILY.      II.    It    WAS  A  VERY   Dn'ERSiriED   FAMILY.       1.    They  Were 

diversified  in  their  sympathies.     2.  They  were  diversified  in  social  position.     III. 

Il  WAS  A  VERY  TRIED  FAMILY.      IV.    It  WAS  A  VERY  IXFL0ENTIAL  FAMILY.      V.   It   WAS  A 


CHAP.  I.]  EXODUS.  3 

VERY  RELIGIOUSLY  PRIVILEGED  FAMILY.  Lessons  I  1.  A  icbukc  to  family  pride. 
2.  A  warning  against  seeking  satisfaction  in  family  jo^s.  3.  A  lessen  as  to 
the  right  use  of  family  relationshiijs.  Live  together  as  those  who  must 
die.      4.     Some    strong    reasons    for    expecting    family    meetings    after    death. 

(1)  Such  different  characters  cannot  admit  exactly  the  same  fate.  Extinc- 
tion is  either  too  good  for  the  sinner,  or  else  a  strange   reward   for  the  saint. 

(2)  Family  affection  seems  too  strong  to  be  thus  quenched.  (U.  li.  Thomas.) 
The  zinii-ersal  characteristic  : — The  succession  of  generations  among  the  children  of 
men  has  been,  from  Homer  downwards,  likened  to  that  of  the  leaves  among  the  trees 
of  the  forest.  The  foliage  of  one  summer,  withering  gradually  away,  and  strewing 
the  earth  with  its  wrecks,  has  its  place  supplied  by  the  exuberance  of  the  following 
spring.  But  there  is  oue  point  in  which  the  analogy  does  not  hold, — there  is  one 
difference  between  the  race  of  leaves  and  the  race  of  men  :  between  the  leaves  of 
successive  summers  an  interval  of  desolation  intervenes,  and  "  the  bare  and  wintry 
woods"  emphatically  mark  the  passage  from  one  season  to  another.  But  there  is 
no  such  pause  in  the  succession  of  the  generations  of  men.  Insensibly  they  melt 
and  shade  into  one  another  :  an  old  man  dies,  and  a  child  is  born  ;  daily  and  hourly 
there  is  a  death  and  a  birth  ;  and  imperceptibly,  by  flow  degrees,  the  actors  in  life's 
busy  scene  are  changed.  Hence  the  full  force  of  this  thought — "  One  generation 
passeth  away,  and  another  generation  cometli  " — is  not  ordinarily  felt.  The  first 
view  of  this  verse  that  occurs  to  us  is  its  sti  iking  significance  and  force  as  a  com- 
mentary on  the  history  of  which  it  so  abruptly  and  emphatically  announces  the 
close.  The  previous  narrative  presents  to  us  a  busy  scene— an  animated  picture  ; 
and  here,  as  if  by  one  single  stroke,  all  is  reduced  to  a  blank.  It  is  as  if  having 
gazed  on  ocean  when  it  bears  on  its  broad  bosom  a  gallant  and  well-manned  fleet — 
bending  gracefully  to  its  rising  winds,  and  triumiDhantlj'  stemming  its  swelling 
waves — you  looked  out  again,  and  at  the  very  next  glance  beheld  the  wide  waste  of 
waters  reposing  in  dark  and  horrid  peace  over  the  deep-buried  wrecks  of  the  recent 
storm.  "  And  all  that  generation  "  :  How  startling  a  force  is  there  in  this  awful 
brevity,  this  compression  and  abridgment — the  names  and  histories  of  millions 
brought  within  the  compass  of  so  brief  a  statement  of  a  single  fact  concei'ning  them 
— that  they  all  died !  Surely  it  seems  as  if  the  Lord  intended  by  this  bill  of  mor- 
tality for  a  whole  race,  which  His  own  Spirit  has  framed,  to  stamp  as  with  a 
character  of  utter  mockery  and  insignificance  the  most  momentous  distinctions  and 
interests  of  time  ;  these  all  being  engulfed  and  swallowed  up  in  the  general  doom  of 
death,  which  ushers  in  the  one  distinction  of  eternity.  I.  Let  us  ponder  the 
announcement  AS  it  respects  the  individual — "Joseph  died."  His  trials,  with 
their  many  aggravations — his  triumphs,  with  all  their  glories — were  alike  brief  and 
evanescent ;  and  his  eventful  career  ended,  as  the  obscurest  and  most  common- 
place lifetime  must  end — for  "  Joseph  died."  Joseph  is  at  home,  the  idol  of  a  fond 
parent.  Ah  !  dote  not,  thou  venerable  sire,  on  thy  fair  and  dutiful  child.  Remember 
how  soon  it  may  be  said  of  him,  and  how  certainly  it  must  be  said  of  him,  that 
"  Joseph  died."  Joseph  is  in  trouble — betrayed,  persecuted,  distressed,  a  prisoner, 
a  slave.  But  let  him  not  be  disquieted  above  measure.  It  is  but  a  little  while, 
and  it  shall  be  said  of  him  that  "  Joseph  died."  Joseph  is  exalted — he  is  high  in 
wealth,  in  honour,  and  in  power.  But  why  should  all  his  glory  and  his  joy  elate 
him?  It  will  be  nothing  to  him  soon — when  it  comes  to  be  said  of  him  that 
"  Joseph  died."  Ah !  there  is  but  one  of  Joseph's  many  distinctions,  whether  of 
character  or  of  fortune,  that  does  not  shrivel  beside  this  stern  announcement.  The 
simplicity  of  his  trust  in  God,  the  steadfastness  of  his  adherence  to  truth  and  holi- 
ness, the  favour  of  Heaven,  his  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart  and  a  good  conscience 
and  faith  unfeigned — these  will  stand  the  shock  of  collision  with  this  record  of  his 
decease.  II.  "  And  all  his  brethren."  They  too  all  died,  and  the  vicissitudes  of 
their  family  history  came  to  an  end  in  the  silent  tomb.  "  Joseph  died,  and  all  his 
brethren."  Ah  !  how  intimately  should  this  reflection  have  knit  them  together  in 
unity  of  interest,  of  affection,  and  of  aim !  The  tie  of  a  common  origin  is  scarcely 
stronger  or  closer  than  the  tie  of  a  common  doom.  The  friend,  the  beloved 
brother  who  has  gone,  has  acquired,  by  his  death,  new  value  in  your  esteem — a 
new  and  sacred  claim  to  your  regard.  Now  for  the  first  time  you  discover  how  dear 
he  should  have  been,  how  dear  he  was,  to  your  hearts — dearer  far  than  you  had  ever 
thought.  How  fondly  do  you  dwell  on  all  his  attractions  and  excellencies  !  How 
frivolous  are  all  former  causes  of  misunderstanding,  ail  excuses  for  indifference, 
now  seen  to  be  !  And  whither  are  they  gone  ?  And  what  are  their  views  now,  and 
what  their  feeUngs,  on  the  matters  which  formed  the  subject  of  their  familiar  inter- 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

— « . 

course  here  ?  Are  they  united  in  the  region  of  blessedness  above  ?  Or  is  there  a 
fearful  separation,  and  are  there  some  of  their  number  on  the  other  side  of  the  great 
gulf  ?  III.  "  And  all  that  generation."  The  tide  of  mortality  rolls  on  in  a  wider 
stream.  It  sweeps  into  the  one  vast  ocean  of  eternity  all  the  members  of  a  family — all 
the  families  of  a  race.  The  distinctions  alike  of  individuals  and  of  households  are 
lost.  Every  landmark  is  laid  low.  Some  are  gone  in  tender  years  of  childhood, 
unconscious  of  life's  sins  and  sufferings — some  in  grey-headed  age,  weighed  down 
by  many  troubles.  Some  have  perished  by  the  hand  of  violence — some  by  natural 
decay.  And  another  generation  now  fills  the  stage — a  generation  that,  in  all  its 
vast  circle  of  families,  can  produce  not  one  individual  to  link  it  with  the  buried  race 
on  whose  ashes  it  is  treading.  On  a  smaller  scale,  you  have  experienced  something 
of  what  we  now  describe.  In  the  sad  season  of  bereavement,  how  have  you  felt  your 
pain  embittered  by  the  contrast  between  death  reigning  in  your  heart  and  home,  and 
bustling  life  going  on  all  around  !  In  the  prospect,  too,  of  your  own  departure,  does 
not  this  thought  fonn  an  element  of  the  dreariness  of  death,  that  when  you  are  gone, 
and  laid  in  the  silent  tomb,  others  will  arise  that  knew  not  you  ? — your  removal  will 
scarce  occasion  even  a  momentary  interruption  in  the  onward  course  and  incessant 
hurry  of  affairs,  and  your  loss  will  be  but  as  that  of  a  drop  of  water  from  the  tide 
that  rolls  on  in  its  career  as  mighty  and  as  majestical  as  ever.  But  here,  it  is  a 
whole  generation,  with  all  its  families,  that  is  engulfed  in  one  unmeasured  tomb  ! 
And  lo  !  the  earth  is  still  all  astir  with  the  same  activities,  all  gay  with  the  same 
pomps  and  pageantries,  all  engrossed  with  the  same  vanities  and  follies,  and,  alas  1 
the  same  sins  also,  that  have  been  beguiling  and  disappointing  the  successive  races 
of  its  inhabitants  since  the  world  began  !  And  there  is  another  common  lot — 
another  general  history — another  universal  characteristic:  "After  death,  the 
judgment."  Joseph  rises  again,  "and  all  his  brethren,  and  all  that  generation." 
And  they  all  staud  before  the  judgment-seat.  There  is  union  then.  The  small  and 
the  great  are  there  ;  the  servant  and  his  master — all  are  brought  together.  But  for 
what  ?  What  a  solemn  contrast  have  we  here !  Death  unites  after  separation  :  the 
judgment  unites  in  order  to  separation.  Death,  closing  the  drama  of  time,  lets  the 
ample  curtain  fall  upon  its  whole  scenery  and  all  its  actors.  The  judgment, 
opening  the  drama  of  eternity,  discloses  scenery  and  actors  once  more  entire.  (R. 
S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Death  : — I.  Death  removes  the  most  useful  men — "  Josepn." 
1.  He  had  instructed  his  brethren.  2.  He  had  enriched  his  father.  3.  He  had 
saved  his  nation.  4.  He  had  taught  the  world  an  eternal  lesson.  II.  Death 
BEMOVES  THE  LARGEST  FA5ULIES — "  All  his  brethren."  III.  Death  behoves  thb 
PBOUDEST  NATIONS.  1.  Pitiable.  2.  Irremediable.  3.  Admonitory.  (/.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  Death's  disciplinary  power : — God  deprives  the  Church  of  her  comfort  and 
stay — 1.  That  she  may  gain  the  power  of  self-rehance.  2.  That  she  may  show  her 
ability  to  be  independent  of  all  human  instrumentahties.  3.  That  she  may  move 
into  the  exigencies  of  the  future.     {Ihid.)  Death  common  to  all ; — In  one  of 

Nathaniel  Hawthorne's  note-books  there  is  a  remark  as  to  qualifying  men  by  some 
common  quality  or  circumstance  that  should  bring  together  people  the  most  unlike 
in  other  resjjects,  and  make  a  brotherhood  and  sisterhood  of  them.  "First  by 
their  sorrows ;  for  instance,  whenever  there  are  any,  whether  in  fair  mansion  or 
hotel,  who  are  mourning  the  loss  of  friends.  Secondly,  all  who  have  the  same 
maladies,  whether  they  lie  under  damask  canopies,  or  on  straw  pallets,  or  in  the 
wards  of  hospitals.  Then  proceed  to  generalize  and  classify  all  the  world  together, 
as  none  can  claim  other  exemption  from  either  sorrow,  sin,  or  disease  ;  and  if  they 
could,  yet  death,  like  a  great  parent,  comes  and  sweeps  them  all  through  one  dark- 
some portal — all  his  children."  (H.  O.  Mackey.)  Death  admonitory  : — There  is 
a  bird  peculiar  to  Ireland,  called  the  cock  of  the  wood,  remarkable  for  the  fine  flesh 
and  folly  thei'eof.  All  the  difficulty  to  kill  them,  is  to  find  them  out,  otherwise  a 
mean  marksman  n?ay  easily  despatch  them.  They  fly  in  woods  in  flocks,  and 
if  one  of  them  be  shot,  the  rest  remove  not  but  to  the  next  bough,  or  tree  at  the 
farthest,  and  there  stand  staring  at  the  shooter,  till  the  whole  covey  be  destroyed  ; 
yet  as  foolish  as  this  bird  is,  it  is  wise  enough  to  be  the  emblem  of  the  wisest  man 
in  the  point  of  mortality.  Death  sweeps  away  one,  and  one,  and  one,  here  one,  and 
there  another,  and  all  the  rest  remain  no  whit  moved,  or  minding  of  it,  till  at  last  a 
whole  generation  is  consumed  and  brought  to  nothing.  (J.  Spencer.)  Death^s 
impartiality : — Death  levels  the  highest  mountains  with  the  lowest  valleys.  He 
mows  down  the  fairest  lilies  as  well  as  the  foulest  thistles.  The  robes  of  illustrious 
princes  and  the  rags  of  homely  peasants  are  both  laid  aside  in  the  wardrobe  of  the 
grave.     {Archhp.  Seeker.)        Meditate  on  death : — There  was  a  motto  on  the  walls 


CHAP.  I.]  EXODVS.  5 

*      ■  f — 

of  the  Delphian  Temple,  ascribed  to  Chilo,  one  of  the  seven  wise  men  of  Greece — 
"Consider  the  end."  Death  levels  all  distinctions ; — As  trees  growing  in  the  wood 
are  known — some  by  difference  of  their  trunks,  and  some  by  the  properties  of  their 
branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruits ;  but  this  knowledge  is  had  of  them  only  whilst 
they  stand,  grow,  and  are  not  consumed ;  for  if  they  be  committed  to  the  tire,  and 
are  turned  into  ashes,  they  cannot  be  known.  It  is  impossible  that,  when  the  ashes 
of  divers  kinds  of  trees  are  mingled  together,  the  tall  pine  should  be  discerued  from 
the  great  oak,  or  the  mighty  poplar  from  a  low  shrub,  or  any  one  tree  from 
another;  even  so  men,  whilst  they  live  in  the  wood  of  this  world,  are  known — 
some  by  the  stock  of  their  ancestors,  some  by  the  flourishing  leaves  of  their  words 
and  eloquence,  some  in  the  flowers  of  beauty,  and  some  in  the  shrub  of  honesty, 
many  by  their  savage  ignorance,  and  some  by  their  kindness ;  but  when  death 
doth  bring  them  into  dust,  and  has  mixed  all  together,  then  their  ashes  cannot  be 
known — then  there  is  no  difference  between  the  mighty  princes  of  the  world  and  the 
poor  souls  that  are  not  accounted  of.     (Cawdray.) 

Vers.  7-22.  The  children  of  Israel  were  fruitful— T/t/r  increase  of  the  Church  s — 
I.  Notwithstanding  the  removal  of  its  chief  officer  (ver.  G).  Joseph  dead ;  his 
influence  gone  ;  his  counsel  inaccessible.  To-day  the  Church  loses  her  chief  officers, 
but  it  still  grows.  II.  Notwithstanding  the  decade  of  the  generation  (ver.  6). 
So  to-day  men  die,  but  the  Church,  by  making  new  converts,  multiplies  her  progeny 
to  an  almost  incredible  extent.  III.  Notwithstanding  the  persecution  to  which 
IT  was  subjected  (ver.  11).  The  Churtdi  can  never  be  put  down  by  force.  The 
Infinite  Power  is  on  her  side.  This  is  more  than  all  that  can  be  against  her.  IV. 
Notwithstanding  the  artifices  by  which  it  was  sought  to  be  betrayed  (vers.  15- 
22).  So  the  Church  has  been  in  danger  tbrough  the  treachery  of  the  outside  world, 
and  through  the  daring  cruelty  of  meddlesome  men.  Still  it  grows.  May  it  soon 
fill  the  world,  as  the  Israelites  did  E^'ypt !  All  Church  increase  is  from  God  ;  not 
from  men,  not  from  means.  God  has  promised  to  multiply  the  Church.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  Increase  by  God's  blessing : — 1.  The  death  of  fathers  cannot  hinder 
God's  increase  of  the  Church's  children.  They  decrease  and  these  increase  under 
God.  2.  God's  promises  for  His  Church's  increase  cannot  fall  to  the  ground.  He 
doth  fulfil  them.  3.  Fruitfulness,  abundant  increase,  multiplication  excessive,  and 
strength,  are  the  Church's  blessing  from  God.  4.  God  works  wonderfully  to  fulfil  His 
promise  of  increasing  His  people.  5.  The  land  of  enemies  is  made  by  God  a  nursery 
for  the  increase  of  His  Church.     6.  God's  blessing  makes  His  Israel  to  fill  Egypt,  the 

Church  to  fill  the  world.  {G.  Hughes,  B.D. )      A  large  j^opulation,  and  what  it  led  to  : 

I.  A  large  population  is  of  great  advantage  to  a  nation.  1.  It  gives  an  impulse 
to  civilization.  2.  It  augments  the  force  of  the  national  prowess.  3.  It  invests  the 
nation  with  importance  in  the  estimation  of  surrounding  kingdoms.  II.  A  large 
population  sometimes  excites  the  suspicion  and  envy  of  neighbouring  kings.  1. 
Pharaoh  was  jealous  of  the  numerical  growth  of  Israel.  2.  He  was  suspicious  of 
what  might  befall  his  country  in  future  exigencies.  III,  This  suspicion  fre- 
quently leads  kings  to  practise  the  most  abject  slavery,  1,  It  was  cunning.  2. 
It  was  unjust.  3.  It  was  painful.  4.  It  was  apparently  productive  of  gain.  But 
what  was  gained  in  public  buildings  was  lost  in  sensitiveness  of  conscience,  force  of 
manhood,  and  worth  of  character.  Slavery  involves  a  loss  of  all  that  is  noble  in 
human  nature,  and  it  leads  to  murder  (ver.  22).  IV,  Slavery  is  an  incobipetent 
method  of  conquest.  1.  Because  it  does  not  gain  the  sympathy  of  the  people  it 
conquers.  2.  Because  it  arouses  the  indignation  of  those  who  are  subject  to  its 
cruelties,  3.  It  does  not  save  a  ruler  from  the  calamity  he  seeks  to  avert.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  A  large  population: — The  larger  the  population  of  a  nation,  the 
greater  are  its  capabilities  of  sympathy,  mutual  dependency,  and  help,  and  often- 
times the  gr<  ater  difficulty  in  its  right  government.  (Ibid.)  Oppression  and 
groicth : — 1.  There  are  three  aspects  in  which  the  oppression  of  Israel  in  Egypt 
may  be  viewed.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  God's  own  word  ;  it  was  education  ;  it  was 
a  type.  1.  The  covenant  with  Abraham  had  included  the  prediction  of  four 
hundred  years  of  oppression  in  a  strange  land.  The  fulfilment  is  reached  through 
the  fears  and  cruel  policy  of  Pharaoh.  The  Bible  decisively  upholds  the  view  that 
not  in  Israel  alone,  but  everywhere,  the  movements  of  nations,  as  the  incidents  of 
individual  livts,  are  directed  by  God.  To  it  the  most  important  thing  about  Egypt 
and  the  mighty  Eameses  was  that  he  and  it  were  the  instruments  for  carrying  out 
God's  designs  in  reference  to  Israel.  Has  not  history  verified  the  view  1  Who  cares 
about  anything  else  in  that  reign  in  comparison  with  its  relation  to  the  slaves  in 


ft  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Goshen  ?  2.  The  oppression  was,  further,  education.  We  can  say  nothing  certainly 
as  to  the  teaching  which  Israel  received  in  science,  art,  letters,  or  religion.  Some 
debts,  no  doubt,  accrued  in  all  these  departments.  Probably  the  alphabet  itself  was 
acquired  by  them,  and  some  tinge  of  acquaintance  was  made  by  a  few  with  other 
paits  of  the  early  blossoming  Egyptian  civilization.  But  the  oppression  taught 
them  better  things  than  these.  Pressure  consolidates.  Common  sorrows  are 
wonderful  quickeners  of  national  feeling.  The  heavier  the  blows,  the  closer  grained 
the  produce  of  the  forgo.  Not  increase  of  numbers  only,  but  tough  knit  conscious- 
ness of  their  unity,  was  needed  for  their  future.  They  acquired  some  beginnings  of 
that  extraordinary  persistency  of  national  life  which  has  characterized  them  ever 
since,  in  these  bitter  days.  Note  further,  they  learned  endurance,  without  which 
the  education  of  a  nation,  as  of  a  man,  is  defective.  The  knowledge  of  God's 
covenant  with  Abraham  would  in  some  degree  be  preserved,  and  it  taught  them 
that  their  affliction  was  part  of  the  Divine  plan  for  them.  So  they  would  learn — at 
least  the  best  of  them  would — to  look  for  the  better  things  following  which  the 
covenant  held  forth,  and  would  be  able  to  see  some  gleam  of  the  dawn  even  in 
the  thickest  daikness.  "  If  winter  comes,  can  spring  be  far  behind  ?  "  The 
evil  foretold  and  accomplished  is  turned  into  prophecy  of  the  good  foretold  and 
yet  unseen.  3.  The  growth  of  Israel  under  its  oppression.  The  pressure  which 
was  intended  to  crush  only  condensed.  "  The  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more 
they  .  .  .  grew."  So  the  foiled  oppressors  glared  at  them  with  a  mixture  of  awe 
and  loathing,  for  both  feelings  are  implied  in  the  words  rendered  "  were  grieved." 
It  is  the  history  of  the  nation  in  a  nutshell.  The  same  marvellous  tenacity  of  life, 
the  same  power  of  baffling  oppression  and  thriving  under  it,  have  been  their  dower 
ever  since,  and  continue  so  yet.  The  powers  that  oppress  them  fill  the  world  with 
their  noise  for  awhile,  and  pass  away  like  a  dream  ;  they  abide.  For  every  tree 
felled,  a  hundred  saplings  spring  up.  What  does  it  mean?  and  how  comes  it? 
The  only  answer  is  that  God  preserves  them  for  a  better  deliverance  from  a  worse 
bondage,  and  as  His  witnesses  in  their  humiliation,  as  they  were  His  in  their 
prosperity.  The  fable  of  the  one  of  their  race  who  bade  Christ  march  on  to 
Calvary  is  true  concerning  them.  They  are  doomed  to  live  and  to  wander  till  they 
shall  recognize  Him  for  their  Messiah.  That  growth  is  a  truth  for  God's  Church, 
too.  The  world  has  never  crushed  by  persecuting.  There  is  a  wholesome  obsti- 
nacy and  chivalry  in  human  nature  which  rallies  adherents  to  a  persecuted  cause. 
Truth  is  most  powerful  when  her  back  is  at  the  wall.  Times  of  oppression  are 
times  of  growth,  as  a  hundred  examples  from  the  apostles'  days  down  to  the  story 
of  the  gospel  in  Madagascar  prove.  The  world's  favour  does  more  harm  than  its 
enmity.  Its  kisses  are  poisonous;  its  blows  do  no  hurt.  (A.  Maclarcn,  D.D.) 
Fruitfiilness  of  Israelites  in  Egypt : — Some  commentators  resort  to  natural  causes 
to  account  for  this  amazing  increase.  A  modern  writer  declares  that  "  the  females 
in  Egypt,  as  well  among  the  human  race  as  among  animsls,  surpass  all  others  in 
fruitfulness."  But  we  ^irefer  to  ascribe  the  matter  to  Divine  intervention.  The 
blessing  of  Jehovah  was  now  signally  conferred  upon  the  people.  God  "  increased 
His  people  greatly,  and  made  them  stronger  than  their  enemies  "  (Psa.  cv.  24). 
The  word  that  after  a  long  del«y  came  to  Israel,  the  third  patriarch,  was  now 
fulfilled  (Gen.  xxxv.  11).  Though  the  performance  of  God's  promises  is  sometimes 
slow,  yet  it  is  always  sure.  It  was  when  the  Israelites  lost  the  benefit  of  the  pro- 
tection of  Joseph  that  God  made  their  numbers  their  defence,  and  they  became 
better  able  than  they  had  been  to  shift  for  themselves.  If  God  continue  our  friends 
and  relations  to  us  while  we  most  need  them,  and  remove  them  when  tliey  can  be 
better  spared,  let  us  owti  that  He  is  wise,  and  not  complain  that  He  is  hard  upon 
us.  (.4.  Nevin,  D.D.)  Ancestry  nuvxerically  regarded: — The  number  of  a  man's 
ancestors  doubles  in  every  generation  as  his  descent  is  traced  upward.  In  the  first 
generation  he  reckons  only  two  ancestors,  his  father  and  mother.  In  the  second 
generation  the  two  are  converted  into  four,  since  he  had  two  grandfathers  and  two 
grandmothers.  But  each  of  these  four  had  two  parents,  and  thus  in  the  third 
generation  there  are  found  to  be  eight  ancestors ;  that  is,  eight  great-grandparents. 
In  the  fourth  generation  the  number  of  ancestors  is  sixteen ;  in  the  fifth,  thirty-two ; 
in  the  sixth,  sixty-four  ;  in  the  seventh  128.  In  the  tenth  it  has  risen  to  1,024;  in 
the  twentieth  it  becomes  1,048,576 ;  in  the  thirtieth  no  fewer  than  1,073,741,834. 
To  ascend  no  higher  than  the  twenty-fourth  generation  we  reach  the  sum  of 
16,777,216,  which  is  a  great  deal  more  than  all  of  the  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain 
when  that  generation  was  in  existence.  For  if  we  reckon  a  generation  at  thirty- 
three  years,  twenty-four  of  such  will  carry  us  back  792  years,  or  to  a..d.  1093,  when 


CHAP.  I.]  EXODVS.  7 

William  the  Conqueror  had  been  sleeping  in  his  gi-ave  at  Caen  only  six  years,  and 
his  son  William  II.,  surnamed  Rufus,  was  reigning  over  the  land.  At  that  time  the 
total  number  of  the  inhabitants  of  England  could  have  been  little  more  than  two 
millions,  the  amount  at  which  it  is  estimated  during  the  reign  of  the  Conqueror. 
It  was  only  one-eighth  of  a  nineteenth-century  man's  ancestors  if  the  normal  ratio 
of  progression,  as  just  shown  by  a  simple  process  of  arithmetic,  had  received  no 
check,  and  if  it  had  not  been  bounded  by  the  limits  of  the  population  of  the 
country.  Since  the  result  of  the  law  of  progression,  had  there  been  room  for  its 
expansion,  woiUd  have  been  eight  times  the  actual  population,  by  so  much  the  more 
is  it  certain  that  the  lines  of  every  Englishman's  ancestry  run  up  to  every  man  and 
every  woman  in  the  reign  of  William  I.,  from  the  king  and  queen  downward,  who 
left  descendants  in  the  island,  and  whose  progeny  has  not  died  there.  (Popular 
Sdencp  Monthly.)  Successful  colonists : — Englishmen  are  not  the  only  successful 
colonists  ;  and  the  credit,  if  any,  of  exterminating  aborigines  they  are  entitled  to 
share  with  insects.  Let  us  take  the  case  of  the  Australian  bee.  The  Austi-alian  bee 
is  about  the  size  of  a  fly,  and  without  any  sting;  but  the  English  bee  has  been  so 
successfully  introduced  as  to  be  now  abundant  in  a  wild  state  in  the  bush,  spreading 
all  over  the  Australian  continent,  and  yielding  large  quantities  of  honey,  which  it 
deposits  in  the  hollows  of  i;rees ;  the  immense  quantities  of  honey-yielding  flowers 
afford  an  abundant  supply  of  material.  The  foreign  bee  is  fast  driving  away  the 
aboriginal  insect  as  the  European  is  exterminating  the  black  from  the  settled 
districts,  so  that  the  Australian  bee  is  now  very  scarce.  (Scientijic  Illustrations 
and  Symbols.)  A  new  king. — Chanye  of  government : — 1.  God's  blessing  on  His 
Church  is  the  cause  that  worldly  rulers  consult  against  it.  2.  Blessings  from  God 
and  oppositions  from  worldly  powers  usually  are  connected.  3.  Changes  of  kings 
and  governments  may  bring  changes  on  the  Church's  state.  4.  New  and  strange 
rulers  are  set  up,  when  new  and  strange  things  are  to  be  in  the  Church.  5.  God 
Buffers  such  to  rise  up,  and  orders  them  to  His  praise.  6.  All  God's  goodness  by 
His  instruments  to  the  world  are  apt  to  be  committed  to  oblivion  and  ignorance. 
7.  Ignorance  and  oblivion  of  God's  mercies  by  His  Church  causeth  wicked  rulers  to 
persecute  them.     (G.   Huyhes,  B.D.)  EgypVs  ncic  king: — I.  He  was  out  op 

SYMPATHY  WITH  THE  PURPOSE  AND  PROVIDENCE  OF  GoD.  II.  He  WAS  OUT  OF  SYMPATHT 
WITH    THE    CONDUCT   OF   HIS    PREDECESSORS.      III.    He  WAS    ENVIOUS  IN  HIS  DISPOSITION. 

Envious  men  generally  bring  on  themselves  the  evils  of  which  they  suspect  the 
innocent  to  be  guilty.  IV.  He  was  cunning  in  his  arrangements.  Policy  a  bad 
basis  for  a  throne.    It  invites  suspicion,  alienates  respect,  leads  to  ruin.    V.  He  was 

CRUEL   IN    HIS    REQUIREMENTS.       VI.    He  WAS  THWARTED  IN   HIS  PROJECT.       Mere  pOWBT 

cannot  always  command  obedience.  It  is  sometimes  defeated  by  weakness. 
Heaven  is  on  the  side  of  the  oppressed.  [J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  vicissitudes  of 
power: — The  vicissitudes  of  power — 1.  Are  independent  of  past  services.  2.  Are 
independent  of  moral  character.  3.  Are  frequently  dependent  upon  the  arbitrary 
caprice  of  a  despotic  king.  (Ibid.)  A  bad  king  will  make  a  wicked  people  : — 1, 
He  will  influence  the  weak  by  his  splendour.  2.  Terrify  the  timid  by  his  power. 
3.  Gain  the  servile  by  his  flattery.  4.  Gain  the  simple  by  his  cunning.  5,  Some- 
times gain  the  good  by  his  deception.  (Ibid.)  Like  ruler,  like  people  : — If  the 
mountains  overflow  with  waters,  the  valleys  are  the  better  ;  and  if  the  head  be  full 
of  ill-humours,  the  whole  body  fares  the  worse.  The  actions  of  rulers  are  most 
commonly  rules  for  the  people's  actions,  and  their  example  passeth  as  current  as 
their  coin.  The  common  people  are  like  tempered  wax,  easily  receiving  impres- 
sions from  the  seals  of  great  men's  vices ;  they  care  not  to  sin  by  prescription  and 
damn  themselves  with  authority.  And  it  is  the  unhappy  privilege  of  greatness  to 
warrant,  by  example,  others'  as  well  as  its  own  sins,  whilst  the  unadvised  take  up 
crimes  on  trust  and  perish  by  credit.  {J.  Harding.)  The  king  that  knew  not  Joseph : — 
It  is  said  Joseph  was  not  "  known  "  by  this  dynasty.  This  is  a  strong  expression, 
used  to  denote  the  perfect  obscuritv  into  which  this  good  and  great  man  had  fallen  ; 
or  rather,  the  contempt  in  which  this  benefactor  and  true  patriot  was  held  by  those 
who  were  unable  to  appreciate  him.  It  was  not  that  Joseph's  character  had  waned 
in  beauty  ;  it  was  not  that  his  intellect  had  lost  its  sagacity  ;  but  the  new  dynasty 
wished  to  pursue  a  course  of  action  and  conduct  inconsistent  with  that  purity, 
integrity,  and  candour  which  Joseph  had  counselled  ;  and  therefore  he  was  cast  off. 
Less  worthy  men  were  taken  in  his  place.  But  what  occurred  to  Joseph  is  just  what 
befalls  Christians  still,  in  proportion  as  their  Christianity  ceases  to  be  latent.  We 
are  told  by  an  apostle  that  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Christ  not. 
1.  The  reason  why  the  world  does  not  appreciate  the  Christian  character  is  that 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  Christian  lives  a  higher  life.  He  is,  in  proportion  as  he  is  a  Christian, 
influenced  by  motives  and  hopes,  and  guided  by  laws  and  a  sense  of  a  presence, 
which  an  unconverted,  worldly  man,  such  as  was  the  new  king  of  Egypt  who  knew 
not  Joseph,  cannot  at  all  understand.  2.  Another  reason  why  the  world  does  not 
appreciate  the  Christian  now  is  that  it  judges  a  Christian  by  itself,  and  thinks  that 
he  must  be  at  heart,  notwithstanding  all  his  pretences,  what  it  is.  The  world  loves 
sin,  delights  in  it.  And  when  the  world  meets  with  a  man  who  professes  to  have 
laid  his  ambition  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  and  whose  thirst  for  power  is  the  noble 
thirst  of  doing  good,  it  will  say,  "  This  sounds  very  fine,  but  we  do  not  believe  it. 
The  only  difference  between  you  and  us  is  that  we  do  not  pretend  to  these  things, 
and  that  you  do ;  for  behind  the  curtain  you  practise  what  we  practise,  and  are 
exactly  what  we  are."  Therefore  the  world  hates  the  Christian,  not  simply  for  his 
Christianity,  but  because  it  cannot  conceive  such  a  man  to  be  any  other  than  a 
thorough  hypocrite.  (/.  Cumming,  D.D.)  A  king's  ignorance  : — I.  Who  was 
THIS  MAN  ?  1.  Exiled  for  many  years.  2.  Belonged  to  an  alien  dynasty.  3.  May 
simply  mean  that  he  refused  to  know  Joseph.  II.  Why  did  he  reign  ?  To  carry 
out  the  promise  of  God.  1.  God  does  not  always  use  the  same  methods.  Brought 
Israel  into  Egypt  by  prosperity  ;  took  them  out  by  adversity.  2.  God  had  to 
prepare  the  way  for  His  work.  III.  What  has  he  to  do  with  ns?  1.  He  shows  us 
how  human  wisdom  overreaches  itself.  His  policy  only  brought  about  the  very 
object  he  wished  to  avoid.  2.  He  shows  us  the  abuse  of  privileges.  He  might  have 
known  Joseph.  Ignorance  is  no  excuse  for  those  who  ought  to  know.  [Homilist.) 
Emptiness  of  fame: — The  readiness  with  which  the  populace  forgets  its  vaunted 
idols  has  ever  been  a  favourite  topic  with  thh-d-rate  moralists.  A  surviving  friend 
of  William  Pitt  was  convinced  of  the  emptiness  of  fame  by  seeing  the  greatest 
statesman  of  the  age  completely  forgotten  in  ten  days.  Queen  Elizabeth's  passage 
into  oblivion  was  even  more  rapid,  for,  according  to  an  eminent  historical  authority, 
she  "  was  as  much  forgot  in  four  days  as  if  she  had  never  existed."  To  be  sure  in 
such  cases  the  oblivion  has  been  short-lived.  Posterity  has  amply  remedied  the 
brief  injustice  of  contemporary  opinion,  {Christian  Jomnal.)  Oblivion  and 
neglect : — It  is  a  memorable  example,  amongst  many  others  that  we  have,  of  William 
the  Conqueror's  successor,  who  being  unhappily  killed,  as  he  was  hunting  in  the 
New  Forest,  all  his  nobles  and  courtiers  forsook  him,  only  some  few  that  remained 
laid  his  body  in  a  colher's  cart,  which  being  drawn  with  one  silly  lean  beast  through 
very  foul  and  filthy  way,  the  cart  broke,  and  there  lay  the  spectacle  of  worldly 
glory,  both  pitifully  gored  and  all  bemired.  Now,  if  this  were  the  portion  of  so 
mighty  a  prince,  whom  immediately  before  so  glorious  a  troop  attended,  what  then 
must  others  of  meaner  rank  expect  and  look  for,  but  only  with  death's  closing  up 
of  their  eyes  to  have  all  their  friends  excluded,  and  no  sooner  gone  but  to  be  as 
suddenly  forgotten.  Hence  it  is  that  oblivion  and  neglect  are  the  two  handmaids  of 
death.  (J.  Spencer.)  Let  us  deal  wisely. — Wrong  councils  : — Kings  ought  to  know 
better  than  to  convene  councils  to  oppose  the  intentions  of  God.  Such  conduct  isr— 
1.  Daring.  2.  Keprehensible.  3.  Buinous.  4.  Ineffectual.  {J.S.Exell,M.A.)  The 
end  and  design  of  the  council : — 1.  To  prevent  the  numerical  increase  of  Israel.  2.  To 
enfeeble  the  military  power  of  Israel.  3.  To  detain  the  Israelites  in  permanent  bondage. 
(Ibid.)  Persecution  of  God's  people  for  hypotlietical  offences : — Hypothetical  offences 
have  generally  been  the  ground  of  the  persecution  of  the  people  of  God.  It  has  rarely 
been  for  a  crime  proved,  but  generally  for  a  crime  possible.  And  this  dynasty,  in 
the  exercise  of  what  it  thought  a  very  far-reaching  diplomacy,  but  really  a  very  wild 
and  foolish  hallucination,  determined  to  persecute,  and  gradually  crush,  the  children 
of  Israel.  The  result  proved  that  the  wisdom  of  man  is  folly  with  God.  Whatever 
is  undertaken  that  has  no  sanction  from  God,  never  will  have  any  real  or  permanent 
success  before  men.  But  attempt  anything,  however  wise  it  looks,  or  talented  it 
appears,  yet  if  it  be  not  inspired  by  principle,  it  is  a  rope  of  sand — it  must  fall  to 
pieces.  Let  us,  therefore,  ever  feel  that  we  never  can  do  wisely,  unless  we  do  well, 
and  that  the  highest  principle  is  ever  the  purest  and  best  policy.  The  dynasty  that 
succeeded  the  ancient  Pharaoh  did  not  know  this.  They  thought  they  could  extir- 
pate God's  people.  They  might  as  well  have  tried  to  extirpate  the  sun  from  the 
firmament,  or  the  fruits  and  trees  of  the  earth  ;  for  the  everlasting  arms  are  around 
all  them  that  love  and  fear  God ;  and  they  are  an  immortal  people  who  are  the  sons 
and  daughters  of  the  Most  High.  The  Egyptians  found  here  that  the  more  they 
afflicted  them,  the  more  they  multiplied.  {J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  A  perversion  of 
language: — The  wisdom  here  proposed  to  be  employed  was  the  wisdom  of  the 
serpent ;  but  with  men  of  reprobate  minds,  governed  solely  by  the  corrupt  spirit  of 


CHAP.  I.]  EXODUS.  9 

this  world,  whatever  measures  tend  to  promote  their  own  interests  and  circDmvent 
their  opponents,  is  dignified  by  the  epithet  loise,  though  it  be  found,  when  judged 
by  a  purer  standard,  to  be  in  reahty  nothing  less  than  the  very  policy  of  hell.  (G. 
Bush.)  Pharaoh's  sceptical  reasoning  : — All  Pharaoh's  reasoning  was  that  of  a 
heart  that  had  never  learnt  to  take  God  into  its  calculations.  He  could  accurately 
recount  the  various  contingencies  of  human  affairs,  the  multiplying  of  the  people, 
the  falling  out  of  war,  the  joining  with  the  enemy,  their  escape  out  of  the  land,  but 
it  never  once  occurred  to  him  that  God  could  have  anything  whatever  to  do  in  the 
matter.  Had  he  only  thought  of  this,  it  would  have  upset  his  entire  reasoning. 
Ever  thus  is  it  with  the  reasonings  of  man's  sceptical  mind.  God  is  shut  out,  and 
their  truth  and  consistency  depend  upon  His  being  kept  out.  The  death-blow  to  all 
scepticism  and  infidelity  is  the  introduction  of  God  into  the  scene.  Till  He  is  seen, 
they  may  strut  up  and  down  upon  the  stage  with  an  amazing  show  of  wisdom  and 
plausibility,  but  the  moment  the  eye  catches  even  the  faintest  glimpse  of  that 
blessed  One  whose 

"Hand  unseen 
Doth  turn  and  guide  the  great  machine," 

they  are  stripped  of  their  cloak,  and  disclosed  in  all  their  nakedness  and  deformity. 
{A.  Nevin,  D.D.)  Jealousy  of  autocrats : — Autocrats,  whether  elected  or  usurp- 
ing, are  all  more  or  less  jealous.  The  female  autocrat  is  in  some  respects 
worse  than  the  male.  Two  queen  bees  will  not  hve  together  in  the  same  hive. 
And  indeed,  as  soon  as  a  young  queen-bee  is  about  to  lay  her  eggs,  she  is 
anxious  to  destroy  all  the  royal  pupae  which  still  exist  in  the  hive.  Wlien  she  has 
become  a  mother,  she  attacks  one  after  the  other  the  cells  which  still  contain 
females.  She  may  be  seen  to  throw  herself  with  fury  upon  the  first  cell  she  comes 
to.  She  tears  an  opening  in  it  large  enough  for  her  to  introduce  her  sting.  When 
she  has  stung  the  female  which  it  contains,  she  withdraws  to  attack  another.  Man 
is  not  much  behind  these  jealous  insects.  Among  certain  tribes  of  Ethiopians  the 
first  care  of  the  newly  crowned  chief  is  to  put  in  prison  all  his  brothers,  so  as  to 
prevent  wars  by  pretenders  to  the  throne.  And  even  among  more  civihzed  nations 
the  records  are  numerous  of  the  mean  and  petty  tricks  and  cruelties  adopted  by 
kings  and  queens  for  disposing  of  any  possible  rivals.  {Scientific  Illustrations  and 
Symbols.)  The  more  they  multiplied. — Moral  growth  proportionate  to  afflic- 
tion:— 1.  This  is  true  of  individual  moral  character.  2.  This  is  especially  true 
in  the  development  of  the  Church.     (J.   S.   Exell,  M.A.)  Why  does  persecu- 

tion and  trial  operate  thus  ? — 1.  To  manifest  the  love  of  God  towards  His  Church. 
2.  To  manifest  the  power  of  God  over  His  enemies.  3.  To  fulfil  the  promise  of 
God  made  to  the  good.  4.  To  manifest  His  providence  towards  the  Church.  5.  To 
strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  tyrants.  6.  To  manifest  the  divinity  of  truth,  and 
pure  moral  character.  (Ibid.)  The  Egyptians  were  grieved  : — 1.  Because  their 
plots  were  a  failure.  2.  Because  their  cruelty  was  unavailing.  3.  Because  they 
had  exasperated  an  enemy  they  could  not  subdue.  .  .  .  Half  the  grief  of  the  world 
is  occasioned  by  the  failure  of  wicked  and  cruel  purposes.  (Ibid.)  Persecution 
fertilising: — "The  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."  Persecuting 
the  Church  is  but  like  casting  manure  upon  the  ground.  It  for  "a  while  covers  the 
plants,  and  seems  to  destroy  them;  but  it  makes  the  earth  more  fertile,  and  the 
plants  more  numerous  and  vigorous.  (J.  Orton.)  Strange  increase: — How  diverse 
were  the  barbarities  and  kinds  of  death  inflicted  on  the  Christian  confessors  !  The 
more  they  were  slain,  the  more  rapidly  spread  the  faith  ;  in  place  of  one  pprang  up 
a  hundred.  When  a  great  multitude  had  been  put  to  death  one  at  court  said  to  the 
king,  "  The  number  of  them  increaseth,  instead  of,  as  thou  tbinkest,  diminishing." 
"  How  can  that  be?  "  exclaimed  the  king.  "  But  yesterday,"  replied  the  courtier, 
•'  thou  didst  put  such-and-such  a  one  to  death,  and  lo  !  there  were  converted  double 
that  number ;  and  the  people  say  that  a  man  appeared  to  the  confessors  from 
heaven,  strengthening  them  in  their  last  moments."  Whereupon  the  king  himself 
was  converted.  (The  Apology  of  Al  Kindy,  a.d.  830.)  Prosperity  under  persecu- 
tions : — Whatever  has  been  done  by  enemies  in  rage  or  in  recklessness,  God  has 
always  met  it  calmly  and  quietly.  He  has  shown  Himself  ready  for  every  emergency. 
And  He  has  not  only  baffled  and  utterly  defeated  all  the  inventions  of  wicked  men, 
but  He  has  turned  their  strange  devices  to  good  account,  for  the  development  of  His 
own  sovereign  purposes.  I.  In  the  case  of  Iseael,  it  did  seem  to  be  a  deep-laid 
plot,  very  politic  and  crafty  indeed,  that  as  the  kings  of  Egypt,  themselves  of  an 
aUen  race,  had  subdued  the  Egyptians,  they  should  prevent  the  other  alien  race, 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  Israelites,  from  conquering  them.  Instead  of  murdering  them  wholesale,  it  did 
seem  a  wise  though  a  cruel  thing  to  make  them  slaves ;  to  divide  them  up  and  down 
the  country  ;  to  appoint  them  to  the  most  menial  work  in  the  land,  that  they  might 
be  crushed  down  and  their  spirits  become  so  base  that  they  would  not  dare  to  rebel. 
Thus  we  may  suppose  it  was  hoped  that  their  physical  strength  would  be  so  relaxed, 
and  their  circumstances  so  reduced,  that  the  clan  would  soon  be  insignificant  if  not 
utterly  extinct.  But  God  met  and  overruled  this  policy  in  various  ways.  "  The 
more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they  multiplied."  The  glory  of  God  shines 
forth  conspicuously  in  the  use  to  which  He  turned  the  persecutions  they  endured. 
The  severe  treatment  thf-y  had  to  bear  from  the  enemy  became  to  them  a  sahitary 
discipline.  In  order  to  cut  loose  the  bonds  that  bound  them  to  Egypt,  the  pharp 
knife  of  affliction  must  be  used;  and  Pharaoh,  though  he  knew  it  not,  was  God's 
instrument  in  weaning  them  from  the  Egyptian  world,  and  helping  them  as  His 
Church  to  take  up  their  separate  place  in  the  wilderness,  and  receive  the  portion 
which  God  had  appointed  for  them.  Once  more — and  here  you  may  see  the  wisdom 
of  God — the  very  means  wiiich  Pharaoh  devised  for  the  effectual  crushing  of  the 
jieople — the  destruction  of  the  male  children — became  the  direct,  nay,  the  Divine 
provision  for  educating  a  deliverer  for  them.  II.  Let  us  now  carry  the  same  thought 
a  stage  farther,  and  taJ;e  a  brief  survey  of  the  history  of  the  children  of  God. 
The  like  means  will  appear  in  manifold  operation.  Men  meditate  mischief,  but  it 
miserably  miscarries.  God  grants  protection  to  the  persecuted,  and  provides  an 
escape  from  the  most  perilous  exposure.  Full  often  the  darkest  conspiracy  is 
briiught  to  the  direst  confusion.  Persecution  has  evidently  aided  the  increase  of 
the  Church  by  the  scattering  abroad  of  earnest  teachers.  We  are  very  apt  to  get 
hived — too  many  of  us  together — and  our  very  love  of  one  another  renders  it 
difficult  to  part  us  and  scatter  ns  about.  Persecution  therefore  is  permitted  to 
scatter  the  hive  of  the  Church  into  various  swarms,  and  each  of  these  swarms 
begins  to  make  honey.  We  are  all  like  the  salt  if  we  be  true  Christians,  and  the 
proper  place  for  the  salt  is  not  massed  in  a  box,  but  scattered  by  handfuls  over  the 
liet-h  which  it  is  to  preserve.  Moreover,  persecution  helps  to  keep  up  the  separation 
between  the  Church  and  the  world.  When  I  heard  of  a  young  man  that,  after  he 
joined  the  Church,  those  in  his  workshop  met  him  at  once  with  loud  laughter  and 
reproached  him  with  bitter  scorn,  I  was  thankful,  because  now  he  could  not  take 
up  the  same  position  with  themselves.  He  was  a  marked  man:  they  who  knew 
him  discovered  that  there  was  such  a  thing  as  Christianity,  and  such  a  one  as  an 
earnest  defender  of  it.  Again,  persecution  in  the  Christian  Church  acts  like  a 
winnowing  fan  to  the  heaps  gathered  on  the  threshing-floor.  Persecution  has  a 
further  beneficial  use  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  it  is  this.  It  may  be  that  the 
members  of  the  Church  want  it.  The  Roman  who  professed  that  he  would  like  to 
have  a  window  in  his  bosom,  that  everybody  might  see  his  heart,  would  have 
■wished,  I  should  think,  before  long  for  a  shutter  to  that  window ;  yet  it  is  no  slight 
stimulus  to  a  man's  own  circumspection  for  him  to  know  that  he  is  observed  by 
unfriendly  eyes.  Our  life  ought  to  be  such  as  will  bear  criticism.  And  this  perse- 
cution has  a  further  usefulness.  Often  does  it  happen  that  the  enmity  of  the 
world  drives  the  Christian  nearer  to  his  God.  III.  And  now  I  close  this  address 
by  just  very  briefly  hinting  that  this  great  general  truth  applies  to  all 
BELIEVERS ;  but  I  will  make  a  practical  use  of  it.  Are  you  passing  through  great 
trials  ?  Very  well  then,  to  meet  them  I  pray  that  God's  grace  may  give  you  greater 
faith  ;  and  if  your  trials  increase  more  and  more,  so  may  your  strength  increase. 
You  will  be  acting  after  God's  manner,  guided  by  His  wisdom,  if  you  seek  to  get 
more  faith  out  of  more  trial,  for  that  trial  does  strengthen  faith,  through  Divine 
grace,  experience  teaches  us,  and  as  we  make  full  proof  of  the  faithfulness  of  God, 
our  courage,  once  apt  to  waver,  is  confirmed.  (C.  H.  Sjntrgeon.)  How  to  defeat 
the  devil : — Always  take  revenge  on  Satan  if  he  defeats  you,  by  trying  to  do  ten 
times  more  good  than  you  did  before.  It  is  in  some  such  way  that  a  dear  brother 
now  preaching  the  gospel,  whom  God  has  blessed  with  a  very  considerable  measure 
of  success,  may  trace  the  opening  of  his  career  to  a  circumstance  that  occurred 
to  myself.  Sitting  in  my  pulpit  one  evening,  in  a  country  village,  where  I  had  to 
preach,  my  text  slipped  from  my  memoi"y,  and  with  the  text  seemed  to  go  all  that  I 
had  thought  to  speak  upon  it.  A  rare  thing  to  happen  to  me ;  but  I  sat  utterly 
confounded.  I  could  find  nothing  to  say.  With  strong  crying  I  lifted  up  my  soul 
to  God  to  pour  out  again  within  my  soul  of  the  living  water  that  it  might  gush  forth 
from  me  for  others ;  and  I  accompanied  my  prayer  with  a  vow  that  if  Satan's 
enmity  thus  3iad  brought  me  low,  I  would  take  so  many  fresh  men  whom  I  migkt 


CHAP.  I.]  EXODUS.  11 

meet  with  during  the  week,  and  train  them  for  the  ministry,  so  that  with  their 
hands  and  tongues  I  would  avenge  myself  on  the  Philistines.  The  brother  I  have 
alluded  to  came  to  me  the  next  morning.  I  accepted  him  at  once  as  one  whom  God 
had  sent,  and  I  helped  him,  and  others  after  him,  to  prepare  for  the  service,  and  to 
go  forth  in  the  Saviour's  name  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God.  Often 
when  we  fear  we  are  defeated,  we  ought  to  say,  "I  will  do  all  the  more.  Instead  of 
dropping  from  this  work,  now  will  I  make  a  general  levy,  and  a  sacre:l  conscription 
upon  all  the  powers  of  my  soul,  and  I  will  gather  up  all  the  strength  I  ever  had  in 
reserve,  and  make  from  this  moment  a  tremendous  life-long  effort  to  overcome  the 
powers  of  darkness,  and  win  for  Christ  fresh  trophies  of  victory."  After  this 
fashion  you  will  have  an  easier  time  of  it,  for  if  you  do  more  good  the  more  you  are 
tempted,  Satan  will  not  so  often  tempt  you.  When  he  knows  that  all  the  more  you 
are  afflicted  so  much  the  more  you  multiply,  very  likely  he  will  find  it  wiser  to  let 
you  alone,  or  try  you  in  some  other  method  than  that  of  direct  and  overt  opposition. 
So  whenever  you  have  a  trial,  take  it  as  a  favour  ;  whenever  God  holds  in  one  hand 
the  rod  of  affliction,  He  has  a  favour  in  the  other  hand  ;  He  never  strikes  a  child 
of  His  but  He  has  some  tender  blessing  m  store.  If  He  visits  you  with  unwonted 
affliction,  you  will  have  unusual  delight ;  the  Lord  will  open  new  windows  for  you, 
and  show  His  beauty  as  He  shows  it  not  to  others.  According  as  your  tribulations 
abound,  so  also  shall  your  consolations  abound  in  Christ  Jesus.  (Ibid.)  Egypt, 
the  house  of  hondage  to  God's  people : — I.  The  chabacter  of  Egypt,  and  hee  influ- 
ence ON  HER  cHrLDREN.  1.  Egypt  was  distinguished  as  the  abode  of  a  peculiarly 
easy  and  luxurious  life.  In  Egypt,  as  in  the  world,  there  was  all  that  could  lay  the 
goul  to  sleep  under  its  vine  and  fig-tree,  and  reduce  it  to  the  level  of  the  brutes 
which  the  Egyj^tian  worshipped  as  more  wise  and  wonderful  than  man.  This 
easiness  of  the  terms  of  life  is  fatal  to  the  noblest  elements  in  man.  Look  at 
Naples.  No  heroism  can  be  extracted  from  the  Lazzaroni.  Give  the  fellow 
a  bit  of  bread,  a  shce  of  melon,  and  a  drink  of  sour  wine,  and  he  will  lie  all 
day  long  on  the  quays,  baskuig  in  the  sun  and  the  glorious  au-;  and  what 
cares  he  if  empires  rise  or  totter  to  their  fall  ?  Egypt  was  the  Naples  of  the  old 
world  ;  wealth,  luxury,  elaborate  refinement,  of  a  kind  not  inconsistent  with  gross- 
ness ;  but  no  moral  earnestness,  no  manhood,  no  life.  Nature  wooed  man  to  her  lap 
in  Egypt  and  won  him,  bathing  him  in  luxurious  pleasures — Egypt  was  the  world. 
2.  Moreover,  Egypt  was  cut  off  very  much  fiom  all  the  political  and  intellectual 
activity  in  which  Babylon  was  compelled  to  share.  She  could  "  live  to  herself  and 
die  to  herself,"  as  was  not  possible  for  Babylon.  She  could  play  away  her  strength 
and  her  life  in  wanton  pleasures  at  her  will.  Egypt  is  the  image  of  the  wanton 
world  herein.  It  was  full  of  the  wisdom  of  this  world,  the  wisdom  of  the  under- 
standing, which  prostitutes  itself  easily  to  the  uses  of  a  sensual  and  earthly  life. 
II.  The  experience  of  God's  children  there — its  influence  on  a  people  conscious 
that  they  had  a  soul  to  be  saved.  1.  They  went  down  to  Egypt  with  the  fairest 
prospect — certainty  of  sustenance,  and  promise  of  wealth,  honour,  and  power. 
They  were  to  settle  in  Goshen ;  better,  richer  land  than  the  bare  hills  which  would 
be  their  only  home  in  Canaan,  whose  rich  valleys  would  be  mainly  occupied  by  the 
native  inhabitants — land  in  every  way  suited  to  yield  pasture  to  their  flocks.  So 
the  world  woos  us.  We  are  born  in  it,  God  placed  us  here,  God  gave  us  these  keen 
senses,  these  imperious  appetites,  and  the  means  of  their  fullest  indulgpnce ;  and 
why  should  we  tighten  the  rein  ?  See  you  no  new  reason  why  Egypt,  when  the 
patriarchs  dwelt  there,  was  a  fit  and  full  image  of  "  the  world  "  ?  2.  They  had  not 
lived  there  long,  before,  rich  and  fruitful  as  was  the  land,  they  began  to  find  their 
life  a  bondage.  Egypt  was  strange  to  them.  They  could  not  amalgamate  with  the 
inhabitants.  The  Egyptians  came  to  feel  it ;  alienation  sprang  up  and  bitterness. 
Egypt  laid  chains  on  them  to  keep  them  in  her  service,  while  they  groaned  and 
writhed,  and  sighed  to  be  gone — to  be  free.  And  rich  as  the  world's  pastures  may 
be,  propitious  as  may  be  its  kings,  the  soul  of  man  grows  uneasy  in  its  abodes. 
There  are  moments  of  utter  heart-sickness  amidst  plenty  and  luxury,  such  as  a  sick 
child  of  the  mountains  knows,  tossing  on  a  purple  bed  of  state  :  "  Oh,  for  one 
breath  of  the  sunny  breezes,  one  glance  at  the  shadows  sweeping  over  the  brown 
moorlands  ;  one  breath,  one  vision,  would  give  me  new  life."  The  very  prosperity 
makes  the  soul  conscious  of  its  fetters.  3.  The  moment  comes,  in  every  experience, 
when  the  bondage  becomes  too  grevious  to  be  borne ;  when  the  spirit  cries  out  and 
wrestles  for  deliverance,  and  the  iron,  blood-rusted,  enters  the  very  heart.  The 
men  became  conscious  of  their  higher  vocation,  and  wept  and  pleaded  more 
earnestly ;  and  their  tyrants  yoked  them  more  tightly,  and  loaded  them  more 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

heavily ;  till,  like  Job,  they  cursed  God's  light  and  hated  life,  in  bitterness  of  soul. 
And  the  soul  in  its  Egypt,  the  world,  drinks  deep  of  this  experience.  The  moment 
comes  when  it  wakes  up  and  says,  "I  am  a  slave";  "I  am  a  beast";  "I  will 
shake  off  this  yoke  "  ;  "I  will  be  free."  Then  begins  a  battle-agony ;  a  strife  for 
life  and  immortality — the  end  either  a  final,  eternal  relapse  into  captivity,  or  an 
exodus  into  the  wilderness  and  to  heaven.  Let  the  soul  fight  its  own  battles,  and 
the  most  heroic  struggles  shall  not  save  it.  Let  it  follow  the  Captain  of  Salvation, 
and  gird  on  the  armour  of  God,  and  death  and  heU  shall  not  spoil  it.  (J.  B.  Brown, 
B.A.)  The  taskmasters  of  the  world  : — 1.  Sin  is  a  taskmaster.  2.  The  rich  are 
often  taskmasters.  3.  The  ambitious  are  often  taskmasters.  These  taskmasters 
are— (1)  Authoritative :  "  They  did  set  over  thee. "  (2)  Painful:  "  To  alHict  thee." 
(3)    Inconsiderate:    "Burdens."      (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  That  God  allowed  His 

people  thus  to  be  enslaved  and  afflicted : — 1.  A  mystery,  2.  A  problem.  3.  A 
punishment.      4.    A  discipline.      {Ibid.)  Suffering  and  strength  : — One  thing 

experience  teaches,  that  life  brings  no  benediction  for  those  who  take  it  easily.  The 
harvest  cannot  be  reaped  until  the  soil  has  been  deeply  ploughed  and  freely 
harrowed.  "Learn  to  suffer  and  be  strong,"  says  the  poet;  and  certain  it  is  that 
without  suffering  there  can  be  no  strength.  Not,  indeed,  that  suffering  is  or  makes 
strength,  but  that  it  evokes  the  latent  power,  and  rouses  into  action  the  energies 
that  would  have  otherwise  lain  ingloriously  supine.  The  disciphne  of  life  is  a 
necessary  prelude  to  the  victory  of  life ;  and  all  that  is  finest,  purest,  and  noblest  in 
human  nature  is  called  forth  by  the  presence  of  want,  disappointment,  pain, 
opposition,  and  injustice.  Difficulties  can  be  conquered  only  by  decision;  obstacles 
can  be  removed  only  by  arduous  effort.  These  test  our  manhood,  and  at  the  same 
time  confirm  our  self-control.  (W.  H.  D.  Adams.)  Life  maintained  by  struggling  : — 
You  lament  that  your  life  is  one  constant  struggle  ;  that,  having  obtained  what  you 
tried  hard  to  secure,  your  whole  strength  is  now  required  in  order  to  retain  it ;  and 
that  your  necessities  impose  on  you  the  further  obligation  of  additional  exertions. 
It  is  so ;  but  do  not  repine.  As  a  rule,  the  maintenance  of  life  is  everywhere 
conditional  on  struggling.  It  is  not  only  so  with  men  and  animals.  It  is  so  even 
in  the  vegetable  world.  You  struggle  with  obstacles;  but  the  very  trees  have  to  do 
the  same.  Observe  them  ;  take  heart  and  grow  strong.  M.  Louis  Figuier  says  that 
the  manner  in  which  roots  succeed  in  overcoming  obstacles  has  always  been  a 
subject  of  surprise  to  the  observer.  The  roots  of  trees  and  shrubs,  when  cramped 
or  hindered  in  their  progress,  have  been  observed  to  exhibit  considerable  mechanical 
force,  throwing  down  walls  or  splitting  rocks,  and  in  other  cases  cUnging  together 
in  bunches  or  spreading  out  their  fibres  over  a  prodieions  space,  in  order  to  follow 
the  course  of  a  rivulet  with  its  friendly  moisture.  Who  has  not  seen  with  admira- 
tion how  roots  will  adapt  themselves  to  the  special  circumstances  of  the  soil, 
dividing  their  filaments  in  a  soil  fit  for  them  almost  to  infinity,  elsewhere  abandoning 
a  sterile  soil  to  seek  one  farther  off  which  is  favourable  to  them ;  and  as  the  ground 
was  wide  or  less  hard,  wet  or  dry,  heavy  or  light,  sandy  or  stony,  varying  their 
shapes  accordingly  ?  Here  are  wonderful  energy,  and  illustrations  of  the  way  in 
which  existence  may  be  maintained  by  constant  action.  (Scientific  Illustrations 
and  SymboU.)  Use  of  adversity: — The  springs  at  the  base  of  the  Alpine  Mountains 
are  fullest  and  freshest  when  the  summer  sun  has  dried  and  parched  the  verdure  in 
the  valleys  below.  The  heat  that  has  burned  the  arid  plains  has  melted  mountain 
glacier  and  snow,  and  increased  the  volume  of  the  mountain  streams.  Thus,  when 
adversity  has  dried  the  springs  of  earthly  comfort  and  hope,  God's  great  springs  of 
salvation  and  love  flow  freshest  and  fullest  to  gladden  the  heart.  {Irish  Congre- 
gational Magazine.)  Moulding  influences  of  life  : — The  steel  that  has  suffered 
most  is  the  best  steel.  It  has  been  in  the  furnace  again  and  again  ;  it  has  been  on 
the  anvil ;  it  has  been  tight  in  thejawsof  the  vice  ;  it  has  felt  the  teeth  of  the  rasp; 
it  has  been  ground  by  emery  ;  it  has  been  heated  and  hammered  and  filed  until  it 
does  not  know  itself,  and  it  comes  out  a  splendid  knife.  And  if  men  only  k«ew  it, 
what  are  called  their  "  misfortunes  "  are  God's  best  blessings,  for  they  are  the 
moulding  influences  which  give  them  shapeliness  and  edge,  and  durabiUty,  and 
power.  (H.  IV.  Beecher.)  The  advantage  of  afflictions: — Stars  shine  brightest 
in  the  darkest  night ;  torches  are  better  for  the  beating ;  grapes  come  not  to  the 
proof  till  they  come  to  the  press  ;  spices  smell  sweetest  when  pounded  ;  young  trees 
root  the  faster  for  shaking ;  vines  are  the  better  for  bleeding ;  gold  looks  the  brighter 
for  scouring  ;  glow-worms  glisten  best  in  the  dark  ;  juniper  smells  sweetest  in  the 
fire ;  pomander  becomes  most  fragrant  for  chafing  ;  the  pahn-tree  proves  the  better 
for  pressing ;  camomile,  the  more  you  tread  it,  the  more  yon  spread  it.    Such  ia 


CHAP.  I.]  EXODUS.  n 

the  condition  of  all  God's  children,  they  are  then  most  triumphant  when  most 
tempted ;  most  glorious  when  most  afflicted ;  most  in  the  favour  of  God  when  least 
in  man's ;  as  their  conflicts,  so  their  conquests ;  as  their  tribulations,  so  their 
triumphs;  true  salamanders,  that  live  best  in  the  furnace  of  persecution,  so  that 
heavy  afflictions  are  the  best  benefactors  to  heavenly  affections.  (J.  Spencer.) 
The  unirersity  of  hard  knocks : — A  great  deal  of  useless  sympathy  is  in  this  day 
expended  upon  those  who  start  in  life  without  social  or  monetary  help.  Those 
are  most  to  be  congratulated  who  have  at  the  beginning  a  rough  tussel  with  circum- 
stances. John  Kuskin  sets  it  down  as  one  of  his  calamities  that  in  early  life  he 
"had  nothing  to  endure."  A  petted  and  dandled  childhood  makes  a  weak  and 
insipid  man.  You  say  that  the  Kuskin  just  quoted  disproves  the  theory.  No.  He 
is  showing  in  a  dejected,  splenetic,  and  irritated  old  age  the  need  of  the  early 
cudgelling  of  adversity.  He  seems  fretting  himself  to  death.  A  little  experience  of 
the  hardship  of  life  would  have  helped  to  make  him  gratefully  happy  now.  No 
brawn  of  character  without  compulsory  exertion.  The  men  who  sit  strong  in  their 
social,  financial,  and  political  elevations  are  those  who  did  their  own  climbing. 
Misfortune  is  a  rough  nurse,  but  she  raises  giants.  Let  our  young  people,  instead 
of  succumbing  to  the  influences  that  would  keep  them  back  and  down,  take  them 
as  the  parallel  bars,  and  dumb-bells,  and  weights  of  a  gymnasium,  by  which  they 
are  to  get  muscle  for  the  strife.  Consent  not  to  beg  your  way  to  fortune,  but  achieve 
it.  God  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  man  who  does  his  best.  God  helps  the  man 
who  tries  to  overcome  difficulties.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Graces  multiply  by  affliction : 
— Graces  multiply  by  afflictions,  as  the  saints  did  by  persecutions.  (T.  Adams.) 
Beneficial  effects  of  affliction : — The  walnut  tree  is  most  fruitful  when  most  beaten. 
Fish  thrive  best  in  cold  and  salt  waters.  The  most  plentiful  summer  follows  upon 
the  hardest  winter.  (/.  Trapp.)  Injuries  overruled : — Though  your  attempt  to 
destroy  a  man's  position  may  fail  to  accomplish  that  object,  it  may  be  productive 
of  serious  injury  to  him.  Yet,  fortunately  for  him,  that  very  injury  may  afterwards 
bring  forth  good  results.  His  friends  may  rally  round  him  ;  his  resources  may  be 
added  to  through  the  medium  of  the  sympathetic ;  or  he  may  be  so  acted  on  as  to 
put  forth  power  from  within  which  develops  new  graces  and  fresh  vigour.  You 
injure  a  tree,  and  you  will  discover  reparation  is  at  work  even  there.  The  wheel  of 
your  cart,  for  instance,  grazes  the  trunk,  or  the  root  of  the  tree  is  wounded  by  your 
passing  ploughshare  ;  the  result  is  an  adventitious  bud  comes.  Wherever  you  see 
those  adventitious  buds  which  come  without  any  order,  you  may  recollect  that  their 
formation  is  frequently  thus  produced  by  the  irritation  caused  by  injury.  You  cut 
down  the  heads  of  a  groujD  of  forest  trees  ;  you  have  not  destroyed  them.  Like 
the  men  you  have  injured,  they  live  to  tell  the  tale.  The  pollarded  dwarf  remains 
to  declare  what  the  forest  tree  would  have  become  but  for  you.  Even  the  date  of 
your  attack  can  be  ascertained ;  for  the  stunted  group  wiU  cover  themselves  with 
branches  all  of  the  same  age  and  strength,  which  will  exhibit  to  the  sky  the  evidence 
of  the  story :  Injured  these  all  are ;  yes,  but  not  destroyed.  (Scientific  Illustrations  and 
Symbols.)  Affliction  and  groivth : — Bunyan's  figure  of  Satan  pouring  water  on  the  fire 
to  extinguish  it,  and  it  all  the  while  waxing  brighter  and  hotter  because  the  unseen 
Christ  was  pouring  oil  upon  it,  illustrates  the  prosperity  of  God's  people  in  affliction. 
"The  more  they  afflicted  them,  the  more  they  grew."  When  a  fire  attains  a 
certain  heat  and  volume,  to  pom'  water  upon  it  is  only  to  add  fuel.  The  water, 
suddenly  changed  to  its  component  gases,  feeds,  instead  of  extinguishing,  the  flame. 
So  God  changes  the  evil  inflicted  upon  His  people  into  an  upbuilding  and  sanctifying 
power.  {H.  C.  Trumbull.)  They  made  their  lives  bitter  with  hard  bondage. — 
The  bondage  of  sin : — I.  The  bondage  as  an  illustration  of  sin.  "  Whosoever 
committeth  sin  is  the  servant  of  sin."  1.  The  unnaturalness  of  this  bondage. 
Men  were  fitted  to  serve  God,  not  Satan.  All  their  powers  are  perverted,  misused, 
and  reversed,  when  they  are  in  courses  of  disobedience,  and  rebellion.  "Eight" 
means  *'  straight,"  and  "  wrong  "means  "  wrung."  2.  The  severity  of  this  bondage. 
No  taskmaster  for  men  has  ever  been  found  more  brutal  than  a  brutal  man.  'Hie 
devil  has  no  despot  out  of  hell  more  despotic  than  sinners  to  place  over  sinners. 
When  villains  get  villains  in  their  power,  how  they  do  persist  in  lashing  them  into 
further  villainy  and  vice !  3.  The  injustice  of  this  bondage.  Satan  never 
remembers  favours  bestowed.  One  may  give  himself,  body,  soul,  and  spirit  to  the 
devil,  and  no  fideUty  will  win  him  the  least  consideration.  Injustice  is  the  rule  in 
sin,  it  never  in  any  case  has  exceptions.  The  prince  of  evil  simply  uses  his 
devotees  all  the  worse  because  of  their  serviUty  and  patience.  4.  The  destructiveness 
-of  this  bondage  of  sin.    The  wanton  waste  of  all  that  makes  life  worth  a  struggle 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

by  persistent  courses  of  siu  is  familiar  to  every  thoughtful  observer.  Wickedness 
never  builds  up  ;  it  always  pulls  down.  Once  in  the  heat  of  a  public  discussion 
some  infidels  challenged  an  immediate  reply  to  what  they  called  their  arguments. 
A  plain  woman  arose  in  the  audiecce  ;  phe  proceeded  to  relate  how  her  husband 
had  been  dissipated  and  unkind ;  she  had  prayed  for  him,  and  he  had  become  a 
praying  man  and  a  good  father ;  years  of  comfort  and  of  peace  had  they  now  dwelt 
together  in  the  love  of  each  other  and  the  fear  of  God.  "  So  much,"  she  continued, 
"has  my  religion  done  for  me.  Will  you  kindly  state  now  what  your  religion  has 
done  for  you  in  the  same  time?  "  Done?  unbeUef  does  not  do  anything,  it  undoes. 
II.  And  now  with  so  sorrowful  a  showing  as  this  bondage  has  to  maie,  it  seems 
surprising  to  find  that  the  Israelites  were  counselled  to  "  remember  "  it.  Why  should 
THEY  RECALL  SUCH  HUMILIATION  ?  1.  Such  reminiscenccs  promote  humility.  Spiritual 
pride  is  as  dangerous  as  a  vice.  What  have  we  that  God's  mercy  has  not  bestowed 
upon  us?  Why  boast  we  over  each  other?  Eecollect  that  "the  Lord  hath  taken 
you,  and  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  iron  furnace,  even  out  of  Egypt,  to  be  unto 
Him  a  people  of  inheritance,  as  ye  are  this  day."  To  Him  we  owe  everything  we 
are.  2.  Such  a  remembrance  quickens  our  considerate  charity  for  others.  Our 
disposition  is  to  condemn  and  denounce  the  degeneracies  of  the  times  in  which  we 
live.  Wherein  are  people  worse  now  than  we  ourselves  were  once  ?  How  do  we 
know  what  we  might  have  been  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  arrest  of  our  rebellion  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Once,  as  a  drunken  man  reeled  past  his  door,  John 
Newton  exclaimed  :  "  But  for  the  grace  of  God,  there  goes  John  Newton  !  "  {C.  S. 
Robinson,  D.D.)  Embittering  the  lives  of  others: — It  is  no  credit  to  Pharaoh  that 
God  overruled  his  oppression  of  the  Israelites  to  their  advantage.  For  his  course 
there  is  nothing  but  guilt  and  shame.  He  who  makes  another  life  bitter  has  got 
the  bitterness  of  that  life  to  answer  for,  whatever  good  may  come  to  his  victim 
through  the  blessing  of  God.  It  is  a  terrible  thing— a  shameful  thing  also — to 
make  another's  life  bitter.  Yet  there  are  boys  and  girls  who  are  making  their 
mothers'  lives  bitter ;  and  there  are  husbands  who  are  making  the  lives  of  their 
wives  bitter ;  and  there  are  parents  who  are  making  their  children's  lives  bitter. 
Is  no  one's  life  made  bitter  by  your  course  ?  Is  there  no  danger  of  bitterness  of 
life  to  any  one  through  your  conduct — or  your  purposed  action?  Weigh  well  these 
questions ;  for  they  involve  much  to  you.  Pharaoh  is  dead  ;  there  is  no  danger  of 
his  making  our  lives  bitter  with  hard  bondage.  But  the  devil  is  not  dead; 
and  there  is  danger  of  our  being  in  hard  bondage  to  him.  Pharaoh's  bondage 
was  overruled  for  good  to  those  who  were  under  it.  The  devil's  bondage 
is  harder  than  Pharaoh's,  and  no  good  ever  conies  of  it  to  its  subjects. 
It  were  better  for  us  to  have  died  under  the  hardest  bondage  of  Pharaoh 
than  to  live  on  under  the  devil's  easiest  bondage.  ^H.  C.  Trumbull.) 
Pharaoh's  cruel  policy  : — It  is  worth  notice  that  the  king  holds  council  with  his 
people,  and  evidently  carries  them  with  him  in  his  policy.  The  Ejjyptians  had 
more  than  their  share  of  the  characteristic  ancient  hatred  and  dread  of  foreigners, 
and  here  they  are  ready  to  second  any  harsh  treatment  of  these  intruders,  whom 
three  hundred  years  have  amalgamated.  Observe,  too,  that  the  cruel  poUcy  of 
Pharaoh  is  policy,  and  that  only.  No  crime  is  alleged  ;  no  passion  of  hate  actuates 
the  cold-blooded  proposal.  It  is  simply  a  piece  of  state-craft,  perfectly  cool,  and 
therefore  indicating  aU  the  more  heartlessness.  Calculated  cruelty  is  worse  than 
impulsive  cruelty.  Like  some  drinks,  it  is  more  nauseous  cold  than  hot.  No  doubt 
the  question  what  to  do  with  a  powerful  subject  race,  on  a  threatened  frontier,  who 
were  suspected  of  kindred  and  possible  alliance  with  the  enemy  on  the  other  side  of 
the  boundary,  was  a  difficult  one.  Eameses  must  have  thought  of  Goshen  and  the 
IsraeUtes  much  as  we  may  fancy  Prince  Bismarck  thinks  of  Alsace.  He  was  afraid 
to  let  them  become  more  powerful,  and  he  was  loath  to  lose  them.  Whether  they 
stayed  or  went,  they  were  equally  formidable.  High  pohcy,  therefore,  which,  in  Old 
Egypt,  and  in  other  lands  and  ages  nearer  home,  has  too  often  meant  undisguised 
selfishness  and  cynical  cruelty,  required  that  the  peaceful  happiness  of  a  whole 
nation  should  be  ruthlessly  sacrificed ;  and  the  calm  Pharaoh,  whose  unimpassioned, 
callous  face  we  can  still  see  on  the  monuments,  laid  his  plans  as  unmoved  as  if  he 
had  been  arranging  for  the  diminution  of  the  vermin  in  the  palace  walls.  What  a 
picture  of  these  God-defying,  man-despising,  ancient  monarchies  is  here !  What 
would  he  have  thought  if  any  of  his  counsellors  had  suggested,  "  Try  kindness  "  ? 
The  idea  of  attaching  subject  peoples  by  common  interests,  and  golden  bonds  of 
benefit,  had  to  wait  millenniums  to  be  born.  It  is  not  too  widely  spread  yet.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  despotism  of  sin  ; — I.  It  commences  by  suggesting  a  sualIi 


CHAP,  I.]  EXODUS.  15 

TRIBUTE  TO  THE  SINNER.  It  wins  US  by  the  hope  of  a  good  investment — whereby  we  nifty 
secure  wealth,  prosperity,  fame.  A  false  hope  ;  a  deceptive  promise.  Sin  is  cunning  ; 
has  many  counsellors  ;  many  agencies.  You  are  no  match  for  it.  II.  It  sdcceeds 
IN  GETTING  THE  SINNER  COMPLETELY  WITHIN  ITS  POWER.  1.  Sin  gets  the  sinner  under 
its  rule.  "2.  Sin  makes  the  sinner  subject  to  its  counsel.  3.  Sin  makes  the  sinner 
responsible  to  its  authority.  III.  It  ultimately  imposes  upon  the  sinner  an  in- 
tolerable SEKViTDDE.  1.  The  Servitude  of  a  bitter  life.  Destroys  friendly  com- 
panionships, breaks  up  family  comfort.  2.  The  servitude  of  hard  work.  Unpro- 
fitableness and  folly  of  sin.  3.  The  servitude  is  degrading.  Brings  men  from 
respect  to  derision — from  plenty  to  beggary — from  moral  rulership  to  servitude. 
{J.  S,  Exell,  M.A.)  The  spiritual  bondage  ofvien:—!.  An  entire  and  universal 
bondage.  No  meiciful  limit  nor  mitigation  (see  2  Tim.  ii.  26  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19  ;  John 
viii.  34  ;  Eom.  v.  18,  Eom.  iii.  23  ;  Gal.  iii.  22).  1.  It  extends  to  all  mankind.  2. 
The  slavery  of  the  individual  is  as  complete  and  total,  as  that  of  the  species  is  uni- 
versal. (1)  Understanding  depraved.  (2)  Will  perverted.  (3)  Affections  depraved. 
II.  A  severe  and  cruel  bondage.  No  mastery  can  be  found  more  pitiless  than 
that  of  the  unhallowed  affections  and  passions  which  rule  the  mind,  until  the 
Almighty  Eedeemer  breaks  the  yoke,  and  sets  the  captive  free  from  the  law  of  sin 
and  death.  III.  A  helpless  bondage.  1.  The  oppressor  of  the  soul  abounds 
too  greatly  in  power  and  resources  to  dread  any  resistance  from  a  victim  so 
helpless.  Our  strength  for  combat  against  such  an  enemy  is  perfect  weakness. 
2.  In  addition  to  his  own  power  Satan  has  estabUshed  a  close  alliance  with 
every  appetite  and  affection  of  our  nature.  Morally  unable  to  deliver  our- 
selves. Hope  in  God  alone.  Seek  His  aid  through  prayer.  (R.  P.  Buddicom, 
M.A.)  The    sufferings    of   Israel    were    rendered    more    intense :  —  1.    As   a 

punishment  for  their  idolatry.  2.  To  inspire  within  them  a  deep  hatred  toward 
Egypt,  so  that  through  their  perils  in  the  wilderness  they  might  not  wish  to 
return  thither.  3.  That  the  prospect  of  Canaan  might  animate  and  refresh  their 
souls.  4.  That  after  such  excessive  and  unpaid  labour  they  might  fairly  spoil  the 
Egyptians  on  their  departure.  5,  That  they  might  be  aroused  to  earnest  prayer  for 
deliverance.  6.  That  the  power  and  mercy  of  God  might  be  more  forcibly  displayed 
in  their  freedom.  Here  is  a  true  picture  of  tyranny  :  1.  Its  rigour  increases  with 
failure.  2.  It  becomes  more  impious  as  it  is  in  evident  opposition  to  the  Divine 
providence.  3.  It  discards  all  the  claims  of  humanity.  4.  It  ends  in  its  own 
defeat  and  overthrow.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  bondage: — Situated  as  they 
were  within  the  bounds  of  a  foreign  kingdom,  at  first  naturally  jealous,  and  then 
openly  hostile  towards  them,  it  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  the  kind  of  treatment 
inflicted  on  them,  viewing  the  position  they  occupied  merely  in  its  worldly  relations 
and  interests.  But  what  account  can  we  give  of  it  in  its  religious  aspe^-t — as  an 
arrangement  settled  and  ordained  on  the  part  of  God  ?  Why  should  He  have 
ordered  such  a  state  of  matters  concerning  His  chosen  seed  ?  For  the  Egyptians — 
"though  their  hearts  thought  not  so" — were  but  instruments  in  His  hands,  to 
bring  to  pass  what  the  Lord  had  long  before  announced  to  Abraham  as  certainly  to 
take  place  (Gen.  xv.  13).  1.  Considered  in  this  higher  point  of  view,  the  first  light 
in  which  it  naturally  presents  itself  is  that  of  a  doom  or  punishment,  from  which, 
as  interested  ia  tbe  mercy  of  God,  they  needed  redemp'on.  For  the  aspect  of 
intense  suffering,  which  is  latterly  assumed,  could  only  be  regarded  as  an  act  of 
retribution  for  their  past  unfaithfulness  and  sins.  (1)  It  first  of  all  clearly  demon- 
strated, that,  apart  from  the  covenant  of  God,  the  state  and  prospects  of  those  heirs 
of  promise  were  in  no  respect  better  than  those  of  other  men — in  some  respects  it 
seemed  to  be  the  worse  with  them.  They  were  equally  far  off  from  the  inheritance, 
being  in  a  state  of  hopeless  alienation  from  it ;  they  had  drunk  into  the  foul  and 
abominable  pollutions  of  the  land  of  their  present  sojourn,  which  were  utterly  at 
variance  with  an  interest  in  the  promised  blessing ;  and  they  bore  uj^on  them  the 
yoke  of  a  galling  bondage,  at  once  the  consequence  and  the  sign  of  their  spiritual 
degradation.  They  differed  for  the  better  only  in  having  a  part  in  the  covenant  of 
God.  (2)  Therefore,  secondly,  whatever  this  covenant  secured  for  them  of  promised 
good,  they  must  have  owed  entirely  to  Divine  grace.  (3)  Hence,  finally,  the  pro- 
mise of  the  inheritance  could  be  made  good  in  their  experience  only  by  the  special 
kindness  and  interposition  of  God,  vindicating  the  truth  of  His  own  faithful  word, 
and  in  order  to  this,  executing  in  their  behalf  a  work  of  redemption.  While  the 
inheritance  was  sure,  because  the  title  to  it  stood  in  the  mercy  and  faithfulness  of 
God,  they  had  of  necessity  to  be  redeemed  before  they  could  actually  possess  it.  2. 
It  formed  an  essential  part  of  the  preparation  which  they  needed  for  occupying  the 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  V 

inheritance.  (1)  It  was  necessary  by  some  means  to  have  a  desire  awakened  in  their 
bosoms  towards  Canaan,  for  the  pleasantness  of  their  habitation  had  become  a 
snare  to  them.  The  affliction  of  Israel  in  Egypt  is  a  testimony  to  the  truth,  common 
to  all  times,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  must  be  entered  through  tribulation.  The 
tribulation  may  be  ever  so  varied  in  its  character  and  circumstances  ;  but  in  some 
form  it  must  be  experienced,  in  order  to  prevent  the  mind  from  becoming  wedded 
to  temporal  enjoyments,  and  to  kindle  in  it  a  sincere  desire  for  the  better  part, 
which  is  reserved  in  heaven  for  the  heirs  of  salvation.  Hence  it  is  so  peculiarly 
hard  for  those  who  are  hving  in  the  midst  of  fulness  and  prosperity  to  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God.  And  hence,  also,  must  so  many  trying  dispensations  be  sent 
even  to  those  who  have  entered  the  kingdom,  to  wean  them  from  earthly  things, 
and  constrain  them  to  seek  for  their  home  and  portion  in  heaven.  (2)  But  if  we 
look  once  more  to  the  Israelites,  we  shall  see  that  something  besides  longing  desire 
for  Canaan  was  needed  to  prepare  them  for  what  was  in  prospect.  For  that  land, 
though  presented  to  their  hopes  as  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  was  not  to 
be  by  any  means  a  region  of  inactive  repose,  where  everything  was  to  be  done  for 
them,  and  they  had  only  to  take  their  rest,  and  feast  themselves  with  the  abundance 
of  peace.  There  was  much  to  be  done,  as  well  as  much  to  be  enjoyed  ;  and  they 
could  neither  have  fulfilled,  in  regard  to  other  nations,  the  elevated  destiny  to  which 
they  were  appointed,  as  the  lamp  and  witness  of  heaven,  nor  reaped  in  their  own 
experience  tbe  large  measure  of  good  which  was  laid  up  in  store  for  themselves, 
unless  they  had  been  prepared  by  a  pecuhar  training  of  vigorous  action,  and  even 
compulsive  labour,  to  make  the  proper  use  of  all  their  advantages.  (P.  Fairbairn, 
D.D.)  The  bondage  of  sin: — Throughout  the  Scriptures  the  circumstances  of 
Israel  in  Egypt  are  referred  to  as  typical  of  the  servitude  under  wbich  the  sinner  i3 
held.  There  is  more  than  guilt  in  wickedness.  It  would  indeed  be  bad  enough,  even 
if  that  were  all,  but  there  is  slavery  besides.  Our  Lord  Himself  says,  "  Whosoever 
committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin  " ;  and  there  are  no  taskmasters  so  exacting  as  a 
man's  own  lusts.  Look  at  the  drunkard  1  See  how  his  vile  appetite  rules  him  !  It 
makes  him  barter  every  comfort  he  possesses  for  strong  drink.  It  lays  him  help- 
less on  the  snowy  street  in  the  bitter  winter's  cold.  It  sends  him  headlong  down 
the  staircase,  to  the  injury  of  his  body  and  the  danger  of  his  life.  If  a  slaveholder 
were  to  abuse  a  slave  as  the  drunkard  maltreats  himself,  humanity  would  hiss  him 
from  his  place,  and  denounce  him  as  a  barbarian.  And  yet  the  inebriate  does  it  to 
himself,  and  tries  to  sing  the  while  the  refrain  of  the  song  which  ends,  "  We  never, 
never  shall  be  slaves."  The  same  thing  is  true  of  sensuality.  Go  search  the 
hospitals  of  this  city  ;  look  at  the  wretched  victims  of  their  own  lusts  who  fill  the 
wards,  and  then  say  if  man's  inhumanity  to  himself  be  not,  in  some  aspects  of  it, 
infinitely  more  terrible  than  his  oppression  of  his  neighbours.  Visit  our  prisons, 
and  see  how  avarice,  fashion,  frivolity,  and  the  love  of  standing  well  with  their  com- 
panions,  have  held  multitudes  in  their  grip,  forcing  them — nay,  I  will  not  say 
forcing  them,  for  they  sin  wilfully — but  leading  them  to  dishonesty  day  by  day, 
until  at  last  the  inner  servitude  gives  place  to  an  external  imprisonment.  The 
setting  of  slaves  to  make  bricks  without  straw  is  nothing  to  the  drudgery  and  the 
danger — as  of  one  standing  on  the  crater's  edge — that  dishonesty  brings  upon  a 
man  when  once  it  has  him  in  its  power.  And  it  is  the  same  with  every  kind  of  sin. 
But  this  slavery  need  not  be  perpetual,  for  the  Great  Emancipator  has  come.  {W. 
M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Egypt  opposed  to  Israel : — It  is  no  new  thing  for  Egypt  to  be 
unkind  and  cruel  to  Israel.  Israelites  and  Egyptians  are  of  contrary  dispositions 
and  inclinations  ;  the  delight  of  one  is  the  abomination  of  the  other.  Besides,  it  ia 
the  duty  of  Israel  to  depart  out  of  Egypt,  Israel  is  in  Egypt  in  respect  of  abode,  not 
of  desire.  Egypt  is  not  Israel's  rest.  If  Egypt  were  a  house  of  hospitality,  it 
would  more  dangerously  and  strongly  detain  the  Israelites,  than  in  being  a 
house  of  bondage.  The  thoughts  of  Canaan  would  be  but  slight  and  seldom 
if  Egypt  were  pleasant.  It  is  good  that  Egyptians  should  hate  us,  that 
so  they  may  not  hurt  us.  When  the  world  is  most  kind,  it  is  most  corrupt- 
ing ;  and  when  it  smiles  most,  it  seduces  most.  Were  it  not  for  the  bondage 
in  Egypt,  the  food  and  idols  of  Egypt  would  be  too  much  beloved.  Blessed 
be  God,  who  will  by  the  former  wean  us  from  the  latter ;  and  wiU  not  let  ua 
have  the  one  without  the  other :  far  better  that  Egypt  should  oppress  us  than  we 
oppose  God.  (W.  Jenkyn.)  The  bondage  of  sin  : — Vice,  as  it  groweth  in  age,  so 
it  improveth  in  stature  and  strength ;  from  a  puny  child  it  soon  waxeth  a  lusty 
striphng,  then  riseth  to  be  a  sturdy  man,  and  after  a  while  becomes  a  massy  giant 
wliom  we  shall  scarce  dare  to  encounter,  whom  we  shall  be  very  hardly  able  to  van- 


-enAp.xl  EXODUS.  17 

quish  ;  especialiy  seeing  that,  as  it  groweth  taller  and  stouter,  so  we  shall  dwindle 
and  become  more  impotent,  for  it  feedeth  upon  our  vitals  and  thriveih  by  our 
decay  ;  it  waxeth  mighty  by  stripping  us  of  our  best  forces,  by  enfeebling  our 
reason,  by  preventing  our  will,  by  corrupting  our  temper,  by  debasing  our  courage, 
by  seducing  all  our  appetites  and  passions  to  a  treacherous  compliance  with  itself  ; 
every  day  our  mind  growing  more  blind,  our  will  more  restive,  our  spirit  more 
faint,  our  appetites  more  fierce,  our  passions  more  headstrong  and  untaraeable. 
The  power  and  empire  of  sin  do  strangely  by  degrees  encroach,  and 
continually  get  ground  upon  us  till  it  has  quite  subdued  and  enthralled  us. 
First  we  learn  to  bear  it,  then  we  come  to  like  it ;  by  and  by  we  contract 
a  friendship  with  it ;  then  we  dote  on  it ;  at  last  we  become  enslaved  to  it  in  a 
bondage  which  we  shall  hai-dly  be  able  or  willing  to  shake  off.  {Itsaac  Barroio.) 
Darkest  before  the  dawn: — "Fear  not  to  go  down  into  Egypt ;  for  I  will  there  make 
of  thee  a  great  nation"  (Gen.  xlvi.  3).  Look  down,  thou  sainted  patriarch!  see 
what  has  here  become  of  thy  posterity,  increased  now  fourteen  thousand  fold  ;  nay, 
see,  Thou  God  of  Abraham,  what  has  become  of  Thine  inheritance,  how  they  have 
watched  and  prayed  in  vain  !  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken,  the  Lord  hath  forgotten !  " 
And  this  continues,  not  for  years,  but  centuries,  each  year  of  \yhich  seems  in  itself 
a  century  !  "  Verily,  Thou  art  a  God  tbat  hidest  Thyself  1  "  With  such  a  scene  of 
sorrow  in  his  view,  the  most  unfortunate  among  us  well  may  cease  complaint ;  and 
he  who  has  to  some  extent  learned  to  observe  God's  dealings  in  His  providence, 
may  have  himself  already  marked  how,  in  the  present  case,  an  old-established  law 
iu  God's  government  is  set  before  us  in  the  form  of  a  most  touching  incident :  the 
Lord  ofttimes  makes  everything  as  dark  as  they  can  possibly  become,  just  that 
thereafter  and  thereby  the  light  may  shine  more  brilliantly.  Ishmael  must  faint 
beneath  the  shrubs  ere  Hagar  shall  be  told  about  the  well.  Josf-ph  must  even  be 
left  to  sigh,  not  merely  in  his  slavery,  but  in  imprisonment  and  deep  oblivion,  ere 
he  is  raised  to  his  high  dignity.  The  host  of  the  Assyrians  must  stand  before 
Jerusalem's  gates  ere  they  are  smitten  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  The  prophet 
Jeremiah  must  be  let  sink  down  into  the  miry  pit,  ere  he  is  placed  upon  a  rock. 
Did  not  a  violent  persecution  of  the  Christians  precede  the  triumph  of  the  gospel  ?_ 
In  the  night  of  mediaeval  times,  must  not  star  after  star  set  ere  the  Eeformation' 
dawn  arose  ?  Yes  ;  is  not  Israel's  history  in  this  respect  also  the  history  of  God's 
own  people  in  succeeding  times,  even  in  the  present  day  ?  They  suffer  persecution, 
are  oppressed,  ill-treated,  and  opposed  through  a  mistaken  policy  ;  all  kinds  of  force 
are  often  used  for  their  restraint  under  the  sacred  name  of  liberty ;  yet  still  they 
stand,  and  take  deep  root,  and  grow,  expecting  better  times  will  come  in  spite  of 
these  fierce  hun-icanes.  Nay,  verily,  the  Lord  has  not  forgotten  to  be  gracious, 
though  He  sometimes  seems  to  hide  His  face ;  nor  does  He  cease  to  rule  the  world, 
though  He  delays  to  interpose.  The  Father  watches  and  preserves  his  child  amidst 
•  the  fiercest  fires  of  persecution ;  and  although  the  furnace  of  the  trial  through 
■which  he  comes  be  heated  seven  times  more  than  usual,  every  degree  of  heat  is 
counted,  measured,  regulated  by  the  Lord  Himself.  Though  He  permits  injustice, 
and  even  lets  it  grow  to  an  extraordinary  height,  He  yet  employs  it  for  a  purpose 
that  may  well  command  our  adoration  and  regard — the  purifying  and  the  perfecting 
of  those  who  are  His  own.     (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)         The  bitter  lives: — 

1.  God's  blessing  makes  frditfdl.     1.  The  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  2-8). 

2.  The  number  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  (vers.  9,  10).  II.  Note  the  mistakes  com- 
mitted THROUGH  PREJUDICE.  1.  The  Egyptians  hated  and  spurned  the  Israelites ; 
therefore,  ultimately,  lost  the  blessing  of  their  presence.  2.  Statesmanship  fails  in 
■placing  policy  before  principle.  3.  Cruelty  begot  enmity;  kindness  wi  u'd  have 
won.  III.  Selfishness  soon  forgets  past  favours.  A  new  ruler  disregarded  the 
claims  of  Joseph's  seed.  This  world  works  for  present  and  prospective  favours. 
IV.  Here  is  a  type  of  the  growth  of  sin.  The  Israelites  came  into  the  best  part 
of  Egypt;  first  pleasant,  then  doubtful,  then  oppressed,  then  finally  enslaved. 
1.  Sin  yields  bitter  fruit.  2.  We  have  taskmasters  in  our  habit.  3.  Life  becomes 
a  burden :  sorrows  of  servitude.  V.  Note  the  reason  for  this  affliction.  1. 
They  were  becoming  idolatrous  (Josh.  xxiv.  14 ;  Ezek.  xx.  5-8).  2.  Bitterness  now 
would  help  to  prevent  return  to  Egypt.  3.  We  sometimes  find  sorrow  here  that  we 
may  look  above.  VI.  God's  favour  here  contrasted  with  man's  opposition. 
Pharaoh  failed ;  the  Israelities  multiplied.  VII.  Affliction  helps  us.  1.  As 
afidicted,  so  they  grew.  2.  Christ  purgeth  us  for  more  fruit.  3.  Self-denial  is  the 
path  to  power.  (Dr.  Fowler.)  The  mummy  of  Barneses  the  Great: — After  the 
verification  by  the  Khedive  of  the  outer  winding-sheet  of  the  mummy  in  the  sight  of 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chaj;  t 

Irtie  other  illustrious  personages,  the  initial  wrapping  was  removed,  and  there  was 
disclosed  a  band  of  stuff  or  strong  cloth  rolled  all  around  the  body ;  next  to  this 
was  a  second  envelope  sewed  up  and  kept  in  place  by  narrow  bands  at  some  distance 
each  from  each  ;  then  came  two  thicknesses  of  small  bandages  ;  and  then  a  new 
winding-sheet  of  linen,  reaching  from  the  head  to  the  feet.  tFpon  this  a  figure 
representing  the  goddess  Nut,  more  than  a  yard  in  length,  had  been  drawn  in  red 
and  white  colour,  as  prescribed  by  the  ritual  for  the  dead.  Beneath  this  amulet 
there  was  found  one  more  bandage  ;  when  that  was  removed,  a  piece  of  linen  alone 
remained,  and  this  was  spotted  with  the  bituminous  matter  used  by  the  embalmers ; 
80  at  last  it  was  evident  that  Rameses  the  Great  was  close  by — under  his  shroud. 
Think  of  the  historic  changes  which  have  passed  over  the  world  since  that  linen 
cloth  was  put  around  the  form  of  the  king.  Think  what  civilization  stood  facing 
an  old  era  like  his.  A  single  clip  of  the  scissors,  and  the  king  was  fully  disclosed. 
The  head  is  long  and  small  in  proportion  to  the  body.  The  top  of  the  skull  is  quite 
bare.  On  the  temple  tbere  are  a  few  sparse  hairs,  but  at  the  poll  the  hair  is  quite 
thick,  forming  smooth,  straight  locks  about  two  inches  in  length.  White  at  the 
time  of  death,  they  have  been  dyed  a  light  yellow  by  the  spices  used  in  embalm- 
ment. The  forehead  is  low  and  narrow  ;  the  brow-ridge  prominent ;  the  eyebrows 
are  thick  and  white ;  the  eyes  are  small  and  close  together ;  the  nose  is  long,  thin, 
arched  like  the  noses  of  the  Bourbons ;  the  temples  are  sunken  ;  the  cheek-bones 
very  prominent ;  the  ears  round,  standing  far  out  from  the  head,  and  pierced,  like 
those  of  a  woman,  for  the  wearing  of  ear-rings ;  the  jawbone  is  massive  and  strong ; 
the  chin  very  prominent ;  the  mouth  small  but  thick-lipped;  the  teeth  worn  and 
very  brittle,  but  white  and  well  preserved.  The  moustache  and  beard  are  thin. 
They  seem  to  have  been  kept  shaven  during  life,  but  were  probably  allowed  to  grow 
during  the  king's  last  illness ;  or  they  may  have  grown  after  death.  The  hairs  are 
white,  like  those  of  the  head  and  eyebrows,  but  are  harsh  and  bristly,  and  a  tenth 
of  an  inch  in  length.  The  skin  is  of  earthy  brown,  splotched  with  black.  Finally, 
it  may  be  said  the  face  of  the  mummy  gives  a  fair  idea  of  the  face  of  the  living  king. 
The  expression  is  unintellectual,  perhaps  slightly  animal;  bat,  even  under  mummi- 
fication, there  is  plainly  to  be  seen  an  air  of  sovereign  majesty,  of  resolve,  and  of 
pride.  The  rest  of  the  body  is  as  well  preserved  as  the  head  ;  but,  in  consequence 
of  the  reduction  of  the  tissues,  its  external  aspict  is  less  life-like.  He  was  over  six 
feet  in  height.  The  chest  is  broad ;  the  shoulders  are  square ;  the  arms  are  cmssed 
upon  the  breast;  the  hands  are  small  and  dyed  with  henna.  The  legs  and  thighs 
are  fleshless  ;  the  feet  are  long,  slender,  somewhat  flat-soled,  and  dyed,  like  the 
hands,  with  henna.  The  corpse  is  that  of  an  old  man,  but  of  a  vigorous  and  robust 
old  man.  .  .  .  The  man  was  an  incarnation  of  selfishness.  To  him  there  was  but 
one  being  in  the  universe  for  whom  he  needed  to  care  one  groat ;  only  a  single  will 
was  to  be  consulted,  only  a  single  man's  comfort  was  to  be  sought ;  he  himself  was 
the  sole  centre  of  all  things.  Man's  strength,  and  woman's  honour,  life,  wealth, 
time,  and  ease  of  other  men,  went  for  his  personal  glorification.  And  now  the 
•world  looks  at  him,  and  gives  him  his  due,  in  the  light  of  the  charities  and 
decencies  God  commands.  What  do  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  "  a  hard  man  "  ? 
One  of  the  visitors  who  saw  that  mummy  unrolled,  a  cool,  quiet  German,  wrote 
afterwards  this  clause  of  description  :  "  The  expression  of  the  features  is  that  of  a 
man  of  decided,  almost  tyrannical,  character."  That  ought  to  be  so.  This  is  the 
despot  who  ordered  that  the  tally  of  bricks  should  remain  undiminished,  while  his 
slaves  should  have  to  forage  for  their  own  necessity  of  straw.  He  was  "  a  hard 
man."  Is  anyone  of  us  hard?  Do  we  need  to  be  kings  in  order  to  have  that 
name  ?  Can  one  be  hard  upon  his  clerks,  his  journeymen,  his  neighbours,  in  so  far 
as  he  has  power?  So,  again,  does  "  a  man  of  decided,  almost  tyrannical  character  " 
fashion  and  fix  his  character  in  the  expression  of  his  features  ?  Do  you  recognize 
"a  hard  man  "  by  his  looks,  when  you  set  eyes  upon  him  in  ordinary  life?  Will 
one's  disposition  grow  on  him,  until  it  shows  itself  in  his  forehead,  his  lips,  his 
chin,  the  poise  of  his  proud  head?  As  years  pass,  are  your  features  growing 
heavier  and  colder  ?  Furthermore,  is  it  on  the  body  alone  that  character  makes  an 
impression  ?  Is  it  possible  that,  even  unconsciously  to  ourselves,  soul  as  well  as 
body  is  becoming  indurate  and  chilly  ?  Is  money  forcing  features  on  our  inner  life 
and  being  ?  As  we  rise  in  life,  do  we  grow  interested  in  others  ;  unselfish,  gentle, 
forbearing,  in  our  judgments,  or  stiff,  and  rigid,  and  violent,  and  impatient  of 
others'  successes  ?  And  finally,  if  character  thus  perpetuates  itself  in  the  soul  as 
well  as  on  the  body,  is  there  anything  disclosed  to  us  of  the  world  to  come  which 
•will  avail  to  change  the  destiny  we  have  fashioned  ?    On  the  day  royal  Rameses 


fHAP.  I.]  EXODUS.  19 

« _——— ^ — ^ 

was  buried,  they  wrapped  his  aged  bald  head  in  cerements,  and  covered  him  in  the 
ehadows.  He  comes  up  now  after  some  awful  centuries  of  silence,  and  he  looks 
just  as  he  used  to  look.  It  is  likely  his  soul  has  not  grown  different  either.  We 
know  nothing  about  his  future.  It  is  ours  that  concerns  us.  What  is  going  to 
chnnge  any  lineament  of  soul  in  the  mysterious  Herearter?  (C.  S.  Eohinson,  D.D.) 
If  it  be  a  son,  then  ye  shall  kill  him. — High  social  position  used  for  the  furtherance 
of  a   2cirked  pjirpose : — I.  Sometimes   high  social  position  exerts  its  authority 

FOR   THE    ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  A  WICKED  AND  CRDEL  PURPOSE.       1.    The  king  COmmauds 

the  murder  of  the  male  children  of  the  Israelites.  Diabolical  massacre  of  innocents. 
Abuse  and  degradation  of  regal  power.     2.  He  seeks  to  accomplish  this  by  bringing 
the  innocent  into  a  participation  of  his  murderous  deed.     Tyrants  are  generally 
cowards.     II.  When  high  social  authority  is  used  to  further  a  wicked  design, 
WE  are  justified  in  opposing  its  effort.    1.  We  are  not  to  do  wrong  because  a  king 
commands  it.     To  oppose  murder,  when  advocated  by  a  king,  and  when  it  could  be 
accomplished  unknown — or,  if  known,  gain  applause  of  nations — is — (1)  heroic; 
(2)  benevolent ;  (3)  divinely  rewardable  ;  (4)  duty  of  all  who  fear  God.     2.  Such 
opposition  must  embody  the  true  principle  of  piety.     The  midwives  feared  God 
more  than  they  feared  the  king.     3.  Such  opposition  will  secure  for  us  the  Divine 
protection.     III.  For  such  opposition  we  shall  be  divinely  rewarded  (vers.  20, 
21).     {J.  S.  ExeU,M.A.)         Why  were  the  males  to  be  put  to  d'uth?—!.  Because 
they  were  the  most  capable  of  insurrection  and  war.     2.  Because  the  Israelitish 
•women  were  fairer  than  the  Egyptian,  and  so  might  be  kept  for  the  purposes  of  lust. 
3.  Because  the  Israelitish  women  were  industrious  in  spinning  and  needlework,  and 
so  were  kept  for  service.     (Ibid.)         Pharaoli^s  murdcious  intentions  : — His  plan 
was  a  quiet  one.     I  dread  the  quietness  of  murderers.     When  murderers  lay  their 
heads  together,  and  fall  into  soft  whispers,  their  wliispers  are  more  awful  than  the 
roar  of  cannon  or  the  crash  of  tlmuder.     The  king's  plan  was  to  murder  the  male 
child  the  instant  it  was  born.     The  thing  could  easily  be  done.     A  thumb  pressed 
on  the  throat  would  do  it.     A  hand  covering  the  external  organs  of  respiration  for 
a  few  moments  would  be  sufficient.     This  was  his  simple  plan  of  beating  back  the 
manhood  of  the  dreaded  nation.     He  was  going  to  do  it  very  simply.     Oh,  the 
simplicity  of  murderers  is  more  intricate  than  any  elaboration  of  complexity  on  the 
part  of  innocent  men  !     There  was  to  be  no  external  demonstration  of  violence — no 
unsheathing  of  swords — no  clash  of  arms  on  the  field  of  battle  ;  the  nation  was  to 
be  sapped  very  quietly.     Sirs  1  Murder  is  murder,  whether  it  is  done  quietly  or 
with   tumult   and    thunder.      Beware   of  silent  manslaughter !    Beware   of    quiet 
murder !      Nothing  sublimer  than  butchery  struck  the  mind  of  this  idiot  king. 
Thoughts  of  culture  and  kindness  never  flashed  into  the  dungeon  of  his  soul.     He 
had  no  idea  of  the  omnipotence  of  love.     He  knew  not  of  the  power  of  that  govern- 
ment which  is  founded  on  the  iutelligence  and  affection  of  the  common  people. 
Annihilation  was  his  fierce  remedy      There  is  a  profound  lesson  here.     If  a  king 
fears  children,  there  must  be  great  power  in  children ;  if  the  tyrant  begins  with  the 
children,  the  good  man  should  begin  with  them  too.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)         The 
midwives  feared  God. — Pharaoh's  evil  intention  frustrated  by  God: — 1.  Tyrants' 
commands  are  sometimes  crossed  by  God's  good  hand.     2.  The  true  fear  of  God, 
from  faith  in  Him,  will  make  weakest  creatures  abstain  from  sin.     3.  The  name  of 
the  only  God  is  powerful  to  support  against  the  word  of  mightiest  kings.     4.  God's 
fear  will  make  men  disobey  kings,  that  they  may  obey  God.     5.  The  fear  of  God 
will  make  souls  do  good,  though  commanded  by  men  to  do  evil.     6.  Life  preservers 
discover  regard  to  God,  and  not  bloody  injurious  life  destroyers.     7.  God  makes 
them  save  life  whom  men  appoint  to  destroy  it.     8.  The  good  hand  of  God  doth 
keep  the  males  or  best  helps  of  the  Church's  peace,  whom  persecutors  would  kill 
(ver.  17).     {G.  Hughes,  B.D.)        Beneficent  influence  of  the  fear  of  God:— They 
who  fear  God  are  superior  to  all  other  fear.      When  our  notion   of    authority 
terminates  upon  the  visible  and  temporary,  we  become  the  victims  of  fickle  circum- 
stances ;  when  that  notion  rises  to  the  unseen  and  eternal,  we  enjoy  rest  amid  the 
tumult  of  all  that  is  merely  outward  and  therefore  perishing.  Take  history  through 
and  through,  and  it  will  be  found  that  the  men  and  women  who  have  most  devoutly 
and  honestly  feared  God  have  done  most  to  defend  and  save  the  countries  in  which 
they  lived.     They  have  made  little  noise ;  they  have  got  up  no  open-air  demon- 
strations ;  they  have  done  little  or  nothing  in  the  way  of  banners  and  trumpets, 
and  have  had  no  skill  in  getting  up  torchlight  meetings ;  but  their  influence  has 
silently  penetrated  the  national  life,  and  secured  for  the  land  the  loving  and  mighty 
care  of  God,     Where  the  spiritual  life  is  profound  and  real,  the  social  and  political 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  .       [chap.  i. 

"  

influence  is  correspondingly  vital  and  beneficent.     All  the  great  workers  in  society 
are  not  at  the  front.     A  hidden  work  is  continually  going  on  ;  the  people  in  the 
shade  are  strengthening  the  social  foundation.     There  is  another  history  beside 
that  which  is  written  in  the  columns  of  the  daily  newspaper.     Every  country  has 
heroes  and  heroines  uncanonised.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        A  definition  of  the  fear  of 
God : — Fe-iX  of  God  is  that  holy  disposition  or  gracious  habit  formed  in  the  soul 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  whereby  we  are  inclined  to  obey  all  God's  commands ;  and 
evi<lem'S  itself  by — 1.  A  dread  of  His  displeasure.     2.  Desire  of  His  favour.     3. 
Eegaid  for  His  excellences.      4,  Submission  to  His  will.      5.  Gratitude  for  His 
benefits.     6.  Conscientious  obedience  to  His  commands.     (C.  Bxick.)         Civilizing 
influence  of  the  fear  of  God: — A  weaiy  day  had  been  passed  in  visiting  a  wretched 
neighbourhobd.     Its  scenes  were  sad,  sickening,  repulsive.    Famine,  fever,  want, 
squalid  nakedness,  moral  and  physical  impurities,  drunkenness,  death,  and  the 
devil  were  all  reigning  there.    Those  only  who  have  known  the  sinking  of  heart 
which  the  miseries  of  such  scenes  produce,  especially  when  aggravated  by  a  close 
and  tainted  atmosphere,  can  imagine  the  grateful  surprise  with  which,  on  opening 
a  door,  we  stepped  into  a  comfortable  apartment.   Its  whitewashed  walls  were  hung 
around  with  prints,  the  household  furniture  shone  like  a  looking-glass,  and  a  bright 
fire  was  dancing  merrily  over  a  clean  hearth-stone.     It  was  an  oasis  in  the  desert. 
And  we  well  remember,  ere  question  was  asked  or  answered,  of  saying  to  ourselves, 
"  Surely  the  fear  of  God  is  in  this  place  ;  this  must  be  the  house  of  a  church-going 
family."      It  proved  to  be  so.     Yet  it  was  a  home  where  abject  poverty  might 
have  been  expected  and  excused.     A  blind  man  dwelt  there.     (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
The    fear  of  God: — Learn  a  life-lesson  from  the  monument  to  Lord  Lawrence 
in   Wfstminster   Abbey.      Of  all   the   memorials   there,    you   will   not  find    one 
that  gives  a  nobler  thought.     Simply  his  name,  and  the  date  of  his  death,  and 
these  words  ;  "  He  feared  man  so  little,  because  he  feared  God  so  much."    Here 
is  one  great  secret  of  victory.      Walk  ever  in  the  fear  of  God.     Set  God  ever 
before  you.     Let  your  prayer  be  that  of  the  Rugby  boy,   John  Laing  Bicker- 
eteth,  found  locked  up  in  his  desk  after  his  death :   "  0  God,  give  me  courage 
that  I  may  fear  none  but  Thee."     (Great  Thoughts.)         Obedience  to  congcience : — 
Lord  Erskine,  when  at  the  bar,  was  remarkable  for  the  fearhssness  with  which  he 
contended  against  the  Bench.     In  a  contest  he  had  with  Lord  Kenyon  he  explained 
the  rule  and  conduct  at  the  bar  in  the  following  terms : — "  It  was,"  said  he,  "  the 
lirst  command  and  counsel  of  my  youth  always  to  do  what  my  conscience  told  me 
to  be  my  duty,  and  leave  the  consequences  to  God.    I  have  hitherto  followed  it,  and 
have  no  reason  to  complain  that  any  obedience  to  it  has  been  even  a  temporal 
sacrifice  ;  I  have  found  it,  on  the  contrary,  the  road  to  prosperity  and  wealth,  and  I 
shall  point  it  out  as  such  to  my  children."     (IF.  BaxendaU.)         Excellency  of  the 
fear  of  God  : — It  hath  been  an  usual  observation,  that  when  the  king's  porter  stood 
at  the  gate  and  suffered  none  to  come  in  without  examination  what  he  would  have, 
that  then  the  king  was  within ;  but  when  the  porter  was  absent,  and  the  gates  open 
to  receive  all  that  came,  then  it  was  an  argument  of  the  king's  absence.     So  in  a 
Christian,  such  is  the  excellency  of  the  fear  of  God,  that  when  it  is  present,  as  a 
porter  shutting  the  doors  of  the  senses,  that  they  see  not,  hear  not  what  they  list, 
it  is  an  argument  the  lord  of  that  house,  even  God  Himself,  is  within  ;  and  when 
this  fear  is  away,  a  free  entrance  is  given  to  all  the  most  dissolute  desires,  so  that 
it  is  an  infallible  demonstration  of  God's  removal  from  such  a  soul.     (J.  Spencer.) 
Fear  of  God  a  safefiuard : — If  we  fear  God,  we  need  know  no  other  fear.     That 
Divine  fear,  like  the  space  which  the  American  settler  burns  around  him  as  a 
defence  against  the  prairie  fire,  clears  a  circle,  within  which  we  are  absolutely  safe. 
The  old  necromancists  believed  that  if  a  man  was  master  of  himself  he  enjoyed 
complete  immunity  from  all  danger ;  if  his  will  was  firmly  set,  the  powers  of  evil 
could  not  harm  him  ;  he  could  defy  a  host  of  devils  raging  around.     Against  the 
malice  of  human  and  infernal  power,  the  citadel  of  a  man's  heart  that  is  set  upon 
God  is  impregnable.     (Dr.  Hugh  Macmillan.)         The  best  service  : — He  who  serves 
God,  serves  a  good  master.     He  Who  truly  serves  God  is  courageous  and  heroic. 
Here  are  two  humble  women  who  despise  the  patronage  of  a  crown,  and  set  a  king's 
edict  at  defiance.     There  is  no  bravery  equal  to  the  bravery  that  is  moral.     It 
makes  the  weakest  a  conqueror,  and  lifts  up  the  lowest  to  pluck  the  palm  of  victory. 
A  short-sighted  policy  would  have  said,  "Please  Pharaoh";   a  true  heart  said, 
"  Please  God."    Pharaoh  had  much  to  give.    He  held  honours  in  his  hand.    He 
could  deal  out  gold  and  silver.    He  could  give  a  name  among  the  Egyptians.    What 
of  it  1    God  coold  turn  his  honours  into  shame,  and  send  the  canker  on  his  gold. 


CBAP.  II,]  EXODUS.  21 

Serve  God  !  Well  tended  is  that  fold  which  God  watches.  Pharaoh  may  frown, 
but  his  frowns  will  be  unseen  and  unregarded  amid  the  light  of  an  approving 
heaven !     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Cast  into  the  river.— T/ie  last  edict  of  a   tyrant 

king  : — I.  It  was  public  in  its  PROCLiMATioN.  How  men  advance  from  one  degree 
of  sin  to  another.  II.  It  was  cruel  in  its  kequikejients.  Why  should  a  tyrant 
king  fear  the  infant  sons  of  Israel  ?  He  knew  they  would  be  his  enemies  in  the 
future  if  spared.  Young  life  is  the  hope  of  the  Church  and  the  terror  of  despots. 
(J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Progress  in  sin: — There  is  a  woful  gradation  in  sin.  As 
mariners,  setting  sail,  lose  sight  of  the  shore,  then  of  the  houses,  then  of  the 
steeples,  and  then  of  the  mountains  and  land;  and  as  those  who  are  waylaid  by  a 
consumption  first  lose  vigour,  then  ajipetite,  and  then  colour ;  thus  it  is  that  sin 
hath  its  woful  gradations.  None  decline  to  the  worst  at  first,  but  go  from  one 
degree  of  turpitude  to  another,  until  the  very  climax  is  reached.  The  climax  of 
cruelty  : — If  we  glance  once  more  at  the  different  means  which  Pharaoh  devised 
for  the  o])pression  and  diminution  of  the  Hebrews,  we  find  that  they  imply  the 
following  climax  of  severity  and  cruelty  :  he  first  endeavoured  to  break  their  energy 
by  labour  and  hardship  (vers.  11-14),  then  to  effect  their  diminution  by  killing  the 
newborn  male  children  through  the  midwives  (vers.  15,  16) ;  and  when  neither  of 
these  plans  had  the  desired  result — the  former  in  consequence  of  the  unusual 
robustness  of  the  Hebrew  women,  the  latter  owing  to  the  piety  and  compassion  of 
the  midwives — he  tried  to  execute  his  design  by  drowning  the  young  children  (ver. 
22) ;  which  last  device  was  in  two  respects  more  audacious  and  impious  than  tHe 
second:  first,  because  he  now,  laying  aside  all  shame,  showed  publicly  his  despotism 
against  a  harmless  foreign  tribe,  which  relied  on  the  hospitality  solemnly  promised 
to  them  ;  and,  secondly,  because  now  the  whole  people  were  let  Ic  :,d  against  the 
Hebrews ;  spying  and  informing  was  made  an  act  of  loyalty,  and  compassion 
stamped  as  high-treason.  (M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.)  Increasing  iJower  of  sin  : — 
"When  once  a  man  has  done  a  wrong  thing  it  has  an  awful  power  of  attracting  him 
and  making  him  hunger  to  do  it  again.  Every  evil  that  I  do  may,  indeed,  for  a 
moment  create  in  me  a  revulsion  of  conscience,  but  stronger  than  that  revulsion  of 
conscience  it  exercises  a  fascination  over  me  which  it  is  hard  to  resist.  It  is  a  great 
deal  easier  to  find  a  man  who  has  never  done  a  wrong  thing  than  to  find  a  man 
who  has  only  done  it  once.  If  the  wall  of  the  dyke  is  sound  it  will  keep  the  water 
out,  but  if  there  is  the  tiniest  hole  in  it,  it  will  all  come  in.  So  the  evil  that  you  do 
asserts  its  power  over  you  ;  it  has  a  fierce,  longing  desire  after  you,  and  it  gets  you 
into  its  clutches.  Beware  of  the  first  evils,  for,  as  sure  as  you  are  living,  the  first 
step  will  make  the  second  seem  to  become  necessary.  The  first  drop  will  be  followed 
by  a  bigger  second,  and  the  second,  at  a  shorter  interval,  by  a  more  copious  third, 
until  the  drops  become  a  shower,  and  the  shower  becomes  a  deluge.  The  course  of 
evil  is  ever  wider  and  deeper,  and  more  tumultuous.  The  little  sins  get  in  at  the 
window  and  open  the  front  door  for  the  big  housebreakers.  One  smooths  the  path 
for  the  other.  All  sin  has  an  awful  power  of  perpetuating  and  increasing  itself.  As 
the  prophet  says  in  his  awful  vision  of  the  doleful  creatures  that  make  their  sport 
in  the  desolate  city,  "  None  of  them  shall  want  her  mate.  The  wild  beasts  of  the 
desert  shall  meet  with  the  wild  beasts  of  the  islands."  Every  sin  tells  upon 
character,  and  makes  the  repetition  of  itself  more  and  more  easy.  "None  is 
barren  among  them."  And  all  sin  is  linked  together  in  a  slimy  tangle,  like  a  field 
of  seaweed,  so  that  the  man  once  caught  in  its  oozy  fingers  is  almost  sure  to  dro\|D. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vees.  1-4.  An  ark  of  bulrushes. — The  birth  of  Moses : — I.  As  occueeing  of  noble 
PAKENTAGE.  1.  They  were  of  moderate  social  position.  2.  They  were  of  strong 
parental  affection.  3.  They  were  of  good  religious  character.  Happy  the  child 
that  is  linked  to  the  providence  of  God  by  a  mother's  faith  !  Faith  in  God  i|  the 
preserving  influence  of  a  threatened  life — physically,  morally,  eternally.  l|.  As 
HAPPENING  IN  PERILOUS  TIMES.  1.  When  his  nation  was  in  a  condition  of  servUude. 
That  this  servitude  was  severe,  exacting,  grievous,  disastrous,  murderous,  is  ef  ident 
irom  the  last  chapter.     2.  When  a  cruel  edict  was  in  force  against  the  youndr   III. 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  n. 

As  INVOLVING  MOMENTOUS  ISSUES.  1.  Issues  relating  to  the  lives  of  individuals. 
The  birth  of  Moses  made  Miriam  a  watcher,  gave  her  an  introduction  to  a  king's 
daughter,  and  has  given  immortality  to  her  name.  It  brought  Aaron  into  historical 
prominence.  2.  Issues  involving  the  freedom  of  an  enslaved  people.  3.  Issues 
relating  to  the  destiny  of  a  proud  nation.  IV.  As  exhibiting  the  inventiveness 
OF  MATERNAL  LOVE.  1.  In  that  she  devised  a  scheme  for  the  safety  of  her  child. 
The  mother  was  more  clever  than  the  tyrant  king  and  his  accomplices.  Tyranny 
is  too  calculating  to  be  clever.  Maternal  love  is  quick  and  spontaneous  in  thought. 
V.  As  eluding  THE  EDICT  OF  A  cfiUEL  KINO.  Tlic  mothar  of  Moses  was  justified 
in  eluding  this  edict,  because  it  was  unjust,  murderous ;  it  did  violence  to  family 
affection,  to  the  laws  of  citizenship,  and  to  the  joyful  anticipation  of  men.  (/.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  The  infancy  of  Moses : — 1.  His  concealment.     2.  His  rescue.     3. 

His  restoration.     {Caleb  Morris.)  Lessons: — 1.  Providence  is  preparing  good, 

while  wickedness  is  working  evil  to  the  Church.  2.  Liues,  tribes,  and  persons  are 
appointed  by  God,  by  whom  He  will  work  good  to  His  people.  3.  In  the  dpsola- 
tions  of  tbe  Church's  seed,  God  will  have  His  to  marry  and  continue  it.  4.  Tribes 
cursed  for  their  desert,  may  be  made  instrumental  of  good  by  grace.  5.  Choice  and 
taking  in  marriage  should  be  under  Providence,  free,  and  rational  (ver.  1).  6.  The 
greatest  instruments  of  the  Church's  good  God  ordereth  to  being  in  the  common 
way  of  man.  7.  God  ordereth,  in  His  wisdom,  instruments  of  salvation  to  be  born 
in  times  of  distinction.  8.  No  policies  or  cruelties  of  man  can  hinder  God  from 
sending  saviours  to  His  Church  (ver.  2).     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  The  ark  of  bul- 

rushes : — I.  The  goodly  child — Moses.  1.  Its  birth.  (1)  In  an  evil  time.  The 
edict  of  Pharaoh,  like  the  sword  of  Damocles,  over  its  head.  God  takes  care  that 
men  needed  for  His  work  in  evil  times  shall  be  bom  in  them — Wickliffe,  Luther. 
(2)  Of  an  oppressed  people  and  humble  origin.  Great  men  often  of  lowly  extrac- 
tion. 2.  Its  ai)pearance — "  Goodly."  Beautiful,  not  only  to  a  mother's  eyes,  but 
really  so.  Its  beauty  appealed  to  the  mother,  as  its  tears  to  the  princess.  3.  The 
excitement  cansed  by  its  birth.  Babes  usually  welcomed.  Here  were  fear  and 
sorrow  and  perplexity.  This  Divine  gift  becomes  a  trial,  through  the  wickedness 
of  man.  Sin  turns  blessings  into  curses,  and  joy  into  sorrow.  II.  The  anxious 
MOTHER— Jochebed.  1.  Her  first  feelings.  Touched  by  the  rare  loveliness  of  her 
child.  Bravely  resolves  to  evade  the  decree.  She  had  another  son— Aaron — now 
three  years  of  age  (chap.  vii.  7) ;  but  could  not  spare  cue.  2.  Her  careful  conceal- 
ment. For  three  months  she  contrived  to  preserve  her  secret  from  the  Egyptians. 
Anxiously  thmking  what  she  might  presently  do.  3.  Her  ingenious  device.  Con- 
cealment no  longer  possible.  She  will  trust  God  rather  than  Pharaoh.  III.  The 
OBEDIENT  DAUGHTER — Miriam.  1.  Her  obedience.  The  blessing  of  obedient 
children.  Trusted  by  the  mother.  The  elder  should  care  for,  and  watch  over,  the 
younger.  2.  Her  surprise.  The  princess  and  her  retinue  appear.  She  attentively 
watches.  The  ark  discovered,  brought  out,  and  opened.  Her  anxiety.  She 
approaches.  3.  Her  thoughtfulness.  She  is  quick-witted.  Sees  compassion  in 
the  princess's  face.  Shall  she  fetch  a  nurse  ?  Of  the  Hebrew  women  ?  4.  Her 
great  joy.  Her  brother  saved.  Her  return  home.  Perhaps  the  mother  was  pray- 
ing for  the  child.  Jochebed's  surprise  and  gratitude  and  joy.  A  great  result  grew 
out  of  her  obedience  (1  Pet.  i.  14;  Eph.  vi  1;  Col.  iii.  20).  IV.  The  compassionatb 
PRINCESS.  Kindness  in  the  house  of  Pharaoh  !  "  Out  of  the  strong  sweetness." 
Children  not  always  to  be  judged  by  their  parents.  Eli's  sons  were  not  godly 
(1  Sam.  ii.  12).  Pharaoh's  daughter  not  cruel,  as  her  father.  Moved  by  an 
infant's  tears,  she  at  once  comprehends  the  history  of  the  child.  Eesolves  to 
adopt  it.  Providential  use  of  compassion,  maternal  solicitude,  filial  obedience, 
infantile  beauty  and  helplessness.  "  All  things  work  together  for  good."  Learn — 
1.  To  prize  a  mother's  love,  and  return  it.  2.  To  imitate  Miriams  obedience  and 
sisterly  affection.  3.  Not  to  judge  of  children  by  their  parents.  4.  To  admire  the 
wisdom  of  Providence.  5.  "Unto  us  a  child  is  born,  onto  us  a  son  is  given" — 
Jesus.  (J-  C.  Graij.)  The  cradle  on  the  waters: — I.  The  power  of  young  life 
TO  ENDURE  HARDSHIP.     CodUng  of  children  is  foolish,  unhealthy.     II.   The  use 

THAT    ONE   MEMBER   OF   A   FA3IILY   MAY    BE   TO  ANOTHER.       ScrviceS  which  Seem  trifling 

may  prove  far-reaching  in  effect.  Miriam  thus  helped  to  bring  aboat  the  freedom 
of  her  nation.  III.  The  pathetic  influence  of  a  babe's  tears.  Touching  tokens 
of  sorrow,  weakness,  helplessness.  Potent,  inviting  help.  Many  are  moved  by  the 
sight  of  personal  grief  who  look  unmoved  upon  a  national  calamity.  IV.  The 
SENSiTme  conscience  of  a  tyrant's  daughter.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  babe 
in  the  bulrushes: — L   Let  us  consideb  the  perils  which  surrounded  this  pub- 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  ^3 

POSEFDL   LIFE,    WHICH    WAS    RESCUED    IN     SUCH   A   REMARKABLE    MANNER.        1.     Fot   OUe 

thing,  it  was  the  life  of  an  infant  child.  Infancy  alone  is  more  than  enough  to 
extinguish  such  a  diminutive  glimmer  of  existence;  just  leave  him  where  he  is  a 
little  longer,  and  you  will  never  hear  of  that  child's  going  up  into  Mount  Sinai. 
There  is  only  the  side  of  a  slight  basket  between  him  and  swift  drowning ;  one  rush 
of  the  waves  through  a  crevice,  and  the  march  through  the  wilderness  will  never 
be  made.  2.  Observe  also  this  was  the  life  of  a  proscribed  child.  3.  And  then 
observe  that  this  was  the  life  of  an  outcast  child.  He  had  no  fi-iends.  His  mother  had 
already  hidden  him  until  concealment  was  dangerous.  II.  Let  us  try  to  find 
SOME  SUGGESTIONS  AS  TO  MODERN  LIFE  AND  DUTY.  There  Moscs  lay,  before  he 
was  called  Moses,  or  had  any  right  to  be — an  infant,  proscribed,  outcast  child ! 
You  pity  him ;  so  do  I  pity  him,  with  all  my  heart.  Still,  I  will  tell  you  frankly 
what  I  pity  more  by  far,  and  I  trust  to  better  purpose.  There  are  hundreds  of  sons 
and  daughters  of  misery  drifting  out  upon  a  stream  of  vice,  which  the  Nile  river, 
with  all  its  murkiness  and  its  monsters,  cannot  parallel  for  an  exposure  of  peril — 
a  river  of  dejjraved  humanity,  hurrying  on  before  it  everything  stainless  and  pro- 
mising into  the  darkness  of  destiny  behind  the  cloud.  It  was  a  woman  who 
ultimately  brought  up  this  babe  from  the  bulrush  ark.  Women  know  how  to  save 
children  better  than  men  do.  The  spirit  in  which  all  this  work  must  be  done  is 
that  of  faith.  There  is  a  sense  of  possibility  in  every  child's  constitution,  and  this 
is  what  gives  a  loftier  value  to  it  than  that  which  is  possessed  by  any  other 
creature  of  the  living  God.  A  child  owns  in  it  what  a  diamond  Las  not :  a  child 
can  grow,  and  a  diamond  cannot.  They  say  it  takes  a  million  of  years,  more  or 
less,  to  make  a  big  diamond  ;  but  the  biggest  of  diamonds  has  a  past  only,  and  the 
smallest  of  children  has  a  limitless  future.  Faith  and  works  are  what  seemed 
once  to  disturb  the  balance  of  a  man  whose  business  it  was  to  write  an  epistle  in 
the  New  Testament.  See  what  a  vivid  illustration  this  has  in  the  story  here  before 
us.  Jochebed  had  absolute  faith  ;  so  had  Amram  ;  and  so  had  Miriam  for  all  we 
know.  But  it  would  have  done  no  good  to  fall  down  and  go  to  crying,  nor  to  sit 
down  and  quote  the  promises,  nor  to  be  trampled  down  and  give  up  the  baby. 
Jochebed  told  Amram  to  get  her  some  of  the  toughest  rushes  he  could  Hnd,  and  he 
went  and  did  it ;  then  she  awaked  Moses,  and  wrapped  him  in  tbe  most  comfortable 
way  she  could  for  an  outing  ;  then  she  took  some  pitch  and  bitumen,  and  told 
Miriam  a  patient  story  as  to  how  she  was  to  watch  her  brother.  The  word  "  ark  " 
is  found  only  in  this  instance,  and  in  that  not  altogether  unlike  it  in  the  case  of 
Noah  ;  only  in  these  two  places  has  the  inspired  Word  of  God  employed  it.  There 
was  the  same  principle  at  stake  in  both  experiences  — Noah  believed  God,  and  then 
made  his  "  ark  "  ;  Amram  and  Jochebed  believed  God,  and  then  made  their  "  ark." 
And  I  can  readily  imagine  that  these  pious  parents  got  their  first  notion  of  the 
plan  to  save  the  baby  out  of  the  story  of  Noah ;  and  so  they  used,  whenever  they 
spoke  of  it,  to  employ  the  same  name.  At  any  rate,  it  has  a  lesson  for  every  one 
of  us.  Trust  God,  always  trust  God  ;  then  do  all  within  your  power  to  help  on  the 
purpose  you  prayerfully  hope  He  is  about  to  undertake  for  you.  Make  the  best  ark 
you  can  ;  place  it  in  the  river  at  the  safest  spot  you  can  find ;  leave  it  there ;  then 
trust  God.  The  main  point  is,  venturesomeness  is  the  highest  element  of  belief  in 
our  Father  in  heaven.     (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  mother  of  Moses  :— I.  The 

mother's  love  of  THE  CHILD.  Diviue.  Providential.  II.  The  mother's  in- 
genuity. Danger  risked.  Ample  reward.  III.  The  mother's  heroism.  A  sacri- 
fice of  love.  (J.  0.  Davies.)  The  mother  remained  at  home,  showing — 1.  The 
dignity  of  her  faith — she  could  wait  away  from  the  scene  of  trial.  2.  Her  supreme 
hope  in  God — the  issue  was  to  be  Divine.  3.  Her  happy  confidence  in  her  little 
daughter — children  do  their  work  better  when  they  feel  that  tbey  are  trusted  with 
it  entirely.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  beautiful  ministry  of  a  youthful  life  : — 
1.  Loving.  2.  Cautious.  3.  Obedient.  4.  Reflective.  6.  Courteous.  6.  Suc- 
cessful. {Ibid.)  The  faith  of  Moses'  parents: — We  shall  study  the  history  of 
Moses  without  the  key  if  we  overlook  the  point  made  by  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews 
(chap.  xi.  23).  "By  faith,"  &c.  Faith  in  God  made  them  fearless  of  Egypt's 
cruel  king.  It  may  sometimes  happen  that  profound  interest  in  a  babe  of  apparently 
rare  promise  shall  run  in  a  very  low  and  selfish  channel,  suggesting  how  much  he 
may  do  to  comfort  their  own  hearts,  or  to  build  up  the  glory  of  their  house  or  of 
their  name  ;  but  when,  by  a  heavenly  faith,  it  takes  hold  of  useful  work  for  God, 
when  it  prompts  to  a  special  consecration  of  all  the  possibilities  of  his  future  to 
the  kingdom  of  Christ,  it  is  morally  sublime.  Such  seems  to  have  been  the  faith 
of  the  parents  of  the  child  Moses.    How  their  faith  prompted  ingenious  methods 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  Tb^ 


of  concealments ;  how  it  wrought  in  harmony  with  God's  wise  providence,  not  only 
to  preserve  the  Ufe  of  this  consecrated  child,  but  to  give  him  a  place  in  the  heart  ■ 
of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  thus  open  to  his  growing  mind  all  the  wealth  of  Egypt's 
culture  and  wisdom,  we  learn  somewhat  from  this  story.  {H.  Cowles,  D.D.) 
Moses  and  Christ: — Moses  and  Christ  stand  together  in  the  same  supernatural 
scheme ;  they  are  in  the  line  of  the  same  Divine  puqDose ;  they  work  together, 
though  in  different  ways,  towards  the  same  end.  Although  they  occupy  far  distant 
ages,  and  live  under  completely  different  conditions,  they  largely  undergo  the  same 
experiences,  conform  to  the  same  laws,  confront  the  same  difficulties,  and  manifest 
the  same  spirit.  In  many  cases  the  events  of  their  lives  actually  and  literally 
correspoud,  and  in  many  more  it  only  needs  that  the  veil  of  outward  manifestation 
he  hf  ted  to  see  that  in  spirit  they  are  one.  And  this  not  by  accident,  but  by  design. 
The  plan  of  God  is  a  complete  whole.  That  Moses,  the  founder  of  the  preparatory  dis- 
pensation, should  he  pre-eminently  like  Him  who  was  to  fulfil  it,  is  most  natural ; 
that  he  should,  in  his  measure,  set  Him  forth,  is  what  we  might  expect  (see  Deut. 
xviii.  15  ;  John  v.  46).  To  point  out  that  likeness,  and,  at  the  same  time,  mark 
the  contrasts,  is  the  work  upon  which  we  enter.  We  shall  study  Moses  in  the 
light  of  Christ.  Like  two  rivers,  at  one  time  we  shall  see  the  two  lives  to  flow 
together  in  the  same  channel— the  same  quiet  flowing,  the  same  tortuous  course, 
the  same  cataracts  in  each ;  but  anon  they  divide,  and  pursue  each  a  separate  bed, 
only  to  meet  again  far  away  beyond.  1.  We  take  the  two  lives  at  their  beginnings. 
The  time  of  each  is  most  significant.  The  age  in  each  case  was  charged  with  ex- 
pectancy. Bo'.h  were  periods  of  bondage,  and  bondage  crying  out  for  a  deliverer. 
Both  were  born  to  be  emancipators.  But  the  one  birth  is  not  like  the  other.  The 
source  of  the  one  river  is  at  our  feet;  the  source  of  the  other  is  like  Egypt's  own 
mysterious  Nile— far,  far  away  in  a  land  of  mystery,  and  where  mortals  have  never 
trodden.  2.  The  two  deliverers  are  aUke  again  in  this— that  they  owe  nothing  of 
their  greatness  to  their  parents.  Amram  and  Joseph,  Jochebed  and  Mary,  stand 
upon  the  ordinary  level  of  mankind.  God  is  not  bound  down  to  evolution.  He 
can  raise  up  a  Moses  from  the  slave  huts  of  Egypt ;  He  can  send  forth  His  Christ 
from  the  peasantry  of  Galilee.  3.  They  start  together  from  obscurity  and  poverty 
and  adversity.  4.  Both  children  are  born  to  great  issues,  and  both  must  meet, 
therefore,  that  opposition  with  which  goodness  is  ever  assailed.  It  would  seem 
that  the  birth  of  auy  soul  having  great  moral  capabilities  arouses  the  opposition 
of  the  powers  of  darkness.  Fable  and  legend  have  recognized  this,  and  have  made 
their  heroes  pass  through  extraordinary  dangers  whilst  only  children.  Romulus 
and  Remus,  cast  away  to  die,  were  nursed  by  a  wolf,  and  thus  lived  to  build  the 
foundations  of  Rome  and  the  Roman  Empire.  Cyrus,  the  founder  of  the  Medo- 
Persian  monarchy,  was  said  to  have  been  thrown  out  into  the  wilderness,  and_  to 
have  been  adopted  by  a  shepherd's  wife,  whose  own  babe  was  dead.  Our  own  King 
Arthur,  too,  passed  a  similar  peril.  Doubtless  these  are  no  more  than  legends, 
confused  echoes  possibly  from  the  story  of  Moses  itself;  but  they  serve  to  show  us 
how  mankind  has  ever  recognized  that  lives  destined  to  be  great  are  met  by  hard- 
ship and  opposition.  Moses  and  Christ  are  one  in  this.  5.  The  likeness  of  the 
two  births  is  not,  however,  completed  until  we  notice  the  special  providences  of 
God,  by  which  they  are  delivered  from  their  enemies.  What  are  the  edicts  of 
Pharaoh  or  the  swords  of  Herod  against  the  purposes  of  the  Most  High  ?  Who  are 
kings  and  piinces,  that  they  should  withstand  the  Lord?  What  are  all  the  com- 
binations of  evil,  and  all  the  plots  of  the  devil,  against  His  will,  who  ruleth  over 
all?     (H.  Wonnacott.)  The  bulrush: — The  bulrush  is  the  papyrus,  or  paper- 

reed,  of  the  ancients.  It  grows  in  marshy  places,  and  was  once  most  abundant  on 
the  banks  of  the  Nile ;  but  now  that  the  river  has  been  opened  to  commerce,  it  has 
disappeared,  save  in  a  few  unfrequented  spots.  It  is  described  as  having  "an  angular 
stem  f roru  three  to  six  feet  high,  though  occasionally  it  grows  to  the  height  of  fourteen 
feet;  it  has  no  leaves;  the  flowers  are  in  very  small  spikelets,  which  grow  in 
thread-like,  flowering  hranchlets,  which  form  a  busby  crown  to  each  stem."  It 
■was  used  for  many  purposes  by  the  Egyptians  —  as,  for  example,  for  shoes, 
baskets,  vessels  of  different  sorts,  and  boats ;  but  it  was  especially  valuable  as 
furnishing  the  material  corresponding  to  our  paper,  on  which  written  communica- 
tion could  be  mnde.  To  obtain  this  last  fibre,  the  course  exterior  rind  was  taken 
off,  and  then  with  a  needle  the  thin  concentric  layers  of  the  inner  cuticle,  sometimes 
to  the  number  of  twenty  to  a  single  plant,  were  removed.  These  were  afterward 
joined  together  with  a  mixture  of  flovu:,  paste,  and  glue ;  and  a  similar  layer  of 
strips  being  laid  crosswise  in  order  to  strengthen  the  fabric,  the  whole  sheet  was 


COAP.  n.]  EXODUS.  25 

subjected  to  pressure,  dried  in  the  sun,  beaten  with  a  mallet,  and  polished  with 
ivory.  When  completed  and  written  over,  the  sheets  were  united  into  one, 
and  rolled  on  a  slender  wooden  cylinder.  Thus  was  formed  a  book,  and  the 
description  of  the  process  gives  the  etymology  and  primal  significance  of 
our    ownword   "volume."       (W.    M.    Taylor,   D.D.)  Children    in    need    of 

jireserving  mercy  : — The  spot  is  traditionally  said  to  be  the  Isle  of  Kodak,  near  old 
Cairo.  In  contrasting  the  perils  which  surrounded  the  infancy  of  Moses  with  the 
security  and  comfort  with  which  we  can  rear  our  own  offspring,  we  have  abundant 
grounds  of  gratitude.  Yet  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  whatever  care  we  may 
exercise  for  our  little  ones,  or  whatever  guardianship  we  may  afford  them,  they  as 
really  require  the  preserving  mercy  of  heaven  when  reposing  in  their  cradles  or 
sporting  in  our  parlours  as  did  Moses  when  enclosed  in  his  ark  of  bulrushes  and 
exposed  to  the  waves  or  the  ravenous  tenants  of  the  Nile.  (A.  Nevin,  D.D.) 
Tmininri  0/  children  : — What  if  God  should  place  in  your  hand  a  dinmond,  and  tell 
you  to  inscribe  on  it  a  sentence  which  should  be  read  at  the  last  day,  and  be  shown 
then  as  an  index  of  your  own  thoughts  and  feelings  ?  What  care,  what  caution, 
would  you  exercise  in  the  selection.  Now,  this  is  what  God  has  done.  He  has 
placed  before  you  the  immortal  minds  of  your  children,  more  imperishable  than  the 
diamond,  on  which  you  are  about  to  inscribe  every  day  and  every  hour,  by  your 
instructions,  by  your  spirit,  or  by  your  example,  something  which  will  remain,  and 
be  exhibited  for  or  against  you  at  the  judgment  day.  {Dr.  Payson.)  Parental 
instruction  best  .-—Even  as  a  plant  will  sooner  take  nourishment  and  thrive  better 
in  the  soil  where  it  first  grew  and  sprung  up  than  in  any  other  ground,  because  it 
liketh  its  own  soil  best ;  so,  likewise,  children  will  sooner  take  instruction  and  good 
nurture  from  their  parents,  whom  they  best  like,  and  from  whom  they  have  their 
being,  than  from  any  other.       (Cawdray.)  Divine  ordering  of  events  : — The 

mother  had  done  her  part.  The  rushes,  the  slime,  and  the  pitch  were  her  prudent 
preparations  ;  and  the  great  God  has  been  at  the  same  time  preparing  His  macerials, 
and  arranging  His  instruments.  He  causes  everything  to  concur,  not  by  miraculous 
influence,  but  by  the  simple  and  natural  operation  of  second  causes,  to  bring  about 
the  issue  designed  in  His  counsels  from  everlasting.  (G.  Bush,  D.D.)  God's 
providence  in  our  family  life : — The  phrase  "  special  providence,"  is  hable  to  be 
misunderstood.  The  teaching  of  this  book  is  not  that  God  overrules  some  things 
more  than  others,  but  that  He  is  in  all  alike,  and  is  as  really  in  the  falling  of  a 
sparrow  as  the  revolution  of  an  empire.  God  was  as  truly  in  the  removal  of  the 
httle  ones  that  were  taken  away  as  He  was  in  the  saving  of  Amram's  son  ;  and 
there  were  lessons  of  love  and  warning  from  the  one,  no  less  than  of  love  and 
encouragement  from  the  other.  Nay  more,  God  is  in  the  daily  events  of  our  house- 
holds precisely  as  He  was  in  those  of  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  long  ago.  The 
births  and  the  bereavements ;  the  prosperity  and  the  adversity ;  the  joys  and  the 
sorrows  of  our  homes,  are  all  under  His  supervision.  He  is  guiding  us  when  we 
know  it  not ;  and  His  plan  of  our  lives,  if  we  will  only  yield  ourselves  to  His  guid- 
ance, will  one  day  round  itseK  into  completeness  and  beauty.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D  D.) 
The  events  of  life  under  a  Divine  providence : — -When  Druyse,  the  gunsmith, 
invented  the  needle-gun,  which  decided  the  battle  of  Sadowa,  was  it  a  mere 
accident  ?  When  a  farmer's  boy  showed  Blucher  a  short  cut  by  which  he  could 
bring  his  army  up  soon  enough  to  decide  Waterloo  for  England,  was  it  a  mere 
accident  ?  When  the  Protestants  were  besieged  at  Bezors,  and  a  drunken  drummer 
came  in  at  midnight  and  rang  the  alarm  bell,  not  knowing  what  he  was  doing,  but 
waking  up  the  host  in  time  to  fight  their  enemies  that  moment  arriving,  was  it  an 
accident  ?  When,  in  the  Irish  rebellion,  a  starving  mother,  flying  with  her  starv- 
ing child,  sank  down  and  fainted  on  a  rock  in  the  night,  and  her  hand  fell  on  a 
warm  bottle  of  milk,  did  that  just  happen  so?  God  is  either  in  the  affairs  of  men 
or  our  religion  is  worth  nothing  at  all,  and  you  had  better  take  it  away  from  us, 
and  instead  of  this  Bible,  which  teaches  the  doctrine,  give  us  a  secular  book,  and  let 
us,  as  the  famous  Mr.  Fox,  the  Member  of  Parliament,  in  his  last  hour,  cry  out : 
"  Read  me  the  eighth  book  of  Virgil."  Oh  my  friends ;  let  us  rouse  up  to  an  appre- 
ciation of  the  fact  that  all  the  affairs  of  our  life  are  under  a  King's  command,  and 
under  a  Father's  watch.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  minute  providence  of  God: 
— You  must  have  been  struck,  as  you  read  these  opening  verses  of  the  biography  of 
the  greatest  of  Old  Testament  worthies,  with  their  simplicity  and  truth-likeness. 
There  is  no  mention  of  prodigies  such  as  those  which  were  said  to  attend  the  birth 
of  Cyrus,  and  such  as  mythology  delighted  to  tell  concerning  Romulus  and  Remus. 
It  is  a  plain  unvarnished  story.     There  is  no  word  of  any  miracle.     The  incidents 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

are  such  as,  allowing  for  the  difference  between  ancient  and  modern  life,  might 
have  happened  among  ourselves.  And  yet  see  how  they  fit  into  each  other, 
altogether  irrespective  of,  and  indeed  independent  of,  human  calculation.  Had  it 
been  the  case  of  a  single  fortunate  occurrence,  we  might  have  talked  of  chance  ;  but 
the  coalition  of  so  many  acts  of  so  many  agents  indicates  design.  When  you  come 
to  a  great  railway  junction,  at  which  trains  an-ive  from  north  and  south  and  west, 
in  time  to  be  united  to  another  that  is  just  starting  for  the  east,  and  you  see  the 
connection  made,  nobody  talks  of  a  happy  coincidence.  There  was  a  presiding 
mind  guiding  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  train  in  each  case,  so  that  the  junction 
was  reached  by  all  at  the  required  moment.  Now,  at  the  birth  and  preservation  of 
Moses,  one  feels  himself  standing  at  the  meeting-place  of  many  separate  trains  of 
events,  all  of  which  coalesce  to  save  the  life  of  the  child,  and  to  put  him  in  the  way 
of  securing  the  very  best  education  which  the  world  could  then  furnish.  ( IV.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)  His  sister : — Miriam  : — I.  How  she  trusted  in  God.  In  Hel>rews  xi.  we 
read  that  by  faith  Moses  was  hid  of  his  parents.  It  was  chiefly  the  doing  of  his  mother 
and  Miriam.  Amram  probably  had  little  hand  in  it,  as  he  had  to  work  night  and 
day,  making  bricks  without  straw  under  the  lash  of  ruffian  slave-drivers.  Now 
Miriam  could  not  have  so  shared  her  mother's  confidence,  if  she  had  not  also  shared 
her  mother's  faith.  And  her  faith  was  great,  for  it  outlived  great  trials.  As  she 
was  a  very  quick-witted  girl  she  must  have  had  many  a  deep  thought.  The  hands 
of  Providence  were  strangely  crossed.  But  her  faith  did  not  fail.  Oh  girl,  great  i3 
thy  faith,  for  thou  trustest  in  Jehovah,  though  He  seemeth  to  be  slaying  thee  and 
thine.  How  she  condemns  many  girls  who  are  content  to  live  without  God !  II. 
How  SHE  Lo\'ED  HFR  FAMiLT.  She  had  real  daughterly  and  sisterly  feeling ;  she 
was  true  to  her  family,  helping  her  mother  all  she  could,  entering  into  her  jilanand 
making  it  a  success,  risking  her  own  life  to  save  her  brother's.  It  is  not  the  clever- 
ness nor  the  success,  but  the  spirit  of  her  act  which  you  should  think  upon.  What 
a  help  and  a  comfort  she  must  have  been  to  her  sorely-tried  mother  !  Faith  in 
God  made  her  thoughtful  and  feeling-hearted,  and  great  sorrows  drew  out  her 
sweetest,  strongest  sympathy  with  her  poor  parents.  She  loved  her  folk  more  than 
she  feared  Pharaoh.  In  that  level  land  Pharaoh's  pyramids  and  palaces  were  the 
only  mountains  ;  how  very  small  she  must  have  felt  when  she  stood  near  them  1 
And  how  awful  and  mighty  Pharaoh  must  have  seemed  to  her !  Yet  she  was  not 
afraid  of  the  king's  commandment.  Hers  was  the  true  love  which  makes  the  weak 
strong,  the  timid  brave,  and  the  simple  wise  ;  which  betters  what  is  best  in  boy  and 
girl,  and  works  wonders  for  others'  good.  It  made  Miriam  the  saviour  of  Moses. 
It  gave  her  great  presence  of  mind,  tbat  is,  the  rare  power  of  doing  at  once  in  a 
moment  of  danger  the  very  thing  that  needs  to  be  done.  As  a  pointsman  by  a 
single  timely  jerk  puts  a  whole  train  on  the  right  line,  so  she  by  a  single  hint  turned 
the  sympathy  of  the  princess  into  the  right  channel,  and  moulded  it  into  action 
before  it  cooled  down.  No  girl  ever  did  greater  service  to  her  family  and  her  kind. 
And  she  did  it  not  by  aiming  at  some  great  thing,  but  by  forgetting  self  and  doing 
her  work  at  home  in  the  right  spirit.  Cultivate  the  heavenly  beauty  of  Miriam's 
conduct.  What  is  true  and  good  is  beautiful  with  an  everlasting  beauty :  disease 
cannot  mar,  death  cannot  destroy  it.  In  girls  nothing  is  uglier  than  the  lack  of 
love  at  home.  It  is  bad  enough  in  a  boy,  but  it  makes  a  girl  simply  hideous.  For 
girls  have  been  formed  by  God  to  soften  and  sweeten  life,  and  we  are  shocked  when 
they  poison  the  fountains  at  home.  HI.  How  Mibiam  remained  steadfast.  We 
left  Miriam  with  Pharaoh's  daughter ;  and  we  meet  her  again,  about  eighty  years 
afterwards,  on  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea  (chap.  xv.  20).  Miriam  was  more  than  one 
hundred  and  twenty  years  old  when  she  died,  yet  with  only  one  exception,  so  far  as 
we  know,  she  stood  firm  in  God's  service.  IV.  How  she  fell  at  Hazeboth.  Oh 
Miriam,  how  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  thou  beautiful  star  of  the  morning  1 
The  time  came  when  Miriam  must  give  place  to  Zipporah,  Moses'  wife,  "  an 
Ethiopian  woman  "  (Num.  xii.).  Miriam  would  naturally  feel  that  her  share  in  the. 
saving  of  Moses  gave  her  special  claims  upon  him.  Her  envy  was  stirred,  and  she' 
spake  against  Moses.  Two  things  made  her  sin  worse.  She  pretended  that  zeal 
for  religion  was  her  motive,  and  so  gained  Aaron  over  to  her  side  (ver.  2).  And 
then  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men ;  and  her  anger  should  have  melted  at  his 
meekness.  You  may  wonder  that  I  have  praised  for  steadfastness  one  who  had  such 
a  sad  fall.  But  a  character  is  fixed  not  by  an  act  or  two,  but  by  the  habits  of 
years.  I  remember  standing  for  the  first  time  on  the  bridge  of  a  far-famed  river,  j 
Just  under  me  there  was  a  backward  eddy,  and  a  stiff  breeze  was  also  rippling  the\ 
surface  backwards.    I  was  quite  deceived ;  I  fancied  that  the  stream  flowed  in  the 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  27 

direction  of  the  eddy  and  the  ripples.  When  I  walked  along  the  bank  I  smiled  at 
my  mistake.  I  should  do  Miriam  a  great  wrong  did  I  judge  her  by  that  act ;  for  it 
was  the  one  backward  eddy,  the  one  backward  rippling  in  the  on-rushing  current  of 
a  good  life.  Now,  what  exactly  was  Miriam's  sin  ?  Was  it  not  selfishness  bursting 
out  into  envy  and  jealousy  ?  Her  selfishness  took  a  very  common  form  ;  for  it  filled 
her  with  ill-will  against  a  new-comer  into  the  family  by  marriage — that  Ethiopian 
woman  !  How  natural !  yet  how  ugly !  If  one  could  see  the  soul  of  an  envious 
girl,  as  the  blessed  angels  see  it,  it  would  shock  us  as  much  as  Miriam's  leprosy 
shocked  all  beholders.  Let  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  fill  and  flood  your  soul ;  and 
then  it  will  absorb  and  change  your  self-love,  as  the  ocean  absorbed  and  changed 
the  brook  ;  and  all  your  selfish  grumblings  will  disappear  in  the  peace  of  God  that 
passeth  all  understanding.  (J.  Wells.)  The  watching  sister  : — Society  needs 
watchers  as  well  as  workers.  Had  we  been  passing  the  spot  at  which  the  sister  of 
Moses  took  up  her  position  of  observation,  we  might  have  condemned  her  as  an 
idler  standing  there  and  doing  nothing  !  We  should  be  careful  of  our  condemna- 
tion, seeing  how  little  we  know  of  the  reality  of  any  case.  In  doing  nothing,  the 
girl  was  in  reaUty  doing  everything.  If  she  had  done  more,  she  would  have  done 
less.  There  is  a  silent  ministry  as  well  as  a  ministry  of  thunder.  Mark  the  cun- 
ning of  love !  The  watcher  stood  afar  off.  Had  she  stood  quite  close  at  hand,  she 
would  have  defeated  the  very  object  of  her  watching.  She  was  to  do  her  work  with- 
out the  slightest  appearance  of  doing  it.  Truly  there  is  a  great  art  in  love,  and  in 
all  good  ministry.  There  are  wise  master-builders,  and  also  builders  who  are  very 
foolish.  Sometimes  we  must  look  without  staring  ;  we  must  speak  without  making 
a  noise ;  we  must  be  artful  without  dissimulation,  and  hide  under  the  cahnest 
exterior  the  most  urgent  and  tumultuous  emotion.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Miriam's 
tact: — "Stood  afar  off"  !  Mark  that.  There  is  tact  in  everything.  Had  she  gone 
too  near,  she  might  have  been  suspected.  Eagerness  would  have  defeated  itself. 
Our  watching  must  not  be  obtrusive,  officious,  demonstrative,  and  formal.  We  are 
not  policemen,  but  friends.  We  are  not  spies,  but  brothers  and  sisters.  We  must 
watch  as  though  we  were  not  watching.  We  must  serve  as  though  we  were  not 
serving.  There  is  a  way  of  giving  a  gift  which  makes  it  heavy  and  burdensome  to 
the  receiver ;  there  is  a  way  of  doing  it  which  makes  the  simplest  offering  a 
treasure.  Sometimes  we  increase  each  other's  sorrow  in  the  very  act  of  attempting 
to  diminish  it.  (Ibid.)  A  devoted  sister  : — Caroline  Herschel  was  the  devoted 
helper  of  her  brother.  Sir  Wm.  Herschel.  Her  only  joy  was  to  share  in  his  labours 
and  help  to  his  successes.  She  lived  for  years  in  the  radiance  of  genius  ;  sharing 
its  toils  and  privileges.  After  her  brother's  death  she  was  honoured  by  various 
scientific  societies  in  many  ways.  But  these  she  regarded  as  tributes  to  her  brother, 
rather  than  the  reward  of  her  own  efforts.  (H.  0.  Mackey.)  Sisters  and 
brothers : — "Go  home,"  some  one  might  have  said  to  Miriam.  "  Why  risk  yourself  out 
there  alone  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  breathing  the  miasma  and  in  danger  of  being 
attacked  of  wild  beast  or  rufiBan ;  go  home !  "  No ;  Miriam,  the  sister,  most 
lovingly  watched  and  bravely  defended  Moses,  the  brother.  Is  he  worthy  her  care 
and  courage  ?  Oh,  yes  ;  the  sixty  centuries  of  the  world's  history  have  never  had 
Bo  much  involved  in  the  arrival  of  any  ship  at  any  port  as  in  the  landing  of  that 
papyrus  boat  caulked  with  bitumen.  Its  one  passenger  was  to  be  a  none-such  in 
history.  Lawyer,  statesman,  politician,  legislator,  organiser,  conqueror,  deliverer. 
Oh,  was  not  ^Iiriam,  the  sister  of  Moses,  doing  a  good  thing,  an  important  thing,  a 
glorious  thing,  when  she  watched  the  boat  woven  of  river  plants  and  made  water- 
tight with  asphaltum,  carrying  its  one  passenger?  Did  she  not  put  all  the  ages  of 
time  and  of  a  coming  eternity  under  obligation,  when  she  defended  her  helpless 
brother  from  the  perils  aquatic,  reptilian,  and  ravenous  ?  What  a  garland  for  faith- 
ful sisterhood  !  For  how  many  a  lawgiver,  hero,  deUverer,  and  saint  are  the  world  and 
the  Church  indebted  to  a  watchful,  loving,  faithful,  godly  sister  ?  God  knows  how 
many  of  our  Greek  lexicons  and  how  much  of  our  schooling  was  paid  for  by  money 
that  would  otherwise  have  gone  for  the  replenishing  of  a  sister's  wardrobe.  While 
the  brother  sailed  off  for  a  resounding  sphere,  the  sister  watched  him  from  the 
banks  of  self-denial.  Miriam  was  the  oldest  of  the  family,  Moses  and  Aaron,  her 
brothers,  are  younger.  Oh,  the  power  of  the  elder  sister  to  help  decide  the  brother's 
dharacter  for  usefulness  and  for  heaven  I  She  can  keep  off  from  her  brother  more 
evils  than  Miriam  could  have  driven  back  water-fowl  or  crocodile  from  the  ark  of 
bulrushes.  The  older  sister  decides  the  direction  in  which  the  cradle-boat  shall 
eail.  By  gentleness,  by  good  sense,  by  Christian  principle  she  can  turn  it  towards 
the  palace,  not  of  a  wicked  Pharaoh,  but  of  a  holy  God ;  and  a  brighter  princess 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

than  Thermutis  shall  lift  him  out  of  peril,  even  religion,  whose  ways  are  ways  of 
pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace.  Let  sisters  not  begrudge  the  time  and 
care  bestowed  on  a  brother.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  any  boy  that  you  know  so 
well  as  your  brother  can  ever  turn  out  anything  very  useful.  Well,  he  may  not  be 
a  Moses.  There  is  only  one  of  that  kind  needed  for  six  thousand  years.  But  I  tell 
you  what  your  brother  will  be — either  a  blessing  or  a  curse  to  society,  and  a  candi- 
date for  happiness  or  wretchedness.  Whatever  you  do  for  your  brother  will  come 
back  to  you  again.  If  you  set  him  an  ill-natured,  censorious,  unaccommodating 
example,  it  will  recoil  upon  you  from  his  own  irritated  and  despoiled  nature.  If 
you,  by  patience  with  all  his  infirmities  and  by  nobility  of  character,  dwell  with  him 
in  the  few  years  of  your  companionship,  you  will  have  your  counsels  reflected  back 
upon  you  some  day  by  his  splendour  of  behaviour  in  some  crisis  where  he  would 
have  failed  but  for  you.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  Weak  li^ks  useful: — And  you,  again, 
the  weak  and  httle  ones,  will  you  still  fancy  you  may  well  be  quite  passed  by,  when 
Miriam's  case  proclaims  to  you  how  needful  even  the  weak  link  is  to  join  the  other 
links  into  one  chain,  and  how  God  can  avail  Himself  even  of  a  child  deemed  insig- 
nificant in  the  promotion  of  our  human  bliss  and  joy  ?     (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  This  is  one  of  the  Hebrews'  children. — The  princess  and  the  orphan: — 
I.  The  claims  of  the  orphan.  1.  The  first  claim  on  her  compassion  was  the  claim  of 
infancy.  "  She  saw  the  child."  That  sentence  contains  an  argument.  It  was  an 
appeal  to  the  woman's  heart.  Eank,  caste,  nationality,  all  melted  before  the  great  fact 
of  womanhood.  This  feeling  was  spontaneous.  She  did  not  feel  compassion  because 
it  was  her  dnty,  but  because  it  was  her  nature.  God  has  provided  for  humanity  by 
a  plan  more  infallible  than  system,  by  implanting  feeling  in  our  nature.  2.  Con- 
sider the  degradation  of  the  child's  origin.  "Hebrews' children."  The  exclusive- 
ness  of  the  Egyptian  social  system  was  as  strong  as  that  of  the  Hindoo — slave — 
enemy — to  be  slain.  Princess  brought  up  with  these  ideas.  She  was  animated  by 
His  Spirit  who  came  to  raise  the  abject,  to  break  the  bond  of  the  oppressor.  3.  The 
last  reason  we  find  for  this  claim  was  its  unprotected  state.  It  wept ;  those  tears 
told  of  a  conscious  want — the  felt  want  of  a  mother's  arms.  II.  The  orphan's 
EDUCATION.  1.  It  was  a  suggestion  from  another.  This  woman  brought  up  in 
luxury — had  warm  feelings — not  knowing  how  to  do  good — was  told  by  another. 
Results  of  this  training :  1.  Intellectually.  He  learned  to  ask  "  Why  ""  the  bush 
is  not  consumed."  2.  In  the  moral  part  of  his  character  we  notice  his  hatred  of 
injustice.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  child  : — 1.  The  moment  of  its  degrada- 
tion. 2.  The  moment  of  its  sadness.  3.  The  moment  of  its  hope.  4.  The  moment 
of  its  unknown  future.  5.  The  moment  of  a  mother's  recompense.  {J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  God  rules : — 1.  Providence  sometimes  raises  the  poor  out  of  the  dust  to 
set  them  among  princes  (Psa.  cxiii.  7,  8),  to  make  men  know  that  the  heavens  do 
rule.  2.  Those  whom  God  designs  for  great  services  He  finds  ways  to  qualify  and 
prepare  beforehand.  The  fact  of  the  princess  disobeying  her  father's  command  in 
adopting  the  child,  so  far  from  being  a  difliculty,  as  some  have  made  it,  is  the  very 
impress  of  truth  itself.  If  there  is  a  thing  too  strong  for  man's  laws,  it  is  a  woman's 
heart.  Witness  Antigone  burying  her  brother.  (A.  Kevin,  D.D.)  Womanly  com- 
passion of  Pharaoh's  daughter : — The  sweet  picture  of  womanly  compassion  in 
Pharaoh's  daughter  is  full  of  suggestions.  Her  name  is  handed  down  by  one  tradition 
as  "  Merris,"  and  "Meri "  has  been  found  as  the  appellation  of  a  princess  of  the 
period.  A  rabbinical  authority  calls  her  "Bithiah,"  that  is,  "Daughter  of 
Jehovah  "  ;  by  which  was,  no  doubt,  intended  to  imply  that  she  became  in  some 
sense  a  proselyte.  This  may  have  been  only  an  inference  from  her  protection  of 
Moses.  There  is  a  singular  and  very  obscure  passage  in  1  Chron.  iv.  17,  18, 
relating  the  genealogy  of  a  certain  Mered,  who  seems  to  have  had  two  wives,  one 
"  the  Jewess,"  the  other  "  Bithiah,  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh."  We  know  no  more 
about  him  or  her,  but  Keil  thinks  that  Mered  probably  "  lived  before  the  Exodus  " ; 
bui;  it  can  scarcely  be  that  the  "daughter  of  Pharaoh,"  his  wife,  is  our  princess, 
and  that  she  actually  became  a  "  daughter  of  Jehovah,"  and,  like  her  adopted  child, 
refused  royal  dignity  and  prefeiTed  reproach.  In  any  case,  the  legend  of  her  name 
is  a  tender  and  beautiful  way  of  putting  the  belief  that  in  her  "  there  was  some 
good  thing  towards  the  God  of  Israel."  But,  passing  from  that,  how  the  true 
woman's  heart  changes  languid  cm-iosity  into  tenderness,  and  how  compassion 
conquers  pride  of  race  and  station,  as  well  as  regard  for  her  father's  edict,  as  soon 
as  the  infant's  cry,  which  touches  every  good  woman's  feelings,  faUs  on  her  ear  I 
"  One  touch  of  nature  makes  the  whole  world  kin."    All  the  centuries  are  {is 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  29 

nothing ;  the  strange  garb,  the  stranger  mental  and  spiritual  dress,  fade,  and  we 
have  here  a  mere  woman,  affected  as  every  true  sister  of  hers  to-day  would  be  by 
the  helpless  wailing.  God  has  put  that  instinct  there.  Alas  that  it  ever  should  be 
choked  by  frivolity  or  pride,  and  frozen  by  indifference  and  self-indulgence  !  Gentle 
Bouls  spring  up  in  unfavourable  soil.  Eameses  was  a  strange  father  for  such  a 
daughter.  How  came  this  dove  in  the  vulture's  cage  ?  Her  sweet  pity  beside  his 
cold  craft  and  cruelty  is  like  the  lamb  couching  by  the  lion.  Note,  too,  that  gentlest 
pity  makes  the  gentlest  brave.  Sbe  sees  the  child  is  a  Hebrew.  Her  quick  wit 
understands  why  it  has  been  exposed,  and  she  takes  its  part,  and  the  part  of  the 
poor  weeping  parents,  whom  she  can  fancy,  against  the  savage  law.  No  doubt, 
as  the  Egyptologists  tell  us,  the  princesses  of  the  royal  house  had  separate  households 
and  abundant  liberty  of  action.  Still,  it  was  bold  to  override  the  strict  commands 
of  such  a  monarch.  But  it  was  not  self-willed  sense  of  power,  but  the  beautiful 
daring  of  a  compassionate  woman  to  which  God  committed  the  execution  of  His 
purposes.  And  that  is  a  force  which  has  much  like  work  trusted  to  it  in  modern 
society  too.  Our  great  cities  swarm  with  children  exposed  to  a  worse  fate  than  the 
baby  among  the  flags.  Legislation  and  official  charity  have  far  too  rough  hands 
and  too  clumsy  ways  to  lift  the  little  life  out  of  the  coffer,  and  to  dry  the  tears.  We 
must  look  to  Christian  women  to  take  a  leaf  out  of  "  Bitbiah's  "  book.  First,  they 
should  use  their  eyes  to  see  the  facts,  and  not  be  so  busy  about  their  own  luxury 
and  comfort  that  they  pass  the  poor  pitch-covered  box  unnoticed.  Then  they 
should  let  the  pitiful  call  touch  their  heart,  and  not  steel  themselves  in  indifference 
or  ease.  Then  they  should  conquer  prejudices  of  race,  pride  of  station,  fear  of 
lowering  themselves,  loathing,  or  contempt.  And  then  they  should  yield  to  the 
Impulses  of  their  compassion,  and  never  mind  what  difficulties  or  opponents  may 
stand  in  the  way  of  their  saving  the  children.  If  Christian  women  knew  their 
obligations  and  their  power,  and  lived  up  to  them  as  bravely  as  this  Egyptian 
princess,  there  would  be  fewer  little  ones  flung  out  to  be  eaten  by  crocodiles,  end 
many  a  poor  child,  who  is  now  abandoned  from  infancy  to  the  devil,  would  be 
rescued  to  grow  up  a  servant  of  God.  She,  there  by  the  Nile  waters,  in  her 
gracious  pity  and  prompt  wisdom  is  the  type  of  what  Christian  womanhood,  and, 
indeed,  the  whole  Christian  community,  should  be  in  relation  to  child  life.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  God's  providential  care  of  children  : — I  remember  reading  a 
story  of  a  baby — a  wee  child — that  travelled  by  railroad.  Away  whirled  the  coach 
very  fast ;  but  it  soon  knocked  against  something,  and  all  were  thrown  out — men, 
women,  mothers,  and  babes,  some  were  pitched  here,  some  there  ;  heads  were 
broken,  hands  cut  off.  In  the  midst  of  the  confusion,  a  voice  was  heard  crying — 
"  Where  is  my  baby  ?  Oh!  my  dear  baby  !  I  cannot  find  him  anywhere.  Did 
nobody  see  my  sweet  baby  ?  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  One  man  lost  his  leg,  another 
his  hand,  another  his  eye ;  but  the  mother  did  not  mind  them,  but  was  going  about, 
wringing  her  hands,  and  crying,  "  Where  is  my  baby  ?"  After  much  search  for 
it,  and  for  a  great  while  in  vain,  at  length  a  man  went  over  to  a  place  where  there 
was  a  bandbox,  he  took  up  the  bandbox,  and  what  do  you  think  he  found  under 
it  ?  The  baby,  fast  asleep  !  Now,  if  God  takes  care  of  babies,  surely  He  would  take 
care  of  all  little   children.  Womanly  compassion  : — Of  what  infinite  value  to 

society  is  that  tenderness,  compassion,  and  benevolence  which  the  Almighty  has 
mercifully  impressed  on  the  female  heart.  It  is  a  woman's  exclusive  gift ;  it  is  the 
foundation  of  all  her  virtues ;  the  mainspring  of  her  usefulness.  Let  her  then 
daily  consider  the  awful  responsibility  of  such  a  gift ;  let  her  consider  it  as  amongst 
her  most  valuable  possessions ;  and  solely  employ  it  for  the  benefit  of  her  fellow- 
creatures  ;  and  more  especially  for  the  nursing,  training,  and  educating  the  young 
of  her  own  species :  let  her  give  her  heart,  her  tenderness,  her  compassion,  to  the 
infant  orphan  and  the  deserted  child  ;  let  her,  in  humble  imitation  of  her  great 
Mabter,  become  a  teacher  of  the  ignorant,  and  an  instructor  of  babes  ;  and  let  her, 
like  Him,  fold  in  her  arms  the  lovely  emblems  of  those  beings  that  form  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Let  her,  with  active  zeal,  bring  little  children  to  Christ,  that 
He  may  bless  them  ;  and  though,  under  her  fostering  care  no  great  legislator, 
prince,  or  prophet  may  arise,  a  superior  reward  wiU  await  her  labours :  that  which 
is  promised  to  those  who  save  a  soul  from  death.  It  will  be  her  peculiar  and 
happy  lot  to  rear  good  Christians  and  useful  members  of  society ;  and  above  all, 
blessed  spirits  for  eternal  happiness  in  the  communion  of  saints  made  perfect. 
{Mrs.  King.)  Providentially  preserved: — Sir  Thomas  Gresham,  who  built  the 
Koyal  Exchange  in  London,  was  the  son  of  a  poor  wotnan,  who,  while  he  was  an 
infant,  abandoned  him  in  a  field.    By  the  providence  of  God,  however,  the  chirping 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  a  grasshopper  attracted  a  boy  to  the  spot  where  the  child  lay ;  and  his  life  was 
by  this  means  preserved.  (IF.  Baxendale.)  Royal  compassion: — Some  years 
ago,  her  Majesty  the  Queen  came  to  open  a  new  wing  of  the  London  Hospital. 
For  some  days  previously  nothing  else  was  talked  about  in  the  papers  and  on  the 
streets  but  Her  Majesty's  intended  visit.  There  was  a  little  orphan  child  lying  in 
one  of  the  wards  of  the  hospital,  and  she,  too,  had  heard  that  the  Queen  was  coming. 
She  said  to  the  nurse,  "  Do  you  think  the  Queen  will  come  and  see  nie?  "  "  I  am 
afraid  not,  darling,"  said  her  nurse,  "  she  will  have  so  many  people  to  see  and  so 
much  to  do."  "  liut,  I  should  so  much  like  to  see  her,"  pleaded  the  little  patient, 
"  I  should  be  so  much  better  if  I  saw  her  ";  and  day  after  day  the  poor  child  was 
expressing  her  anxiety  to  see  her  Majesty.  When  tbe  Queen  came,  the  governor 
told  her  Majesty,  and  the  Queen,  with  her  large  kindly  heart  and  motherly  instincts, 
said,  "  I  should  like  to  see  that  dear  child.  Would  you  just  take  me  to  the  ward  ?  " 
and  Queen  Victoria  was  conducted  to  the  bedside  of  the  orphan  girl.  The  little 
thing  thought  it  was  one  of  the  women  come  in  the  crowd  to  see  the  opening  of  the 
hospital,  and  said,  "  Do  you  think  the  Queen  will  come  and  see  me?  I  should  like 
to  see  the  Queen."  "  I  am  the  Queen,"  said  her  visitor.  "  I  heard  you  were  anxious 
to  see  me.  I  hope  you  will  be  so  much  better  now;"  and  she  stroked  down  her 
fevered,  wasted,  pale  brow,  gave  some  money  to  the  nurse  to  get  some  nice  things 
for  the  child,  and  went  her  way.  The  chUd  said,  "  I  am  ever  so  much  better  now 
that  I   have   seen   the    Queen."  God's    purpose    accomplished   by   unexpected 

aaencics : — The  wheels  in   a  clock   or   a  watch   move   contrary   one  to  another, 
some  one  way,  some  another,  yet  all  serve  the  intent  of  the  workman,  to  show 
the  time,  or  to  make   the  clock   to    strike.      So   in   the  world,  the  providence 
of  God  may  seem  to  run  cross  to  His  promises.      One  man  takes   this  way, 
another  runs   that   way;    good  men   go   one  way,  wicked  men   another;   yet  all 
in  conclusion  accomplish  the  will  and   centre  in  the  purpose  of  God,  the  great 
Creator  of  all  things.         TIte  Gentiles  useful  in  the  deliverance  of  Israel  :—\nihQ 
fact  that  the  deliverer  of  Israel  from  the  power  of  Egypt  was  himself  first  delivered 
by  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  Egypt,  we  find  the  same  interweaving  of  the  history 
of  Israel  with  that  of  the  Gentiles  already  observed  in  the  history  of  Joseph ;  and 
we  may  now  regard  it  as  a  law,  that  the  preference  shown  to  Israel  when  it  was 
selected  as  the  chosen  seed  on  whom  the  blessings  were  first  bestowed,  was  to  be 
counterbalanced  by  the  fact  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  could  not  be  fully  effected 
without  the  intervention  of  the  Gentiles.     (.1/.  Baumgarten,  D.D.)         T lie  value  of 
first  thouijhts  : — All  done  in  a  moment,  as  it  were !     Such  are  the  rapid  changes  iu 
lives  which  are  intended  to  express  some  great  meaning  aud  purpose  of  God.    They 
are  cast  down,  but  not  destroyed  ;  persecuted,  but  not  forsaken  !     From  the  action 
of  Pharaoh's  daughter  we  learn  that  first  thoughts  are,  where  generous  impulses 
are  concerned,  the  only  thoughts  worth  trusting.     Sometimes  we  reason  that  second 
thoughts  are  best ;  in  a  certain  class  of  cases  this  reasoning  may  be  substantially 
correct,  but,  where  the  ..oart  is  moved  to  do  some  noble  and  heroic  thing,  the  first 
thought  should  be  accepted  as  an  inspiration  from  God,  and  carried  out  without 
eelf-consultation  or  social  fear.     Those  who  are  accustomed  to  seek  contribution  or 
service  for  the  cause  of  God,  of  course  know  well  what  it  is  to  encounter  the  impru- 
dent  prudence  which  says,  "  I  must  think  about  it."     Where  the  work  is  good, 
don't  think  about  it;  do  it,  and  then  think.     When  a  person  goes  to  a  place  of 
business,  and  turns  an  article  over  and  over,  and  looks  at  it  with  hesitation,  and 
finally  says,  "I  will  call  again,"  the  master  of  the  establishment  says  in  his  heart, 
"Never!"     If  Pharaoh's  daughter  had  considered  the  subject,  the  probability  is 
that  Moses  would  have  been  left  on  the  Nile  or  under  it ;  but  she  ac;epted  her 
motherly  love  as  a  Divine  guide,  and  saved  the  life  of  the  child.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  unconscious  element  in  life: — Pharaoh's  daughter  little  knew   what  slie  was 
doing.     And  do  any  of  us  know  what  we  are  doing?     Is  there  not  something  behind 
the  very  plainest  transaction  which,  after  all,  may  be  the  shadow  of  the  Divine 
hand  ?     You  throw  a  penny  to  a  poor  child  in  the  street ;  that  penny  may  buy  an 
orange  to  moisten  the  lips  of  his  poor  mother,  dying  in  an  unknown  garret.     (Ibid. ) 
God's  way  of  working : — Israel's  deliverer  is  brought  up  on  Pharaoh's  bread.     This 
is  God's  method  of  executing  His  purposes.     He  restrains  the  wrath  of  man,  and 
causes  the  remainder  to  praise  Him.     He  sets  a  watch  upon  His  enemies.     He  puts 
His  hook  in  the  jaws  of  leviathan.    He  suddenly  violates  the  security  of  the  wicked, 
and  shows  kings  that  they  reckon  badly  who  reckon  without  Him.     (Ibid.) 

I     Ver.  9.  Take  tMs  child  away,  and  nurse  it  for  me. — Care  for  children:— I.  To 


CHAP.  II.]  EXODUS.  81 

NONE  IS  God's  commendation  vouchsafed  more  fully  than  to  those  who  love  chil- 
dren FOR  Christ's  saice.  The  presence  of  childhood  represents  and  brings  back 
our  own.  Children  confide  in  those  around  them  with  a  sweet  and  simple  faith. 
They  obey  from  affection,  not  fear.  And  so  our  Father  in  heaven  would  have  His 
children  trust  Him,  casting  all  our  care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  us.  II.  Chil- 
dren te.\ch  US  reverence  as  well  as  faith.  They  Usten  with  a  solemn  awe  when 
we  talk  to  them  of  God.  They  tread  softly,  and  speak  with  bated  breath  in  His 
holy  place.  III.  Children  ti^ch  us  to  be  kind,  pitiful,  and  tender-hearted. 
They  cannot  bear  to  witness  pain.  They  do  all  they  can  to  soothe.  Have  we  these 
sorrowful  sympathies  ?  IV.  If  the  love  of  Christ  is  in  our  hearts,  it  should  con- 
strain us  to  DO  OUR  VERY  BEST,  THOUGHTFULLY,  PRAYERFULLY,  GENEROUSLY,  TO  PRE- 
SERVE   IN    THE    CHILDREN    AND    TO    RESTORE    IN    OURSELVES  THAT  WHICH    MADE    THEM   SO 

PRECIOUS  IN  His  sight,  and  makes  them  so  like  Him  now — like  Him  in  their 
innocence,  their  sweet  humility,  their  love.  (Dean  Hole.)  The  providence  of 
God  in  relation  to  the  young  : — I.  As  rescuing  them  from  the  peril  of  unhappy 
CIRCUMSTANCES.  1.  Moscs  was  rescucd  from  murder — in  the  Egyptian  palace  he 
was  safe.     2.  Moses  was  rescued  from  slavery — in  the  Egyptian  palace  he  was  free. 

II.  As  ENSURING  AN  EDUCATION  NECESSARY  TO  FIT  THEM  FOR  THEIR  FUTURE  ENGAGE- 
MENTS. 1.  As  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  Moses  had  the  opportunity  of  a  good 
scholastic  education.  2.  As  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  he  would  be  prepared 
to  undertake  the  freedom  of  his  nation.  HI.  As  employing  the  most  unlikely 
AGENCY.  The  tyrant's  daughter  was  the  means  of  rescuing  Moses  from  peril,  and 
of  educating  him  for  his  future  calling.  Unlikely  means — 1.  Because  her  father 
had  issued  an  edict  for  the  death  of  all  Israelitish  children.  2.  Because  it  appeared 
unlikely  that  a  royal  daughter  should  wish  to  adopt  the  son  of  an  Israelite.  IV. 
As  employing  the  most  EFFICIENT  INSTRUMENTALITY.  1.  The  mother  of  the  boy — 
who  could  better  teach  him  the  wrongs  of  his  country  than  she — that  hundreds  had 
suffered  the  fate  he  had  managed  to  escape — the  slavery  of  his  people — the  tyranny 
of  the  king.  She  instructed  him  during  the  earUest  days  of  his  youth— her  instruc- 
tion would  therefore  be  enduring — hence  he  would  go  to  the  Egyptian  court  with  a 
knowledge  of  his  country's  woe — and  of  his  father's  God.  2.  The  daughter  of  the 
king.  V.  As  requiring  the  utmost  human  effort  possible.  1.  His  mother  did 
the  best  for  Moses  that  she  could.  2.  His  mother  was  judicious  in  her  conduct 
towards  Moses.  VI.  As  perfectly  consistent  with  the  free  agency  of  individuals. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  training  of  children: — I.  The  first  qualification  fob 
THE  TRAINING  OF  CHILDREN  IS  THE  LOVE  OF  CHILDREN.  The  hard  heart  in  which  the 
merriment  of  childhood  kindles  no  sunshine  and  wakens  no  music,  is  no  more  fit 
for  the  resting  and  growing  place  of  an  infant,  than  the  sands  of  the  desert  are  fit 
for  the  planting  of  a  vineyard  or  the  sowing  of  a  wheatfield.  II.  The  second  grand 
essential  to  the  right  training  of  children,  is  to  receive  them  as  sacred  trusts  from 
God  to  be  nursed  for  Him.  Whence  do  we  think  the  child  comes  to  us?  What 
do  we  desire  it  to  be,  in  its  relation  to  ourselves,  and  to  the  world,  and  to  God  ?  A 
mere  doll,  to  be  dressed  for  the  gratification  of  our  vanity  ?  A  mere  pet  animal,  to 
be  fed  and  fondled  for  our  amusement  ?  A  mere  competitor  in  the  race  of  life,  to 
struggle  for  a  little  while  after  its  pleasures,  honours,  and  riches,  and  then  pass 
away  for  ever  ?  Or  do  we  regard  it  as  a  being  of  unbounded  susceptibilities,  and 
destined  to  eternity,  which  God  has  committed  to  us  to  train  for  His  glory  and 
the  enjoyment  of  Himself  for  ever?  When  this  simple  but  sublime  thought, 
that  a  human  soul  has  been  committed  to  us  to  be  trained  for  God,  has  once 
possessed  us,  it  will  ally  itself  with  our  love  for  children  working  itself  out 
without  effort,  and  almost  without  thought  into  our  daily  conduct.  HI.  A 
third  essential  to  the  right  training  of  children  is  the  requirement  of  un- 
answering  obedience.  The  best  answer  to  a  child's,  "  Why  must  I  do  this,  or 
abstain  from  that?"  is  "Because  your  father  or  mother  requires  it."  If  further 
explanations  are  to  be  given,  they  should  come  after  as  a  reward  for  obedience,  and 
not  before,  as  its  condition.  The  habit  of  unanswering  obedience  is  easily  estab- 
lished, and  when  once  fi^ed  is  permanent.  And  it  should  be  further  remembered 
that  this  requirement  of  unanswering  obedience  is  saturated  and  sweetened  through 
and  through  by  the  love  of  children.  It  is  exalted  and  lifted  above  the  impulses  of 
selfish  petulance  and  passion,  by  a  sense  of  the  Divine  trust  committed  to  us.  IV. 
Parents  ought  diligkntly  to  cultivate  and  win  the  absolute  confidence  and 
affection  of  their  children.  So,  as  years  roll  on,  authority  will  broaden  out  into 
I  loving  companionship,  and  obedience  become  a  delightful  conformity  to  the  wishes 
'  of  those  who  are  dearer  than  themselves.    Tempered  and  guided  by  the  principles 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

already  announced,  this  plan  ■will  succeed.  I  do  not  say  there  will  be  no  exceptional 
cases.  There  is  a  mystejy  in  the  heredity  of  evil  and  in  the  working  of  iniquity 
which  seems  at  times  to  defy  all  general  rules.  Let  parents  understand  this :  that 
their  children  may  attain  the  highest  ends  of  life  without  wealth,  without  social 
distinction,  and  even  without  the  higher  forms  of  secular  education ;  but  they  can- 
not inherit  the  richest  blessings  of  the  family  relation,  without  being  thoroughly  in 
love  with  their  father  and  mother,  as  the  representatives  and  appointed  agents  of 
God,  who  says,  "  Take  this  child  and  nurse  it  for  Me,  and  I  will  give  thee  thy  wages." 
{H.  J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  The  education  of  Moses  : — There  from  a  mother's  lips 
he  learned  the  story  of  the  great  forefather  Abraham,  his  call,  and  God's  covenant 
with  him  and  his  seed  ;  the  meaning  of  the  mark  of  circumcision  in  his  flesh,  and 
the  duties  to  which  it  bound  him  ;  the  Divine  unity  and  holiness ;  the  worship  and 
service  that  is  the  Creator's  due ;  was  made  tenderly  alive  to  the  wrongs  and  suffer- 
ings of  his  people ;  was  taught  patriotism  and  piety,  and  prepai'ed  to  become  in  due 
time  the  vindicator  of  Israel's  freedom  and  faith.  (JR.  A.  Hallam,  D.D.)  The 
education  of  Moses : — 1.  See  how  much  in  the  making  up  of  the  leader  of  His 
chosen  people  God  makes  of  secular  instruction — what  ample  provision  God  made 
for  it  in  his  equipment  for  his  arduous  and  difficult  task.  The  Scriptures  give  no 
countenance  to  ignorance.  The  world  has  knowledge  to  impart  which  the  Church 
may  gladly  accept.  The  Church  is  in  many  ways  beholden  to  the  world.  Egypt 
was  largely  a  benefactor  to  Moses  and  to  the  Israelitish  people.  Nothing  that 
Egypt  had  imparted  would  be  without  its  use  in  such  a  task.  God  did  not  despise 
it  as  a  means,  but  subsidized  it,  and  brought  all  its  resources  and  influences  to  bear 
in  making  for  Himself  the  man  who  was  to  lift  His  Church  from  a  tribe  into  a  nation, 
from  slavery  to  independence.  Though  He  could  have  communicated  all  these 
qualifications  to  Moses  by  a  direct  gift,  He  did  not,  but  cliose  to  bestow  them  upon 
him  by  means.  To  despise  secular  knowledge,  and  think  that  we  are  better  Chris- 
tians for  being  destitute  of  worldly  lore,  is  fanatacism,  and  not  piety.  Civilization 
is  the  ally  of  religion  and  not  its  foe.  Intelligence  strengthens  godliness,  and  does 
not  lower  or  injure  it.  2.  Finally,  see  the  value  of  early  and  specially  of  maternal 
influence,  in  its  bearing  on  the  religious  character  and  hfe.  What  a  power  both  of 
impulsion  and  of  resistance  it  had  in  the  case  of  Moses  !  By  this  means  Jochebed 
against  fearful  odds  was  successful,  more  than  a  match  for  them.  An  obscure 
woman,  with  no  more  than  ordinary  attainments,  of  a  proscribed  race,  acting  in  a 
capacity  little  better  than  menial,  she  was  too  much  for  all  Egypt's  sages,  and 
scholars,  and  priests,  and  nobles  and  rulers.  There  were  two  things  that  gave  her 
gi-(  at  advantage  in  the  contest.  She  got  the  start  of  them.  She  worked  by  the  law 
of  love.  Before  any  Egyptian  influence  could  reach  the  child,  she  had  possession 
of  his  ear  and  of  his  heart.  What  an  encouragement  is  here  to  all  mothers,  to  all 
parents  !  How  much  greater  things  they  may  be  labouring  for  than  they  contem- 
plate or  foresee.  {Ibid.)  Infancy  of  Moses: — I.  The  duty  enjoined.  1.  The 
object — "  This  child."  (1)  What  it  may  become.  Philosopher,  warrior,  statesman, 
philanthropist,  &c.  (2)  What  it  must  become.  A  responsible  moral  agent.  2. 
The  duty — "  Nurse  it."  This  includes — (1)  Attention  to  physical  wants.  (2)  Cul- 
tivation of  mental  faculties.  (.3)  Religious  instruction.  II.  The  reward  prosused — 
' '  And  I  will  pay  thee  thy  wages."  You  may  be  rewarded — 1.  By  seeing  your  efforts 
crowned  with  success.  2.  You  shall  at  any  rate  possess  the  consciousness  of  the 
Divine  favour.  3.  You  shall  leave  your  children  with  composure  when  you  come 
to  die.  4.  You  shall  stand  before  them  with  confidence  in  the  judgment  day.  (1) 
Let  pious  parents  be  encouraged  in  the  way  of  duty.  2.  Let  negligent  parents 
consider  the  cruelty  of  their  conduct,  and  the  bitter  consequences  which  must  result 
from  it.  (/.  Burns,  D.D.)  God's  method  of  raising  vp  souls  for  His  service  : — I. 
God  gives  and  sends  theii  as  they  are  needed.  II.  That  they  mat  be  fully 
trained  and  prepared  for  their  work,  they  are  "  made  like  unto  their  brethren." 
III.  The  very  family  and  people  that  sought  to  destroy  Israel  are  made  instru- 
mental IN   NOURISHING  AND  REARING   THE   DELIVERER  OF   ISRAEL   AND  THE  AVENGER  OF 

HIS  brethren's  wrongs.  Injustice  and  cruelty  are  made  to  avenge  themselves 
in  the  end.  IV.  In  the  raising  up  or  the  man  Moses  we  have  a  most  instruc- 
tive   EXEMPLIFICATION    OF    THE    DOCTRINE    AND    WORKING    OF    THE    DiVINE    PROVIDENCE. 

V.    In    Pharaoh's    daughter,   and    the    part    she    takes,   we   have   the   proof 

THAT  HUMAN  NATURE,  THE  HUMAN  HEART,  IS  ONE  ;  AND  THAT  ALL  CLASSES  OF  MANKIND, 
ALL    NATIONS,    ARE    DESTINED    TO    BECOME    ONE    IN    God'S    GREAT    SAVING  PLAN.       (Pulpit 

Analyst.)  The  potcer  of  a  mother's  love : — 1.  To  control  its  impulse.  2.  To  school 
its  utterance.    3.  To  make  self-denial  for  the  good  of  her  child.    4.  To  enter  into 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  33 

the  method  of  Providence  concerning  the  future  of  her  boy.  (/.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
A  beautiful  pattern  of  self-control: — 1.  Not  arising -^rom  indifference.  2.  Not 
arising  from  hard-heartedness.  3.  But  arising  from  the  calm  indwelling  of  faith. 
(Ibid.)  This  mother  a  model  nurse: — 1.  Because  she  taught  her  son  to  have 
sympathy  with  the  slave.  2.  Because  she  taught  him  to  despise  injustice  (ver.  12). 
3.  Because  she  tauj-'ht  him  the  folly  of  anger  (ver.  13).  4.  Because  she  taught  him 
to  defend  the  weak  (ver.  17).  (Ibid.)  A  mother  the  best  nurse: — 1.  Because  she 
has  truest  sympathy  with  the  circumstances  of  the  child's  life.  2.  Because  she  is 
more  truly  concerned  for  the  right  development  of  its  moral  character.  3.  Because 
then  she  will  have  gladdening  memories  of  its  infancy  and  childhood.  (Ibid.) 
Bringiiuj  up  in  the  faith: — "How  can  an  outward  action,  or  ceremony,  lilve  the 
baptism  of  water,  alter  the  inward  state  and  affect  the  real  course  of  life  ?  "  It  can 
do  it  just  as  the  Egyptian  princess,  by  one  gesture  of  her  arm  and  one  command 
from  her  lips,  does  in  fact  raise  a  new-born  infant  from  the  slave's  cabin  to  the 
fellowship  of  monarchs.  It  is  no  miraculous  or  talismanic  transformation.  There 
is  no  \-iolent  revolution  of  the  secret  forces  or  moral  circulatious  of  the  soul.  But 
the  child  is  set  into  new  relations,  and  out  of  those  new  relations  flow,  as  naturally 
as  the  stream  through  a  new  channel  cut  in  the  hills,  new  habitudes,  new  disposi- 
tions, a  new  life,  a  new  heart,  a  new  destiny.  Observe  that  there  is  nothing  here 
which  insures  the  child's  safety :  nothing  that  precludes  the  possibility  of  his  falling 
back  again,  if  he  chooses,  into  bondage ;  nothing  that  compels  him  to  stay  in  his 
Lord's  house  or  in  any  way  overrules  his  liberty — the  awful  liberty  to  apostatize 
into  guilt  and  perdition.  Now  we  pass  on  to  another  question.  What  will  it  be  to 
nourish  your  child  for  Christ?  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  will  be  to  keep  in  your  own 
heart  a  constant  feeling  of  the  charge  laid  upon  you  iii  the  child's  spiritual  nature. 
The  power  of  this  feeling  will  be  manifested  not  only  in  express  words  and  direct 
actions,  but  in  countless  and  daily  signs  of  your  faith  which  the  child  is  sure  to 
understand.  The  unconscious  part  of  education,  especially  of  the  education  of  the 
soul,  is  always,  probably,  the  more  important  part,  yet  the  least  considered.  In 
other  words,  what  we  are  tells  more  on  a  child,  in  the  long  run,  than  what  we  say. 
Every  father  or  mother  is  not  only  either  for  Christ  or  against  Him  in  the  house — 
but  they  are  perpetually,  inevitably,  helping  to  set  out  and  enlist  their  offspring  for 
Him  or  against  Him.  2.  Again,  those  parents  nourish  the  child  for  Christ,  who, 
after  they  have  presented  him  in  holy  baptism,  take  care  not  to  contradict  the  vow 
they  have  there  made  by  a  systematic  indoctrination  of  him  into  ideas  and  fashions 
which  Christ  abhors.  They  do  not  come  here  to  give  him  up  by  a  ceremony  to  hia 
Maker,  and  then  begin  steadily  to  baptize  him  themselves  into  the  bitter  and  polluted 
spirit  of  this  world.  3.  Turn  to  a  more  positive  and  attractive  aspect  of  your  obU- 
gation.  You  are  to  nourish  your  child  into  a  famihar  knowledge  of  his  personal 
membership  in  Christ  and  his  sonship  in  Christ's  kingdom.  Two  other  things 
must  accompany  this  work;  the  one  as  a  help,  the  other  as  a  hope,  but  both  of 
them  powers,  indispensable  to  your  success.  1.  The  child  is  to  be  nourished  with 
the  habitual  practice  of  intercessory  prayer.  Whatever  you  may  fail  of  in  your 
^knowledge,  or  your  earthly  providing,  or  your  power  of  rehgious  influence  otherwise, 
have  hope  in  your  intercessions.  2.  And  therefore,  finally,  take  this  child  away 
and  nourish  him  for  Christ  with  the  expectation  of  a  blessing.  That  expectation  is 
to  be  not  only  a  comfort  to  you  on  the  way,  but  one  of  the  spiritual  forces  with 
which  you  are  to  prevail.  This  Lord,  who  has  lent  you  the  little  one,  not  only  loves 
the  importunities  of  His  people  ;  He  dehghts  in  their  largest  confidences.  [Bp.  F. 
D.  Huntington.)  The  children  of  the  poor,  the  charge  of  the  Church: — I.  First, 
let  us  look  at  the  class  of  childben  who  are  specially  committed  to  oue  care  and 
CONCERN.  It  seems  a  truth  sufficiently  obvious  from  analogy,  that  the  strong  ought 
to  take  care  of  the  weak,  and  the  rich  ought  peculiarly  to  regard  the  poor.  1.  God 
especially  regards  the  poor.  2.  The  souls  of  the  poor  are  as  valuable  as  the  rich. 
3.  God  has  selected  from  among  the  poor  many  of  the  most  eminent  characters 
both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.  II.  Now  let  us  glance  at  another  point  of  the 
doctrine,  and  that  is— the  training  we  are  to  give  them.  "  Take  this  child,  and 
nurse  it  for  Me."  We  are  to  nurse  them  and  train  them  for  God.  Here  I  would 
lay  great  emphasis.  Education  is  an  engine  of  great  moral  power.  It  enlarges  the 
mind ;  it  ennobles  the  individual ;  it  furnishes  him  with  a  fund  of  enjoyment ;  it 
capacitates  him  for  usefulness;  it  directs  his  energies  to  proper  objects.  But  let  it 
be  well  and  thoroughly  understood  that  if  education  be  not  founded  on  religious  and 
on  scriptural  principles,  you  put  a  weapon  into  the  hand  of  an  individual  to  do  more 

8 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  n. 

evil — to  do  it  secretly  and  effectually.  You  render  him  a  more  expert  agent  to  fight 
against  God  and  to  oppose  the  reign  of  holiness.  III.  But  there  is  another  point 
which  ought  to  be  touched  upon  :  and  that  is — the  rewaed  we  may  expect.  "I  will 
give  thee  thy  wages."  Not  "apples  of  gold";  not  "pictures  of  silver";  not 
honours  that  shall  adorn  our  brows,  achieved  by  the  victories  of  the  noble  and  the 
wiles  of  the  great.  Not  literal  "wages."  But  still  there  is  a  reward;  good,  and 
blessed  and  large.  And  what  is  this  reward?  Wages  far  higher  than  money  can 
bring.  Is  there  no  reward  in  doing  good?  No  reward,  that  "  when  the  ear  hears 
you,  then  it  blesses  you ;  and  when  the  eye  sees  you,  it  bears  witness  to  you  "  ?  No 
reward,  to  see  those  dear  children  growing  up  to  fill  important  stations  in  life  by 
your  instrumentality  ?  No  reward,  to  reflect  that  you  have  been  turning  many  in 
your  generation  to  serve  God,  and  to  serve  their  generation  ?  No  reward,  to  think 
that  you  are  acting  out  true  patriotism,  and  training  children  who  shall  serve  their 
country  and  bless  the  age  in  which  they  live?  But  especially,  is  there  no  reward, 
when  the  Master,  whose  glance  is  life  and  "  whose  favour  is  better  than  life,"  shall 
at  the  last  day  say,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it,"  &c.  (J.  Sherman.)  The 
training  of  children  for  God : — God  speaks  to  every  parent,  teacher,  pastor,  with 
every  child  He  puts  into  their  care.  I.  So  He  speaks  to  the  parent  with  a  definite 
AND  INDIVIDUAL  CHARGE.  He  says  not :  "  Take  some  child,"  but,  This  one  take  and 
train.  There  is  no  question  here  as  to  which  out  of  the  many  is  to  be  the  object  of 
your  care.  How  that  definiteness  enhances  the  solemnity  of  the  charge  !  It  is 
the  very  charge  you  would  have  chosen,  too.  The  tie  of  nature  is  a  stronger  one 
than  you  can  make  with  bands  of  gold  or  fetters  of  brass,  and  when  that  tie  receives 
the  strengthening  sanction  of  God's  approval,  it  is  the  most  enduring  thing  in  all 
the  world.  God  has  organized,  and  He  sanctions,  the  family  and  its  sweet  bonds. 
II.  For  in  these  words  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  taken  as  the  King's  own  word  to  us, 
we  find  THE  SECRET  OF  THE  TRAINING  OF  THE  CHILD.  "  Nurse  it  foT  Me."  Not  for 
yourself  are  you  to  train  this  child  entrusted  to  your  care.  It  was  not  given  for 
your  amusement  or  your  service.  Nor  may  you  train  them  for  themselves,  as  though 
the  world  was  made  for  them  and  all  their  business  was  to  please  themselves  with 
it.  The  only  right  and  worthy  object  of  our  labours  for  the  children,  and  it  should 
be  an  aim  clearly  before  ns,  is  to  bring  them  up  for  God.  We  surely  cannot  do  it 
unless  it  be  our  definite  purpose.  Train  it  not  for,  but  in.  Christian  faith  and  love 
and  obedience,  and  teach  it  always  to  live  to  please  tbe  Lord  that  bought  us.  The 
New  Testament  teaching  is  like  the  Old  :  based  on  the  same'principles,  uttered  in 
similar  form — "And  ye  fathers,  provoke  not  your  children  to  wrath  :  butbringthem 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."  III.  And  so  we  shall  receive  the 
EEWARD.  "I  will  give  thee  thy  wages."  It  was  the  daughter  of  the  king  who 
promised  thus  to  Moses'  mother.  It  is  the  King  Himself  who  gives  His  word  to  us. 
He  pays  us  for  taking  care  not  of  our  children,  but  of  His.  Here  is  the  worst  mis- 
take of  all,  if  we  do  not  recognize  them  as  God's  children  and  we  as  only  nurses  in 
His  employ.  The  promise  is  as  definite  as  the  charge.  "  I  will  pay  thee."  It  is 
the  faithful  parent  or  the  faithful  teacher  who  will  be  rewarded.  {G.  M.  Boynton.) 
Children  to  be  educated  for  God: — I.  What  is  implied  in  educating  children  fob 
God.  1.  A  realizing,  heartfelt  conviction  that  they  are  His  property,  His  children, 
rather  than  ours ;  and  that  He  commits  them  for  a  time  to  our  care,  merely  for  the 
purpose  of  education,  as  we  place  children  under  the  care  of  human  instructors  for 
the  same  purpose.  2.  A  cordial  and  solemn  dedication  or  surrender  of  them  to 
Him,  to  be  His  for  ever.  3.  We  must  do  all  that  we  do  for  them  from  right 
motives.  4.  If  we  would  educate  our  children  for  God,  we  must  educate  them  for 
His  service.  (1)  This  implies  that  we  pay  more  attention  to  the  soul  than  to  the 
body.  (2)  It  implies  that  we  pay  more  attention  to  the  heart  or  disposition  than 
to  the  mind.  (3)  It  implies  that  we  educate  them  for  eternity  rather  than  for  time  ; 
for  a  future  world — rather  than  for  this.  II.  The  reward  which  He  gives  to  those 
WHO  PERFORM  this  duty  ARIGHT.  This  Tcward  consists — 1.  In  the  pleasure  which 
attends  every  attempt  to  educate  children  for  God.  2.  Another  part  of  the  reward 
which  God  bestows  on  those  who  educate  their  children  for  Him,  is  the  happiness 
which  they  enjoy  when  they  see  their  labours  crowned  with  success.  (E.  Payson, 
D.D.)  On  the  Christian  education  of  children : — What  are  the  wages  of  fidelity 
in  the  important  work  of  the  Christian  education  of  children  ?  1.  In  the  first  place, 
then,  a  part  of  the  reward  of  fidelity  in  religiously  educating  your  children  consists 
in  the  pleasure  of  the  work.  It  is  an  innocent,  an  interesting,  and  an  honourable 
occupation.  2.  There  enters  into  the  reward  of  religiously  educating  children,  the 
pleasure  which  arises  from  doing  good  to  society.     3.  There  is  high  honour  in  co- 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  35 

operating  with  God,  and  great  happiness  in  conforming  to  the  intentions  of  His 
providence.  4.  The  good  of  his  children  is  what  every  parent  purposes  to  himself, 
as  the  object,  perhaps,  of  his  fondest  desire,  as  the  motive  to  all  his  parental  conduct. 
And  herein  is  a  large  part  of  the  wages  of  fidelity  in  religiously  educating  them, 
that  thereby  their  great  good  in  this  life  will  be  most  effectually  promoted.  It  is  a 
perilous  and  unhappy  world  into  which  you  introduce  them.  And  yet  the  mis- 
fortune is,  that  in  education  respect  is  more  generally  had  to  its  pleasures  than  its 
sorrows,  to  its  honours  than  its  snares.  The  great  question  concerning  your 
offspring  is,  where  in  it  shall  wisdom  be  found,  and  where  is  the  place  of  satis- 
faction ?  Look  around  you.  See  in  what  path  they  shall  be  most  likely  to  find 
peace.  Examine  the  claims  of  wealth,  of  honour,  of  rank,  of  power,  of  pleasure. 
Turn  to  religion.  Institute  a  comparison  between  her  claims  and  theirs.  Inquire 
which  of  them  has  most  efficacy  to  quell  the  passions,  which  are  the  parents  of  evil ; 
to  soothe  the  sorrows,  which  are  the  offspring  of  our  condition  ;  to  open  sources  of 
happiness  at  which  the  weary  spirit  may  always  be  refreshed ;  and  to  take  the  barbs 
from  the  arrows  of  death  ?  Such  a  comparison  will  assuredly  produce  a  result  in 
favour  of  a  Christian  education.  6.  The  faithful  parent  has  a  recompense  for  his 
care  in  the  religious  education  of  his  children,  in  the  greHter  security  of  his  own 
happiness.  It  is  through  the  child  that  the  heart  of  a  parent  is  most  vulnerable. 
The  hour  comes  when  your  children  shall  stand  around  you,  and  you  will  perceive 
that  you  are  leaving  them  without  you  in  this  evil  world.  What  can  mitigate  this 
anguish  of  death?  What  but  to  be  able  to  say  of  them,  when  you  cast  on  them 
your  final  look,  "  I  am  going  unto  my  Father,  and  their  Father;  and  to  my  God, 
and  their  God."  They  will  honour  me  in  their  lives  when  I  shall  be  gone.  The 
Almighty  is  their  Friend  and  He  will  protect  them.  6.  But  not  in  this  life  is  the 
reward  of  the  faithful  in  any  case  complete.  By  far  the  largest  part  of  the  "  wages," 
which  God,  in  His  mercy,  has  promised  to  any  of  their  good  works,  is  reserved  to  be 
given  them  in  the  great  day  of  the  final  consummation.  {Bp.  Dehon.)  Permanence  of  ly 
early  iin2)ressi07is  : — A  farmer  decided  to  remove  an  old  beech-tree  which  grew  on  his 
farm.  The  wood-cutter  noticed  on  the  bark  of  the  tree  some  curious  marks  looking 
like  the  letters  J.  L.,  roughly  cut,  and  below  them  some  ornamental  design.  After 
the  tree  had  been  cut  down  and  was  being  separated  into  lengths  he  was  startled  to 
find  on  the  hard  dry  wood  at  the  core  of  the  tree,  directly  opposite  the  place  on  the 
bark  where  he  had  noticed  the  marks,  the  clearly  cut  letters  J.  L.,  on  a  dark  back- 
ground, and  below  them  an  anchor.  On  inquiries  being  made,  it  was  found  that 
the  letters  were  the  initials  of  a  sailor  named  John  Leland,  who,  in  an  idle  hour,  had 
cut  them  on  the  beech-tree  when  it  was  young.  There  were  thirty-seven  rings 
between  the  letters  and  the  bark  of  the  tree,  and  the  woodsman  said  that  each  ring 
represented  one  year's  growth  of  the  tree.  He  inferred  that  the  letters  must 
have  been  cut  in  the  year  1853,  and  his  belief  was  confirmed  when  he  learned  that 
it  was  in  that  year  that  the  sailor  had  spent  some  time  in  that  neighbourhood. 
Thus  the  inscription  had  not  only  remained  in  the  place  where  it  was  cut  at  the  first, 
but  as  each  year  added  to  the  growth  of  the  tree,  the  letters  still  appeared  on  the 
surface,  scarcely  legible  there,  it  is  true,  but  perfectly  clear  at  the  core.  It  is  so 
with  human  character.  Many  an  old  man,  in  spite  of  the  rough  usage  of  the  world 
and  the  scar  of  time  and  trouble,  bears  upon  his  walk  and  conversation  the  marks 
of  the  handwriting  which  in  his  youth  God  put  in  his  heart.  Care  of  children : — A 
florist,  who  was  so  absorbed  with  his  "  cuttings  "  that  he  did  not  hear  until  twice 
spoken  to,  apologized,  saying,  "  I  beg  your  pardon,  but  you  see  one  must  put  his 
whole  mind  on  these  young  things,  if  he  would  have  them  do  well ;  and  I  can- 
not bear  that  one  should  die  on  my  hands,  for  I  should  almost  feel  as  if  I  had 
murdered  it." 

Ver.  10 .  She  called  his  name  Moses. — Moses  trained  in  Egypt — a  lesson  in  ^^rovi- 
dence : — The  great  lesson  of  this  incident,  as  of  so  much  before,  is  the  presence  of 
God's  wonderful  providence,  working  out  its  designs  by  all  the  play  of  human 
motives.  In  accordance  with  a  law,  often  seen  in  His  dealings,  it  was  needful  that 
the  deliverer  should  come  from  the  heart  of  the  system  from  which  he  was  to  set 
his  brethren  free.  The  same  principle  which  sent  Saul  of  Tarsus  to  be  trained  at 
the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  made  Luther  a  monk  in  the  Augustinian  convent  at 
Erfurt,  planted  Moses  in  Pharaoh's  palace  and  taught  him  the  wisdom  of  Egypt, 
against  which  he  was  to  contend.  It  was  a  strange  irony  of  Providence  which  put 
him  so  close  to  the  throne  which  he  was  to  shake.  For  his  future  work  he  needed 
to  be  lifted  above  his  people,  and  to  be  familiar  with  the  Egyptian  court  as  well  as 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [cnAP.  n. 

with  Egyptian  learning.  If  he  was  to  hate  and  to  war  against  idolatry,  and  to 
rescue  an  unwilling  people  from  it,  he  must  know  the  rottenness  of  the  system,  and 
must  have  lived  close  enough  to  it  to  know  what  went  on  behind  the  scenes,  and 
how  foully  it  smelled  when  near.  He  would  gain  influence  over  his  countrymen 
by  his  connection  with  Pharaoh,  whilst  his  very  separation  from  them  would  at 
once  prevent  his  spirit  from  being  broken  by  oppression,  and  would  give  him  a 
keener  sympathy  with  his  people  than  if  he  had  himself  been  crushed  ^by  oppres- 
sion. His  culture,  heathen  as  it  was,  supplied  the  material  on  which  the  Divine 
Spirit  worked.  God  fashioned  the  vessel,  and  then  filled  it.  Education  is  not  the 
antagonist  of  inspiration.  For  the  most  part,  the  men  whom  God  has  used  for  His 
highest  service  have  been  trained  in  all  the  wisdom  of  their  age.  When  it  has  been 
piled  up  into  an  altar,  "  then  the  fire  of  the  Lord  "  falls.  Our  story  teaches  us 
that  God's  chosen  instruments  are  immortal  till  their  work  is  done.  No  matter  how 
forlorn  may  seem  their  outlook,  how  small  the  probabilities  in  their  favour,  how 
opposite  the  gaol  may  seem  the  road  He  leads  them,  He  watches  them.  Around 
that  frail  ark,  half  lost  among  the  reeds,  is  cast  the  impregnable  shield  of  His 
purpose.  All  things  serve  that  will.  The  current  in  the  full  river,  the  lie  of  the 
flags  that  stop  it  from  being  home  down,  the  hour  of  the  princess's  bath,  the  direc- 
tion of  her  idle  glance,  the  cry  of  the  child  at  the  right  moment,  the  impulsje  welling 
up  in  her  heart,  the  swift  resolve,  the  innocent  diplomacy  of  the  sister,  the  shelter 
of  the  happy  mother's  breast,  the  safety  of  the  palace — all  these  and  a  hundred 
more  trivial  and  unrelated  things  are  spun  into  the  strong  cable  wherewith  God 
draws  slowly  but  surely  His  secret  purpose  into  act.  So  ever  His  children  are ., 
secure  as  long  as  He  has  work  for  them ;  and  His  mighty  plan  strides  on  to  its  i 
accomplishment  over  all  the  barriers  that  men  can  raise.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)\ 
Birth  and  Irahiirit]  of  Moses : — I.  The  wonderful  clearness  of  Bible  por- 
TH.\iTS.  Some  of  the  pictures  of  the  men  whom  the  world  has  united  in  calling 
masters  are  well-nigh  indistinguishable.  They  are  hke  an  old  manuscript 
whith  you  must  study  out  word  by  word.  II.  The  superior  dignity  and  glory 
OF  THE  HUJLAN  LIFE.  Where  now  is  the  city  Cain  builded?  What  about  the 
civil  movements  of  that  far-off  day?  its  political  revolutions?  Who  cares  any 
thing  about  them  ?  Learn  from  this,  that  it  is  human  life  fashioned  by  the  Divine 
Artificer,  and  in  His  own  image,  which  is  the  noblest  thing  altogether  in  this 
world.  III.  The  BIRTH  AND  TiLiiNiNG  OF  MosES.  1.  The  time  of  the  birth.  Pharaoh's 
Joseph  had  gone.  His  bones  only  were  now  in  Egypt — a  poor  part  of  any  man. 
"Every  son  that  is  born  of  the  Hebrews  ye  shall  cast  into  the  river."  And  so 
Moses  was  doomed  before  he  was  born.  "  From  his  mother's  womb  to  the  waters 
of  the  Nile, '  ran  the  decree.  And  Moses  did  go  to  the  Nile,  but  in  God's  way — not 
in  Pharaoh's — as  we  shall  see.  2.  The  goodliness,  the  beauty  of  the  child.  An 
infant  child.  Is  there  anything  more  beautiful?  Look  at  its  little  hands.  Can 
any  sculptor  match  them  ?  Behold  the  light  of  its  eyes.  Does  any  flower  of  earth 
open  up  with  such  a  glory  ?  Look  upon  the  rose,  the  lily,  the  violet,  as  they  first 
open  their  eyes  upon  this  world.  Ah !  there  is  no  such  light  in  any  of  them.  A 
man  is  far  gone— a  woman  farther — when  the  child  which  comes  to  them — the 
immortal  clasp  of  their  two  hearts — is  not  beautiful  in  their  sight.  Earth  has  no 
honour  so  great  as  the  parentage  of  an  immortal ;  heaven  no  higher  dignity.  But 
in  Moses'  case  beauty  was  to  reach  unto  an  end  nobler  than  itself.  It  was  to  fill 
the  mother's  heart  with  a  subtler  strategy,  with  a  bolder  daring.  It  was  to  fasci- 
nate the  eyes  of  a  princess.  It  was  to  work  the  deliverance  of  a  mighty  nation.  So 
beauty,  when  not  abused,  ever  beyond  itself  reaches  unto  a  nobler  end.  And  this 
beauty  of  the  sunset,  of  the  landscape  and  the  flower,  fruits  in  the  human  life.  It 
emphasizes  purity,  it  lifts  up  towards  God.  Ah,  mothers !  be  not  so  anxious  to 
keep  your  child  from  the  looking-glass  as  to  teach  her  that  she  holds  a  noble  gift 
from  God  in  that  face,  in  that  form,  of  hers.  3.  The  exposed  and  endangered  con- 
dition of  the  babe.  For  a  while  the  mother  hid  him ;  hid  him  from  the  eyes  of 
Pharaoh  and  his  minions.  But  the  powers  that  be  have  many  eyes.  "And  when 
she  could  no  longer  hide  him,  she  took  for  him  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  and  daubed  it 
with  slime  and  with  pitch,  and  put  the  child  therein,  and  she  laid  it  in  the  flags  by 
the  river's  brink."  Did  ever  mother  launch  such  a  craft  before?  Ay,  often. 
Every  day  they  do  it.  Every  day,  every  hour,  some  mother  is  committing  her 
child  to  the  currents  of  this  world,  than  which  the  waters  of  the  Nile  were  not 
more  cruel.  Think  of  harlotry,  the  painted  devil.  Think  of  intemperance,  the 
destroying  fiend.  Think  of  dishonour,  the  consuming  fire.  Are  not  these  worse 
than  all  the  crocodiles  that  ever  opened  jaw  in  river  of  earth  ?    And  yet  must  they 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  37 

do  it !  Upon  the  angry  surface  of  this  world's  danger  must  mothers  launch  their 
hopes ;  their  only  consolation  being — God  is  strong,  and  a  Father  to  defend.  I  can 
imagine  the  mother  of  Moses  weaving  her  little  ark  of  bulrushes.  Love  makes  her 
hands  to  be  full  of  skill  as  ever  shipbuilder's  were.  So  mothers  now.  The  ark 
which  they  make  is  the  covenant  with  their  God  ;  its  lining,  the  world-resisting 
element  of  a  mother's  prayers ;  and  then  with  eyes  that  cannot  see  for  tears,  and 
with  heart-strings  breaJving,  they  push  forth  their  little  craft — their  heart's  hope — 
their  world.  And  now  may  God  defend  the  boy,  for  the  mother  may  not — cannot 
longer.  IV.  The  training  of  Moses.  Note  the  elements  of  this.  1.  He  had  his 
mother.  Sure  I  am,  if  Pharaoh's  daughter  could  have  glanced  mto  that  home  just 
then,  she  would  have  thought  that  she  had  happened  upon  a  most  excellent  nurse. 
"Very  affectionate,  surely,"  she  would  have  said,  "  and  I  hope  she  has  judgment." 
Yes,  princess ;  never  fear.  Your  nurse  has  excellent  judgment,  too.  Her  strange 
love  will  make  her  very  wise.  This  was  the  first  element  of  Moses'  training.  A  / 
human  life,  like  any  other  life,  needs  training.  And  for  this  work  there  is  no  one  *^ 
like  the  mother.  Interest  makes  her  wise.  Love  makes  her  unwearying.  Were 
the  Israelites  accustomed  to  point  to  that  "hated  throne"?  If  so,  all  this  story 
would  filter  through  a  mother's  heart  into  the  mind  of  the  growing  child.  She 
would  tell  it  him  as  he  lay  upon  her  lap.  She  would  sing  it  to  him  as  she  rocked 
him  to  sleep.  Talk  it  to  him  as  he  played  about  the  house.  The  sympathetic 
instinct  between  mother  and  child  would  be  a  syphon,  through  which,  with  every 
hour  of  the  day,  would  flow  the  story  of  Israel's  bitter  wrong.  And  did  the  promise 
of  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  Jacob  linger  in  the  darkened  minds  of  their 
enslaved  descendants,  keeping  hope  alive  there,  and  the  expectation  of  deliverance? 
If  so,  with  this  hope  the  mother  would  feed  the  mind  and  fill  the  heart  of  ber 
growing  boy.  With  the  word  freedom,  she  would  daily  stir  his  ambition.  2.  His 
home  in  the  palace  of  Pharaoh.  "  And  the  child  grew,  and  she  brought  him  unto 
Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  he  became  her  son."  He  was  to  break  the  chains  of 
slavery,  not  to  be  bound  by  them.  Therefore  he  must  be  lifted  up  to  the  greatness 
of  his  work.  Two  most  necessary  elements  of  preparation  he  gained  by  going  into 
the  home  of  the  Pharaoh.  The  first  was  knowledge.  Moses,  we  read,  was  learned 
in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians.  And  this  he  got  as  the  adopted  son  of 
Pharaoh's  daughter.  Good  impulses,  a  noble  spirit,  is  not  enough.  Knowledge  is 
power,  and  necessary  power,  save  when  God  works  by  miracles.  Therefore  Moses 
was  homed  in  the  palace.  He  goes  to  study  the  throne  which  he  is  yet  to  shake. 
Out  of  Pharaoh's  armoury  he  will  gird  himself  for  the  coming  contest  with  Pharaoh. 
His  residence  at  court  would  serve  to  impress  him  with  the  immense  power  with 
which  the  Hebrews  contended,  and  the  heel  of  which  was  upon  their  necks.  And 
yet  he  must  know  this,  or  he  will  not  be  prepared  for  his  work.  3.  The  desert. 
"  He  that  beheveth  shall  not  make  haste."  So  he  that  worketh  for  God  shall  not 
make  haste.  These  forty  years  had  taught  him  something.  His  first  failure  had 
taught  him  something.  So  had  his  desert  life,  in  which  he  had  been  alone  with 
God.  Moses  at  eighty  years  of  age,  in  his  own  estimation,  was  not  nearly  so  much 
of  a  man  as  at  forty.  So  of  all  growing  men  always.  There  are  many  now  in  the 
world,  not  yet  out  of  their  teens,  who  are  a  deal  wiser  and  mightier,  and  fitter  to 
cope  with  error  and  wrong,  than  they  will  be  twenty  years  hence  ;  that  is,  provided 
they  keep  on  growing  these  twenty  years.  But  God  has  a  school  ready  for  such 
(that  is,  if  they  are  worth  the  schooling),  and  one  which  they  will  not  be  long  in 
entering.  It  is  the  school  of  mistakes^of  failure  ;  the  school  in  which  many  a 
man  spells  out  this  lesson,  "  What  a  big  fool  I  was  !  "  This  was  the  training 
which  God  now  gives  to  Moses.  He  allows  him,  in  the  impulse  of  youth,  to  strike 
a  blow,  and  then  gives  him  forty  years  in  the  desert  to  meditate  upon  its  folly.  In 
conclusion,  note  some  of  the  great  lessons  which  our  subject  teaches.  1.  We  learn 
how  low,  oftentimes,  God  permits  the  true  cause  to  sink.  The  world  has  often  seen 
the  last  stronghold  of  human  rights  defended  by  the  might  of  one  solitary  arm.  So 
it  was  here.  Yes,  Israel's  hope  floated  in  the  little  ark  of  bulrushes  among  the 
flags  upon  the  river's  brink.  And  yet  Israel's  cause  was  safe  enough.  With  faith 
in  God,  we  need  never  fear.  Suppose  there  is  left  but  one  human  life  for  defence. 
God  and  such  a  one  are  always  a  majority.  2.  We  learn  the  measureless  importance 
of  one  single  human  life.  God  often  throws  into  the  balance  of  the  moral  world  a 
single  life,  to  keep  it  even.  Think  of  this,  ye  teachers,  and  count  no  life  committed  to 
your  care  common  or  unclean.  3.  The  grand  work  of  man-building.  This  is  what 
God,  the  Great  Architect,  is  for  ever  engaged  in.  It  is  that  which  some — yes,  aU.  of 
ns,  are  called  to  do.    Time  itself,  with  aU  its  centuries,  is  only  one  of  many  hands 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.n. 

engaged  in  this  sublime  work.     Everything  else  in  this  world,  all  sorrow,  all  joy,  all 
wars,  aU  peace,  all  slavery,  all  liberty,  all  learning,  all  art,  is  only  so  much  scaf- 
folding.    The  slavery  of  the  Hebrews ;  the  cruel  despotism  of  Pharaoh ;  the  mother's 
love  and  the  mother's  fear ;  the  princess,  the  Nile;  ay,  even  the  buhushes  which 
grew  by  its  brink — all  these  were  used  of  God  in  building  up  His  servant,  the  man 
Moses.     Up,  up,  upward  unto  God,  rises  the  immortal  man.     His  axe  the  gloi-y  and 
power  of  an  endless  life.     4.  We  learn  how  easy  it  is  for  God  to  fashion  a  human 
life  to  suit  His  purpose.     "  To  the  Nile  with  it,"  shouts  Pharaoh  from  his  throne. 
"  To  the  Nile,"  responds  the  power  of  Egypt.     "  Yes,"  says  God,  "  to  the  Nile ;  but 
from  it  too  ;  from  it,  unto  a  home,  unto  the  palace,  unto  the  headship  of  a  mighty 
nation,  unto  Sinai,  unto  Pisgah."     In  the  very  palace  of  the  Pharaohs,  God  nurses 
a  life  for  the  overthrow  of  the  Pharaohs.     With  such  dehgbtful  facility  does  God 
model  and  mould  human  life.     (S.  S.  Mitchell,  D.D.)        Moses: — I.  The  child  op 
POVERTY.     You  and  I  will  draw  near  and  look  upon  this  strange  nest  and  nestling. 
He  was  a  foundling,  that  is,  a  child  left  by  its  parents  and  found  by  some  passer-by. 
His  name  means  water-saved.     I  knew  a  foundling  who  was  called  Horace  Nelson, 
because  he  was  found,  one  winter  morning,  on  Glasgow  Green  near  Nelson's  monu- 
ment.    He  was  named  from  the  monument,  which  was  not  harder  than  his  mother's 
heart ;  and  so  Moses  was  named  from  the  water  out  of  which  he  was  drawn.     Each 
seemed  to  be  nobody's  child  ;  and  so  the  one  was  named  as  the  child  of  the  water, 
and  the  other  as  the  child  of  the  monument.     That  slave's  child  in  the  ark  seems 
the  poorest  of  the  poor.     Left  as  a  prey  to  flood  and  famine,  to  crocodiles  and  vul- 
tures, wrts  ever  poor  child  in  sadder  plight  ?     Yet  his  fame  now  fills  the  world  as 
the  man  I  if  men  next  to  the  Messias,  the  Conqueror  of  Pbaraoh,  the  Leader  of 
Israel,  and  Ihe  Giver  of  the  Law  to  all  mankind.     At  Moses'  cradle  learn  never  to 
scorn  a  poor  child  because  he  is  poor.     Often  the  child  of  poverty  has,  like  Moses, 
stood  before  kings,  and  proved  himself  kinglier  than  they.     Let  not  the  poor  be 
discouraged ;  let  not  the  rich  be  proud.    But  it  is  very  sinful  as  well  as  very  sense- 
less to  despise  the  poor.     God  never  does  so.    Before  leaving  it,  take  another  look  at 
Moses'  cradle.  Ah,  the  baby's  beauty  makes  us  glad  !  'Tis  the  human  face  divine.  He 
is  "a  goodly  child";  "exceeding  fair";  he  has  an  heavenly  beauty.   I  have  come  to 
know  hundreds  of  our  poorest  children,  and  have  often  been  struck  with  their  beauty, 
which  shone  through  all  their  hardships.    What  fine  powers  of  body  and  mind  and 
heart  many  of  them  have !     What  cleverness !  what  wit !  what  kindly  feeling !     In 
their  beautiful  eyes  you  may  notice  the  beamings  of  a  promising  soul.     Indeed,  I 
have  sometimes  wondered  whether  God's  bounty  had  not  endowed  them  so  richly 
with  these  better  gifts  in  order  to  make  up  for  the  want  of  what  money  can  buy. 
Imitate  Pharaoh's  daughter  whom  you  bless  and  admire.     Turn  not  proudly  or 
coldly  away  from  the  forsaken  child  .    11.  The  child  of  providence.     God's  provi-  v 
dence  is  God's  forethought,  or  foresight ;  His  kind  care  over  us  in  all  things.     I  wish 
you  would  think  about  the  wonders  of  providence.    Take  an  instance  from  your 
school  books.     This  nineteenth  century  has  been  shaped  by  the  battle  of  Waterloo. 
And  God  did  it  all  with  a  few  drops  of  rain.    The  rain  on  the  night  before  the  battle 
made  the  clayey  soil  slippery,  so  that  the  French  could  not  get  their  guns  forward 
til  the  sun  bad  dried  the  ground.     But  for  the  rain.  Napoleon  would  probably  have 
won.     God's  providence  brings  about  the  greatest  things  by  means  of  the  smallest. 
The  dangers  around  the  child  Moses  were  very  great.     The  Nile  might  drown  him ; 
the  sou  by  day  or  the  moon  by  night  might  smite  him ;  the  crocodiles  were  around, 
and  the  vultures  above  him ;  there  seemed  no  hope  for  the  darling  boy.     The 
dangers  around  the  most  favoured  children  are  perhaps  as  great,  though  not  so 
easily  seen.     Believe  firmly,  then,  that  God  is  on  earth  as  well  as  in  heaven,  and 
that  His  hand  is  in  small  things  no  less  than  in  great.     And  think  how  much  yoa 
owe  to  His  fatherly  providence.     Your  mother  may  have  done  all  a  mother  could, 
your  Miriam  may  have  watched  over  you,  but  it  was  God's  providence  that  placed 
you  in  the  ark  of  safety  which  has  carried  you  on  to  this  good  hour.     And  you 
should  thank  Him  also  for  unseen  and  unknown  deliverances.     The  whole  web  of 
your  hfe  is  woven  with  mercies.     III.  The  child  of  grace.     Grace  saved  him  from 
his  greatest  dangers.    Through  the  palace  a  dark  river  ran,  drowning  men's  souls 
in  perdition.     Vices  more  deadly  than  the  crocodiles  were  rife  around  him.    He 
found  plagues  in  Pharaoh's  coiurt  more  frightful  than  any  he  afterwards  sent  into 
it.     I  imagine  that  no  youth  ever  had  greater  temptations  than  Moses  (Heb.  xi. 
24).    His  character  was  formed  by  that  choice :  his  blessed  Mfe  was  a  harvest  from 
that  one  seed.     The  choice  you  make  between  Christ  and  the  world,  makes  you. 
Notice  that  Moses'  choice  was  most  reasonable,  though  to  the  Egyptians  it  seemed 


iCHAP.  IL]  EXODUS.  39 

sheer  madness.  Moses'  was  also  a  joyous  choice.  Think  not  that  he  was  the  most 
wretched  youth  in  Egypt  when  he  forsook  Egypt's  gods.  Ah,  no.  His  choice 
woukl  pain  him  in  many  ways ;  but  then  he  had  the  deep  satisfaction  of  having 
done  what  was  right.  He  had  better  joys  than  the  Egyptians  dreamt  of.  And  he 
must  have  made  in  his  boyhood  this  choice  which  he  publicly  confessed  as  soon  as 
he  came  of  age.  Like  him,  choose  Christ  in  youth,  and  declare  your  choice.  You 
gather  fresh  flowers  for  your  friends  ;  and  will  you  offer  Christ  only  an  old  withered 
flower,  that  has  lost  all  its  beauty  and  perfume?  (/.  Wens.)  Child-growth: — 
Physically — mentally — morally.  1.  Important  to  families — leaving  home.  2,  Inte- 
resting to  strangers — princess.  3.  Important  to  nations — Egypt.  (./.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  Child-nomenclature: — 1.  Perpetuating  the  memory  of  a  cruel  edict.  2. 
Perpetuating  the  memory  of  a  loving  mother.  3.  Perpetuating  the  memory  of  a 
kindly  providence.  4.  Perpetuating  the  memory  of  a  compassionate  stranger. 
Home  life  exchanged  for  palace  life.  (1)  It  would  be  at  first  unwelcome — stranger. 
(2)  It  would  gradually  become  a  temptation — its  gaiety.  (3)  It  would  forcefully 
become  a  discipline.  (Ibid.)  Adoption  by  royalty  : — Suppose  that  you  were  to 
see  the  child  of  a  beggar  in  the  streets,  or  the  child  of  a  criminal  in  prison,  and  it 
80  happened  that  the  emperor  of  Russia  or  the  queen  of  England  were  to  see  this 
little  unfortunate  creature  and  exclaim,  "  I  will  adopt  it  as  my  own,"  and  were  to 
have  it  taken  to  a  palace,  clad  in  rich  dresses,  fed  at  the  royal  table,  brought  up 
under  the  royal  care,  and  even  prepared  for  a  throne.  "  Oh,"  you  would  think, 
"  what  a  change  of  life !  what  happiness  for  this  child !  "  And  if  it  were  an  angel, 
or  an  archangel,  or  a  seraph  that  adopted  it,  in  order  to  make  it,  if  it  were  possible, 
an  angel  that  should  never  die ;  that  would  be  a  thousand  times  more  glorious  still. 
Think,  now,  what  it  is  to  become  a  child  of  God  ;  and  this  is,  nevertheless,  what  all 
of  us  may  become  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  What  wonderful  glory  I  what  marvel- 
lous happiness!  Thus  St.  John  exclaims,  "Behold  what  manner  of  love  the 
Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God."  And  it 
is  by  faith  that  we  become  the  children  of  God.  "  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of 
God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  {Prof.  Gaussen.)  Moses'  education  in  Egypt: — 
The  adopted  son  of  the  daughter  of  an  Egyptian  king  must  have  been  trained  in  all 
the  wisdom  of  Egypt.  This  is  also  in  harmony  with  the  tradition  reported  by 
Manetho,  which  makes  Moses  a  priest  of  Heliopolis,  and  therefore  presupposes  a 
priestly  education.  It  was  precisely  this  education  in  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians, 
which  was  the  ultimate  design  of  God  in  all  the  leadings  of  His  providence,  not 
only  with  reference  to  the  boy,  but,  we  might  say,  to  the  whole  of  Israel.  For  it 
was  in  order  to  appropriate  the  wisdom  and  culture  of  Egypt,  and  to  take  possession 
of  them  as  a  human  basis  for  Divine  instruction  and  direction,  that  Jacob's  family 
left  the  land  of  their  father's  pilgrimage,  and  their  descendants'  hope  and  promise. 
But  the  guidance  and  fate  of  the  whole  of  Israel  were  at  this  time  concentrated  in 
Moses.  As  Joseph's  elevation  to  the  post  of  grand  vizier  of  Egypt  placed  him  in  a 
position  to  provide  for  his  father's  house  in  the  time  of  famine,  so  was  Moses  fitted 
by  the  Egyptian  training  received  at  Pharaoh's  court  to  become  the  leader  and  law- 
giver of  his  people.  {M.  Baumgarten,  D.D.)  Moses'  choice: — There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  foster-son  of  the  king's  daughter,  the  highly-gifted  and  well-educated 
youth,  had  the  most  brilliant  course  open  before  him  in  the  Egyptian  state.  Had 
he  desired  it,  he  would  most  likely  have  been  able  to  rise  like  Joseph  to  the  highest 
honours.  But  affairs  were  very  different  now.  Moses  could  not  enter  on  such  a 
course  as  this  without  sacrificing  his  nation,  his  convictions,  his  hopes,  his  faith, 
and  his  vocation.  But  that  he  neither  would,  nor  durst,  nor  could.  (J.  H. 
Kurtz,  D.D.)  An  incident  expressed  in  a  name  : — Admiral  Bythesea,  V.C.,  C.B., 
who  has  just  retired  after  having  for  many  years  been  the  Consulting  Naval  Officer 
to  the  Government  of  India,  was  picked  up  as  an  infant  far  out  at  sea,  lashed  to  a 
bale  of  goods.  A  lady — presumably  his  mother — was  with  him,  but  she  was  dead, 
and  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  kind  by  which  the  name  of  the  waif  could  be  traced. 
The  officers  of  the  man-of-war  which  picked  up  the  poor  little  infant  did  all  they 
could  to  find  out  his  relations,  and,  finding  all  their  attempts  futile,  they  deter- 
mined to  adopt  the  child,  to  whom  they  gave  the  name  of  "  By  the  Sea."  He  was 
sent  to  a  naval  school,  and  when  old  enough  joined  the  navy.  By  a  happy  coin- 
cidence the  first  ship  in  which  he  served  was  the  one  which  had  saved  his  life  aa 
an  infant.  He  took  to  his  profession,  and  during  the  Crimean  war  distinguished 
himself  at  the  Island  of  Wardo,  where  he  earned  the  Victoria  Cross  and  the  deco- 
ration of  C.B.  Later  on  his  services  in  India  gave  him  the  Companionship  of  the 
order  of  the  Indian  Empire,  and  he  now  retires  from  the  service  with  the  rank  of 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it.- 

admiral — a  consummation  little  dreamed  of  by  the  kind-hearted  officers  who 
rescued  and  educated  him. 

Vers.  11,  12.  He  slew  the  Egyptian. — The  oppressor  slain;  or  a  wrong  way  oj 
reproving  injury  : — I.  There  aee  many  inst.\nces  ofcruel  oppression  in  the  world. 
1.  There  is  oppression  in  the  commercial  life  of  mun.  The  rich  smite  the  poor — 
the  fortunate  the  unfortunate — the  defrauder  the  honest  tradesman.  2.  There  is 
oppression  in  the  social  life  of  men.  The  haughty  fro\vn  upon  the  humble.  3. 
There  is  oppression  in  the  political  life  of  men.  There  is  the  oppression  of  an 
unjust  king — of  a  politic  statesman — of  an  unruly  crowd — of  an  unrighteous  edict. 
4.  There  is  oppression  in  the  Church  life  of  men.  The  man  of  little  religion  wishes 
to  dictate  to  and  perplex  those  who  are  more  devout  than  bimseh.     II.  It  is  the 

DUTT  OF    A  GOOD  AND  PATRIOTIC    MAN  TO  OPPOSE  THESE    ^UMFESTATI0NS    OF    OPPRESSION. 

1.  Because  he  should  have  sympathy  with  the  burdens  of  the  oppressed.  2.  Because 
he  should  recognize  the  brotherhood  of  men.  3.  Because  he  should  recognize  the 
claim  of  Uiitionality.     III.  That  a  good  man  must  be  careful  as  to  the  spirit  and 

MANNER  IN  WHICH  HE  RESENTS  OPPRESSION,  OR  HE  MAY  BE  AS    CRUEL  AS  THOSE  WHOM  HE 

reproves.  1.  His  conscience  told  him  that  he  was  doing  wrong.  2.  The  spirit 
and  manner  in  which  the  oppressor  should  be  reproved.  (1)  Boldly.  (2)  Firmly. 
(3)  Sometimes  kindly.  (4)  Make  him  feel  the  wrong  of  his  conduct.  {J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  Retributive  justice  : — Look  at  retributive  justice  in  man  in  three  aspects. 
I.  As  EXCITED.  "He  spied  an  Egyptian,"  &c.  It  was  always  there,  working  no 
doubt  silently,  and  in  many  ways,  but  now  it  broke  into  flame.  The  moral  outrage 
he  witnessed  roused  him,  &c.  II.  As  restrained.  "  He  looked  this  way,"  &0. 
The  eight  of  a  child  will  so  frighten  the  nocturnal  desperado  that  it  will  paralyze 
his  arms  and  drive  him  panic-struck  from  the  scene.  Man  keeps  man  in  check. 
A  wise  and  beneficent  arrangement.  It  is  a  power,  however,  that  has  its  limits. 
It  should  never  prevent  us  from  doing  right.  III.  As  free.  "  ^Yhen  he  saw  there 
was  no  man,  he  slew,"  Ac.  Were  the  retributive  instincts  of  human  nature  left 
entirely  unrestrained  the  earth  would  become  a  pandemonium.  (Homilist.) 
Lessons : — 1.  Maturity  of  years  and  parts  God  appoints  unto  the  instruments  of 
deUverance.  2.  Providence  orders  objects  to  be  seen  to  move  instruments  unto 
their  work.  3.  Sight  of  pressures  and  injuries  upon  the  Church  must  move  helpers 
to  compassion.  4.  Single  injuries  done  to  any  member  of  the  Church  may  occasion 
just  revenge.     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)        Strife,  intervention,  and  Jiight   of  Moses  : — 

I.  Strife.  1.  Between  the  Egyptian  and  Hebrew.  The  Egyptian  was  smiting 
the  Hebrew.  Whipping  him  to  his  work,  or  punishing  him  for  doing  less  than  his 
allotted  task.  Cruel,  tyrannical.  The  strong  and  protected,  persecuted  the  weak 
and  defenceless.  Pride  of  power.  Official  meanness.  Domineering  spirit  and 
conduct.  2.  Between  Hebrew  and  Hebrew.  This  is  a  worse  feature  of  strife. 
Fellow  bondsmen  increasing  each  other's  sufferings.    Children  of  one  family  striving. 

II.  Intervention.  1.  The  person.  Moses.  Adopted  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter. 
Learned.  Mighty  in  deeds  and  words.  Honour,  title,  wealth  before  him.  2.  His 
patriotic  feelings.  Did  not  abandon  his  nationality.  "  Not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren."  3.  Slays  the  Egyptian.  Unjustifiable  conduct.  "  Vengeance  is  mine, 
I  will  repay,  sailh  the  Lord."  Yet  it  was  an  heroic  act,  under  the  peculiar  circum- 
stances. The  first  blow  for  freedom.  4.  Concealment.  Hides  the  body.  5.  Second 
intervention.  Nut  to  kill,  but  to  expostulate.  6.  Repudiation  of  Moses  by  his 
brethren.  Jesus  was  despised  and  rejected,  "came  to  His  own,  and  His  own  received 
Him  not."  III.  Flight  of  Moses.  1.  The  reason.  Pharaoh  sought  to  slay  him. 
Moses,  dwelling  in  the  palace,  would  soon  hear  of  this  design.  His  friends — perhaps 
the  princess  if  living — would  inform  him.  2.  The  course  of  his  flight.  Over  ground 
to  be  presently  traversed  by  the  Israelites.  A  long  and  solitary  journey.  His 
thoughts  by  the  way.  3.  Incidents  of  the  end.  The  well's  mouth.  How  many 
incidents  have  occurred  at  the  mouth  of  wells  !  The  sheperdesses  and  the  boors. 
Moses'  courage  and  politeness.  The  Christian  should  be  a  true  gentleman.  The 
reward  of  chivalry  and  politeness.  Kind  words  and  deeds  easy.  Defence  of  the 
weak  a  mark  of  true  nobleness.  Moses  a  real  nobleman.  Christ  mighty  to  save  the 
weak;  and  willing.  Learn — 1.  The  meanness  of  taking  a  base  advantage.  2.  The 
strong  should  be  helpers  of  the  weak.  3.  Jesus,  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses, 
raised  up  to  be  our  peacemaker  and  deliverer.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  Moses'  sympathy  with 
his  brethren: — Strong  was  the  temptation  that  beset  Moses.  He  had  a  fair  oppor- 
tunity (as  we  say)  to  make  his  fortune,  and  to  have  been  serviceable  to  Israel  too, 
with  his    nterest  at  court,  and  yet  he  obtained  a  glorious  victory  by  faith.    He 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODVS.  41 

esteemed  it  greater  honour  and  advantage  to  be  a  son  of  Abraham  than  an  adopted 
child  of  the  royal  family.  He  had  a  tender  concern  for  his  poor  brethren  in  bondage, 
with  whom  (though  he  might  easily  have  avoided  it)  he  chose  to  suffer  affliction  ; 
he  looked  on  their  burdens  as  one  that  not  only  pitied  them,  but  was  resolved  to 
venture  with  them,  and,  if  necessary,  to  venture  for  them.  We  must  not  be  satis- 
fied with  wishing  well  to,  doing  service  for,  or  speaking  kindly  on  behalf  of  the  people 
of  God.  We  ought  to  be  fully  identified  with  them,  no  matter  how  despised  or 
reproached  they  may  be.  It  ia,  in  a  measure,  an  agreeable  thing  to  a  benevolent 
and  generous  spirit  to  patronize  Christianity,  but  it  is  a  wholly  different  thing  to  be 
identified  with  Christians,  or  to  suffer  with  Christ.  A  patron  is  one  thing,  a  martyr 
is  quite  another.  This  distinction  is  apparent  throughout  the  entire  book  of  God. 
Obadiah  took  care  of  God's  witnesses,  but  Elijah  was  a  witness  for  God.  Darius 
was  so  attached  to  Daniel  that  he  lost  a  night's  rest  on  his  account,  but  Daniel  spent 
that  selfsame  night  in  the  lion's  den,  as  a  witness  for  the  truth  of  God.  Nieodemus 
ventured  to  speak  a  word  for  Christ,  but  a  more  matured  discipleship  would  have 
led  him  to  identify  himself  with  Christ.  {A.  Neviji,  D.D.)  Brotherly  symijathy : 
— Prior  to  the  return  of  Mr.  Henson,  the  original  of  "  Uncle  Tom,"  to  America  in 
1851,  he  was  invited  to  a  dinner  party  in  the  lordly  mansion  of  one  of  our  city 
merchants ;  and  when  seated  at  a  table  covered  with  the  most  tempting  viands,  and 
surrounded  with  every  comfort  and  luxury  which  affluence  could  provide,  he  was 
so  overpowered  with  the  remembrance  of  his  former  misery  and  degradation  that 
he  rose  from  the  table,  feeling  that  he  could  not  partake  of  a  single  morsel  of  the 
sumptuous  banquet.  His  generous  host  went  after  him,  and  asked  whether  he  was 
taken  unwell,  or  whether  he  would  like  some  other  kind  of  dishes.  "  Oh  no,"  was  the 
touching  and  pathetic  response  of  this  good  old  man,  "  I  am  well  enough  ;  but, 
oh !  how  could  I  sit  down  to  such  a  luxurious  feast  as  this  when  I  think  of  my  poor 
brother  at  this  moment  a  wretched,  miserable,  outcast  slave,  with  perhaps  scarcely 
a  crust  of  bread  or  a  glass  of  water  to  appease  the  cravings  of  nature?  "  (John  Lobb.) 
Blood  thicker  than  water : — Commodore  Tatnall  was  in  command  of  the  United  States 
squadron  in  the  East  Indies,  and,  as  a  neutral,  witnessed  the  desperate  fight  near 
Pekin  between  the  English  and  Chinese  fleets.  Seeing  his  old  friend,  Sir  James 
Hope,  hard  pressed  and  in  need  of  help,  he  manned  his  barge,  and  went  through  a 
tremendous  fire  to  the  flag-ship.  Offering  his  services,  surprise  was  expressed  at 
his  action.  His  reply  was,  "  Blood  is  thicker  than  water."  {H.  O.  Mackey.) 
Sympathy  with  burden  bearers : — Napoleon,  at  St.  Helena,  was  once  walking  with  a 
lady,  when  a  man  came  up  with  a  load  on  his  back.  The  lady  kept  her  side  of 
the  path,  and  was  ready  to  assert  her  precedence  of  sex ;  but  Napoleon  gently  waved 
her  on  one  side,  saying,  "  Respect  the  burden,  madam."  You  constantly  see  men 
and  women  behave  to  each  other  in  a  way  which  shows  that  they  do  not  "  respect 
the  burden,"  whatever  the  burden  is.  Sometimes  the  burden  is  an  actual  visible 
load  ;  sometimes  it  is  cold  and  raggedness  ;  sometimes  it  is  hunger  ;  sometimes  it 
is  grief,  or  illness.  And  how  far,  pray,  are  we  to  push  the  kind  of  chivalry  which 
"  respects  the  burden  "  ?  As  far  as  the  love  of  God  will  go  with  us.  A  great  distance  ; 
it  is  a  long  way  to  the  foot  of  the  rainbow.  (Good  Words.)  Some  people  will 
never  look  on  the  burdens  of  their  brethren : — 1.  They  pretend  not  to  see  them. 
2.  They  have  no  sympathy  with  them.  3.  They  fear  lest  their  purse,  or  energy 
should  be  taxed.  4.  They  miss  the  luxury  of  relieving  them.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  inquiring  look  of  conscience  : — 1.  It  was  anxious.  2.  It  was  suspicious.  3. 
It  was  troubled.  4.  It  was  perplexed.  5.  It  was  mistaken.  (Ibid.)  The  inquiring 
look  of  conscience  : — 1.  Gives  a  moment  for  reflection.  2.  Indicates  the  moral  evil 
of  the  deed.  3.  Suspects  an  unhappy  issue  from  the  deed.  (Ibid.)  Hidden  sin: 
— "  He  slew  the  Egyptian,  and  hid  him  in  the  sand."  I.  Hidden  by  fallacy.  "  The 
Egyptian."  He  was  cruel — unjust;  had  I  not  a  right  to  kill  him?  Moses  might 
reason  thus  to  convince  himself.  A  man  must  bury  sin  out  of  the  sight  of  his  own 
conscience,  before  he  can  be  happy — by  false  argument  or  true.  II.  Hidden  by 
folly.  "In  the  sand."  1.  Would  leave  traces  of  his  deed.  2.  The  dead  body 
would  be  easily  discovered.  So  all  our  efforts  to  bury  sin  are  equally  futile.  God 
sees  it.  He  can  lead  men  to  its  grave.  Sin  leaves  traces.  It  is  better  not  to  be 
under  the  necessity  of  making  the  soul  into  a  grave,  or  any  spot  of  life  into  a  tomb. 
If  we  do,  there  will  sure  to  come  a  resurrection.  A  man  who  is  going  to  commit  sin, 
requires  to  have  all  his  wits  about  him.  (Ibid.)  The  upivard  look  best : — This 
action  teaches  a  deep  practical  lesson  to  all  the  servants  of  God.  There  are  two 
things  by  which  it  is  superinduced  :  namely,  the  fear  of  man's  wrath,  and  the  hope 
of  man's  favour.    The  servant  of  the  living  God  should  neither  regard  the  one  nor 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOH.  [chap.  ii. 

the  other.  What  avails  the  wrath  or  favour  of  a  poor  mortal,  to  one  who  holds  the 
Divine  commission,  and  enjoys  the  Divine  presence?  It  is,  in  the  judgment  of  such 
an  one,  less  than  the  small  dust  of  the  balance.  Divine  intelligence  will  ever  lead 
us  to  look  upward  and  onward.  Whenever  we  look  around  to  shun  a  mortal's 
frown  or  catch  his  smile,  we  may  rest  assured  there  is  something  wrong  ;  we  are  off 
the  proper  ground  of  Divine  service.  (C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  The  chivalry  of  Closes  : 
— This  is  one  of  the  firstrecorded  acts  of  the  meekest  of  men  I  Do  not  let  iis  be  hard 
upon  him  !  The  impulse  was  right.  There  must  be  men  in  society  who  can  strike, 
and  who  need  to  strike  but  once.  Let  it  be  understood  that  this,  after  all,  was  but 
the  lowest  form  of  heroism — it  was  a  boy's  resentment — it  was  a  youth's  untempered 
chivalry.  One  can  imagine  a  boy  reading  this  story,  and  feeling  himself  called  upon 
to  strike  everybody  who  is  doing  something  which  displeases  him.  There  is  a  raw 
heroism  ;  an  animal  courage  ;  a  rude,  barbaric  idea  of  righteousness.  We  applaud 
Moses,  but  it  is  his  impulse  rather  than  his  method  which  is  approved.  Every  man 
should  burn  with  indignation  when  he  sees  oppression.  In  this  instance  it  must  be 
clearly  understood  that  the  case  was  one  of  oppressive  strength  as  against  down- 
trodden weakness.  This  was  not  a  fight  between  one  man  and  another  ;  the 
Egyptian  and  the  Hebrew  were  not  fairly  pitted  in  battle  :  the  Egyptian  was  smiting 
the  Hebrew — the  Hebrew  in  all  probability  bending  over  his  labour,  doing  the  best 
in  his  power,  and  yet  suffering  the  lash  of  the  tyrant.  It  was  under  such  circum- 
stances as  these  that  Moses  struck  in  the  cause  of  human  justice.  In  this  fiery  protest 
against  wrong,  in  this  blow  of  ungoverned  temper  against  a  hoary  and  pitiless 
despotism,  see  somewhat  of  the  tender  sympathy  that  was  in  Jochebed  embodied  in 
a  form  natural  to  the  impetuosity  of  youth.  Little  did  Moses  know  what  he  did  when 
he  smote  the  nameless  Egyptian.  In  smiting  that  one  man,  in  reality  he  struck 
Pharaoh  himself,  and  every  succeeding  tyrant  1  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Closes'  rash 
haste : — We  may  not  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  but  for  his  lack  of  self- 
restraint  Moses  might  have  become  an  earlier  benefactor  to  the  people  whom  he 
desired  to  liberate.  He  was  running  before  he  had  been  sent ;  and  he  discovered 
by  the  result  that  neither  was  he  as  yet  competent  to  be  the  leader  of  the  people, 
nor  were  the  people  ready  to  rise  at  his  call.  There  is  a  long  distance  often  between 
the  formation  of  a  purpose  and  the  right  opportunity  for  its  execution  ;  and  we 
should  not  always  regard  promptitude  as  wise.  The  providential  indicators  of  duty 
are  the  call  within  us,  and  the  willingness  of  those  whom  we  would  benefit,  to  receive 
our  blessing;  and  if  either  of  these  is  absent,  we  should  pause.  Above  all,  we 
should  not  allow  the  passion  of  a  moment  to  throw  us  off  our  guard  and  lead  us 
into  sin,  for  we  may  be  sure  that  in  the  end  it  will  only  retard  our  enterprise  and 
remove  us  from  the  sphere  of  our  activities.  The  ripening  of  a  jiurpose  is  not  always 
the  mark  of  the  presence  of  an  opportunity.  "  Raw-haste  "  is  always  "  half-sister 
to  delay  "  ;  and  wrong-doing  can  never  help  forward,  directly  at  least  (however  God 
may  afterward  overrule  it),  a  good  cause.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  prince 
and  the  serfs  : — Many  years  ago,  there  was  a  little  boy  named  Alexander.  He  was 
tlie  son  of  Nicholas,  Emperor  of  Russia,  in  whose  empire  there  were  many  millions 
of  poor  people,  called  serfs.  These  were  kept  in  a  state  much  resembling  slavery, 
and  were  sold  with  the  lands  on  which  they  lived.  Many  of  them  were  poor  and 
wretched ;  some  few  were  prosperous  and  wealthy  ;  but  all  were  under  the  control 
of  the  lords  on  whose  territories  they  dwelt.  One  day,  Nicholas  noticed  that  little 
Alexander  looked  very  sad  and  thoughtful,  and  asked  him  of  what  he  was  thinking. 
"Of  the  poor  serfs,"  replied  the  little  boy ;  "  and,  when  I  become  emperor,  I  will 
emancipate  them."  This  reply  startled  the  emperor  and  his  courtiers ;  for  they  were 
very  much  opposed  to  all  such  plans  for  improvement  of  the  condition  of  the  poor. 
They  asked  little  Alexander  how  he  came  to  think  of  doing  this,  and  what  led  him 
to  feel  so  interested  for  the  serfs.  He  replied,  "From  reading  the  Scriptures,  and 
hearing  them  enforced,  which  teach  that  all  men  are  brothers."  Tbe  emperor  said 
very  little  to  his  boy  on  the  subject,  and  it  was  hoped  that  the  influences  and  opinions 
which  prevailed  in  the  royal  court  would  gradually  correct  the  boyish  notions  of  the 
young  prince ;  but  this  expectation  was  vain.  The  early  impressions  of  the  little  boy 
grew  deeper  and  stronger  ;  and  when  at  last  the  great  Nicholas  died,  and  Alexander 
was  placed  upon  his  father's  throne,  he  called  the  wise  statef^men  of  the  land  to  his 
councils,  and  a  plan  of  emancipation  was  formed ;  and  the  imperial  decree  went 
forth,  which  abolished  serfdom  throughout  all  the  Russian  empire.  It  is  in  this 
way  that  God  works  wonders  by  the  power  of  His  Word.  The  great  fact,  that  God 
has  "  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth," 
lodged  like  an  incorruptible  seed  in  the  heart  of  the  young  prince,  and  growing  with 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  43 

his  growth,  and  strengthening  with  his  strength,  at  last  budded  and  blossomed,  and 
brought  forth  the  fruit  or  blessing  for  millions  of  the  human  race. 

Vers.  13,  14.  Two  men  of  the  Hebrews  strove  together. — Biases'  championship  of 
the  right : — In  the  first  instance  we  might  have  thought  that  in  taking  part  with  the 
Hebrew  against  the  Egyptian,  Moses  was  but  yielding  to  a  clannish  feeling.  It  was 
race  against  race,  not  right  against  wrong.  In  the  second  instance,  however,  that 
conclusion  is  shown  to  be  incorrect.  We  now  come  to  a  strife  between  two  Hebrews, 
both  of  whom  were  suffering  under  the  same  gaUing  bondage.  How  did  the  youthful 
Moses  deport  himself  under  such  circumstances  ?  Did  he  take  part  with  the  strong 
against  the  wealc  ?  Did  he  even  take  part  with  the  weak  against  the  strong  ? 
Distincdy  the  case  was  not  one  determined  by  the  mere  disparity  of  the  combatants. 
To  the  mind  of  Moses  the  question  was  altogether  a  moral  one.  When  he  spoke, 
he  addressed  the  man  who  did  the  wi'ong ;  that  man  might  have  been  either  the 
weaker  or  the  stronger.  The  one  question  with  Moses  turned  upon  injustice  and 
dishonourableness.  Do  we  not  here  once  more  see  traces  of  his  mother's  training  ? 
yet  we  thought  that  the  home  life  of  Moses  was  a  life  unrecorded  I  Read  the 
mother  in  the  boy ;  discover  the  home  training  in  the  public  life.  Men's  behaviour 
is  but  the  outcome  of  the  nurture  they  have  received  at  home.  Moses  did  not  say. 
You  are  both  Hebrews,  and  therefore  you  may  fight  out  your  own  quarrel :  nor  did 
he  say,  The  controversies  of  other  men  are  nothing  to  me  ;  they  who  began  the 
quarrel  must  end  it.  Moses  saw  that  the  conditions  of  life  had  a  moral  basis ;  in 
every  quarrel  as  between  right  and  wrong  he  had  a  share,  because  every  honourable- 
minded  man  is  a  trustee  of  social  justice  and  common  fair  play.  We  have  nothing 
to  do  with  the  petty  quarrels  which  fret  society,  but  we  certainly  have  to  do  with 
every  controversy,  social,  imperial,  or  international,  which  violates  human  right, 
and  impairs  the  claims  of  Divine  honour.  We  must  all  fight  for  the  right :  we  feel 
safer  by  so  much  as  we  know  that  there  are  amongst  us  men  who  will  not  be  silent 
in  the  presence  of  wrong,  and  will  lift  up  a  testimony  in  the  name  of  righteousness, 
though  there  be  none  to  cheer  them  with  one  word  of  encouragement.  {J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  Hebrew  quarrel: — 1.  Multiplied  their  enemies.  2.  Weakened  Israel. 
3.  Banished  Moses.  Divisions  defeat  the  Church.  Moses,  as — 1.  A  judge  dooming 
his  enemies.    2.  A  peacemaker  among  his  countrymen.   {Dr.  Fowler.)      Lessons: — 

I.  Daily  and  successive  is  the  care  of  God's  saving  instruments  to  His  oppressed 
Church.  2.  God's  faithful  instruments  leave  courtly  pleasures  to  visit  God's 
afflicted  frequently.  8.  In  visiting  for  good  the  oppressed  Church,  sad  contentions 
may  appear  among  the  members.  4.  It  is  an  observable  evil  by  overseers,  to  see 
Church  members  striving  together.  5.  Duels  in  the  Church  and  among  its 
members  are  sad  things  to  record.  6.  Men  called  of  God  must  interpose  and  curb 
the  injurious  and  offending  parties.  7.  Smiting  of  neighbours  and  brethren  is  a 
sin  sharply  reprovable  in  the  Church  (ver.  13).  8.  Injurious  and  offending  parties 
are  apt  to  recoil  against  rulers  upon  reproof.  9.  Wickedness  makes  men  question 
any  authority  of  God,  that  would  suppress  them.  10.  Sin  will  not  endure  to  be 
suppressed  by  power;  but  will  rage  against  it.  11.  It  is  the  artifice  of  malefactors 
to  recriminate  powers  for  escaping  themselves.  12.  Zealous  avengers  of  God's 
oppressed  may  be  terrified  sometimes  with  the  criminations  of  the  wicked.  (G. 
Hughes,  B.D.)        A  good  man's  interference  with  a  quarrel : — I.  It  is  the  duty  op 

GOOD  MEN  TO   TKT    TO   SUBDUE  ANY    QUARRELS    THEY    MAY    BE    CALLED    TO    WITXESS.      1. 

Because  they  recognize  the  common  grief  of  men.  The  suffering  of  humanity 
an  argument  for  friendliness.  2.  Because  they  recognize  the  claim  arising  from  the 
brotherhood  of  men.     3.  Because  they  ought  to  be  superior  to  the  passion  of  strife. 

II.  In    this   ENDEAVOUR    GOOD     MEN    SHOULD    MAKE    MORAL   CONSIDERATIONS   THE    BASIS 

OF  THEIR  APPEAL  TO  THE  QUARRELSOME.  1.  Not  favoui'itism.  2.  Not  greater  physical 
strength.  Christianity  must  aid  weakness  when  associated  with  rectitude.  3.  Not 
hope  of  reward.    A  satisfied  conscience  is  brighter  and  more  enduring  than  gold. 

III.  Good  men,  in  trying  to  subdue  the  quarrels  o?  others,  often  get  little 

THANKS,    AND    MAY   INVOLVE    THEMSELVES   IN    TROUBLE.       "  Who    made    thce,"    &C.       1. 

They  imagined  that  Moses  assumed  unrightful  authority.  2.  They  reminded  Moses 
of,  and  taunted  him  with,  past  sin.  It  requires  a  blameless  life  to  rebuke  evil.  3. 
The  heroic  interference  of  Moses  lacked  moral  continuity.  His  own  sin  made  him 
a  coward.  4.  Moses  incurred  the  hatred  of  Pharaoh.  Through  endeavouring  to 
stay  this  quarrel,  he  lost  position  and  comfort ;  but  it  was  the  means  of  putting 
him  on  the  track  of  Divinely-imposed  duty,  which  would  win  him  world-wide 
renown.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)        Wherefore  smitest  thou  (% /eWow  .«— Apply  this 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

question — 1.  To  the  domestic  circle.  2.  To  society  at  large.  3.  To  the  Church. 
(Ibid.)  Some  find  reason  for  their  conduct : — 1.  In  revenge.  2.  In  impulse.  3. 
Necessity.  (Ibid.)  Discouragement : — The  best  friends  of  the  Church  often  meet 
with  the  most  discouragement.  1.  Their  authority  is  rejected.  2.  They  are  not 
understood.  3.  Their  safety  is  endangered.  4.  The  welfare  of  the  Church  is 
imperilled.  (Ibid.)  The  good  man  must  not  he  turned  aside  from  duty  by  circum- 
stances : — 1.  Moses  was  not  offended  by  this  treatment.  2.  He  did  not  give  up  in 
despair.  3.  He  worked  out  the  training  of  his  boyhood.  4.  He  worked  out  the 
providence  of  God.  5.  He  worked  out  the  dictates  of  his  conscience.  (Ibid.) 
Discord  and  strife  : — In  the  ringing  of  bells,  whilst  every  one  keeps  his  due  time 
and  order,  what  a  sweet  and  harmonious  sound  they  make  !  All  the  neighbouring 
villages  are  cheered  with  the  sound  of  them  ;  but  when  once  they  jar  and  check 
each  other,  either  jangling  together  or  striking  preposterously,  how  harsh  and  un- 
pleasing  is  that  noise.  So  that  as  we  testify  our  public  rejoicings  by  an  orderly  and 
well-timed  peal,  when  we  would  signify  the  town  is  on  fire,  we  ring  the  bells  back- 
ward in  a  confused  manner.  It  is  just  thus  in  the  Church.  When  every  one  knows 
his  station,  authority,  and  keeps  his  due  rank,  there  is  melodious  concert  of  comfort 
and  contentment ;  but  when  either  states  or  persons  will  be  clashing  with  each  other, 
the  discord  is  grievous  and  prejudicial.  (/.  Ilall.)  Results  of  physical  degrada- 
tion : — The  Israelites  had  sunk  into  brute  insensibility  under  oppression.  It  is  a 
remarkable  fact  we  cannot  too  earnestly  reflect  on,  always  and  everywhere  true, 
that  extreme  physical  degradation  dulls  the  intellect,  and  destroys  moral  sensibility. 
Some  persons  complain,  that  the  very  poorest  classes  of  the  community,  who  live 
in  underground  cellars  and  upper  garrets,  are  unthankful.  But  it  is  because  we  are 
undutiful.  Physical  degradation  has  a  most  pernicious  effect  upon  the  moral, 
spiritual,  and  intellectual  feelings  of  mankind.  It  brutalizes  and  barbarizes.  I 
believe  that  our  missions,  with  all  their  value — our  city  missionaries  and  our 
Scripture  readers,  doing  a  most  noble  work — are  here  vastly  obstructed  in  their 
work.  I  believe  a  great  physical  and  social  amelioration  in  poor  men's  homes  must 
be  made,  before  a  substantial  moral  and  spiritual  one  begins  in  their  hearts.  We 
must  raise  the  masses  above  the  level  of  the  brutes,  before  we  can  raise  them  to  the 
level  of  Christians.  You  must  make  them  men,  before  you  can  make  them,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  Christians.     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  He  sat  down  by  a  well. — The  meditations  of  a  perplexed  soul : — I.  They 

OCCURRED  AT   AN  IMPORTANT  CRISIS    IN    THE    LIFE    OF    MoSES.       "  But    MoSCS    fled    frOm 

the  face  of  Pharaoh."  1.  Moses  had  vacated  a  good  home.  2.  Moses  had  incurred 
the  anger  of  Pharaoh.  II.  They  afford  an  opportunity  for  determining  on  a  new 
COURSE  of  life.  III.  They  are  soon  interrupted  by  a  call  to  new  acttvities  (ver. 
17).  IV.  They  were  indulged  in  a  very  favourable  place.  The  well  in  olden 
time,  a  fine  scene  for  rest  and  contemplation.  Christ,  when  He  was  tired,  sat  on  a 
well.  His  rest  was  broken  by  the  advent  of  a  woman,  whom  He  ultimately  led  to 
Himself  in  contrition  of  heart.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Moses'  flight  : — 1.  Crimina- 
tions of  God's  servants  are  soon  carried  to  the  ears  of  persecutors.  2.  Persecutor's 
ears  are  open  to  receive  all  reports  against  God's  people.  3.  Fame  of  any  evil 
against  God's  servants  stirs  up  violent  men  to  pursue  them.  4.  The  death  of  God's 
instruments  for  His  Church's  good  is  the  aim  of  bloody  enemies.  5.  God  provides 
Midian  to  save  what  Egypt  would  destroy.  6.  God  is  pleased  to  change  court 
enjoyments  for  a  poor  well,  to  refresh  His  weary  saints  (ver.  15).  (G.  Hughes, 
B.D.) 

Vers.  16-22.  Moses  was  content  to  dwell  with  tbeman. — The  reward  of  a  kindly 
action: — I.  The  hospitality  of  a  kind  family  (ver.  20).  1.  This  hospitality 
was  much  needed  by  Moses.  2.  This  hospitaUty  was  prompted  by  parental  inquiry. 
A  good  and  considerate  father  often  turns  his  home  into  a  sanctuary  for  the  servants 
of  God.  By  welcoming  an  heroic  stranger  to  it,  he  may  bring  himself  into  harmony 
with  great  histories,  and  sublime  providences.  II.  Employment  for  every-day  life. 
When  a  young  man  is  thus  welcomed  by  a  kind  family  he  must  expect  to  share  their 
work,  as  also  their  food.  The  study  of  Moses  in  Egypt  had  not  raised  him  above 
hard  work.  III.  A  wife  (ver.  21).  A  man  who  will  defend  a  woman  is  worthy 
of  a  wife.  The  greatest  and  most  important  events  of  our  Lives  depend  upon  little 
deeds  of  kindness.  IV.  Another  advance  in  the  intention  of  Divine  providencb. 
Moses  has  finished  his  education  of  the  palace.  He  now  commences  that  of  the 
desert.    (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)         Moses  in  Midian: — 1.  We  Bee  here,  first,  activity 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  "45 

presented  to  us  as  an  indispensable  and  effective  element  in  education.  This  is  the 
great  lesson  taught  by  Moses  in  Midian.  Head  knowledge  Moses  had  obtained  in 
Egypt ;  hand  work  he  was  to  practise  in  Midian.  He  was  already  learned  in  all 
Egypt's  wisdom  ;  be  was  now  to  be  a  participant  in  all  Midian's  labour.  The  latter 
was  needful  to  give  the  former  robustness,  practical  force,  and  substantial  usefulness. 
In  Egypt  he  was  a  student,  in  Midian  a  worker ;  and  in  the  combination  of  the  two 
he  became  a  man  of  wonderful  heroism,  and  high  executive  power.  Egypt  could 
not  do  this  !or  him.  It  could  instruct  him,  it  could  polish  him  ;  it  did.  Remaining 
in  Egypt  he  might  have  been  a  man  of  elegant  leisure ;  or  with  his  literary 
resources,  have  lived  among  books,  and  become,  perhaps,  puffed  up  with  knowledge, 
or  bewildered  with  speculation.  Idle  learning  is  apt  to  come  to  that.  In  Midian  his 
business  was  to  do,  to  turn  his  knowledge  into  skill,  make  it  practical.  We  need 
knowledge ;  we  cannot  have  too  much  of  it,  if  it  be  genuine.  But  we  must  ground 
action  upon  it.  We  are  to  be  workers,  doers  in  some  line  of  useful  activity,  if  we 
would  fulfil  the  end  of  our  being.  Neither  the  ignorant  worker  nor  the  indolent 
scholar  is  the  man  for  this  world,  but  the  intelligent  and  instructed  doer,  whose 
brains  prompt  his  hands,  and  whose  hands  second  his  brains.  2.  Again,  Moses  in 
Midian  is  to  us  a  pattern  of  a  wise  conformity.  He  did  not  stand  aloof  from  the 
people  among  whom  he  lived  in  a  proud  superciliousness  or  an  offensive  singularity ; 
nor  did  he  waste  his  time  in  an  idle  regretting  of  the  past,  and  an  uncomfortable 
repining  at  the  unpleasant  change  of  his  condition.  He  made  the  best  of  the  state 
into  which  God's  providence  had  called  him,  and  so  was  neither  odious  nor  unhappy 
in  it.  Our  Lord  was  much  of  a  conformist  in  His  time,  and  the  Pharisees  called 
Him  a  "  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners."  He  was  their  friend,  but  not  in  the 
Pharisees'  sense.  And  what  He  practised  He  recommended.  He  said  to  His  disci- 
ples, "  W^hen  ye  enter  into  a  house,  salute  it,"  "  and  in  the  same  house  abide,  eating 
such  things  as  they  set  before  you."  So,  too,  the  great  apostle,  St.  Paul,  tells  us 
that  he  "  was  made  all  things  unto  all  men,"  and  says,  "  To  the  Jews  I  became  as 
a  Jew  that  I  might  gain  the  Jews ;  to  them  that  are  without  law  as  without  law, 
that  I  might  gain  them  that  are  without  law."  This  is  worldly  wisdom,  and  it  is 
religious  wisdom  too.  We  are  not  to  rebel  against  our  circumstances,  not  to  dwell 
upon  lost  good.  3.  Finally,  we  see  in  Moses  in  Midian  the  example  of  a  wise 
patience.  Forty  years  elapsed  during  which  his  great  undertaking  was  in  abeyance, 
and  gave  no  signs  of  an  approaching  resumption.  He  knew  that  "to  everything 
there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  heaven,"  and  that  "it  is  not 
for  us  to  know  the  times  and  the  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  His  own  power." 
He  had  nothing  to  do  but  to  wait,  and  he  did  wait,  and  uncomplainingly.  How 
different  is  this  from  the  course  of  many  reformers,  patriots,  philanthropists,  of 
whom,  like  some  of  old,  it  may  well  be  said,  "  I  have  not  sent  them,  yet  they  ran  : 
I  have  not  spoken  unto  them,  yet  they  prophesied";  whose  haste  outruns  the 
dilatory  motion  of  the  chariot  of  God,  and  whose  eagerness  chides  God's  delay  by 
devices  of  their  own,  and  headstrong  enterprises  and  efforts,  on  which  God  has 
never  promised  His  blessing,  nor  have  they  asked  it.  Good  things  we  have 
purposed,  good  things  we  have  hoped  for,  do  not  come  as  rapidly  as  our  impetuous 
wishes  are  fain  to  anticipate.  "  Tarry  thou  the  Lord's  leisure  ;  be  strong,  and  He 
shall  comfort  thine  heart ;  and  put  thou  thy  trust  in  the  Lord."  (R.  A.  Hallam, 
D.D.)  Discipline  needed  after  faith  : — "  But,"  you  will  say,  "when  once  the  right 
choice  has  been  made,  and  the  decisive  step  is  taken,  there  was  surely  no  necessity 
at  least  for  painful  disappointment."  Say  not  so  ;  for  surely  it  was  just  in  this 
•way  that  the  character  of  Moses  was  refined.  It  is  quite  possible  that,  at  the  first, 
a  man  may  be  a  true  believer,  and  remain,  alas  !  weak,  vain,  proud,  arrogant.  Such 
was  the  case  with  Moses  when  you  see  him  summoned  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  Israel. 
He  has  firm  faith  in  God  and  in  His  promises  ;  his  feelings  and  affections  are  no 
longer  bound  to  Egypt ;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt,  or  none,  concerning  his 
sincerity  :  but  he  is  sadly  wanting  in  humility.  Moses  is  conscious  of  a  special 
destiny  for  something  great,  but  thinks  he  is  the  man  that  can  the  least  be  spared 
in  any  case.  His  is  a  merely  carnal  zeal  to  save  his  fellow-Israelites,  as  is  quite 
evident  from  the  great  failure  that  befell  his  first  attempt ;  for  his  heart,  a  prey  to 
his  own  folly,  is  the  sport  and  plaything,  now  of  pride  and  arrogance,  and  now  of 
fear  and  cowardice.  He  will,  he  can,  he  shall  do  just  as  he  thinks  right;  but  God 
is  not  yet  willing.  God  shall  certainly  perform  His  will  through  Moses,  but  not 
through  a  Moses  such  as  this.  The  darling  of  the  whole  Egyptian  world  still  stands 
t(»o  high  ;  he  must  descend  a  step  or  two  before  he  can  be  used  to  serve  Him  who 
hatee  lofty  looks,  be  they  of  friends  or  foes.     Moses  has  made  great  progress  in 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Egyptian  wisdom  ;  but  lie  is  as  yet  quite  unaware  that,  in  the  wisdom  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  while  he  is  nothing,  God  is  everything.  Although  his  heart  is  right,  his  will 
is  not  sufficiently  subdued  ;  he  still  counts  far  too  much  both  on  his  own  strength 
and  the  gratitude  of  men ;  his  old  man  yet  must  needs  be  slain,  as  he  slew  the 
Egyptian.  Therefore  the  Lord  Himself  assails  him  now,  and  seems  in  this  quite  as 
unmerciful  as  he  had  been  to  the  oppressor  of  his  brethren.  In  the  first  Israelite  to 
whom  he  showed  himself  as  a  deliverer,  he  must  be  made  to  see,  as  in  a  glass,  the 
nation's  meanness  and  ingratitude,  that  he  may  learn  to  do  all  for  the  sake  of  God, 
but  nothing  for  the  sake  of  man  ;  and  that  he  never  may  presume  to  say,  "  My  hand 
hath  led  out  Israel."  Moses'  first  action  lets  us  see  what  he  shall  afterwards  be 
able  for,  when  God's  grace  shall  have  wholly  filled  and  purified  his  manly  soul ;  just 
as  the  husbandman  perceives,  in  the  strong  crop  of  weeds,  the  promise  of  good 
harvest,  when  the  ground  shall  have  been  cleared  of  tares,  and  sown  with  wheat. 
But  haiTowing  and  ploughing,  that  break  down  the  hardest  clods, — such  are  the 
operations  specially  attended  to  by  Him  who  is  the  heavenly  Husbandman,  when, 
in  His  wisdom,  He  proposes  to  lay  out  a  field  that  is  particularly  fine  ;  and  disap- 
pointment to  our  dearest  and  legitimate,  perhaps,  indeed,  our  most  praiseworthy 
plans,  forms  the  deep  furrow  drawn  across  us,  that  the  heavenly  seed  may  after- 
wards be  sown.  Christians  !  do  not  forget  that  God  is  constantly  employing  such  a 
means  for  cleansing  these  our  hearts  from  that  impurity  which  brings  Him  so  much 
pain,  and  us  so  much  disgrace.  Have  you  formed  fine  ideals  of  the  good  that  you 
will  do  for  the  promotion  of  your  neighbour's  happiness  ?  It  shall  not  be,  says  God ; 
you  still  rely  too  much  on  your  own  strength,  expecting  far  too  little  from  the  Lord, 
who  must  do  all.  Have  you  been  sketching  out  a  golden  future  for  yourself  ?  God 
blows  on  your  designs  some  time  or  other,  right  before  your  eyes,  that,  with  a 
broken  but  a  humble  heart,  you  may  exclaim,  "  I  know,  0  Lord,  that  the  way  of 
man  is  not  in  himself  !  "  Have  you  been  really  so  foolish  as,  unthinking,  to  rely 
on  human  love  and  gratitude?  God,  in  some  rude  and  startling  way,  opens  your 
eyes,  that,  fleeing  in  your  terror  from  the  falling  idol,  you  may  fall  doWn  at  the  feet 
of  the  true  God — nay,  sink  into  your  heavenly  Father's  arms !  (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee, 
D.V.)  A  large  family  : — 1.  Of  sacred  station.  2.  Of  womanly  influence.  3.  Of  indus- 
trious activity.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Domestic  toil : — 1.  The  employment  of  true 
womanhood.  2.  The  test  of  true  womanhood.  3.  The  glory  of  true  womanhood. 
(Ibid.)  Two  classes  of  men  are  tijpifii'd  by  the  conduct  of  these  shepherds,  and 
Moses: — The  former — 1.  Oppose  the  honest.  2.  Persecute  the  industrious.  3. 
Hinder  the  diligent.  The  latter — 1.  Co-operate  with  the  weak.  2.  Sympathize 
with  the  persecuted.  3.  Defend  the  imperilled.  4.  Win  the  victory.  6.  Receive 
hospitality.  (Ibid.)  Why  is  it  that  ye  have  left  the  man  f — This  question  may 
be  asked  in  reference  to  the  world's  philanthropists,  preachers,  who  are  striving  to 
defend  the  weak.  1.  Is  it  because  you  do  not  understand  him  ?  2.  Is  it  because 
you  do  not  believe  in  him  ?  3.  Is  it  because  you  are  selfish  ?  4.  Is  it  because  you 
have  not  been  taught  better?  5.  Fetch  him  to  your  home  as  soon  as  possible.  {Ibid.) 
A  contented  resident: — 1.  A  wondrous  sight — accustomed  to  a  palace.  2.  A  happy 
sight — pastoral  toil.  3.  A  scarce  sight— men  are  restless.  He  was  content — 
1.  With  his  daily  companionships.  2.  With  his  daily  occupation.  3.  With  the 
scene  of  his  residence.  4.  With  his  matrimonial  alliance.  {Ibid.)  A  pilgrim 
life  the  best  for  preachers : — 1.  Good  for  their  health.  2.  Good  for  their  moral 
training.  3.  Good  for  their  moral  usefulness.  4.  Good  for  the  enlargement  of 
their  social  friendships.  {Ibid.)  A  friend  of  the  oppressed  commended  : — A  young 
lad  came  from  school  late,  and  with  a  flushed  countenance.  His  mother  inquired 
into  the  cause.  A  number  of  thoughtless  and  wicked  boys  were  teasing  a  child  of  a 
helpless  widow,  in  order  to  provoke  those  bursts  of  imbecile  passion  for  which  she 
was  remarkable.  Contrary  to  expectation,  the  widow  remained  unmoved,  merely 
hastening  her  footsteps  and  those  of  her  little  daughter.  This  led  the  boys  to 
increase  their  efforts,  till  they  inflicted  positive  injury  on  the  child.  John,  the  lad 
alluded  to  above,  remonstrated,  and  finally  fought  one  of  the  boys  in  defence  of  the 
widow's  child.  He  went  home  with  the  widow,  and  received  her  thanks.  He  then 
set  out  for  home,  but  was  doubtful  how  his  conduct  would  be  viewed  by  his  mother. 
She  had  taught  him  to  avoid  all  broils.  He  stated  the  case  to  her,  and  received  her 
■warm  commendation  for  his  sympathy  with  the  oppressed,  and  his  bravery  in  their 
defence.  That  commendation  made  him  for  life  the  generous  and  fearless  friend 
and  defender  of  the  oppressed.  {Wesleyan  S.  S.  Magazine.)  An  extended  visit : — 
The  Countess  of  Huntingdon  once  told  Mr.  Toplady,  the  author  of  "Eock  of  Ages," 
that  when  she  visited  Dr.  Watts  on  one  occasion  he  thus  accosted  her :  "  Madam, 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODUS.  47 

your  ladyship  is  come  to  see  me  on  a  very  memorable  day."  "  Why  so  remarkable  "  ? 
she  asked.  "  Ihis  day  thirty  years,"  he  replied,  "  I  came  hither  to  the  house  of  my 
good  friend  Sir  Thomas  Abney,  intending  to  spend  but  one  single  week  under  his 
friendly  roof ;  and  I  have  extended  my  visit  to  the  length  of  exactly  thirty  years." 
"  Sir,"  added  Lady  Abney,  "what  you  have  termed  a  long  thirty  years'  visit,  I 
consider  as  the  shortest  my  family  ever  received."  Alone  with  God : — Nothing  can 
possibly  make  up  for  the  lack  of  secret  communion  with  God,  or  the  training  and 
discipline  of  His  school.  "All  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians"  would  not  have 
qualified  Moses  for  his  future  path.  He  might  have  taken  out  his  degree  in  the 
school  of  man,  and  yet  have  to  learn  his  alphabet  in  the  school  of  God.  Mere 
human  wisdom  and  learning,  how  valuable  soever  in  themselves,  can  never  consti- 
tute any  one  a  servant  of  God,  nor  equip  him  for  any  department  of  Divine  service. 
Such  things  may  qualify  unrenewed  nature  to  figure  before  the  world  ;  but  the  man 
whom  God  will  use  most  must  be  endowed  with  widely-different  qualifications — 
such  qualifications  as  can  alone  be  found  in  the  deep  and  hallowed  retirement  of 
the  Lord's  presence.  All  God's  servants  have  been  made  to  know  and  experience 
the  truth  of  these  statements.  Moses  at  Horeb,  Elijah  at  Cherith,  Ezekiel  at 
Chebar,  Paul  in  Arabia,  and  John  at  Patmos,  are  all  striking  examples  of  the 
immense  practical  importance  of  being  alone  with  God.  And  when  we  look  at  the 
Divine  Servant,  we  find  that  the  time  He  spent  in  private  was  nearly  ten  times  as 
long  as  that  which  He  spent  in  public.  He,  though  perfect  in  understanding  and 
in  will,  spent  nearly  thirty  years  in  the  obscurity  of  a  cari^enter's  house  at  Nazareth, 
ere  He  made  His  appearance  in  public.  And,  even  when  he  had  entered  upon  His 
public  career,  how  oft  did  He  retreat  from  the  gaze  of  men,  to  enjoy  the  sweet  and 
sacred  retirement  of  the  Divine  presence  1  Now  we  may  feel  disposed  to  ask,  how 
could  the  urgent  demand  for  workmen  ever  be  met,  if  all  need  such  protracted 
training,  in  secret,  ere  they  come  forth  to  their  work  ?  This  is  the  Master's  care — 
not  ours.  He  can  provide  the  workmen,  and  He  can  train  them  also.  That  is  not 
man's  work.  God  alone  can  provide  and  prepare  a  true  minister.  Nor  is  it  a 
question  with  Him  as  to  the  length  of  time  needful  for  the  education  of  such  an  one. 
We  know  how  He  could  educate  him  in  a  moment,  if  it  were  His  will  to  do  so.  One 
thing  is  evident,  namely,  that  God  has  had  all  His  servants  very  much  alone  with 
Himself,  both  before  and  after  their  entrance  upon  their  public  work ;  nor  will  any 
one  ever  get  on  without  this.  The  absence  of  secret  training  and  discipline  will, 
necessarily,  leave  us  barren,  superficial,  and  theoretic.  (C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 
Solitary  discipline : — There  was  much  in  the  solitude  of  his  shepherd  life  that  would 
stimulate  him  to  devout  meditation.  Here  amidst  "  the  sleep  that  is  among  the 
lovely  hills,"  he  communed  with  himself,  with  nature,  and  with  God  ;  facing  for 
himself  those  "  obstinate  questionings  "  which  continually  arise  when  one  seeks  to 
fathom  the  mysteries  of  being.  A  very  different  university  was  this  from  that  at 
which  he  studied  among  the  worshippers  of  the  sun  at  Heliopolis ;  yet  more  help- 
ful to  him  even  than  tiie  education  which  he  had  received  in  Egypt,  would  be  his 
musings  upon  the  mountain  sides,  as  he  rose  from  the  thunder-riven  peaks  to  Him 
Vi  ho  before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth  is,  from  everlasting  to  everlasting, 
God.  Like  the  Scottish  boy,  who  in  the  intervals  of  his  shepherd  life  mapped  out 
for  himself  with  beads  the  distances  of  the  stars,  and  designated  himself  "  God 
Almighty's  scholar,"  Moses  was  now  under  the  special  tuition  of  the  Lord.  His 
books  were  the  silent  stars  and  giant  hills  ;  the  shrubs  that  grew  at  his  feet,  and  the 
flocks  that  went  on  beside  him,  browsing  on  the  grass ;  and  often  and  often  would 
he  pore  lovingly  over  the  pages  of  man's  first  Bible — Nature.  But  most  frequently, 
perhaps,  he  would  look  within  and  try  to  read  himself ;  and  after  awhile  there  was 
to  come  to  him  the  vision  which  would  open  to  him  as  a  scroll  "  the  marvel  of  the 
everlasting  will."  (William  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  A  new  training  school : — The  flight 
of  Moses  from  Egypt  introduced  him  into  a  new  training  school.  At  Pharaoh's 
court  he  had  learned  much  that  was  required  to  fit  him  for  his  vocation,  as  the 
deliverer  and  leader  of  Israel,  as  the  mediator  of  the  ancient  covenant  and  founder 
of  the  theocracy,  and  also  as  a  prophet  and  lawgiver.  But  his  education  there  had 
been  of  a  very  partial  character.  He  had  learned  to  rule,  but  not  to  serve,  and  the 
latter  was  as  necessary,  if  not  more  so  than  the  former.  He  possessed  the  fiery 
zeal  of  youth,  but  not  the  circumspection,  the  patience,  or  the  firmness  of  age.  A 
consciousness  of  his  vocation  had  been  aroused  within  him  when  in  Egypt ;  but  it 
was  mixed  with  selfishness,  pride,  and  ambition,  with  headstrong  zeal,  but  yet  with 
a  pusillanimity  which  was  soon  daunted.  He  did  not  understand  the  art  of  being 
still  and  enduring,  of  waiting  and  listening  for  the  direction  of  God,  an  art  so  in- 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

dispensable  for  all  who  labour  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  the  school  of  Egyptian 
wisdom  his  mind  had  bee  ,  -^nriched  with  all  the  treasures  of  man's  wisdom,  but  his 
heart  was  still  the  rebell.  '°3  unbelieving  heart  of  the  natural  man,  and  therefore 
but  little  adapted  for  the  reception  of  Divine  wisdom,  and  by  no  means  fitted  for 
performing  the  works  of  God.  And  even  the  habit  of  siftiug  and  selecting,  of 
pondering  and  testing,  acquired  by  a  man  of  learning  and  experience,  must  cei  tainly 
have  been  far  fi-om  securing  anything  Uke  the  mature  wisdom  and  steadfastness 
demanded  by  bis  vocation.  All  tiiis  he  had  yet  to  acquire.  Persecution  and  alilic- 
tion,  want  and  exile,  nature  and  solitude,  were  now  to  be  his  tutors,  and  complete 
his  education,  before  he  entered  upon  tbe  duties  of  his  Divine  vo'^ation.  (J.  If. 
Kurtz,  D.D.)  Moses^  domestic  life  in  Midian: — The  house  of  the  Midianitish 
priest  was,  doubtless,  a  severe  but  salutary  school  of  humiUation  and  affliction,  of 
want  and  self-denial,  to  the  spoiled  foster-son  of  the  king'.s  daughter.  We  can 
undei  stand  this,  if  we  merely  picture  to  oursf<lves  the  contrast  between  the  luxury 
of  the  court  and  the  toil  connected  with  a  shepherd's  hfe  in  the  desert.  But  we 
have  good  ground  for  supposing  that  his  present  situation  was  trying  and  humiliat- 
ing in  other  respects  also.  His  marri«ge  does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  happy  one,  and 
his  position  in  the  house  of  his  father-in-law  was  apparently  somewhat  subordinate 
and  servile.  (Ihid.)  Zipporah. — Character  of  Zipporah  : — Zipporah  is  represented 
as  a  querulous,  self-willed,  and  passionate  woman,  who  sets  her  own  will  in  opposi- 
tion to  that  of  her  husband,  who  will  not  trouble  herself  about  his  religious  convic- 
tions, and,  even  when  his  life  is  evidently  in  danger,  does  not  conceal  the  reluctance 
with  which  she  agrees  to  submit,  in  order  to  save  him.  We  might  be  astonished  to 
find  that  a  man  of  so  much  force  of  character  as  Moses  possessed,  could  ever  suffer 
this  female  government.  But  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed  suffi- 
ciently explain  them.  He  had  amved  there  poor  and  helpless,  as  a  man  who  was 
flying  from  pursuit.  A  fortunate  combination  of  circumstances  led  to  his  receiving 
the  Emir's  daughter  as  his  wife.  It  is  true  he  could  not  pay  the  usual  dowry.  But 
the  remarkable  antecedents  of  his  life,  his  superior  mental  endowments,  his  manly 
beauty,  and  other  things,  may  have  been  regarded  at  first  by  his  chosen  bride  and 
her  relations  as  an  adequate  compensation  for  its  omission.  But  if  the  character  of 
Zipporah  were  such  as  we  may  concluae  it  to  have  been  from  chap.  iv.  24  sqq. ,  we 
can  very  well  imagine  that  she  soon  began  to  despise  all  these,  and  made  her 
husband  feel  that  he  was  only  eating  the  bread  of  charity  in  her  fathers  house. 
Nor  does  he  seem  to  have  been  admitted  to  any  very  intimate  terms  with  his  father- 
in-law  ;  at  least  we  might  be  led  to  this  conclusion  by  the  reserve  with  which  he 
communicated  to  Jethro  his  intended  departure,  and  the  little  confidence  which  he 
displayed  (chap.  iv.  18).  Thus  he  was,  and  continued  to  be,  a  foreigner  among  the 
Midianites  ;  kept  in  the  background  and  misunderstood,  even  by  those  who  were 
related  to  him  by  the  closest  ties.  And  if  this  was  his  condition,  the  sorrows  arising 
from  his  exile,  and  his  homeless  and  forlorn  condition,  must  have  been  doubly,  yea 
trebly  severe.  Under  circumstances  such  as  these,  his  attachment  to  his  people, 
and  his  longing  to  rejoin  them,  instead  of  cooling,  would  grow  stronger  and  stronger. 
There  is  something  very  expressive  in  this  respect  in  the  names  which  he  gave  to 
the  sons  who  were  born  to  him  during  his  exile  (ver.  22 ;  xviii.  3,  4).  They 
enable  us  to  look  deeply  into  the  state  of  his  mind  at  that  time,  for  (as  so  frequently 
h  ippened)  he  incorporated  in  them  the  strongest  feelings  and  desires  of  his  heart. 
{Ibid.) 

Vers.  23-25.  Sighed  by  reason  of  the  bondage. — The  bondage  of  the  Israelites  : — 
The  Israelites  were  to  be  a  witnessing  nation — a  nation  in  which  the  worship  of  the 
true  God  was  to  be  maintained,  while  other  nations  were  sunk  in  idolatry ;  and  the 
revelation  which  God  gave  of  Himself  preserved,  while  all  the  world  was  sunk  in 
grossest  darkness  ;  and  the  humane  principles  of  the  Divine  law,  not  only  taught, 
but  practised,  in  a  world  where  injustice  and  violence  and  cruelty  were  rampant. 
And  it  requires  no  very  acute  or  penetrating  discernment  to  perceive  how  their  ex- 
perience under  the  Egyptian  bondage  was  likely  to  conduce  to  the  fulfilment  of 
their  mission.  I.  It  was  an  illustration  to  them  of  the  XKEATirEKX  which  the 
Church  might  expect  from  the  world,  fitted  to  promote  in  them  the  isolation 
which  it  was  necessary  they  should  maintain.  Egypt  was  the  world  in  its  best  state. 
They  saw  in  her  an  illustration  of  what  the  intellect  and  muscle  of  man  may  ac- 
complish when  his  heart  is  alienated  from  God.  She  was  a  learned  and  powerful 
nation,  great  in  war  and  advanced  in  art.  The  Israelites  were  thus  brought  in  con- 
tact with  the  world  in  its  best  and  most  attractive  form,  and  thereby  taught,  by 


CHAP,  n.]  EXODVS.  49 

bitter  experience,  what  treatment  they  might  expect  from  the  world,  and  what  rela- 
tion to  it  it  behoved  them  to  sustain.  II.  In  another  ci'y  their  bondage  experience 
would  tend  to  the  same  result,  by  promoting  that  Mere  Ah  svjii-atiit  which  is  the 
NECESSARY  BOND  OF  NATIONAL  LIFE.  Great  troubles  and  great  deliverances  shared  in 
common  have  the  efifeet  of  fusing  into  one  body  those  who  before  were  only  an 
aggregate  of  individuals  without  any  uniting  tie.  III.  But  there  was  yet  another 
end  to  be  served  by  their  bondage — the  teaching  andpr'Ct^ce  of  the  hciiane 
PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  DivisE  LAW,  IN  THE  FACE  OF  THE  OPPRESSION  and  violencc  and 
cruelty  which  were  then  prevalent  throughout  the  world.  (IT.  Landds,  D.D.) 
The  hinrj  dying,  the  people  suffering,  God  reigning  : — L  The  king  dying.  1.  He  was 
despotic  in  his  rule.  Unmoved  by  human  suffering.  2.  He  was  vindictive  in  his 
temper.  3.  He  was  altogether  out  of  sympathy  with  the  providential  arrangements 
of  God.  And  now  he  dies.  The  despot  meets  with  the  conqueror.  He  must 
appear  before  the  God  whose  authority  he  has  tried  to  dethrone.  The  folly — woe 
— eternal  ruin  of  sin.  II.  The  people  suffering.  1,  Their  suffering  was  tyrannic. 
Freedom  lost.  Spirit  broken.  2.  Their  suffering  was  intense.  "  Sighed."  3. 
Their  suffering  was  long  continued.  4.  Their  suffering  appealed  to  the  Infinite. 
Suffering  should  link  our  souls  to  God.  It  should  be  an  inspiration  to  prayer.  III. 
God  REIGNING.  1.  God  reigns,  though  kings  die.  Wisdom  of  trusting  only  in  the 
Infinite.  2.  God  reigns,  though  men  suffer.  Eealize  the  Divine  Eulership.  3. 
God  reigns  in  harmony  with  His  covenant  made  with  the  good.  The  Divine  will  is 
not  capricious,  but  benevolent  in  design,  and  continuous  in  operation.  Let  every 
nation  and  family  have  a  covenant  with  God.  Lessons  :  1.  Do  not  despond  in 
times  of  affliction.  2.  Afflictions  are  designed  to  bring  us  into  harmony  with  the 
requirements  of  God's  covenant  for  our  good.  3.  It  is  the  purpose  of  God  to  work 
the  freedom  and  welfare  of  men.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Lesaon.-) : — 1.  Oppressors 
may  die,  and  yet  persecution  not  die  with  them.  2.  XJries  to  heaven  arc  often  ex- 
torted from  God's  persecuted  children.  3.  If  men  want  freedom,  they  cannot  do 
better  than  direct  their  attention  to  God.  {Ibid.)  Death  indiscriminating  : — 
Death  is  so  dim-sighted  and  so  blundering-footed  that  he  staggers  across  Axmmster 
tapestry  as  though  it  were  a  bare  floor,  and  sees  no  difference  between  the  fluttering 
rags  of  a  tatterdemalion  and  a  conqueror's  gonfalon.     Side  by  side  we  must  all 

■  come  down.  No  first  class,  second  class,  or  third  class  in  death  or  the  grave. 
Death  goes  into  the  house  at  Gad's  Hill,  and  he  says,  "I  want  that  novelist." 
Deith  goes  into  Windsor  Castle,  and  he  says,  "  I  want  Victoria's  consort."  Death 
goes  into  Ford's  Theatre,  at  Washington,  and  says,  "  I  want  that  President."  Death 
goes  on  the  Zulu  battle-field,  and  says,  "  I  want  that  French  Prince  Imperial." 
Death  goes  into  the  marble  palace  at  Madrid,  and  says,  "  Give  me  Queen  Mercedes." 
Death  goes  into  the  almshouse,  and  says,  "  Give  me  that  paup  >r."  Death  comes 
to  the  Tay  Bridge,  and  says,  "  Discharge  into  my  cold  bosom  all  those  passengers." 
Alike  I  Alike !  By  embalmment,  by  sculptured  sarcophagus,  by  pj-ramidal 
grandeur,  by  epitaphal  commemoration,  by  mere  intoxicated  "  wake  "  or  grander 
cathedral  dirge,  we  may  seem  to  give  a  caste  to  the  dead,  but  it  is  soon  over.  I 
took  out  my  memorandum-book  and  lead-pencil  in  Westminster  Abbey  a  few  weeks 

.  ago,  and  I  copied  a  verse  that  it  would  interest  you  to  hear : — 

**  Think  how  many  royal  bones 
Sleep  within  these  heaps  of  stones ; 
Here  they  lie — had  realms  and  lands — ■ 
Who  now  want  strength  to  stir  their  hands." 

(T,  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Godheard. — The  hitter  cry  of  Israel  henrd : — I.  Salvation 
BEGINS  WITH  ASIGH.  Until  a  sinner  is  weary  of  sin,  it  is  of  no  use  to  bring  the  tidings 
of  redemption  to  him.  II.  God  hears  the  groanings  of  poor  sinners.  Psa.  xviii.  6 ; 
xxxiv.  6  ;  Ixxvii.  1 ;  Joel  ii.  32 ;  John  vi.  37.     III.  He  sees  ocr  afflictions  and 

KNOWS  OUR  sorrows.       IV.    He  REMEMBERS  HiS  COVENANT.  (G.  F.  FeTlteCOSt,  D.D.) 

God  remembered,  remembers  : — At  last  they  remembered  God  and  His  promises. 
They  thought  of  their  ingratitude  towards  Him  and  towards  Moses,  and  they  began 
to  sigh  after  God.  This  was  what  God  was  waiting  for  in  order  to  show  them 
mercy.  He  was  waiting  for  their  humihation,  their  return  to  Him,  their  aversion 
to  Egypt,  their  fervent  prayers.  It  is  to  this  frame  of  mind  that  God  wishes 
'to  bring  His  children  when  He  corrects  them,  and  leaves  them  for  a  time  in 
the  bands  of  the  wicked.  Yon  will  find  immediately  afterwards,  in  the  following 
▼erses,  four  expressions,  which  describe  the  goodness  of  God  towards  this  unhappy 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

people.  "God  heard  their  groaning;  and  God  remembered  His  covenant  with 
Abraham,  with  Isaac,  and  with  Jacob.  And  God  looked  upon  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  God  had  respect  unto  them."  Remark  that  the  name  of  God  is  repeated  four 
tmies  in  these  verses,  as  if  to  express  with  greater  force  the  free  grace  and  sove- 
reignty of  His  merciful  dealings  with  the  Israelites.  It  was  not  because  of  their 
merits  that  He  had  iDity  upon  them,  any  more  than  it  is  because  of  ours  that  He 
sends  His  gospel  to  us  who  have  broken  His  law,  neglected  Him,  and  insulted  Him 
by  our  ingratitude.  But  to  us  He  calls,  and  says,  "  Come  unto  Me,  that  ye  may 
have  eternal  life."  (Prof.  Gaussen.)  God  hears  the  cry  of  His  suffering  children : — 
My  little  boy  has  three  calls.  He  opens  the  study  door  and  calls,  "  Papa."  I  pay 
no  attention  to  him  because  I  know  it  is  merely  to  attract  notice.  Again  he  comes 
throwing  the  study  door  open,  and  running  in,  he  calls,  "  Papa,  look  here,  I  have 
something  to  show  you."  I  know  by  his  call  that  he  is  really  in  earnest,  and  I 
turn  to  share  in  his  joy.  He  has  still  another  call ;  when  he  is  in  the  garden  he 
may  meet  with  an  accident ;  in  a  quick  and  distressed  voice  he  calls,  "Papa."  I 
know  by  the  call  that  my  child  is  in  trouble,  and  I  am  out  of  the  house  in  an  instant, 
and  by  my  boy's  side,  doing  what  I  can  to  help  him.  In  like  manner  God  deals 
with  us.  We  sometimes  call  to  Him,  scarcely  meaning  anything  by  our  call,  and 
never  looking  for  or  expecting  a  reply.  Then,  again,  we  wish  to  call  the  Lord's 
attention  to  some  unexpected  joy  or  pleasure  which  we  have  received.  He  listens 
to  us  because  He  delights  to  share  in  all  that  concerns  us.  But,  dear  friends,  how 
quickly  the  Lord  will  come  to  the  call  of  one  in  distress !  He  knows  all  the  different 
calls  of  His  children,  and  specially  those  in  trouble,  for  has  He  not  promised,  "Call 
upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will  deliver  thee."     (Z).  L.  Moody.) 


CHAPTER  m. 


Veks.  1-6.  A  flame  of  fire  out  of  the  midst  of  a  busb. — Bloses  at  the  Inirning  hush : — 
I.  The  story  of  Moses  is  the  story,  at  first,  of  failure.  Two  gi-eat  streams  of  influ- 
ences moulded  his  life — the  one  drawn  from  the  Egyptian  surroundings  of  his  early 
days,  and  the  other  drunk  in  with  his  mother's  milk  and  his  mother's  teaching.  On 
the  one  side  he  had  before  him  the  revelation  of  the  world  in  its  majesty  and  power, 
brute  energy  and  magnificence,  massive  pui-pose  and  force,  and  splendid  genius,  with 
a  kind  of  weird  and  magical  faith  in  the  dim  powers  of  the  unseen — those  speechless- 
eyed  deities  of  Egypt  looking  for  ever  into  his  face ;  and,  along  with  these,  a 
rugged  sense  of  the  responsibility  of  human  life.  And  then,  from  the  Hebrew 
side,  another  strain  of  thought.  There  came  belief  in  the  governing  providence  of 
God ;  there  was  belief  in  something  more  than  might  and  majesty  of  force,  and 
brute  power ;  something  like  a  belief  that  the  weak  might  yet  become  strong — for 
the  early  history  of  that  people  was  the  history  of  the  individual,  or  of  the  tribe 
waiting,  not  for  his  power  upon  the  tokens  of  brute  force,  but  waiting,  rather,  for 
his  power  upon  the  evolution  of  their  history  under  the  providence  of  God.  But 
where  he  expected  amongst  people  of  his  kin  to  find  aspirations  after  better 
things,  and  responsiveness  to  his  own  spirit,  he  met  only  with  chillness,  coldness, 
and  refusal  to  follow.  Then  came  his  exile  in  Midian — an  exile  from  all  his  early 
dreams  and  hopes,  an  exile  from  the  splendid  position  he  had  in  Egypt,  an  exile 
from  the  future  which  glowed  before  him,  and  an  exile,  too,  from  the  confidence  he 
had  that  there  was  the  power  capable  of  lifting  the  hearts  of  his  people  and  making 
them  fit  to  strike  a  blow  for  freedom,  II.  Look,  now,  at  the  vision  which  restored 
him  to  faith  and  energy.  1.  A  revelation  of  permanence.  The  bush  was  not  con- 
sumed ;  it  held  its  own  life  amidst  the  devouring  flame.  Moses'  feeling  was  one 
of  suffering  from  that  which,  after  all,  is  so  common  an  experience  of  Ufe — from 
the  temptation  to  cry,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity."  It  was  something  at 
such  a  moment  to  find  that  the  revelation  was  to  him  one  of  permanence,  where 
everything  had  slipped  from  his  grasp.  A  while  ago  young  dreams  were  his ;  a  while 
ago,  in  his  manhood,  a  noble  purpose  was  his ;  and  now  all  is  gone,  the  temptation 
is  to  sit  down  and  take  a  cynical  attitude,  and  say,  with  a  world  where  all  things 
change,  and  where  notliing  abides,  the  safest  and  the  wisest  course  is  to  laugh  at 
existence,  and  take  up  either  the  language  of  despair,  which  wails  out  vanity  of 


CHAP,  ni.]  EXODUS.  '  51 

vanities,  or  the  easy  cynicism  which  treats  life  as  a  joke.  But  to  the  man  in  that 
state  came  a  revelation  of  permanence.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  change  of  things 
there  is  something  which  abides.  Do  not  believe  the  answer  to  the  cry  of  your 
heart,  that  all  things  perish,  that  the  powers  of  decay  touch  everything  in  your 
life.  There  is  in  the  uncousumed  bush,  there  is  in  the  change  and  policy  of  the 
world,  an  element  of  permanence.  2.  A  revelation  of  purity.  "  The  place  whereon 
thou  standest  is  holy  ground."  In  our  first  thought  we  think  of  permanence  in 
material  things.  We  see  intellectual  and  moral  things  pass  away  and  the  materials 
remain ;  but  the  revelation  of  faith,  the  revelation  of  God,  the  revelation  of  all 
noble  impulses  of  men,  is  everlastingly  this  :  it  is  in  the  elements  of  purity  that 
the  powers  of  permanence  are  concerned.  Mark  you  that  the  revelation  given  to 
Moses  was  not  simply  of  the  burning  bush.  Thrust  thine  hand  into  thy  bosom  ; 
and  he  thrust  it  in,  and  drew  it  out  leprous.  Thrust  thine  hand  into  thy  bosom 
again  ;  and  he  did  so,  and  drew  it  out  clean,  ^^^lat  significance  is  here  to  remind 
him  Ihat  the  cause  of  his  failure  lay  not  in  the  want  of  high  purpose  and  high 
moral  methods !  The  failure  was  not  the  failure  of  Moses'  purpose,  it  was  not  the 
failure  of  his  high  hopes ;  there  was  permanent  power,  possibly,  but  there  was  a 
leprous  stain  within  the  breast  of  the  patriot,  and  he  understood  it  so  ;  for  when  at 
last  his  dream  was  nearly  accomplished,  and  he  had  led  the  people  out  from 
beneath  the  trj-annies  of  the  Pharaohs,  and  had  planted  them  in  the  wilderness, 
then  he  drew  from  the  throne  of  God  that  real  law,  that  holy  code,  and  he  gave  it 
to  them  graven  as  the  image  of  eternity  upon  permanent  stone,  and  said  tliis  is  the 
law  of  the  longevity  of  the  people  ;  these  ten  commandments,  engrafted  into  the 
people's  life,  made  part  of  their  aspirations,  part  of  their  feelings,  part  of  their 
intellectual  powers,  part  of  their  whole  social  life,  will  guarnntee  their  permanence. 
It  shall  be  your  life  if  ye  will  observe  to  do  these  things.  The  vision  had  taught 
him  that  permanence  was  to  be  found  in  purity.  3.  A  revelation  of  personal  power 
and  love.  Behind  the  purity  is  a  personal  God.  We  might  pause  a  moment  and 
say,  Yv'hy  is  this  ?  If  I  have  this  moral  law,  and  if  the  possession  of  this  righteous 
strength  gives  permanence,  why  this  personal  God  behind  ?  The  answer  is  simple. 
You  and  I  may  think  there  is  energy  in  law  ;  but,  after  all,  law  is  merely  a  name 
given  to  certain  causes  and  effects  and  sequences.  There  is  no  inspiration  neces- 
sary in  law.  To  tell  Moses,  indeed,  that  here  this  people  could  live,  that  there  was 
no  reason  why  Israel  should  die,  that  the  element  of  permanence  might  be  there  if 
only  the  element  of  righteousness  was  there,  would  be  to  mock  Moses,  who  might 
have  said,  "All  my  patriotic  hopes  are  gone ;  here  I  get  the  answer  of  permanence,  but 
I  do  not  get  the  guarantee  of  it.  I  get  no  inspiration  as  to  whether  any  one  cares." 
Lo !  the  answer  is  given  :  "  God  cares ;  these  people  that  seemed  God  forsaken, 
have  yet  God  as  their  God ;  righteousness  is  not  a  dead  letter,  righteousness  is  an 
expression  of  a  living  will,  and  an  expression  of  a  living  will  moulding  human  life 
to  achieve  some  great  and  final  thing."  Thus  he  began  to  see  that  he  was  not 
struggling  merely  against  the  nerveless  hearts  of  men,  but  living  and  loving  hearts 
were  co-operating  with  his,  and  the  aspirations  which  had  dawned  within  his  breast 
were  not  simply  his  own  weak  thought,  but  were  the  answers  back  to  the  purposes 
of  God  ;  for  in  the  best  sense  it  is  true  that  the  aspirations  of  man  are  the  aspira- 
tions of  God  ;  and  when  you  realize  that,  then  you  begin  to  see  how  needed  is  the 
guarantee  which  Moses  asked,  "  Give  me  strength  ;  what  am  I  that  I  should  go?  " 
Because  He  is  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob — the 
God  of  this  people  who  seemed  to  be  no  people ;  therefore  their  resurrection  is 
possible.  III.  The  re\'elation  was  not  foe  Moses  alone.  You  remember 
the  scene  in  "Alton  Locke,"  where  the  poet  would  go  to  the  Southern  Pacific, 
and  there  find  inspiration  for  his  song,  and  a  shrewd  Scotchman  took  him 
into  the  slums  of  a  great  city,  where  the  squalor  and  dinginess  of  life  existed,  and 
said  to  him  that  the  poet  sees  poetry  everywhere — the  poetry  is  there  if  you  will  turn 
your  poet's  eye  upon  it.  So  also  is  religion.  There  is  in  every  common  bush  the 
light  of  God,  and  only  those  who  see  it  draw  off  their  shoes.  It  is  the  old  story 
again.  God  is  near,  God  is  in  this  place,  and  we  knew  it  not.  You  may  say  that 
the  vision,  and  that  faith  which  the  life  which  has  surrounded  you,  has  slowly  dimmed 
and  numbed,  and  you  say,  "  There  is  no  revelation  for  me ;  my  heart,  my  mind,  is 
a  wilderness  now ;  there  were  little  fruits  and  flowers  in  the  garden  of  my  early  Hfe, 
and  I  hoped  to  dedicate  my  life,  and  consecrate  my  services,  to  God — perhaps  as  a 
minister  of  His  Church,  perhaps  in  a  high  calling  in  the  State ;  but  now  I  have 
grown  confused  with  new  and  strange  thoughts,  that  rise  sirocco-like ;  new  things 
have  swept  away  the  old,  and  have  left  me  no  verdure  and  flowers  in  their  place ;  I 


53  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cahp.  ra. 

am  in  a  wilderness,  and  there  is  no  revelation  of  fire  for  me."  Pardon  me,  there 
is:  Alter  your  views.  Do  you  never  feel  a  sense  of  dissatisfaction  ?  did  ever  cross 
your  mind  the  law  of  self-condemnation,  and  have  you  not  said,  "  I  meant  to  make 
more  of  my  life  in  this  place  of  study,  and  meant  to  have  worked  for  a  purpose  ; 
and  now  I  am  dissatisfied  ?  Where  I  meant  to  be  a  living  agent,  I  have  only 
become  an  idle  dreamer.  I  look  back  upon  a  wasted  and  unprofitable  life,  and  say, 
Woe  is  me !  all  the  bright,  hopeful  views  have  gone,  and  my  life  is  like  a  ship- 
wrecked thing."  Is  not  that  pain,  which  is  the  witness  of  your  failure,  the  fire  of 
God?  He  lets  it  burn,  that  it  may  bum  away  the  base  thing,  and  that  you  may 
see  in  the  voice  of  noble  discontent  the  possibility  of  stepping  up  once  more  to  the 
dream  of  your  early  life,  and  by  the  strength  of  God  achieving  it.  But  we  forget 
to  turn  aside  to  see  the  great  sights  about  us.  Give  your  hearts  leisure  sometimes 
to  meet  with  God,  and  God  will  meet  with  you.  Give  your  souls  the  opportunity 
of  letting  the  light  of  God's  vision  shine  sometimes  with  a  possibihty  of  reflection 
upon  your  own  life,  and  the  fire  will  glow,  and  the  bush  will  burn,  and  the  revela- 
tion will  begin.  {Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.)  The  vision  and  the  roiee  : — I.  The 
VISION.  1.  The  vision  was  miraculous.  2.  Moses  had  this  vision  when  he  was 
in  solitude.  3.  It  was  symbolic — (1)  Of  Israel  in  Egypt.  (2)  Of  the  Church . 
in  the  world.  (3)  Of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  (4)  Of  ourselves,  who  have  the 
religious  life  within  us.  II.  The  voice.  1.  It  revealed  the  majesty  and 
grandeur  of  God.  2.  It  revealed  the  special  providence  of  the  great  God — the  God 
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  3.  It  proclaimed  the  faithfulness  of  God.  4.  It 
demanded  reverence.  {T.  Jones.)  Biases  at  the  bush: — This  narrative  is  a 
chain  of  glorious  wonders.  We  see  here — I.  An  old  man  c.\lled  to  go  o0t  on 
THE  GREAT  EUBAND  OF  HI8  LIFE.  The  educatiou  of  Moscs  for  the  great  mission  of 
his  life  lasted  eighty  years.  God  never  sends  forth  fruit  until  the  season  is  fitted 
for  the  fruit,  and  the  fruit  for  the  season  ;  when  the  hour  was  ready  for  the  man, 
and  the  man  for  the  hour,  then  God  sent  forth  Moses.  II.  The  burning  bush 
FROM  wuicn  THAT  CALL  WAS  SOUNDED.  1.  Tliis  was  a  sign  to  indicate  the  peculiar 
presence  of  God.  2.  It  was  also  a  symbol  of  His  people,  eminently  adapted  to 
encourage  the  prophet  in  undertaking  their  cause.  III.  The  angel  who  urTEBED 
THIS  CALL.  We  see  at  the  first  glance  that  He  is  Divine  ;  we  next  learn  that  He  is 
an  angel ;  we  further  find,  from  a  chain  of  Scripture  proofs,  that  He  is  Christ. 

IV.      The     COVENANT    under   WHICH    THE   ANGEL   GAVE    HIM    HIS   COMMISSION.        It     WaS 

the  same  covenant  that  had  been  given  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  V.  The 
angel's  name.  That  name  asserts — 1.  His  real  existence.  2.  His  underived 
existence.  3.  His  independent  existence.  4.  His  eternity.  VI.  The  effect  to 
BE  wrought  by  the  remesibrance  of  His  name.  1.  It  was  intended  to  inspire 
profoundest  reverence  for  the  Being  to  whom  it  belongs.  2.  It  reveals  the  infinite 
sufficiency  of  a  Christian's  portion.  3.  It  gives  encouragement  to  evangelical  en- 
terprise. (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Moses^  education  and  life-uwrk : — I.  How  was 
the  earlier  history  of  Moses  an  education  for  the  great  work  of  his  life? 
In  order  to  free  his  people  from  their  bondage,  Moses  needed  sympathy  and  faith ; 
and  the  Bible  gives  us  three  phases  of  his  life,  wonderfully  adapted  to  educate  him 
in  these  qualities.  1.  His  education  in  the  Egyptian  court.  2.  His  attempt  to 
convince  the  people  of  their  brotherhood.  3.  His  flight  into  the  wilderness.  II. 
How  did  this  vision  explain  to  Moses  the  work  of  his  life  ?  1.  The  vision 
of  God  prepared  him  for  the  work  of  his  life.  It  showed  him  the  everlastingnesa 
of  God,  and  his  own  unworthiness  to  do  God's  work.  But  the  voice  upheld  him 
amid  the  overwhelming  sense  of  his  nothingness,  and  made  him  feel  his  vocation. 
2.  The  vision  of  God  gave  endurance  in  fulfilling  that  work.  Even  should  hi3 
work  seem  to  fail,  he  had  a  grasp  on  eternity  which  would  keep  him  strong  and 
true.  (-E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  The  Divine  call  and  its  sign  : — I.  The  call  op  the 
CHOSEN  leader.  Moscs  was  already  a  believing  man,  walking  in  favour  and  fellow- 
ship with  God,  and  in  sympathy  with  his  down-trodden  people.  We  must  carefully 
distinguish  between  Moses'  decision  for  God,  and  God's  disclosure  of  duty  to 
Moses.  The  one  took  place  in  his  early  manhood;  the  other  was  defeiTed  till  the 
threshold  of  old  age,  when  God  gave  the  charge  of  the  story  before  us,  and  the 
servant's  self-denying  choice  was  rewarded  by  the  sovereign's  honourable  commis- 
sion. The  two  experiences  differ,  you  see,  as  conversion  from  service,  as  personal 
consecration  from  official  appointment,  as  entrance  on  a  hfe  of  hoUness  from 
entrance  on  a  life  of  work.  1.  And  here  comes  our  first  lesson — a  lesson  for  all 
who,  like  Moses,  await  God's  call — the  lesson,  namely,  of  faith  and  of  self-restraint. 
.  Are  we  struck  with  the  fact  that  of  the  hundred  and  twenty  years  assigned  to  Moses, 


CHAP,  ni.]  EXODUS.  53 

eighty  were  spent  in  preparation,  and  only  forty  in  work  ?  But  it  is  God's  way. 
What  seems  a  time  of  uselessness  as  regards  the  world  may  be  a  time  of  probation 
as  regards  yourself.  And  the  time  of  probation,  if  quietly  endured  and  conscien- 
tiously improved,  may  issue,  ere  God  has  done  with  you,  in  a  work  of  deliverance 
on  the  earth,  whose  concentration,  rapidity,  and  success  may  amply  explain  the 
preceding  delay.  2.  Take  a  second  lesson  at  this  point  in  passing — a  lesson  of 
diligence.  I  know  not  how  God  means  to  meet  and  to  summon  you,  if,  as  in 
Moses'  case,  He  has  special  service  in  store  for  you ;  but  I  am  sure  of  this,  that 
revelations  of  special  service  are  given  only  in  the  midst  of  conscientious  applica- 
tion to  ordinary  duty.  3.  Learn  here  yet  a  third  truth — a  lesson  of  constant 
watchfulness.  For  though  Moses  was  at  the  time  unexpectant,  he  was  not  upon 
that  account  heedless.  His  mind  was  in  sympathy  with  the  spiritual  and  eternal, 
and  his  eye  was  kept  open  to  discern  it.  Be  sure  that,  for  all  his  industry  in  his 
worldly  calling,  the  mood  of  Moses  was  such  that  no  indication  or  hint  could 
escape  him  from  the  world  that  is  unseen  and  Divine.  And  let  us  take  that  spirit 
along  with  us,  if,  like  Moses,  we  would  find  the  lights  and  the  beacons  of  God  on 
our  path — a  spirit  of  devout  and  careful  attention,  of  inquiry,  and  of  vigilant 
thought.  4.  The  lesson  of  reverence  is  needed  too.  While  the  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  for  those  that  seek  Him,  it  is  also  for  those  that  fear  Him.  5.  Holy  diffidence. 
Much  of  the  best  work  with  which  the  Church  has  been  served  lias  been  rendered 
by  men  who,  like  Moses,  were  at  first  overcome  by  the  thought  of  it,  aud  would 
fain  have  drawn  back  had  Providence  permitted.  Take  the  example  of  the  great 
pioneer  of  the  Church  in  Scotland — the  leader  of  its  glorious  exodus  from  the 
superstition  and  tyranny  of  popery  to  the  heritage  which  God  had  prepared  for 
it,  in  the  light  wherewith  His  Spirit  illumines,  and  the  liberty  wherewith  His  truth 
makes  free.  When  Knox  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of  the  church  of  St.  Andrews, 
and  the  first  step  was  disclosed  to  him  of  a  road  that  led  onwards  to  service  and 
fame,  we  read  that  a  strange  thing  happened.  The  audience  were  gathered,  the 
service  was  proceeded  with,  the  wish  of  the  people  was  announced  by  the  officiating 
minister,  and  echoed  back  as  he  spoke  by  the  cries  of  the  people  themselves.  But 
when  Knox  rose  to  speak  in  return,  he  broke  down  into  tears,  left  the  meeting-place 
abruptly,  and  enclosed  himself  in  the  privacy  of  his  house  ;  "  aud  from  that  day," 
as  the  chronicler  tells  of  him,  "  till  the  day  he  presented  himself  to  preach,  his 
countenance  and  behaviour  did  sufficiently  declare  the  grief  and  the  trouble  of  his 
heart,  for  no  man  saw  any  sign  of  mirth  from  him,  neither  had  he  pleasure  to  ac- 
company any  man  for  days  together."  Such  feelings  of  diffidence  and  misgiving  will 
a  true  man  feel  whensoever  he  is  honoured  with  special  service  ;  nor,  if  he  is  wise, 
will  he  seek  to  repress  it.  II.  The  revelation  of  the  changeless  God.  Nothing 
will  establish  the  Church,  nothing  will  support  and  encourage  its  leaders  in  times 
of  trial  such  as  those  through  which  Israel  was  passing,  like  ihe  thought  of  the 
changelessness  of  God,  and  in  especial  the  changelessness  and  eternity  of  His 
love,  of  which  trials,  however  grievous,  and  temptations,  however  scorching,  form 
only  a  brief  and  a  passing  phase.  The  processes  God  employs  may  be  many,  but 
the  principle  He  acts  on  is  one.  The  manifestations  He  makes  of  Himself  may 
be  various,  but  the  character  that  underlies  them  is  the  same.  (IF.  A.  Gray.) 
Man  in  relation  to  mystery : — I.  That  sometimes  men  meet  with  mtstery  im  the 
PUESDiT  OF  their  DAILY  CALLING.  1.  This  visiou  was  Unexpected.  2.  This  vision, 
was  educational.  II.  That  sometimes  mystery  is  associated  with  things  of  a 
VERY  ordinary  CHARACTER.  "  A  bush."  The  smallest,  the  most  trivial,  tbe  ap- 
parently unmeaning  things,  events  of  life,  are  full  of  mystery,  contain  a  heavenly 
presence,  a  Divine  voice,  will  teach  a  reflective  spirit,  will  become  an  impulse  to  a 
higher  life — avocation.  The  bushes  of  life  are  full  of  mystery.  The  world  is  a 
great  secret — is  vocal  with  messages  of   freedom  to  listening  souls.      III.    That 

MYSTERY   SHOULD    BE    INVESTIGATED    WITH    THE    UTMOST    DEVOTION    OF    SOUL.       "  Put  off 

thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet."  1,  There  must  be  devotion  in  opposition  to  levity. 
2.  There  must  be  devotion  in  opposition  to  curiosity.  Why  this  devotion  ?  (1) 
Because  mvstery  is  holy.  (2)  Because  mystery  is  authoritative.  It  commands  us 
to  take  off  our  shoes.  Its  authority  is  Divine ;  will  be  recognized  by  true  man- 
hood. IV.  That  sometimes  good  men  are  favoured  with  a  grand  unfolding  of 
MYSTERY.  "  I  am  the  God,"  &c.  1.  God  observes  the  conduct  of  men  in  relation 
to  mysteiy.  "  And  the  Lord  saw  that  he  turned  aside  to  see."  What  a  subduing, 
inspiring  thought,  that  God  knows  all  the  efforts  of  our  souls  in  their  investigation 
of  mystery.  2.  God  speaks  to  men  who  are  anxious  to  investigate  mystery.  "  God 
called  to  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  bush."    God  speaks — allows  us  to  investigate. 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

3.  God  reveals  Himself  as  the  great  solution  of  all  mystery.  (/.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Desert  revelations : — I.  Let  us  contemplate  the  element  of  wonder  in  the  history. 
1.  This  was  the  crowning  preparation  and  call  of  Moses  for  his  hfe's  work.  2.  This 
was  to  be  the  beginning  of  a  new  stage  in  the  life  and  history  of  the  chosen  people, 
and  of  the  history  of  the  Divine  unfolding.  II.  Some  of  the  elements  of  wonder 
HERE  are  old.  1.  The  Angel  Jehovah  was  not  a  created  Being.  The  designation 
is  evidently  used  in  a  special  sense,  because,  He  speaks  as  God  Himself  and  receives 
Divine  homage.  Here  it  means  the  Divine  as  self-revealing ;  the  Infinite  bringing 
Himself  into  relations  of  knowledge  with  a  limited  and  finite  creature,  and  into 
relations  of  covenanted  grace  and  mercy.  It  is  God  to  whom  we  can  get  near, 
understand,  grasp,  love,  serve,  obey.  2.  The  Angel  Jehovah  was  God  of  the  fathers. 
But  He  was  revealed  to  them  as  El  Shaddai,  God  Almighty.  3.  But  what  He  had 
been  to  the  fathers  He  still  was.  The  fathers'  God  !  The  God  of  our  dead !  The 
sanctities  of  home  life  go  into  and  along  with  our  religion.  4.  There  was  still 
another  old  element  in  the  wonder ;  and  that  was  the  Fire.  This  was  the  same 
element  which  appeared  amid  and  upon  the  cherubic  symbols,  darting  hither  and 
thither  like  flashing  sword  in  the  sunshine  at  the  gate  of  Eden,  and  which  we  read 
of  as  "  the  Presence,"  the  faces  of  Jehovah  ;  and  as  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  III. 
But  to  the  wonder  which  was  old  there  were  elements  added  which  are  new. 
God  reveals  Himself  here  under  a  new  name.  An  old  word  is  vitalized  with  a  new 
meaning,  and  is  laid  at  the  foundation  of  a  dispensation.  He  will  be  known  in  all 
the  Mosaic  times  and  institutions,  not  as  El  Shaddai,  but  as  Jehovah,  "  I  am  that  I 
am."  He  is  the  one  self-existent,  unchangeable,  ever-Uving  God  of  ages.  From 
everlasting  to  everlasting  God.  But  the  name  is  adopted  and  comes  mto  use, 
specially  in  relation  to  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  the  constitution  of  the  nation. 
So  it  means,  the  Sovereign  Ruler  and  Ordainer  of  the  Ages,  who  has  become  a 
Righteous  Deliverer  and  Redeemer.  {W.  H.  Davison,  D.D.)  The  buruinghush  : — 
1.  Observe  the  substance  of  the  figure.  Not  a  fine  tall  tree,  a  cedar  or  a  cypress,  but 
a  bush — a  mere  bush.  Such  is  the  unage  of  the  Church — poor  and  humble.  It  was 
at  one  time  in  the  ark,  and  there  was  a  wicked  Ham,  at  another  in  the  family  of 
Abraham,  and  there  was  a  mocking  Ishmael.  It  was  now  in  Egypt,  consisting  of 
slaves  and  brickmakers.  Jesus  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head.  His  followers  were 
the  common  people.  His  apostles  were  fishermen.  2.  Observe  the  condition  of  the 
bush.  It  burned  with  fire.  Fire  denotes  suffering.  Christians  must  have  tribula- 
tion in  the  world.  They  are  never  to  consider  "  fiery  trials  "  as  strange  things.  Of 
how  many  can  God  say,  "I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  allliction  "?  3.  Mark 
the  bush's  presei-vation.  The  bush  was  not  consumed.  Sometimes  the  Church  has 
burned  in  the  fire  of  persecution,  and  sometimes  of  derision.  But  with  what  result  ? 
Whilst  kingdoms  and  empires  have  passed  away,  and  not  a  wreck  of  them  is  left  but 
some  vestiges  in  ruins,  lingering  in  monumental  mockery  of  the  boasts  of  men,  the 
Church  still  stands,  as  she  is  destined  ever  to  do,  in  the  light  and  strength  of  her 
omnipotent  and  faithful  Lord.  And  this  is  as  true  of  every  individual  believer  as 
of  the  whole  Church  collectively.  (A.  Nevins,  D.D.)  The  bush  as  an  emblem : — 
Some  also  see  in  this  bush  an  emblem  of — 1.  The  awfulness  of  God's  offended 
justice  (Deut.  iv.  21 ;  Mai.  iii.  2).  2.  The  incarnation  and  sufferings  of  Christ,  the 
bush  representing  His  human  nature  (Isa.  liii.  2),  the  flame  of  fire  shadowing  forth 
His  Divine  nature  (Deut.  iv.  24),  and  the  union  of  the  flame  with  the  bush  denoting 
the  union  of  the  Divine  with  the  human  nature.  3.  Those  dreadful  sufferings  by 
which  sin  should  be  expiated— Christ  enduring  the  fierce  flames  of  the  wrath  of  God, 
yet  not  consumed  (Heb.  ix.  28).  (Ibid.)  Was  this  a  great  sight  ? — 1.  It  was  the 
great  I  Am  who  exhibited  it.  2.  It  afforded  a  bright  gleam  of  hope  to  Israel,  that 
their  bondage  was  nearly  over  (vers.  7,  8).  In  order  to  see  this  great  sight,  we  must 
turn  aside — 1.  From  the  world  (1  John  ii.  15 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  17).  2.  Carnal  reasoning 
(1  Cor.  ii.  14  ;  John  iii.  9).  3.  All  known  sin  (Eph.  iv.  17,  18 ;  2  Pet.  i.  9).  (Ibid) 
The  God  of  Moses : — Here  we  have  an  account  of  God's  disclosure  of  Himself  to 
Moses ;  we  have  that  which  is  the  root  out  of  which  Moses'  whole  conception  of  God 
and  His  government  grew.  Laying  aside  all  preconceptions  and  prejudices,  let  us 
see  what  sort  of  a  portrait  this  chapter  ^ives  us:  1.  It  shows  us  a  self-reveaUng 
God ;  a  God  who  discloses  Himself  to  the  human  race,  and  communicates  with  them. 

2.  This  God  is  one  who  is  not  indifferent  to  the  woes  and  sufferings  of  His  people. 

3.  He  is  a  God  of  deliverance.  4.  In  working  out  this  deliverance.  He  chooses 
human  and  imperfect  instruments.  5.  The  very  name  by  which  God  at  once  reveals 
and  conceals  Himself  suggests  the  similitude  between  the  Old  Testament  and  the 
New  Testament  revelations.     "  I  am,"  says  Jehovah  to  Moses ;  "  you  must  trust 


CHAP,  m.]  EXODUS.  55 

Me  and  walk  by  faith  in  My  assurance,  and  not  in  an  intellectual  comprebension  of 
My  character  and  My  purposes."  "  I  am,"  says  Christ  to  Philip  ;  "  you  must  trust 
in  Me,  and  walk  by  your  faith  in  Me  :  not  by  an  understanding  of  what  the  Father 
is  who  hath  sent  Me,  or  a  comprehension  of  what  the  Father  purposes  to  ace  >mplish 
in  and  by  you."  In  a  sense  the  Egyptian  inscription,  the  Athenian  altar,  and 
Herbert  Spencer's  definition  are  true ;  God  is  the  Unknown  and  Unknowable.  The 
intellect  tries  in  vain  to  draw  aside  the  veil ;  but  love  and  sympathy  pass  behind  it. 
Philosophy  in  vain  endeavours  to  analyse  and  interpret  mother-love ;  but  the  child 
in  simplicity  and  faith  reposes  on  it.  The  God  of  Moses  and  the  God  of  the  twelve 
disciples  are  alike  in  this — that  Tbey  are  the  incomprehensible  "  I  am  "  ;  to  be  loved, 
trusted,  obeyed,  rested  on,  but  never  to  be  measured,  fathomed  and  understood. 
Sometimes  from  my  hill-side  home  among  the  Highlands  of  the  Hudson  I  see,  fifty 
miles  away,  obscured  by  haze  and  overhanging  clouds,  and  partially  veiled,  perhaps, 
in  mist  or  rain,  the  distant  outline  of  the  Catskill  range  ;  and  then  tbe  veil  is  drawn 
aside,  the  turbaned  mist  is  lifted  off  their  foreheads,  and  that  which  before  was  dim 
and  indistinct  stands  out  against  the  dark  background  of  sky  in  clear,  intelligible 
outline,  yet  leaving  all  the  dress  of  grey  rock  and  green  tree  and  foaming  cataract, 
and  dark  gloom,  and  Hitting  sunshine  breaking  through  the  trees,  to  the  imagina- 
tion ;  for  at  best  it  is  only  an  outline  I  can  see.  So  in  the  Old  Testament  I  look 
upon  the  outline  of  my  God  veiled  in  cloud ;  in  the  New  Testament  the  cloud  is 
lifted,  the  mist  is  cleared  away,  and  through  an  atmosphere  like  that  of  the  most 
perfect  October  day  I  look  on  the  same  outline,  distinct  and  beautiful  against  a 
heavenly  background  :  and  still  it  is  but  an  outline  that  I  see  of  the  mystery  and 
majesty  of  the  nature  I  shall  never  know,  never  be  able  even  to  explore,  until  I  stand 
in  His  presence  and  am  invited  to  know  Him  even  as  I  am  known.  {Lijwan  Abbott, 
D.D.)      Mones  and  the  burning  hush;  or,  a  picture  of  a  true  student  and  the  Bible  : — 

I.  That  God's  purposes  are  punctual  in  their  accomplishment  (see  Gen.  xv.).  The 
clock  of  time  had  now  struck  the  four  hundred  years,  and  God  forthwith  began  to 
redeem  His  pledge.  2.  That  God's  purposes,  in  relation  to  our  world,  are  generally 
accomplished  by  the  agency  of  man.  3.  That  the  men  whom  God  employs  for  the 
carrying  out  of  His  pui-poses.  He  qualifies  by  a  special  revelation.  4.  That  this 
special  revelation  which  He  vouchsafes,  is  frequently  symbolical  in  its  character. 
All  nature  is  a  symbol.  Truth  in  symbol  is  palpable,  attractive,  impressive.  The 
burning  bush  was  a  symbol.  But  what  did  it  symbolize?  God's  presence.  I. 
Obseeve  Moses  dieectixg  his  e.vrnest  attention  to  the  Divine  revelation.  1. 
Moses  directs  his  attention  to  it,  under  an  impression  of  its  greatness.  2.  Moses 
directs  his  attention  to  it,  in  order  to  ascertain  its  imj)ort.  It  is  ever  so  with  a  true 
student  of  the  Bible.  He  will  seek  to  find  out  "  the  reason  of  things."  II.  Observe 
Moses  holding  intercourse  with  God  through  the  Divine  revelation.  1.  God's 
communications  depended  upon  his  attention.  Only  he  who  looks  and  inquires, 
hears  in  the  Bible  the  voice  of  God.  2.  God's  communications  were  consciously 
personal  to  him.  3.  God's  communications  were  directive  and  elevating.  III. 
Observe  Moses  realizing  the  profoundest  impressions  through  the  Divine 
revelation.  "Hid  his  face,"<S:c.  1.  These  impressions  are  peculiarly  becoming 
in  sinful  intelligences.  The  Bible  is  designed  to  produce  reverence  for  God.  2. 
These  impressions  are  necessary  to  qualify  men  for  God's  work.  3.  These  impres- 
sions are  consonant  with  the  highest  dignity  and  enjoyment.  He  that  is  consciously 
least  is  always  gi-eatest.  (Humilist.)  The  burning  bush  : — I.  The  locality.  How 
many  noted  Scriptural  events  took  place  on  mountains  !  1.  It  seems  as  if  they  were 
above  the  common  herd  of  man.  2.  They  are  difficult  of  access.  All  religious 
duties  must  be  connected  with  difficulty.     8.  They  were  mostly  places  of  solitude. 

II.  The  spot.  A  bush.  1.  Its  insignificance.  2.  Its  incongruity.  What  apparent 
connection  between  God  and  a  bush  ?  3.  Its  intrinsic  worthlessne?s.  III.  The 
phenomenon.  1.  The  bush  burned  \vith  fire.  God's  glory  appeared  in  it,  humble 
as  it  was.  2.  The  bush,  though  burning,  was  not  consumed.  (Ibid.)  Moses 
encouraged  by  the  burning  bush  : — Some  would  have  us  learn,  that  it  is  God's  glory 
makes  the  Church  beautiful,  and  gives  the  poor  bush  its  excellence  and  power ; 
others,  that  the  burning  fire  represents  the  afflictions  to  which  we  are  subject  as 
Christians,  which  exist,  but  do  not  consume  the  soul.  We  mfly,  indeed,  profitably 
extract  any  such  lessons  ;  they  all  help  us  on  our  way.  But  I  think  the  appearance 
was  only  intended  to  encourage  Moses.  He  was  sent  forth  to  go  to  Pharaoh,  but 
complained  of  his  own  inability.  God  showed  him  that  it  was  not  the  power  of  the 
instrument  that  was  to  prevail,  but  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  which  animated  it ; 
even  as  it  was  not  the  bush  which  was  remarkable,  but  the  fire  which  dwelt  in  it. 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

(Ibid.)         The  hurning  hush ;  or,  the  Church  in  the  world: — Eemember  also,  that 
you  may  attain  the  end  of  your  being  in  any  place  ;  that  you  may  adorn  with  moral 
beauty  the  very  humblest  sphere  ;  that  you  may  confer  upon  your  position  greater 
dignity  than  any  position  could  poosibly  confer  upon  you.     When  we  read  the 
histories  of  the  world's  brightest  characters,  we  seem  to  forget  altogether  the  social 
ranks  to  which  they  belonged  ;  the  dazzling  brightness  of  their  heroism,  their  valour, 
their  truth,  makes  their  outward  surroundings  of  no  account ;  the  one  prominent 
fact  which  forces  itself  upon  our  attention  is,  that  they  acquitted  themselves  like 
men,  and  won  the  admiration  of  all  succeeding  ages.     Who  ever  stops  to  reflect  that 
John  Bunyan  was  a  tinker;  that  Paul  the  apostle  was  a  tent-maker ;  that  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  was  a  carpenter's  son?    Be  it  ours,  therefore,  not  to  murmur  at  our 
circumstances,  but  to  make  the  most  of  whatever  circumstances  in  which  we  may 
be  placed.  Let  us  learn  from  this  scene  how  to  conduct  ourselves  in  God's  presence. 
Of  course,  God  is  present  everywhere,  our  conduct  should  therefore  be  an  habitual 
recognition  of  this  solemn  fact.     Still  there  are  times  and  places  in  which  we  come 
into  God's  special  presence.     When  we  open  God's  book,  and  meditate  upon  its 
contents,  and  endeavour  to  profit  in  the  study  of  it.  His  presence  breathes  in  every 
page,  and  speaks  words  of  mercy,  warning,  and  encouragement  to  our  souls.    Ah !  my 
friends,  it  makes  one  sad  to  think,  how  men  can  treat  their  Bible  as  if  it  were  mere 
trash ;  how  men  can  repeat  their  prayers,  as  if  they  were  useless  forms ;  how  men  can 
hear  the  gospel,  as  if  it  were  a  worthless  talel     I.  Tjie  Chcrcii  in  tue  midst  of  the 
WOHLD.    The  primary  reference  in  the  text  is  to  the  Jewish  Church  in  Egypt.    There 
is  an  uncompromising  antagonism,  an  eternal  conflict,  between  the  Church  and  the 
world.     And  the  Church  being  comparitively  small  in  number,  engages  in  this 
conflict  at  great  odds.     Hence  it  frequently  seems  as  if  she  must  be  eventually 
overcome.     The  spirit  of  this  world  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  principles  which 
the  Church  is  commissioned  to  hold  forth.     The  morality  which  it  propagates  is  a 
standing  protest  against  the  world's  most  cherished  notions.     Is  it  likely  that  such 
teaching  as  this  should  provoke  no  opposition  ?    It  has  provoked  opposition  of  the 
strongest,  keenest,  deadliest  kind.     I  shall  not  detain  you  with  any  account  of  the 
horrible  persecutions  which  the  Church  has  passed  through  during  the  last  eighteen 
centuries  of  its  history.  But  in  spite  of  all,  the  Church  has  proved  itself  invincible ; 
though  persecuted,  it  has  not  been  cast  down  ;  though  burned  with  fire,  it  has  not 
been  consumed.     Nay,  we  can  say  even  more.     The  very  trials  to  which  the  Cburch 
has  been  exposed,  have  only  helped  to  develop  its  powers,  to  widen  its  influence,  to 
make  it  what  it  is  at  the  present  day.    The  bush  has  been  set  on  fire.    True.     But 
■what  then  ?     The  fire  itself  has  been  for  its  benefit ;  fanned  into  a  mighty  conflagra- 
tion, it  has  shone  all  the  more  brilliantly  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  darkness.     II. 
God  in  the  midst  of  the  Chcrch.    The  glory  which  appeared  in  the  bush  is  a 
fit  emblem  of  God's  presence  in  the  Church — His  life-giving  presence — His  protecting 
presence — His  conquering  presence.     God  is  in  the  heart  of  every  true  member  of 
the  Church,  God  is  the  source  of  his  spiritual  life,  God  is  the  secret  of  his  spiritual 
power.    God's  presence  is  the  Church's  chief  defence.     It  is  not  strange  that  she 
has  been  so  firm,  so  immovable,  so  enduring,  when  we  consider  the  mighty  Being, 
whose  power  has  protected  her.     "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us ;  the  God  of  Jacob 
is  our  refuge."    But  this  great  fact — this  ever-abiding  presence  of  God  in  the  Church 
— suggests  a  still  more  j^recious  thought ;  for  it  is  a  guarantee  for  the  Church's 
future  ;  its  future  safety,  its  future  triumphs,  its  future  glory.     (D.  Rowlands,  B.A.) 
The  burning  hush : — Moses  was  not  engaged  in  any  unworthy  work,  or  any  career  of 
sin.     He  was  tending  the  flock  of  his  father-in-law,  and  he  led  the  flock  to  the  back- 
side of  the  desert,  and  came  to  the  mountain  of  God.     Here,  perhaps,  he  had  been 
often  before,  but  as  he  led  the  flock  along  that  famihar  track,  suddenly  there  came 
to  him,  in  the  calm  and  quiet  of  that  lonely  place,  this  wonderful  revelation  of  the 
Lord,  which  became  a  point  of  departure  in  Moses'  own  heart  and  history,  and  in 
the  history  of  the  people  of  God.     So,  I  say,  that  which  makes  life  worth  living  is 
this — we  will  come  to  the  point  at  once — the  great  glory  of  our  life  is  that  God  comes 
into  it  and  reveals  His  presence ;  that  God  opens  our  eyes  to  see  that  there  is  more 
in  the  world  than  simply  our  daily  calhng,  our  flock  of  sheep,  and  our  temporal 
interests;    that  life   is   more  than  a  day's  work,  no  matter  how  diligently  and 
conscientiously  perfonned,  and  a  night's  sleep.     God,  the  personal  God,  is  here  to 
greet  our  own  eyes  with  the  kindhng  glory  of  the  manifestation  of  His  own  presence. 
He  will  change  our  life,  its  whole  current,  its  whole  outcome.    And  I  would  like  at 
the  outset  to  waken  up  an  expectation  in  those  who  are  rather  apt  to  think  that  the 
day  is  gone  by  for  them  either  to  expect  or  to  receive  such  visions  and  revelations 


CHAP,  in.]  EXODUS.  57 

of  the  Lord.  My  friends,  Moses  was  an  old  man  when  this  took  place.  Therefore 
let  not  those  growing  old,  either  in  years  or  in  cares,  give  in  or  sink  down.  Many  a 
long  day  and  year  Moses  had  trudged  about  this  very  region,  when  suddenly  one 
year,  one  d&y,  one  hour,  one  particular  moment,  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and,  as  we 
all  know  now,  Lo  !  there  was  God.  In  the  midst  of  all  the  ordinary  humdrum  and 
routine  of  life  I  see  something.  There  is  a  glimmer,  a  something  extraordinary 
somewhere,  sometime,  and  I  open  my  eyes.  I  was  often  there  before,  and  saw 
nothing  ;  but  now  there  is  a  gleam,  a  hght,  an  Epiphany.  My  very  soul  is  engaged, 
led  on,  and  on,  and  on,  until  the  end  of  it  is  God  as  man  speaking  to  me,  lifting  up 
my  life  by  the  grapphng-hooks  of  His  own  purposes,  and  using  and  glorifying  it  and 
me  for  ever  and  ever.  I  want  to  show,  for  example,  that  you  might  have  had  a  man, 
another  shei^herd,  and  that  man  might  have  been  going  on  for  seventy  or  eighty 
years  of  age  like  Moses,  and  he  never  would  have  seen  this  revelation.  He  would 
have  got  so  down  to  the  level  of  a  shepherd's  life  and  a  shepherd's  experience  that 
when  he  saw  the  bush  burning  he  would  have  got  some  natural  explanation  for  it, 
and  passed  on.  It  would  have  come  too  late  in  the  day  for  him  to  say,  "  That  is 
worth  looking  at.  It  is  a  little  extra  blush  on  that  bush  ;  but  it  cannot  be  a  fire,  it 
is  only  an  extra  glow  of  the  sunlight  on  the  furze.  I  do  not  think  I  ever  saw  it  just 
BO  before,  though."  Meantime  the  sheep  give  a  bleat,  and  he  turns  his  face  away, 
and  on  he  goes.  Oh,  it  is  hard  to  waken  up  some  of  us  !  We  are  so  unlike  Moses. 
No ;  old  as  he  was,  he  was  as  curious  as  a  bairn.  He  had  still  the  faculty  to  open 
his  eyes  and  see  wonderful  sights,  and  clap  his  hands,  and  wonder  what  they  were. 
May  God  take  away  the  oldness  of  some  of  us,  and  give  us  the  freshness  of  youth ! 
It  will  be  the  beginning  of  salvation.  Open  your  eyes !  The  world  is  not  done,  and 
you  are  not  done.  Your  days  are  only  in  the  beginning,  and  if  you  only  get  your 
eves  open  to  see  what  is  here,  they  will  never  close  again.  When  once  God  shows 
Himself  to  us  in  Christ,  we,  at  last,  have  our  eyes  open.  Curiosity !  a  human 
thing ;— and  God  pulled  Moses  by  that  little  thread — curiosity.  And  this  great 
chain  cable  came  after  it — faith,  clear,  strong  faith  in  a  personal  God,  sj^eaking  to 
him,  and  giving  him  a  personal  message  and  mission.  "  And  Moses  said,  I  will  now 
turn  aside,  and  see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bush  is  not  burnt."  Now,  turn  aside  ; 
get  off  the  track,  oh  man  ;  step  out  of  your  way  ;  turn  aside.  Go,  go,  go  along  this  ' 
new  course ;  it  is  not  far  to  go.  Do  not  sit  still  and  let  .things  go  past.  It  is  a 
wonderful  world  ;  it  is  a  wonderful  church ;  all  life  is  just  bursting  with  wonder,  if 
you  will  only  turn  aside.  But  not  everybody  sees  the  burning.  Everybody  sees  the 
bush.  It  is  only  Moses  that  becomes  aware  of  the  "glory  on  the  grass";  "the 
silence  that  is  in  the  starry  sky  "  ;  "  the  sleep  that  is  among  the  lonely  hills."  The 
world  is  more  than  mud  or  atoms  brought  together  fortuitously,  or  in  any  other  way. 
The  world  is  a  burning  bush.  It  is  so  far  earth — solid,  material.  I  can  handle  it, 
and  become  a  man  of  science,  and  say, "  \Vhat  is  in  it  ?  "  And,  God  help  me,  I  can 
become  so  much  a  mere  scientist  as  only  to  see  the  bush  and  leaves  and  berries,  and 
the  shape  of  the  leaves  and  the  shape  of  the  stem,  and  tell  you  how  it  prrew,  and 
then  say,  "  There  is  no  flame."  .lust  so  ;  there  is  a  way  of  looking  at  that  bush, 
man — a  way  of  looking  at  the  bush  that  puts  out  its  light,  or  your  light,  which  is  the 
same  thing.  There  could  have  been  a  kind  of  man  come  tramping  along  here  with 
the  sheep,  and  with  one  single  look  he  would  have  quenched  that  flame  ;  and  the 
same  damnable  thing  may  be  in  you  and  me.  We  may  look  at  nature,  and  look  at 
our  own  bodies,  and  look  at  Christ  in  the  Bible ;  and  look  at  the  Bible  itself,  with 
such  a  blauk  look  and  stare  of  unbelief  that  God  withdraws  Himself,  and  never 
comes  back.  Never !  There  is  a  way  of  looking,  a  trick  in  the  eye,  that  is  an 
abomination  to  God,  and  He  simply  withdraws.  Everything  is  a  burning  bush. 
Nature  is  such  a  burning  bush.  Nature  is  full  of  the  supernatural,  everywhere 
ready  to  burst  forth,  but  you  must  not  push  forward,  but  stund  back  if  you  wish  to 
see  it.  The  more  we  push  in  irreverently,  the  more  it  flies  from  us.  Our  own 
bodies — a  burning  bush  !  Have  you  ever  thought  of  that  ?  Here  is  the  physical, 
the  material,  the  natural,  but  in  it  and  on  it  the  immaterial,  the  spiritual,  in  a  true 
sense,  the  metaphysical.  Streaming  out  of  it,  and  above  it,  and  beyond  it,  is  that 
which  lifts  itself  up  from  the  mass  of  blood  and  brain  and  bone,  and  says,  "  I,  I 
am."  Then,  again,  here  is  a  burning  bush  for  you — the  Bible.  So  much  of  it 
natural :  the  boards,  and  that  means  the  binder ;  the  print,  and  that  means  the 
printer ;  the  thoughts,  and  that  means  the  thinker — like  any  other  book.  Like  any 
other  book,  but,  God  be  praised,  more  than  any  other  book.  For  the  glory,  the 
voice,  the  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  comes  out  from  this,  that  comes  from  no  other 
book.    Such  a  burning  bush  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  I  speak  not  now  of  her 


V 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in 

survival  of  fiery  trials.  Now,  a  congregation,  a  Church,  either  in  the  large  sense  or 
the  sectional  sense  of  the  word,  is  just  like  any  other  corporation  or  society.  It  has 
its  laws  and  purposes,  and  there  is  so  much  in  it  of  man's  planning  and  guiding  and 
ordering.  Yet  a  Church  is  not  a  mere  guild  like  any  other ;  a  corporation  of  people 
like  any  other  gathering.  No,  no,  no!  It  is  like  them  as  that  bush  is  like  any 
other  bush  ;  but,  man,  there  is  a  glory  in  it,  there  is  a  wonder  in  it !  The  Lord  is  in 
this  place.  "  In  all  places — all  places — where  I  record  My  name,  there  will  I  come, 
and  I  will  bless  them."  "Oh,  Thou  that  dwellest  in  Thy  Church,  shine  forth."  For 
some  of  us  it  is  becoming  only  a  bush,  an  institution  hke  any  other.  And  I  see 
coming  to  us  Christ  Himself  as  a  burning  bush.  There  He  lies,  a  baby,  like  your 
own,  my  good  woman ;  but,  unUke  your  own,  there  is  a  glory,  there  is  a  flame. 
Wherever  you  come  across  Him,  as  babe,  or  as  boy,  or  as  man,  or  as  crucified,  there 
is  the  flame,  there  is  the  extra  superadded  something,  and  that  something  is  the 
eternal  and  uncreated  Godhead.  Worship  Him,  wherever  you  meet  Him,  from 
Bethlehem  right  on  to  the  cross,  on  to  the  glory.  Worship  Him — God  in  human 
flesh.  Turn  aside  and  see  this  great  sight :  why  human  nature  can  exhibit  this 
mystery — whj-the  bush  is  not  burnt.  But  further,  all  this  came  to  Moses,  humanly 
speaking,  this  wonderful  revelation,  because  of  reverence.  "  Draw  not  nigh  hither : 
put  oli  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standcst  is  holy 
ground."  He  was  near  enough.  I  can  quite  well  understand  that  very  likely  no 
man  more  than  Moses  would  feel,  "  Oh,  I  would  like  to  see  tliis  great  sight,  and  get 
to  the  bottom  of  it."  But  he  could  not,  and  we  should  not.  God  has  set  bounds  to 
the  inquiries  of  the  human  spirit,  not  cramping  bounds,  but  wise  and  safe  ones. 
So  with  many  other  difficulties.  How  am  I  at  once  body  and  spirit?  But  I  am 
warned  by  this,  that  many  men  who  have  gone  into  that  question  in  order  to  find 
out  about  it  have  put  out  their  eyes.  They  come  back  from  the  examination  of  the 
human  frame,  from  wonder  upon  wonder,  they  come  back  and  say,  "  We  have  found 
no  spirit,  no  breath  of  God ;  all  that  has  no  warrant  from  our  researches."  Out 
you  go  with  your  researches  !  And  they  go  to  this  Bible  and  say,  "  It  is  a  very 
wonderful  Book,  and  we  have  examined  it  in  the  spirit  of  frank,  candid,  and  fearless 
inquiry.  We  have  not  scoffed  at  the  Book,  nor  scorned  it ;  we  have  examined  it  in 
the  spirit  of  frank  and  fearless  inquiry,  and  we  find  the  gloi-y  is  gone."  It  is  just 
so.  There  is  only  one  method — the  reverent ;  and  one  result — and  that  is  to  know 
God  better  and  bow  down  flatter  before  Him.  You  cannot  take  away  the  hyphen 
that  holds  the  "  burning  "  and  the  "  bush  "  together.  When  even  Moses  would 
have  gone  forward  to  see  why,  he  was  kept  back,  and  his  thoughts  turned  in 
more  profitable  directions.  So  you  are  forbidden  to  go  nearer;  you  are  near 
enough  to  see  and  to  know  and  to  bow  down  and  to  give  an  intelligent,  whole- 
hearted adoration  and  worship  of  obedience.  And  any  spirit  that  enters  into 
you  and  me,  and  makes  me  go  beyond  the  point  where  Moses  had  to  pull 
up,  is  a  dangerous  spirit,  alike  in  method  and  result.  (J.  2IcNein.)  The 
call  of  Moses : — I.  The  occasion  of  the  call.  1.  Solitude.  2.  God  is  watching 
a  man.  3.  God  doesn't  call  until  the  man  turns  aside  to  see.  II.  The  sockce  of 
THE  CALL.  A  bramble  that  does  not  burn  away.  III.  Eesults  of  the  c.u.l,  1. 
Beverent  self-surrender.  2.  Transformation  of  life.  {E.  Judsoii.)  The  manifes- 
tation of  God : — I.  Thb  slujifestation  of  God  in  the  pueity  of  its  natcbe.  1. 
Purity  is  essential  to  the  being  of  God.  2.  Purity  is  essential  to  the  government  of 
God.  3.  Purity  is  essential  to  the  worship  of  God.  H.  The  manifestation  of  God 
IN  THE  SEVERITY  OF  ITS  OPERATION — "the  bush  was  bumcd  with  fire."  Every 
impurity  must  be  consumed,  and  every  obstacle  to  the  kingdom  of  God  must  be 
destroyed.  This  severity  is  evident — 1.  In  the  chastisements  of  th'?  godly,  and — 2. 
In  the  utter  destruction  of  the  impenitent.  III.  The  manifestation  of  God  in  its 
GRACIOUS  intention — "  and  the  bush  was  not  consumed."  1.  God  in  Chi'ist  is  a 
Saviour.  2.  The  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  purify  the  soul,  but  do  not  destroy 
the  man.  {British  Weekly.)  The  burning  bush  : — I.  The  circumstances  in  which 
Moses  was,  when  the  Lord  appeared  to  him.  In  desert.  Keeping  sheep.  What  a 
contrast  to  his  employments  in  youth  1  Yet  probably  this  was  the  happiest  part  of 
his  hfe.  Time  for  reflection  and  for  poetical  musings.  II.  The  nature  of  the 
appearance.  1.  The  emblem  in  which  the  Church  was  held  forth — "Bush."  If 
numbers  and  splendour  are  the  mark  of  a  true  Church  as  its  properties,  where  should 
we  find  for  many  ages  the  Church  of  God  ?  Seldom  in  the  Old  Testament,  never  in 
the  New.  The  Church  of  God  was  once  enclosed  in  the  ark ;  at  this  time  it  consisted 
of  a  number  of  slaves  and  brickmakers.  2.  The  condition  in  which  it  was  found. 
"  Burning  with  fire. "     Grievously  oppressed  and  persecuted.    3.  Its  preservation. 


CHAP.  III.]  EXODUS.  59 

"  Not  consumed."  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  has  ever  been  the  seed  of  the  Church. 
4.  The  cause  of  this  security.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  was  in  the  midst  of  it.  III. 
The  aitemtion  it  aw.vkened.  Let  us,  like  Moses,  turn  aside,  and  contemplate  His 
revelations.  IV.  God's  prohibition,  ok  rather,  regulation.  A  check  on  curiosity. 
Be  satisfied  with  the  facts  of  Christianity,  without  the  philosophy  of  them.  Be 
content  with  the  use  of  things,  rather  than  attempt  to  dive  into  their  nature  and 
their  qualities.  Take  the  rehgious  controversies,  which  have  occupied  so  much 
time,  and  which  have  injured  so  many  fine  tempers ;  and  what  have  they  com- 
monly turned  to,  but  things  too  deep  for  human  reasoning  to  fathom,  too  lofty 
to  be  soared  to  without  presumption,  or  too  insignificant  to  merit  regard  ?  V. 
God's  address.  All  along,  from  the  beginning,  God  has  shown  favour  to  some 
for  the  sake  of  others.  Under  the  law  He  was  called — "  The  God  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  "  :  because  the  covenant  made  with  them  was  for  Israel :  in  him 
they  were  blessed,  and  for  his  sake  they  received  all  things.  But  now  the  covenant 
made  for  the  spiritual  Israel,  was  made  with  a  far  more  glorious  character ;  it 
was  set  up  from  everlasting — from  the  beginning,  ere  the  earth  was.  His  name 
is  Jesus :  it  is  in  Him  that  we  are  accepted ;  it  is  in  Him  that  we  are 
blessed  with  aU  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  ;  it  is  for  His  sake  that  we 
receive  all  things.  And  therefore,  while  of  old  His  style  was,  "  The  God  of  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,"  it  is  now,  under  the  gospel,  '•  The  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  There  are  two  things  derivable  from  this  address  of  God,  when 
He  says,  "I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  The  first  is,  that  un- 
questionably, therefore,  Moses  had  some  knowledge  of  a  future  state.  He  does  not 
say,  He  was  "  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  " ;  but,  "  I  am  the  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  "  ;  their  spirits  are  with  Me  now;  their  renewed  bodies 
shall  be,  by  and  by,  as  certainly  as  they  are  now  in  the  dust.  You  obsei-ve,  also, 
that  God  sustains  His  relationship  to  those  of  your  connections,  who  are  gone  before. 
VI.  Let  us  observe  the  impression  made  upon  Moses.  "And  Moses  hid  his  face; 
for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God."  1.  Here  you  see,  first,  that  Divine  manifesta- 
tion always  produces  self-difiidence  and  abasement.  2.  You  see,  also,  how  little  we 
can  physically  bear.  "  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  "  ;  the 
splendour  would  be  too  much  for  the  eye,  the  sounds  too  much  for  the  ear  ;  the  poor 
frame  would  break  down  under  that  "  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory."  (IF.  Jay.)  God's  Bible  not  consumed  : — This  book,  do  you  see  it  ?  Not 
a  leaf,  not  a  word,  not  a  letter  of  it,  but  has  been  burned  ten  thousand  times — on 
parchment,  papyrus,  and  paper  ;  in  many  a  language  and  many  a  land  it  has  fed 
the  furnace  and  lit  the  fire.  It  has  been  piled  by  thousands  and  thousands  at  a  time 
in  huge  bonfires,  and  offered  amid  the  yells  of  triumphant  crowds,  a  holocaust  to 
gods  of  wood  and  to  the  triple-crowned  idol  of  the  papal  throne!  "  The  bush  has 
burned  with  fire."  "  But  the  bush  was  not  consumed."  This  Book  is  ubiquitous ; 
never  a  land  under  heaven  that  has  it  not,  never  a  language  among  men  that  does 
not  contain  it.  Paganism,  I  tell  you,  has  had  it  trampled  into  dirt  by  beasts ; 
popery  has  burnt  it  at  the  hands  of  the  common  hangman ;  sceptical  science  has 
branded  and  seared  it  as  with  hot  iron ;  infidelity  has  torn  it  into  shreds ;  and 
atheism,  of  the  modern  type,  has  besmeared  its  pages  with  mud  and  filth  whose 
fumes  are  insupportable — but  the  bush  is  not  consumed  !  Lo  !  the  bush  burned 
with  fire.  But  the  blessed  Saviour  declares  that  "the  servant  shall  be  as  his  Lord." 
What  has  been  done  to  Him  in  the  world.  He  says,  shall  be  done  to  you  also.  Chris- 
tian believer.  Then  the  burning  bush  is  a  lively  image  of  the  Christian  too.  Now 
I  desire  to  leave  one  final  thought  with  you.  Why  did  not  the  fire  burn  the  bnsh  ? 
Because  the  Lord  was  in  it.  He  had  made  it  His  temporary  dwelling-place.  Why 
did  not  the  fire  burn  the  Christ  ?  Through  wrath  and  rage  of  man  and  devil, 
through  cross,  and  death,  and  hell.  He  passed  unscathed.  Why?  Because  of  the 
Divine  in  Him.  Because  the  bush  of  that  clay  temple  of  humanity  was  the  taber- 
nacle in  which  dwelt  the  Deity.  Why  has  not  the  fierce,  horrible,  and  perpetual 
fires  of  persecution  and  testing  succeeded  in  destroying  the  Christian  Church  ? 
Because  God  is  in  it.  In  it  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men.  Christ  walks  amid 
the  golden  candlesticks  ;  the  Father  dwells  where  His  name  is  recorded,  and  the 
very  life-breath  of  the  Church  is  the  living  Spirit  of  God.  (J.  J.  Wratj.)  The 
burning  bush : — I.  An  emblem.  1.  This  bush  had  God  in  the  midst  of  it  (ver.  4), 
and  the  Church  has  God  in  the  midst  of  her  (Psa.  xlvi.  5).  2.  This  bush,  burning 
in  the  night,  gave  a  great  light  in  the  wilderness  ;  and  the  Church  of  God  gives  a 
great  light  in  this  dark  world.  3.  The  bush  burns,  but  is  unburnt.  The  Church 
suffers,  but  still  survives.    II.  A  miracle.    The  first  miracle  we  read  of  was  wrought 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

upon  fire.  Fire  had  been  more  worshipped  than  any  of  the  elements  of  nature : 
from  the  Moloch  of  the  Ammonites  to  the  Juggernaut  of  the  Hindoos,  no  idol  has 
had  such  crowded  temples  or  costly  offerings.  God  struck  His  first  blow  at  the 
favourite  idol.  "  He  will  not  give  His  honour  to  another,  nor  His  glory  to  graven 
images."  "  He  will  not  have  a  rival — He  cannot  have  an  equal."  All  the  miracles 
of  Egypt  were  wrought  against  idolatry.  Each  was  a  blow  struck  at  some  favourite 
idol.  In  Babylon  another  blow  was  struck  at  fire,  in  the  case  of  the  three  Hebrew 
youths.  HI.  A  magnet.  "  I  wiU  draw  near  and  see,"  A'c.  Since  the  fall,  man  has 
ever  been  more  alive  to  the  gratification  of  his  curiosity  than  the  welfare  of  his  soul. 
Plain  truths,  though  big  with  importance  to  him,  he  neglects ;  but  mysteries  in 
nature,  providence,  and  revelation,  he  industriously  pries  into.  IV.  A  monitor.  It 
is  true,  that  now  we  are  not  ordered  to  keep  at  a  distance,  but  draw  near  ;  instead 
of  timidity,  there  is  to  be  boldness ;  instead  of  a  burning  bush  a  throne  of  grace  ; 
and  instead  of  a  God  upon  whose  face  we  cannot  look,  there  is  an  incarnate  God 
upon  whose  face  we  can  look.  Yet  this  monitor  teaches  us  this  most  unportant 
truth — that  we  can  come  to  God  acceptably,  only  when  we  come  in  His  own  way  ; 
and  God's  way  is  through  Christ,  "  with  reverence  and  godly  fear."  (T.  Macconnell.) 
The  burniriii  bush : — I.  The  learned  shepuerd.  1.  Humility.  From  a  palace  he 
stoops  to  this  lowly  life.  2.  Patience.  For  forty  years  he  thus  laboured.  3. 
Fidelity,  Led  his  father-in-law's  flock.  Involved  seeking  out  the  best  pasturage  : 
folding,  and  guarding,  &c.  A  good  servant  in  his  own  house,  before  God  made  him 
a  master  in  Israel.  "Faithful  in  little,"  &c.  II.  The  great  sight.  1.  Where  it 
appeared.  In  the  wilderness.  God  there  also.  2.  When  it  appeared.  In  the 
time  of  Israel's  sorrow,  and  Moses'  toil.  3.  Wherefore  it  appeared.  (1)  Because 
the  day  of  deliverance  was  near.  (2)  To  instruct  the  mind  of  Moses,  and  excite  his 
curiosity.  (3)  To  represent  the  state  of  the  Israelites.  A  Church  in  the  furnace  of 
affliction.  The  bush  not  consumed,  though  the  fire  was  hot.  Israel  flourishing  in 
trial.  It  was  not  only  a  "  wonder,"  but  a  "  sign."  A  great  sight,  but  not  merely  a 
something  to  look  at  and  investigate  ;  but  also  to  learn  from.  III.  The  present 
God.  He  dwelt  in  the  bush  (Mark  xii.  26  ;  Luke  xx.  37  ',  Acts  vii.  35 ;  Deut.  xxxiii. 
16).  God  in  the  bush  showed  His  relation  to  His  people.  1.  With  them  in  trouble. 
2.  Sustains  them  in  trouble.  3.  With  them  a  source  of  instruction.  Learn — 1.  To 
cultivate  high  qualities  in  lowly  callings.  2.  Seek  our  comfort  in  aflliction  from  an 
ever-present  God.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  The  burning  bush : — 1.  As  an  emblem  it 
instructs.  2.  As  a  miracle  it  astonishes.  3.  As  a  magnet  it  attracts.  4.  As  a 
monitor  it  warns.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  A  great  sight : — 1.  Occasioned  by  a  Divine 
agency.  2.  Illumined  by  a  Divine  presence.  3.  Given  for  a  Divine  purpose.  (Ibid.) 
Great  sights: — 1.  Desired  by  the  world.  2.  Sought  by  the  pleasure-seeker.  3. 
Found  only  by  the  Christian.  4.  The  inspiration  of  a  good  hfe.  (Ibid.)  The 
moral  preparation  and  condition  necessary  for  the  beholding  of  heavenly  visions: — 1. 
We  must  turn  aside  from  the  gaiety  of  the  world.  2.  From  the  futility  of  merely 
human  reasonings.  3.  From  the  commission  of  moral  evil  in  daily  life.  4.  From 
following  the  instruction  of  incompetent  teachers.  5.  They  are  largely  dependent 
upon  our  personal  wilhngness  of  soul — God  speaks  to  all  men  who  reverently  turn 
aside  to  hear  Him.     (76/(7.)  God  calls   truth-sechers  by   name: — "Moses," — 

Nathaniel.  1.  To  indicate  His  delight  in  them.  2.  His  favour  toward  them.  3. 
His  hope  of  them.  4.  To  prepare  them  for  further  revelations.  (Ibid.)  The  name 
of  a  good  man  vocal  on  the  lips  of  God  : — 1.  An  honour.  2.  A  destiny.  3.  A  pro- 
phecy. 4.  A  vocation.  (Ibid.)  The  truth-seeker's  response  : — 1.  His  personaUty. 
2,  His  place.  3.  His  wilhngness.  We  should  always  respond  to  the  calls  of  heaven. 
(Ibid.)  The  souVs  turning  aside  to  see  often  leads  to  visio7is  of  God: — 1.  In  His 
Book.  2.  In  His  works.  3.  In  His  providences.  4.  In  His  Church  and  sanctuary. 
(Ibid.)  Soul  visions: — 1.  Obtained  by  prayer.  2.  Refreshing  to  the  soul.  3. 
Strengthening  to  manhood.  4.  Related  to  human  suffering.  (Ibid.)  The  neigh- 
bourhood of  Horeb . — The  southern  end  of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  to  which  the 
sacred  narrative  now  takes  us,  consists  of  a  confused  mass  of  peaks  (the  highest 
above  9,000  feet),  some  of  dark  green  porphyry,  but  mostly  red  granite  of  different 
hues,  which  is  broken  by  strips  of  sand  or  gravel,  intersected  by  wadies  or  glens, 
which  are  the  beds  of  winter  torrents,  and  dotted  here  and  there  with  green  spots, 
chiefly  due  to  perennial  fountains.  The  great  central  group  among  these  mountains 
is  that  of  Horeb,  and  one  special  height  in  it  Sinai,  the  "  mount  of  God."  Strangely 
enough,  it  is  just  here  amidst  this  awful  desolateness  that  the  most  fertile  places  in 
"  the  wilderness  "  are  also  found.  Even  in  our  days  part  of  this  plateau  is  quite 
green.    Hither  the  Bedouin  drive  their  flocks  when  summer  has  parched  all  the 


CHAP,  ni.]  EXODUS.  Gl 

lower  districts.  Fruit-trees  grow  in  rich  luxuriance  in  its  valleys,  and  "  the  neigh- 
bourhood is  the  best  watered  in  the  whole  peninsula,  running  streams  being  found 
in  no  less  than  four  of  the  adjacent  valleys."  It  was  thither  that  Mose'!,  probably 
in  the  early  summer,  drove  Eeuel's  flock  for  pasturage  and  water.  Behind  him,  to 
the  east,  lay  the  desert ;  before  him  rose  in  awful  gi-andeur  the  mountain  of  God, 
The  stillness  of  this  place  is  unbroken ;  its  desolateness  only  reUeved  by  the  variety 
of  colouring  in  the  dark  green  or  the  red  mountain  peaks,  some  of  which  "  shine  in 
the  sunlight  like  l)urnished  copper."  The  atmosphere  is  such  that  the  most  distant 
outlines  stand  out  clearly  defined,  and  the  faintest  sound  falls  distinctly  on  the  ear. 
All  at  once  truly  a  "  strange  sight  "  presented  itself.  On  a  solitary  crag,  or  in  some 
sequestered  valley,  one  of  those  spiked,  gnarled,  thorny  acacia  trees,  which  form  so 
conspicuous  a  feature  in  the  wddies  of  "  the  desert,"  of  which  indeed  they  are  "  the 
only  timber  tree  of  any  size,"  stood  enwrapped  in  fire,  and  yet  "  the  bush  was  not 
consumed."  {A.  Edersheim,  D.D.)  The  hush  and  the  fire  : — In  the  brier  we  have 
a  symbol  of  the  people  of  Israel.  From  this  time  till  the  cursing  of  the  fig-tree, 
which  had  no  fruit  on  it  but  only  leaves,  the  chosen  people  of  God  are  frequently 
and  variously  refen-ed  to  under  the  figure  of  a  bush  or  tree.  Here  they  are  repre- 
sented as  a  low,  contemptible  brier,  in  contradistinction  to  the  tall  majestic  trees, 
which  proudly  rear  their  heads  to  the  clouds,  and  are  gazed  at  and  admired  by  the 
world.  Hence  the  brier  was  symbolical  of  Israel,  as  a  people  despised  by  the  world. 
The  fire  is  always  used  in  the  Scriptures  as  a  symbol  of  Divine  holiness.  And  this 
is  the  case  here  ;  for  the  record  expressly  says  that  the  presence  of  God  was  made 
known  in  the  fire.  The  burning  brier,  therefore,  was  a  svmbol  of  the  community  of 
God,  in  which  the  holiness  of  God  had  its  abode.  The  brier  was  burning  in  the  tire, 
but  it  v:as  not  consumed,  although  from  its  nature  it  deserved  to  be  consumed,  and 
could  easily  be  so.  It  was  a  miracle  that  it  was  not  consumed.  And  thus  was  it 
also  a  miracle  of  mercy,  that  the  holiness  of  God  could  dwell  in  a  sinful  community 
without  consuming  it.  But  in  the  midst  of  the  thorns  of  the  natural  life  of  the 
community  there  was  hidden  a  noble,  imperishable  germ,  namely,  the  seed  of  the 
promise,  which  Jehovah  Himself  had  prepared.  It  could  not,  indeed,  be  set  free 
without  the  pain  of  burning,  but  by  that  burning  it  was  made  holy  and  pure.  There 
was  also  another  fact  of  great  importance  represented  by  this  symbol,  viz.,  that  the 
fire  of  Divine  holiness,  which  burned  in  Israel,  ^vithout  consuming  it,  served  also  as 
an  outward  defence.  Hitherto,  every  one  who  passed  by  might  ridicule,  injure  or 
trample  on  the  insignificant  bush,  but  henceforth  whoever  touched  it  would  burn 
bis  own  fingers.  (-7.  H.  Kurtz,  D.D.)  A  beautiful  conjunction  of  the  natural  ami 
supernatural: — A  bush  burned  into  a  sanctuary !  Though  the  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain the  Great  One,  yet  He  hides  Himself  under  every  flower,  and  makes  the  broken 
heart  of  man  His  chosen  dwelling-place.  So  great,  yet  so  condescending ;  infinite 
in  glory,  yet  infinite  in  gentleness.  Wherever  we  are,  there  are  gates  through 
nature  into  the  Divine.  Every  bush  will  teach  the  reverent  student  something  of 
God.  The  lilies  are  teachers,  so  are  the  stars,  so  are  all  things  great  and  small  in 
this  wondrous  museum,  the  universe  !  In  this  case  it  was  not  the  whole  mountain 
that  burned  with  fire ;  such  a  spectacle  we  should  have  considered  worthy  of  the 
majesty  of  God ;  it  was  only  the  bush  that  burned  :  so  condescendingly  does  God 
accommodate  Himself  to  the  weakness  of  man.  The  whole  mountain  burning 
would  have  dismayed  the  lonely  shepherd  ;  he  who  might  have  been  overwhelmed 
by  a  blazing  mountain  was  attracted  by  a  burning  bush.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Honest  vocations  : — Forty  years  was  Moses  a  courtier,  and  forty  years  after  that  a 
shepherd.  That  great  men  may  not  be  ashamed  of  honest  vocations,  the  greatest 
that  ever  were  have  been  content  to'  take  up  with  mean  trades.  The  contempt  of 
honest  calling  in  those  which  are  well  born  argues  pride  without  wit.  There  can  be 
no  fitter  disposition  for  a  leader  of  God's  people  than  constancy  in  his  undertakings, 
without  either  weariness  or  change.  He  that  hath  true  worth  in  himself  and  fami- 
liarity with  God  finds  more  pleasure  in  the  deserts  of  Midian  than  others  can  do  in 
the  palace  of  kings.  While  he  is  tending  his  sheep  God  appears  unto  him.  God 
never  graces  the  idle  with  his  visions.  {Bishop  Hall.)  Solitude  a  preparation  for 
service : — Writing  of  his  father,  Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  Julian  Hawthorne'  says  : 
"The  knights-errant  of  old  watched  their  armour  previous  to  embarking' on  their 
enterprise  ;  the  young  Indian  chiefs  were  made  to  undergo  a  period  of  solitude  and 
fasting  before  being  admitted  to  full  standing.  Bunyan  wrote  his  book  in  Bedford 
jail ;  and  Hawthorne,  in  Salem,  withdrew  himself  from  the  face  of  man,  and  medi- 
tated for  twelve  lonely  years  upon  humanity.  He  came  forth  a  great  original  writer. 
He  was  destined  to  do  a  great  work,  and  to  that  end  were  needed,  not  only  his  native 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

abilities,  but  an  exceptional  initiation,  or  forty  days  in  the  wilderness."  {H.  0. 
Mackeij.)  Usefully  employed  : — Satan  loves  to  meet  men  idle.  God  delights  to 
honour  diligence  and  fidelity.  (William  Jay.)  Exile  profiting  s  : — James  Douglas, 
son  of  the  baui.-hed  Earl  of  Angus,  afterwards  well  known  by  the  title  of  Earl  of 
Morton,  lurked  during  the  exile  of  his  family  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  under  the 
assumed  name  of  James  Innes,  otherwise  James  the  Grieve  (i.e.,  Eeve  or  Bailiff). 
"  And  as  he  bore  the  name,"  says  Godscroft,  "  so  did  he  also  execute  the  office  of  a 
grieve  or  overseer  of  the  lands  and  rents,  the  corn  and  cattle,  of  him  with  whom  he 
lived."  From  the  habits  of  frugality  and  observation  which  he  acquired  in  his  humble 
situation ,  the  historian  traces  that  intimate  acquaintance  with  popular  character  which 
enabled  him  to  rise  so  high  in  the  State,  and  that  honourable  economy  by  which  he  re- 
paired and  established  the  shattered  estates  of  Angus  and  Morton.  (Sir  Walter  Scott.) 
Put  oflf  thy  shoes. — Reverence  : — I.  The  essence  of  keverence  lies  in  our  forming 
A  true  estimate  of  oub  place  among  the  powers  arocnd  rs,  AND  so  understanding 

ARIGHT   AND  HAMTUALLT  FEELING  WHAT  IS    OUR   RELATION   TO  THEM.       NoW,    tO    do    this 

— 1.  We  must  apprehend  something  of  the  mystery  of  life  in  ourselves  and  in  others. 
2.  We  must  recognize  the  distinction  of  the  different  grades  of  being  in  those  in 
whom  life  is,  and  seek  to  find  and  to  keep  our  own  due  place  in  that  mighty  and 
marvellous  scale  of  existences.  II.  We  must  bow  down  before  Him  who  is  the 
FOUNTAIN  OF  ALL  LIFE,  THE  LIFE  OF  ALL  WHO  LIVE.  This  adoratiou  of  the  soul  before 
Him  is  the  central  point  of  the  grace  of  reverence,  and  its  influence  pervades  and 
adjusts  all  our  other  relations,  both  towards  Himself  and  towards  the  other  creatures 
of  His  hand.     III.  It  is  a  question  of  the  deepest  moment  to  us  all  how,  in  an  age 

ONE  SPECL\L  TEMPTATION  OF  WHICH  IS  CLEARLY  TO  LOSE  ITS  REVERENCE,  THE  GIFT  CAN  BE 

KEPT  QUICK  AND  LIVING  IN  OURSELVES.  1.  The  fiist  Step  must  be  the  keeping  guard 
against  whatever  tends  to  irreverence.  All  that  professedly  robs  hfe  of  its  mystery 
does  this.  So,  even  more  directly,  does  all  that  robs  revelation  of  its  awfulness. 
Eeceiving  God's  Word  as  God's  Word,  striving  to  do  it,  striving  to  overcome  temp- 
tations to  doubt,  not  by  crushing  them  out,  but  by  turning  them  into  occasions  of 
prayer  and  of  adoration,  these  efforts,  and  such  as  these,  will  keep  us  in  an  irre- 
verent age  from  the  great  loss  of  irreverence.  2.  Above  all,  we  must  pray  for 
reverence  as  the  gift  of  God  ;  for  such  prayer  not  only  draws  down  a  certain  answer, 
but  even  by  its  own  action  tends  to  put  our  spirits  in  the  frame  of  reverence.  (Bp. 
S.  Wilbcrforce.)  Access  to  God : — 1  Accesses  by  honest  hearts  to  the  place  of  God's 
appearing  may  be  rash.  2.  Such  hasty  and  unadvised  accesses,  God  forbids  unto 
His  servants.  3.  Due  preparations  must  be  made  by  creatures  in  their  accesses  to 
God.  4.  Places  have  been  and  may  be  relatively  holy,  for  God's  appearance  in 
them.  5.  So  far  to  use  them  holily  as  in  reference  to  God's  presence  is  the  duty  of 
all  (ver.  5).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  The  reception  of  the  Christian  mysteries: — 
Here  is  an  intimation,  that  clearness  of  intellect  is  not  that  upon  which  mainly 
depends  the  right  perception  of  God's  revelation  of  Himself.  Moral  fitness,  rather 
than  subtilty  of  intellect,  is  needed  for  receiving  rightly  this  revelation  of  Himself. 
This,  indeed,  is  but  what  we  might  reasonably  expect ;  for  as  the  Christian  revela- 
tion, by  its  own  profession,  is  not  a  mere  intellectual  abstraction,  but  in  its  nature 
and  foundations  is  essentially  moral,  the  evidence  on  which  it  rests  cannot,  as  in 
abstract  science,  be  addressed  purely  to  the  intellect.  To  receive  it  rightly,  the  will 
must  assent  to  it  no  less  than  the  understanding ;  a  pure  and  teachable  spirit  is  the 
main  distinction  of  that  temper  in  which  we  should  approach  the  mysteries  of  the 
Christian  revelation.  I.  From  this,  then,  it  follows,  first,  that  man  is  responsible 
FOR  HIS  BELIEF ; — responsible,  that  is,  just  as  he  is  for  any  other  branch  of  moral 
conduct :  that  it  is,  indeed,  a  part  of  his  trial,  and  a  great  one,  whether  he  will 
believe :  that,  as  a  right  belief  is  the  only  source  of  moral  purity,  so  a  wrong  belief, 
where  a  true  revelation  is  offered  to  us,  is  the  undoubted  fruit  of  moral  evil :  and 
hence,  that  as  in  all  other  parts  of  his  probation,  it  is  out  of  the  power  of  fallen  man 
by  his  own  might  and  strength  to  do  that  which  is  right,  so  especially  is  it  out  of 
his  power  to  believe  ;  but  that,  as  in  all  other  parts  of  his  probation,  so  too  in  this, 
obedience  is  within  the  power  of  redeemed  man,  through  that  blessed  help  of  God's 
most  Holy  Spirit  which  will  not  be  withheld  from  those  who  seek  for  it.  II.  And  this 
leads  us  on  to  the  second  part  of  our  inquiry ;  for  to  be  thoroughly  convinced  of  the 
certainty  of  this  connection,  is  one  of  the  first  means  of  maintaining  a  fit  temper  for 
receiving  these  great  mysteries.  So  long  as  we  in  any  degree  deem  of  them  as  of 
subjects  into  which  we  are  to  obtain  a  pecuHar  insight  by  our  own  reasonings,  wb 

SHALL  FIND  IT  IMPOSSIBLE  TO  REPRESS  THAT  PRIDE  OF  INTELLECT,  WHICH,  WHILST  IT 
FLATTERS  US  WITH  APPARENT   DISCOVEEIES,  DOES,  IN  FACT,  MOST   EFFECTUALLY  SHUT  OUT 


CHAP.  III.]  EXODUS.  63 

THE  LIGHT  OF  TEUTH.  We  must  be  content  to  be  learners,  not  discoverers,  in  the 
school  of  faith  ;  receiving  a  revelation,  not  reasoning  out  conclusions  :  and  this 
temper  we  cannot  maintain,  unless  we  come  into  God's  presence  remembering  that, 
so  tar  only  as  He  gives  us  to  know  Him  can  we  know  aright  ;  for  that  we  need  per- 
fect purity  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  and  that  we  are  compassed  about  with  infirmity. 
Then  only  when  the  thought  of  His  holiness  and  of  our  corruption  bows  us  to  the 
earth,  shall  we  receive  His  teaching  with  the  simplicity  of  children ;  fixing  on  the 
ground  those  eyes  which  were  ready  to  gaze  too  rashly  at  the  wonders  of  His  presence, 
and  be  ready,  indeed,  to  "  put  off  our  shoes  from  our  feet,"  feeling  that  "  the  place 
whereon  we  stand  is  holy  ground."  To  this  conviction,  moreover,  we  should  join  a 
constant  watchfulness,  lest  allowed  sin  in  any  form,  lest  boldness  of  spirit,  or  sloth- 
fulness  m  our  use  of  holy  things,  impair  the  reverence  of  our  souls.  To  these  means 
must  be  added  further  as  perhaps  the  greatest  instrument  of  all  for  preserving  the 
unsullied  clearness  of  a  reverend  faith,  that  we  be  deep  and  constant  'students  of 
God's  holy  Word.  We  need  not  fear,  with  Bishop  Andrewes,  to  speak  of  "  the  Word 
as  one  of  those  arteries  which  convey  the  Spirit  to  us."  In  a  two-fold  way  does  the 
faithful  study  of  the  Scripture,  by  increasing  in  us  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  secure 
our  receiving  rightly  the  mysteries  of  God :  first,  since  it  is  the  especial  province  of 
the  Spirit  to  reveal  these  mysteries,  those  will  the  most  surely  grow  in  hght 
who  grow  in  grace  ;  they  who  the  most  humbly  seek  His  teaching  will  be 
the  most  surely  led  on  into  all  truth.  There  is  a  "  teaching  of  the  Spirit  "  ; 
we  may,  cs  children,  give  up  ourselves  to  Him,  and  humbly  trust  He  will  enlighten 
us.  And  then,  secondly,  besides  the  increase  of  this  direct  teaching, 
we  are  thus  made  the  fitter  recipients  of  His  instruction  ;  for  since, 
as  we  saw  before,  the  due  reception  of  these  mysteries  depends  more  on 
moral  than  on  intellectual  fitness,  they  who  by  a  growth  in  grace  are  growing  in 
holiness,  are  indeed  taking  the  surest  way  to  purge  the  eyes  of  their  understanding, 
so  that  they  may  see  mthout  speck  or  dimness  wlaat  the  Lord  has  revealed  of  Him- 
self (Psa.  cxix.  99,  100).  {Bp.  S.  Wilberforce.)  Reverence  in  God's  presence : — 
The  impression  that  God  is  here,  ought  ever  to  have  a  solemnizing  effect  upon  our 
minds,  and  repress  everything  like  carelessness,  Mstlessness,  or  levity.  Had  we  a 
proper  sense  of  the  Divine  majesty  resting  upon  our  spirits,  would  it  be  possible  that 
we  could  give  way  to  that  profane  heedlessness  of  mind  which  often  steals  over  us  ? 
Would  one  short  hour's  attendance  betray  us  into  slumber  ?  Would  a  crowd  of 
worldly  or  sensual  thoughts  intrude  into  our  minds  ?  Could  the  eye  find  leisure  to 
roam  over  the  assembly,  and  upon  the  dress  or  deportment  of  others  ?  Could  a 
scornful  or  simpering  countenance  by  significant  smiles  communicate  its  contemp- 
tuous or  frivolous  emotions  to  another?  Assuredly  not.  {G.  Bush.)  Holy  ground  : 
— This  admonition  may  be  understood  in  various  ways.  I.  As  a  check  to  vain 
CDEiosiTY.  Let  us  be  satisfied,  in  religious  matters,  with  what  the  Holy  Spirit  has 
made  plain.  H.  As  an  incentive  to  humility  in  the  presence  of  God.  We  should 
offer  outward  tokens  of  respect  and  reverence  when  we  come  to  worship  in  His  holy 
house.  III.  As  A  PROOF  of  the  sanctity  of  God's  presence.  All  places  set  apart 
for  the  worship  of  God  are  "holy  ground,"  God  will  be  sanctified  in  all  that  come 
near  Him.  (Preac)icrs  Analyst.)  Lessons  : — 1.  All  ground  is  holy  which  has 
been  consecrated  by  valour,  virtue,  piety,  or  love.  The  island  of  Erromanga,  where 
Williams  died;  the  banks  of  Avon  and  of  Doon,  where  the  tw^o  greatest  bards  of 
England  and  Scotland  were  born ;  the  patriot-fields  of  Marathon,  Morgarten,  and 
Bannockburu ;  the  moors  of  Drumclog  and  Airsmoss,  where  the  Covenanters  fought 
and  fell  ;  the  peaks  of  Lochuagar  and  Ben  Cruachan  ;  the  bald  and  sovereign  head 
of  Mont  Blanc  ;  these,  and  ten  thousand  such  spots  as  these,  are  holy  ground  ;  and 
if  men  do  not,  like  Moses  at  the  bush,  put  off  their  shoes  while  standing  there,  yet 
may  they  uuco\  er  their  heads,  and  feel  that  in  doing  reverence  to  the  great  of  old 
and  to  the  works  of  nature,  they  are  doing  homage  to  something  which  has  in  it  a 
large  portion  of  the  Divine,  which  is  Godhke,  although  not  God.  2.  Let  us,  in  a 
figm-e,  put  off  our  shoes  as  we  draw  near,  even  here,  unto  God.  Let  us  strip  our- 
selves of  the  high  buskins  of  pride,  of  the  light  sock  of  indifference  and  idle  mirth, 
of  the  luxurious  slippers  of  sensual  sin,  and  of  the  hard  shoes  of  rude  presumption  ; 
and  let  us,  with  naktd  and  trembling  feet,  and  with  covered  face,  but,  at  the  same 
time,  with  all  holy  boldness  and  filial  love,  in  the  sanctuary  and  at  the  Lord's  table, 
the  presence  of  that  God  who  is  "a  consuming  fire."  3.  What  an  overpowering 
reflection  is  that,  of  us  all  having  one  day  to  draw  in  a  very  close  degree  near  to  the 
presence  of  God.  Conceive  a  mortal,  although  winged  being,  after  long  wandering 
through  the  universe,  caught  in  a  current  too  mighty  for  his  pinions,  and  which  he 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rn 

feels  is  hurrying  him  into  the  very  heart  of  the  burning  sun !  Conceive  his  horror 
as  he  sees  the  orb  becoming  larger  and  larger, and  feels  it  becoming  hotter  and  hotter ; 
and  how  in  vain  he  struggles  to  turn  upon  his  way,  and  shun  that  ocean  of  fire  wh'cli 
is  to  consume  him.  But  on,  on,  on,  he  is  precipitated,  and  the  imagination  thrinks 
back  as  she  sees  the  contact  and  hears  the  shriek  of  the  extinguished  wretch.  Thus 
may  a  guilty  soul  after  death  feel  itself  approaching  its  Maker  ;  resisting  the  attrac- 
tion, but  resisting  in  vain,  drawn  ruthlessly  within  the  circle  of  than  eve  of  fire,  anil 
exclaiming  as  it  sinks  in  terror,  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  r.ands  of  tho 
living  God."  But  even  the  saint  shudders  sometimes  at  the  thought  of  meeting  a 
Being  so  tremendous,  and  would  on  his  death-bed  shudder  more,  did  not  at  one 
time  a  merciful  stupor  deaden  his  sensibilities,  and  were  it  not  that  at  another  the 
thought  of  God  is  swallowed  up  in  the  image  of  Christ.  (G.  GiljVlni.)  Ilohj 
ground : — All  places  are  holy,  but  some  are  especially  so : — 1.  Because  they  are 
hallowed  by  the  supreme  residence  of  God.  2.  By  happy  memories.  3.  By  holy 
friendships.  4.  By  moral  conquest.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  htuuiHty  and 
reverence  of  an  accepted  worshipper : — It  has  been  said  that  God  is  everywhere 
present,  and  therefore  should  everywhere  be  honoured  alike;  it  has  buca  said,  that 
the  mind  and  the  heart  are  everything,  and  that  the  posture  of  the  body  is  nothing. 
In  opposition  to  these  retined  speculations  of  modern  days,  it  were  sufficient  to  hoid 
up  the  authority  and  command  of  the  Word  of  God.  But  we  may  properly  remark, 
in  addition  to  this,  that  though  the  Almighty  is  everywhere  present,  He  may  bo 
present  at  some  times  and  in  some  places,  in  a  peculiar  manner.  Our  blessed  Lord 
Himself  has  declared,  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  My  name,  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  It  is  again  contended,  that  the  mind  and  tho  affections 
may  be  equally  lifted  up  to  God  in  any  posture  ;  sitting  or  lying  down,  as  well  as 
kneeling  :  and  to  a  certain  extent  this  remark  may  be  perfectly  true.  If  the  mind 
and  affections  be  equally  interested  in  the  two  cases  ;  if  the  devotion  be  equally 
pure  and  the  obedience  equally  sincere,  then  the  acceptance  of  the  service  may  be 
equal.  But  how  can  the  obedience  in  these  two  cases  be  equally  complete  and 
sincere,  when  we  know  that  God  has  enjoined,  in  His  holy  Word,  a  reverent  posture 
of  devotion — a  posture,  which  we  find  all  good  men,  in  all  ages,  scrupulously 
observing?  A  carelessness  of  posture  is  an  act  of  positive  disobedience.  Nor  is  it 
easy  to  believe,  that  the  feelings  of  devotion  are  equally  pious  and  sincere.  Does 
not  nature  herself,  when  the  soul  is  overwhelmed,  teach  us  to  humble  and  prostrate 
the  body?  There  may  be,  in  many  instances,  sufficient  reasons  for  declining  this 
bodily  service  ;  there  may  be  infirmity,  there  may  be  other  reasons  ;  but  where  there 
are  not,  such  service  would  seem  to  be  indispensable  to  the  devout  and  trccepted  wor- 
shipper. Let  me  not  appear  to  be  countenancing  the  practices  of  those,  whose 
religion  chiefly  consists  in  outward  form  :  let  it  not  be  supposed,  that  auy  corporeal 
homage  is  of  the  smallest  avail,  unless  it  proceed  from  an  earnest  and  a  pious  heart : 
so  far  otherwise,  that  to  bow  down  unmeaningly  in  the  presence  of  tho  Lord,  is  an 
act  of  insufferable  hypocrisy.  Yet  we  must  not,  from  such  abuses  as  these,  draw 
arguments  against  a  positive  duty ;  we  must  not  conclude,  as  some  are  perverse 
enough  to  do,  that  every  outward  appearance  and  form  are  hypocritical.  Such  a 
conclusion  is  not  only  weak,  but  wicked.  "  Keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest  to  the 
house  of  God  ":  be  jealous  of  thy  ways  ;  be  narrowly  attentive  to  thy  demeanour; 
be  watchful  of  the  affections  and  imaginations  of  thy  heart :  thou  goest  for  a  holy 
and  mighty  purpose,  see  that  it  be  answered ;  see  that  thou  be  accepted  in 
thy  deed;  see  that  tliou  return  with  a  blessing  on  thy  head.  (-7.  Slade,  M.A.) 
Value  of  reverence  : — All  that  delicate  perception  of  what  is  due  from  man  to  man 
upon  which  the  high-bred  courtesy  of  life  depends,  is  closely  linked  to  a  reverential 
spirit.  Society,  when  ro'  ibed  by  kreverence  of  the  shrinking  consideration  for  others 
which  a  sense  of  the  m\  stery  of  redeemed  life  within  them  can  alone  make  real,  has 
already  lapsed  half-way  to  barbarism.  Man  becomes  ready  to  sacrifice  man  in  the 
chase  for  wealth,  or  honour,  or  pleasure,  or  power ;  and  class  grown  to  be  parted 
fatally  from  class,  by  the  selfish  enjoyment  of  those  who  possess,  ar>d  the  selfish 
discontent  of  those  who  lack  what  they  see  others  have.  Family  life,  too,  suffers 
the  same  wrong ;  its  tender  kindliness  cannot  long  survive  the  death  of  reverence. 
And  all  this,  observe,  reaches  far  beyond  the  surface  of  mere  manners.  For  it 
affects  all  those  exer'i  ns  and  sacrifices  for  others  which  require  a  high  ideal  stan- 
dard to  call  them  out  :  /•  leads  men  to  be  contented  with  poor  and  immediate  results 
measurable  by  the  dii  ■  r  gain  or  loss  of  money,  pleasure,  or  power.  It  dwarfs,  too, 
almost  all  the  acting;-  '  th^*  intellect.  In  such  a  state  of  society  the  highest  art  can 
scarcely  more  exist  than  verdure  without  dew,  or  life  without  an  atmosphere. 


CHAP.nr;]  EXODUS.  65 

Science,  too,  will  soon  feel  the  loss,  for  no  one  ever  penetrated  deeply  into  nature's 
secrets  unless  a  deep  reverence  for  that  which  he  explored  taught  him  to  be  of  a 
humble  spirit — made  him  a  true  learner,  and  not  a  self-concoited  theorist — kept 
him  ready  to  follow  out  hints,  and  to  lift  the  veil  which  God  has  cast  over  even  His 
natural  Avorks  with  a  hand  which  almost  trembled  under  a  sense  of  the  mightiness 
of  the  mysteries  it  was  revealing.  But  pre-eminently  is  this  true  as  to  the  reception 
of  God's  revelation  of  Himself.  For  here  above  all  is  the  receptive  faculty  injured 
by  the  lack  of  reverence.  As  to  this  the  ancient  voice  which  broke  the  silence  of 
the  mount  of  Horeb  sounds  yet  in  the  ear  of  every  man  who  would  turn  aside  to 
see  the  awful  sight,  "  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  placie  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  The  humility,  the  patience,  the  docility,  without  which 
there  can  be  no  clear  intuition  into  the  mystery  of  God's  nature  and  ways,  cannot 
survive  in  the  irreverent  heart.  The  scoruer  is,  in  God's  Word,  but  another  word 
for  the  atheist.  {Bv.  S.  Wilherforce.)  The  earth  holy  ground : — 1.  The  whole 
earth  is  holy  ground,  because  here  God's  perfections  are  everywhere  so  conspicuously 
displayed.  Wherever  I  go  or  stay,  I  will  think  that  Jesus  has  lived  upon  the  earth, 
and  that  nowhere,  in  thought  or  in  deed,  can  I  sin  where  it  is  not  holy  ground. 
Besides,  in  the  lives  of  every  single  one  of  us  have  there  been  holy  experiences,  and 
we  have  single  spots  on  the  earth's  surface,  which  make  for  us  the  whole  earth  holy. 
Either  that  place  is  most  holy  to  us  where  we  first  saw  the  light,  or  where  our  an- 
cestors dwell  or  have  dwelt,  or  where  the  years  of  our  childhood  glided  joyously  by; 
can  we  see  it  again,  visit  it,  without  tears  in  our  eyes  and  thanks  in  our  hearts  ; 
without  looking  up  to  heaven  ?  Is  not  that  place  holy  to  us,  where  the  most  im- 
portant earthly  relations  were  formed ;  where  we  found  a  partner  for  life  in  marriage? 
Is  not  that  place  holy  to  us,  where  we  experienced  some  good  fortune  we  had  longed 
for,  sent  to  us  by  the  Giver  of  all  good  ;  deliverance  from  danger,  the  safe  return  of 
relatives  and  friends  ?  Alone  wandered  Jacob  through  a  wild  pathless  waste.  In 
weariness  and  grief  he  closed  his  eyes.  But  how  completely  was  he  comforted  by 
the  vision  of  that  ladder  let  down  from  heaven,  and  of  his  Lord  speaking  to  him  in 
accents  of  blessing !  Holy  to  him  was  that  place  1  And  should  not  that  place  be 
holy  to  us  where  the  Lord,  faithful,  earnest,  ay,  severe,  appeared  to  us  in  the  puri- 
fying flame  of  affliction  ?  These  places  we  think  of,  as  though  the  events  connected 
with  them  happened  of  themselves.  Shall  we  not  remember  that  God  is  over  all, 
and  that  He  is  near  in  joy  and  sorrow ;  in  danger,  which  He  allows,  but  out  of 
which  He  delivers  us  ?  If  we  do  this,  earth  will  more  and  more  become  to  us  holy 
ground,  the  very  gate  of  heaven  ;  and  more  and  more  holy  will  be  our  lives  from  the 
constant  feeling  of  God's  nearness  and  presence.  2.  The  earth  is  holy  ground, 
because  God  is  worshipped  upon  it.  As  God  revealed  Himself  to  man  from  the 
beginning,  there  never  has  been  a  period  when  some  of  His  creatures,  however  small 
the  number,  have  not  known  and  worshipped  Him  aright.  The  patriarchs  builded 
altars  to  Him  and  called  on  His  holy  name.  Few  and  small,  at  first,  were  these 
streams  of  the  knowledge  and  the  worship  of  God.  Behold,  how  mightily  He  has 
extended  them  I  And  the  time  will  come.  He  confidently  awaits  it,  when  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord  will  fill  the  earth,  as  the  waters  fill  the  sea.  Perfect  in  heaven 
stands  the  Kingdom  of  God,  to  which  our  race  after  a  long  pilgrimage  will  attain. 
Bat  because  of  our  high  destination  holy  is  the  earth  on  which  we  have  journeyed 
thither.  And  is  not  our  fatherland  holy  ground  ?  Yes,  so  we  proclaim  it :  and  that 
without  comparing  it  with  any  other  land.  Yes,  ye  children,  holy  is  your  home,  be- 
cause of  the  edifying  life  of  your  parents.  Yes,  ye  residents  of  this  city,  there  is 
within  the  enclosure  of  your  own  walls,  outside  of  the  churches  where  God  is  wor- 
shipped, many  a  spot,  upon  which  He  approvingly  smiles.  Look,  then,  at  this  : 
this  earth  on  which  you  dwell  and  walk,  is  a  holy  place.  It  is  so  because  of  the 
worship  of  God ;  because  of  the  faith  and  piety  which  have  been  displayed  upon  it. 
liecognize  this  fact,  and  let  it  inspire  you  with  fervent  enthusiasm,  or  with 
wholesome  reverence  ;  this  earth  can  be  made  holy  or  profane  by  yourselves.  3. 
The  earth  is  holy  ground,  because  of  what  daily  transpires  upon  it,  and  because  of 
what  will  yet  transpire  upon  it,  intimately  linking  it  to  the  world  of  spirits.  What 
is  more  frequent  than  birth  and  death  ?  Not  less  holy  than  birth  is  death  itself. 
{J.  E  Rankin. )  From  curiosity  to  reverence : — Many  a  man  has  been  led  through 
the  gate  of  curiosity  into  the  sanctuary  of  reverence.  Moses  purposed  but  to  see 
a  wonderful  sight  in  nature,  little  dreaming  that  he  was  standing  as  it  were  face  to 
face  with  God.  Blessed  are  they  who  have  an  eye  for  the  startling,  the  subhme, 
and  the  beautiful  in  nature,  for  they  shall  see  many  sights  whi^-h  will  fill  them  with 
glad  amazement.    Every  sight  of  God  is  a  "  great  eight  " ;  the  sights  become  Utile 

5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  m. 

to  us  because  we  view  them  without  feeling  or  holy  expectation.  It  was  when  the 
Lord  saw  that  Moses  turned  aside  to  see  that  He  called  unto  him  and  mentioned 
him  by  name.  This  is  indeed  a  great  law.  If  men  would  turn  aside  to  see,  God 
would  surely  speak  to  them.  But  we  do  not  do  this.  We  pass  by  ail  the  great 
sights  of  nature  with  comparative  indifference,  certainly,  as  a  general  rule,  without 
reverence.  The  sea  wants  to  speak  to  us,  but  we  listen  not  to  its  sounding  voice; 
the  stars  are  calling  to  us,  but  we  shut  them  out ;  the  seasons  come  round  to  tell 
their  tale,  but  we  are  pre-occupied  with  trifling  engagements.  We  must  bring  so 
much  with  us  if  we  would  put  ourselves  into  healthful  communion  with  nature :  we 
must  brin;;  the  seeing  eye,  the  hearing  ear,  and  the  understanding  heart :  we  must, 
at  all  events,  be  disposed  to  see  and  hear,  and  God  will  honour  the  disposition  with 
more  than  expected  blessing.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Eclifiious  aice : — Curiosity  must 
not  become  familiarity.  The  difference  between  the  creature  and  the  Creator  must 
always  be  infinite.  Is  not  all  ground  holy  ?  Is  not  God  everywhere  ?  Certainly  so ; 
yet  it  hath  pleased  God  to  mark  special  lines  and  special  places  as  peculiarly  holy. 
We  are  not  to  treat  all  places  alike.  Every  successful  appeal  to  man's  reverence 
redeems  him  from  vulgarity.  When  a  man  loses  his  sense  of  religious  awe,  he  has 
exhausted  tbe  supreme  fountain  of  spiritual  joy.  He  then  measures  everything  by 
himself  :  he  is  to  himself  as  God,  and  from  the  point  of  self -idolatry  he  will  speedily 
sink  to  the  point  of  self-despair.  It  is  only  the  good  man  who  can  be  satisfied 
from  himself,  and  this  is  only  because  goodness  has  its  very  root  in  God.  {Ibid.) 
Cultivate  reverence  : — Cultivate  the  spirit  of  reverence.  For  ours  is  an  age  of  icono- 
clasm,  overthrowing  ancestral  traditions,  dethroning  venerable  beliefs,  making  the 
sacred  common,  disj^olving  the  sacramental  in  the  physical  equation  of  correspond- 
ence with  environment  ;  in  brief,  shattering  the  very  instinct  of  homage.  And  this 
is  peril  indeed  I  For,  as  Emerson  says,  "  No  greater  calamity  can  befall  a  nation 
than  its  loss  of  worship."  Bad  as  heathenism  is,  irreligion  is  worse.  Better  super- 
stition than  atheism.  Young  man,  believe  me ;  no  man  is  ever  so  great  as  when  he 
kneels.  Be  it  yours  to  have  the  same  lowly  reverence  which  so  beautifully  marked 
such  illustrious  scientists  as  a  Galen,  who  regarded  his  professional  life  as  "  a  religi- 
ous hymn  in  honour  of  the  Creator";  a  Copernicus,  on  whose  tombstone,  in  St. 
John's  of  Frauenburg,  is  the  following  epitaph  :  "  Not  the  grace  bestowed  on  Paul 
do  I  ask,  not  the  favour  shown  to  Peter  do  I  crave  ;  but  that  which  Thou  didst  grant 
the  robber  on  the  cross  do  I  implore  " ;  a  Kepler,  who  concludes  his  treatise  entitled 
"  Harmony  of  the  Worlds  "  thus :  "  I  thank  Thee,  my  Creator  and  Lord,  that 
Thou  hast  given  me  this  joy  in  Thy  creation,  this  delight  in  the  works  of  Thy  hands ; 
I  have  shown  the  excellency  of  Thy  works  unto  men,  so  far  as  my  finite  mind  was 
able  to  comprehend  Thy  infinity  ;  if  I  have  said  aught  unworthy  of  Thee,  or  aught 
in  which  I  have  sougbt  my  own  glory,  graciously  forgive  it  " ;  a  Newton,  who  never 
mentioned  the  name  of  Deity  without  uncovering  his  head.  (G.  D.  Boardman.) 
Reverence  : — When  a  boy  in  Princeton  College,  it  was  my  inestimable  privilege  to 
be  the  pupil-assistant  of  Professor  Joseph  Henry,  the  illustrious  Christian  scientist, 
in  Wis  original  experiments.  When  for  the  first  time  electric  signals  were  sent  from 
point  to  point,  the  earth  itself  being  used  for  the  return  current,  Professor  Henry 
put  me  at  one  end  of  the  circuit,  while  he  stood  directing  the  experiments  at  the 
other.  T  can  well  remember  the  wonderful  care  with  which  he  arranged  all  his 
principal  experiments ;  when  he  approached  the  solution  the  experiment  was  re- 
peated fund  repeated  over  and  over  again,  and  all  its  variable  conditions  altered  and 
recombined  in  every  form.  Then  often,  when  the  testing  moment  came,  that 
eminent  scientist  would  raise  his  hand  in  adoring  reverence,  and  call  upon  me  to  un- 
cover my  head  and  worship  in  silence, "  Because,"  he  said,  "  God  is  here.  I  am  about 
to  ask  God  a  question."  (A.  Hodge.)  Loicering  thestandard  of  reverence  : — It  is  very 
easy  to  lower  our  standard  of  reverence  for  anything.  We  have  only  to  speak  of  it 
habitually  in  a  light  way.  There  is  nothing  like  it  to  take  the  life  out  of  the  most  pre- 
cious texts  of  Scripture.  We  may  repent  of  such  a  sin  with  bitter  weeping,  but  those 
words  can  never  be  to  us  again  what  they  were  before.  We  may  have  cut  down  a 
bridge  we  shall  some  day  vainly  long  to  cross.  A  gentleman  of  keen  wit  used  often  to 
point  his  remarks  with  some  apt  quotation  from  the  Bible.  A  friend  who  greatly  ad- 
mired him  was  present  in  his  last  hours,  and  asked  with  deep  sympathy  what  was 
the  future  outlook.  "  Very  gloomy,  indeed,"  was  his  response.  Surprised  and  deeply 
pained,  he  hastened  to  quote  some  precious  promises  suited  to  the  solemn  hour. 
"  I  have  spoiled  them  all  for  myself,"  was  his  answer.  "  There  is  not  one  but  is 
associated  with  some  jest."  His  light  went  out  in  darkness,  though  his  name  was 
on  the  church  roll.  What  a  lesson  is  here  for  all  who  are  willing  to  be  taught  by  it ! 


CHAP,  nr.]  EXODUS.  67 

■ __— — ^ — 

Lay  it  to  heart.  {Christian  Age.)  Unclogged  feet : — Put  off  thy  shoes  of  sensu- 
ality, and  other  sins.  Affections  are  the  feet  of  the  soul ;  keep  them  unclogged. 
{J.  Trapp.) 

Ver.  6.  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father.— T^e  ancestral  God  our  God:— This 
declaration  was  made  in  order  to  assure  Moses  that  even  in  the  present  oppressed 
state  of  his  nation  in  Egypt,  the  Most  High  had  not  forgotten  them,  or  His  relation 
to  them  as  a  God  in  covenant.  This  would  be  an  unspeakable  consolation  to  Moses, 
to  find  himself  addressed  by  that  God  of  whose  appeai'ances  and  promises  to  his 
fathers  he  had  often  heard,  and  to  know  that  His  heart  was  as  kindly  affected  to 
him  as  it  ever  had  been  to  his  venerated  ancestors.  How  comforting  beyond 
measure  to  the  Christian,  in  his  more  favoured  moments,  to  be  assured  that  the  God 
of  all  the  good  who  have  ever  lived  is  his  God,  and  equally  pledged  by  His  covenant 
faithfulness,  to  show  to  him  the  same  loving-kindness  that  He  showed  to  them! 
(G.  Biish.)  The  Divine  revelation : — The  Divine  Being  here  reveals  Himself  as — 
1.  The  God  of  individual  men.  2.  The  God  of  families.  3.  The  God  of  the 
immortal  good.  (J.  S.  Exell,  3LA.)  The  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  : — 
He  is  thus  the  God  of  generations,  the  God  of  individuals,  and  the  God  of  the  whole 
human  family.  There  is  something  inexpressibly  beautiful  in  the  idea  that  God  is 
the  God  of  the  father,  and  of  the  son,  and  of  all  their  descendants  ;  thus  the  one  God 
makes  humanity  into  one  family.    ( J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  I  have  surely  seen  the  affliction  of  My  people.— God's  people— the  Jeics  .- 
their  history,  and  their  afHiction  : — Quite  apart  from  its  religious  signiticauce,  there 
is  no  other  historical  phenomenon  that  is  to  be  compared  for  a  moment  in  interest 
with  this  ever-growing  wonder  of  the  Jewish  race.  The  light  falls  clearly  and 
steadily  on  its  history  from  first  to  last.  The  whole  connected  story  lies  before 
us  like  a  mighty  river,  which  from  some  high  mountain  summit  you  can  trace  from 
its  fountain  to  the  ocean.  I.  The  history  of  this  people  is  thus  the  history  of 
MANKIND  IN  ITS  CENTRAL  SEATS  OF  POWER.  It  biiugs  with  it  living  reminisceuces  of 
the  remotest  past.  In  order  to  understand  how  strange  a  phenomenon  is  this  indo- 
mitable vitality  of  the  race— a  race  without  a  home  or  a  country-^compare  their  his- 
tory with  that  of  the  numberless  tribes  of  other  races  who  have  been  either  migratory 
or  settled.  Excepting  the  Arabs,  also  Abraham's  descendants,  all  the  other  settled 
contemporary  races  around  Palestine  have  either  died  out  completely,  as  the  ancient 
people  of  Tyre,  Edom,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Egypt;  or,  if  migratory,  they  have  been 
lost  and  absorbed  after  a  few  centuries.  The  bond  that  has  held  the  Jews  apart 
from  other  nations,  and  yet  together,  has  been  their  common  religion,  their  common 
historical  glory.  When  all  Eastern  Asia  held  evil  to  be  incurable,  and  eternal,  and 
Divine,  the  race  of  Abraham  held  that  evil  was  "  but  for  a  moment,"  and  that  God's 
goodness  and  justice  alone  were  eternal;  and  it  is  they  who  have  taught  this  lesson 
to  the  nations  of  the  modern  world.  II.  Notice,  next,  the  tragic  side  of  this 
WONDERFUL  NATIONAL  HISTORY.  The  houour  of  being  the  intellectual  and  spiritual 
leaders  of  the  world  for  four  thousand  years  has  been  paid  for  by  four  thousand 
years  of  national  martyrdom  and  humiliation.  The  terrific  penalties  announced  at 
the  beginning  for  failure  in  their  national  vocation  amidst  the  gi-eat  nations  of  the 
ancient  world,  have  been  exacted  to  the  letter.  The  so-called  Christian  nations 
have  made  their  lives  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred  years  one  prolonged  Egyptian 
bondage.  New  Testament  Christianity  has  at  last  taught  us  English,  at  least,  to 
love  the  nation  to  whom  we  owe  such  priceless  blessings.  We  believe  that  the  time 
is  hastening  on  when  Christ  will  return  to  avenge  the  quarrel  of  Israel,  and  to  end 
"  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  "  by  the  restoration  of  the  scattered  nation  to  its  old 
central  position  in  a  renovated  world.  {E.  Wliite.)  Of  Israel's  salvation : — I. 
God  is  beforehand  with  His  salvation.  It  is  notso  much  that  God  has  prepared 
salvation  for  us,  as  that  He  has  prepared  us  for  salvation.  Salvation  was  laid  up 
in  Christ  before  sin  entered  into  the  world.  So  that  when  sin  did  enter  in— and 
there  was  need— God  brought  it  forth.  There  is  great  comfort  and  assurance  in  this 
truth.  II.  God  does  not  always  answer  oub  prayers  immediately,  or  from  the  spot 
WHERE  OUR  prayers  ARE  MADE.  Let  US  pour  out  our  praycrs,  and  leave  them  with 
God.  If  they  fall  wi'thin  His  gracious  covenant  of  salvation,  they  will  receive  the 
answer  in  due  time,  and  as  quickly  as  it  is  possible  for  us  to  receive  and  bear  it. 
III.  God's  message  to  Moses.  1.  There  is  compassion  and  mercy  with  the  Lord. 
Salvation  proceeds  from  His  love  and  grace.  2.  Notice  that  He  says — "  I  am  come 
down  to  deUver  them."    (1)  He  has  not  sent  another,  but  has  come  Himself. 


69  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m.' 

4 

In  Christ.  (2)  God  has  not  left  it  for  us  to  reach  up  to  Him,  but  has  in  mercy 
bowed  the  heavens,  and  come  down  to  us.  We  frequently  hear  people  talking  about 
getting  up  to  God.  Not  long  ago,  a  lady  told  me  that  she  was  "trying  to  get 
through  nature  up  to  nature's  God."  This  may  do  for  sentiment;  but  it  is  not  a 
possible  way  to  reach  God.  It  is  true  that  the  "  invisible  things  of  Him,  .  .  .  even 
His  eternal  power  and  Godhead,"  are  seen  by  the  things  that  are  ;  but  this  is  not  to 
get  to  God.  To  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  the  universe  who  is  eternally  powerful 
—•is  not  to  know  Him  as  a  Saviour.  It  does  not  help  me  out  of  the  bondage  of  sin, 
or  into  peace  and  joy,  to  know  that  God  is  almighty,  I  must  know  that  He  is 
gracious,  and  that  He  receiveth  sinners,  before  I  can  be  at  peace.  Nay,  in  fact,  I 
cannot  get  to  Him  ;  He  must  come  to  me.  3.  God  told  Moses  that  He  was  going  to 
do  three  things  for  Israel.  (1)  To  deliver  them,  (2)  To  bring  them  up.  (3)  To 
give  them  a  better  land.  (Gf.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Ajiicture  of  human  sorrow  : — 
I.  God  knows  the  sorrows  to  which  His  people  are  exposed.  1.  Because  of  the 
relationship  He  sustains  to  them.  "  My  people."  (1)  It  indicates  ownership.  (2) 
Endearment.  (3)  Astonishment.  The  choicest  of  God's  saints  in  circumstances 
of  great  trial.  A  problem  the  next  world  will  better  solve.  2.  Because  His  omni- 
scient eye  is  upon  them.  He  sees  their  trials.  3.  Because  they  are  in  the  habit 
of  making  known  their  sorrows  to  Him  by  prayer.  II.  That  at  the  proper  time 
God  will  deliver  His  people  from  sorrow  (ver.  8).  1.  Sometimes  after  it  has 
been  long  continued.  2.  Sometimes  when  least  expected.  3.  Sometimes  by 
agencies  once  despised.  III.  God  uses  human  instrumentalities  in  the  de- 
liverance OF  His  people  from  sorrows.  1.  Prepared  by  life's  discipline.  2. 
Encouraged  by  heaven's  vision.  3.  Called  by  God's  voice.  (J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  "  3Iy  j)cople"  : — 1.  Therefore  we  must  love  Him.  2.  Therefore 
we  must  serve  Him.  3.  Therefore  we  must  aid  His  Church*.  (Ibid.)  God's 
cognizance  of  His  people's  afflictions  :—Hovr  interesting  is  this  fact,  that  God 
takes  cognizance  of  the  afflictions  of  His  people  ;  of  one  as  of  many  ;  of  great  and 
small !  One  sometimes  is  puzzled  to  determine  whether  God  appears  greatest  when 
He  rides  on  the  whirlwind  and  directs  the  storm,  speaks  in  the  thunder,  and 
manifests  His  glory  in  the  lightning,  or  when  he  descends  to  minister  every  pulse 
to  the  minutest  microscopic  insect,  or  to  notice  the  pains,  the  sorrows,  and  the 
sufferings  of  the  humblest  and  the  lowliest  of  the  human  family.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  God's  greatness  is  more  magnificently  revealed  by  the  microscope,  than  it  is  by 
the  telescope  ;  in  creation  and  in  providence  in  little  things,  than  in  great  things ; 
and  that  He  appears  arrayed  in  a  richer  glory  when  His  fatherly  hand  lays  its 
healing  touch  upon  a  broken  heart,  than  when  that  hand  launches  the  thunderbolt, 
or  gives  their  commissions  to  the  angels  of  the  sky.  God's  people  could  not  suffer 
in  the  brick-yards  of  Egypt,  without  drawing  down  the  sympathies,  as  they  shared 
in  the  cognizance,  of  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham.  (-7.  Gumming,  D.D.)  Three 
things  to  he  remembered  : — 1.  God  had  seen  the  affliction  of  the  Israelites.  Alas  ! 
it  seemed  to  them  as  though  they  were  not  seen  by  any  one.  God  sees  all.  "  The 
eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place."  2.  He  had  heard  their  cry.  The  Israelites 
had  begun  to  entreat  for  mercy  ;  and,  notwithstanding  their  ignorance,  wickedness, 
and  idolatry,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  hear  them.  3.  He  knew  their  sorrows  ;  not 
only  He  saw  and  heard,  but  He  knew  all,  much  better  than  men  did,  and  He  pitied 
thek  misery.  Yes,  God  sees  the  affliction  and  hears  the  ciy  of  His  creatures  who 
are  suffering.  Do  not  forget  this  when  you  are  in  sorrow.  {Prof.  Gaussen.)  "  I 
Inow  their  sorroics  "  ; — It  is  wonderful  what  a  provision  is  made  by  Deity  for  human 
"  sorrow."  The  First  Blessed  Person  in  the  Trinity  is  as  a  Father.  A  loving 
Father ;  a  Father,  too,  most  when  He  chastens  most.  And  the  Second  is  co-equal. 
A  Brother.  "A  Man  of  sorrows,"  who  is  "  acquainted  with  our  griefs."  And  the 
T'oird,  co-equal  still,  is  a  Comforter.  "  Father  " — "  Brother  " — "  Comforter."  What 
eloquence  does  it  give  to  the  Voice  of  the  wilderness,  "  I  know  their  sorrows."  We 
should  lay  great  stress  on  the  "  I."  It  is  a  conclusive  I.  No  one  can  say  that  "  I  " 
as  He  says  it, — not  father,  or  mother,  or  dearest  friend.  It  is  "  I " — alone  in  the 
universe—"  know  your  sorrows."  I  who  made  the  "  sorrows  "  ;  I  who  made  you  ; 
I  who  can  balance  the  burden  and  the  strength ;  I  to  whom  all  ears  are  open  and  all 
secrets  disclosed.  But  there  are  sorrows  and  sorrows.  There  are  selfish  "sorrows,", 
■which  cannot  bear  to  be  seen  in  happiness,  and  rather  like  to  make  others  sad.' 
There  are  "  sorrows  "  of  sheer  formality,  which  come  and  go  with  the  seasons,  j 
There  are  "  sorrows  "  of  mere  vexations  and  mortified  pride,  which  come  for  any 
little  thing.  There  are  morbid  "  sorrows,"  which  mope  about  in  solitude.  There 
are  defiant  "sorrows,"  which  put  away  all  sympathy,  and  refuse  to  be  comforted.! 


CHAP.ra.]  EXODUS,  69 

e — 

There  are  idle  "  sorrows,"  which  lead  to  no  action  ;  barren  because  there  is  no  root. 
And  there  are  sorrows  "  which  have  an  actual  sin,  and  sin  lives  in  that  "  sorrow." 
And  there  are  "  sorrows  "  which  call  themselves  contrite,  but  have  no  penitence  ; 
they  are  merely  nature's  fears.  And  there  are  hardened  "  sorrows,"  putting  away 
God,  grieving  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  working  death  !  And  God  "  knows  "  these 
sorrows,  and  His  eye  detects  them  in  a  moment — all  their  hollowuess  and  all  then- 
hypocrisy.      (J.    Vaughan,  M.A.)  God's  knowledge  of  His  people's  sorrows: — 

Our  nature  yearns  for  sympathy.  I.  How  cheeking  is  the  announcement  of  the 
TEXT.  1.  It  is  not  a  mere  man  who  says  this,  but  God — the  Creator,  the  Lord  of 
life  and  death,  the  Eedeemer,  the  Comforter.  2.  When  we  remember  that  the 
Speaker  is  the  Omnipresent  and  Omniscient  God,  we  remember  also  that  His  know- 
.  ledge  is  something  more  than  man's  mere  knowledge  of  the  fact.  He  sees  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  an  event  at  once  ;  He  knows  all  about  our  sorrows — whence 
they  came,  how,  when,  why.  3.  It  greatly  raises  our  thoughts  of  God's  conde- 
scension if  we  consider  who  these  people  were,  and  what  their  sorrows.  (1)  They 
were  God's  people  ;  but  in  men's  eyes  they  were  but  a  poor  band  of  slaves,  toiling  day 
and  night  under  hard  taskmasters.  (2)  Their  sorrows  were  those  which  poverty 
and  hard  labour  bring.  4.  As  God  knew  His  people's  sorrows  then,  so  He  knows 
ours  now,  however  infinitely  various  they  may  be — however  great,  however  small' — 
whether  of  body,  mind,  or  soul.  The  Lord  Jesus  knows  by  exptri  .'iice,  toil,  fatigue, 
pain,  weeping,  anxiety,  desolation.  II.  Lessons  of  comfort.  1.  If  our  Lord 
knows  our  sorrows  thus  intimately,  we  may  go  and  lay  the  whole  before  Him, 
assured  of  sympathy  (Matt.  xiv.  12).  2.  If  our  Lord  knows  our  sorrows,  we  may 
be  sure  that  these  sorrows  are  well  ordered.  3.  If  our  Lord  knows  our  sorrows,  we 
may  be  sure  that  He  will  help  us  in  due  time,  and  that  although  He  seem  to  tarry 
long.  He  only  tarries  for  our  good.  III.  Lessons  of  instruction.  1.  If  God,  who 
is  love  and  power,  knows  our  sorrows  and  permits  them,  though  He  does  not 
willingly  afflict.  He  must  mean  something  by  them  ;  there  is  a  voice  in  them  which 
we  should  listen  to.  Let  us  ask,  what  does  my  heavenly  Father  mean  by  this 
affliction  ?  What  sins  most  beset  me  ?  What  graces  are  most  lacking  in  me  ?  2. 
By  afflicting  us,  our  Father  means  not  only  to  correct  our  shortcomings,  but  to 
purify  our  faith.  3.  God  tries  our  patience  by  sorrow,  for  the  example  of  others. 
How  does  the  sight  of  a  Christian  sufferer  cheer  and  strengthen  his  fellow-travellers 
on  the  Christian  course  1  Let  us  take  care  that,  in  our  time  of  sulfering,  we  glorify 
God  by  our — (1)  Calmness,  (2)  Confidence,  (3)  Patience,  (4)  Thankfulness.  4.  Not 
only  may  our  suffering  affliction  be  a  blessing  to  others  as  an  example,  but  as  calling 
forth  their   sympathy  and   love.      (S.    P.    C.  K.  Sermons.)  The  Divine  care 

and  presence  : — I.  Infinite  STMPAiny.  Often  adversity  leads  us  into  a  spirit  of  care- 
lessness and  unbelief.  In  our  impatience  we  cannot  wait  for  the  Lord.  The  history 
of  Israel  says — "  Leave  all  to  God ;  He  will  order  and  provide."  II.  Seasonable 
intervention.  Often  God  waits  to  teach  us  our  own  helplessness  before  interposing ; 
but  "  the  salvation  of  the  righteous  is  of  the  Lord."  "  When  the  fulness  of  time 
was  come,"  &c.  III.  Abundant  benefaction.  Christ  is  a  greater  Moses,  through 
whom  we  are  not  only  delivered  from  the  punishment  of  sin,  but  sanctified  also  as 
"  a  peculiar  people,"  and  made  "  meet  for  the  inheritance,"  &c.  Our  conversion  is 
merely  the  turning-point.  Heaven  is  the  goal,  and  God  is  with  us  all  the  way.  (J. 
C.  McLachlan,  M.A.)  "  I  knoiv  their  sorrows  ": — I.  The  Person.  1.  He  can  help. 
Fulness  of  resource.  2.  He  will  help.  Whole  scheme  of  salvation^  bas^d  on  this. 
3.  He  delights  to  help.  Sympathy,  the  natural  outcome  of  God's  heart.  II.  The 
Knowledge.  1.  It  is  certain.  He  cannot  be  deceived,  or  mistaken.  What  a  con- 
solation for  afflicted  !  2.  It  is  unlimited.  God  knows  all  sorrows.  3.  It  is  com- 
passionate. Touched  with  feeling  of  our  infirmity.  III.  The  sorrow.  1.  It  may 
be  long  coalinued.  Delay  disciplines.  2.  It  may  be  deeply  oppiessive.  3.  It  may 
be  widely  experienced.  "  I  know  their  sorrows."  (1)  Therefore  do  not  complain. 
(2)  Therefore  wait  His  time  for  deliverance.  (3)  Therefore  seek  His  grace.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  God  can  always  hear  : — A  poor  old  deaf  man  resided  in  Fife.  He 
was  visited  by'his  minister  shortly  after  coming  to  his  pulpit.  The  minister  said 
he  would  often  call  and  see  him  ;  but  time  went  on,  and  he  did  not  visit  him  again 
until  two  years  after,  when,  happening  to  go  through  the  street  where  the  deaf  man 
was  living,  be  saw  his  wife  at  the'door,  and  could  therefore  do  no  other  than  inquire 
for  her  husband.  "  Weel,  Margaret,  how  is  Tammas?  "  "  None  the  better  o'  you," 
was  the  rather  curt  reply.  "  How  !  how  !  Margaret?  "  inquired  the  minister.  "Oh, 
ye  promised  twa  year  syne  to  ca'  and  pray  once  a  fortnight  wi'  him,  an'  ye  hae  ne'er 
dai-kened  the  door  sin'  syne."     "Weel, weel,  Margaret,  don't  be  so  short;  I  thought 


70  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

it  was  not  so  necessary  to  call  and  pray  with  Tammas,  for  he  is  sae  deaf  ye  ken  he 
canna  hear  me."  "But,  sir,"  said  the  woman,  with  a  rising  dignity  of  manner, 
"  the  Lord's  no  deaf !  "  And  it  ia  to  be  supposed  the  minister  felt  the  power  of  her 
reproof. 

Ver.  8.  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them. — The  world's  sorrow  and  Christ's 
redemption  : — 1.  Christ  came  down  from  heaven.  2.  Christ  came  at  the  call  of  the 
world's  sorrow.  3.  Christ  came  to  achieve  the  world's  moral  freedom.  4.  Christ 
came  todestroy  the  kingship  of  sin..  5.  Christ  came  to  lead  men  into  happiness. 
6.  Christ  came  to  awaken  holy  agencies  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  the  race.  (J.S. 
Exell,  3LA.)  Jehovah  resents  the  oppression  of  the  Church: — 1.  Surely.  2.  Speedily. 
3.  Continually.  4.  Retributively.  (Ibid.)  "  I  am  come  down  "  : — God  is  said  to 
descend.  1.  In  accommodation  to  a  human  form  of  speech.  2.  To  show  judgment 
on  the  wicked  (Gen.  xviii).  3.  Perhaps  to  indicate  the  situation  of  Egypt,  which 
was  a  low  country.  4.  To  indicate  some  notable  event  about  to  follow.  Babel. 
{Ibid.)  ''To  bring  them  vp  cut  of  that  land": — 1.  Of  bad  rulership.  2.  Of 
wicked  companionship.  3.  Of  hostile  religious  influences.  4.  Of  seiTile  bondage. 
6.  There  are  many  countries  in  the  world  where  it  is  dangerous  for  God's  people  to 
reside.  {Ibid.)  "  Unto  a  good  land,  and  a  large  "  ; — 1.  Canaan  was  large  com- 
pared with  Goshen.     2.  God  exchanges  the  situations  of  His  people  for  their  good. 

3.  God  does  not  intend  His  people  to  remain  long  the  slaves  of  any  earthly  power. 

4.  The  spiritual  Israel  will  in  eternity  enter  into  the  fulness  of  these  words.  (Ibid.) 
"  The  Canaaiiitcs  and  the  Hittites" : — A  disinherited  people: — 1.  Disinherited  by 
God,  as  the  Supreme  Disposer  of  all  territory.  2.  As  under  a  special  cm-so.  3.  As 
guilty  of  unrepented  sin.  4.  A  warning  for  nations  to-day.  (Ibid.)  The  Divine 
resolution : — Here  the  absolute,  free,  unconditional  grace  of  the  God  of  Abraham, 
and  the  God  of  Abraham's  seed,  shines  forth  in  all  its  native  brightness,  unhindered 
by  the  "  ifs  "  and  "  buts,"  the  vows,  resolutions,  and  conditions  of  man's  legal 
spirit.  God  had  come  down  to  display  Himself,  in  sovereign  grace,  to  do  the  whole 
work  of  salvation,  to  accomplish  His  promise  made  to  Abraham,  and  repeated  to 
Isaac  and  Jacob.  He  had  not  come  down  to  see  if,  indeed,  the  subjects  of  His 
promise  were  in  such  a  condition  as  to  merit  His  salvation.  It  was  sufficient  for 
Him  that  they  needed  it.  He  was  not  attracted  by  their  excellencies  or  their  virtues. 
It  was  not  on  the  ground  of  aught  that  was  good  in  them,  either  seen  or  foreseen, 
that  He  was  about  to  visit  them,  for  He  knew  what  was  in  them.  In  one  word,  we 
have  the  true  ground  of  His  gracious  acting  set  before  us  in  the  words,  "  I  am  the 
God  of  Abraham,"  and  "  I  have  seen  the  affliction  of  My  people."  These  words 
reveal  a  great  fundamental  principle  in  the  ways  of  God.  It  is  on  the  ground  of 
what  He  is,  that  He  ever  acta.  "  I  am,"  secures  all  for  "  My  people."  Assuredly 
He  was  not  going  to  leave  His  people  amid  the  brick-kilns  of  Egypt,  and  under  the 
lash  of  Pharaoh's  taskmasters.  They  were  His  people,  and  He  would  act  toward 
them  in  a  manner  worthy  of  Himself.  Nothing  should  hinder  the  public  display 
of  His  relationship  with  those  for  whom  His  eternal  purpose  had  secured  the  land 
of  Canaan.  He  had  come  down  to  deliver  them  ;  and  the  combined  power  of  earth 
and  hell  could  not  hold  them  in  captivity  one  hour  beyond  His  appointed  time.  He 
might  and  did  use  Egypt  as  a  school,  and  Pharaoh  as  a  schoolmaster  :  but  when  the 
needed  work  was  accomplished,  both  the  school  and  the  schoolmaster  were  set  aside, 
and  His  people  were  brought  forth  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm.  (C. 
H,  3Iackintosh.) 

Ver.  10.    I  will  send  thee  tinto  Pharaoh. — The  calling  of  a  great  deliverer: — I. 

His  CALL  WAS  KEXDEKED  NECESSARY  BY  INTENSE  NATIONAL  SUFFEEING  (ver.  7).       1.  The 

sufferings  to  which  the  Israelites  were  exposed.  (1)  Politically  they  were  prisoners. 
(2)  Socially  they  were  bondmen.  (3)  Commercially  they  were  ruined.  (4)  Reli- 
giously they  were  degenerate.  2.  The  Divine  attention  to  the  sufferings  of  the 
Israelites.  God  has  deep  sympathy  with  the  sorrowful.  (1)  God  sees  the  pain  of 
the  oppressed.  (2)  God  hears  the  cry  of  the  oppressed.  (3)  God  relieves  the  pain 
of  the  oppressed.  II.  He  was  called  to  his  mission  by  the  immediate  agency  of 
God  (ver.  10).  1.  His  free  agency  was  consulted.  Such  a  call  is— (1)  Honourable. 
(2)  Responsible.  2.  His  adaptability  was  considered.  Social  considerations  are 
subordinate.  A  shepherd  may  be  called  to  accomplish  the  freedom  of  Israel. 
Hence  the  Divine  call  to  human  souls  is— (1)  Emphatic.  (2)  Judicious.  (3)  Hope- 
ful. III.  He  was  definitely  made  acquainted  with  the  mission  he  h.vd  to  under- 
take (ver.  10).    1.  He  was  to  pay  a  visit  to  royalty.    2.  He  was  to  achieve  the 


CHAP,  in.]  EXODUS.  71 

freedom  of  Israel.  God  forewarns  him  of  the  difficulties,  that  they  may  not  surprise 
or  overwhelm.  This  arrangement  is — (1)  Merciful.  (2)  Considerate.  (3)  Accom- 
modated to  our  weakness.  IV.  In  the  PEKFOKiiAXCE  of  his  mission  he  was  animated 
BY  THE  HIGHEST  HOPES  (vcr.  8).  1.  He  anticipated  the  freedom  of  Israel.  2.  He 
anticipated  conquest  in  the  event  of  war.  3.  He  anticipated  residence  in  a  land  of 
beauty  and  fertility.  God  always  animates  those  engaged  in  great  service  by  great 
hopes.  Lessons  :  1.  That  God  knows  how  to  prepare  men  to  become  the  deliverers 
of  the  good.  2.  That  a  Divine  call  is  requisite  for  the  mission  of  life.  3.  That 
human  sorrow  is  pathetic  and  powerful  in  its  appeal  to  God.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  mission  of  Moses;  or,  the  qualification  for  a  Divine  work  : — I.  God  elevates  the 
BACE  BT  THE  iNSTKDMENTALiTY  OF  iNwviDUAi  MEN.  1.  It  serves  to  piomote  in  mau 
the  principle  of  self -help  fulness.     2.  It  serves  to  promote  social  unity.     II.  God 

•SPECIAXLT  QUALIFIES  THE    MAN    He    EMPLOYS   TO    ELEVATE    THE    BACE.       1.   By  a  SpCCial 

manifestation  of  Himself.  2.  By  impressing  him  with  the  divinity  of  his  mission. 
3.  By  assuring  him  of  His  co-nperation.  4.  By  making  him  sensible  of  his  own 
insufficiency.  5.  By  providing  him  with  a  coadjutor  to  supplement  his  deficiencies. 
{Homilist.)  The  call  of  Moses  : — I.  The  manner  of  the  call.  1.  Eemarkable  for 
its  suddenness.  2.  Remarkable  for  its  mysteriousness.  3.  Eemarkable  for  its 
manife>tiition  of  God.  (1)  His  holiness.  (2)  His  faithfulness.  II.  The  reason  op 
THE  CALL.  1.  The  severity  of  the  affliction  of  God's  people.  2.  The  cry  of  God's 
people,  which  had  come  up  into  the  ears  of  God.  III.  Ths  purpose  of  the  call. 
1.  The  deliverance  of  His  people  from  the  task-master.  2.  The  fulfilment  of  the 
Divine  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  IV.  The  encouragement  to 
OBEY  the  call.  The  personal  presence  of  God.  V.  The  name  op  Him  who 
ISSUED  THE  CALL.  1.  The  levelatiou  of  this  name  was  called  out  by  a  significant 
question  of  Moses.  2.  The  significance  of  the  name.  (1)  It  represents  the  per- 
sonality, eternity,  and  supremacy  of  God.  (2)  It  represents  an  authority  and 
•sovereignty  that  even  Pharaoh  cannot  gainsay.  Lessons:  1.  We  learn  God's 
deep  and  practical  interest  in  His  people.  2.  We  learn  that  God  is  a  hearer 
and  an  answerer  of  prayer.  3.  We  learn  God's  wisdom  in  calling  His  servants.  4. 
We  leaiu  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  Divine  encouragement  to  every  worker.  (D.  C. 
Hughes,   M.A.)  GocVs   choice  of   instruments: — God   chooses   the  humblest 

instruments.  He  passes  by  the  tempest,  and  waters  the  fields  and  gardens  with  His 
imperceptible  dew.  He  passes  by  the  great  elephant,  and  bestows  the  hues  of 
sapphire  and  amethyst  upon  the  tiny  humming-bird.  He  passes  by  the  lofty  pines 
and  huge  elm  tree,  and  lavishes  blossom  and  perfume  on  the  violet.  All  history 
teaches  the  same  truth.  Moses  was  the  son  of  a  poor  Levite ;  Gideon  was  a 
thresher  ;  David  was  a  shepherd  boy ;  Amos  was  a  herdsman  ;  the  apostles  were 
obscure  and  unlearned ;  Zwingle  was  a  shepherd  ;  Melancthon,  the  great  theologian 
of  the  Reformation,  was  an  armourer ;  Luther  was  the  child  of  a  poor  miner ; 
Fuller  was  a  farm  servant ;  Carey,  the  originator  of  the  plan  of  translating  the 
Bible  into  the  language  of  the  millions  of  Hindustan,  was  a  shoemaker ;  Morrison, 
who  translated  the  Bible  into  the  Chinese  language,  was  a  last-maker ;  Dr.  Milne 
was  a  herd-boy ;  Adam  Clarke  was  the  son  of  Irish  cotters ;  John  Foster  was  a 
weaver  ;  Jay,  of  Bath,  was  a  herdsman.  (Christian  Age.)  The  call  of  Moses : — 
I.  The  preparations  for  the  c.u.l.  His  miraculous  escajie  in  infancy ;  his  careful 
training  in  the  court  of  Pharaoh ;  his  knowledge  of  governments,  men,  armies,  re- 
ligious rites  ;  his  silent  years  of  obscurity,  watching  the  leisure  of  the  seasons  as 
they  came  and  went,  the  slow  movements  of  the  stars ;  the  care  of  God  for  the 
helpless  creatures  over  which  he  was  a  shepherd  ;  the  home-life — all  these  were  a 
part  of  the  call.  His  soul  ripened.  II.  The  call  itself.  A  greater  one  was  never 
issued  to  mortal  man.  The  only  greater  one  was  assigned  to  that  Prophet  like  unto 
Moses  who,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  came  to  lead  the  world  out  of  a  worse  than 
Egyptian  bondage  through  the  death  of  the  cross.  III.  The  hesitation  of  Moses 
AT  the  great  summons.  He  was  perfectly  honest  before  God.  And  it  is  because  he 
was  so  honest  that  we  can  understand  him  and  get  our  lessons  from  him  at  this 
turning-point  in  his  career.  We  would  not  lose  the  picture  of  this  great  man — this 
chosen  vessel  of  God — hesitating,  confessing  his  cowardly  feelings,  and  trying  to 
hide  away  from  duty.  The  response  from  Jehovah  was  as  sudden  as  the  command, 
and  it  was  a  complete  satisfaction  for  all  the  real  and  imaginary  troubles  in  the 
situation :  "  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee."  IV.  Lastly,  if  we  seek  further  practical 
LESSONS  from  this  part  of  sacred  history,  we  shall  be  led  to  ask  why  the  Bible  makes 
so  much  of  the  calls  its  chief  characters  received  to  their  office.  Was  it  merely  to 
prove  the  genuineness  of  their  commission  ?    They  proved  that  by  their  works  done 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m.' 

in  the  name  of  God.    Was  it  to  show  the  power  of  Him  who  can  call  out  children 
to  Abraham  from  the  stones  and  cause  things  that  are  not  to  be  as  those  that  are? 
Not  this  alnne,  but  rather  to  make  us  feel  that  we  may  be  receiving  calls  to  His  ser- 
vice, though  we  disregard  them,  and  that,  if  we  live  near  Him,  life  may  at  any  time 
take  on  a  new  form  and  character.     {E.  N.  Packard.)        The  deliverer  and  his  com- 
mission : — The  personal  history  of  the  deliverer  and  his  commission,  viewed  in 
reference  to  the  higher  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  exhibits  the  following  principles, 
on  which  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  offer  any  lengthened  illustration.     1.  The  time 
for  the  deliverer  appearing  and  entering  on  the  mighty  work  given  him  to  do,  as  it 
should  be  the  one  fittest  for  the  purpose,  so  j^  must  be  the  one  chosen  and  fixed  by 
God.    It  might  seem  long  in  coming  to  many,  whose  hearts  groaned  beneath  the 
yoke  of  the  adversary  ;  and  they  might  sometimes  have  been  disposed,  if  they  had 
been  able,  to  hasten  forward  its  arrival.     But  the  Lord  knew  best  when  it  should 
take  place,  and  with  unerring  precision  determined  it  beforehand.     Hence  we  read 
of  Christ's  appearance  liaving  occurred  "  in  due  time,"  or  "  in  the  fulness  of  time." 
2.  The  Deliverer,  when  He  comes,  must  arise  within  the  Church  itself.    With  her  is 
the  covenant  of  God;  and  she  alone  is  the  mother  of  the  victorious  seed,  that 
destroys  the  destroyer.    3.  Yet  the  deliverance,  even  in  its  earlier  stages,  when 
existing  only  in  the  personal  history  of  the  deliverer,  is  not  altogether  independent 
of  the  world.    The  blessing  of  Israel  was  interwoven  with  acts  of  kindness  derived 
from  the  heathen  ;  and  the  child  Moses,  with  whom  their  very  existence  as  a  nation 
and  all  its  coming  glory  was  bound  up,  owed  his  preservation  to  a  member  of 
Pharaoh's  house,  and  in  that  house  found  a  tit  asylum  and  nursing-place.     Thus 
the  earth  "  helped  the  woman,"  as  it  has  often  done  since.     In  the  history  even  of 
the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith,  the  history  of  redemption  links  itself  closely 
to  the  history  of  the  world.     4.  Still  the  deliverer,  as  to  his  person,  his  preparation, 
his  gifts  and  calling,  is  peculiarly  of  God.     That  such  a  person  as  Moses  was  pro- 
vided for  the  Church  in  the  hour  of  her  extremity,  was  entirely  the  result  of  God's 
covenant  with  Abraham  ;  and  the  whole  circumstances  connected  with  his  prepara- 
tion for  the  work,  as  well  as  the  commission  given  him  to  undertake  it,  and  the 
.supernatural  endowments  fitting  him  for  its  execution,  manifestly  bespoke  tbe 
special  And  gracious  interposition  of  heaven.     But  the  same  holds  true  in  each 
particular,  and  is  still  more  illustriously  displayed  in  Christ.     (P.  Fairhairn,  D.D.) 
Preparation  for  the  viinistry  : — I.  A  human  ministry  for  a  Divine  s.u.vation.     The 
mother  in  the  nursery,  or  at  the  bedside  of  her  children  ;  the  father,  by  his  godly 
life,  as  well  a,s  by  direct  instruction ;  the  merchant  among  his  clerks  and  salesmen ; 
the  employer  among  his  employes;  the  mistress  among  her  servants  :  all  these  have 
opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  the  ministry  of  grace.     Other  means  besides  the 
public  ministry,  or  the  direct  dealing  of  the  Christian  worker,  are  used  of  God  to 
bring  His  people  up  out  of  the  land  of  bondage  into  His  kingdom  of  life  and  light. 
A  thousand  silent  and  cumulative  influences  may  be  amongst  the  agencies  that  end 
in  the  conversion  of  every  soul.     II.  This  ministry  is  not  self-appointed.     "  I  will 
send  thee."     In  all  our  service  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  to  go  in  God's 
name,  by  His  appointment  to  do  His  work  and  not  our  own  :  otherwise  the  work 
will  be  a  miserable  failure,  and  the  name  of  God  will  be  blasphemed.     III.  The 
nature  of  tde  commission.     "  I  will  send.'^     The  Lord  calls  all  His  people  to  go 
forth  into  this  world  with  a  testimony  and  witness  from  Him.      What  the  Lord 
needs  now,  as  at  the  beginning,  is  that  His  disciples  should  go  everywhere  preaching 
Jesus  and  the  Etsurrection.    When  the  Spirit  works  freely  in  bi-liever.",  then  are 
many  more  disciples  made.   IV.  Moses  was  to  go  down  to  where  the  people  were. 
Now,  mark  that  when  God  bade  Moses  to  go  down  He  did  not  tell  him  to  build  a 
pulpit  on  the  border  of  Egypt,  and  cry,  "  Come  !  "     I  heard  of  a  minister  who  was 
asked  to  go  and  see  a  man  who  was  anxious  about  his  soul.    He  rei^lied,  "He  knows 
.  where  I  live.     If  he  wants  my  help  or  counsel,  let  him  come  to  me.     If  he  is  in 
earnest,  he  will."     I  should  have  said  to  him,  "  If  you  are  in  earnest  about  your 
Master's  work,  and  know  the  meaning  of  the  commission  under  which  you  hold 
your  office,  you  will  go  to  him."     Do  not  forget  that  our  commission  is  to  "go." 
((r.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)       The  Divine  call  to  service  : — 1.  It  is  persuasive — "come." 
2.  It  is  immediate — "now."   3.  It  is  logical — "therefore."    (J.  S.Exell,  M.A.)      "I 
will  send  theeunto  Pharaoh  "  ; — 1.  A  vocation.   2.  A  preparation.    3.  A  commission. 
{Ibid.)        A  God-given  task:—l.  Arduous  in  its  requirement.     2.  Eesponsible  in 
its  exercise.    3.  Glorious  in  its  issue.    4.  Unique  in  its  character.    {Ibid.)      Notes: — 
1.  God's  call — is  instant,  and  suffers  no  delay.     2.  Though  God  needs  no  man,  He 
calls  some  for  the  help  of  His  people.    3.  Such  as  God  calls,  He  sends  to  bring 


OHAP.  in.J  EXODUS.  73 

about  deliverance.  4.  The  mission  of  God  may  be  of  the  poorest  man  to  the  greatest 
potentate.  5.  God's  command  is  enough  to  empower  the  weakest  man  for  the 
strongest  work.  (Ibid.)  The  principle  of  mediation  in  God's  dealings  %vith  men  : — 
In  the  eightli  verse  God  says,  "  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  Egyptians";  and  in  the  tenth  verse  He  says,  "  I  will  send  thee  unto  Pharaoh." 
Is  there  not  a  discrepancy  here  ?  If  God  Himself  came  down  to  do  a  work,  why 
did  He  not  go  and  do  it  personally  ?  One  word  from  Himself  would  surely  have 
done  more  for  the  cause  which  He  had  espoused  than  all  the  words  which  the  most 
gifted  of  His  creatures  could  have  used.  Looking  at  this  incident  as  standing  alone, 
it  does  undoubtedly  appear  most  remarkable  that  God  did  not  personally  execute 
what  He  had  personally  conceived.  The  thinking  was  His,  so  was  the  love  ;  all  the 
spiritual  side  of  the  case  belonged  exclusively  to  God  ;  yet  He  calls  a  shepherd,  a 
lonely  and  unfriended  man,  to  work  out — with  painful  elaboration,  and  through  a 
long  series  of  bewildering  disappointments — the  purpose  which  it  seems  He  Himself 
might  have  accomplished  with  a  word.  We  find,  however,  that  the  instance  is  by 
no  means  an  isolated  one.  Throughout  the  whole  scheme  of  the  Divine  government 
of  the  human  family,  we  find  the  principle  of  mediation.  God  speaks  to  man 
through  man.  Undoubtedly,  this  is  mysterious.  To  oar  imperfect  understanding, 
it  would  seem  that  the  direct  personal  revelation  of  His  presence  and  glory  would 
instantly  secure  the  results  which  are  so  desirable,  and  yet  so  doubtful.  It  is  here 
that  faiih  must  lead  us.  Moreover,  this  principle  of  individual  selection  in  the 
matter  of  all  great  ministries,  is  in  keeping  with  the  principle  which  embodies  in  a 
single  germ  the  greatest  forests.  It  is  enough  that  God  gives  the  one  acorn,  man 
must  plant  it  and  develop  its  productiveness.  God  works  from  the  one  to  the  many. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D. )  That  thou  mayest  bring  forth  My  people. — The  typical  character 
of  Moses  considered,  as  the  deLiverer,  mediator,  laicgiver,  and  guide  of  Israel : — I. 
Moses  typical  of  Chkist  as  a  delivebek.  1.  When  we  were  dead  in  sin,  God  pre- 
pared a  Deliverer.  2.  Only  one  Deliverer  for  the  whole  race.  3.  A  Man,  like  unto 
His  brethren.  4.  Moses,  like  Christ,  made  no  common  sacrifice  to  fulfil  the  duty 
•with  which  God  had  charged  him:  II.  In  no  point  of  view  is  the  character  of  Moses 
more  venerable,  or  himself  more  illustrious  as  a  type  of  our  blessed  Lord,  than 
when  we  regard  in  him  the  appointed  mediator  between  God  and  Israel.  Moses 
•was  qualified  for  this  office— by  cordial  love — meekness — long  suffering— dis- 
interestedness— ever-watchful  zeal ;  so  God  could  have  no  interest  with  men  except 
through  Christ,  who  is  far  more  qualified  for  the  office  of  mediator  than  Moses.  III. 
In  attempting  to  estimate  the  character  of  Moses  as  a  type  of  Christ,  we  must  by 
no  means  neglect  to  regard  him  in  his  office  of  lawgiver  to  Israel.  It  was  neces- 
sary that  some  mode  of  government  should  be  given  to  them.  This  was  given  by 
the  Most  High— through  Moses.  So,  in  the  mournful  captivity  of  the  soul,  the  lust 
of  the  flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life,  oppose  the  will  of  God  ;  and  the  fallen  creature 
becomes  a  fatal  law  unto  himself.  Even  when  the  condemnation  of  impiety  is 
removed,  and  the  fetters  with  which  it  bound  all  the  passions,  and  faculties,  and 
principles  of  the  mind  are  broken,  the  liberated  bond-servant  naeds  a  revelation  of 
the  Word  of  God  by  which  his  conduct  may  be  governed.  Cbrist  a  law-giver — 
assisted  at  the  formation  of  the  law — can  best  explain  it — best  enforce  it.  IV. 
Consider  his  typical  character,  as  iTHE  leader  and  guide  of  Israel.  Ye  may 
have  fled  from  Egypt ;  but  are  ye  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation  ?  Have  ye  passed 
through  all  the  •wilderness  of  sin  and  seduction  ?  Have  ye  triumphed  over  all  your 
enemies,  and  received  your  allotted  portion  in  the  habitations  of  eternal  rest  and 
glory  ?  Ye  have  not.  A  difficult  pilgrimage  is  before  you :  but  infinite  mercy  has 
not  left  you  to  wander  alone.  Your  Conductor  fully  knows  the  way  to  that  blessed- 
ness whither  ye  are  endeavouring  to  foUow  Htm.  Ignorant  as  ye  are.  He  can  give 
you  knowledge — feeble,  He  can  support  you — faint.  He  can  refresh  you.  Lessons  : 
1.  Be  persuaded  that  the  gospel  is  worthy  of  all  acceptation.  2.  But  if  worldly  and 
unholy  affections  still  oppose  the  influence  of  that  gospel  over  your  hearts,  yield  not 
tamely  to  the  slavery  they  would  impose,  until  ye  are  provided  with  an  answer  to 
the  awful  question,  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  3.  It 
wUl  naturally  be  asked,  Thou  that  teachest  another,  teacbest  thou  not  thyself  ? 
While  therefore  the  ministers  of  religion  are  endeavouring  to  make  others  wise_ unto 
salvation,  they  may  read  in  this  history  a  rebuke  to  their  own  unbelief  and  timidity. 
{R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)  Leaders  : — 1.  Leaders  we  must  have.  To  be  a  leader 
one  must  have  courage.  Not  without  reason  did  Sir  Walter  Scott  say :  "  It  appears 
to  me  that  what  is  least  forgiven  in  a  man  of  any  mark  and  likelihood  is  want  of 
that  quality  called  pluck.    All  the  fine  qualities  of  genius  cannot  make  amends  for 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  m 

it."  Boldness  is  demanded  by  the  very  nature  of  the  case.  He  who  never  moves  till 
every  one  else  is  moving  may  be  an  excellent  companion  or  follower;  but  a  leader 
he  is  not.  He  who  would  lead  must  go  before,  must  be  in  advance.  2.  But  courage 
must  have  some  basis ;  and  this  basis  is  found  largely  in  convictions.  He  who 
would  lead  must  have  not  opinions  alone  but  convictions.  He  must  have  before 
him  some  definite  result  to  be  reached,  and  a  fixed  conception  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  end  is  to  be  gained.  And  all  this  must  not  be  a  surmise,  but  an  assurance. 
We  cannot  lead  people  with  a  perhaps.  Usually,  in  proportion  to  the  positiveness 
of  one's  convictions  will  be  his  courage  in  obeying  them.  If  one's  aims,  methods, 
convictions  are  elevated  and  noble,  so  much  the  better  ;  but  convictions  he  must 
have,  if  he  would  be  a  leader,  and  he  must  hold  them  with  a  tenacity  that  death 
alone  can  unloose.  3.  One  of  the  convictions  that  go  to  make  up  leadership  is  a 
belief  that  things  ought  to  be  done,  that  they  can  be  done,  that  they  must  be  done ; 
or,  in  other  words,  faith.  There  must  be  faith  in  a  cause,  faith  in  one's  self,  in 
one's  destiny,  in  man ;  or,  rather,  there  must  be  a  faith  in  what  God  is  able  and 
desirous  to  do  for  man  and  through  man.  To  say  "  nothing  can  be  done  "  is  to  say 
"  God  can  do  nothing."  This  despair  is  not  only  totally  unchristian,  it  is  fatal  to 
leadership.  "  I  can't"  is  powerless,  or  potent  only  for  evil.  "  I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me  "  conducts  to  victory.  4.  Out  of  faith  comes 
progressiveness.  To  have  no  aspiration  beyond  holding  things  just  where  they  are 
— or,  perhaps,  pushing  them  back  an  inch  or  two — this  is  fatal.  But  there  is  inspi- 
ration in  the  thought  of  a-l.'eving  something  that  has  not  been  done  before,  of 
treading  heights  unattained  hitherto.  The  brakeman  is  very  well  in  his  way.  But 
he  is  not  the  conductor.  He  cannot  start  the  train.  5.  For  leadership  there  must 
be  sympathy — a  knowledge  of  men,  of  their  feelings,  of  their  desires,  hopes,  and 
fears,  prejudices,  &c.  And  for  leadership  there  must  be  unselfishness.  Many  other 
qualities  are  needed  that  a  man  may  lead  wisely,  successfully.  These  seem  to  me 
indispensable  that  he  may  lead  at  sU. 

Ver.  11.  Who  am  I  7 — Ministerial  timidity  : — I.  It  is  sometimes  occasioned  by 

UNDUE    AND    DEPRECIATING    THOUGHTS    OF    SELF.       1.    By   UuduC    thoUght   of    OUT    SOCial 

position.  2.  By  undue  thought  of  our  intellectual  weakness.  3.  By  undue  thought 
of  our  moral  inability.  U.  It  is  sometimes  occasioned  by  an  undue  estimation 
OF  the  difficulties  of  the  work.  1.  This  may  arise  from  the  depressing  ex- 
periences of  youth.    2.  This  may  arise  from  the  removal  of  friendly  aids.    III.  It 

is    sometimes    OCCASIONED    BY    OUR    NOT     APPRECIATING,    AS    WE    OUGHT,    THE    DiVINB 

PRESENCE  AND  HELP.  1.  The  Diviue  presence  is  our  guide.  2.  The  Divine  presence 
is  our  sustaining  influence.     3.  The  Divine  presence  is  our  victory.    IV.  It  should 

BE  REMOVED  BY  THE  HOPES  WITH  WHICH  IT  IS  ANIMATED.       1.    By  the  hopC  of  achieving 

the  freedom  of  a  vast  nation.  2.  By  the  hope  of  leading  a  vast  nation  into  the 
land  of  promise.  Moses  was  to  lead  the  Israelites  into  Canaan :  (1)  Fertile.  (2) 
Abundance.  (3)  Beauty.  So,  the  minister  of  Christ  has  to  lead  men  to  heaven — 
this  is  the  hope  by  which  he  is  animated — and  ought  to  subdue  all  timidity — and 
inspire  him  with  holy  joy.  [J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Notes: — 1.  God  may  sometimes 
be  denied  by  the  best  of  men  in  their  infiiinity.  2.  The  best  souls  are  apt  to  have 
the  lowest  thoughts  of  themselves  for  God's  work.  3.  Visible  difliculties  in  the 
Church  may  dishearten  men  to  work.  4.  The  power  of  Egyptian  oppressors  may 
stai"tle  weak  instruments  of  deliverance.  5.  The  redemption  of  men  from  the 
house  of  bondage  is  a  startling  fact.  (Ibid.)  The  power  of  increasing  age  : — 1. 
To  change  the  views.  2.  To  calm  the  temper.  3.  To  humble  the  soul.  (Ibid.) 
Wo7-k  greater  than  self: — No  wonder  that  he  so  inquired.  The  message  seemed  to 
be  much  greater  than  the  messenger.  He  works  best  who  magnifies  his  oflSce. 
Preachers,  and  all  ministers  of  good,  should  see  their  work  to  be  greater  than  them- 
selves if  they  would  work  at  the  highest  point  of  energy.  Let  a  man  suppose  his 
work  to  be  easy,  to  be  unworthy  of  his  talents,  and  he  will  not  achieve  much 
success.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  Divine  commission : — I.  Good  men  often  want 
GREATER  CONFIDENCE  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD.  1.  Distrust  may  arisG  from  an  honest 
conviction  of  personal  unfitness.  The  most  suitable  workers  are  often  the  most 
diffident.  Great  talkers  are  little  workers.  2.  Distrust  may  arise  from  a  false 
impression  of  opposing  difficulties.  Our  estimate  of  what  we  can  accompUsh  should 
be  measured  by  our  determination  and  love.  3.  Distrust  may  arise  from  a  positive 
relapse  of  religious  fervour.  Love  inspires  zeal.  II.  Good  men  often  want  speciaIi 
ENCOURAGEMENT  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD.  1.  God  cucourages  His  servauts  by  the 
assurance  of   His  presence.     He  will  give — (1)  Strength  for  every  conflict;   (2) 


CHAP,  in.]  EXODUS.  75 

Wisdom  for  every  emergency  ;  (3)  Protection  from  every  danger.  2.  God  encourages 
His  servants  by  the  assurance  of  ultimate  success.  III.  Good  men  often  keqcire 
MINUTE  instruction  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD.  When  Moscs  determined  to  go  to 
the  Israelites,  he  anticipated  the  difficulties  that  would  arise.  They  would  want 
proof  of  his  Divine  commission,  and  he  asks,  "  What  shall  I  say  unto  them?  "  1. 
We  should  inquire  of  God  respecting  our  secular  engagements.  Why  am  I  engaged 
in  this  work,  and  not  in  some  other  ?  What  is  the  object  for  which  I  work  ?  What 
is  the  influence  of  my  work  upon  my  life  ?  What  is  the  spirit  in  which  I  work  ? 
2.  We  should  inquire  of  God  respecting  our  intellectual  tendencies.  This  is  an  age 
of  intellectual  unrest.  Old  theories  are  discarded,  and  old  doctrines  thrown  aside. 
Am  I  wandering  from  the  old  paths  ?  Am  I  resting  on  the  true  foundation  ?  3. 
We  should  inquire  of  God  respecting  our  religious  progress.  Spiritual  life  neces- 
sitates spiritual  growth.  Our  progress  may  be  slow  and  imperceptible,  but  it  must 
advance  or  perish.  Are  we  going  forward  in  the  Divine  life  ?  Is  faith  stronger  ? 
is  love  deeper  ?  is  zeal  more  intense  ?  IV.  Good  men  often  received  Divine 
authority  for  the  service  of  God.  1.  What  evidence  had  Moses  of  his  Divine 
commission  ?  It  was  attested  by  a  miraculous  call.  2.  What  evidence  had  the 
Israelites  of  his  Divine  commission  ?  It  was  attested  by  a  miraculous  power.  (J. 
T.  Woodhouse.)  Moses'  self-distrust : — These  words  indicate  humility,  not  fear. 
Among  the  grounds  which  he  alleges  for  his  hesitation,  in  no  instance  is  there  any 
allusion  to  personal  danger ;  what  he  feared  was  failure  owing  to  incompetency, 
especially  in  the  power  of  expression.  This  shrinking. f-om  self-assertion  is  the 
quality  which  seems  to  be  specially  intimated  by  the  word  rendered  "  meek  "  in 
Numb.  xii.  3.  (Canon  Cook.)  False  humility  : — Some  people  in  studying  this 
passage  in  the  life  of  Moses  will  praise  his  humility.  His  pleas  were  all  on  the 
ground  of  personal  unworthiness  or  unfitness  for  the  great  work.  But  let  us  not  be 
deceived.  That  "  humihty  "  is  not  to  be  commended  that  shrinks  from  any  duty 
which  God  commands.  At  Baalbec,  in  a  quarry,  lies  a  magnificent  block,  almost 
detached  and  ready  for  transportation.  It  was  undoubtedly  intended  to  be  placed 
with  its  fellows  in  the  wall  which  supported  the  Temple  of  the  Sun.  So  large,  so 
grand,  it  is  a  failure,  because  it  never  filled  the  place  for  which  it  was  hewn.  Like 
failures  are  many  human  lives.  Who  can  tell  how  many  men  lie  among  the  wastes 
and  ruins  of  Ufe,  that  God  designed  to  fill  grand  places,  but  that,  when  called, 
refused  to  go?  They  folded  their  talents  away  in  the  napkins  of  supposed  humility, 
of  self-distrust,  or  of  indolence  or  disobedience,  and  buried  them  in  the  earth. 
For  ever  they  will  lie  in  the  quarries,  pale  ghosts  of  glorious  "  might  have  beens," 
while  the  places  in  God's  temple  which  they  were  meant  to  fill  remain  for  ever  vacant. 
We  can  only  make  our  lives  successful  by  promptly,  joyfully,  and  unhesitatingly 
accepting  every  call  of  our  Master  to  His  service,  by  putting  ourselves  utterly  into 
His  hands  to  be  used  anywhere,  in  any  way,  in  any  work,  for  any  end,  as  He  may 
direct.     {The  Westndnster  Teacher.) 

Ver.  12.  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee. — The  guarantee  of  success : — Take  thig 
assurance  as  applying  to  the  whole  service  of  sanctified  life,  and  it  entitles  us  to 
draw  four  practical  inferences.  I.  "  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee." — Then  man  is 
SERVANT,  not  MASTER.  He  should  kuow  his  place,  or  he  can  never  keep  it.  As 
servant,  he  should — 1.  Constantly  consult  his  Master.  2.  Constantly  speak  in  the 
name  of  his  Master.  3.  Constantly  be  jealous  of  the  honour  of  his  Master.  II. 
"  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee." — Then  the  work  must  succeed.  What  is  the 
guarantee  of  success  ?  1.  Not  human  cleverness ;  ministers  may  be  clever,  so  may 
churches,  &c. ;  we  may  have  learned  sermons,  able  sermons,  ingenious  sermons,  &c. 
2.  Not  skilful  organisation.  Cards,  bazaars,  registers,  circulars,  &c.,  all  useless  as 
ends.  3.  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  the  guarantee  of  success.  "  The  mouth  of  the 
Lord  hath  spoken  it."  "  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  Me  void."  III.  "  Certainly 
I  will  be  with  thee." — Then  the  servant  is  to  be  received  for  the  Master's 
BAKE.  "  He  that  receiveth  you  receiveth  Me,  and  he  that  receiveth  Me  receiveth 
Him  that  sent  Me."  The  true  minister  carries  a  blessing  with  him.  The  Eomans 
were  to  receive  Phoebe  in  the  Lord.  What  a  lesson  to  ministers — they  are  repre- 
sentatives of  God!  IV.  "Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee." — Then  there  need  be 
NO  LACK  OF  GRACE  OR  POWER.  "  If  any  man  lack  wisdom,"  &c.  "  Lo,  I  am  with 
you  alway,"  &c.  "  Ye  have  not  because  ye  ask  not,  or  because  ye  ask  amiss."  The 
servants  may  take  counsel  of  one  another,  but  not  to  the  interruption  of  continuous 
and  trustful  prayer  to  the  Master.  1.  God  is  with  His  servants  for  their  comfort. 
2.  For  their  guidance.    3.  For  their  safety.     Application :  Notice— 1.  The  indi- 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

viduality  of  the  promise,  "I  will  be  with  thee" — with  the  one  man.  2.  The 
emphasis  of  the  promise — "  Certainly."  Who  is  with  us  in  our  life-ministry  ? 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  Divine  companionship  realised  by  the  good  in  the  service 
of  the  Christian  life : — I.  It  was  considerate.  Promise  made  when  most  needed — 
at  time  of  weakness.  II.  It  was  emphatic.  Leaving  no  room  for  doubt.  III.  It 
WAS  sympathetic.  "With  thee."  Not  I  will  follow  thee — not  I  will  go  before  thee — 
not  I  will  be  near  thee — but  with  thee — as  a  companion  to  cheer  thy  soul ;  as  a  friend — 
to  give  thee  counsel ;  as  a  God — to  make  thee  victorious.  How  can  a  mission  fail 
when  God  is  with  the  worker?  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  God's  presence  with  His  minis- 
ters : — The  mission  of  Moses  resembles  that  of  every  Christian  minister,  in  that — I.  He 

WAS  SENT  TO  HIS  BKETHKEN.       II.    WhEN  HE  WENT  TO  THEM,  HE  FOUND  THEM  IN  A  STATE 

OF  BONDAGE  AND  OPPRESSION  ;  their  Spirits  crushed,  their  minds  degraded.    HI.  He 

FOUND    THAT   HE    ONLY    PROVOKED   THEM   BY   HIS   ENDEAVOURS   TO    DELIVER    THEM.      IV. 

Promises  were  given  to  support  him  under  his  disappointments.  View  the 
promise  in  the  way  of — 1.  Encouragement.  God  will  be  with  every  minister — 
(1)  As  a  guide ;  (2)  To  strengthen  and  support  him  under  trial ;  (3)  To  comfort 
and  console  him.  2.  Caution.  While  each  pastor  rests  on  the  consolation  of 
this  privilege,  he  must  not  forget  the  call  to  watchfulness  and  holiness  which 
is  inseparably  connected  with  it.  {II.  Raihes,  M.A.)  God  is  with  His  minis- 
ters : — When  I  first  entered  the  ministry,  twenty  years  ago,  I  was  filled  with  an 
enthusiasm  that  was  as  fresh  as  it  was  inexperienced  in  the  work  of  winning  souls. 
I  felt  sure,  when  I  began  to  preach,  that  all  the  world  would  hear  and  be  converted. 
The  gospel  was  so  simple ;  the  news  so  good;  the  grace  of  Christ  so  precious — that 
I  could  think  of  nothing  else  but  that  my  hearers  would  at  once  give  themselves  to 
Christ.  I  was  under  the  impression  that  the  reason  people  were  not  converted  in 
greater  numbers  was  that  the  preachers  did  not  make  the  gospel  simple  and  plain. 
This  I  supposed  that  I  could  do.  Alas,  I  was  as  ignorant  as  Moses  when  he  made 
his  first  attempt  to  save  his  brethren.  I  did  not  know  what  the  bondage  was,  though 
I  myself  had  been  delivered.  I  did  not  realize  the  darkness  of  the  unrenewed  mind, 
the  enmity  of  the  unrenewed  heart.  I  did  not  know  the  strength  of  the  chain  with 
which  Satan  has  bound  souls.  But,  like  Melancthon,  who  had  a  similar  thought,  I 
found  that  "  old  Adam  was  stronger  than  young  Pentecost  "  ;  and  I  confess  that  to 
this  hour,  though  I  have  been  in  the  work  for  twenty  years,  I  never  sit  down  by  the 
side  of  an  unconverted  man,  woman,  or  child,  to  attempt  to  lead  them  to  Christ, 
without  a  certain  sense  of  fear.  My  insufficiency  always  comes  before  me  when  I 
think  of  what  is  involved  in  this  work.  To  persuade  a  man  to  reform  his  life,  to 
give  up  certain  sins  and  hurtful  lusts,  is  comparatively  easy  :  but  to  convert  a  sinner 
to  God  is  difficult  work  indeed ;  and  without  the  aid  of  the  Divine  Spirit  it  is 
Impossible  for  man  to  effect  it.  What  answer  have  we  to  give  to  this  honest 
shrinking  from  a  difiScult  work?  Let  us  hear  how  God  answered  Moses :  "  Certainly 
I  will  be  with  thee."  As  though  He  had  said,  "  Why,  Moses,  you  did  not  expect 
that  I  was  going  to  send  you  down  to  Egypt  alone,  to  deliver  My  people?  Have 
you  forgotten  that  I  said  I  had  come  down  to  deliver  ?  You  indeed  are  to  be  My 
instrument ;  but  I  will  be  with  you  to  make  you  mighty,  and  to  bring  the  apparently 
impossible  work  to  pass."  This  puts  the  work  in  a  new  light.  If  God  goes  with  us 
to  the  work,  then  can  we  undertake  anything.  When  Jesus  said,  "  Go  ye  into  all 
the  world,  and  make  disciples  of  all  nations,"  He  did  not  forget  to  say,  "  Lo,  I  am 
with  you  alway."  {G.F.Pentecost,  D.D.)  Theinvisihle  hut  ever-present  God: — God 
thus  puts  Himself  apparently  into  a  secondary  position.  Moses  is  to  stand  at  the  front, 
and,  so  far  as  publicity  is  concerned,  to  incur  the  whole  responsibility  of  the  proposed 
movement.  It  was  easy  for  Moses  to  say  that  he  was  prompted  of  God  to  make 
certain  representations  to  Israel  and  Pharaoh,  but  how  were  they  to  be  convinced 
that  Moses  was  servant  and  not  master?  This  is  the  difficulty  of  all  the  highest 
service  of  life,  namely,  that  the  spiritual  is  in\'isible,  and  yet  omnipotent ;  public 
attention  is  fixed  upon  the  human  agent,  and  professions  of  spiritual  inspiration 
and  impulse  are  treated  with  distrust,  if  not  with  contempt,  by  the  most  of  mankind. 
It  is  the  invisible  Christ  who  is  with  the  Church.  Were  He  present  manifestly,  it 
is  supposed  that  greater  results  would  accrue  from  Christian  service  ;  but  the  sup- 
position must  be  mistaken,  inasmuch  as  He  to  whom  such  service  is  infinitely 
dearer  than  it  ever  can  be  to  ourselves  has  determined  the  manner  of  Christian 
evangelisation.  WTiat,  then,  is  the  great  duty  and  privilege  of  the  Church  ?  It  is 
to  realize  the  presence  and  influence  of  the  Invisible.  The  Church  is  actually  to 
see  the  Unseen.  There  is  another  vision  beside  the  vision  of  the  body ;  faith  itself 
is  sight  J  and  where  faith  is  complete,  there  is  a  consciousness  of  God's  presence 


CHAP.  III.]  EXODUS.  T7 

)_ ^ 

I  throughout  our  life  and  service  which  amounts  to  a  distinct  vision  of  God's  personal 
presence  and  government.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  spirit  of  destiny  : — Moses  has 
been,  as  it  were,  audibly  and  visibly  called  to  service  and  invested  with  authority. 
A  keen  pleasure  would  seem  to  attach  to  experiences  of  that  kind.  Surely  it  was  a 
blessed  thing  to  speak  face  to  face  with  God,  and  to  go  straight  away  from  the 
communing  to  do  the  work  which  had  been  prescribed.  The  directness  of  the 
interview,  the  absence  of  all  second  causes  and  instrumentalities,  has  about  it  a 
solemnity  which  profoundly  affects  the  heart.  But  is  my  destiny  less  Divine  because 
it  has  been  revealed  to  me  under  conditions  which  seem  to  separate  widely  between 
the  Creator  and  the  creature  ?  Has  God  only  one  method  of  working  in  revealing 
to  a  man  what  that  man's  work  in  life  is  intended  to  be  ?  We  do  not  always  see 
the  fountain ;  sometimes  we  have  to  be  content  to  drink  at  the  stream.  The  danger 
is  lesi,  we  imagine  the  stream  created  itself,  forgetting  in  our  irreligion  and  folly 
that  the  stream  is  impossible  apart  from  the  fountain.  A  man  is  sometimes 
awakened  to  his  destiny  by  his  fellow-men.  In  other  cases  a  man's  destiny  seems 
to  be  determined  by  what  he  calls  his  circumstances  or  his  environment.  But  why 
this  wide  and  circuitous  way  of  putting  the  case  to  the  mind  ?  We  do  not  depose 
God  by  mistaking  the  origin  of  our  action ;  we  do  but  show  the  poorness  of  our  own 
judgment,  or  the  want  of  justice  which  impoverishes  our  lives  of  their  best  qualities. 
Every  man  should  put  to  himself  the  question — What  is  my  destiny  ?  What  does 
God  mean  me  to  be  and  do  in  the  world  ?  (Ibid.)  The  presence  of  God : — In  the 
early  days  of  the  Theological  Seminary  at  Alleghany,  it  was  often  in  great  need  of 
money.  Once,  in  a  time  of  extremity,  the  Kev.  Dr.  Francis  Herron,  President  of 
the  Board  of  Directors,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Elisha  P.  Swift,  also  a  director,  and  Eev.  Jos. 
Patterson,  met  to  devise  some  way  of  relief.  With  all  their  faith,  the  first-mentioned 
brethren  were  greatly  dejected,  "We  have  no  one  to  help  us,"  said  one  of  them. 
"  No  one  !  "  replied  Mr.  Patterson,  warmly  :  "  Why  !  I  know  of  a  thousand  here." 
The  two  looked  astonished.  He  continued,  "  Is  not  Dr.  Herron  a  cipher?  is  not 
Dr.  Swift  a  cipher  ?  am  not  I  a  cipher  ?  But  Jesus  Christ  is  surely  One.  And  if 
we  put  one  before  three  ciphers,  does  it  not  make  a  thousand?  "  They  took  new 
courage,  went  to  that  One  who  is  able  to  help,  and  did  not  pray  in  vain.  Christ's 
presence  promised : — Chrysostom  beautifully  says,  for  our  comfort :  "  I  have  a  pledge 
from  Chiist — have  His  note  of  hand — which  is  my  support,  my  refuge  and  haven ; 
and  though  the  world  should  rage,  to  this  security  I  cling.  How  reads  it  ?  '  Lo,  I 
am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.'  If  Christ  be  with  me,  what 
shall  I  fear?  If  He  is  mine,  aU  the  powers  of  earth  to  me  are  nothing  more  than 
a  spider's  web." 

Ver.  13.  What  shall  I  say  unto  them  ? — Ministerial  difficulties  to  be  anticipated, 
and  how  to  overcome  them : — I.  Ministers  must  anticipate  difficulties  in  the 
PERFORMANCE  OF  THEIR  LIFE-MISSION.  1.  Arising  from  prejudice  in  reference  to  the 
man.  2.  Arising  from  scepticism  in  reference  to  the  truth.  3.  Arising  from 
lethargy  in  reference  to  the  mission.  JI,  To  overcome  these  difficulties 
MINISTERS  MUST  SEEK  DIRECTION  FROM  GoD.  1.  Diviue  recognition  of  ministerial 
difficulty.  He  will  not  reject  any  who  seek  His  aid.  2.  Divine  sympathy  with 
ministerial  difficulty.  (1)  Manifested  by  the  gift  of  heavenly  vision  (ver.  2).  (2) 
Manifested  by  the  gift  of  needful  instruction  (vers.  15-17).  (3)  Manifested  by  the 
gift  of  holy  companionships  (ver.  12).  Such  a  manifestation  of  Divine  sympathy- 
ought  to  inspire  every  minister  with  spirit  and  fortitude  for  his  work.  They  that 
are  for  him,  are  more  than  all  that  can  be  against  him.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Why 
did  Hoses  ask  the  name  of  God  ? — 1.  Not  to  instruct  his  ignorance.  He  had  not 
forgotten  God  in  Egypt.  2.  Not  to  gratify  his  curiosity.  3.  But  io  satisfy  Israel. 
Error  has  many  gods,  he  therefore  wanted  to  know  bow  he  might  prove  to  the 
enslaved  nation  that  he  came  in  the  name  of  the  True  One.  (Ibid. )  Lessons : — 
1.  It  is  good  for  a  minister  to  know  on  whose  business  he  is  going.  2.  God's 
answer  to  one  objection  oftentimes  begets  another  in  His  servants.  3.  Dissatisfac- 
tion of  men  about  God's  instruments  is  very  probable.  4.  God's  servants  very 
reasonably  expect  that  He  will  clear  up  all  doubt  as  to  His  name,  and  their  duty. 
(Ibid.)         "  What  shall  I  say  unto  them  ?  " — a  question  for  the  pulpit : — I.  Shall  I 

SAT   UNTO    THEM    TRUTHS     THAT   ARE   IN     HARMONY   WITH     THEIR   DEPRAVED   CONDITION  ? 

No  ;  ministers  are  not  to  preach  doctrines  in  harmony  with  the  depraved  tastes  of 
men — but  to  awaken  them  from  their  sin,  by  the  proclamation  of  the  Divine  name 
and  freedom.  II.  Shall  I  give  them  an  argumentative  discourse  ?  It  would  be 
necessary  for  Moses  to  convince  the  Israelites  that  he  was  divinely  commissioned — 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  the  chief  use  that  a  minister  can  make  of  logic  is  to  prove  the  divinity  of  hia 
call  to  the  ministry.  III.  Shall  I  give  them  a  sensational  mscouRSE  ?  Had 
Moses  done  this  he  might  have  aroused  a  wave  of  feeling,  but  it  would  soon  have 
subsided  into  calm.  The  freedom  of  the  nation  would  not  have  been  achieved  in 
tbis  way.  The  sensational  preachers  of  the  world  are  not  doing  the  most  towards 
the  moral  freedom  of  the  race.  IV.  Shall  I  say  cnto  them  how  clever  I  am  ? 
Moses  had  humbled  himself  before  God.  And  men  humble  before  God  are  generally 
so  before  their  fellows.  Ministers  should  not  make  a  display  of  their  learning — 
such  conduct  will  never  accomplish  the  freedom  of  souls.  V.  Shall  I  tell  them 
Aiiovx  the  Cross  of  Jesus  ?  "  Yes,"  replies  the  penitent  sinner  ;  "  that  is  what  I 
want."  "  Yes,"  replies  the  aged  believer  ;  "  that  is  the  charm  of  my  soul."  Preach 
the  Cross  as  the  emancipation  of  the  world.  Not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the 
Lord.  (Ibid.)  What  to  preach: — I  remember  being  asked  by  the  late  Dr. 
McLeod,  who  was  head  physician  in  one  of  the  Government  asylums,  if  I  would 
preach  to  some  of  the  inmates.  "What  kind  of  men  are  they?"  I  inquired. 
"  Oh,  mostly  sailors  ;  and  if  you  accept  the  invitation  to  preach  to  them,  you  must 
make  up  your  mind  to  stand  a  good  knock  or  two,  perhaps  even  a  blow  in  the  face ; 
but  if  you  wish  to  make  friends  with  them,  you  must  take  no  notice  of  it."  "  I  am 
not  a  bit  afraid  of  them,"  I  replied  ;  "if  they  be  sailors  I  shall  speak  to  them  as 
sailors,  and  I  am  sure  they  will  not  touch  me."  I  went  and  spoke  to  them.  There 
was  no  attempt  to  molest  me,  but  many  of  the  poor  fellows  came  up  to  me  after- 
wards and  thanked  me  for  what  I  said.  Some  declared  that  what  they  hked  about 
me  was  that  I  spoke  to  them  as  sailors.  No  one  who  had  ever  spoken  to  them 
before  had  done  so.  Their  former  visitors  had  seemed  to  beheve  all  that  they  were 
told,  that  they  were  kings,  dukes,  and  earls,  hut  I  had  spoken  to  them  as  sailors,  to 
their  true  selves,  and  though  insane,  they  felt  that  I  was  speaking  the  truth. 
Similarly  we  must  speak  to  sinners  as  being  just  what  they  are.  (Christian  Herald.) 
God-directed  speaking  : — A  man  in  America  died,  who  had  long  been  renowned  for 
wickedness.  His  intellectual  abilities  were  of  no  mean  order ;  his  property  was 
considerable,  and  he  had  belonged  to  a  family  of  good  position.  By  the  practice  of 
every  kind  of  dissipation  he  had  achieved  an  evil  notoriety,  and  gloried  in  being 
considered  the  most  fascinating  and  dangerous  rone  in  the  country.  This  being  so, 
his  associates  resolved  upon  giving  him  a  funeral  worthy  of  his  reputation.  As  one 
means  of  ensuring  this,  they  invited  one  of  the  most  eminent  Presbyterian  ministers 
in  the  region  to  deliver  the  funeral  discourse.  To  the  surprise  of  many,  after  some 
little  hesitation,  he  consented.  On  the  day  and  at  the  hour  appointed  the  country 
church  was  crowded  to  overflowing  by  an  assembly  composed  of  the  relatives, 
friends,  and  companions  of  the  deceased,  together  with  a  mixed  multitude  drawn 
from  far  and  near  by  curiosity  to  hear  what  such  a  minister  could  find  to  say  of 
such  a  man.  Pimctual  to  the  moment,  the  tall  form  of  the  clergyman  ascended  the 
pulpit,  and  the  service  began.  There  was  first  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures.  Then 
followed  a  prayer,  subdued  and  tender,  for  the  family  and  relatives  of  the  deceased. 
But  the  announcement  of  the  text  fell  upon  the  assembly  like  a  clap  of  thunder.  It 
was  from  Luke  xvi.  23:  "And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments." 
The  sermon  was  a  most  pungent  and  powerful  exhibition  of  the  character,  course, 
and  end  of  a  wicked  man.  It  held  the  assembly  spellbound  to  the  very  last  word  ; 
but  there  was  in  it  not  a  single  direct  allusion  to  the  person  whose  obsequies  they 
had  come  there  to  celebrate.  In  silence  and  in  deep  solemnity  the  congregation 
dispersed  after  the  service  was  finished.  Some  were  indignant,  but  any  attempt  to 
excite  odium  against  the  preacher  was  a  failure.  It  was  generally  thought  that  in 
what  he  had  done  he  was  governed  by  a  sense  of  duty.  He  was  said  to  have  stated 
afterwards  that  when  he  was  invited  to  preach  on  that  occasion  he  had  determined 
to  decline,  but,  in  answer  to  prayer,  received  a  message  which  he  believed  to  be 
from  God — "Go — and  preach  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee."  {Ibid.)  God's 
servants  report  God's  words : — Words  spoken  on  your  own  account,  without  reference 
to  your  Lord,  will  fall  to  the  ground.  When  the  footman  goes  to  the  door  to 
answer  a  caller,  he  asks  his  master  what  he  has  to  say,  and  he  repeats  what  his 
master  tells  him.  I'ou  and  I  are  waiting-servants  in  the  house  of  God,  and  we  are 
to  report  what  our  God  would  have  us  speak.  The  Lord  gives  the  soul-saving 
message,  and  clothes  it  with  power  :  He  gives  it  to  a  certain  order  of  people,  and 
under  certain  conditions.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Closes'  difficulty  : — If  Moses  had 
been  rejected  forty  years  before,  what  resistance  and  what  objections  might  he  not 
expect  then  ?  And  when  he  should  speak  to  them  of  the  God  of  their  fathers,  and 
should  say  to  them,  "  I  have  seen  Him ;   He  has  spoken  to  me,  He  has  made 


CHAP,  in.]  EXODUS.  79 

promises  to  me,  He  has  sent  me  to  you,"  would  they  believe  him,  would  they  listen 
to  him,  would  they  understand  him  ?  It  was  thus  that  the  apostles  of  Jesus  Christ, 
when  they  went  to  gather  together  the  people  of  God  amid  idolaters,  had  to 
encounter  two  classes  of  enemies ;  on  the  one  hand,  the  emperors  of  Rome,  the 
rich  and  powerful  priests  of  the  old  reUgions,  who  had  their  gods,  Jupiter,  Mars, 
Mercury,  and  many  more ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  nations  whom  they  were  sent  to 
convert :  there  was  the  gieatest  difficulty.  Eead  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  you 
will  readily  perceive  that  the  apostles'  impediments  and  persecutions  came  from  the 
people  more  than  from  the  emperors  and  the  great  men  of  the  world.  But  do  you 
fully  understand  the  objection  that  Moses  expected  from  the  unbelief  of  the  people? 
The  Israelites  had  probably  become  idolaters  by  living  among  the  Egyptians,  who 
worshipped  a  great  number  of  gods,  pach  of  which  had  its  name,  as  Ammon,  Isia, 
Osiris,  Apis.  They  shall  say  to  me,  What  is  His  name?  Is  He  truly  the  God  of 
our  fathers  ?  Has  He  said  so  to  thee  ?  We  do  not  see  Him  ;  He  has  forsaken  us. 
{Prof.  Gmisspn.)  A  necessary  inquiry: — Before  going  on  any  of  life's  great 
errands,  we  should  know  who  has  sent  us,  and  7chat  is  the  business  on  which  we 
proceed.  Inquiries  of  this  kind  will  lead  to  a  true  apprehension  of  our  position,  and 
in  not  a  few  cases  to  a  reversion  of  our  daily  course.  What  are  you  living  for? 
You  are  hurrying  and  whirling  forward  at  a  tremendous  rate,  your  brain  teems 
upon  conceptions,  your  hand  hardly  knows  a  moment's  rest,  you  pursue  the  bubble, 
you  jostle  and  compete  and  envy,  you  flatter  and  are  flattered,  you  hoard  and  you 
dispense.  What  does  it  aU  mean  ?  Who  sketched  the  map  by  which  you  regulate 
your  pilgrimage?  What  account  can  yon  give  of  yourself  to  those  who  ask  the 
name  of  your  guiding  spirit  ?  Take  the  subject  in  the  light  of  every-day  affairs, 
and  the  singular  absurdity  of  not  knowing  on  whose  business  you  are  engaged  will 
instantly  appear.  You  meet  a  traveller  who  is  professedly  engaged  in  business ; 
you  ask  him  what  is  his  business,  and  he  cannot  answer ;  you  ask  him  whose 
interests  he  represents,  and  no  reply  is  forthcoming ;  you  ask  him  whither  he  is 
bound,  and  he  returns  the  inquiry  with  a  look  of  vacancy ; — to  what  conclusion  can 
you  come  respecting  such  a  person?  You  instantly  feel  that  the  man  is  a  child,  and 
that  the  child  has  gone  astray.  The  same  thing  holds  true  in  the  deeper  and  vaster 
concerns  of  life ;  and  he  who  is  wisely  and  profoundly  anxious  to  know  on  what 
basis  he  is  proceeding  in  commercial  transactions,  should  look  beyond  the  mere 
detail,  and  face  the  great  question — upon  what  principle  is  my  intellectual, 
emotional,  moral,  and  spiritual  life  proceeding?  Oh  man,  be  persuaded  for  a 
moment  to  tarry  in  thy  impetuous  course,  and  cross-examine  thine  own  heart  1 
Don't  be  deluded  by  the  whirl  and  thunder  and  tempest  of  an  outer  life ;  mistake 
not  commotion  for  progress,  enthusiasm  for  regeneration,  self-applause  for  the 
benediction  of  heaven!     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you. — Immutable  aiitJiority  : — I.  Moses  on 
entering  upon  a  great  mission  naturally  inquires  the  conbitions  upon  which  he 
proceeds.  II.  In  the  revelation  made  to  Moses,  "  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto 
you,"  we  have  being  distinguished  from  manifestation.  "  I  AM "  is  the 
summary  of  Being.  III.  The  answer  which  Moses  received  from  Almighty 
God  was  an  immutable  authority  for  the  greatest  of  missions.  Only  let 
us  be  sure  that  we  are  doing  God's  errand,  and  Pharaoh  and  Ca3sar,  and  all 
names  of  material  power,  will  fall  before  us,  never  again  to  rise.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  The  great  "I  AM'^: — I.  God  is  the  Incomprehensible  One,  and  yet 

is  revealed  in  His  intercourse  with  men.  The  conviction  of  His  unsearch- 
ableness  lies  at  the  root  of  all  reverence  and  awe.  Before  the  "  I  AM  that  I  AM  " 
our  spirits  lie  in  deepest  adoration,  and  rise  into  loftiest  aspiration.  But  we  need 
equally  the  other  side.  We  need  a  God  revealed  in  the  essential  features  of  His 
character  ;  and  it  is  in  His  dealings  with  men  who  feared  and  loved  Him  that  He 
has  made  Himself  known.  II.  God  is  the  Independent  and  Absolute  One,  and 
yet  He  enters  into  covenant  and  most  definite  relationships  with  men.  He  is  the 
God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  III.  God  is  the  Eternal  One,  and  yet  the  God 
of  dying  men.  Every  moment  that  we  have  of  fellowship  with  the  Eternal  God 
assures  us  that  for  us  there  is  no  death.  IV.  God  is  the  Unchangeable  One,  yet 
the  God  of  men  of  all  different  types  and  temperaments.  The  same  Lord  over  all. 
Take  these  three  patriarchs,  so  closely  related  in  blood — Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob. 
How  different  they  were  !  Yet  God  was  the  God  of  all  three,  for  they  all  agreed  in 
being  seekers  of  God.  (J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  The  great  "  I  AM"  : — The  first  thought, 
perhaps,  of  all  which  lies  wrapped  in  these  two  grand  comprehensive  words,  "  I 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

AM,"  is  mystery.  Our  best  worship  is  in  silence,  and  our  truest  wisdom  when  we 
confess  without  confession.  "  It  is  too  high  for  me,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  The 
utmost  conception  of  the  most  exalted  intellect  of  the  most  heaven-taught  man  is 
only  a  faint  approximation  thereto.  "  I  AM."  It  still  lies  in  the  future  of  a  far-off 
beatitude — "Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart  for  they  shall  see  God."  But  where  do 
these  glimpses  lie  of  the  great  I  AM ;  and  how  can  we  now  know  Him  at  all  ?  I 
believe,  first,  in  nature.  The  wonderful  organization  and  marvellous  system  of 
nature,  in  the  world  I  live  in.  Next  I  look  for  it  in  the  Huly  Word  which  He  has 
given  to  me  with  the  impress  of  His  mind  and  being.  But  more  in  that  Spirit 
wljich  dwells  m  me  and  which  is  the  reflection  of  the  nature  and  a  very  part  of  the 
life  and  the  essence  of  God.  Thirdly,  and  better  still  in  Him,  His  own  dear  Son, 
"  the  brightness  of  His  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,"  and  who  claims 
to  Himself  that  very  name  (John  viii.  58).  No  created  thing  could  ever  say  with 
truth,  "lam."  God  alone  has  no  other  origin  but  Himself.  He  depends  upon 
nothing  ;  His  life  is  essential  life  ;  all  life,  from  all  eternity  past  to  all  eternity  yet 
to  come.  He  is  "I  AM."  Therefore  because  He  is  the  I  AM,  all  is  present  time 
with  God.  It  is  the  present  tense  ever.  The  consequences  are  tremendous.  All 
our  past  sins,  all  our  past  mercies,  all  our  past  promises  and  vows,  all  our  past  life, 
and  all  the  life  that  is  yet  to  come,  it  is  all  the  present  moment  with  God,  in  all  its 
freshness  and  clearness  and  distinctness  at  this  moment — "I  AM."  Hence  the 
absolute  and  perfect  unchangeableness !  Or  take  another  instance  in  that  great 
name  "  I  AM."  All  life,  which  is  life  indeed,  must  emanate  from  Him.  He  is  the 
life.  And  there  is  another  view  which  we  may  take  of  these  two  grand  words,  "  I 
AM."  God  does  not  say  what  He  is.  He  leaves  that  to  us.  We  must  fill  in  the 
blank.  "  I  am  whatever  you  make  Me.  If  you  disbelieve  Me,  if  you  think  little  of 
Me,  I  am  a  just  God,  a  holy  God,  a  jealous  God,  an  avenging  God,  a  strict  God,  a 
punishing  God  ;  I  shall  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty,  I  am  a  consuming  fire.  I£ 
you  are  a  penitent  sinner,  if  you  have  left  Me  and  are  coming  back  to  Me,  if  you  are 
sorry  for  what  you  have  done,  if  you  have  grieved  Me,  and  now  wish  to  please  Me, 
I  am  a  forgiving  God,  full  of  mercy  and  compassion,  of  great  pity,  passing  by  trans- 
gression and  siu  more  than  any  one  asketh.  I  am  love.  If  you  are  really  My  child, 
poor,  weak,  unworthy,  sinful  though  you  are,  yet  still  My  child,  striving  to  please 
Me,  earnest  to  serve  Me,  desiring  more  and  more  to  see  Me  and  be  with  Me,  telling 
Me  everything  in  your  little  heart,  trusting  Me,  loving  Me,  I  am  your  own  dear 
loving  faithful  Father ;  I  am  yours  and  you  are  Mine  to  the  very  end.  I  have  loved 
you  and  chosen  you  from  all  eternity,  and  I  never  change.  Though  I  do  sometimes 
hide  Myself,  yet  behind  the  cloud  I  am,  I  am,  I  AM.  I  am  thine,  and  thou  art  Mine, 
for  ever  and  ever!  "  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Divine  name: — I.  As  only  revealed 
BY  THE  Divine  Being  Himself.  H.  As  only  paktially  undeustood  by  the  GR.iNDEST 

INTELLECTS.      III.  As  SUFFICIENTLY  COMrREHENDED  FOB  THE  PRACTICAL  SERVICE  OF  THE 

Christian  life.  We  know  enough  of  God  to  give  strength,  responsibility,  hope,  to 
our  Christian  work  and  life.  (J.  S.  Exell,  21.  A.)  The  name  of  the  Lord  : — The 
answer  is  twofold.  It  repeats  the  idea  that  He  is  the  God  of  their  father ;  but  it 
connects  that  with  the  idea  that  He  is  Jehovah.  I.  The  eternal  name.  "  God 
said  unto  Moses,  I  AM  that  I  AM.  Say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath  sent 
me  unto  you."  The  word  is  that  from  which  Jehovah  comes.  It  expresses  the  idea 
of  existence.  In  announcing  Himself  by  this  name  the  Divine  Being  excludes  all 
notion  of  any  commencement  or  termination  of  His  existence,  or  that  He  is  indebted 
for  it  to  any  other.  It  is  self-existence,  necessary  existence ;  His  non-existence  is 
an  impossibility  and  cannot  be  entertained.  Jesus  Christ  "  the  same  yesterday, 
and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  "  The  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last." 
"  He  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  Perhaps  the  most  helpful  conception  we 
have  of  permanence  is  given  by  the  spectacle  of  the  lofty  mountains  which  stand 
unmoved  and  unchanged  for  centuries  and  millenniums.  We  call  them  the  ever- 
lasting hills.  But  He  was  before  the  mountains,  and  will  continue  His  undying 
existence  when  they  have  disappeared  in  the  final  dissolution.  II.  The  abiding 
relationship.  "  The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the 
God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob."  The  two  names  are  closely  connected, 
because  He  could  not  be  the  one  God  of  successive  generations  if  He  were  not 
Jehovah — the  Everlasting.  1.  You  will  mark  that  He  is  not  only  Jehovah, 
God  in  Himself,  as  He  cannot  but  be ;  He  is  the  God  of  the  persons  here  men- 
tioned. Think  what  a  great  thing  it  is  that  He  should  be  the  God  of  any  one ! 
Think  what  a  blessedness  and  a  glory  it  is  to  have  His  ahnightiness  on  your  side ; 
His  love  your  restiAg-place  ;  His  throne  your  refuge  in  distress ;  His  unchanging 


CHiP.  in.]  EXODUS.  81 

faithfulness  your  abiding  confidence.  2.  Next,  observe  that  He  was  the  God  of 
each  of  the  persons  named.  God  knows  how  to  be  the  God  of  all  His  people  how- 
ever they  differ  from  each  other  in  those  subtle  shades  of  character  which,  like  the 
features  of  the  face,  distinguish  one  man  from  another.  3.  Then  observe,  further. 
He  was  the  God  of  their  successive  generations.  This  thought  is  valuable  in  con- 
nection with  the  idea  that  God  still  has  a  people.  The  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham. 
Also  that  the  children  of  godly  parents  should  value  the  blessin<»  of  having  their 
father's  God.  Fear  to  forfeit  it.  4.  Nor  must  we  overlook  the  important  use  the 
Great  Teacher  made  of  the  statement  in  our  text.  Argument  for  resurrection  and 
immortality  in  Matt.  xxii.  24-32.  IH.  The  permanekt  name.  God's  eternity  con- 
trasts with  our  brief  life  :  warrants  our  confidence  in  Him  :  suggests  the  ble-?sed- 
ness  of  those  who  are  interested  in  Him.  (John  Raivlinson.)  God's  name  of 
■  Himself: — I.  Peusoxality — "I."  1.  We  attach  three  ideas  to  personality.  (1) 
Essential  distinctness.  (2)  Individual  consciousness.  (3)  Spontaneity.  2.  God's 
personality— (1)  Explains  the  unity  of  the  universe.  (2)  Meets  the  aspirations 
of  human  nature.  U.  Self-existence — "I  AM."  1.  The  independent  amidst 
dependent  beings.  2.  The  Unchangeable  amidst  a  changing  universe.  III.  Un- 
searchableness — "  I  AM  that  I  AM."  1.  Mystery  is  essential  to  Deity.  2.  Mystery 
is  a  want  of  human  nature.  Stirs  intellect,  wakes  wonder,  inspires  reverent  awe  of 
souls.  {Homilist.)  "I  AM  ^' : — I.  The  highest  inquiry  of  man  as  a  moral 
AGENT.  1.  This  inquiry  is  most  reasonable.  2.  This  inquiry  is  most  urgent. 
II.  The  highest  revelation  to  man  as  a  moral  student.  "I  AM — "  what? 
The  Fountain  of  all  Ufe,  the  Foundation  of  all  virtue,  the  Source  of  all 
blessedness,  the  Cause,  the  Means,  and  the  End  of  all  things  in  the  universe 
but  sin.  1.  This  is  the  revelation  that  man  as  a  thinker  craves  for.  2.  This 
is  the  revelation  which  the  gospel  gives.  III.  The  highest  authority  of  man 
AS  A  MORAL  WORKER.  LcssoHs :  1.  God  is.  The  grandest  fact  in  the  universe. 
2.  God  is  an  absolute  personality.  3.  God  deals  with  individual  men.  "  Hath 
sent  me."  4.  God  makes  man  His  messenger  to  men.  {Ibid.)  The  minister 
sent  by  God: — I.  The  Divine  existence.  "  I  AM."  He  who  is,  and  who  will  be 
what  He  is.  II.  The  ministry  a  Divine  institution.  "  I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto 
you."  This  creates  the  relation  of  pastor  and  people.  III.  Mutual  duties  op 
pastor  and  people.  1.  The  duty  of  the  pastor.  (1)  He  must  preach  the  gospel  in 
its  purity  and  simplicity.  (2)  He  must  administer  the  ordinances.  (.S)  He  must 
maintain  a  wholesome  discipline  in  the  Church.  2.  The  duty  of  the  people.  (1) 
Sympathy;  (2)  Love;  (3)  Obedience;  (4)  Co-operation;  (5)  Prayer  for  their 
minister.     (J.    W.  Bay.)  The  immutability  of  God: — I.  That  Jehovah  is  un- 

changeable   IS    PROVED    from    what  WE    KNOW   OF   HiS    OTHER   ATTRIBUTES.      We    are 

assured,  for  example,  that  He  is  infinite  in  goodness,  infinite  in  knowledge,  infinite 
in  power.  The  simple  inquiry  before  us  is.  Are  these  attributes  subject  to  change  ? 
Now,  change  in  any  being  implies  increase,  or  diminution,  or  entire  removal  of 
certain  properties.  To  suppose  any  attribute  of  God  to  cease  entirely,  is  to  sup- 
pose that  He  ceases  to  be  God.  Change,  then,  if  it  occurs  at  all,  must  imply  either 
increase  or  diminution  of  His  perfections.  On  this  principle,  it  is  easy  to  see  that 
the  least  change  in  the  degree  of  His  power,  for  example,  must  make  Him  more 
than' almighty,  or  less  than  almighty ;  the  least  change  in  His  knowledge  must 
make  Him  more  than  omniscient,  or  less  than  omniscient;  in  other  words,  the  least 
change  in  a  perfect  and  infinite  being  is   inconceivable.      II.  That  Jehovah  is 

unchangeable    is  PROVED  FROM  EXPLICIT  AND  REPEATED  DECLARATIONS  OF  THE    BiBLE. 

(See  Mai.  iii.  6 ;  Tit.  i.  2  ;  James  i.  17  ;  Psa.  cii.  27).  The  inferences  resulting  from 
the  truth  thus  established  are  so  important  as  to  demand  the  remaining  time  that 
can  be  allotted  to  this  discourse.  1.  All  conceptions  of  God  which  apply  time  and 
succession  to  His  existence,  are  erroneous.  "  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thou- 
sand years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day."  He  is  no  older  than  He  was  from 
eternity.  Age  is  a  relative  term  :  it  implies  beginning ;  but  God  is  eternal.  It  im- 
plies change  ;  but  God  is  unchangeable.  Time  is  the  measure  of  created  existence  ; 
but  God  is  uncreated.  Hence,  the  diversity  of  views  which  we  have  of  the  same 
thing  at  different  times,  results  from  the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge.  Change 
of  opinion  implies  liabihty  to  mistake.  Increase  of  knowledge  implies  past  ignor- 
ance ;  decrease  of  knowledge  implies  present  ignorance.  But  neither  of  these  can 
apply  to  Him  whose  "  understanding  is  infinite."  2.  God  has  no  new  purposes. 
This  follows,  by  unquestionable  inference,  from  His  immutability.  WTiatever  was 
His  purpose  from  eternity  is  His  purpose  now  :  and  whatever  is  His  purpose  now, 
was  His  purpose  from  eternity.    Two  things  then  are  certain.    (1)  That  God  is  un- 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

changeable.  (2)  That  God  haspurposes.  The  inference  is  perfectly  conclusive  that 
these  purposes  are  eternal.  This  argument  cannot  be  evaded.  It  has  the  clearness 
of  demonstration.  3.  The  certainty  of  final  salvation  to  true  believers  is  a  reason- 
able doctrine,  grounded  on  the  immutable  truth  of  God,  as  imphed  in  the  promises 
of  the  new  covenant.     These  promises  of  the  unchanging  God  must  be  fulfilled. 

4.  When  God  is  said  to  repent,  it  implies  no  change  in  His  character  or  purpose. 

5.  The  immutability  of  God  is  no  discouragement  to  prayer,  but  the  best  ground  of 
encouragement.  If  Jehovah  were  fickle,  like  earthly  monarchs,  then,  indeed,  it 
would  be  vain  to  pray.  The  answer  of  prayer  implies  no  change  in  the  mind  of 
God.  6.  The  unchangeable  perfection  of  God  is  a  doctrine  full  of  comfort  to  His 
people.  This  world,  with  all  its  concerns,  bears  the  stamp  of  mutability.  Amid 
these  scenes  of  fluctuation,  is  there  no  object  then  in  heaven  or  earth  that  is  un- 
changing ?  Yes,  one ;  God  is  unchanging.  Here  is  stability.  7.  The  immuta- 
bility of  God  is  a  doctrine  full  of  terror  to  His  enemies.  (E.  Potter,  D.D.)  God, 
the  great  "  /  AM  "  : — If  I  say  "  I  am,"  I  say  what  is  not  true  of  me.  I  must  say  "  I 
am  something — I  am  a  man,  I  am  bad,  or  I  am  good,  or  I  am  an  Englishman,  I  am 
a  soldier,  I  am  a  sailor,  I  am  a  clergyman  " — and  then  I  shall  say  what  is  true  of 
me.  But  God  alone  can  say  "I  AM"  without  saying  anything  more.  And  why? 
Because  God  alone  is.  Everybody  and  everything  else  in  the  world  becomes  :  but 
God  is.  We  are  all  becoming  something  from  our  birth  to  our  death — changing 
continually  and  becoming  something  different  from  what  we  were  a  minute  before ; 
first  of  all  we  were  created  and  made,  and  so  became  men  ;  and  since  that  we  have 
been  every  moment  changing,  becoming  older,  becoming  wiser,  or  alas  1  foolisher ; 
becoming  stronger  or  weaker;  becoming  better  or  worse.  Even  our  bodies  are 
changing  and  becoming  different  day  by  day.  But  God  never  changes  or  becomes 
anything  different  from  what  He  is  now.  What  He  is,  that  He  was,  and  ever  will 
be.  Many  heathen  men  have  known  that  there  was  one  eternal  God,  and  that  God 
is.  But  they  did  not  know  that  God  Himself  had  said  so  ;  and  that  made  them 
anxious,  puzzled,  almost  desperate,  so  that  the  wiser  they  were,  the  unhappier  they 
were.  For  what  use  is  it  merely  knowing  that  God  is  ?  The  question  for  poor 
human  creatures  is,  "  But  what  sort  of  a  being  is  God  ?  Is  He  far  off  ?  Does  He 
care  nothing  about  us  ?  Does  He  let  the  world  go  its  own  way,  right  or  wrong  ?  Is 
He  proud  and  careless  ?  A  Self-glorifying  Deity  whose  mercy  is  not  over  all  His 
works,  or  even  over  any  of  them  ?  And  the  glory  of  the  Bible,  the  power  of  God 
revealed  in  the  Bible,  is,  that  it  answers  the  question,  and  says,  "  God  does  care 
for  men,  God  does  see  men,  God  is  not  far  off  from  any  one  of  us.  Ay,  God  speaks 
to  men — God  spoke  to  Moses  and  said,  not  "  God  is,"  but  "  I  AM."  God  in  sundry 
times  and  divers  manners  spoke  to  our  fathers  by  tbe  prophets  and  said,  "  I  AM." 
But  more — Moses  said,  "  I  AM  hath  sent  me."  God  does  not  merely  love  us,  and 
yet  leave  us  to  ourselves.  He  sends  after  us.  He  sends  to  us.  But  again  :  "  I 
AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you."  Unto  whom?  Who  was  Moses  sent  to?  To  the 
Children  of  Israel  in  Egypt.  And  what  sort  of  people  were  they?  Were  they  wise 
and  learned  ?  On  the  contrary,  they  were  stupid,  ignorant,  and  brutish.  Were 
they  pious  and  godly  ?  On  the  contrary,  they  were  worshipping  the  foolish  idols  of 
the  Egyptians — so  fond  of  idolatry  that  they  must  needs  make  a  golden  calf  and 
worship  it.  Then  why  did  God  take  such  trouble  for  them  ?  Why  did  God  care  for 
them,  and  help  them,  and  work  wonders  for  them  ?  Why?  Exactly  because  they 
were  so  bad.  Just  because  they  were  so  bad.  His  goodness  yearned  over  them  all 
the  more,  and  longed  to  make  them  good.  Just  because  they  were  so  unclean  and 
brutish.  His  holiness  longed  all  the  more  to  cleanse  them.  Because  they  were  so 
stupid  and  ignorant.  His  wisdom  longed  to  make  them  wise.  Because  they  were  so 
miserable,  His  pity  yearned  over  them,  as  a  father  over  a  child  fallen  into  danger. 
Because  they  were  sick,  they  had  all  the  more  need  of  a  physician.  Because  they 
were  lost,  there  was  all  the  more  reason  for  seeking  and  saving  them.  Because  they 
were  utterly  weak,  God  desired  all  the  more  to  put  His  strength  into  them,  that  His 
strength  might  be  made  perfect  in  weakness.  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  God's  memorial 
name : — I.  In  this  memorial  name  of  God  we  ake  taught  His  Lom  existence. 
"  I  AM  that  I  AM  "  is  a  name  synonymous  in  meaning  with  Jehovah.  This  name 
includes  within  its  vast  extent  of  signification  aU  past,  present  and  future  existence 
and  duration.  1.  Self-existence  is  a  Divine  attribute.  2.  Eternity  necessarily 
follows  from  His  self-existence.  3.  His  proprietorship  springs  from  the  fact  of  His 
existence.  II.  The  revelation  of  this  memorial  name  to  Moses  had  purpose.  It 
was  a  crisis  in  the  history  of  Moses,  and  also  of  that  of  Israel  in  Egypt.  1.  One 
purpose  it  served  was  to  strengthen  Moses  in  executing  his  work.     2.  Aiiother  par- 


CHAP,  ra.]  EXODUS.  83 

. , • ■ ■ — * — . 

pose  was  to  check  idolatrous  practices.  3.  It  taught  Moses  the  safety  of  the  people. 
4.  The  revelation  of  this  name  in  connection  with  the  people's  ancestry  shows  that 
they  were  the  heirs  of  immortality.  5.  The  revelation  of  this  name  indicated 
victory.  (J.  H.  Hill.)  The  greatness  and  glory  of  God  : — The  creature  is  nothing 
in  comparison  with  God ;  all  the  glory,  perfection,  and  excellency  of  the  whole 
world  do  not  amount  to  the  value  of  a  unit  in  regard  of  God's  attributes  ;  join  ever 
so  many  of  them  together,  they  cannot  make  one  in  number ;  they  are  nothing  in 
His  regard,  and  less  than  nothing.  All  created  beings  must  utterly  vanish  out  of 
sight  when  we  think  of  God.  As  the  sun  does  not  annihilate  the  stars,  and  make 
them  nothing,  yet  it  annihilates  their  appearances  to  our  sight ;  some  are  of  the 
first  magnitude,  some  of  the  second,  some  of  the  third,  but  in  the  daytime  all  are 
alike,  all  are  darkened  by  the  sun's  glory :  so  it  is  here,  there  are  degrees  of  per- 
fection and  excellency,  if  we  compare  one  creature  with  another,  but  let  once  the 
glorious  brightness  of  God  shine  upon  the  soul,  and  in  that  light  all  their  differ- 
ences are  unobserved.  Angels,  men,  worms,  they  are  all  nothing,  less  than  nothing, 
to  be  setup  against  God.  This  magnificent  title  "  I  AM,"  darkens  all,  as  if  nothing 
elsewhere.      (X.  Manton,  D.  D.) 

Ver.  15.  The  Lord  God  of  youf  fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac. 

— The  Qod  of  the  generations : — Men  are  always  influenced  more  or  less  by  the 
power  of  great  names.  This  appears  in  every  sphere  of  life,  social,  scientific, 
political,  literary,  religious.  The  name  of  a  wise,  heroic,  or  philanthropic,  or 
notably  godly  man,  is  a  perpetual  fountain  of  inspiration — a  well-spring  of  living 
water  from  which  we  gather  stimulus,  courage,  power  to  be  and  to  do.  The  sound  of 
it  stirs  the  pulses  of  our  better  life.  But  no  names  in  any  country,  or  among  any 
people,  have  wielded  a  mightier  power  than  these  three  mentioned  in  the  test  exerted 
over  the  minds  and  history  of  the  Jews.  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  stood  forth 
in  every  succeeding  age  in  increasing  lustre,  unshadowed  even  by  the  memories 
of  other  noble  names,  such  as  Moses,  Daniel,  Solomon,  Elijah,  Isaiah.  Appeal  to 
them  was  always  effective  when  all  other  means  of  rousing  the  national  heart 
failed.  I.  It  ANxonNCES  God's  relation  to  individual  life.  "  I  am  the  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob."  Here  there  is  a  sublime  fact  upon  which  our  minds  can 
lay  hold.  The  statement  is  not  vague  or  unsubstantial,  but  tells  us  that  the  great 
God  has  to  do  with  men,  and  holds  a  distinct  personal  relation  towards  each  of  them. 
Perhaps  we  have  been  too  apt  to  attempt  to  satisfy  ourselves  with  impalpable 
generalities,  and  to  talk  of  God  as  the  God  of  Creation,  from  whose  fulness  of 
life  and  omnipotence  of  energy  the  universe  has  derived  its  existence.  In  like 
manner  we  employ  what  may  be  termed  His  official  titles  to  represent  Him  to  our 
thought.  He  is  the  King  of  kings,  the  Euler,  the  Governor  of  the  nations.  But 
the  hearts  of  men  crave  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  God  than  these  ideas  can 
possibly  convey.  We  cannot  satisfy  ourselves  with  abstractions.  Official  titles 
never  command  our  affection.  What  we  want  is  not  a  revelation  that  only  declares 
God's  universal  dealings  with  humanity,  but  His  personal  interest  in  individual 
men.  And  we  see  that  thus  early  in  the  history  of  the  race  this  revelation  is  clearly 
made.  Nay,  from  the  first  and  earliest  declaration  of  God's  relation  to  the  world, 
this  is  uuhesitatingly  announced.  All  the  beautiful  stories  of  Divine  intercourse 
with  men  contained  in  the  Book  of  Genesis  are  recorded  to  teach  us  that  God  has 
not  been  satisfied  with  a  merely  general  and  official  relationship  to  men,  but  that 
He  has  ever  had  regard  to  the  personal  wants,  the  personal  struggles,  the  personal 
sins,  the  personal  joys  and  sorrows,  the  personal  lives  and  deaths  of  each  man, 
woman,  and  child  born  into  this  world.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  "  ;  and  our 
response  is,  "  This  God  is  our  God.  He  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death." 
"  The  Lord  is  my  shepherd,  I  shall  not  want."  More  clearly  still  is  this  revelation 
made  in  the  New  Testament — that  carries  the  truth  further,  and  by  Jesus  Christ  we 
are  shown  that  God  has  the  most  intimate  relation  with  human  souls.  Indeed,  the 
very  use  of  the  word  "  Father  "  implies  this  personal  relationship.  It  is  impossible 
for  a  true  father  to  regard  and  treat  the  members  of  his  family  in  a  general  indis- 
criminate manner — looking  upon  them  in  the  mass,  and  not  as  individuals — that 
were  to  destroy  the  very  meaning  and  beauty  of  family  life.  But  the  father  knows 
that  he  has  a  distinct  love  for  each  member.  Thus  our  Lord  teaches  -us  the  par- 
ticular and  special  and  personal  nature  of  the  relationship  of  God  to  us.  We  are 
not  lost  in  the  mass,  as  one  in  a  crowd  for  whom  no  one  cares,  and  whom  no  one 
would  miss.  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob." 
Connected  with  this  is  another  thought  worthy  of  notice.    It  is  that  God  here 


8i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  in. 

— « _ — ■ — ■ 

expresses  His  relation  to  persons  of  distinct  and  differing  characters.  Perhaps  no 
three  men  were  more  unlike  than  this  father,  son,  and  grandson.  Look  at  Abraham, 
the  bold,  brave,  generous,  trusting  chief,  a  dweller  in  tents,  at  home  in  the  desert. 
Compare  him  with  the  quiet,  meditative,  ease-loving,  simple-minded  Isaac,  some- 
what fond  of  savoury  living,  who  succeeded  him.  There  is  as  much  unlikt  ness  as 
could  possibly  exist  between  father  and  son.  Take,  again,  Jacob,  the  cunning, 
adroit,  ingenious,  selfish,  money-loving,  physically  timid — a  man  who  probably  had 
more  brains  than  either  of  his  predecessors,  but  who  was  made  to  be  a  politician,  a 
statesman,  to  whose  active,  contriving  spirit,  sitting  at  home,  or  roving  in  the 
desert,  would  be  alike  uncongenial.  There  we  have  three  men  totally  distinct  in 
character,  yet  the  declaration  is  made— "lam  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob."  Surely  there  is  meaning  in  this,  and  it  is  that  God  cares  equally  for,  and 
is  as  truly  related  to,  one  kind  of  disposition  and  character  as  another.  Ah !  there 
is  exquisite  beauty  and  comfort  in  the  tenderly-expressed  words  of  John  concerning 
Christ — "  Now  Jesus  loved  Martha,  and  her  sister,  and  Lazarus."  Three  varieties 
of  character,  but  all  beloved.  If  all  this  be  true,  what  need  of  our  nature  is  left 
unsatisfied?  If  this  be  true,  who  is  there  will  not  feel  that  his  life,  so  specially  the 
subject  of  God's  thought,  is  therefore  a  grander,  nobler,  and,  withal,  a  more 
responsible  thing  ?  Who  will  depreciate  his  own  proud  worth  ?  Who  will  bemoan 
his  lot,  thinking  with  envy  of  others  better  circumstanced  ?  II.  It  announces  God's 
RELATION  TO  scccEssivE  GENERATIONS.  Thcse  three  men  represented  an  unbroken 
succession  of  three  generations,  running  into  one  another,  yet  in  a  measure  distinct. 
May  we  not  learn  from  these  facts  that  God  is  not  a  God  of  seasons  and  partiaUties, 
but  that  He  belongs  to  all  the  successive  generations  as  they  move  across  the  world 
to  the  silence  of  the  grave  ?  There  is  no  break  in  His  thoughtful  care  or  in  the 
manifestations  of  His  love.  He  does  not  appear  at  one  age  and  disappear  at 
another,  at  one  time  show  Himself  peculiarly  concerned  with  human  welfare,  at 
another  time  altogether  indifferent  about  the  joys  and  sorrows,  the  sins  and  the 
cravings  of  men.  In  such  a  Being  as  that  we  could  neither  trust  nor  believe.  There 
is  no  intermission.  God's  intercourse  with  men  is  never  broken  off.  This  intercourse 
may  assume  different  forms.  What  is  suited  to  one  age  maybe  altogether  unsuited 
to  the  next.  At  one  time  His  revelations  may  be  such  as  the  senses  can  testify 
to ;  He  may  instruct  men  in  His  mind  and  will  through  the  medium  of  miracles, 
flashing  symbols  of  omnipotence  before  their  eyes  ;  at  other  times  He  may  reveal 
Himself  in  a  person;  in  a  human  life,  as  we  believe  He  did  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 
At  others,  all  visions  may  disappear ;  no  miracle  shall  startle  the  world  into 
wonderkig  awe.  God  is  not  tied  to  methods.  He  may  and  does  employ  all  at  one 
time  or  another  in  order  to  convince  men  of  His  nearness  to  them  and  interest  in 
their  life.  "  The  God  of  the  Hebrews  is  not  our  God."  That  is  the  sum  of  much 
of  the  unbelief  of  the  day.  The  cry  is  for  palpable  evidence.  Palpable  evidence  ! 
Why,  we  have  abundance  of  it  on  all  sides.  Miracles !  There  is  no  need  of  them. 
WTiy,  the  very  researches  of  our  scientific  men  are  doing  away  with  the  necessity 
for  miracles,  for  they  are  demonstrating  by  their  discoveries  that  the  world  is  full 
of  order,  of  beauty,  of  marvellous  contrivances  that  must  be  the  work  of  mind. 
Here  are  the  proofs  of  Divine  existence.  Divine  working,  Divine  wisdom  and  bounty 
and  power.  To  believe  He  is  not  as  much  the  God  of  this  generation  as  of  any  in 
all  the  long  past,  is  to  cut  to  the  very  root  of  all  true  faith  and  trust  in  Him,  is  to 
regard  Him  as  partial,  as  doing  more  for  one  people  than  for  another  equally  in  need 
cf  His  revelation  of  power  and  love ;  it  is  to  throw  us  back  for  our  faith  in  God 
I  pon  dead  history,  which  can  never  create  or  nourish  into  a  living  hope  the  trust  of 
1  uman  souls.  We  may  say  that  the  age  of  supernatural  displays  of  mere  power  is 
)  assed,  but  we  are  called  upon  to  rise  from  the  merely  materialistic  and  tangible, 
r.ud  to  realise  God  in  the  hallowed  and  invisible  communion  of  the  Spirit.  The 
God  of  the  father  is  to  be  the  God  of  the  son  and  the  grandson  by  legitimate, 
unhindered  succession,  and  those  who  come  after  can  speak  of  "  the  God  of  our 
fathers."  That  there  is  no  reason  against  it  in  the  will  and  purposes  of  the  Divine 
Being  Himself  we  have  seen.  He  is  willing  to  bless  and  enrich  each  and  all,  with- 
out choice  or  favouritism.  But  in  how  few  cases  in  the  family  life  is  He  recognized 
from  one  generation  to  another.  Here  I  bring  the  matter  direct  home  to  your 
hearts.  I  know  I  must  be  speaking  to  some  who  are  thinking  of  pious  parents.  Yon 
have  a  godly  father  or  mother,  or  perhaps  both.  What  of  yourself  ?  Are  yon 
continuing  the  succession  ?  The  name  you  bear  has  been  associated  with  godliness 
in  one  or  two  generations  past.  Is  it  to  be  separated  in  your  time  ?  What  will 
yonr  children  say  of  you  ?  WiU  they  be  able  to  pray  to  the  God  of  their  parents  ? 
iW.  Brqden.) 


CHAP,  in.]  EXODUS.  85 
»   » 

Ver.  16.  Gather  the  elders. — The  xcisdom  of  gathering  the  few;  or  the  consider- 
ateness  of  the  Divine  Being  in  reference  to  the  mission  of  His  servants  : — I.  This 

WOULD    BE    THE    MOST    EFFECTIVE    METHOD    OF   ENLIGHTENING    THE    MIND  OF  THE  N.iTION 

IN  KEFERENCE  TO  THE  DiviNE  INTENTION.  1.  This  afforded  Moses  a  good  oppor- 
tunity for  personal  explanations.  2.  It  was  a  good  precaution  against  the  ignorance 
and  fanaticism  of  the  common  people.  The  more  agencies  a  man  can  bring  into 
his  life-work  the  better.  II.  It  would  be  the  most  effective  method  of  gaining 
THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  NATION.  All  great  workcrs  should  be  judicious  in  their 
movement.  III.  It  would  thus  be  the  most  effective  method  of  wofvKing  out 
THE  Divine  project  in  reference  to  the  nation.  1.  How  considerate  of  the 
Divine  Being  to  give  Moses  this  idea  of  working  !  Many  men  will  not  listen  to  the 
Divine  instructions.  This  is  the  occasion  of  the  great  failure  of  so  much  religious 
energy.  2.  How  numerous  are  the  agencies  put  in  motion  for  the  performance  of 
Divine  projects.  God  is  the  source  of  all  commissions  for  the  moral  good  of  man. 
3.  All  great  workers  may  find  a  pattern  here.  Not  to  trust  their  new  and  Divine 
enterprises  to  the  tide  of  i^opular  opinion — storms  may  gather — may  be  wrecked. 
Launch  them  first  on  the  more  tranquil  waters  of  the  few — afterwards  they  will  be 
more  likely  to  weather  the  national  gale.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  A  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey. — An  inferior  motive  for  a 
religious  life  : — I.  Some  people  are  religious  because  they  hope  thereby  to  be 
SAVED  FROM  AFFLICTION.  "  I  wiU  bring  you  out  of  the  affliction  of  Egypt."  1.  They 
hope  to  escape  the  affliction  of  a  bad  name.  2.  They  hope  to  escape  the  affliction 
of  a  retributive  providence.  3.  They  hope  to  escape  the  affliction  of  moral  punish- 
ment from  God.  II.  Other  people  are  religious  because  they  hope  thereby 
TO  better  their  condition,  and  gain  greater  enjoyment.  "  Unto  a  land  flowing 
with  milk  and  honey.  " — 1.  Because  they  imagine  religion  will  free  them  from 
slavery.  2.  Because  they  imagine  religion  will  give  them  an  advantage  over  their 
enemies.  3.  Because  they  imagine  religion  will  give  them  rich  possession.  III. 
That  while  the  l.\nd  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  may  be  one  motive  for  a, 
religious  life,  the  superior  is  love  to  god  and  moral  freedom.  (j.  s.  excll, 
M.A.)  Tlie  resolution  of  Divine  mercij  : — 1.  Awakens  instruments  to  convey  its 
message.  2.  Prepares  Churches  to  welcome  its  tidings.  3:  The  giving  of  a  new 
impulse  to  history.  (Ibid.)  The  encouragement  God  gives  to  Christian  ivorkers  : — 
1.  Divine  aid  in  the  work.  2.  Bright  hope  in  their  future.  3.  Glad  success  in 
their  toil.  (Ibid.)  A  happy  residence: — 1.  A  land  of  plenty.  2.  A  land  of 
beauty,  f^.  A  land  of  promise,  4,  A  land  of  freedom,  5.  A  land  of  rest.  6.  A 
land  typal  of  heaven.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  18.  Let  us  go,  we  beseech  thee,  three  days' journey. — A  moderate  request : 
— This  request  seems  at  first  to  be  put  in  a  politic  form,  as  if  to  secure  a  favourable 
answer.  This,  however,  was  quite  unnecessary,  since  the  Almighty  was  about  to 
bring  His  people  out  of  Egj'pt  by  a  strong  hand.  It  is  merely  expressed  in  a  style 
of  reserve  and  moderation.  It  was  not  requisite  to  reveal  to  Pharaoh,  who  was  in  a 
hostile  mood,  all  the  intentions  of  God  concerning  His  people.  Hence  Pharaoh  is 
merely  informed  that  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  has  met  with  them  ;  and  their  request 
is  hmited  to  the  first  step  to  be  taken  in  obedience  to  His  will.  A  three  days' 
journey  is  mentioned,  simply  because  this  would  take  them  clear  out  of  Egypt,  one 
day  being  employed  in  setting  out,  one  in  marching,  and  the  third  in  coming  to  a 
resting-place.  And  a  sacrifice  is  added,  because  this  is  the  first  act  of  obedience. 
The  former  involves  their  departure  out  of  Egypt,  the  latter  commences  the  perfect 
service  of  God.  This  is  exactly  the  mode  in  which  God  trains  His  i^eople.  The 
immediate  duty  and  the  immediate  blessing  are  set  before  them,  and  these  are 
pregnant  with  all  farther  and  higher  duties  and  blessings.  So  He  deals  with  Pharaoh, 
But  there  is  not  only  reserve,  but  moderation  in  the  request.  It  makes  the  smallest 
demand  consistent  with  actually  leaving,  and  assigns  the  highest  reason  for  taking 
this  step,  namely,  the  command  of  God.  By  sedulously  avoiding  every  thing  harsh 
and  extravagant  in  its  terms,  it  affords  the  least  possible  occasion  for  Pharaoh  to 
harden  his  heart,  and  dismiss  the  petitioners  with  an  obstinate  refusal.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  a  bold  and  open  assertion  of  liberty.  If  the  people  had  formed  a 
secret  plot  to  escape  from  the  land  of  their  bondage,  we  should  have  been  slow  to 
condemn,  if  not  prompt  to  applaud.  But  this  is  not  the  Lord's  way.  If  Pharaoh 
had  condescended  to  ask  at  once,  "  Who  shall  go?  Will  your  wives  and  children 
go  ?    Will  your  cattle  and  your  other  moveables  be  taken  with  you  "  ?  he  would  have 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

— m 

received,  as  he  eventually  did,  a  ready  and  candid  reply.  But  such  questions  were 
in  reality  superfluous.  Pharaoh  was  well  aware  that  bondsmen  who  had  marched 
three  days  out  of  the  land  of  the  oppressor,  with  their  families  and  goods,  would  not 
return  without  compulsion.     (J.  G.  Murphy,  LL.D.) 

Vers.   19-22.  I  am  sure  the  king  of  Egypt  wUl  not  let  you  go. — The  Livina 
hnoicledfje    of   the   success    or   otherwise   of  ministerial   work : — I.   That    God   is 

THOROrGHLT     ACQUAINTED     WITH     THE      MORAL     OBSTINACY     OF     MEN.         1.      There    are 

many  people  who  act  like  Pharaoh  in  relation  to  the  commands  of  God. 
God  knows  such  people.  Their  names  are  vocal  on  His  lips.  He  tells  His 
servants  about  them.  He  indicates  judgments  in  reference  to  them.  Such 
people  are  almost  beyond  the  reach  of  ministerial  influence.  The  minister  is 
not  altogether  responsible  for  the  success  of  his  mission.  He  cannot  force 
men  to  be  good.  2.  In  all  the  commissions  of  human  life  God  recognises 
the  free  agency  of  the  wicked.  Is  it  not  a  mystery  that  man  has  the  abiUty  to 
oppose  the  will  of  God  ?  3.  We  may  inquire  into  the  utility  of  employing  Christian 
agency  where  the  result  will  be  ineffectual.  To  leave  impenitent  sinners  without 
excuse.  II.  That  God  is  thoroughly  acqcaixted  with  the  method  He  will 
PURSUE  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE  MORALLY  OBSTINATE.  1.  God  dcals  with  the  morally 
obstinate  after  the  method  of  a  consecutive  plan.  First,  He  prepares  the  messenger 
to  visit  and  teach  them ;  then  gives  him  the  message;  then  tells  him  how  to  make 
it  known  ;  then  smites  in  judgments,  successive,  severe.  Thus  God  does  not  deal 
with  the  morally  obstinate  according  to  the  impulse  of  the  moment— fitfully,  inci- 
dentally, but  according  to  a  harmonious,  merciful,  self -consistent  plan — a  plan  that 
will  admit  of  the  repentance  and  faith  of  the  sinner.  2.  God  sometimes  meets  the 
morally  obstinate  with  demonstrations  of  His  power.  "  I  will  stretch  out,"  &c.  III. 
That  God  can  thwart  the  intention  of  the   morally  obstinate   by  their  own 

WICKEDNESS,   AND   BY  THE  CONDUCT  OF  THEIB  COMRADES  (vCt.  22).      (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Ver.  1.  But,  behold,  they  will  not  believe  me. — Moses'  temptation  to  shrink  from 
the  contest : — Our  duty  to  our  Lord  in  this  world  requires  that  we  should  do  some- 
what more  than  live  a  life  of  obedience  to  Him.  Our  obedience  must  be  acknow- 
ledged obedience.  We  must  never  be  loth  to  say,  "  Whose  we  are,  and  Whom  we 
serve."  We  may  read  this  lesson  writ  large  in  the  history  of  God's  sending  Moses 
to  deliver  His  people.  Moses  went  through  a  trial  on  Mount  Horeb,  the  exact 
opposite  of  the  trial  of  Christ.  I.  Moses  was  tempted  to  decline  the  contest  with 
the  world  altogether,  to  shrink  from  action  and  from  prominence,  when  God  called 
him.  Christ  was  tempted  to  take  the  world  by  storm,  to  overwhelm  it  with  conviction. 
II.  Moses  w.is  full  of  sympathy  for  the  poor,  full  of  a  desire  to  see  God's  ancient 
promises  realized ;  but  when  the  time  came,  and  God  said,  "  Now  go,"  then,  for  the 
first  time,  it  flashed  upon  Moses  that  he  was  unfit  to  carry  out  what  he  had  so 
aspired  to  be  trusted  with.  His  eighty  years  of  life  had  been  given  him  that  in  its 
vast  experience  he  might  learn  that  God  was  all,  man  was  nothing.  He  had  very 
nearly  learned  it  in  truth  ;  the  crust  or  chrysalis  of  self  was  very  nearly  ready  to 
drop  off  ;  it  needed  just  this  interview  with  God  to  rid  him  of  it  entirely.  He  had 
seen  the  miraculous  powers  with  which  he  had  been  endowed,  but  he  had  not  fully 
understood  them,  and  therefore  his  will  was  pausing  still.  III.  The  voice  of  God 
within  him  and  without  him  waxed  more  imperious.  God  sternly  pointed  out  that 
such  eloquence  as  he  longed  for  was  but  a  secondary  qualification.  "  Thy 
brother,  I  know  that  he  can  speak  well " ;  the  legislator  need  not  be  the  orator. 
There  is  not  one  of  us  who  ever  complained  to  God  of  insufiicient  strength  without 
finding  his  complaint  answered  either  by  ministration  of  gi'ace  or  disappearance  of 
difficulties.  IV.  What  interests  trembled  in  the  balance  while  Moses  was  debat- 
ing !  It  is  not  for  ourselves  only  that  we  shall  be  responsible  if  we  debate  till  the  time 
is  gone.  (Archbishop  Benson.)  God's  call  and  man's  duty : — I.  God  proposes  great 
things  to  men.  In  proportion  as  any  call  in  life  is  great,  let  the  heart  pause  and 
consider  whether  its  very  greatness  is  not  a  proof  of  its  divinity.  II.  We  are  not  to 
LOOS  AT  WHAX  WE  ABE,  but  at  what  God  is.  When  He  calls,  He  qualifies  for  the  work 


CHIP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  87 

III.  What  is  bight  in  itself  may  be  perverted  and  abused.  Timidity  is  right  in 
itself ;  but  when  pushed  into  cowardice,  it  is  wrong.  Self -distrust  is  right  iu 
itself  ;  but  if  it  degenerates  into  atheism,  then  it  is  the  plague  and  destruction  of  the 
soul.  IV.  God's  call  to  faith  is  the  greatest  call  to  His  universe.  Our  duty 
is  to  go  forward  to  the  unknown  and  the  invisible,  and  live  by  faith.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  mission  of  Moses  : — I.  The  nature  of  the  mission.  1.  Its  difficulty  and  danger. 
2.  It  was  divinely  appointed.  II.  Moses  was  trained  specially  for  it.  1.  The 
school  of  providence.  2.  Our  need  of  discipline.  III.  Moses  was  sufficiently 
equipped.  The  rod.  1.  The  use  of  httle  things.  2.  The  use  of  present  means. 
Use  "  what  is  in  thy  hand."  IV.  Moses  shrank  from  his  mission.  Modesty  and 
self-distrust  generally  go  with  true  greatness  and  exalted  virtue.  (P.  S.  Heiison, 
D.D.)  The  lament  of  the  pulpit : — I.  The  preacher  has  frequently  to  lament 
the  scepticism  of  his  congregation.  Practical  unbehef.  II.  The  preacher  has 
frequently  to  lament  the  inattention  of  his  congregation.  Nothing  worse  than 
disobedience  to  the  messages  of  God,  III.  The  preacher  has  frequently  to  lament 
the  querulous  spirit  op  his  congregation.  They  question  inspiration,  preparation, 
quahfication  of  teacher.  And  often  in  unkind,  factious  spirit.  Should  rather  wel- 
come him  as  from  God,  sent  to  achieve  their  moral  freedom.   IV.  That  this  conduct 

ON  THE  PART  OF  CONGREGATIONS  HAS  A  MOST   DEPRESSING    INFLUENCE    ON    THE    MINDS    OF 

MINISTERS.  He  needs  the  attention,  sympathy,  prayers,  help  of  those  whom  he  seeks 
to  free  from  the  tyranny  of  sin.  He  has  enough  to  contend  with  external  hindrances, 
with  the  opposition  of  Pharaoh,  without  having  added  to  it  that  of  the  slave  whose 
fetter  he  seeks  to  break.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Why  did  Moses  imagine  that  the 
Israelites  ivould  not  believe  him  ? — 1.  Because  he  knew  that  they  were  a  stiff- 
necked  people.  2.  Because  he  considered  himself  of  insufficient  authority  to 
command  their  respect.  3.  Because  the  power  and  tyranny  of  Pharaoh  would  deter 
them  from  beUeving  him.  4.  Because  they  would  think  it  unlikely  that  God,  who 
had  never  been  seen  by  man,  should  appear  to  him.  (Ibid.)  Human  distrust : — 
Human  distrust  is  a  difficulty  which  every  preacher,  teacher,  and  holy  labourer  has 
to  encounter.  All  great  movements  are  carried  by  consent  of  parties.  God  Himself 
cannot  re-establish  moral  order  without  the  concurrence  of  the  powers  that  have 
rebelled  against  His  rule.  After  all,  the  spiritual  labourer  has  less  to  do  with  the 
unbehef  of  his  hearers  than  Avith  the  instruction  and  authority  of  God.  We  have 
to  ascertain  what  God  the  Lord  would  have  us  to  say,  and  then  to  speak  it  simply 
and  lovingly,  whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  The  preacher 
must  prepare  himself  for  having  doubts  thrown  upon  his  authority  ;  and  he  must 
take  care  that  his  answer  to  such  doubts  be  as  complete  as  the  authority  itself .  God 
alone  can  give  the  true  answer  to  human  doubt.  We  are  not  to  encounter  scepticism 
with  merely  ingenious  repUes  and  clever  arguments,  but  in  the  power  and  grace  of 
the  hving  God.  (•/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Ministerial  duty  in  spite  of  discouragement : — 
Dr.  Stevens  narrates  how  an  eminent  minister  was  very  much  depressed  by  the 
unbelief  of  his  congregation,  and  how  his  spirit  of  depression  was  shaken  off.  He 
di-eamed  that  he  was  working  with  a  pick-axe  on  the  top  of  a  b:tKaltic  rock,  which 
remained  non-riven  in  spite  of  repeated  strokes  of  his  arm  of  muscle.  When  about 
to  give  up  in  despair,  a  stranger  of  solemn  and  dignified  demeanour  appeared  on  the 
scene,  who  reminded  him  that  as  a  servant  he  was  bound  to  go  on  whether  the  rock 
yielded  or  not.  "  Work  is  your  duty  ;  leave  the  results  to  God,"  were  the  last  words 
of  his  strange  visitor.  The  result  was  that  the  discouraged  pastor  resumed  his  work, 
and  was  abundantly  rewarded  by  "  the  shattering  of  the  rock  of  unbehef  and 
indifference  "  among  his  flock.  Frailty  invested  tvith  divinity  : — If  we  pause  for  a 
moment  and  consider  the  almost  insurmountable  difficulties  which  stood  in  the  way  of 
Israel's  redemption  from  Egypt,  we  can  readily  appreciate  the  hesitation  on  the 
part  of  Moses  before  undertaking  this  herculean  task.  Egypt  at  that  time  was  one 
of  tne  most  powerful  of  nations.  It  was  not  that  Egypt  desu-ed  simply  to  hold 
Israel  in  subjection,  that  such  a  strict  and  powerful  sovereignty  was  exercised ; 
but  the  Israelites  had  become  the  servants,  the  slaves  of  the  Egyptians,  and 
as  such  were  almost  necessai-y  to  the  vigour  of  the  nation.  Besides,  four 
centuries  of  oppression  had  left  their  deep  and  degrading  mark  upon  the  children 
of  Israel.  They  had  become  in  a  measure  satisfied  with  their  condition.  Hope  had 
taken  to  itself  wings.  Ambition  had  died  within  them.  There  native  fire  and 
energy  had  wasted  away.  To  redeem  a  people  who  do  not  care  to  be  redeemed,  to 
set  free  a  nation  which  is  content  with  captivity,  is  a  work  well-nigh  impossible. 
And  then,  to  add  to  the  difficulty  of  the  case,  supposing  even  that  they  were  free, 
where  will  they  go  ?    Their  own  land,  the  land  promised  to  their  father  Abraham, 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOB.  [chat,  iv.' 

is  already  occupied.  Warlike  tribes  have  come  down  from  the  north  and  strongly 
entrenched  themselves  within  its  borders.  "  Who  and  what  am  I,"  said  Mosea. 
"  that  I  should  go  upon  this  great  mission  ?  What  proofs  can  I  bring  to  assure  the 
people  that  I  am  come  from  God  ?  They  will  not  behove  my  word,  and  they  will 
ask,  Where  is  the  God  of  om-  fathers  and  what  is  His  name  ?  What  sign  have  I 
to  convince  them  ?  What  power  have  I  to  display  "  ?  At  length  God  answers,  What 
is  that  in  thy  hand  ?  And  he  said  a  rod.  He  was  told  to  cast  it  upon  the  ground, 
when  all  at  once  it  became  a  writhing  serpent.  You  will  notice  all  through  the 
Scriptures  in  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  people,  that  in  almost  every  instance  He 
proceeds  upon  the  principle  contained  in  our  text.  When  any  great  work  is  to  be 
done,  when  any  special  mission  is  to  be  undertaken,  God  does  not  bringdown  to  the 
accomplishment  of  His  purpose  strange  or  wonderful  agencies,  but  He  rather  takes 
the  simple  things  that  he  about  common  life,  and  makes  them  achieve  the  Divine 
will.  God  seems  to  take  the  most  exquisite  pleasure  in  clothing  human  frailty  with 
Divine  strength  and  beauty,  and  imparting  to  the  most  ordinary  and  trivial  things, 
heavenly  meaning  and  significance.  Indeed,  God's  constant  purpose  seems  to  have 
been  to  unite  this  world  with  another  one,  to  blend  this  life  with  a  life  infinitely 
higher  and  grander.  Life  is  robbed  of  all  its  harmony,  all  its  grace,  all  its  imprea- 
siveness  if  we  ever  allow  it  to  become  separated  from  the  Divine  and  the  eternal,  and 
the  little  boat  which  is  unswung  from  the  davits  and  carried  off  by  a  huge  billow 
from  its  place  on  the  ocean  steamer,  is  no  more  helpless  as  it  rolls  in  the  trough  of 
the  sea,  and  is  no  more  pitiable  in  its  desolation,  than  the  life  which  is  adrift  from 
God  out  upon  the  great  waters  of  human  experience  and  distress.  To  many  life  is 
a  weary  drudgery  all  the  way  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave.  It  is  nothing  but  work 
and  eat  and  sleep.  Once  in  a  great  while  there  is  a  little  change,  but  not  often. 
The  great  bulk  of  hfe  is  a  sad  monotony,  and  millions  look  forward  to  the  quiet  and 
rest  of  the  grave.  And  why  are  these  people  in  this  dismal  plight  ?  Simply  because 
their  life  is  not  connected  with  the  Divine  life,  because  this  world  is  not  made  a  part 
of  the  heavenly  world,  and  like  a  car  which  has  become  detached  from  the  swift 
express  and  tluiig  out  upon  a  siding,  it  stands  helpless  and  forsaken  in  the  dark  and 
dismal  night.  Suppose  that  here  are  three  plates  of  common  glass  a  foot  square,  an 
eighth  or  aquarter  of  aninchinthickness,andsupposethatthey  are  given  to  three  men 
to  dispose  of  them  as  they  please.  One  takes  his  and  he  covers  it  with  black  enamel, 
and  on  the  ebonized  surface  he  paints  a  human  face,  or  some  lovely  flowers.  Another 
takes  his  and  he  spreads  upon  it  a  solution  of  quicksilver  and  it  becomes  a  mirror 
throwing  back  to  the  beholder  his  own  face  and  expression.  But  the  third  takes  his 
to  the  best  room  in  his  house,  he  inserts  it  in  the  window  which  has  the  most  com- 
manding view,  and  then  carefully  removing  all  the  dust  and  finger-marks,  he  looks 
through  its  open  substance  and  sees  the  skies  in  their  morning  beauty,  the  fields  in 
living  green  or  glistening  white,  and  thus  brings  heaven  and  earth  within  the  circle 
of  that  room.  Now  these  are  the  ways  in  which  most  of  us  live.  We  take  our  life 
and  we  enamel  or  ebonize  it.  We  make  it  opaque.  We  cannot  see  through  it  to 
anything  that  lies  beyond  ;  and  though  we  paint  it,  and  try  to  adorn  it,  yet  we  in  no 
wise  remove  the  mystery;  the  darkness  in  the  sad  background  which  even  the 
flowers  will  not  hide  away.  Some  use  the  coating  of  mercury,  and  make  their  hfe 
nothing  but  a  mirror  which  reflects  themselves.  Self  is  the  image  ever  rising  before 
their  eyes.  But  the  wise  man  makes  this  life  simply  a  transparency  through  which 
he  can  see  the  life  of  God.  There  are  three  forms  of  power  by  which  the  machinery 
of  clocks  is  kept  in  motion.  The  first  and  the  one  of  the  oldest  date  is  that  of  the 
weight  suspended  upon  a  chain  or  rope.  The  bulk  and  heaviness  of  the  weight  was 
always  in  proportion  to  the  size  of  the  clock,  and  the  wheels  were  literally  driven  by 
the  sheer  force  of  the  big  weights  as  they  slowly  descended.  The  second  is  that  of 
the  spring,  the  band  of  steel  coiled  within  its  cylinder  spending  its  strength  in 
expansion,  aud  forcing  the  wheels  to  revolve  in  its  great  desire  to  get  free.  The 
third  is  that  of  electricity,  where  the  current  is  carried  along  the  wire  from  the 
central  battery.  Silently,  but  almost  irresistibly,  the  mysterious  force  operates  upon 
the  machinery,  ensuring  an  accuracy  and  faithfulness  which  can  be  gained  in  no  other 
way.  And  in  these  we  have  illustrations  of  how  human  life  is  carried  on.  Many  of 
us  go  by  weight.  We  are  dragged  down  by  heaviness  and  toil,  and  compelled  by 
the  demands  of  circumstances  to  go  our  weary  round.  Others  go  through  by  the 
sheer  force  of  their  own  energy.  They  have  power  and  strength  in  themselves  to 
propel  them  around  the  dial-plate  of  common  existence,  and  in  this  way  they  fulfil 
the  measure  of  their  days.  But  some  have  an  electric  current.  The  wires  of  their 
thought  are  in  connection  with  the  gieat  battery  of  God.  Life  to  them  is  not  a  mere 


CHAP,  m]  EXODUS.  89 

drag.  Life  to  them  is  not  merely  an  expenditure  of  vital  force.  Life  to  them  means 
heavenly  communion,  Divine  fellowship,  holy  enjoyment,  and  the  days  of  their 
pilgrimage  are  accomplished  in  simple  dependence  upon  the  Almighty  will.  Now, 
what  seems  to  be  the  very  plain,  the  very  obvious  meaning  of  this  rod  ?  Is  it  not 
this:  that  the  most  common  things  within  our  possession,  and  under  our  control, 
can  be  so  wrought  upon  by  Divine  influence,  and  so  charged  with  Divine  power, 
as  to  accomplish  the  most  strange  and  glorious  results  ?  St.  Paul  tells  us  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  that  God  has  a  strange  choice  in  the  selection  of  His 
instrumentalities :  "  Not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many 
noble  are  called :  but  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound 
the  wise."  And  if  you  will  go  down  the  lines  of  history  you  will  see  that  God  has 
carried  out  this  jirinciple  in  its  integrity.  And  this  ought  not  to  strike  us  as  either 
strange  or  remarkable,  because  we  do  just  the  same  ourselves.  We  take  the  most 
common  things  that  we  can  find,  and  we  unite  them  with  other  things  until  we 
fiaally  develop  the  most  potential  forces  of  our  time.  A  few  gallons  of  water,  a 
few  pieces  of  coal  are  enough  to  send  the  mad  steam  hissing  through  the  pipes,  eager 
to  turn  yon  giant  engine,  or  send  the  train  of  cars  thundering  along  the  line.  A  few 
drops  of  vitriol,  a  few  pieces  of  prepared  zinc,  a  single  thread  of  wire,  and  lo,  the 
electric  force  flashes  as  light  around  our  world.  A  few  grains  of  charcoal  and  sul- 
phur mixed  with  nitre  are  sufficient  to  give  us  the  dreadful  gunpowder  which  sends 
iron  giants  swinging  in  the  air  that  beat  into  ruin  walls  and  parapets  of  stone.  We 
take  the  most  common  rods  that  Nature  has  in  her  hand,  and  we  breathe  upon  them, 
and  they  become  instinct  with  life  ;  we  give  them  of  our  genius  and  our  strength  ; 
we  lift  them  up  out  of  their  low  estate.  We  take  the  iron  and  the  coal  from  the 
mines,  we  dig  out  the  metals  that  are  in  the  hills,  we  dignify  them  and  ennoble 
them  until  at  length  they  become  our  most  valued  agents  and  servants.  But  we 
must  always  remember  that  the  rod  of  itself  will  be  valueless  unless  it  have  with  it 
the  presence  and  favour  of  God.  Of  what  worth  was  the  mere  rod  which  Moses  held 
in  his  hand  that  day  as  he  stood  before  the  burning  bush  ?  In  all  probability  it  was 
only  the  shepherd's  crook  which  he  used  while  attending  the  flocks  of  Jethro.  The 
rod  itself  was  almost  of  no  value  whatever.  And  so  exactly  with  our  life.  Before 
we  can  be  really  useful,  before  we  can  accomplish  any  great  work,  before  we  can  live 
up  to  the  measure  of  our  power,  we  must  first  of  all  meet  with  God.  We  must  stand 
before  the  burning  bush  ;  we  must  listen  to  the  Divine  voice  ;  we  must  receive  the 
heavenly  commission  ;  we  must  accept  the  Divine  command.  Until  this  is  done  our 
life  is  nothing  but  a  rod— a  rod  without  any  special  use  or  intrinsic  value,  and  which 
will  one  day  break  in  our  hands,  and  be  cast  into  the  fire  and  be  destroyed.  Look 
how  this  is  illustrated  :  What  is  that  in  thy  hand?  "A  sling,"  said  David.  "It 
is  enough;  go  up  against  the  giant";  and  the  great  Goliath  fell  before  the 
shepherd-boy.  What  is  that  in  thy  hand?  "A  sword,"  answered  Jonathan. 
"  It  is  enough,"  and  the  brave  youth,  followed  by  his  armour-bearer,  goes  up 
against  an  army,  andthe  Philistines  are  defeated  by  these  twain.  What  is 
that  in  thy  hand  ?  "  A  piece  of  parchment,"  answered  Luther.  It  is  enough,  and  he 
proceeds  to  nail  his  famous  protest  upon  the  doors  of  the  Roman  Church  and  the 
era  of  the  Reformation  broke  upon  darkened  Europe.  What  is  that  in  thy  hand  ?  "  A 
pen,"  said  Bunyan,  as  he  spoke  from  under  the  arches  of  Bedford  jail.  It  is  enough, 
and  he  wrote  the  story  of  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  which  will  live  while  the  world 
endures.  Men  and  women,  with  common,  simple  things  about  them,  have  heard 
the  voice  of  God,  and  doing  just  what  their  hand  found  to  do,  they  made  their  life 
memorable  in  the  history  of  the  Church  and  accomplished  the  Divine  will.  What 
is  that  in  your  hand  ?  "  Only  a  rod,"  answers  the  mother  from  beside  the  cradle,  the 
workman  standing  at  the  bench,  the  clerk  behind  the  counter,  the  man  of  business 
at  his  desk.  Only  a  rod,  and  is  that  all?  Oh,  there  is  something  of  far  greater 
value  than  you  now  suppose.  Ask  that  honest  farmer  in  a  few  weeks  from  now 
standing  in  the  open  furrows,  what  is  that  in  his  hand,  and  he  will  answer,  only  a 
few  grains  of  seed.  But  is  that  all  ?  Far  from  it.  Those  grains  of  seed  contain 
the  germs  of  the  gx'eat  harvest  which  will  fill  our  lands  with  plenty,  and  crowd  the 
threshing-floors  .with  abundance.  Then  say  not  "  Only  a  rod."  There  is  no  such 
word  as  "  only  "  about  human  Hfe.  Every  part  of  it  is  invested  with  mysterious 
grandeur  and  possibility.  We  cannot  tell  how  far  the  most  simple  thing  will  reach. 
A  word  dropped  from  our  lips,  a  hand  clasped  within  ours,  something  apparently 
trifling  done  and  then  forgotten,  will  go  on  long  after  we  have  passed  away,  and  a 
life  which  throws  its  shadows  all  down  eternity  cannot  have  anything  but  which  is 
of  value.     (J.  W.  Johnston.) 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Vers.  2-5.  What  is  that  in  tliine  hand? — A   trivial  possession: — I.  God  fke- 

QDENTLY   MAKES   INQUIRY   ABOUT    THE    MOST   TRIVIAL    POSSESSIONS    OF    MEN.        1.     Have 

they  ibeen  honourably  gained  ?  2.  Are  they  being  put  to  their  proper  use  ?  3. 
Are  they  in   a  line  with  Divine  power  ?    II.  God  frequently  makes  the  most 

TRIVIAL    possessions    OF    MEN    TEACH    GREAT     TRUTHS.         1.    This    shoWS    the    DivinS 

adaptability  to  the  circumstances  of  men.  2.  This  shows  the  Divine  wisdom 
in  making  insignificant  things  teach  Divine  truth.  3.  This  shows  the  Divine 
simplicity  of  the  plans  and  puq30ses  of  Heaven.     III.  That  the  most  trh'ial 

POSSESSIONS    are     USEFUL    TO    OTHERS    AS    WELL    AS    THOSE     TO    WHOM    THEY    BELONG. 

IV.  That  the  most  trivial  possessions  of  men  prove,  after  all,  the  most  useful, 
and  ought  therefore  to  awaken  human  gratitude.  (Ibid.)  A  rod  : — 1.  The  subject 
of  Divine  inquiry.  2.  The  token  of  a  shepherd's  office.  3.  The  symbol  of  a  leader's 
power.  4.  "The  prophecy  of  a  nation's  freedom.  (Ibid.)  The  rod  : — When  God 
installed  Moses  into  his  great  trust,  He  gave  him  a  wand  or  staff  of  office  as  its  badge. 
But  it  was  not  the  baton  of  a  general  nor  the  sceptre  of  a  king.  It  was  only  the  shep- 
herd's rod.  In  Moses'  hand  it  became  what  no  jewelled  crosier  ever  has  been  or  will 
be.  This  stick  was  to  be  nqt^nlj  the  ensign  of  his  power,  but  its  instrument.  And  in 
this  simplicity,  In^eecf.Tay  its  special  fitness  for  ffs  office  ;  "Bccaa^callTcien  wlio  looked 
upon  it  could  see  that  its  power  was  not  in  itself,  not  inherent ;  not  in  the  rod, 
but  effectual  only  by  a  self-imposed  law  of  God's  action,  and  conditioned  in  its 
success  upon  His  fidelity  to  His  own  rule.  In  this,  as  afterwards  of  the  yet 
humbler  symbol  of  the  cross, — in  this,  the  symbol  of  his  simplicity,  of  his  exile,  of  his 
lowliness,  the  world  was  to  be  conquered.  1.  I  remark  in  regard  to  this  rod,  that 
it  had  no  natural  aptitude  for  its  work.  There  was  nothing  in  its  natural  quahties 
to  distinguish  it  from  any  other  rod,  and  its  appointment  to  be  Moses'  staff  of  office 
and  instrument  of  miracle  wrought  in  it  no  physical  change  whatever.  It  was  still 
mere  wood.  Sufficient  force  would  break  it.  A  sharp  tool  would  cut  it.  And  it 
was  according  to  the  analogy  of  His  ways  :  and  so  St.  Paul  broadly  states  it.  "  Base 
things  of  the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things 
which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are."  It  is  God's  way  to  do  great 
things  by  weak  means.  That  is  the  Divine  philosophy  of  action,  the  opposite  of 
man's.  2.  Notice,  again,  that  God  in  doing  His  great  works  does  not  need  any 
instruments,  but  uses  them  simply  of  His  own  sovereign  will ;  and  this  appears  in 
their  obvious  inadequacy  in  themselves  to  the  results  which  they,  nevertheless, 
produce.  Moses  was  not  indispensable  to  God,  nor  his  rod  to  Moses,  but  by  God's 
determination.  If  we  look  at  our  Lord's  miracles  when  He  was  upon  earth,  we  shall 
see  this  truth  strikingly  illustrated.  In  the  variety  of  their  methods  they  are  so 
exhibited  as  at  once  to  show  His  independence  of  all  means,  and  His  sovereign 
power  in  appointing  and  employing  them.  So  this  wonder-working  rod  of  Moses 
answered  simply  the  purpose  of  forming  a  visible  link  between  the  Divine  will  and 
the  effect  that  was  produced.  The  rod  did  not  do  the  miracle,  but  a  Power  that 
worked  by  it ;  and  that  showed  itself  able  to  dispense  with  it  by  employing  in  its 
work  an  instrument  so  manifestly  incapable  of  contributing  anything  to  the  pro- 
posed result.  A  word  brings  Lazarus  from  the  grave  ;  a  touch  of  the  bier  awakens 
the  widow's  sou.  And  thus  we  come  to  the  philosophy  of  means  in  the  system  of 
grace.  They  are  visible  signs  of  God's  working,  such  signs  as  cannot  work  except 
as  God  works  in  them  ;  and  to  us  they  are  tests  of  obedience  and  trials  of  faith. 
There  is  nothing  quite  so  irrational  as  rationalism.  To  obey  God  is  the  most 
rational  of  things.  And  to  stand  arguing  and  questioning  about  a  thing,  debating  its 
propriety  and  efficacy  when  God  has  told  as  to  do  it,  is  eminently  irrational.  Moses 
might  have  stood  and  said.  This  wooden  stick  cannot  divide  the  waters,  or  turn  the 
dust  to  flies,  or  make  the  heavens  dark,  or  draw  water  out  of  a  rock ;  and  he  would 
have  said  nothing  but  the  truth.  And  yet,  if  Moses  had  thrown  away  his  rod,  he 
could  never  have  invented  anything  else  that  would  have  done  these  things,  and  the 
things  would  have  remained  undone.  There  is  a  supernatural  working  in  the  world 
that  the  world  does  not  take  knowledge  of.  And  it  works  by  a  class  of  instrumen- 
talities that  the  world  regards  as  childish  and  impotent.  The  reliance  some  people 
place  upon  them  it  counts  superstition,  and  derides  as  futile  and  delusive.  To  expect 
any  benefit  from  them  they  consider  irrational.  The  measure  of  their  belief  is  their 
reason.  So  they  eliminate  all  miracle  from  the  Scriptures,  and  all  that  is  super- 
natural from  the  Church  of  God ;  and  out  of  the  poor  residue  they  construct  what 
they  call  rational  Christianity,  and  a  very  mean  Christianity  it  is.  And  so  they 
illustrate  very  well  the  apostle's  saying,  "  Professing  themselves  wise,  they  became 
fools."  And  there  are  too  many  Christians  who,  without  goingsuch  lengths,  arequite 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  91 

too  ready  to  criticise  God's  appointments,  and  either  hold  them  of  light  obligation, 
or  greatly  underrate  their  value  and  efficacy.  But  there  is  a  supernatural  element 
in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  God  in  it  works  invisibly  by  means.  "  Water,"  say 
they,  "cannot  cleanse  the  soul,  nor  bread  and  -wine  nourish  it.  The  touch  of  a 
prelate  can  have  no  power  to  convey  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  to  ministers  in 
Ordination,  or  to  lay  people  in  Confirmation."  Men  may  see  that  the  ten  command- 
rQeats__are  right  aid -salutary,  and  may  observe  them  on  that  accouut.  Their 
reason  pronounces  them  proper,  and  therefore  they  regard  them.  They  would 
regard  them  if  they  had  found  them  in  the  Koran,  or  the  Books  of  Confucius. 
There  is  much  of  this  sort  of  virtue,  and  it  is  respectable  and  useful  to  its  possessor 
and  to  society.  But  it  is  not  obedience,  it  is  not  religion.  Faith  does  not  underlie 
it.  The  love  of  God  is  not  its  life.  Moses  took  his  rod  in  his  hand  and  with  it  he 
did  wonders.  He  believed  in  it,  because  he  believed  in  God,  and  in  God's  assignment 
of  it  to  him  as  an  instrument  of  power.  And  then  it  was  an  instrument  of  power,  a 
wonder  staff,  before  which  impediments  vanished  and  foes  fled  away.  {R.  A.Hallam, 
D.D.)  A  talhwith  r.Mldre.n — "  What  is  that  in  thine  handl" — This  was  a  question 
which  asTonisEed  Moses.  It  was  a  surprising  thing  to  him  that  God  should  think 
anything  of  a  shepherd's  crook.  It  would  not  have  astonished  him  to  hear  God  speak 
about  sceptres,  but  that  He  should  call  special  attention  to  an  old  rod  that  he  had 
carried  as  a  shepherd  a  thousand  times  was  more  than  he  could  have  ever  expected. 
But  God  now  began  to  show  Moses  that  he  could  turn  that  rod  to  higher  use  than  he 
had  ever  done  hitherto.  There  are  many  things  put  into  the  hands  of  little  children 
the  full  use  of  which  they  do  not  yet  know.  1.  For  instance,  when  at  first  you  are 
taught  to  write  a  pen  is  placed  in  your  hand.  What  an  amount  of  trouble  you  have 
before  you  learn  even  how  to  hold  that  pen  1  For  a  long  time  you  do  not  exactly 
know  how  to  hold  the  gift  that  is  given  you  ;  and  for  a  still  longer  time  you  little 
know  what  use  you  may  yet  make  of  it.  When  the  apostle  Paul  was  a  boy  in  school, 
and  had  to  learn  how  to  use  the  stylus,  or  pen,  he  little  knew  what  use  he  would  be 
able  to  make  of  his  pen  in  writing  his  Epistles.  So  with  regard  to  the  apostle  John. 
So  also  with  reference  to  John  Bunyan.  \Vhen  he  was  at  school,  a  poor  boy,  he 
was  not  taught  much,  since  he  was  only  to  be  a  tinker.  But  a  pen  was  put  into  his 
hand,  and  it  is  wonderful  what  use  he  made  of  it  in  later  years  in  writing  the 
"  Pilgrim's  Progress."  Who  knows  ?  perhaps  there  is  a  child  here  to-day  who  has 
only  just  learnt  how  to  use  the  pen,  and  yet  thousands  may  yet  thank  God  for  what 
he  will  write.  2.  Again,  some  of  you  have  recently  been  on  a  journey  by  train. 
Had  you  looked  at  the  engine  before  you  started  you  might  have  seen  a  man  laying 
hold  of  a  handle,  or  lever.  You  might  well  have  asked  him,  "  What  is  that  in  thine 
hand?  "  Had  you  done  so,  he  would  have  replied,  "  This  is  the  lever  by  which  I 
have  power  over  the  engine  and  make  it  to  go  fast  or  slow,  or  by  which  I  stop  it." 
Thus,  by  holding  j  ust  that  httle  piece  of  iron,  the  engine-driver  is  perfect  master  of  that 
huge  and  powerful  engine.  3.  Again,  you  go  with  your  father  to  a  telegraph  office. 
He  wants  to  send  a  message  to  America.  The  clerk  looks  at  the  message  and  lays 
hold  of  a  small  handle  by  which  he  sends  those  words  along  the  cable  through  the 
depths  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  they  are  read  in  a  few  seconds  in  New  York. 
4.  Again,  in  times  of  war,  when  ships  draw  near  a  port,  you  may  find  a  man  in  a 
small  room,  or  shed,  who  watches  until  a  ship  comes  to  a  certain  point.  He  then 
touches  a  little  button  and  the  ship  is  blown  up  in  an  instant.  There  is  a  con- 
nection between  that  Uttle  button  and  a  mine  of  explosives  which  is  hidden  in  the  water 
beneath  the  ship  ;  and  although  that  mine  may  be  many  miles  away  from  that  little 
telegraph  ofiice,  a  touch  of  the  button  by  a  man's  hand  at  once  explodes  the  mine 
and  works  terrible  destruction.  When  an  Arab  baby -boy  is  born,  his  parents  put  a 
little  ant  into  his  right  hand,  and  closing  the  hand  upon  it  say,  "  May  the  child  be 
as  busy  and  clever  as  the  little  ant."  That  is  the  best  wisa  they  can  utter  for  their 
children.  But  we  would  put  something  better  than  an  ant  in  your  little  hands.  We 
would  have  you  hold  firmly  the  Bible,  and  remember  all  that  it  tells  you  of  the 
Saviour's  love.  We  would  have  you  study  prayerfully  that  Book,  and  live  according 
to  its  teaching.  (D.  Davies.)  Work  for  all : — The  subject  that  I  desire  to  bring 
before  your  attention  is  that  of  appointed  instrumentality.  God  accomphshes  the 
purposes  of  His  grace  by  instrumentality.  Blessed  are  they  who  are  enabled 
to  give  themselves  up  with  all  that  they  have  and  all  that  they  are  to  be 
employed  in  the  Lord's  service.  We  are  not  employed  to  be  writers  of  God's 
revealed  will,  nor  to  be  leaders  of  God's  people,  nor  to  be  in  other  respects 
what  Moses  was.  But  he  was  a  pattern  to  beUevers  in  Christ,  as  far  as  instru- 
mentaUty  went,  in  the  work  to  which  he  was  called.    I.  Now  consider  PBEPiEA- 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  IV. 

TiON  FOR  USEFULNESS.  In  the  case  of  Moses  we, see  very  remarkably  a  course 
ol43Tgparation  going  forward  for  many  years,  both  as  respects  the  dealing  of 
God's  providence  with  him,  and  also  as  respects  the  blessing  of  God's  grace 
bestowed  upon  him.  II.  But  this  brings  me  now  to  the  second  particular,  namely, 
ENCOURAGEMENT  IN  God's  seevice  AS  His  iNSTEUMENTS.  You  will  observe  our 
text  brings  Moses  before  us,  after  all  this  lengthened  preparation  and  when  God 
was  calling  him  to  begin  his  work,  as  one  who  was  making  excuses  and  objections. 
As  if  he  had  said,  "  Well,  but  what  good  can  I  do?  There  is  no  use  in  my  going 
on  this  errand  ;  I  am  not  fit  for  it."  If  you  read  the  remaining  part  of  this  chapter, 
you  will  see  that  this  conviction  of  his  mind  was  expressed  again  and  again.  And 
here  we  may  observe,  by  the  way,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  false  humility. 
Humility,  when  it  is  genuine,  the  work  of  God's  Spirit,  cannot  be  overprized.  But 
there  may  be  what  looks  like  humility  that  is  not  the  fruit  of  God's  Spirit.  If  God 
calls  me  or  you  to  any  particular  service,  and  we  think  that  we  are  very  humble  and 
say,  "  No,  I  cannot  attempt  that  service,  I  am  not  fit  for  it,"  this  is  false  humility, 
because  God  never  gives  work  without  giving  strength  and  wisdom  to  do  it.  God 
never  brings  a  trial  upon  us  without  providing  grace  to  enable  us  to  bear  the  trial ; 
so  that  believers  in  Christ  may  say,  under  all  circumstances,  "  All  is  well."  But 
without  dwelling  further  upon  this,  the  point  I  wish  to  notice  is,  how  God  removed 
Moses'  objection.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  him.  What  is  that  in  thine  hand?  And 
he  said,  A  rod.  And  the  Lord  said.  Cast  it  on  the  ground."  He  did  so,  and  then 
the  circumstances  occurred  which  you  will  read  in  the  following  verses.  Observe, 
Moses  had  but  a  simple  rod  in  his  hand  when  he  came  to  that  point  in  his  history 
on  which  the  Lord  was  telling  him  to  enter  upon  the  special  work  for  which  he  had 
been  prepared.  And  yet  if  Moses'  heart  were  right  with  God,  he  had  that  in  his 
hand  which  might  be  useful  in  God's  service,  though  it  was  only  a  rod.  Man's 
wisdom  is  here  utterly  at  fault.  If  man  had  been  asked,  "Now,  what  means 
should  be  used  in  order  to  deliver  out  of  the  iron  bondage  of  a  powerful  monarch 
a  nation  such  as  Israel  ? "  man  would  have  formed  some  plan  by  which  an  army 
might  be  raised,  and  furnished  with  suitable  weapons  of  war,  and  a  suitable 
opportunity  taken  in  order  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  Pharaoh's  government  and 
rule.  But  here  was  Moses,  God's  instrument,  and  he  had  neither  sword,  nor  spear, 
nor  army ;  he  had  a  simple  rod,  a  shepherd's  rod  in  his  hand.  Observe,  God  does 
not  require  of  Moses,  when  He  tells  him  to  go  to  His  work,  that  which  Moses  has, 
not.  He  does  not  require  of  Moses  sword,  and  spear,  and  shield,  and  armies,  in 
order  to  go  forth  to  be  a  deliverer  of  Israel.  The  question  is  not  to  him,  "What 
canst  thou  do  ?  Canst  thou  obtain  those  who  will  go  forth  under  thy  command  to 
fight  a  battle  of  loyalty  and  for  liberty  ?  Canst  thou  get  together  ammunition  and 
other  things  which  they  will  need  for  their  warfare  "  ?  Moses  might  have  then  said 
with  truth  he  could  not  engage  in  the  work.  But  all  that  God  said  to  him  was, 
"  Moses,  what  is  thatin  thine  hand?" — not,  "  What  canst  thou  get  ?  "  but,  "  What 
hast  thou  got?  "  Now,  we  learn  from  this,  that  God  can  use  any  instrument  which 
He  pleases  for  His  work,  and  that  those  are  altogether  wrong  who  suppose  that  they 
are  not  called  upon  to  do  anything  in  the  service  of  God  because,  perhaps,  they  are 
not  distinguished  as  others  of  their  fellow-creatures — have  not  so  much  money,  not 
so  much  influence,  not  so  great  learning,  not  so  much  time  on  their  hands,  and  so 
on.  It  is  not  to  be  looked  at  in  this  way,  as  if  God  demanded  of  us  that  which  we 
have  not,  but  simply  that  He  requires  of  us  that  which  we  have.  Observe,  next, 
the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  "Cast  it  on  the  ground"  ;  and  upon  its  being  cast  on 
the  ground,  the  rod,  we  are  told,  "  became  a  serpent."  Afterwards  he  was  told  to 
put  forth  his  hand,  and  "it  became  a  rod  in  his  hand."  God,  by  this  double 
miracle,  laid  hold  of  that  rod  of  Moses  as  His  rod;  it  was  no  longer  the  rod  of 
Moses  only  ;  it  was  the  rod  of  God,  (IT'.  Cadman,  31. A.)  What  is  that  in  thine 
hand  ? — I.  A  question  foe  Moses.  Well — what  had  he  ?  A  rod.  That  is,  as  I 
suppose,  a  shepherd's  crook :  a  stout  sapling,  curved  at  one  end,  to  hel2)  him  in 
caring  for  his  flock.  But  how  could  this  help  him  in  caring  for  Israel  ?  Who  can 
turn  it  into  a  talisman  to  draw  their  hearts  to  him  ?  It  is  enough  to  tell  of  the 
Being  and  the  power  and  the  skill  of  the  Creator ;  but  not  enough  to  prove  a 
Divine  commission.  There  was  need  of  some  further  revelation — and  this  further 
revelation  was  not  withheld.  What  was  Moses  told  to  do  with  the  rod  ?  "  Cast  it 
on  the  ground"  ;  as  though  God  had  said,  "  You  can  do  nothing  with  it,  see  what  I 
can  do."  "  And  it  became  a  serpent."  Now  here  we  are  confronted  with  the  super- 
natural, the  mu-aculous ;  for  there  is  no  natural  evolution  of  vegetable  out  of  animal, 
or  animal  out  of  vegetable.    God  can  do  it — and  do  it  quite  as  easily  as  He  can 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  93 

bring  the  sturdy  staff  out  of  the  feeble  bud  ;  but  it  is  not  in  His  ordinary  course  of 
action.  He  will  only  resort  to  it  when  some  extraordinary  end  is  in  view.  But  was 
there  not  a  lesson  in  this  miracle  ?  Was  it  not  a  symbol  of  the  great  things  God 
was  about  to  do?  H.  A  question  fok  Christians.  1.  Is  there  not  work  for  every 
one  of  us  ? — and  work  not  unlike  that  to  which  Moses  was  called.  The  state  of  the 
world  at  large  is  described  in  this  volume  under  many  figures,  very  sad  and  very 
affecting  ;  and  one  of  the  saddest  and  most  affecting  is  that  of  slavery.  Slaves  of 
appetite — slaves  of  covetousness — slaves  of  fashion  :  we  hear  their  sighs — their 
groans,  sometimes.  For  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the 
pride  of  life  are  hard  taskmasters  ;  they  will  give  their  bondsmen  no  rest  or  peace  : 
there  is  no  slavery  like  that  of  sin !  And  therefore  the  cry  of  the  gospel  is — 
"Emancipation!  "  "  If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  2. 
But  what  good  can  we  hope  to  do  ?  There  are  as  many  difficulties  in  our  way  as 
in  the  way  of  Moses.  Our  fellow-men  are  so  accustomed  to  slavery  that  they  won't 
believe  in  freedom.  Ay — and  they  are  so  accustomed  to  all  kinds  of  folly  and 
imposture  that  they  won't  believe  that  our  message  comes  from  God.  How  then 
can  we  succeed?  Now  comes  the  question  of  the  text,  "What  is  that  in  thine 
hand"?  What  power  of  influence  has  God  given  you?  Now  see  whether  that 
power  may  not  be  used  for  Him.  "Oh,  but,"  you  say,  "my  influence  is  a  very 
insignificant  thing  "  !  And  so  is  a  shepherd's  crook.  But  see  what  a  shepherd's) 
crook  became  in  the  hand  of  Moses  ;  and  remember  that  God  may  "  choose  weak 
things  to  confound  the  mighty,  and  foolish  things  to  confound  the  wise."  '6.  And 
so  the  question  comes  to  us — "  What  is  that  in  thine  hand  ?"  Not — what  would 
you  like  to  have  there,  or  hope  to  have  there?  but — what  have  you?  Be  it  the 
three  hundred  pence,  or  be  it  the  two  mites — use  it  for  God,  and  see  what  God 
will  make  of  it !  Certainly  nothing  will  recommend  the  gospel  to  those  around  us 
like  the  personal  exertion  of  those  who  advocate  it.  {F.  Tucker,  B. A.)  Great 
things  from  small : — God  often  does  His  greatest  works  by  the  humblest  means.  The 
great  forces  of  nature  are  not  the  earthquake  which  tumbles  cities  into  ruins.  This 
power  passes  in  a  moment ;  the  soft  silent  light,  the  warm  summer  rain,  the  stars 
whose  voice  is  not  heard — these  are  the  majebtic  mighty  forces  which  fill  the  earth 
with  riches,  and  control  the  woilds  which  constitute  the  wide  universe  of  God.  So 
in  Providence.  Not  the  great  Church  organization,  excellent  and  proper  as  it  is. 
Martin  Luther,  apoor  monk  who  had  difficulty  in  getting  bread  to  eat,  shook  the  world ; 
Linnfeus,  with  eight  shillings  in  his  pocket,  began  to  study  botany  ;  Columbus  had  no 
giand  steamer  to  carry  him  across  the  wide  Atlantic.  He  wearied  his  life,  and  at  last 
got  from  the  rulers  of  his  time  a  reluctant  permission  to  embark  with  a  hundred  and 
fifty  men  only,  and  in  three  small  ships.  The  founders  of  the  United  States  of  America 
were  humble  pious  men.  The  Pilgrim  Fathers  sought  only  a  place  to  rest  the  soles 
of  their  feet  where  they  could  worship  God  in  peace.  The  founders  of  Christianity 
were  fishermen.  Christ  Himself  the  Carpenter,  the  Nazarene,  despised  and 
crucified,  was  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God.  For,  did  He  not  say — "  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me  "  ?  So  in  the  text — "  What  is  that  in  thine 
hand  ?  A  rod  " — the  emblem,  the  tool  of  his  daily  work.  With  this  Moses  was  to 
do  mighty  deeds.  Eabbinical  tradition  has  it  that  Moses  was  an  excellent  shepherd. 
He  followed  a  lamb  across  the  wilderness,  plucked  it  with  his  rod  from  a  precipice 
amid  the  rocks,  and  carried  it  in  his  bosom ;  whereupon  God  said — "  Let  us  make 
this  Moses  the  shepherd  of  Israel."  He,  a  stranger,  a  fugitive,  a  humble  shepherd, 
becomes  the  lawgiver,  the  leader,  the  deliverer  of  his  people.  The  lesson  of  the 
text  is  plain.  God  stiff  meets  every  man,  and  asks  the  old  question — "  What  is  that 
in  thine  hand?  "  Is  it  the  tool  of  an  ordinary  trade? — with  that  God  will  be  served. 
The  artisan  where  he  is,  in  his  humble  workshop,  by  using  the  rod  which  is  in  his 
hand,  the  merchant  in  his  business,  are  in  the  place  where  they  are  now  ;  all  are 
called  upon  to  do  service.  Few  have  rank,  or  wealth,  or  power,  or  eloquence.  Let 
those  illustrious  few  use  their  ten  talents ;  but  let  us,  the  obscure  millions,  use  the 
simple  duties  of  life — the  rod  that  is  in  our  hand.  A  smile,  like  a  little  rushlight, 
may  cheer  a  sick  man  tossing  on  his  bed.  Happiness-givers  are  the  true  represen- 
tatives of  Christ ;  to  shed  abroad  in  home  and  social  circles  the  joy  and  the  charity 
of  Christ  is  the  true  work  of  Christ's  followers ;  and  in  this  blessed  happiness- 
giving  all,  exalted  and  lowly,  may  alike  engage.  {J.  Cameron  Lees,  D.D.)  Splendid 
instruments  not  necessary  : — A  rod  :  probably  the  shepherd's  crook,  the  symbol  of 
his  present  condition.  Among  the  Arabs  a  long  staff  with  a  curved  head,  varying 
from  three  to  six  feet  in  length,  is  used  for  this  purpose.  This  rod  was  made  the 
subject  of  a  double  miracle.    From  the  story  of  Moses'  rod  the  poets  inveilted 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

fables  of  the  thyrsus  of  Bacchus  and  the  caducseus  of  Mercury.    Homer  represents 
Mercury  as  taking  his  rod  to  work  miracles,  precisely  in  the  same  way  as  God 
commanded  Moses  to  take  his.     God  takes  the  weakest  instruments  to  accomplish 
His  mightiest  ends.     "A  rod,"  "a  ram's  horn,"  "a  cake  of  barley  meal,"  "  an 
earthen  pitcher,"  "  a  shepherd's  sling,"  anything,  in  short,  when  used  of  God,  will 
do  His  appointed  work.     Men  imagine  that  splendid  ends  can  only  be  reached  by 
splendid  means,  but  such  is  not  God's  way.     He  can  use  a  crawling  worm  as  well 
as  a  scorching  sun,  a  gourd  as  well  as  a  vehement  east  wind.     (A.  Nevin,  D.D.) 
The  rod  as  a  symbol : — The  staff  was  the  shepherd's  crook,  with  which  he  had 
hitherto  conducted  the  flock  of  Jethro.    Hence  it  represented  his  vocation  as  a 
shepherd.   This  he  was  to  throw  away,  i.e.,  he  was  to  give  up  his  calling  and  follow 
a  new  one.     But  the  staff  which  he  had  thrown  away  became  a  serpent,  and  Moses 
fled  before  it.    His  vocation  hitherto  had  been  a  poor  and  despised  one ;  but  it  was 
also  quiet,  peaceful,  and  free  from  danger.     When  this  was  given  up,  he  was  to  be 
exposed  to  dangers  of  such  magnitude,  that  even  his  life  would  be  threatened. 
Moses  could  foresee  all  this,  and  hence  the  obstinacy  with  which  he  refused  to  enter 
upon  his  new  vocation.     But  at  the  word  of  God  he  laid  hold  of  the  snake,  and  it 
became  a  staff  in  his  hand  once  more.     This  showed  that,  by  the  power  of  God,  he 
would  be  able  to  overcome  the  dangers  that  would  surround  him,  when  he  relin- 
quished, his  present  calling.     By  overpowering  the  snake  he  recovered  his  staff,  but 
it  was  no  longer  his  staff ;  it  was  the  rod  of  God  (ver.  20),  and  with  the  staff 
thus  altered  he  was  to  perform  the  work  entrusted  to  him  (ver.  17).    It  was  still 
a  shepherd's  staff,  and  his  new  vocation  was  a  shepherd's  calling.     From  being  a 
shepherd  of  Jethro's  sheep  he  was  to  become  the  shepherd  of  God's  sheep,  the 
leader  and  lawgiver  of  the  people  of  God.    And  he  became  so,  by  overcoming  the 
dangers  which  intervened  between  these  two  different  employments.     We  mnst  also 
observe,  that  this  was  the  rod  with  which  he  was  to  bring  the  plagues  upon  Egypt ; 
and  therefore  it  was  the  retributory  counterpart  to  the  rod  with  which  the  Egyptian 
taskmasters  had    beaten   the    Israelites    (ver.   14).      As   soon,   then,   as    Moses 
appeared  before  the  people  and  performed  tbis  sign,  it  showed  them,  first,  that  the 
dangers  to  which  the  mission  of  Moses  would  expose  them — dangers  which  they 
soon  experienced  (chap,  v.) — would  be  overcome  ;  and  secondly,  that  the  staff  of 
shepherd  and  ruler,  with  which  Moses  was  to  lead  and  govern  them,  was  not  assumed 
without  authority,  but  given  to  him  by  God,  and  therefore  the  question  could  not  be 
asked,  as  it  was  before,  •'  Who  made  thee  a  prince  and  a  judge  over  us?  "  (chap.  ii.  14). 
He  afterwards  performed  the  same  miracle  in  the  presence  of  Pharaoh  (chap.  vii. 
10,  &c.).     {J.  H.  Kurtz,  D.D.)        The  symbol  of  a  consecrated  life: — I  believe  the 
rod  cast  down,  and  taken  up  again,  typifies  the  entire  consecration  of  the  Christian's 
life  to  God.     The  rod  was  the  ordinary  sign  and  instrument  of  Moses'  daily  occupa- 
tion.    That  cast  down,  and  taken  up,  became  filled  with  power  ;  and  by  it  he  proved 
to  Israel  and  to  Pharaoh  that  he  had  seen  Jehovah.     We  are  commanded  in  1  Cor. 
vii.  24  to  abide  in  the  calling  "  wherein  we  are  called."     I  suppose  we  may  under- 
stand from  this  that  we  do  not  need  to  change  our  station  and  calhng  (supposing  it 
to   be   an  honest  one)  in  order  to   serve   God.     Are  we   shepherds,   carpenters, 
merchants,  lawyers,  doctors,  teachers,  servants,  or  what  not,  we  may  serve  God  in 
that  calling  quite  as  efficiently  as  in  any  other.     So  He  can,  and  will,  make  you 
mighty  in  the   use  of  your  calling,  be  it  what  it  may,  high  or  low,  learned  or 
mechanical,  the  calling  of  a  master  or  a  servant,  a  mistress  or  a  maid.     Only  cast 
it  down  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  in  humble  and  holy  consecration  ;  and  then  take  it  up 
again  to  use  it  and  pursue  it  for  Him.     What  God  needs  to-day  in  this  world  is  a 
host  of  men  and  women,  in  every  walk  of  life,  who  are  living  for  God,  and  serving 
Him  in  their  calling,  using  it  as  a  means  of  illustrating  God's  righteousness.     He 
wants  some  merchants  todo  business  for  Him,  that  the  world  may  know  what  God's 
thought  of  righteousness  in  trade  is.     The  banker  may  serve  God  in  the  same  way. 
The  medical  man  has  a  calUng  in  which  he  may  leave  the  testimony  of  God's 
tenderness  in  the  sick  room  ;  and  by  his  ministry  of  healing  exercised  on  the  body 
he  has  an  opportunity,  such  as  is  afforded  to  no  other  man  in  the  world,  to  point 
his  patients  to  the  great  Physician  and  Healer  of  souls.     As  it  is,  alas  that  so  many 
Christian  physicians  fail  to  cast  down  their  rods  at  the  feet  of  Christ !    The  lawyer 
at  the  bar,  and  the  judge  on  the  bench,  may  be  God's  witnesses  in  their  profession. 
The  teacher  with  the  children  (a  most  difficult  position)  may  also  cast  his  or  her  rod 
down.    The  governess,  the  nurse,  and  the  mother  may  be  consecrated  to  God  for 
those  to  whom  God  has  sent  them,  or  whom  He  has  given  them.    The  servant  in 
the  house — both  the  maid-seryant  and  the  man-servant— every  one,  in  his  or  her 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  95 

place,  may  throw  down  the  rod  of  their  calling  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  take  it  up 
again  in  power.        (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Leprous  as  snow. — Leprosy  as  emhlematical  of  douht : — I.  That  as 
leprosy  was  the  wokst  disease  that  could  have  been  permitted  to  the  hand  op 
Moses,  so  doubt  of  the  Divine  Word  is  the  most  hurtful  that  can  overtake  the 
HUMAN  mind.  1.  Both  are  small  in  their  commencements.  2.  Both  are  progressive 
in  their  developments.  3.  Both  are  gloomy  in  their  forebodings.  4.  Both  are 
isolating  in  their  tendency.  5.  Both  are  paralysing  in  their  influence.  6.  Both  are 
deadly  in  their  result.  II.  That  as  leprosy  comes  upon  men  unexpectedly,  so  does 
doubt  upon  the  human  mind.  The  germ  of  scepticism  often  remains  long  concealed 
in  the  human  mind ;  its  workings  are  subtle,  and  we  know  not  what  will  be  the 
extent  of  its  future  harvest.  III.  That  as  leprosy  could  only  be  removed  by  the 
Divine  touch,  so  human  doubt  can  only  be  removed  by  communion  with  God.  (J. 
S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Various  suppositions  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  miracle : — 1.  Some 
give  it  a  moral  signification — as  that  the  leprous  hand  of  Moses  showeth  the  works 
of  the  law  that  justifieth  not.  2.  Some  give  it  a  mystical  signification — that  the 
leprous  hand  of  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews  was  cast  off  as  the  leprous  person  out 
of  the  house,  and  the  hand  restored  betokeneth  the  Gentile  Church  adopted  instead 
of  the  Jewish.  3.  Some  refer  it  to  Christ,  that  He  being  the  Hand,  that  is,  the 
power  of  His  Father,  by  taking  our  nature  upon  Him,  became  as  it  were  leprous, 
that  is,  deformed,  by  His  sufferings  and  passion,  but  by  His  resurrection  and  ascen- 
sion His  glory  appeareth.  4.  Some  give  it  an  historical  signification — by  the  leprous 
hand  they  understand  the  miserable  state  of  the  Hebrews  in  the  time  of  their  cruel 
servitude,  who  in  their  deliverance  received  their  former  liberty.  5.  Some  think 
that  the  leprous  hand  signifieth  the  pollutions  of  Egypt,  wherewith  Israel  was  defiled, 
who  being  delivered  were  restored  to  the  true  worship  of  God.  6.  That  the  first 
sending  of  Moses  to  the  Israelites  brought  upon  them  more  cruel  treatment,  but  his 
after  ministry  brought  them  joy  and  dehverance.  7.  That  the  hand  being  the 
instrument  of  working,  betokeneth  the  ministry  and  authority  of  Moses,  and  that 
God  would  use  a  weak  instrument  to  effect  His  will,  Moses  having  lived  a  long  time 
in  banishment  seemed  a  thing  leprous  and  vile,  yet  God  should  in  this  His  service 
make  him  a  glorious  vessel  and  instrument.  8.  That  as  the  leprosy  is  only  cured 
by  God,  so  their  dehverance  was  only  God's  work,  and  to  humble  Moses  by  the  re- 
inembrance  of  his  own  infirmity.  9.  As  far  as  the  intrinsic  significaucy  of  the  sign 
is  concerned,  it  was  evidently  calculated  to  teach  that  whatever  is  new,  vigorous, 
vital,  and  flourishing,  may  at  once  be  withered  at  the  word  of  Omnipotence ;  and 
again  with  equal  facility  restored  to  its  pristine  condition.  (Ibid.)  Ability  for 
God's  service : — 1.  Human  hands  weak  and  unfit  for  service.  2.  Sanctified  power 
is  only  attained  from  God.  3.  Hence  the  worker  must  be  humble,  but  not  impotent 
or  paralytic  in  hand.  (Ibid.)  Soul-instruction : — I.  As  u.ndertaken  by  a  Divine 
TEACHER.  There  are  lessons  for  every  man  to  learn,  which  heaven  only  can  teach. 
II.  As  EMPLOYING  THE  MOST  IMPRESSIVE  SYMBOLISM.  The  Diviuc  teaching  is  always 
suggestive,  never  exhaustive.  III.  As  occupying  but  a  short  space  of  time.  An 
eternal  lesson  may  be  learnt  in  a  moment.  IV.  As  preparing  for  important  du'iy. 
Divine  instruction  is  never  aimless.  Designed  not  merely  to  make  men  clever,  but 
to  give  them  the  power  of  moral  emancipation.  (Ibid.)  The  leprous  hand  re- 
stored : — That  which  happened  to  the  hand  of  Moses  was  a  picture  of  what  had 
happened,  and  was  still  to  happen,  to  the  people  of  Israel.  By  going  down  to  Egypt, 
the  Israelites  had  been  preserved  from  the  injurious  influence  of  Canaanitish  cus- 
toms. Through  the  favour  of  the  first  Pharaohs,  Egypt  was  undoubtedly  a  hiding- 
place,  in  which  the  family  of  Jacob  had  been  cherished  and  preserved,  when  it  was 
distressed  both  in  body  and  mind.  But  there  had  been  a  change  in  both  the  men 
and  the  times,  and  Israel  was  enslaved,  despised,  and  held  in  abomination  in  the 
land  of  Egypt.  When  Israel  departed  from  Egj-pt,  he  was  like  a  homeless  leper. 
But  Jehovah  led  him  once  more  to  a  hiding-place,  where  he  was  cleansed  from  the 
leprosy  which  he  had  brought  with  him  from  Egj-pt,  and  where  he  was  set  apart  as 
a  holy  people  and  a  priestly  nation  (chap.  xix.  6).  It  is  very  easy  to  explain  why  this 
sign  was  not  exhibited  before  Pharaoh  as  well  as  the  others  (chap.  vii.).  The  thing 
signified  was  of  too  internal  and  spiritual  a  nature,  it  was  too  closely  connected 
with  the  counsel  of  God  concerning  His  people  to  be  appropriately  displayed  to 
Pharaoh.     (J.  H.  Kurtz,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8,  9.    They  will  believe  tbe  voice  of  the  latter  sign. — The  paralysis  of 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

doubt : — A  man  needs  not  to  be  a  thorough  unbehever,  overtly  renouncing  all  alle- 
giance to  revealed  truth,  in  order  to  become  useless  in  the  pulpit  and  religiously 
powerless  in  society.  He  needs  only  to  put  a  note  of  interrogation  after  some  of  the 
articles  of  his  creed.  That  is  enough,  without  absolutely  erasing  them.  The  hesi- 
tant is  as  impotent  for  spiritual  good  as  the  heretic.  The  man  who  is  shooting  for 
the  Queen's  cup  may  as  well  attempt  to  hold  his  rifle  with  a  paralysed  arm  as  take 
aim  with  a  trembling  hand.  That  tremor  will  be  fatal  to  success  in  hitting  the 
mark.  Truth  uttered  questioningly  and  apologetically  will  prove  an  arrow  of  con- 
viction to  no  man's  soul.  This,  it  seems  to  me,  rather  than  absolute  and  pro- 
nounced infidelity,  is  the  bane  and  weakness  of  the  age.  It  pervades  the  pulpit  and 
the  pew.  From  the  former,  doctrines  may  be  still  propounded  with  logical  accuracy, 
with  great  precision  of  definition,  with  much  beauty  and  felicity  of  illustration,  but 
with  not  enough  of  conviction  to  drive  them  forcibly  home.  The  rifle  is  a  beautiful 
piece  of  mechanism,  but  there  is  something  amiss  with  the  powder.  {J.  Ilalsey.) 
The  Divine  treatment  of  ]iuman  doubt: — I.  The  Divine  Being  kecookizks  the  pro- 
bability THAT  men  will   NOT   WELCOME   THE   TRUTH    UPON   ITS    FIKST   PKESENTATION  TO 

THEM.  Yet  the  message  proclaimed  by  Moses  was— 1.  Adapted  to  their  condition 
Announcing  freedom.  The  tendency  of  all  unbelief  is  to  intensify  slavery  of  moral 
nature.  2.  Wonderfully  simple.  3.  Divinely  authenticated.  Miracles  will  not 
convince  a  sceptic.  II.  The  Divine  Being  mercifully  makes  provision  for  the  con- 
viction AND  persuasion  OF  MEN  in  reference  to  the  reality  of  the  truth  proclaimed, 
notwithstanding  their  confirmed  unbelief.  This  method  of  treatment  is — 1.  Con- 
siderate. Every  facility  given  for  complete  investigation.  2.  Merciful.  Sign  after 
sign.     3.  Condescending.     III.   The   persistent  unbelief  of  men  is  likely  to 

AWAKEN    evidences    OF   TRUTH    INDICATIVE    OF    THE   DiVINE    DISPLEASURE    (ver.    9).       1. 

Evidences  that  recall  past  sorrows.  Reminding  of  murder  of  children  in  river.  2. 
Evidences  prophetic  of  future  woe.  Indicating  a  strange  and  unhappy  change  in 
their  condition,  if  they  embraced  not  the  message  of  Moses.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  voice  of  the  first  sign  : — 1.  It  speaks  of  the  thraldom  of  man.  2.  It  speaks  of 
the  inability  of  man  to  liberate  himself  therefrom.  3.  It  speaks  of  the  agency 
that  God  has  provided  for  the  freedom  of  man.  4.  It  speaks  of  the  strange 
unwillingness  of  man  to  credit  the  tidings  of  freedom.  (Ibid.)  Miracles : — 1. 
Miracles  at  first  may  miss  their  end,  and  not  persuade  men  to  faith.  2.  Second 
miracles  may  do  that  which  the  first  failed  to  etfect.  3.  God's  word  and  promise 
alone  can  make  miracles  themselves  efifectual  means  of  faith.  4.  Miracles  have 
voices  which  should  command  faith  and  obedience.  (Ibid.)  Ministers  exposed  to 
unbelief: — That  a  true  minister,  notwithstanding— 1.  His  call.  2.  His  spiritual 
preparation.  3.  His  knowledge  of  the  Divine  name.  4.  His  supreme  moral  power, 
and — 5.  Intimate  communion  with  God — is  exposed  to  the  unbelief  of  those  whom 
he  seeks  to  benefit.  (Ibid.)  The  obstinacy  of  unbelief : — It  will  reject  the  truth. 
1.  In  opposition  to  the  word  of  him  by  whom  it  is  brought.  2.  In  opposition  to 
the  Divine  power  by  which  it  is  accompanied.  3.  In  opposition  to  the  benevolent 
design  it  contemplates.  4.  In  opposition  to  accumulative  demonstration.  (Ibid.) 
The  folly  of  rejecting  the  gospel  of  emancipation  : — One  can  hardly  conceive  a  poor 
wayworn  wretch,  as  he  lies  on  the  arid  waste,  panting  with  blackened  lips  and 
swollen  tongue,  striking  the  kind  traveller's  flask  from  his  hand,  and  spilling  the 
precious  water  among  the  blistering  sands.  The  slave  boy — now  an  African  bishop 
— exulted  gleefully  when  a  British  cruiser  snapped  the  fetters  from  his  youthful 
limbs  and  bore  him  to  free  Liberia.  Can  folly  surpass  that  insensate  madness  which 
makes  the  sinner  spurn  the  clear,  cool,  crystal  drops  of  life,  and  perversely  traverse 
the  wilds  of  sin  ?  Can  madness  outrival  that  supreme  folly  which  leads  the  hapless 
bondsman  of  sin  to  hug  the  chains  of  condemnation,  and  obstinately  kiss  the  fetters 
of  wrath? 

Vers.  10-13.  0  my  Lord,  I  am  not  eloquent. — The  objections  made  to  religiou$ 
service : — I.  These  objections  webe  made  after  God  had  given  him  a  full  insight 
INTO  THE  nature  OF  THE  SERVICE  KEQUiRED.  1.  The  iusight  givcu  into  the  nature 
of  this  service  was  infallible.     2.  It  was  forceful.     3.  It  was  sympathetic.    II.  These 

OBJECTIONS    FBEQUENTLY   ARISE   FROM   AN   UNDUE    CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  SELF.       1.    From  a 

consciousness  of  natural  infirmity.  This  ought  to  inspire  within  them  a  more 
thorough  determination  to  seek  Divine  help.  Silence  is  often  more  eloquent  and 
valuable  than  speech.  2.  From  a  supposition  of  moral  incapacity.  The  call  of  God 
is  calculated  to  educate  all  the  sublime  tendencies  of  the  soul,  and  renders  men  fit 
for  the  toil  allotted  to  them.    3,  That,  rather  than  self,  God  must  be  the  supreme 


CHAP.  IT.]  EXODUS.  97 

idea  of  the  soul  when  about  to  enter  upon  religious  service.  Our  hearts  should  be 
a  temple  in  which  every  act  of  service  should  be  rendered  to  the  Inliiiite.  III. 
These  objections  do  not  sufficiently  regard  the  efficacy  of  the  Divine  help 
THAT  IS  promised  IN  THE  SERVICE.  "  Now  therefore  go,  and  I  will  be  with  thy 
mouth,  and  teach  thee  what  thou  shalt  say."  1.  The  Divine  help  is  adapted  to  our 
natural  infirmity.  It  is  far  better  to  have  God  joined  to  our  infirmity,  than  to  have 
the  eloquent  tongue  without  Him.  Thus  there  are  times  when  an  infirmity  may  be 
an  inestimable  advantage  to  a  Christian  worker.  2.  The  Divine  help  is  adapted  to 
our  full  requirement.  God  did  not  merely  promise  to  aid  the  speech  of  Moses,  but 
also  to  teach  him  what  he  should  say.  So  in  the  Christian  service  of  to-day,  good 
men  are  not  merely  aided  in  the  line  of  their  natural  infirmity,  but  also  along  the 
entire  line  of  their  reij[uirement.  IV.  These  objections  are  a  reflection  on  the 
PROPRIETY  of  THE  DiviNE  SELECTION  FOR  THE  SERVICE.  "  And  the  Lord  Said  unto 
him,  who  hath  made  man's  mouth,"  &c.  1.  This  method  of  conduct  is  ungrateful. 
2.  Irreverent.  V.  These  objections  do  not  sufficiently  recognize  the  dignity 
AND  honour  the  SERVICE  WILL  COMMAND.  1.  There  was  the  honour  of  achieving 
the  freedom  of  a  vast  nation.  2.  There  was  the  honour  of  conquering  a  tyrant 
king.     3.  There  was  the  honour  of  becoming  the  lawgiver  of  the  world.     VI.  These 

OBJECTIONS   ARE    LIABLE    TO    AWAKEN  THE    DiVINE    DISPLEASURE.       *'  And    tllC    anger   of 

the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Moses."     1.  This  anger  may  be  manifested  in  our 
removal  from  the  service.    2.  This  anger  may  be  manifested  by  the  positive  infliction 
of  penalty.     3.  This  anger  may  occasion  our  eternal  moral  ruin.     Learn  :  1.  Good 
men  ought  to  know  better  than  to  object  to  the  pervice  of  God.     2.  That  in  the 
service  of  God  men  find  the  highest  reward.     3,  That  in  the  service  of  God  men 
attain  the  truest  immortality.     (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A . )         Usclessiieas  of  mere  tcords : — 
I  am  tormented  with  the  desire  of  writing  better  than  I  can.     I  am  tormented,  say 
I,  with  the  desire  of  preaching  better  than  I  can.     But  I  have  no  wish  to  make  fine, 
pretty  sermons.     Prettiness  is  well  enough  when  prettiness  is  in  place.     I  like  to 
see  a  pretty  child,  a  pretty  flower  ;  but  in  sermons,  prettiness  is  out  of  place.     To 
my  ear,  it  would  be  anything  but  commendation,  should  it  be  said  to  me,  "  You  have 
given  us  a  pretty  sermon."     If  I  were  put  upon  trial  for  my  life,  and  my  advocate 
should  amuse  the  jury  with  tropes  and  figures,  or  bury  his  arguments  beneath  a 
profusion  of  flowers  of  his  rhetoric,  I  would  say  to  him,  "  Tut,  man,  you  care  more 
for  your  vanity,  than  for  my  hanging.     Put  yourself  in  my  place — speak  in  view  of 
the  gallows^and  you  will  tell  your  story  plainly  and  earnestly."     I  have  no  objec- 
tions to  a  lady  winding  a  sword  with  ribbons,  and  studding  it  with  roses  as  she 
presents  it  to  her  hero-lover ;  but  in  the  hour  of  battle  he  will  tear  away  the 
ornaments,  and  use  the  naked  edge  on  the  enemy.     {Robert  Hall.)        The  art  of  the 
orator  undedrahle  in  a  preacher  : — Hipponicus,  intending  to  dedicate  a  costly  statue, 
was  advised  by  a  friend  to  em-ploy  Policletus,  a  famous  workman,  in  the  making  of 
it ;  but  he,  being  anxious  that  his  gi-eat  expense  should  be  the  admiration  of  all 
men,  said  that  "  he  would  not  make  use  of  a  workman  whose  art  would  be  more 
regarded  than  his  own  cost."     When  in  preaching  the  great  truths  of  gospel  salva- 
tion the  enticing  words  which  man's  wisdom  teacheth  are  so  much  sought  out  that 
the   art   of  the  orator  is   more   regarded   by  the  hearers   than  the  value   of   the 
truth  spoken,  it    is    no  wonder  that    the   Lord  refuses    to   grant   His   blessing. 
He  will  have  it  seen  that  the  excellency  of  the  power  lies  not  in  our  speech,  but 
in  His  gospel.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)       Eloquence  : — "  I  am  not  eloquent."     I.  Then 
TRUE  eloquence  MAY  HAVE  ITS  USE.     1.  To  explain  Divine  truth.     2.  To  inspire 
men  M'ith  the  thought  of  freedom.     3.  To  manifest  the  perfection  of  the  gift  of 
speech.     II.  Then  do  not  condemn  men  who  are.     III.  Then  do  not  envy  those 
WHO  ARE  acknowledged  TO  BE  SO.     If  we  havs  not  eloquence,  we  have  some  other 
equally  valuable  talent  in  its  place.     IV   Then  the  Lord  can  use  a  feeble  instru- 
mentality.    This  will   enhance  the  Divine  glory.     V.  Then  words  are  not  the 
CHIEF  conditions  OF  SERVICE.     Ideas,  thoughts,  emotions,  and  spiritual  influences, 
occupy   a   more    prominent  place.     VL  Then   do   not   grumble,    but   seek   the 
Divine  aid  in  your  infirmity.     He  will  help  and  bless  work  done  for  Him.     (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)         Slowness  of  speech  : — I.  An  infirmity.     II.  A  discretion.     III.  A 
discipline.      (Ibid.)  Why   icas   Moses  not  gifted  with   eloquence  ? — It   might 

certainly  be  asked  with  propriety,  why  Moses,  who  was  singled  out  by  Providence 
as  the  great  medium  for  bringing  the  wisdom  of  heaven  down  to  the  earth,  for  ever 
substituting  Divine  truth  instead  of  human  error,  and  who  was  gifted  with  such 
uncommon  p£rfection  of  the  mind  and  intellect,  was  denied  the  power  of  eloquence, 
apparently  so  indispensable  for  his  extraordinary  vocation.    But  it  was  an  act  of 

7 


98  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  17. 

the  sublime  wisdom  of  the  Almifjhty  to  withhold  from  Moses  just  the  gift  of 
persuasion,  lest  it  should  appear  that  he  owed  the  triumph  over  the  obstinacy  of 
Pharaoh  and  the  disbelief  of  the  Israelites,  not  to  the  miracles  of  God  and  the 
intrinsic  worth  of  the  Law,  but  to  the  artifices  and  subtleties  of  oratory,  which  too 
often  procure,  even  to  fallacies  and  sophisms,  an  ephemeral  victory.  It  was  wisely 
designed  that  the  power  of  God  should  the  more  gloriously  shine  through  a  humble 
and  imperfect  instrument.  This  is  a  remarkable  and  deeply  interesting  difference 
between  the  legislator  of  Israel  and  the  founders  of  almost  all  other  religions, 
to  whom,  uniformly,  no  qualitv  is  ascribed  in  a  higher  degree  than  the  gift  of 
eloquence.  {31.  M.Kalisch,  Fh.D.)  Self-consciousness  : — Moses  has  now  descended 
from  the  high  level  of  the  argument,  and  narrowed  the  case  into  one  of  mere  human 
personality.  He  has  forgotten  the  promise,  "  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee."  The 
moment  we  get  away  from  Divine  promise  and  forget  great  principles,  we  narrow 
all  controversy  and  degrade  all  service.  Self-consciousness  is  the  ruin  of  all 
vocations.  Let  a  man  look  into  himself,  and  measure  his  work  by  himself,  and  the 
movement  of  his  life  will  be  downward  and  exhaustive.  Let  him  look  away  from 
himself  to  the  Inspirer  of  his  life,  and  the  Divine  reward  of  his  labours,  and  he 
will  not  so  much  as  see  the  difficulties  which  may  stand  ever  so  thickly  in  his  way. 
Think  of  Moses  turning  his  great  mission  into  a  question  which  involved  his  own 
eloquence !  All  such  reasoning  admits  of  being  turned  round  upon  the  speaker  a3 
a  charge  of  foolish,  if  not  of  profane,  vanity.  See  how  the  argument  stands  :  "  I 
am  not  eloquent,  and  therefore  the  mission  cannot  succeed  in  my  hands,"  ig 
equivalent  to  saying,  "  I  am  an  eloquent  man,  and  therefore,  this  undertaking  must 
be  crowned  with  signal  success."  The  work  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the 
eloquence  or  ineloquence  of  Moses.  It  was  not  to  be  measured  or  determined  by 
his  personal  gifts :  the  moment,  therefore,  that  he  turned  to  his  individual  talents, 
he  lost  sight  of  the  great  end  which  he  was  called  instrumentally  to  accomplish. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Fluency  in  speech  : — Moses  was  a  thinker  rather  than  a  speaker. 
Fluency  was  not  his  forte.  He  saw  too  much  in  a  moment  to  be  able  to  give 
utterance  to  it  all  at  once ;  and  so  his  lack  of  readiness  in  the  use  of  language  was 
the  result  of  the  richness  of  his  thought,  rather  than  of  its  poverty.  When  the 
bottle  is  full,  its  contents  flow  out  less  freely  by  far  than  when  it  is  two  parts 
empty.  So,  very  often,  the  fluency  of  one  speaker  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he  sees 
only  one  side  of  a  subject ;  while  the  hesitancy  of  another  is  the  consequence  of 
his  taking  in  at  a  glance  all  the  bearings  of  his  theme,  and  of  his  desire  to  say 
nothing  on  it  that  will  imperil  other  great  principles  with  which  it  is  really,  but  not 
to  all  minds  visibly,  connected.  (IK.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  I  will  be  with  thy 
mouth. — Natural  injirrnitics  in  relation  to  moral  service: — I.  Taxi  God  does  not 

ALWAYS  SEE  FIT  TO  KEMOYE   NATUEAL    INFIRMITIES  FROM   TUOSE  WHO   ARE  COMMISSIONED 

TO  IMPORTANT  SERVICE.  1.  T^jcy  kccp  US  humblc.  2.  They  remind  us  of  God. 
3.    They  prompt  us  to    prayer.    II.   That  God  renders  natural  impediments 

EFFECTIVE    TO   THE   CLEAR  MANIFESTATION   OF   HiS  POWER  AND    GLORT.       1.    Should   wifl 

our  submission.  2.  Should  gain  our  confidence.  3.  Should  inspire  our  praise. 
III.  That  God  so  far  compassionates  our  natural  infirmities  as  to  relieve  them 
BY  congenial  and  EFFICIENT  HELP.  1.  Fraternal.  2.  Adapted  to  need.  3.  Constant. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  'M.A.)        The  Divine  Creatorship : — I.  Should  silence  the  voice  op 

COMPLAINT    UNDER    NATURAL    INFIRMITIES.       II.    ShOULD     BECOME     AN    ARGUMENT    FOB 

the  re.vdt  performance  of  any  mission  on  which  we  may  be  divinely  sent.  iii. 
Should  lead  us  reverently  to  acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of  God  in  the 

VARIED   ALLOTMENTS   OF  LIFE.       {Ihicl.)  LcSSOnS  : — I.   ThB  DiVINE  COMMISSION.      11. 

The  Divine  companionship.  III.  The  Divine  instruction.  (Ibid.)  Speech,  or 
dumbness,  from  Gotl : — I.  Language  is  of  Divine  original.  You  may  have  been 
accustomed  to  consider  it  just  as  natural  to  man  to  speak  as  to  walk  ;  but  this  is  a 
mistake.  A  child  left  to  itself  may  learn  to  walk,  but  a  child  left  to  itself  would 
never  learn  to  speak  ;  it  would  utter  sounds,  but  it  would  never  connect  sounds  with 
thoughts — it  would  never,  that  is,  learn  to  express  certain  thoughts  by  certain 
sounds.  It  might  invent  some  jargon  of  its  own,  but  as  to  anything  which  should 
at  all  resemble  even  the  elements  of  a  language,  and  a  system  of  sounds  by  which 
everything  around  us  should  be  classified  and  defined,  you  will  never  think  that  this 
could  be  found  in  the  accidental  babblings  of  infancy  ;  and  however  you  may  seek 
to  account  upon  natural  principles  for  the  origin  of  language,  we  still  venture  to  say, 
that  unless  you  receive  the  Mosaic  account  of  the  Creation,  there  is  no  phenomenon 
so  hopelessly  inexplicable  as  language.  Unless  it  be  supposed  that  God  formed 
man  at  first,  and  gave  him  the  organs  of  speech,  ay,  and  then  taught  him  their  use, 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  99 

and  furnished  him  with  words  by  which  ideas  should  be  expressed,  language  is  the 
most  unintelligible  of  prodigies ;  and  you  may  search  the  universe  and  find  nothing 
which  you  may  not  account  for  without  God,  if  you  can  shut  out  His  agency  from 
the  introduction  of  speech.  And  there  is  scriptural  evidence  of  the  fact,  that  God 
taught  man  language,  or  that  the  language  first  spoken  was  Divine  in  its  origin. 
You  will  observe,  that  so  soon  as  man  was  created  God  spake  unto  him  ;  and  thus 
the  first  use  of  words  was  to  communicate  the  thoughts  of  God.  But  the  thoughts 
of  God  must  have  been  communicated  in  the  words  of  God,  and  man  could  not 
have  understood  God's  words,  unless  he  had  been  first  tanght  them  of  God ;  so  that 
when  on  the  very  outset  of  human  existence  you  find  conversation  held  between 
man  and  his  Maker,  you  are  forced  to  conclude,  that  since  on  no  supposition  could 
man  in  such  a  brief  space  have  invented  a  language,  the  employed  language  must 
have  been  Divine,  and  Adam  must  have  received  from  God  the  earliest  intimations 
of  speech.  II.  Every  case  of  inability  to  speak  is  of  Divine  appointment. 
God  has  meted  out  to  us  our  every  endowment,  whether  of  body  or  of  mind ;  we 
are  indebted  for  nothing  to  chance,  for  everything  to  Providence ;  and  though  it 
were  beside  our  pui-pose  to  inquire  into  the  reasons  which  may  induce  God  to  deny 
to  one  man  the  sense  of  sight,  and  to  another  the  sense  of  hearing,  we  are  as  much 
bound  to  recognise  His  appointment  in  these  bodily  defects  as  in  the  splendid  gifts 
of  a  capacious  memory,  a  rich  imagination  and  a  sound  judgment,  which  procure 
for  their  possessor  admiration  and  influence.  And  when  there  shall  come  the 
grand  clearing  up  of  the  mysteries  and  discrepancies  of  the  present  dispensation, 
we  nothing  doubt  that  the  Almighty  will  show  that  >-iere  was  j,  dts'gu  to  be  answered 
by  every  deformed  limb,  and  every  sightless  eyeball,  and  every  speechless  tongue, 
and  that  in  regard  both  to  the  individual  himself  and  to  numbers  with  whom  he 
stood  associated,  there  has  been  a  distinct  reference  to  the  noblest  and  most  glorious 
of  ends,  in  the  closing  up  of  the  inlets  of  the  senses,  or  in  the  yielding  the  members 
to  disease  or  contraction.  The  deaf  and  dumb  child  shall  be  proved  to  have  acted 
a  part  in  the  furtherance  of  the  purposes  of  God,  which  it  could  never  have 
performed,  had  it  delighted  its  parents  by  hearkening  to  their  counsels  and  pouring 
forth  the  music  of  its  speech ;  the  bhnd  man  and  the  cripple  shall  be  shown  to  have 
been  so  placed  in  their  pilgrimage  through  life,  that  they  should  have  been  decidedly 
disadvantaged,  the  one  by  sight,  the  other  by  strength.  "Who  maketh,"  then, 
"  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or  the  seeing  or  the  blind?  have  not  I  the  Lord  ?  "  Thine,  0 
God,  is  the  allowing  upon  earth  the  melancholy  assemblage  of  those  who  seem  but 
fractions  of  men ;  but  wise  and  good,  though  unsearchable  and  past  finding  out, 
are  all  Thy  ways  and  all  Thy  permissions.  III.  And  there  are  two  inferences  which 
you  should  draw  from  the  facts  thus  established,  and  which  we  would  press  with  all 
earnestness  on  your  attention.  1.  You  discern,  first  of  all,  the  extreme  sinfulness 
of  looking  slightingly  or  with  contempt  on  those  who  are  afilicted  with  any  bodily 
defect  or  deformity.  Ridicule  in  such  case,  however  disguised  and  softened  down, 
is  ridicule  of  an  appointment  of  God ;  and  to  despise  in  the  least  degree  a  man 
because  he  possesses  not  the  full  measure  of  senses  and  powers,  is  to  revile  the 
Creator,  who  alone  ordered  the  abstraction.  2.  If  we  are  indebted  to  God  for  every 
sense  and  every  faculty,  are  we  not  laid  under  a  mighty  obligation  to  present  our 
bodies  a  living  sacrifice  to  our  Maker?  {H.  Melvill,  B.I).)  Gifts  other  than 
eloquence  an  element  in  leadership  : — Probably  Moses  stammered,  as  he  said  he  was 
slow  of  speech  ;  and  was  not  fluent  in  speaking,  notwithstanding  all  his  learning. 
A  man  may  be  a  philosopher,  a  statesman,  may  have  a  clear  head  and  a  strong  will, 
a  solid  judgment  and  a  great  mind,  and  yet  be  destitute  of  any  talent  for  speaking. 
It  was  the  same  with  St.  Paul  (see  1  Cor.  ii.  1-4  ;  2  Cor.  x.  10),  who  was  so  full  of 
wisdom  and  zeal  and  love,  but  had  no  eloquence.  {Prof.  Gaussen.)  Inspiratioji 
better  than  education: — Speaking  of  art-training,  Mr.  Euskin  says  :  "Until  a  man 
has  passed  through  a  course  of  academy  studentship,  and  can  draw  in  an  improved 
manner  with  French  chalk,  and  knows  foreshortening,  and  perspective,  and  some- 
thing of  anatomy,  we  do  not  think  he  can  possibly  be  an  artist.  What  is  worse,  we 
are  very  apt  to  think  that  we  can  make  him  an  artist  by  teaching  him  anatomy,  and 
how  to  draw  with  French  chalk  :  whereas  the  real  gift  in  him  is  utterly  independent 
of  all  such  accomplishments."  So  the  highest  powers  of  the  teacher  or  preacher, 
the  power  of  interpreting  the  Scriptures  with  spiritual  insight,  of  moving  the 
hearers  to  earnest  worship  and  decision,  may  exist  with  or  without  the  culture  of 
the  schools.  Learned  Pharisees  are  impotent  failures  compared  with  a  rough 
fisherman  Peter  anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  Inspiration  is  more  than 
education.    (H,  0.  Mackey.)      Strength  not  always  appropriate : — Professor  Tyn- 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv.' 

dall  states  as  a  most  remarkable  fact,  that  the  waves  which  have  np  to  this 
time  been  most  effectual  in  shaking  asunder  the  atoms  of  compound  molecules 
are  those  of  least  mechanical  power.  "Billows,"  he  instructively  adds,  "are 
incompetent  to  produce  effects  which  are  easily  produced  by  ripples."  It  is  so 
with  us.  Often  the  greatest  of  us  cannot  do  things  that  the  smallest  and  weakest 
can.  God  sends  power  from  on  high  to  them,  and  it  should  be  our  prayer  that 
God  will  endue  us  with  power  from  on  high  that  we  may  do  His  work,  even  though 
we  be  the  weakest  and  humblest  of  His  servants.  God  can  make  use  of  poor 
material : — The  meek  Moses  lost  sight  of  the  fact  that  God  does  not  of  necessity 
require  good  moierial.  The  paper  manufacturer  is  not  nice  in  the  choice  of  his 
materials.  He  does  not,  writes  Arnot,  reject  a  torn  or  filthy  piece  as  unfit  for 
his  purpose.  All  come  alike  to  him  ;  for  he  knows  what  he  can  make  of  them. 
The  filthy  rags  can  be  made  serviceable.  So  God  needed  not  a  man  highly 
endowed  with  mental  gifts  and  intellectual  energies,  with  commanding  presence 
and  persuasive  eloquence.  His  providence  and  grace  could  prepare  Moses  for 
his  mission.  GfuVs    biddinr/s  are  enahlings  : — The  missionary  John  Williams 

once  said  that  there  were  two  little  words  which  were  able  to  make  the  most 
lofty  mountains  melt :  "  Try  "  and  "  Trust."  Moses  had  yet  to  learn  the  use  of 
these  words.  God  taught  him.  The  sailor  has  to  be  taught  that  he  must  not 
look  on  the  dark  and  troubled  waters,  but  at  the  clear  blue  heavens  where  shines 
the  pole-star.  Moses  was  gazing  at  the  surging  sea  of  Egyptian  wrath,  and  God 
taught  him  to  direct  his  gaze  heavenward,  then  to  try  and  trust,  for  greater  is 
He  that  is  with  you  than  all  that  be  against  you.  As  an  early  Christian  writer 
enjoins,  let  us  not  forget — as  Moses  did  at  first — that  all  God'o  biddings  are 
enabling^,  and  that  it  is  for  us  not  to  ask  the  reason  but  to  obey. 

Ver.  13.  Send,  I  pray  Thee,  by  the  hand  of  him  whom  Thou  wilt  send. — An 
evasion  of  sjnritual   n-ork : — I.  Moses  recooxized  the  necessity  toat  the  work 

SHOULD  BE  ACCOMPLISHED.  H.  He  MANIFESTED  A  DISPOSITION  TO  SHRINK  FROM 
ACHIEVING  THE  WORK  HIMSELF.  IH.  He  EXPRESSED  A  DESIRE  THAT  SOME  OTHER 
PERSON  SHOULD  BE  CALLED  TO,  AND  ENTRUSTED  WITH,  THE  WORK.  IV.  He  WAS  IN 
DANGER   OF   LOSING    THE     HONOUR     OF     THE    WORK    TO    WHICH    HE    WAS    CALLED.         {J.    S. 

Excll,  j\I.A.)  The  joy  of  being  used  by  God: — I  have  a  letter  from  a  dear 
Christian  lady  in  this  city  who  refused  to  speak  to  an  inquirer  when  I  asked  her 
to,  on  the  ground  that  she  could  not  talk  to  an  inquirer.  The  nest  day  she  was 
deeply  humiliated  to  think  that  she  had  refused  to  speak  to  an  anxious  soul ;  aud 
the  question  even  of  her  own  acceptance  with  God  came  up  for  discussion  in  her 
own  mind.  "  Can  I  be  a  child  of  God,  if  I  am  not  willing  to  speak  to  an  anxious 
soul  about  Jesus?  "  She  was  led  by  this  to  cast  herself  down  in  consecration  to 
God  to  be  used  of  Him  in  any  way,  and  especially  in  speaking  to  the  anxious. 
Here  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  just  received.  "  I  am  constrained  to  tell  you  that 
He  allowed  me  on  Sunday  night,  for  the  first  time,  the  intense  joy  of  helping  to 
lead  a  dear  soul  to  Himself.  Oh,  the  rest,  and  joy,  and  peace  to  my  own  heart, 
is  more  than  tongue  can  tell !  To  think  that  after  being  His  child  for  seventeen 
years,  and  being  cold  and  useless  all  that  wasted  time.  He  sliould  then  be  so 
loving  and  gracious  as  to  use  me,  such  a  worthless  cumberer.  Oh,  it  is 
wonderful  !  Praise  His  dear  name."  Dear  friend,  would  you  not  like  to  have 
a  similar  experience?      (G.  F.  Pentecost,   D.D.)  The   inventiveness  of  reluc- 

tance : — Man  excusing  himself  from  duty  is  a  familiar  picture.  It  is  not 
a  picture  indeed ;  it  is  a  personal  experience.  How  inventive  we  are  in  finding 
excuses  for  not  doing  the  will  of  God !  How  falsely  modest  we  can  become ! 
depreciating  ourselves,  and  putting  ourselves  before  God  in  a  light  in  which 
we  could  never  consent  to  be  put  before  society  by  the  criticism  of  others. 
Is  not  this  a  revelation  of  the  human  heart  to  itself  ?  We  only  want  to 
walk  in  paths  that  are  made  beautiful  with  flowers,  and  to  wander  by  streams 
that  lull  us  by  their  own  tranquillity.  Nerve,  and  pluck,  and  force  we  seem  to 
have  lost.  In  place  of  the  inventiveness  of  love  we  have  the  inventiveness  of 
reluctance  or  distaste.  It  should  be  our  supreme  delight  to  find  reasons  for 
co-operating  with  God,  and  to  fortify  ourselves  by  such  interpretations  of  circum- 
stances as  will  plainly  show  us  that  we  are  in  the  right  battle,  fighting  on  the 
right  side,  and  wielding  the  right  weapon.  The  possibility  of  self-deception  is 
one  of  the  most  solemn  of  all  subjects.  I  cannot  question  the  sincerity  of  Moses 
in  enumerating  and  massing  all  the  diflSculties  of  his  side  of  the  case.  He  meant 
every  word  that  he  said.    It  is  not  enough  to  be  sincere ;  we  must  have  intelli- 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  101 

gence  and  conscience  enlightened  and  enlarged.  Mistakes  are  made  about  this 
matter  of  sincerity ;  the  thing  forgotten  being  that  sincerity  is  nothing  in  itself, 
everything  depending  upon  the  motive  by  which  it  is  actuated  and  the  object 
towards  which  it  is  directed.  The  Church  is  to-day  afflicted  with  the  spirit  of 
Belf-excusing  : — it  cannot  give,  because  of  the  depression  of  the  times ;  it  cannot 
go  upon  its  mighty  errands,  because  of  its  dainty  delicateness  ;  it  cannot  engage 
in  active  beneficence,  because  its  charity  should  begin  at  home ;  it  cannot  enter 
into  ardent  controversy,  because  it  i^refers  the  comfort  of  inaction.  Churches 
should  not  tell  lies  to  themselves.  The  tirst  great  thing  to  be  done  is  for  a  man 
to  be  faithful  to  his  own  heart,  to  look  himself  boldly  in  the  face,  and  speak  the 
clear  truth  emphatically  to  his  own  consciousness.     [J,  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.   14-17.    He  shall  be  thy  spokesman. — Mutual  aid  in  reli/jious  vork  : — 
I.  That  sometimes    great    men  are  called   to    undeet.\ke    a  woek  against  the 

PEKFORMANCE    OF    WHICH    THEY   IMAGINE    THEMSELVES  TO    HAVE  A  NATURAL  IMPEDIMENT. 

1.  Men  should  be  certain  that  their  so-called  impediment  will  be  a  real  hindrance 
in  the  service  to  which  they  are  sent.  In  these  days,  when  people  are  called 
to  work,  they  at  once  refer  to  their  infirmity  and  unfitness  for  it ;  but  their  real 
infirmity  is  not  so  much  their  slowness  pf  speech,  as  their  unbelief,  and  un- 
willingness to  follow  the  Divine  command.  They  have  not  the  mcral  courage  to 
encounter  difficulty.  2.  But  we  admit  that  sometimes  men  are  called  to  religious 
work,  against  the  performance  of  which  they  have  a  true  natural  impediment. 
And  why  this  apparent  anomaly  ?  (1)  It  is  because  with  the  command  lie  gives 
the  moral  energy  necessary  for  its  execution.  He  gives  the  timid  man  the 
stimulus  of  the  vision.  He  gives  him  the  inspiration  of  a  miracle.  (2)  Its 
design  is  to  educate  man  on  the  side  of  his  weakness.  (3)  It  is  to  render  the 
mission  all  the  more  triumphant  when  accomplished.  It  is  the  distinguishing 
glory  of  Christianity  that  it  makes  provision  for  the  victory  of  the  weak,  who 
have  within  their  souls  the  grace  of  God.     II.    That    at    such  times  good  men 

EEQUIRE    the   AID    OF   OTHERS   WHOSE     TALENTS     COMPENSATE    FOB     THEIR    INFIRMITIES. 

1.  This  help  was  adapted  to  the  infirmity  of  Moses.  "  Is  not  Aaron  the  Levite 
thy  brother  ?  I  know  that  he  can  speak  well."  So  there  are  a  variety  of  gifts 
and  talents  in  the  Church.  The  one  is  the  complement  of  the  other.  2.  This 
help  was  arranged  by  the  Providence  of  God.  "And  also,  behold,  he  cometh 
forth  to  meet  thee."  (1)  As  to  the  time  of  meeting.  (2)  As  to  the  place  of 
meeting.  (3)  As  to  the  purpose  of  meeting.  3.  This  help  was  founded  upon, 
and  rendered  welcome  by,  family  relationship.     "  Thy  brother."     III.  That  such 

CO-OPERATION      RENDERS     RELIGIOUS     WOEK     MUCH     MOEE     JUBILANT     AND     SUCCESSFUL. 

1.  It  is  happy.  It  is  adapted  to  our  weak  condition  of  faith.  2.  It  is 
sympathetic.      3.  It  is  hopeful.      (J.   S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Moses   and   Aaron:-^ 

I.  The  ceetificated  ambass.vdoe.  Moses.  1.  His  hesitation.  Caused  by — 
(1)  His  own  meekness.  Had  not  a  high  opinion  of  himself.  (2)  His  know- 
ledge of  the  people  he  was  sent  to  dehver,  and  also  of  the  oppressor.  He 
had  not  forgotten  their  rejection  of  him.  2.  His  certificate.  Power  to  work 
sundry  miracles  is  given.  3.  His  unbelief.  Moses  seems,  at  this  time,  to  rely 
too  much  on  human  qualities.  His  lack  of  eloquence,  he  thinks,  will  be  a 
great  hindrance.  II.  The  gracious  compensation.  Moses  and  Aaron  the  comple- 
ment of  each  other.  The  man  of  words  and  the  man  of  action.  Human  qualities 
are  mercifully  distributed.  No  one  man  perfect.  Each  needs  the  help  and  talents 
of  others.  Providence  designs  that  men  should  not  be  independent  of  one  another. 
"  Two  heads  better  than  one."  Opposites  often  found  in  one  family.  Moses  and 
Aaron — brothers.  Different  qualities  and  talents  in  a  household  to  be  used,  and 
combined,  for  the  service  of  God.  Let  none  envy  the  gifts  of  others,  but  cultivate 
his  own.  III.  The  brothers'  meeting.  1.  In  the  wilderness.  Place  of  brotherly 
meeting  a  garden  in  the  desert  of  life.  How  great  the  joy  of  meeting  each  other 
where  all  around  is  paradise,  and  no  separation  or  toil  in  prospect.  2.  Marked  by 
affection.  They  "kissed"  each  other.  Mutual  respect  and  love.  3.  Their  inter- 
course. Chief  matter  in  hand  was  Moses's  commission.  Aaron,  the  elder, 
cheerfully  takes  the  second  place.  Is  indebted  for  even  that  to  the  humility  of 
Moses.  They  journey  on  together,  and  at  once  address  themselves  to  their  work. 
Learn — 1.  God's  witnesses  are  witnessed  to.  Seals  to  their  ministry.  2.  Humbly 
to  regard  ourselves,  but  do  any  work  to  which  Providence  calls  us.  3.  PkCJoice  in 
others'  powers,  and  cheerfully  unite  for  common  ends.  4.  Thank  God  for  our 
meeting  on  earth,  and  prepare  for  the  better  one.     5.  Christ,  our  elder  Brother, 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cms.  vr. 

meets  ds  in  the  wilderness,  salutes  us  with  the  kiss  of  love,  and  goes  with  us  to  all 
our  holy  labours.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  Mxitual  service: — In  the  valley  of  Cha- 
mounix  there  stands  a  very  interesting  monument;  it  presents  two  figures — 
Saussure,  the  great  scientist,  and  Balmat,  the  guide,  who  was  the  very 
first  to  stand  on  the  summit  of  Mont  Blanc.  Saussure  on  the  summit  of  the 
mighty  mountain  could  do  what  the  poor  guide  could  not  do,  he  could  observe 
the  structure  of  the  rocks,  take  observations  of  barometrical  variations,  note  the 
intensity  of  the  solar  rays,  the  mode  of  formation  of  clouds,  and  he  could 
describe  the  superb  scenery  unfolded  to  his  view  with  the  feeling  of  an  artist 
and  the  pen  of  a  poet.  Balmat  could  do  nothing  of  all  this,  but  had  it  not  been 
for  his  skill  and  daring,  Saussure  had  never  scaled  the  glorious  height.  So  on 
the  monument  both  are  immortalized,  the  lowly  guide,  the  famous  philosopher, 
for  by  tbeir  mutuality  they  triurr.phed  and  gave  mankind  a  new  world  of  science 
and  poetry.  So  it  ever  is  in  the  Church.  In  Christian  fellowsbip  all  souls  serve 
one  another.  (W.  L,  Watkimon.)  Life  and  service  interdependent: — In  the 
great  honey  industries  of  South  California  the  bees  play  a  most  important  and 
valuable  part.  But  they  cannot  pierce  the  skins  of  the  apricots  until  the  lady-bug 
has  made  a  hole  for  them.  It  must  have  been  an  accidental  thing  at  the  outset, 
the  first  bee  joining  a  lady-bug  at  her  feast  of  apricot,  but  tbey  have  now  become 
necessary  to  the  honey-crop  of  the  district.  All  life  and  service  is  interdependent 
— >Timothy  is  necessary  to  Paul ;  the  least  essential  to  the  great.  (H.  0.  Mackey.) 
The  Divine  anger: — 1.  Often  righteously  provoked.  2.  Often  gentle  in  its 
reproof.  3.  Truly  benevolent  in  its  disposition.  (-7.  S,  Exell,  M.A.)  I  know 
that  he  can  speak  well : — I.  Then  God  takes  kkowledoe  of  the  varied  talents  OB" 
MEN.     II.  Then  God  will  hold  men  responsible  for  their  talents.     III.  Then  thb 

TALENTS  OF  MEN  CANNOT  BE  BETTER  EMPLOYED  THAN  IN  THE  SERVICE    OF   THE    ChURCH. 

(Ibid.)  Clirintian  -workers  more  ready  to  rely  on  man  than  on  God: — We  have 
noted  the  timidity  and  hesitation  of  Moses,  notwithstanding  the  varied  promises 
and  assurances  with  which  Divine  grace  had  furnished  him.  And  now,  although 
there  was  nothing  gained  in  tbe  way  of  real  power,  although  there  was  no  more 
virtue  or  cOicacy  in  one  mouth  than  in  another,  although  it  was  Moses,  after  all, 
who  was  to  speak  unto  Aaron,  yet  Moses  was  quite  ready  to  go  when  assured  of 
the  presence  and  co-operation  of  a  poor  feeble  mortal  like  himself,  whereas  he 
could  not  go  when  assured  again  and  again  that  Jehovah  would  be  with  him.  How 
his  case,  like  a  mirror,  reflects  our  own  hearts !  We  are  more  ready  to  trust 
anything  than  the  living  God.  How  deeply  should  it  humble  us  before  the  Lord 
that,  though  we  move  along  with  bold  decision  when  we  possess  the  countenance 
and  support  of  a  poor  frail  mortal  like  ourselves,  yet  we  falter,  hesitate,  and 
demur  when  we  have  the  light  of  the  Master's  countenance  and  the  strength  of 
His  omnipotent  arm  to  support  us.     {A.  Nevin,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.    Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee. — A  true  recognition   of  filial  duty  : — I.  It 

CONSISTS   IN    A   TRUE    RECOGNITION    OF    PARENTAL  AUTHORITY.       1.    MoSeS  WaS  animated 

by  honesty.  2.  Moses  was  related  by  marriage.  3.  Moses  was  obliged  by 
kindness.  II.  It  is  compatible  with  silence  in  reference  to  the  inner 
EXPERIENCES  OF  OUR  SPIRITUAL  LIFE  AND  WORK.  Moscs  Only  askcd  the  consent  of 
his  father-in-law  to  visit  his  brethren  in  Egypt;  he  did  not  name  the  primary 
object  of  his  journey.  This  was  quite  consistent,  under  the  circumstances,  with 
a  true  recognition  of  filial  duty,  1.  Silence  is  not  necessarily  cunning.  2.  Silence 
may  be  discreet.  3.  Silence  may  be  self-protective.  Many  toils  of  Christian 
workers  have  been  brought  to  nought  by  the  lack  of  precautionary  measures  on 
the  part  of  those  who  have  been  entrusted  with  them.     III.  It  should  awaken 

KINDLY   and    judicious   PARENTAL    CONSIDERATION   AND    RESPONSE.        "  And  JethrO    Said 

to  Moses,  Go  in  peace."  1.  Sometimes  the  request  should  be  granted.  2.  Always 
goodwill  should  be  expressed.  "  Go  in  peace."  3.  Supremely  should  self  be 
forgotten.      (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  compidsion   of  service  : — This   case  of 

Moses  reminds  us  that  our  best  lifework  is  that  on  which  we  enter  under  a 
feeling  that  it  is  absolutely  essential  that  we  should  do  it.  Moses  tried  in  every 
way  to  put  away  from  him  the  office  to  which  God  called  him.  But  still  it  came 
back  upon  him.  He  felt  that  he  must  go  ;  and  when  that  irrepressible  mttst  shaped 
itself  in  his  soul,  he  went,  and  carried  all  before  him.  It  is  the  irrepressible  in  a 
man  that  makes  him  great.  So  long  as  the  work  he  undertakes  is  performed 
because  he  must  do  something,  there  is  nothing  remarkable  either  about  him  or 
about  it ;  but  when  he  enters  upon  it  because  it  is  something  that  he  must  do,  then 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  103 

prepare  yourself  for  something  noble.  Is  it  not  just  in  this  that  the  quality  which 
we  call  genius  peculiarly  resides  ?  If  a  man  thinks  that  he  would  like  to  write  in 
verse,  or  to  paint  something,  or  to  make  a  speech,  or  what  not,  his  work  will 
never  be  heard  of.  But  if  there  is  in  him  a  song  which  insists  on  singing  itself 
out,  or  a  painting  which  will  not  let  him  rest  until  he  has  put  it  on  the  canvas,  or 
a  truth,  the  utterance  of  which  he  cannot  hold  back,  then  he  is  sure  to  be  at 
length  a  poet,  an  artist,  or  an  orator.  That  was  a  wise  old  minister  who,  on  being 
consulted  by  a  youth  who  desired  to  become  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  said  to  him, 
"  Young  man,  don't  become  a  minister  if  you  can  help  it."  It  is  the  man  who 
cannot  help  being  a  preacher  who  will  be  most  effective  always  in  the  pulpit. 
The  work  which  we  can  help  doing  is  not  for  us.  If  Moses  could  have  successfully 
excused  himself,  he  would  have  been  no  fit  man  for  the  great  crusade  on  which 
he  entered.  But  it  was  because,  in  spite  of  all  his  reluctance,  there  was  within  him 
the  overmastering  sense  that  God  had  called  him  to  be  Israel's  deliverer  that  he 
■was  at  length  so  successful.  Ah  !  have  we  not  here  the  cause  of  so  many  failures 
in  moral  and  religious  enterprises  ?  The  men  who  have  inaugurated  them  have 
done  so  for  personal  eclat  or  pecuniary  profit,  and  not  because  of  this  inner 
compulsion.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Domestic  synniathy  in  duty  : — Moses  tells 
Jethro  of  his  commission  from  Jehovah,  and  asks  permission  to  carry  out  the 
Lord's  will.  This  request  is  at  once  granted.  It  is  most  encouraging  to  be  thus 
cordially  seconded  by  those  of  our  own  house  in  our  purpose  to  serve  the  Lord, 
whether  in  public  or  private  ministry.  We  also,  whether  we  are  called  into  the 
pubhc  or  private  service  of  God,  ought  to  communicate  with  those  of  our  own 
household.  My  advice  is  always  to  a  young  convert,  to  go  at  once  to  those  at 
home,  to  whom  they  naturally  owe  confidence,  and  tell  them  what  the  Lord  has 
done  for  them,  and  that  lie  has  called  them  to  service.  If  it  is  son  or  daughter, 
go  to  mother  or  father  ;  if  it  is  wife  or  husband,  then  to  husband  or  wife.  Seek 
not  to  keep  your  conversion,  or  your  consecration  to  God,  a  secret  from  those  of 
your  own  household.  It  sometimes  happens  that  one  must  stand  alone  in  one's 
house.  This  is  often  very  hard  to  do.  Once  Paul  was  compelled  to  stand  alone. 
"  At  my  first  answer  no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all  forsook  me :  .  .  .  notwith- 
standing the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened  me."  This  we  can  always 
count  on  ;  and  no  one  is  alone  with  whom  the  Lord  stands.  I  once  knew  a 
husband  and  wife,  each  of  whom,  afraid  of  the  other,  had  sought  the  Lord  in  one 
of  our  meetings,  apart  from  the  other,  each  being  afraid  that  the  other  would 
ridicule.  They  had  both  of  them  been  open  and  scoffing  unbelievers.  Now  both 
had  found  the  Lord  ;  but  each  was  afraid  to  confess  it  to  the  other,  and  yet  each 
of  them  noticed  a  change  in  the  other.  At  last  the  wife  summoned  courage  to  tell 
her  husband  that  she  had  been  so  burdened  with  a  sense  of  her  sin,  that,  having 
no  rest,  she  had  sought  the  Lord  and  found  Him.  To  her  unspeakable  joy  the 
husband  caught  her  in  his  arms,  and  confessed  the  same  for  himself  to  her.  Let 
us  always  first  go  home  and  tell  our  friends  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done 
for  us,  and  saved  our  souls  ;  and  then  shall  we  have  a  free  course  to  serve  the 
Lord.  Otherwise  our  hands  will  be  tied  ;  and  we  shall  be  hindered  in  every  way 
from  faithful  service.  I  think  there  will  always  be  some  one  at  home  who  will  be 
glad  that  we  have  met  with  the  Lord  ;  either  for  the  first  time,  or  in  a  way  that 
means  an  entire  consecration  to  Him  and  His  service.  And  as  Jethro  said  to 
Moses,  so  will  they  say  to  us :  "  Go  in  peace."     (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  All  the  men  are  dead -which  sought  thy  life.— The  death  of  enemies : — 
1.  In  a  world  like  this,  the  greater  the  man  the  more  enemies  he  will  have.  2. 
Death  in  this  world  is  constantly  sweeping  away  our  enemies  as  well  as  friends. 
I.  The  death  of  our  enemies  should  kestbain  resentment.  Were  it  not  wrong  to 
return  evil  for  evil,  to  revile  those  who  revile  us,  it  would  scarcely  be  wise.  While 
we  are  preparing  our  retaliating  machinery,  death  is  doing  his  work  with  them. 
Our  blows  will  scarcely  reach  them  before  they  fall,  and  then,  when  they  are  gone, 
they  can  do  us  no  harm.  But  if  we  have  retaliated,  the  memory  of  the  retaliation 
will  give  us  pain.  II.  The  death  of  our  enemies  should  stimulate  us  to  ovekcome 
EVIL  BY  good.  The  sublimest  conquest  is  not  that  which  will  crush  the  body  or 
wound  the  feelings,  but  that  which  will  subdue  the  enmity  and  win  the  hostile 
soul  to  friendship  and  love.  {Homilist.)  The  Divine  precaution  for  the  safety  of 
Christian  workers: — I.  It  is  sometimes  manifested  by  e|:moving  good  men  and 
GREAT  WORKERS  FROM  DANGEROUS  ASSOCIATIONS.  1.  Christian  workers  are  sometimes 
removed  from  the  pride  of  high  society.      2.  Christian  workers  are  sometimes 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

removed  from  the  contamination  of  great  sin.  3.  Christian  workers  are  sometimes 
removed  from  the  pedantry  of  great  learning.  4.  Christian  workers  are  sometimes 
removed  from  physical  evil.  II.  It  is  sometimes  manifested  by  infokmino  good 
MEN  AND  GitEAT  woEKEES  OF  THE  REMOVAL  OF  DANGER.  Time  aids  the  enterprises 
of  heaven.  Death  subdues  the  hatred  and  passion  of  men.  III.  The  Divine  pre- 
caution  DOES   not  allow   AN   ABANDONMENT   OF   THE   WORK   COMMITTED   TO   THE   GOOD. 

(J.  S.  Excll,  M.A.)  Death  of  enemies  : — Hearing  a  whole  choir  of  birds  chirping 
merrily  together,  my  curiosity  was  excited  to  inquire  into  the  occasion  of  their 
convocation  and  merriment,  when  I  quickly  perceived  a  dead  hawk  in  the  bush, 
about  which  they  made  such  a  noise,  seeming  to  triumph  at  the  death  of  an  enemy. 
I  could  not  blame  them  for  singing  the  knell  of  one  who,  like  a  cannibal,  was  wont 
to  feed  upon  their  living  bodies,  tearing  them  limb  from  limb,  and  scaring  them 
with  his  frightful  appearance.  Over  this  bird,  which  was  so  formidable  when  alive, 
the  most  timid  wren  or  titmouse  did  not  now  fear  to  chirp  and  hop.  This  occur- 
rence brought  to  my  mind  the  case  of  tyrants  and  oppressors.  When  living,  they 
are  the  terror  of  mankind  ;  but  when  dead,  they  are  the  objects  of  general  contempt 
and  scorn.     "  When  the  wicked  perish,  there  is  shouting  "  (Prov.  xi.  10). 

Ver.  20.  Returned  to  the  land  of  Egypt. — The  journey  to  Egypt ; — I.  That  a 

GOOD    MAN    JODBNEYINO    ON     THE     SERVICE    OF     GoD     SHOULD     TAKE     HIS     FAMILY    WITH 

HIM.  Never  go  on  any  good  errand  without  your  family ;  teach  the  youthful  feet 
to  walk  in  obedience  to  God.  II.  That  a  good  man  journeying  on  the  service 
OP  God  SHOULD  take  his  rod  witb  him.  Never  go  on  a  journey  of  moral  service 
■without  God.  Especially  if  you  are  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  take  the  rod  on  your 
journey  to  Egypt.  1.  It  will  keep  you  humble.  It  will  remind  you  of  your  humble 
occupation  in  the  desert,  when  you  are  tempted  to  pride,  in  the  great  service  to 
which  God  has  called  you.  Every  Christian  worker  needs  to  have  something 
within  his  soul  to  inspire  humility.  2.  It  will  make  you  hajipy.  When  you  are 
desponding  and  sad,  when  the  work  does  not  open  up  to  your  effort  as  you  would 
wish,  the  rod  will  remind  you  of  the  vision  at  the  bush,  and  of  the  miracles  wrought 
at  the  commencement  of  the  mission.  The  reason  why  there  are  so  many  unhappy 
workers  in  the  Church,  is  because  they  have  left  the  rod  at  home.  3.  It  will  make 
you  powerful.  With  this  rod  Moses  was  to  work  miracles.  So  if  Christian  workers 
had  the  rod  of  God  in  their  hand,  they  would  be  able  to  show  to  the  world  much 
more  effectively  than  they  do,  the  holy  tokens  of  their  mission.    (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  21.  See  that  thou  do  all  these  wonders  before  Phajraoh. — Moses  before 
Pharaoh  : — Israel  was  under  the  sovereign  control  of  the  King  of  Egypt.  He  had 
property  in  them.  Moses  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  suddenly  asked  Pharaoh  to  give 
Israel  their  freedom.  He  was  startled.  Hedidnot  acknowledge  the  Lord.  Apolitical 
petition  was  presented  to  him,  and  he  dealt  with  it  on  political  grounds.  It  was 
not  a  spiritual  question  which  was  proposed  to  Pharaoh.  It  was  exclusively  a 
political  question.  It  was  therefore  within  this  sphere  that  the  Divine  action 
was  taken,  and  that  action  is  fitly  described  in  the  text  as  a  hardening  of 
Pharaoh's  heart.  The  question  will  then  arise,  what  the  meaning  of  that 
hardening  was,  and  what  useful  results  accrued  from  a  process  which  appears 
to  us  to  be  so  mysterious.  The  hardening  of  Pharaoh's  heart,  as  involving  the 
development  of  a  merely  political  scheme,  may  amount  in  effect  to  no  more  than 
this,  "I  will  delay  the  process,  this  request  shall  not  be  granted  at  once;  and  I 
will  prolong  the  process  in  order  that  I  may  brii^g  out  lessons  for  Pharaoh 
himself,  for  the  children  of  Israel,  and  for  mankind  at  large ;  were  Pharaoh  to 
let  the  children  of  Israel  escape  from  him  at  once,  the  result  would  be  mis- 
chievous to  themselves  ;  therefore  in  mercy,  not  in  anger,  I  will  harden  Pharaoh's 
heart."  So  far,  the  question  is  not  a  moral  one,  except  in  the  degree  in  which 
all  questions  have  more  or  less  of  a  moral  bearing.  It  has  been  supposed  by 
some  that  in  the  case  of  this  exercise  of  Divine  sovereignty,  the  sum  total  of 
Pharaoh's  wickedness  was  increased.  Not  so.  There  is  the  greatest  difference 
between  wickedness  being  localized  and  wickedness  being  increased.  As  the 
history  proceeds,  we  see  that  the  political  situation  enlarges  itself  into  a 
spiritual  problem.  Pharaoh  made  a  promise  to  Moses,  which  he  did  not  keep. 
Thus  he  hardened  his  own  heart.  Applying  these  lessons  to  ourselves  as 
sinners,  I  have  now  to  teach  that  Jesus  Christ  tasted  death  for  every  man,  and 
that  whosoever  will  may  avail  himself  of  the  blessings  secured  by  the  mediation 
of  the  Saviour.  If  any  man  excuses  himself  on  the  ground  that  God  has 
hardened  his  heart,  that  man  is  trusting  to  an  excuse  m  the  most  solemn  affairs 


CHAP,  rv.]  EXODUS.  105 

of  his  being  which  he  would  not  for  a  moment  tolerate  in  the  region  of  his 
family  life  or  commercial  relations.  We  must  not  be  sensible  in  ordinary 
affairs  and  insane  in  higher  concerns.  Were  a  servant  to  tell  her  mistress  that 
she  is  fated  to  be  unclean  in  her  habits,  that  mistress  would  instantly  and 
justly  treat  her  with  angry  contempt.  Were  a  clerk  to  tell  a  banker  that  he 
was  fated  to  come  late  every  morning,  and  go  away  early  every  afternoon,  the 
statement  would  be  received  as  a  proof  of  selfishness  or  insanity.  Were  a 
travelling  companion  to  tell  you  to  make  no  attempt  to  be  in  time  for  the 
steamboat  or  train,  because  if  you  were  fated  to  catch  it  there  would  be  no  fear 
of  your  losing  it,  you  would  treat  his  suggestion  as  it  deserved  to  be  treated. 
Yet  men  who  can  act  in  a  common-sense  manner  in  all  such  little  affairs,  some- 
times profess  that  they  will  not  make  any  attempt  in  a  religious  direction, 
because  they  believe  in  the  doctrine  of  predestination  or  fatalism.  Wicked  and 
slothful  servants,  they  shall  be  condemned  out  of  their  own  mouth!  "Come 
unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  *'  Him  that  cometh  to  Me,  I  will  in  no  wise 
cast  out."  "How  often  would  I  have  gathered  you,  as  a  hen  doth  gather  her 
brood  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not !  "  In  presence  of  such  statements  as 
these,  it  must  be  the  very  consummation  of  blasphemy  to  turn  round  upon  God 
and  say,  "  I  wanted  to  be  saved,  but  Thou  didst  harden  my  heart  and  condemn 
me  to  hell."     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Israel  is  My  son,  even  My  firstborn. — The  primogeniture  of  the 
good : — I.  That  the  good  have  a  Divine  Father.  1.  He  is  merciful  to  the 
children.  2.  He  vindicates  the  children  from  their  foes.  II.  That  the  good 
HAVE  heavenly  PRIVILEGES.  As  the  SOUS  of  God.  1.  They  have  the  privilege  of 
high  birth.  Only  they  who  are  the  subjects  of  this  new  birth  know  the  privileges 
it  confers  upon  them.  Nor  can  the  meanest  ancestry  of  earth  be  excluded  there- 
from. 2.  They  have  the  iirivilege  of  good  moral  culture.  In  God's  family  all 
the  children  are  well  disciplined.  This  culture  of  our  moral  nature  is  designed  to 
fit  us  more  thoroughly  for  the  high  relationship  into  which  we  are  called,  that  we 
may  be  responsive  to  all  its  duties,  and  in  harmony  with  its  sacred  destinies.  III. 
That  the  good  have  inspiring  hopes.  1.  The  hope  of  a  happy  death.  2.  The 
hope  of  a  vast  inheritance.  3.  The  hope  of  a  sublime  future.  Christians  are  the 
sons  of  God.  Lessons  :  1.  Live  worthy  of  your  great  Parent.  2.  Act  worthy  of 
your  noble  ancestiy.  3.  Embrace  your  glorious  privileges.  4.  Let  nothing  dim 
your  bright  hopes.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Let  My  son  go,  that  he  may  serve  Me. — 
The  Divine  intention  in  the  moral  freedom  of  man: — I.  That  God  has  a  definite 
purpose  in  the  moral  freedom  of  men.  His  great  aim  is  to  bring  men  from  the 
tyranny  of  passion,  pride,  covetousness  and  self,  into  the  freedom  of  a  tranquil, 
humble,  and  self-denying  service.  Hence  the  Divine  preparation  that  is  given  to 
the  varied  agencies  that  are  to  achieve  this  freedom.  II.  That  the  purpose  of 
God  in  the  moral  freedom  of  men  is  that  thet  should  serve  Him.  1.  That 
we  should  serve  Him  in  our  business.  2.  That  we  should  serve  Him  in  our  social 
life.  3.  That  we  should  serve  Him  with  all  our  energies.  Why  should  we  serve 
Him  ?  (1)  Because  we  are  His  sons.  (2)  Because  of  the  freedom  He  has  wrought 
for  us.      {Ibid.)  The  great  Emancipator: — I.    Let  us  endeavour  to   fix  our 

thoughts  upon  the  voice  of  God,  which  was  a  real  power  to  bring  up  His  people 
out  of  Egypt.  That  voice  was  threefold  ;  asserting  His  proprietorship  in  them, 
demanding  their  freedom,  and  ordaining  their  destiny.  II.  Now  here  was  the 
voice  of  bian.  ^Vliat  a  come-down  it  seems  to  be.  "  Thou  shalt  say  unto  Pharaoh, 
Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Let  My  son  go."  Why  did  not  the  Lord  say  it  Himself? 
Why  did  He  need  to  pick  up  a  Moses  and  send  him  to  say  it  ?  Well,  had  the 
Lord  said  it  Himself  to  Pharaoh,  it  would  have  been  very  startling,  and  Pharaoh 
must  have  yielded  ultimately  to  the  Divine  fiat :  but  do  you  not  see  the  deeper 
marvel  in  the  milder  proceeding,  when  Jehovah,  as  it  were,  hides  His  power  and 
cloaks  it  in  weakness  ?  Instead  of  appealing  to  Pharaoh  with  that  voice  which 
breaks  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  and  makes  the  hinds  to  calve.  He  speaks  to  him  by 
one  who  was  slow  of  speech  and  of  a  stammering  tongue.  Now,  if  God's  voice  can 
vanquish  Pharaoh  when  it  masks  itself  behind  the  feebleness  of  a  stammering 
Moses,  it  will  be  more  glorious  than  it  would  have  been  if  it  had  used  no  instru- 
mentality whatever.  Go  on  with  steady  perseverance.  Be  ye  sure  of  this,  ye  shall 
not  labour  in  vain  or  spend  your  strength  for  naught.  Are  you  still  slow  of 
speech  ?    Nevertheless,  go  on.    Have  you  been  rebuked  and  rebuffed  ?     Have  you 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X7 

had  little  else  than  defeat  ?  This  is  the  way  to  success.  You  shall  macadamize 
the  road  \vith  the  rough  flints  of  your  failure.  Toil  on  and  believe  on.  Be 
steadfast  in  your  confidence,  for  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm  the 
Lord  will  fetch  out  His  own  elect,  and  He  will  fetch  some  of  them  out  by  you. 
III.  Our  last  word  is  upon  the  poweb  of  God.  Without  the  power  of  God  the 
voice  of  man  would  have  been  an  utter  failure.  What  effect  was  produced  by  the 
voice  of  Moses  ?  Went  there  not  forth  with  it  a  power  which  plagued  Pharaoh  ? 
It  filled  the  sinful  land  of  Egypt  with  plagues.  So  men  that  preach  God's  gospel 
with  God's  power  fill  the  world  with  plagues.  What  will  occur  by  and  by  ?  Why, 
the  oppressor  will  be  glad  to  part  with  his  bondsmen.  It  sometimes  happens 
that  tbe  ungodly  become  themselves  very  glad  to  get  rid  of  God's  chosen  people, 
whom  they  are  prone  to  persecute.  "Their  melancholy  ill  comports  with  our 
liveliness,''  so  they  say.  A  lady  who  joined  this  Church  some  years  ago,  moving 
in  the  higher  circles  of  society,  said  to  me,  "  I  was  quite  willing  to  continue  my 
acquaintance  with  my  friends,  but  I  found  they  gave  me  the  cold  shoulder,  and 
did  not  want  me."  Just  so.  It  is  a  great  mercy  when  the  Egyptians  say,  "  Get 
ye  gone,"  and  when  they  are  ready  to  give  yon  jewels  of  silver  and  jewels  of 
gold  to  get  rid  of  you.  The  Lord  wants  His  people  to  come  right  out  and  to  bo 
separate;  He  knows  how  by  the  simple  utterance  of  the  gogpel  to  put  such  a 
division  between  His  people  and  those  who  are  not  His  people,  that  even  the 
ungodly  shall  begin  to  say,  "  Get  you  gone ;  we  want  to  have  nothing  further  to 
do  with  you."  Glory  be  to  God  when  such  a  thing  as  that  happens.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  A  Divine  threat: — 1.  Claims  attention.  2.  Certain  of  execution. 
3.  Stern  in  requirement.     (J.'^S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Vers.  24-2G.  Zlpporali  took  a  sharp  stone. — Neglected  duty  a  hindrance  to  the 
performance  of  religious  work  : — I.  Moses  n^D  neglected  the  duty  of  circum- 
cisiNQ  HIS  SON.  n.  That  this  neglect  op  doty  introduced  an  expeiiience  op 
PAIN  into  nis  life.  III.  That  this  neglect  of  duty  endangered  the  perform- 
ance OF  his  BEUGious  WORK.  Many  a  Christian  worker  is  rendered  feeble  to-day 
by  the  sin  of  his  past  life.  Let  us  beware  how  we  imperil  the  freedom  of  men,  and 
the  work  of  God,  by  our  own  neglect.  Freedom  from  sin  is  the  great  essential  to 
the  success  of  Christian  work.  IV.  That  the  neglect  of  this  duty  was  most  foolish, 
AS  IT  HAD  after  ALL  TO  BE  PERFORMED.  McH  will  havo  to  face  thch  ncglccted 
duties  again,  if  not  for  performance  in  tliis  world,  yet  for  judgment  in  the  next. 
(J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  Divine  purpose  of  a  strange  event : — I.  Take  the  fact 
JUST  AS  stated  (ver.  24).  1.  The  very  terms  are  confessedly  startling.  The  Lord 
seeking  and  trying  to  liiUl  But  His  fatherly  heart  withheld  His  arm.  2.  The 
character  of  the  sufiferer  makes  it  still  more  remarkable.  To  cut  short  such  a  hfe 
as  that  of  Moses — how  strange !  3.  Considerations  of  time  and  circumstances 
only  deepen  the  wonder.  God  had  just  spoken  to  Moses  as  a  friend,  and  expressly 
engaged  him  for  an  exceptionally  important  work.  4.  The  prominence  and  emphasis 
given  to  the  record  complicates  the  mystery.  It  is  God  speaking  to  all  generations 
on  things  belonging  to  their  peace.  II.  Cause  and  purpose  of  go  strange  a 
DISPENSATION.  1.  Moscs'  Compliance  with  Egyptian  custom  of  circumcising  only 
adults.  2.  So  long  as  he  discarded  the  national  seal  or  sign  of  the  covenant  made 
with  Abraham,  he  was  essentially  unfit  to  take  the  place  of  recognized  champion 
and  deliverer  of  God's  people.  3.  His  position  was  that  of  a  rebel,  determined  not 
to  submit  to  an  ordinance  acknowledged  to  be  Divine.  God  would  sooner  "  kill  " 
Moses  than  allow  him  to  enter  on  a  work  in  a  state  of  hardened  impenitence.  HL 
Immediate  results.  Moses  yielded,  and  God  "  let  him  go."  1.  Though  up  to  that 
moment  there  seemed  no  hope  of  escape,  the  instant  there  was  confession  on  one 
side,  there  came  forgiveness  on  the  other.  2.  Henceforth  there  is  not  simply  a 
change,  but  a  marked  improvement  in  his  entire  spirit  and  character.  IV.  Conse- 
quent blessings  and  blessedness.  1.  The  disease  was  instantly  arrested.  2. 
Thereon  followed  another  token  for  good,  to  cheer  and  to  strengthen  his  heart 
(vers.  27-29).  3.  In  further  evidence  of  complete  reconciUation,  think  of  the 
wonderful  and  unparalleled  success  with  which  the  mission  was  crowned.  Con- 
clusion. 1.  To  such  as  are  in  vigorous  health,  the  moral  is — boast  not  thyself  of 
to-morrow.  2.  To  such  as  may  recently  have  passed  through  heavy  afiliction,  it 
suggests  the  wisdom  of  much  earnest  self-scrutiny.  3.  Of  the  large  class  of  almost 
Christians,  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  it  asks  with  special  solemnity — 
"Why  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?"  4.  To  those  of  us  who  call  ourselves 
Christians,  and  profess  to  be  aiming  at  public  usefulness,  its  unmistakable  voice 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS.  107 

is — •'  They  should  be  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary."  Sins  tinfor- 
saken,  however  secret,  or  however  deplored,  are  sins  unforgiven.  {H.  Griffith.) 
Lessons : — 1.  After  greatest  encouragements  may  bitter  discoveries  be  made  from 
God  to  His  servants.  2.  In  the  way  of  obedience,  God's  servants  may  meet  with 
the  sharpest  temptations.  3.  The  place  intended  for  rest  by  us  may  be  turned  into 
a  place  of  trouble  by  God.  The  inn.  4.  Jehovah  Himself  may  meet  His  dearest 
servants  as  an  adversary.  5.  God  may  seek  to  kill,  when  He  purposeth  not  to  kill 
His  servants.  6.  It  is  some  sad  defects  in  God's  servants  that  put  Him  upon  such 
attempts  (ver.  24).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  The  circumcision  at  the  inn: — 1.  That 
a  law,  the  fitness  and  utility  of  which  we  cannot  discover  by  our  natural  reason,  is 
more  a  test  of  the  spirit  of  obedience  than  a  moral  requirement  that  commends 
itself  to  our  judgment  as  good  and  proper  ;  because  our  compliance  with  the  latter 
may  be  but  a  compliment  to  our  own  intelligence,  and  not  at  all  an  act  of  deference 
to  the  Divine  authority.  Of  what  use  is  circumcision  to  the  child  ?  Or  what  good 
can  it  do  to  apply  a  little  water  to  a  chUd's  face?  Surely,  the  guilt  of  neglecting 
such  rites  as  these,  if  there  be  any,  must  be  very  small.  It  is  not  of  small  account 
that  ourselves  and  our  children  should  be  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  have,  by 
covenant  with  God,  a  part  in  its  rich  privileges  and  blessings.  And  God  can  surely 
appoint  His  own  form  of  entrance  into  it,  and  His  own  mark  of  membership  in  it. 
To  neglect  these  rites  is  trampling  on  God's  love,  and  spurning  His  favours ;  and 
though  He  may  not  now,  as  in  old  time,  visit  our  offence  with  physical  disease  or 
other  visible  inflictions.  He  will  surely  not  hold  us  guiltless.  2.  Sickness,  or  danger 
of  death  in  some  form,  is  here  sent  as  a  reminder  of  a  past  neglect  of  duty.  la 
not  this  often  its  office  ?  3.  But  it  is  far  better,  surely,  to  forestall  such  medicinal 
sufferings  by  a  voluntary  revision  of  our  lives,  and  a  voluntary  supplying  of  those 
things  that  are  wanting,  by  a  remedying  of  neglects  as  far  as  it  can  be  done,  a 
supplying  of  deficiencies  as  far  as  opportunity  is  given  us.  (it.  A.  Hallam,  B.D.) 
Another  meeting  loith  the  Lord : — I.  If  we  give  ourselves  to  the  Lord  di  conse- 
cration, WE  MAY  BE  SURE  THAT  BEFORE  WE  GET  FAIRLY  TO  OUR  WORK  -^VE  MUST 
BEPAIR    ANY   OF   THE    WASTE    PLACES   IN    OUR   LIVES    THAT   ARE    APPARENT.        And    if     WS 

have  overlooked  any,  we  may  expect  that  the  Lord  will  meet  us  with  a  drawn  sword, 
and  hold  us  prisoners  to  Himself,  until  we  make  the  crooked  thing  straight.  Every 
person  who  has  sought  to  walk  in  the  consecrated  way  has  found  out  the  truth  that 
"  judgment  must  begin  at  the  house  of  God."  In  other  words,  if  we  are  to  bring 
other  people  out  of  Egyptian  bondage,  we  must  show  in  ourselves  that  we  ourselves 
are  delivered.  How  can  a  man  bring  another  up  out  of  the  bondage  of  strong 
drink,  if  he  is  indulging  in  that  drink  himself  ?  How  can  a  man  or  woman  lead 
another  out  of  the  Egj-ptian  world  of  pleasm^e  and  self-indulgence,  if  they  are 
living  in  pleasure  themselves?  One  has  said,  "If  you  want  to  lift  a  soul  out  of 
the  pit  you  must  first  get  a  good  solid  footing  out  of  the  pit  yourself."    H.  There 

IS    A   STILL   DEEPER    MEANING    IN    THIS   TRANSACTION.       So  SOOn    aS    the   rite   Of    cirCUm- 

cision  was  complied  with,  in  the  person  of  the  son  of  Moses  (who,  I  must  think, 
stands  for  himself  in  this  case,  because  it  was  a  denial  of  the  truth  on  his  part  to 
have  allowed  the  rite  to  lapse  in  that  son,  as  much  so  as  to  have  neglected  it  in  his 
own  body),  "  the  Lord  let  him  go."  "  So,  the  Lord  let  him  go,"  is  significant.  We 
are  made  free,  in  meeting  the  Lord  and  fulfilling  His  will.  It  will  be  seen  that  the 
drawn  sword  was,  after  all,  the  sword  of  life.  For  in  fighting  against  our  uncir- 
cumcised  flesh  the  Lord  is  fighting  against  the  death  that  is  in  us.  He  never  slays, 
but  to  make  alive.  And  if  we  accept  His  judgment  against  ourselves  and  die  to 
the  flesh,  by  being  crucified  with  Christ,  behold,  we  live  I  {G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 
Lessons  from  the  incident  at  the  inn : — 1.  That  God  takes  notice  of  and  is  mucn 
displeased  with  the  sins  of  His  own  people,  and  that  the  putting  away  of  their  sins 
is  indispensably  necessary  to  the  removal  of  the  Divine  judgments.  2.  That  no 
circumstances  of  prudence  or  convenience  can  ever  with  propriety  be  urged  as  an 
excuse  for  neglecting  a  clearly  commanded  duty,  especially  the  observance  of 
sacramental  ordinances.  3.  That  he  who  is  to  be  the  interpreter  of  the  law  to 
others  ought  in  all  points  to  be  blameless,  and  in  all  things  conformed  to  the  law 
himself.  4.  That  when  God  has  procured  the  proper  respect  to  His  revealed  will, 
the  controversy  between  Him  and  the  offender  is  at  an  end ;  the  object  of  His 
government  being  not  so  much  to  avenge  Himself  as  to  amend  the  criminal.  {G. 
Bush.)  Results  of  neglect: — There  is  no  need  that  the  man  in  a  skiff  amid 
Niagara's  rapids  should  row  toward  the  cataract ;  resting  on  his  oars  is  quite  enough 
to  send  him  over  the  awful  verge.  It  is  the  neglected  wheel  that  capsizes  the 
vehicle,  and  maims  for  hfe  the  passengers.    It  is  the  neglected  leak  that  sinks  tlie 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  iv. 

ship.  It  is  the  neglected  field  that  yields  briers  instead  of  bread.  It  is  the 
neglected  spark  near  the  magazine  whose  tremendous  explosion  sends  its  hundreds 
of  maugled  wretches  into  eternity.  The  neglect  of  an  officer  to  throw  up  a  rocket 
on  a  certain  night  caused  the  fall  of  Antwerp,  and  postponed  the  deliverance  of 
Holland  for  twenty  or  more  years.  The  neglect  of  a  sentinel  to  give  an  alarm 
hindered  the  fall  of  Sebastopol,  and  resulted  in  the  loss  of  many  thousand  lives. 
He  who  would  lead  others  into  obedience  must  himself  be  exemplary  : — Moses  had,  I 
perhaps,  yielded  to  the  importunities  of  his  Midianitish  wife  in  this  matter ;  she 
may  have  been  tempted  to  think  that  it  was  a  very  slight  thing  after  all.  But  he 
must  learn  to  know  no  one  but  God,  when  duty  is  in  the  case ;  and  in  the  very  outset 
of  his  ministry,  he  must  have  it  impressed  upon  his  heart  that  nothing  is  little 
which  God  has  thought  it  important  enough  to  command.  There  is  a  temptation 
to  be  encountered  at  the  beginning  of  every  enterprise ;  and  according  as  we  meet 
that,  we  demonstrate  our  fitness  or  unfitness  for  entering  upon  the  undertaking. 
When  you  are  starting  out  on  some  new  and  noble  work,  with  aspirations  kindled 
at  some  flaming  bush  of  Divine  revelation  to  your  soul,  "  be  not  high-minded,  but 
fear."  Look  for  some  test  to  be  administered  to  you  just  then,  and  look  for  it  in 
no  great  affair,  but  rather  in  some  such  common  thing  as  the  getting  of  your  daily 
bread,  or  in  some  such  domestic  matter  as  the  government  of  your  children  ;  for  by 
these  God  may  be  determining  your  fitness  for  the  work  you  covet ;  and  if  you  fail 
in  the  trial,  there  will  come  no  second  probation.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Cir- 
cumcision among  the  Egyptians  : — The  Egyptians,  according  to  Herodotus,  Strabo, 
and  other  writers,  practised  circumcision.  "  This  custom,"  says  the  former,  "  can 
be  traced  both  in  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  to  the  remotest  antiquity  "  (1.  ii.  c.  104). 
At  what  age  it  was  performed  by  the  Egj-ptians  is  uncertain  ;  but  it  is  worthy  of 
remark  that  the  Arabians  circumcised  their  children  when  they  were  thirteen  years 
old,  because  the  founder  of  their  nation,  Ishmael,  was  circumcised  at  that  age 
(Gen.  xvii.  23).  The  Midianites,  though  descended  also  from  Abraham  by  KeturaJb, 
omitted  it,  and  this  explains  the  reluctance  of  Zipporah  to  perform  the  rite  upon 
her  son.  To  save  her  husband's  life,  however,  she  consented  to  it,  and  herself 
performed  the  operation,  using  for  the  purpose  a  sharp  stone,  or  knife  of  flint, 
which,  as  Herodotus  tells  us,  was  prefen-ed  to  steel  for  purposes  connected  with 
religion,  and  especially  for  making  cuttings  or  incisions  in  the  human  person 
(Herod,  ii.  86).  Specimens  of  these  knives,  both  broad  and  narrow,  have  been 
found  in  the  tombs  at  Thebes,  where  they  were  used  in  the  preparation  and 
embalming  of  mummies,  and  may  be  seen  in  collections  of  Egyptian  antiquities, 
(r.  S.  Milling  ton.) 

Yer.  27.  Go  into  the  •wilderness  to  meet  Moses. — Family  relationships  : — I.  The 

BROTHERHOOD  AND  AFFKCTIOX  SU13SI3TIXO  liETWEKN   THE  DIFFERENT  MEMREBS  OF    God'S 

FAMILY.  This  is  twofold.  God's  people  stand  in  a  twofold  relation  to  one  another,  as — 
(1)  natural  and — (2)  spiritual  men.  H.  Notice  the  breaches  of  intercourse  brought 

ABOUT  IN  this  WORLD  BET\VEEN  THOSE  MEMBERS  OF  God'S  FAMILY  WHO   HATE    SEEN  AND 

KNOWN  ONE  ANOTHER  IN  THE  FLESH.  1.  Many  interruptions  of  intercourse  are 
brought  about  by  providential  arrangements,  2.  All  direct  communication  between 
brethren  in  the  Lord  is  cut  off  by  death.      III.  Consider  the  need  of  and  con- 

SEQUKNT     TEARNINQ     AFTER     EACH     OTHER's     SOCIETY     AND     ASSISTANCE     WHICH,    WHILE 

PARTED,  THE  MEMBERS  OF  God's  FAMILY  EXPERIENCE.  The  need  is  bascd  upou,  and 
flows  from,  their  spiritual  constitution  in  one  body.  We  are,  in  the  design  of  God, 
constituent  parts  of  a  whole,  and  we  are  continually  evincing  our  consciousness  of 
this  truth.  IV.  Consider  the  blissful  reunion  of  the  sundered  members  op 
God's  family  in  the  realms  of  glory.  There  shall  be  a  day  when  all  the  yearn- 
ings of  the  Christian's  heart  after  the  society  of  his  brethren  shall  be  satisfied  to 
the  full,  when  his  joy  shall  receive  its  entire  complement  in  his  recognition  of  and 
intercommunication  with  those  whom  he  has  known  and  loved  in  the  Lord. 
{Dean  Goulhurn.)  Moses  and  Aaron: — I.  God  brought  the  leaders  together. 
A  strange  place  for  their  meeting,  and  a  strange  scene.  II.  God  brought  His 
LEADERS  TO  His  PEOPLE.  God  may  be  obUged  to  prepare  His  leaders  as  well  as  His 
people.  Moses  was  not  ready  for  his  work  until  he  was  eighty  years  old.  How 
much  of  God's  work  may  be  waiting  for  His  leaders  !  Pray  for  leaders  set  apart  in 
the  Mount  of  God ;  but  pray,  too,  for  elders  to  gather  about  them.  And  pray  again 
for  a  people  ready  to  be  led.  Everything  must  stay  until  so  much  is  attained, — a 
consecrated  ministry,  a  consecrated  eldership,  a  consecrated  church.  III.  Gon 
BEocGHT  His  LEADERS  BEFORE  Phaeaoh.     God's  encmies  must  be  subdued  if  they 


CHAP,  IT.]  EXODUS.  109 

reject  the  Divine  message.  But  first  He  will  thoroughly  apply  gentle  methods. 
{G.  R.  Leavitt.)  Moses  and  Aaron: — I.  Aaron's  commission.  1.  Its  reason 
suggestive  to  the  reluctant  servant  (vers.  1-14).  2.  The  fact  suggestive  of  the 
Divine  condescension  and  forbearance.  II.  Aaeon's  obedience.  1.  Prompt.  2. 
Sincere.  III.  Moses  and  Aaron  carrying  out  the  Divine  command.  1.  Thoy 
observed  their  respective  places.  2.  Their  reception  by  the  people  (ver.  31).  IV. 
The  interview  between  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Pharaoh.  1.  The  reasonableness  of 
the  request.  2.  The  unreasonableness  and  haughtiness  of  the  reply.  Lessons  :  1. 
To  analyze  the  Divine  motive,  in  the  use  of  all  these  human  instrumentalities,  i3 
fraught  with  most  helpful  and  instructive  suggestions.  2.  The  unwisdom  of 
hesitancy,  in  accepting  a  clearly-indicated  call  of  God,  is  here  seen.  3.  The 
modesty  and  judiciousness  with  which  the  request  of  Moses  and  Aaron  was  couched, 
suggest  the  carefulness  which  soul-winners  should  exercise.  4.  In  the  haughtiness 
of  Pharaoh  we  discover  the  preliminary  step  to  his  fall.  {D.  C.  Hiiglws,  M.A.) 
Lessons : — 1.  God  joineth  His  seconds  to  His  firsts,  as  He  seeth  need  for 
redemption  of  His  Church.  2.  The  same  Jehovah  only  fits  and  calls  His  first  and 
second  instruments  for  His  woi'ks.  All  from  God.  3.  God  may  call  the  elder  after 
the  younger  brother,  and  subject  him.  4.  God  can  bring  brethren  together  which 
■were  as  lost  one  to  another.  5.  Motion  and  place  and  work,  God  points  out  to  Hia 
instruments  of  salvation.  6.  God  makes  the  deserts  places  for  deliverers  to  meet 
in  for  His  Church'fl  good.  7.  God's  call  to  meeting  of  instruments  is  to  teach  them 
their  respective  work.  8.  Hearts  which  God  toucheth  are  ready  for  obedience  to 
God's  call.  9.  The  mount  of  God,  and  God  in  the  mount,  is  best  for  His  servants 
to  meet  about  His  work.  10.  Nature  and  grace  teach  men  to  give  signs  of  love 
and  loyalty  to  God's  substitutes  below  (ver.  27).  11.  It  is  just  for  supreme  powers 
to  open  their  commissions  from  God  to  inferiors.  12.  God's  words  alone  are  to  be 
declared,  which  He  speaks  to  His  servants,  and  are  to  be  spoken  by  them.  13. 
Mission  and  commission  of  God's  ministers  must  appear  both  from  God.  14.  God's 
wonderful  works  as  well  as  gi-acious  works  must  be  showed  at  His  command.  15. 
Joint  ambassadors  of  the  Church's  deliverance  need  to  know  God's  words  and  works 
(ver.  28).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  The  two  brothers: — I.  As  educated  by  different 
methods.  II.  As  meeting  AiTER  A  LONG  SEPARATION.  1.  The  meeting  was  providential. 
2.  The  meeting  had  a  moral  and  national  significance.  3.  The  meeting  was  welcome 
to  the  brothers.  III.  As  uniting  in  a  grand  enterprise.  Brothers  should  unitedly 
place  themselves  in  a  line  with  the  providence  of  God.  IV.  As  entering  upon  an 
IMPORTANT  future.  All  the  casual  meetings  of  life  are  important  in  their  bearing 
upon  present  work  and  future  destiny.  V.  As  reflecting  commend.\tion  upon 
THEIR  family.  Sous  hououT  their  parents  when  they  undertake  an  enterprise  for 
the  good  of  men.  Brothers  cannot  be  better  united  than  in  the  cause  of  God.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  The  meeting  of  two  brothers: — I.  It  was  in    a   strange    place. 

Some  men  are  only  brotherly  before  the  crowd,  in  privacy  or  solitude  they  are  social 
despots.  The  wilderness  will  test  our  affection.  II.  It  was  characterized  by 
wabmth  of  affection.  They  kissed  each  other.  Brothers  do  not  often  act  thus 
in  these  days.  They  think  it  unmanly  to  do  so.  The  age  is  cold  at  heart.  It  is  a 
token  of  courage  as  well  as  love  that  a  brother  will  thus  greet  his  brother.  But  let 
the  kiss  be  accompanied  by  kindly  attentions,  otherwise  it  is  a  mockery.     III.  It 

WAS    THE    occasion    FOR    RELIGIOUS    TALK   AND    CONSULTATION.        No    better    topic     than 

this.     (Ibid.)  Christian  brothers: — 1.  Called  by  God  to  work.     2.  Joined  by 

God  in  work.  3.  Conversing  together  about  work.  4.  Learning  their  respective 
work.  (Ibid.)  Providential  arrangements  : — But  admire  the  manner  in  which 
God  governs  the  thmgs  of  this  world  and  of  His  Church.  When  it  pleases 
Him  to  save  a  soul,  or  call  a  servant,  He  causes  all  persons  and  all  events 
to  work  together  for  this  end,  and  in  a  way  already  determined.  As  a 
skilful  general  sends  each  division  of  his  army,  without  the  knowledge  of  the 
others,  to  assemble  on  the  same  field  of  battle,  so  the  Lord  sends  His  servants 
who  are  fighting  the  good  fight,  to  the  place  and  at  the  time  where  tbey  ought  to 
meet.  It  was  thus  that  He  sent  Peter  to  Cornelius,  Ananias  to  Paul,  Philip  to  the 
eunuch.  It  is  thus  that  in  our  time  He  sends  misbionaries  to  heathen  lands.  It 
was  thus  that  He  caused  Farel  and  Calvin  to  meet  at  Geneva,  that  they  might  help 
each  other,  and  form  a  friendship  that  lasted  during  their  lives,  and  greatly  con- 
'  tributed  to  the  success  of  their  work.  How  this  thought  enlightens,  strengthens, 
comforts,  and  rejoices  those  who  are  engaged  serving  God.  (Prof.  Gaussen.) 
The  tico  brothers : — The  history  of  Moses  and  Aaron  appearing  together  at  the 
court  of  Pharaoh,  the  one  working  miracles  and  the  other  as  his  spokesman,  may 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ty. 

have  given  rise  to  the  traditions  of  the  Greeks  and  Komans,  in  which  Jupiter  and 
Mercury,  both  of  them  Egyptian  deities  worshipped  at  Hammon  and  Tlioth,  are 
described  visiting  the  earth  in  a  similar  relationship.  The  latter  was  represented 
with  the  caduceus,  a  rod  twisted  about  with  serpents,  and  was  the  god  of  speech  or 
eloquence.  To  such  traditions  the  saying  of  the  people  of  Lystra  may  be  referred, 
when  Paul  had  healed  the  cripple  (Acts  xiv.  11).  {T.  S.  Millington.)  Mofcs  and 
Aaron ;  or,  the  use  of  association : — True  greatness  is  modest.  It  is  a  false  greatness  that 
magnilies  its  own  powers,  and  disparages  the  strength  of  opposing  forces.  One  of  the 
penalties  of  greatness  is  isolation.  It  removes  the  man  from  common  aids  and 
B.ympatliies,  and  sets  him  by  himself.  Greatness  is  lonely.  This  isolation  Moses 
was  beginning  to  feel,  while  the  task  before  him  grew  awful,  and  swelled  into  a 
frightful  magnitude.  Solitude,  and  that  isolation  which  is  worse  than  sohtude — 
separation  from  the  insight  and  sympathy  of  men  around  us — is  weakening.  Moses 
grew  weak  and  drew  back.  Thinkers  are  not  always  speakers,  nor  speakers 
thinkers.  Nay,  thought  in  its  very  striving  after  accuracy  and  exactness,  is  apt  to 
be  a  hindrance  of  fluency.  Moses  could  think  and  act,  but  he  could  not  speak.  He 
was  a  greater  man  than  his  brother,  but  his  brother  was  a  better  speaker.  He 
could  excogitate  the  ideas,  and  his  brother  could  put  them  into  words  for  him. 
God  is  economical  in  His  bestowments,  and  seldom  heaps  His  manifold  favours  on 
one  man.  Cromwell,  whether  a  good  or  a  bad  man,  was  certainly  a  great  man ; 
yet  out  of  his  tangled  utterances  it  was  hard  to  come  at  his  meaning.  Here,  then, 
the  want  was  supplied,  and  with  it,  as  appears  in  the  subsequent  history,  a  much 
broader  surface  of  want  besides ;  for  God  is, "  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above 
all  that  we  ask  or  think,"  and  is  "  wont  to  give  more  than  either  we  desire  or 
deserve."  The  abundance  of  His  mercy  will  not  be  kept  within  the  narrow  bounds 
our  mean  conceptions  set  to  it.  Moses,  in  the  guise  of  an  Egyptian,  and  as  tlie  son  ol 
Pharaoh's  daughter,  had  learned  to  recognize  and  love  his  brother  Aaron  under 
Amram's  roof ;  they  had  been  nurtured  for  uses  of  which  neither  of  them  dreamed. 
How  much  of  this  provision  for  a  secret  future  is  there  in  the  lives  of  men.  What 
important  effects  to  the  end  of  life  may  flow  from  the  seemingly  casual  associations 
and  intimacies  of  childhood  1  This  companionship  at  once  delivered  Moses  from 
his  solitude,  the  isolation  of  peculiarity,  by  raising  up  for  him  a  co-worker,  to  stand 
with  him  on  the  same  elevated  plane  above  the  mass  of  the  people,  and  aid  him  in 
bearing  cares  on  which  none  but  one  so  commissioned  might  presume  to  intrude. 
Here,  then,  was  unity  with  subordination,  and  harmony  with  distribution  and 
diversity  ;  and  thus  the  apparatus  of  action  for  the  great  enterprise  was  complete. 
See  here  the  good  of  association.  See  how  it  raised  Moses  out  of  the  ague  of 
despondency  that  overtook  him  when  the  object  of  his  long  desire  had  at  last  come 
within  his  grasp ;  how  it  warmed  hispowers  into  resolute  endeavour,  and  shed  a  benigo 
influence  upon  his  subsequent  labours  and  sufferings.  So  "  Jonathan,  Saul's  son 
arose,  and  went  to  David  in  the  wood,  and  strengthened  his  hand  in  God."  So, 
too,  our  blessed  Lord  thought  of  this  principle  and  acted  upon  it,  and  stamped  it 
with  the  seal  of  His  infallible  wisdom,  when  He  sent  out  His  disciples  two  by  two, 
making  but  six  missions,  where  an  earthly  wisdom  would  have  thought  it  better 
economy  to  make  twelve.  And  the  great  St.  Paul  had  always  with  him  Barnabas, 
or  Mark,  or  Luke,  or  Gains,  or  Epaphroditus  in  his  missionary  travels  and  labours. 
Let  us  remember  that  in  the  Divine  household  we  are  knit  together  into  one  fellow- 
ship, and  are  to  learn  to  be  mutnally  considerate  and  helpful,  and  "  bear  each 
other's  burdens,"  as  "  every  one  members  one  of  another."  God's  work,  our  work, 
will  be  done  more  easily,  pleasantly,  effectually.  See  here,  too,  the  good  of  sub- 
ordination. Aaron  was  always  with  Moses,  his  shadow  or  second  self ;  but  Moses 
always  was  head.  If  both  had  been  heads  the  machinery  would  not  have  worked  so 
kindly,  smoothly,  and  comfortably.  Nothing  does  well  with  two  heads.  {R.  A. 
Hallam,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29,  30.  Gathered  together  aU  the  elders. — The  first  interview  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  with  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  the  welcome  they  received  : — I.  They  acted  upon 
THE  DrviN'E  suGGESTiox.  All  Christian  work  should  be  undertaken  according  to  the 
Divine  suggestion,  and  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  God  generally  tells  men 
how  to  work  as  well  as  what  to  do.  If  we  were  left  to  mark  out  our  own  methods 
of  toil,  we  should  often  involve  both  ourselves  and  the  enterprise  entrusted  to  us  in 
great  danger.  II.  They  spake  accoedisg  to  the  Divine  dictation.  Great  workers 
require  to  be  taught  by  God.  In  this  consists  their  safety  and  success.  A  man 
who  speaks  to  the  world  the  messages  of  God  will  always  be  listened  to.    IH.  Thex 


CHAP.  IV.]  EXODUS,  111 

SUCCEEDED  ACCORDING  TO  DiviNE  INTIMATION.  Thus  Moscs  and  Aaron  awakened — 
1.  Faith.  2.  Hope.  3.  Devotion — of  Israel.  Moses  bad  previously  said  that 
Israel  would  not  believe  him.  We  mistake  our  missions.  We  cannot  form  an 
estimate  of  success.  If  we  act  and  speak  according  to  the  instruction  of  God  we 
must  succeed.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Lessons: — 1.  Declaring  of  God's  will  is 
suitably  united  to  the  assembling  of  His  people.  2.  God's  spokesmen  made  by 
Him  are  fittest  to  declare  his  mind  to  His  people.  3.  The  words  of  Jehovah  only, 
which  He  hath  spoken  to  His  servants,  must  be  given  to  His  assembly.  4.  God 
may  give  His  mind  more  immediately  to  one  servant  than  to  another  (to  Moses). 
5.  God's  stupendous  works  must  be  done,  as  well  as  His  words  spoken,  to  His 
people.  6.  God's  congregation  are  the  first  subject  to  whom  His  words  and  works 
are  sent.  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  The  gathering  of  the  elders  : — The  gathering  of  the 
♦'  elders"  of  the  children  of  Israel  may  point  to  no  more  than  a  family  and  tribal 
organization  which  was  not  known  or  used  by  the  Egyptians  for  the  purposes  of 
government,  but  only  used  among  the  Israehtes  themselves  for  their  religious  and 
ritual  teaching.  But  it  would  be  contrary  to  most  oriental  experience  to  suppose 
60.  It  has  been  the  custom  of  most  eastern  rulers,  as  of  the  Turks  to-day,  to 
recognize  all  proper  governmental  organizations  among  a  subject  people.  It  was 
even  a  large  part  of  the  wisdom  of  the  politic  Romans.  The  general  government, 
indeed,  extends  its  power  to  the  individual,  and  is  not  slow  to  do  so.  But  it  is  both 
convenient  to  have  an  opportunity  for  the  "respondeat  superior"  principle  in  law 
to  work,  and  politic  to  have  thus  a  hold  upon  the  more  generous-  feelings  of  the 
subject  classes.  The  heads  of  the  subject,  tribe,  or  people  are  made  responsible  for, 
collection  (or  at  least  the  payment)  of  tribute,  and  for  the  preservation  of  a  certain 
law  and  order,  and  are  the  ready  subjects  of  extortion  on  very  slight  pretences.  On 
the  other  hand,  their  brethren  of  inferior  order  take  pride  in  them,  and  serve  them, 
and  throurrh  them  the  general  government,  with  much  less  driving.  A  pretty  fair 
example  of  this  in  modern  times  can  be  seen  in  the  Turkish  recognition  of  the 
various  religious  bodies  within  its  domains.  Perhaps  it  is  the  best  of  modera 
illustrations.     {Prof.  Isaac  H.  Hall.) 

Ver.  31.  The  people  believed. — Lessons : — 1.  The  people's  faith  should  cfosely 
follow  upon  God's  word  ministered,  and  by  His  works  confirmed.  A  good  connec- 
tion. 2.  Where  God  promiseth  success  to  His  ministers  in  the  faith  of  others, 
there  they  shall  believe  (chap.  iii.  18).  3.  All  professed  believers,  receive  not  God's 
word  with  the  same  faith.  4.  Hearing  is  the  usual  sense  of  bringing  in  faith  and 
the  fruits  of  it.  5.  God's  gracious  visitation  of  His  Church,  and  providential 
sight  of  its  afflictions,  is  very  good  to  be  heard  by  them.  6.  Such  hearing  of  God's 
visiting  love  and  redeeming  providence  must  affect  God's  Israel.  7.  Faith  working 
by  this  sense  stirs  up  souls  to  suitable  returns  unto  God.  8.  The  humblest  and 
sincerest  worship  in  body  and  spirit  is  the  most  suitable  return  to  God  for  His 
redemption.  ((?.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Human  and  Divine  attitudes  : — I.  The  atti- 
tudes PREDICATED  OF  TUE  PEOPLE.  1.  Their  belief .  2.  Their  reverence.  3.  Their 
devotion.  II.  The  attitudes  predicated  of  God.  1.  He  saw  the  affliction  ol 
Israel.  2.  Visited  Israel.  (J.  S.  Exell,  3I.A.)  Faith  easy  when  in  the  line  of 
desire : — People  are  a  great  deal  more  apt  to  receive  a  message  as  from  God  when 
it  is  in  the  line  of  their  own  longings.  The  Israelites  were  quick  to  receive  from 
God  a  promise  of  relief  from  Egyptian  brick-making,  readier  to  worship  than  when 
they  wanted  water  or  meat  on  the  desert  and  failed  to  find  it  ready  at  hand  for 
them.  And  they  were  very  much  like  the  rest  of  us  in  all  this.  How  we  should 
bow  our  heads  and  worship  if  the  one  inner  longing  of  our  hearts  at  this  moment 
were  granted  to  us,  or  even  promised  of  God,  all  of  a  sudden  !  But  how  is  it  while 
God  keeps  back  from  us  that  which  we  long  for,  and  we  know  that  He  is  prompted 
to  His  course  by  both  wisdom  and  love  ?  Do  we  bow  our  heads  and  worship,  all 
the  same  ?  Well,  we  bow  our  heads  ;  but  not  always  to  worship.  {H.  C.  Trumbull.) 
Confidence  in  God : — The  Roman  noblemen  could  give  no  greater  proof  of  their 
confidence  in  their  city  and  army,  than  when  they  bought  the  land  on  which  their 
Carthaginian  enemies  were  encamped  around  the  city.  And  we  can  give  no  greater 
proof  of  our  confidence  in  God,  than  by  trusting  Him  in  the  land  which  our  enemies, 
darkness  and  sickness  and  trouble,  seem  to  possess,  and  acting  as  if  He  were  their 
master,  and  mightier  than  they  all.  {W.  Baxendale.)  The  believing  people: — 
I.  God  always  furnishes  sufficient  evidence  to  justify  belief.  Moses  was  a 
stranger  to  the  people  ;  Aaron  doubtless  weU  known.  He  had  a  welcome  message 
— deliverance.     Miracles  in  outward  form  ;  miracles  typical  in   character :  rod 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

changed  to  a  serpent  and  back,  Moses  changed  from  a  shepherd  to  a  ruler  ;  cleans- 
ing of  leprosy,  the  purifying  of  the  human  for  Divine  use.  II.  Hkap.ing  precedes 
BELiEviN'o.  God  sent  Aaron  to  speak.  Ministers  sent  to  preach.  III.  The 
Israelites  man'ifest  theik  taith  pcbliclt.  We  mast  confess  Christ  in  token  of 
faith.  IV.  God  prep.vres  the  way  for  the  reception  of  His  truth.  Aaron 
called  to  meet  Moses.  God's  Spirit  precedes  and  accompanies  the  truth  we  utter. 
V.  Faith  secures  deliverance.  By  it  the  Israelites  secured  theirs.  So  must  we 
by  ours.  It  is  unto  us  according  to  our  faith.  (Dr.  Fowler.)  Bowal  lieaiU  : — 
1.  Some  heads  are  bowed  with  business  cares.  During  the  last  four  years  many 
homes  have  been  broken,  and  others  sadly  reduced,  not  so  much  through  men's  owu 
folly,  as  from  the  long  and  serious  depression  in  trade.  2.  Some  heads  are  bowed 
with  sorrow  over  sinful  children.  That  never-fading  picture  of  the  Prodigal  Son, 
painted  by  a  master  hand,  is  often  too  truly  representative  of  our  own  families. 
Young  men,  think  of  all  the  pain  and  anguish  you  cause  for  those  dear  parents  by 
your  lives  of  sin.  3.  Some  heads  are  bowed  with  bereavement.  To  many  of  U3 
there  have  come  dark  days  of  sorrow  and  pain.  Eoses  have  withered  in  our 
domestic  gardens ;  buds  have  been  nipped  before  they  had  time  to  bloom ;  lights  we 
loved  have  gone  out.     (Charles  Leach.) 


CHAPTER  V. 


Ver.  1.  Let  My  people  go. — The  deliverance  of  God^s  people  : — The  history  of  the 
deliverance  of  God's  people  from  the  bond;  g3  of  Egypt,  their  pilf^rimage  through 
the  wilderness,  and   their  ultimate  settlement  in  the  Land  of  Promise,   bears  a 
striking  analogy  to  the  history  of  the  human  soul.     I.  The  words  "Let  My  people 
go,"  regarded  as  spoken  concerning  human  souls,  may  be  said  to  contain  in  them- 
selves the  whole  gospel  history    of  our  redemption.     Even   the   small  word 
"My"  is  emphatic.     1.  We  are  God's  people;  not  Satan's  people.    When  God 
claims  us  we  should  remember  that  He  claims  His  own,  and  that  we  are  bound  to 
support  His  claim.     2.  The  summons  to  let  the  people  of  God  go  implies  a  bondage 
from  which  they  are  to  be  delivered.   That  which  forms  the  basis  of  Holy  Scripture 
is  the  fact  that  man  committed  sin.    He  rebelled  against  his  Maker,  and  became 
the  slave  of  one  to  whom  he  owed  no  obedience.     3.  If  the  words  "  Let  My  people 
go  "  imply  the  existence  of  slavery,  they  still  more  emphatically  imply  the  way  and 
the  promise  of  redemption.     The  Gospel  of  Christ,  as  preached  throughout  the 
whole   world,   is   just   this — "  Let   My   people   go."     II.    The   whole   system  op 
ordinances  and  sacraments,  in  which  we  find  ourselves  by  God's  providence,  like 
the  system  of  ordinances  and  sacrifices  which  was  given  to  Israel  when  they  came 
out   of   Egypt,   are    intended   to   insure    and   perfect  and   turn   to  the   best 
account  the  liberty  which  the  Lord  has  given  us,  for  the  soul  of  man  may  not 
be  content  with* emancipation  once  and  for  all.     III.  The  consideration  of  what 
Jesus  Christ  has  done  for  rs  is  the  chief  means  of  moving  our  he.arts  to  seek 
THAT  LIBERTY  WHICH   GoD   DESIGNS  US  ALL    TO  POSSESS.     (Bp.    Harvcij   Goodwill.) 
Freedom  to  serve  God  : — I.  Perfect  freedom  is  not  the  thing  demanded  of  Pharaoh, 
nor  is  this  the  prize  of  their  high  calling  held  out  before  the  eyes  of  the  Israelites. 
To  serve  God  is  the  perfect  freedom  held  out :  to  change  masters,  to  be  rid  of  him 
who  had  no  claim  to  their  allegiance,  and  to  be  i^ermitted  without  hindrance  to  serve 
Him  who  was  indeed  their  Lord  and  their  God.     This  was  the  boon  offered  to  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  demanded  on  their  account  by  Moses  as  the  ambassador  of 
God-   II.  This  feature  in  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  is  worthy  of  special  notice, 
when  we  regard  it  as  typical  of  the  deUverance  from  sin  and  the  bondage  of  the 
devil,  which  our  heavenly  Father  is  willing  to  effect  for  each  of  us.    "Let  My  people 
go," — not  that  they  may  be  free  from  a  master,  but  that  they  may  serve  ;  let  them 
go,  because  they  have  been  redeemed  by  Christ,  and  are  not  their  own,  but  His. 
The  deUverance  from  sin  which  God  works  for  His  people  is,  in  fact,  a  change  from 
one  service  to  another :  a  change  from  service  to  sin,  which  is  perfect  bondage,  to 
service  to  God,  which  is  perfect  freedom.     IH.  The  blessedness  of  the  service 
of  God  is  not  estimated  as  it  ought  to  be  ;  men  in  these  days  are  too  like  the 
childi-en  of  Israel,  who  seemed  to  think  that  they  had  conferred  a  favour  on  Moses 
by  following  his  guidance,  and  that  the  least  reverse  would  be  a  sufficient  excuse  to 
justify  them  in  going  back  again  to  Egypt.    There  is  nothing  in  their  conduct  mora 


CHAP.  IT.]  EXODUS.  113 

strange  or  more  blamable  than  in  the  conduct  of  men  calling  themselves  Chi'istians, 
who  do  not  perceive  that  in  the  earnest  discharge  of  God's  service  is  their  highest 
happiness   as   well   as   their  principal  duty   and   most  blessed  privilege.     (ibUl.) 
Lessons  : — 1.  God's  ambassadors  must  proceed  orderly  in  delivering  their  message 
— first  to   Israel,  secondly  to  Pharaoh.     2.  Order  of  persons  as  well  as  time  is 
observable  by  God's  servants.     3.  The  poorest  persons  under  God's  authority  may 
press  into  the  presence  of  the  proudest  kings.     4.  God's  ambassadors  must  speak 
and  declare  His  will  to  the  greatest  potentates.     6.  God's  messen<.'ers  must  go  in 
His  authority  and  vouch  His  name.     6.  The  true  way  of  making  out  God  unto  man 
is  concretely  not  abstractly.   Every  nation  acknowledgeth  God,  but  not  Israel's  God. 
7.  The  true  God  hath  a  peculiar  people  whom  He  owneth  in  the  world.    8.  The  will 
of  God  is  to  have  His  people  set  free  from  all  that  hinders  them  from  Him.    9.  The 
end  of  all  redemption  is  that  God's  people  should  serve  Him.     10.  The  true  service 
of  God  is  a  festival  living  to  Him.     11.  Such  feasting  with  God  is  better  in  the 
wilderness  than  in  Egypt.     12.  All  such  feasting,  sacrificing,  and  worship  must 
terminate  in  Jehovah.     (G.  Huphi's,  B.D.)       Moses  before  Pharaoh: — 1.  The  sense 
of  his  high  commission  enabled  him  to  discharge  the  duty  it  laid  upon  him  with 
dignity  and  boldness.     The  sinking  of  heart  that  had  seized  him  upon  its  first  an- 
nouncement had  passed  away  ;  and  in  its  place  had  come  "  the  spirit  of  power,  and 
of  love,  and  of  a  sound  mind."     2.  Aaron  was  with  him;  but  the  relation  he 
sustained  to  the  work  is  marked,  as  it  is  throughout  the  narrative,  by  the  order  of 
the  names,  Moses  and  Aaron — ^never  Aaron  and  Moses — a  companion,  an  associate, 
but  only  as  a  helper,  a  support,  a  spokesman,  though  Aaron  was  the  elder.     There 
are  chords  in  our  nature  that  vibrate  mysteriously  to  another's  touch,  a  magnetism 
that  works  by  laws  imperfectly  understood,  by  which  the  presence  and  sympathy  of 
a  companion,  silent  though  it  be,  and  without  visible  action,  braces  and  enlivens 
the  heart ;  and  that,  though  the  disparity  be  so  great  that  the  inferior  who  cares  for 
us  can  ouly  think  as  we  think,  and  feel  as  we  feel,  without  any  contribution  of  useful 
counsel  or  active  succour.     "  At  my  first  answer,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  no  man  stood 
with  me,  but  all  men  forsook  me."    Let  us  not  say  that  we  cannot  help  our  friend 
because  we  are  inferior  and  of  small  resources.     It  is  too  often  but  the  cover  of 
cowardice  or  coldness  of  heart.   He  that  knows  the  magic  there  is  in  a  look,  a  touch, 
or  a  word,  to  alleviate  and  quicken  a  pained  or  fainting  soul,  feels  the  falsehood. 
Nor  let  us,  in  our  height  of  pride  and  self-suificiency,  despise  the  "fellowship  of 
kindred  minds"  because  they  are  below  us,  and,   it  may  be,  without  manifest 
strength  to  aid.     A  little  child's  sympathy  is  not  to  be  despised.     Moses'  commis- 
sion was  sole,  but  Aaron's  presence  facihtated  its  execution.     There  is  a  wonderful 
power  in  company.    3.  What  Moses  first  asked  of  Pharaoh  for  his  people,  then, 
was  a  rehgious  privilege — liberty  to  go  out  into  the  wild  country  beyond  the  bounds 
of  Goshen,  and  worship  God  ;  sacrifice  to  that  great  Being  in  whom  their  fathers 
had  trusted,  but  whose  image,  we  may  well  believe,  had  grrf^n  dim  among  them 
during  their  long  period  of  depression  and  enslavement.     Moses  was  a  religious 
reformer.    The  revival  of  truth,  faith,  and  loyalty  to  Jehovah,  lay  at  the  bottom  of 
all  the  other  great  things  he  was  to  do  for  them.     The  feast  in  the  wilderness  was 
preliminary  to  all  that  was  to  follow,  to  stand  as  the  frontispiece  of  that  series  of 
wonderful  events  in  which  their  deliverance  was  to  be  accomplished,  the  prologue 
of  the  great  drama  of  their  entrance  upon  national  life.     4.  To  Pharaoh,  in  this 
call,  there  was  a  test  of  faith,  and  of  that  obedience  in  which  all  real  faith  finds  its 
true  expression.     God  came  forth  from  His  obscurity  and  spoke  to  him.    Would  he 
hear  that  voice,  recognize  it  as  the  voice  of  Him  who  is  "  King  of  kings  "  ?     In 
humanity  there  is  a  chord  that  ever  vibrates  to  God's  touch,  and  an  ear  that  hears 
His  voice.     It  was  the  call  of  God's  mercy  to  Pharaoh,  Jehovah's  coming  near  to 
him  to  do  him  good.    Alas !  he  "  knew  not  the  time  of  his  visitation."    But  if  the 
heart  of  Pharaoh  towards  God  was  tested  by  this  call,  so  was  his  heart  towards  man. 
It  was  an  appeal  to  his  humanity.    5.  See  the  wisdom  of  acting  in  great  matters 
with  judgment,  moderation,  and  patience.     Many  a  good  design  has  been  ruined  by 
abruptness,  haste,  and  grasping  greed.    Moses  did  not  succeed  in  his  embassy,  but 
he  adopted  fit  and  judicious  methods  to  obtain  success ;  and  if  they  failed  to  secure 
their  object,  it  was  simply  because  they  encountered  an  opposition  that  no  power  or 
skill  could  overcome.     The  eagerness  that  will  have  all  at  once,  loses  all.     The 
impatience  that  will  reach  the  goal  at  a  single  bound,  never  reaches  it.    To  have 
asked  the  immediate  emancipation  of  the  Israelites  would  have  been  manifestly 
useless.     6.  Finally,  beware  of  striving  against  God.     It  can  end  in  nothing  but 
destruction.    Its  gains  are  losses,  its  successes  its  most  ruinous  failures.    (R,  A, 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  v. 

Hallam,  D.D.)      Reasom  for  sending  Moses  and  Aaron : — Why  did  God  send  Moses 
and  Aaron  to  Pharaoh,  when  He  could  have  destroyed  Him  with  a  stroke,  and  have 
wrought  the  freedom  of  Israel?    1.  That  God's  power  might  appear  in  showing  His 
wonders.     2.  That  the  Israelites  might  see  the  great  care  God  had  over  tbem.     3. 
To  exercise  their  patience,  not  being  delivered  at  once.     4.  To  leave  Pharaoh  with- 
out excuse.     (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)        A  proclamation  of  God : — 1.  His  name.     2.  His 
authority.     3.  His  regard  for  His  people.     4.  His  desire  for  the  freedom  of  man. 
(Ibid.)         T lie  freedom  of  men  : — 1.  Earnestly  desired.     2.  Effectively  undertaken. 
3.  Divinely  approved.     4.  Successfully  achieved.     (Ibid.)        A  Divine  challenge  : — 
The  slavery  of  Israel  in  Egypt  was  hopeless  slavery  ;  they  cou^d  not  get  free  unless 
God  interfered  and  worked  miracles  on  their  behalf.     And  the  slavery  of  the  sinner 
to  his  sin  is  equally  hopeless;  he  could  never  be  free,  unless  a  mind  that  is  infinitely 
greater  than  he  can  ever  command  shall  come  to  his  assistance  and  help.     What  a 
blessed  circumstance  it  is,  then,  for  those  poor  chosen  children  of  God,  who  are  still 
in  bondage,  that  the  Lord  has  power  to  say,  and  then  power  to  carry  out  what  He 
has  said — "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  My  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  Me."     I. 
The  ruLNESS  of  the  sentence.    "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  My  people  go,  that  they 
may  serve  Me."    I  don't  doubt  but  what  there  are  some  of  God's  people  who  have 
not  any  idea  they  are  His  people.    The  demand  was  not  made  to  Pharaoh,  "  Make 
their  tasks  less  heavy;  make  the  whip  less  cruel;   put  kinder  taskmasters  over 
them."     No,  but,  "  Let  them  go  free."    Christ  did  not  come  into  the  world  merely 
to  make  our  sin  more  tolerable,  but  to  deliver  us  right  away  from  it.     He  did  not 
come  to  make  our  lusts  less  mighty ;  but  to  put  all  these  things  far  away  from  His 
people,  and  work  out  a  full  and  complete  deliverance.   Again,  y^u  will  mark,  it  says, 
"  Let  My  people  go."     It  says  nothing  about  their  coming  back  again.     Once  gone, 
they  are" gone  for  ever.     II.  The  eightness  of  it.     The  voice  of  justice,  and  pity, 
and  mercy,  cries  to  death,  and  hell,  and  sin,  "  Let  My  people  go  free — Satan,  keep 
thine  own  if  thou  wilt,  but  let  My  people  go  free,  for  they  are  Mine.     This  people 
have  I  created  for  Myself ;  tliey  shall  show  forth  My  praise.     Let  My  people  go  free, 
for  I  have  bought  tliem  with  My  precious  blood.     Thou  hast  not  bought  them,  nor 
hast  thou  made  them  :  thou  hast  no  right  to  them  ;  let  My  people  go  free."     All 
this  is  our  comfort  about  poor  sinners,  and  we  hope  that  some  of  them,  though 
they  don't  know  it,   are  God's   people.     III.  Tde  iskpetition  of  this  sentence. 
Observe  now,  as  I'haraoh  would     ot  give  up  the  people,  the  sentence  had  to  be 
repeated  again,  and  again,  until  ■  ,  last  God  would  bear  it  no  longer,  but  brought 
down  on  him  one  tremendous  blow.     He  smote  the  firstborn  of  Egypt,  the  chief  of 
all  their  strength,  and  then  He  led  forth  His  people  like  sheep  by  the  hands  of  Moses 
and  Aaron.     In  like  manner  this  sentence  of  God  has  to  be  repeated  many  times 
in  your  experience  and  mine,  "  Thus,  saith  the  Lord,  let  My  people  go  free,"  and  if 
you  are  not  quite  free  yet,  don't  despair ;  God  will  repeat  that  sentence  till  at  last 
you  shall  be  brought  forth  with  silver  and  gold,  and  there  shall  not  be  a  feeble 
thought  in  all  your  soul ;  you  shall  go  forth  with  gladness  and  with  joy;  you  shaU 
enter  into  Canaan  at  last,  up  yonder  where  His  throne  is  glittering  now  in  glorious 
light,  that  angel  eyes  cannot  bear.     It  is  no  wonder  then,  if  it  is  to  be  repeated  in 
our  experience,  that  the  Church  of  Christ  must  keep  on  repeating  it  in  the  world  as 
God's  message.     Go,  missionary,  to  India,  and  say  to  Juggernaut,  and  Kalee,  and 
Brahma,  and  Vishnu,  "  Thus  saith  theLord,  let  My  people  go  free."   Go,  ye  servants 
of  the  Lord,  to  China,  speak  to  the  followers  of  Confucius,  and  say,  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  let  My  people  go  free."     Go  ye  to  the  gates  of  the  harlot  city,  even  Eome,  and 
say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  My  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  Me."   Think  not 
though  you  die  that  your  message  will  die  with  you.     'Tis  for  Moses  to  say,  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord,"  and  if  he  be  driven  from  Pharaoh's  sight,  the  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord"  still  stands,  though  His  servant  fall.     Yes,  brothers  and  sisters,  the  whole 
Church  must  keep  on  throughout  every  age,  crying,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  My 
people  go."    IV.  The  omnipotence  of  the  command.     Sin  is  a  Pharaoh,  but  God 
is  Jehovah.    Your  sins  are  hard;  you  cannot  overcome  them  of  yourself,  but  God 
can.    There  is  hope  yet ;  let  that  hope  arouse  you  to  action.     Say  to  your  soul  to- 
night, "  I  am  not  in  hell,  though  I  might  have  been.     I  am  still  on  praying  ground 
and  pleading  terms,  and  now,  God  helping  me,  I  will  begin  to  think."    And  when 
you  begin  to  think  you  will  begin  to  be  blessed.   (C.  H.  Sjntrgeon.)      God's  people : — 
I.  Who  ake  these  whom  God  calls  "  My  people  "  ?     1.  They  are  a  distinct  and 
separate  race.     The  people  of  God  are  not  those  who  agree  with  each  other  as  to 
certain  theories — in  these  things  they  may  be  sundered  far  as  the  poles.     It  is  not 
that  they  come  together  on  certain  particular  occasions  and  observe  the  same 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  115 

ceremonies.  No  ceremonies  however  ancient,  however  solemn,  however  significant, 
however  faithfully  observed  can  make  us  His  people.  The  distinction  is  one  of 
birth.  It  is  a  dillerence  of  nature.  Born  of  God,  begotten  of  God,  they  are  the 
children  of  God.  Within  them  is  the  very  Spirit  of  God  whereby  they  cry  "  Abba 
Father."  2.  They  are  created  of  God  by  a  distinct  and  wholly  supernatural  act. 
The  children  of  a  new  life — of  the  resurrection.  And  out  of  that  relationship  to 
God  come  a  thousand  new  relationships.  There  is  a  new  authority  which  is  ever 
supreme — there  is  a  new  nature,  with  new  hopes,  and  new  desires ;  and  new  needs  ; 
and  new  aspirations  ;  and  new  delights  ;  a  nature  which  can  find  its  only  satisfac- 
tion in  Him  in  whom  it  found  its  source;  there  is  a  new  relationship  to  all  things. 
Born  of  God,  they  look  further;  they  soar  higher  ;  they  find  more.  II.  But  if  these 
are  His  people,  why  does  He  soffeb  tiieh  to  be  here  ?  Forsaken,  wronged — 
has  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious?  Who  shall  deliver  them  out  of  the  hand  of 
Pharaoh  ?  1.  That  they  may  know  that  I  am  the  Lord — this  is  the  key  to  it  all. 
They  are  led  into  the  wilderness  where  there  is  neither  bread  nor  water,  that  they 
may  learn  to  look  up  to  God  for  their  help  :  so  they  are  hemmed  in  by  all  possible 
evils  in  Egyjit,  that  they  may  see  the  greatness  and  might  of  their  God  in  their 
deliverance.  The  mightier  the  nation  that  oppressed  them,  the  greater  the  glory  of 
their  deUverance.  The  more  hopeless  their  condition,  and  the  more  hopeless  the 
people,  so  much  more  room  was  there  for  God  to  show  forth  His  mighty  arm.  The 
greatness  of  life — its  breadth  and  depth,  its  expanse  like  heaven  above  us,  its  solidity 
like  the  earth  beneath  us — is  exactly  according  to  onr  knowledge  of  our  God.  And 
the  deep  peace  and  rest — the  blessedness  and  satisfaction — these  too  come  only 
from  knowing  Him.  We  are  most  indebted— not  to  those  things  for  which  it  is 
easiest  to  give  thanks,  but  to  those  from  which  we  have  shrunk,  and  which  set  us 
wondering,  fearing,  perhaps  even  doubting.  The  reaper  is  a  happy  man,  and  poets 
sing  and  artists  paint  the  scene  of  harvest  home.  But  the  keen  frosts  that  break 
the  clods,  and  the  patient  ploughman  plodding  wei^rily  b<-hmd  the  share  with  which 
he  cleaves  the  soil  in  chill  wanter  winds  and  under  cheerless  skies — these  are  apt  to 
be  forgotten  and  unthanked.  And  yet  what  should  the  reaper  bring  if  the  plough- 
man went  not  forth?  "  My  people."  God  sends  them  to  school  that  they  may 
learn  to  know  Him.  2.  Learn  further  that  wherever  His  people  are  led,  they  can 
never  get  where  God  cannot  help  them.  Be  sure  of  that.  Whatever  clouds 
gather  they  cannot  hide  His  child  in  tho  is'  -ness.  No  circumstances  can  ever 
shut  us  out  from  His  help.  3.  The  Lord  kno\i  ith  them  that  are  His.  He  leadeth 
them  in  a  way  that  they  know  not,  but  He  knoweth  the  way.  Fear  not :  we  too 
may  sing — "  He  leadeth  us  in  a  right  way  to  bring  us  to  a  city  of  habitation."  4. 
Notice  yet  another  characteristic  of  His  people.  See  Israel  come  forth  from  Egypt. 
Every  man,  every  woman,  every  child  bows  his  head  beneath  a  doorpost  on  which 
is  sprinkled  the  blood — each  one  passes  between  the  side  posts  whereon  is  the 
crimson  stain.  They  are  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord — My  people — ransomed  by  a 
great  price.  The  people  of  God  find  their  deliverance  in  the  power  of  the  Cross. 
{J/.  G.  Pcarse.)  Moses  and  Aaron  before  Pharaoh  : — We  never  heard  of  an 
insurrection  against  a  tyrarmical  government,  deliberately  planned,  for  which  there 
was  not  aggregated  some  sort  of  preparation  in  armies  and  munitions  of  war.  So 
we  inquire  in  this  instance.  What  was  the  number  of  Israel's  troops  now  on  their 
belUgerent  way  to  beseige  the  capital  of  Egypt?  Only  one  organized  battalion, 
consisting  of  these  two  old  men  !  What  were  the  arms  they  carried  ?  These  were 
altogether  seven  weapons  in  detail.  Any  one  can  count  them  at  his  pleasure  :  one 
shepherd's  crook,  called  a  "  rod,"  one  tremendous  name  in  the  Hebrew  language, 
four  promises,  and  a  miracle.  These  were  expected  to  revolutionize  Egypt.  I. 
Inadequacy  of  conspicuous  resources  is  no  argument  against  success,  when  Gob 

rN  PERSON  IIAS  sent  HiS  SERVANTS  FORTH  TO  DO  HiS  ERRAND.  II.  ThE  ALMIGHTY  GoD 
HAS  NEVER  LET  GO  HiS  HOLD  UPON  ANT  INDIVIDUAL  OF  THE  HUMAN  RACE,  FOB  ALL  THE 
SPITEFUL   REBELLION   SOME  MEN   HAVE    SUQV^-N.       HI.    It    IS  OF  THE  UTMOST  IMPORTANCE 

THAT  INTELLIGENT  PEOPLE  SHOULD  HAVE  A  SAFE  CREED.  Undoubtedly  Pharaoh  is 
very  much  in  earnest.  He  does  not  "  know  "  Jehovah  ;  he  knows  the  deities  he  has 
been  educated  to  worship.  But  if  we  only  wait  a  little  longer,  and  read  the  story  of 
the  exodus  clear  through  to  the  crossing  of  the  Bed  Sea,  we  shall  find  out  whether  it 
made  any  difference  to  Pharaoh  what  he  believed  in  that  moment  when  he  defied 
Jehovah  !    IV.  See  how  clearly  the  all-wise  God  works  up  to  simple  issues  with 

EVERY    WILFUL    TRANSGRESSOR   BEFORE    He    CASTS    HIM    UTTERLY   OUT.       There    is    OUly 

one  question  which  confronts  any  man,  no  matter  how  many  are  the  forms  in  which 
it  may  be  put :  Will  you,  or  wiU  you  not,  obey  God  ?    V.  Those  who  seek  to  help 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v. 

— ♦ _— _ — ^ • 

THEIR  FELLOW-MEN  IN  THIS  WORLD  MUST   EXPECT  MISJUDGIIENT.      VI.    So  We  reach  OUt 

final  lesson  :  The  NATUR.Ui  and  first  result  of  stirring  up  sin  is  to  aggravate  its 
vroLENCE.  Satan  hates  to  lose  his  slaves.  The  heart  is  desperately  wicked,  and 
seems  to  grow  more  malignant  than  before.  "It  is  always  darkest  just  before  day." 
This  does  not  happen  so  ;  it  is  the  Divine  rule.  (C.  S.  Bobinson,  D.D.)  Divine 
condescension  to  Pharaoh  : — At  the  outset,  we  observe  the  more  than  dutiful  manner 
in  which  Israel  was  directed  to  act  towards  Pharaoh.  Absolutely  speaking,  Pharaoh 
had  no  right  to  detain  the  people  in  Egj-pt.  Their  fathers  had  avowedly  come  not 
to  settle,  but  temporarily  "  to  sojourn,"  and  on  that  understanding  they  had  been 
received.  And  now  they  were  not  only  wrongfully  oppressed,  but  unrighteously 
detained.  It  was  infinite  condescension  to  Pharaoh's  weakness,  on  the  part  of  God, 
not  to  insist  from  the  first  upon  the  immediate  and  entire  dismissal  of  Israel.  Less 
could  not  have  been  asked  than  was  demanded  of  Pharaoh,  nor  could  obedience 
have  been  made  more  easy.  Assuredly  such  a  man  was  ripe  for  the  judgment  of 
hardening ;  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  had  at  the  first  yielded  obedience  to 
the  Divine  will,  he  would  surely  have  been  prepared  to  receive  a  farther  revelation 
of  His  will,  and  grace  to  submit  to  it.  And  bo  God  in  His  mercy  always  deals 
with  man.  "He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful  also  in  much: 
and  he  that  is  uujust  in  the  least,  is  unjust  also  in  much."  The  demands  of  God 
are  intended  to  try  what  is  in  us.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of  Adam's  obedience,  of 
Abraham's  sacrifice,  and  now  of  Pharaoh  ;  only  that  in  the  latter  case,  as  in  the 
promise  to  spare  Sodom  if  even  ten  righteous  men  were  found  among  its  wicked 
inhabitants,  the  Divine  forbearance  went  to  the  utmost  verge  of  condescension. 
{A.  Ederxheivi,  D.D.)  Divine  authority  for  the  message: — On  one  occasion  when 
Whitefield  was  preaching,  an  old  man  fell  asleep,  and  some  of  the  audience  became 
listless.  Suddenly  changing  his  manner,  Whitefield  broke  forth  in  an  altered  tone, 
declaring  that  He  had  not  come  to  speak  in  his  own  name,  otherwise  they  might 
lean  on  their  elbows  and  go  to  sleep.  "  No ;  I  have  come  to  you  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  I  must  and  will  be  heard."  The  sleeper  started  wide 
awake;  the  hearers  were  stripped  of  their  apathy  at  once;  and  every  word  of  the 
sermon  was  attended  to.  It  was  thus  that  Moses  addressed  Pharaoh;  and  it  is 
thus  all  witness  for  God  should  address  the  listeners — with  authority.  Hold  a 
feast  unto  Me. — The  first  attempt  at  a  religious  service  : — I.  That  this  first  attempt 

AT   a    religious    SERVICE    WAS    M.U)E    RESPONSIVE    TO   THE    CALL,  AND    IN    HARMONY  WITH 

THE  WILL,  OF  GoD.  1.  Thus  there  was  a  great  necessity  that  the  work  now  attempted 
by  Moses  and  Aaron  should  be  accomplished.  2.  Moses  and  Aaron  were  the  right 
men  to  undertake  this  work.  In  the  tirst  place,  Moses  had  been  directly  called  by 
God  to  do  it ;  also  Aaron  had  been  providentially  conducted  to  this  sphere  of  work. 
In  this  we  see  the  different  methods  by  which  God  enjoins  work  upon  good  men. 
Then,  again,  Moses  and  Aaron  had  been  Divinely  prepared  for  their  work.  Men 
are  prepared  indifferent  ways.  Solitude  prepares  one  man  ;  publicity  will  prepare 
another — the  preparation  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  temperament  of  the  man, 
and  the  work  tbat  he  has  to  perform.  The  Church  requires  to  think  less  of  results, 
and  more  of  the  methods  by  which  they  are  to  be  attained.  3.  Moses  and  Aaron 
undertook  this  work  in  the  proper  spirit.     II.  That  our  first  attempt  at  religious 

SERVICE    IS    often    MET   BY   OPEN    PROFANITY   AND    IGNORANCE.       1.    MoSCS     and    AaiOU 

were  met  by  a  manifestation  of  ignorance.  2.  They  were  met  by  deep  profanity. 
3.    They  were   met   by  unwarrantable   pride.     III.    That  our  first  attempt  at 

SERVICE    IS    OFTEN    MISUNDERSTOOD,    AND  ITS    MOTIVE  MALIGNED.       1.    Pharaoh  waS  not 

sensitive  to  the  claims  of  duty.  2.  Pharaoh  was  not  a  disinterested  interpreter  of 
the  claims  urged  upon  him.     IV.  Th.\t  sometimes  our  first  attempt  at  religious 

SERVICE   appears    TO   BE    MORE    PRODUCTIVE    OF    HARM   THAN    GOOD,     AND    TO    HAVE    THE 

VERY  OPPOSITE  EFFECT  TO  TiL\T  DESIGNED.  Lcssons :  1.  Begin  at  once  some  enter- 
prise for  the  moral  freedom  of  humanity,  2.  If  in  the  first  attempt  at  service  you 
meet  with  difficulty  and  rejection,  do  not  be  dismayed.  3.  That  you  must  be  finally 
successful  in  your  efforts.  (1)  For  they  are  appointed  by  God.  (2)  You  are  upheld 
by  heaven.     (3)  You  have  the  sympathy  of  ail  good  men.     (J,  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  2.  Who  Is  the  Lord  that  I  should  obey  His  voice  ? — Pharaoh's  question 
answered  : — If  we  would  know  God  as  He  is,  we  should  neither  take  our  own  idea 
nor  adopt  the  world's  estimates,  but  see  Him  as  He  has  revealed  Himself  in  His 
Word,  especially  in  the  Gospel  which  began  to  be  spoken  by  His  Son,  the  only 
Teacher  competent  to  instruct  us  here.  1.  God  is  One,  indeed,  who  will  punish 
sin,  &c.    As  a  Holy  God,  He  hates  it ;  and,  as  a  Just  God,  He  wiU  "  by  no  means 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  117 

clear  the  guilty,"  etc.  2.  But,  at  the  same  time,  He  is  One  who  would  rather  not, 
and  who  will  not  unless  He  must.  Judgment  is  His  strange  work,  and  He  "  would 
have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth."  3.  One,  too, 
so  averse  to  puuish  that  He  "  spared  not  His  own  Son,"  &c.  Abraham  could  give 
no  higher  proof  of  his  love  to  God  than  by  his  willingness  to  offer  up  his  son,  his 
only  son,  Isaac.  "God  so  loved,"  etc.  4.  One,  too,  who,  in  addition  to  giving 
His  Son,  strives  with  men  by  His  Word,  ordinances,  Spirit,  Providence,  to  dispose 
them  to  accept  that  Son  and  find  peace  and  joy  in  believing.  5.  One,  again,  who 
has  filled  His  Word  with  warnings  to  arouse,  invitations  to  attract,  directions  to 
instruct,  promises  to  encourage,  &c.  6.  One,  too,  who  has  thrown  the  door  of 
hope  wide  open  to  all,  and  imposed  no  impossible,  or  even  difficult,  condition  in  the 
case  of  any.  7.  One,  in  fine,  who  can  say,  "  What  more  could  I  have  done  for 
My  vineyard  that  I  have  not  done  in  it  ?  "  One  whose  plan,  provision  and  proffer 
of  salvation  is  such  that  if  any  fail  of  its  privilege^;,  they  can  but  blame  themselves. 
This  is  the  Lord  !  Not  only  our  Creator  (that  itself  should  summon  our  service ; 
see  Psalm  c),  nor  only  our  Preserver  (living  by  His  bounty,  should  we  not  live  by 
His  bidding,  too  ?) ;  but  also  our  Eedeemer :  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Surely,  then,  if  there  be  any  voice,  we  should  obey,  it  is  His.  That  voice, 
further,  is  the  voice  of  One  who  knows  us  ;  knows  our  frame,  knows  what  suits  us, 
knows  what  will  contribute  to  our  well-being.  His  commands  are  so  far  from  be- 
ing arbitrary  that  in  the  very  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  reward  ;  and,  following 
the  course  they  indicate,  we  shall  ever  have  growing  reason  to  say,  "  The  lines  are 
fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places  " ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  all  experience,  as 
well  as  revelation,  declares,  "the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  The  sinner  Hies  from 
God's  voice,  thinking  it  a  voice  of  anger  ;  whereas,  did  he  but  stop  and  listen,  he 
would  "  wonder  at  the  gracious  words  that  proceed  out  of  His  mouth."  Only  let  us 
"acquaint  ourselves  with  Him,  and  we  shall  be  at  peace,  and  good  shall  thereby 
come  to  us."  But  if  we  follow  after  lying  vanities,  we  forsake  our  own  mercies. 
(David  Jamison,  B.A.)  Lessons: — 1.  Proud  imperious  spirits  are  hasty  to  reply 

roughly  ujjon  God's  messengers.  2.  Idolaters  are  apt  to  despise  God  in  the  true 
revelation  of  Him.  3.  Hardened  souls  vent  their  contempt  upon  God  Himself 
more  than  on  His  Church.  4.  Contempt  of  Jehovah  suffers  not  men  to  hear  His 
voice.  5.  Disobedience  to  God  ushers  in  oppression  to  His  people.  6.  Scorners  of 
God  can  never  come  to  the  right  knowledge  of  God  or  acknowledgment  of  Him. 
7.  Wicked  wretches  glory  in  the  contempt  of  knowing  God.  8.  Denial  of  knowing 
God  deuieth  all  good  commanded  for  His  people.  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  God  en- 
titled to  an  obedience : — I.  We  ought  to  obey  God,  because  He  is  the  benevolent 
Ceeatok  of  the  univeese.  II.  We  are  bound  to  obey  God,  because  He  is  the 
constant  Preserver  of  the  creatures  of  His  power.  III.  We  are  under  yet 
greater  obligations  to  obey  god,  because  He  is  the  perfect  Governor  of  the 

universe.      IV.    W^E    ARE    OBLIGATED   IN   THE    HIGHEST    DEGREE    TO    OBEY  GoD,  BECAUSE 

He  is  the  merciful  Redeemer  of  sinners.  (C  Coffin,  D.D.)  God's  claim  on  our 
obedience: — I.  SoirE  particulars  relative  to  God's  voice.  1.  The  persons  to  whom 
He  speaks^Mankind.  (1)  His  favourite  creatures.  (2)  Ignorant  creatures.  (3) 
Improvable  creatures.  2.  The  means  by  which  He  speaks.  (1)  His  works,  (a) 
Of  creation.  (6)  Of  providence.  (2)  His  Word.  3.  What  He  says  to  us.  He 
speaks  to  us  variously,  according  to  our  various  states,  as  sinful,  submissive,  and 
reclaimed  creatures.  As  sinful  creatures,  who  transgress  His  laws,  He  speaks  to  us 
in  the  language  of  reproof ;  charging  us  with  rebellion  (Isa.  i.  1,  2) ;  and  ingratitude 
(Deut.  xxxii.  6) ;  and  in  the  language  of  warning  ;  showing  us  that  we  are  rejected 
by  Him  (Prov.  xv.  8,  26) ;  under  His  curse  (Gal.  iii.  10)  ;  and  under  the  sentence 
of  eternal  death  (Ezek.  xviii.  20;  Bom.  vi.  21).  As  submissive  creatures,  who 
desire  to  obey  Him,  He  speaks  to  us  in  the  language  of  kind  authority  (Isa.  Iv.  6, 
7  ;  Matt.  xi.  28,  29) ;  of  encouragement  (Isa.  i.  16-18) ;  and  of  caution  against 
delay  (Psa.  xcv.  7,  8).  As  reclaimed  creatures,  restored  to  His  favour  and 
service,  He  speaks  to  us  in  the  language  of  instruction  (Mic.  vi.  8  ;  Tit.  ii.  12) ; 
and  in  the  language  of  consolation,  (Isa.  xl.  1 ;  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).  4.  With  what 
design  He  speaks.  This  is  to  engage  our  obedience.  His  works  teach  us  to 
glorify  Him  as  God  (Bom.  i.  21).  His  Word  requires  practical  piety  as  man's 
indispensable  duty  (1  Sam.  xv.  22  ;  Matt.  vii.  21 ;  James  i.  22,  25).  The  obedi- 
ence thus  required  must  be  prompt,  without  delay  (Job.  xxii.  21).  Universal, 
without  defect  (Psa.  cxix.  6).  Persevering,  without  intermission  (Rom.  ii.  7) ;  and 
humble,  without  arrogance.  It  must  be  humbly  ascribed  to  Divine  grace  (Isa.  xxvi. 
12) ;  humbly  presented  through  Christ  for  acceptance  (1  Pet.  ii.  5) ;  and  humbly 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [chap.  t. 

as  unprofitable  at  best  (Luke  xvii.  10).  Such  being  the  obedience  which  God 
requires,  let  us  consider — II.  His  claims  on  our  obedience  to  His  voice.  These 
will  appear  by  answering  the  inquiry  here  instituted — "  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  "  &c. 
1.  He  is  our  indisputable  Proprietor.  2.  He  is  our  acknowledged  Sovereign.  3. 
He  is  our  best  Friend,  and  kindest  Benefactor.  4.  He  is  the  Disposer  of  our 
eternal  destiny.  (1)  Omniscient.  (2)  Just.  (3)  Powerful.  {Sketches  of  Sermons.) 
Pharaoh's  i)npioits  interrogation: — I.  God  has  spoken  to  m.vnkind.  II.  Why  and 
HOW  YOU  SHOULD  HEAR.  1.  Why.  (1)  Bccausc  of  His  right  in  and  over  you.  (2) 
Because  of  His  condescension  to  you.  (3)  Because  of  the  design  of  His  speaking 
— your  present  and  eternal  welfare.  2.  How.  With  awe,  sacred  attentions,  holy 
anxiety.  III.  The  impiety  and  folly  of  refusing  to  hear  the  voice  of  God.  1. 
It  is  a  flagrant  contempt  of  God.  2.  It  is  open  rebellion  against  authority.  3.  It 
must  be  eventually  ruinous  to  the  sinner.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Scorners  of  God  : — 
1.  They  hear  not  His  voice.  2.  They  perceive  not  His  revelations.  3.  They  recog- 
nize not  His  claims.  4.  They  insult  His  servants.  5.  They  enslave  His  people. 
(3.  They  are  obstinate  in  their  denials.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Pharaoh  fighting 
against  God: — A  certain  king  used  to  wander  about  in  disguise.  Once  he  fell  into 
a  quarrel,  and  was  getting  rather  roughly  handled.  But  as  soon  as  his  assailant 
knew  that  he  was  pummeling  the  king,  he  dropped  on  his  knees,  asking  for  mercy. 
It  is  a  good  thing  to  know  against  whom  we  are  fighting.  Pharaoh  did  not  realize 
that.  When  Job  came  to  see  that  he  was  fighting  against  God,  he  said,  "Behold, 
I  am  vile.  ...  I  will  lay  mine  hand  upon  mine  mouth."  "  I  know  not  the  Lord  " 
-^agnosticism  of  the  heart  and  will : — A  kind  of  agnosticism  more  prevalent  than 
agnosticism  of  a  scientific  kind.  There  is  an  agnosticism  of  the  heart ;  there  is  an 
agnosticism  of  the  will.  Men  reason  foolishly  about  this  not  knowing.  Men 
imagine  that  because  they  know  not  the  Lord,  the  Lord  knows  not  them.  There  is 
a  vital  distinction.  We  do  not  extinguish  the  sun  by  closing  our  eyes.  If  men 
wall  not  inquire  for  God  in  a  spirit  worthy  of  such  an  inquiry,  they  can  never  know 
God.  Pharaoh's  no-knowledge  was  avowed  in  a  tone  of  defiance.  It  was  not  an 
intellectual  ignorance,  but  a  spirit  of  moral  denial.  Pharaoh  practically  made  him- 
self god  by  denying  the  true  God.  This  is  the  natural  result  of  all  atheism. 
Atheism  cannot  be  a  mere  negative ;  if  it  pretend  to  intelligence  it  must,  in  some 
degree,  involve  the  Godhead  of  the  being  who  presumes  to  deny  God  ;  the  greatest 
difficulty  is  with  people  who  know  the  Lord,  and  do  not  obey  Him.  If  they  who 
professedly  know  the  Lord,  would  carry  out  His  will  in  daily  obedience  and  sacrifice 
of  the  heart,  their  lives  would  constitute  the  most  powerful  of  all  arguments.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Dangerous  ignorance  : — He  says  he  does  not  know  Jehovah ;  he 
does  not  recognize  His  authority  or  admit  His  claims.  His  soul  is  full  of  practical 
unbelief  in  God — a  fact  which  commonly  lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  hardening  of 
Binners'  hearts  in  every  age.  Pharaoh  did  not  at  fii'st  contemplate  crossing  swords 
and  measuring  strong  arms  with  the  Almighty  God.  If  he  had  taken  this  view  of 
the  case  he  might  have  paused  a  while  to  consider.  So  it  usually  is  with  sinners. 
Unbelief  in  God  conduces  to  launch  them  upon  this  terrible  conflict.  Once  com- 
mitted, they  become  more  hardened  ;  one  sin  leads  on  to  more  sinning  till  sin  be- 
comes incurable — shall  we  say  it  ? — an  uncontrollable  madness.  (H.  Coicles,  D.D.) 
"  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  " — This  is — 1.  The  language  of  independence.  "  Who  is  the 
Lord?"  I  am  the  lord  of  Egypt,  &c.  2.  Of  decided  opposition  ;  a  setting  up  of 
his  will  against  that  of  Jehovah  ;  "  Who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should  obey  Him  ?  " 
3.  Of  contemptuous  rejection  of  Divine  authority.  He  says,  "  Let  My  people  go  "  ; 
but  I  say,  I  will  not.  4.  Of  insolent  defiance,  braving  all  terrors.  Are  we  not 
struck  vrith  horror  at  the  impiety  of  Pharaoh's  answer  to  the  message  of  Jehovah  ? 
But  what,  if  in  this  congregation,  there  be  a  man  or  woman  in  whose  heart  the 
same  priuuiple  of  rebellion  reigns  !  1.  I  address  myself  first  to  the  j^oung — "  My 
son,  give  Me  tbine  heart."  Now  what  is  the  answer  of  many  ?  is  your  heart  either 
divided,  or  altogether  devoted  to  worldly  pursuits  and  gratifications?  if  so  then  the 
principle,  if  not  the  words  of  Pharaoh  is  yours.  2.  I  would  address  those  who  are 
more  advanced  in  life.  Ye  men  of  business,  I  have  a  message  to  you.  Let  me  ask 
you  if,  on  account  of  worldly  gain,  you  do  not  sometimes  violate  your  conscience  ? 
Then  is  not  your  language,  "Who  is  the  Lord"?  I  must  mmd  my  business 
first,  I  know  not  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  let  my  gains  go.  {George  Breay,  B.A.) 
Pharaoh's  ignorance  self-imposed  : — We  may  think  that  this  would  be  of  course  the 
language  of  a  heathen  king,  of  one  who  was  not  in  the  covenant.  The  Scripture 
does  not  teach  us  so.  We  are  told  that  the  Lord  spoke  to  Laban  and  to  Abimelech, 
and  that  they  understood  His  voice.    When  Joseph  told  Pharaoh  who  was  reigning 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  119 

in  his  day,  that  the  Lord  had  sent  him  his  dream,  and  had  interpreted  it,  he  believed 
the  message  and  acted  accordingly.  It  is  never  assumed  in  any  part  of  Scripture 
that  God  is  not  declaring  Himself  to  heathens,  or  that  heathens  may  not  own  Him. 
We  shall  find  precisely  the  opposite  doctrine  in  the  Old  Testament  as  in  the  New. 
When  then  this  Pharaoh  said,  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  His  voice?  " 
we  are  to  understand  that  he  had  brought  himself  into  a  condition  of  ignorance  and 
darkness,  \vhich  did  not  belong  to  him  in  consequence  of  his  position,  or  of  any 
natural  disadvantages.  He  had  come  to  regard  himself  as  the  Lord,  his  will  as  the 
will  which  all  things  were  to  obey ;  therefore  he  said  inevitably,  "  Who  is  the  Lord  ?  ' 
He  had  lost  the  sense  of  a  righteous  government  and  order  in  the  world  ;  he  had  come 
to  believe  in  tricks  and  lies  ;  he  had  come  to  think  men  were  the  mere  creatures 
and  slaves  of  natural  agencies.  Had  God  no  voice  for  such  a  man,  or  for  the  priests 
and  the  people  whom  he  represented,  and  whose  feelings  were  the  counterparts  of 
his  ?     We  shall  find  that  He  had.     (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 

Ver.  3.  Let  us  go,  we  pray  thee,  three  days'  journey. — Lessons : — 1.  God's  am- 
bassadors must  not  forsake  His  message,  upon  man's  denial.  2.  Further  arguments 
must  press  God's  message,  when  the  proposal  is  not  enough.  3.  The  God  of  the 
Hebrews  must  be  owned  by  them,  though  despised  by  Pharaoh.  4.  Eelation  unto 
God,  and  call  from  Him  necessitates  souls  to  follow  His  commands.  5.  Although 
God  command  powers,  yet  it  beseemeth  His  people  to  enti'eat  them.  6.  To  go  at 
God's  call,  and  serve  Him  only  after  His  will  must  be  insisted  on  by  His.  7.  Small 
desires  of  the  Church  for  God,  leave  powers  on  earth  inexcusable  in  denying.  8. 
To  sacrifice  to  God  and  to  feast  with  Him  are  synonymous.  9.  Entreaties  from 
powers  to  serve  God  for  averting  His  judgments  is  reasonable.  10.  Pestilence  and 
sword  are  God's  judgments  exacting  the  neglect  of  His  service.  11.  These  plagues 
are  incident  on  all  that  neglect  God,  but  much  more  on  them  that  forbid  others  to 
serve  Him.  12.  The  fear  of  these  judgments  should  awe  souls  from  slighting  His 
message  to  them.  (G.  Hughes, B.D.)  It  is  right  to  recognize  the  danger  of  disobedience 
to  God : — "  Let  us  go  .  .  .  lest  He  fall  upon  us  with  pestilence,  or  with  the  sword." 
It  is  right  to  have  in  mind  the  fact  that  God  will  punish  us  if  we  refuse  to  do  as  He 
tells  us  to.  It  may  answer  for  other  people  to  talk  about  needing  no  other  motive 
to  well  doing  than  love ;  but  you  and  I  are  not  always  influenced  by  love  alone.  If 
we  knew  to-day  that  we  could  do  wrong  with  entire  impunity — do  a  little  wrong,  I 
mean,  a  pet  wrong,  a  wrong  that  no  one  would  know  anything  about,  and  that 
wouldn't  seem  to  harm  anybody  very  much  any  way — could  do  it  without  any 
suffering  or  any  punishment ;  do  you  think  we  shoufd  be  just  as  strong  for  the 
right  as  now,  while  we  know  that  the  disclosure  and  the  puuishment  of  sin  is  sure? 
Well,  even  if  you  and  I  think  so,  God  doesn't  take  that  view  of  it.  God  threatens 
as  well  as  entreats.  He  holds  up  the  danger  of  punishment  for  sin,  as  well  as  the 
rewards  of  loving  and  serving  Him  trustfully ;  and  God  doesn't  make  any  mistake 
in  so  doing.     (S.  S.  Times.) 

Ver.  4.  Get  you  unto  your  burdens. — Wrong  judgment : — Good  men  are  often 
wrongly  judged: — 1.  In  respect  to  their  motives.  2.  Actions.  3.  Writings.  {J.S.ExeU, 
M.A.)  The  claims  of  religion : — You  will  observe  that  God  gave  a  command,  and 
Pharaoh  refused  either  to  obey  the  command,  or  to  pay  anything  like  respect  unto  it. 
I.  Let  us  consider  what  it  is  that  God  requiees.  In  the  case  of  Israel  we  see  that 
He  requires  what  I  may  sum  up  in  three  particulars.  1.  He  requires  that  they 
should  acknowledge  Him  publicly  as  their  God ;  that  is  the  first  principle.  "  Let 
My  people  go,  that  they  may  hold,"  &c.  2.  He  requires  of  Israel  that  there  should 
be  a  marked  acceptance  of  His  way  of  reconciliation.  "  Let  us  go  and  sacrifice 
unto  the  Lord  our  God."  From  the  very  first  when  man  sinned,  there  was  God's 
revealed  way  by  which  the  sinner  must  come  near  to  Him ;  and,  therefore,  the 
feast  that  was  to  be  held  unto  Jehovah,  was  a  feast  that  was  to  be  founded  upon 
sacrifice.  3.  God  requires  that  everything  else  should  give  way  and  yield  to  the 
discharge  of  these  required  duties.  They  were  to  go  at  once  to  Pharaoh,  and  ask 
his  permission  to  go  and  obey  God's  commands,  and  to  sacrifice  unto  Him  as  their 
Lord.  They  were  not  to  be  withheld  from  doing  this  by  their  knowledge  of 
Pharaoh's  tyrannical  disposition.  They  were  not  to  be  withheld  by  the  remem- 
brance of  their  worldly  duties,  or  of  the  hardships  and  the  toils  connected  with 
these  duties.  Now  is  there  anything  peculiar  to  Israel  and  to  God's  requirements 
of  Israel  in  all  this?  Do  we  not  see,  underlying  this  narrative,  a  principle  which 
is  universally  applicable  to  all  those  to  whom  God's  message  comes  ?    What  doth 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  7, 

the  Lord  require  of  us,  to  whom  the  word  of  this  salvation  is  sent?  Does  He  not 
demand  of  us  acknowledgment,  acceptance  of  His  salvation,  and  immediate  de- 
cision ?      II.  But  now  WHAT  DOES  MAN  THINK  OF  THE  KEQDIKEMENTS  OF  Goi> '?      Let  U3 

answer  this  question  by  referring  to  the  case  of  Pharaoh.  Pharaoh  said,  "  Ye  be 
idle ;  therefore  ye  say,  let  us  go  and  do  sacrifice  to  the  Lord.  Therefore  now  go 
and  work."  And  tht-n  again,  "Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  His  voice  to 
let  Israel  go?  I  know  not  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  let  Israel  go."  And  again, 
"  Let  more  work  be  laid  upon  the  men,  that  they  may  labour  therein,  and  let  them 
not  regard  vain  words."  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  language  ?  May  I  not  render 
it  truly,  but  simply,  when  I  say  that  in  Pharaoh's  mind  there  was  an  opinion  that 
there  was  no  need  of  so  much  religion  ?  "  Let  them  go  and  work  "  ;  there  was  no 
need  of  going  to  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  their  God.  And  then  when  he  heard  God's 
threateniugs  to  those  who  neglected  His  commands,  how  did  Pharaoh  feel  then? 
He  maintains  that  there  is  no  danger  in  neglecting  the  supposed  commands  of  God 
in  this  matter.  He  thinks  them  vain  words,  all  about  God's  threatenings  to  those 
who  do  not  acknowledge  Him,  and  who  do  not  accept  His  terms  of  reconciliation. 
"  All  these  are  vain  words,  pay  no  attention  to  them,  go  and  work."  That  was 
Pharaoh's  way  of  thinking.  And  then,  further,  he  thought  that  there  was  no 
sincerity  in  those  who  professed  to  want  to  worship  God.  "  Ye  are  idle ;  therefore 
ye  cry,  Let  us  go  and  sacrifice.  Y'^ou  do  not  mean  to  go  and  sacrifice ;  you  do  not 
want  to  go  and  sacrifice ;  it  is  your  idleness,  your  hypocrisy."  So  that  you  will 
observe  Pharaoh  thought  thus  of  God's  requirements ;  first,  that  there  was  no  need 
of  them  ;  secondly,  that  there  was  no  danger  in  neglecting  them  ;  and  thirdly,  that 
those  who  professed  did  not  intend  to  worship,  they  did  not  mean  what  they  said. 
Now  is  Pharaoh  at  all  singular  in  the  ideas  which  are  thus  attributed  to  him?  Is 
it  not  still  the  case  that  an  unconverted  man  acts  in  the  same  way  as  Pharaoh 
acted?  And  then  when  Pharaoh  is  reminded  of  the  awful  language  in  which  God 
speaks  to  those  who  neglect  His  requirements,  and  His  judgments  against  those 
who  know  not  the  Lord,  and  who  obey  not  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
what  does  Pharaoh,  and  what  do  unconverted  men  now  say,  but  that  in  their 
opinion  all  these  are  vain  words  ?  Pharaoh  thought  they  were  vain  words  ;  and  so 
do  men  now.  (IF.  Cadman,  M.A.)  Egyptian  bondage  in  the  metropolis : — I.  Now, 
dark  as  this  picture  is,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  it  is  faithfully  bepeodcced  ai 
THE  PRESENT  TIME.  You  may  sec  the  same  thing  any  day  in  this  metropolis.  The 
bondsmen,  whose  lives  are  now  made  bitter  with  hard  bondage,  are  the  artizans 
who  make  the  garments  you  now  have  on  ;  the  men,  the  women,  the  children,  who 
minister  to  your  fashions  and  your  luxuries ;  the  shopmen  and  shopwomen  who 
wait  on  your  convenience,  the  industrial  classes  in  general,  by  whose  toil  this 
country  is  rich  and  luxurious,  who  are  forced  to  spend  the  marrow  of  their  strength, 
and  make  their  lives  short  and  bitter,  in  providing  superfluities  for  others.  The 
Pharaoh  at  whose  bidding  all  this  is  done  is  the  spirit  of  commerce,  that  lust  of 
filthy  lucre,  that  morbid  and  unbridled  zeal  of  competition,  which  reigns  supreme 
over  so  large  a  portion  of  the  world  of  business.      II.  Let  us  therefore  inquire 

WHETHER  ANY  REMEDY    CAN    BE    APPLIED   TO   THESE    GREAT   AND    SORE    EVILS  ?       Can    We 

individually  or  collectively  do  anything  towards  delivering  our  brethren  from  these 
oppressions  and  wrongs  ?  Now,  it  appears  to  me  that  there  is  but  one  perfect  and 
thorough  remedy,  and  that  is  the  dethronement  of  the  Pharaoh  who  tyrannizes  so 
cruelly  over  his  subjects ;  I  mean  the  overthrow  of  that  vicious  commercial  spirit 
which  has  enslaved  the  great  mass  of  the  public.  If  this  were  done,  if  every  one 
traded  in  a  fair  and  legitimate  manner,  if  every  one  dealt  by  others  as  he  would 
wish  to  be  dealt  by  himself,  if  no  one  entered  into  the  arena  of  dishonest  and 
ruinous  competition,  if  every  employer  were  as  determined  to  give  fair  wages  to  his 
workpeople,  as  to  secure  a  fair  profit  to  himself ;  if  these  principles  were  universal, 
then  oppressions  would  cease  in  our  midst,  and  our  courts  and  alleys  would  be  the 
abodes  of  happiness.  But  this  is  not  to  be  yet.  The  evil  and  the  good  will  be 
mingled  together  until  the  harvest,  which  is  the  end  of  the  world.  We  can  only 
hope  at  present  for  improvements  and  palliatives.  Now — 1.  With  respect  to  shop- 
keepers, much  evil  might  be  remedied  if  all  the  members  of  each  several  trade 
would  meet  together  and  bind  themselves  by  a  mutual  covenant  not  to  keep  their 
shops  open  beyond  a  certain  reasonable  hour.  2.  To  shop-assistants  and  operatives, 
I  would  suggest  that  the  members  of  each  trade  or  establishment  might  with  great 
propriety  express  their  opinions  on  the  subject  in  a  manly  and  temperate  spirit  to 
their  employers.  3.  And  now  to  the  large  class  of  persons  who  are  ordinary  pur- 
chasers—the public  in  general— I  would  say,  it  is  in  supplying  your  wants  or  eon- 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  121 

veniences,  that  all  this  competition,  and  oppression,  and  cruelty  is  engendered. 
Much  good  might  be  effected  by  a  determination  on  the  part  of  purchasers  never  tt) 
buy  after  a  certain  reasonable  hour.     III.  The  eestricting  of  the  hours  of  labouk 

WITHIN  JUST  AND  REASONABLE  LIMITS  WOULD  BE  THE  CAUSE  OF  IMMENSE  BENEFIT  NOT  ONLY 

TO  THE  LABOURING  MAN,  BUT  TO  ALL  CLASSES.  I  believG  that  the  employers  would  be 
gainers  even  in  a  money  point  of  view  by  the  improvements  now  advocated.  The 
men  would  work  with  more  spirit  and  energy,  because  they  would  feel  that  they 
were  men,  because  they  would  be  in  a  much  higher  physical  condition  than  when 
they  were  overtasked ;  they  would  labour  with  more  cheerfulness  and  good  will ;  the 
work  would  be  done  more  skilfully,  because  with  more  sustained  attention.  There 
would  be  less  drunkenness  amongst  the  men,  because  in  the  intervals  of  labour  they 
would  feel  less  exhausted  and  have  less  craving  for  stimulus.  Then,  again,  the 
public  would  be  gainers.  They  would  be  better  served ;  articles  of  commerce  would 
not  be  cheaper  possibly,  but  they  would  be  better  in  quality,  and  therefore  really 
cheaper  in  the  end.  Moreover,  the  country  would  be  a  gainer,  by  having  a  strong, 
energetic,  and  numerous  race  of  labouring  men,  in  the  stead  of  the  present  pale, 
jaded,  and  dyspeptic  race.  Lastly,  the  Church  of  Christ  would  gain  many  members. 
There  is  scarcely  any  greater  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  religion  amongst  our 
industrial  classes  than  this  Egyptian  system  of  overtasking  the  strength.  How  can 
that  man  give  due  attention  to  his  religious  duties  on  Sunday  who  is  exhausted 
and  prostrate  by  a  week  of  excessive  toil?  {J.  Tagg,  M.A.)  Folly  of  unwise 
exaction: — The  llama,  or  guanaco  {Auchenia  llama),  is  found  among  the  recesses 
of  the  Andes.  In  the  silver  mines  his  utility  is  very  great,  as  he  frequently  carries 
the  metal  from  the  mines  in  places  where  the  declivities  are  so  steep  that  neither 
asses  nor  mules  can  keep  their  footing.  The  burden  carried  by  this  useful  animal, 
the  camel  of  the  New  World,  should  not  exceed  from  one  hundred  to  one  hundred 
and  twenty-five  pounds.  If  the  load  be  too  heavy  he  lies  down,  and  no  force  or 
persuasion  will  indtice  him  to  resume  his  journey  until  the  excess  be  removed. 
Thus  he  teaches  us  the  unwisdom  of  endeavouring  to  exact  too  much  from  those 
who  are  wilhng  to  serve  us  well.  (Scientific  Illustrations.)  Pharaoh's  com- 
plaint : — That  complaint  has  been  made  by  a  good  many  interested  employers  since 
the  days  of  Pharaoh.  "  How  these  evangelists  do  hinder  trade"  !  "  What  a  clog 
on  business  this  revival  is ! "  "  How  much  money  these  missionary  causes  do 
divert  from  the  shopkeepers !  "  "  This  Sunday-go-to-meeting  notion  takes  the 
profits  off  of  the  menagerie ;  or  of  the  agricultural  fair  1 "  "  These  thanksgivings 
and  fast-days  interfere  wretchedly  with  steady  work  1  "  "  Why  can't  things  go  on 
regular,  week  in  and  week  out,  without  any  bother  about  religion?  "  This  is  the 
way  the  Pharaoh  class  looks  at  attention  to  God's  service.  But  is  it  the  right  way  ? 
{S.  S.  Times.) 

Vers.  7-12.  Ye  shall  no  more  give  the  people  straw. — Requiring  the  impossible  .-— 
I.  That  there  are  some  people  in  society  who  strive  to  make  those  under  them 
DO  the  impossible.  Pharaoh  tried  to  make  the  Israelites  do  the  impossible,  when 
be  commanded  them  to  make  bricks  without  providing  them  with  straw.  This 
demand  of  tyranny  is  heard  to-day,  in  our  large  factories,  and  amongst  our  agricul- 
tural population.  1.  All  require  men  to  do  the  impossible  who  wish  them  to  work 
beyond  their  capabilities.  (1)  Physical  strength.  (2)  Intellectual  ability.  (3) 
Moral  energy.  2.  All  require  men  to  do  the  impossible  who  wish  them  to  work 
beyond  their  opportunity.  Every  man  must  have  time,  and  a  proper  time  to  do  his 
work.  He  must  not  be  expected  to  do  two  things  at  once.  3.  Contemplate  the 
method  employed  to  get  men  to  do  the  impossible.  These  methods  are  various. 
Some  will  condescend  to  flattery  and  cant  to  get  men  to  do  that  for  which  they  are 
wholly  unadapted.  Others  will  use  force  and  persecution.  (1)  They  set  task- 
masters over  us.  To  watch  our  conduct.  To  inspect  our  work.  To  augment  our 
burden.  To  darken  our  sorrow.  (2)  They  abuse  us.  Thty  say  we  are  idle,  and 
that  even  after  we  have  made  the  best  attempt  within  our  power  to  fall  in  with 
their  unjust  demands.  (3)  They  mock  our  religious  sentiment.  "  Therefore,  ye 
eay,  let  us  go  and  do  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord."  They  impeach  our  religious  motives. 
These,  then,  are  the  ways  and  methods  in  which  we  are  treated,  when  tyrants  en- 
deavour to  compel  us  to  do  the  impossible.  (4)  Some  people  will  attempt  to 
accomphsh  the  impossible.  It  wiU  involve  you  in  utter  failure  and  distress  at  last, 
when  you  will  get  no  sympathy  from  those  who  urged  you  to  it.  II.  That  the 
people  who  strive  to  make  those  under  them  do  the  impossible  abb  throwing 
SOCIETY  into  an  ATTITUDE  OF  PAIN  AND  COMPLAINT.    "  Theu  the  officers  of  the  CbiU- 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

dren  of  Israel  came  and  cried  unto  Pharaoh,  saying,  wherefore  dealest  thou  thus 
with  thy  servants."  1.  The  requirement  of  the  impossible  tends  to  tljrow  society 
into  an  attitude  of  pain.  National  happiness  is  to  a  very  large  extent  the  outcome 
of  a  free  and  sympathetic  employment  of  the  working  classes.  2.  The  requirement 
of  the  impossible  tends  to  throw  society  into  an  attitude  of  complaint.    III.  That 

THE  PEOPLE  WHO  STKIVE  TO  MAKE  THOSE  UNDER  THEM  DO  THE  IMPOSSIBLE,  AND  WHO 
THKOW  SOCIETY  INTO  AN  ATTITUDE  OF  PAIN  ARE  BUT  LITTLE  AFFECTED  BY  THE  WOE  THEY 
OCCASION,  AND  GENERALLY  RESENT  ANY  MENTION  OF  IT  TO    THEM.       "  Go    therefore    nOW, 

and  work ;  for  there  shall  no  straw  be  given  you,  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  tf 
bricks."  1.  Notwithstanding  the  outcry  of  the  oppressed,  the  tyrant  demands 
renewed  work.  "Go  therefore  now,  and  work."  2.  Notwithstanding  the  out- 
cry of  the  oppressed,  the  tyrant  adheres  to  his  cruel  measures.  "  There  shall 
no  straw  be  given  you."  3.  Notwithstanding  the  outcry  of  the  oppressed, 
the  tyrant  mocks  their  woe,  and  treats  them  with  contempt.  Lessons :  1. 
Never  require  the  impossible.  2.  Never  attempt  the  impossible.  3.  Adapt 
methods  to  ends.  4.  Cultivate  kindly  dispositions  toward  your  employers.  (J. 
S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Lacking  the  essential: — Writing  on  the  treatment  of  his 
brother.  General  A.  S.  Johnston,  Mr.  W.  P.  Johnston  says:  "His  command  was 
imperial  in  extent,  and  his  powers  and  discretion  as  large  as  the  theory  of  the 
Confederate  Government  permitted.  He  lacked  nothing  except  men,  munitions  of 
war,  and  the  means  of  obtaining  them !  He  had  the  right  to  ask  for  anything,  and 
the  State  executives  had  the  power  to  withhold  everything."  (H.  O.  Mackey.) 
Strawless  bricks  : — I.  An  illustration  of  the  painful  aggravations  of  the  lot  of 

THE  toilers  of  EVERY  AGE.  II.  An  ILLUSTRATION  OF  THE  UNSATISFACTORY  EFFORTS 
OF  MEN  SEEKING  FOE  HAPPINESS  APART  FROM  RELIGION.  HI.  An  ILLUSTKATION  OF  THE 
POWERLESSNESS  OF  ALL  RELIGIOUS   SYSTEMS    NOT   POSSESSED    OF  A   LIVING    ChRIST.      IV. 

An  illustration  of  futile  endeavours  to  attain  Christian  peace  without  exer- 
cising LIVING  FAITH.  (F.  Hastings.)  The  world  and  Satan  opposed  to  the  Chris- 
tianas spiritual  j^rogress : — "  If  thou  come  to  serve  the  Lord,"  saith  the  wisdom  of 
the  Son  of  Sirach,  "  prepare  thy  soul  for  temptation."  Have  you  listened  to 
the  gracious  pleading  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  sincere  anxioty  for  a  complete 
and  eternal  deliverance  ?  You  will  meet  with  hmdrances,  one  of  the  first  will 
arise  from  those  who  make  a  mock  at  sin,  who  deride  the  privileges  and  duties 
of  pure  and  undefiled  religion.  I.  The  prejudices  of  the  careless  and  worldly 
AGAINST  sincere  AND  VITAL  GODLINESS.  1.  It  is  regarded  as  tbe  dream  and  vision 
of  a  heated  and  enthusiastic  imagination.  2.  It  is  regarded  as  inconsistent 
with  a  proper  attention  to  the  duties  of  active  life.  II.  Another  temptation 
which  Satan  employs  to  oppose  an  entire  devotion  of  the  heart  to  God,  is 
BY  EXAGGERATING  THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  WORLDLY  PURSUITS.  "  Let  there  be  more 
work  laid  upon  the  men."  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  shall  gain  tbe 
whole  world,  if  he  shall  lose  his  own  soul?  A  double  caution  may  be  deduced  :  1. 
To  those  who  would  hinder  the  spiritual  freedom  of  others  whom  they  may  control 
or  influence  ;  as  Pharaoh  would  have  impeded  tbe  political  deliverance  of  Israel. 
Tou  may  settle  from  Scripture  and  prayer  whether  the  resolutions  and  desires  you 
oppose  arise  from  the  inspiration  of  God,  or  the  imagination  of  men.  Woe  to  him 
that  striveth  with  his  Maker.  2.  You  who  are  thus  hindered,  remember  that  Scripture 
addresses  you  with  a  cautionary  voice  Be  not  slothful  in  business.  {J.  R.  Buddi- 
com. )  The  burdens  increased : — Note  that — I.  Benefactors  jiay  expect  misrepre- 
sentation. Moses  was  censured ;  Christ  rejected  by  His  own.  The  enemy  will 
slander.  Our  hope  is  in  working  only  for  God.  II.  Sin  asks  to  be  let  alone. 
Pharaoh  blamed  Moses  ;  Ahab  blamed  EUjah ;  the  Jews  blamed  the  disciples.  III. 
Sin  BECOMES  more  terrible  vnin  age.  Pharaoh  gi-ew  more  exacting,  and  the 
people  weaker ;  he  answers  prayers  with  falsehoods  and  insults.  Sin  toys  with 
youth,  but  scourges  manhood.  IV.  All  appeal  must  be  made  to  God.  Mosea 
turned  to  God ;  he  did  not  censure  the  elders.  V.  It  is  darkest  just  before  day. 
Sin  grows  worse  till  it  breaks  down.  It  threatens  in  order  to  drown  conscience. 
(Dr.  Fowler.)  Sin  more  tyrannical  when  men  would  escape  from  it: — When 

Moses  demanded  from  Pharaoh  the  liberation  of  the  Hebrews,  the  tyrant  increased 
their  burdens ;  and  in  like  manner,  when  the  soul  rises  to  expel  evil  from  its 
domain,  it  then  for  the  first  time  discovers  the  full  bitterness  of  its  bondage.  Its 
earUest  impulse  thereon  is  to  blame  the  truth  which  awakened  it  to  a  sense  of  its 
degradation,  for  causing  the  misery  which  it  only  revealed.  The  preacher 
is  accounted  cruel  when  he  has  been  only  faithful ;  and  his  hearer  accuses  him 
oi  personal  mahce  when  he  has  been  only  holding  up  a  mirror  wherein  the 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  123 

angry  one  caught  a  glimpse  of  himself.  But  all  these  are  hopeful  signs.  They 
are,  indeed,  when  rightly  regarded  and  fostered,  the  prophecies  of  a  commg  conver- 
sion. The  docile  slave,  who  is  contented  with  his  condition,  is  petted  and  made 
much  of  by  his  master ;  but  if  he  tries  to  run  away,  he  is  immediately  put  into 
fetters.  So,  when  we  are  roused  to  battle  with  sin,  it  is  then  that,  most  of  all,  we 
feel  its  power.  Satan  does  his  worst  on  the  soul  just  as  he  is  about  to  be  expelled 
from  its  possession.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Means  necessary  to  work  : — I.  That 
MAN  CANNOT  ACCOMPLISH  woKK  WITHOUT  MEANS.  A  man  canuot  Write  a  book  without 
intellect,  or  build  a  church  without  money,  or  save  souls  without  intimate  com- 
munion with  God.     Folly  to  make  the  attempt.     II.  That  one  man  has  often  the 

POWER  to  IXTEBCEPT  THE  MEANS  BY  WHICH  ANOTHER  MAN  WORKS.       III.  ThaT  WHEN  MEN 

abe  bobbed  of  their  means  of  work,  they  abe  thbown  into  gbeat  straits.  iv. 
Any  man  who  intercepts  the  work  op  another  takes  a  feabful  besponsibility 
UPON  himself.  (•/.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  Church  cast  upon  her  own  resources  : — • 
I.  That  the  Chuech  is  often  cast  upon  her  own  besodbces.  Times  of  dark  de- 
pression. II.  That  when  human  aid  is  thus  withdbawn,  men  expect  from  the 
Chubch  the  same  ajiount  of  work  that  she  accomplished  before.  III.  TUXT 
WHEN  the  Chuech  does  not  accomplish  hee  woek  as  fully  and  speedily  under 
these  difficult  circumstances,  she  is  persecuted  and  slandered  by  the  world. 
{Ibid.)  The  discipline  of  failure  : — The  intervention  of  Moses  in  behalf  of  his  people 
was  not,  at  first,  attended  with  happy  results.  The  people  themselves  were  abject 
and  spiritless,  and  Pharaoh  was  stubborn  and  unyielding.  The  condition  of  the 
Hebrews  gi-ew  worse  instead  of  better.  And  yet,  it  was  but  passing  through  a  stage 
as  helpful  to  its  ultimate  success  as  any  other.  Great  enterprises  are  wont  to  en- 
counter such  checks  in  their  initial  stages.  The  worm  that  is  to  be  a  butterfly 
must  go  into  the  condition  of  a  chrysalis,  and  lie  motionless,  and  seemingly  dead. 
The  seed  that  is  to  be  a  plant  must  "  fall  into  the  ground  and  die."  Men  want  the 
rapid,  the  grand,  and  noticeable ;  and  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven  cometh  not  with 
observation."  Men  desire  deliverance,  but  they  do  not  Uke  the  process  of  deliver- 
ance. Yet  such  checks  are  tests  of  character,  trials  of  men's  faith  and  earnestness. 
Moses  did  not  despair  of  a  cause  because  it  had  met  with  a  reverse.  He  believed 
that  the  cause  was  God  s.  He  believed  in  himself  as  God's  instrument  to  make  it 
victorious.  Now  I  have  said  that  this  sort  of  discipline  is  common ;  and  doubtless 
it  is  needful  and  salutary.  A  defeat  at  the  outset,  duly  used,  is  the  security  of  an 
augmented  success.  Yet,  at  no  age  is  the  trial  that  is  ever  repeating  itself,  though 
it  be  with  diminished  force,  an  unprofitable  subject  of  contemplation — the  trial  of 
an  over-sanguine  expectation  followed  by  painful  and  disheartening  failure.  Such 
an  one,  starting  with  a  full,  strong  confidence  in  his  own  sincerity  and  earnestness, 
looks  for  large  and  speedy  results.  "  The  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  house, 
and  his  goods  are  in  safety."  He  looks  at  him  over  the  ramparts  with  placid  con- 
tempt. And  now  comes  the  hour  of  despondency.  His  ministry  is  a  failure.  He 
is  nothing ;  he  can  do  nothing.  Men  will  not  heed  his  message.  "The  trial  of 
your  faith  is  more  precious  than  of  gold  that  perisheth."  Try  it  again.  "  Thou 
shalt  see  greater  things  than  these."  "  God  will  help  thee,  and  that  right  early." 
"  And  thou  shalt  come  again  with  joy,  and  bring  thy  sheaves  with  thee."  {R.  A. 
Hallam,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Wherefore  dealest  thou  thus. — Lessons: — 1.  Oppressed  souls  cannot 
but  complain  of  cruel  and  unjust  smitings ;  blows  make  cries.  2.  Addresses  for 
relief  are  fittest  from  the  afdicted  to  the  highest  power  oppressing.  3.  Access  and 
cries  and  sad  speeches  are  forced  from  oppressed  to  oppressors.  4.  The  execution 
by  instruments  is  justly  charged  upon  their  lords.  5.  True  servants  may  justly 
expostulate  about  hard  deahngs  from  their  rulers.  6.  Unreasonable  exactions  will 
force  afflicted  ones  to  expostulate  with  powers  oppressing  them  (ver.  15).  7.  To 
give  no  straw  and  to  command  bricks  is  a  most  unreasonable  exaction.  8.  To 
punish  innocent  servants  when  others  sin  is  a  most  unjust  oppression.  9.  Such 
sad  dealings  make  God's  servants  sometimes  to  complain  to  earthly  powers  (ver. 
16).     {G.  Hughes, B.D.)      Beasons  required  for  moral  conduct: — I.  There  are  times 

WHEN  MEN  ARE  REQUIRED  TO  GIVE  REASONS  FOR  THEIR  METHOD  OF  MORAL  CONDUCT.    Public 

opinion  often  calls  a  man  to  its  tribunal.  Sometimes  men  are  the  questioners. 
Sometimes  God  is  the  Questioner.  II.  It  is  highly  important  that  every  man 
bhould  be  able  to  allege  heavenly  principles  and  motives  as  the  basis  of  his  con- 
duct. Love  to  God  and  man  is  the  only  true  and  loyal  principle  and  motive  of  human 
action,  and  only  will  sustain  the  scrutiny  of  infinite  rectitude.     HI.  Thai  a  man 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

WHO  CAN  ALLEGE  HEAVENLY  PRINCIPLES  AS  THE  BASIS  OF  HIS  CONDUCT  WILL  BE  SAFE  AT  ANY 

TRIBUNAL  TO  WHICH  HE  MAY  BE  CALLED.  1.  He  wiU  be  Safe  at  the  tribunal  of  his  own 
conscience.  2.  He  will  be  safe  at  the  tribunal  of  God's  Book.  3.  He  will  be  safe 
at  the  tribunal  of  public  opinion.  4.  He  will  be  safe  at  the  final  tribunal  of  the 
universe.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  expostulations  of  the  slave : — I.  They  expos- 
tulate THAT  THE  MEANS  NECESSARY  TO  THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  THEIR  DAILY  WORK  WERE 

WITHHELD.  "  There  is  no  straw  given  to  thy  servants."  11.  They  expostulate  that 
THEY  WERE  BRUTALLY  TREATED.    "  Thy  scrvauts  are  beaten."    lU.  They  expostulate 

that  they  WERE  NOT  MORALLY  CULPABLE  IN  THEIR  NEGLECT  OF  WORK.      ' '  The  fault  is  iu 

thine  own  peo)3le."  {Ibid.)  The  tyrant: — 1.  Unreasonable  in  his  demands.  2. 
Cruel  in  his  resentment.     3.  Mistaken  in  his  judgment  of  guilt.     (Ihid.)  The 

true  object  of  blame : — Gotthold  had  a  little  dog,  which,  when  placed  before  a 
mirror,  became  instantly  enraged,  and  barked  at  its  own  image.  He  remarked  on 
the  occasion :  In  general,  a  mirror  serves  as  an  excitement  to  self-love,  whereas 
it  stimulates  this  dog  to  anger  against  itself.  The  animal  cannot  conceive  that  the 
figure  it  sees  is  only  its  own  reSection,  but  fancies  that  it  is  a  strange  dog,  and 
therefore  will  not  suffer  it  to  approach  its  master.  This  may  remind  us  of  an 
infirmity  of  our  depraved  hearts.  We  often  complain  of  others,  and  take  offence 
at  the  things  they  do  against  us,  without  reflecting  that,  for  the  most  part,  the 
blame  lies  with  ourselves. 


Vers.  20,  21.  Ye  have  made  our  Bavour  to  toe  abhorred. — Lessons : — 1.  Sense 
of  evil  from  tyrants  may  make  the  oppressed  fall  foul  with  their  best  friends.  2. 
Providence  orders  His  servants  sometimes  to  meet  with  friends  after  sad  usage  by 
oppressors.  3.  Ministers  of  salvation  wait  to  meet  God's  afflicted,  whan  they  looked 
not  after  them.  4.  Instruments  of  deliverance  may  desire  a  good  egress  of  the 
oppressed  from  tyrants,  and  not  find  it  (ver.  20).  5.  Sense  overcharged  with 
oppression  may  make  men  reproach  God  and  curse  His  ministers.  6.  Unbelieving 
souls  are  ready  to  set  God  against  His  own  word,  and  instruments  sent  by  Him. 
7.  Hasty  unbelievers  under  cross  providences  are  ready  to  charge  the  cause  upon 
God's  ministers.  8.  It  is  the  lot  of  God's  instruments  6f  Ufe,  to  be  charged  to  be 
causes  of  death,  by  foolish  souls.  9.  Such  unreasonable  charges  are  recorded  to 
the  shame  of  such  brutish  creatures  (ver.  21).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Ministers 
blamed : — There  was  no  other  to  lay  the  blame  upon  ;  and  so  they  charge  their 
trouble  upon  Moses  and  Aaron.  "  If  you  had  not  come  we  should  have 
plodded  along  in  our  bondage,  bearing  it  as  best  we  could  ;  but  you  came  and 
raised  our  hopes,  not  only  to  dash  them  down,  but  to  make  our  already  hard  lot 
more  bitter  and  unbearable."  They  were  angi-y,  apparently  not  with  Pharaoh,  but 
with  God's  ministers.  I  have  heard  it  said,  that  most  sinners  who  have  been 
aroused  out  of  the  sleep  and  death  of  sin  "  wake  up  mad."  Indeed,  I  am  quite  sure 
that  this  is  often  the  case.  I  remember  the  case  of  a  man  who  came  to  me  at  one 
of  our  meetings  in  America.  He  was  in  the  greatest  distress  of  mind,  fairly  frantic 
with  the  conviction  of  sin,  and  with  the  terror  of  conscience  working  mightily  under 
the  law.  At  the  same  time  he  was  bitterly  angry  with  Mr.  Moody,  who  had  pre- 
ceded me  in  those  meetings,  and  also  with  me.     With  a  terrible  oath  he  said  :   "  I 

wish  to  God  you  and  Moody  had  never  come  to  this  city,  and  begun  these 

Gospel  meetings.  Before  you  came  and  began  to  preach  I  had  no  trouble.  I  used 
to  go.to  church  regularly  on  Sunday  morning  ;  but  I  was  not  troubled  about  my  sins. 
What  a  fool  I  was  ever  to  come  into  this  rink !  I  have  had  no  peace  day  or  night 
since  I  first  heard  Moody  preach.  And  you  have  been  making  it  worse.  Tou  talk 
of  peace  and  joy ;  but  you  have  turned  my  soul  into  a  perfect  hell.  I  cannot  stay 
away  from  the  meetings  ;  and  to  come  to  them  only  makes  me  worse.  You  promise 
salvation ;  and  I  only  find  torment.  I  wish  to  God  you  would  clear  out  and  leave 
the  city  ;  and  then  perhaps  I  could  get  back  my  old  peace.  If  this  is  religion,  I 
am  sure  I  do  not  want  any  of  it."  And  thus  he  raved  and  tore  about  hke  a  mad- 
man. The  devil  was  giving  him  a  great  tearing ;  and  he  could  not  distinguish 
between  what  the  devil  and  his  sin  were  doing  in  him,  and  the  grace  that  was 
even  then  loosing  him.  Let  us  not  be  discouraged  or  surprised  if  the  first  effect  of 
our  preaching,  or  labour  with  souls,  seems  to  make  matters  worse.  "I  am  a  lost 
6oul,"  cried  George  Whitefield's  brother,  one  day,  while  sitting  at  table  with  Lady 
Huntingdon,  his  brother,  and  some  other  earnest  Christians  who  were  talking  of 
the  things  of  the  Kingdom.  "  Thank  God  for  that,"  cried  Lady  Huntingdon ;  "  for 
now  I  am  sure  the  Lord  has  begun  a  good  work  in  you."    Conviction  of  sin,  and 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  125 

the  struggle  of  the  old  man  to  get  out  of  the  grip  of  God's  law,  are  not  pleasant 
experiences  ;  but  they  precede  conversion.     (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Why  is  It  that  Thou  hast  sent  me  ? —  The  sorrows  of  Christian 
service  : — There   is   a    tone   of  unspeakable  sadness  in  this  complaint  of   Moses. 
He  had  been  crossed  in  his  aims,  his  Divinely-inspired  hopes  had  received  an 
unexpected  reverse,    and    all   his   plans  for  liberating    Israel  lay  in   ruins.     It 
was  a  bitter  moment,    and  every  one  who  knows   anything  of  the   vicissitudes 
of   Christian  work  will   be    able  to    enter    into    his    feelings  on   this   occasion. 
There  come  times  to  every  earnest  labourer  in  God's  service,  when  his  efforts  seem 
fruitless,  and  he  gets  downcast.     There  are  so  many  unforeseen  contingencies  to 
interrupt  our  work,  that  it  is  beyond  our  power  to  provide  against  them.     This 
portion  of  the  Great  Law-giver's  history  will  picture  to  us  the  son-ows  of  Christian 
service  arising  from — I.  Opposition.     It  may  seem  strange  that  any  opposition  at 
all  should  have  to  be  encountered  in  the  prosecution  of  God's  work  ;  yet  it  has  been 
so  in  every  age,  especially  when  its  success  affected  any  of  the  worldly  interests  that 
men  hold  dear.     The  reformer,  the  patriot,  the  philanthropist,  the  man  who  strives 
to  battle  with  injustice,  and  to  leave  the  world  better  than  he  found  it,  may  always 
lay  their  account  for  opposition.     Such  is  human  nature,  that  it  may  be  taken  for 
granted  that  those  whose  vested  interests  are  to  be  touched  will  resist  change. 
Pharaoh  may,  in  this  respect,  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  enemies  of  philanthropic 
and  Christian  work.     As  Moses  and  Aaron  had  to  contend  with  the  selfishness  of 
the  Egyptian  king,  so,  when  our  popular  leaders  have  sought  the  emancipation  and 
elevation  of  their  fellow-men,  their  efforts  have  been  thwarted  by  the  cupidity  of 
some  time-serving  ofBcial,  or  the  prejudice  of  some  petty  aristocrat.    Luther  had 
arrayed  against  him  all  the  forces  of  Charles  V.  as  well  as  the  emissaries  of  the 
Pope.     Calvin  had  to  remonstrate  with  the  king  of  France  in  favour  of  religious 
Uberty  for  his  oppressed  subjects.     Savonarola  manfully  resisted  the  tyranny  of  the 
Medicean  rule  in  Florence,  and  paid  the  penalty  with  his  life.     William  of  Orange 
contended  successfully  for  the  liberation  of  the  Netherlands  from  the  Pharaoh  of 
Papal  domination.     Instances  without  number  might   be  adduced  from  history 
illustrative  of  the  opposition  encountered  in  the  long  struggle  for  human  rights. 
There  was  a  high-handed  Pharaoh  every  ready  to  step  in  and  say,  This  is  not  for 
the  good  of  the  people,  and  I  will  not  let  it  be  done.     Nor  need  we  be  at  all  sur- 
prised  at  this,  when  we   reflect  that  One  greater  than  all    the   philanthropists, 
reformers,  and  martyrs,  had  to  endure  the  contradiction  of  men  in  the  discharge  of 
the  noblest  mission  the  world  has  ever  known.     The  Lord  Jesus  came  to  proclaim 
principles  which,  if  acted  out,  would  put  an  end  to  injustice  and  oppression.    He 
was  opposed  on  every  hand,  and  so  will  it  be  with  all  who  follow  in  His  steps.     If 
you   oppose   the   evil  of  the  world,   the  world  will  oppose  you.      If  you  resist 
oppression,  the  oppressor  will  resist  you.     Moses,  from  the  moment  he  struck  at 
Pharaoh,  had  trouble  to  his  dying  day,  but  he  emancipated  a  nation  and  left  an 
undying  name.    Let  no  opposition,  then,  deter  you  from  the  right.     II.  Misrepke- 
SENTATiON.     This  additional  sorrow  was  experienced  by  Moses  when  the  King  of 
Egypt  met  his  demand  for  the  release  of  Israel  by  insinuating  that  his  action  was 
prompted  by  selfish  ambition.   "  Why  do  ye,  Moses  and  Aaron,  let  (or  hinder)  the 
people  from  their  work  ?  "    As  if  he  had  said.  The  people  are  content,  if  you  would 
only  let  them  alone.     You  are  stirring  up  this  agitation  for  your  own  interest. 
Indolence  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  movement.     "  Ye  are  idle,  ye  are  idle."     From 
this  absurd  charge  it  is  obvious  in  what  light  Pharaoh  regarded  the  whole  question. 
He  looked  at  it  from  the  side  of  self-interest.     He  was  not  accustomed  to  look  at 
the  moral  side  of  things.     He  judged  every  one  by  his  own  low  moral  standard. 
Now,  in  all  this,  have  we  not  a  picture  of  what  is  going  on  every  day  round  about 
us  ?     Some  noble  soul,  stung  at  the  sight  of  oppression  and  injustice,  raises  his 
voice  in  protest  from  no  other  motive  than  to  see  justice  done.     The  oppressor, 
smarting  under  the  rebuke,  cries  out  in  impotent  rage,  What  have  you  got  to  do 
with  it  ?    Why  do  you  hinder  the  people  from  their  work  ?    You  are  agitating  for 
some  selfish  purpose.     "  Ye  are  idle,  ye  are  idle."    You  are  interfering.     Attend  to 
your  own  affairs.     Such  is  the  style  of  argument  which  the  philanthropist  and 
Christian  worker  have  oftentimes  to  face.     They  have  to  appeal  to  men  destitute  of 
religious  feehng,  who  recognize  no  interest  higher  than  their  pocket.    There  own 
motives  are  of  the  earth  earthy,  and  they  judge  others  accordingly.     One  regrets 
that  there  is  need  for  this  style  of  remark,  but  the  spirit  here  condemned  is  still 
prevalent  among  us.   I  have  known  a  devoted  evangelist  well-nigh  crushed  in  spirit 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


on  having  the  taunt  flung  in  his  face,  that  he  was  engaging  in  Christian  work  for  a 
livinc.  Such  insinuations  are  a  sore  annoyance  to  the  sensitive  labourer,  and  well 
if  he  can  bear  them  for  conscience  sake.  III.  Ingratitude.  Another  discourage- 
ment which  the  Christian  worker  has  often  to  face,  arises  from  the  ingratitude  of 
those  whom  he  seeks  to  serve.  One  would  have  thought  they  would  have  enthusi- 
astically hailed  him  as  their  deliverer ;  but,  instead  of  that,  they  flung  back  his 
efforts  into  his  face,  and  ungratefully  taunted  him  with  making  their  condition 
more  bitter  than  it  had  been.  They  said.  Ye  have  put  a  sword  into  Pharaoh's  hands 
to  slay  us.  But  how  true  is  all  this  of  Christian  work  still.  The  etTort  to  break 
aivay  from  old  f^urroundings  originates  new  pains,  and  the  blame  of  the  new  pains 
is  apt  to  be  laid  at  the  door  of  the  man  who  suggested  the  change.  It  is  impossible 
to  break  off  from  a  long-established  evil  custom  or  practice  without  a  painful  wrench. 
It  is  impossible  to  deliver  a  sinner  from  the  consequences  of  his  sms  without  making 
disagreeable  revelations  to  him  of  the  wickedness  of  his  heart,  which  often  increases 
his  pains  a  thousand-fold.  The  attempt  to  make  things  better  has  c*ten  the 
tendency  to  make  them  worse  for  the  time  being.  And  this  is  a  great  source  of 
discouragement  to  the  worker.  It  may  cost  the  drunkard  many  a  pang  to  throw 
aside  his  cups  ;  but  he  must  not  reproach  the  man  who  led  him  to  see  the  evils  of 
intemperance.  A  physician  is  not  cruel  because  he  probes  a  wound  deeply  and  pains 
the  pMtient ;  and  he  would  be  an  ungrateful  patient  who  would  rtproach  the 
physician  for  an  operation,  however  painful,  which  saved  his  life.  The  man  who 
aims  at  permanent  good  need  not  therefore  be  surprised  if  he  incurs  temporary 
reproach.  In  the  early  days  of  Christianity,  the  apostles  were  called  men  who 
turned  the  world  upside  down.  IV.  Failure.  This  is  another  experience  for 
•which  the  Christian  worker  has  to  lay  his  account ;  and  it  would  be  the  saddest  of 
all  if  the  failure  was  final  But  it  is  not  final,  it  is  temporai-y,  and  only  apparent. 
What  we  call  failure  may  arise  from  our — 1.  Impatience  to  see  results.  From  the 
very  nature  of  the  work,  results  do  not  readily  manifest  themselves.  In  manual 
labour  we  see  the  results  of  our  exertions,  and  can  measure  our  progress  from  time 
to  time.  Take  the  building  of  a  house.  The  mason  sees  the  cditice  gradually 
rising  before  his  eyes,  and  can  calculate  more  or  less  exactly  the  time  when  it  will 
be  finished.  But  in  Christian  work  it  is  altogether  different.  You  cannot  measure 
results.  You  have  different  kind  of  material  to  deal  with,  material  that  does  not 
readily  lend  itself  to  a  physical  test.  You  cannot  apply  the  moral  test  as  you  can 
the  physical.  It  is  true  you  may  see  fruits  in  changed  lives  and  improved  morals, 
the  redress  of  grievances  and  the  establishment  of  purer  laws;  but  all  that  takes 
time,  and  the  man  who  laid  the  foundation  of  the  improvement  seldom  sees  its 
completion.  Now,  it  is  this  which  makes  us  so  impatient,  that  we  are  apt  to  mis- 
understand the  slowness  of  the  progress.  We  do  not  see  the  improvement  we 
expected,  and  wo  draw  a  wrong  conclusion  and  call  it  failure.  2.  InabiHty  to 
interpret  God's  method  of  working.  In  Christian  work  we  have  not  only  to  lament 
our  lack  of  results,  but  in  many  cases  present  appearances  are  positively  against  us. 
This,  too,  gives  our  services  the  impression  of  failure.  Had  iloses  been  able  to 
interpret  the  meaning  of  events,  he  would  have  seen  that  the  increased  burdens 
were  the  first  indication  of  success,  for  if  Pharaoh  had  not  dreaded  that  his  power 
was  drawing  to  an  end,  he  would  not  have  demanded  more  work.  It  is  not  easy  to 
acquiesce  when  things  are  going  against  us.  Few  indeed  can  look  below  the 
surface  and  read  eveuts  aright,  and  this  lack  of  discernment  accounts  for  many  of 
the  fancied  difiiculties  of  Christian  service.  (D.  Merson,  M.A.)  Christian  norkers  : 
their  difficulties  and  disconrarjements  : — I.  That  Christian  workers  have  frequently 

TO  CONTEND  WITH  THE  OBSTINACY  AND  RIDICULE  OF  HEN  IN  HIGH  POSITIONS.     We  imagine 

that  ridicule  is  almost  the  severest  trial  the  Christian  worker  has  to  endure.  Thus 
we  see  that  it  is  not  the  Divine  plan  to  shield  men  from  the  ridicule  and  insult 
incurred  by  their  effort  of  moral  service,  but  rather  to  give  grace  that  they  may 
endure  as  serving  Him  who  is  invisible.     II.    That    Christian   workers    have 

FREQUENTLY  TO  CONTEND  WITH  THE  DISCOURAGEMENT  OF  A  FIRST  DEFEAT,  AND  APPARENT 

FAILURE.  Never  be  disheartened  by  apparent  failure,  it  may  be  but  the  shutting 
of  a  door,  which  will  open  wide  upon  your  next  approach.     IH.  That  Christian 

WORKERS  HAVE  FREQUENTLY  TO  CONTEND  WITH  THE  MISAPPREHENSION  OF  THOSE  WHOM 
THEY  SEEK  TO  RENEFIT.  IV.  ThaT  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS  HAVE  FREQUENTLY  TO  CONTEND 
WITH  THEIR  OWN  MISCONCEPTION  OF  THE  DiVINE  METHOD  OF  WORKING,  AND  THEIR  INA- 
BILITY TO  RIGHTLY  INTERPRET  THE  MEANING  OF  EVENTS  IN  RELATION  THERETO.    LeSSOUS  ', 

1.  Not  to  be  discouraged  by  apparent  failures  in  Christian  service.  2.  Not  to 
yield  to  the  scorn  of  the  mighty  in  our  attempt  to  improve  the  moral  condition  of 


CHAP,  v.]  EXODUS.  127 

men.  3.  To  interpret  the  reproach  of  the  slave  in  the  light  of  his  augmented 
slavery,  and  not  to  be  dismayed  by  it.  4.  To  prayerfully  study  daily  events  so  as 
to  find  God's  purposes  of  freedom  developing  themselves  therein.  (J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  The  apparent  failure  of  Christian  service  : — I.  Ode  sukprise  that  Christian 
SERVICE  SHOULD  HE  AF.uLURE.  It  is  a  matter  of  surprise — 1.  Because  the  workers 
had  been  Divinely  sent,  and  prepared  for  their  toil.  They  had  been  instructed  by 
vision.  They  had  been  enriched  by  life's  discipline.  They  had  gathered  impulse 
from  holy  communioa  with  heaven.  They  were  invested  with  the  power  to  work 
miracles.  They  were  given  the  message  which  they  were  to  deliver  unto  Pharaoh. 
We  cannot  but  wonc^er  at  this  failure.  2.  Because  the  workers  had  received  all  the 
accompaniments  necessary  to  their  toil.  They  did  not  go  a  warfare  in  their  own 
charges.  All  the  resources  of  heaven  went  with  them.  3.  Because  the  workers  had 
arisen  to  a  moral  fortitude  needful  to  the  work.  Once  they  were  cowardly,  and 
shrank  from  the  mission,  but  their  cowardice  had  broken  unto  heroism  ;  their 
tremor  was  removed  by  the  promise  of  God.  Hence  we  should  have  expected  them 
to  have  succeeded  at  once,  as  a  brave  soul  is  never  far  from  victory.  II.  Our  sorrow 
THAT  Christian  service  should  be  a  failure.  It  is  a  matter  of  sorrow,  because — 1. 
The  tyrant  is  unpunished.  2.  The  slave  is  unfreed.  3.  The  workers  are  disap- 
pointed. III.  Our  hope  that  the  failure  of  Christian  service  will  not  be 
ultimate.  1.  Because  the  Divine  call  will  be  vindicated.  2.  Because  service  for 
the  good  of  men  cannot  ultimately  fail.  Lessons:  1.  Do  not  be  alarmed  at  the 
temporary  failure  of  Christian  work.  2.  The  apparent  failure  of  Christian  work 
answers  some  wise  purposes.  3.  Those  who  occasion  the  temporary  failure  of 
Christian  work  are  liable  to  the  retribution  of  heaven.  4.  Let  Christian  workers 
hold  on  to  the  word  and  promise  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Lessons: — 1.  Unjust  incrimi- 
nations from  GoJ's  people  may  make  the  ministers  of  God  quail  and  recede  from 
their  duty.  2.  God's  faithful  instruments  though  they  do  retreat  of  weakness, 
yet  it  is  unto  the  Lord.  3.  God's  faithful  ones  under  pressures  may  charge  God 
foolishly  for  doing  evil  to  His  people.  4.  In  such  workings  of  flesh,  the  Spirit  may 
humbly  expostulate  with  God  by  prayer.  5.  Sad  events  in  ministering  may  make 
God's  servants  question  their  mission.  6.  In  such  questioning,  souls  may  humbly 
deprecate  the  frustration  of  their  ministry  (ver.  22).  7.  The  evil  doings  of  men 
may  turn  His  servants  sometimes  to  expostulate  with  God.  8.  Wicked  men  will  do 
worse  and  worse  notwithstanding  God's  instruments  come  and  speak  in  His  name. 
9.  Evil  instiuments  may  be  permitted  of  God  to  oppress,  and  He  not  at  all 
deliver.  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Perseverance  rewarded: — I  once  heard  a  gentle- 
man say  that  he  remembered  the  making  of  the  railway  between  Manchester  and 
Liverpool,  and  it  was  constructed  over  ground  which  at  first  seemed  to  say  that  no 
line  could  ever  be  made.  The  soil  was  of  a  soft,  peaty  character,  and  it  almost 
appeared  as  if  no  line  could  be  constructed.  However,  they  threw  in  oceans  of 
stuff,  of  rubbish  of  aU  kinds,  and  gradually  their  perseverance  was  rewarded,  for 
the  foundation  grew  firmer  and  firmer,  the  line  was  built,  and  now  you  cannot  go 
over  a  stronger  bit  of  road  on  any  line  in  the  kingdom.  And  may  it  not  be  so  in  the 
cause  of  missions  ?  Do  not  let  us  be  in  a  hurry  with  regard  to  results.  We  may 
seem  to  be  doing  little  or  nothing,  and  the  morass  is  a^  deep  as  ever.  Our  work 
may  appear  to  be  fruitless,  but  in  reality  we  are  laying  the  foundation,  and  driving 
deep  the  piles  which  prepare  the  basis  for  urgent  and  enduring  Christian  work  and 
a  highway  for  the  Gosi^el.  The  challenge  of  circumstances : — All  along  the  history  of 
humanity  there  are  great  epochs,  where  some  upward  step  marks  a  new  era  of 
civilization,  such  as  the  invention  of  the  printing  press.  Yet  the  environing 
circumstances  did  not  encourage  such  inventions.  Every  adventurer  into  the 
realms  of  the  unfamiliar  met  at  once  with  opposition.  It  was  a  square  issue  with 
such  men  whether  their  inward  light  or  their  outward  environment  was  to  prevail ; 
and  the  greater  the  opposition  the  firmer  their  determination.  Had  Livingstone 
surrendered  to  circumstances,  he  would  have  remained  a  factory  hand  all  his  life  ; 
it  was  because  he  defied  his  surroundings  and  conquered  them  that  he  rose  to 
eminence.  It  is  a  doctrine  of  fatalism  that  we  are  what  our  forefathers,  our  climate, 
and  other  influences  have  made  us.  One  might  say:  "  How  can  I  be  better  ?  lam 
a  child  of  godless  parents,  surrounded  hy  thoughtless  people,  driven  by  business, 
■wordly  minded — such  is  the  atmosphere  in  which  I  live."  But  such  was  the 
atmosphere  in  which  John  Lawrence,  Governor-General  of  India,  found  himself 
when  he  first  trod  the  streets  of  Calcutta.  He  set  his  face  like  a  flint  against  luxury, 
intrigue,  profligacy.  He  took  up  the  challenge  of  circumstances.  With  indomitable 
\Till  he  fought,  crushing  mutiny  to-day  and  righting  an  injustice  to-morrow,  until  his 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctap.  rt. 

patient  heroism  won  him  the  title  of  the  Saviour  of  India.  (Great  Thoughts.)  Human 
shortsifihtediiess : — With  every  fresh  movement  of  God's  grace  in  the  inner  life,  fresh 
difficulties  and  questions  are  raised.  If  we  will  bring  these  before  the  Lord,  though  it 
should  be  with  the  expression  of  trembling  and  grief,  yet  are  they  not  to  be  regarded 
as  signs  of  unbelief,  but  rather  of  the  struggles  and  contests  of  faith ;  and  the  Lord  is 
patient  toward  the  doubtings  of  human  shortsightedness.  {Otto  Von  Gerlach,  D.D.) 
Success  and  failure  : — Not  unfrequently  our  first  essays  at  service  are  encouraging  : 
otherwise  we  might  turn  back.  But  we  must  be  prepared  to  meet  with  discourage- 
ments further  along  ;  as  we  shall  see  that  Moses  did.  It  is  hard  to  tell,  upon  the 
whole,  which  is  the  most  profitable  to  the  Christian  worker— success,  or  failure. 
No  doubt,  both  are  useful ;  and  in  such  proportion  as  God  adjusts,  they  are  exactly 
suited  to  our  need.  All  failure  would  so  discourage  us,  that  we  should  turn  back 
from  the  work  ;  whereas  if  we  never  had  anything  but  success,  we  should  become 
proud  and  self-sufficient.  Discouragements  are  useful  in  keeping  us  humbled  and 
low  before  God,  in  a  spirit  of  dependence  and  prayer ;  while  successes  inspire  and 
stimulate  us  in  the  work,  and  give  us  boldness  to  go  forward  in  new  and  more  dilfi- 
cult  enterprises.  I  recently  met  Miss  Macpherson,  who  is  doing  so  much  for  the 
poor  waifs  in  London  ;  and  she  told  me  of  her  early  trials  in  getting  her  work 
started.  At  first  she  felt  quite  equal  to  it ;  and  so  sure  was  she  that  others  would 
see  it  in  the  same  light  that  she  did,  that  when  she  went  to  solicit  money  from 
some  of  the  wealthy  merchants  of  London,  with  which  to  build  her  Home,  she  had 
no  doubt  of  an  immediate  response.  She  was  greatly  staggered  and  discouraged 
when  she  found  that  her  expected  patrons  kindly  and  politely  held  themselves 
excused.  This  discouragement  drove  her  to  her  knees  ;  and  thei-e  she  found  strength 
in  God.  Presently  the  money  came  to  her  from  other  directions,  and  in  answer  to 
her  prayers  ;  and  was  really  of  more  use  to  her  than  if  she  had  obtained  it  in  her 
own  way.  And  now  her  success  in  rescuing  children,  and  finding  good  homes  for 
them  in  Canada,  is  so  great,  that  she  is  all  enthusiasm.  She  affords  an  admirable 
example  of  what  a  single-handed  woman  can  do  who  goes  down  into  Egypt  to  bring 
up  the  little  ones.  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  God's  work  not  estimated  according 
to  apparent  results : — A  missionary  in  China  was  greatly  depressed  by  the  careless- 
ness of  his  hearers.  One  day  the  words  of  Isa.  liii.  1  came  to  his  mind  as  sent 
from  above,  and  they  were  followed  by  a  dream.  He  thought  he  was  standing  near 
a  rocky  boulder,  and  trying  with  all  his  might  to  break  it  with  a  sledge-hammer  ; 
but  blow  after  blow  had  no  effect— there  was  no  impression  made.  At  length  he 
heard  a  voice,  which  said,  "  Never  mind,  go  on  ;  I  will  pay  you  all  the  same, 
whether  you  break  it  or  not."  So  he  went  on  doing  the  work  that  was  given  Lim, 
and  was  content.     (IF.  Baxendale.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Yer.  1.  Now  Shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do. — God''s  reply  to  the  prayer  of  a  dif- 
appointed  worker : — I.  This  reply  to  the  prayer  of  Moses  intimated  that  God 

WOULD  BRING  THE  TRUE  RESULT  OF  HIS  MISSION  MORE  THOROUGHLY  WITHIN  THE  COGNI- 
ZANCE OF  HIS  SENSES.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Now  shalt  thou  see  what  I 
will  do  to  Pharaoh."  1.  The  mission  had  hitherto  been  a  great  tax  upon  the  faith 
of  Moses.  The  first  repulse  made  him  cry  out  for  the  visible  and  the  tangible.  2. 
Now  the  mission  is  lowered  to  the  sensuous  vision  of  Moses.     II.  This  reply  to  the 

PRAYER    OF  MoSES    VINDICATED    HIS   CONDUCT    AGAINST    THE    RECENT    INSINUATIONS    AOT) 

REPROACH  OF  THE  ISRAELITES.  Men  oftcH  take  a  wrong  view  of  our  conduct.  God 
always  takes  the  right  view.  He  knows  when  His  servants  are  doing  what  He  tells 
them.  He  sends  them  messages  of  approval  for  so  doing.  This  vindication — 1. 
Would  reassure  Moses  in  his  work.  2.  Would  clear  his  conscience  from  all  con- 
demnation.    3.  Would  enable  him  to  interpret  his  apparent  failure.     III.  This 

REPLY  TO  THE  PRAYER  OF  MoSES  INDICATED  HOW  THOROUGHLY  THE  WORK  ANNOUNCED  BY 

God  should  be  accomplished.  "  For  with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  let  them  go,  and 
with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  drive  them  out  of  his  land."  1.  This  shows  how 
wicked  men  are,  under  the  providence  of  God,  brought  to  do  that  which  they  had 
once  resolutely  refused.  The  sinner  knoweth  not  the  future,  or  he  would  act  with 
greater  wisdom  in  the  present.  2.  God  makes  these  revelations  in  response  to 
ptayer,  that  He  may  reanimate  the  dispirited  worker.    IV.  In  reply  to  the  prayeb 


CHAP.  VI.]  ElOLVS.  129 

OP  Moses,  God  vouchsafes  a  new  and  sublime  revelation  of  His  character.  1.  A 
sublime  revelation  of  His  name.  2.  A  comforting  reference  to  His  covenant.  3.  A 
pathetic  reference  to  the  sorrow  of  Israel.  Lessons :  1.  That  God  speaks  to  dis- 
appointed souls  in  prayer.  2.  That  the  Divine  communings  with  a  disappointed 
soul  have  an  uplifting  tendency.  3.  That  God  deals  compassionately  with  the 
weakness  of  Christian  workers.  {J.  S.  Exell^  M.A.)  God's  long  restrained 
icrath  .-—When  the  ice  on  the  great  American  rivers  is  broken  up,  it  is  sometimes 
obstructed  in  its  course  towards  the  sea  by  a  log  of  wood,  or  something  else,  that 
arrests  it.  But  then,  as  block  after  block  of  ice  accumulates,  the  waters  above 
increase  in  volume  and  weight,  till  their  force,  with  mighty  crash,  sweeps  away  all 
the  mass.  And  so  the  wrath  of  God,  though  long  restrained  by  His  love  and  mercy, 
sweeps  away  the  incorrigible  sinner  to  perdition.  {H.  R.  Burton.)  C'nvditions  of 
successful  work  for  God: — 1.  Faith  in  God,  and  honest  conviction  that  Gud  will  do 
as  He  says  He  will.  2.  Courage  to  do  what  faith  declares.  God  doesn't  use 
cowards  or  faint-hearted  men  to  do  mnch  for  Him.  He  told  Joshua  to  be  of  good 
courage,  3.  Perseverance.  Keep  right  on  in  the  place  God  gives  you  to  work  for 
Him.  Many  men  fail  right  on  the  eve  of  battle.  The  best  silver  mine  in  England 
was  worked  for  a  long  time  by  a  man  who  became  discouraged  just  before  it  yielded 
the  richest  ingots  of  choicest  silver,  and  he  sold  out  for  a  song  and  lost  a  princely 
fortune.  Keep  at  it.  Get  others  to  help,  and  work  and  plod  and  win  success.  4. 
Enthusiasm  is  a  valuable  element,  and  one  that  most  men  need.  Too  many  are 
afraid  of  enthusiasm,  but  all  of  us  need  to  put  more  fire  and  feeling  in  what  we  do 
for  the  Lord.  (D.  L.  Moodyi)  The  judgments  of  God  upon  wicked  men: — T.  Tn.\T 
God  sends  severe  judgjients  on  men  who  reject  His  commands.  "  Now  shalt  thou 
see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh."  1.  Notwithstanding  his  kingship.  2.  Notwith- 
etandiug  his  obstinacy.  3.  Notwithstanding  his  despotism.  IL  That  these  judg- 
ments ARE  often  witnessed  BY  CHRISTIAN  PEOPLE.  "  Now  shalt  thou  SCO."  1.  They 
are  seen  clearly.  2.  Ketributively.  3.  Solemnly.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  God's 
everlasting  ^' shalls  "  : — It  is  a  great  thing  to  get  hold  of  one  of  God's  everlasting 
"  shalls."  For  when  God  says  a  thing  shall  be  done,  who  shall  hinder  ?  When 
God  says  "  shall,"  you  may  be  sure  that  He  is  stirring  up  His  strength  and  making 
bare  His  mighty  arm,  to  do  mighty  and  terrible  things  in  righteousness.  Just  read 
through  this  chapter,  and  note  how  Jehovah  asserts  Himself — "  I  am  the  Lord  "  ; 
'*  I  have  remembered  My  covenant  "  ;  "I  will  bring  you  out  from  under  the  burdens 
of  Egypt  ■'  ;  "  I  will  rid  you  of  tbeir  bondage";  "  I  will  redeem  you  with  a  stretched- 
out  arm"  ;  "  I  will  take  you  to  Me  for  a  people  "  ;  "  I  will  bring  you  into  the  land 
concerning  which  I  did  swear  to  give  it  to  Abraham,  and  I  will  give  it  to  you  "  ;  "  I 
am  the  Lord."  All  this  is  very  refreshing  and  encouraging  to  me.  It  must  have 
been  so  to  Moses,  as  he  stood  there  and  listened  to  these  strong  and  blessed  words. 
And  so  I  learn  from  such  words  this  lesson  :  when  I  am  discouraged  or  cast  down 
either  about  my  own  salvation,  or  about  the  work  of  the  Lord — to  turn  to  the  blessed 
Scriptures  and  search  through  the  pages,  and  read  over  and  over  again  the  strong, 
sure  words  of  God.  They  sound  like  bugle-blasts  to  me,  calling  me  to  faith  and 
service.  So  may  the  strong  words  of  God  reassure  any  fainting  heart !  Be  sure 
that  He  will  not  be  untrue  to  even  the  least  of  the  promises  He  has  made  to  you  ; 
but  will  fulfil  them  all  most  gloriously.  These  promises  are  like  the  cakes  baked  for 
Elijah,  in  the  strength  of  which  he  went  for  forty  days.  Only  we  may  eat  them 
fresh  every  day  if  we  are  so  disposed.    (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-3.  I  am  the  Lord. — Diitrj  to  Jehovah : — Consider  the  meaning  of  our  duty 
to  God ;  the  great  truth  that  we  have  such  a  duty ;  and  how  it  comes  about  that  we 
have  it.  I.  Duty  is  something  which  is  due  from  one  to  another  :  something 
which  ought  to  be  given,  or  ought  to  be  done ;  not  a  thing  which  is  given  or  done 
under  compulsion,  under  the  influence  of  fear,  extorted  by  force,  not  even  a  free 
gift  or  oliering ;  quite  different  from  this ;  if  a  thing  is  a  duty,  it  must  be  done 
because  it  is  right  to  do  it  and  wrong  to  omit  it.  II.  The  words  of  the  text  are,  as 
it  were,  the  sign  manual  whereby  Almighty  God,  in  His  dealings  with  His  ancient 
people  the  Children  of  Israel,  claimed  from  them  the  performance  of  that  duty 
which  they  owed  to  Him.  The  words  which  gave  validity  to  an  Israelitish  law 
merely  rehearsed  the  fact  that  He  who  gave  the  law  was  Jehovah ;  and  nothing 
more  was  added,  because  nothing  more  remained  to  be  said.  III.  Notice  the 
principles  upon  which  our  duty  to  God  depends.  1.  There  is  a  relationship,  a 
close  vital  connection  between  God  and  man,  which  does  not  exist  between  God 
and  any  other  of  His  creatures  ;  man  is  in  a  very  high  sense  "  the  Son  of  God,"  go 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi. 

that  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  true  aims  and  purposes  of  God  and  man  can  be 
distinct.  Man  being  made  in  God's  image,  ought  to  do  God's  will.  2.  Our  duty  to 
God  depends  also  on  the  ground  c^  election.  God  deals  with  us  now  as  with  His 
Church  in  former  days ;  it  is  still  a  Church  of  election.  We,  to  whom  God  sends 
His  commands,  arc  still  rightly  described  as  redeemed  out  of  the  house  of  our 
bondage  ;  and  if  the  redemption  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt  be  nothing  better  than  the 
faintest  type  and  shadow  of  the  redemption  of  mankind  out  of  the  power  of  the 
devil,  how  much  greater  is  the  appeal  which  is  made  to  us  on  the  ground  of  that 
deliverance  which  Jesus  Christ  has  wrought  out,     (Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.) 

Vers.  4,  5,  I  have  also  established  My  covenant  with  them. — A  true  pattern  of 
gospel  redemption : — I.  That  gospel  redemption  comes  to  the  sodl  after  a  period  of 
MORAL  BONDAGE  AND  DISTRESS,  1.  It  finds  the  soul  in  a  condition  of  moral  bondage. 
"  Whom  the  Egyptians  keep  in  bondage,"  It  is  the  bondage  of  sin.  It  has  been 
long  continued,  throngh  many  years  of  our  lives.  It  has  been  degrading.  It  has 
been  fruitless  to  ourselves.  Almost  hopeless,  2.  It  finds  the  soul  in  a  condition 
of  anxious  grief,  "  I  have  also  heard  the  groaning,"  &c.  Tears  of  repentance. 
Cries  for  pardon.  3.  It  is  generally  preceded  by  some  Christian  agency.  Aim  of 
ministry  to  awaken  desire  for  moral  freedom,  II.  That  gospel  redemption  comes 
TO  the  soul  by  virtue  of  a  Divine  covenant  and  promise,  "  I  have  remembered," 
&c,  1.  God  through  Christ  has  made  a  covenant  of  salvation  with  all  who  trust  in 
the  atonement.  2.  By  virtue  of  this  covenant,  all  contrite  and  believing  souls  may 
find  rest  in  and  pardon  from  God,  3,  This  covenant  ie — (1)  Unique,  (2)  Merciful, 
(3)  Of  long  standing.  III.  That  gospel  redemption  brings  the  soul  into  holt 
and  responsible  rel,^tionship  to  God.  "And  I  will  take  you  to  Me  for  a  people, 
and  I  will  be  to  you  a  God  "  (ver,  7).  1,  It  constitutes  the  soul  aDivine  possession, 
2.  It  places  the  Doul  under  the  peculiar  guardianship  of  the  Infinite,  IV,  That 
gospel  redemption  leads  the  faithful  into  the  inheritance  of  Canaan,  What  a 
change!  All  things  are  yours,  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Reasons  for  human  redemp- 
tion:— I,  The  burden  of  jun  is  a  reason  for  human  redemption.  No  human 
hand,  but  Christ  alone,  can  remove  it,  II.  The  lordship  of  Christ  is  a  reason 
FOR  human  redemption,  Hc  only  could  fulfil  violated  law  ;  forgive  past  neglect ; 
and  enable  us  to  keep  it  in  future.  III,  The  covenant  of  God  is  a  reason  fob 
human  redemption,      (Hid.)  God's  coveiiant   to  His  people : — 1.  Stated.      2. 

Settled.    3,  Kept,    4,  Happy.     5.  Restful. 

Vers,  6-8,  I  will  bring  you  out. — The  guarantee : — 1.  God  is  able  to  deliver  Hig 
people,  2.  God  is  able  to  lead  His  people.  3.  God  is  able  to  bring  His  people 
home.  I.  Redemption  is  possible,  although  the  difficulties  are  great,  because 
God  is  its  Author.  On  the  Divine  side — 1.  Satisfaction  to  the  throne  in  the  obedience 
of  Christ ;  and  on  the  human  side — 2.  The  sanctitication  of  man  through  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  II.  The  magnitude  of  redemption  is  less  than  the  Divine  resources.  God 
is  able  to  supply — 1.  Strength ;  2.  Patience  ;  and — 3.  Preservation  for  the  journey. 
III.  God  can  fulfil  all  prospective  desires  in  heaven.  {British  Weekly.)  Israel 
and  Pharaoh  :  types  of  the  new  and  old  man : — I.  Israel's  position  in  Egypt.  One 
of  great  and  increasing  trial.  Iron  bondage,  occasioned  instrumentally  by  cruelty 
and  jealousy  of  Pharaoh.  Ordained  of  God  to  wean  them  from  Egypt,  and  make 
them  long  for  promised  land.  H.  The  judgment  on  Egytt.  Real  contest  between 
kingdom  of  light  and  kingdom  of  darkness.  Satan  has  supernatural  power ;  and 
in  order  to  deceive  Pharaoh,  and  harden  his  heart,  he  gave  the  magicians  power,  as 
far  as  he  could  (for  there  is  a  limit  to  his  power),  to  work  miracles  of  deception  in 
imitation  of  miracles  of  truth.  A  miracle  does  not  necessarily  prove  a  man  comes 
from  God ;  but  only  that  he  is  connected  with  some  higher  power — one  of  two 
kingdoms.  It  is  the  morality  of  the  miracle,  and  the  holiness  of  the  doctrine  it  is 
meant  to  attest,  that  proves  it  to  be  from  God.  III.  The  bearing  of  these  on  the 
Christian's  life.  See  Rom.  vii.  9,  24:  State  of  awakened  soul;  old  man  and 
new,  with  conflict  between  them ;  new  man  often  oppressed,  old  man  often  domi- 
nant though  under  judgment.  (G.  Wagner.)  A  stretched  out  arm : — The  signifi- 
cance of  this  figure,  "  a  stretched-out  arm,"  must  have  been  well  understood  by  the 
Israelites.  The  deities  of  the  Egyptians  were  represented  with  outstretched  arms, 
as  symbols  of  irresistible  might.  In  the  hieroglyphics  which  may  yet  be  seen  upon 
the  obelisk  at  Heliopolis,  and  with  which  the  Children  of  Israel  must  have  been 
familiar,  two  outstretched  arms  occur  as  part  of  the  title  of  one  of  the  kings, 
Osirtasen  Racheperka,  with  this  meaning,  "  Osuiasen,  the  sun,  is  might !  "    God's 


CHAP.  VI.]  EXODUS.  131 

outstretched  arm,  therefore,  is  opposed  to  the  king's  ;  and  He  adds,  "  I  will  take  you 
to  Me  for  a  people,  and  I  will  be  to  you  a  God ;  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord  your  God,  which  bringeth  you  out  from  under  the  burden  of  the  Egyptians." 
Moses  must  also  have  bethought  him  of  the  promise  made  to  him  upon  the  moun- 
tains :  ".See,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh  " :  his  outstretched  arm  was  now 
endued  with  "  might  ";  it  was  the  instrument  by  which  many  of  the  plagues  were 
brought  upon  the  land,  and  by  which  at  last  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  over- 
whelmed.    {T.  S.  MiUingtoru) 

Ver.  9.  They  hearkened  not  unto  Moses  for  anguish  of  spirit — Plu/sical  destitu- 
tion stifling  spiritul  life  : — A  permanent  principle  of  our  nature,  and  a  distinctive 
feature  of  the  Divine  government  are  here  embodied  in  an  example.  We  shall 
endeavour  to  explain  the  historic  incident,  and  to  apply  the  spiritual  lesson.  I. 
The  fact  which  embodies  the  pkinciple.  It  consists  of  three  parts — 1.  The 
message  addressed  to  Israel :  "  Moses  so  spake  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  In 
that  message,  whether  you  regard  its  Author,  its  bearer,  or  its  nature,  everything 
tended  to  entice  ;  nothing  to  repel  them.  Its  Author  was  the  God  of  Abraham,  of 
Isaac,  and  of  Jacob ;  its  bearer  was  Moses,  a  man  who  for  their  sakes  had  sacrificed 
his  position  among  the  princes  of  Pharaoh,  and  taken  refuge  in  a  desert ;  its  nature 
was  hope  to  the  desponding  and  freedom  to  the  enslaved.  Tbe  time,  too,  seemed 
fit :  when  the  bondage  had  become  unbearable,  word  is  sent  that  the  bondage  is 
almost  done.  2,  Their  neglect  of  the  message  :  "  Tbey  hearkened  not  unto  Moses." 
It  was  a  spark  of  fire  that  fell,  but  it  fell  on  wetted  wo"d,  and  kindled  therefore  no 
Same.  They  said  nothing  against  it,  but  they  let  it  alone.  3.  Examine  now  the 
specific  reason  of  their  apathy.  The  cause  of  their  inditlerence  to  liberty  was  the 
extreme  severity  of  their  bondage.  They  hearkened  not  "  for  anguish  of  spirit 
and  for  cruel  bondage."  Here  is  a  paradox :  the  slavery  is  excessively  severe,  and 
therefore  the  slave  does  not  care  for  freedom.  Broken  hearts  have  lost  tbeir  spring, 
and  cannot  bound  from  the  bottom  of  the  pit  at  the  call  of  a  deliverer.  Great  need 
does  not,  alone,  produce  great  exertion.  The  hopeless,  helpless  captive  steadily 
refuses  to  btir,  lest  the  chain  by  the  movement  should  saw  deeper  into  his  flesh. 
II.  The  pr.ixciPLE  embodied  in  the  fact.  These  things  happened  to  them  in  order 
that  their  history  might  be  a  type  for  us.  I.  The  message.  To  us,  as  to  them,  it 
is  a  message  of  mercy.  Specifically,  it  proclaims  deliverance  to  the  captive..  God 
recognizes  all  mankind  as  slaves,  and  sends  an  offer  of  freedom.  Christ  is  the 
Messenger  of  the  covenant.  A  greater  than  Moses  is  here,  publishing  a  greater 
salvation.  Through  the  lamb  slain  is  the  deliverance  wrought.  The  death  of 
Christ  is  the  death  of  death.  2.  Such  is  the  proposal ;  but  it  is  not  heeded. 
Comparatively  few  disbelieve  the  message  or  revile  the  messenger.  They  simply 
pay  no  heed.  3.  The  reason  of  this  neglect.  A  carnal  mind,  which  is  enmity 
against  God.  At  one  time  prosperity,  at  another  adversity,  becomes  the  immediate 
occasion  to  an  evil  heart  of  departing  from  the  living  God.  At  present  we  are 
called  to  investigate  only  one  class  of  these  occasions  or  causes  of  neglect.  Anguish 
of  spirit  and  cruel  bondage  still  make  many  captives  hug  their  chains,  and  refuse 
to  hear  the  voice  which  invites  them  to  glorious  liberty.  The  lesson  here  parts  into 
two  branches,  one  pointing  to  our  neighbour's  neglect,  and  another  to  our  own.  (1) 
The  first  lesson  teaches  the  duty  of  Christ's  disciples  to  a  careless  neighbourhood. 
Abject  poverty  in  these  favoured  lands  exacts  a  heavier  task  than  Pharaoh  from  a 
more  numerous  host  than  the  Hebrews  in  Egypt.  Self-sacrificing,  laborious  effort 
to  improve  the  temporal  condition  of  the  poor  is  a  species  of  revival  much  needed 
in  the  Church  of  Christ.  Of  course  I  do  not  counsel  donations  of  money  or  food 
to  the  vicious,  instead  of  reproof  and  instruction  :  I  claim  the  union  of  the  two.  (2) 
The  second  lesson  applies  more  directly  to  ourselves.  Anguish  of  spirit,  whether 
it  comes  from  God's  hand  in  the  form  of  personal  affliction,  or  from  man's  hand  in 
the  form  of  unjust  oppression,  may  become  the  occasion  of  neglecting  the  salvation 
of  Christ.  Beware  of  neglecting  your  spiritual  state  and  interests  while  you  are 
well,  in  the  expectation  that  distress  when  it  comes  will  make  you  religious.  There 
is  no  truth  in  nature  more  certain  than  this,  that  the  time  of  health  and  happiness 
is  the  best  time  for  cleaving  to  Christ  and  making  our  calling  and  election  sure. 
Then  it  could  be  best  done,  if  men  would  then  do  it.  Beware  lest  you  be  letting  the 
best  time  slip  past,  and  the  worst  time  draw  on,  while  you  are  not  saved !  It  is  true 
that  God  in  sovereign  mercy  often  uses  affliction  to  bring  us  to  Christ ;  but  He  does 
so  because  we  would  not  come  to  Christ  at  an  earlier  and  better  time,  ^he  mind 
may  be  heavenly  without  "  sore  bondage,"  and  earthly  with  it.    If  you  beckon  tht 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ti. 

Spirit  off  till  affliction  come,  affliction  may  come  without  the  Spirit.  There  is  no 
"anguish  of  spirit  "  in  "the  just  made  perfect,"  and  yet  they  are  like  flames  of 
fire  in  the  keenness  of  their  love  to  the  Lord  that  bought  them.  They  are  happiest 
who  give  their  bright  days  to  Christ ;  for  when  the  dark  days  come,  the  Light  of 
Life  continues  to  shine  within  their  hearts.  (JV.  Arnot,  D.D.)  To  the  saddest 
of  the  yad  : — Little  words  often  contain  great  meanings.  It  is  often  the  case  with 
that  monosyllable  "  so."  In  the  present  instance  we  must  lay  stress  upon  it  and 
read  the  text  thus — "Moses  spake  so  unto  the  Children  of  Israel."  That  is,  he  said 
what  God  told  him  to  say.  He  did  not  invent  his  message.  He  was  simply  a 
repeater  of  the  Divine  message.  As  he  received  it,  so  he  spake  it.  Now,  the 
message  Moses  brought  was  rejected,  and  he  knew  why  it  was  rejected.  He  could 
see  the  reason.  The  people  were  in  such  bondage,  they  were  so  unhappy  and 
hopeless,  that  what  he  spake  seemed  to  them  to  be  as  idle  words.  There  are 
hundreds  of  reasons  why  men  reject  the  gospel.  Amongst  all  the  reasons,  however, 
that  I  ever  heard,  that  with  which  I  have  the  most  sympathy,  is  this  one — that 
some  cannot  receive  Christ  because  they  are  so  full  of  anguish,  that  they  cannot 
find  strength  enough  of  mind  to  entertain  a  hope  that  by  any  possibility  salvation 
can  come  to  them.  I.  And  first,  will  you  notice  that  what  Moses  brought  to  these 
people  was  glad  tidings.  It  was  a  fkee  axd  full  gospel  message.  To  them  it  was 
the  gospel  of  salvation  from  a  cruel  bondage,  the  gospel  of  hope,  the  gospel  of 
glorious  promise.  It  was  a  very  admirable  type  and  metaphorical  description  of 
what  the  gospel  is  to  us.  Moses'  word  to  them  was  singularly  clear,  cheering,  and 
comforting  ;  but  they  could  not  receive  it.  II.  We  come  now  to  note  that  it  was 
r.ECEivED  WITH  cxBELiEF  CAUSED  BY  ANGUISH  OF  HEART.  We  Can  quitc  Understand 
what  that  meant.  Let  us  look  into  the  case.  1.  They  could  not  now  receive  this 
gospel  because  they  had  at  first  caught  at  it,  and  had  been  disappointed.  They 
limited  the  great  and  infinite  God  to  minutes  and  days;  and  so,  as  they  found 
themselves  at  first  getting  into  a  worse  case  than  before,  they  said  to  Moses,  deliber- 
ately, "  Let  us  alone,  that  we  may  serve  the  Egyptians."  They  did  as  good  as  say — 
You  havedone  us  no  good  ;  indeed,  you  have  increased  our  miseries;  and  we  cannot 
believe  in  you  or  accept  your  message  as  really  from  God,  seeing  it  has  caused  us  a 
terrible  increase  of  our  sufferings.  Grace  may  truly  and  effectually  come  to  a  heart, 
and  for  awhile  cause  no  joy,  no  peace  ;  but  the  reverse.  Yet  press  on ;  be  of  good 
courage.  Wait  hopefully.  The  God  who  begins  in  darkness  will  end  in  light.  2. 
The  inability  of  Israel  to  beheve  the  message  of  Moses  arose  also  from  the  fact  that 
they  were  earthbound  by  heavy  oppression  :  the  mere  struggle  to  exist  exhausted  all 
their  energy,  and  destroyed  all  their  hope.  If  yon  have  such  a  struggle  for  exis- 
tence here,  you  should  seek  that  higher,  nobler,  better  life,  which  would  give  you, 
even  in  penury  and  want,  a  joy  and  a  comfort  to  which  you  are  a  stranger  now. 
3.  But,  worst  of  aU,  there  are  some  who  seem  as  if  they  could  not  lay  hold  on  Christ 
because  their  sense  of  sin  has  become  so  intolerable,  and  the  wretchedness  which 
follows  upon  conviction  has  become  so  fearful,  that  they  have  grown  almost  to  be 
contentedly  despairing.  A  man  who  has  begun  to  be  numbed  with  cold,  cries  to  his 
comrades,  "  Leave  me  to  sleep  myself  to  death  "  ;  and  thus  do  despairing  ones  ask 
CO  be  left  in  their  misery.  Dear  soul,  we  cannot,  we  dare  not,  thus  desert  you. 
III.  The  message  was  at  first  not  received  by  Israel  by  reason  of  their  anguish  of 

soul,  but   IT  WAS  TKUE  FOR  ALL   THAT,  AND  THE  LoRD    MADE    IT  SO.       1.    The  first  thing 

the  Lord  did  to  prove  His  persevering  grace  was  to  commission  Moses  again  (ver.  1 ; 
chap.  vii.  2).  So  the  Lord  God,  in  everlastmg  mercy,  says  to  His  minister,  "  You 
have  to  preach  the  gospel  again  to  them.  Again  proclaim  My  grace."  2.  But  the 
Lord  did  more  than  that  for  Israel.  As  these  people  had  not  listened  to  Moses,  He 
called  Moses  and  Aaron  lo  Him,  and  He  renewed  their  charge.  It  is  a  grand  point 
when  the  Lord  lays  the  conversion  of  men  on  the  hearts  of  His  ministers,  and 
makes  them  feel  that  they  must  win  souls.  Moses  was  bound  to  bring  out  Israel. 
'  But  there  is  Pharaoh."  Pharaoh  is  included  in  the  Divine  charge.  They  have  to 
beat  Pharaoh  into  submission.  "  But  these  Children  of  Israel  will  not  obey."  The 
Lord  put  them  in  the  charge:  did  you  not  observe  the  words,  "  He  gave  them  a 
charge  unto  the  Children  of  Israel,  and  unto  Pharaoh  "  ?  Moses  and  Aaron,  you 
have  to  bring  Israel  out,  Pharaoh  is  to  let  them  go,  and  Israel  is  to  go  willingly. 
God  has  issued  His  royal  decree,  and  be  you  sure  it  will  stand.  3.  I  cannot  help 
admiring  the  next  thing  that  God  did  when  He  told  His  servant  what  to  do.  The 
Lord  began  to  count  the  heads  of  those  whom  He  would  redeem  out  of  bondage. 
You  see  the  rest  of  the  chapter  is  occupied  with  the  children  of  Reuben,  and  the 
children  of  Simeon,  and  the  children  of  Levi.     God  seemed  to  say,  "Pharaoh,  let 


CHAP.  VI.]  EXODUS.  133 

My  people  ro  !  "  "  I  -will  not,"  said  the  despot.  Straightway  the  Lord  goes  right 
down  into  the  brick-town  where  the  poor  slaves  are  at  work,  and  He  makes  out  a 
Hst  of  all  of  them,  to  show  that  He  means  to  set  free.  So  many  there  of  Simeon. 
So  many  here  of  Eeuben.  So  many  here  of  Levi.  The  Lord  is  counting  them. 
Moreover  He  numbers  their  cattle,  for  He  declares,  "  There  shall  not  an  hoof  be  left 
behind."  Men  say,  "It  is  of  no  use  counting  your  chickens  before  they  are 
hatched  "  ;  but  when  it  comes  to  God's  counting  those  whom  He  means  to  deliver, 
it  is  another  matter ;  for  He  knows  what  will  be  done,  because  He  determines  to  do 
it,  and  He  is  almighty.  He  knows  what  is  to  come  of  the  gospel,  and  He  knows 
whom  He  means  to  bless.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Men  content  to  remain  in  hondarie  : — 
When  Moses  came  to  the  Hebrews  to  deliver  them  from  bondage,  they  distrusted 
his  commission,  and  begged  to  be  let  alone  that  they  might  serve  the  Egyptians. 
And  so  it  happens  when  Christ,  the  Divine  Emancipator,  comes  to  men  who  have 
long  worn  the  inherited  chain  of  bondage  to  sin.  They  have  become  so  habituated 
to  the  hopes,  the  desires,  the  pleasures  and  expectations  of  a  worldly  life,  that  they 
give  no  heed  to  Him  who  offers  to  break  their  chain  and  bring  them  forth  into  glorious 
and  immortal  liberty.  I  have  seen  the  caged  eagle  beating  vainly  against  the  iron 
bars  of  his  prison,  his  plumes  soiled  and  torn,  his  strong  wings  drooping,  the  light 
of  his  glorious  eye  dimmed,  the  pulse  of  his  proud  heart  panting  in  vain  for  contlict 
with  the  careering  clouds  and  the  mountain  blast ;  and  I  thought  it  a  pitiable  sight 
to  see  that  kingly  bird  subjected  to  such  bondage,  just  to  be  gazed  at  by  the  curious 
crowd.  And  I  have  seen  the  proud  denizen  of  the  air  rejoicing  in  the  freedom  of 
his  mountain  home,  basking  in  the  noon's  broad  liqht,  balancing  with  motionless 
wings  in  the  high  vault  of  heaven,  or  rushing  forth  like  the  thunderbolt  to  meet  the 
clouds  on  the  pathway  of  the  blast ;  and  I  thought  that  that  wild  and  cloud-cleaving 
bird  would  choose  death,  could  the  choice  be  his,  rather  than  give  up  his  free  and 
joycus  life  to  drag  out  a  weary  bondage  in  a  narrow  and  stifling  cage.  And  yet  I 
have  seen  a  greater  and  sadder  contrast  than  that.  I  have  seen  men,  made  in  the 
image  of  the  hving  God,  endowed  with  the  glorious  and  fearful  gift  of  immortality, 
capable  of  becoming  co-equal  companions  with  archangels,  consenting  to  be  caged 
and  fenced  around  and  fettered  down  by  customs  and  cares  and  pleasures  and 
pursuits,  that  only  bind  them  to  earth,  make  them  slaves  of  things  they  despise, 
and  answer  their  noblest  aspirations  with  disappointment.  {D.  Mansh,  D.D.) 
Ready  for  deliverance  ; — Imagine  some  poor  shipwrecked  mariner  cast  ashore  upon 
a  lonely  island  in  mid-ocean.  The  gallant  vessel  whicli  had  been  his  home  upon 
the  deep  went  down  with  all  its  precious  freight  before  the  fury  of  the  storm.  His 
fellow-voyagers  all  perished  in  the  terrible  conflict  with  the  winds  and  the  waves. 
He  alone  was  cast  alive  on  shore,  to  suffer  more  than  the  bitterness  of  death  in 
sorrowing  for  his  lost  companions,  and  in  longing  for  a  return  to  his  far-distant 
home.  The  climate  of  the  island  is  perpetual  summer.  Everything  needed  to 
sustain  life  springs  from  the  earth  without  cultivation.  Flowers  blossom  and  fruits 
ripen  through  all  the  year.  The  forests  are  full  of  singing  birds.  But  to  the  lonely 
shipwrecked  mariner  this  seeming  paradise  is  a  prison.  He  longs  for  his  distant 
home  beyond  the  melancholy  main.  The  first  thing  in  the  morning  and  the  last 
at  evening  he  climbs  the  rocky  height  overlooking  the  sea,  to  search  round  the 
whole  horizon  for  some  friendly  ship  coming  to  deliver  him  from  his  watery  prison. 
And  when  at  last  he  sees  a  white  sail  hanging  in  the  far  horizon  and  growing  larger 
as  it  approaches,  it  looks  to  him  as  if  it  were  the  white  wing  of  an  angel  flying  to 
his  rescue.  With  eager  and  frantic  joy  he  makes  every  possible  f-ignal  to  arrest 
the  attention  of  the  coming  ship.  And  when  his  signals  are  answered,  and  a  boat 
is  lowered  to  take  him  on  board,  he  is  ready  to  rush  into  the  waves  and  swim  out  to 
meet  his  deliverers  before  they  reach  the  land.  Yet  all  his  joy  is  excited  by  the  hope 
of  return  to  an  earthly  home,  where  he  must  still  be  exposed  to  pain  and  sorrow 
and  death.  This  earth  is  an  island  in  the  infinite  ocean  of  space.  It  has  abun- 
dance of  riches,  and  pleasures,  and  occupations  for  a  few — much  toil,  and  work, 
and  suffering  for  many — and  it  must  be  a  temporary  resting-place  for  all.  But  it 
has  no  home  for  the  soul.  The  ship  of  salvation  is  sent  to  take  us  to  the  land  of 
rest.  Shall  we  not  look  often  and  eagerly  for  its  coming  ?  And  when  it  appears 
shall  we  not  be  ready  and  willing  to  go  ?  Shall  we  try  so  to  accustom  ourselves  to 
the  ways  of  living  on  this  island  waste  of  earth  that  we  shall  be  unfitted  to  live  in  a 
land  where  there  is  no  death  ?     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  10-13.     Go  in,  speak  unto  Pharaoh. — The  successive  services  of  the  Christian 
life : — I.  That  the  successive  sekvices  of  the  Chkistun  life  abe  bequired  not- 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

WITHSTANDING     THE    APPARENT     FAILUBE     OF     PAST     EFFOBTS    (VCr.     10,    11).       1.     This 

service  must  be  continued  by  Moses  and  Aaron  because  the  command  of  God  has 
not  yet  been  executed.  2.  This  service  must  be  continued  by  Moses  and  Aaron 
because  their  duty  has  not  been  accomplished.  3.  This  service  must  be  continued 
by  Moses  and  Aaron  because  the  slaves  must  be  freed.  4.  We  find  Moses  and 
Aaron  were  sent  on  exactly  the  same  work  as  before.  There  is  much  waste  of  effort 
in  the  Church,  because  men  are  so  restless  and  changeful  in  their  toils.  We  need 
determination,  concentration,  and  patience  in  our  effort  to  free  the  slave.  Failure 
is  no  excuse  for  fickleness  in  Christian  service.  II.  That  the  scccessive  services 
OF  the  Christian  life  are  more  difficult  in  their  requikemexts.  The  first 
injunction  given  to  Moses  was  to  call  the  elders  of  Israel  together  that  he  might 
communicate  to  them  the  Divine  will  in  reference  to  their  nation.  Now  he  is  told 
to  go  direct  to  Pharaoh.  The  language  of  the  12th  verse  shows  that  Moses  regarded 
the  service  as  increased  in  rigour.  1.  This  increased  rigour  of  service  is  surprising. 
Must  the  scholar  who  has  failed  in  the  alphabet  be  put  to  the  declensions  of  service? 
2.  This  increased  rigour  of  service  is  disheartening.  3.  This  increased  rigour  of 
service  is  a  discipline.  Increased  work  has  often  made  a  bad  workman  into  a  good 
one.  It  has  increased  his  responsibility.  It  has  awakened  him  to  reflection.  III. 
That  the  successive  services  of  the  Christian  life  sometimes  awaken  the 
EXPOSTULATIONS  OF  MEN  (ver.  12).  1.  These  expostulations  make  mention  of 
natural  infirmities.  "  Who  am  of  uncircumcised  lips."  It  is  unnecessary  that 
men  should  inform  God  of  their  natural  impediments  to  religious  service.  He 
knows  them.  He  is  acquainted  with  those  whom  He  sends  on  His  eriands,  with 
their  weakness  and  strength.  If  He  calls,  it  is  yours  to  obey.  2.  These  expostu- 
lations make  mention  of  past  difficulties  and  failure.  "  Behold,  the  Children  of 
Israel  have  not  hearkened  unto  me."  3.  These  expostulations  are  presumptuous. 
Lessons  :  1.  Not  to  shrink  from  tlie  successive  services  of  the  Christian  life.  2. 
To  leave  all  the  moral  work  of  our  life  to  the  choice  of  God.  3.  Not  to  imperil  our 
welfare  by  expostulation  with  the  providence  of  heaven.  4.  To  concentrate  our 
energies  patiently  on  one  Christian  enterprise.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Perseverance : 
— Johnson  tells  us  that  "all  the  performances  of  human  art,  at  which  we  look 
with  praise  and  wonder,  are  instances  of  the  resistless  force  of  perseverance;  it 
is  by  this  that  the  quarry  becomes  a  pyramid,  and  that  distant  countries  are  united 
by  canals.  If  a  man  were  to  compare  the  effect  of  a  single  stroke  of  the  pickaxe, 
or  of  one  impression  of  the  spade  with  the  general  design  or  the  last  result,  he  would 
be  overwhelmed  by  the  sense  of  their  disproportion  ;  yet  those  petty  operations 
incessantly  continued,  in  time  surmount  the  greatest  difficulties,  and  mountains  are 
levelled  and  oceans  bounded  By  the  slender  force  of  human  beings."  The  great 
Freetrader's  motto  was  that  of  the  needle,  "  I  go  through."  Having  given  himself 
to  the  cause,  he  was  not  the  man  to  desert  it ;  undismayed  by  reproach  and  laughter, 
and  undaunted  by  the  tremendous  power  of  his  opponents,  he  pushed  on  in  bis 
arduous  task,  clearing  the  way  foot  by  foot  by  dint  of  dogged  resolution  and 
unflagging  energy.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-27.  These  be  the  heads  of  their  fathers'  houses. — The  gene j  logy  of  the 
Church  : — I.  That  it  was,  hum.vnly  speaking,  of  very  unpretentious  origin.  II. 
That  it  was,  morally  speaking,  of  a  very  miscellaneous  character.  We  have  names 
in  this  list  of  very  varied  moral  worth.  Some  noted  for  their  piety,  others  remark- 
able for  their  profanity.  The  Church  has  now  a  mixed  genealogy.  All  down  through 
the  ages  the  tares  and  wheat  have  been  growing  together,  and  they  will  do  so  until 
Ihe  harvest,  which  is  the  end  of  the  world.  The  miscellaneous  character  of  the 
Church  is  accounted  for — 1.  By  the  diversified  temperaments  of  men.  2.  By  the 
diversified  thinkings  of  men.  3.  By  the  diversified  character  of  men.  4.  By  the 
diversified  alliances  of  men.  IH.  That  it  was,  socially  speaking,  of  very  great 
influence.  It  had  a  great  political  influence.  The  Jewish  nation  was  for  a  long 
time  a  theocracy.  God  was  its  king.  Heaven  was  its  parliament.  The  priests  were 
of  supreme  influence  in  the  nation.  The  community  was  eminently  religious  in 
idea  and  sentiment.  Hence,  from  the  names  here  recorded  there  comes  out  a  great 
stream  of  social,  moral,  anjl  political  influence  upon  humanity  to-day.  (J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  Lessons: — 1.  Order  in  genealogy  is  useful  to  give  right  understanding 
of  the  Church's  line.  2.  Heads  of  families  in  the  Church  have  been  too  prone  to 
mingle  themselves  in  strange  marriages  (ver.  15).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  A  pano- 
ramic glance  at  history  : — L  We  see  the  mass  of  lives  that  are  crowded  into  a 
bbief  era.     The  ages  soon  empty  their  contents  into  eternity.     II.  We  see  how 


CHIP,  vu.]  EXODUS.  135 

THK    MINUTE    DETAILS    OP   INDIVIDUAL    LIFE    AEE   LOST    IN    THE    AGGREGATE    OF    HISTORY. 

The  heroes'  battles  are  forgotten.  The  remembrance  of  our  great  calamities  is  no 
more.  The  life  of  the  greatest  king  is  summed  up  into  a  sentence  on  the  page  of 
the  world's  history.     III.  We  see  the  great  effort  of  life  to  culminate  in,  and 

GIVE    prominence    TO,  THE    BIRTH    OF   ITS    HEROES    AND    EMANCIPATORS.       The    whole    of 

these  lives  were  preparatory  to  the  lives  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  All  before  them 
were  introductory.  There  is  a  gradual  process  in  life.  Life  is  ever  trying  to  find 
emphatic  expression  in  the  conduct  of  the  good.     History  makes  this  apparent.     IV. 

We  SEE  HERE  THAT  INDIVIDUAL  LIVES  DERIVE  THEIR  GREATNESS  FROM  THE  CALL  OF  GOD 
TO  SERVICE,  RATHER   THAN  FROM    SOCIAL   CONSIDERATIONS.       (J.  S.  Excll,  M.A.)  The 

genealogical  table : — We  have  here  a  genealogy  of  those  two  great  patriots,  Moses 
and  Aaron,  to  show  that  they  were  Israelites,  bone  of  their  bone,  and  tlesh  of  their 
flesh,  whom  they  were  sent  to  deliver,  raised  up  unto  them  of  their  brethren,  as 
Christ  also  should  be,  who  w^as  to  be  the  Prophet  and  Priest,  the  Redeemer  and  Law- 
giver, of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  whose  genealogy  also  was  to  be  carefully  preserved. 
The  heads  of  the  houses  of  three  of  the  tribes  are  here  named.  Eeuben,  Simeon, 
and  Levi  are  thus  dignified  here  because  they  three  were  left  under  marks  of  infamy 
by  their  dying  father ;  and  Moses  would  put  this  peculiar  honour  upon  them  to 
magnify  God's  mercy  in  their  repentance  and  remission,  as  a  pattern  to  them  that 
should  afterward  believe  :  the  two  first  seem  to  be  mentioned  only  for  the  sake  of 
Levi,  from  whom  Moses  and  Aaron  descended,  and  all  the  priests  of  the  Jewish 
Church,    {M.  Henry.) 


CHAPTER  VIL 

Vers.  1,  2.  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh. — The  moral  position  in  xcMch 
some  men  stand  to  others : — God  made  Moses  to  be  a  god  to  Pharaoh,  and  Aaron  to 
be  a  prophet.  There  are  many  good  and  noble  men  in  the  world  to-day,  who  are 
gods,  the  instructors  and  rulers,  of  their  fellow-creatures.  I.  This  exalted  moraii 
POSITION  IS  the  result  OF  DiviNE  ALLOTMENT.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses, 
see,  I  have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh."  XL  This  exalted  moral  position  involves 
ARDUOUS  WORK  AND  TERRIBLE  RESPONSIBILITY.  1.  The  tiuc  gods  of  socioty  havo  Some- 
thing more  to  do  than  to  amuse  it.  The  bearing  of  their  efforts  has  reference  to  souls, 
to  man's  life  in  its  relation  to  the  Infinite.  A  man  whose  highest  aim  is  to  excite 
the  merriment  of  society,  is  too  far  removed  from  divinity  to  be  mistaken  for  a 
god.  2.  The  true  gods  of  society  find  their  employment  in  communicating  to  men 
the  messages  of  God.  They  come  to  teach  us  ;  to  awaken  us  ;  to  enable  us  to 
fulfil  the  will  of  God.     Hence  their  work  is  arduous  and  responsible.    III.  This 

EXALTED    MORAL   POSITION    IS    MOST    EFFICIENTLY   EMPLOYED    IN    SEEKING    THE    FREEDOM 

OP  MEN.  But  for  the  slavery  of  Israel  Moses  would  not  have  been  a  god  unto 
Pharaoh.  The  position  is  the  outcome  of  a  condition  of  things  it  ought  to  remove. 
It  is  not  for  self-aggrandizement.  It  is  to  give  men  the  freedom  of  a  Divine  salva- 
tion.    {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  I  will  harden  Pharaoh's  heart,  and  multiply  My  signs  and  My 
wonders. — The  struggle  between  God's  will  and  Pharaoh's  : — The  text  brings  before 
us  the  two  great  results  which  God  forewarned  Moses  would  rise  from  the  struggle 
between  His  will  and  Pharaoh's.  On  the  one  hand,  the  tyranny  was  to  be  gradually 
overthrown  by  the  sublime  manifestations  of  the  power  of  the  Lord ;  on  the  other, 
the  heart  of  Pharaoh  himself  was  to  be  gradually  hardened  in  the  conflict  with  the 
Lord.  I.  Why  was  the  overthrow  of  Pharaoh's  tyranny  through  the  miracles 
OF  Moses  so  gradual?  Why  did  not  God,  by  one  overwhelming  miracle,  crush 
for  ever  the  power  of  the  king?  1.  It  was  not  God's  purpose  to  terrify  Pharaoh 
into  submission.  He  treats  men  as  voluntary  creatures,  and  endeavours,  by 
appealing  to  all  that  is  highest  in  their  natures,  to  lead  them  into  submission. 
2.  In  his  determination  to  keep  Israel  in  slavery,  Pharaoh  had  two  supports — hia 
confidence  in  his  own  power,  and  the  flatteries  of  the  magicians.  Through  both 
these  sources  the  miracles  appealed  to  the  very  heart  of  the  man.  3.  The  miracles 
appealed  to  Pharaoh  through  the  noblest  thing  he  had  left — his  own  sense  of 
religion.    When  the  sacred  river  became  blood,  and  the  light  turned  to  darkness, 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

and  the  lightning  gleamed  before  him,  he  must  have  felt  that  the  hidden  God  of 
nature  was  speaking  to  him.  Not  until  be  had  been  warned  and  appealed  to  in  the 
most  powerful  manner  did  the  final  judgment  come.  II.  We  ake  told  that  the 
HEART  CF  Pharaoh  was  hardened  by  the  miracles  which  overthrew  his  pur- 
pose. What  does  this  mean  ?  One  of  the  most  terrible  facts  in  the  world  is  the 
battle  between  God's  will  and  man's.  In  Pharaoh  we  see  an  iron  will  manifesting 
itself  in  tremendous  resistance,  the  results  of  which  were  the  hardening  and  the 
overthrow.  Tliere  are  three  possible  explanations  of  the  hardening  of  Pharaoh's 
heart.  1.  It  may  be  attributed  entirely  to  the  Divine  sovereignty.  But  this 
explanation  is  opposed  to  the  letter  of  Scripture.  We  read  that  Pharaoh  hardened 
his  heart.  2.  We  may  attribute  it  wholly  to  Pharaoh  himself.  But  the  Bible  says 
distinctly,  "  The  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart."  3.  We  may  combii:ie  the  two 
statements,  and  thus  we  shall  get  at  the  truth.  It  is  true  that  the  Lord  hardened 
Pharaoh,  and  true  also  that  Pharaoh  hardened  himself.  {E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.) 
Hardening  of  conscience : — It  is  a  very  terrible  thing  to  let  conscience  begin  to 
grow  hard,  for  it  soon  chills  into  northern  iron  and  steel.  It  is  like  the  freezing 
of  a  pond.  The  first  film  of  ice  is  scarcely  perceptible ;  keep  the  water  stirring 
and  you  will  prevent  the  frost  from  hardening  it ;  but  once  let  it  film  over  and 
remain  quiet,  the  glaze  thickens  over  the  surface,  and  it  thickens  still,  and  at  last 
it  is  so  firm  that  a  waggon  might  be  drawn  over  the  solid  ice.  So  with  conscience, 
it  films  over  gradually,  until  at  last  it  becomes  hard  and  unfeeling,  and  is  not  crushed 
even  with  jjonderous  loads  of  iniquity.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  Seven  chin-act  eristics  of 
Pharaoh : —  vl.  Ignorant  (chap.  v.  2).  II.  Disobedient  (chap.  v.  2).  III.  Un- 
believing (chap.  v.  9).  IV.  Foolish  (chap.  viii.  10).  V.  Hardened  (chap.  viii. 
15).  VI.  Privileged  (chap.  ix.  1).  VIL  Lost  (chap.  xiv.  26-28).  (C.  Inglis.) 
Judicial  hardness  of  heart  inflicted  by  God : — I.  I  shall  give  some  gener.u.  obser- 
vations from  the  story ;  for  in  the  story  of  Pharaoh  we  have  the  exact 
platform  of  a  hard  heart.  1.  Between  the  hard  heart  and  God  there  is  an 
actual  contest  who  shall  have  the  better.  The  parlies  contesting  are  God  and 
Pharaoh.  2.  The  sin  that  hardened  Pharaoh,  and  put  him  upon  this  contest, 
was  covetousness  and  interest  oil  State.  3.  This  contest  on  Pharaoh's  part  is 
managed  with  slightings  and  contempt  of  God  ;  on  God's  part,  with  mercy 
and  condescension.  4.  The  first  plague  on  Pharaoh's  heart  is  delusion.  Moses 
worketh  miracles,  turneth  Aaron's  rod  into  a  serpent,  rivers  into  blood,  bringeth 
frogs,  and  the  matijians  still  do  the  same;  God  pcrmitteth  these  magical  im- 
postures, to  leave  Pharaoh  in  his  wilful  error.  5.  God  was  not  wanting  to  give 
Pharaoh  sufficient  means  of  conviction.  The  magicians  turned  their  rods  into 
serpents,  but  "Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods"  (ver.  12);  which 
showeth  God's  super-eminent  power.  6.  Observe,  in  one  of  the  plagues  Israel 
might  have  stolen  away,  whether  Pharaoh  would  or  no  (chap.  x.  22,  23)  :  but  God 
had  more  miracles  to  be  done.  When  He  hath  to  do  witli  a  hard  heart,  He  will 
not  steal  out  of  the  field,  but  go  away  with  honour  and  triumph.  This  was  to  be  a 
public  instance,  and  for  intimation  to  the  world  (1  Sam.  vi.  6).  The  Phihstines 
took  warning  by  it,  and  it  will  be  our  condemnation  if  we  do  not.  7.  In  all 
these  plagues  I  observe  that  Pharaoh  now  and  then  had  his  devout  pangs.  In  a 
hard  heart  there  may  be  some  relentings,  but  no  true  repentance.  8.  In  process  of 
time  his  hardness  turns  into  rage  and  downright  malice  (chap.  x.  28).  Men  first 
slight  the  truth,  and  then  are  hardened  against  it,  and  then  come  to  persecute  it. 
A  river,  when  it  hath  been  long  kept  up,  swelleth  and  beareth  down  the  bank  and 
rampire ;  so  do  wicked  men  rage  when  their  consciences  cannot  withstand  the 
light,  and  their  hearts  wiU  not  yield  to  it.  9.  At  length  Pharaoh  is  willing  to  let 
them  go.  After  much  ado  God  may  get  something  from  a  hard  heart ;  but  it  is  no 
sooner  given  but  retracted ;  like  fire  struck  out  of  a  flint,  it  is  hardly  got,  and 
quickly  gone  (Hosea  vi.  4).  10.  The  last  news  that  we  hear  of  hardening  Pharaoh's 
heart  was  a  little  before  his  destruction  (chap.  xiv.  8).  Hardness  of  heart  will  not 
leave  us  till  it  hath  wrought  our  full  and  final  destruction.  Never  any  were  hardened 
but  to  their  own  ruin.  II.  How  God  hardens.  1.  Negatively.  (1)  God  infuseth 
no  hardness  and  sin  as  he  infuseth  grace.  All  influences  from  heaven  are  sweet 
and  good,  not  sour.  Evil  cannot  come  from  the  Father  of  lights.  God 
enforceth  no  man  to  do  evil.  (2)  God  doth  not  excite  the  inward  propension  to  sin  ; 
that  is  Satan's  work.  2.  Afiirmatively.  (1)  By  desertion,  taking  away  the  restraints 
of  grace,  whereby  He  lets  them  loose  to  their  own  hearts  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  12).  Man,  in 
regard  to  his  inclinations  to  sin,  is  like  a  greyhound  held  by  a  slip  or  collar ;  when 
the  hare  is  in  sight,  take  away  the  slip,  and  the  greyhound  runneth  violently  after 


cBAP.  VII.]  EXODUS.  137 

the  hare,  according  to  his  inbred  disposition.  Men  are  held  in  by  the  restraints 
of  grace,  which,  when  removed,  they  are  left  to  their  own  swing,  and  run  into  all 
excess  of  riot.  (2)  By  tradition.  He  delivereth  them  up  to  the  power  of  Satan,  who 
worketh  upon  the  corrupt  nature  of  man,  and  hardeneth  it ;  he  stirreth  him  up  as 
the  executioner  of  God's  curse  ;  as  the  evil  spirit  had  leave  to  seduce  Ahab  (1  Kings 
xxii.  21,  22).  (.3)  There  is  an  active  providence  which  deposeth  and  propoundeth 
such  objects  as,  meeting  with  a  wicked  heart,  maketh  it  more  hard.  God  maketh 
the  best  things  the  wicked  enjoy  to  turn  to  the  fall  and  destruction  of  those  that 
have  them.  In  what  a  sad  case  are  wicked  men  left  by  God !  Mercies  corrupt  them, 
and  corrections  enrage  them  ;  as  unsavoury  herbs,  the  more  they  are  pounded,  the 
more  they  stink.  As  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God,  so 
all  things  work  for  the  worst  to  the  wicked  and  impenitent.  Providences  and 
ordinances  ;  we  read  of  them  that  wrest  the  scriptures  to  their  own  destruction 
(2  Peter  iii.  16).  Some  are  condemned  to  worldly  happiness ;  by  ease  and  abund- 
ance of  prosperity  they  are  entangled :  "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them  " 
(Prov.  i.  32)  ;  as  brute  creatures,  when  in  good  plight,  grow  fierce  and  man-keen. 
If  we  will  find  the  sin,  God  will  find  the  occasion.  (T.  Manton,  D.I).)  A  hardened 
heart : — God  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart  by  submitting  to  him  those  truths,  argu- 
ments, and  evidences  which  he  ought  to  have  accepted,  but  the  rejection  of  which 
recoiled  upon  himself,  and  hardened  the  heart  they  did  not  convince.  Everybody 
knows,  in  the  present  day,  that  if  you  listen,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  to  great  truths, 
and,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  reject  them,  you  grow  in  your  capacity  of  repulsion  and 
ability  to  reject  them,  and  the  more  hardened  you  become  ;  and  thus,  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  that  was  meant  to  melt,  will  be  the  occasion  of  hardening  your  heart 
— not  because  God  hates  you,  but  because  you  reject  the  gospel.  The  sun  itself 
melts  some  substances,  whilst,  from  the  nature  of  the  substances,  it  hardens  others. 
You  must  not  think  that  God  stands  in  the  way  of  your  salvation.  There  is  noth- 
ing between  the  greatest  sinner  and  instant  salvation,  but  his  own  unwillingness  to 
lean  on  the  Saviour,  and  be  saved.  (/.  Gumming,  D.D.)  The  punishment  of 
unbelief: — The  gospel  is  "  the  savour  of  life  unto  life,-  and  of  death  unto  death," 
as  one  and  the  same  savour  is  to  some  creatures  refreshing,  to  others  poisonous. 
But  that  the  gospel  is  unto  death,  is  not  a  part  of  its  original  intention,  but  a  con- 
sequence of  perverse  unbelief;  but  when  this  takes  place,  that  it  is  unto  death 
comes  as  a  i^unishment  from  God.  Thus  the  expression  "hardening"  presup- 
poses an  earlier  condition,  when  the  heart  was  susceptible,  but  which  ceased 
in  consequence  of  the  misuse,  of  Divine  revelations  and  gifts.  As  Pharaoh 
hardens  himself,  so  God  hardens  him  at  the  same  time.  (Otto  von  Gerlach,  D.D.) 
Heart-hardening  : — 1.  Both  the  expressions  employed  and  the  facts  themselves  lead 
to  the  conclusion,  that  hardening  can  only  take  place  where  there  is  a  conflict  between 
human  freedom  and  Divine  grace.  2.  Again,  it  follow^s  from  the  notion  of  harden- 
ing, that  it  can  only  result  from  a  conscious  and  obstinate  resistance  to  the  will  of 
God.  It  cannot  take  place  where  there  is  either  ignorance  or  error.  So  long  as  a 
man  has  not  been  fully  convinced  that  he  is  resisting  the  power  and  will  of  God, 
there  remains  a  possibility  that  as  soon  as  the  conviction  of  this  is  brought  home 
to  his  mind,  his  heart  may  be  changed,  and  so  long  as  there  is  still  a  possibility 
of  his  conversion,  he  cannot  be  said  to  be  really  hardened.  The  commencement  of 
hardening  is  really  hardening  itself,  for  it  contains  the  whole  process  of  hardening 
potentially  within  itself.  This  furnishes  us  with  two  new  criteria  of  hardening ; 
(1)  before  it  commences,  there  is  already  in  existence  a  certain  moral  condition, 
which  only  needs  to  be  called  into  activity  to  become  positive  hardness  ;  and  (2)  as 
soon  as  it  has  actually  entered  upon  the  very  first  stage,  the  completion  of  the 
hardening  may  be  regarded  as  certain.  In  what  relation,  then,  does  God  stand  to 
the  hardening  of  the  heart?  Cei'tainly  His  part  is  not  limited  to  mere  permission. 
Hengstenberg  has  proved  that  this  is  utterly  inadmissible  on  doctrinal  grounds  ; 
and  an  impartial  examination  of  the  Scriptural  record  will  show  that  it  is  exegeti- 
cally  inadmissible  here.  No.  God  desires  the  hardening,  and,  therefore,  self- 
hardening  is  always  at  the  same  time  hardening  through  God.  The  moral  condition, 
which  we  have  pointed  out  as  the  pre-requisite  of  hardening  the  soil  from  which  it 
springs,  is  a  man's  own  fault,  the  result  of  the  free  determination  of  his  own  will. 
But  it  is  not  without  the  co-operation  of  God  that  this  moral  condition  becomes 
actual  hardness.  Up  to  a  certain  point  the  will  of  God  operates  on  a  man  in  the 
form  of  mercy  drawing  to  himself,  He  desires  his  salvation ;  but  henceforth  the 
mercy  is  changed  into  judicial  wrath,  and  desires  his  condemnation.  The  will  of 
God  (as  the  will  of  the  Creator),  when  contrasted  with  the  will  of  man  (as  the  will 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

of  the  creature),  is  from  the  outset  irresistible  and  overpowering.  But  yet  the  will 
of  man  is  able  to  resist  the  will  of  God,  since  God  has  created  him  for  freedom, 
self-control,  and  responsibility  ;  and  thus  when  the  human  will  has  taken  an  ungodly 
direction  and  persists  in  it,  the  Divine  wiU  necessarily  gives  way.  Hence,  the 
human  will  is  at  the  same  time  dependent  on  the  Divine  will,  and  independent  of 
it.  The  solution  of  this  contradiction  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  the  will  of 
God  is  not  an  inflexibly  rigid  thing,  but  something  living,  and  that  it  maintains  a 
different  bearing  towards  a  man's  obedience,  from  that  which  it  assumes  towards 
his  stubborn  resistance.  In  itself  it  never  changes,  whatever  the  circumstances 
may  be  ;  but  in  relation  to  a  creature,  endowed  with  freedom,  the  manifestation  of 
this  will  differs  according  to  the  different  attitudes  assumed  by  the  freedom  of  the 
creature.  In  itself  it  is  exactly  the  same  will  which  blesses  the  obedient  and  con- 
demns the  impenitent — there  has  been  no  change  in  its  nature,  but  only  in  its 
operations — just  as  the  heat  of  the  sun  which  causes  one  tree  to  bloom  is  precisely 
the  same  as  that  by  which  another  is  withered.  As  there  are  two  states  of  the 
human  will — obedience  and  disobedience — so  are  there  two  corresponding  states  of 
the  Divine  will,  mercy  and  wrath,  and  the  twofold  effects  of  these  are  a  blessing  and 
a  curse.  (-/.  //.  Kurtz,  D.D.)  Lessons: — 1.  First  and  foremost,  we  learn  the 
insudiciency  of  even  the  most  astounding  miracles  to  subdue  the  rebellious  will, 
to  change  the  heart,  or  to  subject  a  man  unto  God.  Our  blessed  Lord  Himself 
has  said  of  a  somewhat  analogous  case,  that  men  would  not  believe  even  though 
one  rose  from  the  dead.  And  His  statement  has  been  only  too  amply  veri- 
fied in  the  history  of  the  world  since  His  own  resurrection.  Religion  is  matter  of 
the  heart,  and  no  intellectual  conviction,  without  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
affects  the  inmost  springs  of  our  lives.  2.  A  more  terrible  exhibition  of  the  daring 
of  human  pride,  the  confidence  of  worldly  power,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  than 
that  presented  by  the  history  of  this  Pharaoh  can  scarcely  be  conceived.  And  yet 
the  lesson  seems  to  have  been  overlooked  by  too  many !  Not  only  sacred  history, 
but  possibly  our  own  experience,  may  furnish  instances  of  similar  tendencies  ;  and 
in  the  depths  of  his  own  soul  each  believer  must  have  felt  his  danger  in  this  respect, 
for  "  the  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked."  3.  Lastly, 
resistance  to  God  must  assuredly  end  in  fearful  judgment.  Each  conviction  sup- 
pressed, each  admonition  stifled,  each  loving  offer  rejected,  tends  towards  increasing 
spiritual  insensibility,  and  that  in  which  it  ends.  It  is  wisdom  and  safety  to  watch 
for  the  blessed  influences  of  God's  Spirit,  and  to  throw  open  our  hearts  to  the  sunlight 
of  His  grace.  (A.  Edersheim,  D.D.)  Providence  penal: — In  accordance  with  a 
vow  a  Hindu  once  bandaged  up  his  eyes  so  tightly  that  not  a  single  ray  of  light  could 
enter  them.  So  he  continued  for  years.  At  last,  when  his  vow  was  completed,  he 
threw  off  his  bandage,  bat  only  to  find  that  through  disuse  he  had  completely  lost 
his  sight.  In  one  sense,  he  had  deprived  himself  of  sight ;  in  another,  God  had  de- 
prived him  of  it.  So  it  was  with  Pharaoh's  spiritual  sight.  Then  comes  the  warn- 
ing of  consequences.  It  is  very  pleasant  to  go  floating  down  the  river  toward  the 
rapids.  The  current  is  so  gentle  that  one  can  easily  regain  the  bank.  But  remain 
in  that  current,  in  spite  of  all  warnings,  just  one  moment  too  long,  and  you  and 
your  boat  will  go  over  the  falls.     (S.  S.  Times.) 

Ver.  5.  The  Egjrptians  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord. — A  knowledge  of  God : — I. 
That  the  worst  of  men  will  one  day  have  to  recognize  the  reality  of  the  Ditinb 
EXISTENCE.  "  And  the  Egyptians  shall  know,"  &c.  1.  Men  of  bad  moral  cha- 
racter shall  know  this.     2.  Men  of  sceptical  dispositions  shall  know  this.     II.  That 

THEY   WILL   BE    BROUGHT    TO   A    RECOGNITION     OF     THE     DiVINE     EXISTENCE     BY   SEVERE 

JUDGMENTS.  1.  Some  men  will  listen  to  the  voice  of  reason.  The  Egyptians  would 
not.      2.    Such  will  learn  the  existence  of  God  by  judgment.     III.    That   the 

EXISTENCE    OF    GOD    IS    A   GUABANTEE     FOR     THE     SAFETY    OF   THE    GOOD.        "  And    bring 

out,"  &c.,  from  moral  and  temporal  bondage  into  Canaan,  of  peace  and  quiet.  (J. 
S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  plagues  : — 1.  These  plagues  are  arranged  in  regular  order, 
and  gradually  advance  from  the  external  to  the  internal,  and  from  the  mediate  to 
the  immediate  hand  of  God.  They  are  in  number  ten,  which  is  one  of  the  numbers 
denoting  perfection.  They  are  divided  first  into  nine  and  one,  the  last  one  standing 
clearly  apart  from  all  the  others  in  the  awful  shriek  of  woe  which  it  draws  forth 
from  every  Egyptian  home.  The  nine  are  arranged  in  threes.  In  the  first  of  each 
three  the  warning  is  given  to  Pharaoh  in  the  morning  (ver.  15  ;  chaps,  viii.  20  ;  ix.  13). 
In  the  first  and  second  of  each  three  the  plague  is  announced  beforehand  (chaps, 
viii.  1 ;  ix.  1 ;  x.  1) ;  in  the  third  not  (chaps,  viii.  16  ;  ix.  8  ;  x.  21).    At  the  third 


CHAP.  VII.]  EXODUS.  139 

the  magicians  of  Pharaoh  acknowledge  the  finger  of  God  (chap.  viii.  19),  at  the 
sixth  they  cannot  stand  before  Moses  (chap.  ix.  11),  and  at  the  ninth  Pharaoh 
refuses  to  see  the  face  of  Moses  any  more  (chap.  x.  28).  In  the  first  three  Aaron 
uses  the  rod,  in  the  second  three  it  is  not  mentioned,  in  the  third  three  Moses  uses 
it,  though  in  the  last  of  them  only  his  hand  is  mentioned.  All  these  marks  of 
order  lie  on  the  face  of  the  narrative,  and  point  to  a  deeper  order  of  nature  and 
reason  out  of  which  they  spring.  2.  The  plagues  were  characterized  by  increasing 
severity,  a  method  of  procedure  to  which  we  see  an  analogy  in  the  warnings  which 
the  providential  government  of  the  world  often  puts  before  the  sinner.  3.  These 
plagues  were  of  a  miraculous  character.  As  such  the  historian  obviously  intends 
us  to  regard  them,  and  they  are  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  the  "  wonders  "  which  God 
wrought  in  the  land  of  Ham  (Psa.  cv.  27),  as  His  miracles  in  Egypt  (Psa.  cvi.  7), 
and  as  His  signs  and  prodigies  which  He  sent  into  the  midst  of  Egypt  (Psa.  cxxsv.  9). 
It  is  only  under  this  aspect  that  we  can  accept  the  narrative  as  historical.  4.  That 
the  immediate  design  of  these  inflictions  was  the  deUvering  of  the  Israeliteg 
from  their  cruel  bondage  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  narrative,  but  with  this  other 
ends  were  contemplated.  The  manifestation  of  God's  own  glory  was  here,  as  in  all 
His  works,  the  highest  object  in  view,  and  this  required  that  the  powers  of  Egyptian 
idolatry,  with  which  the  interest  of  Satan  was  at  that  time  peculiarly  identified, 
should  be  brought  into  the  conflict  and  manifestly  confounded.  For  this  reason 
it  was  that  nearly  every  miracle  performed  by  Moses  had  relation  to  some  object  of 
idolatrous  worship  among  the  Egyptians  (see  chap.  xii.  12).  For  this  reason,  also, 
it  was  that  the  first  wonders  w^rought  had  such  distinct  reference  to  the  exploits  of 
the  magicians,  who  were  the  wonder-workers  connected  with  that  gigantic  system 
of  idolatry,  and  the  main  instruments  of  its  support  and  credit  in  the  world.  They 
were  thus  naturally  drawn,  as  well  as  Pharaoh,  into  the  contest,  and  became,  along 
with  him,  the  visible  heads  and  representatives  of  the  "  spiritual  wickedness  "  of 
Egypt.  And  since  they  refused  to  own  the  supremacy  and  accede  to  the  demands 
of  Jehovah,  or  witnessing  that  first,  and  as  it  may  be  called  harmless,  triumph  of 
His  power  over  theirs — since  they  resolved,  as  the  adversaries  of  God's  and  the 
instruments  of  Satan's  interest  in  the  world,  to  prolong  the  contest,  there  remained 
no  alternative  but  to  visit  the  land  with  a  series  of  judgments,  such  as  might  clearly 
prove  the  utter  impotence  of  its  fancied  deities  to  protect  their  votaries  from  the 
might  and  vengeance  of  the  Uving  God.  {A.  Nevin,  D.D.)  The  variety  of  the 
plagues  : — The  diversity  and  various  sorts  of  those  plagues — each  sorer  than  other. 
The  first  and  second  were  upon  the  water,  the  third  and  fourth  were  upon  the 
earth,  the  five  next  were  upon  the  air,  and  the  tenth  falls  upon  the  firstborn  of 
men,  insomuch  that  their  punishment  was  absolute,  not  only  as  to  the  number  of 
the  plagues,  which  was  a  number  of  perfection,  but  more  especially  in  respect  of 
their  nature,  matter,  and  manner,  all  various  and  exquisite.  For — I.  They  were 
PLAGUED  BY  ALL  KIND  OF  CREATURES.  1.  By  all  the  elements ;  as  water,  earth,  air  and 
fire.  2.  By  sundry  animals;  as  frogs,  lice,  caterpillars,  flies,  and  locusts.  3.  By 
men  ;  as  Moses  and  Aaron  were  instruments  in  God's  hand.  4.  By  the  angels  who 
ministered  those  plagues,  both  the  evil  angels  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  44),  whom  He  sent 
among  them,  and  the  good  that  were  employed  in  destroying  their  firstborn  (chap, 
xii.  3,  (fee),  yea,  by  the  very  stars,  who  all  combined  against  them — with  the  sun 
and  moon — in  suspending  their  light  from  that  land — during  the  three  days'  dark- 
ness— as  all  ashamed  to  look  upon  such  sinful  inhabitants  thereof,  &c.     II.  Thei 

WERE    PLAGUED    IN   ALL    THINGS   WHEREIN    THEY    MOST   DELIGHTED.       1.    In    all    manner 

of  their  luscious  and  delicious  fruit,  by  its  being  universally  blasted  or  devoured, 
&c.  2.  In  their  goodliest  cattle — some  of  which  they  worshipped — all  destroyed  by 
murrain,  &c.  3.  In  their  River  Nilus,  which  they  adored,  and  for  which  end,  it  is 
supposed,  Pharaoh  was  going  down  to  pay  his  homage  to  that  idol,  when  God  bade 
Moses  go  meet  him  in  the  morning  (ver.  15).  This  is  intimated  in  Ezek. 
xxix.  3,  9,  where  they  are  twitted  twice  for  idolizing  it,  but  God  made  it  loathsome 
to  them  (ver.  18).  4.  In  the  fish,  which  was  their  daily  and  delicate  diet 
(Numb.  xi.  5),  for  the  flesh  of  many  beasts  they,  out  of  superstition,  would  not  eat 
of,  as  abominable  (chap.  viii.  26).  All  the  fish  died  when  their  water  was  turned 
into  blood  (ver.  21).  5.  In  their  bodies,  wherein  they  greatly  prided  them- 
selves, but  the  boils  God  smote  them  which  spoiled  all  their  beauties  in  their  well- 
built  bodies.  6.  In  their  children,  when  in  every  house  there  was  a  dead  corpse, 
and  that  not  of  a  slave  or  servant,  but  of  their  firstborn.  All  these  were  the  idols 
of  Egypt  (chap.  xii.  12 ;  Zeph.  ii,  11).  III.  They  were  plagued  in  all  their 
SENSES.     1.  In  their  seeing ;  for  they  lost  all  sight  when  the  plague  of  darkness  took 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

away  their  light  for  three  days,  unless  it  were  horrible  sights  mentioned  in 
Apocryplia  (Wisdom  xvii.  6,  7).  However,  their  comfort  of  seeing  they  lost.  2.  In 
their  hearing.  Oh,  what  a  consternation !  Dread  and  terror  seized  upon  them 
when  God  uttered  His  terrible  voice  in  those  frightful  thunders  in  the  plague  of 
hail,  when  fire  ran  along  upon  the  ground,  yet  did  not  melt  the  hailstones  (chap.  ix. 
23).  This  must  be  supernatural,  and  therefore  the  more  dreadful,  which  might 
make  them  thmk  that  God  was  come  to  rain  hell-fire  out  of  heaven  upon  them  as 
He  had  done,  before  this,  upon  wicked  Sodom  (Gen.  xix.).  How  did  this  voice  of 
the  Lord  break  the  cedars,  &c.  (Psa.  xxix.  5,  6,  &c.),  yea,  every  tree  of  the  field 
(chap.  ix.  25).  3.  In  their  smelling,  both  by  the  stench  of  the  frogs  (chap.  viii.  14), 
which  might  mind  them  of  their  sin  that  made  them  stink  before  God,  and  like- 
wise by  the  stinking  rotten  matter  that  ran  out  of  those  ulcers  wherewith  they  were 
smitten  (cbap.  ix.  9-11).  As  they  had  oppressed  God's  people  with  furnace 
work  in  making  brick,  so  the  ashes  of  that  furnace  became  burning  boils  that  break 
forth  into  putrid  running  sores,  &c.  4.  In  their  tasting,  both  by  the  waters  turned 
into  blood,  because  in  them  they  had  shed  the  blood  of  the  male  Hebrew  children. 
These  bloody  men  had  blood  to  drink,  for  they  were  worthy  (Eev.  xvi.  6).  Their 
Eiver  Nilus  they  used  to  boast  of  to  the  Grecians,  sajing,  in  mockery  to  them,  "  If 
God  should  forget  to  rain,  they  might  chance  to  perish  for  it."  The  rain,  thay 
thought,  was  of  God,  but  not  their  river  (Ezek.  xxix.  3,  9),  therefore,  to  confute 
them  in  their  confidence,  as  God  threatens  to  dry  it  up  (Isa.  xix.  5,  6),  so  here  to 
bereave  them  of  all  the  comfortable  use  of  it ;  they  now  loathed  to  drink  of  it  (vers. 
18-20).  God  cursed  their  blessings  (Mai.  ii.  2),  and  also  by  their  thirst 
thereby  procured.  Drinking  such  bloody  water  did  rather  torture  their  taste  than 
please  tbeir  palate,  or  quench  their  thirst.  5.  In  their  touching  or  feeling,  by  their 
dolorous  shooting  pangs  in  their  body,  when  the  sin  of  their  souls  broke  forth  into 
sores  of  their  bodies,  which  pained  them  so,  that,  as  they  could  not  now  sleep  in  a 
whole  skin,  so  they  gnawed  their  own  tongues  for  pain.  This  was  superadded  to 
the  bitings  of  flies,  wasps,  flying-serpents,  &c.,  whereby  some  might  be  stung  to 
death  (Pea.  Ixxviii.  45),  and  the  magicians  themselves,  who  had  so  insolently 
imitated  Moses,  the  devil  being  God's  ape,  were  branded  with  those  boils  to  detect 
their  contumacy.  Besides,  also,  the  frogs  ravaging  upon  their  bodies  so  irresistibly, 
&c.,  must  needs  be  very  offensive  to  their  sense  of  touching.  IV.  Lastly,  as  if  all 
this  had  been  too  little  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  plagues  and  punishments, 
Pharaoh  and  all  his  forces,  that  hitherto  had  escaped,  were  all  drawn  blindfold  into 
the  noose,  by  fair  way,  weather,  Ac,  and  then  were  drowned  in  the  Eed  Sea  (chap, 
xiv.  8,  9,  21,  24,  28).     (C.  Ness.) 

Ver.  6.  So  did  they. — Obedience  to  God: — I.  Ix  m€st  be  rt^kderkd  by  the 
SERVANTS  OF  GoD.  "  Moses  and  Aaron."  All  men  who  are  called  to  moral  service 
by  God  must  obey  Him.  1.  Because  He  gives  them  their  commands.  2.  Because 
He  gives  them  the  power  to  do  so.  3.  Because  He  rewards  obedience.  II.  Ix  must 
BE  co-EXTENSivE  WITH  THEIR  MISSION.  1.  It  must  be  entire.  2.  It  must  be 
cheerful.  3.  It  must  be  holy.  III.  It  will  render  their  mission  effective — 1. 
Because  it  will  lead  to  the  best  mode  of  service.  2.  Because  God  will  delight  to 
honour  it.  The  Divine  commands :  (1)  Rightfully  given.  (2)  To  be  faithfully 
executed.  (3)  To  be  diligently  obeyed.  To  be  supremely  regarded.  (J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  Fourscore  years  old. — Age  of  Moses  and  Aaron  : — Their  ages  would  have 
an  important  bearing  toward  the  work  of  these  two  men.     I.   Their  ages   would 

INDICAIE  XHAI  THEY  WERE    NOT   LIKELY   TO   BE    MISLED  BY  XHE  ENTHUSIASM    OF   YOUTH. 

The  world  is  slow  to  take  young  men  into  its  confidence.  It  soon  smiles  at  their 
visions,  and  laughs  at  their  enthusiastic  hopes.     H.  Their  ages  would  be  likely 

TO    COMMAND    THE     RESPECT     OF     THOSE     WITH     WHOM     THEY    HAD    TO    DO.       The     WOrld 

wants  men  of  tried  energy  and  long  experience  to  achieve  its  moral  emancipation  ; 
men  in  whom  hot  passion  has  calmed  into  a  settled  force.   III.  Their  ages  would  be 

AN  incentive  to  FIDELITY,  AS  THEY  HAD  SPENT  THE  YOUNGER  PART  OF  LIFE,  AND  WOULD 

BE  FORCEFULLY  REMINDED  OF  THE  FUTURE.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Delay  in  enterijij 
upon  work  of  life  : — Let  us  learn  not  to  be  impatient  for  the  discovery  of  our  true  life- 
work.  Moses  was  eighty  years  old  before  he  entered  upon  that  noble  career  by  which 
he  became  the  emancipator  and  educator  of  his  nation.  Two-thu"ds  of  his  days  were 
gone  before  he  really  touched  that  which  was  his  great,  distinctive,  and  peculiar 
labour,  and  his  enterprise  was  all  the  more  gloriously  accomplished  by  reason  of 


CHAP,  vn.]  EXODUS.  141 

the  delay.  Nor  is  this  a  solitary  instance.  The  Lord  Jesus  Himself  lived  thirty 
years,  during  most  of  which  He  was  in  training  for  a  public  ministry,  which  lasted 
only  two-and-forty  months.  John  Knox  never  entered  a  pulpit  until  he  was  over 
forty  years  of  age ;  and  much  of  the  fire  and  energy  of  his  preaching  was  owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  flame  had  been  so  long  pent  up  within  his  breast.  Havelock  was 
a  dreary  while  a  mere  lieutenant,  held  back  by  the  iniquitous  system  of  purchase, 
which  was  so  long  in  vogue  in  the  English  army ;  but,  as  it  happened,  that  was 
only  a  life-long  apprenticeship,  by  which  he  was  enabled  all  the  more  efficiently  to 
become,  at  length,  the  saviour  of  the  Indian  Empire.  So  let  no  one  chafe  and  fret 
over  the  delay  which  seems  evermore  to  keep  him  from  doing  anything  to  purpose 
for  the  world  and  his  Lord.  The  opportunity  will  come  in  its  own  season.  It  does 
come,  sooner  or  later,  to  every  man  ;  and  it  is  well  if,  when  at  length  he  hears  the 
voice  calling,  "  Moses  !  Moses  !  "  he  is  ready  with  the  answer,  "Here  am  I."  For 
while  I  would  comfort  you  with  the  assurance  that  the  hour  will  come,  I  do  not 
mean  that  you  should  be  idle  until  it  strikes.  No  ;  for  if  you  adopt  such  a  plan, 
the  certainty  is  that  you  will  not  hear  its  stroke,  or  that  you  will  not  be  ready  to 
begin  at  its  call.  The  true  principle  is  to  do  with  your  might  that  which  is  lying 
at  your  hand  day  by  day,  in  the  firm  conviction  that  you  are  thereby  training  your- 
self into  fitness  for  your  future  vocation.     (W.  H.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  They  also  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchantments. — 3Ioses 
and  the  viagicians : — I.  Moses  divinely  warned  of  Pharaoh's  demand  for  a 
SUPERNATURAL  CREDENTIAL.  When  men  profess  to  bring  a  message  from  God, 
they  should  be  prepared  to  substantiate  it  by  satisfactory  evidence.  II.  Moses 
divinely  sustained  in  meeting  the  de>und.  1.  God  will  never  forsake  those 
who  go  forth  to  implicitly  work  His  will.  2.  God  often  permits  His  enemies 
to  temporarily  triumph.  III.  Moses  commanded  to  appeal  again  to  Pharaoh 
(vers.  14-17).  1.  God's  knowledge  of  the  human  heart.  2.  God's  knowledge  of 
the  purposes  and  plans  of  men.  3.  God's  recognition  of  free  agency,  and  its  corre- 
lative responsibility.  4.  God  deals  with  men  on  the  basis  of  their  moral  freedom, 
and  according  to  their  constitutional  nature.  Lessons  :  1,  Here  we  have  a  type  of 
the  conflict  of  ages.  (1)  In  its  spirit.  (2)  In  its  aims.  (.3)  In  its  result.  2.  The 
side  to  which  we  lean,  and  for  which  we  fight,  shows  the  party  to  which  we  really 
belong.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Lessons  : — 1.  Miracles  from  God  will  not  persuade 
wicked  hearts  to  believe.  2.  Unbelieving  sinners  are  apt  to  call  in  all  instruments 
of  Satan  to  gainsay  God.  3.  Providence  hath  of  old  suffered  wisdom  to  be  abused 
to  sorcery  and  pernicious  acts  (ver.  11).  4.  God  hath  suffered  creatures  by  Satan's 
help  to  do  some  like  things  to  His  miracles.  5.  Under  God's  permission  Satan  may 
work  strange  changes  in  creatures,  but  no  miracles.  6.  God's  true  miracles  devour 
all  lying  wonders  of  Satan  (ver.  12).  7.  Wicked  hearts  harden  themselves  by  lying 
wonders  against  God,  and  therefore  are  hardened  by  Him.  8.  The  fruit  of  such 
hardening  is  rebellion  against  God's  word  and  will.  9.  God's  word  is  made  good 
in  all  the  disobedience  of  the  wicked  foretold  (ver.  13).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Man's 
effort  to  7-epudiate  the  message  of  God  by  an  imitation  of  its  miraculous  credentials  : — 
I.  That  man  has   a   right  to   expect  that   any   special  revelation   from  God 

SHOULD    BE    accompanied    BY    INFALLIBLE    AND    UNIMPEACHABLE    CREDENTIALS     (ver.    9). 

1.  We  require  these  credentials  to  vindicate  the  authority  of  the  speaker.  The 
Bible  contains  the  evidences  of  its  Divine  origin  on  its  own  pages,  for  on  every  page  we 
see  the  miracle  repeated,  the  rod  is  turned  into  a  serpent.  And  the  miracles  which 
the  book  contains,  and  the  miracle  which  it  is  in  itself,  are  sufficient  token  to  the 
honest  mind  that  it  comes  from  God.  This  evidence  is  equal  to  the  case.  It  leaves 
disobedience  without  excuse.  2.  We  require  these  credentials  to  vindicate  the 
credibility  of  the  speaker.  God  would  never  give  men  power  to  work  a  miracle  to 
authenticate  a  lie.  The  miracle  not  only  demonstrated  the  authority  of  these  men, 
but  also  the  unimpeachable  honesty  and  verity  of  their  statements.  And  so  men 
take  the  Bible  to-day;  they  perhaps  say  that  in  general  terms  the  book  has  come 
from  God,  and  has  His  authority,  and  yet  how  many  question  the  verity  of  its  con- 
tents. They  call  one  part  of  the  message  a  myth,  another  part  a  fable,  until,  indeed, 
there  is  very  little  remaining  as  true.  3.  That  God  anticipates  these  requests  on 
the  part  of  man,  and  provides  His  messengers  with  the  needed  credentials.  Any 
one  who  rejects  the  claims  of  the  Bible,  rejects  the  iighest  proof,  the  most  reliable 
evidence  ;  hence  his  condemnation  will  be  awful  as  that  of  the  rebellious  king.  4. 
The  spirit  in  which  these  credentials  should  be  investigated  and  received — (1) 
Thoughtfully.     (2)  Devoutly.     (3)  Never  sceptically.     (4)  Remember  that  the  mes- 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai".  vn. 

sengers  of  God  can  only  offer  the  credentials  divinely  permitted  to  them.  II.  That 

MEN  HAVE  EECOUESE  TO  MANY  DEVICES  TO  WEAKEN  AND  NULLIFY  THE  CREDENTIALS 
WHICH    ABE    PEESENTED    TO    THEM    IN    TOKEN    AND    SUPrORT    OF   A   DiVINE    MESSAGE    AND 

CLAIM.  "  Tlien  Pharaoh  also  called  the  wise  men  and  the  sorcerers :  nowthe  magicians 
of  Egypt,  they  also  did  in  like  manner  with  their  enchantments."  1.  We  find  that 
men  in  the  investigation  of  a  Divine  message  are  not  satisfied  with  the  evidence 
they  themselves  propose.  A  sceptical  mind  will  not  yield  even  when  it  has  attained 
evidence  for  the  truth  of  its  own  seeking.  It  is  most  criminal  in  its  unbelief.  2. 
We  find  that  men  in  the  investigation  of  a  Divine  message  often  seek  others  to  supply 
them  with  sceptical  arguments  they  are  not  clever  enough  to  produce  themselves. 
3.  We  find  that  men  endeavour  to  confirm  their  comrades  in  scepticism  by  imita- 
ting the  credentials  of  the  messengers  of  God,  But  in  vain.  The  truth-seeker  can 
distinguish  between  the  productions  of  the  two  ;  he  never  mistakes  the  enchantment 
of  the  Egyptian  for  the  miracle  of  Moses.  4.  That  the  men  who  endeavour  to  con- 
firm their  comrades  in  scepticism  respecting  the  Divine  credentials  are  subject  to 
the  truth.     The  rods  of  the  Egyptian  magicians  were  swallowed  up  by  Aaron's  rod. 

III.  Th.\T  the  MEN  WHO  REJECT  THE  CREDENTIALS  OF  DiVINE  MESSENGERS  COM- 
MENCE A  CONFLICT  WHICH  WILL  BE  PRODUCTIVE  OF  GREAT  WOE  AND  OF  FINAL  OVER- 
THROW TO  THEM.  "  And  He  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart  that  he  hearkened  not  unto 
them ;  as  the  Lord  had  said."  Lessons :  1.  That  the  messengers  of  God  can 
always  produce  Divine  credentials.  2.  That  Divine  credentials  are  often  rejected 
by  men  of  high  social  position.  3.  That  a  continued  rejection  of  Divine  credentials 
will  end  in  destruction.  4.  That  the  servants  of  God  are  often  perplexed  by  the 
conduct  of  men  in  rejecting  Divine  claims.  (/.  S.  EptcU,  M.A.)  Imitation  of  the 
good  : — The  mode  in  which  the  magicians  "  withstood  Moses  "  (see  2  Tim.  iii.  1-9) 
was  simply  by  imitating,  so  far  as  they  were  able,  whatever  he  did.  From  this  we 
learn  the  solemn  truth  that  the  most  Satanic  resistance  to  God's  testimony  in  the 
world  is  offered  by  those  who,  though  they  imitate  the  effects  of  the  truth,  have  but 
"  the  form  of  godliness,"  and  "  deny  the  power  thereof."  Persons  of  this  class  can 
do  the  same  things,  adopt  the  same  habits  and  forms,  use  the  same  phraseology, 
profess  the  same  opinions,  as  others.  How  needful  to  understand  this  !  How 
important  to  remember  that  "as  Jannes  and  Jambres  withstood  Moses,"  so  do  those 
self-loving,  world-seeking,  pleasure-hunting  professors  "resist  the  truth!"  They 
would  not  be  without  "a  form  of  godliness";  but  while  adopting  "  the  form," 
because  it  is  customary,  they  hate  "  the  power,"  because  it  involves  self-denial. 
"  The  power  "  of  godliness  involves  the  recognition  of  God's  claims,  the  implanting 
of  His  kingdom  in  the  heart,  and  the  consequent  exhibition  thereof  in  the 
whole  life  and  character;  but  the  formalist  knows  nothing  of  this,  nor  does 
he  desire  to  know  it.  He  does  not  want  his  lusts  subdued,  his  pleasures  interfered 
with,  his  passions  curbed,  his  affections  governed,  his  heart  purified.  He  wants 
just  as  much  religion  as  will  enable  him  "  to  make  the  best  of  both  worlds."  (A. 
Nevin,  D.D.)  Egyptian  magicians  :- -They  must  have  possessed  a  knowledge 

of  nature  beyond  that  of  their  countrymen,  who  had  sufficient  experience  of  the 
utility  of  such  knowledge  to  reverence  teachers  endued  with  any  rare  portion  of  it. 
The  magicians  must  have  considered  this  knowledge  as  Divine ;  and  have  come 
more  and  more  to  regard  the  different  powers  of  nature  and  the  different  objects  in 
which  these  powers  were  exhibited,  as  themselves  Divine.  They  will  have  been 
politicians  as  well  as  naturalists,  ready  to  employ  their  lore  and  the  mastery  which 
it  gave  them  over  the  things  of  the  earth,  to  uphold  the  authority  of  the  monarch, 
or  to  promote  his  plans.  They  will  therefore  have  fallen  into  a  scheme  of  trick  and 
dissimulation,  which  would  have  been  ineffectual  and  impossible  if  there  had  not 
been  some  truths  lying  at  the  root  of  it;  and  some  real  assurance  in  their  own 
minds  both  of  those  truths  and  of  their  own  capacities.  It  is  this  mixture  of  faith 
with  insincerity — of  actual  knowledge  with  the  assumption  of  knowledge,  of 
genuine  power  with  the  desire  to  make  the  power  felt  and  worshipped,  a  readiness 
therefore  to  abuse  it  to  low  grovelling  purposes — which  we  have  to  recognize  in 
the  impostures  of  all  subsequent  ages,  and  to  which  we  are  here  introduced  in  one 
of  its  primitive  manifestations.  It  was  most  natural  for  a  politic  monarch  to  wish 
that  a  body  of  strangers,  who  were  doing  little  good  in  a  certain  portion  of  his  land, 
should  be  made  slaves,  and  so  become  agents  in  carrying  out  what  seemed  to  him 
magnificent  projects.  It  was  most  natural  that  a  body  of  politic  priests — disliking 
these  strangers,  for  the  traditions  and  customs  which  separated  them  from  their 
influence — should  readily  co-operate  with  him  in  that  plan,  or  should  be  the  first 
suggesters  of  it.    It  is  equally  natural  that  his  Egyptian  subjects  should  sympa- 


CHAP.  VII.]  EXODUS.  143 

thize  with  the  design,  and  should  feel  that  they  were  raised  in  the  degradation  of 
another  race.  But  it  was  impossible  that  king,  priests,  and  people,  should  effect 
this  seemingly  sage  and  national  purpose,  without  forging  new  chains  for  them- 
selves, without  losing  some  perceptions  of  a  moral  order  in  the  world  and  a  moral 
Ruler  of  it,  which  had  been  implied  in  their  government  and  worship,  and  which 
Joseph's  arrangements  had  drawn  out ;  it  was  impossible  but  that  with  the  loss  of 
this  feeling,  they  should  sink  further  and  further  into  natural  and  animal  worship. 
{F.  D.  Maurice,  31. A.)  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods. — The  poioer  of 
Aaron's  rod : — I.  Let  us  turn  aside  to  see  this  great  sight — the  Divine  triumphant 
over  the  diabolical :  the  spiritual  subduing  the  natural — Aaron's  bod  swallowing 
ALL  ITS  RIVALS.  1.  Let  US  take  the  case  of  the  awakened  sinner.  That  man  was, 
a  few  days  ago,  as  worldly,  as  carnal,  as  stoUd,  as  he  well  could  be.  If  any  one 
should  propose  to  make  that  man  heavenly-minded,  the  common  observer  would 
say,  "  Impossible  !  As  in  old  Roman  walls,  the  cement  has  become  so  strong, 
that  the  stone  is  no  longer  a  separate  piece,  but  has  become  a  part  of  the  wall  itself 
— so  this  man  is  cemented  to  the  world,  he  cannot  be  separated  from  it.  You  must 
break  him  in  pieces  with  the  hammer  of  death  ;  j^ou  cannot  separate  him  in  any 
other  way  from  the  cares  of  life."  Ah,  but  Aaron's  rod  shall  swallow  up  this  rod. 
The  man  listens  to  the  Word ;  the  truth  comes  with  power  into  his  soul  ;  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  entered  him  ;  and  the  next  day,  though  he  goes  to  his  business,  he  finds 
no  true  contentment  in  it,  for  he  pants  after  the  living  God.  Now,  his  spirit  pleads 
its  needs,  and  outstrips  the  body  in  the  contest  for  its  warmest  love.  He  spurns 
the  trifles  of  a  day :  he  seeks  the  jewels  of  eternity.  Grace  has  won  the  day,  and 
the  worldling  seeks  the  world  to  come.  2.  The  same  fact,  with  equal  distinctness, 
is  to  be  observed  in  the  individual  when  he  becomes  a  believer  in  Jesus  Christ ;  his 
faith  destroys  all  other  confidences.  3.  The  same  fact  is  very  manifest  after  faith 
in  all  who  truly  love  the  Saviour.  They  who  love  Christ  aright,  love  no  one  in 
comparison  with  Him.  4.  You  will  notice  this  in  the  man  who  makes  his  delight 
in  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  who  makes  his  delight  in  Christ  after  a  true  sort,  will  dis- 
cover that  this  delight  swallows  up  all  other  delights.  5.  Yet  more  is  it  so  in  a  man 
who  is  devoted  to  God's  service.  The  service  of  God  swallows  up  everything  else 
when  the  man  is  truly  God's  servant.  When  a  man  gets  fully  possessed  with  an 
enthusiastic  love  for  Jesus,  difficulties  to  him  become  only  things  to  be  surmounted, 
dangers  become  honours,  sacrifices  pleasures,  sufferings  delights,  weariness  rest. 
II.  We  now  draw  an  inference.  If  it  be  so,  that  wherever  true  religion — the  finger 
of  God — comes  into  a  man,  it  becomes  a  consuming  passion,  till  the  zeal  of  God's 
house  eats  the  man  up.  Then  there  are  many  persons  who  profess  religion,  who 
cannot  have  found  the  right  thing.  Those  who  are  mean,  miserly,  and  miserable 
in  the  cause  of  Christ,  whose  only  expenditure  is  upon  self,  and  whose  main  object 
is  gain,  what  can  we  say  of  them?  Why,  that  they  look  upon  religion  as  some 
great  farmers  do  upon  their  little  off-hand  farms.  They  think  it  is  well  to  have  a 
little  religion ;  they  can  turn  to  it  for  amusement  sometimes,  just  to  ease  tliem  a 
little  of  their  cares ;  besides,  it  may  be  very  well,  after  having  had  all  in  this  world, 
to  try  to  get  something  in  the  next.  They  are  moral  and  decent  in  all  ways  ;  they 
can  pray  very  nicely  in  prayer-meetings,  yet  they  never  dream  of  consecrating  their 
secular  employments  unto  God.  Aaron's  rod,  in  their  case,  has  never  swallowed 
up  their  rods.  III.  Now,  I  will  give  sojie  reasons  why  I  put  the  service  of 
God  so  prominent,  and  think  that  Aaron's  rod  ought  to  swallow  up  all  other 
BODS.  What  does  the  great  gospel  revelation  discover  to  us?  Does  it  not  show  us 
an  awful  danger,  and  one  only  way  of  escape  from  it  ?  Does  not  our  religion  also 
reveal  to  us  the  joyous  reward  of  another  world  ?  It  opens  tons  yonder  pearly 
gates,  and  bids  us  gaze  on  angels  and  glorified  spirits.  By  hell,  and  by  heaven, 
therefore,  I  do  entreat  you,  let  Aaron's  rod  swallow  up  all  other  rods  ;  and  let  love 
and  faith  in  Jesus  be  the  master  passion  of  your  soul.  Moreover,  do  we  not  learn 
in  our  holy  faith  of  a  love  unexampled  ?  Where  was  there  love  such  as  that  which 
brought  the  Prince  of  Glory  down  to  the  gates  of  death,  and  made  Him  pass  the 
portals  amid  shame  and  scoffing?  Shall  such  love  as  this  have  half  our  hearts? 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-25.  They  shall  be  turned  to  blood. — The  river  which  was  turned  into 
hlood : — I.  The  river.  Has  received  various  names.  "  The  river  of  Egypt "  (Gen. 
XV.  18) ;  "  Sihor  "  (Job  xiii.  3) ;  "  Shihor  "  (1  Chron.  xiii.  5).  Diodorus  Siculus 
says :  "  The  Nile  was  first  called  Egypt."  Best  and  longest  known  by  the  term 
Nile,  which  is  derived  from  the  Arabic  words  Nil,  which  means  "  blue,"  and  Nileh, 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

whicb  means  "indigo."  Designated,  therefore,  "the  dark  blue  river,''  on  account 
of  its  waters  assuming  at  times  that  appearance.  1.  Its  sources.  Ti.ese  are  three 
"  branches."  The  White  Kiver,  which  is  the  western  branch,  and  takes  its  rise  in 
the  Mountains  of  the  Moon ;  the  Blue  Eiver,  which  is  the  central  branch,  and  rises 
in  the  highlands  of  the  Galla  country,  south  of  Abyssinia ;  the  Black  liiver,  which 
is  the  eastern  branch,  and  rises  in  the  Mountains  of  Laska.  These  three  required 
to  make  the  Nile  what  it  is.  Owes  its  abundance  and  majesty  to  each  of  them. 
Learn  the  necessity  and  the  advantage  of  combined  efforts  in  doin„'  good.  2.  Its 
course.  Referring  here  not  to  the  Bow  of  the  three  rivers  just  named  and  their 
various  tributaries ;  but  coming  down  to  the  confluence  of  the  la.st  of  these,  the 
Nile  runs  in  a  directly  northern  course  to  a  distance  of  1,150  miles.  During  all 
this  way  it  receives  no  permanent  streams,  although  in  the  rainy  season  it  is  often 
Bwollen  by  torrents  from  tlie  mountains  which  lie  between  it  and  ihe  He-d  Sea. 
Fifteen  miles  below  Cairo  it  divides  into  two  arms.  One  of  these  runs  into  tlie 
Mediterranean  Sea  below  Eosetta,  the  other  flows  into  it  near  Damittta.  The 
whole  extent  of  the  river  from  its  farthest  source  is  3,300  miles.  Has  been  pursuing 
this  course  for  the  last  6,000  years.  As  deep  and  broad  as  ever.  Why  ?  For  the 
same  reason  that  the  rays  of  the  sun  are  as  numerous  and  powerful  as  at  first.  He 
who  has  supplied  the  sun  with  light  has  supplied  the  Nile  with  water.  How  thank- 
ful we  should  be  to  Him.  3.  Its  uses.  It  has  helped  to  form  the  clcuds.  The 
sun  has  visited  it  every  day ;  has  received  from  it  some  of  the  human  family  in 
various  forms.  Above  all  it  has  been,  and  continues  to  be,  the  life  of  Egypt.  II. 
The  kfver  changed.  As  at  the  marriage-feast  of  Cana  in  Galilee,  the  waters  in 
the  water-pots  bluphed  into  wine,  because  the  Lord  willed  the  tr.in.«formation ;  so 
the  waters  of  the  Nile  blushed  into  blood  for  the  same  reason.  Tlie  locomotive  in 
the  hands  of  the  driver,  the  ship  and  the  pilot,  the  horse  and  the  rider ;  all  the 
elements  of  natnre  much  more  under  God.  He  can  do  with  every  one  of  them  just 
as  He  pleases.  This,  great  comfort  to  all  that  love  Him.  They  are  safe,  for  nothing 
can  harm  them,  contraiy  to  His  mind  respecting  them.  This  should  deeply  impress 
those  who  do  ne>t  love  Him.  ^lay  be  conquered  at  any  moment  by  the  lightning, 
the  wind,  or  the  water.  III.  The  bfver  changed  fou  three  reasuxs.  1.  It  was 
changed  on  account  of  idolatry.  The  Egyptians  reverenced  the  Nile  ;  boasted  that 
it  made  them  independent  of  the  rain ;  believed  that  all  their  gods,  particularly 
Vulcan,  were  born  on  its  banks.  In  honour  of  it  observed  rites,  ceremonies,  and 
celebrated  festivals.  2.  It  was  changed  that  the  priests  of  Egypt  mit,'ht  be  deeply 
impressed.  Nothing  which  the  priests  more  abhorred  than  blood.  If  the  slightest 
stain  of  blood  had  been  on  their  persons,  even  on  their  sandals  or  garments,  they 
would  have  thought  themselves  deeply  polluted.  How  terrified  they  must  have  been 
when  they  saw  that  "  there  was  blood  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt."  God  meant 
this,  that  they  might  begin  to  think  of  Him,  and  turn  from  their  dumb  idols  to  Him. 
Events,  as  well  as  words,  are  teachers.  May  we  listen  at  all  times  to  truth.  3.  It  was 
changed  to  show  that  God  is  all-powerful.  {A.  McAmlane,  D.D.)  The  river  turned 
into  blood ;  or,  man's  chief  pleasure  and  pride  made  the  medium  of  Divine  retribu- 
lion : — I.  That  Divine  retributions  are  sent  when  other  .ani>  merciful  me.asures 

HAVE  failed  to  ACCOMPLISH  THE  PURPOSE  OF  GOD  IN  MAN.  II.  DiVINE  RETRIBUTIONS 
often    CONSIST   IN   MAKING    THE    SOURCE  OF   MAN's  TRUEST   PLEASURE  Till',  CAUSE  OF   HIS 

GREATEST  MISERY.  1.  Sometimcs  the  religious  notions  of  men  are  made  the  medium 
of  retributive  pain.  2.  Sometimes  the  commercial  enterprises  of  men  are  made  the 
medium  of  retributive  pain.  He  who  might  have  been  prosperous,  had  he  obeyed 
the  behest  of  God,  is  ruined  by  his  folly.  3.  Sometimes  all  the  splieies  of  a  man's 
life  are  made  the  medium  of  retributive  pain.  If  a  man  gets  wrong  with  God,  it 
affects  the  entirety  of  his  life.  Moral  questions  penetrate  into  eveiy  realm  and 
department  of  being,  and  affect  the  whole  of  them,  either  gladly  or  wofuUy,  all 
being  dependant  upon  the  attitude  of  the  soul  toward  the  Eternal.  Hence  it  is  wise 
for  men  to  obey  the  command  of  God  if  they  would  be  prosperous.  4.  Thus  we  see 
how  easily  and  completely  God  can  make  human  life  a  retribution  to  the  evil  doer. 
He  can  turn  our  glory  into  shame.    HI.  That  the  Divine  retributions  are  exten- 

SivE  in  their  EFFECT,  AND  ARE  OPERATIVE  BEFORE  THE  IMPOTENT  PRESENCE  OF  THE 

SOCIALLY  GREAT.  "And  Moses  and  Aaron  did,"  &c.  1.  This  Divine  retribution 
extended  throughout  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  2.  This  Divine  retribution,  in  the  act 
of  infliction,  was  witnessed  by  Pharaoh,  and  he  was  unable  to  prevent  it.  IV.  That 
THE  Divine  retributions  are  not  always  effectual  to  the  subjugation  of  the 
WICKED  heart.  "  And  the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  so  with  their  enchantments,"  &c. 
"And  Pharaoh  turned,"  &c.     1.  The  hardihood  of  a  disobedient  soul.     2.  The 


CHAP,  mi.]  EXODUS.  145 

resistance  of  a  tjTannic  will.  3.  The  effort  of  men  to  mitigate  the  retribution  of 
God.  "  All  the  Egyptians  digged,"  <&c.  Vain  effort.  V.  That  the  Divine  retri- 
bution   SOMETIMES    EVOKES    PRESUMPTIVE    CONDUCT    ON    THE    PART    OF    THE     WICKED. 

Lessons:  1.  That  Divine  retributions  are  often  merited  by  men.  2.  That  God  can 
soon  turn  our  joy  into  pain.  3.  That  obedience  is  the  wisdom  of  man.  (./.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)         Opportunity  in  Christian  service  : — I.  Th.\t  there  are  favourable 

TIMES    at    WHICH    TO    APPROACH    MEN    WITH    THE    MESSAGES    OF    GoD.       "  Get  thee  UntO 

Pharaoh  in  the  morning."  II.  That  there  are  favourable  places  in  which  to 
APPROACH  MEN  WITH  THE  MESSAGES  OF  GoD.  "And  thou  shalt  Stand,"  &c.  III. 
That  the  servants  of  God  are  often  divinely  instructed  as  to  the  best 
OPPORTUNITY  OF  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE,  "Get  thee  unto  Pharaoh  in  the  morning." 
By  a  deep  conviction,  by  a  holy  impression,  and  by  keen  moral  vision,  God  unfolds 
to  good  men  the  most  favourable  opportunity  in  which  to  declare  His  message  to 
the  wicked.     (Ihid.)         The  river  chanped  into  blood: — I.  That  God  can  change 

THE    SCENE    OF    LIFE    INTO    DE.iTH.        II.    ThAT    GoD    CAN    CHANGE    USEFUL    THINGS    INTO 

USELESS.  All  life  dependent  on  His  will.  III.  That  God  can  change  beautiful 
THINGS  into  loathsome.  (Ibid.)  Superstitions  respecting  the  Nile: — One  of  its 
names  was  Htipi,  or  Apis,  which  is  the  same  as  the  sacred  bull.  There  is  extant  a 
hymn  to  the  Nile,  written  about  the  time  of  the  Exodus,  beginning  thus — "Hail,  0 
Nile,  thou  comest  forth  over  this  land,  thou  comest  in  peace,  giving  life  to  Egypt, 
0  hidden  God  !  "  Plutarch,  following  the  jargon  of  the  priests,  calls  the  Nile  "  the 
Father  and  Saviour  of  Egypt"  (Symp.  8,  8);  and  affirms,  "There  is  nothing  so 
much  honoured  among  the  Egyptians  as  the  river  Nile."  Even  the  fish  and 
reptiles  which  it  nourished,  and  the  very  reeds  and  flowers  which  grew  in  it,  were 
held  sacred.  About  midsummer  every  year  a  great  festival  was  celebrated  through- 
out the  country  in  honour  of  the  Nile.  Men  and  women  assembled  from  all  parts 
of  the  country  in  the  towns  of  their  respective  Nomes ;  grand  festivities  were 
proclaimed,  and  the  religious  solemnities  which  then  took  place  were  accompanied 
with  feasting,  dancing,  and  a  general  rejoicing.  A  wooden  image  of  the  river  god 
was  carried  by  the  priests  through  the  villages  in  solemn  procession,  appropriate 
hymns  were  sung,  and  the  blessings  of  the  anticipated  inundation  were  invoked. 
By  the  miraculous  change  of  the  waters  into  blood,  a  practical  rebuke  was  given  to 
these  superstitions.  This  sacred  and  beautiful  river,  the  benefactor  and  preserver 
of  their  country,  this  birthplace  of  their  chief  gods,  this  abode  of  their  lesser  deities, 
this  source  of  all  their  prosperity,  this  centre  of  all  their  devotion,  is  turned  to 
blood :  the  waters  stink ;  the  canals  and  pools,  the  vessels  of  wood  and  vessels  of 
stone,  which  were  replenished  from  the  river,  all  are  alike  polluted.  (2'.  S. 
Millington.) 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Vers.  1-14.  The  frogs  came  up. — The  procession  of  frogs  : — I.  The  creatures 
THAT  WERE  TO  COME.  The  frogs  of  Egypt  distinguished  for  five  things.  Their  ash 
colour  dotted  with  green  spots ;  changed  their  colour  when  alarmed  ;  small ;  crawled 
like  toads ;  made  a  singular,  some  say  an  "  abominable  "  noise,  both  under  the 
water  and  on  the  land.  II.  The  places  to  which  thk  creatures  did  come.  III. 
The  power  which  caused  the  creatures  to  come.  As  the  changing  of  the  Nile 
shdwed  that  all  the  elements  of  nature  were  under  the  control  of  God,  so  the  com- 
ing of  the  frogs  to  the  land  of  Egypt  proved  that  the  animal  parts  of  creation  were 
under  His  control.  IV.  The  purposes  for  which  the  creatures  came.  1.  On 
account  of  pride  (ver.  2).  God  still  abhors  pride,  and  ever  will.  Can  chastise  the 
proud  in  a  similar  way.  Can  send  disease  to  the  pretty  face  ;  take  away  the  idols, 
money,  dress,  friends  ;  weakness  to  either  body  or  mind  ;  death  to  the  unbroken 
circle.  "  Walk  humbly  with  thy  God."  2.  On  account  of  superstition.  Because 
the  rising  of  the  stm  made  wild  beasts  retire,  the  Egyptians  looked  on  them  as 
emblems  of  the  sun's  power.  Because  the  croaking  of  frogs  helped  travellers  in  a 
desert  to  discover  waters,  the  Egyptians  held  them  in  some  reverence.  Eegarded 
the  frog  also  as  sacred  to  the  Nymphs  and  Muses.  Called  attendants  upon  the 
deities  of  streams  and  fountains.  To  correct  this  wrong  and  extravagant  notion 
about  frogs,  the  Lord  sent  them  over  all  the  land.  We  should  be  careful  about  the 
objects  we  love  and  hate,  esteem  and  disesteem,  revere  and  abhor.  V.  The  king's  be- 

10 


146'  THE  BIBLICAL  ILL USTEA  TOB.  [chap.  vni. 

QUEST  TO  HAVE  THK  CREATURES  REMOVED  GRANTED.    {A.  McAuslane,D.D.)       LeSSOtlS  :  — 

1.  Where  the  first  judgment  movethnot,  the  second  may  make  sinners  yield.  2.  Ven- 
geance makes  wicked  men  call  for  God's  messengers  who  have  despised  them.  3.  God's 
judgments  may  work  scornful  oppressors  to  intreat  the  despised  ministers  of  God. 
4.  Jehovah's  judgments  may  and  will  make  proudest  potentates  to  acknowledge 
Him.  5.  In  the  confession  of  the  wicked  God  only  can  take  away  their  judgments. 
6.  Wicked  oppressors  themselves  do  acknowledge  that  mercy  from  Jehovah  cometh 
by  the  prayer  of  His.  7.  Under  sense  of  judgment  persecutors  may  promise 
liberty  of  persons  and  consciences  to  the  Church.  8.  Such  forced  promises  are  seldom 
made  good  by  such  oppressors  (ver.  8).  (G.  Hur/hes,  B.D.)  The  plague  of  frogs  ; 
or,  the  socially  great  smitten  with  the  supremely  contemptible  :  —I.  That  the  socially 
GREAT  SOMETIMES  PROVOKE  THE  JUDGMENTS  OF  GoD.  1.  That  the  Socially  great 
provoke  the  judgments  of  God  by  rejecting  His  claims.  2.  By  slighting  His 
servants.      3.  By  rejecting   His   credentials   of   truth  and   duty.     II.  That   the 

SOCIALLY  GREAT  HAVE  NO  MEANS  WHEREBY  TO    RESIST  THE  JUDGMENTS  OF  GoD.       1.  ThlS 

judgment  was  attlictive,  loathsome,  extensive,  irresistible.  2.  This  judgment  yields 
not  to  social  position,  wealth,  authority,  force.     III.  That  the  socially  great 

OFTEN  involve  OTHERS  LESS  GUILTY  IN  THE  RETRIBUTION  THEY  INVITE.  IV.  ThAT 
the  socially  GREAT  ARE  ALWAYS  SURROUNDED  BY  THOSE  WHO  ARE  WILLING  TO 
STRENGTHEN     THEJI    IN    OPPOSITION   TO    THE    DlVINE    CLAIMS.       LeSSOnS  I     1.    That   the 

socially  great  ought  to  be  in  sympathy  with  the  requirements  of  God.  2.  That  the 
socially  great  ought  to  know  better  than  provoke  the  wrath  of  the  Great  King.  8.  That 
social  position  will  not  avert  the  retributions  of  God.  (./.  ,5.  Kxell,  M.A.)  Supersti- 
tions respecting  frogs : — There  is  no  doubt  that  frogs  were  in  Egypt  the  objects  of  some 
kind  of  superstitious  regard.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  they  were  most  reverenced 
or  feared,  but,  either  as  good  agents  or  evil,  they  were  numbered  among  the  sacred 
animals  of  the  Egyptians.  The  magicians  used  them  in  their  divinations,  and 
pretended  to  foretell  future  events  by  the  changes  and  swellings  which  these 
creatures  undergo.  Frogs  were  supposed  to  be  generated  from  the  mud  of  the 
river.  A  frog  sitting  upon  the  sacred  lotus  was  symbolical  of  the  return  of  the 
Nile  to  its  bed  after  the  inundations.  The  name  Chrur,  which  seems  to  have  been 
derived  from  the  sound  of  its  croaking,  was  also  used,  with  only  a  slight  variation, 
Hhrur,  to  denote  the  Nile  descending.  Seated  upon  a  date-stone,  with  a  young 
palm-leaf  rising  from  its  back,  it  was  a  type  of  man  in  embrj-o.  The  importance 
attached  to  the  frog  in  some  parts  of  Egypt  is  further  apparent  from  its  having  been 
embalmed  and  honoured  with  burial  in  the  tombs  of  Thebes  ;  and  from  its  frequent 
appearance  upon  the  monuments  and  inscriptions.  Among  the  former  is  the  god 
Pthah,  having  the  head  of  a  frog,  and  representing  the  creative  power  of  the  deity; 
tbeie  is  also  a  frog  headed  goddess  named  Heka,  who  was  worshipped  in  the  district 
of  Sah,  as  the  wife  of  Chnum,  the  god  of  the  cataracts,  and  to  whose  favour  the 
annual  overflow  of  tlie  Nile,  with  all  the  benefits  which  followed,  was  ascribed. 
Plutarch  says  the  frog  was  an  emblem  of  the  sun,  and  that  the  brazen  palm-tree  at 
Delphi,  sacred  to  Apollo  or  Osiris,  had  a  great  number  of  frogs  engraved  upon  its 
base.  In  hieroglyphics  the  frog  is  an  emblem  of  fecundity,  an  idea  which  arose 
naturally  from  its  connection  with  the  river.  As  the  wealth  and  prosperity  of 
Egypt  depended  upon  the  annual  overflowing  of  the  Nile,  it  is  not  surjirising  that 
the  people  of  that  land,  who  seem  in  every  possible  instance  to  have  worshipped 
and  served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator,  should  have  ascribed  peculiar 
honour  to  the  frogs,  which  abounded  most  in  the  time  of  the  inundations  ;  they 
may  have  regarded  them  as  in  some  sense  the  authors  of  their  benefits,  or  rather 
as  beneficent  agents  sent  forth  by  their  sacred  river  to  assist  and  direct  its  fertiliz- 
ing process.  But  it  is  probable  that  the  sacred  character  of  these  animals  was 
attributable,  in  some  parts  of  Egypt  at  least,  to  the  fears  entertained  for  them  by 
the  Egyptians,  as  spirits  of  evil.  There  are  even  now  in  Africa  tribes  of  ignorant 
heathen,  worshippers  of  devils,  who  bow  down  before  the  most  hideous  images  they 
can  invent  or  fashion,  and  call  upon  them  with  abject  supplications,  in  order  to 
propitiate  their  fetish,  and  to  turn  aside  the  evils  he  might  bring  upon  them.  St. 
John,  in  the  book  of  Eevelation,  represents  the  frog  as  an  evil  spirit ;  and  his 
emblems  were  generally  derived  from  symbolical  ideas  which  prevailed  of  old  (Rev. 
xvi.  13).  Such  probably  were  the  frogs  which  the  magicians  of  Egypt  brought 
forth  in  opposition  to  Moses,  spirits  of  devils.  Satan,  who  had  greater  license  and 
a  wider  range  in  those  dark  times  and  places  than  he  has  now,  sent  out  his  demons 
in  this  form,  at  the  call  of  his  false  prophets,  to  confirm  the  Egyptians  in  their 
rebellion  against  God ;  and  "  the  magicians  did  so  with  their  enchantments,  and 


CHAP,  vm.]  EXODUS.  147 

brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land  of  Egypt "  (Exod.  viii.  7).  Whether  the  Egyptians 
looked  upon  these  reptiles  as  benefactors,  or  dreaded  them  as  ministers  of  evil,  the 
wonderful  plague  with  which  they  were  now  afflicted  was  a  judgment  against  them 
for  their  miserable  superstition,  and  a  sign  which  they  could  scarcely  fail  to 
understand.  Fond  as  they  were  of  a  multitude  of  deities,  here  were  more  than 
they  could  wish  for  or  endure.  David  says  :  "  He  sent  frogs  among  them,  which 
destroyed  them  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  45)  :  it  was  not  a  mere  inconvenience,  therefore,  but 
a  real  punishment ;  yet  we  may  su^jpose  the  Egyptians  would  not  venture  to  kill  or 
even  to  resist  their  sacred  tormentors.  So  terrible  and  wide-spread  was  the  evil, 
that  we  find  traces  of  it  in  the  oldest  historians,  whose  accounts,  being  derived  only 
from  tradition,  are  inaccurate  as  to  place  and  people,  but  founded,  we  may  sui)pose, 
upon  the  realities  which  are  here  recorded.  Diodorus  tells  us  of  "a  people  called 
Autariats,  who  were  forced  by  frogs  bred  in  the  clouds,  which  poui-ed  down  upon 
them  instead  of  rain,  to  forsake  their  country  "  (1.  iii.  c.  30) ;  Pliny  tells  a  similar 
story  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  district  in  Gaul.  The  fact  that  the  frogs  of  Egypt  were 
sent  upon  the  people  by  God's  command  would  naturally  lead  to  tlie  idea  of  their 
descent  from  the  clouds  ;  while  the  exodus,  both  of  Israelites  and  Egyptians,  which 
followed  soon  afterwards,  might  give  occasion  to  the  story  that  the  people  were 
driven  out  of  their  country  by  the  plague.  {T.  S.  Millington.)  To-morrow. — 
To-morrow  ( for  close  of  year) : — We  have  arrived  at  another  milestone  on  the 
journey  of  life.  How  many  more  we  Lave  to  pass  before  we  reach  our  journey's 
end  we  cannot  say ;  for,  unlike  the  milestones  by  the  roadside,  whicli  not  only  tell 
the  traveller  how  far  he  has  travelled  but  how  much  farther  off  his  destination  is  ; 
our  passing  years  are  milestones  which  only  point  backwards.  In  the  face  of  this 
terrible  uncertainty,  then,  how  foolish  it  is  to  echo  the  word  of  Pharaoh  and  say, 
"  To-morrow."  1.  In  postponing  the  day  of  salvation,  wo  are  postponing  our 
own  happiness.  Think  of  the  madness  of  Pharaoh,  enduring  another  night  of  the 
frogs  when  he  could  obtain  instant  release  from  them.  And  yet  he  was  no  more 
mad  than  the  sinner  is  who  postpones  his  salvation  from  day  to  day.  His  sins  are 
more  numerous  and  nauseous  than  the  frogs  of  Egypt.  They  swarm  everywhere  ; 
they  leave  tlieir  slime  upon  everything ;  they  spawn  in  the  dark  corners  of  his 
heart ;  he  is  plagued  with  them,  and  can  get  no  peace.  2.  In  this  procrastination 
we  are  flying  in  the  face  of  God's  clearest  warnings.  Ten  times  over  God's  warn- 
ings were  repeated  to  Pharaoh  before  the  final  destruction  came ;  but  even  this  is 
not  the  limit  of  His  longsuffering  to  usward.  His  warnings  are  often  uttered  a 
hundred  times  over  to  us  before  the  final  crash.  Yet  many  pay  no  heed  to  them. 
They  are  startled  for  a  while,  and  give  a  passing  thought  to  their  souls,  only  to 
sweep  away  such  thoughts  in  worldliness  again,  and  cry  "  To-morrow  !  I  will 
think  of  this  to-morrow."  A  traveller  from  India  thus  relates  some  of  the 
experiences  of  his  voyage: — "Flocks  of  greedy  albatrosses  and  cape-pigeons 
crowded  around  the  ship's  stern.  A  hook  was  baited  with  fat,  and  upwards  of  a 
dozen  albatrosses  rushed  at  it  instantly;  and  as  one  after  another  was  being  hauled 
on  deck,  the  remainder,  regardless  alike  of  the  struggles  of  the  captured  and 
the  vociferations  of  the  crew,  kept  swimming  about  the  stern.  Not  even  the  birds 
which  were  indifferently  hooked,  and  made  their  escape,  desisted  from  seizing  the 
bait  a  second  time."  Poor,  foolish  birds,  to  disregard  the  death-struggles  of  so 
many  of  their  companions  and  their  own  experience  of  the  sharpness  of  the  hook ! 
Poor,  foolish  men,  to  disregard  more  terrible  warnings  still,  to  procrastinate  in 
spite  of  the  sudden  destruction  of  so  many  of  their  companions  in  the  ways  of  sin 
and  the  sharp  trials  that  God  has  sent  to  urge  them  to  escape  the  like  destruction  ! 
3.  In  putting  ol^  the  great  question  of  salvation  till  to-morrow,  we  forget  that  to- 
morrow will  in  all  probability  see  us  harder-hearted  than  to-day.  Pharaoh  was 
softened  while  he  was  plague-stricken.  He  seemed  even  near  becoming  a  wor- 
shipper of  the  true  God,  for  he  said  to  Moses,  "  Intreat  the  Lord  for  me."  But 
when  the  warning  was  past,  and  the  morrow  came,  he  relapsed  into  his  old  hard- 
hearted enmity  towards  God;  all  the  harder  for  his  temporary  softening.  Transient 
impressions  are  terribly  dangerous.  If  you  take  the  red-hot  metal  and  plunge  it 
into  cold  water,  you  make  it  harder  than  it  was  before.  So  it  was  with  the  heart 
of  Pharaoh  ;  so  it  is  with  our  hearts  too.  [G.A.  Sowter,  M.A.)  ThefoUy  of  delay- 
ing till  to-morroio  : — "  To-morrow !  "  has  been  the  cry  for  years.  Serious  inten- 
tions enough  have  been  formed ;  but  serious  intentions,  formed  only  to  be  forgotten, 
are  but  leaving  a  religious  way  to  hell.  A  sea  captain  tells  how  he  fell  in  with  the 
Central  America  on  the  very  evening  when  she  went  down.  He  relates  how  that, 
having  hailed  her,  Captain  He»nden  replied,  "I  am  sinking!"     "Had  you  not 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

— * — ' 

better  send  your  passengers  on  board  of  us  ?  "  Baid  the  captain.  "  Will  you  stand 
by  me  till  morning?  "  was  Captain  Hemden's  reply.  "I'll  try,"  said  the  captain; 
"  but  had  you  not  better  send  your  passengers  on  board  at  once  ?  "  "  Stand  by  me 
till  morning !  "  was  the  only  answer.  The  captain  did  his  utmost  to  stand  by  the 
ill-fated  ship,  but  'mid  the  darkness  of  the  night  and  the  force  of  the  tempest  he 
saw  the  Central  America  no  more,  and  subsequently  received  information  apprised 
him  that  within  an  hour  of  that  time  she  went  down  in  the  wild  Atlantic.  What 
a  pity  that  poor  Captain  Hernden  would  put  off  till  the  next  day  that  which  might 
have' been  done  that  night.  But  though  he  doubtless  had,  to  him,  some  sufficient 
reason  for  the  course  he  pursued,  that  cannot  be  said  of  those  who  neglect  the 
great  salvation. 

Ver.  15.  When  Pharaoh  saw  that  there  was  respite,  he  hardened  Ms  heart. — 
The  hardening  nature  and  awful  consequences  of  sin  : — I.  I  observe,  that  when  God 
issues  out  His  terrible  threatenings  against  sinners.  He  is  wont  to  suspend  or  stay 

THE  FULL  execution  OF  HiS  SENTENCE,  AND  GIVE  THEM  MANY  AN  INTERVAL  FOR  REPEN- 
TANCE. A  criminal  shut  up  in  the  condemned  cell,  is  said  to  be  respited  when,  by 
a  royal  grant,  his  punishment  is  put  off  from  the  day  appointed.  This  practice  in 
the  administration  of  human  laws,  may  serve  the  purpose  of  illustrating  the 
dispensations  of  Providence,  or  the  dealings  of  God  with  men.  The  stubborn  rebel 
is  often  admonished  ere  he  meets  the  stern  arrest  of  justice  ;  and  the  guilty  soul  is 
often  respited  before  the  sentence  is  carried  into  execution.  It  seems  to  me,  that 
this  precedure  of  the  great  Judge  in  the  mysterious  ways  of  Providence  is  a  bright 
display  of  mercy,  blended  even  with  the  tokens  of  His  displeasure.  Each  interval 
between  successive  warnings  and  judgments  is  a  space  given  for  repentance.  But 
the  final  term  of  forbearance  is  not  far  distant ;  and  with  some  of  you  it  may  be 
now  the  very  last  reprieve,     II.  I  observe,  that  it  proves  a  state  of  most  dreadful 

DEPRAVITY,  WHEN  MEN    TAKE    OCCASION,  FROM    THE    VERY    C0MP.\SSI0NS    AND    MERCIES    OF 

God,  TO  H.VRDEN  THEMSELVES  IN  SIN.  The  goodness  of  God  is  designed  to  lead  you 
to  repentance ;  but  if  you  either  do  not  know,  or  will  not  consider  this,  then  the 
most  lovely  and  attractive  of  all  the  Divine  perfections  is  shamefully  abused  and 
contemned  by  you.  But  can  you  hope  to  escape?  Is  it  possible  to  evade  the  eye 
of  Omniscience,  or  resist  the  hand  of  Omnipotence  ?  Where  can  you  find  an  asylum 
for  your  souls,  when  the  only  Kefuge  which  God  has  prepared,  is  scorned  and  set 
at  nought  ?    III.  I  observe,  that  God  perfectly  knows  all  the  deeds  of  wicked 

MEN  BEFORE  THEY  ARE  DONE,  AND  ALL  THEIR  DESIGNS  BEFORE  THEY  ARE  CONCEIVED.   IV, 

Do  you  now  ask,  what  .\re  the  signs  by  which  it  may  be  known,  that  any  man  is 
GIVEN  UP  TO  HARDNESS  OF  HEART?  1.  It  is  a  dark  sigu  that  the  heart  is  desperately 
hardened,  when  men  sin  on  knowingly  and  deliberately.  A  crime  is  deeply  aggra- 
vated, which  is  committed  with  the  full  consent  of  the  will,  in  defiance  of  the 
clearest  dictates  of  the  understanding  and  the  conscience.  2.  It  is  a  dark  sign  that 
the  heart  is  desperately  hardened,  when  men  hate  and  shun  those  who  faithfully 
warn  and  reprove  them,  and  affectionately  labour  to  reclaim  them.  3.  It  is  a  dark 
sign  that  the  heart  is  desperately  hardened,  when  the  very  intervals  and  opportu- 
nities which  mercy  gives  for  repentance,  are  perverted  to  the  purpose  of  adding  sin 
to  sin.  Are  there  not  some  of  you,  who  have  been  brought  under  the  scourge  of 
God's  afflicting  hand  ?  Kememher,  it  is  written,  "  He  that  being  often  reproved 
hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  be  suddenly  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  {John 
Thornton.)  Constrained  repentance  : — The  constrained  and  j^retended  penitence 
or  Pharaoh,  with  the  compassion  and  prayer  of  Moses,  teach  us  valuable  lessons. 
The  penitence  of  Pharaoh  shows  us  that  we  ought  not  to  put  off  our  repentance 
until  the  hour  of  sickness,  trial,  and  death  ;  for  the  seeming  conversions  which  take 
1  lace  at  such  times  may  be  hypocritical  and  short-lived,  like  that  of  Pharaoh.  Is 
this  sincere  ?  The  sick  man  thinks  that  it  is  ;  but  if  he  recover  will  he  not  be  the 
same  as  before  ?  Will  he  not  forget,  as  Pharaoh  did,  his  promises,  humihation, 
confessions  of  sin,  and  seeming  conversion  ?  From  the  example  of  Moses  we  may 
also  obtain  important  instruction.  He  had,  truly,  very  many  reasons  for  not  putting 
much  faith  in  the  word  of  the  king.  Pharaoh  had  already  shown  much  pride, 
obstinacy,  and  deceit ;  nevertheless,  Moses  did  not  repulse  him  ;  he  knew  that  God 
can  convert  a  soul  even  at  the  last  hour,  Pharaoh  made  promises,  and  "  charity 
hopeth  all  things. "  It  is  God  alone  who  can  judge  the  heart.  We  ought,  there- 
fore, always  to  be  ready  to  console,  and  help  with  our  prayers,  even  persons  who 
have  been  most  hostile,  opposed,  and  contemptuous  to  us.  There  was  a  worthy  pas- 
tor of  the  Canton  de  Vaud  in  Switzerland,  who,  during  a  time  of  persecution,  had  to 
suffer  much  because  he  preached  the  gospel  faithfully.    He  was  even  obliged  to  leave 


CHAP,  vni.]  EXODUS.  149 

his  parish,  and  to  go  and  settle  in  another.     Some  time  aftenvards,  one  of  the  men 
who  had  behaved  most  wickedly  to  him  was  converted  to  the  Lord.     He  immediately 
determined  to  go  to  his  former  pastor  to  tell  him  this  good  news.     "  How  surprised 
he  will  be,"  thought  he  as  he  walked  along.     He  arrived  at  the  village ;  he  rung 
the  bell  at  the  minister's  house ;  the  pastor  himself  opened  the  door.     "  I  am  come 
to  tell  you  that  I  am  converted  ;  I,  who  have  done  you  so  much  harm."     "  I  am  not 
astonished  at  it,"  answered  the  pastor,  "  for  I  have  prayed  for  you  all  these  seven 
years.'"     {Prof.  Gaussen.)        Sin  interrupted,  not  forsaken  : — Though  the  course  cf 
sin  may  he  repelled  for  a  season  by  the  dispensation  of  the  law,  yet  the  spring  and 
fountain  of  it  is  not  dried  up  thereby.     Though  it  withdraws  and  hides  itself  for  a 
season,  it  is  but  to  shift  out  of  a  storm,  and  then  to  return  again.     As  a  traveller  in 
his  way  meeting  with  a  violent  storra  of  thunder  and  rain,  immediately  turns  out  of 
his  way  to  some  house  or  tree  for  his  shelter,  but  yet  this  causes  him  not  to  give 
over  his  journey,  as  soon  as  the  storm  is  over  he  returns  to  his  way  and  progress 
again ;  so  it  is  with  men  in  bondage  unto  sin.     They  are  in  a  course  of  pursuing 
their  lusts ;  the  law  meets  with  them  in  a  storm  of  thunder  and  lightning  from 
heaven,  terrifies  and  hinders  them  in  their  way.     This  turns  them  for  a  season  out 
of  their  course  ;  they  will  run  to  lorayer  or  amendment  of  life,  for  some  shelter  from 
the  storm  of  wrath  which  is  feared  coming  upon  their  consciences.     But  is  their 
course  stopped  ?    are  their  priuciplcs  altered  ?     Not  at  all ;  so  soon  as  the  storm  is 
over,  so  that  they  begin  to  wear  out  that  sense  and  the  terror  that  w-as  upon  them, 
they  return  to  their  former  course  in  the  service  of  sin  again.     This  was  the  state 
with  Pharaoh  once  and  again.     In  such  seasons  sin  is  not  conquered,  but  diverted. 
When  it  seems  to  fall  under  the  power  of  the  law,  indeed  it  is  only  turned  into  a 
new  channel ;  it  is  not  dried  up.    If  you  go  and  set  a  dam  against  the  streams  of  a 
river,  so  that  you  suffer  no  water  to  pass  in  the  old  course  and  channel,  but  it  breaks 
out  another  way,  and  turns  all  its  streams  in  a  new  course,  you  will  not  say  you 
have  dried  up  that  river,  though  some  that  come  and  look  into  the  old  channel  may 
thmk,  perhaps,  that  the  waters  are  utterly  gone.     So  is  it  in  this  case.     The  streams 
of  sin,  it  may  be,  run  iu  open  sensuality  and  profaneness,  in  drunkenness  and  vicious- 
ness  ;  the  preaching  of  the  law  sets  a  dam  against  these  causes  ;  conscience  is 
terrified,  and  the  man  dares  not  walk  in  the  ways  wherein  he  has  been  formerly 
engaged.     His  companions  in  sin,  not  finding  him  in  his  old  ways,  begin  to  laugh 
at  him,  as  one  that  is  converted  and  growing  precise  ;  professors  themselves  begin 
to  be  persuaded  that  the  work  of  God  is  upon  his  heart,  because  they  see  his  old 
streams  dried  up  ;  but  if  there  has  been  only  a  work  of  the  law  upon  him,  there  in 
a  dam  put  to  his  course,  but  the  spring  of  sin  is  not  dried  up,  only  the  streams  of 
it  are  turned  another  way.     It  may  be  the  man  is  fallen  upon  other  more  secret  or 
more  spiritual  sins  ;  or  if  he  be  beat  from  them  also,  the  whole  strength  of  lust  and 
sin  will  take  up  its  residence  in  self-righteousness,  and  pour  out  thereby  as  filthy 
streams  as  in  any  other  way  whatever.     So  that,  notwithstanding  the  whole  work 
of  the  law  upon  the  souls  of  men,  indwelling  sin  will  keep  alive  in  them  still.     (J. 
Owen,  D.D.)        Hypocritical  profession  : — As  a  horse  that  is   good  at  hand,   but 
nought  at  length,  so  is  the  hypocrite ;  free  and  fiery  for  a  spurt,  but  he  jades  and 
tires  in  a  journey.     The  faith,  repentance,  reformation,  obedience,  joy,  sorrow,  zeal, 
and  other  graces  and  affections  of  hypocrites,  have  their  first  motion  and  issue  from 
false  and  erroneous  grounds,  as  shame,  fear,  ho^je,  and  such  resj^ects.     And  it  thence 
comes  to  pass  that,  where  these  respects  cease  to  give  them  motion,  the  graces 
themselves  can  no  more  stand  than  a  house  can  stand  when  the  foundation  is  taken 
from  under  it.     The  boy  that  goes  to  his  book  no  longer  than  the  master  holds  the 
rod  over  him  ;  the  master's  back  once  turned,  away  goes  the  book,  and  he  to  play  : 
60  is  it  with  the  hypocrite.     Take  away  the  rod  from  Pharaoh  ;  and  he  will  be  old 
Pharaoh  still.     Now-,  then,  here  is  a  wide  difference  betw(;en  the  hypocrite  and  the 
godly  man  :  the  one  does  all  by  fits  and  starts,  by  sudden  motions  and  flashes  ; 
whereas  the  other  goes  on  fairly  and  soberly  in  a  settled,  constant,  regular  course  of 
humiliation  and  obedience.      (Bp.  Sanderson.)  False  repentance  : — Many  jier- 

sons  who  appear  to  repent,  are  like  sailors  who  throw  then*  goods  overboard  in  a 
storm,  and  wish  for  them  again  as  soon  as  it  becomes  calm.  Mercy  mistaken  for 
weakness: — How  easy  it  is  to  mistake  mercy  for  weakness!  This  was  Pharaoh's 
mistake.  The  moment  the  Lord  lifted  His  heavy  hand  from  the  Eg\  ptian  king, 
Pharaoh  began  to  forget  his  oath,  and  vow,  and  promise,  and  to  harden  his  heart, 
— saying,  in  effect,  "He  can  do  no  more;  the  God  of  the  Israelites  has  exhausted 
Himself ;  now  that  He  has  removed  His  hand  He  has  confessed  His  weakness  rather 
■than  demonstrated  His  pity."    We  are  committing  the  same  mistake  everyday; 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vnr. 

whilst  the  plague  is  in  the  house  we  are  ready  to  do  anything  to  get  rid  of  it  1  we 
will  say  prayers  morning,  noon  and  night,  and  send  for  the  holy  man  who  has  been 
anointed  as  God's  minister,  and  will  read  nothing  but  solid  and  most  impressive 
books,  listen  to  no  frivolous  conversation,  and  touch  nothing  that  could  dissipate  or 
enfeeble  the  mind.  How  long  \n\l  the  plague  be  removed  before  the  elasticity  will 
return  to  the  man  and  the  old  self  reassert  its  sovereignty  ?  Not  a  day  need  pass. 
We  begin  to  feel  that  the  worst  is  past :  we  say  it  is  darkest  before  it  is  dawn,  "  hope 
springs  eternal  in  the  human  breast  "  ;  and  so  easily  do  we  fall  back  into  the  old 
swing  between  self-indulgence  and  nominal  homage  to  God.  We  think  we  have 
felt  all  the  Lord  can  do,  and  we  say,  "  His  sword  is  no  longer ;  it  cannot  reach  us 
now  that  we  have  removed  away  this  little  distance  from  its  range  ;  now  and  here 
we  may  do  what  we  please,  and  judgment  cannot  fall  upon  us."  Thus  we  play  old 
Pharaoh's  part  day  by  day.  He  is  a  mirror  in  which  we  may  see  ourselves.  There 
is  nothing  mysterious  in  this  part  of  the  solemn  reading.  However  we  may  endea- 
vour to  escape  from  the  line  when  it  becomes  supernatural  or  romantic,  we  are 
brought  swiftly  and  surely  back  to  it  when  we  see  these  repetitions  of  obduracy 
and  these  renewed  challenges  of  Divine  anger  and  judgment.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Transient  repentance  : — Manton  says,  "  Many  a  time  a  brabble  falleth  out  between 
a  man  and  his  lusts  ;  but  he  delayeth,  and  all  cometh  to  nothing.  In  a  heat  we 
bid  a  naughty  servant  begone  ;  but  he  lingereth  and  before  the  next  morning  all  is 
cool  and  quiet,  and  he  is  again  in  favour."  Ungodly  men  have  their  quarrels  with 
their  favourite  sins  on  various  accounts,  but  these  are  like  children's  pets  with  one 
another,  soon  over  because  they  come  of  passion,  and  not  from  principle.  An  un- 
holy person  will  fall  out  with  sin  because  it  has  injured  his  health  or  his  credit,  or 
has  brought  him  into  difliculty  with  his  neighbours ;  but  when  these  temporary 
results  are  ended  he  falls  in  love  again  with  the  same  iniquity.  Thus  we  have  seen 
the  drunkard  loathing  his  cups  when  his  eyes  were  red  and  his  head  was  aching  ; 
but  ere  the  sun  went  down  the  quarrel  was  ended,  and  he  and  Bacchus  were  rolliug 
in  the  gutter  together.  ("  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's  Garden.")  False  repentance  : — 
Pharaoh's  professions  of  repentance  and  promises  of  amendment  were  like  those  of 
the  child  under  the  rod  of  chastisement,  they  were  designed  to  mitigate  the  inflic- 
tion, and  when  the  punishment  was  over  they  went  for  nothing.  Now,  this  is 
always  the  case  when  fear  alone  predominates  over  the  soul.  All !  how  much  of  our 
penitence  is  like  this  of  Pharaoh  ;  how  many  are  saints  on  a  sick-bed,  but  as  wicked 
as  ever  when  they  recover!  During  an  epidemic  of  cholera  in  the  village  where  I 
first  laboured  as  a  minister,  the  churches  were  filled  to  overflowing  by  suppliants 
who  had  never  before  entered  them ;  but  when  it  had  passed,  they  relapsed  into 
worse  carelessness  than  ever :  and  there  may  be  some  here  to-night  who,  when  they 
were  dangerously  ill,  or  when  they  were  laying  a  dear  httle  one's  body  in  the  grave, 
vowed  to  God  that  they  would  yield  themselves  to  Him  ;  while  now  they  are  as  far 
from  His  service  as  ever.  Let  me  beseech  such  hardened  ones  to  beware.  (W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.)  Tests  of  sincerity  in  repentance  : — Lorenzo  de  Medici  lies  dying  in 
the  city  of  Florence  :  in  the  terrors  of  death  he  has  sent  for  the  one  man  who  never 
had  yielded  to  his  threats  or  caresses — the  brave  Savonarola.  Lorenzo  confesses 
that  he  has  heavy  on  his  soul  three  crimes  :  the  cruel  sack  of  Volterra,  the  theft  of 
the  public  dower  of  young  girls,  by  which  many  were  driven  to  a  wicked  life,  and 
the  blood  shed  after  the  conspiracy  of  Pazzi.  He  is  greatly  agitated,  and  Savon- 
arola, to  keep  him  quiet,  keeps  repeating,  "God  is  merciful,"  "God  is  good." 
"  But,"  he  added,  "  there  is  need  of  three  things."  "  And  what  are  they,  father?  " 
"First,  you  must  have  a  great  and  living  faith  in  the  mercy  of  God."  "  This  I 
have — the  greatest."  "  Second,  you  must  restore  that  which  you  have  wrongfully 
taken,  or  require  your  children  to  restore  it  for  you."  Lorenzo  looked  surprised  and 
troubled  ;  but  he  forces  himself  to  compliance,  and  nods  his  head  in  sign  of  assent. 
Then  Savonarola  rises  to  his  feet,  and  stands  over  the  dying  prince.  "  Last,  you 
must  give  back  their  liberties  to  the  people  of  Florence."  Lorenzo,  summoning  up 
all  his  remaining  strength,  disdainfully  turns  his  back,  and,  without  uttering  another 
■word,  Savonarola  departs  without  giving  him  absolution. 

Vers.  16-19.  That  it  may  become  lice. — The  plague  of  lice  : — I.  The  plague 
ITSELF.  1.  This  punishment  was  sent  without  any  previous  warning.  2.  This 
plague  was  inflicted  by  a  very  small  insect.  3.  This  plague  could  not  be  imitated 
by  the  magicians.  This  rendered  Pharaoh's  refusal  to  humble  himself  all  the 
more  unpardonable.  II.  Its  teaching.  1.  Its  infliction  produced  no  real  good. 
How  soon  the  human  mind  becomes  accustomed  to  novelties,  even  of  the  most 


CHAP,  vni.]  EXODUS.  151 

extraordinary  character.  So  the  fallen  soul  becomes  naturalized  to  the  paths  o 
sin  and  the  lessons  of  God's  judgment.  2.  Observe  the  resources  of  God.  The 
least  thing  in  His  hand  can  become  an  instrument  of  torment.  3.  How  foolish, 
then,  and  how  mad,  to  resist  the  will  of  this  Divine  Being  !  (Hoinilist.)  Lessojis  : — 
1.  The  devil  will  try  his  utmost  to  counterwork  God.  2.  The  devil  is 
impotent  upon  the  least  check  from  God.  3.  God's  power  sets  on  His 
judgments  when  the  power  of  Satan  fails  (ver.  18).  4.  The  devil's  instruments 
are  forced  at  last  to  say  they  are  against  God,  and  He  against  them.  5.  God's 
finger  or  the  ledst  of  His  power  makes  the  devil  and  his  instruments  fail.  6. 
Innate  unbelief  loves  to  be  kept  up  by  liars,  but  will  not  yield  when  they  fail. 
7.  Treble  hardening  comes  on  the  wicked  by  treble  judgmeuts.  8.  God's  word 
faileth  not  which  He  hath  spoken  of  the  sin  and  judgment  of  wicked  persecutors  (ver. 
19).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  The  plajue  of  lice  ;  or,  an  enforced  recognition  of  a  Supreme 
Poiver  in  the  dire  retributions  of  human  life  : — I.  Tuat  men  are  slow  to  recognize 
THE  Supreme  Power  in  the  retributions  of  life.  1.  Because  they  have  not  right 
views  of  the  character  of  God.  2.  Because  they  have  not  a  due  consciousness  of  sin 
and  its  demerit.     II.  That   wicked  men  are  made   by  continuous   retributions 

ULTIMATELY  TO  RECOGNIZE    THE    SUPREME   PoWEE    AGAINST    THEM.       "  ThcU    the    magi- 

cians  said  unto  Pharaoh,  This  is  the  finger  of  God."  God  sometimes  plagues 
men  until  they  acknowledge  Him.  The  events  of  life  are  charged  with 
retributions  which  cannot   be  hidden  by  the   art   of   the    sorcerer.     III.   That 

WHEN  WICKED  MEN  ARE  MADE  TO  ACKNOWLEDGE  THE  SOPREME  PoWER  IN  THE 
EETRIBOTIONS  OF  LIFE  THEY  MAY  NEVERTHELESS    CONTINUE  IN    OPEN    OPPOSITION  TO    IT. 

"  And  Pharaoh's  heart  was  hardened."  Lessons:  1.  That  the  retributions  of  life 
are  designed  to  lead  men  to  the  performance  of  moral  duty.  2.  That  there  are  many 
deceptions  calculated  to  blind  men  to  the  hand  of  God  in  the  events  of  life.  3.  That 
wicked  men  are  not  able  to  contend  with  God,  and  are  at  times  brought  to  acknowledge 
His  supremacy.  [J.  S.  Kxell,  M.A.)  Dangerous  dust : — Dangerous  dust  in  the 
air  is  circulated  by  the  elevated  railways  in  New  York.  A  member  of  the  staff  of 
The  Scienti^fic  American  hung  a  magnet  under  the  track  of  tbe  elevated  road,  and 
when  a  few  minutes  later  he  took  it  down  it  was  coated  with  minute  particulars  of 
iron  dust.  This  dust,  he  said,  is  the  cause  of  many  severe  cases  of  eye  troubles. 
The  swift  passing  trains  grind  off  showers  of  iron  particles,  which  often  fall  or  are 
blown  into  the  eyes  of  pedestrians.  The  microscoije  shows,  that  the  particles  are  of 
innumerable  shapes,  and  they  usually  have  jagged  fringes,  and  many  of  them  have 
barbs  like  a  fish  hook.  When  lodged  in  the  eye  they  cannot  be  attracted  therefrom 
with  a  magnet,  but  a  gouge-shaped  instrument  the  size  of  a  sewing  needle  had  been 
devised  for  the  purpose.  This  peculiarity  of  the  dust  resembles  that  of  moral  evil. 
It  is  in  the  air,  and  when  once  it  finds  a  lodgment  in  the  human  heart  it  cannot  be 
withdrawn  without  diiiiculty  and  suffering.  This  Is  the  of  flngor  Uod . — "  Like 
Phidias,  who  in  his  image  carved  his  own  name,  there  is  God  engraven  upon 
every  creature."  Not  in  characters  of  human  writing  is  it  written,  but  in  luo 
character  of  the  work.  Phidias  needed  not  to  have  written  the  word  PHIDIAS  in 
60  many  letters,  for  the  master's  hand  had  a  cunning  of  its  own  which  none  coula 
counterfeit.  An  instructed  person  had  only  to  look  at  a  statue  and  say  at  once, 
"  Phidias  did  this,  for  no  other  hand  could  have  chiselled  such  a  countenance"; 
and  believers  have  only  to  look  either  at  creation,  providence,  or  the  Divine  Word, 
and  they  will  cry  instinctively,  "  Tuis  is  the  finger  of  God."  Yet,  alas,  man  has 
great  powers  of  wilful  blindness,  and  these  are  aided  by  the  powers  of  darkness,  so 
that,  being  both  blind  and  in  the  dark,  man  is  unable  to  see  his  God,  though 
His  presence  is  as  clear  as  that  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  limit  of  false  religion  .-—Human  religions  can  go  to  a  certain  point  in 
good  works,  especially  if  they  have  borrowed  their  systems  and  copied  their 
charities  from  the  teachings  of  Christ,  which  most  of  them  have  done.  But 
beyond  a  certain  point  they  cannot  go.  It  has  been  observed  that  the  magicians 
could  not  bring  living  things  out  of  the  dust  of  the  gi'ound,  as  Moses  did.  And  a  false 
religion  cannot  bring  life  out  of  death,  as  the  gospel  does.  Morality  and  certain 
good  works  it  can  conjure  up  ;  but  spiritual  life  it  cannot  produce.  Atheism,  in  the 
form  of  scientific  materialism,  may  point  to  some  notable  and  heroic  disciple,  such 
as  Professor  Clifford,  who  died  without  fear,  steadfast  in  his  faith  that  death  was 
the  end  of  him  ;  but  it  cannot  enable  a  man  to  die  as  Stephen  and  Paul  died.  It 
is  not  unworthy  of  our  passing  thought  that  the  scientific  magicians  of  our  day, 
who  are  saying,  "  Who  is  tbe  Lord  ?  "  have  tried  very  bard  to  generate  a  living 
thing  out  of  the  dust ;  but  they  have  as  utterly  and  signally  failed  as  the  magicians 


15a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  vrn. 

did  in  the  days  of  Moses.  We  may  confidently  keep  a  good  courage  in  these  days, 
when  the  scientific  and  religious  magicians  are  trying  to  discredit  the  Word  of  God 
with  their  encliantments.  Be  sure  that  if  the  conflict  is  pushed  far  enough  they 
will  come  to  signal  grief.  In  the  end  God  will  give  glorious  victory  to  those  who 
stand  by  His  truth,  and  who  continue  to  cast  their  rods  down  in  the  face  of  an 
unbelieving  world,     (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D,) 

Vers.  20  24.  Swarms  of  flies. — The  plagxte  of  flies ;  or,  an  exceptional  mrthod  of 
the  Divine  adminiatration  in  tJie  affairs  of  this  life: — I.  It  is  a  general  rule  of  the 
Divine  adjiinisthation  that  the  good  and  bad  shall  alike  pahticipate  in  the  pain- 
FxiL  dispensations  OF  THIS  PROBATIONARY  LIFE.  1.  BccEuse  botli  are  guilty  of  sin. 
2.  Because  both  need  correction  and  improvement.  3.  Because  life  is  a  probation 
and  a  discii)line.     II.  It  is  an  exceptional  method  of  the  Divine  administration 

TO  EXEMPT  the  GOOD  FROM  THE  TRIALS  AND  RETRIBUTIONS  OF  THIS  LIFE.       "And    I   will 

put  a  division  between  My  peoi^le  and  thy  people."  1.  Thus  we  see  that  there  are 
times  in  this  life  when  moral  character  gives  exemption  from  severe  retribution. 
This  is  the  honour  God  places  upon  true  moral  goodness.  In  this  way  He 
occasionally  shows  His  approval  of  it.  Piety  shields  the  house.  It  will  protect  a 
nation  from  the  plague  of  God.  2.  Thus  we  see  that  there  are  times  in  this  life  when 
God  manifests  to  men  His  care  for  the  good.  3.  Thus  we  see  that  there  are  times  in 
this  life  when  God  gives  men  a  prophecy  of  the  social  equity  in  the  world  to  come. 
Then  Egypt  will  be  ever  separate  from  Goshen  in  character,  as  in  retribution  and 
reward.  Heaven  will  adjust  the  moral  relations  of  the  universe.  Lessons:  1.  That 
continued  sin  must  be  visited  by  continued  retribution.  2.  That  the  providence  of 
God  is  over  the  good  to  save  them  from  pain.  3.  That  the  wicked  must  see  the  worth 
of  goodness.  (-/.  .S'.  Exell,  M.A.)  God's  retributive  re.'ources: — I  once  knew  a  good 
woman  who  had  three  children,  and  the  youngest  was  her  pet.  And  it  died,  and 
said  she,  "  Kow  God  lias  done  all  that  He  can  do."  But  a  little  after  another  was 
burnt  to  death,  and  then  she  said,  "  I  fee  God  can  do  more  yet."  Soon  after  the 
other  fell  into  a  boiler  of  water,  and  was  scalded  to  death.  Says  she,  "  God  can 
do  more  yet."  Afterwards  her  husband  died,  and  then  she  said,  "  Now  God  has 
done  all  things  well."  If  she  had  said  tbis  before,  she  would  have  had  her  husband 
and  two  children  alive;  but  God  must  bring  His  work  to  pass.  He  afllicts  us  for 
our  good.  (Matthew  Wilks.)  Flies  in  E(]ypt : — Egypt  has  always  suffei'ed  more 
or  less  severely  in  hot  weather  from  the  various  sorts  of  flies  which  arise  from  the 
marshy  lands.  "  The  most  numerous  and  troublesome  among  the  insects  which 
infest  these  countries,"  says  Sonnini,  "  are  flies,  which  cruelly  torment  both  men 
and  animals.  It  is  impossible  to  form  a  just  idea  of  their  obstinate  perseverance 
when  they  wish  to  fasten  upon  any  particular  part  of  the  body,  as  when  they  are 
driven  away  they  return  and  settle  again  in  the  same  moment,  and  their  pertinacity 
tires  out  the  most  patient  sufferer.  They  particularly  delight  in  fastening  upon  the 
corners  of  the  eyes  and  the  edges  of  the  eyelids,  to  which  tender  parts  they  are 
attracted  by  a  slight  humidity."  Mr.  Lane  says — "  In  spi'ing,  summer,  and 
autumn,  flies  are  so  abundant  as  to  be  extremely  annoying  during  the  daytime,  and 
mosquitoes  are  troublesome  at  night,  unless  a  curtain  be  made  use  of  to  keep  them 
away,  and  often  in  the  day."  Herodotus  also  makes  mention  of  the  flies  of  Egypt,. 
and  describes  the  nets  with  which  the  inhabitants  protected  themselves  against 
them.  In  winter,  however,  these  insects  are  rarely  troublesome,  and  Pharaoh  may 
have  thought  that  the  threat  of  such  a  il'igue  was  but  little  likely  to  be  fulfilled. 
For  the  same  reason  the  miraculous  character  of  the  visitation,  when  it  came,  was 
the  more  readily  acknowledged.  (T.  jS.  Jilillijigton.)  Increased  penalties  : — At 
sea,  when  the  enemy's  ship  is  sighted  in  full  flight,  a  gun  loaded  with  powder  only 
is  fired  by  the  pursuer  to  bring  the  fugitive  to.  When  this  fails,  the  cannon  is 
charged  with  a  ball,  but  is  designedly  fixed  so  as  not  to  strike  the  vessel,  in  the  hope 
of  inducing  it  to  furl  the  sails.  But  when  this  attempt  has  failed,  then  the  captain 
of  the  pursuer  orders  the  gun  to  be  fired  straight  at  the  ship  attempting  to  escape. 
It  may  be  that  many  shots  have  taken  effect  in  her  rigging  and  huU  before  she 
ceases  her  flight.  Such,  too,  is  the  forbearance  of  God.  The  first  miracle  of  Moses 
was  harmless — the  second  came  nearer  home,  in  expectation  of  the  stubborn  despot's 
compliance.  Various  kinds  of  flies  in  this  plague  : — The  flies  of  this  i^lague  were 
evidently  of  a  formidable  kind,  and  very  grievous.  The  Psalmist  says — "  He  sent 
flies  among  them,  which  devoured  them  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  45).  There  is  a  kind  of  beetle 
common  in  Egypt  which  is  very  destructive,  inflicting  painful  bites,  and  consuming 
d,ll  sorts  of  niatetials.    The  mosguito  also,  which  is  a  terrible  nuisance  in  aU  hot 


CHAP,  vni.]  EXODVS.  153 

climates,  and  especially  in  the  vicinity  of  rivers,  answers  to  this  description  ;  and 
the  house-fly,  which  swarms  in  Egypt,  carries  corruption,  and  not  unfrequently 
infectious  disease,  wherever  it  alights.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  flies  of  this 
plague  were  of  various  kinds,  including  the  above  and  many  others,  for  David  says 
again  "  He  spake  the  word,  and  there  came  all  manner  of  flies,"  or  "  divers  sorts 
of  flies  "  (Psa.  cv.  31).  The  marginal  reading  gives  a  similar  description,  "  a  mixture 
of  noisome  beasls."  There  is  no  reason,  therefore,  for  supposing  that  the  plague 
was  limited  to  any  one  species  ;  on  the  contrary,  as  the  flies  were  everywhere,  upon 
the  people  and  in  their  houses,  on  the  ground  and  in  the  air,  and  in  all  the  land  of 
Egypt,  it  appears  almost  certain  that  they  were  of  different  habits,  and  therefore  of 
different  species.  There  were  flies  that  devoured,  and  flies  that  stung  ;  flies  that 
corrupted,  and  flies  that  hovered  whirring  in  the  air  ;  flies  upon  men,  inflaming 
their  eyelids  and  blinding  them,  and  flies  upon  the  cattle  ;  there  were  beetles  that 
crawled  upon  the  ground,  and  perhaps  also  bees,  and  wasps,  and  hornets,  pursuing 
the  people  fiercely.  It  is  doubtful  whether  some  kmd  of  flies  were  not  among  the 
sacred  insects  of  the  Egyptians.  Some  of  them  have  been  preserved,  perhaps 
accidentally,  in  the  mummy  cloths,  and  some  few,  among  which  are  the  house-fly, 
the  wasp,  and  the  butterfly,  are  represented  in  paintings  on  the  monuments  and 
walls.  To  make  the  miracle  more  evident,  these  pests,  while  vexing  the  Egyptians 
almost  beyond  endurance,  giving  them  no  rest  either  by  night  or  day,  were  not 
suffered  to  approach  the  Israelites.  "  In  the  land  of  Goshen  were  no  flies."  (T.  S. 
Millington.) 

Vers.  25-32.  It  is  not  meet  so  to  do. — The  impossihUihj  of  compromise  in  a  religious 
life : — I.  That  there  can  be  no  compkoiiise  in  Christian  morality.  "  And  Moses 
said.  It  is  not  meet  to  do  so."  1.  Because  they  do  not  like  to  give  up  tbeir  sins. 
2.  Because  they  will  not  summon  resolution  enough  to  break  the  force  of  old  and 
continued  habit.  II.  That  there  can  be  no  compromise  in  Christian  worship. 
"  We  will  go  three  days'  journey  into  the  wilderness,  and  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  our 
God,  as  He  shall  command  us."  It  is  not  enough  to  worship  God  ;  we  must  wor- 
ship Him  in  the  manner  He  has  made  known.  Men  should  not  place  themselves 
in  temptation  by  going  to  unhallowed  sanctuaries.  1.  Christian  worship  must  not 
be  c  impromised"  by  idolatry.  2.  Christian  worship  must  not  be  compromised  by 
levity.  Prayer  must  be  the  dominant  impulse  of  the  fouI.  III.  That  the  servants 
OF  God  must  reject  all  attempts  at  religious  cojipromise.  1.  Because  religious 
compromise  brings  coutempt  upon  the  Christian  life.  2.  Because  religious  com- 
promise brings  contempt  upon  Christian  worship.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  It  is  not 
meet  so  to  do: — I.  The  impossibility  of  maintaining  a  secret  or  hidden  Christian 
life.  The  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul  will  come  out  in  real  manifestation  and  in 
public  recognition  of  God.  In  the  first  place,  the  very  initial  demand  of  Christ 
upon  His  disciples  is  to  confess  Him  before  men,  and  to  take  up  the  cross  and  come 
after  Him  daily.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  private  and  concealed  faith  allowed 
or  alluded  to  in  the  Scriptures.  Christianity  is  no  secret  organization,  but  a  life 
that  openly  and  boldly  declares  itself.  Besides,  the  very  fact  that  Christianity  is  a 
life  in  the  soul  makes  it  impossible  to  keep  it  a  secret.  A  tree  might  just  as  well 
say,  "  Can  I  not  be  a  real  living  tree  without  giving  forth  buds  and  leaves  in  the 
springtime?  "  or  a  rose,  "  Can  I  not  be  a  rose  without  bursting  into  leaf,  and  in 
due  time  sending  forth  my  flowers  in  their  sweetness  to  rejoice  the  eye  and  delight 
the  smell  of  man?"  A  prominent  fruit  merchant  in  one  of  our  New  England 
cities  was  converted  at  one  of  our  meetings,  and  he  determined  to  keep  the  fact 
secret.  He  was  ashamed  to  confess  Christ  before  his  companions,  among  whom 
he  had  been  a  very  profane  and  godless  man.  His  special  and  besetting  sin  was 
an  awful  habit  of  the  wildest  profanity,  which  used  to  burst  out  of  his  mouth  at 
the  least  provocation  to  his  quick  and  passionate  temper.  Some  of  his  employes 
told  me  that  when  he  came  to  the  warehouse,  where  his  fruit  was  sorted  and  stored 
after  being  received  from  the  ships,  he  would  swear  and  curse  at  such  a  rate  that 
they  all  dreaded  his  coming.  And  especially  was  this  so  if  a  cargo  of  oranges  or 
bananas  turned  out  badly.  The  next  morning  after  he  had  decided  to  give  himself 
to  Christ  he  went  down  to  his  receiving  store.  A  large  cargo  of  oranges  had  been 
received  the  day  before,  and  the  men  were  engaged  in  opening  and  sorting  them. 
They  were  dreading  his  appearance,  well  knowing  that  the  condition  the  fruit  was 
in  would  excite  his  wrath  to  the  uttermost.  Well,  he  came  in,  and  without  a  word 
he  looked  over  the  oranges.  To  the  astonishment  of  his  men,  he  said  to  them 
pleasantly,  "  Well,  boys,  this  is  rather  a  bad  lot,  to  be  sure.    Just  sort  them  over, 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  vni. 

and  make  the  best  of  them.  1  suppose  it  can't  be  helped."  Now,  that  man  did 
not  exactly  confess  Christ  in  so  many  words,  but  the  absence  of  certain  expressions 
from  his  conversation,  and  the  presence  of  a  new  spirit,  revealed  the  fact  that  he 
had  seen  Jesus.  At  once  the  men  came  to  the  conclusion  as  to  what  had  happened. 
They  were  not  wrong.  One  of  them  told  me  the  occurrence  the  next  day.  That 
night  I  related  this  incidexit.  I  did  not  know  the  man  by  sight,  and  was  not  sure 
that  he  was  present ;  but  at  the  close  of  the  meeting  the  merchant  sprang  to  his 
feet  and  confessed  that  he  was  the  man  ;  and  he  there  and  then  publicly  confessed 
Jesus  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  You  see  he  could  not  hide  the  fact  from  those  round 
about  him,  nor  could  he  keep  from  confessing  it.     II.  A  man  c.\nnot  ke  a  Christian 

AND    WORSHIP    GOI)    IN    THE    LAND    WITHOUT    OFFENDING    THE  WORLD.      A  gentleman    in 

Boston  was  converted  at  one  of  Mr.  Moody's  meetings.  lie  purposed  keeping  it  a 
secret.  He  belonged  to  a  wealthy  and  aristocratic  family  and  circle,  among  whom 
it  was  fashionable  to  sneer  at  evangelical  religion,  and  at  that  time  especially  at 
Mr.  Moody  and  the  great  work  going  on  in  that  city.  Shortly  afterwards  this 
gentleman  was  guest  at  a  large  dinner-party.  In  course  of  the  dinner,  the 
tabernacle  meetings  and  Mr.  Moody  came  up  for  discussion  and  ridicule.  From 
bad  they  went  to  worse,  and  began  to  sneer  at  Jesus  and  His  cross.  Ey  and  by, 
when  he  could  bear  it  no  longer,  he  arose  in  his  place,  trembling  with  embarrass- 
ment, yet  courageous  in  purpose,  and  said,  addressing  his  host :  "  I  do  not  wish 
to  seem  rude  ;  but  I  cannot  be  true  to  myself  or  to  my  God,  and  let  this  conversation 
go  on  any  longer.  I  beg  to  say  that  Mr.  Moody,  though  I  am  personally  unknown 
to  him,  is  my  friend ;  and  in  that  same  old  '  tabtruacle '  which  is  the  object  of 
your  ridicule,  and  in  one  of  those  meetings  which  you  hold  in  such  contempt,  he 
■was  the  means  of  awakening  me  to  a  true  knowledge  of  my  condition  before  God, 
and  of  leading  me  to  Christ,  whom  I  believe  to  be  the  very  Son  of  God — and 
through  the  merits  of  His  blood  I  am  trusting  for  forgiveness  and  eternal  life.  I 
cannot  let  the  conversation  go  on  without  at  least  confessing  so  much.  And  not 
wishing  to  disturb  the  freedom  of  your  party,  or  restrain  you  by  my  presence,  I  beg 
leave  of  my  kind  host  to  retire  from  this  table."  III.  "  We  will  go  three  days' 
JOURNEY  INTO  THE  WILDERNESS."  Isracl  could  Dot  woi  ship  God  iu  the  land, 
because  God  had  commanded  them  to  go  out  of  the  land.  "  Three  days'  journey 
into  the  wilderness."  Where  is  that  ?  Surely  it  must  teach  us  that  the  Christian's 
place  is  in  resurrection  with  the  Lord.  From  the  cross  to  the  resurrection  was 
three  days.  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are  above  " 
(Col.  iii.  1).  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Not  very  far  away: — Alas,  how  many 
who  have  named  the  name  of  Christ  have  never  gone  very  far  away  from  the 
"  former  things."  In  the  world  they  are  not  known  as  Christians,  and  are  only 
known  as  Christians  in  the  church  by  the  fact  that  their  names  are  en  the  church 
roll  or  parish  register  as  having  been  baptized  and  confirmed.  It  must  be  apparent 
to  any  thoughtful  person  that  any  half-and-half  position  with  reference  to  Christ 
and  His  salvation  is  not  only  an  inconsistent,  but  a  very  unhappy,  one.    I.  "  Not 

VERY   FAB   AWAY  "    IS   INCONSISTENT   WITH    THE    FIRST    LAW    OF   CHRISTIAN    LIFE,     which 

demands  that  we  shall  break  with  this  world.  "  For  our  citizenship  is  in  heaven  " 
(Phil,  iii.  20).  "  The  whole  world  heth  in  the  evil  one  "  (1  John  v.  19) ;  and  to 
abide  in  the  world  is  to  take  up  quarters  on  Satan's  ground.  Besides,  the  very 
object  that  Moses  had  in  going  down  to  Egypt  was  to  bring  the  people  up  out  of 
that  land  into  a  good  land  and  lai'ge.  How  could  they  ever  reach  Canaan  if  they 
consented  not  to  go  "  very  far  away  "  ?  And  how  shall  we  be  separated  from  this 
present  evil  world  if  we,  as  confessors  of  Christ,  insist  on  lingering  about  the 
borders  of  the  old  life  ?  II.  "  Not  very  fab  away  "  is  entirely  incompatible  with 
A  HAPPY  Christian  life.  In  the  times  of  the  old  border  wars  between  the  Scots 
and  the  English,  the  people  living  in  the  border  counties  had  a  most  wretched  time 
of  it.  First  the  Scots  would  come  pouring  down  into  the  northern  counties  of 
England,  and  devastate  and  destroy  there ;  and  then  the  English  would  invade  the 
southern  counties  of  Scotland,  and  desolation  and  death  would  be  their  portion. 
So  it  is  with  the  border-Christians,  The  Word  of  God  catches  them  iu  the  world, 
and  pricks  and  cuts  without  heahng  ;  and  if  they  are  only  a  little  way  in  the  king- 
dom they  are  thoroughly  exposed  to  the  temptations  and  buffetings  of  Satan. 
With  the  back  to  the  world  and  face  to  Christ,  ever  marching  forward,  is  the  only 
■way  of  peace  and  happiness.  III.  "Not  very  far  away"  is  a  dangerous  place 
TO  BE  IN.  I  once  heard  of  a  little  girl  who  fell  out  of  bed  during  the  night.  The 
mother  heard  the  child's  fall  and  cry,  and  ran  to  her  little  one.  After  she  had 
picked  her  up  and  somewhat  pacified  her,  she  asked  the  little  giil,  "How  did  you 


CHAP.  IX.]  EXODUS.  155 

come  to  fall  out,  my  dear  ?  "  The  child  replied,  "  Oh,  I  suppose  I  went  to  sleep 
too  near  to  the  edge  of  the  bed  where  I  fell  out,"  and  then,  quickly  correcting  hor 
statement,  said,  "No,  I  mean  I  went  to  sleep  too  near  to  the  place  where  I  got  in." 
That  was  the  real  truth  of  it.  There  are  a  great  many  persons  who  profess  con- 
version ;  but  they  do  not  get  very  far  into  the  kingdom ;  and  then  they  go  to 
sleep,  and  when  they  fall  out  the  real  reason  is  that  they  did  not  get  far  enough 
in.     "  Not  far  away  "  is  a  most  dangerous  compromise  to  consent  to.     IV.  "  Not 

VERY   FAR    AWAY  "    IS    A   POSITION    FROM    WHICH    GOD    CAN    CHOOSE    NO    WORKERS.        I    EUl 

very  free  to  say  that  God  can  make  little  or  no  use  of  a  worldly  half-and-half 
Christian.  In  the  first  place,  the  world  has  no  confidence  in  a  Christian  who  is 
hand-and-glove  with  it,  while  at  the  same  time  professing  to  have  found  something 
infinitely  better,  and  to  have  been  saved  from  the  world.  In  the  second  place,  a 
half-and-half  Christian  cannot  do  with  "  all  his  might"  what  God  would  give  him 
to  do.  Consecration  and  service  go  necessarily  together ;  and  no  consecrated  life 
can  be  maintained  on  the  edge  of  the  world  or  on  the  edge  of  the  Church.  (Ibid.) 
Exhortation  to  the  newly  awakened; — The  old  life — so  far  as  that  old  life  is 
associated  with  old  comijanious  and  with  practices  which  are  evil — must  be 
abandoned.  It  does  not  mean  that  you  are  to  turn  hermit  or  nun  ;  but  in  spirit 
and  practice  you  belong  to  another  commonwealth.  But  the  Christian  in  the 
world  is  to  be  as  distinct  from  it  as  the  Gulf  Stream  is  from  the  ocean  through 
^vhich  it  flows.  Christian  and  Great-Heart  passed  through  Vanity  Fair,  but  they 
were  not  citizens  of  that  place.  You  are  not  to  turn  your  back  in  pharisaical  self- 
righteousness  upon  your  old  friends  ;  but  henceforth  you  can  only  have  to  do  with 
them  on  the  basis  of  your  out-and-out  loyalty  to  Christ.  If  you  can  go  with  them 
and  take  Christ  with  j'ou  to  their  feasts  and  pleasures,  then  go ;  but  if  the  con- 
dition of  your  going  is  that  you  leave  your  Master  behind  you,  then  of  course  you 
are  not  to  go :  you  cannot.  Be  true  to  the  Master,  and  your  worldly  associates 
will  spare  you  any  pains  on  the  point.  They  will  adjust  themselves  to  you,  or, 
rather,  from  you,  until  the  moment  comes  when  they  want  a  true  friend,  a 
guide  and  helper  in  some  spiritual  crisis,  and  they  will  come  to  you,  passing  by 
those  Christians  (?)  who  are  "  serving  God  in  the  land."    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTEB  IX. 

Vers.    1-7.    The  hand   of  the   Lord  is  upon  thy  c&ttle.— The  suffering  that 
comes  upon  the  brute  creation  in  consequence  of  the  sin  of  man: — I.  That  wicked 

MEN     OFTEN     ACT     IN     REFERENCE    TO     THE     CLAIMS  OP     GOD     IN    SUCH     A    MANNER     AS 

TO     PROVOKE     His     JUDGMENTS.         H,      ThAT     MEN  WHO      THUS     REJECT     THE     CLAIMS 

OF    God    OFTEN    INVOLVE    THE    BRUTE    CREATION     IN  PAIN    AND    WOE.        III.    ThAT    THE 

MEN    WHO    THUS   INVOLVE    THE   BRUTE     CREATION    IN  PAIN    AND    SUFFERING    ARE     OFTEN 

UNMOVED  BY  THE  DEVASTATION  THEY  OCCASION.  "  And  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was 
hardened."  Lessons:  1.  That  the  retribution  of  sin  does  not  end  with  those  who 
occasion  it.  2.  That  the  brute  world  is  affected  by  the  conduct  of  man.  3.  That 
men  should  endeavour  to  banish  pain  from  the  universe  by  attention  to  the  com- 
mands of  heaven.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Another  blow  at  Egyptian  idolatry  : — 
By  the  former  plagues  their  religious  ceremonies  had  been  interrupted  and  their 
sacred  abominations  defiled  :  but  now  their  chief  deities  are  attacked.  In  Goshen, 
where  the  cattle  are  but  cattle,  they  remain  untouched :  "  Of  the  cattle  of  the 
children  of  Israel  there  died  not  one "  (ver.  6) ;  but  in  all  other  parts  of  the 
country,  where  they  are  reverenced  as  gods,  the  plague  is  upon  them,  and  they  die. 
Osiris,  the  saviour,  cannot  save  even  the  brute  in  which  his  own  soul  is  supposed 
to  dwell ;  Apis  and  Mnevis,  the  ram  of  Ammon,  the  sheep  of  Sais,  and  the  goat  of 
Mendes,  perish  together.  Hence  Moses  reminds  the  Israelites  afterwards,  "  Upon 
their  gods  also  the  Lord  executed  judgments  "  (Numb,  xxxiii.  4);  and  Jethro,  when 
he  had  heard  from  Moses  the  history  of  all  that  God  had  done  in  Egypt,  con- 
fessed, "Now  I  know  that  the  Lord  is  greater  than  all  gods;  for  in  the  thing 
wherein  they  dealt  proudly.  He  was  above  them  "  (chap,  xviii.  11).  (T.  S.  Mil- 
lington.)  Calf-worship  in  modern  times: — There  are  some  traces  of  this  calf- 
worship  to  be  observed  even  in  our  own  days.  The  Hindus  still  pay  reverence  to 
the  ox  as  a  sacred  animal.    One  particular  kind  of  cattle,  having  a  hump  upon  the 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.  nc 

Bhoulders,  is  consecrated  to  Siva,  as  the  Egyptian  bull  was  to  Osiris ;  they  are 
caressed  and  pampered  by  the  people  ;  they  roam  at  large,  and  may  destroy  the 
most  valuable  crops  with  impunity ;  none  dare  lay  hands  upon  them  ;  they  are 
everywhere  treated  with  respect.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  8-12.  A  boll  breaking  forth  with  blains. — Lessons :  1.  Upon  former  warn- 
ings despised,  God  falls  suddenly  on  the  wicked  with  vengeance  unawares.  2. 
Though  God  can  plague  His  enemies  without  instruments,  yet  sometimes  He  will 
use  them.  3.  God  gives  command  out  of  the  ashes  to  bring  fiery  plagues  on  the 
wicked  sometimes  at  His  pleasure.  4.  Hands  full  of  ashes  are  to  note  full  measure 
of  vengeance  on  God's  enemies.  5.  Signal  actions  (as  here  the  sprinkling  ashes) 
God  sometimes  useth  for  men  to  see  and  fear.  6.  God  can  make  ashes  dust,  and 
dust  boils,  to  plague  His  enemies.  7.  God  foretells  His  servants  that  His  command 
obeyed  shall  not  be  in  vain.  8.  Man  and  beast  are  joined  together  in  plagues  when 
sinners  are  not  warned  by  smiting  beasts  alone.  9.  God  giveth  out  threatenings  of 
judgment  for  manner  and  measure  as  He  will.  10.  The  botch  or  blain  on  Egypt  is 
a  memorable  plague.  God  appropriates  it  (ver.  9).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Lessons: 
1,  Experience  of  the  devil's  helplessness  against  God  will  not  persuade  the  wicked 
to  desist  from  him.  2.  God's  boil  shall  come  upon  these  wicked  instruments,  do 
the  devil  what  he  can  against  it.  3.  All  Satan's  instruments  are  vanquished  at  the 
appearance  of  God's  plague  (ver.  11).  4.  The  great  God  observes  and  judgeth  to 
obduration  sinners  who  harden  themselves  against  His  judgments.  5.  Obduration 
from  God's  giving  men  up  to  their  own  lusts  makes  them  more  to  stop  their  ears 
and  turn  their  hearts  from  His  word.  6.  God's  foreseeing  and  foresaying  order  (or 
limit)  the  issues  of  rebellion  in  the  wicked  against  Himself  (ver.  12).  (Ibid.)  The 
physical  suffering  brought  upon  men  by  sin : — I.  That  there  is  siuch  rnTsiCAL 
SUFFEIUNQ  BKOuoHT  UPON  MEN  BY  SIN  AND  DISOBEDIENCE.  Moral  Considerations 
are  at  the  basis  of  health.  The  body  is  influenced  by  the  moods  of  the 
soul.  Piety  is  restorative.  It  gives  eternal  life.  II.  That  the  physical  suffer- 
ing CONSEQUENT  UPON  SIN  COMES  UPON  MEN  INDICPENDENT  OF  THEIR  SOCIAL  POSITION   OB 

OF  THEIR  SCIENTIFIC  ATTAINMENTS.  The  king,  the  magiciaus,  and  all  the  people  of 
Egypt  were  smitten  by  the  pestilence.  None  were  exempt.  1.  Hence  we  see  that 
social  position  does  not  exempt  men  from  the  physical  suffering  consequent  upon 
sin.  2.  Hence  we  see  that  scientific  attainment  does  not  exempt  men  from  the 
physical  suffering  consequent  upon  sin.  The  boils  were  upon  the  magicians.  III. 
That  the  physical  suffering  consequent  upon  sin  does  not  always  lead  to  moral 
REFORMATION.  Lcssons  :  1.  That  God  permits  suffering  to  come  upon  wicked  men 
to  reprove  and  correct  tbeir  moral  character.  2.  That  the  laws  of  physical  man- 
hood are  in  harmony  with  true  well-being  of  the  soul.  3.  That  pain  should  lead 
us  to  review  the  meaning  of  our  lives.     (J.  S.  E.rtU,  M.A.)  The  insignificant 

commencement  of  great  calamities  : — I.  That  great  calamities  are  often  insigni- 
ficant IN  their  commencement.  All  causes  are  potent  to  great  effects.  A  trivial 
ailment  may  work  death,  A  little  misunderstanding  may  break  up  a  Church.  A 
little  sin  may  ruin  a  soul.  U.  That  great  calamities  are  often  mysterious  in 
their  infliction.  It  is  astonishing  how  apparently  trivial  causes  are  intiuential  to 
such  great  results.  Men  are  at  a  loss  to  explain  Low  little  sins  are  so  far-reaching 
in  their  effects.  It  must  be  recognized  as  the  wondrous  ordination  of  God,  and  as 
the  efficient  law  of  moral  life,  designed  to  keep  men  right.      III.    That   great 

C.a<AMITIES  ARE    OFTEN    IRREPRESSIBLE    IN    THEIR   PROGRESS.       When  the  judgments  of 

God  are  abroad  in  the  earth,  and  when  Uttle  causes  are  working  out  their  punitive 
issue  in  the  lives  of  men  and  nations,  they  cannot  be  restrained  by  pride  or  power. 
(Ibid.)  The  helplessness  of  wicked  men  in  the  hour  of  Divine  retribution  : — I. 
They  are  helpless  because  they  have  not  the  ability  to  avert  the  retribu- 
tions OF  God.  Sin  ever  makes  men  helpless.  II.  They  are  helpless  because 
they  have  not  the  courage  to  endure  the  retributions  of  God.  Sin  makes 
men  cowardly.  Hell  cannot  inspire  the  wicked  heart  with  courage  in  the  hour  of 
trial.  III.  They  are  helpless  because  they  lack  those  moral  qualities  which 
alone  can  aid  men  in  the  hour  of  retribution.  Lessons:  1.  That  though  men 
have  experience  of  Satan's  inability  to  help  them  in  their  trouble  consequent  upon 
sin,  they  will  not  desist  from  it.  2.  That  all  Satan's  instruments  are  vanquished 
by  the  plague  of  God.  (Ibid.)  A  type  of  corrupt  souls  : — Let  this  incident 
lead  us  to  think  how  great  will  be  the  anguish  and  confusion  of  wicked  men 
and  persecutors  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  come  again  to  earth,  and 
when  the  light  of  God  shall  shine  upon  them.     Then  the  corruption  of  their  uncon- 


CHAt.  IX,]  EXODUS.  157 

verted  souls  will  openly  appear,  and  they  will  not  dare  to  show  themselves  before 
the  holy  angels,  and  before  the  redeemed,  who  are  covered  with  the  robe  of  Christ's 
righteousness.  Only  imagine  what  would  become  of  any  of  us  if  for  every  evil 
thought,  every  wicked  word,  every  falsehood,  every  slander,  every  angry  word,  au 
ulcer  or  a  boil  were  to  appear  on  our  faces  ?  If  it  were  to  happen  to  us,  for 
example,  as  to  Miriam,  the  sister  of  Moses,  who,  as  the  punishment  of  her  pride 
and  angry  words  to  her  brother,  became  all  at  once  a  leper  white  as  snow,  that  is 
to  say,  covered  with  a  disgusting  disease.  How  horrible  we  should  seem  if  all  the 
pollutions  of  our  souls  were  to  appear  outwardly  on  our  bodies  !  It  is  well  for  us 
to  think  occasionally  of  such  things,  to  examine  the  sins  of  our  hearts,  to  humble 
ourselves  before  God,  and  to  feel  more  deeply  the  need  of  being  washed  in  the 
blood  of  Christ,  which  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  It  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  alone 
who  can  present  to  Himself  His  Church  (that  is,  the  assembly  of  His  redeemed 
people)  glorious  and  pure,  "not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  holy 
and  without  blemish. "     {Prof.  Gaussen.) 

Vers.  13-16.  To  show  In  thee  My  power.  —  The  plagues  of  Egypt  : — I. 
Chakacteristics.  1.  Wonders.  Filled  men  with  astonishment  and  awe.  2. 
Signs.  Instructive.  Showed  the  power  and  anger  of  Jehovah.  "  This,  the 
finger,"  &c.  3.  Punitive  also.  They  punished  the  oppressor,  while  they  opened 
the  doors  of  the  house  of  bondage.  4.  Emblematical  of  the  mission  and  career 
of  Moses.  Thunders  of  Sinai  resounded  through  them  all.  5.  Various.  Attacked 
both  nature  and  man  ;  animate  and  inanimate  objects ;  mineral,  vegetable,  and 
animal  kingdoms.  6.  Numerous.  Ten.  Indeed  more,  for  there  was  the  undoing 
as  well  as  the  doing.  II.  Pcbpose.  1.  To  overthrow  the  deities  of  Egypt. 
Jehovah  the  only  true  God — Lord  of  lords.  2.  To  punish  the  oppressor.  Those 
who  long  years  had  made  the  life  of  Israel  bitter,  now  taste  a  worne  bitterness  than 
they  had  inflicted.  3.  To  confound  the  pride  of  Pharaoh.  Though  he  was  master 
in  the  land.  Had  need  to  be  taught  that  there  was  One  by  whom  kings  rule.  4. 
To  effect  the  deliverance  of  the  captives.  They  gradually  paved  the  way,  and 
ultimately  secured  this.  III.  Effect.  1.  Upon  Pharaoh.  Hardened  his  heart. 
In  proportion  as  he  set  himself  against  the  manifest  will  of  God.  So  even  the 
glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  is,  to  some  men,  the  savour  of  death  unto  death. 
At  last  even  Pharaoh's  resistance  was  broken,  2.  Upon  the  Egyptians.  They 
were  gradually  subdued,  till  at  length  they  entreated  Pharaoh  to  let  Israel  go,  as 
earnestly  as  ever  Moses  and  Aaron  did.  3.  Upon  Israel.  They  had  dwelt  secure 
while  these  terrors  were  abroad.  God  had  hidden  them  in  the  chambers  of  Hia 
love  and  mercy.  Their  confidence  restored.  They  organize  their  flight.  They  see 
the  time  is  at  hand.  And  at  last  wait  for  the  final  word.  Learn — 1.  To  stand  in 
awe  of  the  gi-eat  God  and  sin  not.  2.  To  admire  the  resources  of  infinite  wisdom 
and  power.  3.  To  take  heed  lest  the  gospel  be  a  source  of  condemnation.  4.  To 
expect  no  miracles,  but  turn  to  the  sure  word  of  prophecy.  5.  To  rejoice  in  our 
great  deliverer,  Jesus  Christ.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  The  Divine  name  as  manifested  in 
the  history  of  a  wicked  and  rebellious  soul : — I.  From  the  history  of  Pharaoh 

WE     SEE     THAT     IT     IS    NOT    THE     WAY     OF     GoD    TO    REMOVE     A    WICKED    SOUL    BY    THE 

IMMEDIATE  STROKE  OF  POWER.  The  mercy  of  the  Divine  name  is  declared  in 
the   prolonged    life  of    the    sinner.      II.    From   the    history    of  Pharaoh,    we 

SEE  that  it  is  the  WAY  OF  GoD  TO  SURROUND  THE  WICKED  SOUL  BY  MANY 
MINISTRIES  OF  SALVATION.  III.  FrOM  THE  HISTORY  OF  PhABAOH,  WE  SEE  THAT 
IT  13  THE  WAY  OF  GoD  TO  FOLLOW  THE  WICKED  SOUL  WITH  CONTINUED  JUDG- 
MENTS. The  sorrows  of  the  wicked  are  not  fortuitous  or  casual,  but  divinely 
arranged  and  continuous.  Hence  in  the  life  of  the  sinner  is  seen  the  power 
of  the  Divine  hand.  Lessons :  1.  That  God  permits  wicked  men  to  live  in 
the  universe,  notwithstanding  the  continued  rebellion  against  Him.  2.  That  a  life 
of  sin  is  a  life  of  judgment.  3.  That  the  sovereignty,  mercy,  power,  and  justice  of 
God  are  seen  in  His  dealings  with  men.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  God  to  be  recognized 
in  the  events  of  life  : — In  listening  to  a  great  organ,  played  by  the  hand  of  a  master, 
there  is  often  an  undertone  that  controls  the  whole  piece.  Sometimes  it  is  scarcely 
audible,  and  a  careless  listener  would  miss  it  altogether.  The  lighter  play  goes  on, 
ebbing  and  flowing,  rising  and  sinking,  now  softly  gliding  on  the  gentler  stops,  and 
now  swelling  out  to  the  full  power  of  the  great  organ.  But  amid  all  the  changes 
and  transpositions  this  undertone  maybe  heard,  steadily  pursuing  its  own  thought. 
The  careless  listener  thinks  the  lighter  play  the  main  thing ;  but  he  that  can 
appreciate  musical  ideas,  as  well  as  sounds,  follows  the  quiet  undertone  of  the  piece, 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

and  finds  in  it  the  leading  thought  of  the  artist.  So  men  see  the  outward  events 
of  life,  the  actions,  the  words,  the  wars,  famines,  sins ;  but  underneath  all  God  is 
carrying  out  His  own  plans,  and  compelling  all  outward  things  to  aid  the  music  He 
would  make  in  this  world.     {Christian  Age.)  Why   Pharaoh   was  exalted: — 

The  words  do  not  mean  that  the  Almighty  had  created  Pharaoh  for  this 
purpose;  but  that  He  had  exalted  him  to  worldly  distinction,  and  preserved  him 
alive,  when  the  pestilence  was  ready  to  destroy,  that  he  might  serve  as  a  beacon  to 
warn  the  obstinate  and  rebellious  in  after  times.  It  is  a  fearful  thought,  that  God 
may  allow  us  to  reach  positions  of  influence  and  authority,  towards  which  our 
own  selfish  ambition  has  drawn  us  ;  and  all  this  not  for  the  purpose  of  imparting 
a  blessing,  but  really  f6r  the  manifesting  a  judgment,  or  for  the  display  of  His 
omnipotence.  {J.  H.  Norton,  D.D.)  Reprobation : — I.  I  am  to  show  that  God 
DID  DESTKOY  Ph.veaoh.  The  Deity  threatened  to  cut  him  off  from  the  earth,  which 
plainly  implied  something  more  than  barely  putting  an  end  to  his  life.  Had  He 
permitted  him  to  die  by  old  age,  or  by  sickness,  or  even  by  what  is  commonly  called 
accident,  we  should  have  had  no  right  to  conclude  from  the  manner  of  his  dying 
tbat  he  was  really  destroyed.  But  there  were  two  circumstances  attending  his 
death,  which  may  be  justly  considered  as  denoting  his  destruction.  He  was  cut  off  in 
the  midst  of  his  wickedness.  And  another  is,  that  he  died  by  the  immediate  hand  of 
Divine  justice.  As  God  opened  the  Red  Sea  in  mercy  to  Israel,  so  He  shut  it  again 
in  judgment  to  Pharaoh,  whom  He  had  threatened  to  destroy.  II.  I  am  to  show 
THAT  God  RAISED  UP  Phar-^oh  to  fit  him  for  destroction.  God  worketh  all 
things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.  He  never  does  anything  without  a 
previous  design.  If  He  destroyed  Pbaraoh  in  the  manner  which  has  been  repre- 
sented, there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  He  pieviously  intended  to  destroy  him  in 
such  a  manner.  But  the  Divine  declarations  supersede  the  necessity  of  reasoning 
upon  this  head.  God  made  known,  from  time  to  time,  His  purpose  of  destroying 
Pharaoh.  Now,  if  we  look  into  the  history  of  God's  condact  towards  Pharaoh,  we 
Bhall  find  that  He  used  all  the  proper  and  necessary  means  to  form  him  a  vessel 
of  wrath,  and  fit  him  for  that  miserable  end  to  which  he  was  appointed.  1.  He 
raised  him  up  from  nothing  into  being.  He  gave  him  a  rational  and  immortal 
existence.  2.  He  raised  him  up  to  the  throne  of  Egypt.  In  this  splendid  situation 
he  was  surrounded  with  ever^  thing  that  could  please  his  taste,  flatter  his  vanity, 
and  inflame  his  ambition.  And  this  was  a  natural  and  necessary  step  to  prepare 
him  for  his  final  fate.  For  it  is  a  Divine  maxim,  that  "  pride  goeth  before  destruc- 
tion, and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall."  3.  God  not  only  raised  Pharaoh  to  the 
pinnacle  of  human  glory,  but  also  removed  from  him  outward  restraints.  Besides 
giving  him  the  power  of  an  unlimited  monarch,  was  virtually  setting  him  abave  all 
legal  influence  and  control.  But  besides  this,  God  removed  Moses  from  his 
presence  and  kingdom,  who  was  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt,  and  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  all  the  arts  and  intrigues  of  a  court.  4.  God  endured  this  vessel 
of  wrath  with  much  long-suffering  and  forbearance.  Instead  of  treating  him 
according  to  his  deserts,  He  waited  long  to  be  gracious.  He  used  a  vai'iety  of 
means  to  bring  him  to  repentance.  But  mercies,  as  well  as  judgments,  conspired 
to  increase  his  stupidity  and  hardness  of  heart,  which  prepared  him  for  a  more 
unexpected  and  more  aggravated  doom.  5.  God  hardened  his  heart.  All  other 
methods,  without  this,  would  have  failed  of  fitting  him  for  destruction.  It  is  now 
time  to  make  it  appear,  if  possible — HI.  That  God  is  to  be  justified  in  His 
TREATMENT  OF  Pharaoh.  We  must  procccd  upon  the  supposition  that  God  did 
treat  him  in  the  manner  which  has  been  represented ;  and  especially  that  He  did, 
among  other  things,  actually  harden  his  heart.  1.  That  better  judges  than  we  can 
pretend  to  be,  have  apin-oved  of  God's  treatment  of  Pharaoh.  We  find  his  own 
testimony  in  favour  of  God  and  against  himself.  "Pharaoh  sent  and  called  for 
Moses  and  Aaron,  and  said  unto  them,  I  have  sinned  this  time ;  the  Lord  is 
righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are  wicked."  This  Pharaoh  said  after  God  had 
raised  him  up,  after  He  had  taken  off  restraints  from  his  mind,  after  He  had  sent 
severe  judgments  upon  him,  after  He  had  hardened  his  heart,  and  after  He  had 
told  him  that  He  had  raised  him  up  to  destroy  him.  By  this  time  Pharaoh  was 
nearly  ripened  for  ruin,  and  properly  prepared  to  judge  whether  God  had  injured 
him,  or  whether  he  had  injured  God.  And  he  freely  acknowledges  that  he  was 
wicked,  and  had  injured  God,  and  that  God  was  righteous,  and  had  never  injured 
him.  2.  The  sovereignty  and  justice  of  God  allowed  Him  to  treat  Pharaoh  in  the 
manner  which  has  just  been  described.  The  Deity  had  a  sovereign  right  to  bring 
Pharaoh  into  existence,  to  give  him  the  powers  and  faculties  of  a  moral  agent,  to 


CHAP.  IX.]  EXODUS.  159 

place  him  at  the  head  of  a  kingdom,  and  to  operate  upon  his  heart  in  the  same 
manner  in  which  He  operates  upon  the  hearts  of  other  men.  And  when  Pharaoh, 
under  such  circumstances,  became  extremely  haughty,  cruel,  malevolent  and 
obstinate,  He  had  a  right,  in  point  of  justice,  to  cut  him  off  from  the  earth,  and 
send  him  to  endless  perdition.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Pharaoh  raised  up: — From 
all  we  can  find  out  from  a  careful  comparison  of  what  Moses  wrote  with  what  Paul 
added  in  his  letter  (Rom.  ix.  15-18),  it  would  appear  that  a  paraphrase  like  this 
might  represent  the  truth :  "I  selected  thee  for  a  strong  and  illustrious  example  of 
human  insolence  in  power,  its  capabilities  for  wickedness,  and  the  certainty  of  its 
final  doom  ;  and  this  I  did  in  order  that  I  might  prove  My  own  supremacy  over  the 
creatures  of  My  hand,  and  thus  declare  My  name  in  all  the  ages  of  the  world." 
1.  Observe  here  that  this  king  was  perfectly  intelligent  concerning  what  Jehovah  asked 
of  him:  "Let  My  peo^^le  go,  that  they  may  serve  Me."  That  was  the  demand. 
Does  any  one  say  he  could  not  let  them  go,  if  he  tried  ?  It  was  a  simple  measure 
of  political  economy ;  he  would  lose  an  nnreckoned  number  of  valuable  slaves .  So 
he  made  up  his  mind  that  the  conflict  must  come  on  ;  he  would  not  let  them  go. 
But  there  was  in  the  struggle  more  than  mere  political  economy  ;  from  the  begin- 
ning it  is  an  undenied  fact  that  he  knew  it  was  God  with  whom  he  was  contending ; 
he  was  bracing  himself  for  a  fight  which  meant  life  or  death.  Why,  then,  did 
Menephtah  take  his  stand  in  defiance  of  all  ?  The  real  reason  must  be  found  in 
his  wish  to  try  his  gods  against  Israel's  God ;  the  issue,  at  first  only  economic,  at 
last  became  only  spiritual.  Those  who  exercise  their  sympathy  so  extensively 
about  this  monstrous  despot,  steeped  in  conceit  and  superstition,  and  who  claim 
that  he  was  treated  unfairly  and  had  no  chance,  ought  not  to  forget  that 
Menephtah  was  permitted  to  choose  his  own  forms  of  contending  with  Moses. 
Their  weapons  were  miracles,  and  the  orders  of  the  Hebrew  leader  were  issued  in 
such  slow  details  that  for  a  while  the  king  was  able  with  his  magicians  to  meet  the 
demands  of  a  very  respectable  rebellion  in  show.  But  enough  of  this.  2.  It  is 
more  to  the  point  now  that  we  enter  on  an  explanation  of  this  expression  about 
Pharaoh's  being  "  raised  up  "  as  an  exhibition  of  God's  power  and  supremacy.  For 
years  of  injustice  in  administration  of  the  government,  of  tyranny  in  treatment  of 
the  Israeliie  working-people,  and  of  superstitious  idolatry  in  his  worship,  it  is  clear 
that  Menephtah  had  been  known  and  read  of  all  men.  Just  then  it  pleased  God  to 
teach  Israel,  His  chosen  people,  a  lesson  of  dependence  upon  Himself ;  He  deter- 
mined to  show  His  complete  and  irresistible  supremacy  over  any  one  and  every  one 
else  who  was  in  a  position  to  defy  Him.  The  government  of  Israel  was  a  theo- 
cracy: that  is  to  say,  God  in  person  was  the  King  of  it,  and  Moses  was  the  earthly 
representative  before  the  people.  He  therefore  needed  a  conspicuous  antagonist. 
Menephtah  was  chosen.  God  might  have  selected  the  king  of  the  Philistine  nation 
or  the  Amorite  ;  it  is  likely  both  were  as  bad  as  Pharaoh.  What  He  did  do  was  to 
choose  this  king  of  Egypt,  the  descendant  of  some  awful  generations  of  miscreant 
tyrants — himself  as  wicked  as  the  worst.  This  king,  Menephtah,  the  Lord  took 
when  he  was  at  the  heigbt  of  his  power.  He  kept  him  alive;  He  endured  his 
defiance ;  He  preserved  a  balance  in  His  mind  so  that  he  should  not  go  insane;  He 
gave  him  an  unbroken  season  of  health;  He  guarded  against  any  useless  or  un- 
helpful insurrection  in  his  realm ;  He  patiently  bore  with  his  blasphemy.  Then,  as 
the  conflict  grew  more  malignant,  instead  of  cutting  this  rebel  off  in  the  midst  of 
his  daring  impiety,  God  kept  giving  him  more  and  harder  disciplines — all  calculated, 
mind  you,  to  do  him  good,  if  he  would  only  accept  and  improve  them  to  good;  thus 
kindling  anew  his  passions  with  fresh  fuel.  The  purpose  seems  to  have  been  just 
to  draw  this  one  man  out,  to  exhaust  his  tremendous  powers  and  capabilities  to  the 
very  utmost,  so  as  to  have  the  Hebrews  understand  that  no  king,  not  even  at  the 
highest  conception  of  force  and  tyranny,  was  or  could  be  a  match  for  the  great 
Jehovah  who  was  their  King  and  their  God.  In  this  sense  Pharaoh  was  "  raised 
up,"  so  as  to  become  a  recognized  sinner  for  times  and  races  in  the  unborn  future, 
a  shining  shame  before  the  world.  3.  "As  he  loved  cursing,  so  let  it  come  unto 
him ;  as  he  delighted  not  in  blessing,  so  let  it  be  far  from  him."  Menephtah  does 
not  stand  alone  in  history,  by  any  means.  Cain,  Saul,  the  king  of  Israel,  Sihon, 
Belshazzar,  Judas  Iscariot,  had  a  similar  trial  of  human  will  against  the  Divine. 
These  men  were  conspicuous ;  not  all  men  are  as  much  so  ;  but  all  have  the  same 
human  nature.  Indeed,  most  of  us  are  distinctly  conscious  of  being  perfectly 
unconstrained  in  all  of  our  moral  decisions.  We  should  say,  each  one  of  us,  if  the 
inquiry  were  raised,  that  there  never  was  a  moment  in  all  this  man's  career  in 
which  if  he  had  turned  and  repented,  he  might  not  have  been  saved,  no  matter 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

how  far  on  in  his  guilt  he  might  have  advanced :  so  it  seems  now  to  ourselves. 
There  is  a  theological  doctrine  called  reprobation  ;  the  truth  appears  to  be  that  at 
some  period  in  tbe  controversy  with  a  human  soul,  God  does  judicially  withdraw 
His  Spirit,  and  then  there  is  a  solemn  crisis  reached  for  the  experience  of  hard- 
ness ;  it  looks  as  if  a  man  could  not  repent,  could  not  be  saved,  beyond  that  line 
of  defiance  and  despair.  Now,  everything  the  Lord  does  to  save  a  good  man,  if 
done  to  this  reprobate,  only  makes  him  worse.  How  can  that  be  helped  ?  The 
free  will  is  kept  up,  and  the  sovereignty  does  not  yield.  There  is  no  defence,  so 
far  as  can  be  discovered,  against  the  power  of  an  unrighteous  man  to  make  a 
vicious  perversion  of  God's  most  generous  dealings.  4.  There  is  a  reprobation 
before  death.  The  sentiment  is  not  accurately  true  as  some  persons  sing  it :  it  is 
not  always  sure  that  "  while  the  lamp  holds  out  to  burn,  the  vilest  sinner  may 
return."  For  in  his  heart  there  may  be  a  hardness  that  will  hinder  him  far  ever 
from  coming  to  ask  for  a  pardon  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  is  essential.  After 
this  point  is  reached,  however,  God  goes  right  on  doing  as  He  did  before.  God 
never  does  anything  to  any  soul  with  the  intention  of  hardening  it.  He  never 
"  raises  up  "  any  man  for  the  sake  of  casting  him  down  again  into  hell.  He  has  a 
right  to  choose  as  much  as  we  have  in  any  case.  He  chose  Moses  instead  of 
Meuephtah,  and  Israel  instead  of  Egypt ;  He  had  mercy  on  whom  lie  would  have 
mercy.  The  ancient  Thracian  emblem  of  the  Deity  was  a  sun  with  tbree  of  its 
broadest  beams  proceeding  from  it :  of  these,  one  rested  upon  a  sea  of  ice  and  was 
melting  it ;  another,  on  a  cliff  of  rock,  and  was  causing  it  to  flow  ;  the  third,  on  a 
dead  man's  body,  and  was  rousing  it  to  life.  Now,  just  imagine  each  one  of  tbese, 
or  any  one  of  these,  was  so  free-willed  as  to  be  able,  and  so  spiteful  as  to  wish,  to 
resist,  so  a  new  chill  went  into  the  ice,  and  a  fresh  hardness  into  the  rock, 
and  a  deeper  corruption  sunk  into  the  dead  body;  would  the  warmth-giving  and 
life-giving  sun  be  to  blame,  if  it  still  went  on  shining  as  before?  (C.  S.  Robinson, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  As  yet  exaltest  thou  thyself. — A  self-exalted  vian : — I.  That  a  self- 
exalted  MAN  OFTEN  TREATS  WITH  CONTEMPT  THE  CLAIMS  OF  DUTY.  II.  ThAT  A  SELF- 
EXALTED  MAN  OFTEN  TREATS  WITH  CONTEMPT  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.  III.  ThAT  A 
SELF-EXALTED  MAN  IS  OFTEN  IIC3IILIATED  BY  THE  SAD  DISCIPLINE  OF  LIFE.       Sclf-COnCeit 

is  self-destruction.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  plague  of  hail  threatened ;  or,atten' 
tion  to  the  word  of  God  the  condition  of  safety  in  the  final  judgment  of  life  : — I.  That 

TDEUE  IS  A  GREAT  AND  AWFCL  JUDGMENT  THREATENED  UPON  MAN  IN  THE  FUTURE.       Time 

known  only  to  God.  Enough  that  fact  is  certain.  II.  That  there  is  a  shelter  pro- 
vided   FROM    THE    FINAL    JUDGMENT  OF   THE   FUTURE.      1.    Diviucly  made   kuoWU.      2. 

Mercifully  sufficient.    3.  Gratefully  welcomed.     III.  That  only  those  who  heed 

THE  WARNING  OF  GoD,  AND  AVAIL  THEMSELVES  OF  THE  SHELTER  PROVIDED,  WILL  BE  SAFE 
IN  THE  FINAL  JUDGMENT  OF  LIFE.  IV.  ThAT  MANY,  THROUGH  UNBELIEF,  OR  THROUGH 
NEGLECT    OF    THE    WORD    OF    GoD,     WILL    PERISH     IN     THE     FINAL    JUDGMENT    OF    LIFE. 

Lessons:  1.  Believe  in  the  judgment  to  come.  2.  Believe  in  the  mercy  of 
Christ.  3.  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  {Ibid.)  3IiTiding  what  God  says  : — 
The  text  describes  two  classes,  viz.,  those  that  feared  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
and  those  that  "  set  not  their  hearts  "  to  it.  Here  is  a  very  distinct  parable 
in  history  for  our  use  and  instruction.  We  may  note — I.  The  Divine  warning. 
1.  It  was  "  the  word  of  Jehovah."  It  was  sent  through  a  specially  commissioned 
messenger.  2.  It  was  a  word  of  mercy.  The  Lord  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner. 
3.  It  was  a  word  of  threatening.  But  the  threat  was  only  against  those  whose  wilful 
disobedience  would  merit  judgment.  II.  The  different  ways  in  which  it  was 
regarded.  1.  Wholesome  fear.  This  foar  was  a  fruit  of  faith.  A  feeble  spark  of 
faith,  perhaps,  but  enough  to  stimulate  action.  2.  Careless  neglect.  Prov.  xiv.  16, 
gives  well  the  contrast  of  the  two  classes.  This  "  carnal  security  "  a  very  common 
source  of  spiritual  danger.  III.  The  definite  application  to  ourselves.  God 
has  sent  His  word  to  us,  full  of  mingled  i^romises  and  warnings,  declarations  of 
mercy  and  judgment.  Are  we  taking  heed  thereto?  By  startling  events,  by 
secret  stirrings  of  conscience,  by  the  Bible,  by  His  special  messengers,  "  the 
ministers  of  Christ  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God,"  God  speaks.  Do 
we  listen  ?  or  do  we,  listless,  if  not  openly  scornful,  let  the  utterance  be  to  ns 
as  an  idle  tale?  The  gospel  of  Christ,  as  proclaimed  to  men,  offers  a  refuge 
from  God's  just  wrath  against  sinful  man.  If  we  refuse,  we  shall  be  worthy  of 
worse  punishment  than  heathen  who  have  never  heard,  and  it  shall  be  more  toler- 
able for  them  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  us.     Before  the  hailstorm  of  judg- 


CHAP.  IX.]  EXODUS.  ICl 

ment  come,  let  us  "  set  our  heart  to  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  ;  so  shall  we  be  safe 
in  the  evil  day.     (IF.  Saamarez  Smith,  B.D.) 

Vers.  18-26.  The  hail  shall  come  down  upon  them. — Brought  home  : — I.  God  is 
THE  TRUE  HOJiE  OF  THE  SOUL.  Everything  the  soul  needs  is  to  be  foun.l  in  Him  : 
nowhere  else.     Here  is  inviolable  security,  and  everlasting  peace.     II.  Christ  has 

COME    TO    BniN'G    US    HOME    TO   GOD.       III.    ThE    ETERNAL  BLESSEDNESS    OF    ALL    WHO  ARE 

BROUGHT  HOME  TO  GoD  BY  Chkist.  This  is  Seen  in  two  ways.  1.  By  what  is 
escaped.  "  The  hail."  G  )d's  judgments.  We  have  all  been  solenaily  warned. 
The  voice  of  God  cries  "  gather,"  (ver.  19).  If  we  slight  the  call,  our  blooJ  be  upon 
our  own  heads  !  (Heb.  xii.  25).  2.  By  what  is  enjoyed  (ver.  26).  The  security  of 
the  children  of  Israel  ia  Goshen,  while  the  storm  raged  so  terribly  all  around  them, 
touchingly  represents  the  peace  of  God's  people  in  time  and  in  eternity  (Isa.  xxxii. 
18).  IV.  The  subject  suggests  solemn  questions.  1.  Where  art  tl.ou?  In  tbe 
field,  exposed,  and  defenceless,  or,  at  home?  2.  Dost  thou  fear  God?  (ver.  20,  21). 
True  fear  leads  to  obedience.  But  many  are  heedless  of  counsel  and  warning,  aiid 
God's  judgments  are  put  "  out  of  sight  "  (Psa.  x.  5).  3.  What  are  you  doing  to 
bring  others  home?  If  we  believe  in  "the  wrath  to  come,"  we  cannot  rest  in 
inaction.  (W.  Forsijth,  M.A.)  Lessons: — 1.  Human  faith  of  God's  threatenings 
may  make  men  fear  and  tremble  at  God"s  word.  Human  it  may  be  called  in  respect 
of  the  principle,  though  the  testimony  on  which  it  was  grounded  were  Divine.  2. 
Such  fear  may  make  men  careful  to  shun  temporal  judgments.  3.  Wicked  men, 
through  fear,  may  flee  from  temporal  plagues  but  not  eternal  (ver.  20).  4.  Among 
wicked  men  some  may  refuse  human  faith  which  some  embrace.  5.  Unbelief  will 
not  suffer  men  to  lay  any  of  God's  words  to  heart.  6.  Eegardless  of  God's  threaten- 
ings, maketh  men  leave  them  and  theirs  to  vengeance  (ver.  21).  {G.  Hiuihcs,  B.D.) 
Lessons  : — 1.  God's  warnings  of  judgments  being  not  regarded.  He  quickly  gives 
the  word  for  execution.  2.  To  encourage  faith,  God  calleth  His  servants  to  assist  in 
working  vengeance.  3.  God  makes  use  of  signals  to  induce  judgmeuts  sometimes 
by  the  hand  of  His  instruments.  4.  God's  word  maketh  such  signs  effectual  that 
they  may  be  feared.  5.  God's  word  creates  hail  for  vengeance,  as  some- 
times in  mercy.  6.  Man  and  beast,  herbs  and  all  to  the  utmost  extent,  are 
subjected  to  God's  hail  at  His  command  (ver.  22).  (Ibid.)  Salutary  fears  : — 
Threatened  judgments  test  men.  Some  are  more  susceptible  to  the  presence 
of  God  than  others.  I.  These  men  feared  God's  threatened  judgment.  Fear 
often  arises  from  faith  in  God's  word.  Fear  is  the  alarum  of  the  soul.  It  is 
often  the  lirst  emotion  in  a  new  life.  It  often  brings  in  love,  ' '  as  the  needle 
draws  in  the  thread."  II.  Their  fear  led  to  appropriate  action.  They  prepared 
for  the  coming  storm.  There  is  shelter  for  all  in  Christ,  and  in  Ilim  alone.  III. 
Their  fear  led  to  welcome  safety.  Obedience  brought  its  reward.  Men's  pro- 
perty would  be  safer  if  they  had  greater  respect  for  the  word  of  God.  (J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  Belief  of  the  word  of  God  : — 1.  Makes  men  tremble.  2.  Makes  men  wise. 
3  Makes  men  safe.  4.  Makes  men  singular.  (Ibid.)  Disregard  of  God : — 1. 
Ruinous.  2.  Presumptuous.  3.  Foolish.  4.  Common.  5.  Inexcusable.  (Ibid.) 
God's  command  over  the  elements  : — I.  That  the  material  universe  is  gifted  with 
NUMEROUS  AND  CONTRARY  AGENCIES  AND  ELEMENTS.  1.  The  elements  of  nature 
called  into  exercise  by  this  plague  were  numerous.  There  was  rain,  hail,  fire  and 
thunder.  2.  The  elements  of  nature  called  into  existence  by  this  plague  were  con- 
trary.  The  rain  was  contrary  to  the  fire.  There  are  very  opposite  elements  in 
the  great  universe  around  us ;  yet  all  exist  in  harmony.  One  element  counteracts 
and  yet  co-operates  with  anotber.  The  elements  of  nature  blend  in  one  glorious 
ministry  for  man  ;  though  sin  often  turns  them  into  messengers  of  justice.  3.  The 
elements  of  nature  called  into  existence  by  this  plague  were  emphatic.  When  the 
elements  of  the  material  universe  aie  arrayed  against  man  they  are  emphatic  in 
their  message.  The  thunder  speaks  in  loud  voice.  It  has  a  message  to  the  soul. 
There  is  a  moral  significance  in  the  storm.    II.  That  God  has  complete  control 

OVER  ALL   the    ELEMENTS    OF   THE    MATERIAL   DNIVERSE,       1.    So  that  He  Can  COmmis- 

sion  His  servants  to  use  them  according  to  His  will.  2.  So  that  He  can  make  them 
rebuke  the  sin  of  man.  He  can  arm  the  universe  against  a  wicked  soul.  3.  God 
can  prevent  them  from  working  injury  to  the  good.  The  heathen  imagined  that 
divers  Gods  were  over  divers  things  ;  some  ruling  the  air,  some  the  fire,  some  the 
water,  some  the  mountains,  and  some  the  plains.  But  God  here  demonstrates  to 
the  Egyptians  His  complete  authority  over  the  whole  of  nature.  This  truth  is 
consoling  to  the  good.     III.  That  the  material  pbospeeiiy  of  a  nation  is  gbeatlt 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  nt. 

DEPENDEKT    UPON   THE    ELEMENTS  OF    NATOBE,    AND   THAT    THEREFORE    GOD   ALONE   CAN 

GIVE  TRUE  PROSPERITY  TO  A  PEOPLE.  1.  The  fields  and  gardens  of  Egypt  were 
ruined.  2.  The  flax  and  barley  of  Egypt  were  ruined.  Egypt  was  from  early  times 
the  granary  of  the  world  (Gen.  xli.  57).  And  thus  we  see  how  the  pro.'?perity  of  a 
nation  is  dependent  upon  the  natural  government  of  God  in  the  material  world. 
Let  rulers  remember  this.  And  let  not  the  people  forget  it.  Sin  is  a  curse  to  any 
nation.  National  righteousness  is  national  prosperity  and  elevation.  Lessons: 
1.  That  the  material  universe  is  under  the  rule  of  God.  2.  That  the  good  are 
Divinely  protected  in  danger.  3.  The  national  prosperity  is  the  gift  of  heaven. 
(Ibid.)  The  plague   of  hail: — A  plague  of  hail,  with  lightning  and  thunder, 

must  have  been  far  more  awful  and  portentous   in  Egypt  than  in  any  other 
country;    for    there    rain    was    almost    unknown,   thunderstorms    were    of    rare 
occun-ence,  and  lightning,  when  it  appeared,  was  generally  of  a  harmless  kind. 
Modern  travellers,  indeed,  speak  of  snowstorms,  and  of  thunder  and  lightning 
happening  occasionally  in  lower  Egypt ;  but  such  phenomena  appear  to  have  been 
almost  unknown  in  earlier  times.     Herodotus  says — "  During  the  reign  of  Psam- 
menitus,  Egypt  beheld  a  most  remarkable  prodigy.    There  was  rain  at  the  Egyptian 
Thebes,  a  circumstunce  which  never  happened  before,  and  which,  as  the  Thebans 
themselves  assert,  has  never  occurred  since.    In  the  higher  parts  of  Egypt  it  never 
rains;  but  at  that  period  it  rained  in  distinct  drops  "  (1.  3,  c.  10).    Plutarch  also 
observes  that  "  In  Egypt  no  moisture  of  the  air  is  ever  condensed  into  showers  " 
(de  facie,  c.  25).    Pooocke  mentions  a  storm  of  hail  followed  by  rain  in  the  province 
of  Arsinoe,  which  "  the  natives  were  so  far  from  considering  as  a  blessing,  that  they 
observed  rain  was  productive  of  scarcity,  and  that  the  inundation  of  the  Nile  alone 
was  serviceable. "     The  Egyptians  were  much  given  to  the  observance  of  all  unusual 
phenomena,  and   looked  upon  them  as  portentous.      According  to  Herodotus, 
"  Whenever  any  unusual  circumstance  occurs  tbey  commit  the  particulars  of  it  to 
writing,  and  mark  the  events  which  follow  "  (1.  2,  c.  38).     If  "  distinct  drops   of 
rain  "  were  regarded  as  a  prodigy  worthy  of  being  thus  recorded,  what  must  have 
been  the  effect  of  a  storm  like  this,  when  the  hail  fell  with  sufficient  violence  to 
destroy  both  man  and  beast,  and  the  fire   also  ran  along  the  ground?     "The 
Egyptians,"  says  Diodorus,  "  denominated  fire  Hephaistos,  esteeming  it  a  mighty 
deity,  which  contributed  largely  towards  the  generation  and  ultimate  perfection  of 
beings"  (1.  1,  c.  1).    According  to  Lucian,  "The  Persians  sacrifice  to  fire  and  the 
Egyptians  to  water  "  (de  Jove  trag.  c.  24).     Porphyry  says — "  Even  to  this  day,  at 
the  opening  of  the  temple  of  Serapis,  the  worship  is  made  by  fire  and  water,  for  they 
reverence  water  and  til e  above  all  the  elements."    These  deities  now  came  down 
upon  Egypt  with  destruction  and  terror ;  the  very  gods  in  which  they  trusted  turned 
against  them.     (7'.  S.  Milliiifiton.)        Folly  of  diiireganling  learning  : — Foolhardi- 
ness  is  not  bravery  I  it  is  wicked  waste  of  life.    At  one  of  the  naval  engagements 
between  the  Federal  and  Confederate  forces,  the  officer  in  charge  kept  ordering  the 
men  at  the  ship's  guns  to  "  Look  out !  "  and  when  a  shot  came  bursting  near  them 
to  "Lie  down  1  "     Most  of  them  obeyed  ;  but  some,  either  from  a  spirit  of  bravado 
or  a  belief  in  the  doctrine  of  fatalism,  disregarded,  saying  it  was  useless  to  dodge  a 
cannon-ball,  and  they  would  chance  the  ri^ks.     By  and  by  a  shot  came,  glanced 
on  the  gun,  taking  oil  the  gunner's  cap  and  the  heads  of  three  of  the  young  men 
who  defied  the  order.     It  came  with  a  hissing  sound,  three  sharp  spats  and  a  heavy 
report  told  their  sad  fate.     (H.  0.  Mackey.)        A  warning  disregarded  : — A  gentle- 
man was  travelling  in  Italy  in  the  summer  months.    As  he  left  Eome  he  was 
warned  of  the  danger  of  sleeping  at  Baccano.   He  w-as  told  to  travel  all  night  rather 
than  stop  at  that  place,  as  a  malignant  fever  prevailed  there.     He  arrived  there 
about  bed-time.     The  air  was  balmy  and  the  accommodation  inviting.     He  con- 
cluded to  stoi)  for  the  night.   Those  whose  interests  would  be  promoted  by  his  doing 
so  told  him  there  was  no  danger.     He  rose  in  the  morning  and  proceeded  on  his 
journey.     Some  days  after  he  had  reached  Florence  the  fever  developed  itself,  and 
he  was  soon  in  his  grave.     Sinners  are  warned  of  the  consequences  of  sinful  acts. 
They  are  persuaded  to  disregard  the  warning.     They  sin,  and  the  threatened  con- 
sequences do  not  immediately  appear.     They  think  they  shall  escape  ;  but  ere  long 
God's  immutable  law  overtakes  them,  and  they  perish.     "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it 
shall  die."     Safe  amidst  danger  : — A  walk  along  our  New  York  streets  has  an  occa- 
sional surprise  for  the  man  who  keeps  his  eyes  open.     Not  often,  however,  does  he 
meet  one  so  pleasant  as  that  which  greeted  the  eye  of  a  pedestrian  hurrying  along  a, 
block  near  the  North  River.    A  brilhant  scarlet  spot  in  the  cobble  stone  pavement 
constantly  trodden  by  horses'  feet,  and  worn  by  wheels  of  ice  waggons,  ash  carts  and 


CHAP.  IX.]  'EXODUS.  1G3 

heavy  business  trucks,  drew  the  passer  to  a  nearer  look  ;  and,  behold,  there,  from 
the  scorching  sand  of  a  crevice  in  the  pavement  had  sprung  up  a  thin  stem  of  the 
portulaca ;  a  single  flower  had  opened  its  scarlet  petals,  and  was  lifting  its  orange 
tinted  stamens  to  the  sun.  There  seemed  not  one  chance  in  a  million  that  the 
tender  plant  could  have  escaped  the  crushing  hoofs  and  wheels  and  the  tools 
of  tbe  workmen  at  that  moment  repairing  the  pavement ;  yet  there  was  the 
lovely  blossom,  and  there  at  sunset  it  folded  its  tiny  wings  to  sleep.  Could  one 
fail  to  learn  a  lesson  of  implicit  trust  in  an  ever- watchful  Father  above? 
God's  regard  for  His  own: — Miss  Gordon  Gumming  tells  the  following  thrilling 
story  of  a  Chinese  convert  at  Oiong,  whose  piety  had  obtained  for  him  the 
sobriquet  of  "  Praise  the  Lord."  Miss  Gumming  says  :  "  A  fire  broke  out  in  one 
of  the  streets  of  the  town,  and  at  first  it  was  not  expected  to  reach  as  far  as 
where  '  Praise  the  Lord '  lived.  As  it  spread,  however,  it  neared  the  street  where 
his  house  stood,  and  it  was  evident  to  the  onlookers  that  all  the  buildings  were 
doomed.  His  heathen  neighbours  hastily  collected  all  their  idols,  and  placed  them 
as  a  barricade  against  the  approaching  flames.  The  zealous  old  Christian,  seizing 
his  mattock,  and  swinging  it  round  him,  soon  reduced  the  godsjof  wood  and  clay  to 
a  mass  of  fragments.  Then,  having  denounced  the  folly  which  could  trust  in  sense- 
less images,  he  lifted  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  in  the  hearing  of  the  already 
wildly  excited  mob  he  called  upon  the  great  Creator,  the  true  God,  his  heavenly 
Father,  to  save  the  homes  of  himself  and  his  neighbours  from  the  tlircatening  fire. 
It  was  not  the  first  time  that  he  had  proved  the  promise, '  Wuilo  they  are  yet  speak- 
ing I  will  hear,'  and  now  he  looked  for  an  immediate  answer,  which  would  show  to 
the  heathen  that  the  God  who  could  stay  tbe  fire  was  the  true  God.  Nor  was  he 
disappointed ;  almost  before  they  could  note  any  physical  reason  for  the  change  the 
flames  seemed  blown  back  upon  themselves — tbe  wind  had  suddenly  veered  round, 
and  though  many  of  the  houses  close  by  had  been  scorched,  those  ^>i  the  old  man 
and  his  neighbours  escaped  unhamied,  and  the  marvelling  crowd  saw  the  conflagra- 
tion recede  as  swiftly  as  it  had  approached."  The  jlax  and  barleii  of  Egypt : — 
Herodotus  says — "  The  manufacture  of  linen  is  peculiar  to  the  Colchians  and  the 
Egyptians.  The  linen  which  comes  from  Colchis,  the  Greeks  call  Sardonian;  the 
linen  of  Egypt,  Egyptian  "  (1.  2,  c.  105).  Pliny's  account  of  it  is — "  The  flax  of 
Egypt,  though  the  least  strong  of  alias  a  tissue,  is  that  from  which  the  greatest  pro- 
fits are  derived.  There  is  no  tissue  known  tbat  is  superior  to  those  made  from  the 
thread  of  the  Egyptian  xylon,  either  for  whiteness  and  softness,  or  dressing  ;  the 
most  esteemed  vestments  worn  by  the  priests  of  Egypt  are  made  by  it  "  (Hist.  Nat. 
1.  19,  c.  2).  Pliny  mentions  four  varieties  of  flax,  and  first  among  them  the  Tanaitic, 
growing  in  the  lower  district  of  Egypt,  Zoan,  which  was  the  seat  of  Pharaoh's 
government.  The  destruction  of  the  flax  deprived  the  people  of  the  material  for 
their  chief  manufacture,  and  put  a  stop  to  the  trade  which  they  carried  on  with 
neighbouring  nations,  who  sent  their  treasure  into  the  country  to  pay  for  it.  The 
ruin  of  tbe  barley  was  equally  injurious.  Egypt  appears  to  have  been  from  a  very 
early  period  the  gi'anary  of  the  world.  Thither  Abraham  went  down  to  sojourn 
when  the  land  in  which  he  dwelt  was  visited  with  famine  ;  and  thither  the  sons  of 
Jacob,  under  similar  necessity,  natm-ally  turned  for  help.     (T.  S.  Millington.) 

Vers.  27,  28.  I  have  sinned. — Pharaoh's  "  I  have  sinned  " ; — There  are  no  more 
beautiful  words  ever  spoken  on  this  earth — none  to  which  an  angel  listens  more 
complacently — none  which  wing  tbeir  way  more  surely  to  heaven— none  which 
more  surely  enter  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth — than  those  three — so 
personal,  so  true,  so  simple,  and  so  full,  "  I  have  sinned."  They  occur  nine  times 
in  the  Bible ;  and  of  the  nine  we  may  except  two.  For  where  they  stand — in  the 
seventh  chapter  of  Micah — they  are  the  language,  not  of  an  individual,  but  of  a 
Church.  And  the  prodigal's  use  of  them  is,  of  course,  not  matter  of  fact  or  history ; 
but  only  part  of  a  parable.  There  remain,  therefore,  seven;  ^seven  persons  of  whom 
it  is  written  that  they  said,  "  I  have  sinned."  It  may  surprise  some  of  you  to 
know  that,  of  those  ?even,  four  are  utterly  hollow  and  worthless;  in  God's  scales, 
wanting,  unreal,  and  unprofitable.  It  is  a  humbling  and  teaching  fact  that  in  three 
only — of  the  seven  instances  in  which  persons  are  recorded  in  the  Scriptures  to 
have  said,  "  I  have  sinned,"  was  the  confession  true,  and  the  repentance  valid. 
I.  At  what  time  God's  haedenino  of  Pharaoh's  heabt  began,  it  is  impossible 
EXACTLY  to  deteemine.  But  evidently  from  the  first  it  was;  ..uicial.  A  common 
Btory.  A  sin  indulged  till  the  man  is  given  over  to  his  sin  ;  and  then  the  sin  made  its 
own  punishment.  It  is  not  that  if  you  repent  you  would  not  be  forgiven ;  but  it  is  that 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

you  reduce  your  heart  to  such  a  state  that  it  places  repentance  out  of  your  reach. 
You  become  like  Esau.  Esau,  after  he  sold  his  birthright,  never  repented,  nor  wished 
to  repent.  He  wished  his  father  to  repent,  though  he  himself  did  not  repent, 
Pharaoh  could  say,  "  I  have  sinned,"  and  never  felt  it, — because  his  heart  was 
"hard."  Many  of  you  are  very  young,  and  you  have  tender  hearts.  Take  care; 
take  care  of  that  dew  of  your  spiritual  birth — lest  it  be  brushed  away !  If  you 
love  the  world,  you  will  be  "  hardened."  You  say,  "  I  will  repent  of  my  worldli- 
ness."  You  cannot.  Your  worldlincss  will  have  left  you  too  "  hard  "  to  repent. 
II.  What,  then,  was  Pharaoh's  "I  have  sinned"?  Where  hid  it  tend ?  1.  It 
was  a  mere  hasty  impulse.  There  was  no  thought  in  it ;  no  careful  dealing  with 
his  own  soul;  no  depth.  2.  The  moving  principle  was  nothing  but  fear.  He  was 
agitated — greatly  agitated — only  agitated.  Now,  fear  may  be,  and  probably  must 
be,  a  part  of  real  repentance.  I  do  not  despise  fear.  Fear  is  a  sign  of  penitence. 
Fear  is  a  very  good  thing.  But  I  doubt  whether  there  was  ever  a  real  repentance 
that  was  promoted  by  fear  only.  3.  Pharaoh's  thoughts  were  directed  far  too  much 
to  man.  It  was  not  the  "  against  Thee,  Thee  only,  I  have  sinned."  He  never 
went  straight  to  God.  Hence  his  confession  was  not  thorough.  III.  And  here 
comes  the  solemn  thought — for  comfort  or  for  fear — in  everything  that  is  true, 

THERE   IS   A    GERM,    AND     GOD     SEES   AND    RECOGNIZES,   AT    ONCE,    THE    GERM.        It   may 

not  have  expanded.  Perhaps  the  person — who  has  it — may  not  live  long  enough 
for  it  to  be  expanded  in  this  world.  But  God  knows  that  it  can  expand,  and  that 
it  would  expand.  God  judges  by  that  germ.  If  it  is  not — that  germ  of  love  and 
holiness — the  rest  all  goes  for  nothing.  But  if  it  be  there — God  accepts  all  for  that 
germ.     {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)         The  transient  repentance  of  a  xvicked  soul: — I.  That 

MOODS   OF   TRANSIENT    REPENTANCE    ARE     SOMETIMES   AWAKENED    BY     THE    RETRIBUTIVE 

JUDGMENTS  OF  GoD.  The  penitcncc  of  the  hypocrite ;  not  a  godly  sorrow.  In- 
duced by  the  infliction  of  punishment,  rather  than  by  the  gentle  convictions  of  the 
Divine  Spirit.  True  repentance  will  have  reference  to  God  and  to  the  violated  law, 
rather  than   to  self-comfort  and  immunity  from  pain.      II.  That  in  moods  op 

TRANSIENT    REPENTANCE    MEN     CALL    FOB    THE    MINISTERS    OF    GoD    WHOM    THEY   HAVE 

PREVIOUSLY  DESPISED.  Ministers  must  be  forbearing  toward  their  people,  and  em- 
brace any  opportunity  of  leading  them  to  the  mercy  of  God.  But  the  repentance 
that  sends  for  the  minister  under  the  impulse  of  fear,  will  be  likely  to  dismiss  him 
when  the  plague  is  removed.  It  is  well  to  heed  the  voice  of  the  servants  of  God 
before  the  hour  of  retribution.  III.  That  in  moods  of  transient  repentance  men 
MAKE  promises  THEY  WILL  NEVER  PERFORM.  We  should  remember  in  joy  the  vows 
made  in  sorrow,  in  health,  those  made  in  sickness,  and  then  painful  discipline  will 
become  happy  and  glorious.     IV.  That  in  moods  of  transient  repentance  men 

WILL    acknowledge    THAT    PRAYER    TO     GoD    FOB    MERCY   IS    THEIR   ONLY   METHOD   OP 

HELP.  V.  That  in  moods  of  transient  repentance  men  sometisies  obtain  the  re- 
moval OF  THE  JUDGMENTS  OF  GoD.  Token  of  mercy.  Discipline  of  love  to  lead  to 
duty.  Lessons; — 1.  That  trials  are  calculated  to  lead  the  soul  to  repentance. 
2.  That  under  trials  the  repentance  of  men  may  be  transient.  3.  That  the  mercy 
of  God  is  rich  to  the  proudest  sinner.  4.  That  the  servants  of  God  should  be 
helpful  to  penitent  souls.  (1)  By  fidelity.  (2)  By  sympathy.  (3)  By  prayer. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)        Repentance  inspired  by  fear : — I.  That  repentance  inspired 

BY   FEAR   IS   EXPERIENCED   BY    MEN    OF   THE    PROUDEST  MORAL  CHARACTER.       This  shoWS 

the  all-conquering  power  of  the  truth,  in  that  it  can  subdue  the  tyrant-heart.  It 
also  shows  the  mercy  of  God,  in  that  the  most  degenerate  life  is  blessed  with  the 
refreshing  mood  of  repentance.  No  heart  is  utterly  destitute  of  better  feelings. 
II.  That  repent.\nce  inspired  by  fear  anxiously  seeks  the  aid  of  the  servants 
I  F  God.  III.  That  repentance  inspired  by  fear  is  just  in  its  condemnation 
OF  SELF,  AND  IN  ITS  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  SIN.  There  are  times  when  confession 
is  a  necessity  of  the  soul.  When  sin  is  as  a  fire,  which  must  burn  through  all 
subterfuges  and  manifest  itself  to  the  public  eye.  Hence  open  confession  of  sin  is 
not  an  infallible  token  of  repentance ;  it  may  be  the  outcome  of  necessity  or  of 
terror.  IV.  That  repentance  inspired  by  fear  is  just  in  its  vindication  op 
THE  Divine  character.  Repentance  is  not  to  be  gauged  by  the  utterance  of  the 
lips.  V.  That  bepent.ucce  inspired  by  fear  promises  future  obedience  to  the 
CLAIMS  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Repentings  and  relapsings  : — I.  The  theistic  consti- 
tution of  the  soul.  1.  It  shows  a  primitive  belief  in  the  existence  of  God. 
2.  It  shows  a  primitive  belief  in  the  providential  government  of  God.  II.  The 
unnatubalness  of  our  spiritual  EXISTENCE.  III.  The  unreliableness  of  death- 
bed CONFESSIONS.    Genuine  repentance  for  sin  is  not  the  fear  of  misery,  but  the 


CHAP,  re.]  EXODUS.  1C5 

relentings  of  love.  IV.  The  supreme  interest  op  every  man.  {Homiliitf.)  Sense 
of  guilt  : — I.  Under  its  influence  man  feels  humbled.  II.  Under  its  influence  man 
respects  GODLINESS.  III.  Under  its  influence  man  VINDICATES  THE  Almighty.  (Ibid.) 
I  have  sinned : — 1.  A  good  confession.  2.  A  simple  confession.  3.  A  faithful 
confession.  4.  A  welcome  confession.  5.  Sometimes  an  unreal  confession.  (J. 
S.  Exell,  M.A.)         The  Lord  is  riphteous  : — 1.  Then  admire  His  administration. 

2.  Then  worship  His  glory.  3.  Then  fear  His  justice.  4.  Then  vindicate  His 
operations.  5.  Then  make  known  His  praise.  (Ibid.)  A  iviched ppopJe  and  a 
wicked  monarch : — 1.  Sad.  2.  Afflicted.  3.  Repentant.  {Hid.)  Intreat  the 
Lord  : — 1.  For  He  hears  prayer.  2.  For  He  has  respect  to  the  good.  3.  For 
wicked  men  need  Divine  help.  4.  For  He  is  merciful.  (Ibid. )  Tlie  confession 
of  Pharaoh  : — I.  The  resemblance  of  the  confession  befoke  us  to  the  langu.\ge 
OP  true  contrition,  is  close.  1.  It  was  open,  made  not  to  a  pavtizan  or  friend  in 
the  secrecy  of  retirement,  but  to  Moseg  and  Aaron  in  public  ;  to  the  very  man 
whose  presence  was  likely  to  fill  the  sinner  with  the  greatest  shame,  and  to  require 
of  him  the  most  mortifying  concessions.  2.  It  was  accompanied  also  with  a  sense  of 
guilt,  and  that  not  confined  to  one  transgression  only,  but  extending  to  the  general 
conduct  of  himself  and  his  subjects.  3.  It  is  remarkable  too  that,  like  David,  he 
considered  his  guilt  as  an  offence  against  God.  4.  But  this  was  not  all.  The  con- 
fession of  Pharaoh  included  in  it  an  acknowledgment  of  the  justice  of  God  in 
inflicting  these  judgments.  They  were  great  and  heavy,  but  he  does  not  complain 
of  their  severity.  He  complains  only  of  his  own  sins,  which  had  so  justly 
drawn  them  on  his  head.  "  The  Lord,"  he  says,  "  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my 
people  are  wicked."  5.  There  were  also  some  good  resolutions  connected  with  the 
confession  of  Pharaoh.  II.  Pharaoh  was  not  a  penitent,  though  he  bore  so 
strong  a  resemblance  to  one.  His  confession  was  sincere,  but  it  was  not  godly. 
It  resembled  the  language  of  true  repentance,  but  at  the  same  time  it  differed 
essentially  from  it.  1.  In  attempting  to  trace  this  difference,  we  may  observe  that 
it  was  a  forced  confession,  extorted  from  him  by  the  suffering  he  endured,  and  the 
fear  of  still  heavier  judgments.  The  point  to  be  ascertained  is  not  wh^t  kind  of 
men  we  are  in  affliction  or  in  sickness,  in  the  house  of  God  or  in  the  society  of  His 
servants  ;  but  what  is  the  frame  of  our  minds  when  these  excitements  are  with- 
drawn ?  What  are  we  in  retirement  ?  What  are  we  in  our  families  ?  What  are  we 
in  daily  intercourse  with  the  world  ?  2.  The  confession  of  Pharaoh  differed  from  a 
true  confession  in  this  respect  also — it  was  unaccompanied  with  humiliation  before 
God.  He  rejieatedly  besought  Moses  and  Aaron  to  entreat  for  him,  but  he  dis- 
dained to  bend  the  knee  himself.  He  trembled  at  the  judgments  of  the  Lord,  but 
though  they  laid  waste  his  country  and  cut  off  his  first-born,  he  still  refused  to 
humble  himself  before  Him.  This  spirit  of  independence  is  the  bane  and  curse  of 
our  fallen  nature.  The  very  essence  of  our  depravity  consists  in  it.  We  will  not 
have  God  to  reign  over  us.     Judgments  can  terrify,  but  they  cannot  humble  us. 

3.  The  confession  of  Pharaoh  was  defective  also  in  another  respect — it  was  not 
succeeded  by  an  entire  renunciation  of  sin.  The  true  penitent  does  not  ask,  "  How 
far  may  I  indulge  my  lusts,  and  yet  be  safe  ?  How  much  love  may  I  have  for  the 
world  and  yet  escape  condemnation?"  but,  "  What  right  hand  have  I  yet  to  cut 
off?  What  right  eye  have  I  yet  to  pluck  out?  What  lurking  sin  still  remains  to 
be  discovei-ed  and  overcome  ?  "  4.  But  even  if  the  confession  of  Pharaoh  had  not 
been  defective  in  these  things,  there  was  yet  another  point  of  difference  between  it 
and  a  genuine  confession,  and  that  a  most  important  and  ruinous  difference — it 
was  not  habitual  and  lasting.  The  convictions  from  which  it  sprung  were  as 
temporary  as  the  judgments  which  gave  rise  to  them,  so  that  he  who  feared  and 
trembled  one  hour,  hardened  his  heart  the  next.  Repentance  is  not  an  act,  it  is  a 
habit ;  not  a  duty  to  be  performed  once  in  a  man's  life,  and  then  to  be  thought  of  no 
more;  it  is  to  be  our  daily  work,  our  hourly  employment.  III.  Such  was  tbe  con- 
fession of  Pharaoh.  The  lessons  it  teaches  are  obvious.  1.  It  shows  us,  first, 
the  great  need  we  have  of  self-examination.  We  may  have  confessed  our  sins  from 
our  heart;  but  has  that  heart  been  humbled,  lowly,  obedient?  Instead  of  going 
about  to  establish  our  own  righteousness,  are  we  submitting  ourselves  to  the  righte- 
ousness of  God?  Are  we  praying,  as  well  as  trembling?  2.  This  shows  us 
also  the  extreme  depraAdty  of  the  human  heart.  We  need  tbe  transforming  power, 
the  effectual  working,  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  must  seek  repentance  as  a  gift  of 
mercy  at  the  throne  of  God.  3.  We  may  see,  further,  the  folly  of  trusting  in  con- 
victions. Remorse  is  not  penitence.  Conviction  is  not  conversion.  Fear  is  not 
grace.     4.  But  while  we  are  reminded  of  the  folly  of  trusting  in  convictions,  we 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

are  at  the  same  time  tanght  the  guilt  and  danger  of  stifling  them.  They  cannot 
save  the  soul,  but  they  are  designed  to  make  us  feel  our  need  of  salvation,  and  to 
lead  us  for  it  to  the  great  Saviour  of  the  lost.  5.  There  is  yet  another  lesson  to  be 
learned  from  this  subject.  It  seems  indeed,  on  the  first  ^^ew,  to  speak  to  us  only  of 
the  depravity  of  man  and  the  axvful  justice  of  God,  but  to  what  subject  of  medita- 
tion can  sve  turn,  which  does  not  remind  us  of  the  Divine  mercy?  A  hardened 
Pharaoh,  as  well  as  a  weeping  Peter,  declares  to  us,  that  the  guilty  will  never  seek 
pardon  in  vain.     (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 

Vers.  29,  30.  I  know  that  ye  will  not  yet  fear  the  Lord  God. — Lessons : — 1. 
Gracious  souls  are  willing  to  yield  to  vilest  persecutors  to  help  them  though  they 
deceive  them.  2.  Time  and  place  convenient,  God's  servants  take  to  answer  the 
desues  of  the  wicked.  3.  Heart  and  hand  do  God's  saints  lay  out  in  prayer  to  God 
for  their  enemies.  4.  Under  God's  revelation  his  ministers  may  assure  the  wicked 
of  His  mercies.  5.  Such  discoveries  are  made  to  wicked  men  that  they  might 
acknowledge  His  propriety  and  sovereignty  over  all  (ver.  29).  6.  Though  God's 
servants  know  how  the  wicked  will  afterwai'd  behave  themselves,  yet  they  may 
pray  for  them.  7.  God  doth  foretell  by  His  servants  sometimes  the  incorrigibility 
of  the  wicked  under  judgment  and  mercy.  8.  Wicked  men  may  tremble  under 
vengeance,  but  never  fear  the  Lord  God  when  it  is  removed  (ver.  30).  (G.  Hughes, 
B.D.)         Wise  viinistcrial  treatment  of  an  obstinate  sinner  : — I.  That  the  true 

MINISTER    IS   WILLING    TO    RENDER    HELP    TO   THE   VILEST    PERSECUTOR   IN    THE  HOUR  OF 

IMAGINED  REPENTANCE.  Moscs  did  uot  remain  away  from  Pharaoh  in  the  hour  of 
his  penitence.  He  did  not  treat  him  with  contempt,  as  unworthy  of  further  effort. 
He  went  to  him  at  once.  Ministers  ai'e  never  justified  in  leaving  even  the  vilest 
men  to  themselves  in  their  time  of  perplexity.  They  should  visit  them  and  render 
them  all  the  aid  in  their  power.  The  hypocrite  must  never  be  forsaken  by  the 
servant  of  God.  H.  That  the  true  minister  will  pray  for  the  most  obstinate 
SINNER  IN  the  HOUR  OF  DISTRESS.  "  As  sooH  as  I  am  goue  out  of  the  city,  I  will 
spread  abroad  my  hands  unto  the  Lord."  1.  The  prayer  will  be  offered  in  private. 
*'  Out  of  the  city."  Solitude  is  favourable  to  prayer.  The  minister  should  seek 
solitude.  It  is  well  for  him  to  go  outside  of  the  city  to  meditate  and  to  pray  about 
obstinate  men.  2.  It  will  be  offered  with  earnestness.  "  I  will  spread  abroad  my 
hands  unto  the  Lord."  The  ministers  of  God  should  employ  their  hands  and 
hearts  in  prayer  to  heaven  for  the  souls  of  wicked  men.    III.  That  the  true 

MINISTER  MAY  ASSURE  THE  MOST  OBSTINATE  SINNER  OF  THE  MERCY  OF    GoD  TOWAPJD  MIM. 

A  contrite  heart  shall  not  hear  the  thunder  of  retributive  judgment.     IV.  That  the 

TRUE  MINISTER  MUST  ASSERT  THE  UNBENDING  SOVEREIGNTY  OF  GoD  TO  THE  MOST  OBSTI- 
NATE SINNER.    V.  That  the  true  minister  will  deal  faithfully  with  the  most 

OBSTINATE    SINNER    WHO   MAY   MANIFEST   TOKENS    OF    REPENTANCE.      LcStOUS  :     1.    That 

ministers  are  often  perplexed  as  to  the  best  method  of  conduct  toward  obstinate 
sinners.  2.  They  must  pray  for  them.  3.  They  must  be  faithful  to  them.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  The  earth  is  the  Lord's: — 1.  Then  admire  its  beauty.  2.  Then 
participate  in  its  bounty.  3.  Then  tread  it  reverently.  4.  Then  use  it  generously. 
(Ibid.)  I  know  that  ye  will  not  fear  the  Lord  God: — 1.  Because  yom-  mind  is 
dark.  2.  Because  your  heart  is  hard.  8.  Because  your  conscience  is  seai"ed.  4. 
Because  your  will  is  rebelUous.    5.  Because  your  sin  is  a  pleasure.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  He  sinned  yet  more. — Lessons  : — 1.  Sense  of  judgment  and  mercy 
without  faith  worketh  more  evil  in  sinners  against  God.  2.  Mercies  may  prove 
occasions  of  hardening  unto  wicked  souls  ;  but  no  causes  of  their  sin.  3.  Wicked 
powers  by  unbelief  harden  themselves  and  others  (ver.  34).  4.  God  sets  on  harden- 
ing when  sinners  choose  to  be  stubborn  against  God.  5.  Breach  of  promise 
with  God  is  nothing  with  sinners.  6.  God's  foretelling  of  sinners  ways  aggravates 
that  sin  abundantly  (ver.  35).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Pharaoh's  conduct  after  the 
storm: — I.  Pharaoh's  conduct  is  often  EESEiffiLED  by  men  of  our  day.  Men"s 
views  of  themselves  and  life  change  as  the  dark  clouds  roll  away,  and  the  sun 
breaks  forth  to  gild  their  path  again.  This  has  become  proverbiaL  II.  Pharaoh's 
CONDUCT  REVEALS  THAT  HIS  HEART  HAD  BEEN  UNCHANGED.  Afflictions  do  change  Some 
sinners  into  saints.  They  have  come  out  of  the  storm  new  men.  But  it  often 
produces  no  radical  change.  It  does  not  cLange  the  heai't.  Love  only  awakens 
permanent  resistance  to  sin.  III.  Pharaoh's  conduct  manifested  the  basest  in- 
gratitude. Sin  is  always  lamentable,  but  more  so  in  the  face  of  Divine  mercy. 
Such  insensibiUty  to  mercy  is  sure  to  bring  another  judgment.    IV.  Pharaoh's 


CHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  167 

CONDUCT    WAS    MOST    PEESUMPTDOUS.       V.    PhARAOH'S    CONDUCT    SHOWS    THE    AMOUNT    OP 

DEPRAVITY  THAT  MAY  LURK  IN  A  HUMAN  HEART.  Our  Only  safcty  is  ill  humiliating 
ourselves  before  the  Lord,  and  seeking  for  His  grace  to  overcome  our  own  stubborn- 
ness and  sins.  {W.  Lilleij.)  The  cessation  of  penitential  sorroio  : — 1.  When 
calamity  removed.  2.  When  mercy  bestowed.  3.  When  gratitude  expected.  (J. 
S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Repentance  nnder  judgments  : — One  day,  visiting  a  prison  chap- 
lain, the  Eev.  W.  Harness  asked  him  whether  his  ministry  had  been  attended  with 
success.  "  With  very  little,  I  grievs  to  say,"  was  the  reply.  "  A  short  time  since 
I  thought  I  had  brought  to  a  better  state  of  mind  a  man  who  had  attempted  to 
murder  a  woman  and  had  been  condemned  to  death.  He  showed  great  signs  of 
contrition  after  the  sentence  was  passed  upon  him,  and  I  thought  I  could  observe 
the  dawnings  of  grace  upon  the  soul.  I  gave  him  a  Bible,  and  he  was  most 
assiduous  in  the  study  of  it,  frequently  quoting  passages  from  it  which  he  said  con- 
vinced him  of  the  heinousness  of  his  offence.  The  man  gave  altogether  such  a 
promise  of  reformation,  and  of  a  change  of  heart  and  life,  that  I  exerted  myself  to 
the  utmost,  and  obtained  for  him  such  a  commutation  of  his  sentence  as  would 
enable  him  soon  to  begin  the  world  again,  and,  as  I  hoped,  with  a  happier  result. 
I  called  to  inform  him  of  my  success.  His  gratitude  knew  no  bounds  ;  he  said  I 
was  his  preserver — his  dpliverer.  '  And  here,'  he  added,  as  he  grasped  my  hand  in 
parting,  '  here  is  your  Bible ;  I  may  as  well  return  it  to  you,  for  I  hoiie  I  shall  never 
want  it  again.' " 


CHAPTER  X. 
Vers.  1,  2.  Show  these  My  signs. — Huw  God  hardened  FJtaraoh's  heart : — I.  By 

A  MANIFESTATION  OF  RICH  MERCY,  WHICH  OUGHT  TO  HAVE  MELTED  THE  HEART  OF  THE 
KING.  II.  By  a  MANIFESTATION  OF  GREAT  POWER,  WHICH  OUGHT  TO  HAVE  SUBDUED 
THE  HEART  OF  THE  KING.  III.  By  A  MANIFESTATION  OF  SEVERE  JUSTICE,  WHICH 
MIGHT    HAVE    REBUKED    THE    HEART    OF    THE    KING.       IV.    By   SENDING  HiS  SERVANTS  TO 

INFLUENCE  THE  HEART  OF  THE  KING  TO  THE  RIGHT.  God  did  Dot  harden  Pharaoh's 
heart  by  a  sovereign  decree,  so  that  he  could  not  obey  His  command ;  but  by 
ministries  appropriate  to  salvation,  calculated  to  induce  obedience — the  constant 
neglect  of  which  was  the  efficient  cause  of  this  sad  moral  result.  Lessons:  1.  That 
man  has  the  ability  to  resist  the  saving  ministries  of  heaven.  2.  That  when  man 
resists  the  saving  ministries  of  heaven  he  becomes  hard  in  heart.  3.  That  hard- 
ness of  heart  is  itself  a  natural  judgment  from  God.  4.  That  hardness  of  heart 
will  finally  work  its  own  ruin.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  God  sends  His  minister  to 

hardened  souls  : — 1.  Often.  2.  Mercifully.  3.  Uselessly.  4.  Significantly.  5. 
Disastrously.     (Ihid.)  Hardened  sinners: — 1.   In  companies.     2.  Patterns  of 

judgments.  3.  Tokens  of  indignation.  4.  The  cause  of  plagues.  5.  The  curse 
of  the  world.     6.  Still  followed  by  the  minister  of  God.     (Ibid.)  The  signs  of 

God  to  tite  generations  of  the  future: — I.  That  God  is  supreme  over  the  kingdom 
OF  nature.  Science  places  the  natural  universe  under  the  command  of  man. 
This  is  the  Divine  ordination.  But  man's  power  over  nature  is  derived  ;  God's  is 
underived  and  indei^endent.  Hence — 1.  He  can  inflict  pain  on  the  wicked.  2. 
He  can  protect  the  good  from  harm.  3.  He  can  send  famine  or  plenty.  II.  That 
God  is  supreme  over  the  cunning  and  power  of  the  devil.  The  magicians  of 
Egypt  were  agents  of  the  devil.  They  were  inspired  by  him  in  their  opposition  to 
Moses  and  Aaron.  They  were  aided  by  his  cunning.  Their  defeat  was  his  defeat 
also.  1.  God  can  deliver  men  from  the  power  of  the  devil.  2.  God  can  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil.  3.  God  can  frustrate  the  designs  of  the  devil.  Teach  this 
blessed  truth  and  glorious  fact  to  the  youthful :  that  the  good  agencies  of  the 
universe  are  more  potent  than  the  bad.  This  will  lead  youthhood  to  confide  in 
God.  III.  That  goodness  is  happiness,  and  that  conflict  with  God  is  the 
MISERY  OF  man.  Lcssons:  1.  That  in  the  lives  of  individuals  we  have  signs  of  God. 
2.  That  all  the  signs  of  God  in  human  hfe  are  to  be  carefully  noted  and  taught  to 
the  young.  3.  That  all  the  signs  of  life  are  evidence  of  the  Divine  supremacy. 
(Ibid.)  The  ministry  of  sin  : — God  makes  Pharaoh  "  to  stand  "  for  the  benefit  of 
Israel,  and  in  them  for  the  benefit  of  humanity.  It  was  for  Pharaoh  in  the  first 
instance  to  resist  Divine  light  and  grace,  and  oppress  Israel ;  it  was  then  for  Go(i 


1G8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

to  economise  the  tyrant  and  his  wrath.  The  conduct  of  the  Egyptian  king  served 
— I.  To  KEVE.tL  God,  "  That  ye  may  know  how  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Pharaoh's 
perverseness  revealed  all  the  more  fully  —  1.  The  Divine  love.  2.  The  Divine 
righteousness,  3.  The  Divine  power.  II.  To  further  the  interests  of  Israel. 
God  overrules  sin  to  high  and  happy  issues.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Transmittiiii) 
the  knoivledgc  of  the  true  God  : — I.  Jeuovau  made  Himself  known  to  the  Israelites 
IN  Egypt  as  the  onlv  true  God  by  signs.  His  wondrous  acts  revealed  His 
supremacy.  Christ  is  the  fullest  revelation  of  the  true  God.  II.  That  this  know- 
ledge IS  to  be  transmitted  from  generation  to  generation.  Parental  influence 
the  most  potent  in  telling  of  God's  acts.  No  lips  teach  like  the  lips  of  loving 
authority.  Some  parents  neglect  this  solemn  duty.  Ever  ready  to  speak  about 
worldly  enteii^rises,  the  acts  of  great  men,  their  own  ;  but  they  are  silent  about 
God's.  Such  neglect  is  ruinous  to  their  children  and  dishonouring  to  God.  III. 
In  the  transmission  of  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  is  the  hope  of  the 
WORLD.  Wherever  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  prevails,  righteousness  and  peace 
are  found.  Idolatry  has  ever  been  the  bane  of  mankind.  A  false  conception  of 
God  debases.     (J.  S.  Exell,  3I.A.)  By  signs  :—\.   Showing  the  woe  of  sin.     2. 

The  folly  of  human  malice.  3.  The  justice  of  God.  4.  The  safety  of  the  Church. 
(Ihid.)  The  signs: — 1.  Their  nature.      2.    Their  locality.      3.    Their  design. 

\lbid.)  The  Divine  supremacy  : — 1,  Rejected  by  the  proud.     2.  Received  by  the 

good.  3.  Revealed  by  the  works  of  God.  4.  To  be  acknowledged  by  all.  (Ihid.) 
The  plapnes : — So,  allowing  all  that  may  be  called  romantic,  supernatural,  to  fall  off 
from  this  story  of  the  plagues,  there  remains  all  that  God  wanted  to  remain — three 
things  : — First,  the  assertion  of  the  Divine  right  in  life.  God  cannot  be  turned  out 
of  His  own  creation;  He  must  assert  His  claim,  and  urge  it,  and  redeem  it.  The 
second  thing  that  remains  is  the  incontestable  fact  of  human  opposition  to  Divine 
voices.  Divine  voices  call  to  right,  to  purity,  to  nobleness,  to  love,  to  brotherhood  ; 
and  every  day  we  resist  these  voices,  and  assert  rebellious  claims.  The  third  thing 
that  remains  is  the  inevitable  issue.  We  cannot  fight  God  and  win.  "  It  is  bard 
for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks."  Why  smite  with  feeble  fist  the  infinite  granite 
of  the  infinite  strength?  Who  will  lose?  The  certain  result  will  be  the  overthrow 
of  the  sinner  :  the  drowning  of  every  Pharaoh  who  hardens  himself  against  the 
Divine  will  and  voice.  Now  that  I  come  to  think  of  it,  have  not  all  these  plagues 
followed  my  own  obstinacy  and  hardness  of  heart  in  relation  to  things  Divine? 
We  speak  of  the  plagues  of  Egj-pt  as  though  they  began  and  ended  in  that  distant 
land,  and  we  regard  them  now  as  part  of  an  exciting  historical  romance.  I  will 
think  otherwise  of  them.  The  local  incident  and  the  \%a.l  colour  may  be  dispensed 
with,  but  the  supreme  fact  in  my  own  consciousness  is  that  God  always  follows  my 
obstinacy  with  plagues.  Dangers  are  rightly  used  when  they  move  us  to  bolder  prayer ; 
losses  are  turned  into  gains  when  they  lift  our  lives  in  an  upward  direction ;  disease 
is  the  beginning  of  health  when  it  leads  the  sufferer  to  the  Father's  house.  Pharaoh 
Lad  his  plagues,  many  and  awful ;  and  every  life  has  its  penal  or  chastening  visita- 
tions, which  for  the  present  are  full  of  agony  and  bitterness,  but  which  may  be  so 
used  as  to  become  the  beginning  of  new  liberties  and  brighter  joys.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  God's  judgments  : — Lay  a  book  open  before  a  child,  or  one  that  cannot 
read ;  he  may  stare  and  gaze  upon  it,  but  he  can  make  no  use  of  it  at  all,  because 
he  understandeth  nothing  in  it ;  yet  bring  it  to  one  that  can  read,  and  understandeth 
the  language  that  is  written  in  it,  he  will  read  you  many  stories  and  instructions  out 
of  it ;  it  is  dumb  and  silent  to  the  one,  but  speaketh  to,  and  talketh  with,  the  other. 
In  like  manner  it  is  with  God's  judgments,  as  St.  Augustine  well  applies  it ;  all 
sorts  of  men  see  them,  but  few  are  able  aright  to  read  them  or  to  understand  them 
what  they  say  ;  every  judgment  of  God  is  a  real  sermon  of  reformation  and  repent- 
ance,    (J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  3-6.  To-morrow  will  I  bring  the  locusts. — Humiliation  before  God : — "  How 
long  wilt  thou  refuse  to  humble  thyself  before  Me  y  "  I.  I  shall  show  our  need  of 
humiliation  before  God.  1.  Let  us  inquire  how  we  have  acted  toward  God.  As 
our  Creator,  our  Governor,  our  Benefactor.  2.  Let  us  inquire  how  we  have  acted 
toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Was  made  flesh.  Died  for  us.  3.  Let  us  inquire 
how  we  have  acted  toward  the  Holy  Spirit.  Rebelled,  vexed,  grieved,  quenched. 
II.  I  sh.all  show  wherein  true  humiliation  consists.  1.  In  confession  of  our 
sin  before  God.  Fully  and  unreservedly.  With  deep  and  ingenuous  sorrow.  2. 
In  believing  application  to  God  through  Christ  for  pardon  of  our  sin.  3.  In 
renouncing  our  sins  and  commencing  a  course  of  obedience  to  God,    III,  I  shall 


CHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  169 

SHOW   THE    EVILS    OF    DELATING    TRUE    HUMILIATION    BEFORE  GoD.       1.    The  guilt  (Eom. 

ii.  4,  5).  2.  The  folly.  Stronger  than  He  ?  3.  The  danger.  Pharaoh.  Manasseh, 
(1)  Kepentance  is  never  too  late.  (2)  Eepentance  is  never  too  soon.  (G.  BrooJcs.) 
The  delay  of  soul  hitmility  : — I.  In  what  does  soul-humility  consist?  1.  It 
does  not  consist  in  mournful  verbal  utterances.  A  humble  word  may  conceal  a 
proud  spirit.  2.  Nor  in  outward  manifestations  of  repentance.  3.  It  is  rather 
evinced  in  calm  resignation  to  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  m  His  Word,  and  as 
made  known  in  the  conscience  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  II.  How  is  soul-humility  to 
BE  OBTAINED  ?  1.  By  having  a  clear  conception  of  the  will  of  God  and  of  the 
beauty  of  truth.  2.  By  allowing  the  varied  discipline  of  life  its  due  effect  upon  the 
Boul.  Pain  ought  to  humble  a  man,  reminding  him  of  his  mortality.  3.  By  sub- 
mitting to  the  gentle  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  Why  is  soul-humility  so 
LONG  DELAYED?  1.  Becausc  men  will  not  give  up  their  sins.  Humility  is  the 
outcome  of  purity.  2.  Because  men  will  not  yield  to  the  claims  of  God.  3. 
Because  men  are  rendered  proud  by  exalted  social  position.  4.  Men  can  give  no 
reason  for  the  delay  of  soul-humility.  Humility  is  the  richest  and  best  ornament 
of  the  soul,  and  no  good  excuse  can  be  assigned  for  neglecting  to  wear  it.  This 
ornament  is  but  seldom  seen  in  this  vaunting  age.  It  is  welcome  to  the  eye  of 
heaven.  Lessons :  1,  Soul-humility  should  be  manifested  by  man.  2.  God's 
ministers  should  enforce  it.  3.  God's  people  should  cultivate  it.  4.  Its  absence 
cannot  be  excused.     (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  plague  of  locusts  threatened : — I. 

It    was    THREATENED   IN    CASE    THAT   PhARAOH   WOULD   NOT    GIVE     THE     ISRAELITES     THE 

FREEDOM  DEMANDED  BY  GoD  (ver.  4).  The  good  havc  in  God  a  stern  Defender.  II. 
That  some  men  are  much  more  sensitive  to  the  threatenings  of  God  than 
OTHERS  (ver.  7).  III.  That  Divine  threatenings  must  make  ministers  faithful 
IN  the  discharge  of  their  duty  (ver.  9).  Denounce  all  attempts  at  moral  com- 
promise. (Ibid.)  To-morroiv  : — 1.  A  judgment.  2.  A  mystery.  3.  A  crisis.  4. 
An  anxiety.    5.  A  hope.     {Ibid.)  If  thou  refuse  : — 1.  Then  man  can  refuse  to 

obey  God.  2.  Then  man  can  dare  the  judgments  of  God.  3.  Then  man  takes  a 
great  responsibility  upon  himself.  (Ibid.)  The  locusts: — 1.  Very  grievous.  2. 
Darkening  the  light.  3.  Devouring  the  fruit.  4.  Entering  the  houses.  (Ibid.) 
Good  vien  should  leave  sinners  when  they  have  declared  the  message  of  God : — 1. 
As  a  reproof.  2.  As  a  contempt.  3,  As  a  projihecy.  4.  As  a  relief.  (Ibid.) 
Locust-scaring  godn : — The  Egyptians,  in  common  with  other  nations  whose  ideas 
of  religion  were  derived  originally  from  Egypt,  had  particular  deities  to  whom  they 
appealed  for  help  in  times  of  particular  necessity.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that 
they  had'  gods  to  whom  they  looked  for  protection  against  locusts  as  well  as  against 
flies  and  vermin.  Strabo,  speaking  of  certain  gods  whose  titles  were  derived  from 
insignificant  objects,  says  :  "  The  inhabitants  of  Mount  (Eta  worshipped  Hercules 
under  the  title  of  Hercules  Cornopion,  because  he  had  delivered  them  from  locusts. 
So  the  Erythrsans,  who  live  near  Melius,  worship  Hercules  Ipoctonus,  because  he 
destroyed  the  ipes,  or  worms,  which  are  destructive  to  vines  :  for  this  pest  is  found 
everywhere  except  in  the  country  of  the  Erythrseans.  The  Ehodians  have  in  their 
island  a  temple  of  Apollo  Erythibius,  so  called  from  erysibe  (mildew),  which  they 
call  erythibe.  Among  the  Jilolians  in  Asia  one  of  their  months  is  called  Pornopion, 
for  this  name  the  Bceotians  give  to  parnopes  (locusts),  and  sacrifices  are  per- 
formed to  Apollo  Pornopion."  The  locust  was  esteemed  sacred  in  Greece, 
and  the  Athenians  wore  golden  cicadae,  or  grasshoppers,  in  their  hair,  to  denote  the 
antiquity  of  their  race,  as  avroxf^ovEg,  "of  the  land  itself,"  or  aborigines.  Early 
historians  tell  us  that  the  Greeks  came  originally  from  Egypt ;  Cecrops,  the  first 
king  of  Attica,  was  from  Sais;  Cadmus,  from  Thebes;  and  Daniius  and  Lynceus, 
with  their  colonies,  from  Chemnis.  The  locust-scarers  of  Greece  and  Asia  were, 
therefore,  in  all  probability,  gods  of  the  Egyptians  in  time  of  Pharaoh,  and  were 
put  to  shame,  with  the  rest  of  their  deities,  by  this  unprecedented  and  miraculous 
visitation.  Thus  the  winds  from  the  four  corners  of  heaven  obey  the  command  of 
Jehovah.  As  far  as  man  is  concerned,  nothing  is  more  uncertain,  nothing  more 
absolutely  beyond  control :  "  the  wind  bloweth  were  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the 
Bound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  or  whither  it  goeth  "  (John  iii. 
8).  But  God  directeth  it  under  the  whole  heaven  ;  He  calleth  it,  "  Awake,  O  north 
wind,  and  come  thou  south  "  (Cant.  iv.  16) ;  "  He  gathereth  the  wind  in  Hs  fists  " 
(Prov.  xxx.  4) ;  "  He  bringeth  it  out  of  His  treasuries  "  (Psa.  cxxxv.  7).  At  God's 
command  the  east  wind  brought  the  locusts,  in  twenty-four  hours,  from  the  utter- 
most parts  of  the  east,  collecting  them,  it  may  be,  from  the  far-off  deserts  of  Arabia 
and  Persia ;  and  at  God's  command  the  west  wind  carried  them  away  again.as  far 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

as  the  Eed  Sea.  There  they  all  fell  down  and  perished.  "  I  am  tossed  up  and 
down  as  the  locust "  (Psa.  cix.  23),  says  David.  These  creatures  were  tossed  up 
and  down  by  the  wind  wherever  God  would  send  them.  He  had  used  them  as  His 
Bcourge,  an  instrument  of  punishment,  in  which  He  could  have  no  pleasure ;  and 
when  tlieir  ungrateful  task  was  done,  He  drowned  them  in  the  sea.  To  those  same 
depths  the  infatuated  king  who  refused  to  be  warned  by  the  chastisement  was  pre- 
sently to  follow  them,  and  with  his  miserable  people,  in  their  turn,  to  perish. 
{T.  S.  Millington.) 

Ver.  7.  Knowest  thou  not  yet  that  Egypt  is  destroyed  ? — Lessons : — 1.  Threatening 
from  God  may  touch  hearts  of  servants  and  not  of  rulers.  2.  God  useth  king's 
own  servants  to  move  them,  when  His  ministers  can  avail  nothing.  '6.  Fear  of 
plagues  may  move  wicked  ones  to  yield,  where  the  fear  of  God  is  not.  4.  It  is 
usual  for  wicked  men  to  charge  God's  servants  to  be  snares,  when  their  sins  make 
them.  5.  When  God  makes  His  sei-vants  ministers  of  wrath,  the  wicked  are 
willing  to  be  rid  of  them.  6.  Idolatrous  persecutors  may  tolerate  God's  Church  to 
perve  Him,  when  vengeance  forces  them.  7.  Experience  of  destruction  past,  and 
fear  of  more  to  come,  may  cause  enemies  to  move  for  the  Church's  liberty.  S. 
Persecutiug  powers  are  apt  to  be  stupid  and  willingly  ignorant  of  such  destructions. 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  A  remonstrance  against  sin.: — I.  Addkessed  by  inferiors  to 
TBEiR  scPERioRS.  1.  Bold.  2.  Wisc.  3.  Needed.  H.  Inspired  by  a  deep 
FEELING  OF  TERROR.  It  is  Well  for  men  under  any  circumstances  to  cry  out  against 
moral  evil.  III.  Influential  for  temporary  good.  Some  men  are  apparently  more 
accessible  to  the  advice  of  their  comrades  than  they  are  to  the  comniands  of  heaven. 
The  wicked  servant  may  preach  the  gospel  to  his  despotic  master.  IV.  Ultimately 
disregarded.  Lessons : — 1.  Eemonstrate  with  the  sinner.  2.  Show  him  the  foUy 
and  woe  of  sin.  3.  You  are  not  responsible  for  the  result  of  such  a  remonstrance. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Pharaoh's  mad  ignorance: — "Knowest  thou  not  yet  that 
Egypt  is  destroyed  ?  "  was  the  plea  of  Pharaoh's  servants  before  the  locusts  came. 
No ;  he  knew  it  not ;  he  would  not  know  it.  Even  now,  with  the  scene  of  utter 
desolation  eveiywhere  around  him,  with  the  fields  scorched  and  barren,  and  the 
naked  trees  stretching  out  tlieir  white  and  shattered  boughs  Hke  ghastly  skeletons, 
with  even  the  walls  of  his  houses  and  the  furniture  of  his  chambers  marked  by  the 
gnawings  of  those  "  very  grievous  locusts,"  with  all  these  terrible  witnesses  before 
his  eyes,  Pharaoh  knew  it  not.    (T.  S.  Millington.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  We  will  go  with  our  young  and  with  our  old. — Lessons : — 1.  Upon 
importunity  of  men  wicked  powers  may  be  moved  to  recall  and  treat  further  with 
God's  ministers  when  His  own  word  is  slighted  by  them.  2.  Upon  carnal  considera- 
tions powers  may  hcense  the  Church  to  serve  its  God.  3.  Such  wicked  powers 
bound  their  grants  of  liberty  with  provisos  ^destructive  to  God's  wiU  (ver.  8). 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Lessons : — 1.  Captious  questions  from  the  wicked  are  answered 
with  plain  answers  by  God's  servants.  2.  Faithfulness  to  God  will  not  suffer  His 
servants  to  hide  His  mind  to  the  wicked.  3.  God's  instruments  have  encouragement 
from  Him  to  deliver  His  demands  to  gi'eatest  powers.  4.  Little  ones  as  well  as 
great  must  be  carried  along  with  the  Church  of  God  to  then-  rest.  5.  The  Church's 
portion  in  this  hfe  as  to  outward  estate  God  is  pleased  to  have  free  as  well  as  them- 
selves, that  they  may  comfortably  serve  Him  therewith.  6.  The  Church's  work 
after  redemption  is  to  serve  Jehovah,  or  keep  a  feast  to  Him  (ver.  9).  {Ihid.) 
Renewed  opportunities  of  moral  good : — "  And  Moses  and  Aaron  were  brought  again 
unto  Pharaoh."  I.  Consequent  upon  the  faithful  rebuke  of  friends.  II.  Through 

CONTACT  with  A  HOLY  MAN.      HI.    MaY  BE    LEFT    UNUSED   THROUGH    THE   PERVERBENE63 

OF  THE  SOUL.  {J.  S.  Excll,  M.A.)  The  children  must  he  rescued  : — But  particu- 
larly observe  the  subject  of  dispute.  Concerning  whom  did  it  arise  ?  Concerning 
boys  and  girls— little  childi-en.  Pharaoh  did  not  wish  them  to  accompany  their 
parents  to  hold  a  feast  unto  the  Lord ;  he  required  that  they  should  remain  at  home 
as  hostages.  Moses  refused.  WeU,  there  are  often  similar  disputes  in  our  time 
between  the  devil  and  the  servants  of  God  concerning  you.  The  devil  causes  worldly 
men  to  say,  like  Pharaoh,  "Why  should  you  trouble  children  with  religion,  they 
are  too  young  yet  ?  How  can  they  understand  the  Bible,  since  I,  who  am  a  grown- 
up man,  and  perhaps  a  learned  man,  do  not  understand  it?  They  can  take  no 
pleasure  in  it ;  it  is  too  serious  for  them,  since  for  my  part  I  find  it  a  weariness. 
At  their  age  it  becomes  them  to  play,  and  not  to  study  deeply.  Let  them  enjoy  their 
diversions ;  let  them  amuse  themselves  on  the  Sunday."     Thus  the  prince  of  this 


CHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  171 

world,  the  great  Pharaoh  of  the  darkness  of  this  world,  would  wish  to  keep  you  as 
hostages  in  error,  and  ensnare  your  parents  also.  If  your  house  were  on  fire,  what 
would  you  think  of  a  person  who  should  say  to  your  father,  "  Go  out  as  quickly  as 
you  can,  but  leave  your  children  in  bed  "  ?  Or  if  you  were  at  school,  or  an  apprentice 
to  a  trade,  what  would  you  think  of  a  man  who  should  say  to  your  father,  "  Your 
son  has  a  holiday,  but  do  not  let  him  come  home  to  be  with  you,  for  he  is  at  an  age 
to  amuse  himself.  Do  not  teach  him  to  love  you,  and  to  obey  you,  for  that  would 
weary  him."  Ah  !  dear  children,  you  have  as  much  need  as  we  have  to  escape  the 
wrath  to  come,  and  to  love  God.  Ask  from  Him  grace  to  love  Him.  The  prayer  of 
a  child  who  seeks  a  new  heart  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  always  ascends  to  heaven. 
(Prof.  Gaussen.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Driven  out  from  Pharaoh's  presence. — Driving  away  the  servants 
of  God : — 1.  It  is  to  drive  away  a  good  friend.  2.  It  is  to  drive  away  a  faith- 
ful monitor.  3.  It  is  to  drive  away  a  real  benefactor.  4.  It  is  to  drive 
away  an  angel  of  God.      (/.  S.  Exell,  31. A.)  The  threats  of  the  wicked: — I. 

Evil  men  often  seek  to  ketaed  God's  servants  in  their  works  by  threats. 
But  in  vain.  God  sustains  all  whom  He  sends.  No  opposition,  however  virulent, 
can  retard  them  from  doing  His  work.  They  may  be  weak  and  few,  but  He  is  their 
strength.  II.  That  the  threats  of  evil  men  need  not  be  feared.  Nothing 
can  really  harm  God's  servants.  They  may  have  to  suffer,  but  suffering  will  be 
turned  into  triumphant  joy.  Like  the  saintly  Kutherford,  they  will  find  that  their 
enemies  have  only  set  them  to  reside  for  a  while  in  one  of  God's  palaces.  Eeal 
evil  cannot  befall  them.  III.  That  the  evil  threatened  menaces  the  threatenee. 
As  Luther  said  concerning  the  potentates  of  his  day,  who  did  not  remember  the 
overruling  might  of  God  in  their  projects  :  "  Our  Lord  God  says  unto  them :  For 
whom  do  ye  hold  Me?  for  a  cypher?  Do  I  set  here  above  in  vain,  and  to  no 
purpose?  You  shall  know  that  I  will  twist  your  accounts  about  finely,  and  make 
them  all  false  reckonings."  So  it  was  with  Pharaoh  when  he  threatened  Moses  and 
Aaron.     {W.  O.  Lilly.)         The  imperioiisness  of  unbelief: — I.  In  its  reluctance 

TO  GRANT  CONCESSIONS.  II.  In  ITS  IRRITABLE  IMPATIENCE  IN  LISTENING  TO  THE 
VOICE     OF    REASON.      III.    In     ITS    IGNOMINIOUS    TEEATMENI    OF    RELIGIOUS    TEACHERS. 

(G.  Barlow.) 

Vers.  12-15.  The  locusts  went  up. — The  plague  of  locusts;  or,  the  residue  of 
human  comfort  and  enjoyment  destroyed  by  the  retribution  of  God : — It  has  been 
observed  that  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  as  they  succeeded  each  other,  were  characterized 
with  increasing  severity.  This  one  appears  an  exception  to  the  rule.  But  only  on 
first  sight.  The  very  name  of  locust  was  a  terror  to  the  Egyptians.  They  were  an 
awful  infliction  (Joel  i.  6-12).  I.  That  sometimes  the  retributions  of  God 
LEAVE  A  residue  OF  COMFORT  TO  THE  LIVES  OF  MEN.  It  is  SO  In  bereavement ;  if 
the  wife  is  taken,  the  child  is  left.  It  is  so  in  business ;  if  the  capital  is  lost,  it  may 
be  the  reputation  is  saved.  It  is  so  in  personal  attributes  ;  if  one  sense  grows  dim, 
another  remains  yet  more  active.  If  the  flax  and  barley  are  destroyed,  the  wheat 
and  the  rye  are  left.  This  is  more  than  is  deserved.  It  is  merciful.  But  it  is  the 
kind  way  of  heaven.    II.  That  upon  continued  sin  the  residue  of  human  comfort 

MAY  BE  ENTIRELY  REMOVED  BY  THE  RETRIBUTIVE  ANGER  OF  GoD.  III.  ThAT  UPON 
CONTINUED  SIN  THE  REMAINING  COMFORTS  OF  MAN  MAY  BE  DESTROYED  BY  THE  CO- 
OPERATION OF  PRIMARY  AND  SECONDARY  CAUSES.  "And  the  Lord  brought  an  east 
wind  upon  the  land  all  that  day  and  all  that  night ;  and  when  it  was  morning,  the 
east  wind  brought  the  locusts."  The  sceptic  may  say  that  the  east  wind  alone 
brought  the  locusts  upon  his  green  things ;  but  this  is  unreasonable  and  atheistical. 
Men  in  these  days  have  too  much  Scripture  knowledge  to  regard  nature  as  the 
origin  of  then  trouble.  God  commissions  the  wind  that  works  desolation  upon  the 
hope  of  the  wicked.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 

Vers.  16-19.  Intreat  the  Lord  your  God. — Lessons: — 1.  God's  hasty  judgments 
may  work  hasty  passions  in  sinners,  though  no  repentance.  2.  Vengeance  may 
make  persecutors  call  in  God's  servants  for  help  as  hastily  as  they  drove  them  out. 
8.  Double  confession  of  sin  may  hypocrites  make  under  plagues,  yet  not  in  truth. 
4.  Proud  persecutors  may  be  forced  to  confess  tbeir  guilt  against  men  as  well  as 
against  God  (chap.  v.  16).  6.  Hypocritical  oppressors  may  desire  forgiveness  of 
God's  people  under  plagues,  as  if  they  would  sin  no  more.  6.  Wicked  persecutors 
under  judgment  are  earnest  with  God's  servants  to  intercede  earnestly  for  them. 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

7.  It  is  only  death  which  wicked  sinners  deprecate.  8.  Hypocrites  pretend  upon 
deliverance  from  death,  as  if  they  would  sin  no  more,  or  desire  no  more  mercy 
(ver.  17).     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)        A  false  repentance : — I.  It  proceeds  fkom  the 

IMPULSE  OF  THE  j:OMENT,  AND  NOT  FROM  CONSCIENTIOUS  CONVICTION.  II.  It  IS 
MARKED  BY  SELFISH  TERROR,  AND  NOT  BY  A  GODLY  SORROW  FOR  SIN.  III.  It  CRAVES 
FORGIVENESS  OF  AN  IMMEDIATE  OFFENCE,  RATHER  THAN  A  THOROUGH  CLEANSING  OP 
THE  HEART.  IV.  It  CONFIDES  IN  THE  INTERCESSION  OF  A  FELLOW-MORTAL,  RATHER 
THAN    IN   THE    PERSONAL     HUMBLING    OF   THE    SOUL     BEFORE     GoD.        Chlist   is   the   Only 

Mediator.     V.  It  regards  God  more  as  a  terrible  Deity  whose  wrath  is  to  be 

APPEASED,  than  AS  THE  INFINITE  FaTHER  WHOSE  LOVE  IS  BETTER  THAN  LIFE.  VI. 
It    EXPRESSES   A   PROMISE    OF    AMENDMENT    WHICH   IS    FALSIFIED    BY   PREVIOUS    DISSEM- 

BLiNGS.  Lessons  :  1.  To  be  sure  that  our  repentance  is  genuine.  2.  To  bring  forth 
fruit  meet  for  repentance  in  daily  conduct.  3.  Not  to  pass  a  hasty  judgment  on 
the  repentance  of  men.  Half  the  Revivalists  of  the  day  would  have  called  Pharaoh 
a  true  convert;  time  tests  conversion.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Pharaoh's  imperfect 
repentances : — Dear  children,  when  anyone  confesses  with  sincerity,  "  I  have  sinned" ; 
when  he  says  this  to  God,  and  not  merely  to  man,  be  sure  that  he  is  never  rejected. 
But  let  us  observe  what  was  wanting  in  the  repentance  of  Pharaoh.  1.  Belief  in 
God.  He  called  Him  the  Lord  your  God.  He  spoke  of  Him  as  of  a  stranger. 
Now,  it  is  impossible  that  any  person  or  child  can  love  the  Lord  until  he  feels  himself 
reconciled  to  Him  by  faith,  until  he  can  call  Him  the  Lord  my  God.  2.  Pharaoh 
had  humbled  himself  before  men,  rather  than  before  God.  3.  He  besought  the 
prayers  of  others,  instead  of  praying  for  himself.  4.  He  asked  the  forgiveness  of 
the  servants  of  God,  instead  of  seeking  pardon  from  God  Himself.  If  he  had  said, 
like  David,  "  I  acknowledge  my  sin  unto  the  Lord,"  he  might  have  added  like  him, 
"  And  Thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin."  5.  Pharaoh  did  not  concern  himself 
about  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  He  intreated,  not  that  he  might  be  delivered  from 
sin,  but  only  that  "this  death"  should  be  taken  away  from  him;  he  did  not  think 
of  eternity,  but  only  of  the  plague  under  which  he  was  suffering.  6.  Lastly, 
remark  that  the  king  still  cherished  secret  designs  in  his  heart;  his  submission  was 
not  unreserved.  We  have  begun  as  it  were  to  repent ;  but  as  long  as  we  are  not 
willing  to  renounce  all,  to  follow  Jesus,  our  repentance  is  of  no  avail.  Pharaoh 
said,  "  Go  ye,  serve  the  Lord,  only  let  your  flocks  and  herds  be  stayed."  His  heart 
was  not  yet  submissive,  thus  his  repentance  was  vain.     (Prof.  Gaussen.) 

Ver.  20.  The  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's  heart. — Pharaoh's  jcill  and  God's: — I. 
The  simplest  and  most  patient  study  of  that  portion  of  the  Book  of  Exodus  which 
refers  to  the  Egyptian  plagues  will  lead  us  to  this  conclusion,  that  Moses  is  the 
witness  for  a  Divine  eternal  law,  and  the  witness  against  every  kind  of  king-craft 
or  priest-craft  which  breaks  this  law,  or  substitutes  any  devices  of  man's  jjower  or 
wit  in  place  of  it.  Moses  protested  against  the  deceits  and  impostures  of  the 
magicians,  precisely  because  he  protested  for  the  living  and  eternal  Lord.  It  is  a 
special  token  of  honesty  and  veracity  that  Moses  records  the  success  of  the 
magicians  in  several  of  their  experiments.  We  might  fairly  have  discredited  the 
story  as  partial  and  unlikely,  if  there  had  been  no  such  admission.  Even  the  most 
flagrant  chicanery  is  not  always  disappointed,  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  fact  and 
fraud  are  curiously  dovetailed  into  one  another.  If  you  will  not  do  homage  to  the 
one,  jou  will  not  detect  the  other.  II.  Do  not  the  words,  "  God  hardened  Pharaoh's 
heart,"  distinctly  describe  God  as  the  Author  of  something  in  man  which  is 
pronounced  to  be  utterly  wrong?  Is  He  not  said  to  have  foreseen  Pharaoh's  sin, 
and  not  only  to  have  foreseen,  but  to  have  produced  it?  The  will  of  God  was 
an  altogether  good  will,  and  therefore  Pharaoh's  will — which  was  a  bad  will, 
a  proud  self-wiU — strove  against  it,  and  was  lashed  into  fury  by  meeting  with 
that  which  was  contrary  to  itself.  These  words  of  Scripture  are  most  necessary 
to  us,  for  the  purpose  of  making  us  understand  the  awful  contradiction  which 
there  may  be  between  the  will  of  a  man  and  the  will  of  his  Creator;  how 
that  contradiction  may  be  aggravated  by  what  seemed  to  be  means  for  its 
cure,  and  how  it  may  be  cured.  However  hard  our  hearts  may  be,  the  Divine 
Spirit  of  grace  and  discipline  can  subdue  even  all  things  to  Himself.  {F.  D. 
Maurice,    M.A.)  The    hardening    of   Pharaoh's    heart  : — I.    The    reality    op 

THE  HUMAN  WILL,  and  Consequently  of  responsibility,  is  attached  on  different 
sides  :  here  on  physiological,  and  there  on  historical  grounds.  We  are  told 
that  facts  connected  with  the  human  will  admit  of  exact  calculation  and  prediction, 
according  to  what  is  termed  the  law  of  averages,  and  that  consequently  the  doctrine 


dHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  173 

of  free-will,  which  was  never  capable  of  proof,  must  be  displaced  by  a  doctrine 
recognizing  the  certainty  of  human  action.  To  this  we  answer :  1.  The  belief 
that  man  has  the  power  to  choose  is  so  far  from  wanting  proof,  that  it  has  all  the 
force  which  universal  consent  can  give  it.  2.  This  average,  which  is  supposed  to 
rule  the  will  like  a  rod  of  iron,  is  itself  most  variable.  It  yields  under  the  hand 
like  tempered  clay.  That  which  our  will  is  now  acting  upon,  which  varies  in 
different  countries  because  the  will  of  man  has  made  different  laws  there,  cannot 
be  conclusive  against  the  doctrine  of  free-will.  II.  The  words  of  the  text  are 
NOT  without  their  WARNING.  They  mean  that  God,  who  punishes  sin  with  death, 
sometimes  punishes  sin  with  sin.  When  man  has  repelled  the  voice  of  conscience, 
and  the  warning  of  his  Bible,  and  the  entreaties  of  friends,  then  grace  is  withdrawn 
from  him,  and  sin  puts  on  a  judicial  character,  and  is  at  once  sin  and  punishment. 
(Abp.  Thomson.)  The  hardening  of  the  heart : — "  The  Lord  hardened  Pharaoh's 
heart "  is  a  very  remarkable  and  startling  expression,  and  it  is  repeated  in  this 
history  no  fewer  than  ten  times.  It  is  startling,  for  it  seems  at  first  sight  as  if  it 
ascribed  the  sin  of  that  wicked  man  to  Almighty  God.  But  a  little  thought  will 
show  that  it  is  very  far  from  meaning  this.  1.  In  other  places  the  hardening  is 
attributed  to  Pharaoh  himself.  God  gives  bad  men  a  mysterious  power  to  change 
their  hearts  and  minds  continually  for  the  worse,  by  their  own  wicked  ways ;  so 
that  in  the  end  they  cannot  believe  or  repent.  It  is  their  own  doing,  because  they 
bring  it  on  themselves  by  their  sin,  and  it  is  God's  doing  because  it  is  the  just 
punishment  which  His  law  has  made  the  effect  of  their  sin.  2.  God  knew  before- 
hand that  the  heart  of  Pharaoh  was  such  that  not  even  miracles  would  overcome 
his  obstinacy,  and  knowing  this.  He  determined  to  deal  with  him  in  a  manner 
which  ought  to  have  softened  and  amended  him,  but  which,  according  to  his 
perverse  way  of  taking  it,  only  hardened  him  more  and  more.  3.  The  taking  off 
of  God's  hand,  after  each  successive  plague,  had  the  effect  of  hardening  Pharaoh's 
heart  more  completely.  He  repents  of  his  own  repentance,  and  wishes  he  had  not 
given  way  so  far  to  God's  messengers.  4.  Pharaoh,  like  other  wicked  kings,  had 
no  want  of  evil  subjects  to  encourage  him.  He  had  magicians  who  counterfeited 
God's  miracles,  and  servants  who,  on  every  occasion,  were  ready  to  harden  their 
hearts  with  him.  Such  is  Pharaoh's  case  ;  beginning  in  heathenish  ignorance,  but 
forced  by  warning  after  warning  to  become  aware  of  the  truth.  Every  warning  was 
a  chance  given  him  to  soften  his  heart,  but  he  went  on  hardening  it,  and  so 
perished.  (Plain  Sermons  by  Contributors  to  the  "  Tracts  for  the  Times.") 
Hardening  influence  of  siti: — Look  but  upon  a  youth  when  he  comes  first  to  be  au 
apprentice  to  some  artificer,  or  handicraft  trade,  his  hand  is  tender,  and  no  sooner 
is  he  set  to  work  but  it  blisters,  so  that  he  is  much  pained  thereby  ;  but  when  he 
hath  continued  some  time  at  work,  then  his  hand  hardens,  and  he  goes  on  without 
any  grievance  at  all.  It  is  just  thus  with  a  sinner  :  before  he  be  accustomed  to  an 
evil  way,  conscience  is  tender  and  full  of  remorse,  like  a  queasy  stomach,  ready  to 
kick  at  the  least  thing  that  is  offensive.  Oh,  but  a  continued  custom,  and  making 
a  trade  of  sin,  that's  it  that  makes  the  conscience  to  be  hard  and  brawny,  able  to 
feel  nothing!  As  it  is  in  a  smith's  forge,  a  dog  that  comes  newly  in,  cannot  endure 
the  fiery  sparks  to  fly  about  his  ears  ;  but  being  once  used  to  it,  he  sleeps  securely  ; 
so  let  wicked  men  be  long  used  to  the  devil's  workhouse,  to  be  slaves  and  vassals  to 
sin,  the  sparks  of  hell-fire  may  fly  about  them,  and  the  fire  of  hell  flash  upon  their 
souls,  yet  never  trouble  them,  never  disturb  them  at  all ;  and  all  this  ariseth  from 
a  continued  custom  in  a  course  of  evil.    (J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  21-23.  Darkness  over  the  land  of  Egypt. — Lessons : — 1.  God  falls  upon 
sinners  without  warning  where  they  deal  falsely  with  Him.  2.  The  same  signal 
God  may  command  for  several  uses.  3.  God's  word  determines  the  end  unto  which 
all  signals  are  appointed.  4.  Men's  hands  lifted  up  to  heaven  God  may  make  use  of 
to  bring  evils  on  the  earth.  5.  It  is  God's  word  to  make  a  kingdom  the  land  of 
darkness.  6.  Palpable  darkness  is  a  judgment  of  God's  own  making  (ver.  21). 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Lessons  : — 1.  Obedience  to  God's  signal  commands  must  be 
given  by  His  servants.  2.  Signal  obedience  by  God's  ministers  is  not  in  vain.  God 
giveth  the  effect.  8.  Horrid  darkness  can  God  send  upon  souls  darkened  through 
Bin.  4.  Egyptian  darkness  is  God's  exemplary  vengeance  to  the  world.  5.  The 
place  and  duration  of  darkness  are  at  God's  appointment  (ver.  22).  6.  Dismal 
darkness  is  that  which  takes  from  men  the  use  of  sense  and  motion.  7.  Chains  of 
darkness  can  God  make  to  hold  fast  sinners  in  prison,  8.  God  executes  His  judg- 
ments on  the  world  with  discrimination  to  His  people.     9.  Egypt's  darkness  is 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  X. 

Israel's  light  (ver.  23).  (Ihid.)  The  plamte  of  darhness  ;  or,  a  type  of  the  gad 
moral  condition  of  unregenerate  humanity  .-—I.  That  cnregeneeate  humanity  is  in 
A  CONDITION  OF  MOKAL  DARKNESS.  1.  Ignorant — of  God  as  Father,  Christ  as  Saviour, 
Holy  Ghost  as  Comforter,  and  glories  of  moral  universe.  2.  Miserable.  Groping 
in  darkness  to  an  awful  destiny  of  woe.  3.  In  danger.  Under  condemnation  of 
Heaven.  II.  That  unregenerate  humanity  is  in  moral  darkness  through  sin. 
No  light  but  from  the  Cross.    III.  That  unrenewed  hum-^nity  is  in  great  straits 

THROUGH,    AND    HAS     NO    AT.TIFICIAL    ALLEVIATION    OF,     ITS    MORAL    DARKNESS.       1.    The 

moral  vision  of  humanity  is  impeded.  2.  The  moral  activity  of  humanity  is 
suspended.  Soul-darkness  can  only  be  removed  by  Christ.  Lessons  :  1.  To  seek 
to  relieve  the  woe  of  those  who  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death.  2.  To 
see  the  effect  of  sin.  8.  To  seek  light  from  the  Cross  of  Christ.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Light  in  the  dwellings  of  the  good : — I.  In  the  dwellings  of  the  good  there  is 

THE  LIGHT  OF  KEVEALED  TRUTH.  II.  In  THE  DWELLINGS  OF  THE  GOOD  THERE  IS  THE 
LIGHT  OF  PROVIDENTIAL  GUIDANCE.   HI.  In  THE  DWELLINGS  OF  THE  GOOD  THERE  13 

THE  LIGHT  OF  MOR-siL  cHARACTEB.  {IHd.)  HoTue  light : — The  true  Israel  shall 
have  light  in  their  dwellings.  Light  in  the  heart  brings  light  in  the  home.  I. 
There  is  supernatural  light  in  the  dwellings  of  God's  people.  There  is  a 
light  brighter  than  the  light  of  the  sun.  God's  people  dwell  in  it.  The  light  of  the 
glory  of  God  has  shone  in  upon  them.  No  creations  of  worldly  wisdom,  wealth,  or 
philosophy  can  give  this  heavenly  light.  II.  TnvT  this  light  is  the  source  of 
MANIFOLD  blessings.  Comfort  under  trial ;  strength  in  weakness ;  peace  in  dis- 
quietude ;  lessons  of  resignation,  patience,  and  fortitude :  sanctification  of  afHic- 
tion ;  sjTiipathy  with  the  suffering  members  of  the  household ;  preservation  in 
calamitous  times;  sustaining  trust  in  God  under  perplexing  circumstances ;  hope  of 
eternal  felicity.  III.  That  this  light  is  a  foregleaming  of  that  glory  which 
will  be  enjoyed  by  God's  people  fob  ever.  God's  love  in  Christ  is  the  light  of 
every  true  Israelite's  dwelling  on  earth,  and  that  is  the  light  of  heaven.  Christian 
homes  ought  to  be  "  spangles  of  celestial  brightness  on  this  darksome  earth."  The 
light  here  is  sometimes  dimmed.  Heaven  is  its  native  sphere.  It  suffers  there  no 
eclipse.  Our  vision  too  will  be  clearer.  (Ibid.)  Light  and  darkness;  or,  the 
Church  and  the  xcorld : — I.  Egypt  in  its  dabkness  was  a  type  of  the  world.  It 
was  so  also  in  other  particulars.  In  its  tyrannical  dominion  by  the  despotical 
Pharaoh ; — in  its  diversified  idolatry  ;  but  particularly  in  the  darkness  which 
enshrouded  it.  1,  Darkness  is  an  emblem  of  ignorance  and  error,  and  the  world  is 
involved  in  these.  2.  Darkness  is  an  emblem  of  guilt,  and  the  world  is  involved  in 
this.  3.  Darkness  is  an  emblem  of  peril,  and  in  this  the  world  is  involved.  It  is 
to  be  the  scene  of  the  Divine  vengeance.  It  is  to  be  renovated  by  fire  (2  Pet.  iii.  10). 
4.  Darkness  is  the  emblem  of  misery,  and  in  this  the  world  is  involved.  Now  the 
misery  of  the  men  of  the  world  arises  from  three  things.  (1)  From  the  accusations 
of  guilt,  the  cause  of  their  condemnation.  (2)  From  the  unsatisfying  nature  of 
their  portion.  They  want  happiness,  but  cannot  find  it.  (3)  Their  gloomy  fears  as 
to  the  future.  II.  The  Isr.aelites  with  light  in  their  dwellings  were  a  type 
OF  THE  CnvKcii.  1.  They  have  the  light  of  saving  knowledge.  2.  Tbey  have  the 
light  of  the  Divine  approbation.  3.  They  have  the  light  of  holiness.  In  applying 
tbis  subject  we  behold  the  contrast  between  those  who  are  of  the  world  and  the 
)^eople  of  God,  in  several  conditions  of  life.  (1)  See  them  in  adversity.  Thewicked 
have  an  addition  of  darkness.  No  solace, — no  ray  to  cheer  them  ;  hence  how  often 
they  sink  into  despair  and  rush  into  eternity.  The  Christian  feels,  but  he  recognizes 
God's  hand.  (2)  See  them  in  sickness.  No  light.  Painful,  restless,  and  an  over- 
whelming anxiety.  The  sick  chamber  is  as  dark  as  Egypt.  But  the  righteous  have 
light  in  their  dwellings.  The  serene  countenance,  the  pious  resignation,  the 
cheering  hope,  show  the  difference.  (3)  See  them  in  death.  With  the  wicked 
it  is  a  leap  in  the  dark.  But  the  righteous  have  light  in  death — often  the 
celestial    beams    of    glory.      {J.    Burns,  D.D.)  The   plague    of   darJcuess : — 

Darkness  may  have  been  produced  by  a  deprivation  of  sight.  The  sun  may  have 
risen  and  set  as  usual  upon  the  land,  yet  the  eyes  of  all  the  Egyptians  being  closed 
and  blinded,  no  ray  of  light  could  reach  them  ;  this,  if  it  were  attended  with  pain 
in  the  organs  of  vision,  might  be  properly  described  as  "  darkness  to  be  felt."  The 
men  of  Sodom  were  stricken  with  blindness  for  their  sin.  The  great  host  which 
came  to  take  Elisha  were  smitten  with  blindness.  Moses,  in  Deuteronomy,  where 
he  threatens  the  people  with  the  botch  of  Egypt,  reminding  them  of  the  plague  of 
boils  and  blains,  says  immediately  afterwards,  alluding,  probably,  to  this  plague, 
"  The  Lord  shall  smite  thee  with  blindness  and  thou  sbalt  grope  at  noonday  as  the 


CHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  175 

blind  gropeth  in  darkness"  (Deut.  xxyiii.  27-29).  Blindness  was  the  punishment  in- 
flicted upon  Elymas  the  sorcerer ;  and  these  Egyptians  were  famous  for  their  sorceries. 
The  darkness  may  therefore  have  been  of  this  kind,  a  painful  but  temporary  loss  of 
eyesight.  Darkness,  such  as  is  here  described,  may  have  been  occasioned  by  a  thick 
cloud  resting  upon  the  earth,  and  pervading  all  the  lower  regions  of  the  atmosphere : 
this  would  enfold  the  people  so  as  "  to  be  felt,"  and  would  intercept  the  sun's  rays 
effectually  by  its  density.  God  is  often  described  as  manifesting  His  displeasure  in  a 
cloud.  Joel  speaksof  the  day  of  God's  vengeance  as  "a  day  of  darkness  and  of  gloomi- 
ness, a  day  of  clouds  and  of  thick  darkness"  (Joel  ii.  2) ;  and  Zephaniah  employs 
nearly  the  same  language  (Zeph.  i.  15).  The  pillar  that  went  before  the  Israelites, 
and  gave  them  light,  was  to  the  Egyptians  "a  cloud  and  darkness"  (chap.  xiv.  20). 
Buch  a  cloud  would  be  even  more  terrible  in  Egypt,  sunny  Egypt,  than  in  other 
countries ;  for  there,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the  sky  is  almost  always  clear,  and 
heavy  rains  unknown.  But  in  any  place,  and  under  any  conditions,  it  must  have 
been  full  of  horror  and  misery.  Nothing  could  represent  this  more  forcibly  than 
the  short  sentence,  "Neither  rose  any  from  his  place  for  three  days."  It  was  an 
horror  of  great  darkness ;  it  rested  on  them  like  a  pall ;  they  knew  not  what  dangers 
might  be  around  them,  what  judgment  was  next  to  happen.  If  there  be  any  truth 
in  the  traditions  of  the  Jews  on  this  subject,  there  were  yet  greater  alanns  under 
this  canopy  of  darkness,  this  palpable  obscuricy,  than  any  which  would  naturally 
arise  out  of  the  physical  infliction.  Darkness  is  a  type  of  Satan's  kingdom  ;  and 
Satan  had  some  liberty  in  Egypt  to  walk  up  and  down  upon  the  laud,  and  to  go  to 
and  fro  in  it.  The  Jewish  Kabbis  tell  us  that  the  devil  and  his  angels  were  let  loose 
during  these  three  dreadful  days  ;  that  they  had  a  wider  range  and  greater  liberty 
than  usual  for  working  mischief.  They  describe  these  evil  spirits  going  among  the 
wretched  people,  glued  to  their  seats  as  they  were  with  terror ;  frightening  them 
with  fearful  apparitions;  piercing  their  ears  with  hideous  shrieks  and  groans; 
driving  them  almost  to  madness  with  the  intensity  of  their  fears ;  making  their 
flesh  creep,  and  the  hair  of  their  head  to  stand  on  end.  Such  a  climax  seems  to  be 
referred  to  by  the  Psalmist,  "  He  cast  upon  them  the  fierceness  of  His  anger,  wrath, 
and  indignation  and  trouble,  by  sending  evil  angels  among  them  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  49). 
The  sun  was,  during  the  continuance  of  the  plague  of  darkness,  blotted  out  from 
the  Egj-ptian  sky :  either  their  ehief  God  had  forsaken  them,  and  turned  against 
his  vicegerent  upon  earth,  or  the  God  of  Moses  had  prevailed  against  them  both. 
In  the  intensity  of  their  darkness,  unrelieved  by  any  artificial  light,  the  people 
would  bethink  themselves  of  the  brilliant  illumination  they  had  been  in  the  habit 
of  making  in  honour  of  their  god,  as  described  by  Herodotus,  "  At  the  sacrifice 
solemnized  at  Sais  the  assembly  is  held  by  night :  they  suspend  before  their  houses 
in  the  open  air  lamps,  which  are  filled  with  oil  mixed  with  salt :  a  wick  floats  on  the 
top,  which  will  burn  all  night :  the  feast  is  called  the  feast  of  lamps.  Such  of  the 
Egyptians  as  do  not  attend  the  ceremony  burn  lamps  in  like  manner  before  their 
houses,  so  that  on  this  night,  not  Sais  only,  but  all  Egypt  is  Uluminated.  A  religious 
motive  is  assigned  for  the  festival  itself,  and  for  the  illumination  by  which  it  is 
distinguished  "  (Hero'd.  ii.  02).  Night,  being  supposed  to  divide  the  empire  of  the 
heavens  with  day,  received  also  its  share  of  Divine  honours.  Darkness  existed 
before  light ;  and  therefore  darknlss  was  revered  as  the  most  ancient  of  all  deities. 
Among  the  verses  usually  ascribed  to  Orpheus  is  a  hymn  addressed  to  Night, 
beginning — "Night,  parent  of  gods  and  men  I  "  (Hymn,  ad  Noct.  v.  1.)  Plutarch 
says—"  The  Egyjitians  reverence  the  bhnd  mouse,  because  they  consider  darkness 
to  be  more  ancient  than  lieht"  (Sympos.  1.  4.  qu.  5).  Thus,  again,  the  vanity  of 
the  religious  practices  of  Egypt  was  plainly  shown.  Where  were  now  their  gods? 
Let  them  pray  to  the  sun  ;  let  them  intreat  their  lord  and  king  Osiris  ;  he  would  not 
look  on  them,  nor  give  them  one  ray  of  his  comfort.  Let  them  implore  the 
darkness;  it  would  not  listen  to  them,  nor  depart  from  them.  The  Israelites,  on 
the  contrary,  who  had  never,  as  a  nation,  bowed  the  knee  to  these  creatures,  nor 
had  been  attracted  by  their  glory  to  give  them  the  homage  due  to  God  alone,  were 
filled  with  light  and  warmth.  The  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  sent  down  his 
blessing  upon  their  houses,  singhng  them  out  wherever  they  might  be,  and  made 
even  the  darkness  to  be  light  about  them.  And  now,  perhaps,  they  would  better 
understand  the  worth  and  excellency  of  that  daily  gift  of  God  which  men  enjoy  too 
generally  without  much  thought  of  Him  whose  word  created  and  whose  mercy  sends 
it.  Looking  upon  the  walls  of  blackness  which  were  drawn  around  the  houses  of 
the  Egyptians,  they  would  learn  to  prize  the  glorious  light  and  sunshine  which  still 
prevailed  in  all  their  dwellings  :  they  would  compare  their  own  condition,  even  as 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

slaves  and  bondsmen,  with  the  misery  of  those  who  had  their  habitations  in  the 
fairest  palaces  of  Egypt — fair  no  longer  now,  but  dark  and  desolate ;  and  so  they 
would  doubtless  look  upward  with  gratitude  to  their  almighty  God,  and  confess  the 
security  and  happiness  of  those  who  trust  in  Him.  (T.  S.  Millinnton.)  Lifiht 
in  darkness  : — "  The  happiest  child  I  ever  saw,"  said  Bishop  Ryle,  "  was  a  little 
girl  whom  I  once  met  travelling  in  a  railway  carriage.  She  was  eight  years  old, 
and  she  was  quite  blind.  She  had  never  been  able  to  see  at  all.  She  had  never 
seen  the  sun,  and  the  star?,  and  the  sky,  and  the  grass,  and  the  flowers,  and  the 
trees,  and  the  birds,  and  all  those  pleasant  things  which  we  see  every  day  of  our 
lives  ;  but  still  she  was  quite  happy.  She  was  by  herself,  poor  little  thing.  She 
had  no  friends  or  relations  to  take  care  of  her,  but  she  was  quite  happy  and  con- 
tent. She  said,  when  she  got  into  the  carriage :  '  Tell  me  how  many  peojile  there 
are  in  the  carriage,  for  I  am  quite  blind,  and  can  see  nothing.'  Agentlcman  asked 
her  if  she  was  not  afraid.  '  No,'  she  said  ;  '  I  have  travelled  before,  and  I  trust 
in  God,  and  people  are  always  very  good  to  me.'  But  I  soon  found  out  the  reasi>n 
why  she  was  so  happy.  She  loved  Jesus  Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ  loved  her  ;  she 
had  sought  Jesus  Christ,  and  she  had  found  Him."  Darkness  a  cause  of  terror : — 
Arago  mentions  that  in  the  eclipse  of  1842,  at  Perpignan,  a  dog  which  was  kept 
from  food  for  twenty-four  hours  was  thrown  some  bread  just  before  the  "  totality  " 
of  the  eclipse  began.  The  dog  seized  the  loaf,  begun  to  devour  it  ravenously,  and 
then,  as  the  darkness  came  on,  dropped  it.  Not  until  the  sun  burst  forth  again  did 
the  poor  creature  return  to  its  food.  A  party  of  courtiers  of  Louis  XV. ,  too,  were 
once  gathered  around  Cassini  to  witness  an  eclipse  from  the  terrace  of  the  Paris 
observatory,  and  were  laughing  at  the  populace,  whose  cries  were  heard  as  the  light 
began  to  fade,  when,  as  the  unnatural  gloom  came  quickly  on,  silence  fell  on  them 
too,  the  panic  terror  striking  through  their  laughter.  (//.  0.  Mackey.)  Light  in 
darkness  : — God  couldn't  arrange  it  more  beautiful,"  said  a  poor  old  blind  man,  as 
he  sat  in  the  chimney-corner  of  his  cottage.  "  Arrange  what  ?  "  said  the  visitor. 
"Why,  I'm  as  blind  as  a  mole,  but  I  can  hear  well ;  and  my  old  woman  there," 
pointing  to  his  wife  in  the  other  corner,  "  is  as  deaf  as  a  post,  but  she  can  see  well. 
Could  God  Almighty  a'  done  it  better?  "  This  blind,  bright  saint  could  certainly 
see  beauty  in  God's  an-angcments  where  it  never  would  have  been  suspected  by  on- 
lookers. It  need  hardly  be  said  that  sightless  J.  revels  in  the  light  where  mere 
Bight-seers  would  grumble  at  the  darkness.  His  natural  blindness  seems  to  have 
given  a  quick,  keen  perception  of  his  spiritual  sight.  "  No  walls  around  me  now," 
he  says ;  "  I'm  never  hemmed  in.  It's  all  brightness.  Bless'e,  I'd  ten  times 
sooner  be  as  I  be,  than  have  my  sight,  and  not  see  my  Saviour  !  "  He  is — speaking 
after  the  manner  of  men — at  poverty's  door,  yet  he  has  luxurious  faith ;  and,  in 
truth,  his  bare  home  is  hard  by  the  jewelled  walls  of  the  pearly-gated  city.  Listen 
to  his  thankful,  contented  talk :  "  They  allows  the  old  woman  and  me  two  shillings 
and  niuepence,  and  two  loaves,  and  we  can  manage  on  that ;  and  what  more  do  we 
want  ?  "    (Sword  and  Trowel.) 

Vers.  24-2G.  Thou  must  give  us  also  sacrifices. — Lessons : — 1.  God's  instruments 
of  redemption  seek  not  only  liberty  of  persons,  but  of  means,  to  serve  Him.  2. 
Due  worship  and  true  sacrifice  to  God  are  the  scope  of  all  God's  redeemed  (ver.  25). 
8.  God's  ministers  must  be  resolute  for  all,  and  not  bate  a  jot  of  what  God  requires. 
Not  a  hoof.  4.  All  the  exactions  of  God's  instruments  must  be  aimed  at  God's 
service  truly.  5.  God's  servants  know  not  themselves,  but  depend  upon  His  dis- 
covery for  what  they  must  offer  to  Him  (ver.  20).  (G.Hitcilies,  B.D.)  The  reluctance 
with  which  men  yield  a  complete  obedience  to  the  imperative  claims  of  God  : — I.  The 

FACT  OF  THIS  RELrCTANCE  ON  THE  PABT  OF  lUN  TO  YIELD  COMPLETE  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE 

CLAIMS  OF  God.  1.  This  reluctance  is  seen  in  the  judgments  that  are  sent  to  over- 
come it.  2.  This  reluctance  is  seen  in  the  mercy  that  is  despised.  3.  This  reluc- 
tance is  seen  in  the  faithful  ministries  that  are  rejected.  4.  That  men  resist  these 
judgments,  &c.,  is  complete  evidence  of  their  great  reluctance  to  surrender  all  for 
Him.  (1)  This  reluctance  is  a  matter  of  revelation.  (2)  This  reluctance  is  a  matter 
of  history.     (3)  This  reluctance  is  a  matter  of  experience.     II.  The  reasons  of 

THIS  KELUCTANCE  ON  THE  PART  OF  MAN  TO  YIELD  COMPLETE  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  CLAIMS 

OF  God.  These  reasons  are  obvious.  1.  Depravity  of  nature.  2.  Pride  of  heart. 
3.  Selfishness  of  motive.  4.  Obstinacy  of  will.  III.  The  folly  of  this  reluc- 
tance  ON   THE   PART   OF   MAN   TO   YIELD   COMPLETE   OBEDIENCE   TO   THE   CLAIMS  OF  GOD. 

1.  Because  it  provokes  painful  judgments.  2.  Because  it  is  useless  to  contend  with 
God.    3.  Because  final  overthrow  is  its  certain  outcome.    Lessons :  1.  That  man 


CHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  177 

will  consent  to  any  terms  rather  than  yield  a  complete  submission  to  the  will  of 
God.  2.  That  God  will  only  be  satisfied  by  an  entire  surrender  to  His  will.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  M.A.)       The  way  in  wltich  men  endeavour  to  cotnjyromise  the  service  of  God  : — • 

I.  That  mex  endeavour  to  compromise  the  service  of  God  by  nomin-il  allegiakce. 

II.  That  men  endeavour  to  compromise  the  service  of  God  by  an  occasionaii 
performance  of  duty.  III.  That  men  endeavour  to  compromise  the  service  op 
God  by  a  public  profession  of  it  accompanied  with  private  reservations.  IV, 
That  men  endeavour  to  compromise  the  service  of  God  by  excluding  it  from 
their  worldly  pursuits.  Lessons :  1.  That  men  must  not  compromise  the  ser- 
vice of  God.  2.  That  ministers  must  warn  men  against  compromising  the  service 
of  God.  {Ibid.)  The  picture  of  an  unregenerate  soul : — I.  It  is  opposed  to  the 
service  of  God.  II.  It  is  loathto  part  with  its  evil  possessions.  III.  It  is  slow  to 
heed  the  voice  of  the  SERVANTS  of  truth.  {Ibid.)  Compromise;  or,  tPealth  left 
behind  in  Egi/pt : — "  Only  let  your  flocks  and  herds  be  stayed."  How  many  souls 
are  caught  in  this  snare  !  They  have  left  their  business,  their  work,  their  worldly 
interests,  down  in  Egypt.  They  cannot  be  "  very  far  away  "  in  such  case,  for  they 
must  needs  go  down  to  Egypt  to  attend  to  their  possessions.  "  Lay  not  up  for 
yourselves  treasures  upon  earth  "  ;  "  Make  not  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the 
lusts  thereof  "  (Matt.  iv.  9 ;  Rom.  xiii.  14).  These  are  words  that  need  to  be  con- 
sidered in  connection  with  this  last  snare  of  Satan.  I  think  when  Satan  sees  a 
Christian  go  out  of  Egypt  with  all  his  flocks  and  herds,  he  has  no  hope  of  getting 
him  back  again.  So  he  makes  a  last  stand  here  :  "  Keep  your  business  and  your 
religion  separate.  Give  yourself  to  God ;  but  do  not  consecrate  your  property." 
Now,  will  you  jnst  take  a  look  at  the  state  of  the  Christian  world  to-day.  Look  at 
the  wealth  of  Christians  in  London,  and  in  New  York,  and  over  the  whole  world. 
How  they  have  piled  it  up — thousands  upon  thousands,  heaps  upon  heaps  !  And 
where  is  it?  Surely  in  Egypt.  It  is  not  held  in  sacred  stewardship)  for  the  Lord. 
It  is  used  for  the  most  part  to  gratify  "the  lust  of  the  flesh,"  "  the  lust  of  the  eye," 
and  "  the  pride  of  life."  Look,  I  pray,  at  the  magnificence  of  the  residences,  the 
costliness  of  the  furniture,  and  the  expensiveness  and  luxury  of  the  equipage.  Go 
into  the  houses  of  the  wealthy  Egyptian  Christians,  and  behold  the  splendour  and 
costliness  of  their  entertainments  !  See  the  crowds  of  Egyptians  gathered  there 
to  enjoy  the  feasts  and  pleasures  that  are  provided  by  God's  people  with  the  pro- 
ceeds of  the  flocks  and  herds  that  should  be  used  in  His  service.  Again,  look  at 
the  condition  of  the  Lord's  work  the  world  over.  Consider  the  fewness  of  the 
number  of  missionaries  who  are  abroad !  Note  how  from  every  direction  the  cry 
comes  up  for  help  !  There  are  men  and  women  who  are  waiting  to  give  themselves 
to  the  work — to  forsake  home  and  country,  and  go  to  the  darkest  spots  of  heathen- 
dom ;  but  there  are  not  the  men  and  the  women  who  are  ready  to  spare  from  their 
hoards  the  money  to  send  and  support  them.  If  the  flocks  and  herds  were  out  of 
Egypt,  and  really  given  over  to  the  Lord  to  be  used  in  His  service,  the  world  could 
and  would  be  evangelized  in  less  than  five  years.  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Not 
an  hoof  be  left  behind. — Full  redemption  : — Now,  it  seems  to  me,  that  this  grand 
quarrel  of  old  is  but  a  picture  of  God's  continual  contest  with  the  powers  of 
darkness.  Evil  is  hard  in  dying  ;  it  will  not  readily  be  overcome.  But  this  is  the 
demand  of  God,  and  to  the  last  will  He  have  it.  "  All  My  people  "  ;  the  whole  of, 
every  one  of  them,  and  all  that  My  people  have  possessed,  all  shall  come  out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt.  Christ  will  have  the  whole  ;  He  will  not  be  contented  with  a  part, 
»ind  this  He  vows  to  accomplish.  "  Not  an  hoof  shall  be  left  behind."  I.  First, 
then,  Christ  will  have  the  whole  man.  In  His  people  whom  He  has  purchased 
with  His  blood  He  will  reign  without  a  rival.  No  sin  is  to  be  spared  ;  no  service 
shunned  ;  no  power  unconsecrated.  II.  This  is  equally  true  of  the  whole  Church 
as  of  the  whole  man — "Not  an  hoof  shall  be  left  behind."  When  I  come  to  the 
matter  of  redemption  it  seems  to  me  that  whatever  Christ's  design  was  in  dying, 
that  design  cannot  be  frustrated,  nor  by  any  means  disappointed.  All  that  His 
heavenly  Father  gave  Him  shall  come  to  Him.  III.  Jesus  Christ  will  not  only 
have  all  of  a  man,  and  all  the  men  He  bought,  but  He  will  have  all  that  ever 
belonged  to  all  these  men.  That  is  to  say,  all  that  Adam  lost  Christ  will  win 
back,  and  that  without  the  diminution  of  a  single  jot  or  tittle.  Not  an  inch  of 
Paradise  shall  be  given  up,  nor  even  a  handful  of  its  dust  resigneil.  Christ  will 
have  all,  or  else  He  will  have  none.  IV.  Christ  will  have  the  whole  earth, 
(C,  H.  Spurgeon.)  All  or  none;  or,  compromise  refused: — This  was  the  Divine 
policy  of  "  No  surrender,"  and  I  plead  for  it  with  you.  Satan  says,  "  Do  not  use 
your  property  for  God.     Do  not  use  your  talents  and  your  abilities  ;  espe  cially  do 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

not  use  your  money  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  Keep  that  for  yourself.  You  will  want  it 
one  of  these  days,  perhaps.  Keep  it  for  your  own  enjoyment.  Live  to  God  in 
other  thing's,  but,  as  to  that,  live  to  yourself."  Now,  a  genuine  Christian  says, 
"  When  I  gave  myself  to  the  Lord  I  gave  Him  every  tiling  I  had.  From  the  crown 
of  my  head  to  the  soul  of  my  foot  I  am  the  Lord's.  He  bids  me  provide  things 
honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  and  care  for  my  household ;  and  so  I  shall ;  but 
yet  I  am  not  my  own,  for  I  am  bought  with  a  price  ;  and  therefore  it  becomes  me 
to  feel  that  everything  1  have,  or  ever  shall  have,  is  a  dedicated  thing,  and  belongs 
unto  the  Lord,  that  I  may  use  it  as  His  steward,  not  as  if  it  were  mine,  but  at  His 
discretion  and  at  His  bidding.  I  cannot  leave  my  substance  to  be  the  devil's.  That 
must  come  with  me,  and  must  be  all  my  Lord's,  for  His  it  is  even  as  I  am." 
(Ibid.)  Every  hoof  to  he  brought  out : — God's  will  is  that  we  should  be  com- 
pletely set  free.     This  will  be  accomplished.     Eepeated  conflicts  first.     I.  The 

TRUTH    SUGGESTEn    THAT    OCR   DELIVERANCE    WILL    BE    COMPLETE.       1.    Our  naturCS  wiU 

be  entirely  freed  from  the  thraldom  of  sin.  Every  power  of  body,  mind,  and  soul 
will  ultimately  escape  from  the  dominion  of  evil.  2.  Our  families  shall  be  saved. 
3.  The  whole  Church  shall  be  saved.  II.  The  encourageiient  tdat  may  be 
DERIVED  TRoji  THIS  TRUTH.  We  need  encouragement.  The  bondage  is  often 
bitter,  and  hope  fails.  The  enslavers  powerful  and  the  chains  strong.  But  a 
deliverance,  complete,  triumphant,  and  eternal,  is  sure.  This  ought  to  lead  us — 
1.  To  live  in  the  expectation  of  perfect  freedom  from  all  evil.  2.  To  continue  to 
strive,  believe,  and  pray  for  it.  3.  To  pray  and  labour  zealously  for  the  salvation 
of  our  families.  4.  To  sympathize  with  and  aid  the  weak  and  lowly  in  the  Church. 
{W.  O.  Lille  J/.)  We  know  not  with  what  we  must  serve  the  Lord  until  we  come 
thither. — Going  forth  to  serve  God: — I.  Some  things  are  uncertain  in  the  fdtuke. 
1.  The  continuance  of  our  life  on  earth.  2.  The  new  circumstances  in  which  we 
shall  be  placed.  3.  The  particular  duties  which  will  be  required  of  us.  II.  Some 
THINGS  are  certain  IN  THE  FUTURE.  1.  The  obli;,'ation  of  Bcrvice.  2.  Special 
opportunities  of  service.  3.  Adequate  directions  for  services.  III.  Some  things 
ARE  necessary  FOR  THK  FUTURE.  1.  Diligput  preparation  of  heart.  2.  Humble 
dependence  on  God;  3.  Hopeful  anticipation  of  better  things  to  come.  (B. 
Dale,  M.A.)  The  Lord's  stewards: — 1.  The  teaching  is  that  not  a  part,  but 

THE  WHOLE,  OF  OUR  POSSESSIONS  MUST  GO  OUT  OF  Eo'iTT  WITH  US.  "  There  shall 
not  an  hoof  be  left  behind."  Is  that  so  with  you  ?  Are  you  conscious  that  all 
your  possessions  are  solemnly  consecrated  to  the  Lord,  withdrawn  from  all 
Egyptian  unrighteousness  and  sinful  self-indulgence  ?  Or  are  you  using  your 
wealth  as  any  other  worldly  man  might  use  it  ?  II.  Notice,  th.\t  it  is  more  than 
TAKING  wealth  ON  TO  RELIGIOUS  GROUND.  Is  is  distinctly  taking  it  out  for  the  pur- 
pose of  serving  the  Lord.  Not  that  the  Lord  is  to  have  a  portion  ;  but  that  it  is  all 
held  at  His  call,  for,  says  Moses,  "We  know  not  with  what  we  must  serve  the  Lord." 
It  may  be  that  He  will  want  few,  it  may  be  that  He  will  want  many  sacrifices.  We 
must  hold  all  subject  to  His  call.  This  is  a  high  standard  to  hold  up  before  us  ; 
but  it  is  without  question  the  true  one.  I  do  not  believe  God  grudges  to  His 
children  any  comfort  which  may  be  had  out  of  wealth  honestly  and  righteously  won 
from  the  world  ;  but  without  doubt  the  Lord  does  insist  that  the  necessities  of  His 
service  must  first  be  met,  before  we  can  indulge  ourselves.  How  far  we  must 
allow  ourselves  to  go  in  self-provision  is  a  question  that  can  be  easily  settled  by 
the  man  or  woman  who  is  honestly  out-and-out  —spirit,  soul,  body,  and  property — 
for  the  Lord,     (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D. ) 

Vers.  28,  29.  I  will  see  thy  face  no  more. — Pharaoh  and  Moses ;  or,  contrasted 
characters : — I.  In  this  world  often  the  worst  of  men  come  in  contact  with 
THE  BEST  OF  MEN.  1.  Pharaoh,  an  idolater,  the  greatest  of  tyrants,  a  signal  monu- 
ment of  God's  displeasure ;  Moses,  a  true  worshipper  of  the  true  and  living  God, 
the  meekest  of  men,  an  object  of  God's  highest  favour.  2.  Such  opposite  characters 
as  these  come  in  contact  in  families,  in  schools,  in  political  and  social  circles.     11. 

It  is  possible  that  the  worst  of  men  may  come  in  contact  with    THE  BEST  WITHOUT 

BEING  AT  ALL  BENEFITED.  1.  Think  of  the  noblc  example  which  Moses  set  before 
Pharaoh.  (1)  Disinterestedness.  (2)  Meekness.  (3)  Holiness.  2.  Think  of  the 
important  truths  which  Moses  taught  Pharaoh.  (1)  The  existence  of  one  true 
God  alone.  (2)  That  this  world  is  under  God's  control.  (3)  That  Pharaoh  was 
accountable  to  God.  (4)  That  God  was  ready  to  forgive  those  who  had  rebelled 
against  Him.      III.  When   the   worst  of  men  come   in   contact  with  the  best 

WITHOUT   BEING   BENEFITED   THE   PASTING   IS    DEEPLY    AFFECTING.        {J.    G.    Roberts.) 


CHAP.  X.]  EXODUS.  179 

The  intercourse  of  life : — I.  That  good  men  ake  often  brought  into  contact  with 
BAD  MEN.  1.  Irrespective  of  moral  character.  2.  Irrespective  of  meutal  tempera- 
ment. 3.  Irrespective  of  social  position.  And  why  ?  1.  That  men  may  be 
imbued  with  the  ideas  of  a  common  manhood.  2.  That  class  prejudices  may  be 
destroyed.  3.  That  charity  may  be  developed.  4.  That  life  may  become  a  unity. 
II.  That  when  good  men  are  brought  into  contact  with  b.ad  men  the  meeting 
SHOULD  BE  education.!!;  TO  BOTH.  1.  The  companionship  of  the  good  should  be 
influential  to  the  moral  improvement  of  the  bad.  2.  The  companionship  of  the 
bad  should  inspire  the  good  with  feelings  of  gratitude  and  humility.  Good  men 
might   have   been   far  otherwise.      III.  That  when  good  men  are  brought  into 

CONTACT  WITH  BAD  MEN  THE  MEETING  IS  NOT  ALWAYS  VALUED  AS  IT  OUGHT  TO  BE, 
AND    ITS    OPPORTUNITY    FOR    GOOD    IS    OFTEN    UNIMPROVED.       LCSSOHS  :    1.    That     a    gOOd 

life  is  a  heavenly  ministry.  2.  That  good  men  should  seek  to  influence  the  bad 
aright.  3.  That  good  men  may  learn  lessons  from  wicked  lines.  {J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.)  The   way    in   which  hardened  sinners  treat  the  messengers  of  God  : — 1. 

With   contempt.      2.  With  threatenings  of   evil.      3.  With   banishment.     (Ihid.) 
The  way  in  which  mes.^engers  of  God  treat  hardened  sinners; — 1.  They  scorn  their 
taunts.     2.  They  impart  to  the  language  of  the  wicked  a  deeper  signiticance  than 
was  intended.     3.  They  are  courageous.     4.  Tbey  bid  them  a  sad  farewell.     (Ibid.) 
Persistent  obstinacy : — The  obstinacy  of  Pharaoh  appears  odious  to  us  ;  but,  alas  ! 
the  same  obstinacy  is  found  in  all  sinners.     It  is  seldom  we  meet  with  those  who 
openly  say,  "  I  will  not  be  converted,  I  will  do  nothing  for  God,  I  mock  Him,  I 
brave  Him,  I  defy  Him."     They  do  not  use  language  such  as  this,  but  yet  they 
cherish  some  secret  sin.     Among  the  wicked  boys  who  are  unfortunately  to  be  found 
in  most  large  towns,  you  will  scarcely  meet  oue,  even  let  him  perhaps  be  a  thief, 
who  would  not  say,  "  I  do  not  wish  to  die  an  enemy  of  God'' ;  but,  then,  in  the 
meantime  he  cherishes  his  sin.     What  is  still  more  sad,  we  sometimes  hear  even 
serious  persons  say,  "  I  wish  to  do  the  will  of  God,  but  cannot  cure  myself  of  this 
fault ;  it  is  stronger  than  I.     I  do  not  wish  to  lose  my  soul,  I  wish  to  obey  the 
commands  of  God  ;  but  I  cannot  give  up  the  society  which  is  called  bad,  I  cannot 
give  up  such  and  such  a  habit  which  I  am  told  is  a  sinful  one,  I  cannot  make  those 
sacrifices  which  I  am  told  are  necessary ;  I  will  not  do  it."     And  it  is  thus  that 
people  trifle  with  eternity  !     Let  us  take  heed  ;  we  must  give  ourselves  to  God — 
wholly  and  without  reserve.     He  will  have  no  divided  service.     (Prof.  Gaussen.) 
Moses^  reply  to  Pharaoh  : — Eemark  the  solemn  and  terrible  reply  of  Moses,  "  Thou 
hast  spoken  well,  I  will  see  thy  face  again  no  more."    To  understand  the  meaning 
of  this  answer  we  must  remark  that  it  does  not  finish  with  this  verse,  but  that  it 
has  a  continuation  in  the  succeeding  chapter.     It  contains  a  terrible  threat  to  those 
who  despise  and  reject  the  word  of  God.     This  was  to   be  the  last  time   that 
Pharaoh  should  hear  the  voice  of  the  man  of  God,  who  had  so  often  warned  him 
and  prayed  for  him.     For  him  no  more  time  was  to  be  given.     It  was  finished ; 
the  measure  of  his  iniquities  was  filled  up  ;  the  wrath  of  God  was  to  come  upon 
him  to  the  uttermost.     "  Then  Moses  went  out  from  Pharaoh  in  great  anger." 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  holy  anger,  for  the  Bible  says,  "  Be  ye  angry,  and- sin  not ; 
let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath."     Our  Lord  Himself  was  indignant  with 
the  buyers  and  sellers  in  the  Temple.     And  He  was  "  much  displeased  "  with  His 
disciples  when  they  rebuked  those  who  brought  young  children  to  Him.     He  looked 
round  about  with  anger  on  those  who  wished  to  hinder  Him  from  curing  a  man  on 
the  Sabbath  day.     The  anger  of  Moses  was  caused  by  the  obstinacy  and  ingratitude 
of  Pharaoh,  and  by  the  insulting  manner  in  which  he  braved  his  Creator  and  his 
Judge.     The  meaning  of  his  terrible  reply  was  this,  "  Thou  hast  rejected  the  word 
of  God  ;  the  woid  of  God  rejects  thee.     Thou  dost  not  choose  any  more  to  see  the 
face  of  the  sei  vant  of  the  Lord,  who  has  come  ten  times  to  warn  thee  in  His  name. 
Well,  thou  shalt  see  his  face  no  more.     The  word  of  God  has  been  brought  to  thee, 
but  the  word  of  God  will  leave  thee.     The  grace  of  God  has  been  offered  thee ;  thou 
hast  despised  it,  therefore  now  will  the  grace  of  God  leave  thee.     Thou  hast  chosen 
to  ruin  thyself,  therefore  thou  wilt  ruin  thyself."     How  terrible  is  this  !     We  must 
all  die.     Death  is  very  formidable:  it  is  very  sad  and  solemn  when  we  mourn  for 
others ;  but  thei  e  is  a  remedy  for  this  sorrow  in  a  loving  Saviour,  and  in  the  know- 
ledge that  thtne  is  a  home  where  all  the  children  of  God  shall  meet  each  other 
again.     What  is  really  much  more  terrible  than  death  is  this  sentence,  "  Thou 
shalt  see  My  face  no  more."    (Ibid.) 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  xL. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Ver.  1.  One  pla^e  more. — One  more  plague: — I.  Heaven  will  tekkibly  plague 
THE  SINNER.  Aiul  the  one  plague  more  to  come  upon  the  impenitent  sinner  will  be 
awful,  it  will  be  just ;  it  will  be  the  natural  outcome  of  a  wicked  life,  and  will  be  inflicted 
by  God.  II.  It  shows  that  heaven  has  a  great  resodrce  of  plagues  with  which 
TO  TORMENT  THE  SINNER.  The  material  universe,  in  its  every  realm,  is  the  resource  ol 
heaven  for  the  plaguing  of  men.  Men  ask  how  God  can  punish  the  sinner  in  the 
world  to  come.  He  will  not  be  at  a  loss  for  one  plague  more  whereby  to  torment  the 
finally  impenitent.    How  foolish  of  man  to  provoke  the  anger  of  God  !    III.  It  shows 

THAT  HEAVEN  GIVES  AMPLE  WARNING  OF  THE  PLAGOES  IT  WILL  INFLICT  UPON  THE  SIIfNER. 

Men  do  not  walk  ignorantly  to  hell.  IV.  It  shows  that  heaven  has  a  merciful 
i.VTENTioN  EVEN  IN  THE  INFLICTION  OP  ITS  PLAGUES.  It  designed  tile  moral  submi-sioa 
of  Pharaoh  by  the  threatened  plague,  and  also  the  freedom  of  Israel.  And  so  God 
plagues  men  that  He  may  save  them,  ajid  those  whom  they  hold  in  the  dire  bondage 
of  moral  evil.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  One  effort  more  : — The  old  astronomer  with  hia 
trusty  glass  is  searching  the  heavens  for  a  star,  "  a  lost  star,"  he  says.  "  It  onght 
to  be  there  !  "  he  murmers,  looking  along  the  jewelled  lines  of  some  constellation. 
Not  finding  his  diamond,  he  shakes  his  head,  and  is  about  to  give  up  the  search. 
"  Just  one  trial  more  !  "  he  murmers.  He  directs  his  glass  towards  the  sky,  and 
lo,  there  it  is !  Out  of  the  dark  depths  of  space  flashes  the  pure,  bright  face  of  the 
lost  star.  "  Found  !  "  he  cries.  "  It  was  one  effort  more  that  did  it."  Yes,  it  is 
true  in  nature  and  in  the  world  of  grace  that  it  is  the  one  efifort  more  that  often 
restores  to  its  orbit  the  lost  star.  It  was  the  one  more  reaching  out  of  the  world  of 
Christian  sympathy  that  by  a  friendly  tap  and  a  kindly  word  arrested  a  drunkard 
and  gave  to  temperance  a  star  orator,  Gough.  A  Sunday-school  teacher  touches  on 
the  slioulder  and  kindly  asks  a  young  man  about  his  soul,  and  this  one  effort  more 
of  the  Church  of  God  brought  Dwight  L.  Moody  to  the  Saviour.  God  uses  varied 
instruments  : — One  day,  seeing  some  men  in  a  field,  I  made  my  way  to  them,  and 
found  they  were  cutting  up  the  trunk  of  an  old  tree.  I  said,  "  That  is  slow  work  ; 
why  do  you  not  split  it  asunder  with  the  beetle  and  wedges  "  ?  "  Ah,  this  wood  is 
so  cross-grained  and  stubborn  that  it  requires  something  shai-per  than  wedges  to  get 
it  to  pieces."  "  Yes,"  I  replied  ;  "  and  that  is  the  way  God  is  obliged  to  deal  with 
obstinate,  cross-grained  sinners  ;  if  they  will  not  yield  to  one  of  His  instruments, 
you  may  depend  on  it  He  will  make  use  of  another."     (G.  Grir/g.) 

Vers.  4-10.  All  the  firstborn  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  die. -T^e  last  plague 
threatened: — It  was  to  be. — I.  Solemn  in  its  advent.  "About  midnight."  II. 
Fatal  in  its  issue.  "All  the  firstborn  .  .  .  shall  die."  III.  Comprehensive  in 
its  design.  "From  the  firstborn  of  Pharaoh,"  cSrc.  IV.  Heartrending  in  its  cry. 
"None  like  it."  V.  Discriminating  in  its  iufliction.  "The  Lord  doth  put  a 
difference,"  &c.  Piety  is  the  best  protection  against  woe.  (•/.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
A  contrast : — 1.  The  wicked  crying — the  good  quiet.  2.  The  wicked  dead— the  good 
living.  3.  The  wicked  frightened — the  good  peaceful.  4.  The  wicked  helpless — the 
good  protected.  {Ibid.)  Separating  the  precious  from  the  vile  : — I.  The  difference. 
1  Eternal.  2.  Most  ancient.  Ordained  of  God  from  before  foundation  of  world.  3. 
Vital.  An  essential  distinction  of  nature  between  righteous  and  wicked.  4.  This 
difference  in  nature  is  followed  by  a  difference  in  God's  judicial  treatment  of  the  two 
classes.  5.  This  distinction  is  carried  out  in  providence.  To  the  righteous  man  every 
providence  is  a  blessing.  To  the  sinner  all  things  work  together  for  evil.  6.  This 
difference  will  come  out  more  distinctly  on  the  judgment  day.  II.  Where  is  this 
difference  seen  ?  1.  In  the  Temple.  2.  In  the  whole  life.  3.  In  time  of  temptation. 
4.  In  the  hour  of  death.  III.  Why  should  this  difference  be  seen  ?  Put  your 
finger  on  any  prosperous  page  in  the  Church's  history,  and  I  will  find  a  little  mar- 
ginal note  reading  thus  :  "  In  this  age  men  could  readily  see  where  the  Church  began 
and  where  the  world  ended."  Never  were  there  good  times  when  the  Church  and 
the  world  were  joined  in  marriage  with  one  another.  But  though  this  were  sufficient 
argument  for  keeping  the  Church  and  the  world  distinct,  there  are  many  others. 
The  more  the  Church  is  distinct  from  the  world  in  her  acts  and  in  her  maxims,  the 
more  true  is  her  testimony  for  Christ,  and  the  more  potent  is  her  witness  against 
sin.  We  are  sent  into  this  world  to  testify  against  evils  ;  but  if  we  dabble  in  them 
ourselves,  where  is  our  testimony?  If  we  ourselves  be  found  faulty,  we  are  false 
witnesses ;  we  are  not  sent  of  God  ;  our  testimony  is  of  none  effect.    (C  H.  Sptirgeon.) 


CHAP.  XI.]  EXODUS.  181 

The  Church  and  the  icorW  .-—Originally  there  was  "no  difference"  between  the 
Egyptians  and  Israel ;  both  were  descended  from  one  source,  both  were  tainted  with 
sin.  So  too,  originally,  there  was  no  difference  between  the  Chnrch  and  the  world. 
St.  Paul  enforces  this  "(1)  as  between  Jew  and  Gentile  (Eom.  x.  12)  ;  {'2)  as  between 
individual  members  of  the  human  family  (Rom.  iii  22).  Consider — I.  Tue  nature 
OF  THE  DiFFEiiENCE.  There  can  be  no  doubt  but  there  was  a  difference — that  the 
Lord  "  put  "  one — between  the  Egyptians  and  Israel,  and  "  that  the  Lord  doth  put  " 
one  between  the  world  and  the  Church.  What  is  this  difference  '?  God's  choice. 
He  chose  Israel,  He  did  not  choose  the  Egyptians ;  He  has  chosen  the  Church,  He 
has  not  chosen  the  world.  Herein  lies  the  "  difference  " ;  and  because  it  is  not  a 
visible  or  even,  in  itself,  a  demonstrable  one,  the  world  now,  as  the  Egyptians  then, 
decline  to  believe  in  it,  and  a  sign  becomes  in  some  sense  necessary'.  II.  The 
EEASON  FOR  THE  DIFFERENCE.  Not  merit  on  Israel's  part,  or  sin  on  Egypt's  part; 
but — 1.  God's  love  for  Israel's  fathers  (Deut.  iv,  37).  2.  God's  oath  (based  upon 
Cod's  love)  to  Israel's  fathers  (Deut.  vii.  7,  8).  So  the  Church  was  chosen  because  God 
loved  her ;  though  why  God  loved  her,  or  how  He  loved  her,  in  a  certain  sense  we 
cannot  tell.  III.  The  sign  of  the  difference.  As  said  above,  Pharaoh  declined 
to  believe  in  the  difference,  or,  whilst  tacitly  acknowledging  it,  refused  to  act  iu 
accordance  with  it.  A  sign  was  given,  in  order  that  he  might  "  know  how  that  the 
Lord  doth  put  a  difference  between  the  Egyptians  and  Israel."  That  sign  consisted 
in  the  triumphant  exodus  of  Israel  without  casualty  of  any  kind,  as  contrasted  with 
the  family  distress  and  national  disaster  which  were  about  to  happen  to  the  Egyp- 
tians. Observe  that  the  deliverance  was  a  sign  of  the  difference,  not  the  difference 
itself.  So  salvation,  in  the  ordinary  but  very  partial  sense  of  deliverance  from  future 
punishment,  will  be  but  a  "  sign"  and  a  consequence  of  the  choice  which  God  has 
already  made,  of  the  "difference  "  which  the  Lord  has  already  "put";  a  choice  and  a 
•'  difference  "  about  the  existence  of  which  the  world  is  sceptical,  but  the  reality  of 
which  all  will  be  forced  to  acknowledge  when  the  sign  is  given.  {E.  Armatroiuj  Hall, 
M.A.)  The  importance  of  the  firstborn  : — The  importance  of  the  firstborn  may 
be  thus  explained :  the  firstborn  naturally  enjoyed  both  precedence  and  pre- 
eminence over  the  rest,  he  was  the  firstling  of  his  father's  strength  (Gen.  xlix.3), 
the  first-fruit  of  his  mother.  As  the  firstborn,  he  stood  at  the  head  of  the  others, 
and  was  destined  to  be  the  chief  of  whatever  family  might  be  formed  by  the  succeed- 
ing births.  As  he  stood  at  the  head  of  the  whole  he  represented  the  entire  nation 
of  the  Egyptians.  Hence  the  power  which  slew  all  the  firstborn  in  Egypt  was 
exhibited  as  a  power  which  could  slay  all  that  were  born  then,  and,  in  the  slaughter 
of  the  whole  of  the  firstborn,  the  entire  body  of  the  people  were  ideally  slain.  (J. 
U.  Kurtz,  D.D. )  The  Church  and  the  world  .-—I.  The  nature  of  the  difference. 
1.  Not  a  difference  of  understanding.  2.  Not  a  difference  of  physical  development. 
3.  Not  even  a  difference  in  moral  nalm-e.  The  Israelites  were  quite  as  prone  to  evil, 
lust,  sin,  idolatry,  as  the  Egyptians.  4.  The  difference  was  that  God  chose  Israel  to 
be  His  people,  He  took  them  for  His  own,  hedged  them  by  special  regulations,  laws, 
discipline.  So  He  has  chosen  the  Church.  II.  The  reasons  for  the  difference. 
1.  That  God  might  have  a  faithful  people  even  in  this  world  of  sin.  2.  That  Christ 
might  not  die  in  vain.  3.  That  God  might  fulfil  His  promise  to  the  jiatriarchs. 
III.  TfiE  SIGN  OF  the  difference.  Dclivcrance  from  the  sin  and  bondage  of  the 
■world.  (Homilist.)  Get  thee  out,  and  all  the  people  that  foUow  thee.  A  people's 
efforts  for  freedom  successful: — "We  learn  from  Professor  Bischoff  that  the  steam  of 
a  hot  spring  at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  although  its  temperature  is  only  from  133"  to  167° 
r.,  has  converted  the  surface  of  some  blocks  of  black  marble  into  a  doughy  mass. 
He  conceives,  therefore,  that  steam  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  having  a  tempera- 
ture equal  to  or  even  greater  than  the  melting  point  of  lava,  and,  having  an  elasticity 
of  which  even  Papin's  digester  can  give  but  a  faint  idea,  may  convert  rocks  into 
liquid  matter.  These  wonderful  facts  might  suggest  useful  thoughts  to  the  desjiots 
of  the  world.  Despotism  interdicts  the  expression  of  political  convictions,  and  seeks 
to  bury  them  under  the  adamantean  weight  of  oppressive  decrees  and  colossal  cruelty. 
But  it  is  an  unerring  moral  law  that  the  warm  aspirations  of  a  virtuous  people  shall 
— like  the  subtle  subterranean  gases — arise  to  freedom,  and,  despite  all  impediments, 
dissolve  in  due  time  even  the  hard  and  hoary  foundations  of  injustice.  {Scientifia 
Jllust7'ativns.) 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn 


CHAPTEE  XII. 

Vees.  1,  2.  The  be^nning  of  montlis. — A  new  start : — I.  The  idea  of  a  new 
start  is  natur.\lly  attkactive  to  all  of  us.  We  are  fatigued,  we  are  dis- 
satisfied, and  justly  so,  with  the  time  past  of  our  lives.  We  long  for  a  gift  of 
amnesty  and  oblivion.  II.  There  ake  senses  ln  which  this  is  impossible.  The 
continuity  of  life  cannot  be  broken.  There  is  a  continuity,  a  unity,  an  identity, 
which  annihilation  only  could  destroy.  III.  "  The  beginning  of  months"  is  made 
so  by  an  exodus.  Eedemption  is  the  gkoundwork  of  the  new  life.  If  there  is  in 
any  of  us  a  real  desire  for  change,  we  must  plant  our  feet  firmly  on  redemption. 
IV.  When  we  get  out  of  Egypt,  we  must  remember  that  there  is  still  Sinai  in 
FRONT,  with  its  tiidnderings  AND  VOICES.  We  have  to  be  schooled  by  processes  not 
joyous  but  grievous.  These  processes  cannot  be  hurried,  they  must  take  time. 
Here  we  must  expect  everything  that  is  changeful,  and  unresting,  and  unreposeful, 
within  as  without.  But  He  who  has  promised  will  perform.  He  who  has  redeemed 
will  save.  He  who  took  charge  will  also  bring  through.  (Dean  Vautjhan.)  The 
firat  month  of  the  year  : — I.  The  first  month  of  the  year  is  a  good  time  fob  be- 
LiGiors  contemplation  and  devotion.  Then  the  flight  of  time,  the  events  of  life, 
and  the  mortality  of  man,  may  all  furnish  topics  for  reflection.  Then  especially 
should  the  Passover  be  celebrated,  the  blood  of  Christ  anew  be  sprinkled  on  the 
soul ;  and  in  this  spirit  of  trust  in  the  Saviour  should  the  year  begin.     II.  The 

FIRST  MONTH  OF  THE  YEAR  IS  EVENTFUL  IN  THE  HISTORY   OF   tNDIVIDUAL  AND  COLLECTI\'E 

LIFE.  How  many  souls,  awakened  by  the  circumstances  of  life,  have  been  led  to 
the  Cross  at  this  solemn  period?  What  we  are  then,  we  are  likely  to  remain 
throughout  the  year ;  we  then  get  an  impulse  for  good  or  evil  which  will  affect  our 
moral  character  to  the  end.  The  first  month  is  the  keynote  of  the  year's  moral 
life.  It  is  the  roufih  sketch  of  the  soul's  life  for  the  year.  We  should  therefore  seek 
to  observe  it  unto  the  Lord.  III.  The  first  month  of  the  year  is  important  in  its 
KELATioN  TO  THE  COMMERCIAL  PROSPECTS  OF  MEN.  The  ucw  year  may  mark  the 
advent  of  new  energy,  or  it  may  witness  the  continuance  of  the  old  indolence. 
Lessons  :  1.  That  the  ordering  of  months  and  of  years  is  of  God.  2.  That  the  first 
month  must  remind  us  of  the  advent  of  the  Saviour.  3.  That  the  first  month  must 
be  consecrated  by  true  devotion.  4.  That  the  Church  must  pay  some  attention  to 
the  calendar  of  the  Christian  year.  5.  That  God  usually  by  His  ministers  makes 
known  His  mind  to  His  Church.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  hfgiiming  of  months  : — 
I  want  to  bring  to  your  mind  this  fact,  that,  just  as  the  people  of  Israel  when  God 
gave  them  the  Passover  had  a  complete  shifting  and  changing  of  all  their  dates,  and 
began  their  year  on  quite  a  different  day,  so  when  God  gives  to  His  people  to  eat  the 
spiritual  passover  there  takes  place  in  their  chronology  a  very  wonderful  change. 
Saved  men  and  women  date  from  the  dawn  of  their  true  life  ;  not  from  their  first 
birthday,  but  from  the  day  wherein  they  were  born  again  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
entered  into  the  knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  spiritual  things.  I.  First,  then,  let  us 
DESCRIBE  THIS  REMARKABLE  EVENT,  which  was  heuceforth  to  staud  at  the  head  of  the 
Jewish  year,  and,  indeed,  at  the  commencement  of  all  Israelitish  chronology.  1. 
1.  This  event  was  an  act  of  salvation  by  blood.  The  law  demands  death — 
"  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  Christ,  my  Lord,  has  died  in  my  stead  :  as  it 
is  written,  "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  Such 
a  sacrifice  is  more  than  even  the  most  rigorous  law  could  demand.  "  Christ  our 
Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us."  Therefore  do  we  sit  securely  within  doors, 
desiring  no  guard  without  to  drive  away  the  destroyer;  for,  when  God  sees  the 
blood  of  Jesus  He  will  pass  over  us.  2.  Secondly,  that  night  they  received  refresh- 
ment from  the  lamb.  Being  saved  by  its  blood,  the  believing  households  sat  down 
and  fed  upon  the  lamb.  It  was  a  solemn  feast,  a  meal  of  mingled  hope  and 
mystery.  Do  you  remember  when  first  you  fed  upon  Christ,  when  your  hungry 
spirit  enjoyed  the  first  morsel  of  that  food  of  the  soul?  It  was  dainty  fare,  was 
it  not  ?  3.  The  third  event  was  the  purification  of  their  houses  from  leaven,  for 
that  was  to  go  in  a  most  important  way  side  by  side  with  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  and  the  eating  of  the  lamb.  You  cannot  feed  on  Christ  and  at  the  same 
time  hold  a  lie  in  your  right  hand  by  vain  confidence  in  yourself,  or  by  love  of 
sin.  Self  and  sin  must  go.  This  month  is  the  beginning  of  months,  the  first 
month  of  the  year  to  us,  when  the  Spirit  of  truth  purges  out  the  spirit  of 
falsehood.     4.  A  fourth  point  in  the  Passover  is  not  to  be  forgotten.    On  the  Pass- 


CHAP,  sn.]  EXODUS.  183 

over  night  there  came,  as  the  result  of  the  former  things,  a  wonderful,  j^lorious,  and 
mighty  deliverance.  "  This  month,"  etc.  II.  Now,  secondly,  I  want  to  mention 
THE  VAKiETiES  OF  ITS  KECCKKENCE  auiong  US  at  tliis  day.  1.  The  first  i-ecunence  is 
of  course  on  the  jDersoual  salvation  of  each  one  of  us.  The  whole  of  this  chapter 
was  transacted  in  your  heart  and  mine  when  first  we  knew  the  Lord.  2.  But  then 
it  happens  again  in  a  certain  sense  when  the  man's  house  is  saved.  Eemember, 
this  was  a  family  business.  A  family  begins  to  live  in  the  highest  sense  when,  as  a 
family,  without  exception,  it  has  all  been  redeemed,  all  sprinkled  with  the  blood, 
all  made  to  feed  on  Jesus,  all  purged  from  sin,  and  all  set  at  liberty  to  go  out  of  the 
domains  of  sin,  bound  for  the  kingdom.  3.  Extend  the  thought — it  was  not  only  a 
family  ordinance,  but  it  was  for  all  the  tribes  of  Israel.  There  were  many  families, 
but  in  every  house  the  passover  was  sacrificed.  Would  it  not  be  a  grand  thing  if 
you  that  employ  large  numbers  of  men  should  ever  be  able  to  gather  all  together 
and  hopefully  say,  "  I  trust  that  all  these  understand  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood, 
and  all  feed  upon  Christ."  III.  And  now  I  come  to  snow  in  what  light  this  date 
IS  TO  BE  REGARDED,  if  it  has  occuiTed  to  us  in  the  senses  I  have  mentioned. 
Primarily,  if  it  has  occurred  in  the  first  sense  to  us  personally  :  what  about  it  then  ? 
1.  Why  the  day  in  which  we  first  knew  the  Saviour  as  the  Paschil  Lamb  should 
always  be  the  most  honourable  day  that  has  ever  dawned  upon  us.  Prize  the  work 
of  grace  beyond  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt.  2.  This  date  is  to  be  regarded  as  the 
beginning  of  life.  Let  your  conversion  be  the  burial  of  the  old  existence,  and  as' for 
that  which  follows' after,  take  cai-e  that  you  make  it  real  life,  worthy  of  the  grace 
which  has  quickened  you.  3.  Our  life,  beginning  as  it  does  at  our  spiritual  pass- 
over,  and  at  our  feeding  upon  Clirist,  we  ought  always  to  regard  our  conversion  as 
a  festival  and  remember  it  with  praise.  {C.  H.  S2)iirgeon.)  Tlie  beginning  of 
days : — If  you  have  no  such  spiritual  new  year's  day,  now  is  a  good  time  to  secure 
one.  Says  old  Thomas  Fuller  :  "  Lord,  I  do  discover  a  fallacy,  whereby  I  have 
long  deceived  mys-elf,  which  is  this  :  I  have  desired  to  begin  my  amendment  from 
my  birthday,  or  from  the  first  day  of  the  year,  or  from  some  eminent  festival,  that 
so  my  repentance  might  bear  some  remarkable  date.  But  when  those  days  were 
come,  I  have  adjourned  my  amendment  to  some  other  time.  Thus,  whilst  I  could 
not  agi'ee  with  myself  when  to  start,  I  have  almost  lost  the  runiiing  of  the  race.  I 
am  resolved  thus  to  befool  myself  no  longer.  I  see  no  day  like  to-day.  .  .  .  Grant, 
therefore,  that  to-day  I  may  hear  Thy  voice.  And  if  this  day  be  remarkable  in 
itself  for  nothing  else,  give  me  to  make  it  memorable  in  my  soul ;  thereupon, 
by  Thy  assistance,  beginning  the  reformation  of  my  life."  Let  this  day  be 
the  beginning  of  months,  the  first  month  of  the  year  to  you.  {H.  C.  'frumbiiU.) 
The  lessons  of  time  : — 1.  Time  gives  birth  to  actions.  2.  God  ordains  that 
certain  periods  of  life  shall  determine  others  (Luke  xix.  4i).  3.  There  is  an 
extension  of  man's  trial.  One  chance  more.  4.  Procrastination  ends  destruc- 
tively. Not  only  thief  of  time,  but  also  hardener  of  men's  hearts.  5.  Time 
will  end.  6.  The  issues  of  time  will  last  forever.  (British  Weekly. )  Turning 
over  a  new  leaf : — The  time  has  come  for  turning  over  a  new  leaf.  As  the  town 
clock  struck  midnight  of  the  last  day  of  the  old  year  divers  and  sundry  resolutions 
which  had  lain  dormant  a  long  time,  waiting  for  the  New  Year  to  ring  its  chimes, 
came  forth  into  new  life.  They  had  long  had  an  existence,  these  new  resolutions 
had,  for  in  reality  they  are  not  new  at  all,  but  quite  venerable  ;  for  on  the  first  of 
January  of  many  a  past  year  they  have  been  brought  to  the  surface.  And  so  the 
new  leaf  has  been  turned  over,  and  on  its  virgin  pages  these  new  resolutions  have 
been  written,  and,  alas !  not  inscribed  for  the  first  time.  Were  they  not  written  on 
the  new  leaf  on  the  first  of  January,  just  a  year  ago,  and  the  New  Year's  day  before 
tbat,  and  can  you  not  go  back,  and  back,  and  back,  till  you  come  to  your  childhood 
and  the  time  when  you  first  began  to  turn  over  a  new  leaf?  These  new  leaves  that 
we  are  always  turning  over — how  they  accuse  us !  We  write  on  the  newly  turned 
page  that  we  will  do  many  duties  which  we  have  left  undone — many  duties  in  the 
home,  the  church — many  duties  to  our  friends,  our  neighbours,  duties  to  God  and 
to  ourselves  ;  and  how  long  is  it  before  there  comes  a  little  January  gust  and  blows 
the  leaf  back  again  ?  and  then  all  goes  on  pretty  much  as  before.  The  trouble  with 
this  matter  of  leaf-turning,  of  making  good  resolutions  only  to  break  them,  is  two- 
fold. 1.  The  effort  is  not  made  in  good  faith — it  is  more  a  whim  than  a  solemn 
purpose  put  into  action,  and  so  it  is  we  have  altogether  too  much  regard  to  times 
and  seasons,  and  too  little  to  the  imperative  demand  of  to-day.  Conscience  is  a 
court  whose  fiat  is  to  be  obeyed  not  on  New  Year's  day,  or  Christmas,  or  on  a  birth- 
day, but  now — on  the  instant.    A  man  who  defers  to  execute  a  right  resolution  till 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn^. 

some  particular  day  has  arrived  will  be  pretty  sure  not  to  carry  it  out  at  all.  2. 
Then  the  second  difficulty  is  that  we  rely  too  much  upon  our  own  will  and  too  little 
upon  God's  help.  No  man  can  change  his  own  nature  or  reform  himself.  He  can 
do  much,  if  he  but  will,  in  the  direction  of  carrying  out  a  good  resolution  ;  but  the 
real  efficient  reliance  must  be  God.     (Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  If  the  household  be  too  little  for  the  lamb. — Too  Utile  for  the  lamh  : — 
I.  The  text  reminds  us  of  a  primaky  PErviLEOE.  1.  That  each  man  of  Israel 
ate  the  passover  for  himself ;  "  every  man  according  to  his  eating."  So  do  we  feed 
upon  Jesus,  each  one  as  his  appetite,  capacity,  and  strength  enable  him  to  do.  2. 
But  this  same  delicious  fare  should  be  enjoyed  by  all  the  family — "  a  lamb  for  an 
house."  Oh,  that  each  of  the  parents  and  all  the  children  and  servants  may  be 
partakers  of  Christ !  II.  The  text  is  silent  as  to  a  ceutain  contingency.  1.  The 
lamb  was  never  too  little  for  the  family;  and  assuredly  the  Lord  Jesus  was  never 
too  little  even  for  the  largest  family,  nor  for  the  most  sinful  persons.  2.  There  is 
no  reason  to  stint  our  prayers  for  fear  we  ask  too  much.  3.  Nor  to  stay  our  labours 
because  the  Lord  Jesus  cannot  give  us  strength  enough,  or  grace  enough.  4.  Nor 
to  restrain  our  hopes  of  salvation  for  the  whole  family,  because  of  some  supposed 
narrowness  in  the  purpose,  provision,  or  willingness  of  the  Lord  to  bless.  III.  The 
TEXT  MENTIONS  A  possiniLiTY,  AND  PROVIDES  FOR  IT.  1.  One  family  is  certainly  too 
small  a  reward  for  Jesus — too  little  for  the  Lamb.  2.  One  family  is  too  little  to 
render  Him  all  the  praise,  worship,  service,  and  love  which  He  deserves.  3.  One 
family  is  too  little  to  do  all  the  work  of  proclaiming  the  Lamb  of  God,  maintaining 
the  truth,  visiting  the  Church,  winning  the  world.  Therefore  let  us  call  in  the 
neighbour  next  unto  our  house.  (1)  Our  next  neiglibonr  has  the  first  claim  upon 
us.  (2)  Ho  is  the  most  easy  to  reach,  and  by  each  calling  his  next  neighbour  all 
will  be  reachod.  (3)  He  is  the  most  likely  person  to  be  influenced  by  us.  At  any 
rate  this  is  the  rule,  and  we  are  to  obey  it  (see  Luke  xxiv.  47  ;  John  i.  41 ;  Neh. 
iii.  28).  If  our  neighbour  does  not  come  when  invited,  we  are  not  responsible  ;  but 
if  he  perished  because  we  did  not  invite  him,  blood-guiltiness  would  be  upon  us 
(Ezek.  xxxiii.  8).  IV.  The  whole  subject  suggests  thoughts  upon  neighbourly 
TELLOWSHIP  IN  THE  GOSPEL.  1.  It  is  good  for  individuals  and  families  to  grow  out 
of  selfishness,  and  to  seek  the  good  of  a  wide  circle.  2.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  when 
the  centre  of  our  society  is  "  the  Lamb."  3.  Innumerable  blessings  already  flow  to 
us  from  the  friendships  which  have  sprung  out  of  our  union  in  Jesus.  4.  Our  care 
for  one  another  in  Christ  helps  to  realize  the  unity  of  the  one  body,  even  as  the 
common  eating  of  the  passover  proclaimed  and  assisted  the  solidarity  of  the  people 
of  Israel  as  one  nation.  This  spiritual  union  is  a  high  privilege.  5.  Thoroughly 
carried  out,  heaven  will  thus  be  foreshadowed  upon  earth,  for  there  love  to  Jesus 
and  love  to  one  another  is  found  in  every  heart.  (C.  H,  Sjmrgeou.)  Sharing 
religion  icith  otltcrs : — There  are  some  things  which  can  be  shared  with  our  neigh- 
bours, and  some  which  cannot,  in  the  religious  life.  In  securing  the  "  means- 
of  grace"  we  can  go  halves  with  our  next-door  neighbours;  but  not  so  in  the 
great  fact  of  personal  salvation.  We  can  join  with  a  neighbour  in  taking  a  pew 
in  church,  or  in  getting  a  waggon  to  carry  us  to  church,  or  in  subscribing  for  a 
religious  paper — and  paying  for  it  too ;  but  we  can  share  no  neighbour's  seat  in 
heaven ;  his  team  will  never  carry  us  there ;  the  truths  which  benefit  him  from  the 
weekly  paper  do  not,  because  of  their  gain  to  him,  do  us  any  good.  And  if  our  next- 
door  neighbour's  family  is  a  household  of  faith,  that  doesn't  make  ours  so.  The 
members  of  his  family  may  be  saved  and  ours  lost.  Neighbourliness  is  com- 
manded and  commended  of  God ;  but  God  doesn't  want  you  to  leave  your  salvation 
in  the  hands  of  your  next-door  neighbour.  The  blood  above  your  neighbour's  door- 
post will  not  save  your  household  from  death.     (H.  C.  Trumbull.) 

Ver.  12.  Against  all  the  gods  of  Egypt  I  will  execute  judgment.— T/ie  Lord  God 
of  gods : — When,  in  Deuteronomy  x.  17,  Moses  says,  "  The  Lord  your  God  is  God 
of  gods,"  and  when,  in  Joshua  xxii,  22,  the  people  exclaim,  "  The  Lord  God  of 
gods,  the  Lord  God  of  gods.  He  knoweth  " — what  do  the  words  mean?  Are  there 
other  "  gods  "  than  Jehovah  ?  It  is  likely  this  inquiry  will  come  up  in  the  mind  of 
almost  any  student  of  the  Bible  when  he  is  reading  the  account  of  the  ten  plagues. 
The  question  is  hard  to  discuss ;  but  two  considerations  can  be  offered  for  help,  and 
then  we  can  reach  the  conclusion.  1.  One  is  this  :  the  entire  record,  unless  a  most 
elastic  ingenuity  of  exposition  be  employed,  seems  to  say  that  the  contests  delineated 
in  the   exciting  chapters  which  record   the   deliverance  from  bondage  and  the 


CHAP.  XII.]  EXODUS.  185 

establishment  of  Israel  was  between  supernatural  powers,  rather  than  between 
ordinary  human  antagonists.  Pharaoh  accepted  the  gauntlet  thrown  down  by 
Moses  as  a  defiance  to  his  gods,  and,  with  a  courage  worthy  of  a  better  cause,  took 
it  up  cheerfully  in  their  name.  So  the  conflict  proceeds.  The  nations  stand 
silently  and  solemnly  by  while  these  tremendous  antagonistic  forces  are  employed 
in  the  royal  abodes,  and  are  aroused  only  afterwards  when  the  pressure  outside 
begins  to  be  felt.  The  close  of  the  narrative  teaches  us  that  they  were  perfectly 
intelligent  from  the  beginning  in  the  conceptions  they  had  of  what  was  going  on. 
Pharaoh  Anally  confesses  openly  the  defeat  of  his  gods  when  he  says  humbly  to 
Moses,  "  Go  then,  serve  Jehovah  ;  and  bless  me  also  !  "  And  with  a  like  acknow- 
ledgment the  Israelites  ascribe  all  the  glory  of  their  deliverance  to  God.  They  do 
not  behave  as  if  they  owed  even  a  decent  gratitude  to  Moses  or  Aaron.  2.  We 
must  put  with  this  consideration  a  second :  these  so-called  "  gods "  of  the 
Egyptians  are  spoken  of  constantly  as  if  they  were  not  mere  dumb  idols,  nor  even 
mere  ideal  creations  of  human  imagination  ;  the  language  could  have  hardly  been 
strong*-r  if  it  had  meant  to  leave  the  impression  that  they  were  living  existences — 
beings  possessed  of  life  and  intelligence  and  will  and  some  power  (see  Deut.  xxxii. 
16,  17 ;  1  Cor.  x.  20 ;  Psa.  Ixvi.  4,  5).  For  some  mysterious  reason  of  His  own,  the 
sovereign  INIonarch  of  the  universe  has  accepted  an  antagonism  between  the  powers 
of  evil  and  the  powers  of  good  in  this  world ;  and  for  nearly  six  thousand  years 
Satan  His  creature  has  been  waging  battle  openly  amid  the  sublime  agencies  of 
nature  with  Jesus  Christ  His  Son.  We  feel  as  if  we  must  assume  real  antagonists 
when  we  read  Moses'  own  words  in  Numbers  xxsiii.  4  :  "  The  Egyptians  buried  all 
their  firstborn,  which  tbe  Lord  had  smitten  among  them  ;  upon  their  gods  also  the 
Lord  executed  judgment."  3.  Thus,  then,  we  reach  our  conclusion  at  which  all 
along  we  have  been  aiming.  Were  Pharaoh's  gods  real  gods  ?  How  was  Jehovah 
the  "  God  of  gods  "  ?  And  what  does  our  text  mean,  "  Against  all  the  gods  of 
Egypt  will  I  execute  judgment  "  ?  We  ask  you  to  recapitulate  in  your  own  minds 
the  delineation  made  concerning  the  three  cycles  of  miracles  grouped  around  the 
three  personages  who  stood  on  a  certain  occasion  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration, 
Jesus  Christ,  Moses,  and  Elijah,  each  the  hringerof  a  dispensation  of  revealed  truth 
for  men's  salvation,  the  law,  the  prophets,  and  the  gospel.  It  is  sufficient  to  say, 
here  at  the  start,  that  this  same  onset  of  demoniacal  forces  is  disclosed  in  each  of 
these  cases,  and  a  recognition  made  of  the  fact  that  the  old  fight  with  Satan  was 
renewed,  the  old  fight  which  began  in  the  Garden  of  Eden.  Demoniacal  possession 
is  found  in  these  same  three  cycles  of  time,  and  nowhere  else  in  the  history  of  the 
Old  Testament  or  the  New.  This,  then,  is  what  is  intended  when  we  say  that  this 
was  a  contest  between  Immanuel  and  Satan,  a  positive  resumption  of  the  war  fronj 
the  instant  when  "  the  seed  of  the  woman  "  began  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  So, 
when  we  return  to  the  story  we  are  studying,  we  are  bold  to  say  that  this  whole 
contest  between  Moses  and  Menephtah  was  really  the  sublime  and  awful  conflict 
between  Immanuel  and  Satan  for  the  slavery,  on  the  one  side,  for  the  salvation,  on 
the  other,  of  the  race  of  human  souls  whom  the  Almighty  had  originally  made  in 
Hisown  image.  Several  most  welcome  explanations,  therefore,  meet  us  just  here. 
1.  One  is  concerning  the  abrupt  cessation  of  performances,  on  tbe  part  of 
Pharaoh's  magicians,  when  they  exclaimed,  "This  is  the  finger  of  God."  They 
knew  that  the  resistance  was  virtually  over.  We  may  even  imagine  that  these 
people  had  sometimes  been  surprised  already  at  what  actually  seemed  their  own 
power.  Then  there  is  a  second  explanation  furnished  by  this  disclosure.  2.  We 
know  now  why  this  history  has  such  an  evangelical  spirit  attributed  to  it  when 
references  are  made  in  the  New  Testament.  Read  over  again,  in  the  light  of  such 
an  understanding  of  God's  true  purpose,  the  story  which  the  author  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  gives  concerning  Moses'  choice  in  his  early  career ;  see  how  singular 
is  the  motive  ascribed  to  him  :  He  took  his  stand  as  a  believer  in  Jehovah  Jesus  as 
his  Redeemer — "By  faith  Moses,"  &c.  The  New  Testament  wi-iter  identifies  the 
two  dispensations  as  the  same.  Israel  was  the  Church,  Jehovah  was  Jesus ;  so 
Moses  became  a  Christian.  3.  In  the  same  way  the  allusions  made  to  the  incidents 
of  the  later  history  become  intelligible.  You  recall  the  terrible  trouble  from  the 
fiery  serpents;  put  with  that  now  the  exhortation  of  the  apostle  Paul  :  "Neither 
let  us  tempt  Christ,  as  some  of  them  also  tempted,  and  were  destroyed  of  serpents." 
He  here  says  that  Christ  was  the  one  who  was  tempted  in  that  murmuring  ;  it  was 
Christ  who  was  leading  Israel  through  the  wilderness.  There  never  has  been  but 
one  Church,  but  one  Leader  of  God's  elect,  but  one  Redeemer,  but  one  way  in 
which  to  be  saved.      {€'.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)        Past  redemption  point: — On  the 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

bank  of  the  Niagara  Eiver,  where  the  rapids  begin  to  swell  and  swirl  most 
desperately,  preparatory  to  their  final  plunge,  is  a  sign-board  which  bears  a  most 
startling  legend.  "Past  Kedemption  Point,"  it  reads.  To  read  it  even  when  one 
feels  the  soil  firm  beneath  his  feet  sends  a  shiver  of  horror  through  one's  soul  as  he 
looks  off  upon  the  turbulent  water  and  realizes  the  full  significance  of  the  sign. 
The  one  who  gets  into  those  boiling  rapids  and  passes  that  point,  cannot  retrace 
his  way,  cannot  pull  to  shore,  cannot  be  rescued  by  friends.  Past  redemption  point ! 
How  many  men  despise  the  warnings  God  sends,  and  pass  the  last  stage  at  which 
they  could  arrest  their  evil  way,  and  too  late  they  find  they  have  passed  redemption 
point ! 

Ver.  l.S.  I  will  pass  over  you. — The  Passover : — Our  interest  in  the  Passover,  as 
in  most  of  the  other  institutions  of  the  Levitical  economy,  consists  in  its  relation- 
ship to  higher  institutions,  and  to  a  more  hallowed  provision ;  it  consists  in  the 
prefiguration  by  them  of  our  Surety  and  Saviour,  who  is  at  once  the  Surety  and 
Saviour  of  universal  man.  There  are  three  points  in  the  analogy  to  be  considered. 
I.  We,  like  the  Children  of  Israel  aforetime,  are  in  ciKcmsTANCES  of  sorrow. 
1.  They  were  in  bondage.  We  also  have  been  brought  under  bondage  to  sin,  and 
our  yoke  is  harder  than  theirs,  for  ours  is  heart-slavery,  the  iron  has  entered  into 
our  soul.  2.  The  Israelites  were  in  circumstances  of  peril.  The  Lord  was  about  to 
execute  in  their  sight  His  strange  work  of  judgment.  The  transgressions  of  our 
race,  the  sins  which  we  commit,  expose  us  to  consequences  far  more  imminent,  and 
far  more  terrible.  II.  For  us,  as  for  the  Children  of  Israel  of  old,  there  is  a 
REMEDY  PROVIDED.  The  great  doctrine  of  Atonement  is  here  brought  before  us.  By 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  seen  by  Divine  justice  sprinkled  upon  our  hearts,  wrath  is 
warded  off  from  us,  and  everlasting  salvation  is  secured.  The»Cros8  is  the  meeting- 
place  of  God's  mercy  for  the  sinner.  III.  As  there  is  such  a  remedy  there  can  be 
NO  OTHER.  For  us  as  for  them  there  is  but  one  way  of  escape.  "  There  is  no  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  (Jf.  M.  Pun- 
shoii,  D.D.)  The  blood  of  the  Lamb  : — The  blood  of  the  slain  lamb  a  type  of  that 
shed  on  Calvary.  1.  The  blood  of  salvation ;  2.  Of  substitution ;  3.  Of  sprinkling 
(useless  unless  applied) ;  4.  Of  separation.  (L).  Macmillan.)  Man's  deliverance: — 
I.  This  method  of  deliverance  involved  a  sacrifice  of  innocent  life.     II.  This 

METHOD  of  deliverance  TRANSCENDED  HUMAN  INVENTION.  III.  ThIS  METHOD  OP 
,  DELIVEBANCE  PROVED  COMPLETELY  EFFICIENT.  IV.  ThIS  METHOD  OF  DELFVERANCE  FOB 
ITS  APPLICATION  REQUIRED  PRACTICAL  TRUST  IN  GoD.  V.  ThIS  >[ETH0D  OF  DELIVER.VNCE 
FORMED  A  MEMORABLE    ERA   IN  THE    HISTORY   OF  THE    JeWS.       (HomUist.)  The  PaSS- 

over: — I.  The  Passover  celebrates  a  deliverance  wrought  in  fulfilment  of  a 
Divine  pledge.  The  baseness  of  man  does  not  make  void  the  righteousness  of 
God.  II.  The  Passover  festival  was  the  beginning  of  a  n^ew  and  noble  national 
life.  It  was  the  initiatory  rite  of  a  peculiar  people.  An  eminent  historian,  with 
no  theological  interest,  has  compared  it  to  the  great  feast  at  the  beginning  of  the 
French  revolution,  which  was  to  inaugurate  the  new  age  of  fraternity.  The  sug- 
gestion is  profound  and  pertinent.  It  was  a  national  feast.  It  was  to  be  a  per- 
petual witness  to  them  that  the  Highest  had  seen  the  affliction  of  His  people,  and 
had  come  down  to  deliver  them  ;  that  He  had  established  an  intercourse  with  them 
which  was  to  endure  from  age  to  age.  Its  full  meaning  was  not,  and  could  not, 
then  be  taken  in ;  but  they  did  know  that  it  was  the  bond  of  a  sacred  union 
between  the  redeemed  nation  and  Him  who  bad  redeemed  it ;  that  it  was  the  sign 
of  their  acceptance  of  Him  as  Euler  and  King  instead  of  the  Egyptian  prince. 
During  our  own  Civil  War,  when  it  had  become  evident  on  both  sides  that  it  was  to 
be  a  life-and-death  struggle,  a  proclamation,  called  the  Emancipation  Proclamation, 
was  issued  by  the  President,  setting  free  some  three  or  four  milhons  of  slaves.  That 
proclamation  bad  no  immediate  effect  whatever  upon  the  actual  character  of  those 
whom  it  most  concerned.  It  made  them  neither  better  nor  worse.  A  quarter- 
century  has  passed  away,  and  multitudes  of  them  are  still  unchanged.  They 
remain  degraded,  superstitious,  ignorant ;  and  yet  you  can  say  to  them  what  you 
could  not  say  to  their  fathers.  They  are  free  men.  The  Passover  feast  has  been 
eaten.  A  life  of  liberty,  with  all  its  obligations  and  opportunities,  is  upon  them  ; 
upon  them  whether  they  will  or  no ;  upon  them  for  better  or  worse.  III.  The 
Jewish  festival  has  become  a  CnRisTLiN  sacrament.  The  paschal  lamb  was  not 
only  to  be  sacrificed  ;  it  was  also  to  be  eaten.  Thus  we  are  to  keep  the  feast ;  thus 
we  are  to  show  a  continuous  participation  in  His  sacrificial  life  and  death.  Crucified 
and  risen  with  Him,  we  perpetuate  the  sacrifice  in  ourselves.     {E.  B.  Mason,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  xn.]  EXODUS.  187 

The  paschal  lamb : — I.  The  paschal  lamb  itself.  A  beautiful  tjpe  of  the  Lord 
Jesus — the  perfect,  spotless  Saviour.  II.  Its  connection  with,  and  application  to, 
Israel.  1.  A  substitute  (see  Matt.  xx.  28).  Christ  suffered  that  we  might  live 
wit^  Him  and  in  Him.  2.  Blood  to  be  applied,  as  well  as  shed.  Exercise  of  faith. 
3.  Flesh  to  be  eaten.  Christ  the  daily  food  of  the  believer's  soul.  III.  The 
blvnnek  in  which  Iseael  was  to  eat  of  it.  1.  With  bitter  herbs :  repentance. 
When  we  feed  on  the  Lamb  of  God,  we  must  not  forget  what  we  have  been,  and 
what  we  are.  We  must  remember  our  sins — worldliness,  contentedness  without 
God,  impatience,  and  murmurings.  2.  With  unleavened  bread  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8). 
3.  With  loins  girded.  Travellers — pilgrims  and  strangers  on  earth.  Look  on  scenes 
and  occupations  of  world  as  on  those  which  belong  to  wilderness,  not  home.  At  end  of 
journey  stands  a  continuing  city,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  March  on.  (G.  Wagner.) 
The  Pushover  (A  Good  Friday  Sermon) : — I.  I  ask  tou  to  observe  the  provision 
which  God  made  in  the  Passover  for  the  safety  of  His  people.  The  dykes  of 
Holland,  which  shut  out  the  roaring  ocean  from  the  fertile  fields,  and  the  levees  of 
the  Mississippi  guiding  a  mighty  river  in  its  course,  have  more  than  once  been  cut. 
But  he  who  thus  enchains  the  fierce  spirit  of  the  flood  is  apt  to  find  himself  in  the 
pathway  of  its  devastation.  So  can  no  man  cut  through  the  great  principles  of 
right  and  truth  without  opening  sluice  ways  of  destruction  for  himself.  Eeckless 
injustice,  cruel  oppression,  will  sooner  or  later  overthrow  the  very  man  who  has 
thus  wronged  his  fellow.  And  nations  may  equally  beware  of  breaching  the  barriers 
of  Divine  judgment.  The  water  will  find  out  the  hiding-place  of  a  guilty  people. 
France  reaps  to-day  the  ripening  harvest  of  her  martyred  Albigenses  and  her  bloody 
St.  Bartholomew.  The  stroke  had  fallen  with  relentless  impartiality  "  from  the 
firstborn  of  Pharaoh,  who  sat  on  his  throne,  to  the  firstborn  of  the  captive  in  the 
dungeon."  There  was  no  distinction  in  the  common  and  overwhelming  calamity. 
So  intertwined  were  Egypt  and  Israel.  The  slave  was  dependent  upon  his  master, 
as  the  vine  is  upon  the  oak ;  but  that  very  dependence  only  the  more  entirely 
involved  the  one  in  the  calamity  of  the  other.  When  death  was  on  the  wing  of  the 
pestilence,  no  power  sbort  of  a  miracle  could  separate  the  child  of  Jacob  from  the 
firstborn  of  Egypt.  But  a  miracle  did  God  work,  a  miracle  so  pecuUar  in  its 
character  that  not  one  of  all  Israel's  thousands  died  with  the  sons  of  the  oppressor. 
But  their  deUverance  was  due  to  no  foresight  of  their  own.  The  soldier  who  cuts 
his  way  out  of  the  encircling  hosts  of  the  enemy,  the  pilot  who  safely  threads  the 
mazes  of  the  dangerous  channel,  the  statesman  who  foils  the  blows  and  parries  the 
thrusts  of  his  country's  enemies  on  the  battle-field  of  diplomatic  controversy,  can 
each  point  to  the  skill  and  prudence  with  which  his  web  of  plans  was  woven,  and 
glory  in  his  success.  But  when  Israel  was  saved  from  the  destruction  of  Egyi^t's 
firstborn,  no  one  of  all  their  mighty  host  could  say,  "  I  saw  the  danger,  and  by  my 
wisdom  provided  deliverance."  The  whole  method  of  safety  for  God's  people  was 
one  that  originated  with  God  Himself.  No  man  would  ever  have  thought  of  it,  or, 
if  he  had,  would  have  had  any  confidence  in  its  success.  It  is  a  lamb  slain,  through 
which  the  Lord  would  guard  each  household  of  Israel  from  Egyptian  condemnation. 
In  one  word,  it  was  a  sacrifice  that  alone  could  stand  between  the  firstborn  and 
the  destroyer.  Oh,  when  the  Lamb  is  slain,  when  the  sacrifice  is  made,  when  the 
Son  of  God  hangs  bleeding  on  the  Cross,  wilt  thou  wait  till  the  shadowy  wing  of  the 
death-angel  darkens  thy  door,  dreaming  that  thou  hast  some  better  way  than  God's 
to  save  tliy  soul  from  righteous  condemnation  ?    II.  What  was  the  Israelite  to 

DO  TO  AVAIL  himself  OF  THE  SACRIFICE  WHICH  GoD  HAD  THUS  PROVIDED  ?       Peiched  OQ 

a  grey  crag,  like  the  nest  where  the  eagle  rears  her  young,  Quebec  looked  down  in 
proud  security  upon  the  St.  Lawi'enee  flowing  to  the  sea.  With  muffled  oars  and 
bated  breath,  beneath  the  mantle  of  midnight,  an  English  army  floated  with  the 
ebb  ti  de  down  the  stream,  and  lay  hidden  at  the  base  of  the  frowning  heights.  In- 
accessible as  the  fortress  seemed,  a  path  had  been  discovered.  A  way  there  unques- 
tionably was  by  which  the  precipice  could  be  scaled.  But  to  avail  themselves  of 
that  approach,  to  make  use  of  their  discovery,  was  a  task  so  perilous,  a  venture  so 
begirt  with  difficulty  and  danger,  that  none  but  heroes  ever  would  have  tried.  So 
did  God  reveal  to  the  Israelite  a  path  by  which  he  could  save  his  household 
from  the  dread  visitation  of  the  angel  of  death.  The  sacrifice  was  slain.  The 
paschal  lamb  lay  bleeding  its  life  away.  But  how  was  the  Hebrew  householder  to 
use  the  sacrifice  ?  Here  was  the  road  to  safety,  but  was  it  not  some  mighty  effort, 
some  gigantic  labour,  some  costly  addition  to  the  sacrifice  which  would  make  it  a 
defence  in  the  mysterious  visitation  of  the  fast-approaching  night  ?  How  through 
this  pathway  could  the  heights  of  security  be  gained  ?    In  one  word,  wher  God 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CDap.  xii. 

had  done  His  share  in  the  provision  of  the  offering,  what  was  man  to  do  to  apply 
its  protection  to  himself?     There  is  a  Divine  answer  to  that  question  ;  "  Ye  shall 
take  a  bunch  of  hyssop,  and  dip  it  into  the  blood  that  is  in  the  basin,  and  strike  the 
lintel  and  the  two  side-posts  with  the  blood ;  and  the  blood  shall  be  for  a  token 
upon  the  houses  where  ye  are,  and  when  I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you,  and 
the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy  you  when  I  smite  the  land  of  Egypt." 
And  this  is  all  1     No  mighty  struggles  to  make  the  sacrifice   more  costly.     No 
pompous  rites  to  render  it  more  acceptable.     Nothing  in  the  world  but  sprinkling  a 
few  drops  of  the  blood  upon  the  doorway  of  the  dwelling.     And  even  that  was  no 
work  ;  it  was  simply  an  acceptance  of  God's  work.     It  was  precisely  equivalent  to 
saying,  "  I  cannot  devise  any  way  of  defence  to  ward  off  the  dread  visitation  from 
ray  dwelling :  but  I  trust  God's  way."     Oh  ye  who  are  waiting  on  the  brink  of 
decision  for  Christ,  I  pray  you  hear  this  precious  truth !     I  tell  you,  if  you  only 
knew  what  a  glorious  thing  it  is  that  a  lost  sinner  can  be  saved  just  by  accepting 
Jesus,  you  would  not  leave  this  church  till  His  precious  blood  upon  your  soul  bore 
witness  to  your  salvation.     Twenty  years  ago  a  venturesome  whale-ship,  driven 
from  her  course,  found  a  deserted  brig  drifting  among  the  ice-floes  of  the  polar  sea. 
Deserted  by  her  crew,  her  rudder  guided  by  no  human  hand,  she  had  sailed,  like 
the  ship  of  the  "  Ancient  Mariner,"  into  that  silent  sea.     Her  gallant  discoverers 
brought  their  prize  through  untold  perils  into  port.     But  the  tidings  spread  that 
the  staunch  ship,  which  for  well  nigh  two  years  bad  sailed  among  the  frozen 
horrors  of  the  northern  seas,  without  a  living  soul  within  her  open  sides,  was  one 
of  an  English  fleet  that  the  British  Government  had  sent  to  rescue  the   heroic 
Franklin.    Then  it  was  that  our  country  did  a  beautiful,  as  well  as  noble  act.     Our 
government  fitted  up  the  vessel  in  every  minutest  detail.    From  stem  to  stern  her 
old  aspect  was  restored.     On  the  deck,  in  her  cabin,  not  an  article  was  lacking  to 
render  her  complete.     And  then,  with  grateful  courtesy,  the  costly  gift  was  sent 
across  the  ocean  and  given  back,  a  freewill  offering  to  the  Government  of  England. 
The  glory  of  the  deed  belonged  to  America  alone.    No  British  seaman  had  helped 
to  save  her.     Not  a  farthing  of  English  money  had  aided  in  her  restoration.    Even 
in  her  voyage  across  the  Atlantic,  the  crew  that  manned,  the  officers  that  com- 
manded, her  were  of  our  own  country's  navy.  For  England  there  remained  nothing 
to  do.     She  could  only  accept  the  salvation  of  her  vessel  as  a  free  and  generous 
gift.     Oh  type  of  God's  work  for  man  ;  image  of  the  simplicity  of  man's  accepting 
faith  I    Brother,  your  soul  has  long  been  like  a  ship  abandoned  to  the  seas.     God's 
mercy  alone  has  kept  it  so  long  afloat.     Drifting  amidst  icebergs,  tossed   on  a 
heaving  sea,  it  is  a  miracle  of  Providence  that  it  has  not  sunk  beneath  the  depths. 
And  now  God  would  save  it.    He  would  rescue  it  from  danger.     He  would  restore 
its  long-lost  peace,  its  heavenly  hope,  its  shattered  purity,  and  give  it  back  to  you 
redeemed  and  for  ever  saved.     But  God  will  do  it  all.     He  will  not  give  His  glory 
to  another.     He  will  not  let  you  add  one  solitary  item  to  reileeming  love,  or  pay 
one  farthing  for  the  blessings  of  salvation.     There  is  absolutely  nothing  for  you  to 
do  but  to  accept  the  gift.  And  this  is  faith.  Oh  take  Him  at  His  word  !  (Bp.  Cheney.) 
The  blood : — I.  First,  tben,  the  blood  itself.     In  the  case  of  the  Isra(4ites  it  was 
the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb.     In  our  case  it  is  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.     1.  The  blood  of  which  I  have  solemnly 
to  speak  is,  first  of  all,  the  blood  of  a  Divinely  appointed  victim.     This  indeed  is 
one  of  the  underlying  ground-works  of  the  Christian's  hope.     We  can  rely  upon 
Jesus  Christ's  acceptance  by  His  Father,  because  His  Father  ordained  Him  to  be  our 
Saviour  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.    2,  Christ  Jesus,  too,  like  the  lamb, 
was  not  only  a  divinely  appointed  victim,  but  He  was  spotless.   Had  there  been  one 
sin  in  Christ,  He  had  not  been  capable  of  being  our  Saviour  ;  but  He  was  without 
spot  or  blemish — without  original  sin,  without  any  practical  transgression.     3.  But 
some  will  say,  "  Whence  has  the  blood  of  Christ  such  power  to  save  ?  "     My  reply 
is,  not  only  because  God  appointed  that  blood,  and  because  it  was  the  blood  of  an 
innocent  and  spotless  being,  but  because  Christ  Himself  was  God.     4.  Once  more ; 
the  blood  of  which  we  speak  to-day,  is  blood  once  shed  for  many  for  the  remission 
of  sin.     The  paschal  lamb  was  killed  every  year  ;  but  now  Christ  hath  appeared  to 
take  away  sin  by  the  offering  up  of  Himself,  and  there  is  now  no  more  mention  of 
sin,  for  Christ  once  for  all  hath  put  away  sin,  by  the  offering  of  Himself.     He  is  a 
complete  Saviour,  full  of  grace  for  an  empty  sinner.     5.  And  yet  I  must  add  one 
more  thought,  and  then  leave  this  point.     The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  blood  that 
hath  been  accepted.     II.  The  efficacy  of  this  blood.     "  When  I  see  the  blood  I 
will  pass  over  you."    1.  The  blood  of  Christ  hath  such  a  Divine  power  to  save,  that 


CHAP.  XII.]  EXODUS.  189 

nothing  but  it  can  ever  save  the  soul.     2.  This  blood  is  not  simply  the  only  thing 
that  can  save,  but  it  must  save  alone.     Put  anything  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
you  are  lost ;  trust  to  anything  else  with  this,  and  you  perish.     3.  Yet  again  we 
may  say  of   the  blood  of  Christ,  it  is  all-sufficient.     There  is  no  case  which  the 
blood  of  Christ  cannot  meet ;  there  is  no  sin  which  it  cannot  wash  away.  4.  The  blood 
of  Christ  saves  surely.     If  we  have  that  blood  upon  us  we  must  be  saved,  or  else 
we  are  to  suppose  a  God  unfaithful  and  a  God  unkind ;  in  fact,  a  God  transformed 
from  everything  that  is  God-like  into  everything  that  is  base.     5.  And  yet  again, 
he  that  hath  this  blood  sprinkled  upon  him  is  saved  completely.  Not  the  hair  of  the 
head  of  an  Israelite  was  disturbed  by  the  destroying  angel.     They  were  completely 
saved,  so  he  that  believeth  in  the  blood  is  saved  from  all  things.     III.  The  one 
CONDITION.  "  What,"  says  one,  "  do  you  preach  a  conditional  salvation  ?  "   Yes,  I  do, 
there  is  the  one  condition.     "  Where  I  seethe  blood  I  will  pass  over  you."     What 
a  blessed  condition !  it  does  not  saj-,  when  you  see  the  blood,  but  when  I  see  it. 
Thine  eye  of  faith  may  be  so  dim,  that  thou  canst  not  see  the  blood  of  Christ.     Ay, 
but  God's  eye  is  not  dim  ;  He  can  see  it,  j-ea.  He  must  see  it ;  for  Christ  in  heaven  is 
always  i>resenting  His  blood  before  His  Father's  face.     IV.  And  now,  lastly,  what 
IS  THE  LESSON  ?   The  lesson  of  the  text  is  to  the  Christian  this  :  Christian,  take  care 
that  thou  dost  always  remember,  that  nothing  but  the  blood  of  Christ  can  save  thee. 
(C.  H.  Spurrjeon.)         The  sacred  love-token: — I.  "  The  blood  shall  be  to  you  for  a 
token" — A  DISTINGUISHING  TOKEN.     A  bloodless  gospel  is  a  lifeless  gospcl.     1.  Our 
sin  deserves  death.     2.  We  believe  in  substitution.     Christ  died,  "  the  just  for  the 
unjust."     3.  We  believe  that  we  died  in  Jesus.     4.  Believing  this,  we  next  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  we  are  safe.    II.  The  blood  was  an  assuuing  token.     1.  The 
token  of  suffering.     2.  Death.     (1)  The  Lamb  of  God.     (2)  A  finished  sacrifice. 
III.    A  MOST  SIGNIFICANT  TOKEN.     1.   Kcdcmption.     2.    The  Lord's  property.     3. 
Acceptance.     4.  Perfect  safety.     IV.  A  love-token.     1.  Ancient  love,     2.  Intense 
love.     3.  Mighty  love.     4.   Wise  all-seeing  love.    5.  Unlimited  love.    V.  A  recog- 
nition token.     1.  The  man  who  has  this  token  is  known  to  the  angels  as  one  of 
the  heirs  of  salvation  to  whom  they  minister.     2.  The  devil  also  knows  that  mark, 
and,  as  soon  as  he  sees  it,  he  begins  to  assail  the  man  who  bears  it,  seeking  in  all 
sorts  of  wavs  to  destroy  him.  3.  This  blood-mark  is  known  among  the  saints  them- 
selves, and  has  a  wonderful  power  for  creating  and  fostering  mutual  love.     4.  Best  of 
all,  the  Lord  knows  this  token  too.     A  Primitive  Methodist  brother,  when  he  was  in  a 
meeting  where  a  friend  could  not  pray,  cried  out, "  Plead  the  blood,  brother !  "  and  the 
advice  was  wise.     (Ibid.)       The  institution  of  the  Passover  : — I.  The  circdjistances 
UNDER  WHICH  THE  Passovek  WAS  INSTITUTED.     1.  It  was  instituted  under  perilous 
circumstances.   2.  It  was  instituted  under  exceptional  circumstances.   3.  It  was  insti- 
tuted under  painful  circumstances.  And  so  the  Cross  of  Christ  was  instituted  under 
circumstances  morally  dangerous,  morally  exceptional,  and  morally  painful,  but 
under  circumstances  which  rendered  it  most  welcome  to  the  true  Israel.     II.   The 
PROCEEDINGS  BY  WHICH  THE  Passover  WAS  CHARACTERISED.     1.  A  lamb  was  slain  in 
the  bouses  of  the  Israelites.  2.  The  blood  of  the  Lamb  thus  slain  was  sprinkled  on 
the  upper  door-post  of  the  houses  of  the  Israelites.     3.  The  slain  lamb  was  eaten 
by  the  Israelites  in  an  attitude  of  pilgrimage  and  haste.    And  so  the  soul  must 
appropriate  Christ ;  it  must  cultivate  an  attitude  of  moral  haste,  and  it  must  be 
mindful  of  its  pilgrim  condition,  if  it  is  to  be  saved  by  Him.     III.  The  results  by 
WHICH  the  Passover  was  followed.     1.  After  the  celebration  of  the  Passover  the 
Israelites  were  safe.    2.  They  were  free.    3.  They  were  joyous.    Lessons :  1.  That 
every  household  should  have  an  interest  in  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world.     2.  That   to  experience  the  saving  benefit  of  Christ's  death  the  soul 
must  personally  receive  Him.     3.  That  Christ  as  dying  is  the  only  hope  of  the 
soul.     4.  That  Christ  died  for  all.     {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)         The  Passover  illustrative 
of  atoning  work  of  Christ : — I.  In  the  victim  it  provides  (John  i.  29).     II.  In  the 
SACRIFICE  it  requires.     "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  HO  remission."    III. 
In  the  duty  it  enjoins  (ver.  7).     The  blood  of  Christ  is  the  only  protection  of  the 
soul,  and  must  be  sprinkled  as  well  as  shed  (Rom.  v.  11).    The  soul  must  make  a 
personal  appropriation  of  Christ.     To  know  Christ  will  profit  little.    We  must  feast 
on  Him  by  faith.    IV.  In  the  spirit  it  demands  (ver.  22).    The  bunch  of  hyssop 
signifies  faith  and  humility.     David  said,  "  Wash  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be 
clean  "  (Psa.  li.  7).    Hyssop  is  a  lowly  herb  growing  in  rocky  places.     In  the  recep- 
tion of  Christ  the  soul  must  be  humble.     1.  The  paschal  lamb  was  also  to  be  eaten 
with  unleavened  bread  and  with  bitter  herbs  (ver.  8).     Here  we  have  shadowed 
forth  the  need  of  repentance  and  sincerity.    And  if  the  soul  is  to  receive  Christ,  it 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

must  be  wi'h  a  contrite  heart  and  with  a  deep  sense  of  demerit.  2.  The  paschal 
lamb  was  to  be  eaten  in  the  attitude  of  haste  (ver.  11).  The  loins  must  be  girded, 
the  feet  must  be  shod,  the  hands  must  hold  the  staff.  The  redeemed  soul  must  sit 
loose  to  earthly  things.  The  good  are  pilgrims  in  the  world  ;  they  must  be  ready 
to  go  to  Canaan.  V.  In  the  peril  it  averts  (ver.  13).  An  emblem  of  the  dangers 
averted  from  men  by  a  believing  interest  in  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  They 
are  delivered  from  the  power  of  the  second  death.  They  escape  the  stroke  of  the 
destroying  angel.  Their  safety  is  welcome  and  happy.  VI.  In  the  extent  it 
contemplates.  By  a  proper  observance  of  the  Passover  all  Israel  would  be  pre- 
served from  the  blow  of  the  destroying  angel,  not  one  soul  excepted.  And  so  by 
application  to  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ  the  whole  world  may  receive  an 
eternal  salvation  from  the  awful  penalties  of  sin.  Lessons  :  1.  That  Christ  cruci- 
fied is  the  only  hope  of  moral  safety.  2.  That  Christ  appropriated  is  the  only 
refuge  of  the  soul.  3.  That  Christ  must  be  received  by  repentance  and  faith. 
{Ibid.)  The     blood-marked    house: — The     grand    central     truth    of    all    the 

objective  truths  here  is  shadowed  forth  in  that  blood  of  the  spotless  lamb  shed  and 
sprinkled  on  the  door-posts.  It  has  a  deep,  mysterious  meaning,  and  finds  its 
interpretation  in  the  history  of  Calvary  and  the  Cross,  far  onward  yet,  even  fifteen 
hundred  years,  in  the  history.  The  blood-marked  house  is  but  rejiresentative  of 
every  soul  tenement  on  earth,  the  dweller  in  which — made  alive  to  the  impending 
doom  by  the  voice  that  cries  from  Sinai,  "  Whosoever  sinneth,  him  will  I  blot  out 
from  My  book,"  and  by  the  voice  crying  from  the  depths  within — hath  fled  from 
under  the  dark  thundercloud  of  wrath,  to  Him  who  was  lifted  up  on  the  Cross. 
This  blood  is  not  only  the  central  idea  of  this,  but  of  all  the  revelations  of  God. 
The  whole  gospel,  is,  in  fact,  summed  up  just  here — "  When  I  see  the  blood  I  will 
pass  over."  Blood  !  blood  !  this  is  the  one  cry  of  the  gospel — the  Alpha  and  the 
Omega  of  the  gospel.  All  hope  of  the  Divine  favour — all  strength  to  resist  and 
conquer  sin — all  power  of  a  holy  life  comes  from  this  blood.  Is  man  redeemed  ?  It 
is  because  "  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood."  Are  any  ransomed  from  sin  ? 
"  Not  by  corruptible  ransom  of  silver  and  gold"  are  they  purchased,  "but  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb  without  spot."  Are  these  justified  ?  "  Being 
justified  by  His  blood."  Are  these  cleansed  and  made  holy?  " His  blood  cleanseth 
from  all  sin."  Are  they,  as  strangers  and  wanderers  from  God,  restored  ?  "  Ye 
who  sometimes  were  afar  off  are  now  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ."  Have 
they  access  to  the  Father's  presence  in  prayer?  It  is  because  the  High  Priest 
hath  gone  before  "  sprinkling  the  blood."  Are  they  arrayed  in  spotless  robes  to 
appear  at  the  court  of  the  Great  King  ?  "  They  have  washed,  &c.,  in  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb."  Are  sinners  cast  off  at  last  to  eternal  death?  It  is  because  "  they 
have  trampled  under  foot  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God."  Thus  in  the  gospel  revela- 
tion, all  mercy,  compassion,  and  grace  of  God  have  their  ground  in  that  blood.  All 
conviction  of  sin,  all  holy  desire  in  the  soul,  as  well  as  all  hope  and  trust  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,  come  from  that  blood.  (C  S.  llobinson,  D.D.)  Clirist  our  Passover  : — 
Let  us  for  once  use  the  story  as  an  illustration  of  evangelical  faith  as  an  instrument 
in  attaining  salvation  under  the  gospel.  In  its  analysis  we  are  all  agreed  that 
saving  faith  has  three  elements — knowledge,  assent,  and  trust.  Now,  we  study  these 
in  turn.  I.  In  the  first  place,  the  security  of  the  Children  of  Israel  on  that  awful 
night  lay  j)artly  in  the  intelligent  knowledge  they  possessed  of  the  prescribed 
means  of  escape  from  the  destroying  angel.  Four  things  were  taught  them — 1. 
It  was  not  the  announcement  of  Moses  which  made  this  blood  of  a  slain  lamb  the 
sign  of  deUverance  from  the  plague,  but  the  appointment  of  God  Himself.  The 
essential  truth  taught  here  is,  that  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  had  no  inherent  value 
in  itself  which  could  atone  for  sin ;  it  was  the  covenant  of  redemption  that  gave  it 
its  value.  2.  It  was  not  the  shedding  of  the  lamb's  blood  which  should  avail  to  save 
them,  but  the  sprinkling  of  it  on  the  door.  Every  soul  must  accept  the  atonement 
on  God's  terms.  3.  It  was  not  consciousness  of  security  within,  but  evidence  of 
obedience  without,  which  would  settle  the  fact  of  deliverance  in  every  instance.  It 
ought  to  be  a  help  to  sinners  to  know  that  God  does  not  go  over  the  past  life  of 
those  who  come  to  Him,  as  if  on  inquisition  after  their  iniquities  great  or  small, 
when  once  they  plead  the  merits  of  His  Son  as  their  Redeemer.  The  vilest  become 
clean  in  His  sight  when  Christ  is  whoUy  accepted.  The  angel  of  Divine  justice 
looks  only  upon  the  marks  which  show  obedience  and  substitution.  4.  It  was 
reserved  to  God  Himself  to  judge  of  the  evidence  of  true  and  beUeving  surrender  to 
His  commands.  "When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you."  II.  These  four 
things  were  taught  to  the  people  on  that  remembered  night,  and  constituted  their 


CHAP,  xii.]  EXODUS.  191 

necessary  intelligence  ;  from  this  it  is  easy  to  pass  on  and  inquire  after  the  second 
element  of  saving  faith,  assent,  illustrated  here  in  the  story.     1.    See  how  such  a 
conception  rebukes  a  feeling  of  indifference  in  the  heart  of  any  sinner.     2.  See  how 
thististory  rebukes  a  captious  spirit  making  petulant  objection  to  the  sovereignty 
of  God.     3.  See  how  this  incident  rebukes  the  mistake  of  trying  to  be  a  Christian 
out  of  sight.     No  one  is  wise  in  attempting  to  obey  God  in  secret,  when  it  is 
vrritten  down  plainly  that  part  of  the  command  is  that  we  obey  Him  in  public.     So 
the  Scripture  says,  "With  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness  ;  and  with 
the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."     4.  See  how  this  history  rebukes 
all  delay  in  the  duty  of  obeying  God.     What  if  the  Israelites  one  after  another  put 
off  the  preparation  of  the  lamb  for  the  Passover  ?    What  good  vi^as  there  in  wait- 
ing?    How  strange  it  would  have  been  for  any  one  to  say,  "I  want  more  convic- 
tion," or  for  any  one  to  plead,  "  I  am  not  really  so  badly  off  as  this  assumes  "  ;  or 
for  one  to  say,  "My  neighbours  are  so  inconsistent  that  I  cannot  endure  them"  ! 
If  a  duty  is  to  be  done,  wliy  does  not  each  man  do  his  duty  now  ?     This  is  what 
is  meant  by  assent  as  an  element  of  saving  faith.     III.  There  remains  only  the 
third  element  of  faith  mentioned  in  the  beginning — trust.     Think  of  that  family 
just  the  half-hour  before  midnight.    The  lamb  lies  there;  the  basin  with  its  bunch 
of  hyssop  stained  in  it  is  close  beside  ;  the  doorway  is  wet  with  the  blood.     They 
have  done  all  their  duty  just  as  God  bade  them;  that  was  all  they  could  do.     Now 
they  wait ;  that  waiting  is  trust — the  trust  we  are  talking  about.     It  is  the  feeling 
within  one's  heart  which  says,  "Thus  I  have  tried  to  do  honestly  all  that  the  Lord 
asked  at  my  hands  ;  He  told  me  to  bend  my  will,  make  my  prayer,  take  my  Saviour, 
and   after  that  leave  all  the  rest  to  Him;  there  now  I  stand  and  wait."     (Ibid.) 
The  Egyptian  and  the  Israelite  : — I.  In  the  history  of  the  Exodus,  Egypt  and  Israel, 
the  opposed  nationalities,  represent  two  different  estates  of  the  human  life — 
the  earthly  and  the  spiritual.     These  opposite  estates  are  presented  in  eternal  con- 
trast throughout  the  pages  of  Ho^  Writ.     In  the  Eevelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine 
the  mystical  Babylon  represents  tliat  earthly,  perishable,  debased  life  which  is  here 
represented  by  Egypt ;  and  the  everlasting  destiny  of  the  spiritual  life  is  represented 
by  the  New  Jerusalem.     The  same  antithesis  is  expressed  by  St.  Paul  in  the  fifteenth 
chapter  ot  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.     The  apostle  contrasts  the  earthly 
and  the  spiritual  in  the  forms  of  the  personal  human  life,  out  of  which  the  national 
and  the  civil  life  have  their  origin  :  "  There  is  a  natural  body,  and  there  is  a  spiritual 
body."     So  also  in  his  Epistle  to  the  E^Aesians,  the  opposed  states  of  life  typified 
by  Egypt  and  Israel,  Babylon  and  New  Jerusalem,  derived  from  the  first  Adam  and 
the  Second  Adam,  are  contrasted  in  the  words,  "  That  ye  put  off  concerning  the 
former  conversation  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts ; 
and  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind  ;  and  that  ye  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness."     The  history  of  the  Exodus 
does  not  merely  narrate  facts  that  occurred  in  a  bygone,  distant  age.     It  is  also  an 
ever-contemporary  history  of  the  struggle  of  human  life  going  on  in  every  age. 
The  slavery,  oi^pressiou,  debasement,  and  misery  of  Israel  in  Egypt  represent  to  us 
the  bondage,  the  discontent,  and  unrest  of  the  human  spirit  enchained,  degraded, 
and  debased  by  the  forces  of  the  carnal  and  worldly  life.     The  lusts  and  the  passions 
that  goad  the  human  being  into  the  debasing  works  of  vice  are  task-masters  that 
afflict  with  sore  burdens.     Man's  eternal  inability  to  find  rest  and  blessedness  in 
the  slavery  of  the  sensual  and  worldly  life,  is  expressed  in  the  words,  "  The  Children 
of  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of  the  bondage,  and  they  cried,  and  their  cry  came  up 
unto  God,  by  reason  of  their  bondage."     The  march  out  of  the  Egyptian  bondage 
towards  the  confines  of  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  in  order  to  stand 
before  the  Lord  in  "the  mountain  of  His  inheritance,"  is  the  great   historical 
parable,  composed  in  the  providence  of  God  to  represent  the  progress  of  the  human 
soul  out  of  the  sensual  life  into  the  spiritual — out  of  the  low  life  of  the  earthly 
level  into  the  communion  of  the  most  high  life  of  God.     The  Divine  voice  of  the 
Eternal  Love,  speaking  through  the  Church,  is  for  ever  summoning  man  to  'travel 
towards  the  land  of  nobleness  and  freedom  :  "When  Israel  was  a  child  then  I  loved 
him,  and  called  My  son  out  of  Egypt."     The  means  which  God  employed  to  relax 
the  gi-asp  of  the  tyrant,  are  the  same  which  He  still  employs  from  age  to  age.    The 
human  soul,  enslaved  by  the  overmastering  forces  of   the  flesh  and  the  world, 
cannot  escape  from  its  bondage  without  the  aid  of  a  power  from  above.    How  does 
God  aid  the  soul  to  break  its  chains?     He  sends  trials,  sorrows,  sicknesses,  dis- 
appointments.    The  plagues  are  not  sent  in  vain.     In  the  hour  of  each  visitation 
the  tyrant  grasp  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  world  upon  the  spiritual  will  is  weakened. 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

and  the  claims  of  spiritual  truth  are  acknowledged.  Old  habits  are  not  broken  by 
a  single  chastening.  This  passage  describes,  with  exact  spiritual  accuracy,  the 
nature  of  the  final  visitation  that  carries  conviction  to  the  oft-hardened,  un.yielding 
soul.  What,  then,  are  the  leading  features  of  the  visitation  as  here  set  before  us  ? 
The  manifestation  of  God's  presence ;  the  gloom  of  a  night  unlit,  save  by  tlie 
flashes  of  the  angelic  sword  ;  the  slaughter  of  Egypt's  best  and  choicest  lives  :  the 
exposure  of  the  vanity  and  weakness  of  Egypt's  creature  gods.  The  all-pervading 
l^reseuce  of  God  was  now  to  be  realized  in  the  Egyptian  kingdom,  according  to  the 
words,  "  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of  Egypt."  These  words  express  the  truth 
that  God  was  about  to  compel  those  who  had  been  living  "  without  God  in  the 
world  "  to  realize  the  power  and  majesty  of  His  presence.  The  godless  man,  living 
through  long  years  under  the  government  of  hard,  tyrannical,  untrained  self-will, 
ignores  tbe  presence  of  God  :  "  The  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  bis  countenance, 
will  not  seek  after  God  ;  God  is  not  in  all  his  thoughts."  When  man  has  lived  long 
without  God  in  the  world,  lived  the  sensual,  worldly  life  of  Egypt,  what  power  can 
enable  him  to  realize  the  presence  of  the  Invisible  Lord,  and  to  recognize  in  the 
passing  hours  the  form  of  His  Majesty  ?  Nothing  less  than  some  overpowering 
shock  that  shakes  to  its  very  foundations  the  fabric  of  his  life-habits,  and  convulses 
all  the  recesses  of  his  being.  Such  a  convulsion  is  here  represented  in  the  words, 
•'  I  will  pass  through  the  laud  of  Egypt  this  night."  The  times  in  which  God 
reveals  the  terrors  of  His  presence  to  tbe  sensual,  worldly  natures,  are  times  of 
darkness.  To  the  children  of  Egypt  the  countenance  of  God  comes  in  the  night  of 
trouble,  sickness,  and  dissolution.  In  the  bright  day  of  health,  activity,  and 
wealth,  the  Egyptian  soul  realizes  not  the  nearness  of  God.  This  night  is  for  ever 
falling  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  The  prospects  of  the  sensual  worldly  life  are  for 
ever  subject  to  the  coming  of  tlie  darkness.  There  is  not  a  household  in  all  the 
land  of  Esivpt  that  does  not,  sooner  or  later,  feel  the  growing  darkness  of  the  night 
of  trial  settling  upon  it.  But  another  element  inu  the  power  of  the  visitation  that 
carries  conviction,  is  the  destruction  of  "  the  firetbom."  In  Holy  Writ  this  ex- 
pression has  a  secondary  and  wider  significance.  It  is  used  to  denote  all  that  is 
foremost  in  value  and  strength.  Hence  the  destruction  of  all  the  firstborn  of  Egypt 
represents  the  eternal  truth,  that  the  choicest  and  strongest  existences  of  the 
earthly  and  natural  life  are  doomed  to  change  and  dissolution.  The  day  of  visita- 
tion is  also  a  day  in  which  the  powerlessness  of  the  Egyptian  gods  is  demonstrated  : 
"  Against  all  the  gods  of  Egypt  I  will  execute  judgment."  The  men  of  the  world 
and  the  men  of  the  flesh  exalt  some  of  the  creatures  into  the  throne  that  should  be 
occupied  by  God.  Thus  does  God  for  ever  work  out  the  emancipation  of  chosen 
Bouls.  If  the  natural  life  were  for  ever  undarkened  by  affliction ;  unchastened  by 
bereavement ;  unrebuked  by  the  overthrow  of  its  idols,  then  the  human  spirit  would 
never  escape  out  of  the  tyrannous  bondage  of  sensuality  and  gross  worldliness,  never 
rise  into  the  mountain  of  God's  inheritance.  II.  The  Israelite  lives  are  saved  fro.m 
THE  power  of  the  Destroyer.  In  the  hour  when  the  plagues  oppressed  the  life 
of  Egypt,  Israel  was  delivered  from  the  destroying  power  of  the  visitation :  "  I  will 
pass  over  you,  and  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy  you."  Although 
placed  in  the  midst  of  the  same  objective  circumstances,  Israel  and  Egypt  realized 
different  effects  from  them.  The  land  in  which  both  sojourned  was  the  same  land  ; 
but  for  one  people  it  was  a  land  overrun  by  the  plague  of  darkness  at  the  very  hour 
when  the  other  people  walked  in  the  light.  This  miracle,  accomplished  historically 
in  the  contrasted  destinies  of  the  two  typical  nations,  is  repeated  spiritaally  in  the 
experience  of  all  the  souls  that  bear  in  themselves  the  two  different  types  of  human 
character,  the  earthly  image  of  Egypt  and  the  spiritual  image  of  Israel.  The  land 
of  our  sojourning  is  still  subject  to  the  plague  of  darkness.  Tor  instance,  the  great 
mystery  of  human  suffering  is  a  problem  which  casts  abroad  a  "  darkness  which 
may  be  felt."  Why  do  pain,  want,  and  agony  exist?  To  the  sensual  and  worldly 
man  the  question  is  one  for  which  no  answer  is  to  be  found.  As  the  darkness  of 
Egypt  is  for  ever  recurring,  so  also  is  the  light  of  Israel.  The  very  same  trials 
which  are  inexplicably  gloomy  to  tbe  unspiritual  man,  are  intelligible  in  their 
purpose,  and  full  of  light  to  the  Christian  soul.  To  the  question.  What  is  the 
purpose  of  suffering?  he  is  taught  to  answer,  that  pains  and  agonies  are  means  of 
spiritual  discipline  for  perfecting  strength  and  beauty  of  character.  The  iiternal 
Light  of  the  world  was  shining  in  the  Divine-human  soul  of  Jesus  Christ,  at  the 
very  hour  when  He  voluntarily  passed  under  the  visitation  of  the  power  of  darkness, 
as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  to  be  made  perfect  by  suffering.  So  for  the 
members  of  His  Body,  the  souls  united  to  Him,  the  promise  is  fulfilled.:  "  He  that 


chaP.  xn.]  EXODf75.  193 

foUoweth  Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  As  the 
hour  which  was  dark  to  the  Egyptian  was  bright  to  the  Israelite,  so  the  sword  that 
smote  the  firstborn  of  the  earthly  race  passed  by  the  children  of  the  chosen.  This 
miracle,  also,  is  for  ever  repeated.  But  for  the  Christian,  the  "  firstborn,"  the 
chief,  most  cherished  object  of  His  being,  is  the  hidden  Divine  life  of  Christ  in  the 
soul.  In  the  atoning  death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus,  we  behold  the  fulfilment  of 
that  eternal  spiritual  law,  which  gives  safety  to  the  firstborn  of  Israel.  For  us 
men  and  for  our  redemption  He  mortified  the  natural  life,  and  sacrificed  it  npou  the 
cross.  To  the  earthly  soul,  in  that  self-sacrifice  unto  death  the  God  man  seemed 
to  have  yielded  the  chief  treasure,  the  '*  firstborn  object  of  preservation,  to  the 
destroying  sword.  But  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day,  it  became  m<inifest  that 
thetrvre  Firstborn  was  not  the  life  laid  down  upon  the  Cross,  but  the  risen  life  that 
had  survived  tlip  sword  of  the  Destroying  Angel  in  the  night  of  Calvary,  and  come 
forth  in  safety  and  triumph  out  of  the  hour  of  gloom,  and  out  of  the  pains  of 
death,  "  because  it  was  not  possible  that  He  should  be  holden  of  it."  So  also  iu 
all  the  living  members  of  Christ  this  destiny  is  for  ever  being  accomplished  anew. 
The  Christian  never  loses  his  cherished  treasure,  the  "firstborn"  of  his  heart. 
Why  ?  Because  in  the  voluntary  self-sacrifice  of  his  own  natural  will  he  has  given 
up  the  natural  earthly  "  firstborn."  in  order  to  receive  him  again  in  a  risen,  restored 
form,  ensured  against  the  destroying  sword.  He  who  belongs  to  the  mora.1  common- 
wealth of  Egypt,  and  knows  no  higher  laws  in  the  regulation  of  his  inward  life  than 
those  of  natural  flesh  and  blood,  will  lose  the  dearest  firstborn  of  his  being.  He 
who  is  enrolled  in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  as  a  living  member  of  Christ, 
having  insciibed  on  his  heart  the  laws  of  the  spiritual  kingdom,  has  received  that 
"firstborn"  of  the  Eternal  Life,  who  will  be  found  unscathed  in  the  darker  hour 
when  the  Destroying  Angel  passes  through  the  land  :  "  He  that  loseth  his  life  for 
My  sake  shall  find  it."  The  plague  can  only  be  escaped  by  the  spiritual  franchise 
of  Israel.  They  who  give  their  hearts  to  the  external  treasures  of  the  sensual  and 
temporal  life,  will  find  their  firstborn  smitten  down  in  the  day  of  visitation.     II.  The 

■rOKEN  OF  THE  COVENANT  THAT  5LUIKS  THE  HABITATIONS  OF    ISRAEL.       "  The  blood  sliall 

he  to  you  for  a  token  upon  the  houses  where  ye  are ;  and  when  I  see  the  blood,  I 
will  pass  over  you."  The  Destroying  Angel,  according  to  the  eternal  order  of  God, 
passed  harmlessly  by  the  blood-sprinkled  houses,  and  was  not  authorized  to  use  His 
sword  against  the  lives  of  any  that  presented  that  token.  Throughout  Holy  Writ 
the  saving  efficacy  of  bloodshed  in  sacrifice  according  to  God's  commandment  is 
declared.  "  Almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged  with  blood ;  and  without 
shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  So  in  this  passage,  the  power  that  redeems 
human  nature  from  slavery  and  ruin  is  represented  as  dwelling  in  the  blood : 
"  When  I  see  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you."  But  let  us  ask  again,  What  is  the 
connection  between  salvation  thi-ough  blood  and  the  mystery  of  love  ?  The  hidden 
attribute  of  love  can  only  be  communicated  to  man  by  outward  expression.  The 
true  expression  of  love  is  sacrifice.  The  most  precious  sacrifice  expresses  the 
strongest  love.  In  order  to  give  expression  to  infinite  love,  a  sacrifice  of  infinite 
value  was  required.  Man  knows  of  no  treasure  equal  in  value  to  the  gift  of  life. 
"  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood."  Thus  the  shedding  of  the  Divine-human 
blood  was  tbe  expression  of  that  love  which  "  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  law." 
Therefore  the  power  that  redeems  man  from  Egypt,  and  neutralizes  all  the  influences 
that  tend  to  debase  and  enslave  his  nature,  is  the  power  of  Divine  Love  working  in 
his  being  through  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  came  into  humanity  as  the 
consequence  of  that  infinite  self-sacrifice  on  Calvary  of  Him,  concerning  whom  the 
appointed  witness  testified,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin 
of  the  world."  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  blood  of  the  sacrificed  life  was . 
sprinkled  upon  the  habitations  of  I-rael.  What  is  the  truth  that  we  are  to  learn 
from  that  ?  The  power  of  the  Divine  Love  must  influence  the  forms  of  our  earthly 
human  Hie.  The  means  of  grace  in  the  Church  are  ordained  for  the  p  :rpose  of 
bringing  us  under  the  saving  power  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  The  highest  of  these 
means  is  the  Holy  Communion  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ.  We  must  live 
the  life  of  earnest  Christian  activity :  "  Thus  shall  ye  eat  it ;  with  your  loins 
girded."  We  must  live  in  the  desire  of  spiritual  progress,  earnestly  preparing  our- 
selves "to  walk  henceforth  in  His  most  holy  ways."  We  must  try  to  live  above, 
the  world,  in  the  consciousness  that  we  are  hastening  on  towards  another  scene  of: 
existence  :  "  Ye  shall  eat  it  in  haste."  If  we  are  crucified  with  Christ,  and  living 
the  risen  life  in  Him,  the  tokens  of  the  saving  power  will  be  evident  in  all  the,- 
habits  of  our  being.    The  signs  of  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvatiotn  are  for 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn.  ■ 

ever  the  same.     They  who  are  marked  by  them  "live  soberly,  righteously,  and 
godly  in  this  present  world."     The  sobriety  that  enables  us  to  control  our  own 
inward  life,  is  one  of  the  effects  of  the  atoning  blood.     The  sensual,  the  proud,  the 
self-indulgent  man  has  in  the  character  of  his  life  no  sign  of  the  spirit  of  self- 
sacrifice.     {H.   T.  Edwards,  31. A.)         Christ,  otir  Passover : — I.  First  of  all,  the 
nei;d  roR  the  blood.     And  upon  this  we  need  to  be  very  tamest,  and  to  have 
a  very  clear   conception.     We  must  not  put  it  on   one   side,  as   being   a  minor 
consideration.     In  that  time,  when  Jehovah  shall  make  an  inquisition  for  sin, 
and   shall   search   out  iniquity,  and  shall   set   secret  sins  in    the   light  of   His 
countenance,  then  we  shall  feel,  if  we  do  not  feel  now,  that  there  is  a  needs-be  for 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.     But,  brethren,  we  need  to  keep  this  before  us.     But 
think  not  that  in  the  last  day  it  will  be  as  at  this  time — that  each  household  shall 
give  its  contribution  in  redemption  of  its  firstborn.     Think  not  that  the  judgment 
is  to  come  to  households  or  to  families.     Be  very  clear  upon  that  point :  it  is  to 
come  to  you ;  and  evei-y  one  must  give  an  account  of  himself  unto  his  God.     II. 
Now  I  pass  on  wiih  a  joyous  step  to  the  next  point — the  natdke  of  tde  blood. 
Notice  here  what  our  figure  implies,  by  teaching,  first,  wherein  is  the  efficacy  of 
the  blood  ;  and,  secondly,  wherein  it  is  not.     1.  You  will  see  that  the  great  efficacy 
of  this  blood  is  that  it  is  the  blood — not  any  blood,  but  the  appointed  blood. 
Supposing  any  one  had  been  so  foolish,  on  that  day  to  which  our  text  refers,  as  to 
say,  "  I  will  not  sprinkle  the  lamb's  blood,  but  the  bullock's,  or  some  other  animal's 
blood,  on  the  door-post" — what  would  have  been  the  result?     It  would  not  have 
been  the  appointed  blood  that  was  to  save.     The  eflicacy  of  the  blood  was  that  it 
was  appointed.     Jesus  Christ  came  not  of  Himself,  but  was  sent  by  His  Father.     I 
hear  some  one  say,  "How  shall  I  be  sure  that  God  will  accept  the  blood  of  Christ?" 
■  Why,  He  hath  appointed  it,  and  surely  if  it  is  His  own  appointing  He  will  not 
disown  what  He  hath  done  Himself  ;  and  if  He  hath  appointed  the  blood  to  be  the 
means  whereby  you  are  to  be  passed  over,  rest  assured  that  what  He  hath  fixed  He 
will  stand  to.     2.  And  then,  again,  you  will  perceive  that  from  this  Lamb's  blood 
there  is  an  idea  of  innocence  and  of  purity.     Christ  stood  not  only  the  innocent 
Man,  but  He  stood  the  righteous  Man — having  lived  a  life  of  righteousness,  and 
having  wrought  in  His  own  flesh  and  blood  a  rigliteousness  such  as  the  world  hath 
never  seen,  and  never  shall  see  the  like  again.     We  therefore  glory  this  night  in 
the  purity  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.     3.  Then,  too,  you  will  see  that  this  blood 
was  substitutionary  blood.     It  was  blood  that  had  been  shed  in  the  place  and  stead 
of  the  family  upon  whose  door-post  it  was  put.     Here  tliou  canst  see,  if  Christ  died 
for  thee,  God,  in  justice,  cannot  demand  the  victim  twice,  the  olifering  twice — first 
of  all  thy  substitute,  and  then  thee.    That  were  injustice.    He  hath  received  the 
offering  at  the  hands  of  the  substitute,  and  therefore  thou  canst  say  there  is  no 
condemnation  for  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after 
the  Spirit.     These  are  the  three  things  in  which  the  type  agrees  with  the  antitype. 
Now  we  pass  to  something  in  which  they  differ.     The  type  was  the  blood  of  a  lamb, 
but  He  who  comes  is  the  blood  of  a  man.     Any  one  who  has  ever  seriously  thought 
upon  the  subject  must  have  discovered  what  the  apostle  Peter  so  clearly  revealed 
afterwards,  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  blood  of  bulls  or  of  goats  to  take  away  sin. 
But  when  we  come  to  behold  the  blood  of  the  perfect  Man,  then  we  see  that  there 
is  something  which  can  remove  sin.     The  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  could  not  do  it ; 
but  the  blood  of  God's  own  Son  in  human  flesh  can  do  it.     And  now  to  that  which, 
after  all,  is  the  leading  characteristic  of  this  blood,  by  which  we  expect  to  be  passed 
over.     It  is  Divine  in  its  nature,  or  rather  Divine  in  its  value.     This,  then,  is  the 
nature  of  the  blood — appointed  by  God  the  Father,  perfectly  pure,  substituted  for 
us,  blood  of  man  with  the  value  of  Deity — that  is  the  nature  of  the  blood,  seeing 
which,  God  says  He  will  pass  us  over.     III.  Then,  thirdly,  we  come  to  the  appli- 
cation OF  THAT  BLOOD.     Ycs,  I  allow  that  that  blood  was  a^Dplied  by  the  man  to 
the  door-post,  but  it  was  only  so  applied  as  he  was  influenced  by  a  solemn  power. 
It  was  done  by  the  man  himseli  for  the  family — I  mean  the  head  of  the  household 
representing  the  household — but  that  was  because  he  was  influenced  so  to  do,  by 
sovereign  power  and  sovereign  grace.     If  ever  you  are  saved,  you  will  not  be  saved 
in  spite  of  yourself,  but  you  will  be  saved  by  being  made  willing  in  the  day  of  His 
power.     There  is  no  getting  out  of  human  responsibility.     There  is  no  getting  away 
from  the  fact  that  there  are  Divine  commands.     There  are  Divine  promises,  but 
they  are  linked  with  Divine  commands.     There  is  the  promise  that  will  enable  you 
to  keep  the  command,  but  bear  in  mind  that  you  will  have  to  put  on  the  blood, 
though  it  will  be  by  the  sweet  constraint  and  sovereign  power  of  grace.    IV.  And 


cni?.  xn.]  EXODUS.  195 

now  we  must  pass  on  to  the  effect  of  the  appmcation  of  blood.  We  know  how 
God  passed  through  and  smote  of  every  household  of  Egypt  the  firstborn,  but  not 
one  died  in  Israel.  Oh,  if  you  could  have  known  the  agony  some  doubtless  were 
in  as  they  sat  in  their  houses  that  night  waiting  for  the  midnight  hour  to  strike — 
all  awake — strong  and  healthy — not  one  sick  one  was  found  amongst  them — not 
having  retired  to  rest  because  they  needed  it  not,  but  all  feasting,  and  yet  listening 
— eating  in  haste  because  they  wanted  to  listen  as  well  as  because  they  wanted 
soon  to  depart — listening  to  the  death-shrieks  of  those  who  were  smitten  by  the 
angel  passing  by — wondering  whether  the  angel  would  come  there  or  not.  At  last 
the  angel  comes,  and  passes  on.  Oh,  I  could  think  of  that  till  it  thrills  through 
me !  Did  the  angel  sweep  his  wing  through  the  air  with  a  perceptible  sound,  or 
was  all  silent  till  the  shriek  of  death  rose  again  ?  What  it  was  like  I  know  not ; 
but  I  think  it  must  have  been — oh,  it  must  have  been  an  awful  hour  to  the  children 
of  Israel,  though  it  was  a  gladsome  one  to  their  souls  !  Perhaps  at  that  time  there 
were  anxious  inquirers  too,  saying,  "  Oh,  but  ice  cannot  see  the  blood."  Ah,  but 
the  angel  can  ;  the  promise  is  not,  "  When  ijoa  spe  the  blood  I  will  pass  over  you," 
but,  "  Wheu  I  see  the  blood."  And  I  dare  say  there  was  somewhat  of  trembling 
and  anxiety  lest  the  blood  should  not  have  been  put  on  n<jhtly,  or  lest  something 
should  have  been  omitted.  I  have  no  doubt  they  did  not  feel  perfectly  secure  till 
the  angel  had  passed  by,  and  they  were  safe,  secure,  and  passed  over.  And  so  it 
happens  with  the  Christian.  Though  he  may  have  believed  in  Christ  there  will 
come  times  when  he  will  be  inclined  to  say,  "  I  cannot  see  the  blood,"  and  when  he 
will  be  very  downcast  lest  death  should  come  to  him  then,  and  he  should  not  be 
quite  secure.  So  then,  there  may  be  fear,  and  trembling,  and  doubting,  and  yet 
perfect  securitj'.  But  still  I  am  certain  of  this — God  would  liave  us  to  be  sure  of 
it  and  to  trust  Him.  And  yet  I  feel  this  also,  He  would  have  us  not  to  be  high- 
minded,  but  to  fear  ;  for  He  says,  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed 
lest  he  fall."  Therefore  the  effect  of  the  application  of  this  Llood  is  this — it  is 
certain  you  will  be  passed  over,  but  at  tbe  same  time  you  must  not  be  too  high- 
minded — still  trusting  the  blood — never  forgetting  that  you  may  deceive  yourself. 
V.  And  now  just  to  put  two  or  three  possible  cases  where  this  blood  shall 
NOT  BE  applied.  I  go  to  the  entrance  of  a  solitary  Israelitish  house,  and  see 
there  are  signs  of  mourning  about  it.  I  enter,  and  I  find  the  mother  with  the 
corpse  of  her  firstborn  child  upon  her  knees.  She  is  crying,  "  0  my  son,  my 
son,  would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  I  "  I  say, 
"How  is  it  that  death  should  have  smitten  him  down?  Did  you  not  put  the 
blood  upon  the  doorpost?  No,  you  did  not,  or  he  would  not  have  been  killed.  I 
see  no  blood  upon  tbe  door-post — how  is  this?"  "  Oh,<  never  heard  of  such  a 
thing  as  blood — I  did  not  know  of  it."  "  Oh  !  "  says  one,  "  did  no  man  care  for 
my  soul  ?  I  never  heard  of  the  message  of  mercy  till  it  was  too  late,  and  we  never 
were  told  that  death  was  coming,  nor  of  salvation  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  we 
have  perished  for  lack  of  knowledge."  Now,  I  put  it  seriously  to  you,  and  after  the 
manner  of  men,  of  course  :  Are  there  not  souls  lost  in  the  same  way  now  ?  Are 
not  the  heathen  crying  out  perpetually  ?  Does  not  a  wail  from  the  uttermost  parts 
of  the  earth  penetrate  the  air  ?  Now,  let  us  pass  on  to  another  cause.  I  come  to 
another  house,  and  I  find  them  wailing.  I  say,  "  How  is  this  ?  "  The  head  of  the 
household  says,  "  Oh,  my  boy,  my  boy  !  I  was  passing  by,  and  I  heard  an  elder 
saying  something  to  the  people  ;  I  went  still  further,  and  heard  another  elder  of 
Israel  saying  something  to  a  great  crowd  ;  but  I  went  on.  I  did  not  know  what 
was  going  on,  for  I  had  just  bought  a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  was  going  to  prove  them — 
or  purchased  a  piece  of  land — and  I  was  so  occupied  with  these  things  that  I  did  not 
think  to  listen.  My  whole  heart  was  engrossed  and  engaged  upon  these  things,  and 
I  did  not  think  about  the  plague ;  and  now  see  the  result.  Death  has  come,  and 
we  have  been  struck  down  in  this  way."  Ah,  how  many  of  you  will  be  struck  down 
in  the  same  way !  God's  servants  have  been  preaching  about  faith,  and  the  wrath 
to  come  ;  but  you  have  been  too  busy  to  trouble  your  minds  with  such  things,  I 
will  suppose  another  case.  I  say,  "How  is  this,  my  man?  You  are  perfectly 
aware  of  it,  I  know,  because  Elder  So-and-so  took  care  to  tell  you  of  it."  "  Yes, 
I  am  without  excuse,  I  admit ;  but  you  know,  sir,  I  thought  to-morrow  would 
have  done  quite  as  well  as  to-day,  and  so  I  put  it  off  till  to-morrow,  and 
so  now  my  boy  is  gone."  Oh,  delay  not,  for  delays  are  dangerous — procrasti- 
nation is  the  thief  of  time.  I  could  go  on  giving  instances  of  persons  who  are 
thus  lost ;  let  me  give  one  more  and  I  have  done.  I  go  to  a  house  and  I  see  death 
there.    "  What ! "  I  say,  "  another  case  of  delusion  ?    Whose  is  the  mistake  here  ? 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [cHAp.xn. 

— f — __ — 

I  see  the  lamb,  I  believe  you  have  been  feasting — I  see  preparations  for  the  pass- 
over,  and  yet  there  is  death.  How  is  this  ?  "  "  Well,  sir,"  they  reply,  "  we  thought 
of  everything,  but  we  forgot  the  blood."  Ah,  many  will  have  at  the  last  day 
Christianity,  but  no  Christ — they  will  have  everything  but  the  blood.  They  will 
say,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  but  He  shall  say,  "  I  never  knew  you  ;  ye  never  knew  Me;  ye 
may  have  spoken  My  words,  but  you  never  had  Me  in  your  hearts."  It  is  not 
Christianity  in  its  most  perfect  form,  or  most  sanctimonious  garb,  or  most  earnest, 
zealous  efforts  before  the  world — it  is  not  Christianity  at  all  that  saves,  but  Jesus 
Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ  alone.  (J.  A.  Spnrgeon.)  The  Passover  in  Egypt  and 
its  tupiral  significance: — 1.  The  first  feature  which  strikt'S  us  is,  that  the  rite  was 
of  Divine  appointment.  This  significant  Hebrew  ceremony  would  never  have  been 
thought  of  by  an  Israelite  himself.  It  would  have  been  the  last  thing  that  would 
have  suggested  itself,  on  the  concluding  night  of  bondage,  to  kill  one  of  the 
members  of  their  flock  and  pprinkle  door-post  and  lintel  with  its  blood.  The 
method  of  the  great  Divine  Expiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world  was  pre-eminently 
God's  devising.  What  human  mind  would  ever  have  formulated  such  an  idea  as 
that  the  Eternal  would  send  to  this  apostate  earth  of  ours  the  Prince  of  Life  and 
Lord  of  Glory,  in  order  to  effect,  throu{.'h  a  death  of  self-surrender  and  suffering, 
the  emancipation  and  final  salvation  of  His  people  ?  2.  Let  us  note,  next,  the  name 
and  nature  of  the  appointed  victim — a  lamb.  The  animal  of  all  others  that  seems 
to  suggest  the  idea  of  innocence  and  meekness.  In  the  lion's  whelp,  with  all  its 
playfulness,  there  is  early  discerned  the  incipient  fierceness  of  untamable  years. 
It  seems  to  us  a  poor  reason  which  some  have  given  for  the  selection  of  the  paschal 
offering,  that  it  was  what  could  most  readily  be  furnished  by  the  shepherds  of 
Goshen  from  their  herds.  Let  us  see,  rather,  in  this  first  simple  element  in  the 
typical  significance,  what  the  writer  of  an  after  age  calls,  "  the  meekness  and 
gentleness  of  Christ."  3.  As  a  further  expansion  of  this  thought,  the  selected 
paschal  lamb  was  to  be  "  without  blemish."  Plague-mark  or  disease  or  infirmity 
dare  not  attach  to  it.  No  animal  would  be  accepted  with  torn  fleece  or  broken 
limb.  Christ  was  "  a  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot."  He  "  offered 
Himself  without  spot  to  God."  As  one  flaw  or  vein  in  the  marble  fatally  damages 
the  sculptor's  work ;  as  one  speck  in  tho  lens  of  microscope  or  telescope  destroys 
its  use  and  demands  a  recasting  ;  as  one  leak  would  inevitably  submerge  the  noblest 
vessel  that  ever  rode  the  waters ;  so,  one  leak  in  the  Mighty  Ark  of  Mercy  would 
have  been  fatal  to  His  qualifications  as  a  ransom  for  the  guilty.  Blessed  be  His 
name,  tiie  Lamb  "  slain  for  us  "  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners."  What  a  host  of  witnesses  conspired  on  earth  to  testify  to  His  immaculate 
purity  I  4.  The  paschal  la^b  was  not  only  without  blemish,  but  "  a  male  of  the 
first  year  "  ;  that  is  to  say,  had  attained  its  full  growth.  It  was  the  choicest  of  the 
fold.  It  was,  in  its  lowly  way,  the  type  of  absolute  perfection.  Behold  again,  a 
yet  additional  attestation  to  the  all-perfect  Sacrifice !  It  surely  adds  to  the  touchins? 
thought  of  His  death,  that  it  was  just  when  the  adorable  Saviour  had  attained  all 
that  was  complete  as  the  Ideal  of  humanity,  that  "  He  was  taken  out  of  the  land 
of  the  living."  The  Heavenly  Flower  was  cut  down,  not  when  in  early  incipient 
bud,  but  in  amplest  blossom.  The  pure  white  Lily  bowed  its  head,  not  when  the 
latent  beauty  was  undeveloped,  but  when  it  had  fully  revealed  its  "  calyx  of  gold." 
The  Divine  Tree  of  Life  succumbed  to  the  axe,  not  in  the  early  spring  when  its 
branches  were  unclothed  and  the  fruit  unformed ;  neither  in  late  autumn,  with  the 
leaves  prematurely  seared — but  in  the  full  summer  of  its  glory  ;  when  every  bough 
was  laden  with  verdure  and  hanging  with  richest  clusters.  The  magnificent 
Temple  fell,  not  when  half  upreared,  nor  yet  when  toil  and  suffering  had  left  their 
lines  and  furrows  on  the  gleaming  marble  ;  but  rather,  just  when  the  top  stone  had 
been  brought  forth  with  shouting,  and  the  cry  arose,  "  Grace,  grace  unto  it !  "  5. 
The  paschal  lamb  was  separated  from  the  flock  and  kept  alive  four  days.  This 
formed  a  further  Divine  injunction,  as  yon  will  find  by  reference  to  the  detailed 
instructions  in  the  opening  of  the  chapter  from  which  our  text  is  taken  (vers.  3,  6). 
Christ,  as  we  have  already  seen,  was  designated  for  His  atoning  work  and  sacrifice 
in  the  counsels  of  the  Father  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  6.  The  paschal 
lamb — after  being  presented  "  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month,  at  full 
moon,  between  the  evenings " — was  slain.  Here  is  the  foundation  truth  of  the 
gospel :  "  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  Yes,  the  "  sprinkling  "  ; 
for  observe,  that  under  the  varying  forms  of  observance  in  earlier  and  later  Jewish 
times,  this  expressive  action  was  rigidly  preserved.  Not  enough  for  you  or  for  me 
is  the  slaying  of  the  Lamb :  in  other  words,  the  mere  historical  fact  that  the  Divine- 


CHAP,  xii.]  EXODUS.  197 

human  Victim  died.  The  Israelite  might  have  piled  buttress  on  buttress,  pyramid 
on  pyramid,  to  effect  exclusion.  He  might  have  strengthened  his  dwelling  with 
bars  of  brass  and  pillars  of  iron,  lintels  and  door-posts  of  cunuing  workmanship. 
The  Destroyer's  weajJon  would  have  cleft  them  in  sunder.  "  Neither  is  there 
ealvation  in  any  other. "  The  work  of  Jesus  must  stand  alone  in  all  its  solitary 
grandeur  and  suflSciency.  "  When  I  see  the  blood" — "  the  blood,"  says  God — "  I 
will  pass  over  you."  The  final  injunction  to  the  Hebrews  regarding  their  olTering; 
viz.,  that  after  the  carcass  of  the  victim  was  "  roast  with  fires,"  it  was  to  be  eaten  : 
the  whole  was  to  be  eaten,  nothing  was  to  be  left.  What,  among  others,  is  one 
great  spiritual  lesson  here  inculcated?  That  it  is  not  enough  to  rest  satisfied  with 
the  initial  act  of  pardon  and  forgiveness  through  the  blood  of  the  Cross.  Christ 
must  not  only  be  looked  to  by  simple  faith,  but  in  His  own  expressive  but  much 
misunderstood  and  misinterpreted  words  and  simile,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  Except  "  (in  a  lofty,  spiritual  sense)  "  ye  eat  the  flesh  and  drink  the  blood  of 
the  Son  of  God,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."  (J.  li.  Macdujf',  D.D.)  The  protecting 
hlood: — There  is  a  legend  that  on  that  night  of  the  Exodus  a  young  Jewi'^h  maiden 
— the  firstborn  of  the  family — was  so  troubled  on  her  sick-bed  that  she  could  not 
sleep.  "  Father,"  she  anxiously  inquired,  "  are  you  sure  that  the  blood  is  there?  " 
He  replied  that  he  had  ordered  it  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  lintel.  The  restless  girl 
will  not  be  satisfied  until  her  father  has  taken  her  up  and  carried  her  to  the  door  to 
see  for  herself ;  and  lo  !  the  blood  is  not  there !  The  order  had  been  neglected,  and 
before  midnight  the  father  makes  haste  to  put  on  his  door  the  sacred  token  of 
protection.  The  legend  may  be  false ;  but  it  teaches  a  very  weighty  and  solemn 
admonition  to  every  sinful  soul  who  may  be  near  eternity  and  is  not  yet  sheltered 
under  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  (T.  L.  Cmjlcr.)  Christ's  expiation : — 
"  In  what  way  can  the  death  of  Christ,  considered  as  a  sacrifice  of  expiation,  be 
conceived  to  operate  to  the  remission  of  sins  ?  "  Archbishop  Magee  replies  :  "  To 
this  the  Christian  answer  is,  '  I  know  not,  nor  does  it  concern  me  to  know,  in  what 
manner  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  connected  with  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ;  it  is 
enough  that  this  is  declared  by  God  to  be  the  medium  through  which  my  salvation 
is  effected.  I  pretend  not  to  dive  into  the  counsels  of  the  Almighty.  I  submit  to 
His  wisdom.'  "  Tlie  blood  as  a  remedy  : — A  very  useful  lesson  is  taught  in  the 
following  striking  incident :  "  One  night  I  found,"  says  a  minister,  ■"  at  a  meeting, 
two  lads  of  sixteen  years  of  age  sitting  in  a  corner  with  their  open  Bibles.  One 
had  already  been  conversing  with  me  ;  I  had  noticed  the  other  iu  an  anxious  state. 
'  Well,  Johnny, '  I  said,  '  what  are  you  and  George  doing  here  ?  '  'I  am  trying  to 
clear  up  his  doubts,'  said  Johnny.  '  What  does  he  doubt  ? '  '  His  interest  in 
Christ.'  '  Well,  what  are  you  doing  ?  '  'I  am  pointing  him  to  the  blood.'  '  But 
is  he  not  looking  there  already  ?  '  '  Perhaps  he  is,  but  I'm  telling  him  to  look  till 
it  grows  on  him.'  "  Ah,  that  is  what  we  want ;  to  look  at  the  remedy  till  it  so 
grows  as  to  annihilate  guilt  ;  to  look  at  Christ  and  heaven  till  they  so  grow  upon 
us  as  to  outshine  and  eclipse  the  world.  To  look  at  the  pattern  He  has  set  us  till 
it  grows  in  glory,  and  we  grow  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit  more  "into  the 
same  image  "  !  (/.  Cox.)  Blessed  protection  : — On  board  a  British  man-of-war 
there  was  but  one  Bible  among  seven  hundred  men.  This  belonged  to  a  pious 
sailor  who  had  made  a  good  use  of  it.  He  had  read  it  to  his  comrades,  and,  by 
God's  blessings  on  his  labours,  a  little  band  of  praying  men  was  formed  that 
numbered  thirteen.  One  day  this  ship  was  going  into  battle.  Just  before  the  fight 
began,  these  thirteen  men  met  together  to  spend  a  few  moments  in  prayer.  They 
committed  themselves  to  God's  care,  not  expecting  to  meet  again  in  this  world. 
Their  ship  was  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight.  All  around  them  men  were  stricken 
down  by  death.  Two  of  these  men  were  stationed  with  three  others  in  charge  of 
one  of  the  guns.  The  other  three  men  were  killed  by  a  single  cannon-ball,  but 
there  in  safety  stood  the  two  praying  men.  They  had  agreed  that  when  the  battle 
was  over  those  who  might  still  be  alive  should  meet  if  possible.  They  met  soon 
after,  and  what  was  their  joy  to  find  the  whole  thirteen  were  there.  Not  one  of 
them  had  even  been  wounded.  What  a  blessed  shelter  it  was  that  protected  those 
men  of  prayer  1     (R.  Newton.) 

Ver.  14.  A  feast  to  the  Lord  throughout  your  generations. — Analogy  between 
the  Jewish  Passover  and  the  Lord's  Supper: — I.  The  Jewish  insiituxion  was 
COMMEMORATIVE  ;  SO  IS  THE  Lord's  Suppee.  1.  It  was  a  "memorial  "  of  a  deliver- 
ance from  the  most  cruel  bondage.  2.  It  was  a  "  memorial "  of  a  deliverance 
from  the  most  cruel  bondage  by  the  sacrifice  of  an  innocent  victim.     3.  It  was  a 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

"  memorial "  of  a  deliverance  wrought  by  the  sovereign  compassion  of  God 
(chap.  iii.  7,  8).     II.  The  Jewish  institution  was  social  ;  so  is  the  Lord's  Supper. 

1.  Here  all  feel  that  they  are  in  the  same  moral  condition.  2.  Here  all  feel  that 
they  are  dependent  on  the  same  Redeemer  for  salvation.  3.  Here  all  feel  that  they 
are  members  of  the  same  family  and  destined  for  the  same  house.  III.  The 
Jewish  institution  was  binding  ;  so  is  the  Lord's  Supper.     1.  It  is  binding  on  all. 

2.  It  is  binding  on  all  perpetually.  {Homilist.)        The  Passover : — I.  The  prepara- 
tion FOR  the  Passover.     1.  Divinely  commanded.     2.  The  Passover  a  new  era.     3. 
Details  explicitly  given.     (1)  Indicating  the  importance  of  having  a  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  "  for  every  ordinance  religiously  observed.     (2)  Indicating  the  importance 
of  observing  every  Divine  ordinance  as  divinely  ordained.     (3)  In  the  case  of  the 
Israelites,  to  deviate  from  the  prescribed  form  would  indicate  insubovdiuation.      (4) 
The  lamb  is  Divinely  declared  a  type  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  v.  17).     (5)  The  lamb  being 
"  kept  up  "  from  the  tenth  to  the  fourteenth  may  be  a  type  of  the  time  when  the 
promise  of  Christ  was  given  in  Eden,  and  of  His  crucifixion  on  Calvary.     II.  The 
BLOOD  OF  the  Passover.     1.  The  disposition  to  be  made  of  it.     2.  The  purpose. 
(1)  A  sign  for  the  angel  of  death  to  exempt  the  house  thus  marked.     (2)  This  sign 
thus  became  the  ground  of  peace  and  security  to  the  Israelites.     (3)  This  was  also 
a  sign  that  this  exemption,  peace,  and  security,  were  not  of  works,  but  wholly  of 
grace.     (4)  The  application  to  the  believer,  covered  by  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus 
(1  John  i.  7  ;  1  Pet.  i.  18-20;  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8;  Rom.  iii.  24,  25).     III.  Eating  the 
Passover.     Its  typical  significance.      Lessons :    1.    The    Old    Testament    seems 
typical  of  the  New  Testament.     2.  Doctrine  and  practice  vividly  portrayed.     (D. 
C.   Hughes,  ]Sl.A.)    Eastertide  memories: — 1.  It  is  a  day  that  reminds  us  of  the 
deep  sympathy  of  mind  with   nature.      The  springtime  of  the  year  lias  many 
meanings   for  us  all.     The  face  of  the  earth  is  renewed ;  and  in  imitation  of  it 
we  renew  our  dress  and  the  face  of  our  homes.     And  for  thoughtful  and  sensitive 
minds,    doubtless  the  lesson  goes  very  deep  and  very  far  ;  they  feel  the  gentle  hint 
that  old  dust  and  cobwebs  should  be  swept  out  of  the  mind,  and  that  they  should 
seek  for  a  fresh  stock  of  impressions  to  carry  the  work  of  imagination  cheerfully 
on.     2.  We  are  reminded  of  our  part  in  the  lot  of  humanity.     A  long  history 
seems  to  close;  a  new  one  opens  on  us  Easter  Day.    We  derive  the  name   of 
Easter  from  an  ancient  heathen  goddess,  Ostera,  worshipped  by  our  ancestors.    A 
thousand  years  ago,  her  priestesses  on  Easter   eve  washed  their  faces  in  clear 
springs  :  it  was  akind  of  sacrament  in  her  worship.    Then,  too,  the  Easter  fires  were 
kindled  on  many  a  height,  as  the  name  Osterberg,  which  often  occurs  in  Germany, 
reminds  us.     The  Easter  water  and  the  Easter  fire  had  substantially  one  tendency 
and  one  efficacy — to  cleanse  from  evil,  to  drive  away  evil  spirits,  to  bring  blessing 
to  the  hearth  and  home,  to  the  fields  and  the  toil  of  the  husbandman.     How  far 
and  wide  the  notion  of  a  purgation,  in  the  most  comprehensive  sense,  of  the  doing 
away  with  the  old  and  a  new  beginning,  has  extended  through  the  world  I    We 
may  begin  our  inquiries  in  the  East  of  Loudon,  where  the  Jews  make  a  thorough 
cleansing  of  the  house  and  of  the  utensils  against  the  Passover  season.     With  the 
old  leaven  let  malice  and  wickedness  go  out  of  the  heart,  and  let  it  recovf  r  its  un- 
leavened state  of  sincerity  and  truth.     Corresponding  customs  to  those  of  the  Jews 
are  practised  among  peoples  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  there  is  not  a  tribe  of 
black  or  brown  men  from  whom  we  may  not  learn  something  edifying  for  ourselves. 
At  a  feast  of  first-fruits  of  a  tribe  of  North  American  Indians,  tbey  provide  them- 
selves with  new  clothes,  new  pots  and  pans ;  they  collect  all  their  worn-out  clothes 
and  other  despicable  things,  sweep  and  cleanse  their  houses,  squares,  and  the  whole 
town  of  their  filth,  which,  with  all  the  remaining  grain  and  other  old  provisions, 
they  cast  together  into  one  common  heap,  and  consume  it  with  fire.     After  having 
fasted  for  three  days,  all  the  fire  in  the  town  is  extinguished.     During  the  fast  they 
abstain  from  the  gratification  of  every  passion  and  appetite  whatever.     A  general 
amnesty  is  proclaimed  ;  all  malefactors  may  return  to  their  towns.     On  the  fourth 
morning  the  high  priest,  by  rubbing  dry  wood  together,  produces  new  fire  in  the 
public  square,  whence  every  habitation  in  the  town  is  supplied  with  the  new  and 
pure  flame.     Then  there  is  feasting  and  rejoicing,  and  on  the  following  days  they 
receive  visits  from  their  friends  of  neighbouring  towns,  who  have  in  like  manner 
purified  and  prepai'ed  themselves.     A  man  of  genius,  in  describing  these  things, 
says,  "I  have  scarcely  heard  of  a  truer  sacrament — i.e.,  an  outward  and  visible 
sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  gi-ace — than  this,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  they 
were  originally  inspired  from  heaven  to  do  thus,  though  they  have  no  Biblical 
record  of  the  revelation."  3.  But  this  feast  reminds  us  of  deeper  things — of  things 


CHAP.  XII.]  EXODUS.  199 

that  never  were,  nor  coald  be,  learned  from  nature — of  the  hope  of  humanity,  of 
triumph  over  death.  If  we  look  at  the  imagery  and  traditions  of  the  nations,  there 
is  evidence  of  an  overwhelming  persuasion  that  the  soul  has  a  life  distinct  from 
the  body,  and  that  the  soul  will  live  again.  One  stronj^  belief  was,  when  the  body 
was  consumed  on  the  funeral  pyre,  the  human  burden,  as  a  lloojan  poet  calls  it, 
was  cast  awaj',  mortality  ceased,  and  higher  life  began.  The  phoenix  bird,  which 
arose  from  out  of  the  ashes,  was  one  of  the  symbolic  images  in  which  antiquity 
found  this  thought  expressed.  In  another  way  we  may  see  the  same  belief  form- 
ing the  very  basis  of  worship.  And  at  the  great  feasts  of  the  year,  such  as 
Eastertide,  the  first  thing  was  to  bring  offerings  to  the  spirits  of  the  dej^arted, 
solemnly  to  commemorate  them,  and  to  unite  with  them  in  the  social  feast.  What 
made  those  high  days  so  peculiarly  solemn,  was  the  thought  that  the  ancestral 
spirits  had  come  back  from  the  viewless  regions  to  hold  communion  with  their 
living  posterity,  and  to  imjiart  to  them  a  fresh  blessing.  And  here,  again,  at  the 
head  of  this  belief,  is  something  sweet  and  sound.  If  we  let  the  heart's  logic  have 
its  way  with  us,  we  shall  hold  that  the  life  of  humanity  is  continuous  aud  unbroken, 
and  that  they  who  have  gathered  with  us  in  the  house  of  God  in  times  gone  by 
return  from  time  to  time  to  visit  us  in  our  lingering  exile  from  bliss,  and,  it  may  be, 
secretly  to  inspire  us  to  follow  their  faith  and  to  attain  whither  they  have  attained. 
(E.  Jolnison,  M.A.)  The  Passover: — I.  Obedience.  Lamb  to  be  killed,  prepared, 
eaten.  None  to  be  left  till  morning.  Eaten  in  a  certain  form  and  manner. 
Christ,  the  Lamb,  slain  for  us,  to  be  received  as  a  whole.  His  yoke.  His  cross,  as 
well  as  His  crown.  Example.  Eedeemer.  Eighteousness.  II.  Faith.  More 
reasonable  that  they  should  shed  the  blood  of  their  enemies  than  of  the  lamb,  and 
use  the  sword  than  the  knife.  Spreading  fire  and  slaughter.  More  reasonable, 
apparently,  to  help  and  trust  themselves  than  confide  in  a  word  spoken,  and  a  few 
drops  of  blood  on  the  door-post.  Our  faith,  and  Jesus  the  Lamb.  III.  Humilu- 
TiON.  Eaten  with  bitter  herbs.  Penitential  recollections.  They  prevented  mere 
carnal  delight  in  the  feast.  Our  bitter  herbs :  remembrance  of  sin  ;  of  our  con- 
dition ;  of  our  prospects,  &c.  IV.  Deliveeance.  Last  niglit  in  Egypt.  The  blood 
sprinkled.  The  destroying  angel.  Door  of  every  Israelite's  home  o^jens,  and  the 
family  comes  out.  The  escape.  Learn  :  1.  That  God  gives  songs  in  the  night. 
"  In  darkest  shades,  if  Thou  appear."  2.  That  Christ  our  Passover  was  slain  for 
us  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  3.  That  we  should  receive  Him  with  all  humility,  obedience,  and 
faith.  4.  That  trusting  in  Him,  we  shall  have  a  great  deliverance.  {J.  C.  Gray.) 
A  laudable  custom ;— Eev.  Joseph  Sortain,  the  eloquent  Brigliton  preacher,  was  of 
Huguenot  extraction.  He  always  observed  the  custom  of  his  persecuted  ancestors 
of  reading  the  twenty-third  Psalm  at  family  worship  on  Saturday  evening.  When 
sO'metimes  asked  by  guests  why  he  had  a  special  portion  of  Scripture  for  that 
evening,  he  would  reply,  "  It  was  the  custom  of  my  Huguenot  forefathers,  and  I 
wish  to  gain  inspiration  for  my  Sunday's  duties  by  the  associations  it  calls  up."  (/. 
Tinling.) 

Vers.  15-19.  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread, — The  feast  of  unleavened  bread ;  or, 
the  ordinances  of  God,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  should  be  observed.  The  feast  of 
unleavened  bread  was  a  distinct  ordinance  from  the  Passover,  though  following  imme- 
diately upon  it.  At  this  feast  the  Israelites  were  to  eat  unleavened  bread  ;  probably 
to  commemorate  the  fact  that  they  had  left  Egypt  in  such  haste  that  they  had  no 
opportunity  to  leaven  their  dough,  and  were  consequently  obliged  to  eat  unleavened 
cakes.  It  would  also  remind  them  of  the  power  of  God  in  bringing  them  out  of 
Egypt  when  they  were  without  provision  for  their  journey,  and  it  would  teach  them 
a  lesson  of  trust  in  the  Divine  providence.  This  feast  was  an  ordinance  of  God. 
We  observe  in  reference  to  it— I.  That  the  okdinances  of  God  are  cleablt 
made  known  and  enjoined  upon  man.  1.  Divinely  authorized.  2.  Morally 
beneficial.  3.  Wofully  neglected.  This  neglect  is  prevalent ;  it  is  fearful ;  it  ia 
inexcusable  ;  it  is  morally  injurious  ;  it  will  ultimately  meet  with  its  due  punish- 
ment. II.  That  the  okdinances  of  God  abe  to  be  observed  in  a  spirit  and 
TEMPER  free  FROM  SIN.  1.  In  a  Spirit  free  from  hypocrisy.  2.  In  a  spirit  free 
from  malice  and  bitterness.  3.  The  home-life  must  be  in  sympathy  with  God's 
ordinances.  What  we  are  at  home  we  shall  be  in  the  ordinances  of  God.  The 
home-life  and  the  ordinary  worship  are  inseparable ;  they  are  part  of  the  same 
service,   and  must  be  pure.    III.   That    the    ordinances    of    God    are    to   be 

OBSERVED      with      SOLEMNITY     AND     PROPBIETT     OF    MORAL    CONDUCT    AND    DEMEANOUR. 

IV.    That  those   who  profane  the  ordinances  of  God  are  unworthy  or  them, 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap,  xn." 


AND  SHOULD  BE    DENIED    THE    PRIVILEGE    OF   THEM.       "  That  SOul  shall  be  CUt  off   frcm 

Israel."  Lessons  :  1.  That  there  are  in  connection  with  the  Church  of  God  many 
ordinances  to  be  observed  by  men.  2.  That  these  ordinances  should  be  observed 
■with  due  solemniiy  and  appropriate  conduct.  3.  That  neglect  of  these  ordinances 
is  disobedience  to  the  command  of  God.     (J.  S.  Exell,  31. A.) 

Vers.  21-23.  Strike  tlie  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts  with  the  blood. — 
Three  great  irutlis  taught  by  tlie  Passovir  : — I.  The  oniveksality  of  condem- 
nation. Israelite  and  Egyptian  are  brought  under  one  common  charge  of  guilt,  and 
there  they  all  stand,  "  condemned  already."  II.  The  great  truth  of  sulstitution. 
The  lamb  instead  of  the  firstborn.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  Ac.  III.  The 
third  truth  taught  is  appropriation.  The  Israelite  would  not  have  been  safe  if  he 
had  merely  killed  the  larnb ;  he  had  to  sprinkle  its  blood  on  the  lintel  and  on  the  two 
side  posts.  ^Yhen  we  repose  our  confidence  in  the  Person  of  Christ,  we  have  taken 
the  bunch  r.f  hyssop  and  dipped  it  in  the  blood,  and  from  that  moment  we  are 
safe.  (jr.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  Christ,  our  Passover :— I.  The  first  thing  is  this, 
that  salvation  then  and  now  is  freedom  from  impending  doom.  Let  us  revive 
that  essential  idea  of  our  most  holy  faith  in  all  our  hearts  and  minds.  The 
times  greatly  need  it.  As  there  hung  over  Egypt  that  night  the  awful  threat 
of  God's  descending  wrath,  so  let  my  soul  and  yours  never  forget  there  bangs 
over  this  city  the  threat  of  impending  vengeance.  And  just  because  of  that, 
a  motive  which  worked  that  night  upon  the  hearts  of  Israelites,  and  ought  to 
work  upon  our  hearts  now,  was,  and  should  be,  the  element  and  moving  prin- 
ciple of  fear.  Let  me  reassert  this :  let  me  iterate  and  reiterate  it  —  that  fear 
is  a  legitimate  motive  in  salvation.  Perhaps  the  Israelites  on  that  occasion 
were  immediately  drawn  by  loving  obedience  to  obey  what  God  had  spoken. 
If  so,  they  were  dilTerent  from  you  and  me.  I  rather  think  that  while  some 
temperaments  would  just  quietly  and  unquestioningly  yield  whenever  Moses  declared 
the  mind  and  heart  of  God,  as  to  what  was  coming  of  doom,  and  as  to  how  salvation 
was  to  be  secured,  others  would  question  ;  others  would  be  reluctant ;  others  would 
be  very  like  ourselves.  But  we  do  hope  that,  no  matter  how  they  felt  "  rubbed  the 
wrong  way"  (if  you  will  allow  the  familiar  expression),  they  Lad  sense  enough, 
whether  drawn  by  love  or  driven  by  fear,  to  sprinkle  that  blood  and  get  in 
under  its  shelter  in  time,  and  stay  there.  Ah,  yes,  it  is  said  to  be  unphilosophi- 
cal,  that  if  you  do  not  draw  men  with  love,  you  will  never  drive  them  by  fear. 
Men  are  moved  by  fear  every  day.  Why  did  you  go  and  insure  your  house  last 
week?  Was  it  not  through  fear?  Why  did  you  insure  your  life  last  week,  even 
though  the  doctor  told  you  that  there  was  nothing  wrong  with  you  ?  Was  it  not 
from  fear?  Grand  men,  large  broad-browed  men,  are  men  who  are  moved  by  fear. 
Methinks  Noah  was  a  grand,  broad-browed  man,  and  "Noah,  moved  by  fear, 
jjrepared  him  an  ark  for  the  saving  of  his  house."  It  was  fear  as  well  as  love  that 
clenched  every  bolt  in  it.  So  never  go  away  and  boast,  my  friend,  that  you  have 
such  a  big  intellect  that  fear  will  not  move  you.  This  is  a  real  legitimate  element 
in  salvation.  Gcd  works  upon  it.  He  plays  upon  that  heart-string  by  His  Word 
and  by  His  Spirit.  He  did  it  then  in  that  night  in  Egypt.  II.  Now,  I  should  like 
to  say,  further,  re-stating  some  simple  but  essential  elements  of  gospel  revelation  re- 
garding sin  and  salvation,  that  salvation  was  of  God's  devising.  It  was  altogether 
a  matter  of  revelation.  Nothing  was  left  to  man  but  bare  obedience  of  mind  and 
hand  and  foot.  Mark  that  I  do  not  say  that  God  spoke  irrationally  ;  I  do  not  say 
that  God  simply  came  and  overmastered  them  with  despotic  tj-rannical  power,  but  I 
do  say  that  God  came  forth  out  of  His  secret  place  that  memorable  night,  and 
Himself  devised  the  plan  of  salvation.  God  Himself  devised  such  a  plan  tbat  no 
soul  needed  to  be  lost  if  that  soul  simply  believed  and  obeyed.  It  was  all  of  God, 
it  was  all  of  grace ;  so  still.  III.  I  wish  to  say,  further,  that  on  this  night  of  this 
divinely  appointed  salvation,  when  it  was  received  and  obeyed,  there  were  one  or  two 

THINGS  WHICH  WOULD  SURELY  STRIKE  THE   RECIPIENTS,  AND    THOSE  WHO  WERE  OBEDIENT 

TO  THIS  HEAVENLY  REVELATION.  "  Draw  out  a  lamb,"  says  Moses,  speaking  for  God, 
"  draw  out  a  lamb  and  kill  it,  and  take  its  blood  and  sprinkle  it  on  the  lintel  and  on 
the  two  side  posts."  Every  Israelitish  father  who  killed  the  lamb,  not  simply  with 
a  knife  and  with  his  hand,  but  whose  mind  and  heart  were  working  behind  the 
knife,  must  surely  have  had  this  thought  borne  upon  him — "  If  I  am  not  to  die, 
something  is  to  die."  Substitution.  Oh,  let  me  ring  it  out !  "  For  me,  for  me," 
was  bound  to  ring  in  his  ears  with  every  gurgling  of  that  lapping  blood.  That 
again  is  the  heart  of  salvation,  for  you  and  for  me.    If  I  am  to  go  free,  this  inno- 


CHAP.XH.]  EXODUS.  201 

cent  thing  has  to  part  with  its  very  life's  blood.  "By  His  stripes  we  are  healed." 
Bless  God  for  this  substitutionary  salvation.  Then  this  salvation  on  that  night  in 
Eyypt,  and  this  night  for  you  and  me,  was  not  only  substitutionary,  but  another 
very  simple  ideal  would  like  to  revive  in  your  hearts  and  minds,  and  it  is  this  :  it 
was  after  all  a  matter  of  simple  obedience.  "  Take  the  blood."  It  was  not  enough 
that  it  was  sprinkled  by  every  Israelitish  father  or  head  of  a  household  who  repre- 
sented them  all.  Every  Israehtish  father  had  to  take  that  bunch  of  hyssop  and 
dip  it  in  the  blood,  and  strike  it  on  the  lintel  and  pass  in,  he  and  his  household, 
just  as  he  was  told.  And  there  is  an  element,  therefore,  in  salvation  that  is 
illustrated  there.  What  is  faith  ?  It  is  a  simple  literal  bowing  of  the  soul  in 
abject  obedience.  And,  again,  it  comes  out,  contrariwise,  that  the  very  essence 
of  unbelief  now  is  not  a  want  of  understanding,  but  a  want  of  obedience. 
There  is  a  moral  taint  in  unbelief.  Now,  come  away  to  another  evening 
away  down  the  stream  of  time  for  centuries;  and  again  it  is  becoming  dark, 
and  there  is  a  darkness  deeper  than  the  darkness  of  the  darkening  sky.  The 
darkness  and  blackness  of  siu,  and  of  all  time,  are  gathering  round  about  that  hill 
called  Calvary.  Now,  watch  that  Saviour  Christ.  See  that  innocent  holy  Man, 
holy  as  a  lamb,  without  blemish  and  without  spot.  See  the  soldier  as  he  thrusts 
that  spear  into  His  side,  and  out  there  come  blood  and  water.  And,  remember 
this :  there  is  the  last  blood  that  shall  ever  be  shed  for  human  sins.  "  There 
remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin,  but  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment 
and  fiery  indignation  that  shall  devour  the  adversaries."  "  Take  you  a  bunch  of 
hyssop,  and  strike  the  lintel  and  the  two  side  posts."  God  actually  condescending 
to  tell  a  man  how  to  sprinkle  the  blood !  He  left  no  loop-hole  by  which  a  man 
might  be  lost  if  he  wanted  to  be  saved  himself,  and  to  save  his  wife  and  his 
children.  If  lost,  you  will  be  inexcusable.  What  was  the  hyssop  ?  Well,  so  far  as 
I  can  gather  from  Scripture,  it  was  a  very  common  plant.  You  remember  that 
when  the  range  of  Solomon's  botanical  knowledge  is  being  indicated,  it  is  said  that 
Solomon  spoke  of  trees  from  the  hyssop  that  grows  out  of  the  wall  to  the  cedar 
that  is  in  Lebanon.  What  a  poor  salvation  if  God  had  said,  "  Take  a  sprig  of 
cedar."  What  an  easy  salvation  it  was  when  He  said,  "  Take  a  bunch  of  hyssop" 
— that  kind  of  coarse  grass,  I  suppose,  that  would  grow  out  of  any  dyke-back — 
just  like  the  grass  that  grew  out  of  the  thatch  of  your  mother's  house  away  in  the 
country  long  ago — a  thing  so  simple  ;  do  you  not  see  that  everybody  could  get  at  it? 
Instinctively  the  father's  hand  went  for  it,  and  used  it.  There  is  a  something  in 
the  powers  of  your  soul  and  mine  that  is  common  and  handy,  and  is  continually 
in  use  in  this  work-a-day  life  of  ours.  It  is  continually  in  use  like  the  bunch  of 
hyssop.  And  what  is  that?  It  is  faith.  Believe  me,  faith  is  as  common  as  the 
hyssop  that  sprang  out  of  the  wall.  With  all  the  rack  and  ruin  that  sin  has  made 
it  is  here.  Now,  what  you  have  to  do  is  this.  Take  that  faith,  that  confidence 
that  you  are  exercising  in  brother-man  and  sister-woman  every  day — it  is  the  very 
cement  of  society — society  would  tumble  into  chaos  without  it — take  that  faith  of 
youre  and  give  it  a  new  direction.  Give  it  an  operation  which  it  never  had  before. 
"Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  Faith  is  common, 
natural,  reasonable,  sublime.  You  put  it  to  its  highest  power,  its  loftiest  use,  when 
it  is  turned  to  trust  God  in  the  word  that  He  has  spoken,  and  in  the  love  that  He 
has  displayed  on  Calvary.  IV.  And  the  last  word  I  have  to  say  is  this— the 
last  word  in  the  text,  "Take  the  bunch  of  hyssop,  and  dip  it  in  the  blood,  and  let 

NONE  OF  YOD  GO  OUT  OF  THE  DOOR  OF  HIS  HOUSE  UNTIL  THE  MORNING."   I  hear  tO-day, 

and  so  do  you,  about  "  development,"  and  "  growth" ;  and  what  we  hear  about  them 
gets  wearisome,  does  it  not?  There  was  very  little  development  that  night.  "Let 
none  of  you  go  out  of  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning."  Go  in,  and  stay 
in,  if  you  would  be  saved.  That  is  to  say,  there  was  to  be  no  advance,  and 
absolutely  no  development  from  the  simplicity  of  faith.  That  which  they  had  begun 
to  do  saved  them  only  as  they  kept  it  up.  Human  nature  is  the  same  all  the  world 
over,  whether  you  are  in  Egj'pt  or  in  London  ;  and  I  can  imagine  a  young  Israelite, 
a  young  fellow  just  like  ourselves,  full  of  flesh  and  blood,  full  of  natural  go  and 
glow  and  enthusiasm,  feehng  it  a  httle  irksome  as  the  evening  wore  on,  and  as  the 
night  darkened  down ;  and  feeling  that  it  was  rather  an  ignoble,  inglorious  position 
to  be  huddled  in  there  like  sheep,  with  that  word  over  them,  "  Let  none  of  you  go 
out  of  the  door  of  his  house  until  the  morning."  And  to  be  saved  in  this  simple 
Vay  by  the  blood-red  mark  which  they  did  not  see,  but  which,  being  outside,  could 
be  seen  by  the  Destroying  Angel  as  He  passed.  And  I  should  not  wonder,  as  the 
Israelites  and  the  Egyptians  were  not  separated  one  from  another,  if  the  Egyptians 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

were  all  round  about  the  Israelites;  and  I  should  not  wonder  if  some  young 
Egyptians  came  round  about  tbese  blood-streaked  houses  and  cried,  with  scoffs  and 
jokes,  "Come  out!  Come  out!"  and  laughed  and  said,  "What  are  you  doing  in 
there  ?  There  is  no  judgment.  There  was  never  such  a  fine  night  in  Egypt. 
Come  out !  Come  out !  "  Was  not  that  hard  to  bear  ?  Is  not  that  taunt  in  our  ears 
jet — "  Come  out,  you  stupid  believers !  "  And  I  can  imagine  a  young  Israelite 
chafing  and  getting  restless  as  the  night  wore  on,  and  there  came  no  sign  of  this 
doom,  and  no  sign  of  this  judgment ;  I  can  imagine  him  shaking  himself,  and 
saying,  "  I  will  assert  my  manhood.  This  may  do  for  the  old  people  " ;  and  he  i3 
going  over  to  the  door,  but  his  father  rises,  and  with  a  voice  like  thunder  says, 
"  Unhand  that  door  !  Eack  for  your  life  1"  And  he  was  right  if  he  did.  He  was 
right.  The  Egyptians  might  laugh  that  night,  and  the  young,  restless,  hot-beaded 
Israelites  might  have  a  little  trouble,  but  nobody  laughed  in  the  morning.  And  you 
aud  I,  children  of  faith,  believers  in  God  and  in  God's  Christ  who  died  for  sin,  just 
for  a  little  while  have  to  stand  the  laugh,  and  I  admit  that  it  is  against  our  pride. 
By  the  grace  of  God,  and  in  the  obedience  of  faith,  let  me  charge  you,  hold  on,  my 
brother,  as  you  began.  Let  us  keep  together,  we  who  belong  to  "  the  household  of 
faith."  How  tbat  expression  receives  its  illustration  from  this  story.  Let  us  keep 
together.  Let  us  encourage  ourselves  to  stay  in  doors  until  the  morning.  Soma  of 
you,  God  bless  you,  will  not  have  long  to  wait.  God  bless  all  white  and  whitening 
heads  in  this  assembly ;  you  wiU  not  have  long  to  wait.  "  Now  is  the  time  of  your 
salvation  nearer  than  when  you  believed."  For  you  the  morning  cometh. 
(J.    McNeill.)  Anxiety     in    reference   to   salvation  : — There    is    among     the 

Hebrews  a  legend  of  two  sisters  who  that  night  had,  with  the  rest  of 
their  household,  gone  into  their  dwellings.  One  of  them  stood  all  ready  to 
depart,  and  began  quietly  eating  her  portion  of  the  roast  body  of  the  lamb  (a  type 
of  the  soul  feeding  on  Christ),  her  mind  at  perfect  peace  and  rest.  The  other  was 
walking  about  the  dwelling,  full  of  terrible  fear  lest  the  Destroying  Angel  should 
penetrate  therein.  This  one  reproached  her  sister  for  being  so  careless  and  con- 
fident, and  finally  asked  her  how  it  was  that  she  could  be  so  full  of  assurance  when 
the  angel  of  death  and  judgment  was  abroad  in  the  land.  The  reply  was,  "  Why, 
sister,  the  blood  has  been  sprinkled ;  and  we  have  God's  word  that  when  He  sees 
the  blood,  He  will  pass  over  us.  Now  I  have  no  right  to  doubt  God's  word.  I 
believe  He  will  keep  His  word.  If  I  were  in  doubt  about  the  blood  having  been 
shed  ;  or  if  I  doubted  either  the  integrity  or  ability  of  God  in  connection  with  His 
word,  I  should  be  uneasy.  But,  as  I  do  not  question  the  fact  that  the  blood 
has  been  shed,  and  as  I  believe  that  God  will  be  true  to  His  word,  I  cannot 
but  be  at  peace."  They  were  both  equally  safe;  but  one  was  at  peace,  while 
the  other  was  not.  Or,  as  we  should  say  now :  one  had  assurance ;  and  the 
other  was  full  of  doubts.  But  if  the  doubting  one  had  believed  what  God  said, 
she  could  not  have  been  in  distress.  It  is  even  so  now.  Those  believers  who  make 
the  finished  work  of  Christ  the  ground  of  their  hope,  and  are  resting  simply  and 
sincerely  on  His  Word,  are  at  peace ;  while  those  who  are  trying  to  find  peace  in 
themselves,  in  their  frames  and  feelings,  are  never  at  rest.  It  is  the  Blood  of 
Jesus  that  makes  us  safe ;  it  is  the  Word  of  God  concerning  blood  that  makes 
us  sure.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  24,  25.   Ye  shall  keep  this  service. — Celebration  of  the  Passover: — I.   In 

THIS     INCIDENT    WE     HAVE     A    CLEAE    KECOGNITION     OF    THE     PRINCIPLE     OF     VICARIOUS 

SUFFERING.  It  is  sccu  in  the  birth  of  the  infant,  in  the  history  of  the  family  circle, 
in  the  events  of  everyday  life,  but  supremely  in  the  Cross  of  Christ.  In  the  Cross 
of  Christ  it  is  seen  in  its  highest  embodiment,  in  its  truest  meaning,  and  in  its 
most  glorious  possibility.  There  is  the  innocent  dying  for  the  guilty,  the  God-man 
suffering  for  the  race.     II.    In  this  incident  we  have  a  clear  recognition  of  the 

NEED     of    falling     IN     WITH     ALL     THE     REQUIREMENTS     OF     THE     GREAT     SCHEME    OP 

salvation.  The  method  whereby  the  Israehtes  were  to  be  protected  from  the  stroke 
of  the  Destroying  Angel  was  Divinely  originated,  clearly  revealed,  and  imperative  in 
requirement.  The  sinner  must  be  saved  in  God's  way,  and  not  after  his  own.  He 
may  reason  about  the  peculiarity  of  the  method  of  salvation ;  he  may  think  that 
other  means  will  be  more  effective  to  the  end  desired  ;  but  if  he  at  last  is  found  out 
of  the  Divine  way  of  safety,  he  will  inevitably  be  lost.  The  blood  of  Christ 
sprinkled  on  the  heart  is  the  only  sign  the  Destroying  Angel  will  recognize  and 
regard  as  the  token  of  safety.  III.  In  this  incident  we  have  a  clear  recog- 
nition OF  the  fact  that  the  Divine  method  of  salvation  yriLh  avert  the  most 


CHAP.  XII.]  EXODUS.  203 

AWFUL  PERIL.     The  trustful  soul  shall  not  be  hurt  by  the  second  death.    IV.     In 

THIS    INCIDENT   WE    HAVE   A   CLEAR    RECOGNITION    OF   THE    FACT    THAT    THE    EFFICACY     OF 

THE  Divine  method  of  salvation  should  be  associated  with  public  religious 
ORDINANCES  (vcr.   24).    V.     In  this  incident   we    have   a  clear  recognition  of 

THE    FACT    that    THE    GOOD    SHOULD    BE   ABLE    TO    GIVE  AN  INTELLIGENT  EXPLANATION  OF 

THEIR  MORAL  SAFETY  (vcr.  27).  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  need  of  an  intelUgcnt 
ajyprehension  of  the  service  and  worship  of  God : — I.   It  is  necessary  in  order  to 

THE  true  performance  OF  RELIGIOUS  SERVICE  AND  WORSHIP.  II.  It  IS  NECESSARY 
IN  ORDER  TO  THE  TRUE  PERFORMANCE  OF  PARENTAL  DUTY  AND  INSTRUCTION.  III.  It 
IS     NECESS.UiY    IN     ORDER     TO     REFUTE    AND    SILENCE    THE     SCEPTICAL     REASONINGS     OP 

MEN.    (Ibid.)  The   blood  of  sprinkling  and  the  children : — I.   The  importance 

ATTACHED  TO  THE  BLOOD  OF  SACRIFICE  is  here  made  very  plain,  1.  It  became  and 
remained  the  national  mark.  2.  It  was  also  the  saving  loken.  3.  It  was  rendered 
as  conspicuous  as  possible.  4.  It  was  made  very  dear  to  the  people  themselves  by 
the  fact  that  they  trusted  in  it  in  the  most  implicit  manner.  5.  The  paschal 
bloodshedding  was  to  be  had  in  perpetual  remembrance.  6.  This  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  was  to  be  an  all-pervading  memory.  II.  The  institution  that  was  con- 
nected WITH  THE  remembrance  OF  THE  Passover.  Inquiry  should  be  excited 
respecting  spiritual  things  in  the  minds  of  children.  The  doctrine  of  the  expiatory 
sacrifice  is  a  gospel  for  the  youngest.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Children  should  be 
taught  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross  : — It  is  well  to  explain  to  children  the  ordinance  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,  for  this  shows  forth  the  death  of  Christ  in  symbol.  I  regret  that 
children  do  not  oftener  see  this  ordinance.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  should 
both  be  placed  in  view  of  the  rising  generation,  that  they  may  then  ask  us,  "  What 
mean  ye  by  this?"  Now,  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  perennial  gospel  sei-mon,  and  it 
turns  mainly  upon  the  sacrifice  for  sin.  You  may  banish  the  doctrine  of  the 
Atonement  from  the  pulpit,  but  it  will  always  live  in  the  Church  through  the  Lord's 
Supper.  You  cannot  explain  that  broken  bread  and  that  cup  filled  with  the  fruit  of 
the  vine,  without  reference  to  the  Lord's  atoning  death.  You  cannot  explain  "  the 
communion  of  the  body  of  Christ"  without  bringing  in,  in  some  form  or  other,  the 
death  of  Jesus  in  our  place  and  stead.  Let  your  little  ones,  then,  see  the  Lord's 
Supper,  and  let  them  be  told  most  clearly  what  it  sets  forth.  Tell  them  who  it  was 
that  suffered,  and  why.  And  when  attention  is  excited  upon  the  best  of  themes,  let 
us  be  ready  to  explain  the  great  transaction  by  which  God  is  just,  and  yet  sinners 
are  justified.  Children  can  well  understand  the  doctrine  of  the  expiatory  sacrifice ; 
it  was  meant  to  be  a  gospel  for  the  youngest.  The  gospel  of  substitution  is  a 
simplicity,  though  it  is  a  mystery.  We  ought  not  to  be  content  until  our  little  ones 
know  and  trust  in  their  finished  Sacrifice.  This  is  essential  knowledge,  and  the  key 
to  all  other  spiritual  teaching.  With  all  their  gettings  may  they  get  an  under- 
standing of  this,  and  they  will  have  the  foundation  rightly  laid.  This  will 
necessitate  your  teaching  the  child  his  need  of  a  Saviour.  You  must  not  holdback 
from  this  needful  task.  Do  not  flatter  the  child  with  delusive  rubbish  about  his 
nature  being  good  and  needing  to  be  developed.  Tell  him  he  must  be  born  again. 
Don't  bolster  him  up  with  the  fancy  of  his  own  innocence,  but  show  him  his  sin. 
Mention  the  childish  sins  to  which  he  is  prone,  and  pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to  work 
conviction  in  his  heart  and  conscience.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  28.  Did  as  the  Lord  had  commanded. — Worship  and  obedience : — 1.  Wor- 
ship of  God  in  faith,  humility,  and  integrity  is  the  fittest  way  of  expressing  thanks 
to  him.  2.  God's  revelation  of  grace  in  providences  and  ordinances  deserve  praise 
from  His  people.  3.  Worship  of  God  and  obedience  to  Him  are  well  coupled  (ver. 
27).  4.  Dispatch  in  obedience  is  very  requisite  in  God's  Israel.  5.  Sons  of  Israel  are 
fit  to  give  worship  and  obedience,  and  Jehovah  only  to  receive  it.  6.  Obedience 
and  worship  must  be  regulated  by  God's  Word  only.  7.  As  God  gives  to  ministers, 
so  the  Church  must  receive,  and  do  exactly.    (G.  HugheSy  BJ).) 

Vers.  29,  30.  A  great  cry  in  Egypt.— T^je  death  of  the  firstborn  of  Egijpt  :—l.  We 
see  here  that  God's  vengeance  is  as  certainly  executed  upon  the  rebellious  as 
IT  is  threatened.  Men  cannot  elude  the  stroke  of  heaven.  II.  We  see  here  that 
God's  vengeance  is  upon  all  sinners,  no  matter  what  their  social  position, 
whether  king  or  beggar.  He  takes  the  rich  from  their  wealth,  the  poor  from, 
their  misery ;  and  perhaps  in  the  next  life  the  relations  of  men  may  be  inverted — 
the  poor  man  may  be  the  prince,  and  the  prince  the  slave  in  the  dungeon.  III.  We  see 
HEBE  that  God's  vengeance  comes  upon  sinners  when  they  least  expect  it,  and  is 


204  TUE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xn." 

THEIR  MOMENTS  OF  FANCIED  SECURITY.     The  darkucss  Cannot  hide  from  Him.    We 
know  not  what  will  be  in  the  approaching  night.     IV.    We  see  here  that  God's 

VENGEANCE  MAY  MAKE  THE  MOST  OBSTINATE  SINNERS   YIELD  TO  THE  DEMANDS  OF  HEAVEN. 

Itis  well  to  avoid  thepenalties  of  sin,  though  this  is  the  very  lowest  motive  for  obedience 
to  the  will  of  heaven.  The  submission  of  Pharaoh  1.  It  was  immediate  upon 
the  plague.  2.  It  was  complete  in  its  obedience.  3.  It  was  comprehensive  in  its 
injunction.  4.  It  was  welcomed  by  the  Egyptians.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  ^^  Not 
a  house  where  there  was  not  one  dead  " ; — I.  We  shall  notice  some  of  the  par- 
ticulahs  detailed  in  this  remarkable  history.  It  is  of  no  utility  we  read  it,  if  it 
be  not  with  care  for  our  instruction.  1.  Evidently  there  was  a  Divine  design  in  this 
event.  All  events  are  of  Providence,  and  not  a  single  death  takes  place,  however 
man  seeks  to  shun  it,  without  its  concurrence.  But  in  this  case,  God  obviously 
determined  on  giving  palpable  proof  of  His  hand,  that  the  blindest  of  the  Egyptians 
should  be  able  to  see  and  own  it.  (1)  There  was  method  in  the  dispensation.  (2) 
The  time  was  remarkable.  (3)  There  was  no  death  in  any  of  the  families  of  the 
Israelites.  2.  Let  us  ascertain  what  was  the  design  of  God  in  this  peculiar 
visitation  of  the  Egyptians.  He  may  bear  long  in  patience  with  the  unjust  and  cruel, 
but  not  always,  and  the  lingering  stroke  will  fall  the  more  heavily  at  last.  II.  When 
God  resolves  on  pdnisiiing  the  rebellious,  it  is  impossible  to  stay  His  hand.  1. 
How  sudden  was  the  infliction !  No  sign  was  given  to  the  rebellious  of  this 
particular  calamity ;  for  they  had  been  furnished  with  signs  which  they  had  not 
properly  regarded.  2.  What  may  we  suppose  were  the  contemplations  and  feelings 
of  the  Israelites  during  these  solemn  proceedings  ?  No  doubt  they  had  often  been 
tempted  to  think  hardly  of  Providence  that  had  given  them  such  evil  things,  and 
the  Egyptians  their  good  things  of  wealth  and  prosperity,  at  their  cost.  Now  what 
a  reverse!  "  He  is  not  unrighteous  who  taketh  vengeance."  III.  The  scenes  op 
mortality,  still  so  common  in  our  world,  ought  to  produce  in  us  a  disposition  to 
think  of  our  own  approaching  dissolution.  Let  two  things  be  well  considered. 
1.  A  sense  of  the  transitory  nature  of  earthly  scenes  unquestionably  is  most 
necessary  as  a  preparation  and  stimulus  to  seek  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  2  What 
is  it  to  be  prepared  for  death  ?  There  is  no  other  question  equal  in  importance  to 
this.  You  must  see  and  feel  yourself  a  lost  sinner  without  Christ  as  your  Saviour. 
(Essex  Remembrancer.)  The  marks  of  ypiritual  death: — 1.  The  first  mark  of 
spiritual  death  which  I  shall  mention  is  that  of  living  in  any  open  and  acknowledged 
sin;  suchasprofaneswearing,  sabbath  breaking,  drunkenness,  adultery,  covetousness, 
and  such  like.  2.  Another  mark  of  spiritual  death  is  a  dependence  in  whole  or  in 
part  upon  ourselves  for  salvation.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon 
the  heart  is  to  convince  men  of  sin.  3.  A  third  mark  of  this  state  is,  when  under 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  no  change  takes  place  in  the  life  or  conversation.  4. 
Another  mark  of  this  state  is,  a  practical  preference  of  the  creature  to  the  Creator, 
or  of  self  to  God.  When  the  soul  is  quickened  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  makes  God  its 
chief  happiness.  5.  Another  mark  of  those  who  a:  e  spiritually  dead  is,  living 
without  private  and  secret  prayer.  {J.  H.  Stewart,  M.A.)  A  kinij^s  bereave- 
ment: — Henry  I.,  on  his  return  from  Normandy,  was  accompanied  by  a  crowd 
of  nobles  and  his  son  William.  The  white  ship  in  which  the  prince  embarked 
lingered  behind  the  rest  of  the  royal  fleet,  while  the  young  nobles,  excited  with 
wine,  hung  over  the  ship's  side  taunting  the  priest  who  came  to  give  the  customary 
benediction.  At  last  the  guards  of  the  king's  treasure  pressed  the  vessel's  departure, 
and,  driven  by  the  arms  of  fifty  rowers,  it  swept  swiftly  out  to  sea.  All  at  once  the 
ship's  side  struck  on  a  rock  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and  in  an  instant  it  sank 
beneath  the  waves.  One  terrible  cry,  ringing  through  the  stillness  of  the  night,  was 
heard  by  the  royal  fleet,  but  it  was  not  until  the  morning  that  the  fatal  news  reached 
the  king.  He  fell  unconscious  to  the  ground  and  rose  never  to  smile  again  !  {H.  0. 
3Iackey.)  A  father^ s  grief : — On  the  death  of  his  only  son,  the  famous  Edmund 

Burke  wrote  as  follows :  "  The  storm  has  gone  over  me,  and  I  lie  like  one  of  those 
old  oaks  which  the  late  hurricane  has  scattered  around  me.  I  am  stripped  of  all 
my  honour.  I  am  torn  up  by  the  roots,  and  he  prostrate  on  the  earth.  I  am 
alone."  (J.  Tinling,  B.A.)  The  last  plague,  and  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  : — 
Two  questions  naturally  arise  here :  Why  in  this  judgment  upon  the  life  of  man 
should  precisely  the  firstborn  have  been  slain  ?  and  if  the  judgment  was  for  the 
overthrow  of  the  adversary  and  the  redemption  of  Israel,  why  should  a  special 
provision  have  been  required  to  save  Israel  also  from  the  plague  ?  1.  In  regard  to 
the  first  of  these  points,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  slaying  of  the  firstborn  of 
Egypt  had  respect  to  the  relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah  :  "  Israel,"  said  God,  "  is 


CHAP.xu.]  EXODUS.  205 

My  son,  My  firstborn  :  if  thou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  I  will  slay  thy  son,  thy  firstborn  " 
(chap.  iv.  22,  23).  But  in  what  sense  could  Israel  be  called  God's  firstborn  son  ? 
Something  more  is  plainly  indicated  by  the  expression,  though  no  more  is  very 
commonly  found  in  it,  than  that  Israel  was  peculiarly  dear  to  God,  had  a  sort  of 
firstborn's  interest  in  His  regard.  It  implies  this,  no  doubt,  but  it  also  goes  deeper, 
and  points  to  the  Divine  origin  of  Israel  as  the  seed  of  promise  ;  in  their  birth  the 
offspring  of  grace,  as  contradistinguished  from  nature.  As  the  firstborn  in  God'3 
elect  family  is  to  be  spared  and  rescued,  so  the  firstborn  in  the  house  of  the  enemy, 
the  beginning  of  his  increase,  and  the  heir  of  his  substance,  must  be  destroAed  :  the 
one  a  proof  tnat  the  whole  family  were  appointed  to  life  and  blessing ;  the  otlver,  in 
like  manner,  a  proof  that  all  who  were  aliens  from  God's  covenant  of  grace,  equally 
deserved,  and  should  certainly  in  due  time  inherit,  the  evils  of  perdition.  2.  In 
regard  to  the  other  question  which  concerns  Israel's  liability  to  the  judgment  which 
fell  upon  Egypt,  this  arose  from  Israel's  natui-al  relation  to  the  world,  just  as  their 
redemption  was  secured  by  their  spiritual  relation  to  God.  For,  whether  viewed  in 
their  individual  or  in  their  collective  capacity,  they  were  in  themselves  of  Egypt : 
collectively,  a  part  of  the  nation,  without  any  separate  and  independent  existence  of 
their  own,  vassals  of  the  enemy,  and  inhabitants  of  His  doomed  territory ; 
individually,  also,  partakers  of  the  guilt  and  corruption  of  Egypt.  It  is  tbe  mercy 
and  grace  alone  of  God's  covenant  which  makes  them  to  differ  from  those  around 
them  ;  and,  therefore,  to  show  that  while,  as  children  of  the  covenant,  tbe  plague 
should  not  come  nigh  them,  not  a  hair  of  their  head  should  perish,  they  still  were 
in  themselves  no  better  than  others,  and  had  nothing  whereof  to  boast,  it  was,  at 
the  same  time,  provided  that  their  exemption  from  judgment  should  be  secured  only 
by  the  blood  of  atonement.  (P.  Fairbairn,  D.D.)  A  picture  of  the  wrath  to 
come  : — Is  this  a  dreadful  picture  ?  Yet  it  is  but  a  type  of  what  7mist  be — a  shadow 
merely  of  the  wrath  to  come  to  all  theunsprinkled  souls'  tenements  in  eternity.  Ye 
that  affect  to  think  so  lightly  of  death  and  eternity  !  see  here  this  shadow  and  gather 
the  elementary  ideas  of  what  shall  be,  from  what  has  been  already,  under  the 
government  of  God.  Standing,  in  imagination,  amid  these  complicated  horrors  in 
Egypt — the  groans  of  the  dying,  mingling  with  the  shrieks  of  the  living,  throughout 
a  whole  empire — all  earthly  pomp  and  power  levelled  to  mingle  its  unavailing  cries 
with  the  lowest  and  meanest  in  a  common  woe, — here  see  what  it  is  for  God  to 
"  whet  His  glittering  sword  and  His  hand  to  take  hold  on  vengeance."  {S.  Robinson, 
D.D.)  God's  direct  interference  : — It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  this  last  plague  God 
is  represented  as  descending  in  His  own  Person.  It  is  no  longer  the  man  Moses, 
standing  as  a  mediator  between  the  king  of  Egypt  and  the  King  of  kings.  God 
Himself  awakes  to  judgment ;  He  hath  girt  His  sword  upon  His  thigh,  and  is  come 
down  ; — "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the  midst  of 
Egypt"  (chap.  xi.  4).  This  solemn  assurance,  though  it  might  well  strike  terror 
into  the  hearts  of  the  miserable  Egyptians,  would  encourage  and  confirm  the 
Israelites.  What  God  had  undertaken  could  not  fail,  could  not  miscarry.  The 
course  of  Moses'  policy  with  Pharaoh  hitherto  had  brougbt  them  no  deliverance, 
but  some  increase  of  their  sufferings,  and  many  disappointments.  Now  they  might 
feel  assured  that  the  promised  rescue  was  at  hand.  The  God  of  their  fathers  has 
given  over  the  Egyptians  appointed  unto  death,  and  is  gathering  the  Israelites 
together  for  safety  and  release.  Through  the  fall  of  Egypt  salvation  is  come  unto 
Israel ;  and  the  judgment  which  slays  the  one  people  is  ordained  as  a  type  of  mercy 
and  redemption  for  the  other,  to  be  commemorated  evermore.  If  God  made  use  of 
natural  means  in  a  supernatural  manner,  as  in  the  case  of  the  locusts,  and  generally 
of  the  other  plagues,  the  miracle  would  not,  on  that  account,  be  less  miraculous. 
But  there  are  circumstances  in  the  account  of  this  plague  which  distinguish  it  from 
any  known  or  specific  form  of  disease.  The  firstborn  only  were  smitten  ;  these  were 
sinT;led  out  in  every  family  with  unerring  precision,  the  houses  of  the  Israelites, 
whn-ever  the  blood  of  the  lamb  was  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts  being  passed  over. 
The  death  of  all  those  thousands,  both  of  man  and  beast,  took  place  at  the  same 
instant—"  at  midnight."  Every  one  of  these  extraordinary  events  had  been  foretold 
by  Moses.  Whatever  explanations  modern  scepticism  may  suggest,  they  were 
admitted  without  hesitation  both  by  the  Egyptians  and  the  Jews  to  be  the  Lord's 
doing,  and  marvellous  in  their  eyes.  The  God  whom  they  knew  not  had  come  among 
them,  and  made  His  presence  felt :  they  stood  face  to  face  with  their  Creator.  Fear 
fell  upon  them,  and  a  horrible  dread  overwhelmed  them ;  their  flesh  trembled  for 
fear  of  Him,  and  they  were  afraid  of  His  judgments.  The  sins  of  the  parents 
were  now  visited  upon  the  children ;  the  seed  of  evildoers  was  cut  off.     Slaughter 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

was  prepared  for  the  children,  for  the  iniquity  of  their  fathers.  Is  God  unrighteous, 
then,  that  taketh  vengeance?  No;  this  is  an  act  of  retribution.  The  Egyptians 
liad  slain  the  children  of  the  Israelites,  casting  their  infants  into  the  river.  Now 
the  aflliction  is  turned  upon  themselves  ;  the  delight  of  their  eyes  is  taken  from  thera  ; 
all  their  firstborn  are  dead,  from  the  firstborn  of  Pharaoh  that  sat  upon  his  throne, 
unto  the  firstborn  of  the  captive  tbat  was  in  his  dungeon.  (T.  S.  MiUington.) 
Midnight  terror  : — A  Southern  lady,  writing  of  the  early  days  of  the  war  in  America, 
says — "  Tbe  fear  of  an  uprising  of  the  blacks  was  most  powerful  with  us  at  night. 
The  notes  of  the  whip-poor-wills  in  the  sweet-gum  swamp  near  the  stable,  the 
mutterings  of  a  distant  thunderstorm,  even  the  rustle  of  the  night  wind  in  the  oaks 
that  shaded  my  window,  filled  me  with  nameless  dread.  In  the  daytime  it  seemed 
impossible  to  associate  suspicion  with  those  familiar  tawny  or  sable  faces  that 
surrounded  us.  We  had  seen  them  for  so  many  years  smiling  or  saddening  with 
the  family  joys  or  sorrows  :  they  were  so  guileless,  patient,  and  satisfied.  What 
subtle  influence  was  at  work  that  should  transform  them  into  tigers  thirsting  for 
our  blood  ?  But  when  evening  came  again,  the  ghost  that  refused  to  be  laid  was 
aeain  at  one's  elbow.  Rusty  bolts  were  drawn  and  rusty  fire-arms  loaded.  A  watch 
vv-as  set  where  never  before  had  eye  or  ear  been  lent  to  such  a  service."  (//.  0. 
Mackey.) 

Vers.  33,  35.  The  Egyptians  were  iirgent  upon  the  people  that  they  might  send 
them  out  of  the  land. — Hastened  out  of  Eipjpt : — 1.  Note  tlie  reason  of  this  urgency. 
Fear  lest  death  overtake  them  all.  2.  Note  the  utter  selfishness  of  the  motive. 
No  true  repentance  in  it.  3.  Urgency  is  fitting  when  there  is  imminent  danger. 
4.  There  is  the  greatest  need  of  urgency  in  everj^  sinner's  case.  Doom  and  death 
are  at  hand.  (Homiletic  Review.)  The  Israelites  going  out  of  Egyptian  bondage; 
or,  the  freedom  of  the  Church  : — I.  That  the  Israelites  were  given  their  freedom  by 
those  who  had  long  oppressed  them ;  and  so  the  Church  shall  be  freed  by  those 
who  have  long  enslaved  it.  II.  That  the  Israelites,  in  availing  themselves  of  their 
freedom,  had  to  make  many  temporary  shifts  ;  and  so  the  Church,  in  stepping  into 
liberty,  will  have  to  encounter  many  perplexities.  III.  That  the  Israelites,  going 
into  freedom,  took  vdih  them  all  the  wealth  they  could  get  from  the  Egyptians  ; 
and  so  the  Church,  in  entering  upon  its  liberty,  should  avail  itself  of  all  the  valuables 
it  can  obtain  from  the  world.  {J.  S.  Exell,  31.  A . )  Borrowed  from  the  Egyptians. — 
Borrowing  from  the  enemy  : — I  remember,  when  visiting  Denmark  some  twenty 
years  ago,  I  learned  a  little  incident  in  the  history  of  a  great  Danish  admiral.  On 
one  occasion,  when  commanding  a  little  sloop— it  was  before  he  was  admiral — he 
had  the  audacity  to  engage  an  English  frigate  in  battle.  They  both  fired  away,  but 
after  a  lititle  time  the  captain  of  the  frigate  noticed  that  the  firing  from  the  sloop 
ceased.  A  flag  of  truce  was  hoisted  ;  a  boat  was  lowered,  and  the  Danish  captain 
came  alongside.  Addressing  his  opponent,  he  said.  "  Sir,  our  powder  is  all  done, 
and  we  have  come  to  borrow  some  from  you!"  The  devil  has  been  using  money 
against  the  cause  of  God  for  many  years ;  let  us  take  it  from  him,  and  turn  his  guns 
against  himself.     {Dr.  Sinclair  Patterson.) 

Vers.  37-39.  Journeyed  from  Rameses. — The  setting  forth  of  the  Israelites  from 
Egypt : — 1.  The  sons  of  Israel,  or  Church  of  God,  are  in  a  moving  state  below. 
2.  From  countries  and  cities  with  habitations,  God  leads  His  people  sometimes  to 
pitch  in  booths.  3.  The  number  of  the  seed  of  God's  visible  Church  is  great  and 
multiplied  according  to  His  word.  4.  Men,  women,  and  children,  God  numbers 
with  His  Church  or  Israel  (ver.  37).  5.  Providence  so  ordering,  all  sorts  of  people 
may  join  themselves  to  God's  Church,  though  not  in  truth.  6.  God's  Word  fails 
not  in  giving  His  Church  great  substance  when  He  seeth  it  good  (ver.  38).  7. 
Liberty  from  Egypt  is  Israel's  good  portion  with  unleavened  cakes.  8.  Sufiiciency 
and  contentation  God  giveth  His  people  in  their  straits.  9.  In  working  liberty 
for  His  Church,  God  may  put  them  upon  some  hardship.  10.  God  sometimes 
l^revents  the  providence  of  His  Church  for  themselves,  that  He  may  provide  for 
them  (ver.  39).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  A  mixed  multitude  went  up  also. — The 
nominal  followers  of  the  Christian  Church  ;  the  motives  by  ichich  they  are  actuated, 
and  the  perplexities  by  which  they  are  tested  : — I.    The   motives   by  which   the 

NOMINAL     ADHERENTS     OF     THE     CHRISTIAN     CnrRCH    ARE     ANIMATED.      1.      They    are 

acquainted  and  impressed  with  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  hence  are  induced 
to  follow  it.  2.  They  have  an  inner  conviction  that  the  Church  is  right,  and  hence 
they  are  sometimes  led  to  follow  it.     3.  They  are  associated  by  family  ties  with 


CHAP,  sn.]  EXODUS.  207 

those  who  are  real  members  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  hence  they  are  induced 
to  follow  it.     4.  They  are  troubled  by  ideas  of  the  retributive  providence  of  God, 
and  so  are  induced  to  seek  shelter  in  the  Church.    5.  They  have  an  idea  that  it  is 
socially  correct  to  be  allied  to  the  Church,  and  therefore  are  induced  to  follow  it. 
6.    They  always   follow   the  multitude.     II.    The    pekplexities    by    which    the 
nomin.Uj  adherents  of  the  Christian  Church  are   tested.     We  read  elsewhere 
that  "  the  mixed  multitude  that  was  among  the  Israelites  fell  a  lusting  "  (Num. 
xi.  4).     Their  unhallowed  desires  were  not  gratified.     Tlieir  deliverance  had  not 
been  so  glorious  as  they  had  imagined.     Trial  was  before  them,  and  they  rebelled 
against  the  first  privations  of  the  wilderness.     And  so  it  is,  nominal  members  of 
the  Christian  Church  are  soon  tested,  and  they  often  yield  to  the  trying  conditions 
of  the  pilgrim  Church  life.     1  The  nominal  members  of  the  Church  are  tested  by 
the  outward  circumstances  of  the  Church.     2.    They  are  tested  by  the  pilgrim 
difficulties  of  the  Church.     3.  They  are  tested  by  the  pilgrim  requirements  of  the 
Church.     (J.  S.  Excll,  M.A.)         The  character  and  conduct  of  the  mixed  multitude  : 
— I.    The    character    of    this   mixed    multitude.     Some,   perhaps,   were  mere 
idolaters ;    others   had   outwardly  renounced  their  superstitions.     Some  might  be 
connected  in  marriage  with  the  sons  or  daughters  of  Israel ;  for  such  are  men- 
tioned :  and  some,  perbaps,  were  a  thoughtless  rabble,  whom  curiosity  had  called 
from  their  homes,  that  they  might  go  three  days'  journey  with  the  people,  to 
sacrifice  to  the  Lord  in  the  wilderness.     1.  With  such  a  view  of  the  mixed  multi- 
tude, we  may  reasonably  imagine  that  they  had  a  very  imperfect  knowledge  of  the 
God  of  Israel.    2.  This  mixed  multitude  had  been  induced  to  follow  Israel,  probably 
because  they  had  seen  the  miraculous  interpositions  of    God  in  behalf    of   His 
people,  and  wished  to  partake  of  them.     3.  Others,  again,  had  probably  accom- 
panied the  Israelites  in  unreflecting  carelessness,  without  anticipating  the  difficulties 
and  trials  before  them.     4.     The  mixed  multitude  seem  never  to  have  entirely 
united  themselves  to  the  community  of  Israel.     II.  Their  conduct  in  the  hour 
OF  temptation.     The  i^assage  in  the  book  of  Numbers  informs  us  that  they  fell 
a  lusting.     We  know  not  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  trials  to  which  tbey  were 
exposed ;  but  we  find  them  soon  yielding  to  the  power  of  temptation,  and  the  love 
of  sin.     1.  They  speedily  became  discontented  with  their  condition.     2.  The  in- 
spired penman  speaks  no  more  of  this  mixed  multitude ;  and  therefore  we  are 
justified  in  supposing  tbat  they  who  escaped  the  fire  of  the  Lord,  quitted  the  camp 
of  Israel,  and  returned  to  Egypt.     In  that  mixed  multitude  which  throng  around 
the  Church  of  the  living  God,  and  profess  communion  with  it,  there  are,  I  fear, 
not  a  few  who   sin   after  the  similitude  of   the  transgression  committed  in  the 
wilderness.     (C.  H.  SjJurgeon.)       Lessons: — I.  That  profession  is  not  necessarily 
true  religion.     II.  That  trials  are  necess.ary  proof  of   faith   and   love.     III. 
That  evil  communications  corrupt  good   manners.     (B.  P.   Buddicom.)         The 
mixed  multitude  : — I.  The  emissaries  of  Satan.     In  all  ages  there  have  been  these 
corrupters  of  the  truth  in  the  Church,  who  have  bred  schisms  of  all  kinds,  "  creep- 
ing into  houses,"  and  " leading  captive  silly  women";  and,  as  they  have  gained 
power  and  position,  becomiog  more  bold  in  the  propagandism  of  error,  both  in 
doctrine  and  form.     II.  The  hypocrites.     Worldly  men  come  into  the  Church  for 
the  purpose  of    making  "  gain  of   godliness,"  and  using  religion  as  a  "  cloak  of 
covetousness."     I  remember  very  well,  when  I  was  a  young  man,  going  away  from 
home  into  a  newer  part  of  our  country  with  a  view  of  making  my  fortune.     I  was 
advised  by  a  respectable  business  man  to  "  connect  myself  with  the  most  popular 
church  in  the  town,"  as  a  means  of  "getting  on,"  and  securing  the  recognition  and 
help  of  the  best  people.     Soon  after  I  became  a  pastor,  I  overheard  a  merchant 
talking  to  a  young  man,  and  endeavouring  to  persuade  him  to  join  the  church  ;  he 
used  as  an  argument  the  fact  that  when  he  came  to  that  village  a  young  man,  that 
was  the  first  thing  he  had  done  ;  and  he  affirmed  that  it  was  "  the  best  stroke  of 
business  he  had  ever  done."     He  attributed  his  success  in  life  to  that  fact.     And 
no  doubt  the  hypocrite  was  right.    Verily  he  had  his  reward.    III.  The  formalists. 
By  these  I  mean  those  who  are  more  or  less  apprehensive  of  the  future,  and  some- 
what troubled  about  their  sins,  and  who  take  to  the  formalism  of  Christianity  as  a 
means  of   security  against  the  possible  dangers  of    another  world.     They  know 
nothing  of  Christ  and  His  salvation  ;  are  strangers  to  conversion  and  regeneration : 
but  seize  upon  the  forms  and  ceremonies  of  religion  as  being  all  that  is  needful. 
Among  this  number  mav  be  classed  a  vast  number  who  have  ded  for  refuge  to  the 
"  Church"  in  serious  earnest,  but  who  are  at  best  the  merest  parasites,  or  semi- 
parisites.     They  have  no  life  in  themselves,  but  are  clinging  to  persons  or  things 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

from  whom  or  from  which  they  fancy  they  can  draw  life  for  themselves.  Poor 
souls  !  did  they  only  flee  to  Christ,  and  be  joined  to  Him,  they  would  indeed  be 
saved  ;  but,  as  it  now  is,  they  are  mere  Egyptians  who  are  in  the  midst  of  tbe  camp 
of  Israel  without  the  mark  or  sign  of  blood  upon  them.  IV.  The  self-deckiveu. 
(G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Mixed  multitudes  : — People  looking  on  will  judge  every- 
thing according  to  their  own  quality.  You  cannot  get  bad  people  to  form  good 
judgments.  You  cannot  persuade  good  people  to  form  mean  and  contemptib'e 
judgments.  Let  us  suppose  Moses  and  Aaron  at  the  head  of  this  great  throng. 
Criticism  would  thus  speak  respecting  the  multitude  :  They  must  be  better  than 
they  seem,  or  they  would  not  follow  the  leadership  of  such  men  as  Moses  aud 
Aaron ;  it  is  a  very  motley  crowd,  but  it  must  be  substantially  good  at  heart, 
because  look  at  the  leadership  which  it  has  chosen.  Or  criticism  might  speak  thus  : 
Moses  and  Aaron  cannot  be  much  after  all,  or  they  would  not  allow  this  rag-tag- 
and-bob-tail  following.  Thus  criticism,  I  repeat,  is  determined  by  quality.  In  the 
one  case  the  multitudes  get  the  benefit  of  the  moral  elevation  of  their  leaders  ;  in 
the  other  case  the  leaders  come  in  for  depreciation  because  of  the  motley  character 
of  their  followers.  Blessed  be  heaven,  the  Judge  is  just  who  shall  judge  us  all.  We 
shall  not  be  left  at  the  disposal  of  imperfect  and  selfish  criticism.  A  crowd,  even  in 
a  church,  is  not  to  be  judged  indiscriminately  or  pronounced  upon  in  some  rough 
generalization.  The  crowd  is  "  mixed."  Men  are  not  all  in  church  for  the  same 
reason.  Men  are  not  all  in  church  through  the  same  motives.  Some  are  in  church 
who  do  not  want  to  be  there ;  they  have  a  purpose  to  serve  :  some  are  there  on 
account  of  mere  curiosity.  Others  are  in  church  to  pray,  to  confess  their  life-sins, 
and  seek  the  pity  of  God  as  expressed  in  pardon  at  the  foot  of  the  saving  Cross. 
Outside  criticism  would  thus  judge  us  differently.  Whilst  we  say  this  about  the 
outward  church,  the  great  surging  crowd  that  may  be  within  the  hallowed  walls,  we 
could  say  practically  the  same  thing  about  the  inner  church.  Even  the  inner 
churct),  gathered  around  the  sacramental  board,  is  a  mixed  multitude.  For 
example,  look  at  the  difference  of  spiritual  attainment.  There  is  the  veteran 
who  knows  his  Bible  almost  by  heart,  and  here  is  the  little  learner  spelling  out 
its  earliest  words.  Have  tbey  a  right  t6  be  in  the  same  church  ?  Their  right 
is  not  in  their  attainments,  but  in  their  desire.  But  this  makes  church  life 
very  difficult  to  conduct:  very  difficult  for  the  pastor  aud  teacher,  very  difficult  for 
the  constituent  members  themselves.  One  can  go  at  a  great  pace ;  another  can  only 
crawl.  What  is  to  be  done  when  there  is  such  a  diversity  of  power  ?  Then  look  at 
what  a  mixture  of  disposition  there  is  even  in  tho  inner  church.  We  are  not 
all  of  one  quality.  Some  men  are  born  generous  ;  other  men  are  born  misers.  It 
is  e>isy  for  some  men  to  pray;  other  men  have  to  scourge  themselves  to  their  knees. 
Look  at  the  difference  of  faculty  for  work  you  find  in  the  cburch.  One  man  will  do 
anything  for  you  in  the  way  of  music.  He  likes  it ;  it  would  be  a  burden  to  him 
not  to  do  it.  Thank  God  for  such  service  !  Another  man  will  work  in  the  Sunday 
school.  He  loves  children  ;  their  presence  makes  him  young;  he  can  never  be  old 
so  long  as  he  sees  the  light  of  little  faces.  Every  man  is  himself  a  mixed  multitude. 
That  is  the  philosophy.  Have  you  ever  gone  far  enough  in  the  task  of  self-analysis 
to  find  out  how  many  men  you,  the  individual  man,  really  are?  You  are  self- 
inconsistent  ;  you  are  not  the  same  man  at  night  you  were  in  the  morning ;  whatever 
you  do,  you  do  in  a  mixed  way.  It  is  human  nature  that  is  the  mixed  multitude. 
We  know  that  we  have  motives  ;  we  have  never  seen  them,  but  we  have  felt  them ; 
we  know  of  a  verity  that  we  never  do  anything  with  a  pure,  simple,  direct,  frank 
motive.  Sometimes  the  motive  is  as  a  whole  good,  with  just  one  little  taint  in  the 
middle  of  it.  Sometimes  the  motive  is  predominantly  bad,  with  just  one  little  speck 
of  white  on  the  outside  or  on  the  left  hand.  So  are  we.  It  is  the  same  way  with 
our  thoughts.  We  are  not  always  impious.  Sometimes  even  the  unbeliever  feels  as 
though  he  could  believe  if  one  beam  coul  1  be  added  to  the  light  which  already 
showers  its  glory  upon  his  life.  Sometimes  the  believer  feels  as  if  he  had  been 
misled,  as  if  he  were  following  some  aerial  sprite,  some  shadowy  spectral  nothing. 
At  what  point  is  he  to  be  judged  ?  God  will  judge  him  at  his  best.  God  accepts 
our  prayers  in  their  bloom.  Do  not,  therefore,  condemn  yourselves  because  some- 
times you  are  in  moods  that  really  distress  the  very  soul ;  on  the  other  hand,  do  not 
flatter  yourselves  and  commit  yourselves  to  the  seduction  that  ends  in  utterest 
failure  of  life.  What  is  the  glea^  work  which  tbe  gospel  has  to  do  in  the  soul  in 
relation  to  all  this  mixture  of  moti>e  and  thought  ?  It  has  to  take  out  all  the  bad 
and  throw  it  away.  Come,  thou  Holy  Ghost,  and  take  out  of  our  hearts  the  selfish 
motive,  ihe  miser's  greed,  the  debasing  thought,  the  little,  mean,  contemptible 


CHAP.  XII.1  EXODUS.  209 

purpose ;  tear  it  up,  burn  it  in  unquenchable  fire.  When  a  man  can  so  pray  he  has 
a  good  hope  that  one  day  he  shall  be  self-unanimous.  Blessed  will  be  the  realization  of 
self-unanimity.  {J. Parker,  D.D.)  Hangers-on : — The  remora,  instead  of  swimming 
far  by  its  own  exertions,  greatly  prefers  being  transported  from  place  to  place  on  ships' 
bottoms,  or  even  the  bodies  of  sharks.  When  one  of  the  sharks  to  which  a  remora 
is  clinging  is  caught  by  a  hook,  and  is  pulled  out  of  the  water,  the  little  parasite 
is  shrewd  in  its  own  interest,  for  it  drops  off  and  makes  for  the  bottom  of  the  ship. 
As  long  as  a  ship  remains  within  the  tropics,  numbers  of  remorre  cling  to  its 
bottom,  whether  that  be  coppered  or  not,  whence  they  dart  off  occasionally  to  pick 
up  any  morsels  of  greasy  or  farinaceous  matter  that  may  be  thrown  overboard, 
retiring  again  rapidly  to  their  anchorage.  These  hangers-on  resemble  our  social 
ones  in  the  following  particulars  :  they  like  travelling  about ;  they  do  not  care  what 
they  attach  themselves  to  so  long  as  it  suits  their  purpose  for  the  time  ;  they  will 
not  get  along  by  their  own  exertions  if  they  can  find  others  to  carry  them  ;  they 
are  sharp  in  their  own  interests,  and  know  quite  well  when  to  desert  a  supporter; 
and  they  are  ready  to  avail  themselves  of  discarded  or  accidental  ailment.  [Scientifio 
Illustrations.) 

Vers.  40-41.  All  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out. — The  Exodus  : — I.  We  cannot 

TREAT    THE    ExODCS    AS    AN    ISOLATED    FACT    IN     HISTORY.        Egypt    is    the    type    of    the 

cunning,  careless,  wanton  world,  out  of  which  in  all  ages  God  is  calling  His  sons. 
The  Exodus  remained  a  living  fact  in  history.  The  infant  Jesus  went  down  into 
Egypt,  as  the  infant  Israel  went  down,  not  to  repeat  the  Exodus,  but  to  illume 
afresh  its  fading  lines.  1.  The  Children  of  Israel  were  an  elect  race,  because  they 
were  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  :  that  constituted  their  distinctity.  You  are  of  the 
race  of  the  second  Adam,  of  the  same  flesh  and  blood  as  Jesus ;  and  all  who  wear 
a  human  form  and  understand  a  human  voice,  God  calls  forth  from  Egypt ;  His 
voice  calls  to  His  sons,  "Come  forth  to  freedom,  life,  and  heaven."  2.  You,  like 
the  Israelites,  are  called  forth  to  the  desert,  tlie  fiery  pillar,  the  manna,  the  spiritual 
rock  ;  and  while  you  aim  at  Canaan,  His  will.  His  heart,  are  on  your  side.  II. 
Note  the  moual  features  of  the  Exodus.  1.  There  was  a  life  in  Egypt  which 
had  become  insupportable  to  a  man.  That  bondage  is  the  picture  of  a  soul  round 
which  the  devil's  toils  are  closing.  2.  The  Israelites  saw  the  stroke  of  heaven  fall 
on  all  that  adorns,  enriches,  and  nourishes  a  worldly  life.  3.  They  had  a  Divine 
leader,  a  man  commissioned  and  inspired  by  God.  We  have  the  Apostle  and  High 
Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus,  who,  in  the  house  and  the  work  in  which 
Moses  wrought  as  a  servant,  represents  God  as  the  Son.  4.  We  discern  a  con- 
dition of  utter  dependence  on  the  strength  and  faithfulness  of  God.  They  and  we 
were  delivered  by  a  Divine  work.  5.  Notice,  lastly,  the  freedom  of  the  delivered 
Israelites  ;  a  broad,  deep  sea  flowing  between  them  and  the  land  of  bondage,  and 
the  tyrants  dead  upon  the  shore.  Such  is  the  glorious  sense  of  liberty,  of  wealth, 
of  life,  when  the  deep  sea  of  Divine  forgiving  love  sweeps  over  the  past  and 
obliterates  its  shame.  (J.  B.  Broicn,  B.A.)  The  Exodus  : — I.  First,  consider  the 
MODE  of  their  GOING  ODT.  1.  When  the  Children  of  Israel  went  out  of  Egypt  it 
is  a  remarkable  thing  that  they  were  forced  out  by  the  Egyptians.  The  dove  fleeth 
not  to  his  cote  unless  the  eagle  doth  pursue  it ;  so  sins,  like  eagles,  pursue  the  timid 
soul,  making  it  fly  into  the  clefts  of  the  Rock  Christ  Jesus  to  hide  itself.  Once, 
our  sins  kept  us  from  Christ ;  but  now  every  sin  drives  us  to  Him  for  pirdon.  I 
had  not  known  Christ  if  I  had  not  known  sin  ;  I  had  not  known  a  deliverer,  if  I 
had  not  smarted  under  the  Egyptians.  The  Holy  Spirit  drives  us  to  Christ,  just  as 
the  Egyptians  drove  the  people  out  of  Egypt.  2.  Again  :  the  Children  of  Israel 
went  out  of  Egypt  covered  with  jewels  and  arranged  in  their  best  garments.  Ah ! 
that  is  just  how  a  child  of  God  comes  out  of  Egypt.  He  does  not  come 
out  of  his  bondage  with  his  old  garments  of  self-righteousness  on :  oh  !  no  ;  as 
long  as  he  wears  those  he  will  always  keep  in  Egypt ;  but  he  marches  out  with  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  upon  him,  and  adorned  with  the  goodly 
graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  Note,  moreover,  that  these  people  obtained  their 
jewels  from  the  EgyiJtians.  God's  people  never  lose  anything  by  going  to  the 
house  of  bondage.  They  win  their  choicest  jewels  from  the  Egyptians.  "  Strangely 
true  it  is,  sins  do  me  good,"  said  an  old  writer  once,  "  because  they  drive  me  to  the 
Saviour  ;  and  so  I  get  good  by  them."  Ask  the  humble  Christian  where  he  got  his 
humility,  and  ten  to  one  he  will  say  that  he  got  it  in  the  furnace  of  deep  sorrow  on 
account  of  sin.  See  another  who  is  tender  in  conscience :  where  did  he  get  that 
jewel  from  ?    It  came  from  Egypt,  I'll  be  bound.    We  get  more  by  being  in  bondage, 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [cHAP.rti. 

under  conviction  of  sin,  than  we  often  do  by  liberty.  4.  They  came  out  in  haste.  I 
never  met  with  a  poor  sinner  under  a  sense  of  sin  who  was  not  in  haste  to  get  his 
burden  off  his  back.  No  man  has  a  broken  heart,  unless  he  wants  to  have  it 
bound  up  directly.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your  heart," 
says  the  Holy  Ghost ;  He  never  says  to-morrow ;  to-day  is  His  continual  cry,  and 
every  true-born  Israelite  will  pant  to  get  out  of  Egypt,  whenever  he  has  the 
opportunity.  II.  The  magnitode  of  this  deliver.usxe.  I  would  have  you  par- 
ticularly remember  one  thing;  and  that  is,  that  great  as  this  emigration  was, 
and  enormous  as  were  the  multitudes  that  quitted  Egypt,  it  was  only  one  Passover 
that  set  them  all  free.  One  agonizing  sacrifice,  one  death  on  Calvary,  one  bloody 
sweat  on  Gethsemane,  one  shriek  of  "  It  is  finished  "  consummated  all  the  work  of 
redemption.  HI.  The  completeness  of  theib  deliverance.  As  Moses  said,  "Not 
an  hoof  shall  be  left  behind."  They  were  to  have  all  their  goods,  as  well  as  their 
persons.  What  does  this  teach  us?  Why,  not  only  that  all  God's  people  shall  be 
saved,  but  that  all  that  God's  people  ever  had  shall  be  restored.  All  that  Jacob 
ever  took  down  to  Egypt  shall  be  brought  out  again.  Have  I  lost  a  perfect 
righteousness  in  Adam  ?  I  shall  have  a  perfect  righteousness  in  Christ.  Have  I 
lost  happiness  on  earth  in  Adam  ?  God  will  give  me  much  happiness  here  below  in 
Christ.  Have  I  lost  heaven  in  Adam  ?  I  shall  have  heaven  in  Christ ;  for  Christ 
came  not  only  to  seek  and  to  save  the  people  that  were  lost,  but  that  which  was 
lost :  that  is,  all  the  inheritance,  as  well  as  the  people ;  all  their  property.  IV. 
The  time  when  the  Israelites  came  out  of  Egypt.  God  had  promised  to 
Abraham  that  His  people  should  be  in  bondage  four  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and 
they  were  not  in  bondage  one  day  more.  As  soon  as  God's  bond  became  due, 
though  it  had  been  drawn  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  before,  He  paid  the  bill ; 
He  required  no  more  time  to  do  it  in,  but  He  did  it  at  once.  Christopher  Ness  says, 
they  had  to  tarry  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  till  the  night  came  ;  for  though 
He  fulfilled  it  the  selfsame  day,  He  made  them  stay  to  the  end  of  it,. to  prove  their 
faith.  He  was  wrong  there,  because  Scripture  days  begin  at  night.  "  The  evening 
and  the  morning  were  the  second  day."  So  that  God  did  not  make  them  wait,  but 
paid  them  at  ouce.  As  soon  as  the  day  came,  beginning  with  our  night,  as  the 
Jewish  day  does  now,  and  the  Scriptural  day  always  did — as  soon  as  the  clock 
struck — God  paid  His  bond.     (C.  H.  Spuryeon.) 

Ver.  42.  A  night  to  be  much  observed  unto  the  Lord. — The  Passover: — I.  The 
Passover  the  appointed  means  of  a  great  deliverance.  The  destruction  of  the 
firstborn  secured  Israel's  freedom  ;  the  rite  itself  saved  Israel's  firstborn.  1.  Wrath 
was  averted.  2.  Individual  faith  and  action  were  required.  3.  Perfect  safety  was 
thus  obtained.  II.  The  Passover  an  ordained  feast  of  remembrance.  1.  Not 
a  formal  service,  but  gratefully  rendered,  and  intelligently  observed ;  the  father 
instructing  the  child  as  to  its  meaning  (vers.  26,  27).  2.  To  be  kept  by  all  the 
people  (ver.  4).  The  redemption  to  be  celebrated  by  all  the  redeemed.  3.  In  each 
successive  generation.  A  perpetual  witness  of  Jehovah's  delivering  mercy ;  an 
unfailing  type ;  a  constant  test  and  measure  of  religious  life.  Kept  by  Moses 
(Num.  ix.) ;  by  Joshua  (chap,  v.) ;  revived  by  Josiah  ;  in  Nehemiah's  time  (Ezra,  vi.) ; 
in  our  Lord's  time  widely  observed.  4.  Every  detail  was  divinely  ordered.  5.  The 
lamb  was  eaten  with  special  accompaniments  Bitter  herbs  denoted  penitence ; 
unleavened  bread,  sincerity.  Godly  sorrow  chastens  Christian  joy.  True  con- 
secration marks  the  believer's  praise.  6.  In  a  pilgrim  spirit.  Loins  girded,  shoes 
on  feet,  staff  in  hand.  Christ's  service  here  is  not  the  Christian's  rest.  His  eye 
is  fized  on  heaven  ;  and,  while  he  works  and  praises,  his  true  cry  ever  is,  "  Come, 
Lord  Jesus."  {W.  S.  Bruce,  M.A.)  Freedom  and  discijyline : — I.  Scholars  have 
said  that  the  old  Greeks  were  the  fathers  of  freedom ;  and  there  have  been  other 
people  in  the  world's  history  who  have  made  glorious  and  successful  struggles  to 
throw  off  their  tyrants  and  be  free.  But  liberty  is  of  a  far  older  and  nobler  house. 
It  was  born  on  the  first  Easter  night,  when  God  Himself  stooped  from  heaven  to 
set  the  oppressed  free.  II.  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  the  history  of  the  whole 
Church  and  of  every  nation  in  Christendom.  The  Jews  had  to  wander  forty  years 
in  the  wilderness,  and  Christendom  has  had  to  wander  too,  in  strange  and  blood- 
stained paths,  for  eighteen  hundred  years  and  more.  For  as  the  Israelites  were 
not  worthy  to  enter  at  once  into  rest,  no  more  have  the  nation  of  Christ's  Church 
been  worthy.  As  the  new  generation  sprang  up  in  the  wilderness,  trained  under 
Moses'  stern  law,  to  the  fear  of  God,  so  for  eighteen  hundred  years  have  the 
generations  of  Chxistendom,  by  the  training  of  the  Church  and  the  light  of  the 


CHAP,  xm.]  EXODUS,  211 

— ' • ' ' • • » 

gospel,  been  growing  in  wisdom  and  knowledge,  growing  in  morality  and  humanity, 
in  that  true  discipline  and  loyalty  which  are  the  yokefellows  of  freedom  and 
independence.  (C.  Kingslcy,  M.A.)  A  holy  celebration  : — It  is  the  night  of  our 
regeneration ;  it  is  the  night  of  onr  conversion  (night  or  day,  it  matters  not 
which) ;  the  time  in  which  we  actually  received  salvation,  and  were  made  partakers 
of  this  Passover,  that  we  would  just  now  admonish  you  to  remember.  At  that 
particular  time  important  events  transpired  for  us.  The  most  important  events, 
to  us,  that  ever  occurred  in  our  history,  happened  on  that  occasion.  There  was  a 
point  in  our  life  up  to  which  we  were  dead  :  then  we  were  made  alive.  There  was 
a  point  up  to  which  we  were  condemned  :  then,  in  an  instant,  we  were  acquitted. 
Now,  what  events  transpired  on  that  occasion  ?  1.  Well,  the  first  was,  it  pleased 
God  then  to  show  us  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  to  apply  it  to  our  souls.  That  night, 
too,  or  that  day,  whichever  it  may  have  been,  we  do  remember  that  we  enjoyed  a 
feast  upon  our  Saviour.  The  blood  was  sprinkled,  and  so  we  were  saved;  and  then 
we  sat  down  at  the  table,  and  began  at  once  to  feast  upon  the  precious  things 
stored  up  in  the  person  of  Christ.  2.  And  then  it  was  that  for  the  first  time  in 
your  life  you  felt  that  you  were  free.  You  were  free ;  but  finding  yourself  free,  you 
also  discovered,  for  the  first  time,  that  you  were  a  pilgrim ;  for  the  Israelites,  as 
they  ate  that  paschal  supper,  had  to  do  so  with  their  loins  girt  and  staves  in  their 
hands,  like  men  that  were  to  leave  that  country.  You  found  that  now  you  were  a 
stranger.  If  you  had  an  unconverted  parent,  you  could  not  talk  to  him  or  her 
about  your  soul.  If  you  had  old  companions,  you  felt  you  must  bid  them  farewell, 
for  they  would  not  understand  you;  if  you  did  not  know  you  were  a  pilgrim  before, 
you  found  it  out  the  very  next  day,  when  you  began  to  talk  with  tbem.  0!  it  was 
a  time  to  be  remembered,  and  I  want  you  to  remember  it  now — those  blessed  days 
when  we  began  to  live  !  3.  Important  results  will  flow  to  you  from  the  preservation 
of  this  memorial.  It  will  humble  you  and  foster  the  grace  of  humility.  Have 
you  become  an  old  experienced  Christian,  my  brother  ?  Go  back  to  the  hole  of  the 
pit  whence  you  were  digged.     (C,  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  43-48.  The  ordinance  of  the  Passover. — Minute  instructions  in  reference  to 
the  observance  of  the  Passover : — I.  That  God  not  only  institutes  ordinances  for 

MEN,  BUT  ALSO  SHOWS  IN  WHAT  WAY  THEY  AEE  TO  BE  OBSERVED.  II.  ThAT  GoD  WILL 
NOT  ALLOW  ANY  STRANGER  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  ChEIST  TO  PARTAKE  OF  HiS  HoLY  SACRA- 
MENT.    "There   shall  no  stranger  eat  thereof."     III.    That    a    mere  hired  and 

NOMINAL     RELATION     TO     THE    ChCRCH    DOES    NOT    GIVE    A    TRUE    RIGHT    TO    THE    HOLY 

Sacrament.  "  An  hired  servant  shall  not  eat  thereof."  IV.  That  circumcision  of 
BEAKT  IS  NECESSABY  (ver.  48).     {J.  S.  Excll,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Sanctify  unto  Me  all  the  firstborn. — The  sanctification  of  the  firstborn 
to  the  Lord : — I.  That  the  good  are  required  to  sanctify  their  firstborn  unto 
THE  Lord.  "  All  the  firstborn" — that  is  to  say,  the  most  excellent  of  their  possessions, 
the  most  valuable,  and  that  which  is  viewed  with  the  greatest  regard.  1.  This 
sanctification  of  the  tirstborn  was  required  by  the  Divine  commandment.  2.  This 
sanctification  of  the  firstborn  was  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  mercy 
in  sparing  the  firstborn  from  the  midnight  destruction.  Heaven  never  asks  more 
than  it  gis-es,  or  more  than  is  consistent  with  the  gratitude  of  a  devout  heart  to 
bestow.  3.  This  sanctification  of  the  firstborn  was  to  be  associated  with  the  deliver- 
ance of  the  Israelites  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt.  II.  That  the  good,  in  sancti- 
fying  their    firstborn   unto  the   Lord,  abe  not  called  upon  to  give  up   the 

80L&    use   of    their   PROPERTY,   BUT     TO     REDEEM   AND     TO   PUT    IT    TO    A   LAWFUL    USE. 

Who  would  not  desire  his  firstborn  to  be  the  Lord's  ?    III.  That  the  good  abe 

BEQUIKED     TO     CONNECT    THE     SANCTIFICATION     OF    THEIR    FIRSTBORN     WITH    SACRIFICE. 

*'  And  all  the  firstborn  of  man  among  thy  children  shalt  thou  redeem  "  (ver.  14). 
This  redemption  was  to  be  by  sacrifice.  Parents  need  reminding  of  this  duty.  1. 
Because  they  are  liable  to  forget  the  service  which  past  mercy  requires  of  them. 
2.  Because  tJiey  are  apt  to  be  selfish  in  the  use  of  their  property.    3.  Because  they 


2U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

— ^ 

are  not  sufSciently  spiritually  minded  to  see  God  in  their  property,  and  therefore 
forget  His  claims.  4.  Because  they  do  not  like  to  pay  the  redemption  price.  IV. 
That  the  good  are  to  teach  the  eight  of  God  to  the  firstbokn,  to  their 
POSTERITY  (vers.  14,  15).  Children  are  very  inquisitive.  They  will  ask  questions, 
even  about  religious  matters.  At  such  times  they  should  be  carefully  and  solemnly 
instructed  in  Diviue  truth.  The  family  is  the  best  school  for  the  young.  They 
should  early  be  taught  the  meaning  of  self-sacrifice,  and  the  moral  grandeur  of 
giving  to  the  Lord.  Even  the  young  have  their  firstborn,  which  they  can  be  tnught 
to  give  to  the  Lord  ;  and  if  they  grow  up  in  the  spirit  of  this  obligation  they  will, in 
after  days,  impart  to  it  a  truer  meaning,  and  give  to  it  a  more  solemn  influence 
than  before  they  were  capable  of.  Lessons  :  1.  That  the  good  must  sanctify  their 
best  things  to  the  Lord.  2.  That  this  can  only  be  done  by  the  redemption  of  the 
Cross.  3.  That  the  young  must  be  early  taught  their  obligation  to  the  Lord.  (J.  .S. 
Exell,  M.A.)  Sanctify  unto  Me  all  the  firstborn  : — 1.  A  command.  2.  A  duty. 
3.  A  privilege.  4.  A  benediction.  5.  A  prophecy.  {Ihid.)  The  man-tithe: — 
I.  Observe  the  first  rule  :  "  Sanctify  unto  Me  all  the  firstborn  of  man."  As  the 
redemption  of  the  firstborn  of  the  more  valuable  animals  was  graciously  commuted 
by  the  sacrifice  of  less  valuable  ones,  so  there  was  a  commutation  for  the  firstborn 
of  man  ;  not  indeed  by  inferior  substitutes  as  in  the  former  case,  but  by  his  fellow- 
man — by  the  institution  of  a  priesthood,  "sanctifying,"  or  setting  apart,  the  whole 
tribe  of  Levi  in  place  of  the  firstborn  of  all  Israel.  But  as  this  arrangement  had 
not  yet  transpired  at  the  period  of  the  text,  the  explanation  was  deferred  till  then, 
that  in  the  meanwhile  the  whole  nation  might  fully  realize  the  amount  and  weight 
of  their  liability  to  God ;  and  further,  that  when  Levi  was  sanctified,  the  whole 
Levitical  priesthood — a  priesthood  of  their  brethren,  "  bone  of  their  bone,  and  flesh 
of  their  flesh" — might  symbolize  the  High  Priesthood  of  the  Mediator  who  "was  in 
all  things  made  like  unto  His  brethren,"  that  He  too  "  might  also  make  intercession 
for  the  sins  of  the  people."  This  lies  at  the  root  of  the  Levitical  principle,  the  lay- 
agency  in  the  church  of  God.  Admirable  is  the  advice  of  Jethro  to  bis  son-in-law,  and 
incidentally  it  bears  upon  this  subject.  "  This  thing,"  that  is,  the  whole  burthen  of 
the  work,  "  is  too  heavy  for  thee  ;  thou  art  not  able  to  perform  it  thyse  f  alone.  .  .  . 
Thou  shalt  provide  out  of  all  the  people  able  men,  such  as  fear  Goil,  men  of  truth, 
hating  covetousness ;  and  place  such  over  them,  to  be  rulers  of  thousands,  and 
rulers  of  hundreds,  rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens."  Thus  the  work  of 
religion,  benevolence,  and  rule  was  divided,  subdivided,  and  redivided  still,  from 
considerable  districts  down  to  classes  of  tens,  as  we  should  desire  to  see  the  work  of 
God  among  ourselves  distributed  among  our  lay  deacons  and  elders,  district  visitors, 
collectors  and  Sabbath-school  teachers,  who  in  their  respective  ministries  should 
act  on  the  suggestion  of  Jethro,  "  The  hard  causes  they  brought  unto  Moses,  but 
every  small  matter  they  judged  themselves."  II.  Secondly,  the  text  presents  the 
rule  of  consecrated  wealth — "  Sauctifj'  unto  Me  all  the  firstborn  of  beasts."  On 
this  point  there  is  some  difficulty.  "  All  the  firstborn  of  cattle  "  were  given  to  the 
Lord  by  sacrifice  ;  and  yet  in  the  forty-fifth  verse  of  the  third  chapter  of  Numbers 
the  whole  of  the  cattle  of  the  Levites  were  considered  as  a  substitute  for  the  firstlings 
of  the  general  cattle,  just  as  all  the  men  of  the  Levites  were  accepted  as  the  substi- 
tute for  all  the  firstborn  of  men  from  the  rest  of  the  tribes.  Possibly  the  cattle 
fii'stlings  were  redeemed,  as  the  excess  of  human  firstborn  over  the  number  of  the 
firstborn  of  the  Levites  were,  by  the  half-shekel  atonement  for  each,  which  was 
payable  at  the  census  or  periodical  numbering  of  the  people.  It  is  probable  that 
David's  omission  of  this  payment  was  the  sin  which  incurred  God's  heavy  dis- 
pleasure in  that  unseasonable  numbering  of  the  people,  which,  in  omitting  the  soul- 
tax  for  atonement,  seemed  numbered  for  David  himself,  and  not  for  God.  Be  this 
as  it  may,  the  Lord  claimed  all  the  firstborn  of  their  beasts,  which  were  the  staple 
property  in  the  ruder  forms  of  society.  III.  The  text  presents  its  demand  for 
consecrated  time.  We  need  not  dwell  upon  the  Sabbath,  or  the  Divine  claim  upon 
the  sevenths  of  our  time.  Assuming  we  are  all  agreed  that  this,  the  minimum  of 
God's  requirement,  is  due  from  every  man,  we  may  deplore  the  manner  in  which, 
for  the  most  part,  even  this  holy  debt  is  discharged.  The  abuse  of  the  Sabbath  and 
insubordination  to  its  constantly  recurring,  bounden,  and  emphatic  law,  lies  at 
the  root  of  the  national  irreligion.  There  is  a  significancy  in  the  proportion 
of  the  Divine  demand  of  only  a  tenth  of  all  other  things,  but  a  seventh  of  our 
time.  (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  The  Divine  right  to  the  best  things  of  man: — "  It  is 
Mine."  This  is  the  language  of  God  in  reference  to  each  one  of  us.  It  is  Mine.  I. 
Because  I  created  it.     II.  Because  I  preserved  it.     III.  Because  I  endowee 


CHAP,  xni.]  EXODUS.  213 

IT   WITH    EVERYTHING    THAT    MAKES   IT    VALUABLE.       (J.    S.    Exell,    M.A.)  The  first- 

boni,  types  of  Christ : — I.  As  they  were  God's  peculiar.  1.  By  common  nature. 
2.  By  common  grace.  3.  By  a  special  right.  (1)  In  His  nature,  Christ  is  Firstborn, 
as  Son  of  God.  (2)  In  His  office,  by  special  prerogative,  (a)  For  the  kind,  in  that 
He  was  Mediator,  God  and  Man  in  unity  of  person,  and  the  only  Eedeemer  of  His 
Church,  (b)  For  undertaking  of  His  office,  (c)  For  the  accomplishing  His  office, 
in  His  resurrection.  He  is  called  the  First-begotten,  or  Firstborn  of  the  dead,  two 
■ways :  (i)  In  respect  of  His  Father,  who  first  begot  Him  from  the  dead  ;  (ii)  In 
regard  of  Himself,  whose  privilege  it  was  to  raise  up  Himself  from  the  dead  by  His 
own  power.  H.  The  firstborn  of  Israel  was  the  second,  and  next  to  the  father 
OF  THE  FAiiiLY,  yea,  after  the  father  instead  of  the  father.  So  is  Christ  to  His 
family,  the  Church ;  He  performs  all  offices  of  a  careful  and  tender  father,  and 
takes  on  Him,  not  the  affection  only  of  a  father,  but  even — 1.  The  name  of  a 
father  (Isa.  ix.  6).  2.  The  office  of  a  father.  (1)  He  supplies  the  means  of  spiritual 
life,  as  they  of  natural.  (2)  He  nurtures  and  teacheth  His  Church.  (3)  He  provides 
for  the  present,  and  bestows  the  inheritance  of  eternal  life.  III.  The  firstborn  had 
THE  PRE-EMINENCE  AMONG  THE  BRETHREN,  and  wcrc  chief  in  office  and  authority, 
rulers  in  the  house  after  their  fathers,  and  priests  in  the  family,  before  the  Levitical 
order  was  established.  Herein  they  were  special  types  of  Jesus  Christ ;  who  in  all 
things  must  have  the  pre-eminence,  as  first  in  time,  in  order,  in  precedency,  and  in 
the  excellency  and  dignity  of  His  person.  IV.  The  firstborn  had  a  double  portion 
IN  GOODS  (Deut.  xxi.  17).  Signifying — 1.  The  plenitude  of  the  spirit  and  grace  in 
Christ,  who  was  anointed  with  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows.  2.  The 
pre-eminency  of  Christ  in  His  glorious  inheritance,  advanced  in  glory  and  majesty 
incomprehensible  by  all  creatures.  Use — (1)  Out  of  the  occasion  of  the  law  of  the 
firstborn,  learn  that  the  more  God  doth  for  any  man,  the  more  he  ought  to  conceive 
himself  to  be  the  Lord's,  and  the  more  right  and  interest  the  Lord  challcngeth  in 
him.  (2)  If  Christ  be  the  true  firstborn,  of  whom  all  they  are  but  types,  we  must 
give  Him  the  honour  of  His  birthright.  (3)  Here  is  aground  of  much  consolation, 
(a)  In  that  Christ  being  the  truth  of  the  firstborn,  from  Him  the  birthright  is 
derived  unto  us  believers,  as  it  was  from  Eeuben  unto  Judah,  and  we  jiartake  of  the 
same  birthright  with  our  head.  For  here  is  a  difference  between  the  type  and  truth 
of  the  firstborn.  They  had  all  their  privileges  for  themselves :  but  Christ  not  for 
Himself  but  for  us.  (b)  Being  God's  firstborn  throughout,  we  are  dear  unto  God. 
(c)  God  takes  notice,  and  avenges  all  wrongs  done  to  the  saints,  because  they  are 
His  firstborn.  (4)  Seeing  in  Christ  the  firstborn  we  attain  the  birthright ;  let  every 
Christian  beware  of  profaneness,  and  passing  away  his  birthright  as  Esau,  who 
Bold  his  birthright  for  pottage  (Heb.  xii.  10).  (5)  Learn  to  grow  in  conformity  with 
our  Elder  Brother  Christ,  with  whom  we  cannot  be  equal,  but  like  as  brothers.  We 
must  be  like  Him  in  affection,  like  Him  in  affliction,  like  Him  in  the  combat,  and 
like  Him  in  the  crown.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Consecrated  to  the  Lord: — When 
Bishop  Selwyn  spoke  to  Sir  John  Patteson,  then  a  widower,  of  the  desire  of  his 
splendidly  gifted  son,  Coleridge,  to  join  him  in  the  New  Zealand  Mission,  the 
father's  first  exclamation  was :  "  I  cannot  let  him  go !  "  but  he  immediately  added, 
"  God  forbid  I  should  stop  him !  "  And  he  closed  the  conversation  by  saying : 
•'  Mind,  I  give  him  wholly,  not  with  any  thought  of  seeing  him  again.  I  will  not 
have  him  thmkmg  he  must  come  home  to  see  me."  A  consecrated  child  : — A 
young  man  was  about  to  enter  the  foreign  missionary  work.  A  gentleman  said  to 
the  young  man's  father,  "It's  hard  to  give  up  the  boy."  "  Yes,"  replied  the  father, 
"but  it's  just  what  we've  been  expecting."  "How  so?"  inquired  the  friend. 
••  When  he  was  a  little  baby,"  answered  the  father,  "  his  mother  and  I  went  to  a 
missionary  meeting.  An  appeal,  most  earnest  and  touching,  was  made  for  men  to 
become  missionaries.  We  ourselves  could  not  go.  When  we  returned  home  the 
baby  lay  asleep  in  his  crib.  We  went  to  the  crib.  His  mother  stood  on  one  side, 
I  on  the  other.  We  together  laid  our  hands  on  his  forehead,  and  prayed  that  it 
might  be  God's  will  for  him  to  become  a  foreign  missionary.  We  never  spoke  to 
him  of  what  we  did.  But  all  through  these  twenty-five  years  we  have  believed  that 
our  prayer  about  him  would  be  answered,  and  answered  it  now  is.  Yes,  it  is  hard 
to  give  up  the  boy,  but  it's  what  we've  been  expecting." 

Vers.  3,  4.  Remember  this  day. — A  day  to  be  remr-mbered : — 1.  God's  commands 
and  His  servants'  obedience  are  sweetly  united  together.  2.  Deliverance  of  the 
Church  from  Egyptian  bondage  is  justly  chargeable  on  their  memory.  3.  Jehovah 
the  Author  of  deliverance  is  to  be  minded  with  His  work,  and  po -ver  of  doing  it. 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

4.  Remembrance  of  Jehovah  carrieth  with  it  mindfulness  of  duty  and  service  to 
Him  (ver.  3).  5.  Days  and  montbs  of  mercy  are  ordered  by  God  to  be  remembered 
(ver.  4).     {G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Days  to  be  remembered  : — I.  Theke  ake  days  in 

THE  HISTORY  OF  INDIVIDCALS  WHICH  OUGHT  TO  BE  CELEBRATED.  II.  ThERE  ARE 
DAYS  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  CHURCHES  WHICH  OUGHT  TO  BE  CELEBRATED.  HI.  ThERE  ABE 
DAYS  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  NATIONS  WHICH  OUGHT  TO  BE  CELEBRATED.  {J.  S.  Exell, 
M.A.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Keep  this  service. — The  ordinances  of  the  Lord : — I.  That  the  ordi- 
nances OF  THE  Lord  must  be  observed  in  the  tutes  of  prosperity  (ver.  5). 
II.  That  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord  must  be  observed  with  true  intelli- 
gence (vers.  8,  9).  III.  That  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord  mcst  be  observed 
with  parental  solicitude.  God  has  appointed  the  family  the  moral  nursery  of 
the  young.  Lessons :  1.  To  attend  to  all  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord.  2.  To 
attend  to  them  at  the  most  appropriate  time.  3.  To  attend  to  them  in  right  spirit 
?ind  temper.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  8-10.  Show  thy  son  in  that  day. — Lessons  : — 1.  The  instruction  of  children 
is  a  duty  upon  parents.  2.  God  commands  continuance  of  ordinances  for  instruc- 
tion of  posterity.  3.  The  reason  of  God's  ordinances  must  be  understood  by  parents 
and  children  (ver.  8).  4.  Sacramental  signs,  and  memorials  of  God,  He  is  pleased 
to  give  His  Church.  5.  God  would  have  these  signal  memorials  at  hand  and  before 
the  eyes  of  His.  G.  The  Passover  was  a  true  sacramental  sign  and  seal  of  God's 
covenant.  7.  By  sacraments  rightly  used  God's  covenant  is  confirmed  on  hearts 
and  in  profession.  8.  God's  mighty  gracious  redemption  is  a  just  cause  of  such 
memorials  (ver.  9).  9.  God's  sacraments  are  His  statutes  and  positive  laws.  10. 
It  is  God's  prerogative,  to  make  anniversary  memorials  of  His  mercies  (ver.  10). 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Truth  embodied : — As  the  soul  is  clothed  in  flesh,  and  only 
thus  is  able  to  perform  its  functions  in  this  earth,  where  it  is  sent  to  live ;  as  the 
thought  must  find  a  word  before  it  can  pass  from  mind  to  mind  ;  so  every  great 
truth  seeks  some  body,  some  outward  form,  in  which  to  exhibit  its  powers.  It 
appears  in  the  world,  and  men  lay  hold  of  it,  and  represent  it  to  themselves,  in 
histories,  in  forms  of  words,  in  sacramental  symbols  ;  and  these  things,  which  in 
their  proper  nature  are  but  illustrations,  stiffen  into  essential  fact,  and  become  part 
of  the  reality.  {J.  A.  Froude.)  Importance  of  commemorative  days  and  ordinances : — 
The  following  sentence  is  attributed  to  Voltaire  : — "  I  despair  of  destroying  Chris- 
tianity in  any  country,  so  long  as  millions  of  human  beings  meet  on  Sunday  to 
■worship  God."  Many  things  have  been  fathered  on  Voltahe  of  which  he  never 
heard,  but  if  he  really  said  or  wrote  this  he  uttered  an  unusually  sensible  thing.  It 
is  curious  that  sceptical  writers  have  regarded  so  little  the  testimony  of  Christian 
rites  to  the  facts  with  which  they  are  indissolnbly  connected.  How  did  the  Lord's 
Supper  and  the  Lord's  Day  come  to  be  estabhshed  institutions  ?  Rites  and  observ- 
ances do  not  estabUsh  and  perpetuate  themselves.  The  origin  of  these  two  Chris- 
tian institutions  can  only  be  explained  by  their  connection  with  the  events  they 
commemorate.  If  the  written  records  of  the  apostolic  age  could  be  blotted  from  the 
memory  of  man,  the  Lord's  Supper  would  still  bear  testimony  to  Christ's  death  for 
man's  salvation,  as  the  Lord's  Day  would  eloquently  witness  to  His  resmTection 
from  the  dead. 

Vers.  11-13.  All  the  firstborn. — Firstborn  to  be  dedicated  to  God : — 1.  Jehovah  is 
the  beginning  and  end  of  His  own  ordinances.  He  sets  them  for  Himself.  2.  The 
Church  must  act  these  duties  from  God  unto  God  Himself.  3.  All  that  God  requires 
must  His  people  make  to  pass  from  them  to  Him.  4.  Firstborn  males  of  beasts 
God  required  in  the  law  for  special  use  to  Himself  (ver.  12).  5.  Clean  and  unclean 
among  creatures  is  a  distinction  made  by  God  for  men,  not  for  Himself.  6.  Grod 
hath  a  proprietary  in  all  creatures  be  they  never  so  unclean,  7.  God  hath  ordered 
redemption  for  unclean  by  putting  the  clean  in  their  stead.  8.  Unclean  unredeemed 
must  be  destroyed.  9.  A  price  hath  God  setfor  man's  redemption  to  gain  a  Church 
of  the  firstborn.  10.  The  law  of  the  firstborn  hath  its  truth  and  accomplishment  in 
Christ  Jesus,  "  the  Firstborn  of  every  creature  "  (CoL  i.  15  ;  ver.  13).  (G.  Hughes, 
B.D.) 

Vers.  14-16.  When  thy  son  asketh  thee. — The  Book  of  Exodus  introduces  that 
new  epoch  in  the  scriptural  history  of  sacrifices  when  they  began  to  be  regulated  by 


CHAP.  XIII.]  EXODUS.  215 

fixed  laws,  to  be  part  of  a  national  economy.     I.  The  offering  of  the  firstborn  was 

THE    DEI'ICATION    AND    CONSECRATION    OF    THE    WHOLE    JEWISH    NATION.       The    tiistborn 

represented  its  strength,  its  vitality,  its  endurance.  This  act  signified  that  its 
strength  lay  only  in  its  dei^endence  on  God's  strength,  that  its  vitality  came  from 
the  life  which  is  in  Him,  that  it  would  endure  from  generation  to  generation, 
because  He  is  the  same  and  His  years  fail  not.  The  calling  of  the  Israelites  was 
the  calling  to  confess  a  Eedeemer  of  Israel,  a  righteous  Being  who  had  brought  out 
their  fathers  from  the  house  of  bondage.  II.  Moses  taught  the  people  that  by  look- 
ing upon  themselves  as  beings  surrendered  and  sacrificed  to  the  God  of  truth,  the 
Deliverer  of  men,  by  feeling  that  they  held  all  the  powers  of  their  minds  and  bodies 
as  instruments  for  the  great  work  in  which  He  is  engaged,  thus  they  might  be  a. 
KATioN  INDEED,  One  whicli  would  be  a  pattern  to  the  nations,  one  which,  in  due  time, 
would  break  the  chains  which  bound  them  to  visible  and  invisible  oppressors.  III. 
When  once  we  understand  that  we  are  witnesses  for  God,  and  do  His  work,  self- 
SACEiFiCE  CAN  NEVER  BE  AN  AMBITIOUS  THING — a  fine  Way  to  get  the  reputation  of 
saints  or  the  rewards  of  another  world.  It  will  be  regarded  as  the  true  ground  of 
all  action  ;  that  on  which  all  tlie  blessed  relations  of  life  stand  ;  that  which  is  at  the 
same  time  the  only  impulse  to  and  security  for  the  hard  and  rough  work  of  the  world. 
{F.  D.  Maurice,  31. A.)  Cleaning  of  ordinances  to  be  explained: — 1.  Ancient 
ordinances  may  be  justly  questioned  in  succeeding  ages  to  know  the  meaning  of 
them.  2.  Eeason  is  to  be  given  of  our  religion  to  such  as  reasonably  demand  it. 
3.  Children  may  ask  of  parents  and  they  must  inform  them  of  the  ordinances  of 
God.  4.  Redemption-mercies  are  to  be  recorded  and  reported  as  just  ground  of  God'g 
ordinance  (ver.  14).  5.  Opposition  against  redemptions  are  justly  declared  to  make 
the  work  glorious,  and  God's  people  obedient.  6.  Vengeance  upon  the  enemies  of  the 
Church's  redemption  is  fit  to  be  known  to  quicken  them  to  duty.  7.  The  Church's 
reason  for  its  religion  to  God  is  rightly  taken  from  its  redemption  (ver.  15).  8. 
God's  redeeming  mercies  ought  to  work  in  the  Church  eternal  memorials  of  Him 
(ver.  16).  {G.  Huf/hes,  B.D.)  Lessons: — 1.  After  redemption  of  His  Church  God 
provideth  for  guiding  them  in  the  way  to  rest.  2.  Nearest  ways  to  rest  with  men 
are  not  always  approved  by  God  for  His  people.  3.  God's  foreknowledge  of 
dangerous  w-ays  to  His  Church  doth  prevent  them.  4.  God  will  not  put  His  people 
upon  war  or  hard  trials  until  He  have  fitted  them  for  it.  5.  God's  special  care  of 
His  Chm-ch  is  to  keep  them  from  a  retreat  to  bondage  after  redemption  (ver.  17). 
[Ibid.)  Imparting  knowledge  : — Knowledge  cannot  be  stolen  by  or  from  you.  It 
cannot  be  sold  or  bought.  You  may  be  poor,  and  be  troubled  by  the  sheriff  on  the 
journey  of  life.  He  may  break  into  your  house  and  sell  your  furniture  at  auction  ; 
diuve  away  your  cow  ;  take  away  your  ewe  lamb,  and  leave  you  homeless  and  penni- 
less ;  but  he  cannot  lay  the  law's  hand  upon  the  jewellery  of  your  mind.  This  can- 
not be  taken  for  debt ;  neither  can  you  give  it  away,  though  you  give  enough  of  it 
to  fill  a  million  minds.  In  getting  rich  in  the  things  which  perish  with  the  using, 
men  have  often  obeyed  to  the  letter  that  first  commandment  of  selfishnes^s  :  "  Keep 
what  you  can  get,  and  get  what  you  can."  In  filling  your  minds  with  the  wealth  of 
knowledge,  you  must  reverse  this  rule,  and  obey  this  law :  "  Keep  what  you  give, 
and  give  what  you  can."  The  fountain  of  knowledge  is  filled  by  its  outlets,  not  by 
its  inlets .  You  can  learn  nothing  which  you  do  not  teach ;  you  can  acquire  nothing 
of  intellectual  wealth  except  by  giving.     (Elihu  Burritt.) 

Vers.  17-18.  Through  the  way  of  the  wilderness.— T/ie  waxj  of  the  wilderness  : — 
I.  The  WAV  by  which  God  often  leads  His  people  slay  be  defceibed  as  the  "  way 
OF  the  w  ildebness."  There  are  several  points  of  analogy  or  similarity  between  the 
journey  of  Israel  from  Egypt  to  Canaan,  and  the  path  of  God's  people  through  this 
world.  For  one  thing,  the  journey  of  the  sons  of  Jacob  was  circuitous.  There  can 
be  little  doubt  that,  after  their  release  from  bondage,  they  looked  forward  to  a 
speedy  occupation  of  the  Promised  Land ;  but  in  this  they  were  disappointed. 
They  were  not  permitted  to  go  direct  and  at  once  to  their  inheritance.  Then, 
again,  it  was  not  a  way  of  their  own  choosing.  There  were  two  routes,  either  of 
which  they  might  have  followed;  one,  the  ordinary  caravan  route  through  the 
country  of  the  Philistines,  entering  Canaan  from  the  south  ;  the  other,  by  the  Red 
Sea  and  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  entering  Canaan  from  the  west.  There  was  no 
geographical  necessity  for  taking  the  more  circuitous  route  through  Sinai.  Indeed, 
without  an  expUcit  command  from  God,  it  would  have  been  the  height  of  folly  for 
any  leader,  even  Moses,  to  have  attempted  to  conduct  such  a  vast  host  all  unpro- 
vided for  into  the  desert.    Now,  the  discerning  reader  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

the  similarity  of  all  this  to  the  Providential  ordering  of  human  life.  The  current 
of  our  earthly  bemg  seldom  runs  straight.  There  are  often  many  windings  before 
it  reaches  its  goal ;  and  it  may  be  that  few  of  those  windings  would  have  been  in 
accordance  with  our  wishes.  How  true  is  tbis  of  Moses,  who,  in  his  impatience  for 
the  release  of  his  countrymen,  struck  the  blow  for  freedom  too  soon.  And  instead 
of  being  permitted  to  go  direct  to  the  work,  he  had  to  undergo  forty  years  of  pre- 
paratory service  among  the  solitudes  of  Midian.  Take  Joseph,  and  you  see  the 
working  of  the  same  principle.  How  strikingly  is  the  hand  of  Providence  seen  in 
his  life  !  His  cxpeiiences  in  Egypt  before  his  promotion  may  seem  a  strange  pre- 
paration for  his  after  eminence,  and  certainly  not  of  his  own  choosing.  God  was 
"  leading  Lim  about."  The  pit  in  Dolhan,  servitude  under  Potiphar,  continement 
in  prison,  were  so  many  steps  or  turnings  in  a  life  that  ro>e  to  such  distinction. 
Then  again  take  the  apostle  Paul.  The  great  ambition  of  his  life  was  to  jireach  the 
gospel  at  Kome.  The  noble  apostle  got  his  wish.  He  was  permitted  to  go  to  Rome, 
but  he  went  as  a  prisoner.  The  chains  might  seem  to  confine  his  influence,  but, 
for  aught  we  know,  they  may  have  added  to  the  impressiveness  of  his  message  and 
testimony  for  his  Master.  God  was  leading  him  about,  an  ambassador  in  bonds. 
So  in  our  life.  The  course  of  Providence  sometimes  takes  strange  turns.  Our  life- 
path  is  seldom  what  at  one  time  we  expected  it  to  be,  any  more  than  the  journey 
from  Egypt  to  Canaan  was  what  the  Israelites  expected.  We  come  to  our  Etham 
on  the  edge  of  the  wilderness,  and  at  that  point  the  current  of  our  life  is  altered 
and  its  winding  course  begins.  The  altered  current  may  lead  us  into  the  desert  of 
adversity,  or  into  the  wilderness  of  alHiction,  where  for  years  we  may  have  to 
endure.  Many  a  Christian  has  been  led  home  through  the  winding  path  of  pain. 
It  is  God  "  leading  us  about."  II.  We  now  proceed  to  inquire  into  the  pukpose  op 
THIS  roundabout  JOURNEY  THROUGH  THE  WILDERNESS.  When  the  SOUS  of  Jacob  left 
Egypt,  they  were  little  better  than  a  band  of  undisciplined  slaves,  and  they  had  to 
be  trained.  The  growth  of  every  noble  quality  had  been  cramped  and  hampered  by 
degrading  bondage,  and  the  wilderness  was  to  be  their  training-school.  There  was, 
therefore,  a  moral  purpose  in  the  forty  years'  wandering.  It  was  intended  to  train 
them  to  be  and  to  do,  to  develop  in  them  noble  qualities,  and  train  them  for  noble 
deeds.  They  could  have  marched  to  Canaan  in  eight  or  ten  days ;  but  eight  or  ten 
days  would  have  been  too  short  a  period  for  the  growth  of  character.  No  one  can 
read  their  history  without  observing  the  change  wbich  forty  years  had  produced  on 
them.  They  gained  new  experiences,  and  developed  those  manly  qualities  needed 
to  fight  their  way  to  the  possession  of  Canaan.  Now,  is  it  not  in  this  way  still  that 
God  prt pares  His  people  for  their  mission?  As  a  general  rule  the  men  who  have 
made  the  deepest  impression  for  good  on  the  world's  history  luive  been  led  up  to 
their  throne  of  influence  by  a  long  path  of  preparation.  Few  leap  into  their  posi- 
tion at  a  bound.  The  shortest  way  is  not  always  the  best.  There  is,  perhaps,  no 
station  in  life  in  which  diflSculties  have  not  to  be  encountered  and  overcome  before 
any  decided  measure  of  success  can  be  achieved.  Those  difficulties  are,  however, 
our  best  instructors,  as  our  mistakes  often  form  our  best  experience.  Home  Tooke 
used  to  say  of  his  studies  in  intellectual  philosophy,  that  he  had  become  all  the 
better  acquainted  with  tbe  country  through  having  had  the  good  luck  sometimes  to 
lose  his  way.  And  a  distinguished  investigator  of  physical  science  has  left  it  on 
record  that  whenever,  in  the  course  of  his  researches,  he  encountered  an  apparently 
insuperable  obstacle,  he  generally  found  himself  on  the  brink  of  some  novel  dis- 
covery. The  severe  preparatory  discipline  which  God's  men  have  to  undergo  i-i 
for  most  part  unknown  to  the  world.  We  cannot  tell  how  the  Israelites  spent 
thirty-eight  years  of  their  desert  life,  we  only  know  the  effect  it  had  on  them.  We 
might  further  extend  tbis  thought  to  the  discipline  which  God  applies  for  the  soul's 
sanctification.  The  ultimate  end  of  all  the  Divine  dealings  with  man  in  this  life 
must  be  sought  in  the  life  to  come.  The  soul  has  often  to  pass  through  the  path  of 
affliction  or  adversity  ere  it  is  fit  for  the  fellowship  of  the  pure  in  heart  in  the 
Promised  Land.  The  reward  will  be  more  prized  and  the  rest  the  sweeter  on 
account  of  the  experience  gained  when  God  led  you  about  through  tbe  way  of  the 
vrilderness.  III.  In  order  to  derive  full  benefit  from  the  experiences  of  life, 
SEVERAL  THINGS  HAVE  TO  BE  ATTENDED  TO.  Discipline,  however  suitable  it  may  seem, 
will  not  of  itself  further  tbe  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,  unless  it  is  accepted  as  from 
God.  Confining  ourselves  to  this  narrative,  we  find  two  or  three  conditions  with- 
out which  Divine  discipline  will  yield  no  moral  profit.  1.  In  the  first  place,  we 
must  not  harbour  a  spirit  of  discontent  with  our  lot.  To  this  &i)irit  are  traceable 
many  of  the  calamities  of  the  wilderness,  and  it  barred  the  gates  of  Canaan  against 


CHAP,  xin.]  EXODUS.  217 

the  generation  that  left  Egypt.  That  generation  did  not  benefit  by  God's  dealings. 
Now  all  this  is  true  in  our  life.  We  often  miss  the  good  that  is  meant  for  us  by 
dissatisfaction  with  the  channel  through  which  it  comes.  The  apprentice  lad  miTst 
not  chafe  if  he  is  put  to  distasteful  work  and  at  a  low  wage :  let  him  learn  that  this 
is  the  price  to  be  paid  for  future  advancement,  and  let  him  cheerfully  accept  his 
post.  Murmuring  at  cross-bearing  will  do  us  no  good,  but  rather  harm,  as  it  will 
prevent  us  from  attaining  to  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will.  2.  Secondly,  in  order 
to  secure  the  greatest  good  from  our  lot,  we  must  banish  from  our  company  what- 
ever tends  to  lead  us  astray.  When  the  Israelites  left  Egypt  they  were  joined  by  a 
group  called  the  "  mixed  multitude."  The  Church's  greatest  danger  lies  not  so 
much  in  attacks  from  without,  as  in  temporizing  with  worldly-minded  men,  and 
harbouring  in  her  midst  those  who  are  not  of  her  in  spirit.  But  this  "mixed 
multitude,"  while  it  is  typical  of  nominal  Christians  in  the  Church,  may  be  regarded 
as  a  type  of  those  unholy  desires  and  passions  that  are  more  or  less  to  be  found  in 
the  heart  of  every  one  of  us.  We  all  carry  about  with  us  a  "  mixed  multitude  "  of 
unsubdued  appetites  which  crave  for  gratification ;  and  not  more  surely  did  the 
Israelites  suffer  from  the  presence  of  this  base  throng,  than  we  shall  have  the  peace 
of  our  life  marred,  and  its  usefulness  impaired,  by  giving  reins  to  those  unholy 
forces.  They  need  to  be  constantly  kept  in  check,  else  they  are  sure  to  lead  us 
astray.  Let  us  lay  aside  every  weight  and  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  us ;  and 
let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  us,  lookingunto  Jesus,  the  author 
and  the  finisher  of  our  faith.  3.  There  is  one  more  condition  that  we  must  comply 
with,  if  we  would  finish  our  course  with  joy,  and  that  is,  we  must  loyally  follow  the 
guidance  of  our  Heavenly  Leader.  (D.  Merson,  M.A.)  Why  the  Israelites  were 
guided  by  the  way  of  the  unlderness  : — I.  They  had  been  sated  with  the  magnificence 
of  man's  works  ;  God  led  them  forth  into  the  wilderness  to  show  them  His  works 
IN  THEIR  NATIVE  GRANDEUR,  and  to  refresh  their  exhausted  hearts  and  spirits  by  the 
vision  of  the  splendour  of  His  world.  II.  God  led  them  forth  by  the  way  of  the 
wilderness,  that  He  might  reveal  not  nature  only,  bdt  Himself.  He  led  them 
into  the  wilderness,  as  He  leads  us,  that  He  might  meet  with  them,  speak  with 
them,  reveal  Himself  to  them,  and  leach  them  to  know  themselves  in  knowing  Him. 
III.  God  led  them  into  the  wilderness,  that  He  might  there  cultivate  their  manly 
qualities,  and  fit  them  to  hold  the  possessions  they  might  win.  (•/.  B.  Brown,  B.A.) 
God's  path  : — 1.  God  dops  not  order  salvation  to  His  as  it  pleaseth  man,  but  as  it 
pleaseth  Himself.  2.  God  in  wisdom  sometimes  translates  His  Church  from  the 
bouse  of  bondage  to  a  wilderness.  3.  Wilderness  and  Bed  Sea  paths,  are  the  way 
of  God's  people  here  below.  4.  God  makes  the  way  to  rest  not  always  straight,  but 
to  be  about.  5.  Israel,  or  God's  people,  go  the  rouud  that  God  doth  lead  them.  6. 
Orderly  and  well  instructed  are  the  Church's  motions  under  God  in  wilderness-ways. 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)         God's  people  in  the  wilderness  : — I.  That  by  Israel  in  Egypt 

WE    MAY  UNDERSTAx<JD    THE  SPIRITUAL   BONDAGE  OF  God'S    CHOSEN  PEOPLE  AT  LARGE.       1. 

Israel  was  in  an  enemy's  country.  So  are  the  elect  by  nature.  2.  Their  bondage 
was  rigorous.  So  was  the  Christian's.  3.  Their  departure,  like  the  believer's,  was 
opposed.  4.  And  when  liberated,  their  enemies  pursued  them.  II.  Some  reasons 
WHY  God  did  not  admit  the  children  of  Israel  into  the  promised  land,  im- 
mediately ON  their  coming  out  of  Egypt,  and  why  He  does  not  admit  His  elect 
into  glory  imjeediately  on  their  conversion.  1.  The  Egyptians  must  be  drowned 
— enemies  subdued.  2.  The  Israelites  must  be  humbled  (Psa.  Ixvi.  10-12).  3.  He 
led  them  some  hundreds  of  miles  about ;  yet  it  was  the  right  way  (Psa.  cvii.  7).  4. 
God's  way  is  right,  although  it  may  appear  round  about  (Psa.  xviii.  30).  III.  Some 
reasons  for  God's  conduct  in  keeping  them  in  the  wilderness.  1.  They  were  not 
fit  as  yet  for  severe  warfare.  2.  Their  enemies  were  great,  and  themselves  weak. 
3.  He  had  much  to  teach  them.  IV.  The  Manner  in  which  they  went  up. 
"  Harnessed  " — or  by  fives,  or  five  in  a  rank,  or  rather  by  five  bodies  or  squadrons, 
and  so  marched  out,  not  in  a  disorderly  or  confused  way,  but  in  great  order  and 
regularity.  1.  Their  loins  were  girt  (Eph.  vi.  14).  2.  Their  heart  was  secured 
(Eph.  vi.  14).  3.  Their  feet  were  shod  (Eph.  vi.  15).  4.  Having  a  shield,  helmet, 
and  sword  (Eph.  vi.  16,  17).  (T.  B.  Baker.)  The  way  of  God  in  comluctiny  the  life 
of  the  good  : — I.  That  it  is  the  way  of  God  to  bring  the  good  to  a  place  of  rest. 
This  is  the  object  of  all  life's  discipline.  II.  That  it  is  the  way  of  God  to  bring  the 
good  away  from  the  things  that  would  be  unfriendly  to  their  welfare.  He  selects 
the  life  path  of  the  good— 1.  Wisely.  2.  Kindly.  III.  That  it  is  often  the  way 
OF  God  to  bring  the  good  a  circuitous  route  to  their  destination.  The  nearest 
way  is  not  always  the  best.    IV.  That  it  is  the  way  of  God  to  bring  the  good 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

ALONG  UNWELCOME  PATHS.  Impossible  to  get  to  Canaan  without  perplexities.  God 
is  always  with  the  good  in  their  wilderness  wanderings.  V.  That  it  is  the  way  of 
God  to  bring  the  good  into  a  better  and  more  thorough  knowledge  of  themselves. 
Men  get  to  know  more  in  the  desert.  Some  Christians  are  taken  to  heaven  through 
a  long  route  of  pain.  They  long  for  home,  but  the  journey  is  prolonged.  It  is  hard 
to  see  the  reason  of  their  protracted  existence.  The  Divine  purpose  is  not  \  et 
accomplished  in  them.  VI.  That  it  is  the  way  of  God  to  bring  the  good  into  a 
wise  exercise  of  their  own  strength.  "And  the  children  of  Israel  went  up 
harnessed  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  They  walked  in  battle  array.  And  so,  while 
it  is  the  way  of  God  to  conduct  human  life  to  its  destination,  it  is  also  the  duty  of 
man  to  exercise  his  own  wisdom  and  strength,  so  that  he  may  do  all  to  aid  the  plans 
of  God  concerning  him.  Lessons  :  1.  That  God  leads  men  from  Epypt  to  Canaan. 
2.  That  men  must  give  themselves  up  to  the  guidance  of  God.  3.  That  life  is  oten 
through  a  long  wilderness.  4.  However  long  the  journey,  men  must  trust  in  God. 
{J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  roundabout  way  : — I.  God  led  them.  "  Man's  extremity 
is  God's  opportunity."  When  He  calls  you  up  the  slopes  of  the  mount  of  sacritice, 
it  is  to  bring  you  within  the  sound  of  Divine  voices  at  the  summit ;  when  He  calls 
you  to  the  "edge  of  the  wilderness,"  or  to  a  "  desert  place  apart,"  it  is  to  "  speak 
comfortably  "  unto  you  "  out  of  the  cloud."    II.  God  led  them  not  through  the 

LAND  OF  THE  PHILISTINES,  ALTHOUGHJTHAT  WAS  NEAR    .    .    .    BUT  He  LED  THEM  ABOUT  BY 

THE  WAY  OF  THE  WILDERNESS  OF  THE  Eed  Sea.  He  had  not  taken  them  into  His 
confidence,  they  could  not  understand  Him,  they  had  no  sympathy  with  His  vast 
and  gracious  designs,  therefore  He  did  not  "  give  an  account  of  any  of  His  matters." 
"  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."  Let  no  one 
hesitate  to  "  go  up  and  possess  the  land,"  for  fear  he  be  overpowered  with  tempta- 
tions that  beset  the  path  of  Peter  or  Paul  or  Luther,  or  of  some  venerable  man  of 
God  who  but  too  faithfully  has  given  an  account  of  his  conflict  with  the  world  and 
the  flesh  and  the  devil.  God  will  take  you  to  heaven,  but  He  has  not  promised  to 
take  you  by  the  near  way.  It  may  be  by  a  very  long  way.  One  thing  I  know,  it 
will  not  be  through  the  way  of  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  or  of  any  foes  who  would 
effect  your  ruin  and  drive  you  back  in  despair  to  the  country  from  whence  you  came 
out.  Only  one  enemy  will  encounter  you  at  a  time,  and  you  will  be  prepared  for 
each  as  he  comes,  and  the  "  last  enemy  "  will  be  kept  to  the  last,  and  you  will  be 
made  "more  than  conquerors."  "  God  is  faithful  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be 
tempted  above  that  ye  are  able."  III.  "  And  the  children  of  Israel  went  up  in 
BATTLE  ARRAY  OUT  OF  THE  LAND  OF  EGYPT."  The  great  woi'k  given  the  Church  to  do 
is  the  conquest  of  the  world.  These  are  the  marching  orders  of  the  Captain  of 
Salvation.  IV.  If  the  children  of  Israel  had  entered  Palestine  by  the  near  way, 
HOW  MUCH  would  THEY  HAVE  MISSED  !  The  sojoum  in  the  -wilderness  was  not  a  scene 
of  urureheved  gloom.  They  bought  and  sold,  they  increased  in  cattle  and  in  riches. 
"  Their  garments  waxed  not  old,  nor  their  shoes  upon  their  feet."  They  were 
left  generally  unmolested  by  any  of  the  tribes,  and  when  attacked,  they  were 
as  a  rule  able  to  hold  their  own.  Had  they  not  come  by  the  roundabout  way, 
the  song  of  Moses  had  been  unsung,  Miriam's  harp  had  been  untuned,  Elim, 
with  its  wells  and  pahns  had  been  undiscovered,  Sinai,  with  its  words 
of  love  and  law  had  been  unknown,  the  cloud  had  never  been  seen,  the 
manna  had  not  been  tasted,  the  water  from  the  rock  had  not  followed  them. 
They  would  have  had  no  opportunity  of  partaking  in  a  sacramental  feast  with  the 
princely  Jethro,  and  of  exerting  such  a  favourable  impression  upon  his  tribe  that 
many  who  were  "  without "  were  induced  to  come  witbin  and  to  respond  to  the 
invitation,  "  Come  with  us  and  we  will  do  you  good,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good 
concerning  Israel."  Theirs  would  not  have  been  the  joy  which  they  did  experience 
when,  Jordan  crossed,  they  did  eat  at  last  the  old  corn  in  the  land  in  a  city  of 
habitation;  they  would  not  have  left  behind  them  " footprints  on  the  sands  of 
time,"  which  will  cheer  the  hearts  of  countless  generations  of  pilgrims  until  the 
■world  shall  have  an  end;  they  could  never  have  conceived  how  good  and  how 
patient  God  was,  they  could  never  have  believed  how  corrupt  their  own  hearts  were, 
had  not  Moses  at  the  end  of  all  the  wanderings  recalled  one  scene  after  another,  one 
act  of  rebellion  after  another  committed  in  the  light  of  the  unwearied  love  which 
"blackened  every  blot."  This  last  point  deserves  more  than  passing  notice, 
•'  Thou  shalt  remember  all  the  way  which  the  Lord  thy  God  led  thee  these  forty 
years  in  the  wilderness  to  humble  thee,  to  prove  thee,  to  know  what  was  in  thine 
heart,  to  know  whether  thou  wouldst  keep  His  commandments  or  no."  God  knew 
what  was  in  their  hearts.     The  people  did  not  know  their  own  hearts.    Some  one 


CHAP,  xra.]  EXODUS.  219 

will  say,  "  I  would  that  I  had  died  in  the  days  of  childhood,  I  should  have  been 
saved  many  a  weary  march."  But  you  would  have  missed  many  a  providence,  the 
memory  of  which  will  cast  a  shadow  of  seraphic  loveliness  on  the  background  of 
your  eternal  home,  and  which  will  enable  you  to  strike  a  higher  note  than  other- 
wise you  could  ever  have  reached.  Had  you  not  passed  through  that  night  of  bitter 
anguish,  you  could  not  have  fathomed  the  depths  of  the  words  as  you  did,  "Thy 
way  is  in  the  sea,  Thy  path  is  in  the  great  waters,  and  Thy  footsteps  are  not 
known."  Had  you  not  been  forced  to  take  thought  for  the  morrow,  you  could 
never  have  said  as  sincerely  as  you  did  say,  "  My  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  I 
have  need  of  all  these  things."  Had  it  not  been  for  that  sore  sickness,  there  would 
not  have  been  lying  upon  your  life,  consecrating  it,  a  "  light  that  never  was  on  land 
or  sea."  The  scars  of  your  suffering  are  "  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  Your  little 
bits  of  experience  are  so  many  types  which  to-day  you  can  set  up,  and  from  which 
you  can  spell  out  the  might,  and  majesty,  and  mercy  of  the  blessed  God.  (J. 
Macmillan,  M.A.)  The  nearest  way  home: — You  and  I  often  mark  a  path  out  for 
ourselves  ;  and  to  us  it  seems  so  easy,  so  likely,  so  promising  of  success.  Then  all 
at  once  something  happens  that  disappoints  us,  and  directs  us  another  road  that  we 
find  further  round,  and  apparently  much  harder;  and  we  call  it  a  "mysterious 
providence."  Of  course,  all  is  mysterious  that  is  the  result  of  wider  knowledge 
than  our  own.     Do  you  remember  old  Quarles'  lines : — 

♦'  I  say  this  way ;  God  says  that. 
His  way  is  best,  for  He  knows  what 
Of  lions  may  beset  my  road. 
I'll  follow  Thee  1    Lead  on,  my  God  1 " 

He  knew  what  was  best  and  safest,  and,  in  the  long  run,  surest ;  and  by  the  good 
hand  of  God  they  were  kept  out  of  mischief  and  away  from  danger.  The  old 
proverb  is  still  very  true  :  "  The  longest  way  about  is  often  the  nearest  way  home." 
"  He  that  goes  straight  across,  may  have  to  carry  a  cross.  He  that  goes  round 
about,  may  have  the  chance  to  go  without."  His  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts, 
and  it  is  a  gi-and  thing  to  be  under  His  guidance;  for  "  the  way  of  man,"  as  the 
good  Book  says,  "  is  not  in  himself;  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his 
steps."  We  know  not  what  is  good  for  us,  and,  like  children,  if  we  were  to  run 
alone,  we  should  soon  run  into  mischief.  You  and  I  have  often  been  imposed  on, 
both  by  what  we  hope  and  what  we  fear.  Many  a  time  we  have  tried  to  run  away 
from  what  afterwards  turned  out  to  be  a  blessing,  and  many  a  time  we  have  been 
disappointed  to  save  us  from  being  destroyed.  I  remember  on  one  occasion,  when 
I  was  young,  I  got  it  into  my  head  that  I  was  able  to  drive.  Having  narrowly 
escaped  an  upset,  and  frightened  myself  almost  out  of  my  wits,  I  resigned  the  reins 
into  more  skilful  hands  than  mine,  and  travelled  safely.  Let  us  be  as  wise  as  the 
psalmist,  and  say,  "The  Lord  shall  choose  mine  inheritance  for  me!"  Let  us 
learn  a  lesson  of  patience,  too.  We  may  be  very  anxious  to  pluck  the  fruit ;  but  we 
had  better  wait  till  it's  mellow,  for  fear  the  pain  kills  all  the  pleasure.  God's  time 
is  a  good  time,  and  God's  way  is  a  safe  way,  both  to-day  and  to-moiTow,  too  !  (■/. 
J.  Wray.)  The  tender  consideration  manifested  by  God  toicards  the  Israelites: — 
The  Christian  life  is  a  growth,  and  if  assailed  by  some  temptations  in  its  infancy, 
the  consequences  might  be  fatal.  He,  therefore,  who  commences  and  maintains 
the  process  of  our  salvation,  gradually  accustoms  His  soldiers  and  servants  to  the 
difficulties  of  their  warfare.  Their  faith,  love,  zeal,  and  self-denial  are  thus 
exercised  rather  than  oppressed.  The  text  confirms  this  consolatory  view  of  the 
Divine  procedure.  I.  The  ciecumstances  of  the  Israelites.  The  deliverance  of 
the  chosen  tribes  was  at  this  moment  like  the  first  rays  of  the  morning  spread  upon 
the  mountains.  They  had  been  redeemed  from  bondage.  They  were  commencing 
their  journey  to  the  promised  land,  every  spirit  filled  with  pleasure.  They  were 
confident  of  their  power  to  endure  the  trials  of  the  way.  The  heart-searching  God 
knew  their  deficiencies  ;  and  a  variety  of  circumstances  connected  with  their  feeble 
faith  determined  Him  in  wisdom  to  divert  their  feet  towards  Canaan  by  a  devious 
path.  1.  The  Philistines,  who  lay  between  them  and  the  promised  inheritance, 
were  a  brave  and  warlike  people,  against  whom  the  sons  of  Jacob,  numerous  as 
they  were,  could  not  hope  to  succeed  in  battle.  Wisely,  therefore,  did  the  Lord 
judge  that  they  would  shrink  from  such  enemies.  Such  are  the  Christian's  foes. 
They  are  well  practised.  Satan  has  triumphed  over  man  in  eveiy  age,  over  the 
philosophy  of  Greece,  the  wisdom  of  Rome,  and  the  refinement  of  Britain.     And 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xra. 

thinkest  thou,  Christian,  that  the  enemies  of  thy  soul  are  enfeebled  ?  No !  What, 
then,  would  be  the  consequences  if  God  led  thee  past  them  to  Canaan  ?  Wisely 
and  graciously  are  you  led  by  the  wilderness.  2.  The  Israelites  were  disarmed, 
and  therefore  utterly  unable  to  cope  with  the  Philistines,  who  were  prepared  with 
every  means  of  defence  which  a  people  whose  delight  was  in  war  could  invent.  The 
young  believer  just  escaped  from  the  house  of  bondage  is  defenceless.  His  euemies 
are  armed.  He  cannot  expect  to  wield  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  with  the  full  energy 
of  one  who  has  been  accustomed  to  fight  with  it.  3.  In  thus  estimating  the  good- 
ness of  God  towai'ds  the  children  in  their  need,  we  must  add  that  their  spirits  were 
bowed  down  by  long  captivity.  The  hard  bondage  in  mortar  and  brick  was  not  the 
school  in  which  to  learn  courage.  Hence  Israel  was  not  fitted  to  match  against  the 
free  soldiers  of  Philistia.  The  slavery  of  Satan  unfits  for  conflict  with  the  foes  of 
the  soul.  n.  The  dealino  of  God  towards  them.  God  might  have  made  Israel 
at  peace  with  the  Philistines ;  or  have  given  them  courage  to  defeat  their  foes.  But 
this  procedure  would  have  comprehended  less  of  moral  discipline.  1.  He  avoided 
the  nearest  way  to  the  promised  land,  and  led  them  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness. 
The  Israelites  would  be  astonished  at  the  line  of  march  ;  they  would  be  disposed  to 
murmur.  Has  not  God  often  contradicted  your  desires?  Tou  ought  not  to  impugn 
His  wisdom.  The  passenger  ignorant  of  navigation  cannot  direct  the  course  of  the 
ship.  The  shipmaster  knows  the  rocks  :  God  knows  our  path  best.  2.  The  Most 
High  saw  fit,  not  only  that  His  chosen  tribes  should  avoid  the  shortest  way,  but 
that  they  should  pass  through  the  dangers  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  sojourn  in  the 
wilderness  of  Zin.  Could  this  be  the  result  of  wisdom  ?  Clouds  and  darkness  are 
round  about  Him.  It  is  the  exclusive  province  of  unerring  wisdom  to  draw  a  line 
between  the  discipline  necessary  for  our  moral  good,  and  that  severity  of  afliiction, 
which  might  overwhelm  us  with  despondency.  We  must  confide  in  our  heavenly 
Father.  3.  Never,  then,  should  it  be  forgotten,  that  although  the  journey  of  the 
Israelites  was  contrary  to  their  expectations,  their  wishes,  and  their  clouded  judg- 
ment, it  was  the  safest  and  the  best  path  to  Canaan.  (R.  P.  Buddicom.)  Walking 
through  the  icilderncss : — Let  us  try  to  apply  this,  so  far  as  the  circumstances  of  the 
case  permit,  to  the  Christian's  experience  in  his  religious  life.  That  life  must  have 
had  somewhere  a  conscious  beginning.  I  say  a  conscious  one,  because  its 
actual  beginning  precedes  our  knowledge  of  the  fact.  Our  Christian  life  really 
began,  through  God's  grace,  in  our  baptism,  wherein  we  were  made,  though  uncon- 
scious of  the  blessed  truth,  the  children  of  God.  But  to  know  what  then  was  done 
for  us ;  to  know  that  we  have  been  made  and  are  alive  unto  God,  to  perceive  what 
we  are  and  whose  we  are — this  is  like  a  second  beginning.  This  new  beginning  is 
made,  ordinarily,  at  the  time  of  confirmation  and  first  communion  ;  then  the 
Christian's  conscious  life  begins.  If  at  that  time  you  were  really  in  earnest,  and 
knew  what  you  were  about,  and  did  what  you  did  in  love  and  smcerity,  then  first 
you  felt  yourself  to  be  a  Christian,  and  for  the  first  time  saw  yourself  to  be  on  the 
inarch  towards  the  Celestial  City.  Now  how,  by  what  route,  or  what  line,  was  your 
journey  to  be  made  ?  I  say  at  once  and  emphatically  that  its  best  typical  picture 
must  still  be  found  in  the  forty  years  of  wandering,  with  what  they  brought  by  way 
of  trial,  and  proof,  and  weaning  from  the  love  of  this  present  world  ;  and  that 
without  such  steady,  quiet  discipline,  the  work  runs  the  risk  of  being  brought  to 
naught.  For  persons  recently  awakened  to  sober  reflection  on  their  state,  and 
newly  brought  to  Christ,  should  not  be  thought  of  as  able,  competent,  and  strong. 
They  are  not  yet  veterans ;  they  are  not  yet  fairly  drilled  reserves ;  they  are 
but  raw  and  awkward  recruits.  It  must  be  so,  unless  in  rare  instances,  as 
■when  in  some  sweet,  holy  child  one  sees  the  certain  making  of  a  saint.  If 
they  make  their  profession  of  Christ  at  a  very  early  age,  and  ere  yet  they 
Lave  left  the  secure  protection  of  a  holy  family  and  a  religious  household, 
then  their  weakness  is  that  of  a  fallen  nature  which  has  not  been  tried  by 
severe  temptations  from  outside.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  they  make  their  open 
profession  of  the  faith  at  a  later  date  of  life,  then,  in  addition  to  that  congenital 
weakness,  they  have  what  comes  of  loss  of  time,  delay  without  suflicient  cause, 
and  commerce  with  the  world,  and  some  past  relish  for  the  paths  of  sin.  Either 
way,  this  new  recruit  is  weak,  and  liable  to  fall.  Now  suppose  such  an  one  brought 
face  to  face  with  the  Philistines,  with  a  race  that  know  not  God,  with  Gohath  and 
the  other  giants,  with  the  vast  and  splendid  array  of  the  notable  enemies  of  the 
Church,  with  the  temptations  and  trials  of  this  world.  Such  an  encounter  can 
hardly,  by  any  possibility,  be  avoided.  The  world  is  become  one  great  Philis- 
tine camp.     Strong  races,  hardened  against  religion,  hold  its  chief  places.    '\Miat 


CHAP,  xin.]  EXODUS.  221 

is  lil\ely  to  result  when  our  young  Christian  falls  on  such  terrible  appearances 
and  is  called  on  to  surrender?  Here  surely  is  work  for  veterans  and  champions; 
but  he  is  no  champion,  and  as  yet  has  hardly  proved  his  arms.  There  is  danger  of 
discouragement,  of  terror,  of  flight.  And  Egypt  calls  to  him  to  come  back,  fair  to 
the  eye,  sweet  to  the  taste,  with  many  allurements,  and  a  bondage  which  many  find 
agreeable,  as  if  one  were  bound  in  fetters  of  silk  or  chains  of  gold.  Yes,  the  danger, 
if  one  were  to  go  right  on  by  the  waj'  that  is  near,  would  be  that  of  losing  heart 
under  the  first  fire,  and  wishing  one's  self  out  of  the  battle ;  and  taking  back,  or  at 
least  forgetting,  tbe  promise  he  had  made,  and  sinking  dow*,  a  backslider  from 
Christ.  What  he  wants  is  hardening,  proving,  tempering.  But  that  comes  in  the 
roundabout  way.  It  is  effected  by  means  of  the  discipline  of  long  and  slow-moving 
years ;  it  is  the  result  of  innumerable  trials  and  temptations,  the  fruit  of  many 
painful  incidents.  St.  James  bids  us  count  it  all  joy  when  we  fall  into  divers 
temptations.  Why  ?  Because  they  constitute  the  precious  discipline  of  life.  If 
we  fail  not,  we  shall  be  purified  thereby,  and  made  ready  for  the  great  and  final 
conflict  in  our  own  valley  of  decision.  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  The  way  of  the 
wilderness  : — To  spare  a  child  the  toils  and  pains  of  education,  is  the  most  grievous 
wrong  that  a  father  can  iullict  on  him.  Thus  did  not  God  spare  His  sons  1  From 
the  day  when  they  sang  their  triumphal  hymn  upon  the  desert  shore,  to  the  day 
when  they  "  passed  over  Jordan,"  their  life  was  one  continued  discipline:  each 
station,  each  experience,  had  a  distinct  office  in  relation  to  the  formation  of  their 
character ;  was  sent  to  add  to  them  a  virtue  which  would  be  an  instrument  of 
conquest  or  government,  and  a  spring  of  strength,  not  in  time  only,  but  eternity. 
Not  simply  to  keep  them  out  of  the  way  of  the  Phihstines,  but  to  drill  them  till 
they  could  master  their  enemies ;  to  nurse  them  till  they  could  bring  forth  a 
Samson,  a  David,  who  could  compel  the  Philistines  to  own  their  supremacy,  He  led 
them  by  Sinai,  and  trained  them,  by  self-conquest,  to  conquer  the  strongest  foes. 
Tbey  came  at  last  on  Canaan,  not  as  a  scattered  band  of  marauders,  but  with  the 
shock  of  a  thunderbolt ;  you  feel  that  the  battle  is  won  the  first  moment  that  they 
set  their  feet  on  the  land.  And  those  men  in  the  desert,  hard  as  was  their  way  and 
fare,  were  making  history.  Bunsen  says,  "  History  was  born  that  night,  when 
Moses  led  forth  his  people  from  Goshen."  The  narrative  of  their  toils  and 
struggles  is  the  oldest  and  most  precious  of  historic  records,  and  their  waybook 
has  become  the  heirloom  of  the  pilgrim  world.  "  Behold,  we  count  them  happy 
which  endure."  And  you  who  are  out  in  the  wilderness,  faithless  and  heartless, 
like  a  sailor  on  a  dark  sea  unlit  by  stars,  learn  from  Israel  the  grand  reason  of 
your  pilgrim  vocation,  and  the  end  to  which  it  will  be  guided  if  you  follow  the 
highway  of  God.  God  fiuds  you  a  slave ;  He  would  make  you  a  son.  You  are 
not  the  lawful  slave  of  wanton  Egypt ;  you  have  the  King's  mark  upon  you — the 
King  of  kings  is  waiting  to  redeem  His  own.  Come  forth,  then,  come  forth  to  freedom ! 
breathe  the  free  air,  scan  the  broad  horizon — it  is  your  land  of  wandering  ;  see  the 
soft  blue  bills  swelling  in  the  distance,  the  gleaming  of  rivers,  the  shadow  of  wood- 
lands— it  is  your  land  of  rest.  {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  God's  guidance  : — When  the 
English  soldiers  were  marching  up  the  heights  of  Alma,  meeting  the  Russians  who 
were  marching  down  towards  the  English  Unes,  there  came  a  command  for  the 
English  company  to  divide,  part  turning  to  the  left  and  marching  along  the  side  of 
the  bill.  It  seemed  a  foolish  order  when  first  received  by  the  soldiers.  There 
were  Iluss-ians  marching  right  in  their  teeth,  and  yet  half  of  them  were  to  turn 
away  when  the  foe  was  close  upon  them  !  But  the  order  was  not  long  considered 
foolish.  Those  that  turned  to  the  left  soon  found  that  a  company  of  Russians  had 
been  secretly  coming  up  the  side  of  the  hill  to  fall  upon  the  English  unawares.  The 
commander-in-chief  from  the  hill  on  which  he  stood  could  see  all  the  movements  of 
the  foe,  while  those  that  were  perplexed  at  his  orders  could  see  only  a  small  portion 
of  the  field.  So  He  who  orders  our  life  and  lot  sees  all  the  movements  of  the 
powers  of  darkness,  and  to  deliver  us  from  their  plots  and  designs.  He  often 
leads  us  by  a  way  we  know  not.  {H.  Starmer.)  God's  wondrous  providence: — 
What  do  you  do  when,  in  reading  the  massive  folios  of  ancient  English  authors, 
you  meet  passages  written  in  an  unknown  tongue?  Paragraph  after  paragraph 
you  read  with  all  possible  fluency,  instantly  apprehending  the  author's  purpose ; 
but  suddenly  the  writer  throws  before  you  a  handful  of  Latin,  or  a  handful  of 
Greek ;  what  then  ?  If  you  are  absorbed  by  the  interest  of  the  book,  you  eagerly 
look  out  for  the  next  paragraph  in  English,  and  continue  your  pursuit  of  the 
leading  thought.  Do  likewise  with  God's  wondrous  Providence-book.  Much  of  it 
is  written  in  your  own  tongue — in  large-lettered  English,  so  to  speak ;  read  that, 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

master  its  deep  significance,  and  leave  the  passages  of  unknown  language  until  you 
are  further  advanced  in  the  rugged  literature  of  life;  until  you  are  older,  and 
better  scholars  in  God's  probationary  school.  The  day  of  interpretation  will 
assuredly  come.     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vcr.  19.— Moses  took  the  bones  of  Joseph. — An  interesting  incident  in  IsraeVs 
di'parture  from  Egript : — I.  The  discharge  of  a  sacred  trust  (Gen.  1.  24,  25). 
Pay  attention  to  the  requests  of  the  dead.  II.  The  fulfilhekt  of  an  ancient 
prophecy  (Gen.  1.  2o).  God  can  kindle  the  fire  of  prophecy  in  the  soul  of  a  dying 
saint,  that  the  sorrowful  may  be  encouraged.  III.  The  giving  of  a  timely 
encouragement.  IV.  The  bestowal  of  an  appropriate  honour  on  an  illus- 
trious ancestor.  (J.  S.  Exelt,  M.A.)  A  memento  and  a  pledge  : — And  Moses 
took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with  him.  This  rendered  the  march  a  kind  of  funeral 
procession,  and  such  as  no  other  history  relates.  Never  was  body  so  long  in  its  con- 
veyance to  the  grave,  for  forty  years  were  taken  up  in  bearing  Joseph  to  his  burial. 
We  read  at  the  death  of  Joseph  that  "  they  embalmed  him,  and  he  was  put  in 
a  coffin  in  Egypt."  The  precious  deposit,  likely  to  be  cared  for  by  some  of  the 
descendants  of  his  own  family,  was  dear  to  all.  It  was  a  memento  of  the  vanity 
of  human  greatness.  It  was  also  a  moral  as  well  as  a  mortal  memento.  Joseph 
was  a  very  pious  character ;  he  had  been  highly  exemplary  in  every  relation  and 
condition  of  life,  and  much  of  God,  of  providence,  and  of  grace  was  to  be  read  in 
his  history.  What  an  advantage  to  be  always  reminded  of  such  a  man  in  having 
his  remains  always  in  the  midst  of  them !  But  the  body  would  be  above  all 
valuable  as  a  pledge  of  their  future  destination.  It  was  a  present  palpable  sign 
of  God's  covenant  with  their  fathers  in  their  behalf.  (A.  Nevin,  D.D.)  Rest  in 
native  land: — Sir  Bartle  Frere  was  often  asked  at  the  Cape,  "What  do  you  expect 
when  you  reach  England  ?"  His  reply,  which  was  found  written  on  a  slip  in  his 
Bible  after  his  death,  was  thus  expressed  : 

"  Where  in  the  summer  sun  the  early  grasses  grow, 
Six  feet  of  English  ground,  a  Briton's  grave, 
Eest  in  my  native  land  is  all  I  crave." 

Burial  places  : — It  is  the  almost  universal  custom  in  America,  and  seems  to  be 
growing  in  favour  here,  for  great  men  to  be  buried  in  the  place  where  they  have 
mostly  lived,  and  among  their  own  kith  and  kin.  Washington  lies  at  Mount 
Vernon ;  Lincoln  at  Springfield  ;  Emerson  and  Hawthorne  under  the  pines  of 
New  England  ;  Irving  on  the  banks  of  the  Hudson  ;  Clay  in  Kentucky.  They  are 
laid  to  rest  not  in  some  central  city  or  great  structure,  but  where  they  have  lived, 
and  where  their  families  and  neighbours  may  accompany  them  in  their  long  sleep. 
(H.  0.  Mackey.) 

Ver.  21. — By  day  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud. — The  prophetic  element  in  life: — 
"  The  Lord  went  before  them  in  a  cloud."  So  God  ever  goes  before  His  people, 
and  standing  as  we  do  now  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  year,  we  may  recall  this 
truth  to  our  great  comfort.  The  future,  unknown  to  us,  is  not  unkuown  to 
Him ;  He  has  gone  before  us,  and  is  evermore  delicately  adjusting  things  to  our 
discipline,  our  perfecting,  our  utmost  salvation  and  bliss,  I.  We  find  an  illustration 
of  the  text  in  the  preparation  of  the  world  as  a  dwellisg-place  for  man. 
Ages  before  man  appeared  on  this  planet,  God  was  preparing  it  as  a  habitation  for 
us  to  dwell  in.  You  talk  of  "  getting  the  house  ready"  for  some  newly  married 
pair ;  but  consider  the  getting  ready  of  this  globe  as  the  scene  for  humanity  to 
dwell  in,  and'  in  which  to  work  out  its  fortunes.  What  vast  ages !  What  complex 
and  far-seeing  adjustments !  And  so  we  find  to-day  that  the  world  has  been 
provisioned  for  ages,  the  storehouses  of  nature  are  full,  we  do  not  lack  any  good 
thing.  And  God  also  anticipated  the  moral  exigencies  of  the  race.  II.  We  find 
another  illustration  of  the  text  in  God's  government  of  the  race.  We  are  not 
moving  at  random,  the  world  is  full  of  design,  the  law  is  progress,  we  are  always 
entering  into  our  inheritance.  The  races  of  man  form  a  vast  motley  multitude, 
and  the  Lord  goes  before  us  preparing  for  us  paths,  resting  places,  wells,  palm-trees. 
"  He  sent  a  man  before  them,  even  Joseph,  who  was  sold  for  a  servant"  (Psa.  cv.  17). 
"He  sent  a  man  before  them."  And  this  was  not  some  exceptional  thing;  God  is 
always  sending  out  pioneers,  outriders,  heralds  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  general 
host  in  its  march  through  the  ages.    They  come  in  science,  they  come  in  pohtics, 


CHAP,  xm.]  EXODUS.  228 

they  come  in  philosophy,  they  come  in  religion :  men  full  of  the  prophetic  instinct, 
men  who  anticipate  a  new  world,  and  who  prepare  us  for  it.  So  these  Josephs, 
these  dreamers,  go  before  us,  making  possible  to  us  new  creations,  new  redemptions, 
We  ought  all  of  us,  as  God's  people,  to  have  a  bit  of  this  prophetic  instinct  in  us, 
helping  to  usher  in  a  new  and  better  state  of  things — God's  messengers  preparing 
the  way.  God  has  gone  before  us;  He  is  preparing  happier  things  for  our  race  ; 
and  although  He  works  mysteriously,  He  works  certainly  to  His  glorious  purpose. 
And  all  this  is  true  in  relation  to  our  universal  life.  In  our  worldly  life  God  is  ever 
providing  for  us  new  blessings,  glad  surprises.  Some  do  not  see  God  because  of 
the  cloud,  but  He  is  in  it  nevertheless,  working  out  His  gracious  purpose.  And  as 
to  our  spiritual  life  and  need,  God  goes  before  us.  We  believe  in  "  prevenient " 
grace — the  grace  that  goes  before.  Grace  that  comes  before  our  trials,  preparing 
us  for  them,  so  that  they  do  not  overwhelm  us.  Grace  that  comes  before  our 
temptations,  warning  us  of  them,  strengthening  us  against  them.  Grace  that 
comes  before  our  duties,  so  that  we  no  sooner  hear  the  call  than  we  feel  the  strength 
to  obey.  We  may  enter  a  new  year  with  tranquil  confidence.  Sydney  Smith 
recommended  people  to  take  "  short  views,"  and  we  can  afford  to  do  that, because  God 
on  our  behalf  takes  long  views.  III.  We  find  our  last  illustration  of  the  text  in 
the  fact  THAT  Christ  has  gone  before  us  into  the  heavenly  places.  "  A  cloud 
received  Him  out  of  their  sight."  In  that  cloud  He  has  gone  before  us  to  make 
ready  for  us  once  more.  (IF.  L.  Watkinson.)  The  pillar  of  cloud;  a  symbol  of 
the  Bible: — I.  The  jiystic  pillar  eesembled  the  Bible  in  the  ends  it  answered. 
1.  The  mystic  pillar  promoted  their  emancipation.  So  the  Bible  opens  the  soul's 
prison  doors,  snaps  its  chdins,  delivers  it  from  the  despotism  of  sin,  and  makes  its 
way  clear  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  The  mystic  pillar  guided  them  through 
the  wilderness.  So  does  the  Bible  show  us  tbe  path  of  life.  It  is  ever  in  advance 
of  humanity,  &c.  3.  The  mystic  pillar  protected  them  from  all  that  would  injure. 
The  Bible  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit ;  the  armour  of  the  soul.     II.   The  mystic 

PILLAR  RESEMBLED  THE   BiBLE    IN    THE    ATTRIBUTES    IT    DISPLAYED.      1.    Supcmatural- 

ness.  2.  Adaptation.  3.  Many-sidedness.  III.  The  mystic  pillar  resembled 
THE  Bible  in  the  conditions  it  required.  1.  It  required  a  constant  observance 
of  its  movements.  Bible  of  no  service  unless  studied.  2.  It  required  a  constant 
following  of  its  movements.  You  must  go  as  the  Bible  goes  in  relation  to  sin. 
SatHU,  holiness,  and  God;  life  and  death,  time  and  eternity.  (Homilist.)  The 
Divine  h;adcrsliip  of  the  good: — I.  That  the  good  are  Divinely  led  in  the 
wanderings  of  life.  "  The  Lord  went  before  them."  1.  A  visible  Guide.  2.  A 
competent  Guide.     3.  A  faithful  Guide,     II.   That  the  good  are  often  Divinely 

LED   DURING    THE   WANDERINGS    OF   LIFE    INTO   VARIED  AND  UNSUSPECTED  PATHS.      "The 

edge  of  the  wilderness."  1.  God  sometimes  leads  His  people  contrary  to  their 
expectations.  2.  God  sometimes  leads  His  people  contrary  to  the  dictates  of  their 
reason.  8.  God  always  leads  His  people  into  those  paths  which  shall  yield  the 
most  sacred  and  safe  disoipline  to  them.    III.  That  the  method  of  the  Divine 

LEADERSHIP    IS   ADAPTED    TO   THE   CHANGING    CIRCUMSTANCES    OF    THE    GOOD.       "  By  day 

in   a  pillar  of  cloud,"  &c.     IV.    That  the  Divine  leadership  should  not  be 

MISTAKEN   IN   ASSOCIATION   WITH   THE    ORDINARY   AGENCIES    OF    LIFE.         V.      ThAT     THE 

Divine  leadership  is  solicitous  to  lead  the  good  to  their  promised  and 
PEACEFUL  DESTINY.  (J.  S.  Exell,  31. A.)  Tlie  cloudy  and  fiery  pillar  a  symbol  of 
the  Bible.  I.  As  the  pillar  of  cloud  was  given  to  guide  and  comfort,  bo 
THE  Bible  is  designed  to  lead  the  thought  and  console  the  sorrow  of 
MAN.  Without  the  Bible  man  would  be  lost  in  the  wide  waste  of  error.  It  is  also 
intended  to  console  the  human  heart  in  all  the  troubled  moods  of  life,  when  its 
joys  grow  dim,  when  it  is  rendered  lonely  by  bereavement,  and  when  it  comes  to 
death.  At  such  times  the  Bible  is  our  chief  consolation,  it  enables  us  to  sorrow  in 
hope,  it  shows  us  One  who  is  the  Eesurrection  and  the  Life.  II.  As  the  pillar 
combined  both  cloud  and  fire,  so  the  Bible  unites  illumination  and  mystery. 
There  is  mystery  in  it  which  the  finest  genius  cannot  attain,  which  angelic  intel- 
ligence cannot  interpret,  and  which  eternity  may  not  simplify.  Deity  dwells  in  the 
volume,  and  we  expect  that  clouds  and  darkness  will  be  round  about  Him.  But 
there  is  fire  in  the  Book  which  illumines  the  doctrines  and  morality  of  the  Christian 
life.  III.  As  the  pillar  of  cloud  aided  the  outgoing  of  Israel  from  bondage 
TO  rest,  so  the  Bible  is  the  best  help  man  can  have  in  walking  through 
this  life  to  the  next.  They  walk  the  best  in  the  wilderness  of  life  who  pay  the 
most  heed  to  the  Word  of  God  (Psa.  cxix.  105).  Lessons  :  1.  Be  thankful  for  the 
Bible.    2.  Follow  the  directions  of  the  Bible.   3.  Seek  the  consolation  of  the  Bible. 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap.  xin. 

(Ibid.)  Divine  guidance : — I.  Explain  the  text.  1.  We  may  observe  that  God's 
people  in  every  age  stand  in  need  of  a  guide,  and  without  it  they  would  miss  the  path 
of  duty  and  of  happiness.  2.  The  Lord  Himself  graciously  condes^cends  to  become 
the  guide  of  His  people,  and  He  alone  is  fit  to  be  so.  He  only  has  a  parfect 
knowledge  of  the  way,  and  of  all  the  difficulties  that  may  befall  them  in  it ;  and  He 
only  is  able  to  support  and  defend  them  against  the  designs  of  all  their  enemies. 
3.  The  Lord  guides  His  people  in  different  ages  of  the  world,  by  various  means 
adapted  to  their  circumstances,  and  to  the  peculiar  dispensations  under  which  they 
live.  (1)  By  His  Providence.  (2)  By  His  Word.  (3)  By  His  Spirit.  IL  SyjinoLio 
MEANING.  1.  It  was  altogether  miraculous,  and  a  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence. 
It  was  called  the  cloud  of  the  Lord ;  there  it  was  He  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  His 
people,  and  spake  with  them  face  to  face  (Num.  xix.  14).  2.  This  mysterious 
cloud  was  intended  to  direct  the  Israelites  in  their  journey,  and  by  it  ihe  L^rd 
communicated  to  them  His  will.  3.  The  cloudy  pillar  in  the  wilderness  afforded 
refreshment  by  its  shade,  as  well  as  guidance  by  its  light.  And  is  not  Jesus  both 
our  sun  and  shield,  our  light  and  shade,  as  our  different  necessities  require?  In  a 
season  of  darkness,  He  sends  forth  His  cheering  beams  ;  and  when  our  soul  is  ready 
to  faint  within  us,  He  ministers  to  our  refreshment  and  rehef.  4.  Tlie  cloudy 
pillar  was  designed  for  safety  and  defence,  as  well  as  for  a  guide  through  ti)e 
wilderness.  (B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Need  of  guidance  : — General  Hill  says  :  "In 
many  of  the  battles  the  great  want  with  the  Confederates,  strange  as  it  may 
seem,  was  accurate  knowledge  of  the  country  in  their  front.  The  map  furnished 
me  (and  I  suppose  the  six  other  major-generals  had  no  better)  was  very  full  in 
regard  to  everything  within  our  own  lines,  but  a  red  line  without  any  points 
marked  on  it  was  our  only  guide  to  the  route  on  which  our  march  was  to  be  made." 
{H.  0.  Mackey.)  God's  guidance : — The  other  day  I  was  walking  across  the 
Northumbrian  fells  to  call  at  a  shepherd's  house  that  lay  distinctly  enough  before 
me  on  the  Fell  side.  The  directions  I  received  from  a  Fellsider  whom  I  had  just 
left,  after  the  manner  of  those  who  live  every  day  in  the  midst  of  ample  space,  were 
vague  indeed.  The  rivkty,  half-formed  road  on  which  I  was  walking  was  distinct 
enough  immediately  before  me,  but  when  I  strove  to  trace  the  course  of  the  road  a 
preater  distance  ahead  it  became  blended  with  the  frowsy  bracken  and  bronzed 
heather,  and  was  utterly  lost  to  view.  To  have  struck  boldly  out  across  country  to 
reach  my  destination  by  what  seemed  the  shortest  route  would  have  entangled  me 
among  the  spongy  bogs  and  numerous  streams  with  which  the  hillside  was 
intersected.  However,  by  carefully  following  the  road  that  was  visible  before  me  I 
managed  to  pick  my  way  aud  reached  my  calling-place  in  safety.  So  is  it  in  our 
daily  search  after  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  will.  When  in  our  impatient 
eagerness  we  wish  to  look  too  far  into  the  future,  all  is  indistinct  and  hazy  ;  but, 
if  we  carefully  note  what  is  near  and  sufficiently  revealed,  we  shall  be  led  up 
infallibly  to  safety  and  to  rest.  {Christian  Journal.)  God's  guidance  of  the 
Israelites: — There  was  an  old  fisherman  who  got  converted  in  his  old  age.  He 
was  not  able  to  read,  and  therefore  had  to  do  his  own  thinking,  not  being  able  to 
catch  up  all  ideas  aired  in  our  newspapers.  A  friend  of  mine  visited  him,  and 
knowing  how  be  loved  the  Word  of  God,  said  to  him,  "  Now,  John,  shall  I  read  you 
a  chapter  ?  "  "  Yes,  if  you  please,  I  should  so  much  like  to  hear  a  chapter.  I  do 
dearly  love  to  hear  the  Word  read."  "  And  what  part  shall  I  read  to  you  ?  "  "  About 
the  Lizard  Lights,  please.  Do  read  about  them,  for  when  I  see  them  I  always  think 
I  am  near  my  heavenly  home.  I  have  often  been  out  on  the  Atlantic  on  dark 
stormy  nights,  and  when  I  caught  sight  of  the  Lizard  Lights  I  knew  I  was  near 
Falmouth  harbour,  and  would  soon  be  safely  moored."  "  I  am  afraid,"  ventured  my 
friend,  "  that  I  do  not  know  about  the  Lizard  Lights  ! "  "Not  know  about  them  ! 
Well,  I  thought  you  a  gentleman,  and  had  Scripture  knowledge,  but  if  you  don't 
know  about  the  Lizard  Lights,  you  must  just  wait  until  Mary  comes  in."  In  a  short 
time  Mary,  who  was  his  daughter,  came  in,  and  the  old  man  said,  "  Mary,  where  is 
that  in  the  Book  about  the  Lizard  Lights  ?  You  know  you  were  reading  about 
them  last  Sunday  night."  "  Oh,  father,"  she  said,  "  that  was  not  the  Lizard  Lights, 
It  was  the  Israelites."  That  old  man  had  made  a  mistake  in  the  apprehension  but 
not  in  the  application.  The  story  of  the  Israelites  told  of  the  guidance  of  God,  ia 
their  wanderings,  and  the  Lizard  Lights  had  frequently  been  the  beacon  that  had 
guided  the  fisherman  to  his  desired  haven.  (Mark  G.  Pearse.)  Tlie  pillar  of 
cloud;  historical  parallels : — Xenophon  mentions,  in  his  Spartan  republic,  in 
describing  the  military  expedition  of  a  Spartan  king,  that  a  servant,  or  officer,  who 
was  called  "  firebearer,"  preceded  the  king  with  the  fire,  which  had  been  taken 


CHAP,  xni.]  EXODUS,  225 

from  the  altar,  on  which  he  had  just  before  sacrificed  at  the  frontier  of  the  Spartan 
territory.  After  they  had  sacrifieed  once  more,  and  the  march  Lad  commenced,  a 
fire  which  was  liahted  at  the  second  sacrifice  preceded  the  lines,  without  ever 
extinguishing.  In  Curtius  we  read,  "  He  (Alexander  the  Great)  ordered  a  lofty 
pole,  visible  from  all  sides,  to  be  raised  over  the  general's  tent,  and  from  the  top  of 
this  pole  streamed  a  signal  conspicuous  everywhere  to  every  one,  smoke  by  day  and 
fire  by  ni(jht."  Alexander  had  in  this,  as  in  many  other  points,  imitated  the 
custom  of  the  Persians,  who,  in  common  with  most  of  the  eastern  nations,  on  their 
marches  through  deserted  regions,  bear  before  the  army  high  poles,  on  which  iron 
pots  are  afiixed,  filled  with  lighted  combustibles ;  so  that,  the  smoke  by  day,  and 
the  flame  by  night,  signalized  the  way  to  the  troops.  Thus  we  cannot  but 
acknowledge  a  certain  curious  similarity  between  the  Biblical  miracle  and  a  general 
military  custom  prevailing  in  the  East.  Under  these  circumstances  we  entirely 
approve  of  Faber's  remarks:  "Both  the  miracle  and  the  custom,  collated  and 
compared,  give  light  to  each  other.  The  custom  effects,  that  we  find  the  miracle 
dignified  and  worthy  of  God ;  and  the  miracle  shows,  that  that  very  custom  cannot 
have  been  quite  unknown  to  the  Israelites."  (M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.)  The  pillar 
of  the  cloud  and  of  fire  : — The  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire  was  certainly  (1)  sacra- 
mental (1  Cor.  X.  1,  2)  ;  (2)  of  a  typical  character  (Isa.  iv.  5  ;  Num.  xiv.  42).  He 
whom  the  cloudy  and  fiery  pillar  typified  was  the  same  Almigbty  Being  who  hath 
said  to  the  faithful  members  of  his  militant  Church,  in  every  age  of  its  warfare,  "  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  The  cloud  was  manifestly 
intended — I.  To  guide  the  Israelites  through  the  wilderness.  1.  The  pillar 
of  cloud  guided  the  children  of  Israel  with  infallible  certainty.  God  Himself  was 
in  it ;  and  unless  He  could  err,  their  way  could  not  be  mistaken.  Mark  here,  the 
glorious  character  of  the  Bible, — that  light  to  our  feet  with  which  the  unsearchable 
compassion  of  our  Saviour's  love  has  provided  us.  It  testifies  of  Christ.  It 
embodies  His  teaching  and  salvation,  as  the  pillar  contained  them  in  the  wilderness. 
2.  This  wondrous  appearance  in  the  heavens  was  a  constant  director  to  Israel.  In 
every  emergency  the  page  of  divine  truth  may  be  consulted.  II.  The  cloudy  and 
fiery  pillar  afforded  not  merely  guidance,  but  protection  to  the  Israelites  in  their 
eventful  march.  Sin  invades,  temptation  threatens,  and  every  spiritual  enemy 
seems  permitted  to  assail  with  a  fierceness  which  might  well  gather  gloom  and 
despondency  around  the  heart ;  but  the  fainting  Christian  is  encouraged  by  that 
voice  which  speaks  as  from  the  cloud  between  him  and  his  enemies.  "  Fear  thou 
not,  for  I  am  with  thee  :  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God."  His  life  is  hid  with 
Christ  in  God ;  and  amidst  every  trial  and  seduction  by  which  his  salvation  ia 
endangered,  he  may  lay  hold  upon  One  who  walks  with  him,  and  has  promised  to 
uphold  him  with  the  sufiQciency  of  an  Almighty  arm.  III.  The  pillar  of  cloud  and 
of  fire  had  yet  another  ofiice  to  perform  for  the  children  of  Israel.  It  gave  them 
refreshment  and  comfort  in  the  wilderness.  Now  say,  0  Christian,  is  it  not  thus 
with  thee  in  the  hour  of  thy  most  oppressive  trial  ?  (R.  P.  Bitddicum.)  The  pillar  of 
cloud  and  lire: — I.  The  way  along  which  God  led  His  people.  II.  The  manner  ix 
which  God  guided  and  protected  them.  1.  Pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  only  means : 
Jehovah  Himself  their  true  guide.  God  is  with  His  people.  What  decision,  blended 
with  humility,  will  the  realization  of  this  great  truth  give  us  !  What  calmness  in 
the  midst  of  excitement ;  submission  under  trial ;  perseverance  under  difficulties. 
2.  Mark  the  adaptation  of  God's  method  of  guidance  to  the  condition  and 
necessities  of  the  Israelites.  Gradual  progress.  (G.  Wagner.)  The  fiery  cloudy 
pillar : — The  fiery  cloudy  pillar  performed  many  friendly  offices  to  the  Israelites, 
It  was — 1.  A  guide.  To  lead  was  its  main  mission.  It  was  a  striking  illustration 
of  the  longsnffering  kindness  of  Gad.  Neither  murmurings,  nor  rebellion,  nor 
idolatry,  ever  drove  away  the  angel  of  His  presence.  The  guidance  vcuchsafed,  too, 
was  of  the  most  gracious  kind — that  of  a  shepherd  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  52),  and  that  of  a 
loving  and  affectionate  parent  (Deut.  i.  31).  2.  A  light  (see  Neh  ix.  19).  3.  A 
shade  (see  Psa.  cv.  39).  4.  A  shield  (see  Deut.  i.  30 ;  Exod.  xiv.  19).  5.  An 
oracle  (see  Psa.  cxix.  7).  He  who  opened  His  mouth  in  the  burning  bush  at  Horeb, 
opened  His  mouth  in  the  cloudy  pillar,  and  frequently  spake  to  Israel's  leader  for 
Israel's  benefit.  6.  An  avenger.  When  God  wished  to  mark  His  displeasure,  the 
cloud  assumed  a  very  wrathful  appearance.  The  Lord  looked  unto  the  host  of  the 
EgyptiKns  through  the  pillar  of  fire,  and  troubled  the  host  of  the  Egyptians.  What 
a  dreadful  visage  it  must  have  worn  when  flashes  went  forth  from  it  and  devoured 
Nadab  and  Abihu  (Lev.  x.  2),  and  also  when  fire  came  out  from  it  and  consumed 
two  hundred  and  fifty  men  !  (Num.  xxi.  35).     If  the  aspect  of  the  cloud  was  thus  at 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xni. 

times  such  as  to  trouble  those  with  whom  God  was  angry,  it  would,  no  doubt,  have 
a  very  pleasing  one  when  He  desired  to  manifest  His  favour  to  the  congregation. 
As  they  looked  up,  they  would  behold  the  smiling  face  of  their  Divine  leader 
cheering  and  encouraging  them  to  go  on  in  the  path  of  duty.  {W.  Broicn.) 
The  presence  of  God  adapted  to  human  need  : — The  consciou^.ness  of  the  Divine 
presence  is  in  proportion  to  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed.  In  other 
words,  our  circumstances  determine  our  consciousness  of  the  Divine  nearness. 
Sometimes  life  is  all  day — almost  a  summer  day  with  great  spans  of  blue  sky  over- 
head, and  where  the  clouds  gather  they  gather  in  beautiful  whiteness,  as  of  purity 
akin  to  the  holiness  of  the  inner  and  upper  cities  of  the  universe.  Then  what  do 
we  want  with  fiery  displays  of  God  ? — they  would  be  out  of  keeping,  out  of  reason 
and  out  of  proportion.  There  are  days  that  are  themselves  so  bright,  so  hospitable, 
60  long  ending,  and  so  poetic  in  all  their  breezes,  and  suggestions,  and  ministries, 
that  we  seem  not  to  want  any  dogmatic  teaching  about  the  personality  and  near- 
ness of  God.  All  beauty  represents  Him.  Any  more  emphatic  demonstration 
would  be  out  of  harmony  with  the  splendid  serenity  of  the  occasion.  Then  there 
are  periods  in  life  all  night,  all  darkness,  all  storm  or  weariness.  We  cannot  say 
where  the  door  of  liberty  is,  nor  dare  we  step  out  lest  we  fall  over  a  precipice ;  all  is 
dark,  all  is  trouble  ;  friends  are  as  absent  as  if  they  were  dead,  and  all  the  sanctuaries 
to  which  we  have  hitherto  resorted  are  concealed  by  the  infinite  darkness.  What  do 
we  want  then  ?  A  bird  to  sing  to  us  ?  That  would  be  helpful.  A  little  tiny  voice  to 
break  the  troubled  silence?  That  would  net  be  amiss.  But  what  do  we  really 
want?  A  column  of  fire,  a  pillar  of  glory,  an  emphatic  incarnation  and  vision  of 
Providence ;  and  the  soul  gets  both  these  manifestations  of  God  according  to  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  soul  is  living.  Take  it,  therefore,  simply  as  an 
analogy,  and  then  it  is  a  rational  analogy ;  it  is  true  to  every  man's  experience. 
And  if  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  should  drop  off,  there  will  remain  the  eternal 
truth,  that  according  to  the  soul's  circumstances  is  the  Divine  revelation  of  itself. 
Where  the  visible  is  enough,  why  add  more  ?  A  man  should  not  want  much 
theology  of  a  formal  sort  on  a  bright  summer  day.  Some  Uttle  tuft  of  cloud  will 
represent  the  Infinite.  Some  almost  invisible  wing  in  the  aii' — more  a  thought 
than  a  thing— hardly  to  be  identified  by  the  bodily  eye,  will  symbolize  the  all- 
embracing  power  and  the  all-brooding  love.  Then  at  night  we  want  what  is 
called  dogmatic  teaching,  broad  emphasis,  piercing  declaration,  vividness  that 
cannot  be  mistaken,  God  almost  within  the  clasping  of  the  poor  arms,  God  almost 
in  sight  of  the  eyes  of  the  body.  Thus  God  deals  with  us.  This  is  true  to  our 
history.  The  mere  cloud  may  go,  the  pillar  of  fire  may  be  accepted  as  figurative ; 
but  the  eternal  truth  that  God  comes  to  us  in  different  ways  under  different 
circumstances— now  as  a  cloud,  now  as  a  fire,  now  as  a  judgment,  now  as  without 
mercy,  now  a  roaring  tempest,  now  a  still  small  voice, — is  a  truth  that  remains, 
whatever  havoc  may  be  wrought  amid  the  mere  figurativeness  by  which  that  truth 
is  symbolized.  (J.  Parker,  I).D.)  Divine  guidance : — How  does  this  remarkable 
narrative  exhibit  to  us  in  every  variety  the  picture  of  God's  daily  guidance  of  His 
people !  1.  The  guidance  is  as  indispensable,  and  at  the  same  time  as  obvious 
now  as  it  was  then.  God  stQl  leads  His  people,  through  the  voice  of  the  purified 
conscience,  through  the  evident  suggestions  of  His  exalted  Providence,  through  the 
ntteraoces  especially  of  His  infallible  Word ;  and  all  these  indications  differ 
sufficiently  from  what  flesh  and  blood  make  known  to  us  in  order  to  preserve  us 
from  wandering.  2.  The  guidance  now  is  indeed  as  mysterious,  but  yet  as  well 
adapted  to  its  purpose,  as  that  of  which  the  history  of  Israel  tells  us.  Our  countless 
whys  and  wherefores  are  still  as  little  answered  as  the  questions  concernmg  the 
peculiar  nature  and  essence  of  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  cloud  which  probably 
disturbed  the  minds  of  the  ancient  Israelites.  But  as  regards  the  question 
whither,  the  answer,  God  be  praised,  has  not  remained  unknown  to  us  ;  all  God's 
guidance  of  His  people,  we  know,  has  one  good — to  bring  us  out  of  disquietude  into 
rest,  out  of  bondage  to  liberty,  along  the  path  of  faith  to  the  land  of  sight.  3.  Also 
in  our  case  God's  guidance  is  as  varied,  but  still  as  faithful,  as  was  the  promise  to 
the  ancient  people.  In  the  day  of  prosperity  He  goes  before  us  as  in  the  cloudy 
pillar,  in  order  to  temper  the  glow  of  our  joy  through  the  remembrance  of  His  close 
neighbourhood ;  in  the  night  of  adversity  the  word  of  His  promise  beams  on  us  in 
as  friendly  and  consoling  a  manner  as  did  the  fiery  pillar  on  Israel  in  midst  of  the 
darkness.  But  as  Moses  beheld  in  the  fortieth  year  of  his  pilgrimage  the  same 
sign  in  the  heavens  which  had  guided  and  encouraged  him  in  the  first,  so  God's 
presence  is  never  lost  to  His  redeemed  ones  in  Christ,  whatever  else  around  may 


CHAP,  xm.]  EXODUS.  227 

»■ — 

faint  or  fail.  Neither  by  day  nor  by  night  does  He  take  from  us  the  tokens  of  His 
nearness  ;  and  even  when  He  seems  to  hide  His  face  from  us,  new  thoughts  of 
mercy  and  of  peace  are  in  His  heart.  4.  Who  does  not  perceive  how  such  a 
guidance  promises  as  much,  but  also  claims  as  much  return  as  that  of  Israel  ?  It 
guarantees  us  the  entrance  into  Canaan,  but  only  along  the  path  of  believing 
perseverance  and  obedience.  When  the  way  indicated  through  the  wilderness  was 
despised,  the  pillar  of  cloii^  and  fire  rose  above  many  a  grave,  and  yet  there  is  no 
single  promise  of  God  to  him  who  chooses  his  own  path.  (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee, 
D.D.)  The  mystic  pillar : — I  have  called  it  a  mystic  pillar — that  cloud  in  the 
desert ;  and  so  to  them  who  saw  it,  and  to  us  who  read  of  it,  it  was.  Of  what  it 
was  composed ;  by  what  means  it  was  kept  pillar-like  and  intact  while  all  other 
clouds  were  carried  and  scattered  by  the  winds  of  heaven  ;  by  wbat  strange  secret 
force  the  cloud-pillar  was  nightly  transformed  to  a  column  of  bright  flame?— these 
are  questions  that  no  doubt  often  exercised  the  minds  of  the  spectators,  only  to  be 
dismissed  again  as  a  baffling  mystery  that  could  not  be  explored.  And  not  only  its 
nature  and  changes,  but  its  direction,  its  movements  as  to  time  and  place — they 
had  no  knowledge,  could  make  no  sure  prediction.  'WTiether  it  would  bend  to  the 
right,  turn  to  the  left,  or  move  straight  onward ;  whether  it  would  remain  stationary, 
or  begin  to  move  night  or  morning,  or  at  noon — all  this,  and  all  concerning  it,  was 
above  and  beyond  their  knowledge ;  the  laws  that  governrd  it  and  the  will  that 
led  it  was  as  entirely  outside  their  information  as  it  was  beyond  their  control. 
What  they  did  know  was  that  Jehovah  was  tlie  God  of  the  cloud;  what  they  could 
do  was  to  trust  it  imphcitly,  follow  it  constantly,  seeing  in  it  all  the  while  the  good 
band  of  their  God  over  them  for  good.  In  all  this,  for  my  learning  and  for  yours, 
I  see  a  picture — a  true  and  instructive  picture — of  the  providence  of  God.  From 
the  beginning  until  now,  the  ways  of  God  to  man  have  been  shrouded  in  mystery, 
have  exercised  inquiring  but  baffled  minds,  have  furnislied  material  for  the  sneer  of 
the  infidel,  the  sophistry  of  the  sceptic,  and  the  logic  of  the  merely  scientific  mind; 
ay,  and  have  strained  and  tested  the  faith  of  the  pious,  and  placed  stumblingblocks 
before  his  faitb,  on  which  his  foot  hath  well-nigh  slipped.  All  this  arises  from  the 
fact  that  men  tcill  strive  to  be  equal  with  God ;  that  their  mind  will  cope  with 
that  of  Deity,  and  by  their  finite  feebleness  gauge  the  plans  and  purjjoses  of  the 
Infinite  and  Eternal  Lord  of  aU.  (J.  J.  Wray.)  Providential  mercies : — A 
clergyman  wbo,  with  some  others,  had  escaped  in  a  boat  from  a  burning  ship,  was 
discoursing  in  a  large  company  of  the  marvellous  favour  of  Divine  Providence, 
that  had  so  specially  watched  over  and  preserved  him.  A  wonderful  providence  1 
A  special  intervention  of  God's  goodness!  "That  was  a  very  great  mercy,  sir," 
said  Archbishop  Whately,  seriously,  "  but  I  can  record  a  greater  in  my  own 
experience.  I  once  sailed  across  the  sea  in  just  such  a  ship,  and  bound  for 
just  the  same  port,  and — ^would  you  believe  it? — the  vessel  never  caught  fire 
at  all !  "  My  friends,  that  is  the  way  I  would  have  you  think  of,  and 
trust  in  Providence,  as  being  ever  present,  ever  wise  and  watchful,  and,  like 
the  cloud-pillar  of  Israel,  ever  for  your  real  good — pursuing  its  Divine  and 
gracious  pith.  Good  and  bad.  light  and  shade,  joy  and  sorrow,  prosperity  and 
adversity,  things  present  and  things  to  come,  all  are  proceeding  on  precisely  the 
same  plan, — namely,  the  working  of  the  soul  and  mind  of  God  for  His  glory  in  the 
true  well-being  of  His  creatures,  and  for  the  ultimate  advancement  and  elevation 
of  mankiud.  Wherever  the  pillar  went,  with  whatever  seemingly  reasonless  vaga- 
ries the  pillar  moved,  and  however  widely  experiences  and  opinions  differed  about 
its  moving,  we  know  now  that  it  led  them  safe  enough  and  sure  enough  to  the 
Canaan  which  was  the  longing  desire  of  every  heart.  The  mind  of  a  pious  and 
thoughtful  artisan  named  Albert  Thierney  was  much  occupied  with  the  ways  of 
God.  which  seemed  to  him  to  be  full  of  inscrutable  mysteries.  The  two  questions, 
"  How?  "  and  "  Why  ?  "  were  constantly  in  his  thoughts,  both  as  to  the  events  of 
his  own  life  and  the  government  of  the  world.  One  day,  in  visiting  a  large  ribbon 
manufactory,  his  attention  was  attracted  by  a  large  and  extraordinary  piece  of 
machinery.  His  eye  was  that  of  a  cultivated  artisan,  and  he  was  immensely 
interested.  Countless  wheels  were  revolving  in  intricate  motions,  and  thousands  of 
threads  were  twirling  and  twisting  in  all  directions.  He  could  not  understand  its 
movements,  and  closer  study  only  deepened  his  interest  and  increased  the  mystery. 
He  was  informed  that  all  this  work  and  motion  was  connected  with  a  common 
centre  where  there  was  a  large  chest  wbich  was  kept  shut.  Anxious  to  understand 
the  principle  of  the  machine,  he  asked  permission  to  look  inside  the  chest.  "  The 
master  holds  the  key,"  was  the  reply.    The  words  came  to  him  like  a  flash  of 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

light.  Here  was  the  answer  to  all  his  perplexing  thoughts — his  anxious  question- 
ings about  Providence.  "  Yes,"  thought  he,  "the  Master  holds  the  key  ;  He  knows, 
He  governs,  He  directs  all— God  I     That  is  enough  1  what  need  I  more  ?  "     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Vers.  1-4.  Encamp  before  Pl-hahlroth. — The  good  in  the  trying  situations  of 
life : — I.  That  the  good  are  often  beocght,  by  the  providence  of  God,  into 
THE  most  tktino  SITUATIONS  IN  LIFE  (ver.  1).  It  is  in  the  trying  situations  of  life 
that  we  get  the  best  revelations  of  the  love  and  power  of  God.  WTien  men  feel 
that  they  cannot  help  themselves,  then  God  helps  them.  Thus  they  are  humbled. 
They  are  brought  to  dpspair  of  creature  aids.  Then  the  promises  become  precious. 
The  circumstances  of  life  are  all  divinely  ordered  with  immediate  reference  to  the 
moral  culture  of  the  good ;  the  Israelites  were  taught  a  great  lesson  before  Pi- 
habiroth.  When  God  fixes  our  position,  it  is  sure  to  be  a  salutary  one,  even  though 
it  be  perplexing.     II.  That  the  trying  circumstances  into  which  the  good  are 

PROVIDENTIALLY   BROUGHT   ARE  VIGILANTLY    OBSERVED    BY   THE    WICKED  (vCr.   3).       SataU 

watches  the  best  opportunity  of  frustrating  the  march  of  the  soul  into  freedom. 
But  the  wicked  often  misinterpret  the  providence  of  God  in  reference  to  the  good, 
and  hence  pursue  their  plans  to  their  own  ruin.     III.  That  the  trying  situations 

INTO   WHICH    the    GOOD    ARE    BROUGHT    ARE     DESIGNED     ULTIM.\TELY     TO     ENHANCE     THE 

GLORY  OF  God  and  the  RETRIBUTION  OF  WICKED  MEN.  "  I  will  be  hoHoured  upon 
Pharaoh,"  "  That  the  Egyptians  may  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Lessons  :  1.  Rest 
patiently  in  the  circumstances  in  which  God  has  placed  you.  2.  God  is  greater 
than  all  the  hindrances  to  your  true  freedom.  3.  Follow  God,  even  though  it  be 
through  the  great  waters.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  In  a  fix  : — I  was  led  to  take  this 
subject  from  seeing  a  sheet  almanac  upon  which  was  painted  a  boy  who  had  got 
his  satchel  full  of  apples,  which,  I  presume,  he  had  been  stealing.  He  was  hanging 
by  the  tips  of  his  fingers  from  the  top  of  a  wall,  and  just  above  the  wall  on  the 
other  side  was  the  owner,  while  at  the  bottom  was  a  big  bulldog,  chained  to  a 
tennel — he  could  not  go  up  for  fear  of  the  owner,  he  dare  not  drop  down  for  fear 
of  the  dog ;  and  it  said  at  the  bottom,  "  In  a  fix."  It  would  be  very  well  for  us  if 
that  represented  the  only  fix  in  which  we  had  ever  been.  I  might  talk  for  a  con- 
siderable time  in  a  general  way  about  men  who  have  been  in  a  fix,  but  now  I 
want  you  to  give  me  your  attention  while  I  try  to  point  out  to  you  a  nation 
that  was  once  in  a  fix,  and,  if  I  can,  teach  some  lessons  that  may  be  of 
use  to  you  and  me.  There  they  are — the  river  before  them,  rocks  on  either  hand, 
and  the  Egyptians  behind  them.  They  could  not  make  boats  to  cross  the  sea ; 
they  could  not  fly  ;  and  were  unable  to  fight  —  they  had  not  the  skill,  neither 
the  weapons.  The  most  remarkable  thing  is  this,  that  God,  who  had  sent  Moses  to 
deliver  them,  had  brought  them  into  this  very  position !  Observe,  they  were  in 
the  path  of  duty — doing  just  as  He  had  commanded  them  ;  suggesting  to  us  the 
thought  that  if  we  would  serve  our  God  faithfully,  sometimes  we  may  find  our- 
selves "  in  a  fix."  There  will  be  times  when  dark  clouds  wiU  gather,  and  we 
cannot  see  our  way,  and  we  shall  feel  inclined  to  give  up  in  despair.  But  wait 
a  bit.  If  God  has  brought  them  into  this  fix,  He  will  bring  them  out  of  it. 
There  they  are  ;  and,  see  !  Pharaoh  is  following.  He  did  not  let  the  people 
go  until  he  had  been  compelled ;  and,  like  a  man  shamed  out  of  half -a- crown 
lor  some  charitable  purpose,  he  repented  afterwards.  He  went  after  them  de- 
signing their  ruin,  but  God  designed  to  ruin  him.  He  designed  to  put  the  Lord's 
people  into  a  fix,  and  the  Lord — who  always  protects  His  own — designed  to  fix 
him.  And  then  comes  this  thought :  That  what  seems  to  tend  to  our  ruin  is 
often  over-ruled  to  our  good.  A  great  many  years  ago  there  used  to  be  the  old 
stage  coach,  and  in  those  days  they  were  the  chief  means  of  travelling.  I  have 
heard  some  old  men  say  what  a  terrible  thing  it  was  to  take  a  long  journey.  One 
day  the  locomotive  was  invented ;  they  were  going  to  take  goods  and  people  in  such 
quantities  and  at  such  a  speed  as  the  stage  coach  never  could.  The  owners  of  the 
coaches  might  declare  they  were  all  to  be  ruined !  What  would  become  of  them  ? 
The  stage  coach  was  ruined,  but  what  of  its  owners  ?  They  shared  the  common 
advantages  of  the  "puffing  billy."    This  same  principle  will  apply  to  things  of  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  229 

present  day.  Years  ago,  tailoring  was  said  to  be  a  good  business.  Their  sewing 
was  then  done  by  hand.  By  and  by  the  sewing-machine  was  invented  ;  and  when 
it  was  brought  to  somethiug  Hke  perfection,  clothing  was  sewn  with  it.  The  tailors 
were  in  such  a  state — it  would  destroy  their  prospects  !  it  would  ruin  their  trade  I 
Ani  the  drtssmakers  were  in  the  same  excited  condition.  When  were  tailoring  and 
dressmaking  better  than  now  ?  They  are,  I  am  told,  more  profitable  than  they 
ever  were.  I  give  you  these  illustrations  to  prove  my  statement — that  very  often 
that  which  seems  to  tend  to  our  injury  is  over-ruled  by  a  merciful  Providence  to) 
our  good.  These  Egyptians  were  following  the  Israelites,  and  were  about  to  destroy 
them  ;  they  appeared  now  in  the  jaws  of  death,  but  it  was  over-ruled.  "  The 
wicked,"  says  Solomon,  "  diggeth  a  pit,  and  falleth  into  it."  "  He  layeth  a  snare, 
and  his  own  feet  are  taken  therein."  Ah  !  there  are  many  things  you  and  I  cannot 
understand  now.  Many  a  cloud  sweeps  over  our  path ;  many  dark  things  we 
cannot  quite  see  through.  If  we  could  rise  above  all  these  things,  and  see  God's 
doings,  perhaps  we  should  rejoice  that  He  sometimes  puts  us  in  a  fix.  We  do 
not  see  through  it  all  now  ;  we  shall  by  and  by.  "  Sometimes  God  brings  us 
into  straits  that  He  may  bring  us  to  our  knees."  You  know  that  to  be  true. 
Often  in  your  sorrow  you  have  looked  unto  your  Father  for  the  help  you  could 
not  get  elsewhere.  Observe,  if  they  were  in  a  fix,  Moses  was  not.  What  did 
he  do  ?  He  ciied,  "  Fear  not,  God  will  fight  for  you  "  ;  though  God  has  led  you 
here.  He  will  lead  you  elsewhere.  He  knew  they  could  do  nothing,  so  he  com- 
manded them  to  stand  still.  Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  Have  you 
never  been  in  a  fix  like  this  ?  Your  business  has  failed,  your  prospects  blighted, 
your  heart  smarting  through  some  bereavement.  A  darlmg  child  or  wife  has  been  1 
snatched  ■from  you.  In  utter  helplessness  you  have  cried,  "What  can  I  do?"  You  I 
can  do  nothing.  You  have  been  doing  too  long.  God  has  brought  all  this  to  teach  ' 
you  to  stand  still,  and  let  Him  do.  "Stand  still."  Oh!  there  is  reason  in  that. 
If  your  God  briugs  you  to  see  your  helplessness  and  poverty,  and  He  reveals  His 
true  riches  to  you,  it  is  worth  your  while  to  "  stand  sitU."  Have  salvation ;  you 
may.  Get  His  love  into  your  hearts ;  stand  till  He  makes  you  free  ;  and  when 
once  He  does,  then  comes  the  cry  as  Moses  gave  it,  "  Forward  !  "  and  though  there 
be  before  you  a  dark  night  and  a  troubled  sea,  you  may  go  forward  with  safety. 
There  is  this  further  thought :  that  though  sometimes  God  allows  the  enemies  of 
His  people  to  bring  them  into  a  fix,  be  assured  the  Lord  will  turn  the  scales,  and 
bring  the  enemies  into  a  fix.  What  He  did  for  these  Egyptians  —  the  haters 
of  the  friends  of  God — He  may  do  for  you.  Many  a  faithful  man  of  God 
has  been  annoyed,  perhaps  by  you  ;  but  be  assured,  God  will  annoy  you. 
See  what  He  did  for  these  Egyptians.  There  was,  first,  darkness.  That 
which  gave  light  to  His  people  became  dark  to  His  enemies.  It  is  dark 
where  the  enemies  of  God  are — so  dark !  Secondly,  God  toubled  them.  The 
children  of  God  crossed  the  sea,  and  you  know  how  m  foTTowing  them  the 
Egyptians  all  perished  in  the  waters,  through  which  the  Israelites  had  passed  in 
safety.  One  word  more.  If  you  are  on  the  side  of  God  and  truth.  He  will  be  with 
you,  and  bring  you  out  of  every  fix  into  which  you  may  get  whilst  serving  Him. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  you  refuse  to  acknowledge  Him,  you  may  get  into  a  fix 
which  you  will  never  be  able  to  get  out  of.  (Cliarles  Leach.)  Itifiht  beqinnings ; 
or,  iu)  " progress"  ; — Every  true  and  strong  life  has  its  sharp  transitions,  its  critical 
choice,  its  decisive  moment  between  Migdol  and  the  sea.  It  is  true  enough,  most  o' 
our  time  we  move  on  in  a  path  no  way  remarkable,  or  in  a  routine  with  nothin 
signal  or  memorable  about  it.  Day  takes  after  day,  and  the  scene,  the  occupatior 
the  company,  helps  and  hindrances,  are  much  the  same  from  month  to  montl 
But  look  longer,  and  you  find  that,  however  the  wheels  of  habit  may  run  on  in  ; 
kind  of  groove,  with  few  startling  outside  changes,  yet  somewliere  there  was  a 
spot  where  this  regular  drift  got  its  start  and  its  new  direction.  You  stood  alone 
somewhere,  at  a  p  irting  of  tvfo  ways,  and  you  chose  ;  and  then,  as  the  consequence 
of  that  ctioice,  your  life  went  thenceforth  in  a  particular  channel,  jDure  or  filthy, 
straight  or  crooked,  heavenward  or  hellward,  long  after.  And  there  is  nothing 
exceptional  about  this.  The  same  law  governs  national  concerns,  processes  in 
nature,  and  mechanics.  War,  for  instance,  is  well-nigh  the  staple  of  history  ;  and 
yet  historians  count  but  fifteen  decisive  battles  of  the  world,  all  other  vast  move- 
ments of  ages  and  empires  winding  like  a  whirlpool  around  these  bloody  centres. 
So  in  mechanics.  Only  now  and  then,  on  its  turn-table,  the  engine  is  set  in  its 
new  direction  ;  but  all  it  does,  or  draws,  afterwards,  proceeds  from  that  momentary 
pivotal  determination.     The  grain  grows  day  and  night  all  summer  till  harvest ; 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

but  there  is  a  single  time  of  planting.  The  patriarch  lodged  only  one  night  at 
Bethel ;  but  then,  afterward,  all  his  journeyings  over  the  Eastern  lands  were  at  the 
bidding  of  his  God.  How  did  you  come  to  be  the  man  you  are  to-day  ?  There  was 
most  likely  some  hour  of  choice.  Two  forms  of  apparent  good  lay  before  you.  Two 
voices  spoke.  Among  all  the  common  questions  that  rise,  this  one  question  rose. 
It  was  the  question  of  your  soul's  eternity.  Very  hkely  it  had  relation,  too,  to 
some  other  soul  besides  your  own— your  affection,  your  duty,  to  him  or  her.  Per- 
haps it  was  in  the  line  of  your  common  doing,  only  an  emergency  of  larger  and 
uncommon  concern.  How  did  you  act  ?  Did  you  say  Yes,  or  No  ?  Did  you  go  or 
stay  ?  Did  you  accept  the  partnership,  the  companionship,  the  offer — or  refuse  ? 
The  question  is  not  one  of  expediency,  or  taste,  or  convenience,  or  profit.  It  has 
to  do  with  your  soul's  life,  honour,  uprightness,  salvation.  Such  periods  can  be 
recalled  in  memory,  I  think,  by  most  persons ;  but  never  recalled  in  fact.  The  rest 
of  life  depends  on  them,  and  on  the  way  we  meet  them.  We  are  between  Migdol 
and  the  sea.  Egypt  and  Pharaoh — an  old,  bad  life,  and  its  despotism  of  darkness 
— are  behind;  the  other  way  the  road  runs  where  God  will.  With  Israel  it  was 
well  that  it  ran  to  the  baptism  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea.  We  have  only  to 
enlarge  the  reach  of  such  a  decision,  carrying  it  through  the  roots  and  springs 
of  character,  to  find  in  it  that  one  all-including,  all-controlling  choice  which 
turns  a  bad  man  into  a  good  one,  or  creates  a  living  Christian.  Indeed,  it  is  of 
that  one  radical  renewing  that  the  exodus  of  Israel  has  always  been  regarded  aa 
the  type.     (Bp.  F.  D.  Huntington.) 

Vers.  5-10.  The  Egsrptlans  marched  after  them. — Israel  pursued : — Notice  some 
analogies  between  the  flight  of  Israel  from  Egypt  and  the  progress  of  the  sinner 
from  the  captivity  of  the  devil.  In  both  cases  we  have  a  debased  condition  of  man- 
kind, a  powerful  enemy,  a  pursuing  foe,  a  perilous  road,  a  human  miuistiy,  and 
an  omnipotent  and  gracious  Iledeemer.  I.  The  state  of  Israel  ix  Egypt  was  a 
STATE  of  the  UTMOST  ABASEMENT.  Every  siuncr  is  a  slave.  The  wicked  man 
serves  a  cruel  master.  He  is  watched  on  every  hand ;  all  his  movements  are 
understood  :  every  desire  or  aspiration  after  liberty  is  turned  into  an  occasion  of 
augmented  suffering.  Wickedness  reduces  the  volume  and  quality  of  manhood. 
Every  bad  thought  and  every  wicked  deed  is  so  much  taken  from  the  completeness 
and  dignity  of  human  nature.  II.  The  enemy  of  Israel  was  powerful.  So  with 
the  great  enemy  of  man.  His  resources  are  all  but  inexhaustible.  He  is  not  con- 
fined to  one  series  of  temptations.  The  diabolic  genius  in  luring  and  seducing  men 
to  evil  dispositions  and  courses  is  fertile  beyond  all  parallel.  He  assaults  us  through 
the  flesh  ;  he  insinuates  ruinous  ideas  into  the  mind ;  he  secretly  touches  the  very 
fountains  of  life.  He  can  touch  our  nature  with  a  light  hand,  or  he  can  smite  us 
with  tremendous  force.  III.  Israel  was  pursued — so  is  the  redeemed  man.  It 
is  too  frequently  expected  that  when  a  man  forsakes  his  evil  ways,  he  will  at  once 
become  an  exemplary  saint.  It  is  forgotten  that  the  devil  relinquishes  his  hold 
reluctantly.  Years  upon  years  after  our  conversion  to  God  we  are  conscious  of  the 
presence  of  the  old  nature ;  there  are  sudden  uprisings  of  forces  which  we  supposed 
to  be  extinct.  IV.  There  is  an  omnipotent  and  gracious  Eedeejiee.  In  the 
course  of  our  Christian  experience  we  are  often  called  upon  simply  to  stand  still. 
Herein  is  shown  the  tender  grace  of  the  living  Redeemer.  We  are  weak,  we  are 
weary,  and  there  is  no  more  strength  left  in  us  ;  at  that  point  He  says,  "  Waiting 
shall  be  accounted  as  serving,  and  standing  still  as  the  progress  of  triumphant 
strength."  Israel  was  not  self -redeemed,  nor  are  we  ;  Jesus  Christ  is  the  angel  of 
our  redemption  ;  trusting  to  His  leadership,  neither  mountain  nor  sea  shall  keep 
us  back  from  the  Canaan  of  God.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Difficulty  in  duty: — I.   ' 

Difficulty  in  duty  deeply  felt.  1.  Our  temporary  well-being  here  greatly 
depends  upon  the  conduct  of  our  contemporaries  toward  us.  2.  The'  majority  of 
our  contemporaries  are  governed  by  corrupt  principle.  3.  The  man,  therefore, 
who  carries  out  in  his  daily  life  the  principles  of  duty,  must  more  or  less  excite  the 
anger  and  create  the  antagonism  of  his  contemporaries.  II.  Difficulties  in  duty 
testing  chaeactee.  1.  Look  at  the  influence  of  this  difficulty  upon  the  Israelites. 
(1)  Their  cowardice.  (2)  Their  ingratitude.  (3)  Their  apostacy.  2.  Look  at  the 
influences  of  difficulty  upon  Moses.  He  now  rises  into  the  majesty  of  the  hero. 
ni.  Difficulty  in  duty  divintily  overcome.  Thus  it  is  ever.  1.  The  nature 
of  moral  progress  shows  this.  2.  The  promises  of  G^d's  Word  ensure  this. 
(Homilist.)         The  good  purs^ied  by  old  enemies  : — I.  That  the  good,  in  seeking 

10  COilE  OUT  OF  THE  BONDAGE  OF  SIN,  AKE  FSEQCEXTLY  PURSUED  BY  OLD  EXEMIES. 


CHAP,  xiv.l  EXODUS.  23i 

1.  Satan.  He  is  powerful.  He  has  great  resources.  He  will  arouse  indwelling 
corruption.  To  sense  all  seems  dark.  To  faith  all  is  bright.  We  cannot  get 
to  the  Promised  Land  without  much  resistance  from  the  devil.  2.  Wicked 
habits.  The  habits  of  youth  are  not  easily  conquered,  hence  they  should 
be  carefully  formed,  or  they  may  impair  the  Christian  career  of  the  future.  3. 
Wicked  companions  pursuing  with  taunts  and  slanders  even  to  the  banks  of  the 
Bed  Sea.  These  are  a  terror  to  many  a  godly  soul.  Thus  we  see  that  Satan  pur- 
8ues  the  good  with  a  gi-eat  army,  with  many  allies,  in  splendid  array,  and  often 
strikes  fear  into  their  hearts.     II.    That   sometimes  the  ciKcrMSTAXCEs  of  life 

APPEAR    to    favour   THE    PURSUIT    OF    THE    OLD    ENEMIES     OF     THE    SOUL.        "  And    OVCr- 

took  them  encamping  by  the  sea,"  &c.  The  world  in  which  we  live  is  a  Pi-hahiroth, 
and  the  devil  knows  it :  but  the  God  who  has  brought  us  from  Egypt  can  bring  us 
from  before  Pi-hahiroth,  if  we  trust  in  Him — He  is  greater  than  the  pursuing 
enemies.  III.  That  the  pursuit  of  the  old  enemies  of  the  soul  often  awakens 
THE  SORROWFUL  APPREHENSION  OF  THE  GOOD.  "And  whcn  Pharaoli  drew  near  .  .  .  sore 
afraid,"  How  often  does  it  happen  that  when  the  good  are  followed  by  their  old 
enemies,  they  forget  the  mercies  of  the  past,  the  power  of  God,  and  look  only  to 
the  on-coming  foe.  They  think  they  will  have  to  yield  to  the  prowess  of  Satan, 
and  go  back  to  the  old  bondage  of  the  soul.  But  we  see  in  this  narrative  the  folly 
of  allowing  the  advance  of  old  enemies  to  awaken  terror  in  the  heart  of  the  good  ; 
for  they  are  only  advancing  that  the  power  of  God  may  be  seen  in  their  defeat. 
Good  people  of  melancholy  temperament  sometimes  think  that  they  made  a  mis- 
take in  coming  out  of  Epypt,  and  that  they  will  never  reach  Canaan.  Such  fears 
are  dishonouring  to  the  grace  of  God.  IV.  That  the  pursuit  of  the  old  enemies 
OF  the  soul  must  be  met  under  the  guidance  of  heaven.  "  Fear  ye  not,  stand 
still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  It  is  a  blessed  fact  that  God  adapts  the 
method  of  His  redemption  to  the  weak  condition  of  His  people.  1.  The  enemies  of 
the  soul  are  overcome  by  God.  He  alone  can  give  salvation  from  the  enmity  of 
Satan,  from  the  weakness  of  self,  and  from  the  perilous  circumstances  of  the  wilder- 
ness life.  2.  The  soul  must  wait  patiently  the  outcome  of  this  aid.  The  good  know 
not  by  what  method  of  discipline  the  Lord  will  deliver  them  from  their  old  habits 
of  evil.  We  see  here  the  advantage  of  having  God  as  our  Helper,  in  that  He  car 
make  a  way  for  our  feet  through  the  sea.  Lessons :  1.  That  the  good,  being  pur 
sued  by  the  enemies  of  their  old  life,  are  in  constant  need  of  Divine  grace.  2.  That 
progress  in  the  freedom  of  the  soul  is  in  spite  of  the  enmity  of  Satan.  3.  That  all 
moral  progress  is  the  outcome  of  the  help  of  God  to  the  soul.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Pursuit  of  the  entangled : — The  things  of  the  world  are  so  many  purveyors  for 
Satan.  When  Pharaoh  had  let  the  people  go,  he  heard  after  a  while  that  they  were 
entangled  in  the  wilderness,  and  supposes  that  he  shall,  therefore,  now  overtake 
them  and  destroy  them.  This  stirs  him  up  to  pursue  them.  Satan,  finding  those 
whom  he  has  been  cast  out  from  entangled  in  the  things  of  the  world,  by  which  he 
is  sure  to  find  an  easy  access  unto  them,  is  encouraged  to  attempt  upon  them 
afresh,  as  the  spider  to  come  down  upon  the  strongest  fly  that  is  entangled  in  his 
web  :  for  he  comes  by  his  temptations  only  to  impel  them  unto  that  whereunto  by 
their  own  lusts  they  are  inclined,  by  adding  poison  to  their  lusts,  and  painting  to 
the  objects  of  tbem.  And  oftentimes  by  this  advantage  ho  gets  so  in  upon  the 
souls  of  men,  that  they  are  never  well  free  of  him  more  whilst  they  live.  And  as 
men's  diversions  increase  from  the  world,  so  do  their  entanglements  from  Satan. 
When  they  have  more  to  do  in  the  world  than  they  can  well  manage,  they  shall 
have  more  to  do  from  Satan  than  they  can  well  withstand.  When  men  are  made 
spiritually  faint,  Satan  sets  on  them  as  Amalek  did  on  the  faint  and  weak  of  the 
people  that  came  out  of  Egypt.     {J.  Owen,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Hast  thou  taken  us  away  to  die  In  the  wilderness  ? — The  foolish 
way   in  which  many  people   anticipate   difficulties : — 1.    That    many  people  meet 

ANTICIPATED  DIFFICULTIES  IN  A  SPIRIT  OF  GREAT  FEAR.  II.  ThaT  3IANY  PEOPLE  MEET 
anticipated  DIFFICULTY  IN  A  SPIRIT  OP  COMPLAINT  AGAINST  THOSE  WHO  HAVE 
GENEROUSLY   AIDED   THEM    IN    THEIR   ENTERPRISE.      It    is    baSC    tO  turn  UpOU  men    who 

have  spent  their  best  energy  and  wisdom  in  our  service  when  trouble  seems  to 
threaten.  But  this  is  the  way  of  the  world,  a  momentary  cloud  will  eclipse  a  life- 
time of  heroic  work.     III.  That  many  people  meet  anticipated  difficulties  in  a 

SPIRIT    which    degrades    PREVIOUS   EVENTS    OF   A    GLORIOUS    CH^UIACTER.        LcSSOHS  :     1. 

That  when  trials  threaten  we  should  trust  in  God.  2.  That  fear  weakens  men  in 
the  hour  of  trial.     3.  That  it  is  ungenerous  to  murmur  against  those  who  earnestly 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

seek  our  good.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  An  unreasonable  complaint : — During  one  of 
the  campaigns  in  the  American  Civil  War,  when  the  winter  weather  was  very 
severe,  some  of  Stonewall  Jackson's  men,  having  crawled  out  in  the  morning  from 
their  snow-laden  blankets  half  frozen,  began  to  curse  him  as  the  cause  of  their 
sufferings.  He  lay  close  by  under  a  tree,  also  snowed  uj),  and  heard  all  this; 
but,  without  noticing  it,  presently  crawled  out  too,  and,  shaking  off  the  snow,  made 
some  jocular  remark  to  the  nearest  men,  who  bad  no  idea  he  had  ridden  up  in  the 
night  and  lain  down  amongst  them  !  The  incident  ran  through  the  army  in  a  few 
hours,  and  reconciled  his  followers  to  all  the  hardships  of  the  expedition,  and  fuUy 
re-established  his  popularity. 

Ver.  13.  Fear  ye  not,  stand  Btill,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord. — The  temper 
for  the  crises  of  life  : — I.  The  question  was  once  asked  by  an  eminent  thinker, 
WHETHER  KATioNs,  LIKE  indivihuals,  COULD  GO  MAi>.  There  ccrtaiuly  have  been 
movements,  like  the  Ileformation  or  the  French  Kevolution,  of  which  uo  one  could 
foretell  the  existence  or  power.  But  such  movements,  like  the  cataclysms  of  geology, 
have  been  rare,  and  they  seem  likely  to  be  rarer  as  the  world  goes  on.  Yet  this  is 
not  the  aspect  of  the  world  which  our  imagination  presents  to  us.  There  are  the 
two  opposite  poles  of  feeling,  the  one  exaggerating,  the  other  minimizing,  actions 
and  events  ;  the  one  all  enthusiasm  and  alarm,  the  other  cynical  and  hopeless. 
The  true  temper  in  politics  is  the  temper  of  confidence  and  hope.  "  Stand  still, 
and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  Be  patient,  and  instead  of  changing  every  day 
with  the  gusts  of  public  opinion,  observe  how  curiously,  not  without  a  Divine 
providence,  many  things  work  themselves  out  into  results  wLich  we  never  foresaw. 

II.    A    TEJU'EB   OF   CONFIDENCE   AND    REPOSE    IS   NEEDED    IN  XUTTEKS  OF  RELIGION.       The 

great  changes  m  religious  opinion  during  the  last  forty  years  have  taken  two  direc- 
tions— Eome  and  Germany.  These  cbangcs  are  far  from  unimportant,  but  the 
temper  of  alarm  and  exaggeration  is  not  the  right  way  of  dealing  with  them.  Amid 
the  changes  of  religious  opinions  and  the  theological  discord  which  distracts  the 
world,  we  may  possess  our  souls  in  peace.  If  sometimes  our  ears  are  thrilled  and 
our  minds  confused  by  the  Babel  of  voices  which  dins  around  us,  we  may  turn  from 
without,  and  listen  calmly  to  that  voice  which  speaks  to  us  from  within,  of  love,  and 
righteousntss,  and  peace.  III.  Let  cs  apply  the  sajie  principle  to  ocr  own  lives. 
We  need  to  see  ourselves  as  we  truly  are,  in  all  our  relations  to  God  and  to  our 
fellow-men.  We  need  to  carry  into  the  whole  of  life  that  presence  of  mind  which 
is  required  of  the  warrior  who  in  the  hour  of  confiict  is  calm,  and  sees  what  h& 
foresaw.  (/>.  Jowett,  ^LA.)  A  duty  and  a  blessing: — I.  These  words  which  to 
fleshly  Israel  must  have  seemed  so  strange,  and  which  to  weak  faith  echo  so 
strangely  still,  contain  two  parts,  a  dctv  and  a  blessing.  They  were  to  "  stand 
stQl,"  and  so  should  they  see  the  salvation  of  God.  And  this  condition  of  blessing 
runs  continually  through  the  whole  history  of  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Church. 
When  God  has  tried  His  chosen  servants  or  His  chosen  people,  the  jnost  frequent 
trial  perhaps  has  been  this,  whether  they  would  tarry  the  Lord's  leisure,  be  content 
to  receive  God's  gift  in  God's  way,  hasten  not,  turn  not  to  the  right  hand  or  the  left,  but 
"  stand  still "  and  see  the  salvation  of  God.  By  patient  (the  word  implies  suffering) 
waiting  for  God,  an  unresisting  resistance  unto  blood,  did  the  Church  take  root  in 
the  whole  world.     II.  It  is  for  instruction  only  that  we  may  ask  why  God  should 

so  HAVE  ANNEXED  THE  BLESSING  OF  CONQUEST  TO  ENDURING  SUFFERING,  AND  MADE 
PATIENCE    MIGHTIER    THAN    WHAT    MEN    CALL   ACTIVE  VIRTUES.       1.    It  may  be  that  it  haS 

some  mysterious  connection  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Yiearious  suffering  may 
be  so  far  well  pleasing  to  God  as  having  a  communion  with  the  sufferiigs  of  His 
beloved  Son,  and  doubtless  it  may  make  those  who  are  partakers  of  it  more  capable 
of  the  communication  of  the  merits  and  influence  of  His  passion.  2.  Then,  also, 
it  may  be  needful,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  for  the  perfecting  of  His  saints.  As  all 
trial  implies  pain,  so  the  trial  of  the  most  precious  vessels,  it  may  be,  is  to  be  accom- 
panied by  pains  proportionate.  3.  It  is  evident,  that  so  God's  power  and  f^lory  are 
most  shown  in  averting  suffering,  or  in  crowning  the  enduring  fai'h  by  His  blessing. 
4.  Since  man's  self-will  was  the  cause  of  his  fall,  God  would  thus  teach  him  to 
renounce  dependence  upon  himself,  to  quit  his  own  wisdom  and  his  own  schemes, 
and  do  God's  will.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Lessons  : — 1.  It  concerns  God's  instru- 
ments of  salvation  to  reason  quietly  with  a  froward  people  who  despise  it.  2.  God 
much  contends  by  His  ministers  to  remove  the  unbelieving  fears  of  His  people.  3. 
Stability  in  faith  is  God's  command  to  cure  fears  in  unbelief.  4.  Jehovah's  salva- 
tion is  worth  the  looking  unto  by  His  poor  creatures  in  faith.     5.  Present  salvation 


CHAP,  siv.]  EXODUS.  233 

God  can  and  will  give  to  His  people  to  quiet  them  in  believing.  6.  God's  com- 
mand for  faith  carries  proportionable  reason  for  it  in  all  cases.  7.  Causes  of  fear 
which  hinder  faith  God  removeth  at  His  pleasure.  8.  In  God's  great  redemption, 
tj'pical  and  real,  the  Church  is  passive,  not  a  word  to  it.  9.  In  such  appearances 
of  God  it  is  but  just  with  men  to  be  silent  from  murmuring  (ver.  14).  (G.  Hitches, 
B.D.)  Faith  and  fear  : — As  man  is  capable  of  different  forms  of  actions,  so  is 
he  susceptible  of  various  kinds  of  emotions.  There  are  two  kinds  of  emotions 
which  govern  mankind  more  than  any  others — faith  and  fear.  These  comprehend 
almost  all  the  interests,  and  sway  almost  all  the  actions -of  life. .  They  are  often 
opposed  to  each  other,  and  frequently  fear  conquers  faith.  Fear  is  a  power 
governed  more  by  sense  than  faith  ;  it  is  more  selfish  and  timid  than  it.  Faith  is 
a  more  spiritual  and  religious  power  than  fear,  and  must  conquer  all  fear  and  all 
opposing  powers  before  men  can  be  powerful  and  triumphant.  I.  Let  us  observe, 
first,  THE  TRiujiPH  OF  FEAR  OR  FEELING  OVER  FAITH.  1.  Faith  Is  Often  opposed  and/'' 
conquered  when  immediate  danger  appears,  and  when  it  cannot  point  to  immediate 
dehverance.  2.  When  the  superficial  inclination  of  man  is  opposed  and  self-denial 
demanded,  faith  often  is  vanquished,  and  feeling  triumphs.  3.  Faith  is  often  con- 
quered by  sense  or  feeling  when  reason  cannot  comprehend  and  explain  things  in 
God's  dealings  towards  His  creatures.  4.  Feeling  often  overcomes  faith  when 
religion  appears  to  militate  against  what  men  consider  their  present  interest.  5. 
Feeling  sometimes  gets  the  advantage  over  faith  on  the  ground  of  ease  and  indul- 
gence. 6.  Faith  also  is  often  conquered  for  want  of  free  and  open  heart  and  mind 
to  receive  truth  and  conviction.  Prejudice  and  narrowness  of  mind  are  deadly  ' 
enemies  to  faith,  as  they  are  to  the  advancement  of  truth  and  right  hfe  everywhere. 
7.  I  mention  another  ground  on  which  faith  is  too  often  conquered  by  feeling — 
namely,  because  it  looks  to  the  future  for  its  full  reward.  Feeling  has  no  patience 
to  wait;  it  must  be  satisfied  with  its  objects  now;  whilst  faith  rises  above  the 
visible  and  the  present  to  the  unseen  and  the  future.  II.  We  shall  now  notice  the 
TRIUMPH  OF  FAITH  OVER  SENSE  AND  FEELING.  Though  faith  is  above  feeling,  it  is 
not  necessarily  opposed  to  it ;  it  works  through  it,  and  makes  it  subordinate  to  its 
influence  and  end.  The  unity  of  the  two  is  essential  to  make  men  strong  and 
happy  ;  when  they  are  divided  the  happiness  of  men  is  marred,  and  their  strength 
of  heart  and  character  is  shorn.  1.  When  the  mind  is  profoundly  convinced  of 
truth  it  conquers.  In  the  degree  the  mind  is  capable  of  deep  conviction,  it  is 
strong,  and  this  also  is  one  of  tbe  strongholds  of  faith.  When  the  mind  becomes 
thoroughly  imbued  with  the  importance  and  truth  of  anything,  it  possesses  the  first 
qualification  of  conquest  over  all  opposition  and  dilEculty ;  and  never  till  then  can 
great  things  be  accomplished.  2.  Another  condition  under  which  faith  proves  itself 
triumphant  is  a  deep  conviction  of  need.  Conviction  of  need,  either  personally  or 
relatively,  is  both  the  reason  and  power  of  any  and  every  effort,  and  no  great 
sacrifice  and  conquest  will  be  accomplished  without.  3.  For  the  development  and 
triumph  of  faith,  it  is  requisite  as  a  condition  that  the  soul  should  be  convinced  of 
the  failure  and  insufficieney  of  all  sensuous  and  finite  things  to  satisfy  its  require- 
ments. 4.  It  is  requisite  that  the  moral  perception  and  feeling  of  the  soul  should 
be  opened  and  awakened  to  see  and  feel  things  as  they  are  before  faith  can  conquer. 
Though  faith  is  a  power  of  confidence  in  the  dark,  it  is  nevertheless  a  power  that 
thrives  in  light,  and  demands  all  the  evidence  the  ease  in  hand  permits.  5.  Faith 
conquers  whilst  the  soul  lives  in  close  union  with  God,  and  carries  with  it  a  con- 
sciousness of  His  presence  ;  for  conscious  communion  with  God  is  the  power  as 
well  as  the  life  of  the  soul,  and  so  long  as  this  is  enjoyed  faith  is  triumphant.  III. 
We  come  now  to  the  teicjiph  of  God  over  nature — "  See  the  salvation  of  the 
Lord,  which  He  will  show  to  you  to-day."  Such  a  salvation  was  not  wrought  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  nature.  Apparently  the  forces  and  laws  of  nature  were 
against  the  possibility  of  it ;  it  was  a  Divine  display  of  Divine  triumph  of  God  over 
nature.  1.  The  event  is  represented  as  authentic  and  real.  It  is  not  an  allegory, 
or  any  ideal  manifestation  representing  a  potential  possibility,  or  a  thing  to  excite 
human  fancy.  2.  The  event  was  a  manifestation,  and  produced  in  subordination 
to  the  purpose  of  mercy.  3.  The  event  was  produced  for  amoral  and  rehgious  end. 
God  had  repeatedly  promised  to  deliver  them,  and  the  act  was  a  fulfilment  of  an  old 
and  repeated  engagement.  The  promise  was  made  and  performed  on  the  ground  of 
religion.  4.  The  event  is  in  harmony  with  its  conditions.  The  event  is  not  pro- 
fessed to  be  the  production  of  ordinary  power,  which  would  be  inconsistent ;  for  it 
is  an  extraordinary  one,  and  there  must  be  some  equality  betw-een  the  power  of 
production  and  the  production  itself.    The  event  is  professed  to  be  an  extraordinary 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

manifestation  of  an  infinite  power ;  and  anless  this  power  itself  is  denied  in  the  fact 
of  its  existence,  it  is  hard  to  guess  how  the  ev(  nt  can  be  considered  impossible. 
The  event  is  professed  to  have  been  produced  lor  a  wise  and  sufficient  reason. 
Lessons  :  1.  The  dealings  of  God  are  suitable  always  to  the  occasion.  He  works  in 
the  right  time  and  place,  when  and  where  the  thing  is  needed.  2.  It  is  possible  to 
be  in  a  condition  which  is  beyond  all  human  and  natural  deliverance.  3.  God 
sometimes  delays  His  deliverance  to  an  extreme  hour.  4.  Where  duty  is  clear, 
difficulties  should  not  prevent  an  effort  to  perform  it.  5.  The  difference  between 
the  real  and  the  unreal  is  seen  most  clearly  in  extreme  conditions.  6.  There  are 
things  in  life  which  we  meet  once,  and  we  pass  on  and  never  meet  again.  7. 
Genuine  and  deep-rooted  faith  shows  its  superiority  in  circumstances  that  baffle 
sensuous  reasoning.  (T.  Hughes.)  Direction  in  dilemma : — Our  text  exhibits  the 
posture  in  which  a  man  should  be  found  while  exercised  with  trial.  Methinks, 
also,  it  shows  the  position  in  which  a  sinner  should  be  found  when  he  is  under 
trouble  on  account  of  sin.     We  will  employ  it  in  both  ways.     I.  Take  our  text  first 

as   A   PICTURE    OF    THE    BELIEVER    WHEN    HE     IS    REDUCED    TO     GREAT     STR.UTS.       Then 

God's  command  to  him  is,  "  Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  In 
this  brief  sentence  there  are  two  things  very  conspicuous  :  first,  what  is  to  be  done, 
"  Stand  still "  ;  and  secondly,  what  is  to  be  seen,  "  See  the  salvation  of  the  Lord." 

1.  What  is  to  be  done?  Faith  hears  the  bidding  of  her  faithful  God,  and  is  not 
willing  to  be  shut  up  in  the  iron  cage  of  despair ;  nay,  she  defies  the  old  giant  to 
put  so  much  as  a  finger  upon  her.  Lie  down  and  die  ?  that  she  never  will  while 
her  God  bids  her  stand.  See  the  word  "  stand."  What  does  it  mean?  Keep  the 
posture  of  an  upright  man,  ready  for  action,  expecting  further  orders,  cheerfully 
and  patiently  awaiting  the  directing  voice.  But  in  what  way  are  we  to  "  stand  still "  ? 
Surely  it  means,  among  other  things,  that  we  are  to  wait  awhile.  Time  is  precious, 
but  there  are  occasions  when  the  best  use  we  can  make  of  it  is  to  let  it  run  on.  A. 
man  who  would  ride  post-haste  had  better  wait  till  he  is  perfectly  mounted,  or  he 
may  slip  from  the  saddle.  He  who  glorifies  God  by  standing  still  is  better  employed 
than  he  who  diligently  ser  es  his  own  self-will.  (1)  Wait  in  prayer,  however.  Call 
upon  God  and  spread  the  '  .se  before  Him;  tell  Him  your  difficulty,  and  plead  Hi3 
promise  of  aid.  (2)  Wai  in  faith,  for  unfaithful,  untrusting  waiting  is  but  an 
insult  to  the  Lord.  Belie  'e  that  if  He  shall  keep  you  tarrying  even  till  midnight, 
yet  He  will  come  at  the  right  time  ;  the  vision  shall  come  and  shall  not  tarry.  (3) 
Wait  in  quiet  patience,  not  murmuring  because  you  are  under  the  affliction,  but 
blessing  God  for  it.  2.  But  now,  secondly,  what  is  to  be  seen  ?  You  are  to 
see  the  salvation  of  God.  In  your  present  temporal  trials  you  are  to  see  God's 
power  and  love  manifested.  Now,  I  think  I  hear  you  say,  "  Well,  one  thing  I  know, 
I  cannot  deliver  myself  out  of  the  dilemma  in  which  I  am  now  placed.  I  had  some 
dependence  once  upon  my  own  judgment  and  upon  my  own  ability,  but  that  depen- 
dence is  entirely  gone."  It  ia  a  good  thing  for  you  sometimes.  Christian,  to  be 
wholly  weaned  from  yourself.  But  you  are  saying,  "  What  shall  I  see  ?  "  WeU,  I 
know  not  precisely  what  you  shall  see,  except  I  am  sure  of  this,  you  shall  see  the 
salvation  of  God,  and  in  that  salvation  you  shall  see  two  or  three  things,  just  as 
the  children  of  Israel  saw  them.  (1)  You  shall  see,  if  needs  be,  all  nature  and  all 
providence  subservient  to  God's  love.  (2)  You  will  see  again,  if  you  will  bat  stand 
still  and  see  it,  that  the  Lord  reigneth.  You  shall  have  such  a  picture  of  Jehovah 
sitting  upon  His  throne,  controlling  and  overruling  all  things,  that  you  shall  extol 
Him  with  your  whole  heart  as  your  God  and  King  for  ever.  You  shall  see  most 
distinctly,  if  you  will  but  wait  and  look  for  it,  how  He  can  make  you  a  wonder. 
(3)  You  shall  be  a  wonder  to  yourself,  and  marvel  how  it  is  that  God  supports  you. 
You  shall  be  a  wonder  to  your  enemies.  I'ou  shall  do  what  they  cannot  do  ;  you 
shall  walk  through  the  depths  of  the  sea,  which  the  Egyptians,  assaying  to  do,  were 
drowned.  (4)  You  shall  see  your  enemies  utterly  destroyed,  if  you  will  but  wait. 
II.  I  intend  to  take  the  text  in  reference  to  the  sinner  brought  into  the  same  con- 
dition IN  A  MORAL  SENSE.  1.  "  Stand  still  "  in  the  renunciation  of  all  thine  own 
righteousness,  and  of  all  attempts  to  seek  a  righteousness  by  thine  own  doings. 

2.  But  now  the  sinner  says,  "  Suppose,  then,  I  give  up  all  hope,  and  do  no  more 
by  way  of  trusting  to  myself,  what  shall  I  see  ?  "  Do  remark  that  all  the  sinner 
can  do  is  to  see  the  salvation.  He  is  not  to  work  it  out,  he  is  not  to  help  jt 
on,  but  he  is  to  see  it ;  yet,  mark  you,  that  sinner  cannot  even  find  out  that 
salvation  of  itself,  for  if  you  notice,  the  next  sentence  to  our  text  is,  "  which 
He  will  show  you  to-day."  God  must  show  it  to  us,  or  else  we  cannot  see  it. 
I  will  tell  thee  of  it.     (1)  First,  it  was  ordained  of  old,  hke  the  deliverance  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  235 

the  Eed  Sea.  If  God's  election  comes  to  those  who  are  without  merit,  without 
hope,  without  strength,  here  is  hope  for  thee.  (2)  In  the  next  place,  the  salva- 
tion which  God  shows  is  one  wrought  by  a  mediator.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Salvation  of  the  Lord : — John  Lyons,  a  well-known  citizen  in  Arizona,  while  at 
work  in  the  shaft  of  his  mine  near  Tres  Alamos,  had  just  put  in  a  blast  and  lighted 
the  fuse,  when,  on  reaching  the  top  of  the  shaft,  he  beheld  four  mounted  Apaches 
rapidly  approaching.  Their  horrible  yells  and  hostile  gestures  revealed  their 
murderous  intent,  and  Mr.  Lyons  was  for  an  instant  paralyzed  with  terror.  His 
first  impulse  was  to  hurl  himself  into  the  shaft  and  be  blown  to  atoms  by  the 
explosion  of  the  blast  rather  than  perish  miserably  at  the  hands  of  the  remorseless 
foe.  Suddenly  the  blast  at  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  exploded  with  terrific  effect, 
throwing  a  shower  of  rock  and  debris  high  in  the  air,  which  was  followed  by  a  dense 
volume  of  smoke  rolling  up  from  the  shaft.  The  Indians  checked  their  horses, 
appalled  by  the  unexpected  and  to  them  mysterious  eruption,  then,  with  a  yell  of 
terror,  wheeled  round  and  galloped  off  in  the  direction  whence  they  came.  But  for 
the  coincidence  of  the  blast  igniting  at  that  particular  moment,  the  man  would, 
doubtless,  have  been  tortured  to  death  in  the  true  Apache  style.  In  the  Christian 
life  there  come  times  when  destruction  seems  inevitable,  as  it  seemed  to  the  miner, 
but  those  who  trust  in  God  experience  deliverance  as  unexpected  as  his.  Fitness 
before  action: — The  first  thing  this  proud  and  sinful  soul  of  mine  needs  is  to  be 
emptied  of  self  and  become  like  a  little  child.  Action  by  and  by.  Work  when  you 
are  ready  and  fit  for  work.  March  when  you  have  been  told  where  to  go,  and  can 
see  your  way — not  before.  First  of  all,  if  we  would  do  anything  good  or  great  we 
must  get  into  a  right  attitude  with  God,  from  whom  all  goodness  and  greatness 
come.  First  of  all  get  you  to  the  Fountain  Head,  and  see  that  the  channels  are 
open  for  real  streams  of  light  and  life  to  flow  down  from  the  unseen  and  super- 
natural Heart  into  your  own.  Make  sure  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  He  is  your 
God  ;  and  that,  being  yours.  His  course  is  your  course  and  His  fight  is  your  fight. 
It  is  not  1  he  atheist  that  is  told  to  go  forward;  for  his  /ery  going  will  be  godless 
and  he  will  blunder  into  Egypt  again.  The  farther  he  goes  the  worse.  It  is  not 
the  pantheist  that  is  bidden  to  go  forward  ;  for  no  fath  rly  hand  will  lead  him  but 
a  blind  force,  the  blind  leading  the  blind.  It  is  not  th.  arrogant  and  unreligious 
moralist ;  for  he  will  have  to  build  his  system  out  of  th*  same  materials  that  have 
failed  him  so  often,  or  else  trust  the  poor  instinct  which  has  already  cast  him 
helpless  between  the  wilderness  and  the  sea.  When  Christ  and  the  apostles  were 
asked,  "What  shall  I  do  to  be  a  Christian  "?  the  answer  was  always  in  the  same 
order — it  was  a  pointing  upward,  first,  not  forward  :  Believe  ;  lay  hold  on  Heaven  ; 
take  the  hand  of  Christ ;  see  that  spiritual  things  are  real ;  make  your  first  act  one 
of  devotion ;  repent ;  be  baptized  ;  be  confirmed ;  pray.  Fill  your  mind  and  will 
with  power  from  on  high.  (Bp.  F.  D.  Himtivgton.)  The  Christian  must  both 
"stand  still"  and  '^ go  foncard"  : — Twice  the  Divine  voice  speaks.  It  says,  first, 
"Stand  still."  Stand  still,  0  impatient,  eager,  unthinking,  unbelieving  men  I 
Stand  still,  men  of  unregulated  activity,  of  unconsecrated  knowledge,  of  swift  and 
sweeping  passion,  of  intemperate  desire!  Stand  still,  reckless  competitions, 
grasping  enterprises,  immoderate  labours  and  furious  amusements,  of  these  hurrying 
days  and  heated  nights  !  Stand  still,  boundless  ambition,  over-wrought  and  over- 
confident brain,  from  your  wild  chase  for  bubbles  in  the  air  I  Stand  still,  selfish 
traffic,  corrupted  legislation.  Mammon  and  Passion  and  Vanity  Fair,  an  unprin- 
cipled press,  a  frivolous  society,  a  worldly-minded  and  mercenary  Church !  Stand 
still  and  see  the  salvation  of  God !  Stand  still,  0  lustful  appetite  and  unfeeling 
avarice  and  cruel  pride  and  headstrong  self-will  in  the  unchildlike  and  unchristian 
heart !  But  go  forward,  men  of  duty,  men  of  honour,  men  of  faith,  men  of  God! 
Speak  to  the  children  of  the  Christian  Israel  soberly ;  speak  encouragingly  to  one 
another,  you  who  have  long  borne  a  burden  that  presses  hard  and  borne  it  for  your 
covenant's  and  your  sanctuary's  sake.  "  The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you."  Go 
forward,  mercy  and  charity,  works  of  faith  and  love,  missions,  healings,  sacrifices, 
praises,  reconciliations — go  forward,  0  kingdom,  in  every  soul  and  every  land  till 
they  all  are  the  kingdom  of  our  God  !  (Ibid.)  Sit  still  and  trust : — One  day  when 
Stonewall  Jackson,  with  his  sister-in-law,  was  crossing  the  boiling  torrent,  just 
below  the  American  falls  at  Niagara,  in  a  slight  boat  manned  by  two  oarsmen,  the 
current  so  swirled  the  boat  that  the  lady  became  terrified,  believing  they  were  going 
to  the  bottom.  Jackson  seized  her  by  the  arms,  and  turned  to  one  of  the  men  and 
said,  "  How  often  have  you  crossed  here  ?  "  "I  have  been  rowing  people  across, 
sir,  for  twelve  years."     "Did  you  ever  meet  with  an  accident?"    "Never,  sir." 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv. 

"  Never  were  capsized?  never  lost  a  life  ?  "  "  Nothing  of  the  kinct,  sir  !  "  Then 
turning,  in  a  somewhat  peremptory  tone,  he  said  to  the  lady,  "  You  hear  what 
the  boatman  says,  and  unless  you  think  you  can  take  the  oars  and  row  better 
than  he  does,  sit  still  and  trust  him  as  I  do."  Stand  still  : — These   words 

contain  God's  command  to  the  believer  when  he  is  reduced  to  great  straits  and 
brought  into  extraordinary  difiBculties.  "  Stand  still."  Despair  whispers,  "  Lie 
down  and  die ;  give  it  all  up."  But  God  would  have  us  put  on  a  cheerful 
courage,  and  even  in  our  worst  times  rejoice  in  His  love  and  faithfulness. 
Cowardice  says,  "Ketreat,  go  back  to  the  worldling's  way  of  action  ;  >ou  cannot 
play  the  Christian's  part,  it  is  too  difficult.  Kelinquish  your  principles."  But, 
however  much  Satan  may  urge  this  course  upon  you,  you  cannot  follow  it,  if  you 
are  a  child  of  God.  The  Divine  fiat  has  bid  thee  go  from  strength  to  strength,  and 
BO  thou  shalt ;  and  neither  death  nor  hell  shall  turn  thee  from  thy  course.  Preci- 
pitancy says,  "  Do  something  ;  stir  yourself — to  stand  still  and  wait  is  sheer 
idleness."  We  must  be  doing  something  at  once.  Presumption  boasts,  "  If  the  sea 
be  before  you,  march  into  it  and  expect  a  miracle."  But  Faith  listens  neither  to 
Presumption,  nor  to  Despair,  nor  to  Cowardice,  nor  to  Precipitancy,  but  it  hears 
God  say,  "  Stand  still,"  and  immovable  as  a  rock  it  stands.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Ye  shall  see  them  again  no  more  for  ever. — Social  separations  : — Although  the 
Israelites  beheld  the  next  morning  the  Egyptian  host  dead  upon  the  beach,  they 
saw  them  no  more  in  their  pomp  and  power,  fierceness  and  anger ;  they  saw  them 
no  more  in  this  world  for  ever.    Let  us  look  at  the  fact  in  three  aspects.    I.  As 

AFFOKDINQ   A   GLIMPSE    OF    THE    MORAL  GOVERNMENT    OF    GoD.       A    signal   iuterposltion 

displaying  justice  towards  the  oppressor,  and  mercy  towards  the  oppressed.  1. 
Moral  government  takes  cognizance  of  man's  conduct.  2.  Moral  government 
righteously  visits  man's  conduct.  II.  As  illustrating  separations  that  are  going 
ON  between  men  every  day.  1.  Every  day  we  see  men  that  we  shall  see  no  more  in 
this  world  for  ever.  2.  Every  day  we  see  men  that  we  shall  see  no  more  in  their 
present  circumstances  for  ever.  3.  Every  day  we  see  men  that  we  shall  see  no 
more  in  their  present  character  for  ever.     III.  As  foreshadowing  that  final  sepa- 

BATION  which    must  TAKE   PLACE    BETWEEN   THE  WICKED  AND   THE  RIGHTEOUS.       1.    Thifl 

takes  place  really  at  death.  No  more  sensualists  with  their  seductions,  sceptics 
with  their  insinuations,  devil  with  his  temptations.  2.  This  takes  place  publicly  in 
the  day  of  judgment.  (Homilist.)  Leasom  : — I.  Then  wicked  men  shall  perish 
IN  the  very  hour  of  their  splendour  and  pride.     II.  Then  wicked  men  are  often 

POWERLESS  TO  INFLICT  THE  INJURY  THEY  DESIRE  UPON  THE  GOOD.       If  We  are  iujurcd  by 

these  enemies  of  the  soul,  it  is  because  of  our  unbelief.     III.  Then  the  wickkd  and 

THE   GOOD  WILL  BE    ETERNALLY   SEPARATED  IN  THE    LIFE  TO    COME.       {J.  S.  Exell,  3I.A.) 

Never  again : — I  have  seen  one  person  at  least,  to-day,  whom  I  have  seen  for  the 
last  time  in  this  life.  He  may  live  many  days  or  many  years — I  may  live  many 
days  or  many  years ;  but  in  a  crowded  city  like  this  it  must  needs  be  that  there  is 
one  among  that  throng  whom  I  have  passed  whom  I  never  again  will  see.  He 
stands,  therefore,  as  a  messenger  direct  from  me  to  the  judgment  seat  of  God. 
Little  did  I  think,  when  I  spoke  to  him,  with  what  a  messaq;e  I  was  freighting  him  1 
It  is  the  last  look  that  strikes,  the  last  touch  that  tells,  and  if  it  was  an  unkind  or  a 
false  word  I  then  spoke,  that  unkind  or  fal?e  word  has  sunk  like  a  die  on  the  mflten 
memory  of  him  from  whom  I.  have  just  parted,  as  well  as  of  myself.  What 
testimony  will  he  bear  against  me  in  the  judgment  of  the  future?  1.  Perhaps  it 
was  one  whom  I  was  bound  to  love  on  whom  my  words  fell.  If  it  were,  may  God 
forgive  me!  for  if  they  burned  and  seared  tbat  heart,  far  more  deeply  will  they 
burn  and  sear  mine,  when  I  find  that  the  ear  that  listened  so  eagerly  for  love,  and 
shrank  so  agonizingly  from  unkindness,  is  now  closed  in  death.  2.  Perhaps  it  was 
one  whom  I  was  bound  to  protect,  and  whom  with  words  of  cunning  I  have  over- 
reached. If  so,  may  God  forgive  me,  for  I  have  thus  sent  direct  to  His  throne  of 
justice  this  accugation  against  myself!  Never  again  !  And  yet  again  when  I  go 
forth  to-morrow  there  is  at  least  one  other  whom  I  will  meet  whom  I  may  meet 
never  again!  Guard  my  tongue  and  my  heart,  0  GoJ,  that  my  account  as  to  him 
may  be  just  before  Thee  !  (Episcopal  Recorder.)  The  resource  of  God  against 
the  enemies  of  the  good : — During  the  American  Civil  War  an  English  ship  was 
boarded  by  the  crew  of  a  confederate  cruiser.  They  drew  their  swords.  But  the 
gallant  English  Captain  Williams  marched  forward  and  said,  "  Gentlemen,  I  am  a 
simple  sailor,  but  do  not  forget  that  behind  this  flag  which  I  hold  in  my  hand  lies 
all  the  power  of  the  army  and  navy  of  England.  If  you  strike  me  you  strike  the 
might  of  England."  So  we  may  be  simple  men  and  women,  but  when  we  are 
engaged  in  the  Lord's  work  we  do  not  stand  a'    'e.    (G.  Howard  James.) 


CHAP.  SIT.]  EXODUS.  237, 

Ver.  15.  Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  Me  ?  .  .  .  Go  forward. — Go  forivard : — Men 
are  more  ready  to  cry  out  for  help  tliau  to  help  themselves.  They  are  more  ready  to 
call  for  more  light,  means,  privileges,  than  to  use  faithfully  what  they  possess.  They 
are  more  ready  to  complain  than  to  exert  themselves ;  to  wonder  at  what  the  Divine 
Providence  has  done,  or  to  speculate  on  what  it  intends  to  do,  than  to  observe  its 
will,  snd  stand  in  the  line  of  their  duty,  and  "  go  forward."  1.  And  first,  when  we  are 
confused  with  uncertain  speculations  as  to  points  of  religious  doctrine  and  the 
designs  of  Providence,  let  us  rest  from  the  questions  that  are  beyond  mortal  solving, 
from  the  debate  and  from  those  who  would  pretend  to  settle  it  for  us,  and  obey  the 
practical  exhortation  of  the  text.  What  we  can  discover  and  know  may  not  be 
much  ;  but  what  we  have  to  do  is  plain  enough,  and  deserves  the  chief  place  in  our 
attention.  Theories  are  many,  and  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  is  hid ;  but  what  He 
requires  of  us  tbere  needs  but  singleness  of  heart  to  discern  and  follow.  The  abso-  \ 
luie  truth  may  often  be  beyond  us  ;  but  the  right,  as  distinct  from  the  wrong,  is  in  J 
the  sentiment  of  every  one's  conscience  and  in  the  power  of  his  hand.  The  present  !\ 
age  is  remarkably  bent  upon  a  prying  kind  of  research  into  the  deep  things  of  ^ 
religious  faitb.  Let  me  not  find  fault  with  this  tendency,  so  long  as  it  is  reverent,  ' 
and  not  presumptuous ;  so  long  as  it  is  humble,  and  not  disputatious  ;  so  long  as  it 
is  neither  carping,  nor  over-anxious,  nor  neglectful  of  nearer  claims.  But  it  has  its 
dangers.  Sometimes  it  distracts  the  thoughts  with  fears  and  unprofitable  conjec- 
tures ;  and  sometimes  it  absorbs  them  in  cares  that  are  intense,  but  stationary, 
holding  back  the  mind  from  a  manly  progress  and  impeding  the  cheerful  diligence 
of  life.  Do  not  gaze  backward,  nor  pause  to  contemplate  anxiously  what  is  in  front, 
but  move.  If  you  are  faithful,  God  will  carry  you  through.  Work  and  you  shall 
believe.  Do  and  you  shall  know.  You  shall  learn  more  that  is  worth  the  learning 
through  your  conscience  than  through  your  researches.  You  will  be  guided  to  the 
best  convictions,  by  being  heartily  engaged  in  an  obedient  service.  2.  Thus,  duty  is 
better  than  speculation  ;  and  this  is  the  first  lesson  that  our  subject  teaches.  But 
the  mind  is  troubled  with  other  things  than  the  doubtful  aspects  of  truth.  There 
are  atfiicted  and  dejected  hours,  when  we  hardly  care  to  inquire  about  anything. 
A  feeling  of  discouragement  hangs  about  the  heart.  Now,  sorrow  is  naturally 
sluggish,  selfish — as  indisposed  to  strive  for  anything  as  to  be  thankful  for  any- 
thing. It  chooses  to  sit.  It  looks  upon  the  ground.  It  nurses  its  gloomy  medita- 
tions. When  it  is  caused  by  losses  and  disappointments,  it  is  apt  to  make  men 
think  that  there  is  nothing  that  deserves  their  winning,  or  at  least  that  it  is  not 
worth  while  for  them  any  longer  to  try.  No  doubt  it  makes  many  a  man  better.  It 
brings  the  thoughtless  to  reflection.  Sorrow  is  a  holy  thing  when  it  is  rightly  ac- 
cepted. It  gives  a  consecrated  turn  to  the  experiences  and  affections  of  our 
humanity.  And  yet  it  has  a  power  of  an  opposite  kind  ;  and  they  who  come  under 
that  power  are  rendered  worse  instead  of  better  by  it.  They  lose  their  usefulness, 
as  well  as  give  up  their  own  good.  Others  add  the  sin  of  murmuring  to  that  of 
supineness.  Why  have  they  been  thus  distressed  ?  What  have  they  clone  to  be  so 
hemmed  in  ?  They  complain  of  the  very  prophets  and  guiding  messengers  of  God, 
because  they  show  them  no  more  mercy,  and  will  encourage  them  in  no  other  way 
than  one  that  they  refuse  to  follow.  They  want  to  be  relieved  just  where  they  stand. 
They  want  to  be  delivered  without  any  thought  or  effort  of  their  own.  But  it  is  not 
so  that  God  will  have  it.  "  Speak  unto  them,"  is  His  word  still,  "  that  they  go  for- 
ward." The  best  consolation  is  in  your  tasks,  with  their  straining  toil  or  their 
steady  and  quiet  occupation.  3.  But  it  is  perhaps  the  labour  imposed  upon  your 
unwilling  strength  that  most  disconcerts  you.  The  apprehension  of  coming 
calamities  has  fastened  its  terrors  upon  you.  The  fears  of  a  faint  heart  form  the 
chief  trial  of  your  lot.  Not  an  arrow  has  reached  you  yet  from  the  pursuing  host 
of  your  enemies,  but  you  hear  their  trumpets,  and  you  are  dismayed  at  the 
trampling  of  their  approach.  You  have  not  yet  wet  your  shoes  in  the  waves  of  the 
intercepting  sea  ;  but  you  look  at  its  broad  flow,  and  are  dismayed  at  what  seems  to 
you  its  unfathomable  and  impassable  depth.  You  are  afraid  of  what  you  may  be 
compelled  to  do  ;  or  you  are  afraid  of  what  you  may  be  appointed  to  suffer.  What 
is  so  depressing  as  this  dread,  when  once  it  settles  down  upon  a  man?  How  it 
paralyzes  his  resolution !  But  no  power  can  assist  him,  at  least  not  in  the  manner 
he  would  choose — by  interfering  to  change  his  whole  situation,  and  that  without 
any  step  of  his  own  taking.  He  must  stand  in  his  lot.  He  must  march  at  command. 
There  will  be  always  something  like  a  chase  in  the  rear.  There  will  be  some  gulf 
crossing  his  advanced  post.  He  will  not  be  listened  to,  if  he  sits  and  prays  that  all 
this  may  be  otherwise.  At  the  same  time  the  help  that  was  refused  to  his  comi^laint 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiT. 

and  his  supplication  awaits  his  diligence.  Let  him  "  go  forward."  The  cowardice 
that  was  his  worst  enemy  shall  then  be  vanquished.  Beware  how  you  waste  in 
sighs  the  time  that  should  be  spent  in  exertion.  Beware  how  you  look  abroad  for 
the  succour  that  you  will  contribute  nothing  to  bring.  Beware  how  you  abandon 
your  own  cause.  Bear  your  part,  according  to  the  imperfect  ability  that  you  have 
received,  in  the  work  of  your  deliverance.  Commit  the  issues  of  events  to  the 
Sovereign  Disposer.  They  may  venture,  as  long  as  their  trust  is  in  Him.  "  Speak 
unto  all  My  people,"  saith  God,  "  that  they  go  forward."  Their  prayer  is  good ; 
but  their  obedience  is  better.  His  grace  shall  be  sufficient  for  them  while  they 
move  towards  it.  (N.  L.  Frothingham.)  The  journey  through  life  : — It  points 
out,  with  sulHcient  clearness,  the  best  mode  of  journeying  through  life.  "  Go  for- 
ward " — (1)  from  that  point  to  which  God  has  conducted  us ;  (2)  along  the  path 
God  bids  us  take  ;  (3)  by  the  light  which  God  affords  ;  (4)  with  the  staff  which  God 
l^rovides  ;  and  (5)  to  the  land  which  God  prepares.  I.  You  are,  then,  willing  to  go 
forward  ?  But  whether  you  will  or  not,  you  must.  What  better  starting-point  can 
you  discover  than  that  from  which  Israel  began — the  point  to  which  God  has 
BROUGHT  Tou  NOW  ?  Stop  for  a  moment,  my  impatient  fellow-traveller  ;  we  are  not 
speaking  of  the  point  to  which  you  have  now  brought  yourself,  but  of  that  to  which 
God  has  conducted  you ;  and  you  must  very  soon,  I  think,  feel  that  there  may  be 
an  important  difference  between  these  two.  God  may,  indeed,  command  us  to  go 
forward  from  the  point  to  which  He  has  Himself  conducted  us,  but  not  by  any 
means  to  make  advance  on  that  wrong  path  which  we  have  chosen  through  our  own 
folly  and  our  sin.  In  such  a  case,  God  must  have  rather  asked,  "  Why  do  you  cry 
to  Me  ?  You  are  yourselves  the  cause  of  your  distress  and  misery ;  there  is  no 
safety  on  this  road,  but  only  death  and  horror  ;  speak  unto  the  IsraeHtes  that  they 
return  immediately  !  "  But  now,  because  the  Lord  Himself  has  pointed  out  the 
place  where  they  were  to  encamp,  between  Pi-hahiroth  and  Baal-Zephon,  they  are 
in  the  position  which  He  bade  them  occupy ;  they  now  are  standing  in  the  place 
where  He  would  have  them  be  :  now  we  may  speak  of  going  on.  "  Advance  !  "^ 
it  is  a  glorious  word  ;  and  that  which  it  denotes  deserves  the  application  of  our 
noblest  powers.  But,  in  advancing,  the  main  question  is — not  whether  we  are 
rising  rapidly  enough,  but  simply  whether  we  are  really  on  the  right  track,  and 
keeping  the  great  end  in  view.  Yes;  "  Forward"  is  still  a  glorious  word,  but  not 
the  first,  scarcely  the  second  that  we  should  employ  ;  and  you  will  be  in  a  position 
to  apply  it  with  advantage  to  yourselves  only  when,  like  these  ransomed  ones,  you 
have  an  Egypt  at  your  back,  and  a  Canaan  before.  But  what  think  you  ?  O  man 
of  sin,  the  path  you  now  pursue  leads  down  to  death  ;  repentance  is  the  only  way 
to  life — regeneration  of  the  soul  the  first,  although  perhaps  the  least  felt  requisite 
for  entering  on  the  new  period.  Nay,  no  advance  ere  you  have  first  stood  still,  made 
full  confession  of  your  guilt,  sought  for  deliverance  from  worse  than  Egypt's  bond- 
age, and  cried  for  blood  more  precious  than  the  blood  of  even  the  spotless  Paschal 
Lamb,  to  hide  your  sins  !  II.  "  Advance  !  "  The  order  may  be  given  easily,  but 
is  it  quite  as  speedily  performed  ?  Then  listen,  in  the  second  place,  to  what  is 
further  given  in  the  summons — advance  along  the  way  which  God  commands. 
"  Which  God  commands."  This,  in  a  certain  aspect,  makes  the  thing  much  easier, 
but  in  another  much  more  difficult.  Y'ou  will  at  once  perceive  this  when  you  place 
yourself  again  in  the  position  of  the  Israelites.  Moses  need  not,  in  deep  anxiety, 
inquire,  "  W^hither?"  for  there  is  but  one  path,  and  not  another  given  him  to 
choose.  There  is  the  most  peremptory  command  not  to  go  back  ;  nor  would  good 
come  of  turning  to  the  right  or  left ;  moreover,  there  are  mountains  rising  up  to 
heaven,  and  rocks,  which  shut  the  people  in,  as  if  within  a  fortress.  Forward, 
then !  But  well  may  we,  also,  in  spite  of  not  a  little  difference,  find  a  resemblance 
to  the  path  on  which  the  Lord  once  more  calls  you  and  me  to  make  advance.  That 
way  itself  is,  in  its  leading  features,  quite  as  plain,  as  difficult,  and  yet  withal  as 
safe,  as  that  for  which  the  Israelites  now  looked.  If  we  are  Christians,  there  is  only 
one  way  possible  for  our  understanding,  our  faith,  our  conscience ;  and  that  is  the 
way  God  bids  us  go.  See  that  the  path  before  you  is  indeed  the  way  appointed  by 
the  Lord ;  and  do  not  venture  on  a  single  step  before  you  bow  the  knee  to  Him  in 
deep  humility.  But  if  it  be  quite  evident  that  just  this,  and  no  other,  is  the  road 
which  God  deems  best  for  you,  then  act  as  if  you  heard  His  voice  from  heaven  say- 
ing, "  Why  do  you  cry  to  Me  ?  Surely  you  know  that  I  am  not  a  God  who  says, 
'  Go  forward,'  without  giving  strength  wherewith  to  go."  Nay,  verily,  God  has  not 
changed,  so  that  He  now  should  call  His  people  to  advance  into  the  sea,  and  leave 
them  there  to  perish  in  the  flood.    Suppose  the  Israelites,  alarmed  at  the  idea  of 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODTJS.  239 

advancing  through  the  vsraves,  had  taken  time  to  think,  and  then  attempted  to  re- 
treat ;  or  sought,  amidst  the  mountains  on  each  side,  an  opening  by  which  they 
might  escape  approaching  death  :  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  natural  man, 
they  would  have  acted  with  the  utmost  prudence,  yet  they  would  have  but  been 
hastening  into  the  yawning  grave.  The  passage  through  the  sea  turns  out  to  be  much 
safer  than  the  path  along  the  quiet  shore,  as  soon  as  it  appears  that  God  is  with  us. 
It  is  precisely  when  the  prophet  Jonah  seeks  to  flee  from  Nineveh,  and  find  a  safe 
retreat  in  Tarshish,  that  such  mortal  danger  comes  so  close  on  him  ;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  when  Paul,  led  by  the  Lord  to  Eome,  courageously  defies  Euroclydon 
and  every  storm,  his  life  is  saved,  although  the  ship  is  lost.  Our  life  is  ever  free 
from  danger  when  we  risk  it  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  ;  because,  as  has  been  truly 
said,we  are  immortal  while  God  needs  us  here.  III.  "  But  what  avails  it  me,  even 
though  I  know  the  way,  so  long  as,  in  short-sightedness,  I  still  must  grope  about 
under  dark  clouds?"  You  are  quite  right;  but  you  too,  just  like  Israel,  are  this 
day  summoned  to  advance  under  thk  light  that  God  affords.  You  can  imagine 
that  you  now  behold  the  mysterious  fiery  pillar,  scattering  its  golden  rays  upon  the 
silvery  waters  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  straightway  turning  its  fierce  light- 
nings on  the  host  of  the  Egyptians.  But  say,  has  not  God,  in  His  written  word, 
sent  light  from  heaven  sufficient  in  amount  and  clear  enough  to  brighten,  with  its 
friendly  rays,  many  a  gloomj'  night  and  many  a  cloudy  day?  And  have  you  ever 
been  kept  waiting  long  without  an  answer,  when,  with  the  earnest  question,  "What 
will  the  Lord  have  me  to  do?  "  you  took  your  precious  Bible  up,  in  silent  solitude, 
not  to  consult  it,  like  so  many,  just  as  if  it  were  a  kind  of  heathen  oracle — examin- 
ing the  first  page  that  might  open  up  to  you — but  earnestly  endeavouring  to  find 
out  what  the  Lord  desires  ?  But  is  it  not  the  case  that  we  are  just  like  that  rebel- 
lious Israel— constantly  inclined  to  choose  their  own  way  rather  than  simply  pursue  ' 
the  path  to  which  the  cloudy  pillar  guided  them  ?  And  even  after  we  have  been 
already  taught,  on  numberless  occasions,  through  the  shame  and  injury  that  have 
befallen  us,  we  still  direct  our  eyes  continually  to  the  ignix  fatmis  of  human  wisdom, 
when  we  rather  should  fear  God,  and  give  attention  to  His  word.  And  what  should 
hinder  you  from  choosing  that  same  word  of  God  to  be  a  lamp  unto  your  feet,  a  light 
unto  your  path  ?  Should  the  obscurities  and  enigmas  that  here  i^resent  themselves 
to  you  prove  such  a  barrier  ?  Even  the  fiery  pillar  had  for  Israel  its  impenetrable 
and  mysterious  side ;  but  this  much  they  perceived  quite  well,  that  it  afforded  them 
more  light  than  a  thousand  other  lights.  And  there  is  something  wondrous  in  the 
fact  that  this  great  light  illumines  everything,  although  you  know  not  where  it  has 
its  seat ;  nor  can  you  find  in  anything  besides  a  pi'oper  substitute  when  it  has  been 
removed.  Or — just  acknowledge  it — are  you  offended  at  the  vehemence  with  which 
the  Word  of  God  denounces  sin  ?  Yes,  verily,  the  cloudy  pillar  sent  forth  dreadful 
thunderbolts,  but  they  were  only  aimed  at  hardened  ones  like  Pharaoh  ;  and  that 
same  light  of  God's  unspotted  holiness,  which  is  po  terrible  to  sinners,  is  the  con- 
solation of  all  those  who  make  His  mercy  the  foundation  of  their  hopes.  Or  has 
that  light  no  longer  an  attraction  for  you,  inasmuch  as  it  has  lost  the  spb-ndour  of 
most  novelties  ?  Surely  the  fiery  pillar  was  quite  as  invaluable  in  the  fortieth  year 
that  followed  Israel's  Exodus,  as  in  the  first  night  when  they  were  redeemed?  And 
should  you  not  be  rather  cheered  by  the  consideration  that,  when  everthing  to-day 
announces  instability  and  cbange,  the  word  of  God  endures  for  aye  ?  IV.  But  do 
you  make  complaint — not  against  God,  but  rather  against  yourself?  And  do  you 
fear  your  strength  will  fail?  We  could  not  urge  you  to  advance,  did  we  not  also, 
in  the  fonrth  place,  iudicate  the  staff  which  God  bestows  on  us.  Let  it  suffice  to 
state  that,  without  living  faith  working  within  the  heart,  it  is  as  hopeless  to  set  out 
upon  life's  journey  as  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  march  through  the  Bed  Sea 
without  the  all-prevailing,  wonder-working  rod.  Poor  man,  you  rise  up,  but  you 
know  not  whence  ;  you  wander  here  and  there,  but  do  not  know  how  long ;  you  ask 
for  strength,  yet  know  not  whence  it  may  be  gained  !  The  Lord's  words  are  most 
true  :  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that  maketh  flesh  his  arm.  .  .  Blessed  is  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  the  Lord."  But  have  you  never  found  that  all  things  are  possible  to 
him  that  believeth,  and  that  even  mountains  of  difficulties  seemed  to  dwindle  away 
into  molehills  when  touched  by  this  wonder-working  staff?  The  time  will  often 
come  when  you  shall  stand  before  a  task  for  which  your  own  unaided  wisdom  will 
be  quite  unequal ;  but  the  praver  of  faith  works  wonders,  and  strength  comes  down 
from  above  into  the  heart  which  owns,  in  deep  humility,  that  it  is  naught  but  weak- 
ness when  apart  from  God.  V,  The  Lord  arouses  us  to  march  on  to  the  l.wd 
which  He  prepares  for  us.  You  are  aware  that  Israel  was  called  not  merely  to  for- 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

sake  the  land  of  Egypt,  nor  even  to  spend  a  desert  life  in  peace  and  liberty,  but  to 
march  on  into  a  land  which  God,  ages  before,  had  promised  to  bestow  on  the  pos- 
terity of  those  who  were  His  friends.  Not  one  of  all  those  multitudes  who  passed 
through  the  Bed  Sea  had  ever  seen  that  promised  land.  Upon  the  ground  of 
credible  authority,  they  were  constrained  to  the  belief  that  it  was  a  reality  awaiting 
them  beyond  the  flood.  Not  even  the  wisest  of  them  all  was  free  to  choose  the 
mode  of  access  to  that  land  which  flowed  with  milk  and  honey.  But  their  great 
Leader  ever  held  Himself  responsible  for  the  result,  although  the  moment  when  the 
earthly  paradise  was  to  unfold  its  gates  was  still  kept  in  deep  secrecy.  Nor  are  we 
called  to  wander  aimlessly,  and  to  march  on  without  exactly  knowing  where  we  are 
to  go.  The  Lord  from  heaven  has  appeared  on  this  vile  earth  that  we,  exiles  from 
Eden,  might  have  an  eternal  dwelling-place ;  and  though  no  messenger  has  come 
back  from  the  habitations  where  He  has  prepared  us  room,  we  know,  as  surely  as 
we  live,  that  what  no  eye  hath  seen,  what  ear  hath  never  heard,  what  hath  not  entered 
into  any  human  heart,  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  for  all  who  know  and  love  Him. 
Whoever  will  draw  back  unto  perdition  may  perceive,  in  Israel's  case,  that  while 
God  presses  upon  sinful  men  His  heavenly  gift.  He  will  by  no  means  let  Himself  be 
mocked.  The  way  that  leads  to  it  may  not,  perhaps,  be  quite  the  shortest  (und 
those  who,  like  Isniel,  are  slow  to  learn  require  a  longer  training-time),  still  less  is 
it  the  most  agreeable,  but  most  assuredly  it  is  the  best.  And  the  inheritance  itself 
will  only  seem  more  beautiful  if  we,  like  Moses,  are  obliged  to  wait  a  long  time  ou 
God  that  we  may  get  possession  of  the  whole.  Do  you  know  any  prospect  more 
inspiriting  than  that  of  one  day  having  done  entirely  with  that  daily  d\ing  which  we 
now  call  "life  ";  of  our  at  last,  some  time  or  other,  breathing  with  a  pleasure  and 
a  freedom  we  have  never  yet  felt  here,  where  every  day  brought  us  more  than 
enough  of  its  own  ills;  of  once  more  hearing  there,  too,  the  command,  "Forward!" 
and  then  advancing  through  the  spacious  fields  of  heaven,  but  finding  nowhere  near 
us  any  foe,  nor  seeing  any  wilderness  before?  Surely,  even  though  it  cost  us  other 
forty  anxious  years,  as  it  cost  Israel  the  Promised  Land,  what  one  of  us  would  think 
the  price  of  such  a  calling  far  too  dear?  (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzec,  D.D.)  Unseaxon- 
able prayer: — I.  Sometimes  the  answer  will  be  very  CNSAXisFACTor.Y.  1.  Because 
I  was  brought  up  to  do  so.  2.  It  is  a  part  of  my  religion.  These  pray  as  a  Dervish 
dances  or  a  Fakir  holds  his  arm  aloft ;  but  they  know  nothing  of  the  spiritual 
reality  of  prayer  (Matt.  vi.  7).  3.  It  is  a  right  thing  to  do.  So  indeed  it  is  if  we 
pray  aright,  but  the  mere  repetition  of  pious  words  is  vanity  (Isa.  xxix.  13).  4.  I 
feel  easier  in  my  mind  after  it.  Ought  you  to  feel  easier?  •  May  not  your  formal 
prayers  be  a  mockery  of  God,  and  so  an  increase  of  sin  (Isa.  i.  12-15  ;  Ezek.  xx.  31)  ? 
6.  I  think  it  meritorious  and  saving.  This  is  sheer  falsehood,  and  a  high  offence 
against  the  merit  and  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  II.  Sometimes  the  answer  will 
BETRAY  ignorance.  1.  When  it  hinders  immediate  repentance.  Instead  of  quitting 
sin  and  mourning  over  it,  some  men  talk  of  praying.  "  To  obey  is  better  than 
sacrifice,"  and  better  than  supplication.  2.  When  it  keeps  from  faith  in  Jesus. 
The  gospel  is  not  "  pray  and  be  saved  " ;  but "  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved  "  (Matt.  vii.  21 ;  John  vi.  47).  3.  When  we  suppose  that  it  fits 
us  for  Jesus.  We  must  come  to  Him  as  sinners,  and  not  set  up  our  prayers  as  a 
sort  of  righteousness  (Luke  xviii.  11,  12).  4.  When  we  think  that  prayer  alone  will 
bring  a  blessing.  III.  Sometimes  the  answer  will  be  quite  correct.  1.  Because 
I  must.  I  am  in  trouble,  and  must  pray  or  perish.  Sighs  and  cries  are  not  made 
to  order,  they  are  the  irresistible  outoursts  of  the  heart  (Psa.  xlii.  1 ;  Eom  viii.  26). 
2.  Because  I  know  I  shall  be  heard,  and  therefore  I  feel  a  strong  desire  to  deal 
with  God  in  supplication.  "  Because  He  hath  inclined  His  ear  unto  me,  therefore 
will  I  call  upon  Him  "  (Psa.  cxvi.  2).  3.  Because  I  deUght  in  it :  it  brings  rest  to 
my  mind,  and  hope  to  my  heart.  It  is  a  sweet  means  of  communion  with  my  God. 
"  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God  "  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  28).  4.  Because  I  fetd  that 
I  can  best  express  the  little  faith  and  repentance  I  have  by  crying  to  the  Lord 
for  more.  5.  Because  these  grow  as  I  pray.  No  doubt  we  may  pray  ourselves 
into  a  good  frame  if  God  the  Holy  Ghost  blesses  us.  6.  Because  I  look 
for  all  from  God,  and  therefore  I  ciy  to  Him  (Psa.  Ixxii.  5).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Self-lielp  : — Self-help  is  one  of  the  popular  topics  of  the  day,  and  seems  to  be 
commended  in  the  passage  which  contains  the  text.  Help  thyself,  and  Heave  q 
will  help  thee,  is  a  proverb  which,  both  in  its  French  and  its  English  form,  is 
widely  current  ;  and  wisely  current,  if  we  understand  the  Divine  principle  on 
which  it  rests.  Bead  in  the  light  of  Scripture,  it  does  not  run.  Venture,  and  the 
Almighty  hand  will  meet  thee,  the  help  will  come;  but  rather,  Venture,  for  the 


CHAP,  xiv.]  EXODUS.  241 

Everlasting  Arms  are  around  thee,  the  help  is  here.  Thus  read,  it  is  an  all-mastering 
truth.  But  what  is  the  principle  here,  tbe  essential  principle  of  the  progress  ?  Is 
it,  March,  and  I  will  meet  you ;  or  March,  for  I  have  led  you ;  I,  not  you,  am 
responsible  for  these  straits ;  you  are  here  because  through  them  lies  the  path  to 
victory  and  glory.  Therefore  "  c-y  not  unto  Me"  ;  your  being  here  is  My  answer  to 
your  cry.     "  Spaak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  that  they  go  forward."     I.  Their 

STANDING    THERE    AT   ALL   WAS  A  MIRACLE   OF   ALMIGHTY   POWER   AND   LOVE.      By  a  SCricS 

of  the  most  tremendous  miracles  recorded  in  history,  God's  hand  had  led  them  out 
to  that  mountain  gorge,  and  shut  them  in  between  the  moaning  sea  and  their  raging 
foes.  Pharaoh  drew  uear,  but  God  was  even  visibly  more  near.  A  great  army  was 
gathering  behind  them ;  but  the  angel  of  God's  presence  was  visibly  in  the  midst  of 
them.  They  distrusted  and  despised  Emmanuel — God  with  them,  a  visible  glory 
over  their  host.     II.  They  ought  to  have  accepted  God's  guidance  thither  as  the 

ABSOLUTE    ASSURANCE    THAT   THEIR    WAY   ON   LAY    CLEAR    BEFORE    HiS    EYES,  and    that  all 

the  difficulties  which  beset  it  were  under  the  firm  control  of  His  hand.  {J.  B. 
Brown,  B.A.)  Effort  needed  as  well  as  prayer: — A  scholar  was  remarkable  for 
repeating  her  lessons  well.  Her  schoolfellow,  rather  idly  inclined,  said  to  her  one 
day,  "  How  is  it  that  you  always  say  your  lessons  so  perfectly  ?  "  She  replied,  "  I 
fJways  pray  that  I  may  say  my  lessons  well."  "Do  you?  "  said  the  other;  "well 
then,  I  will  pray,  too  "  :  but  alas !  the  next  morning  she  could  not  even  repeat  a 
word  of  her  usual  task.  Very  much  confounded,  she  ran  to  her  friend,  and 
reproached  her  as  deceitful :  "  I  prayed,"  said  she,  "  but  I  could  not  say  a  single 
word  of  my  lesson."  "  Perhaps,"  rejoined  the  other,  "  you  took  no  pains  to  learn 
it."  "Learn  it!  Learn  it!  I  did  not  learn  it  at  all,"  answered  the  first,  "I 
thought  I  had  no  occasion  to  learn  it,  when  I  prayed  that  I  might  say  it."  The 
mistake  is  a  very  common  one.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  flight  from  Egypt: — 
I.  Their  danger.  Foe  behind,  sea  in  front,  mountains  on  each  side.  II.  Their 
DILEMMA.  Knew  not  which  way  to  turn.  HI.  Their  Deliverer.  Man's  extremity 
God's  opportunity,  IV.  Their  duty.  "  Go  forward."  This  demanded  faith. 
V.  Their  determination.  They  obeyed.  VI.  Their  delight.  Song  of  Moses. 
(G.  Weller.)  Go  foricard  : — I.  The  story  from  which  these  words  are  taken  is 
A  STORY  OF  NATIONAL  PROGRESS.  It  is  also  One  of  supematural  progress.  For  us 
the  supernatural  is,  in  the  highest  and  truest  sense  of  the  word,  natural,  for  it 
is  the  revelation  of  the  nature  of  God.  We  accept  the  possibility  of  the  super- 
natural and  miraculous,  but  all  the  more  for  that  do  we  hold  that  if  God  interferes 
in  the  affairs  of  men  miraculously,  He  will  not  do  it  capriciously,  unnecessarily, 
wantonly.  Upon  the  whole  story  of  these  Jewish  miracles  there  is  stamped  a 
character  which  marks  distinctly  the  reason  for  which  they  were  wrought ;  that 
reason  was  the  religious  education  of  the  world.  By  these  miracles  the  Jew  was 
taught  that  for  nations  and  men  there  is  a  God,  an  eternal  and  a  personal  will 
above  us  and  around  us,  that  works  for  righteousness.  This  great  fact  was  taught 
him  by  illustrated  lessons,  by  pictures  illuminated  with  the  Divine  light  and  so  filled 
with  the  Divine  colour  that  they  stand  and  last  for  all  time.  II.  The  lesson  that 
seems  definitely  stamped  on  the  story  of  the  miraculous  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea  is 

THE    LESSON    OF    FEARLESSNESS    IN    THE    DISCHARGE    OF    DUTY,    Of    rCSolute   Walking    in 

the  way  that  we  know  to  be  God's  way  for  us.  We  find  this  true — 1.  In  the  case  of 
individuals.  2.  In  the  case  of  nations.  For  individuals  and  for  nations  God  has 
appointed  a  law  of  progress.  All  who  have  ever  striven  to  raise  tbe  tone  of  a 
nation's  life,  to  bring  the  nation  onward  on  the  path  that  leads  to  peace  and 
righteousntss,  have  been  preaching  to  mankind  this  great  word  of  God's,  "  Go 
forward  where  God  would  have  you  go."  (Bp.  Magee.)  Christian  progress: — 
Frogress  is  the  great  test  of  a  Christian.  It  is  ijot  what  we  are  absolutely,  but 
what  we  are  relatively,  relatively  to  what  we  were.  Religion  must  always  be  "  a 
walk,"  and  the  child  of  God  a  traveller.  Old  things  get  further  and  further  behind, 
and  as  they  recede  look  smaller  and  smaller ;  new  things  constantly  come  into  view, 
and  there  is  no  stagnation.  The  man,  though  slowly,  and  with  much  struggle, 
and  with  many  humiliations,  is  stretching  on  to  the  ever-rising  level  of  his  own 
spiritual  and  heaven-drawn  conscience.  I.  We  may  be  discouraged  becausp  of  past 
FAILURES.  Still  we  have  no  choice  but  to  go  on.  Life  is  made  up  of  rash  begin- 
nings and  premature  endings.  We  have  nothing  for  it  but  to  begin  again.  II.  We 
may  feel  ourselves  utterly  graceless  and  godless.  The  remedy  is,  at  once  to 
determine  to  be  a  great  Christian.  We  must  aim  at  things  far  in  advance.  We 
must  go  forward.  III.  Perhaps  some  great  temptation  or  sin  bars  the  way. 
Then  we  must  not  stand  calculating.    We  must  not  look  at  consequences,  but 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [qhap.  xnr. 

simply  "go  forward"  to  the  new  life  of  self-denial  and  holiness.  (J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)  Going  forward : — Both  the  Israelites  and  Egyptians  went  forward;  but 
how  ?    and  to  what  ? — I.  The  Israelites  went  forwakd  in  obedience  to  Divine 

COMMANDS  ;    THE    EGYPTIANS,    IN    OPPOSITION   TO   THE   DiVINE    WILL.       1.    As  regards  the 

Israelites — In  this  particular  crisis  He  commanded  them  to  proceed  (ver.  15).  The 
means  and  mode  of  their  advance  were  prescribed  by  Hnu  (ver.  16).  2.  The 
Egyptians  went  forward  in  defiance  of  the  will  of  God.     II.  The  Israelites  went 

FORWARD  HAVING  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD  WITH  THLM  AS  A  HELP;  THE  EGYPTIANS 
HAVING  THAT  PRESENCE  AS  A  HINDRANCE  (ver.  19,  20).  III.  ThE  ISRAELITES  WENT 
FORWARD    IN   M7SE     RELIANCE    UPON    GoD ;     THE    EGYPTIANS    IN    INFATUATED    DARIXO    OF 

Him.  IV.  The  Israelites  went  forward  having  the  forces  of  nature  con- 
trolled IN  their  favour;  the  Egyptians  with  those  forces  used  to  theib 
confusion  and  overthrow  (vers.  21-27).  Nature  renders  loyal  obedience  to  its  Lord. 
The  Most  High  employs  nature's  elements  and  forces  for  the  defence  and  deliverance 
of  His  people,  and  for  the  defeat  and  destruction  of  His  foes.     V.  The  Israelites 

WENT     FORWARD     TO    SPLENDID     VICTORY    AND     SPIRITUAL     PROFIT;    THE     EGYPTIANS    TO' 

UTTER  DEFEAT  AND  DEATH.  1.  As  to  the  Israelites — (1)  Their  triumjih  was  complete 
and  glorious  (vers.  29,  30).  (2)  They  also  derived  moral  benefit  from  the  event 
(ver.  31).  Keverential  fear  of  God  was  inspired  witbin  them,  and  their  faith  in 
Him  and  in  His  servant  Moses  was  quickened  and  confirmed.  2.  But  the  Epyptiana 
were  utterly  overthrown  and  slain  (ver.  28).  Lessons :  1.  Going  forward  is  not 
always  making  progi-ess.  2.  Going  forward  is  true  progress  only  when  it  accords 
with  the  will  of  God.  3.  The  path  of  duty  is  often  beset  with  difficulties.  4. 
Difficulties  in  the  path  of  duty  disappear  before  believing  obedience.  5.  Rebellion 
against  God  leads  to  trouble  and  distress,  and  if  persisted  in  must  end  in  ii-retrievable 
ruin.  6.  Faith  in  God  and  obedience  to  Him  lead  onward  and  upward  to  glorious 
triumph.  7.  The  deliverances  wrought  for  us  by  the  hand  of  God  should  encourage 
us  to  reverence  and  trust  Him.  {William  Jones.)  Christian  progress  in  the  face 
of  difficulties: — I.  In  the  Christian  life  advancement  is  demanded.  Forward, 
upward,  heavenward,  Godward.    II.  In  the  Christian  life  advancement  is  demanded, 

WITH   A   FULL    RECOGNITION    OF    THE    OBSTACLES    IN    THE    WAY    OF   IT.       Wc    paSS    ffOm 

conquest  to  renew  the  conflict.  HI.  In  the  Christian  life,  obstacles  to  progress, 
MANFULLY  ENCOUNTERED,  MAY  BE  SURMOUNTED.  Difficulties  vauisli,  in  the  presence 
of  believing  obedience.  IV.  In  the  Christian  life,  obstacles  to  progress,  manfully 
encountered,  contribute   to   our  advancement.     V.  In  the  Christian  life  we  are 

INCITED    to    progress,   NOTWITHSTANDING   OBSTACLES,  BY  A   GREAT   HOST   OF   ENCOURAGE. 

ments.  1.  Believing  prayer  is  mighty  with  God.  2.  Glorious  examples  encourage 
us  onward.  3.  The  character  of  our  Leader  encourages  us  onward.  (Ihid.) 
Forward : — Into  whatever  province  of  Divine  government  we  look,  we  find  that 
"  Forward  "  is  one  of  God's  great  watchwords,  onward  to  that  state  which  is  higher, 
more  perfect.  On  Christian  believers  is  laid  the  obligation  to  "  go  on  unto 
perfection,"  to  "press  toward  ihe  mark,"  &c.  JL.As  the  children  of  Israel,  in 
obedience  to  the  command  of  God,  were  on  their  way  frgm  a  lower  to  a  higher 
AND  MORE  BLESSED  LIFE,  SO  are  Christians.  U.  As  the  children  of  Israel  were 
required  to  go  forward  for  the  discipline  of  their  faith,  so  are  Christian 
believers.  III.  As  the  Israelites  were  required  to  go  forward  in  the  interests  of 
the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  world,  so  are  Christian  disciples.  (R.  Ann.) 
The  Chrixtian's  watc heard : — I.  In  what  the  Christian  is  to  go  forward.  Now 
this  is  evident ;  he  must  go  fonvard  in  the  path  to  eternal  life.  More  particularly, 
he  must  go  forward — 1.  In  the  increase  of  Christian  graces.  2.  In  the  exhibition 
of  Christian  virtues.  Such  as  justice,  temperance,  brotherly  kindness,  and  charity. 
3.  In  the  performance  of  Christian  duties.  In  reading  the  holy  oracles,  and  in 
holy  meditation,  forward.  In  secret  and  public  prayer,  forward.  In  family  worship 
and  discipline,  forward.  In  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  forward.  In  enterprises 
of  usefulness  and  plans  of  benevolence,  forward.  In  all  the  personal  and  relative 
obligations  of  Ufe,  foi-ward.  4.  In  the  attainment  of  Chiistian  privileges  and 
blessings.  "  Peace  flowing  as  a  river,  and  righteousness  abounding  as  the  waves  of 
the  sea."  II.  Why  the  Christian  should  go  forward.  1.  God  commands  it, 
and  His  authority  is  imperative.    2.  Christ  enforces  it,  and  His  claims  are  irresistible. 

3.  The  Holy  Spirit  moves  us  to  it,  and  His  influences  must  not  be  quenched. 

4.  By  the  examples  of  saints  with  whom  we  are  for  ever  to  be  associated.  5.  By 
the  sufficiency  of   the  means  provided  for  our  progress  and  safety.      6.  By  the 

•  dreadful  and  calamitous  effects  produced  by  apostasy.     7.  By  the  glorious  rewards 
which  God  shall  bestow  upon  His  persevering  people.    Application:   1.  Let  the 


CH\p.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  243 

5k 

subject  be  addressed  to  all  classes  and  ages  of  Christian  professors.  To  the  young 
believer,  and  the  aged  disciple,  the  motto  is  the  same — forward.  To  the  illiterate, 
and  the  learned  Christian.  Forward,  in  prosperity  and  adversity ;  in  sickness  and 
health ;  in  life  and  until  death.  2.  The  subject  must  be  reversed  to  the  sinner. 
He  is  in  the  wrong  path  ;  far  enough  already  from  God  and  happiness  and  heaven. 
Turn    from   thy  evil   ways   and   live.      {J.    Burns,   D.D.)  Progress : — I.   The 

NECESSITY  roR  PROGRESS  AS  A  CONDITION  FOR  HEALTH-^  LIFE.  The  advancing  tide 
has  no  sooner  touched  its  highest  point  than  it  begins  to  recede.  In  the  spiritual 
life,  progress  is  needful  to  secure  past  attainments,  as  well  as  to  gain  fresh  victories. 
II.  The  directions  in  which  progress  should  be  sought.  1.  Go  forward  to 
clearer  and  higher  conceptions  of  spiritual  truth.  2.  Go  forward  in  further  develop- 
ment of  the  Church's  social  life.  3.  Go  forward  in  all  works  of  Christian  beneficence. 
4.  Go  forward  individually  in  the  cultivation  of  the  spiritual  life.  (J.  Legge,  M.A.) 
Go  /orxcard — a  New  Year's  sermon  for  the  young : — We  have  been  spared  to  see  the 
beginning  of  another  year,  we  may  therefore  think  of  ourselves  as  having  reached 
a  certain  halting-place  in  our  journey.  I.  We  should  belie%ts  in  Christ,  and 
ALSO  OBEY  Him.  Without  believing  in  Christ,  we  have  no  true  love  to  God  in  our 
hearts ;    and  without   love,   we  cannot   give    Him    the    obedience   of   children. 

II.    We    ABE    TAUGHT  HERE    ALSO    THAT   WE    SHOULD    BOTH  WORSHIP    GoD  AND    WORK    FOE 

Him.  I  have  heard  of  a  heathen  king  who  was  wounded  in  battle,  and  who,  in  his 
dying  hours,  sending  for  his  trusted  servant,  said  to  him,  "  Go,  tell  the  dead  I  am 
come."  That  soldier-servant,  without  hesitating  for  a  moment,  drew  his  sword 
and  stabbed  himself  to  the  heart,  that  he  might  go  to  the  dead  before  his  master, 
and  prepare  them  for  his  coming.  Oh  !  that  we  had  this  spirit  of  service  and  of 
sacrifice  for  the  King  of  kings  !  In  His  dying  hour.  He  also  said  to  us,  "'Go,  tell  the 
dead,  I  come."  He  asks  us  to  go  to  a  world  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  to  tell  them 
of  His  coming,  and  to  preach  to  them  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  Alas  !  how  many 
of  us  are  content  to  worship  Him,  and  say,  "  0  Kmg,  rule  for  ever !  "  without 
spending  and  being  spent,  that  His  kingdom  may  come.    III.  This  passage  further 

TEACHES  us,  THAT,  WHILE  WE  ENJOY  RELIGIOUS    PRIVILEGES,  WE    SHOULD    SEEK  TO    MAKE 

YEARLY  AND  DAILY  PROGRESS  BY  MEANS  OF  THEM.  We  should  becomc  likcr  to  Christ, 
and  seek  to  learn  more  perfectly  the  language  of  heaven.  Christ's  work  for  us  is 
complete.  Christ's  work  in  us  is  only  begun,  and  God  loves  to  see  His  believing 
children  growing  in  likeness  to  that  Elder  Brother  who  is  the  very  image  of  Him- 
self. If  you  ask  me  why  you  should  thus  go  on  towards  perfection,  I  answer — 1. 
It  is  the  will  of  God.  We  are  to  be  perfect  as  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect ; 
and  we  see,  from  all  that  goes  on  around  us  and  within  us,  that  this  j^erfection  is 
not  to  be  reached  by  a  single  effort,  or  in  a  single  day.  2.  But  not  only  should  we 
go  forward  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  ;  we  should  also  feel  that  it  is  needful 
for  our  own  sakes  to  obey  our  heavenly  Father.  For — (1)  If  we  refuse  to  go  forward, 
it  is  ruin  to  our  highest  interests.  (3i\  the  lake  of  Geneva,  some  years  ago,  I  saw 
a  gloomy  cattle  where  prisoners  used  to  be  confined ;  and  in  it  there  was  a  dark 
dungeon,  with  a  di-eadful  staircase,  called  the  oubliettes.  1  was  told  that  sometimes 
the  keeper  went  to  a  poor  prisoner  confined  in  that  dungeon-castle,  and  told  him 
that  now  he  was  to  obtain  his  life  and  liberty,  and  requested  him  to  follow  him. 
The  prisoner  was  delighted,  and  left  his  cell,  and  went  along  very  thankful  and  very 
glad,  witli  hopes  and  visions  of  home  and  happiness.  He  reached  the  staircase  I 
have  spoken  of,  and  was  told  to  go  down,  step  by  step,  in  the  darkness,  that  he 
might  reach  the  castle  gate,  and  so  be  free.  Alas !  it  was  a  broken  stair  !  A  few 
steps  down  into  the  darkness,  and  the  next  step  he  took  he  found  no  footing,  but 
fell  down  fifty  or  sixty  feet,  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  among  rocks,  and  then  to 
have  his  mangled  body  buried  in  the  lake.  So  the  sinner  thinks  that  the  way  of 
self-indulgence  and  self-pleasing  he  takes  will  give  him  all  he  wishes,  but  it  leads  to 
death.  And  if  we  willingly  and  knowingly  go  back  to  our  sins,  as  the  Israelites 
might  have  gone  back  ^vith  Pharaoh's  hosts,  our  last  condition  will  be  worst  than 
our  first.  But,  ps  it  is  death  to  disobey,  so— (2)  It  is  Ufe  to  go  forward  in  the  way 
of  obedience  and  persistent  service.  The  pleasures  of  sin,  indeed,  we  cannot  have. 
But  the  Christian's  is,  after  all,  the  better  part.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all 
things,  having  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  We 
have  the  light  of  Christian  knowledge,  the  blessings  of  religious  faith,  the  hope  of 
a  happy  immortality,  and  the  blessedness  of  holy  love.  Before  I  conclude,  let  me 
give  you  this  one  counsel :  Do  not,  as  pilgrims  of  immortality,  think  lightly  of  little 
steps.  These  Israelites  had  to  go  all  iheir  long  journey  to  Canaan  one  step  at  a 
time,  and  so  it  is  with  you.    And,  alas  !  you  may  go  a  far  way  from  the  path 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

of  duty,  and  the  path  of  safetj',  though  you  only  take  one  step  at  a  time. 
And,  as  bad  persons  become  wicked  step  by  step,  so  it  needs  many  little  steps 
to  go  forward  to  the  love  and  likeness  of  Christ.  It  was  told  of  a  painter,  that  he 
had  "  no  day  without  its  line."  Every  day  he  added  some  touches  to  his  picture. 
So  let  it  be  with  ouis.  Thus  we  shall  make  it  liker  and  liker  to  Christ,  the  perfect 
image  of  the  invisible  God.  (ir.  H.  Grey,  D.D.)  The  memorial  citarge  to  the 
Israelites  : — I.  Let  us  consider  this  commakd  in  reference  to  the  journey  of  the 
IsR.\£LiTES.  It  became  them,  and  it  becomes  us,  to  obey  whenever  God  commands  ; 
and  to  do  whatever  He  enjoins  us,  and  that  for  four  reasons.  1.  Because  He  has  a 
right  to  command.  He  is  the  Sovereign,  we  are  the  subjects.  He  is  the  Master, 
we  are  the  servants.  2.  Because  none  of  His  commands  are  arbitrary.  We  may 
not  be  able  to  perceive  the  reasons  upon  which  they  ai'e  founded ;  but  there  are 
reasons.  3.  Because  all  His  commands  are  beneficial.  They  all  regard  our  welfare, 
as  well  as  His  own  glory.  4.  Because  they  are  all  practicable.  They  all  imply  a 
power  to  obey.  If  not  possessed,  yet  attainable — if  not  in  nature,  yet  in  grace. 
Now,  men  may  enjoin  what  is  really  impossible ;  but  God  never  does.  II.  The 
ADVANCEJnsNT  OF  CHRISTIANS  IN  THE  DiviNE  LIFE.  For  Christians  are  now  on 
their  way  from  Egypt  to  Canaan.  An  old  writer  says,  "  A  Christian  should 
never  pitch  his  tent  twice  in  the  same  place,"  but  with  every  fresh  rising  sun 
there  should  be  some  fresh  advancement.  1.  In  order  to  see  the  possibility, 
the  propriety,  the  importance,  of  thus  advancing  in  the  Divme  life,  turn  to  the 
commands  of  the  Scriptures,  "  Grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  "Add  to  your  faith  virtue,"  &c.  2.  Then  turn  to 
the  advantages  of  progression  in  your  Christian  course ;  for,  as  you  advance,  you 
will  improve,  and  will  rise  higher  in  Divine  attainments.  As  you  advance,  you 
are  "  changing  from  glory  to  glory."  Every  step  you  take  adds  to  your  dignity ; 
every  step  adds  to  your  usefulness,  and  enables  you  more  to  adorn  the  "  doctrine  of 
God  your  Saviour  in  all  things,"  and  to  recommend  His  service  to  those  around  you. 
Every  step  you  take  adds  to  your  comfort ;  it  adds  to  the  evidences  of  your  state, 
and  to  your  character ;  and  so  far  exemplifies  the  words  of  the  Saviour,  "  Herein  is 
My  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit,  so  shall  ye  be  My  disciples  "  ;  appear 
as  such,  and  exemplify  yourselves  as  such.  III.  Let  us  consider  this  command  in 
reference  to  the  progress  of  time.  Time  is  always  advancing  ;  the  hour-glass,  the 
day,  the  week,  the  j  ear — all  go  forward.  And  do  they  leave  you  behind  ?  No ;  you 
advance  with  as  much  speed  as  the  vessel  which  bears  you  along.  You  are  not, 
therefore,  to  consider  us  here  as  exhorting  you  to  go  forward  with  time,  but  how  to 
go  forward,  and  in  what  way  you  ougbt  to  advance.  1.  "  Go  forward  "  with 
humbleness  of  mind,  not  strutting  into  the  new  year,  as  if  you  had  been  acting 
\7isely,  worthily  and  meritoriously,  thn  ughout  the  yeai-  that  is  past ;  but  "  clothed 
with  humility,"  and  "  walking  humbly  with  your  God."  2.  "  Go  forward  with 
gratitude  in  the  remembrance  of  His  mercie^."  Have  they  not  been  "new  every 
morning  "  ?  3.  "  Go  forward  "  under  a  sense  of  present  aid,  in  opposition  to  com- 
plainings and  murmurings.  4.  "  Go  forward  "  also  with  a  firm  confidence  as  to 
what  may  befall  you  in  the  future.  5.  "  Go  forward  "  with  earnest  and  constant 
prayer.  6.  "  Go  forward  "  with  frequent  thoughts  of  your  journey's  end  :  for  it  will 
have  an  end,  and  you  are  brought  one  year  nearer  to  it.  (W.  Jay.)  The  pilgrimage 
of  the  saints  : — I.  The  character  and  course  of  the  people  of  God.  1.  Thfse 
circumstances  of  Israel,  illustrating  the  spiritual  character  and  course  of  those  who 
form  the  new-covenant  Church,  may  apply  to  them  as  they  are  redeemed  and  called 
out  of  the  world.  2.  The  circumstances  of  Israel  ajDply  to  those  who  form  the 
spiritual  Church  of  God,  as  their  redemption  and  calling  out  of  the  world  are  con- 
nected  mth  a  career  of  pUgrimage  to  a  state  of  future  happiness.  II.  The  impedi- 
ments existing  to  the  continuance  of  their  progress.  1.  An  impediment  is  found, 
in  the  actual  presence  of  adversaries,  and  the  view  of  the  danger  which  thence 
appears  to  exist.  2.  An  impediment  is  found  also,  in  the  fears  excited  by  the 
prospect  of  future  perils  and  opposition.  3.  An  impediment  is  found  also,  in  the 
guilty  remembrances  of  past  ease  and  enjoyments.    III.  The  command  under  which 

THEY  are  placed,  AND  WHICH  IS  CONNECTED  WITH  POWERFUL  EXCITEMENTS  TO  OBEDIENCE. 

"Forward,"  is  a  word  comprehending  what  must  be  the  exclusive  spirit  of  the 
Christian  calling.  Perils,  foes,  and  fears,  are  not  to  be  regarded  ;  above  them  all, 
the  mandate  sounds  its  imperious  note — "  Go  forward."  1.  Let  us  reflect  on  the 
danger  of  return.  2.  Let  us  reflect  on  the  sufficiency  of  the  Divine  protection.  3. 
Let  us  reflect  on  the  value  of  the  possessions,  by  the  enjoyment  of  which  our  pro- 
gress is  to  be  closed.     {J.  Parsons.)  Encouragement  in  difficulties  ; — I,  The 


CHAP.  XIV. J  EXODUS.  245 

SITUATION  OF  THE  ISRAELITES.  It  is  HO  uncommon  thing  for  many  past  mercies  to 
be  lost  in  one  present  perplexity.  II.  The  conduct  of  Moses.  We  see  here — 1. 
Piety.  2.  Meekness.  3.  Faith.  III.  The  interposition  of  Jehovah.  It  was 
most  seasonable  and  beneficial.  Conclusion :  It  is  plain  that  such  an  admonition 
as  this  in  the  text,  must  not  be  indiscriminately  urged.  It  belongs  to  Christians. 
To  as  many  as  are  of  this  character,  we  aiiectionately  say,  Go  forward.  More 
particularly.  1.  You  are  engaged  in  a  high  spiritual  pursuit.  Your  object  now  is, 
the  acquisition  of  scriptural  knowledge  ;  not  the  knowledge  of  froth  and  folly  ;  the 
cherisshin«  and  improving  of  religious  impressions  ;  not  to  stifle  and  strive  against 
them.  Your  object  is  to  vanquish  sin  in  all  its  various  forms,  to  make  progress  in 
the  way  of  holiness  ;  not  to  sit  down  at  the  entrance  of  the  way.  Your  object  is  to 
increase  in  spiritual  consolation.  Much  of  this  is  yet  to  be  enjoyed.  2.  In  this 
pursuit  you  must  expect  difficulties.  And  be  not  surprised  if  you  meet  with  them 
at  the  very  entrance  of  your  religious  course.  3.  Notwithstauding  difficulties,  you 
must  "go  forward."  Backward  you  cannot  go,  but  at  the  hazard  of  life,  at  the 
cost  of  utter  destruction.  "  If  any  man  draw  back,  My  soul,"  saith  the  Lord, 
"  sljall  have  no  pleasure  in  him  "  ;  and  to  he  under  the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty 
is  to  be  wretched  and  undone  for  ever.  4.  In  your  progress  there  is  much  to 
encourage  you.  What  is  there  ?  (1)  The  command  of  God  is  evident.  (2)  The 
example  of  others  is  encouraging.  (3)  The  guidance  which  God  gives  is  greatly 
encouraging.  (4)  The  refreshments  of  the  way  must  encourage  you.  The  gospel 
is  food,  affording  the  best  support ;  the  promises  are  a  cordial,  administering  the 
richest  consolation.  Divine  ordinances  are  wisely  adapted  to  the  same  end.  The 
Lord's  Supper  is  a  feast,  a  feast  for  refreshment.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  heaven 
at  the  end  of  your  course  ?  The  Israelites  had  the  prospect  of  Canaan,  and  it 
encouraged  them :  the  hope  of  the  promised  land  helped  them  through  many  trials. 
But  yours  is  a  much  better  hope,  a  much  more  animating  prospect  I  (T.  Kidd.) 
On  going  forward  : — The  Hebrew  life  was  a  camp-life,  and  as  such  is  the  picture  of 
ours.  For  a  while  we  rest  beneath  the  shadow  of  Elim's  palm-trees,  or  lie  down 
beside  the  green  pastures ;  but  ere  long  the  bugle-note  of  our  great  Leader's  voice 
is  heard,  calling  us  to  the  onward  march.  I.  The  call  to  go  forwakd  shows  that 
there  are  seasons  for  swift  obedience,  as  well  as  earnest  prayer.  "  Wherefore 
criest  thou  unto  Me  ?  "  says  God.  Strange  language  from  the  lips  of  Him  who 
has  taught  us  to  be  instant  in  prayer.  Even  prayer  must  not  be  a  medium 
for  distrust  to  unveil  itself.  Prayer  must  bespeak  faith,  not  doubt.  We 
want  brave  hearts,  as  well  as  suppliant  knees.  We  must  fight  against  dis- 
trust. Doubt  is  defeat.  II.  The  call  to  go  forward  was  AccoiiPANiED  by  ex- 
ample. Men  crave  leaders — in  the  State,  in  the  senate,  in  the  field, 
and  in  the  Church.  Fix  your  eye  on  the  unfaltering  Moses.  "Forward!  "  says  a 
voice  from  the  better  land.  III.  The  call  to  go  forward  TEiCHEs  cs  that  God 
HIDES  difficulties  TILL  THEY  COME.  They  had  no  forewarning  of  this  event.  But 
God  keeps  the  veil  down  before  each  life's  future  hour.  We  never  know  what  shall 
be  on  the  morrow :  save  that  grace  will  be  there  if  we  live,  and  glory  if  we  die. 
To-morrow,  the  fairest  lamb  in  the  fold  may  wander,  the  most  loved  friend  be  gone ; 
the  thorn  may  spring  from  the  pillow,  and  the  garden  contain  a  grave.     IV.  The 

CALL    TO    GO     forward     TELLS    US    THAT    WE    ARE    NOT    TO   LIVE    IN    THE    PAST.        Neither 

in  its  successes  nor  in  its  sorrows.  "  Let  the  dead  past  bury  its  dead."  Piety 
should  be  no  fossil  relic  of  past  experience.  Yesterday's  religion  will  not  save  us  ! 
V.  The  call  to  go  forward  answers  to  the  spiritual  instincts  of  the  soul.  For- 
ward !  Not  to  the  grave,  but  through  the  grave.  The  Christian  revelation  gives  us 
the  principles  of  progress,  and  opens  up  the  sphere  for  then*  exercise,  by  its 
unveiling  of  the  immortal  state.  VI.  The  call  to  go  forward  tells  us  that  we 
HAVE  supernatural  ASSISTANCE  TO  GO  FORWARD.  When  in  our  earthly  life,  God  calls 
us  to  human  progress,  what  aids  He  gives  us  in  fellowship,  friendship,  and  love  1 
And  when  in  a  spiritual  sense  God  says.  Go  forward,  He  does  not  leave  us  to  our- 
selves. Go  back  to  your  first  Communion — to  brotherly  sympathy  and  prayer — to 
tender  help  from  hearts  that  now  rest.  What  a  way  it  has  been !  {W.  M. 
Statliam,  M.A.)  Excelsior: — 1.  Going  forward  supposes  difficulty.  You  will  find 
sometimes  the  path  to  be  steep  and  uneven,  rugged  and  rough.  None  but  the  brave 
go  forward.  The  way,  though  right,  is  not  always  smooth  and  pleasant,  charmed 
with  music  and  song  and  perfumed  with  the  fragrance  of  flowers,  but  much  of  a 
contrary  kind.  This  is  true  of  every  enterprise  in  which  men  are  engaged  where 
either  fame  or  opulence  are  sought.  Thus,  a  man  will  be  a  successful  painter, 
sculptor,  mechanic,  or  merchant.     Napoleon  said  of  Massena  that  he  was  not  him- 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

self  till  the  battle  began  to  go  against  him  ;  then,  when  the  dead  began  to  fall  in 
ranks  around  him,  awoke  his  powers  of  combination,  and  he  put  on  terrors  and 
victory  as  a  robe.     So  it  is  in  rugged  crises,  in  unweariable  endurance,  and  in  aims 
which  put  human  sympathy  out  of  question  that  the  angel  is  shown.     Nothing  is 
gained  that  is  worth  the  having  without  difficulty.     Things  easily  got  readily  go. 
2.  To  go  forward  implies  decision  and  energy.     Indecision  is  relaxing  to  the  moral 
nature,  it  weakens,  and  has  often  proved  fatal  to  the  deepest  interests  in  some  of 
life's  most  solemn  crises.     To  swing  this  way  and  that,  hke  the  pendulum  of  the 
clock  in  the  plane  of  its  oscillation,  without  making  any  advance  forward,  is  most 
pitiable  in  a  man.     A  Fiench  orator  says,  "  Indecision  of  movement  shows  lack, 
both  in  mind  and  heart ;  to  wish  and  not  to  wish,  is  most  wretched ;  he  who 
liesitates,  totters,  falls  back,  and  is  lost."     Then,  what  is  needed  to  secure  true 
advancement  is  energy,   decision  of  character,  force,  concentration,  the  power  to 
will  and  to  execute.     And  this  implies  having  an  aim,  a  definite  object  before  us, 
and  fixing  the  mind  on  that,  moving  steadily,  unfalteringly  towards  its  attainment ; 
to  know  where  we  are  going,  looking  to  the  grand  final  results,  and  measuring  our 
steps  accordingly.    3.  To  go  forward  implies  patient  endurance.    The  march  some- 
times will  be  slow  and  weary — you  will  not  always  be  able  to  go  with  "  alacrity  and 
delight,"  nor  shall  you  find  it  "all  glory  going  to  glory."     Times  will  be  when  the 
apostle's  saying  will  have  a  deep  significance — "  Ye  have  need  of  patience  "  ;  and 
when  obedience  to  the  injunction — "In  patience  possess  your  souls,"  will  be  the 
highest  point  of  heroism.     Times  when  the  way  is  dark  and  slippery,  and  adverse 
forces  combine  to  stop  your  progress,  and  when,  if  you  can  move  at  all,  it  will  be 
but  a  step  .'it  a  time.     4.  This  going  forward  implies  an  object.     Something  before 
and  above  us  as  yet,  and  that  may  be  attained  to  and  won  by  diligent  toil,  applica- 
tion, study,  and  earnest  pressing  after.     This,  then,  is  the  grand  end  of  all  going 
forward — the  attainment  of  glory.     It  is  not  now,  nor  here,  but  beyond  and  above. 
(■/.  Iliggins.)         Foniard : — I.  First,  we  will  contemplate  the  Children  of  Israel 
AS  A  FLOCK  OF  FUGITIVES ;  snd  In  this  light  they  give  encouragement  to  trembling 
sinners,  flying  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  from  the  power  of  their  sins.     You  are 
trying  to  escape  from  your  sins  ;  you  are  not,  as  you  used  to  be,  a  contented  bonds- 
man.    You  have  been  flying  as  best  you  could  from  sin  ;  but  the  whole  of  your  sins 
are  after   you,  and  your  conscience  with  its  quick   ear  can  hear  the  sound  of 
threatening  judgment.     "Alas!"  your  heart  is  saying,  "unless  God  help  me,  I 
shall  be  in  hell."     "  Alas  !  "  says  your  judgment,  "  unless  God  be  merciful,  I  shall 
soon  perish."     Every  power  of  your  manhood  is  now  upon  the  alarm.     Now,  what 
shall  I  do  for  you  ?     Shall  I  pray  for  you  ?    Ay,  that  I  will.     But,  methinks,  while 
I  am  praying  for  you,  I  hear  my  Master  saying,  "  Wherefore  criest  thou  unto  Me  ?  " 
Tell  them  to  go  forward  ;  preach  Christ  to  them,  instead  of  praying  any  longer,  or 
bidding  them  pray.     Deliver  to  them  ihe  message  of  the  gospel — "  Forward,  sinner, 
forward  to  the  Cross !  "  II.  Secondly,  we  may  view  the  great  company  who  came  out 
of  Egypt  as  ax  army  under  command;  therefore,  they  must  obey.     The  command 
given  to  them  is,  "  Forward ! "     "  Sir,  I  have  begun  to  be  a  Christian,  but,  if  I 
continue  in  it,  I  shall  lose  my  business.    My  calling  is  such  that  I  cannot  be  honest 
in  it,  and  serve  my  God  faithfully.     What  ought  I  to  do  ?     Ought  I  not  to  give  up 
my  religion  ?  "     Forward !  no  matter  what  is  before  you.     Forward !  you  are  not  fit 
to  be  a  soldier  of  Christ  unless  you  can  count  all  costs,  and  still  hold  fast  to  the 
Cross  of  Christ.     "  Ah !  "  says  one,  "  but  what  is  to  become  of  my  children,  my 
household?"     Friend,  7  cannot  tell  thee,  but  God  can.     It  is  thine  to  trust  them 
with  Him,  for  the  only  command  I  have  for  you  is,  Forward  !  forward !     "  But  my 
husband  says,  I  shall  never  come  into  the  house  again  ;  my  father  tells  me  he  will 
turn  me  out  of  doors."    Be  it  so,  no  one  pities  you  more  than  I  do ;  but  I  dare  not 
alter  my  message  to  your  soul.     "  Go  forward!  "     "  Well,"  says  one,  "these  are 
hard  commands."     Yes,  but  the  martyrs  had  harder  still.     III.  Let  us  view  these 
people  as  on  the  march  towards  Canaan.     Many  of  you  are  on  your  way  towards 
heaven,  and  the  Lord's  command  to  you  is  "  Forward !  forward  !  "     There  are 
some  persons  who  cannot  be  persuaded  to  make  an  advance  in  the  Divine  life.    We 
ought  to  go  forward  in — 1.  Knowledge ;  2.  Faith ;  3.  Fellowship  with  Christ ;  4. 
Work  for  our  Master.     IV.  To  Christians  in  trouble  our  text  is  applicable.     The 
children  of  Israel  were  in  a  trial  into  which  God  had  brought  them  ;  and  it  is  an 
absolute  certainty,  that  if  God  brings  you  in.  He  will  bring  you  out.     He  never  did 
take  a  saint  where  he  must  of  necessity  perish.     What  is  to  be  done  now  ?     God's 
word  is — "Foi-ward!  "     God  shall  fight  for  you,  and  you  shall  hold  your  peace. 
V.  The  Israelites  were  upon  a  Divine  mission.    They  were  going  up  to  slay  the 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  247 

Canaanites.  Preaching  is  the  great  weapon  of  God  for  pulling  down  strongholds  ; 
it  will  pull  down  the  hugest  blocks  of  stone  the  enemy  can  pile  together.  I  would 
I  could  make  every  member  of  this  Church  feel  in  earnest  about  doing  good.  VI. 
Soon  you  and  I  will  stand  on  the  brink  of  Jordan's  river ;  the  deep  sea  of  death 
will  roll  before  us  ;  trusting  in  Jesus,  we  shall  not  fear  the  last  solemn  hour.  We 
shall  hear  the  angel  say,  "  Forward  1  "  we  shall  touch  the  chilly  stream  with  our 
feet,  the  flood  shall  fly,  and  we  shall  go  through  the  stream  dry-shod.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Don't  halt;  "go  forward": — It  is  the  first  step  that  costs.  When 
the  Israelites  came  up  to  the  Eed  Sea,  the  command  of  God  was  :  "  Speak 
to  the  Children  of  Israel  that  they  go  forward."  The  command  is  peremp- 
tory. It  admits  of  no  delay.  "  Go  forward."  Death  is  behind  you.  Hell 
followeth  hard  after  you.  There  is  no  salvation  in  retreat.  Heaven  lies  before  you, 
not  behind.  No  man  ever  saved  his  soul  by  relapsing  into  indifference.  1,  Per- 
haps you  say,  "  I  have  prayed  many  a  time  already,  and  no  blessing  has  yet  come." 
"Will  you  cease  to  pray  then  ?  Will  that  bring  an  answer  ?  How  many  a  soul  has 
quit  praying  when  the  door  of  mercy  was  just  about  opening  1  Go  forward.  2. 
Another  one  is  kept  back  by  fear  of  ridicule.  He  cannot  stand  a  laugh.  There  is 
a  sneer  waiting  for  him  at  his  father's  table,  or  a  cutting  sarcasm  in  his  counting- 
room.  He  wavers  before  it.  Go  forward ;  the  sea  will  open  to  you,  and  so  will 
many  a  heart  to  cheer  you  on.  You  will  inspire  respect  in  the  very  quarters  from 
which  you  now  expect  opposition.  3.  A  third  person  complains:  "  I  am  in  the 
dark ;  I  cannot  see  my  way."  Then  go  forwarif,  and  get  out  of  the  dark. .  The 
determination  to  do  your  duty  will  be  attended  by  a  luminous  discernment  of  the 
path  of  duty.  4.  Unbelief  draws  back  a  fourth.  There  is  only  one  way  to  conquer 
doubt.  It  is,  to  believe.  End  the  torturing  uncertainty  by  going  forward, 
*'  looking  unto  Jesus."  The  only  way  to  do  a  thing  is  to  do  it.  God  gives  strength 
to  the  obedient.  He  has  no  promises  for  cowards,  or  double-minded  vacillating 
doubters.  (T.  L.  Cmjier,  D.D.)  Safety  in  progress : — Flying  birds  are  never  taken 
in  a  fowler's  snare.     {Archbp.  Seeker.)  Go  fonvard  : — And  why  were  they  to  go 

forward  ?  Not  because  there  was  less  danger  in  the  one  path  than  in  the  other ;  there 
was  much  in  both,  and  apparently  more  in  the  advancing  than  in  the  retreating 
path  ;  but  because  to  go  forward  was  the  path  of  duty  and  the  command  of  God. 
Certainly  advance  is  the  great  law  of  the  Christian  life,  as  well  as  of  the  universe. 
All  things  in  nature  and  history  go  forward.  The  stream  moves  forward,  not  a 
wave  of  it  turns  back ;  its  every  eddy,  even,  is,  in  reality,  advancing.  The  winda 
move  forward,  pausing,  indeed,  often  on  their  journey,  lingering  amidst  the  locks 
of  the  pine,  or  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock,  but  speedily  resuming  their  onward  sweep 
again.  The  stars — the  earth  included — move  forward,  "  hasting  not,  resting  not," 
seeking,  it  is  said,  some  distant  centre.  Science,  art,  philosophy,  literature,  every 
species  of  knowledge,  move  forward;  invention  following  invention,  discovery, 
discovery ;  one  man  of  genius  eclipsing  another,  to  be  in  his  turn  outshone.  Time 
moves  forward,  oh,  how  rapidly  !  and  how  his  vast  wings  seem  to  say,  as  they  rush 
along,  "  I  have  an  engagement  at  the  judgment  seat;  I  have  an  appointment  in 
eternity,  and  I  must  fulfil  it.  My  King's  business  requireth  haste."  Christ  Himself  ' 
never  rested.  He  was  never  in  a  hurry,  but  He  was  always  in  haste.  The  difference 
between  Him  and  many  of  His  people  is.  His  life  was  short,  and  He  knew  it,  and 
did  the  most  in  it ;  theirs,  too,  is  short,  but  they  know  it  not,  and  do  not  with  their 
might  what  their  hand  findeth  to  do.  God  Himself  even,  with  all  the  leisure  of 
eternity,  is  not  losing  an  hour,  but  is  carrying  on  His  broad  plans,  with  undeviating 
regularity  and  increasing  swiftness,  and  surely  men  should  aspire  in  this  respect  to 
be  imitators  of,  and  fellow-workers  with,  God.  Christ's  religion,  too,  has  been 
active  and  progressive ;  sometimes  frozen  up  fcr  a  time  like  a  river,  but,  like  a  river, 
working  under  the  ice,  and  when  spring  arrived  making  up  for  the  time  lost  by  the 
increased  rapidity  of  its  course.  And  so  with  the  path  of  the  individual;  like  the 
river,  the  winds,  the  stars,  the  Eternal  Himself,  it  must  advance.  Our  motto 
should  be  "  Excelsior."  The  progress  of  the  Christian,  indeed,  is  often  from  one 
difficulty  to  another  ;  and  very  idle  for  him,  in  this  earth,  to  expect  an  unvaried 
course  of  even  moderate  peace  and  happiness.  No,  no !  he  only  exchanges  one 
difficulty  for  another.  True,  there  is  a  difference  between  the  character  of  the 
difficulties.  In  becoming  a  Christian,  a  man  quits  the  path  of  destruction  for  the 
Hill  Difficulty,  midnight  for  morning  twilight,  the  wrath  of  a  judge  for  the 
discipline  of  a  father,  the  brink  of  hell  for  the  thorny  road  to  heaven ;  Pharaoh, 
the  devil's  agent,  for  the  Eed  Sea,  which  is  God's  ocean,  and  through  which  He 
can  provide  a  passage.    We  are  urged  forward  alike  by  the  command  of  God,  the 


248-  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv, 

expectation  of  rest,  and  the  hope  of  heaven.  Ay  !  and  even  there  the  word  of 
command  is  to  be  "  Forward !  "  No  more  Red  Seas,  indeed,  no  wilderness,  no 
battles  to  be  fought,  no  enemies  to  be  overcome ;  but  still  it  is  an  onward  course 
which  shall  be  pursued  for  ever  by  the  people  of  God.  Heaven  would  cease 
to  be  heaven  were  this  progress  to  stop.  For  what  is  heaven  but  the  fire  of 
the  Infinite  Mind  for  ever  unfolding  itself  to  the  view  and  reception  of  God's 
creatures?  We  hear  of  people  on  earth  whose  "  education  is  finished."  Ah, 
Christian,  thy  education  shall  never  be  finished  I  There  is  only  one  Being 
whose  education  was  ever  finished,  or,  rather,  whose  education  never  began — 
God.  All  others,  having  entered  on  their  future  abode,  are  to  go  onwards, 
pressing  toward  the  mark,  panting,  running,  hoping,  believing,  loving  more 
and  more,  throughout  the  ages  of  eternity.  All  difficulties,  we  should  re- 
member, will  yield  to  faith,  prayer,  and  perseverance.  (G.  Giljillan.)  Fonoard, 
the  true  direction : — Livingstone,  having  broken  fresh  ground  among  the  Bakh- 
atlas,  wrote  to  the  Directors  of  the  London  Missionary  Society,  explaining 
what  he  had  done,  and  expressing  the  hope  that  it  would  meet  with  their  approval. 
At  the  same  time  he  said  he  was  at  their  disposal  "to  go  anywhere — provided 
it  be  FORWARD."  Pushing  through  obstacles : — What  won't,  must  be  made  to. 
On  these  wintry  days,  when  I  cross  the  ferry  to  New  York,  I  sometimes  see 
large  thick  cakes  of  ice  lying  across  the  path  of  the  boat.  They  will  not  take 
themselves  out  of  the  way ;  so  the  pilot  drives  the  copper-cased  bow  of  his  boat 
squarely  against  the  ice-floes,  cle€ving  them  asunder.  If  the}-  will  not  get  out  of 
the  way,  they  must  be  made  to,  and  the  propelling  power  within  is  more  than  a 
match  for  the  obstacles  without.  That  is  a  fine  passage  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress  " 
where  Christian  approaches  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  and  hears  the 
howlings  of  the  dragons,  and  sees  the  "  discouraging  clouds  of  confusion  "  hanging 
heavy  and  black  over  the  horrible  place.  He  does  not  flinch  an  in-tant.  Crying 
out  "  I  perceive  not  but  that  this  is  my  way  to  the  desired  haven,"  he  pushes  his 
way  through  the  frightful  fiends  a  id  past  the  mouth  of  the  burning  pit.  The  road 
to  heaven  is  full  of  obstacles.  They  lie  right  across  every  sinner's  path,  and  like 
the  ice-floes  around  the  boat,  they  will  not  remove  themselves.  An  energetic  young 
man  who  starts  life  with  a  pile  of  hindrances  at  his  bow,  understands  that  the 
battle  of  life  is  to  smash  through  them.  David  Livingstone,  when  a  factory  boy, 
and  fastening  his  scliool  books  on  his  loom  to  study  Latin,  was  practising  this 
process.  You  have  to  contend  with  a  depraved  heart.  It  is  just  in  the  condition 
of  a  clock  whose  inner  works  are  a  heap  of  disordered  wheels  and  springs.  They 
can  be  repaired,  and  the  clock  will  go.  Your  soul  is  dislocated  and  disordered  by 
sin.  The  Divine  hand  that  made  it  can  mend  it.  Sinful  habits,  long  indulged,  are 
obstacles  in  your  way.  They  are  tendencies  of  the  mind  strengthened  by  frequent 
repetition.  If  you  have  not  any  such  horrible  habits  as  swearing,  or  cheating,  or 
hard  drinking,  you  have  formed  the  habit  of  refusitig  all  Christ's  rich  offers  of 
salvation.  This  has  been  a  hardening  process — as  the  cart-wheels  made  a  hard 
beaten  road  across  certain  fields  of  my  grandfather's  farm.  Persistent  push  is 
indispensable  to  your  salvation.  To  enter  into  the  strait  gate  requires  striving. 
To  overcome  obstacles  requires  might  in  the  inner  man,  and  that  comes  from  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Dr.  Spencer  tellsus  of  a  man  who  once  came  bursting  into  his  inqiriry- 
meeting  in  almost  breathless  excitement.  The  poor  man  had  been  walking  back 
and  forth  between  his  own  door  and  the  meeting,  until  at  last  he  said,  "  I  am 
determined  to  go  into  that  inquiry-room  or  die  in  the  attempt."  In  that  fierce 
fight  with  a  wicked  heart,  he  not  only  had  to  call  on  God's  help,  but  he  said  after- 
wards— "  If  you  expect  God  to  help  you,  you  must  be  perfectly  decided."  (2'.  L, 
Cuyler,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Througli  the  midst  of  the  sea. — The  Red  Sea  : — I.  God's  deliver- 
ance OF  Israel.  II.  Judgment  on  God's  enemies,  as  well  as  a  deliverance  of 
His  friends.  III.  God's  separation  of  Israel  for  His  service.  IV.  The 
UNITY    of    God's    redeemed    ones.      {E.    N.    Packard.)  The    Red    Sea  : — I. 

Protection  at  the  Red  Sea.  1.  The  nature  of  the  protection.  2.  The  all- 
sufficiency  of  the  protection.  II.  Deliverance  through  the  Red  Sea.  1.  Its 
means.  A  blendiug  of  the  human  and  the  Divine.  2.  Its  method.  (1)  Obedi- 
ence a  condition  of  deliverance.  (2)  Nothing  can  harm  the  obedient  soul  (ver. 
29).  III.  The  enemy  destroyed  in  the  Red  Sea.  1.  The  superinducing  cause. 
The  daring  persistency  of  Pharaoh  brought  him  and  his  hosts  into  danger. 
So  even  with  sinners.  "Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."    2.  God  left  Pharaoh  and 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  249 

his  hosts  to  themselves  in  the  peril.  3.  God  caused  the  waters  to  return  to  their 
normal  state.  (1)  If  we  stand  in  the  way  of  danger,  we  have  no  one  to  blame  but 
ourselves  for  the  consequences.  (2)  Every  sinner  places  himself  in  the  way  of  peril. 
Lessons  :  1.  Pharaoh  undertook  what  no  one  has  ever  succeeded  in — to  fight  against 
God.  2.  Moses  placed  himseli  and  Israel  in  a  relation  to  God,  in  which  no  one  has 
ever  fai'ed.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  31. A.)  The  passage  of  the  Red  Sea: — 1.  Israel 
leaves  Ej;ypt  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding  to  Canaan,  the  promised  land.  A 
figure  of  au  awakened  soul,  drawn  to  God,  which  takes  the  firm  and  noble  resolution 
to  renounce  all  sin,  and  serve  God,  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His 
righteousness.  2.  The  fiery  and  cloudy  pillar  is  the  secret  but  powerful  attraction 
of  the  Fatber  to  the  Son,  which  the  soul  follows,  and  by  which  it  is  faithfully  and 
correctly  guided.  Here  the  individual  is  brought  to  the  salutary  means  of  grace,  or 
they  to  him,  in  such  a  manner  that  he  is  afterwards  obliged  to  confess,  that  if  a 
single,  and  often  inconsiderable,  circumstance  of  his  life  had  been  otherwise,  his 
whole  course  would  have  assumed  another  form.  3.  The  pursuing  Pharaoh  is  a 
figure  of  the  law  in  its  strict  and  insatiate  requirements,  as  well  as  of  Satan  and 
the  powers  of  darkness.  The  latter  soon  perceives  when  any  one  is  desirous  of 
escaping  from  him,  and  consequently  opposes  him  in  every  way.  Some  he  torments 
with  blasphemous,  others  with  unbelieving  thoughts,  &c.  4.  The  utterly  helpless 
condition  of  the  children  of  Israel  repres^ents  the  oppressive  weakness  felt  by  the 
awakened  soul.  5.  But  the  Red  Sea,  which  threatened  destruction  to  the  Israelites, 
proved  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  them.  And  this  very  feeling  of  sin,  misery, 'and 
inability,  which  causes  an  awakened  person  so  much  uneasiness,  turns  to  his 
greatest  advantage.  For  it  serves,  like  the  blindness  of  the  man  born  blind,  and 
the  death  of  Lazarus,  to  promote  the  Divine  glory  that  Christ  may  be  honoured  by 
it.  6.  The  way  by  which  Israel  was  delivered  was  one  which  was  most  miraculously 
opened  ;  a  way  apparently  dangerous  and  terrific,  and  hidden  from  the  Egyptians. 
This  may  be  also  said  of  the  way  by  which  the  Lord  leads  His  people  to  Ufe.  For 
how  wonderful  is  the  way  of  salvation  through  the  birth,  sufferings,  death,  and 
resurrection  of  Christ !  7.  A  strong  east  wind  arose,  and  dried  the  sea  ;  and  a  rush- 
ing, like  the  sound  of  a  mighty  wind,  was  the  signal  to  tho  holy  apostles  of  the 
approach  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  He  blows  upon  man,  "all  flc^h  is  as  grass, 
and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  as  the  flower  of  the  field."  He  it  is  that  quickens. 
8.  The  cloud,  which  overshadowed  the  people  of  Israel,  protecting  them  from  the 
pursuing  foe,  descending  upon  them  as  a  refreshing  dew,  and  serving  by  its  radiance 
instead  of  a  lamp,  may  be  regarded  as  an  emblem  of  the  Redeemer's  blissful 
mediation  between  God  and  man.  From  it  drops  a  refreshing  dew  upon  the 
troubled  heart,  and  a  healing  balm  for  the  wounded  conscience,  yea,  a  peace  of 
God  which  passeth  understanding.  9.  Lastly,  the  divided  sea  is  a  type  of  baptism, 
and  consequently  of  all  that  which  is  requisite  to  purify  the  soul  from  sin.  The 
Bed  Sea  of  the  Redeemer's  blood  is  the  abyss  into  which  the  sins  of  believers  are 
80  deeply  plunged,  that,  if  sought  for,  they  can  never  be  found ;  the  sea  which 
swallov/s  up,  overwhelms,  and  drowns  Satan,  with  all  his  host,  and  the  old  man, 
and  quickens  in  us  a  new  man,  who  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness.  This  precious  blood  of  Christ,  who  offered  Himself  to  God  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  is  that  which  alone  perfectly  cleanses  our  consciences  from  dead  works,  to 
serve  the  living  God.  (G.  D.  Krummacher.)  The  Red  Sea  : — Regarding  this 
passage  of  the  Red  Sea  as  typical  of  some  events  in  the  pilgrim-life  of  every 
Christian,  let  us  say — I.  We  are  not  delivered  at  the  beginning  of  the  life  op 

FAITH  from  all  THE  OLD  ENEMIES  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  BONDAGE.       II.    The  hour  whcU  old 

enemies  return  may  reveal  the  fact  that  no  accumulation  of  confidence  in  God 

HAS  BEEN  gained  BY  THE  EXPERIENCE  OF  PAST  DELIVERANCES.       To  mOSt  men  the  grf  at 

events  of  life  seem  to  be  disconnected.  They  bear  no  relation  one  to  another.  If 
Fremont's  Peak  and  Pike's  Peak  and  the  Spanish  Peaks  stood  apart,  connected  by 
no  mountain-ridge,  no  great  results  would  come  from  them  upon  soil  or  climate. 
They  would  not  determine  the  rain-fall  or  fix  the  trend  of  the  rivers.  But,  linked 
together  by  lofty  mountain-chains,  they  become  part  of  the  vast  water-shed  of  a 
continent,  fixed  the  length  and  course  of  the  rivers  and  causing  the  humid 
atmosphere  and  fertile  soil  on  one  side,  the  dry  air  and  arid  wastes  upon  the  other. 
So  the  great  facts  of  Divine  Providence,  isolated  and  separate  one  from  another, 
have  no  determinative  influence  over  life.  But  linked  together  they  make  its  moral 
atmosphere.  III.  Some  old  enemies  of  the  soul  may  be  utterly  destroyed. 
Evil  companionships  abandoned,  &c.  IV.  The  providential  way  of  deliverance 
IS  often  mysterious.    V.  Deliverance  came  to  Israel  not  by  human  achievement, 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

BUT  BY  THE  POWER  OF  GoD.  The  most  Solemn  hours  of  life  are  not  times  of  great 
endeavour  and  of  high  achievement.  They  are  times  when  we  are  called  to  "  Stand 
still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  Such  an  hour  is  that  when  we  begin  the 
life  of  faith,  not  a  time  of  achievement  when,  by  mental  struggle  and  spiritual 
travail,  we  win  the  favour  of  God.  It  is  rather  the  time  of  self-surrender,  when 
unreservedly  we  commit  our  ways  to  the  Lord,  that  He  may  work  for  us,  and  in  us, 
His  redeeming  work.    {W.  G.  Sjierry.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  Between  the  camp  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  camp  of  Israel. — 
Lessons  : — 1.  God  in  Christ  moveth  Himself  in  His  hand  or  work  where  the  Church 
doth  most  need  help.  Before  and  behind  Israel  is  He.  2.  God  by  Christ  the 
Angel  of  His  Covenant  hath  given  and  doth  give  all  help  to  His  Church  (ver.  I'J). 
3.  God  sets  His  posture  for  help  between  cruel  persecutors  and  His  Church.  4. 
The  very  same  means  God  makes  to  darken  His  enemies  which  enlighten  His 
people.  So  the  gospel.  5.  This  interposition  of  God  keeps  the  wicked  world 
from  destroying  His  Church  (ver.  20).     (G.  Hughes,   B.D.)  The   removal   of 

Israel's  cloud  to  the  rear : — This  passage  leads  me  to  speak  of  God  our  Rear- 
ward. It  is  God  alone  who  can  make  the  past  a  source  of  peace  and  comfort. 
We  think  much  of  the  future ;  we  desire  greatly  to  have  an  assurance  that  all 
will  be  well  with  us  in  time  to  come.  We  accept  with  gratitude  the  promise, 
"The  Lord  shaU  go  before  thee";  but  do  we  fuUy  consider  how  important 
the  concluding  part  of  that  passage  is — "  and  be  thy  reiurward  "  ?    I.  We  often 

NEED  to  be  deeply  IMPRESSED  WITH  THE  MEMORY  OF  PAST  BLESSINGS.  II.  We 
need  the  PILLAR  OF  CLOUD  BEHIND  US  FOR  OUR  PROTECTION  FROM  THE  EVIL  CONSE- 
QUENCES OF  THE  PAST.  Woudeiful  sight  I  the  angel  of  the  Lord  breaking  camp 
and  going  to  their  rear  1  that  beautiful  meteor,  the  guiding  cloud,  sailing  back  over 
their  six  hundred  thousand  fighting  men,  powerless  as  their  infants,  while  Egypt 
was  pouriug  out  its  swanning  myriads  to  swallow  them  up.  So,  my  soul !  thy  sins 
and  the  hosts  of  heU  are  ready  this  day  to  destroy  thee ;  but  the  angel  of  the 
covenant  has  not  forsaken  thee;  faith  can  see  Him,  as  plainly  as  Israel  beheld  Him 
going  to  their  rear  to  stand  between  them  and  danger  ;  are  not  His  promises  a  pillar 
of  cloud  to  you,  and  do  they  not  stand  between  yon  and  the  past,  saying,  "  I,  even  I, 
am  He  that  blotteth  out  tby  transgressions  for  Mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember 
thy  sins  "  ?  III.  This  rearward  angel  and  this  pillar  of  cloud  seem  to  bid  me 
TO  say  TO  believers,  IT  SHALL  BE  WELL  WITH  YOU.  Foi  thesc  two  things  are  true  con- 
cerning all  who  believe  in  Jesus.  First,  you  have  not  seen  your  best  days ;  and, 
secondly,  you  never  will.  Never  through  eternity,  will  you  arrive  at  that  summit 
of  bliss  from  which  you  will  anticipate  declension.  Onward  and  upward  is  to  be 
your  way.  {N.  Adams,  D.D.)  Different  effects  of  the  same  events  and  dealinr/s  : — 
1.  A  family  is  visited  by  dreadful  calamity ;  is  reduced  from  a  state  of  ease  and 
afiSuence  to  comparative  want.  The  members  of  this  family  are  of  very  different 
characters ;  some  of  them  sincere  believers,  devout  worshippers,  faithful  servants 
of  God  ;  ever  considering  their  talents,  as  lent  for  God's  use.  Other  members  of  the 
family  are  the  reverse  of  all  this  ;  sensual,  worldly,  regardless  of  spiritual  things; 
caring  for  nothing,  but  that  "to-morrow  may  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more 
abundant."  Observe,  now,  how  differently  these  members  of  the  same  family  will 
be  affected  by  what  has  befallen  them  :  how  the  calamity  will  wear  a  bright  side  to 
some,  and  a  dark  side  to  others.  Trouble  of  another  kind  overtakes  the  same 
family ;  a  friend,  a  relation,  upon  whom  the  comfort  of  their  life  depended,  is 
suddenly  removed  by  the  stroke  of  death.  Some  acknowledge  the  providential 
hand  of  God,  inflicting  a  wound,  but  supplying  a  gracious  remedy  ;  they  are  drawn 
the  more  closely  to  their  sure,  unchangeable  Friend.  But  who  are  they,  that  are 
sitting  down  gloomy  and  disconsolate  and  "  refusing  to  be  comforted"?  They  are 
the  godless  members  of  this  family,  whose  all  is  in  the  world,  in  the  creature. 
And  thus,  while  some  are  utterly  discomfited  by  this  loss,  others  can  find  it  to  be 
their  gain.  2.  This  leads  me  to  speak  upon  the  different  impressions  made  upon 
different  persons  by  the  means  of  grace,  by  the  doctrines,  and  promises,  and 
precepts  of  the  gospel.  The  humble,  faithful  servant  of  God,  derives  light  and  life 
from  every  portion  of  Divine  revelation.  Very  contrary  to  this  are  the  views  and 
feelings  of  the  blinded  sinner;  nay,  of  the  careless,  lukewarm,  outward  believer. 
The  same  doctrines,  which  afford  so  much  satisfaction  and  peace  to  the  godly  wear 
to  him  a  different  aspect ;  "  there  is  no  beauty  in  them  that  he  should  desire  them  "  ; 
no  power  derived  from  them  even  to  affect,  much  less  to  change,  the  heart.  The 
same  promises  also  appeal  to  him  without  any  encouraging,  Ufe-giving  effect.    And 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  251 

the  same  holy  precepts,  instead  of  being  loved  and  honoured,  are  a  trouble  to  his 
Boul :  conscience  whispers,  that  he  ought  to  obey  them ;  and  the  law  of  God, 
instead  of  being  his  guide,  stands  in  opposition  to  him,  and  fills  him  with  fear. 
"  The  light  that  is  in  him  is  darkness "  ;  that  which  is  a  light  to  others,  and 
should  be  a  light  to  him,  is  perverted  into  darkness ;  and  then,  "  how  great 
is   that   darkness!"      {J.    Slade,   3I.A.)  The  glory    in    the    rear: — God    is 

always  with  those  who  are  with  Him.  If  we  trust  Him,  He  hath  said,  "  I 
will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  There  is  a  special  and  familiar 
presence  of  God  with  those  who  walk  uprightly,  both  in  the  night  of  their  sorrow, 
and  in  the  day  of  their  joy.  Yet  we  do  not  always  in  the  same  way  perceive  that 
presence  so  as  to  enjoy  it.  God  never  leaves  us,  but  we  sometimes  think  He  has 
done  so.  The  sun  shines  on,  but  we  do  not  always  bask  in  his  beams;  we  some- 
times mourn  an  absent  God.  I.  In  considering  the  subject  of  the  Lord's  abiding 
with  His  people,  I  shall  first  call  attention  to  the  Divine  presence  mysteriously 
BE310VED.  "  The  angel  of  God,  which  went  before  the  camp  of  Israel,  removed." 
1.  The  symbol  of  God's  presence  removed  from  where  it  had  usually  been.  So  has 
it  been  with  us  at  times :  we  have  walked  day  after  day  in  the  light  of  God's 
countenance,  we  have  enjoyed  sweet  fellowship  with  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  and  on 
a  sudden  we  have  missed  His  glorious  manifestation.  2.  Moreover,  they  missed 
the  hght  from  where  they  hoped  it  would  always  be.  Sometimes  you  also  may 
imagine  that  God's  promise  is  failing  you ;  even  the  word  of  God  which  you  had 
laid  hold  upon  may  appear  to  you  to  be  contradicted  by  your  circumstances.  Then 
your  heart  sinks  to  the  depths,  for  "  if  the  foundations  be  destroyed,  what  can  the 
righteous  do?  "  3.  The  pillar  of  fire  also  removed  from  where  it  seemed  more  than 
ever  to  be  needed.  Even  thus  is  it  with  you,  who  once  walked  in  the  light  of  God's 
countenance ;  you  perhaps  have  fallen  into  temporal  trouble,  and  at  the  same 
moment  the  heavenly  light  has  departed  from  your  soul.  Now,  it  is  bad  to  be  in 
the  dark  on  the  king's  highway  ;  but  it  is  worse  to  be  in  the  dark  when  you  are  out 
on  the  open  common,  and  do  not  know  your  road.  It  is  well  to  have  a  guide  when 
the  road  is  easy ;  but  you  must  have  one  when  you  are  coming  upon  precipitous 
and  dangerous  places.  Then  let  him  trust ;  but  he  will  need  all  the  faith  of  which 
he  can  be  master.  Oh,  my  Lord,  if  ever  Thou  dost  leave  me,  forsake  me  not  in  the 
day  of  trouble.  Yet  what  have  I  said  ?  It  is  a  day  of  trouble  when  Thou  art  gone, 
whatever  my  condition  may  be.  4.  Thus  it  did  seem  a  mysterious  thing  that  the 
Covenant  Angel  should  no  longer  direct  the  marchings  of  the  host  of  God,  and  I 
dare  say  that  some  of  them  began  to  account  for  it  by  a  reason  which  their  fears 
would  suggest.  I  should  not  wonder  that,  if  they  had  been  asked  why  the  blazing 
pillar  was  no  longer  in  the  van,  they  would  have  replied,  "  Because  of  our 
murmurings  against  the  Lord  and  His  servant  Moses.  God  will  not  go  before  u3 
because  of  our  sins."  This,  however,  would  have  been  a  mistake.  There  was  not 
a  touch  of  the  rod  about  this  withdrawing  of  His  presence  from  the  van,  not  even  a 
trace  of  fanger ;  it  was  all  done  in  lovingkindness.  So  you  must  not  always 
conclude  that  the  loss  of  conscious  joy  is  necessarily  a  punishment  for  sin.  Dark- 
ness of  soul  is  not  always  the  fruit  of  Divine  anger,  though  it  is  often  so.  Some- 
times it  is  sent  for  a  test  of  faith,  for  the  excitement  of  desire,  and  for  the  increase 
of  our  sympathy  with  others  who  walk  in  darkness.  There  are  a  thousand  precious 
uses  in  this  adversity.  Yet  it  is  a  mysterious  thing  when  the  light  of  the  future 
fades,  and  we  seem  to  be  without  a  guide.  II.  Now  all  this  while  the  Divine 
PRESENCE  WAS  GRACIOUSLY  NEAR.  1.  The  Augcl  of  the  Lord  had  removed,  but  it  is 
added,  He  "  removed  and  went  behind  them,"  and  He  was  just  as  close  to  them 
when  He  was  in  the  rear,  as  when  He  led  the  van.  He  might  not  seem  to  be  their 
guide,  but  He  had  all  the  more  evidently  become  their  guard.  He  might  not  for  the 
moment  be  their  Sun  before,  but  then  He  had  become  their  Shield  behind.  "  The 
glory  of  the  Lord  was  their  rereward."  Oh,  soul,  the  Lord  may  be  very  near  thee, 
and  yet  He  may  be  behind  thee,  so  that  thine  outlook  for  the  future  may  not  be 
filled  with  the  vision  of  His  glory.  2.  Note  in  the  text  that  it  is  said  the  pillar 
went,  and  "  stood  behind  them."  I  like  that,  for  it  is  a  settled,  permanent  matter. 
The  Lord  had  removed,  but  He  was  not  removing  still.  Even  thus  the  Lord 
remaineth  with  the  dear  child  of  God.  Thou  canst  not  see  anything  before  thee  to 
make  thee  glad,  but  the  living  God  stands  behind  thee  to  ward  off  the  adversary. 
He  cannot  forsake  thee.  3.  What  is  more,  these  people  had  God  so  near  that  they  . 
could  see  Him  if  they  did  but  look  back.  See  how  the  Lord  has  helped  you 
hitherto.  4.  A  thoughtful  person  would  conclude  the  Lord  to  be  all  the  more 
evidently  near  because  of  the  change  of  BQs  position.    When  a  symbol  of  mercy 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

comes  to  be  usual  and  fixed,  we  maybe  tempted  to  think  that  it  remains  as  a  matter 
of  routine.  If  the  rainbow  were  always  visible  it  might  not  be  so  assuring  a  token 
of  the  covenant.  Hence  the  Lord  often  changes  His  hand,  and  blesses  His  people 
in  another  way,  to  let  them  see  that  He  is  thinking  of  them.  III.  The  Divine 
PRESENCE  WISELY  REVEALED.  That  the  symbol  of  God's  presence  should  be  with- 
drawn from  the  front  and  become  visible  behind,  was  a  wise  thing.  1.  Observe, 
there  was  no  fiery  pillar  of  cloud  before  them,  and  that  was  wise  ;  for  the  going 
down  into  the  Eed  Sea  was  intended  to  be  an  act  of  lofty  faith.  The  more  of  the 
visible  the  less  is  faith  visible.  2.  Moreover,  let  us  mark  that  the  cloudy  pillar  was 
taken  away  from  the  front  because  the  Lord  meant  them  simply  to  accept  His  word 
as  their  best  guidance.  3.  Moreover,  God  was  teaching  them  another  lesson, 
namely,  that  He  may  be  near  His  people  when  He  does  not  give  them  the  usual 
tokens  of  His  presence.  4.  The  host  of  Israel  did  not  require  any  guide  in  front 
when  they  came  to  the  sea.  "  How  is  that  ?  "  say  you.  There  were  no  two  ways 
to  choose  from  :  they  could  not  miss  the  way,  for  they  must  needs  march  through 
the  sea.  So  when  men  come  into  deep  trouble,  and  cannot  get  out  of  it,  they 
scarcely  need  a  guide  ;  for  their  own  plain  path  is  submission  and  patience. 
5.  What  they  did  want  was  the  pillar  of  cloud  behind  them,  and  that  is  where  they 
had  it.  What  was  that  cloud  behind  them  for  ?  Well,  it  was  there  for  several 
reasons  :  the  first  was  to  shut  out  the  sight  of  their  enemies  from  them.  The 
cloudy  pillar  went  behind  for  another  reason,  namely,  that  the  Egyptians  might 
not  see  them.  Their  enemies  were  made  to  stumble,  and  were  compelled  to  come 
to  a  dead  stand.  Be  calm,  0  child  of  God  ;  for  the  Covenant  Angel  is  dealing  with 
your  adversaries,  and  His  time  is  generally  the  night.    IV.  That  the  Divine 

PRESENCE  WILL  ONE  DAY  BE   MORE   GLORIOUSLY  REVEALED.       "  The  Lord  will  gO  beforS 

you  ;  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  rereward."  This  is  the  condition  into 
which  the  Lord  brings  His  people  when  they  depart  from  Babylon,  and  are  no  more 
conformed  to  this  present  evil  world.  V.  This  Divine  presence  has  a  twofold 
ASPECT :  that  same  glory  which  lit  up  the  canvas  citj',  and  made  it  bright  as  the 
day,  darkened  all  the  camps  of  Egypt.  They  could  see  nothing,  for  the  daik  side 
of  God  was  turned  to  them.  Oh,  is  it  not  a  dreadful  thing  that  to  some  men  the 
most  terrible  thing  in  the  world  would  be  God  ?  If  you  could  get  away  from  God, 
how  happy  you  would  be !  One  of  these  days  Jesus  will  tell  you  to  depart.  "  Keep 
on  as  you  were,"  says  He,  "  you  were  always  departing  from  God  ;  keep  on  depart- 
ing. Depart  from  Me  ye  cursed  1  "  That  will  be  the  consummation  of  your  life. 
(C.  H.  Spuryeon.)  Lessons  : — I.  The  sureness  of  God's  interposition  when  He 
is  needed,  in  the  way  His  wisdom  chooses  (ver.  19).  When  we  are  called  to 
difficult  duty,  God  will  keep  His  promise  to  be  with  us,  and  always  His  help  will  be 
Jound  stationed  at  the  exposed  point.  II.  The  revelation  of  a  twofold  character 
IN  God's  dealings  with  men  (ver.  20  ;  see  Luke  ii.  34  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  16  ;  Eev.  xi.  5  ; 
Matt.  xxi.  42-44  ;  John  ix.  39).  III.  The  practical  bearing  of  a  courageous  faith 
(ver.  21).  We  may  never  be  put  before  an  actual  ocean  tossing  with  billows  under 
difficult  stress  of  demand  like  this;  but  we  shall  often  be  placed  where  mere 
obedience  is  commanded,  and  where  God's  covenant  is  all  that  ensures  success. 
"  Doing  duty  belongs  to  us  ;  achieving  deliverance  belongs  to  God."  Then  it  is  that 
an  unbroken  faith  "laughs  at  impossibility,"  and  says,  "It  shall  be  done!" 
IV.  The  perfect  safety  of  a  believer's  exposure,  upon  a  promise  of  the  living 
God  (ver.  22).  One  of  Aristotle's  sayings  may  well  be  quoted  here.  He  says : 
"Every  how  rests  upon  a  that."  That  is,  if  God  has  declared  that  a  difficult  duty 
is  to  be  done,  He  may  be  trusted  to  show  how  it  is  to  be  done.  He  will  never  ask 
us  into  straits  of  obedience  without  providing  for  our  preservation.  And  when  once 
a  path  of  service  is  lying  out  before  us,  it  does  not  matter  at  all  how  dangerous  it 
appears  ;  we  shall  go  through  it  without  harm.  So  our  safety  is  in  the  exposure 
when  God  is  our  companion.  His  love  will  hold  the  sea-walls  steady,  and  the  sea- 
walls will  keep  back  Pharaoh.  Some  solicitous  friends  once  warned  Whitefield  to 
spare  himself  in  such  extraordinary  efforts  ;  he  only  answered  with  words  that  long 
ago  went  into  history  "I  am  immortal  till  my  work  is  done  !  "  V.  The  forget- 
fulness  and  incorrigibleness  OF  A  daring  unbelief  (ver.  23).  VI.  The  mercy  of 
God,  exhibited  in  the  fact  that  the  way  of  the  transgressor  is  hard  (ver.  24). 
Up  to  the  last  moment  there  was  a  chance  for  that  pursuing  army  to  retreat  by  the 
way  they  came.  So  it  was  a  manifest  benevolence  to  them  on  the  part  of  God  to 
hinder  them  as  much  as  possible.  Chrysostom  calls  attention  to  the  familiar  fact 
that  God  always  warns  before  He  waits,  and  waits  before  He  strikes,  and  strikes 
before  He  crushes,  so  as  to  give  space  for  repentance.  He  threatens  plagues  so  that 


CHAP.  XIV.]  EXODUS.  253 

we  may  avoid  plagues ;  and  indeed,  remarks  the  golden-tongued  orator,  it  is  doubt- 
ful whether  the  prospect  of  hell  has  not  availed  as  much  as  the  promise  of  heaven 
in  hindering  the  blasphemies  of  open  sin.  We  may  safely  assert  now  that  many  a 
man  has  had  occasion  to  thank  God  that  his  chariot-wheels  drave  heavily,  so  that 
he  recognized  the  hindering  hand  of  his  Maker  (ver.  25).  VII.  Our  last  lesson  is 
concerning  tue  sure  jcdgments  of  Almighty  wrath  when  once  the  cup  of 
INIQUITY  IS  FULL  (ver.  26).  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  A  double  aspect : — It  makes 
a  good  deal  of  difference  which  side  of  a  barrier  you  are  on,  in  your  estimate 
of  the  actual  worth  of  that  barrier.  To  the  burglar,  a  strongly  barred  door  is 
a  gi-eat  annoyance.  It  is  a  real  comfort  to  those  who  can  lie  down  to  sleep 
behind  it  at  night.  A  garden  wall  is  a  pleasant  protection  to  those  who  can 
walk  freely  within  its  enclosure.  It  frowns  gloomily  on  those  whom  it  shuts 
out  from  a  share  of  the  joys  within.  Another's  wrong-doing  which  separates 
him  from  us,  may  be  a  source  of  light  to  us  and  of  only  despair  to  him. 
Even  a  cause  of  misunderstanding  with  others  may  be  a  source  of  advantage  to 
us  and  of  worry  to  them.  The  cloud  of  trouble  which  they  and  we  faced 
together  for  a  while,  now  that  it  has  been  put  behind  us,  and  before  them, 
may  shed  light  on  our  path  by  the  lessons  it  teaches  us,  wbiHe  it  confuses  them 
just  as  much  as  ever.  The  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  commandments 
of  the  moral  law,  only  make  plainer  the  course  of  the  child  of  God ;  but  they  are  a 
cause  of  continued  trial  and  discomfort  to  him  who  is  unwilling  to  walk  in  the  way 
God  has  pointed  out.      (H.  C.  Tnnnbull.)  The  diiuUng  inllar  : — A  tradition 

current  in  the  west  of  Scotland  tells  that  when  one  of  the  Covenanting  preachers 
and  his  little  band  of  hearers  had  been  surprised  on  a  hill-side  by  the  military, 
the  minister  cried  out,  "  Lord,  throw  Thy  mantle  over  us,  and  protect  us." 
And  immediately  out  of  the  clear  sky  there  fell  a  mist,  which  sundered  and  pro- 
tected the  pursued  frem  the  pursuers.  And  a  Netherland  tradition  tells  how  a 
little  army  of  Protestants  was  once  saved  from  the  king  of  Spain's  troops  by  the 
flashing  lights  and  noise  as  of  an  army  sent  by  the  Lord  to  throw  confusion 
into  the  camp  of  the  enemy.  The  teacher  will  recollect  the  story  of  the 
Christian  woman,  who  calmly  awaiting  in  her  home  the  approach  of  the  enemy, 
was,  in  answer  to  her  prayer,  saved  from  them  by  a  circling  wall  of  snow.  The 
dividing  pillar  is  a  reality  yet.  (S.  S.  Times.)  Different  aspects  of  the  same 
thing : — There  are  many  scenes  in  life  which  are  either  sad  or  beautiful, 
cheerless  or  refreshing,  according  to  the  direction  from  which  we  approach  them. 
If,  on  a  morning  in  spring,  we  behold  the  ridges  of  a  fresh-turned  ploughed  field 
from  their  northern  side,  our  eyes,- catching  only  the  shadowed  slopes  of  the 
successive  furrows,  see  an  expanse  of  white,  the  unmelted  remains  of  the  night's 
hailstorm,  or  the  hoar-frost  of  the  dawn.  We  make  a  circuit,  or  we  cross  over,  and 
look  behind  us,  and  on  the  very  same  ground  there  is  nothing  to  be  seen  but  the  rich 
brown  soil,  swelling  in  the  sunshine,  warm  with  promise,  and  chequered  perhaps 
here  and  there  with  a  green  blade  bursting  through  the  surface.  (/.  A. 
Froude.) 

Vers.  21-25,  Made  the  sea  dry  land. — The  sea-path: — I.  The  deed  of  valour. 
Moses  walking  down  the  gravelly  beach  into  the  sea  ;  Israel  following.  A 
lesson  to  us  to  come  with  boldness.  II.  The  miraculous  way.  We  walk  in  new 
and  unseen  ways.  III.  The  overthrow  of  the  enemy.  1.  His  wrath.  2.  His 
foolhardiness;  forgetting  the  plagues.  All  sin  is  irrational.  3.  His  sudden 
destruction.  Death  surprises  the  impenitent.  IV.  The  same  instruments  both 
defending  and  destroying.  1.  The  cloud.  2.  The  water.  3.  The  gospel. 
V.  What  Israel  found  in  the  sea-path.  1,  Rebuke  for  the  murmuring. 
2.  Filial  fear.  3.  Trust  in  God.  4.  Trust  in  Moses.  5.  Nationality  ;  before,  they 
were  all  slaves,  then  free  men,  now  a  nation.  Learn  :  1.  All  people  must  struggle 
and  dare.  2.  Our  characters  come  from  soul-straggles  where  self  is  abandoned, 
and  trust  is  put  in  God.  3.  Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  4.  God  will,  out 
of  every  temptation,  make  a  way  of  escape.  {Dr.  Foicler. )  A  treacherous  element : — 
"An  easy  conquest !  "  said  the  eagle,  attracted  by  the  glittering  scales  of  a  large  fish, 
which  shone  through  the  clear,  deep  watersof  thelake.  "  An  easy  conquest !  "  As  he 
dashed  into  the  water,  it  was  as  if  lightning  had  smitten  the  clilf  and  a  fragment 
of  it  had  fallen  into  the  lake.  There  was  a  struggle  ;  the  fish  dived,  and  drew  the 
eagle  with  it.  "  Ah !  "  exclaimed  the  drowning  king  of  birds,  "  had  I  been  in  the 
air,  who  would  have  dared  to  measure  strength  with  me?  But  in  this  strange 
and  treacherous   element,   I   am   overcome   by   one   whom  elsewhere   I   should 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrr. 

have  despised."  (Great  Thoughts.)  Safe  in  the  danger  of  duty  : — "  The  waters 
were  a  wall  unto  them  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their  left."  It  is  amazing 
what  a  blessing  the  things  that  we  dreaded  most  become  to  us,  when  we  go 
straight  toward  them  at  the  call  of  God !  The  sea  of  business  troubles,  which 
looked  as  if  it  never  could  be  crossed,  but  which  we  had  no  choice  but  to 
enter,  how  it  opened  right  and  left  as  we  came  to  it,  and  then  became  to  ua 
a  wall  against  competitors  on  either  side,  because  we  had  ventured  into  its  very 
depths  when  it  was  our  clear  duty  to  do  that  and  nothing  else !  That  desert  life  of 
danger  which  we  entered  with  fear  and  trembling,  at  the  call  of  our  country,  or  of 
some  loved  one  of  our  family,  or  of  some  dear  friend,  how  its  very  exposures  and 
trying  experiences  toughened  us  and  trained  us,  and  made  us  stronger  and  manlier 
and  happier,  so  that  its  results  to-day — its  physical  and  mental  and  moral  results — 
are  as  a  wall  of  protection  to  us  on  our  right  hand  and  on  our  left !  There  is  no 
place  in  all  the  world  so  safe  for  us  as  the  place  of  danger,  when  danger  is  a  duty. 
The  best  way  of  caring  for  ourselves  is  not  to  care  for  ourselves.  If  we  want  to 
■walk  dry  phod,  with  a  wall  shielding  us  on  either  hand,  the  better  way  is  to  plunge 
right  overboard  into  a  sea  of  work  or  of  trial  or  of  peril,  when  God  says  Go  forward. 
(H.  C.  Trumbull.)  Overthrew  the  Egyptians.  — T/ie  destruction  of  the  Egyptians : — 
Consider  this  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host  as — I.  A  JunoirEKT.  It  was — 1. 
Sudden  in  its  execution.  No  warning  given.  2.  Terrible  in  its  nature.  Involving 
the  destruction  of  a  whole  army,  the  picked  men  of  the  most  powerful  nation  in  the 
world.  3.  Well  merited  by  the  subjects  of  it.  Repeated  warnings  were  conveyed  in 
the  plagues,  yet  all  were  now  disregarded.  II.  A  deliverance.  Israel  delivered 
from  Pharaoh — 1.  Out  v  j'.  perilous  situation.  2.  Notwithstanding  their  want  of 
faith.  3.  By  a  glorious  so  scle.  III.  A  lesson  to — 1.  The  sinner.  Beware  lest 
your  end  be  like  Pharac '  ^;  heed  the  warnings  given  to  you.  2.  The  Christian. 
Learn  to  know  the  gret  ^'"S  of  your  deliverance  from  the  host  of  Satan.  {H. 
Barnard,  B.A.)  It  i       jt  always  safe  to  follow  those  who  are  in  the  -path  of 

ciuty  : — A  place  that  is  j  safest  in  the  world  for  one  man  may  be  the  most 
dangerous  in  the  world  lor  the  next  man.  The  portcullis  which  comes  down  to 
shut  in  the  endangered  refugee,  may  crush  to  death  his  close  pursuer.  Because 
another  man  actually  saves  his  life  and  acquires  new  strength  by  exposing  himself 
in  some  sea  of  battle,  or  pestilence,  or  perils  of  search  for  a  lost  one,  it  is  no  reason 
why  you  should  venture  in  that  same  line.  If  God  told  him  to  go  there,  the  very 
waves  of  danger  were  a  shield  to  him ;  but  if  you  have  no  call  there,  those  waves 
may  overwhelm  you.  His  risks  in  business  prove  his  safety,  because  he  made  them 
in  faith,  when  God  commanded  them.  They  would  be  your  ruin  if  you  presumed 
on  them  without  a  command  from  God,  The  question  for  you  is  not.  Is  that  other 
man  safe  in  that  sea?  but.  Do  I  belong  there  ?  The  call  of  God  settles  the  question 
of  your  place  of  duty  and  your  place  of  safety.  God  gives  the  walls  of  protection 
to  His  children  when  they  are  where  He  tells  them  to  be.  God  throws  down  those 
very  walls  on  those  who  have  no  business  to  be  there.     {H.  C.  Trumbull.) 

Vers.  30,  31.  Thus  the  Lord  saved  Israel. — The  great  deliverance: — Had  it  not 
been  for  this  great  deliverance,  the  children  of  Israel  would  only  have  been  re- 
membered in  the  after-history  of  the  world  as  the  slaves  who  helped  to  build  the 
Pyramids.  Their  religion  was  fast  perishing  among  them,  their  religious  rites 
forgotten ;  and  they  would  soon  have  been  found  among  the  worshippers  of  the 
monster  gods  of  Egypt.  But  God  had  better  things  in  store  for  them,  when  He  led 
them  through  the  Red  Sea,  making  a  path  for  them  amid  the  waters.  I.  It  was 
ONE  OF  THE  GREATEST  BLESSINGS  FOR  THE  HOiiAN  RACE,  that  during  the  preservation  of 
the  Jewish  people,  the  great  truth  of  the  personality  of  God,  and  His  nearness  to 
His  people,  was  set  before  them  in  language  which  could  not  be  mistaken.  Audit 
is  one  of  the  greatest  blessings  which  we  enjoy,  that  we  have  the  same  Lord 
personally  presented  to  us,  revealed  in  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  God  is  set  before  us  here  not  only  as  a  Person,  but  as  a  Person  who  cares  with 

ALL  A  father's  LOVE  AND  WATCHFULNESS  FOR  HiS  OWN  PEOPLE.       Our  hopCS  in  dayS  of 

doubt  and  difficulty  are  directed  to  the  same  personal  fatherly  care  of  the  great  God  who 
loves  all  His  creatures,  and  who  loves  Christians  above  all  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  When  a  great  national  victory  is  achieved,  what  boots  it  to  him  who  loses  his 
LIFE  in  the  hour  OF  VICTORY  ?  The  question  for  us  is,  not  whether  God  has  wrought 
a  great  deliverance,  but  whether  we  as  individuals  are  partakers  of  that  deliverance, 
partakers  of  the  victory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Archbishop  Tait.)  Israel's 
deliverance : — I.    The   state   of  the  Israelites  when  Moses  came  to  them.    1. 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  255 

They  were  in  bondage.  2.  They  were  so  far  conscious  of  the  misery  of  their  position 
that  they  had  a  strong  desire  for  Hberty.  3.  They  were  by  no  means  ready  at  first 
to  accept  the  message  of  God's  deUverance,  4.  They  had  their  comforts  even  in 
slavery.  In  all  these  things  we  have  a  picture  of  ourselves.  II.  The  deliverance, 
1.  The  moment  the  Passover  is  observed,  that  moment  Pharoah's  power  is  broken. 
The  moment  that  all  is  right  between  us  and  God,  that  moment  Satan's  power  is 
broken,  and  he  can  no  longer  hold  us  in  bondage.  2.  The  waters  of  judgment 
which  saved  the  Israelites  were  the  means  of  destroying  the  vast  hosts  of  Egypt. 
The  power  of  Satan  is  broken  by  the  very  means  by  which  he  intended  to  destroy. 
3.  It  is  our  privilege  to  take  our  stand  on  the  other  side  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  see 
ourselves  "  raised  up  with  Christ "  into  a  new  life.  {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  The 
Divine  deliverer  recognized : — And  this  mighty  God,  who  so  delivered  Israel  in 
ancient  time,  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  The  walls  and  covering  of  our  habita- 
tions are  as  truly  upheld  and  kept  from  falling  and  crushing  us  to  death,  by  the  Divine 
hand,  as  were  the  walls  of  waters  kept  upright,  like  solid  stone,  by  Almighty  power, 
while  the  Hebrews  passed  safely  between.  We  say  that  it  was  miracle  which  pro- 
tected them,  and  the  laws  of  nature  which  protect  us.  But  in  both  cases  it  is  God. 
The  deepest  and  truest  philosophy  of  life  and  faith  for  us  is  to  bring  ourselves  into 
the  most  intimate  relations  with  the  infinite  God.  The  most  profound  and  accurate 
student  of  nature  is  he  whose  eye  is  quickest  to  see  the  plan  and  purpose  of  an 
intelligent,  governing  Mind  in  everything  that  exists.  What  should  we  think  of  an 
Israelite  walking  through  the  depths  of  the  sea  on  dry  ground,  between  walls  of 
water  standing  up  like  marble  on  either  hand,  and  yet  not  recognizing  the  intended 
and  merciful  display  of  the  Divine  power  for  his  protect'  -?  What  should  we  think 
of  a  ransomed  Hebrew  standing  on  the  safe  shore  of  th/  ^'^  d  Sea  on  that  memorable 
morning,  and  yet  refusing  to  join  in  the  song  of  thanks  /ing  for  the  great  deliver- 
ance of  the  night  ?  The  same  that  we  ought  to  think--  ne  who  lies  down  to  sleep 
at  night  in  his  own  house,  and  goes  to  his  daily  occupas.  in  the  morning,  and  never 
prays,  never  offers  thanksgiving  to  God,  for  the  mercy  ich  redeems  his  life  from 
destruction  every  moment.  In  God  we  live,  and  move,  aVjd  have  our  being.  Every 
use  of  our  faculties,  every  sensation  of  pleasure,  every  emotion  of  happiness,  every 
possession,  experience,  and  hope  that  makes  existence  a  blessing,  is  a  witness  to  us 
of  God's  special,  minute,  and  ceaseless  attention  to  our  welfare.    (D,  March,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Ver.  1.  Then  sang  Moses  and  the  Children  of  Israel.— r/ig  Song  of  Moses  at  the 
Bed  Sea  : — Unwonted  interest  attaches  to  this  song — the  earliest  on  record  of  all 
the  sacred  odes,  and  the  very  foremost  in  the  annals  of  Hebrew  anthology.  To 
the  Jewish  people  themselves,  it  is  what  they  have  long  called  it,  "  The  Song  "  ;  a 
designation  to  which  it  is  entitled,  alike  from  its  inherent  pre-eminence  and  'its 
unrivalled  associations.  1.  It  is  Israel's  natal  song.  For,  in  crossing  the  Red  Sea, 
they  passed  through  the  birth-throes  of  their  national  existence,  and  from  this 
epoch  dates  a  new  chronology  in  Israel's  calendar.  The  oppressed  tribes  have 
become  a  commonwealth ;  and  a  commonwealth  of  the  free.  2.  It  is  Israel's 
emancipation  song,  or  song  of  liberty.  It  signalises  a  triple  deliverance  ;  marking 
the  supreme  moment  of  rescue  from  the  threefold  evils  of  domestic  slavery, 
pohtical  bondage,  and  religious  thraldom.  3.  It  is  Israel's  first  National  Anthern 
and  Te  Deum  in  one.  The  Exodus  was  not  a  mere  effort  on  the  part  of  the 
Hebrew  race  to  achieve  their  independence  and  realize  their  aspirations  after  a 
separate  nationality.  The  spirit  of  even  this  idea  bad  yet  to  be  created  within 
them ;  but  everything  depended  on  their  being  first  delivered  from  the  corrupting 
influences  of  Egyptian  fetichism  and  idolatry,  no  less  than  from  the  yoke  of 
Egyptian  bondage.  Not  that  the  mass  of  them  could  at  all  appreciate  the  full 
meaning  of  the  grand  event  as  a  mighty  religious  movement,  repeating  on  a  larger 
scale  the  migration  of  Abraham  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  and  breaking  away  from 
idolatrous  and  debasing  superstitions,  to  find  a  home  for  the  free  development  of  a 
higher  creed  and  worship.  But  the  eye  of  their  great  leader  descried  this  Divine 
purpose  ;  and  he  had  gone  with  this  first  tentative  proposal  to  Pharaoh  from  God 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

"Let  My  people  go,  that  they  may  serve  Me  in  the  wilderness."  It  is  Israel's  Te 
Deum,  or  song  of  thanks  and  praise  to  God.  An  overwhelming  sense  of  the 
Divine  interposition  is  the  predominant  sentiment  in  the  song  from  first  to  lai-t. 
It  is  no  mere  secular  ode  ;  no  mere  war-song  or  outburst  of  patriotic  triumph  ;  no 
exultant  shriek  of  insult  over  a  fallen  foe ;  but  an  anthem  of  blessing  and  gratitude 
for  a  great  deliverance,  a  devout  and  solemn  p^lm  before  God,  to  whom,  of  whom, 
and  for  whom  it  is  sung.  This  high  and  sacred  intent  keeps  it  from  degen'rating 
into  a  wild  strain  of  vindictiveness  or  vainglory.  4.  It  is  Israel's  Church-sung ; 
the  type  of  all  songs  of  redemption  and  salvation.  The  very  words  "  redemption  " 
aud  "  salvation  "  are  first  introduced  in  connection  with  this  great  deliverance. 
"  I  will  redeem  you  with  an  outstretched  arm  "  ;  and  again,  "  Fear  ye  not ;  stand 
still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  The  people  had  become  unified  into  a 
worshipping  assembly.  It  is  Israel's  triumph-song  of  deliverance.  The  note  is 
that  of  joy  and  victory  ;  and  is  prophetic  of  the  success  of  every  battle  aiid  struggle 
for  the  Lord's  cause  and  kingdom,  fought  in  the  Lord's  name  and  in  His  strenj^th. 
This  triumph  is  the  precursor  especially  of  that  final  and  glorious  one  at  the  tnd 
of  the  ages,  when  the  spiritual  Israel,  which  no  man  can  number,  from  every 
people,  and  tribe  and  language,  "  having  gotten  the  victory  over  the  beast,  and 
over  his  image,  and  over  his  mark,  and  over  the  number  of  his  name,"  shall  t'lke 
up  a  position  like  their  prototypes  of  old — not,  however,  by  the  shore  of  the  Red 
Sea,  with  the  mere  emblem  of  God's  presence  before  them — but  as  John  saw  them 
in  apocalyptic  vision,  standing  by  the  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire ;  no  longer  led 
merely  by  Miriam  and  her  chorus,  but  all  of  them  having  the  harp  of  God  in  their 
hand,  singing,  not  only  "  the  Song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,"  but  "  the  Song 
of  the  Lamb."  I.  Introduction:  ok  the  triple  aim  of  the  song  (vers.  1,  2). 
Thus  the  song  is,  first  of  all,  inscribed  aud  offered  to  the  Lord.  He  also  is  its  great 
theme  or  subject ;  and  it  is  His  exaltation  that  constitutes  its  one  and  expressly 
avowed  aim.  To  God,  of  God,  for  God — these  are  the  three  pivot-thoughts 
regulating  and  determining  the  movement  of  the  opening  strophe,  and,  indeed,  of 
the  entire  hymn.  Here,  as  not  infrequently  with  later  psalms,  we  have  the  whole 
song  concentrated  in  the  first  verse.  The  occasion  of  the  song,  its  subject,  its 
design,  are  all  indicated.  First,  there  is  here  a  singing  to  the  Lord.  The  simplest 
idea  we  can  attach  to  the  opening  words,  "  I  will  sing  lo  the  Lord,"  is  this — I  will 
bring  myself  into  the  immediate  and  felt  presence  of  Jehovah,  and  will  address 
and  offer  my  song  to  Him  !  How  near  has  He  been  to  us  during  the  eventful  and 
stupendous  transactions  of  the  night !  Under  a  realizing  sense  of  that  nearness  I 
will  direct  my  song  to  Him.  To  what  a  pitch  of  solemnity  this  conception  raises 
the  singer  1  But,  while  tliis  idea  of  singing  to  the  Lord  is  expre-sive  of  the  singer's 
attitude  as  immediately  before  the  very  face  of  the  Supreme,  it  no  less  indicates 
that  the  song  is  an  acceptable  offering  and  oblation  to  the  Lord.  It  is  no  self- 
pleasing  exercise  of  gift  and  faculty,  but  "  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  the  fruit  of  the 
lips."  "  Singmg,"  says  one,  "  is  as  much  the  language  of  holy  joy  as  prayer  is  the 
language  of  holy  desire."  How  sublime  a  sight !  The  whole  of  a  people  singing 
before  the  one  invisible  God,  and  consciously  realizing  more  or  less  their  direct 
relation  to  the  Eternal,  under  no  outward  form  or  image  or  material  symbol  I 
Secondly,  the  Lord  is  the  subject  or  theme  of  the  song.  Underlying  all  is  the 
sense  of  the  Divine  personality.  Nothing  but  this  could  have  kindled  the  soul  to 
song.  If  God  is  to  be  the  subject  of  hymning  praise,  it  must  needs  be  the  thought 
of  a  living,  personal  One,  to  evoke  the  spirit  of  glorying  in  and  praismg  His  name. 
Thirdly,  there  is  here  a  singing,  not  only  to  the  Lord  and  of  the  Lord,  but  for  the 
Lord.  To  extol  and  exalt  the  Lord  is  declared  to  be  the  ultimate  end  and  aim  of 
this  song.  And  indeed  this  is  the  highest  reach  and  the  final  purpose  of  all  praise 
— to  manifest  and  express  the  Divine  character,  the  Divine  working  and  ways,  the 
Divine  glory  and  honour.  We  are  taught  to  pray  for  God  as  well  as  to  Him  ;  and 
to  put  this  ever  in  the  foreground  of  our  prayers,  as  of  all  things  the  first,  the  best, 
the  supremely  desirable.  "Hallowed  be  Thy  name:  Thy  kingdom  come:  Thy 
will  be  done  " — these  petitions  have  the  precedence  over  any  for  <  ither  ourselves  or 
others.  But  not  only  to  do  this,  but  also  to  express  it  and  set  forth  our  purpose  to 
do  it — this  is  the  special  aim  aud  function  of  praise,  of  which  "  Doxology,"  or  the 
ascription  of  power,  blessing,  dominion,  and  every  excellency,  is  the  highest 
climax.  It  is  the  very  anticipation  of  heaven  itself  and  of  all  its  worship.  II. 
The  body,  oe  subject-matter  of  the  bono  (vers.  3-13).  The  third  verse  seems 
to  be  designed  for  a  great  chorus — probably  meant  to  be  re-echoed  by  a  body  of 
deep-voiced  warriors.    It  marks  a   transition   from  the  declarative  style  of   the 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  257 

introduction,  to  the. alternation  of  recitative  and  ascriptive  portions  in  the  main 
body  of  the  song.  It  forms  also  a  suitable  link  between  the  two,  being  a  fit  climax 
to  what  precedes,  because  it  sets  forth  why  and  in  what  character  the  Lord  is  to  be 
exalted — "  the  Lord  is  a  Man  of  War  " — and  a  fit  index  to  what  follows,  because  it 
suggests,  so  strikingly,  the  nature  of  His  triumph  which  is  now  about  to  be 
celebrated ;  a  triumph  involving  struggle  and  conflict.  He  is  "  a  Man  of  War  "  in 
accordance  always  with  His  sublime  and  sacred  name  Jehovah.  The  song  proceeds 
to  develop  the  three  great  qualities  of  the  Jehovah-warrior,  the  Warrior  who  is 
Divine.  1.  He  is  in  power  resistless.  This  power  is  seen  first  in  the  magnitude  of 
the  sciile  on  which  it  operates — the  sense  of  this  being  enhanced  by  the  detail  of 
particulars  in  verse  4.  Pharaoh's  chariots,  and  his  host,  and  his  chosen  captains. 
Then,  again,  in  the  ease  with  which  it  effects  its  object  as  He  "  casts  "  them  into 
the  sea — it  is  as  it  He  had  caught  up  the  whole  host  in  His  hand,  and  slung  it  like 
a  stone  into  the  deep ;  and  finally,  in  the  completeness  of  the  overthrow  and  the 
irreversible  aud  irretrievable  nature  of  the  result.  Having  thus  signalized  the 
catastrophe,  the  poet's  inspiration  seems  to  catch  a  new  afflatus.  The  style 
suddenly  changes  in  verses  6,  7,  and  8;  it  ceases  to  be  merely  descriptive,  and 
becomes  directly  ascriptive.  The  tone  is  now  lofty  and  devout,  God  being  addressed 
immediately  in  the  second  person,  and  the  whole  event  being  attributed  to  the 
interposition  and  miraculous  operation  of  His  power  alone.  2.  He  is  in  equity  and 
righteousness  unchallengeable.  The  "  equity  and  righteousness  "  is  as  manifest  as 
the  power.  We  are  taught  in  verse  7  to  regard  the  whole  situation  as  intended  for 
a  display  of  "  the  Divine  excellency  "  ;  so  true,  so  timely,  and  so  exemplary  it  is  in 
its  manifestation.  With  consummate  ease,  but  with  no  less  consummate  justice, 
the  dread  penalty  is  enacted ;  to  show  how  "  He  is  glorious  in  holiness  and  fearful 
in  praises  "  while  "  doing  wonders. "  For  it  is  intimated  that  Egjpt,  in  what  it 
was  doing,  was  not  only  "  the  enemy  "  of  Israel,  but  it  was  "  of  them  that  rose  up 
against  Thee  "  ;  fighting  against  the  Almighty  and  violating  the  first  principles  of 
Divine  justice,  truth,  and  mercy.  The  victims  of  the  catastrophe  were  the  fit 
subjects  of  a  retributive  and  self-vindicating  economy.  Moreover,  it  was  so  well- 
timed.  They  were  taken,  as  it  were,  red-handed,  in  the  very  act ;  at  the  very 
moment  they  were  anticipating  their  revenge  and  gloating  in  its  gratification. 
While  they  were  intoxicated  with  insolence  and  pride  :  while  they  were  breathing 
out  threatening  and  cruelty,  the  Lord  speaks  to  them  in  wrath  ;  the  Lord  holds 
them  in  derision.  3.  Yet,  finally.  He  is  in  mercy  plenteous.  We  have  to  note  the 
goodness,  no  less  than  the  severity,  of  God  here.  The  reiteration  in  verse  12  of 
what  has  been  said  before,  seems  designedly  made  to  enhance  the  sublime  and 
suggestive  contrast.  III.  The  threefold  issues  (vers.  14-18).  In  this  third  and 
last  wave  of  the  anthem,  the  Divine  mercy  in  the  redemption  of  Israel  is  illustrated. 
The  song  becomes  prophetic ;  and  three  grand  issues  are  described  and  anticipated, 
an  immediate,  an  mtermediate,  and  a  final  one.  1.  The  immediate  influence  of 
the  Exodus  and  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  on  the  tribes  and  peoples  around,  verses 
14-16.  A  striking  gradation  is  observed  in  describing  the  various  effects  :  there  is 
first  a  widespread  panic  and  commotion  in  general,  then  the  chiefs  or  "  phylarchs"  of 
Edom  are  paralyzed  with  terror ;  the  mighty  men  of  Moab  tremble  with  uncon- 
trollable fear ;  and  finally  the  Canaanites  melt  away  in  despair.  2.  There  is  an 
intermediate  or  remoter  influence  on  the  ultimate  settlement  and  final  destiny  of 
Israel.  So  great  an  initial  trmmph  was  a  happy  augury  and  a  sure  pr<>gnosticatioa 
of  coming  success.  It  was  to  be  accepted  as  a  Divine  pledge  of  all  needful  aid 
and  succour,  until  at  length  they  should  be  firmly  established  in  the  promised  land, 
as  a  nation,  a  race  or  family,  and  a  Church.  For  in  verse  17  we  have  a  climax 
with  three  particulars,  in  which  Israel  is  presented  in  three  aspects,  and  their  land 
is  set  forth  in  the  triple  character  of  an  inheritance,  a  home,  and  a  sanctuary, 
awakening  the  chords  of  patriotism,  ancestry,  and  worship.  3.  There  is  the  last 
great  issue  of  all,  "  The  Lord  shall  rsign  for  ever  and  ever."  The  prophecy  of 
this  song  reiches  thus  onward  to  the  end  of  all  things;  for  the  deliverance  of 
Israel  was  not  merely  typical  of,  but  actually  a  part  and  instalment  of,  the  final 
redemption.  And  therefore,  this  song  of  Moses  is  not  only  the  key-note  and 
inspiration  of  the  songs  of  the  Old  Testament  Church,  but  a  song  of  the  Church 
in  every  age,  celebrating  as  it  does  an  event  and  deliverance  not  only  pledging  but 
vitally  contributing  to  the  last  great  acts  in  the  onward  triumph  of  Christ's  com- 
plete redemption.  (A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  The  Song  of  Moses  :—l.  The  history 
WHICH  the  song  celebrates.  II.  The  reflections  which  the  history  thus  cele- 
brated suggests.     1.  The  history  affords  an  awful  instance  of  persevering  rebellion 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

against  God,  notwithstanding  the  infliction  of  repeated  and  awakening  chastise- 
ments. 2.  The  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to  forget  past  mercies,  when  we  are 
involved  in  present  afflictions.  3.  The  duty  of  yielding  obedience  to  God,  even 
when  His  commands  seem  to  be  opposed  to  our  interests  and  our  happiness.  4. 
The  certainty  that  God  will  appear  on  b€half  of  His  people,  however  long  His 
interposition  may  be  delayed.  5.  The  history  reminds  us  of  a  nobler  deliverance 
which  God  has  effected  for  His  people  by  Jesus  Christ.  6.  We  may  learn  from  the 
history  with  what  grateful  joy  the  disciples  of  Christ  will  celebrate  His  power  and 
grace,  when  they  have  crossed  the  river  of  death.  [J.  Alexander.)  Jubilate: — 
I.  It  will  be  instructive  to  notice  the  time  of  the  singino  of  this  soxa.  To 
everything  there  is  a  season :  there  is  a  time  of  the  singing  of  birds,  and  there 
is  a  time  for  the  singing  of  saints.  "  Then  sang  Moses."  1.  It  was  first  of  all  at 
the  moment  of  realized  salvation.  When  we  doubt  oar  salvation  we  suspend  our 
singing ;  but  when  we  realize  it,  when  we  see  clearly  the  great  work  that  God  has 
done  for  us,  then  we  sing  unto  the  Lord  who  hath  for  us  also  triumphed  gloriously. 
How  can  our  joy  of  heart  any  longer  be  pent  up?  2.  So  is  it  also  in  times  of 
distinct  consecration.  I  would  remind  you  that  the  apostle  assures  us  that  all 
Israel  were  "  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."  That  passage 
through  the  Eed  Sea  was  the  type  of  their  death,  their  burial,  and  their  resurrec- 
tion to  a  new  life  ;  it  was  their  national  baptism  unto  God  :  and  therefore  they 
sang  as  it  were  a  new  song.  It  is  the  happiest  thing  that  can  ever  hapi'cn  to  a 
mortal  man,  to  be  dedicated  to  God.  3.  It  was  also  a  day  of  the  manifest  display 
of  God's  power.  4.  But  this  song  may  be  sung  at  all  times  throughout  the  life  of 
faith.  Let  your  hearts  begin  to  ring  all  their  bells,  and  let  not  their  sweet  chimea 
cease  for  evermore.  II.  The  tone  of  this  song.  1.  Note,  first,  that  the  tJJne  is 
enthusiastic.  2.  The  tone  is  also  congregational,  bemg  intended  for  every  Israelite 
to  join  in  it.  Though  Moses  began  by  saying,  "  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,"  yet 
Miriam  concluded  with,  "  Sing  ye  to  the  Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed  gloriously." 
This  is  a  hymn  for  every  child  of  God,  for  all  that  have  come  out  of  Egypt.  Let 
the  song  be  enthusiastic  and  unanimous.  3.  Yet  please  to  notice  how  very 
distinctly  personal  it  is.  "  I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed 
gloriously.  The  Lord  is  mtj  strength  and  song,  and  He  is  become  my  salvation  ; 
He  is  my  God,  and  I  will  prepare  Him  an  habitation  ;  my  father's  God,  and  I  will 
exalt  Him."  Do  not  lose  yourself  in  the  throng.  4.  Note,  again,  the  tone  of  this 
Bong  is  exceeding  confident.  There  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  in  it :  it  is  all  the 
way  through  most  positive  in  its  ascriplions  of  praise.  5.  And  this  song  is 
exceeding  comprehensive.  It  sings  of  what  God  has  done,  and  then  of  what  God 
will  do  in  bringing  His  people  into  the  Promised  Land ;  nor  does  it  finish  till  it 
rises  to  that  loftiest  strain  of  all:  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  6. 
Note,  too,  all  through,  that  this  song  is  immeasurably  joyous.  The  Israelites  were 
slaves  eujoying  new  liberty  ;  children  let  out  to  play.  They  did  not  know  how  to 
be  glad  enough.  Let  us  give  to  God  our  unlimited  joy.  7.  Tet  I  must  say,  how- 
ever enthusiastic  that  song  was,  and  however  full  of  joy  it  was,  it  was  only  such  a 
song  as  was  due  unto  the  Lord.  III.  The  first  clauses  of  this  song.  "  The 
Lord  is  my  strength  and  my  song,"  &c.  1.  Notice,  the  song  is  all  of  God  :  there 
is  not  a  word  al-out  Moses.  Let  us  forget  men,  forget  earth,  forget  time,  forget 
self,  forget  this  mortal  life,  and  only  think  of  our  God.  2.  Observe,  the  song 
dwells  upon  what  God  has  done  :  "  The  horse  and  his  rider  hath  He  thrown  into 
the  sea."  Let  us  trace  all  the  mercies  we  get  to  our  God,  for  He  hath  wrought  all 
our  works  in  us ;  He  hath  chosen  us.  He  hath  redeemed  us,  He  hath  called  us,  He 
hath  quickened  us,  He  hath  preserved  us.  He  hath  sanctified  us,  and  He  will 
perfect  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  glory  is  all  His.  3.  The  song  also  declares  what 
the  Lord  will  yet  do.  We  shall  conquer  yet  in  the  great  name  of  Jehovah.  Take 
up  the  first  note  :  "The  Lord  is  my  strength."  What  a  noble  utterance!  Poor 
Israel  had  no  strength !  She  had  cried  out  by  reason  of  her  sore  bondage,  making 
bricks  without  straw.  The  Lord  is  my  strength  when  I  have  no  strength  of  my 
own.  It  is  well  to  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  strength  "  when  we  are  weak  and  the 
enemy  is  strong ;  but  we  must  mind  that  we  say  the  same  when  we  are  strong  and 
our  enemies  are  routed.  The  next  is,  "  The  Lord  is  my  song,"  that  is  to  say,  the 
Lord  is  the  giver  of  our  songs ;  He  breathes  the  music  into  the  hearts  of  His 
people ;  He  is  the  Creator  of  their  joy.  The  Lord  is  also  the  subject  of  their 
songs  :  they  sing  of  Him  and  of  all  that  He  does  on  their  behalf.  Tbe  Lord  is, 
moreover,  the  object  of  their  song :  they  sing  unto  the  Lord.  Their  praise  is  meant 
for  Him  alone.    (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)    The  Song  of  triumph : — The  Song  of  Moses  has 


OOAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  259 

never  been  surpassed  for  the  poetical  beauty  of  its  imagery  and  its  expressions.  It 
is,  besides,  so  lull  of  holiness  and  adoration,  as  to  render  it  incomparable.  I.  Let 
us  recount  all  the  causes  foe  gratitude  which  abe  enumerated  in  it.  1.  The 
Israelites  had  been  delivered  from  a  terrible  danger.  The  enemy  had  said,  "  I  will 
pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil ;  I  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand 
shall  destroy  them."  2.  They  had  been  delivered  from  inevitable  danger.  None 
could  save  them  but  God  only.  Before  them  was  the  sea ;  behind  them  were 
Pharaoh  and  his  host.  3.  They  had  been  delivered  from  universal  danger.  Not 
the  lives  of  a  thousand  only,  or  even  of  ten  thousand,  among  them  had  been 
threatened ;  all,  old  and  young  together,  were  to  have  been  slain.  4.  They  had 
been  delivered  by  most  glorious  miracles  ;  the  strong  east  wind,  the  pillar  of  light, 
the  sea  changed,  as  it  were,  into  walls  of  ice.  5.  They  had  been  delivered  not- 
withstanding their  sins.  Oh,  what  an  example  of  the  free  grace  of  God  1  They 
had  scorned  His  words,  had  murmured  ;  it  was,  so  to  speak,  in  spite  of  themselves 
that  God  had  saved  them.  6.  They  had  been  delivered  altogether,  not  one  was 
missing,  not  one  had  perished,  not  even  the  youngest  child.  No  mourning  marred 
their  triumph,  as  often  happens  to  the  nations  of  the  eaitb  when  they  are  celebrat- 
ing a  great  victory.  7.  They  had  been  saved  by  the  power  of  God  alone.  It  was 
not  their  work,  it  was  that  of  the  Lord,  who  had  said  to  them,  "  Stand  still,  and 
ye  shall  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord ;  the  Lord  shall  fi;;ht  for  you."  8.  Lastly, 
their  deliverance  was  accompanied  by  promises  for  the  future.  God  had  brought 
them  out  of  Egypt,  but  it  was  to  lead  them  to  Canaan.  II.  If  we  are  true 
believers,  and  if  Jesus  is  our  Saviour,  we  have  thk  same  re.vsons  that  the 
Israelites  had  for  singing  the  song  of  praise.  1.  Like  them,  we  have  been 
delivered  from  a  terrible  danger.  It  was  the  danger  of  death,— not  of  the  body, 
for  that  is  comparatively  nothing,  as  our  Loid  has  said,  but  of  the  soul; 
that  is  to  say,  condemnation,  alienation  from  God,  a  whole  eternity  passed 
"  in  outer  darkness,  where  tliere  is  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  2.  Like 
the  Israelites,  we  have  been  delivered  from  inevitable  danger.  There  is  no 
way  of  escape — no  salvation  in  any  other  than  in  the  Lord  Je>us  Christ.  3.  We 
have  been  delivered  from  a  universal  danger.  Indeed,  we  are  all  by  nature  under 
condemnation.  "  There  is  no  difference  :  for  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of 
the  glory  of  God."  4.  We  have  been  delivered  by  most  glorious  marvels.  "  Behold 
what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called 
the  sons  of  God,"  exclaims  the  apostle  John.  These  things  are  so  sublime,  that 
the  angels  desire  to  look  into  them.  5.  We  have  been  delivered  notwithstanding 
our  sins  ;  for  "  God  commendeth  His  love  towards  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet 
sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  6.  Like  Israel,  we  have  been  delivered  altogether. 
Not  one  of  the  chosen  people  of  God  will  be  missing ;  the  youngest  child,  the  most 
despised,  the  most  forgotten  of  men,  if  he  has  put  his  trust  in  the  Led,  will  not 
perish.  7.  God  has  saved  us  without  any  strength  of  our  own,  for  we  were  in- 
capable of  doing  anything.  "I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone,"  saith  the 
Saviour  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah.  He  obeyed  for  us.  He  has  borne  our  sins.  He  has 
accomplished  all  the  work  of  our  salvation.  8.  Lastly,  our  deliverance  has  been 
accompanied,  like  that  of  the  Israelites,  with  glorious  promises.  The  Lord  will 
guide  us  with  His  counsel,  and  afterwards  He  will  receive  us  to  glory.  He  will  be 
our  strer.gth,  because  He  has  been  our  Saviour.  (Prof,  Gaiissen.)  Manly 
gratitude : — Among  the  mass  of  men  how  little  there  is  of  that  frank,  manly 
gratitude,  that  openly,  aud  in  the  sight  of  a  scoffing  world,  acknowledges  the 
deliveiiug,  saving  hand  of  God.  Amid  such  wide-spread  forgetfulness  of  the  hand 
of  an  overruling  Providence,  it  is  a  satisfaction  to  record  the  case  of  a  thankful 
British  seaman,  a  fine  young  man  in  the  naval  service  on  board  Her  Majesty's  ship, 
Queen.  They  were  cruising  off  Cape  Finisterre.  The  hands  had  been  turned  up 
to  reef  top  sails  for  the  night;  the  work  was  just  finished,  when  the  young  captain 
of  the  mizzen  top  overbalanced  himself  and  fell.  He  came  down  a  distance  of  a 
hundred  feet  or  more,  and  would  have  fallen  on  the  deck,  where  no  doubt  he  would 
have  been  instantly  killed  or  seriously  injured  ;  but  as  he  fell  he  clutched  the  foot- 
brail  of  the  mizzen — this  threw  him  against  the  sail,  which  broke  his  fall,  and 
he  was  saved !  And  as  he  touched  the  deck  he  knelt  down  in  the  sight  of 
the  throng  of  officers  and  men  who  composed  the  crew,  and  offered  up  his 
thanks  to  Almighty  God  for  his  safe  deliverance,  during  which  time  the  silence 
and  discipline  was  such  one  might  have  heard  a  pin  drop  on  the  deck.  Aftoj- 
deliverance  there  should  come  a  song  : — Gratitude  is  an  imperative  duty  ;  and 
one  of  its  first  and  finest  forms  is  a  hymn  of  thanksgiving  and  praise.      It  is 


2G0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

true  that  it  will  not  be  worth  much  if  it  expends  itself  only  in  song;  but 
wherever  the  psalm  is  sincere,  it  will  communicate  its  melody  also  to  the  life. 
Too  often,  however,  it  does  not  even  give  a  song.  You  remember  how  only 
one  of  the  ten  lepers  returned  to  thank  the  Lord  for  His  cleansing;  and,  perhaps, 
we  should  not  be  far  wrong  if  we  were  to  affirm  that  a  similar  proportion  prevails 
to-day  between  the  thankful  and  the  ungi-ateful.  Yet  it  would  be  \\Toi)g  if  we  were 
to  leave  the  impression  that  such  gratitude  as  this  of  Mosses  is  almost  unknown. 
On  the  contrary,  the  pages  of  our  hymn-books  are  covered  with  songs  which  have 
been  born,  like  this  one,  out  of  deliverance.  Many  of  the  finest  of  David's  psalms 
are  the  utterances  of  his  heart  in  thanksgiving  for  mercies  similar  to  those  which 
Moses  celebrated ;  and  some  of  the  noblest  lyrics  of  Watts  and  Wesley,  of  Mont- 
gomery and  Lyte,  have  had  a  similar  origin.  Nor  is  this  all  ;  we  can  see  that  in  all 
times  of  great  national  revival  there  has  been  an  outburst  of  song.  At  the  Refor- 
mation, no  result  of  Luther's  work  was  more  remarkable  than  the  stimulus  it  gave 
to  the  Lymnology  of  the  Fatherland.  In  fact,  that  may  be  said  to  have  been  as 
good  as  created  by  the  Reformation ;  and  in  our  own  country  each  successive 
revival  of  religion  has  had  its  own  special  hymn.  But  we  have  not  all  the  genius 
of  Wesley,  or  the  inspiration  of  Moses,  or  of  David  ;  and  what  shall  we  do  then  ? 
We  can  at  least  appropriate  the  lyrics  of  those  who  have  gone  before  us,  and  use 
them  in  so  far  as  tbey  meet  our  case;  and 'I  can  conceive  no  more  pleasant  or 
profitable  occupation  for  the  household  than  the  singing  of  those  hymns  which  have 
become  dear  to  us  because  of  the  personal  experiences  which  we  can  read  between 
the  hues.  But  we  can  do  better  still  than  that;  for  we  can  set  our  daily  deeds  to 
the  music  of  a  grateful  heart,  and  seek  to  round  our  lives  into  a  hymn — the  melody 
of  which  will  be  recognized  by  all  who  come  into  contact  with  us,  and  tbe  power  of 
which  shall  not  be  evanescent,  like  the  voice  of  the  singer,  but  perennial,  like  the 
music  of  the  spheres.  To  this  hymnology  of  life  let  me  incite  you  ;  for  only  they 
who  carry  this  music  in  their  hearts  shall  sing  at  last  on  the  shore  of  the  heavenly 
land,  that  song  of  "  pure  concert  "  for  which  John  could  find  no  better  description 
than  that  it  was  "  the  song  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb," 
But  to  sing  of  deliverance,  you  must  accept  deliverance.  Open  your  hearts,  therefore, 
for  the  reception  of  salvation.  ( W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  Lord  Is  my  strength  and  my 
song. — The  citadel  and  the  temple  ;— I.  What  the  Lord  is  to  His  people.  1.  "  The 
Lord  is  my  strength,"  sang  the  enraptured  host,  when  they  saw  how  He  had 
"triumphed  gloriously  "  for  them — and  this  has  ever  been  the  song  of  God's  people 
as  they  have  passed  through  dangers  and  tribulations  in  their  way  to  the  heavenly 
Canaan  (Isa.  xxvi.  4).  2.  But  if  the  Lord  be  the  strength  of  His  people,  it  must 
imply  that  they  themselves  are  weak.  .S.  But  the  Lord  is  our  strength  ;  and  if  the 
Church  be  likened  unto  things  which  are  weak,  the  figurative  language  of  the  Bible 
is  equally  strong  in  setting  forth  the  Lord  as  her  strength  (Prov.  xxviii.  10 ;  Psa. 
xviii.  2).  The  Lord  Jesus  is  called  the  Captain  of  her  salvation,  her  Deliverer, 
Governor,  Guide.  4.  But  the  Lord  is  not  only  the  strength  of  His  people,  but  also 
their  song.  He  is  a  very  present  help  in  trouble,  and  He  sometimes  raises  the  head, 
and  cheei'S  the  heart,  even  in  the  midst  of  sorrows  and  trials  (Hab.  iii.  17-19).  5. 
The  Lord  is  also  the  salvation  of  His  people.  He  sometimes  saves  them,  in  a 
miraculous  manner,  from  temporal  evils.  6.  He  is  their  God:  and  this  is  everj-- 
thing.  Infinite  power,  wisdom,  mercy,  goodness,  love,  pity,  truth,  justice,  are  all 
exerted  in  their  behalf ;  for,  in  one  delightful  word.  He  is  their  God — yea,  and  He 
will  be  their  God  for  ever  and  ever,  and  their  Guide  even  unto  death.     II.  The 

RESOLUTIONS  WHICH  A  SENSE  OF  HiS  GOODNESS  LEADS  THEM  TO  HAKE.  1.  "  I  wiU  pre- 
pare Him  an  habitation,*'  alluding,  probably,  to  the  Temple  which  the  Jews  after- 
wards built.  But  it  is  in  the  humble,  contrite  heart  that  the  Lord  delights  to  dwell ; 
and  we  prepare  Him  a  habitation  when  we  open  our  hearts  to  receive  Him, 
when  we  devote  them  entirely  to  Him,  and  when  we  make  Him  the  principal  object 
of  our  desires.  2.  "  My  father's  God  " — the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
and  of  all  our  pious  ancestors — "  and  I  will  exalt  Him."  With  my  tongue  will  I 
praise  His  name,  and  my  soul  shall  exalt  in  Him.  (B.  Bailey.)  My  father's 
God.— The  pathos  of  theology: — A  song  is  the  proper  conclusion  of  a  victory. 
Fasting  is  the  worship  of  sorrow ;  singing  is  the  worship  of  joy.  The  words 
specially  chosen  for  meditation  show  that  the  victory  did  not  end  in  itself ;  it 
touched  the  holy  past ;  it  consummated  the  promises  and  hopes  of  ages.  I.  "My 
other's  God."  Then  religion  was  no  new  thing  to  them.  They  were  not  sur- 
prised when  they  heard  the  name  of  God  associated  with  their  victory.  Religion  should 
not  be  an  originality  to  us  ;  it  should  not  be  a  novel  sensation ;  it  should  be  the  com- 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  261 

mon  breath  of  our  daily  life,  and  the  mention  of  the  name  of  God  in  the  relation  of  our 
expeiience  sought  to  excite  no  mere  amazement.  II.  "  My  father's  God."  Then  their 
fathek's  religion  was  not  concealed  from  them.  They  knew  that  their  fatber  had 
a  God.  It  is  possible  not  to  suspect  that  a  man  has  any  regard  for  God  until  we  see 
his  name  announced  in  connection  with  some  religious  event.  We  cannot  read  this 
holy  book  without  being  impressed  with  the  fact  that  the  men  who  made  the  history 
of  the  world  were  men  who  lived  in  continual  communion  with  the  spiritual  and 
unseen.  III.  "  My  father's  God."  Yet  it  does  not  follow  that  the  father  and 
the  child  must  have  the  same  God.  You  have  power  deliberately  to  serve  the 
connection  between  yourself  and  the  God  of  your  fathers.  It  is  a  terrible  power  !  IV. 
"  My  father's  God."  Then  we  are  debtors  to  the  religious  past.  There  are  some 
results  of  goodness  we  inherit  independently  of  our  own  will.  This  age  inherits 
the  civilization  of  the  past.  The  child  is  the  better  for  his  father's  temperance. 
Mephibosheth  received  honours  for  Jonathan's  sake.  The  processes  of  God  are 
not  always  consummated  in  the  age  with  which  they  begiu.  Generations  may  pa^ 
away,  and  then  the  full  blessing  may  come.  Practical  questions :  1.  Your  father 
was  a  Christian, — are  you  so  much  wiser  than  your  father  that  you  can  afford  to 
set  aside  his  example  ?  There  are  some  things  in  which  you  are  bound  to  improve 
upon  the  actiims  of  your  father ;  but  are  you  quite  sure  that  the  worship  of  the 
God  of  heaven  is  one  of  them  ?  2.  Your  father  was  a  holy  man — will  you  under- 
take to  break  the  line  of  a  holy  succession  ?  Ought  not  the  fame  of  his  holiness  to 
awaken  your  own  religious  concern?  3.  Your  father  was  deeply  religious, — will  you 
inherit  all  he  has  given  you  in  name,  in  reputation,  in  social  position,  and  throw 
away  all  the  religious  elements  which  made  him  what  he  was  ?  4.  Your  father 
could  not  live  without  God, — can  you  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  nolle  ancestnj  arid 
a  glorious  resolution  : — I.  A  noble  ancestry.  "  My  father's  God."  Who  are  the 
men  who  have  the  most  illustrious  ancestry  ?  The  men  who  honoured,  served,  and 
trusted  the  one  true  and  living  God.  The  same  God  does  for  all  ages  ;  His  character 
commends  itself  to  the  adoration  of  all  souls.  It  is  natural  to  value  anything  our 
loving  fathers  love.  We  value  their  favourite  books,  but  how  much  more  their  God, 
the  totality  of  goodness,  the  fountain  of  all  blessedness  ?  II.  A  glorious  resolu- 
tion. "  I  will  exalt  Him."  How  can  we  "  exalt  Him?"  Enthrone  Him  in  our 
affections  as  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings,  ruling  all  thoughts,  animating  and 
directing  all  activities.  (Homilist.)  The  living  God: — I.  Who  was  the  God  of 
our  fathers?  1.  A  pure  Being,  not  the  "  chance  "  of  the  atheist.  2.  A  conscious 
Being,  not  the  "mere  law  "  of  the  deist.  3.  A  personal  Being,  not  "the  all  "  of  the 
pautheist.  4.  A  perfect  Being,  as  revealed  in  the  Bible.  5.  An  emotional  Being, 
as  manifested  in  Cbi-ist.  6.  A  communicative  Beiug,  as  imparted  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  I[.  What  IS  IT  TO  exalt  Him  ?  1.  Not  by  tall  spires.  2.  Not  by  gorgeous 
ritual.  3.  To  adore  Him  as  the  object  of  our  worship.  4.  To  give  Him  the  chief 
place  in  our  affections.  (IV.  W.  Wythe.)  My  mother's  God: — At  a  fashionable 
party  a  young  physician  present  spoke  of  one  of  his  patients,  whose  case  he  con- 
sidered a  very  critical  one.  He  said  he  was  "  very  sorry  to  lose  him,  for  he  was  a 
noble  young  man,  but  very  unnecessarily  concerned  about  his  soul,  and  Christians 
increased  his  agitation  by  talking  with  him  and  praying  for  him.  He  wished  Chris- 
tians would  let  his  patients  alone.  Death  was  but  an  endless  sleep,  the  religion  of 
Christ  a  delusion,  and  its  followers  werenot  persons  of  the  highest  culture  or  intelli- 
gence." A  young  lady  sitting  near,  and  one  of  the  gayest  of  that  company,  said, 
"  Pardon  me,  doctor,  but  I  cannot  hear  you  talk  thus  and  remain  silent.  I  am  not  a 
professor  of  religion  ;  I  never  kuew  anything  about  it  experimentally,  but  my  mother 
was  a  Christian.  Times  without  number  she  has  taken  me  with  her  to  her  room, 
and  with  her  hand  upon  my  head,  she  has  prayed  that  God  would  give  her  grace  to 
train  me  for  the  skies.  Two  years  ago  my  precious  mother  died,  and  the  religion 
she  loved  through  life  sustained  her  in  her  dying  hour.  She  called  us  to  her  bed- 
Bide,  and  with  her  face  shining  with  glory,  asked  us  to  meet  her  in  heaven,  and  I 
promised  to  do  so.  And  now,"  said  the  young  lady,  displaying  deep  emotion,  "  can 
I  believe  that  this  is  all  a  delusion?  that  my  mother  sleeps  an  eternal  sleep?  that 
she  will  never  waken  again  in  the  morning  of  the  resurrection,  and  tbat  I  shall 
see  her  no  more?  No,  I  cannot,  I  will  not  beUeve  it."  Her  brother  tried  to  quiet 
her,  for  by  this  time  she  had  the  attention  of  all  present.  "No!"  said  she. 
"Brother,  let  me  alone;  I  must  defend  my  mother's  God,  my  religion."  The 
physician  made  no  reply,  and  soon  left  the  room.  He  was  found  shortly  afterwards 
pacing  the  floor  of  an  adjoining  room,  in  great  agitation  and  distress  of  spirit. 
"What  is  the  matter?"  a  friend  inquired.     "  Oh,"  said  he,  "  that  young  lady  is 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

— r  ■ • ■ 

right.  Her  words  have  pierced  my  soul  like  an  arrow.  I  too  must  have  the  religion 
I  have  despised,  or  I  am  lost  for  ever."  And  the  result  of  the  convictions  thus 
awakened  was  that  both  the  young  lady  and  the  physician  were  converted  to 
Christ,  and  are  useful  and  influential  members  of  the  Church  of  God. 

Ver.    3.    The  Lord  Is    a   man   of  war. — The   triumphs  of  Jehovah : — I.   The 

THOOOHT    OF    God'S   TRIUMPHS   AS   A   MAN     OF    WAB    SEEMS    TO     BE   VALUABLE    AS   GIVINQ 

IN  ITS  DEGREE  A  PROOF  OF  THE  TRUTH  OP  HoLT  Writ.  The  moial  cxpectatioHS 
raised  by  our  Lord's  first  sermon  on  the  Mount  are  being  actually  realized  in  many 
separate  souls  now.  The  prayer  for  strength  to  triumph  against  the  devil,  the 
world,  and  the  flesh  is  becoming  daily  more  visibly  proved  in  the  triumph  of  the 
Spirit,  in  the  individual  lives  of  the  redeemed.    II.  The  triumphs  of  the  Lord 

IN  THE  INDIVIDUAL  HEARTS  AMONG  US  GIVE  AN  INCREASING  HOPE  FOR  UNITT  THROUGH- 
OUT Christendom.  We  cannot  deny  the  debt  we  owe  to  the  labours  of  Noncon- 
formists in  the  days  of  the  Church's  lethargy  and  neglect.  We  cannot  join  them 
now,  but  we  are  preparing  for  a  more  close  and  lasting  union,  in  God's  own  time, 
by  the  individual   progress  in  spiritual   things.     III.  We  must  do  our  part  to 

SET    our    seal   to    THE    TRIUMPHANT   POWER   OF   DiVINE    GRACE.       It  is  the  half-liveS  of 

Christians  which  are  such  a  poor  proof  of  the  truth  of  our  Lord's  words.  They 
do  not  be^iin  early  enough ;  they  do  not  work  thoroughly  enough.  We  have 
the  promise  that  this  song  shall  be  at  last  on  the  lips  of  all  who  prevail,  for  St. 
John  tells  us  in  the  Kevelation  that  he  saw  those  who  had  overcome  standing  on 
the  sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  God,  singing  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb. 
(Bp.  Kiiuj.) 

Ver.  9,  10.  The  enemy  said. — The  enemy's  spirit : — Observe  the  spirit  of  the 
enemy  of  Isrstel.  It  was  characterized — 1.  By  great  ambition.  It  was  the  love 
of  power  and  dominion.  To  hold  human  beings  as  property  is  the  vilest  display 
of  ambition.  2.  Great  arrogance  and  pride.  I  will  pursue  (rather  "  repos- 
sess "),  overtake,  divide,  d'c.  What  self-confidence  1  What  boasting  !  What 
assumption !  Pride  goeth  before  destruction.  3.  Insatiable  avarice.  Divide 
the  spoil.  Had  not  Pharaoh  enough?  An  avaricious  spirit  unceasingly  cries, 
Give !  give !  What  a  cursed  spirit  it  is !  Well  has  it  been  said  that  nature  is 
content  with  little,  grace  with  less,  but  the  lust  of  avarice  not  even  with  all 
things.  4.  Eeckless  malevolence  and  cruelty.  "  My  lust  shall  be  satisfied,  I 
will  draw  my  sword,"  &c.  What  thirsting  for  blood  !  Ambition  and  avarice 
render  the  mind  cold  and  the  heart  callous.  Tears,  wailings,  groans,  mangled 
bodies  and  the  flowing  blood  of  mankind  allay  not  the  fires  of  human  malevo- 
lence and  lust.  5.  Presumptuous  confidence  and  security.  I  will  do,  not  endea- 
vour, no  peradventure.  Contingency  and  doubt  have  no  place.  How  foolish  for 
the  man  who  puts  on  the  armour  to  boast.  (A.  Nevin,  D.D.)  God's  Church 
and  her  enemies  .-—Israel  was  a  type  of  the  Church,  Pharaoh  a  type  of  the  Church's 
enemies  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  both  of  the  spiritual  enemy  Satan,  and  of  the 
I  mporal,  his  instruments.  The  deliverance  was  a  type  of  the  deliverance  that 
Christ  wrought  upon  the  cross  by  His  blood  ;  also  of  that  Christ  works  upon  His 
throne,  the  one  fi'om  the  reign  of  sin,  the  other  from  the  empire  of  antichrist.  The 
text  is  a  part  of  Moses'  song ;  a  song  after  victory,  a  panegyric ;  the  praise  of 
God,  attended  with  dancing,  at  the  sight  of  the  Egyptian  wrecks  (ver.  20).  1.  It 
was  then  real ;  the  Israelites  then  sang  it.  2.  It  is  typical ;  the  conquerors  of 
antichrist  shall  again  triumph  in  the  same  manner  (Rev.  xv.  3).  3.  It  was  an 
earnest  of  future  deliverance  to  the  Israelites.  General  observations.  1.  The 
greatest  idolaters  are  tlie  fiercest  enemies  against  the  Church  of  God.  It  is  the 
Egyptian  is  the  enemy.  No  nation  had  more  and  more  sordid  idols.  2.  The 
Church's  enemies  are  not  for  her  correction,  but  her  destruction  :  "I  will  pursue; 
my  hand  shall  destroy  them."  3.  How  desperate  are  sometimes  the  straits  of 
God's  Israel  in  the  eye  of  man !  How  low  their  spirits  before  deliverance.  4. 
God  orders  the  lusts  of  men  for  His  own  praise.  5.  The  nearer  the  deliverance  of 
the  Church  is,  the  fiercer  are  God's  judgments  on  the  enemies  of  it,  and  the  higher 
the  enemies'  rage.  6.  All  creatures  are  absolutely  under  the  sovereignty  of  God, 
and  are  acted  by  His  power  in  all  their  services.  7.  By  the  same  means  God  saves 
His  people,  whereby  He  destroys  His  enemies  :  the  one  sank,  the  other  passed 
through.  That  which  makes  one  balance  sink  makes  the  other  rise  the  higher. 
8.  The  strength  and  glory  of  a  people  is  more  wasted  by  opposing  the  interests  of 


CHAP,  sv.]  EXODUS.  263 

the  Church  than  in  conflicts  with  any  other  enemy.  9.  We  may  take  notice  of 
the  folly  of  the  Church's  enemies.  Former  plagues  might  have  warned  them  of 
the  power  of  God,  they  had  but  burned  their  own  lingers  by  pinching  her,  jet  they 
would  set  their  force  against  almighty  power,  that  so  often  had  worsted  them ;  it 
is  as  if  men  would  pull  down  a  steeple  with  a  string.  But  the  observations  I  shall 
treat  of  are — 1.  When  the  enemies  of  the  Church  are  in  the  highest  fury  and  re- 
solution, and  the  Church  in  the  greatest  extremity  and  dejection,  then  is  the  fittest 
time  for  God  to  work  her  deliverance  fully  and  perfectly.  When  the  enemy  said, 
"  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil,"  &c.,  then  "  God  blowed 
with  His  wind,"  then  "they  sank."  2.  God  is  the  author  of  all  the  de- 
liverances of  the  Church,  whosoever  are  the  instruments.  •'  Thou  didst  blow 
with  Thy  wind;  who  is  like  unto  the  Lord  among  the  gods."  Uses:  How 
dear  is  the  Church  to  God !  2.  Eemember  former  deliverances  in  time  of 
straits.  3.  Thankfully  remember  former  deliverances.  (S.  Charnock,  B.D.) 
Vanity  of  boasting : — When  Bonaparte  was  about  to  invade  Kussia,  a  person  who 
had  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him  from  his  purpose,  finding  he  could  not  prevail, 
quoted  to  him  the  proverb,  "Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes";  to  which  he 
indignantly  replied,  "I  dispose  as  well  as  propose."  A  Christian  lady,  on  hearing 
the  impious  boast,  remarked,  "I  set  that  down  as  the  turning-point  of  Bonaparte's 
fortunes.  God  will  not  suffer  a  creature  with  impunity  thus  to  usur^j  His  prero- 
gative." It  happened  to  Bonaparte  just  as  the  lady  predicted.  His  invasion  of 
Russia  was  the  commencement  of   his  fall.  Triumpliing  before  the  bittle: — 

Nothing  can  be  got,  but  much  may  be  lost,  by  triumphing  before  a  battle.  When 
Charles  V.  invaded  France,  he  lost  his  generals  and  a  gi'eat  part  of  his  army 
by  famine  and  disease ;  and  returned  balHed  and  thoroughly  mortified  from  an 
enterprize  which  he  began  with  such  confidence  of  its  happy  issue,  that  he  desired 
Paul  Jovius,  the  historian,  to  make  a  large  provision  of  paper  sufficient  to  record 
the  victories  which  he  was  going  to  acquire !  Providentially  destroyed  : — During 
the  last  summer,  at  Coblentz,  we  saw  a  monument  erected  to  commemorate  the 
French  campaign  against  the  Russians  in  1812.  It  was  a  gigantic  failure  ;  400,000 
men  set  forth  for  Moscow;  25,000,  battered  and  worn  and  weary,  tattered  and  half 
famished,  returned.  Do  you  ask  how  it  was  done  ?  Not  by  the  timid  Alexander's 
guns  and  swords.  We  read  in  one  place  that  "  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought 
against  Sisera  "  ;  in  another,  how  God  has  sent  an  army  of  locusts  to  overthrow  an 
army  of  men ;  but  here  the  very  elements  combine  to  drive  the  invader  back  in 
disgrace.  Yes.  "  He  gave  snow  like  wool.  He  scattered  His  hoar-frost  like  ashes, 
He  cast  forth  His  ice  like  morsels — who  can  stand  before  His  cold  ?  "  Who  ?  Not 
Napoleon,  who,  with  self-sufficient  heart,  boasted  in  his  own  right  hand,  and 
sacrificed  to  his  insatiable  ambition  the  blood  of  myriads  of  murdered  men.  No  1 
God  blows  upon  him  with  His  wind  out  of  the  north,  and,  shiverirg  and  half- 
starved,  he  slinks  back  in  defeat.  What  a  picture !  But  Alexander  had  not 
forgotten  to  prepare  his  ways  before  the  Lord  and  seek  the  God  of  Jacob's  aid. 
And  in  recognition  of  the  Divine  interposition  and  help,  he  struck  a  medal  with  a 
legend:  "Not  to  me,  not  to  us,  but  unto  Thy  Name."  Thus  the  lesson  taught 
by  ancient  and  modern  history  is,  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to 
the  strong,  but  to  the  man  who  prepaies  his  ways  before  the  Lord  his  God. 
(Enoch  Hall.) 

Vek.  11.  Who  is  like  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  among  the  gods? — The  incomparable 
God : — I.  Who  is  like  rxxo  Thee,  0  Lokd,  among  the  gods  ?  1.  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords !  Who  among  the  gods  is  like  unto  Thee  in  majesty  and 
power?  Well  might  Israel  exultingly  make  this  inquiry.  2.  Who  is  like  unto 
Thee  in  the  ineffable  purity  of  Thy  nature?  "  Glorious  in  holiness  !  "  3.  Who  is 
like  unto  Thee  in  the  solemnity  and  sanctity  of  Thy  worship  ? — "  fearful  in  praises ! " 
The  gloriously  holy  God  is  alone  worthy  to  be  praised,  but  that  praise  ought  to  be 
offered  with  "reverence  and  godly  fear."  U.  Who  does  like  Thke  ? — "doing 
wonders."  1.  The  wonders  alluded  in  the  text  were  undoubtedly  the  miracles 
recently  wrought  by  Jehovah  for  the  salvation  of  His  people.  "  Thou  art  the  God 
that  doest  wonders,"  &c.  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  14-20).  2.  But  not  only  miracles,  which 
imply  an  inversion  or  suspension  of  the  laws  of  nature,  but  nature  and  her  laws — 
every  part  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  heavens  and  in  the  earth  is  wonderful,  and 
amply  shows  forth  the  power  and  wisdom  of  the  Creator  (Job  xxxvii.  14-23 ; 
Psa.  viii.  3,  4,  xix.  1-7).  If  we  only  study  our  own  frame,  we  shall  be  led  to 
exclaim  with  the  Psalmist,  "  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made  I  "    3.  The  Lord 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

sometimes  does  wonders  in  judgment,  flood,  &c.  4.  The  Lord  does  wonders  in 
mercy.  Redemption.  {D.  Uailey.)  Glorious  in  tidiness. — The  holiness  of  God  : — 
Plutarch  said  not  amiss,  that  he  should  count  himself  less  injured  by  that  man 
that  should  deny  that  there  was  such  a  man  as  Plutarch,  than  by  him  that 
should  affirm  that  there  was  such  a  one  indeed,  but  he  was  a  debauched  fellow, 
a  loose  and  vicious  person.  He  that  saith,  God  is  not  holy,  speaks  much  worse 
than  he  that  saith,  There  is  no  God  at  all.  Let  these  two  things  be  con- 
sidered :  1.  If  any,  this  attribute  hath  an  excellency  above  His  other  perfections. 
(1)  None  is  sounded  out  with  such  solemnity,  and  so  frequentlj'  by  angels  that 
stand  before  His  throne,  as  this.  (2)  He  singles  it  out  to  swear  by  (P.-a.  Ixxxix. 
35 ;  Amos  iv.  2).  (3)  It  is  His  glory  and  beauty.  Holiness  is  the  honour  of 
the  creature — sanctification  and  honour  are  linked  together  (1  Thess.  iv.  4) — 
much  more  is  it  the  honour  of  God ;  it  is  the  image  of  God  in  the  creature 
(Eph.  iv.  24).  (4)  It  is  His  very  life;  so  it  is  called  (Eph.  iv.  18).  2.  As  it  seems 
to  challenge  an  excellency  above  all  His  other  peifections,  so  it  is  the  glory  of  all 
the  rest ;  as  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Godhead,  so  it  is  the  glory  of  every  perfection  in 
the  Godhead ;  as  His  power  is  the  strength  of  them,  so  His  holiness  is  the  beauty 
of  them  ;  as  all  would  be  weak  without  almightiness  to  back  them,  so  all  would  be 
uncomely  without  holiness  to  adorn  them.  Should  this  be  sullied,  all  the  rest 
would  lose  their  honour  and  their  comfortable  efficacy  ;  as  at  the  same  instant  that 
the  sun  should  lose  its  light,  it  would  lose  its  heat,  its  strength,  its  generative  and 
quickening  virtue.  I.  The  nature  of  Divine  holiness.  The  holiness  of  God 
negatively  is  a  perfect  freedom  from  all  evil.  As  we  call  gold  pure  that  is  not 
imbased  by  any  dross,  and  that  garment  clean  that  is  free  from  any  spot,  so  the 
nature  of  God  is  estranged  from  all  shadow  of  evil,  all  imaginable  contagion. 
Positively,  it  is  the  rectitude  of  the  Divine  nature,  or  that  confonnity  of  it  in 
affection  and  action  to  the  Divine  will  as  to  His  eternal  law,  whereby  He  works  with 
a  becomingness  to  His  own  excellency,  and  whereby  He  hath  a  complacency  in 
everything  agreeable  to  His  will,  and  an  abhorrency  of  everything  contrary  there- 
unto. In  particular.  This  property  of  the  Divine  nature  is — 1.  An  essential  and 
necessary  perfection.  He  is  essentially  and  necessarily  holy.  His  holiness  is  as 
necessary  as  His  being,  as  necessary  as  His  omniscience.  2.  God  is  absolutely  holy 
(1  Sam.  ii.  2).  3.  God  is  so  holy,  that  He  cannot  possibly  approve  of  any  evil  done 
by  another,  but  doth  perfectly  abhor  it ;  it  would  not  else  be  a  glorious  holiness 
(Psa.  V.  3),  "  He  hath  no  pleasure  in  wickedness."  He  doth  not  only  love  that 
which  is  just,  but  abhor  with  a  perfect  hatred  all  things  contrary  to  the  rule  of 
righteousness.  Holiness  can  no  more  approve  of  sin  than  it  can  commit  it.  4. 
God  is  so  holy,  that  He  cannot  but  love  holiness  in  others.  Not  that  He  owes  any- 
thing to  His  creature,  but  from  the  unspeakable  holiness  of  His  nature,  whence 
affections  to  all  things  that  bear  a  resemblance  of  Him  do  flow  ;  as  light  shoots  out 
from  the  sun,  or  any  glittering  body.  It  is  essential  to  the  infinite  righteousness 
of  His  nature,  to  love  righteousness  wherever  He  beholds  it  (Psa.  xi.  7).  5.  God  is 
so  holy,  that  He  cannot  positively  will  or  encourage  sin  in  any.  6.  God  cannot  act 
any  evil  in  or  by  Himself.  II.  The  proof  that  God  is  holy.  1.  His  holiness 
appears  as  He  is  Creator,  in  framing  man  in  a  perfect  uprightness.  2.  His  holiness 
appears  in  His  laws,  as  He  is  a  Lawgiver  and  a  Judge.  This  purity  is  evident — (1) 
In  the  moral  law,  or  law  of  nature;  (2)  In  the  ceremonial  law;  (8)  In  the  allure- 
ments annexed  to  it  for  keeping  it,  and  the  atfrightments  to  restrain  from  the 
breaking  of  it ;  (4)  In  the  judgments  inflicted  for  the  violation  of  it.  3.  The  holi- 
ness of  God  appears  in  our  restoration.  It  is  in  the  glass  of  the  gospel  we  "behold 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  18) ;  that  is,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  into  whose 
image  we  are  changed  ;  but  we  are  changed  into  nothing  as  the  image  of  God  but 
into  holiness.  We  bore  not  upon  us  by  creation,  nor  by  regeneration,  the  image  of 
any  other  perfection.  "We  cannot  be  changed  into  His  omnipotence,  omniscience, 
&c. ,  but  into  the  image  of  His  righteousness.  This  is  the  pleasing  and  glorious 
sight  the  gospel  mirror  darts  in  our  eyes.  The  whole  scene  of  redemption  is 
nothing  else  but  a  discovery  of  judgment  and  righteousness.  "  Zion  shall  be  redeemed 
with  judgment,  and  her  converts  with  righteousness  "  (Isa.  i.  27).  (1)  This  holi- 
ness of  God  appears  in  the  manner  of  our  restoration,  viz.,  by  the  death  of  Christ. 
(2)  The  holiness  of  God  in  His  hatred  of  sin  appears  in  our  justification,  and  the 
conditions  He  requires  of  all  that  would  enjoy  the  benefit  of  redemption.  (3)  It 
appears  in  the  actual  regeneration  of  the  redeemed  soul,  and  a  carrying  it  on  to  a 
full  perfection.  As  election  is  the  effect  of  God's  sovereignty,  our  pardon  the  fruit 
of  His  mercy,  our  knowledge  a  stream  from  His  wisdom,  our  strength  an  impression 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  265 

of  His  power,  so  our  purity  is  a  beam  from  His  holiness.  The  whole  work  of 
sanctilication,  and  the  preservation  of  it,  our  Saviour  begs  for  His  disciples  of  His 
Father  under  this  title  (John  xvii.  11,  17).  III.  The  third  thing  I  am  to  do,  is  to 
lay  down  some  propositions  in  the  defence  of  God's  holiness  in  all  His  acts 
ADOUT  OR  coNCEKNiNG  SIN.  1.  God's  holiness  is  not  chargeable  with  any  blemish, 
fi)r  His  creating  man  in  a  mutable  state.  It  was  suitable  to  the  wisdom  of  God  to 
pive  the  rational  creature,  whom  He  had  furnished  with  a  power  of  acting  righteously, 
the  liberty  of  choice,  and  not  fix  him  in  an  unchangeable  state,  without  a  trial  of 
him  in  his  natural.  And  if  he  did  obey,  his  obedience  might  be  the  more  valuable ; 
and  if  he  did  freely  offend,  his  offence  might  be  more  inexcusable.  (1)  No  creature 
can  be  capable  of  immutability  by  nature.  Mutuability  is  so  essential  to  a  creature, 
that  a  creature  cannot  be  supposed  without  it.  (2)  Though  God  made  the  creature 
mutablf,  \et  He  made  Him  not  evil.  There  could  be  nothing  of  evil  in  him  that 
God  created  after  His  own  image,  and  pronounced  good  (Gen,  i.  27,  31).  (3)  There- 
fore it  follows,  that  though  God  created  man  changeable,  yet  He  was  not  the  cause 
of  his  change  by  his  fall.  2.  God's  holiness  is  not  blemished  by  enjoining  man  a 
law  which  He  knew  he  would  not  observe.  (1)  The  law  was  not  above  his  strength. 
(2)  Though  the  law  now  be  above  the  strength  of  man,  yet  is  not  the  holiness  of 
God  blemished  by  keeping  it  up.  It  is  true,  God  hath  been  graciously  pleased  to 
mitigate  the  severity  of  the  law  by  the  entrance  of  the  gospel ;  yet,  where  men 
refuse  the  terms  of  the  gospel  they  continue  themselves  under  the  condemnation  of 
the  law,  and  are  justly  guilty  of  the  breach  of  it,  though  they  have  no  strength  to 
observe  it.  (3)  God's  foreknowledge  that  His  law  would  not  be  observed  lays  no 
blame  upon  Him.  Though  the  foreknowledge  of  God  be  infallible,  yet  it  doth  not 
necessitate  the  creature  in  acting.  3.  The  holiness  of  God  is  not  blemished  by 
decreeing  the  eternal  rejection  of  some  men.  4.  The  holiness  of  God  is  not 
blemished  by  His  secret  will  to  suffer  sin  to  enter  into  the  world.  God  never  willed 
sin  by  His  jireceptive  will.  It  was  never  founded  upon,  or  produced  by  any  word  of 
His,  as  the  creation  was.  Nor  doth  He  will  it  by  His  approving  will ;  it  is  detest- 
able to  Him,  nor  ever  can  be  otherwise.  He  cannot  approve  it  either  before  com- 
mission or  after.  IV.  The  point  was,  that  holiness  is  a  glorious  perfection  of 
THE  NATURE  OF  GoD.  We  havc  showed  the  nature  of  this  holiness  in  God,  what  it 
is,  and  we  have  demonstrated  it,  and  proved  that  God  is  holy,  and  must  needs  be 
so,  and  also  the  purity  of  His  nature  in  all  His  acts  about  sin.  Let  us  now  improve 
it  by  way  of  use.  1.  Is  holiness  a  transcendent  perfection  belonging  to  the  nature 
of  God  ?  The  first  use  shall  be  of  instruction  and  information.  (1)  How  great  and 
how  frequent  is  the  cr^ntempt  of  this  eminent  perfection  in  the  Deity  !  (2)  It  may 
inform  us  how  great  is  our  fall  from  God,  and  how  distant  we  are  from  Him.  (3) 
All  unholiness  is  vile  ai\I  opposite  to  the  nature  of  God.  (4)  Sin  cannot  escape  a 
due  punishment.  A  ha\  ed  of  unrighteousness,  and  consequently  a  will  to  punish 
it,  is  as  essential  to  God  as  a  love  of  righteousness.  (5)  There  is  therefore  a  neces- 
sity of  the  satisfaction  of  the  holiness  of  God  by  some  sufllcient  mediator.  The 
Divine  purity  could  not  meet  with  any  acquiescence  in  all  mankind  after  the  Fall. 
(6)  Hence  it  will  follow,  there  is  no  justification  of  a  sinner  by  anything  in  himself. 
2.  The  second  use  is  for  comfort.  This  attribute  frowns  upon  lapsed  nature,  but 
smiles  in  the  restorations  made  by  the  gospel.  3.  Is  holiness  an  eminent  perfection  of 
the  Divine  nature?  Tben — (1)  Let  us  get  and  preserve  right  and  strong  apprehensions 
of  this  Divine  perfection.  (2)  Is  holiness  a  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  ?  Is  it 
the  glory  of  the  Deity?  Then  let  us  glorify  this  holiness  of  God.  (3)  Since  holiness 
is  an  eminent  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature,  let  us  labour  after  a  conformity  to 
God  in  this  perfection.  (4)  If  holiness  be  a  perfection  belonging  to  the  nature  of 
God,  then,  where  there  is  some  weak  conformity  to  the  holiness  of  God,  let  us 
labour  to  grow  up  in  it,  and  breathe  after  fuller  measures  of  it.  (5)  Let  us  carry 
ouri^elves  holily  in  a  spiritual  manner  in  all  our  religious  approaches  to  God  (Psa. 
xciii,  5).  (6)  Let  us  address  for  holiness  to  God  the  fountain  of  it.  As  He  is  the 
author  of  bodily  life  in  the  creature,  so  He  is  the  author  of  His  own  life,  the  life  of 
God  in  the  soul.  (S.  Charnock,  B.D.)  God  the  pattern  of  holiness : — No  creature 
can  be  essentially  holy  but  by  participation  from  the  chief  fountain  of  holiness,  but 
we  must  have  the  same  kind  of  holiness,  the  same  truth  of  holiness ;  as  a  short 
line  may  be  as  straight  as  another,  though  it  parallel  it  not  in  the  immense  length 
of  it ;  a  copy  may  have  the  likeness  of  the  original,  though  not  the  same  perfection. 
We  cannot  be  good  without  ejeing  some  exemplar  of  goodness  as  the  pattern.  No 
pattern  is  so  suitable  as  that  which  is  the  highest  goodness  and  purity.  That 
limner  that  would  draw  the  most  excellent  piece  fixes  his  eye  unon  the  most  excel- 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv 

lent  pattern.  He  that  would  be  a  good  orator,  or  poet,  or  artificer,  considers  some 
person  most  excellent  in  each  kind  as  the  object  of  his  imitation.  Who  so  tit  as 
God  to  be  viewed  as  the  pattern  of  holiness  in  our  intendment  of,  and  endeavours 
after,  holiness?  The  Stoics,  one  of  the  best  sects  of  philosophers,  advised  their 
disciples  to  pitch  upon  some  eminent  example  of  virtue,  according  to  which  to  form 
their  lives,  as  Socrates,  &c.  But  true  hoUuess  doth  not  only  endeavour  to  live  the 
life  of  a  good  man,  but  chooses  to  live  a  Divine  life.  As  before  the  man  was 
"  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,"  so  upon  his  return  he  aspires  after  the  life  of 
God.  To  endeavour  to  be  like  a  good  man  is  to  make  one  image  lOce  another,  to 
set  our  clocks  by  other  clocks  without  regarding  the  sun ;  but  true  holiness  consists 
in  a  likeness  to  the  most  exact  sampler.  God  being  the  first  purity,  is  the  rule  as 
well  as  the  spring  of  all  purity  in  the  creature,  the  chief  and  first  object  of  imitation. 
(Ibid.)  The  holiness  of  God  and  that  of  His  best  saints: — There  is  as  little 
proportion  between  the  holiness  of  the  Divine  majesty  and  that  of  the  most 
righteous  creature,  as  there  is  between  the  nearness  of  a  person  that  stands 
upon  a  mountain  to  the  sun,  and  of  him  that  beholds  him  in  a  vale  ;  one  is 
nearer  than  the  other,  but  it  is  an  advantage  not  to  be  boasted,  in  regard  of 
the  vast  distance  that  is  between  the  sun  and  the  elevated  spectator.  (Ibid.) 
God  loves  holiness : — God  is  essentially,  originally,  and  efiiciently  holy  :  all  the 
holiness  in  men  and  angels  is  but  a  crystal  stream  that  runs  from  this  glorious 
ocean.  God  loves  holiness,  because  it  is  His  own  image.  A  king  cannot  but 
love  to  see  his  own  eiBgies  stamped  on  coin.  God  counts  holiness  His  own  glory, 
and  the  most  sparkling  jewel  of  His  crown.     "  Glorious  in  holiness."     (T.  Watson.) 

Ver.  13.  Hast  led  forth  the  people  which  Thou  hast  redeemed. — Lessons: — 1. 
God's  future  providence  as  well  as  past  deliverance  is  the  matter  of  faith's  praise. 
2.  God,  as  a  shepherd,  leadeth  His  people  through  their  course  to  rest,  and  will 
lead,  as  if  it  were  done.  3.  Mercy  is  the  rule  of  all  God's  conduct  to  His  Church 
here  below.  4.  God  hath  saved,  and  will  redeem  His  Israel  out  of  all  their  troubles. 
It  is  His  promise  (Psa.  cxxx.  8).  5.  God's  holy  habitation,  Sion  in  type  and  heaven 
in  truth,  is  the  end  of  all  His  providential  guidance  unto  His.  6.  God's  strength 
secureth  the  Church's  conduct  to  His  holy  habitation.  7.  Tender,  sweet,  and  gentle 
is  God's  guidance  of  His  Church  through  their  way  to  rest  (Isa.  xl.  11).  8.  All  this 
promised  guidance  faith  must  return  to  the  praise  of  God.  (G.  Uuijhcs,  B.D.) 
The  song  of  Moses  : — I.  Past  mercies  ackkowledged.  The  fact  celebrated  ia 
redemption  from  Egypt — "Thou  in  Tby  mercy  hast  led  forth  Thy  people  which 
Thou  hast  redeemed."  The  whole  glory  of  deliverance  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord, 
without  any  reference  to  second  causes.  The  believer  will  often  look  back  and 
contemplate  his  mercies,  and  celebrate  his  deliverances  ;  like  Samuel,  he  will  raise 
his  Ebenezer  (1  Sam.  vii.  12).  II.  Future  mercies  anticipated.  "  Thou  hast 
guided  them,  in  Thy  strength,  unto  Thy  holy  habitation."  Here  is  the  language 
of  strong  faith,  as  if  they  were  already  in  Canaan.  Moses  knew  that  God  had 
promised  to  bring  them  to  His  holy  hill,  and  to  His  dwelling;  he  kuew  that  God's 
promises  were  as  good  as  His  performances ;  and  we  may  say  so  too,  for  they  are  all 
yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Lord  had  done  so  much  for  Israel,  that  Moses 
felt  no  doubt  as  to  the  future — "  Thou  shalt  bring  them  in,  and  plant  them  in  the 
mountain  of  Thine  inheritance."  III.  Israel's  enemies  confounded.  "  The 
people  shall  hear  and  be  afraid,  sorrow  shall  take  hold  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Palestine,"  &c.  The  world  has  now  much  to  say  against  the  people  and  cause 
of  God.  Religion  is  denounced  by  them  as  a  delusion — a  gloomy  thing — as  mad- 
ness; but  then  every  objection  will  be  silenced.  Satan,  too,  is  now  very  busy  with 
his  temptations  and  accusations ;  but  this  state  of  things  shall  not  always  last. 
Trembling  shall  take  hold  of  the  beUever's  enemies,  when  the  people  of  God  are 
safely  brought  to  the  heavenly  Canaan.  Then  where  will  be  the  venom  of  tho 
world  ?  where  the  accusations  of  Satan  ?  Not  one  mouth  will  then  be  opened 
against  the  meanest  and  most  neglected  of  God's  people  on  earth.  He  shall  then 
have  nothing  to  fear  ;  admitted  within  the  pearly  gates  of  the  heavenly  Jenisalem, 
he  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Loid.  All  enemies  will  be  for  ever  excluded.  The 
Church  shall  be  saved  and  God  glorified.  IV.  The  kingdom  of  God  permanently 
triumphant.  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  1.  To  the  enemies  of 
Christ.  You  see  that  the  Lord  must  reign  ;  then  what  must  become  of  you  ?  2. 
To  the  friends  of  Christ,  yea,  to  those  who  wish  to  love  the  Saviour.  (1)  Look  back 
and  review  your  mercies  ;  how  numerous,  how  seasonable,  how  undeserved  !  See 
the  Lord's  hand  in  them,  and  this  will  add  to  their  sweetness.     (2)  Look  forward. 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  26T 

Consider  what  God  has  promised  to  do  for  you.  You  have  your  trials,  and  you  will 
have  them  ;  but  you  have  not  one  too  many.  (3)  Look  upward  to  that  promised 
rest — that  "  inheritance  which  is  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  fadeth  not  away,"  &c. 
{George  Breay,  B.A.) 

Vers.  14-16.  The  people  shall  hear,  and  be  afraid. — The  world  afraid  of  God's 
people : — What  shall  make  these  mighty  men  melt  away  ?  Seeing  two  or  three 
millions  of  unwarlike  folks  marching  towards  them — an  unarmed  rabble,  with- 
out military  discipline,  and  without  the  appliances  of  war?  Is  it  before  such 
that  the  mighty  men  of  Moab  are  to  fall  back,  that  the  chivakous  sons  of 
Edom  are  to  be  put  to  flight;  that  all  the  inhabitants  of  Palestine  are  to 
melt  away  ?  Nothing  of  the  kind.  Those  Israelites  were  not  going  to  terrify  all 
these  nations  with  any  display  of  their  own  power  or  prowess.  It  was  the  story  of 
tlie  Exodus,  the  story  of  a  divided  sea,  the  story  of  a  certain  mysterious  pillar  of 
fire,  the  story  of  the  wonderful  overthrow  of  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts  in  the  Red  Sea ; 
it  was  this  that  was  to  fill  them  with  despair.  Many  of  us  are  at  the  outset 
terribly  afraid  of  these  hostile  forces ;  is  it  not  a  comfort  to  know  that  on  account 
of  redemption  they  are  actually  afraid  of  us?  In  a  very  memorable  period  in 
*'  our  island  stoiy,"  when  Admiral  Howard  and  Drake  had  defeated  the  Spanish 
Armada  after  the  first  great  battle,  they  continued  to  pursue  them  for  a  fortnight 
without  having  a  single  shot  or  a  single  charge  of  powder  left  in  their  ships.  They 
had  nothing  left  but  air  to  fill  their  guns  with.  Yet  thus  without  any  ammunition 
our  fleet  went  sailing  on  and  sailing  on,  while  the  terrified  strangers  fled  before 
them,  until  they  were  driven  right  into  the  Northern  Sea.  Then  the  Admiral 
thought  they  could  not  do  much  harm  there,  and»so  he  left  them  and  came  back  to 
get  powder  and  shot  for  his  own  ships.  Our  fleet,  with  empty  guns,  chased  their 
enemies  because  that  enemy  was  afraid  of  them.  They  had  had  one  terrible  defeat, 
and  that  was  enough.  And  even  so  may  we  deal  with  the  forces  of  this  world. 
Count  upon  your  enemies  being  afraid  of  you.  If  instead  of  being  afraid  of  them 
you  will  only  carry  the  war  into  the  enemy's  camp,  and  seek  to  win  them  for 
Christ,  instead  of  allowing  them  to  draw  you  away  from  Him,  you  will  find  that 
redemption  has  already  stripped  them  of  their  courage  and  paralyzed  their  power  to 
do  you  any  injury.     {W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Thou  shalt  bring  them  in. — Anticipations  of  faith: — We  are, 
perhaps,  hardly  surprised  at  the  tone  of  jubilant  confidence  which  pervades  this 
glorious  psalm  of  thanksgiving.  Very  strong  indeed  is  the  language  used ;  but 
perhaps  not  stronger  than  might  naturally  have  been  expected  to  spring  from  such 
circumstances  ;  for  what  a  wonderful  event  had  just  transpired !  Here  they  were 
then,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Bed  Sea,  the  vast  wilderness  stretching  before  them, 
their  long  weary  march  not  yet  commenced,  and  wholly  destitute  of  any  adequate 
supplies,  and  without  either  arms,  or  discipline,  or  any  capacity  for  warfare. 
Surely  the  prospect  mi^ht  have  seemed  most  discouraging.  They  must  have 
known  perfectly  well — what  they  soon  found  out  to  be  a  fact — that  the  wilderness 
swarmed  with  wandering  nomad  hordes,  Bedouins  of  the  desert,  men  of  war,  who 
might  at  any  moment  come  down  upon  them,  cut  off  their  stragglers,  or  even  put 
the  whole  undisciplined  rabble  to  rout  and  make  a  prey  of  them.  And  even 
supposing  they  should  overcome  these  difiiculties  of  the  journey,  what  then? 
There  lay  Canaan  before  them,  but  how  were  they,  who  could  hardly  hold  their 
own  against  the  tribes  of  the  desert,  to  undertake  aggressive  warfare  against  nations 
dwelling  in  cities  with  walls  great  and  high,  and  equipped  with  all  the  appliances  ol 
ancient  warfare  ?  How  chimerical  their  enterprise  would  seem  on  reflection  1  how 
improbable  that  they  would  ever  succeed  in  taking  possession  of  the  land  which 
God  had  promised  to  them !  But  faith  looked  on  beyond  all  difiiculties.  Faith 
never  stops  for  commissariat  supplies  !  Faith  does  not  ask.  Where  is  my  daily 
bread  to  come  from  ?  Faith  does  not  wait  to  be  clothed  with  armour,  save  such 
armour  as  the  power  of  God  supplies.  Faith  does  not  stop  to  weigh  the  adequacy 
of  the  means  within  our  reach  to  induce  the  end.  Children  of  God,  it  is  time  we 
endeavoured  to  apply  the  lessons  suggested  by  all  this  to  ourselves.  We  too  have 
been  the  subjects  of  a  great  deliverance,  a  dehverance  as  supernatural  in  its  charac- 
ter and  as  astonishing  in  its  conditions  as  ever  was  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from 
Egypt.  This  deliverance  is  also  the  product  of  redemption.  We  are  saved  in  order 
that  we  may  rise  to  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,  and  become  inheritors  of  our  true 
Land  of  Promise ;  and  the  first  great  deliverance  is  with  us  also  surely  an  earnest 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

and  a  pledge  of  all  that  is  to  follow.  I  suppose  it  is  because  we  so  imperfectly 
apprehend  the  miracle  of  our  deliverance  aud  its  completeness,  and  the  new  rela- 
tions which  it  establishes  between  ourselves  and  God,  and  between  ourselves  and 
sin,  that  our  feelings  at  the  outset  of  our  new  life  are  so  often  just  the  opposite  of 
those  depicted  in  this  triumphant  song.  Instead  of  joyous  anticipation,  how  common 
a  thing  it  is  to  meet  with  gloomy  forebodings  on  the  part  of  tiJe  newborn  children 
of  God,  fresh  from  the  Cross  of  Christ,  just  rising,  as  we  may  say,  spiritually  out  of 
the  waters  of  the  Eed  Sea.  And  many  of  us  have  scarcely  been  saved  from  our 
condition  of  condemnation  and  spiritual  bondage  before  we  begin  to  consider  the 
difficulties  that  lie  before  us,  the  enemies  that  we  shall  have  to  encounter,  the 
Bacrifices  that  we  may  have  to  make,  the  trials  that  we  may  have  to  undergo.  The 
wilderness  seems  so  vast,  tbe  enemies  so  mighty,  the  supplies  so  inadequate  or 
precarious;  and  while  our  eyes  of  unbelief  are  resting  upon  all  these  adverse  con- 
siderations, our  heart  seems  to  sink  within  us  until  we  are  ready  to  turn  back  again 
into  Egypt.  How  common  a  thing  it  is  to  meet  with  young  Christians  who  seem 
indeed  to  be  on  the  right  side  of  the  Red  Sea,  but  who  appear  to  be  more  inclined 
to  wring  their  hands  in  terror  than  to  "  sound  the  loud  timbrel "  in  exultation  ! 
{TV.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  An  encouraging  deliverance  : — Two  ways   this  great 

deliverance  was  encouraging.  1.  It  was  such  an  instance  of  God's  power  as  would 
terrify  their  enemies  and  quite  dishearten  them  (vers.  14-lG).  It  had  this  effect 
(see  Deut.  ii.  4;  Num.  xxii.  3  ;  Josh.  ii.  9, 10).  2.  It  was  such  a  beginning  of  God's 
favour  to  them  as  gave  them  an  earnest  of  the  perfection  of  His  kindness.  This  was 
but  in  order  to  something  further  (ver.  17).  (.1/.  Henry,  D.D.)  Christ  for  ever: — 
When  Lutber  went  to  his  trial  at  Augsburg  from  Wittemberg  he  walked  all  the 
distance.  Clad  in  bis  monk's  brown  frock,  with  all  his  wardrobe  on  his  back,  the 
citizens,  high  aud  low,  attended  him  in  enthusiastic  admiration.  As  they  went 
they  cried,  "  Luther  for  ever  1 "     "  Nay  1  nay  I  "  he  answered,  "  Christ  for  ever  1 " 

Vers.  19-21.  With  timbrels  and  with  dances. — Sony,  timbrel,  and  dance : — The 
monuments  reproduce  this  scene  in  all  its  parts.  Separate  choirs  of  men  and 
women  are  represented  on  them,  singing  in  alternate  responses;  the  timbrel,  or 
tambourine,  is  represented  as  the  instrument  of  tbe  women,  as  the  flute  is  that  of 
the  men ;  and  the  playing  of  the  tambourine,  unaccompanied,  as  here,  by  other 
instruments,  is  represented  in  connection  with  singing  and  the  dance.  Further, 
it  appears  from  the  monuments  that  music  had  eminently  a  religious  destination 
in  Egypt,  that  the  timbrel  was  specially  devoted  to  sacred  uses,  and  that  religious 
dances  were  performed  in  the  worship  of  Osiris.  {E.  C.  Wines,  D.D.)  In  the 
tombs  at  Thebes  timbrels,  like  Miriam's,  round  and  square,  are  seen  in  the  Ijauds 
of  the  women  ;  while  pipes,  trumpets,  sisirums,  drums,  and  guitars  are  there  in 
great  abundance  and  variety ;  and  harps,  not  niucli  unlike  the  modern  instru- 
ment, with  varying  numbers  of  strings  up  to  twenty-two.  (S.  C.  Bartlett,  D.D.) 
Cheering  effect  of  music: — Whilst  the  Feieral  army  lay  before  the  city  of  Rich- 
mond, the  regimental  bands  were  silent.  When  they  began  to  retre;it  to  Malvern, 
the  troops  marched  through  the  acres  of  ripe  grain,  cutting  off  the  tops  and 
gathering  them  into  their  haversacks,  being  out  of  rations,  as  well  as  lame  aud 
stiff  from  marching.  Orders  were  here  given  for  the  bands  to  strike  up  playing,  and 
the  effect  on  the  dispirited  men  was  almo.st  magical  as  the  patriotic  airs  were  played. 
They  seemed  to  catch  new  hope  and  enthusiasm,  and  a  cheer  went  up  from  each 
regiment.  Serving  God  with  a  cheerful  spirit : — When  the  poet  Carpani  inquired 
of  his  friend  Haydn  how  it  happened  that  his  church  music  was  always  so  cheerful, 
the  great  composer  made  a  most  beautiful  reply.  "  I  cannot,"  said  he,  "  make  it 
otherwise ;  I  write  according  to  the  thoughts  I  feel.  When  I  think  upon  God,  my 
heart  is  so  full  of  joy  that  the  notes  dance  and  leap,  as  it  were,  from  my  pen  ;  and 
since  God  has  given  me  a  cheerful  heart,  it  will  be  pardoned  me  that  I  serve  Him 
with  a  cheerful  spirit." 

Vers.  22-27.  They  came  to  Marah. — Marah  : — I.  The  water  was  deleterious, 
not  distasteful  only.  Had  the  people  drunk  it,  it  would  have  wrought  disease  ;  but 
it  was  healed  by  the  obedience  of  Moses  to  God's  directions.  So  if  we  are  attentive 
and  obedient  to  Hjs  voice  He  will  find  us  remedies  from  all  things  that  might  hurt 
us.  II.  It  was  not  possible,  perhaps,  that  the  children  of  Israel  should,  by  perse- 
Tering  in  the  unwholesome  draught  which  is  there  typical  of  sin,  have  vitiated 
THEIR  taste  tell  THEY  DELIGHTED  IN  IT.  But  it  is  too  possible  iu  the  antitype. 
III.  Though  we  are  compelled  by  God's  providence  to  pass  through  difficulty  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  269 

temptation,  we  are  not  doomed  to  dwell  there.  If  we  are  faithful,  it  is  but  in 
passing  that  we  shall  be  endangered.  If  we  use  the  remedy  of  obedience  to  God's 
Word  to-day,  to-morrow  we  shall  be  beside  the  twelve  ever-springing  fountains, 
and  under  the  shade  of  the  palm-trees   of   Elim.     {Archbis]in2}  Benson.)  The 

waters  of  Marah  : — We  have  here  a  parable  of  the  deep  things  of  Christ.  I.  Israel 
was  in  those  days  fresh  from  the  glorious  deliverance  out  of  Egypt  ;  they 
bad  sung  their  first  national  song  of  victory  ;  tbey  had  breathed  the  air  of  liberty. 
This  was  their  first  disappointment,  and  it  was  a  very  sharp  one;  from  the  height 
of  exultation  they  fell  almost  at  once  to  the  depths  of  despair.  Such  disappoint- 
ments we  liave  all  experienced,  especially  in  the  outset  of  our  actual  marcb,  after 
tbe  first  conscious  sense  of  spiritual  triumph  and  freedom.  II.  Of  us  also  it  is  true 
that  God  hath  showed  us  a  certain  tree,  and  that  tree  is  tbe  once  accursed  tree 
on  which  Christ  died.  This  is  the  tree  of  life  to  us,  though  of  death  to  Him.  III. 
It  was  God  who  showed  this  tree  unto  Moses.  And  it  was  God  who  showed  it 
to  us  in  tbe  gospel.  Applied  by  our  faith  to  the  bitter  waters  of  disappointment 
and  distress,  it  will  surely  heal  them  and  make  them  sweet.  Two  things  there  are 
about  the  tree  of  scorn  which  will  never  lose  their  healing  power — the  lesson  of  the 
Cross  and  the  consolation  of  the  Cross;  the  example  and  the  comiDaniouship  of 
Christ  crucified.  IV.  The  life  which  found  its  fitting  close  upon  the  cross  was 
not  a  life  of  suffering  onlj',  but  ejiphaticallt  a  life  of  disappointjient.  Here 
there  is  comfort  for  us.  Our  dying  Lord  must  certainly  have  reflected  that  He,  the 
Son  of  God,  was  leaving  the  world  rather  worse  than  He  found  it  in  all  human  ap- 
pearance. V.  Whatever  our  trials  and  disappointjients,  let  us  use  this  remedy  ; 
it  will  not  fail  us  even  at  the  worst.     [E.  Winterbotham,  3I.A.)  Bitter-sweet: — 

I,  That  great  jot  is  often  closely  followed  by  a  great  trial.  "  Thou  bast 
made  my  mountain  to  stand  strong  "  is  the  grateful  word  of  many  a  rejoicing 
Christian  ;  and  lo  !  suddenly  touched  by  the  finger  of  Providence,  it  reels  and  rocks 
as  though  heaved  by  an  earthquake,  and  falls  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  In  the 
day  of  prosperity  be  wise !  Rejoice  with  trembling  1  Do  not  presume  on  the 
possession  of  present  good.  In  the  hour  of  peace  forget  not  the  preparation  for  a 
possible  storm.     Trust  in  God  with  a  firm  hand,  both  in  sunshine  and  in  shade. 

II.  Here  is  a  great  tri.\l  transformed  into  a  great  blessing.  The  bitter  was 
not  removed,  but  converted  into  sweet.  So  God  can  make  the  grief  a  grace  and 
change  the  burden  into  a  blessing.  The  rod  itself  shall  bud  and  blossom  and  bring 
forth  almonds,  so  that  the  very  thing  that  chastens  the  trustful  soul  shall  present 
beauty  to  the  eye  and  fruit  to  the  taste.  It  was  a  Divine  work.  The  Israelites, 
even  with  Moses  at  their  head,  had  no  skill  to  meet  tbe  given  necessities  of  the 
hour.  "  The  Lord  showed  them  a  tree,"  and  so  miraculously  healed  the  forbidding 
spring.  Brothers !  human  wisdom,  earth's  pbilosophies,  the  world's  limited 
resources  are  all  useless  in  the  midst  of  our  desperate  needs.     III.  Here  is  a  great 

TRLAL,    so    TRANSFORMED,    PREPARING    FOR   AND    LEADING    TO   A   STILL   GREATER   BLESSING 

(see  ver.  27).  Christian,  be  of  good  courage.  Egypt's  chains  were  heavy  ;  but  the 
Red  Sea  victory  made  thee  glad.  Marah's  waters  were  bitter ;  but  the  Lord  dis- 
tilled sweet  streams  therefrom  to  strengthen  and  refresh  thy  soul.  Then  He  led 
thee  to  beautiful  Elim,  with  its  springs  and  palm-trees,  and  its  grateful  rest,  and  in 
all  and  tbrough  all  thou  art  "nearer"  Canaan  than  when  first  thou  didst  believe. 
Amid  all  thine  alternations  of  joy  and  sorrow  there  shall  be,  if  thou  art  faithful  to 
thy  God,  a  clear  current,  progressive  gain,  and  it  shall  still  be  better  further  on. 
IV.  This  gracious  alternation  and  abundant  deliverance  was  all  experienced  on 
THE  line  OF  march.  Let  the  Christian  never  forget  that  these  are  the  conditions 
necessary  to  secure  his  gracious  progression  of  conquest,  transformation,  and 
exceeding  joy.  {J.  J.  Wray.)  The  sweetening  tree  in  life's  hitter  streams  : — 
Heaven  has  prepared  a  sweetening  tree  for  the  bitter  waters.  I.  Of  our  secular 
LIFE.  Wrecked  plans,  blasted  hopes,  &c.  The  "  tree  "  to  sweeten  this  is  Christ's 
doctrine  of  a  Fatherly  providence.  II.  Of  our  moral  life.  The  bitter  waters  of 
an  accusing  conscience.  "  Whom  God  hath  set  forth,"  &c.  III.  Or  an  intellectual 
life.  God's  revealed  character  in  Christ — all-wise,  all-loving,  all-powerful.  IV. 
Of  our  social  life.  "  I  am  the  Resurrection,"  &c.  "  Them  that  sleep  in  Jesus 
■will  God  bring  with  Him."  V.  Of  our  dying  life.  (Homilist.)  The  mysterious 
tree : — I.  Th.\t  prayer  will  meet  every  painful  crisis  in  human  experience. 
II.  That  all  men,  everywhere,  are  athikst.     III.  That  every  man  will  at  length 

come    to   his    well  ;    but    the  water  thereof  will  BE  BITTER  TO  HIS  TASTE.       ScHSUal 

indulgence.  Fashionable  amusement ;  inebriety ;  riches ;  worldly  renown  ;  infidelity. 
AH  mere  earthly  pools  are  acrid  and  unsatisfying.    IV.  That  there  is  a  tree  which 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

CAN  SWEETEN  ALL  eaeth's  WATERS.  "  Tlie  tree  of  life" — the  Cross  of  Christ.  "  Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come."  {S.  D.  Burcliard,  D.D.)  Life's  bitterness  : — 
The  wilderiK  ss  brings  out  what  is  within.  It  also  discovers  God's  goodness  and 
our  unworthincss.  I.  Earth's  bitterness.  1.  We  must  expect  bitter  pools  in  a 
bitter  world.  2.  Many  of  us  make  our  own  Marahs.  II.  Heaven's  kemedy.  1.  To 
the  praying  man  the  Lord  reveals  the  remedy.  2.  God  uses  instrumentality.  3. 
God  docs  not  always  take  away  the  Marah,  but  drops  an  ingredient  into  it  to 
sweeten   its  bitterness.      (Hoinilist.)  The  waters  of  Marah: — Had  they  been 

allowed  to  seleot  their  path,  they  would  have  taken  the  short  cut  by  the  seaboard  to 
their  own  promised  land.  But  the  cloud  steered  their  pathway  through  difficulty 
and  into  difficulty.  Behind  them  was  the  blood  of  the  lamb.  They  were  ransomed. 
Behind  them  the  wonders  of  Egypt  %vrought  on  their  behalf.  Behind  them  the 
passage  of  the  Red  Sea.  And  they  might  have  expected  that,  the  moment  they 
had  left  their  foes  behind,  they  had  left  all  trouble  and  sorrow  too.  But  instead  of 
that,  their  redemption  from  Egypt  was  their  redemption  from  comparatively  easy 
circumstances  into  arduous  and  difficult  straits.  God  led  His  redeemed  in  the  very 
heart  and  teeth  of  difficulty.  I  am  often  met  by  men  who  have  been  redeemed  by  the 
blood  of  Christ,  who  are  truly  His  servants,  behind  whom  there  lies  a  wondrous  story 
of  deliverance,  and  they  have  come  to  me  with  complaints,  and  they  have  said,  "  I 
thought  when  I  had  given  up  my  old  sins  that  my  life  would  be  calm  and  placid, 
and  that  difficulty  would  be  at  an  end ;  but  instead,  I  never  did  in  all  my  life  go 
through  such  a  sea  of  difficulty  as  I  have  known  since  I  became  a  Christian." 
Friend,  that  is  always  God's  way  with  Ilis  redeemed  ones.  You  must  not  think 
that  difficulty  is  a  proof  that  you  are  wrong.  Difficulty  is  most  likely  an  evidence 
that  you  are  right.  Never  be  daunted  by  it.  Why  ?  Those  verses  we  read  from 
Deuteronomy  answer  the  question.  It  is  in  order  to  humble  us,  to  prove  us,  and  to 
know  what  is  in  our  heart.  Difficulty  is  sent  to  humble  you.  If  1  offer  my  hand 
to  a  little  maiden  on  a  cold  and  frosty  day,  and  she  thinks  she  can  keep  her  feet  by 
herself,  she  is  not  likely  to  take  my  strong  hand  until  she  has  been  humbled  by  a 
tumble  or  two.  God  has  been  compelled  to  break  down  your  self-confidence. 
When  you  started  the  Christian  life  you  thought  your  arm  was  so  strong  it  could 
beat  down  every  barrier,  or  that  you  were  so  elastic  that  you  could  leap  over  any 
wall,  or  that  your  brain  was  so  keen  that  you  could  see  through  any  difficulty.  God 
began  by  little  difficulties,  and  you  leapt  over  them  ;  and  then  He  put  preater  ones, 
and  you  successfully  overcame  them ;  and  God  has  been  compelled  to  pile  dilhculty 
upon  difficulty  until  you  are  now  face  to  face  with  a  very  desert  on  the  one  hand,  and 
an  Alpine  range  upon  the  i.ther  ;  and  now  broken,  cowed,  defeated,  you  are  just  at 
the  very  position  in  which  to  learn  to  appreciate,  and  to  appropriate,  the  infinite 
resourcesjjf  God.  And  there  is  another  thing  that  difficulty  does  for  a  man.  It 
proves  him.  "  He  made  a  statute  and  an  ordinance,  and  proved  them."  There 
are  so  many  counterfeits,  you  do  not  know  that  you  have  got  the  real  thing  till  you 
have  tested  it.  Tou  do  not  know  the  stability  of  a  house  till  it  has  been  tested  by 
the  storm.*  And  it  is  only  when  difhculty  comes  that  we  really  know  what  we  are. 
You  say  that  you  have  faith.  How  do  you  know  ?  All  your  life  has  been  sunny. 
Wait  till  God  hides  Himself  in  a  pavilion  of  cloud.  You  think  that  you  obey  God, 
but  up  till  now  the  path  that  God  ha=!  led  you  hath  been  such  an  easy  i^ath,  through 
a  meadow  where  the  flowers  have  been  bestrewn.  You  do  not  know  how  much  you 
will  obey  until  you  are  proved.  You  say  you  have  got  patience ;  and  thei'e  is 
nothing  sweeter  than  patience — the  patience  and  gentleness  of  Christ.  Yet  you 
wait  until  you  are  put  into  the  midst  of  trying  and  difficult  circumstances,  and  then 
you  may  talk  about  possessing  patience.  And  then,  once  more,  God  not  only 
humbles  and  proves  us,  but  He  tries  what  is  in  our  hearts ;  not  that  He  needs  to 
know,  but  that  He  may  give  us  the  opportunity  of  equipping  ourselves  for  larger 
work.  For  God  thus  deals  with  us :  He  puts  us  into  difficulty  and  watches  us 
lovingly  to  see  how  we  act,  for  every  day  He  stands  before  His  judgment  bar,  and 
every  hour  is  the  crisis  of  our  life.  If  we  stand  the  test,  He  says,  "  Come  up 
higher,"  and  we  step  up  to  the  wider  platform  and  plateau  of  usefulness.  But  if, 
on  the  other  hand,  we  cannot  stand  the  test,  we  step  down.  Will  you  take  heart 
from  this  ?  Will  you  mind  the  difficulties  ?  Oh,  meet  difficulty  in  God,  and  see  if 
it  be  not  a  training-ground  for  great  and  noble  work  in  the  hereafter.  But  there  is 
disappmntment  too.  It  was  hard  enough  to  have  difficulty,  but  it  was  harder  to  be 
tantalized.  They  marched  on  three  days ;  they  exhausted  the  water  they  had 
brought,  or  what  was  left  was  stinking,  and  they  could  not  drink  it.  Ah,  how  weary 
they  were  1    Ah,  you  men  and  women,  so  disappointment  comes  to  all  of  us.     The 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  271 

youth  has  disappointments.  The  lad  at  school  thinks  that  he  is  a  slave,  that  the 
drudgery  of  Egypt  was  nothing  compared  to  this.  How  he  longs  for  the  time  when 
he  will  be  his  own  master  !  And  off  he  starts.  He  buries  his  school  books,  and 
goes  forth  into  the  world.  Alas,  poor  lad !  he  finds  there  is  no  way  to  Canaan 
except  by  the  hard  plodding  sultry  desert  march.  So  it  is  with  age — mature  life  I 
mean,  bo  it  is  with  the  young  convert.  They  think  Christian  living  is  a  great 
holiday,  a  march-past  with  banners  and  bands.  But  they  eoon  find  that  there  is 
a  stern  warfare.  They  are  disappointed  in  the  Church  they  join,  they  find  all 
Christian  people  do  not  act  as  they  thought ;  they  are  disappointed  because  they 
do  not  at  once  find  sin  die  within  them,  or  the  devil  yield,  or  Christianity  become 
what  they  hoped,  just  wandering  through  a  pleasant  garden  plucking  flowers.  {F. 
B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Moses  at  Marah  : — I.  "  They  could  not  drink  of  the  waters  of 
Marah,  for  they  were  bitter " — so  the  greatest  tkiumphs  of  life  may  be  suc- 
ceeded BY  THE  MOST  VEXATIOUS  INCONVENIENCES.  You  may  be  right,  even  when 
the  heaviest  trial  is  oppressing  you.  You  may  be  losing  your  property,  your  health 
may  be  sinking,  your  prospects  may  be  clouded,  and  your  friends  may  be  leaving 
you  one  by  one,  yet  in  the  midst  of  such  disasters  your  heart  may  be  stedfast  in 
faithfulness  to  God.  H.  "  The  people  murmured  against  Moses  " — so  the  greatest 
BERvicES  OF  LIFE  ARE  SOON  FORGOTTEN.    HI.  "And  Moses  ciicd  uuto  the  Lord  " ! 

^SO  MAGNANIMOUS  PRAYER  IS  BETTER  THAN  OFFICIAL  RESIGNATION.  All  great  leader- 
ships should  be  intensely  religious,  or  they  will  assuredly  fail  in  the  patience  with- 
out which  no  strength  can  be  complete.  Parents,  instead  of  resigning  the  oversight 
of  your  children,  pray  for  them  !  Pastors,  instead  of  resigning  your  oflicial  positions, 
pray  for  those  who  despitefuUy  use  you !  All  who  in  anywise  seek  to  defend  the 
weak,  or  lead  the  blind  or  teach  the  ignorant,  instead  of  being  driven  off  by  every 
unreasonable  murmuring,  renew  your  patience  by  waiting  upon  God !  IV.  "  And  the 
Lord  showed  him  a  tree  " — so  where  there  is  a  bane  in  life  there  is  always  an 
ANTIDOTE.  (J.  Parker,  D.I).)  The  waters  of  Marah : — I.  A  grievous  need.  Do 
we  not  see  in  mankind  a  weary  marching  host  of  pilgrims,  looking  eagerly  for  the 
next  well,  and  hoping  there  to  find  satisfaction  ?  It  is  trite  but  true  of  the  greater 
part  of  tliem,  "  Man  never  is  ;  but  always  to  be  blest."  There  are  deep  yearnings 
after  unattained  good ;  a  burning  desire  for  rest.  Moreover,  even  to  them  who 
have  found  "  the  living  waters  "  there  may  be  many  a  weary  march.  II.  A  sorb 
DISAPPOINTMENT.  Intense  as  are  human  desires  for  final  good,  they  are  doomed,  so 
long  as  fixed  upon  created  objects,  to  perpetual  and  agonizing  disappointment.  The 
apples  that  seemed  ripe  for  the  gathering  and  fit  for  "baskets  of  silver"  are 
found  to  contain  only  rottenness  and  dust.  It  is  wisely  ordered  that  no  creature 
should  give  satisfaction  to  the  heart.  Even  those  who  have  chosen  "the  Lord" 
as  their  "portion"  need  to  be  perpetually  quickened,  lest  they  should  cleave  to  the 
dust.  III.  A  rebellious  and  unreasonable  treatment  of  afflictions.  "  The  people 
murmured  agaiust  Moses."  So  men  complain  still.  They  "charge  God  foolishly"; 
and  governmental  measures,  blights,  panics,  failure  of  success,  &c.,  are  suffered  to 
engender  their  thoughts  and  hard  speeches.  IV.  The  true  and  sure  refuge  in 
TIME  OF  AFFLICTION.  There  is  no  might  of  influence  like  that  which  is  wielded  by 
those  who  are  "  hid  in  the  pavilion  "  of  "  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  the  King 
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords."  V.  The  Divine  sovereignty.  When  men  are 
"willing"  to  see  what  God  shows,  how  quickly  is  the  bitterness  of  hfe  changed 
into  "peace  and  joy  through  believing  "  "  Looking  away  unto  Jesus,"  they  hear 
Him  saying,  "  I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee  !  "  The  mystic  tree  is  "  set  forth  " 
before  the  eye  of  faith,  and  its  goodly  boughs  bend  to  the  touch  even  of  the  chief 
of  sinners.  VI.  Another  and  most  significant  passage  occurs  in  connection  with 
Israel's  sojourn  by  the  bitter  well,  and  which  shows  the  continual  obligation  of 
DrviNE  ORDINANCES  EVEN  IN  GREAT  EXIGENCIES.  "  There  He  made  for  them  a 
s'^atute  and  an  ordinance,  and  there  He  proved  them."  They  were  now  tested  as  to 
their  disposition  to  obey  alike  the  stated  and  occasional  commandments  of  God ; 
and  it  is  possible  that  some  further  instructions  were  conveyed  on  Divine  authority. 
But  "  the  statute  and  ordinance  "  plainly  refer  to  the  "solemn  assembly"  which 
was  now  to  be  observed.  VII.  Once  again,  we  learn  beside  the  waters  of  Marah  the 
COMPENSATORY  LAW  OF  DiviNE  PROCEEDINGS.  We  are  "pilgrims  as  all  our 
fathers  were,"  and  often  reach  a  bitter  well  in  our  march  through  the  wilderness; 
but  beside  each  there  is  a  tree  whose  virtue  makes  the  nauseous  waters  sweeter 
than   all   the  streams  of  Goshen.      (J.  D.  Brocklehurst,  D.D.)  Bitter  things 

made  siceet : — But  we  have  here  also  the  means  of  sweetening  all  bitterness.  The 
bitterness  of  repentance  is  sweetened  by  this  consideration,  that,  being  a  godly 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

sorrow,  it  worketh  a  repentance  unto  life,  which  no  one  repenteth  of.  The  bitter- 
ness of  denying  the  world  and  self  is  sweetened  by  this,  that  he  wlio  renounces 
everything  for  His  sake  receives  it  again  a  hundredfold.  The  bittaness  of  the 
spiritual  combat  is  alleviated  by  this,  that  it  is  the  good  figbt  of  faith  to  which  the 
victory  and  the  crown  of  glory  is  held  out.  The  bitterness  of  the  various  sulieiings 
we  have  to  endure  is  sweetened  by  the  consideration  that  they  are  not  worthy  of 
the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed  ;  and  also  of  the  various  temptations  hy  which  we 
are  assailed,  of  which  it  is  said,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureih  ti-mpta- 
tion ;  for  after  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  God  has 
promised  to  them  that  love  Him."  In  short,  this  wondrous  tree  can  sweeten 
all  the  suffering  that  would  be  otherwise  intolerable.  But  still  it  is  necessary 
that  the  remedy  be  shown  and  pointed  out  to  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  (G. 
(D.  Knimmacher.)  Mar<ih\  or,  the  hitter  waters  sweetened: — I.  The  evils 
OF  THE  WILDERNESS.  1.  The  perils  and  trials  of  the  wilderness  ojcur  very 
early  in  the  pilgrim  life.  2.  These  evils  assume  varied  shapes.  3.  Tney 
touch  very  vital  matters.  God  may  touch  you  in  the  most  beloved  object 
of  your  heart.  4.  There  is  a  reason  why  the  earthly  mercies  which  supply  our 
necessities  must  be  more  or  less  bitter.  What  can  you  hope  for  in  a  wilderness 
but  productions  congruous  to  it ?  Canaan!  Who  looks  for  bitterness  there?  IF. 
The  tendency  of  hu>ian  nature.  1.  They  murmured,  complained,  found  fault. 
A  very  easy  thing.  No  sense  in  it,  no  wit  in  it,  no  thought  in  it :  it  is  the  cry  rather 
of  a  brute  than  of  a  man — murmur — just  a  double  groan.  Easy  is  it  for  us  to  kick 
against  the  dispensations  of  God,  to  give  utterance  to  our  griefs,  and  what  is  worse, 
to  the  inference  we  drew  from  them  that  God  has  forgotten  to  be  gracious.  To 
murmur  is  our  tendency ;  but  do  we  mean  to  let  the  tendencies  of  the  old  natui'e 
nile  us  ?  2.  Observe  that  the  murmuring  was  not  ostensibly  against  God.  They 
murmured  against  Moses.  And  have  you  ever  noticed  how  the  most  of  us,  when 
we  are  in  a  murmuring  vein,  are  not  honest  enough  to  murmur  distinctly  against 
God.  No ;  the  child  is  dead,  and  we  form  a  conjecture  that  there  was  some  wrong 
treatment  on  the  part  of  nurse,  or  surgeon,  or  ourselves.  Or  we  have  lost  money, 
and  have  been  brought  down  from  opulence  to  almost  poverty ;  then  some  one 
person  was  dishonest,  a  certain  party  betrayed  us  in  a  transaction  by  failing  to 
fulfil  his  part ;  all  the  murmuring  is  heaped  on  that  person.  We  deny,  perhaps 
indignantly,  that  we  murmur  against  God ;  and  to  prove  it  we  double  the  zeal  with 
which  we  murmur  against  Moses.  To  complain  of  the  second  cause  is  about  aa 
seusible  as  the  conduct  of  the  dog,  which  bites  the  sticks  with  which  it  is  beaten. 
3.  Once  more,  while  we  speak  of  this  tendency  in  human  nature,  I  want  you  to 
cbs3  ve  how  they  betrayed  an  utter  unbelief  in  God.  They  said  unto  Moses,  "  What 
shall  we  drink?  "  They  meant  by  it,  "  By  what  means  can  God  supply  our  want  of 
water?  "  They  were  at  the  K<  d  Sea,  and  God  cleft  the  intervening  gulf  in  twain, 
through  the  depths  thereof  they  marched  dryshod  ;  there  is  Marah's  water — shall  it 
be  more  diihcult  for  God  to  purify  than  to  divide  ?  To  sweeten  a  fountain — is  that 
more  difficult  than  to  cleanse  a  sea?  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord?  III. 
The  remedy  of  grace.  1.  Take  the  case  of  prayer  to  God.  2.  As  soon  as  we  have 
a  prayer,  God  has  a  remedy.  "  The  Lord  showed  him  a  tree."  I  am  persuaded 
that  for  every  lock  in  Doubting  Castle  there  is  a  key,  but  the  promises  are  often  in 
great  confusion  to  our  minds,  so  that  we  are  perplexed.  If  a  blacksmith  should 
bring  you  his  great  bundle  of  picklocks,  you  would  have  to  turn  them  over,  and  over, 
and  over ;  and  try  half  of  them,  perhaps  two-thirds,  before  you  would  find  the  right 
one  ;  ay,  and  perhaps  the  right  one  would  be  left  to  the  last.  It  is  always  a  blessing 
to  remember  that  for  every  aiiiiction  there  is  a  promise  in  the  Word  of  God ;  a 
promise  which  meets  the  case,  and  was  made  on  purpose  for  it.  But  you  may  not 
be  always  able  to  find  it — no,  you  may  go  fumbling  over  the  Scriptures  long  before 
you  get  the  true  word ;  but  when  the  Lord  shows  it  to  you,  when  it  comes  with 
power  to  the  soul,  oh,  what  a  bhss  it  is  !  3.  Now  that  remedy  for  the  healing  of 
Marah's  water  was  a  very  strange  one.  Why  should  a  tree  sweeten  the  waters? 
This  was  no  doubt  a  miraculous  incident,  and  it  was  also  meant  to  teach  us  some- 
thing. The  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  was  eaten  by  our  first 
parents  and  embittered  all ;  there  is  a  tree  of  life,  the  leaves  <^f  which  are  for  the 
heahng  of  the  nations.  4.  That  remedy  was  most  effective.  When  they  cut  down 
the  tree,  and  put  it  into  the  water,  it  turned  the  water  sweet — they  could  drink  of 
it;  and  let  me  assure  you,  that  in  the  case  of  our  trouble,  the  Cross  is  a  most  effec- 
tive sweetener.  5.  It  is  transcendent.  Thewater  was  bitter,  but  it  became  absolutely 
sweet.     The  same  water  that  was  bitter  became  sweet,  and  the  giace  of  God,  by 


CHAP,  x^'.l  EXODUS.  273 

leading  us  into  contemplations  that  spring  out  of  the  Cross  of  Christ,  can  make  our 
trials  themselves  to  become  pleasant  to  us.  It  is  a  triumph  of  grace  in  the  heart 
when  we  not  only  acquiesce  in  trouble,  but  even  rejoice  in  it.  (C.  H.  Sjtxrtjeon.) 
The  well  of  bitterness : — I.  That  the  flrst  day's  jouenet,  in  spite  of  the  splendid 
scenery  of  the  coasts  of  the  gulf,  is  probably  the  most  wearisoiie  and  monotonous 
OF  the  whole  way.  Sand-storms,  white  limestone  plains,  the  dust  caked  into  a 
hard  surface  intensely  hot  and  dazzling,  no  water,  no  trees — it  is  as  if  the  desert  put 
on  its  dreariest  dress  to  greet  its  pilgrims,  and  gave  to  them  at  once  a  full  taste  of 
the  toils  and  wants  which  they  must  endure  in  traversing  its  wastes.  And  is  it 
otherwise  in  life?  Is  not  the  same  character  impressed  for  us  on  earth  nnd  life, 
when  we  enter  on  its  sterner  era,  when  we  leave  the  home  of  our  childhood,  the 
Egypt  of  our  careless,  half-developed  youth,  and  go  out  into  the  wilderness,  to 
wander  freely  there  under  the  law  of  duty,  and  before  the  face  of  God.  Does  it  not 
seem  to  all  of  us  strange  and  dreary  ?  \Mio  ever  found  the  first  aspects  of  duty 
pleasant  ?  Is  it  holiday  pastime,  the  first  grappling  with  the  realities  of  life  ?  ^Vho 
has  not  been  choked  and  parched  by  the  hot  dust  of  the  great  desert  I  though  it  be 
full  of  looms,  and  mill-wheels,  and  manifold  activity,  it  is  a  desert  at  first  to  us 
before  we  get  accustomed  to  its  atmosphere  and  at  home  in  its  hfe.  Well  does  the 
schoolboy  know  it,  as  he  plods  into  the  wilderness  of  study,  and  faints  under  the 
first  experience  of  its  dryness  and  dust.  Let  him  but  hold  on  awhile,  and  he  will 
find  sprinjjs  and  palm-trees,  where  he  may  rest  and  play  ;  but  it  wants  large  faith 
and  a  goad  of  sharp  necessity  to  get  him  through  the  weariness  of  those  first  days. 
God  does  not  conceal  from  any  one  of  us  the  stern  conditions  of  our  discipline.  II. 
It  is  a  trite  saying,  that  disappointment  is  the  hardest  of  all  things  to  bear. 
Hardest,  because  it  finds  the  soul  unbraced  to  meet  it — relaxed,  at  ease,  and  tuned 
to  indulgence  and  joy.  Who  has  not  muttered  "  Marali "  over  some  well  in  the 
desert,  which  he  strained  himself  to  reach  and  found  to  be  bitterness?  It  strikes 
me  that  we  have,  in  this  miracle,  most  important  suggestions  as  to  the  philosophy 
of  all  miracles.  I  beheve  that  the  object  of  all  miracles  is  to  maintain,  and  not  to 
violate — to  reveal,  and  not  to  confound — the  order  of  God's  world.  (J.  B.  Brown, 
B.A.)  Marali  and  Elivi : — I.  The  thoughts  suggested  by  the  changes  herb 
described.  1.  That  the  life  of  a  God-led  man  is  full  of  changes  in  outward 
circumstances.  2.  That  these  changes  are  divinely  ordained.  3.  That  each  change 
brings  its  own  temptations.  4.  That  these  varied  changes  are  intended  to  develop 
all  our  graces.  II.  Thoughts  suggested  by  the  halting-places  here  mentioned. 
1.  Marah  was  a  place  of  temptation.  2.  Marah  was  a  place  of  disappointment.  3. 
Marah  was  a  place  of  trustfulness  and  prayer.  4.  Elim  has  its  suggestiveness. 
God's  bountiful  goodness.  (A.  Boivland,LL.B.)  The  moral  lessons  of  Marah  : — 
I.  We  have  an  expressive  type  of  human  trial  in  the  bitterness  of  the 
waters.  1.  The  bitterness  of  the  waters  disappointed  their  most  eager  expecta- 
tions. 2.  The  bitterness  of  the  waters  left  them  apparently  without  a  grand 
necessity  of  life.  3.  The  bitterness  of  the  waters  immediately  succeeded  a  remark- 
able deliverance.  II.  We  have  unreasoning  mistrust  of  the  Dh^ine  providence 
IN  the  murmuring  of  the  people.  1.  Their  mistrust  was  unreasoning,  considering 
the  person  against  whom  they  murmured.  Not  Moses,  but  God,  was  tbeir  Guide, 
as  they  well  knew.  2.  Their  mistrust  was  unreasoning,  considering  the  Divine 
promises  they  had  received.  3.  Their  mistrust  was  unreasoning,  considering  the 
displays  of  Divine  power  which  they  had  witnessed.  III.  We  have  an  instructive 
appeal  for  Divine  help  in  the  prayer  of  Moses.  1.  It  indicates  the  importance 
of  earnest  supplication  to  God  in  all  our  trials.  2.  It  suggests  the  importance  of  a 
submissive  spirit  in  supplicating  deliverance  from  our  trials.  IV.  We  have  a 
gracious  display  of  Divine  power  in  the  sweetening  of  the  waters.  God  answers 
prayer  in  the  hour  of  trouble.  1.  By  influencing  the  mind  in  the  direction  whence 
relief  may  be  obtained.  2.  By  transmuting  the  temporal  affliction  into  a  rich 
spiritual  blessing.  V.  We  have  an  intimation  of  the  design  of  all  affliction 
IN  THE  declared  PURPOSE  OF  THIS  PARTICULAR  TRIAL.  "  There  He  provcd  tbem  " — 
tested  their  faith  and  obedience.  Afflictions  prove  us.  1.  By  discovering  to  us  the 
unsatisfying  nature  of  earthly  things.  2.  By  disclosing  the  true  measure  of  our  piety. 
{W.  Kirkiu'in.)  Poisoned  icaters : — What  is  aU  this,  but  a  striking  picture  of  human 
life,  and  of  that  which  the  grace  of  God  can  and  does  effect  ?  All  the  waters  of 
human  life  have  been  poisoned  by  sin.  There  is  not  one  drop  that  has  been  left 
quite  pure, — all  has  been  made  bitter.  Much  there  is  still  which  at  a  distance  looks 
beautiful  and  refreshing ;  and  those  who  walk  by  sense  and  not  by  faith,  are  often, 
nay,  always,  deceived  by  appearances  just  as  Israel  was.     It  is  not  until  they  taste 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

for  themselves  that  they  find  out  the  truth  of  Solomon's  words,  that  all  is  "  vanity 
and  vexation  of  spirit."  Look  at  the  attractions  of  the  world,  which  cause  so  many 
souls  to  wander.  What  are  they  all  but  a  vain  show,  which  can  intoxicate  or  lull 
the  soul  for  a  time,  but  which  leave  it,  oh,  how  weary  and  restless  afterwards !  The 
waters  of  the  world  are  truly  bitter  waters.  Or,  look  at  the  ocmpations  of  life.  To 
some  energetic  spirits  the  very  difficulty  and  toil  of  labour  are  attractive  ;  but,  after 
a  while,  will  not  the  question  thrust  itself  upon  the  busy  mind — ob,  what  is  the 
profit  ?  what  the  end  of  all  this  ?  Suppose  that  everything  prospers.  Suppose 
that  I  have  enough  to  satisfy  every  earthly  want,  to  secure  me  every  gratification, 
to  encompass  myself  and  children  with  every  luxury.  What  then  ?  There  is  a 
voice,  a  penetrating  voice,  that  says,  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God  !  "  that  proclaims, 
•'  It  is  appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  that  the  judgment. "  And  then,  what 
will  become  of  me  ?  Or,  look  again  at  the  relationships  of  life.  Instituted  though 
they  are  by  God,  yet  sin  Las  embittered  them  also.  Whence  is  it,  that  some  of  the 
deepest  and  most  certain  trials  of  life  come  to  us  ?  It  is  through  our  relationships 
and  our  friendships.  Deep  affection,  sacred  as  it  is,  has  always  many  anxieties 
associated  with  it.  How  many  a  mother's  heart  is  gradually  worn  out  by  cares 
about  her  children  !  How  many  a  father,  when  surveying  the  disturbances  of  his 
family,  is  impelled  to  adopt  the  words  of  the  aged  Jacob,  "  All  these  things  are 
against  me !  "  And  then,  how  many  a  heart  is  left  widowed  even  early  in  life, 
with  a  void  which  nothing  earthly  can  ever  fill  !  Is  it  too  much  to  say  that 
this  world,  viewed  as  it  is  in  itself,  is  "  Marah  "  ?  Its  waters  are  bitter.  Have  not 
numbers  who  have  embraced  it  as  their  all,  gone  down  to  the  grave,  restless,  dis- 
contented and  murmuring  ?  It  may  seem  to  some  as  if  we  had  invested  the  world 
with  its  pleasures,  its  occupations,  and  its  relationships,  in  too  thick  a  gloom.  If 
so,  we  would  remind  you  that  we  have  been  speaking  of  the  world,  as  such,  as  it  is 
in  itself — of  pleasures  which  are  far  from  God — of  business  and  occupation  from 
which  God  is  excluded — and  of  relationships  which  are  put  in  the  place  of  God. 
(G.  Wagnrr.)  Bitter  waters : — Such  are  often  the  consolations  of  this  world.  We 
ardently  long  for  them,  and  when  we  obtain  them  they  are  bitter.  The  things  we 
have  most  wished  for  become  new  sorrows.  And  this  is  to  teach  us  to  seek  our 
true  joys  in  God  alone,  to  make  the  wilderness,  of  this  world  distast'-ful  to  us, 
and  to  cause  us  to  long  for  eternal  life.  Suppose  a  man  to  be  so  poor  as  to 
earn  his  bread  with  difficulty ;  he  can  scarcely  provide  for  his  family.  "  Ah  1 " 
he  may  perhaps  say  to  himself,  "if  I  were  only  like  so  many  people  around 
me,  who  are  not  obliged  to  work,  and  are  so  happy  in  this  world  I "  Suppose 
this  man  to  become  rich ;  but  still  a  prey  to  care,  sun-ounded  by  enemies, 
and  unhappy  in  his  children.  How  many  bitter  sorrows  are  still  his  lot :  he 
•was  once  in  the  desert  of  Shur,  now  he  is  at  the  waters  of  Marah  !  A  woman 
finds  herself  solitary  and  lonely  ;  she  wishes  for  a  friend  and  protector ;  she 
marries.  But  she  finds  out  too  late  that  her  husband  is  a  man  of  bad  character  or 
of  bad  habits.  She  was  in  the  desert,  she  is  now  at  Marah.  (Professor  Gamsen.) 
Sweeteninp  the  icaters : — I.  Mak-^hs  of  disappointment.  I.  The  young  convert 
imagines  that  when  he  has  got  to  the  Cross  he  has  got,  so  to  speak,  next  door  to 
heaven ;  he  imagines  that,  once  he  has  got  pardon,  he  will  never  have  another 
sigh ;  but  oh !  it  is  only  a  three  days'  march  from  the  City  of  Destruction  to  the 
Slough  of  Despond,  only  a  little  way  out  to  the  darkness  ana  the  trouble ;  and  then, 
when  it  comes,  the  young  convert  is  sometimes  tempted  to  look  back  to  the  delights 
of  the  old  days,  when  he  had  not  any  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes ;  for  he  has  thus 
to  learn  in  bitterness  and  disappointment  that  it  is  through  much  tribulntion  he  is 
to  be  perfected  for  the  kingdom.  2.  So,  too,  with  the  mature  believer  ;  life  is  full 
of  disappointments.  It  takes  very  little  to  turn  the  waters  of  our  best  comforts  into 
bitterness ;  and  disappointment  in  any  case  is  hard  to  bear  ;  but  sometimes  it  is 
doubly  hard  when  it  comes  upon  the  back  of  other  trials.  II.  Mabahs  of  mep.ct.  1. 
God  sends  no  needless  trials.  He  does  not  afflict  for  His  own  pleasure,  but  for  our 
good.  2.  For  every  need  God  has  provided  the  supply,  for  every  bane  the  antidote. 
But  you  will  not  discover  it  yourself.  He  must  point  it  out.  3.  Notice  the  method 
of  the  Divine  mercy.  God  does  not  take  away  the  burden ;  He  will  give  you  more 
strength ;  and  then  you  will  have  the  strength,  even  after  the  burden  is  removed. 
You  will  be  permanently  the  better  for  it.     (G.  Davidson,  B.ISc.)  The  tree  of 

healing :— God's  plans  of  mercy  to  mankind  are  remedial.  He  allows  sin  and 
suffering  to  exist,  but  He  provides  means  for  the  cure  of  these  evils.  The  religion 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  healing  and  curative  influence  in  the  world.  1.  Take, 
for  example,  the  bitterness  of  temptation.     A  man  has  made  noble  resolutions. 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  275 

^ — _^ — _^ — ^ — 

formed  high  plans  of  life,  and  lo,  he  finds,  to  his  utter  mortification,  that  his  sinful 
nature  still  yields  to  any  blast  of  temptation.  He  is  like  one  who  has  built  a  noble 
palace  and  finds  that  some  foul  infection  renders  it  hateful.  Before  the  solemn 
aspect  of  the  Crucified,  the  powers  of  evil  lose  their  fascinating  glow.  2.  And  then 
there  is  the  bitterness  of  remorse,  the  sting  of  remembered  guilt.  A  German  ^vriter 
describes  a  youth  who  returned,  after  a  long  absence,  to  his  home.  All  welcomed 
him  with  joy.  Evei-ything  was  done  to  make  him  happy ;  but  he  still  was  oppressed 
with  a  silent  gloom.  Some  friend  urged  him  to  say  what  ailed  him  and  kept  him 
so  depressed  amidst  their  happiness,  and  at  length,  with  a  groan,  he  explained,  "A 
cin  Ues  heavy  on  my  soul."  But  the  Cross  of  Christ  removes  this  bitter  sorrow,  for 
He  who  is  our  peace  has  nailed  "  the  writing  which  was  against  us  "  to  His  Cross. 
3.  What  shall  we  say  about  the  bitter  cup  of  suffering  which  God,  in  His  inscrutable 
dealings,  places  in  the  hands  of  so  many  to  drink  ?  Yet  the  sufferer  finds  succour 
in  remembering  that  his  Saviour  has  also  suffered,  and  for  his  salvation.  A  poor 
•woman  in  a  ward  of  one  of  the  great  London  hospitals  had  to  undergo  a  fearful 
operation,  and,  as  a  special  favour,  besought  that  it  might  be  performed  on  Good 
Friday,  which  was  close  at  hand,  that  the  reflection  on  her  Eedeemer's  agony  might 
the  better  enable  her  to  endure  her  own  sufferings.  Is  the  bitterness  of  poverty,  or 
of  contempt,  our  lot?  So  was  it  that  of  Jesus,  our  Lord  ;  and  turning  to  Him,  with 
all  confidence  we  appeal  to  His  sympathy.  Are  we  called  on  to  feel  the  terrible 
bitterness  of  bereavement,  to  gaze  on  the  empty  cradle,  or  the  unoccupied  chair? 
Then  think  how  the  Cross  points  upward!  {W.  Harditmn,  LL.D.)  Anticipated 
pleasure  alloyed: — We  look  with  great  expectancy  for  the  arrival  of  some  pleasure 
which  we  imagine  will  afford  us  the  most  complete  satisfaction,  and  no  sooner  does 
it  arrive  than  we  find  in  its  train  a  whole  host  of  petty  annoyances  and  unwelcome 
accompaniments.  It  is  not  only  so  in  social  life,  but  also  in  the  material  world.  Mr. 
Matthew  Lewis,  M.P. ,  in  his  interesting  "  Journal "  of  a  residence  among  the  negroes 
in  the  W^est  Indies,  relates  how  eagerly  in  Jamaica,  after  three  montlis  of  drought, 
the  inhabitants  long  for  rain;  and  when  the  blessing  at  last  descends,  it  is  accom- 
panied by  terrific  thunder  and  lightning,  and  has  the  effect  of  bringing  out  all  sorts 
of  insects  and  reptiles  in  crowds,  the  ground  being  covered  with  lizards,  the  air  filled 
with  mosquitoes,  the  rooms  of  the  houses  with  centipedes  and  legions  of  mosquitoes. 
And  it  will,  on  inquiry,  be  found  that  the  enjoyment  of  nearly  every  anticipated 
pleasure  is  in  like  manner  more  or  less  alloyed  by  reason  of  the  unpleasant  things 
which  seem  inevitably  to  attend  it.  (Scientific  Illustrations.)  We  have  not  done 
with  hardship  when  ice  have  left  Egypt : — This  may  be  regarded  as  a  universal  law 
so  long  as  we  are  in  the  present  life,  and  may  be  illustrated  as  really  in  common 
and  secular  matters  as  in  spiritual  things.  The  schoolboy  is  apt  to  imagine  that 
he  is  a  slave.  He  is  under  tutors  and  governors;  and  as  he  grinds  away  at  his 
studies,  not  seeing  any  relation  between  them  and  what  he  is  to  do  in  the  future, 
he  is  tempted  to  think  that  the  drudgery  of  the  Hebrews  in  the  brickyard  was 
nothing  to  that  which  he  has  to  undergo,  and  he  longs  for  the  day  when  he  shall 
be  a  free  man  and  enter  upon  the  active  duties  of  life.  His  emancipation  froyi  the 
dry  and  uninteresting  labours  at  which  he  has  so  long  been  held  marks  an  epoch  in 
his  history,  and  he  sings  over  it  a  song  as  sincere,  if  not  as  exalted,  as  that  of 
Moses  at  the  sea.  The  burial  of  the  books  by  our  graduating  classes  may  be  in  the 
main  a  foolish  freak ;  but  yet  it  is  the  expression,  in  its  own  way,  of  relief  from 
that  which  has  hitherto  been  felt  to  be  a  restraint,  and  each  of  those  who  take  part 
in  it  is  intensely  jubilant.  But  after  he  has  entered  on  the  active  duties  of  the 
work  to  which  he  devotes  himself,  the  youth  has  not  gone  far  before  he  comes  to 
Marah,  and  his  first  experience  is  one  of  disappointment.  Ah !  well  for  him  then 
if  he  cries  to  God,  and  finds  the  healing  tree  which  alone  can  sweeten  its  waters  of 
bitterness!  So  it  is,  also,  with  every  new  enterprise  in  which  a  man  engages. 
After  his  first  victory  comes  something  which  empties  it  of  half  its  glory.  Pure 
and  unmingled  success  is  unknown  in  the  world,  and  would  be,  let  me  add,  a  great 
calamity  if  it  were  to  be  enjoyed ;  for  then  the  man  would  become  proud  and  forget 
God,  and  lose  all  remembrance  of  that  precious  influence  by  which  the  disappoint- 
ments in  our  experience  are  transmuted  into  means  of  grace.  (TV.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)  A  valuable  tree  .-—The  eucalyptus  tree  is  efficacious  in  preventing  malaria. 
The  cause  is  supposed  to  be  that  its  thirsty  roots  drain  the  soil  for  many  yards 
around,  and  that  its  large  leaves  exhale  an  aromatic  oil  and  intercept  the  malarious 
germs.  An  incident  shows  its  efficacy :  An  officer  in  India  whose  troops  were  often 
attacked  by  sickness  removed  their  huts  to  a  place  where  several  large  trees  grew 
between  them  and  the  swamp,  and  from  that  time  until  the  trees  were  cut  down  the 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

troops  enjoyed  excellent  health  ;  afterwards  sickness  reappeared.  It  appears  to  be 
only  in  the  case  of  zymotic  diseases  that  the  trees  operate  as  a  preventative,  but 
that  is  of  no  slight  value  in  many  districts.  {Youtli's  Companion.)  A  heaven-sent 
plant : — It  is  impossible  for  us  to  win  any  victory  over  this  terrible  evil  in  our 
own  strength.  Even  heathen  teachers  acknowledge  this.  Many  of  you  will  re- 
member the  classic  fable  when  Ulysses  was  on  his  way  from  the  ship  to  deliver 
from  Circe  those  companions  of  his  who  had  been  changed  into  swine  by  tbe  power 
of  the  enchantress  of  sensuality,  he  was  met  by  tbe  legendary  god  Mercury,  who 
told  him  that  he  would  never  be  able  to  overcome  the  enchantress  by  his  own  sword. 
Mercury  gave  him  a  plant,  the  root  of  which  was  black  and  the  Hower  of  which  was 
white,  and  it  was  by  the  power  of  this  plant  that  he  was  to  win  his  victory  over  the 
enchantress.  There  is  a  deep  moral  truth  in  that  myth  of  the  old  Greek  poet.  We 
have  an  enchantress  to  contend  against ;  we  have  to  contend  against  a  mighty 
power  that  is  changing  our  fellow-men  into  swine  every  day,  and  we  cannot  attain 
the  victory  over  that  power  except  by  means  of  a  heaven-sent  plant,  the  Tree  of 
Life,  the   blessed  Cross   of   Christ.      (Dean  Edicards.)  Dificulti'-s  of  leaders 

through  opposition  among  followers  : — What  a  hard  place  was  this  of  Moses 
here  !  Every  gi'eat  reformer  has  had  to  go  through  a  wilderness  to  the  pro- 
mised land  of  his  success ;  and  always  some  of  those  who  left  Egypt  with  him 
have  turned  against  him  before  he  had  gone  far.  I  think  of  the  almost  mutiny 
of  his  men  against  Col  •  nbus,  as,  flay  after  day,  he  steered  westward  and  saw 
no  land ;  I  think  of  the  ^ouble  whic''  Luther  and  Calvin  had  so  often  with  their 
own  followers,  and  of  thu  banif-hine.»t  at  one  time  of  the  latter  from  that  Geneva, 
which,  even  to  this  day,  "^  the  creation  of  his  greatness  ;  I  think  of  the  curs  that 
yelped  at  the  heels  of  th  '^ather'6f  his  country,  when  he  was  following  that  course 
which  now  the  universa  voice  of  posterity  has  applauded ;  I  think  of  the  diflQculties 
which  have  embarrassed  many  meaner  men  in  lower  works  of  reformation,  which 
have  at  length  benefited  and  blessed  the  world ;  and  I  blush  for  the  selfishness  of 
those  who  prefer  their  own  interest  to  the  welfare  of  the  community,  while,  at  the 
same  time,  I  honour  the  conscientious  courage  which  determines  to  go  on,  in  spite 
of  opposition  in  the  front  and  dissatisfaction  in  the  rear.  Oh !  ye  who  are  bravely 
battling  for  the  right,  the  pure,  the  benevolent,  whether  it  be  in  the  sweeping  out 
of  corruption  from  political  offices,  or  in  the  closing  of  these  pestilential  houses 
which  are  feeding  the  intemperance  of  our  streets,  or  in  the  maintenance  in  the 
churches  of  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints — take  heart  of  grace  from  Moses 
here.  Go  with  your  causes  to  the  Lord,  and  be  sure  that  they  who  are  on  His  side 
are  always  in  the  end  victorious.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  sin  of  murmuring  : 
— Consider  that  murmuring  is  a  mercy-embittering  sin,  a  mercy-souring  sin.  As 
the  sweetest  things  put  into  a  sour  vessel  are  soured,  or  put  into  a  bitter  vessel  are 
embittered ;  so  murmuring  puts  pall  and  wormwood  into  every  cup  of  mercy  that 
God  gives  into  our  hands.  The  murmurer  writes  "  Marah,"  that  is,  bitterness, 
upon  all  his  mercies,  and  he  reads  and  tastes  bitterness  in  them  all.  As  "  to  the 
hungry  soul  every  bitter  thing  is  sweet,"  so  to  the  murmuring  soul  every  sweet 
thing  is  bitter.  (T.  Brooks.)  The  evil  of  murmur ing  : — I  have  read  of  Caesar, 
that,  having  prepared  a  great  feast  for  his  nobles  and  friends,  it  so  fell  out  that  the 
day  appointed  was  so  extremely  foul,  that  nothing  could  be  done  to  the  honour  of 
the  meeting ;  whereupon  he  was  so  displeased  and  enraged  that  he  commanded  all 
them  that  had  bows  to  shoot  up  their  arrows  at  Jupiter,  their  chief  god,  as  in 
defiance  of  him  for  that  rainy  weather ;  which,  when  they  did,  their  arrows  fell 
short  of  heaven  and  fell  upon  their  own  heads,  so  that  many  of  them  were  very 
sorely  wounded.  So  all  our  murmurings,  which  are  as  so  many  arrows  shot  at  God 
Himself,  they  will  return  upon  our  own  pates'  hearts  ;  they  reach  not  Him,  but  they 
will  hit  us  ;  they  hurt  not  Him,  but  they  wiU  wound  us ;  therefore  it  is  better  to  be 
mute  than  to  murmur  ;  it  is  dangerous  to  provoke  a  "  consuming  fire  "  (Heb.  xii,). 
(Ibid.)  Murmuring,  the  mother  sin,  to  he  fought  against : — As  the  king  of  Syria 
said  to  his  captains,  "Fight  neither  with  small  nor  great,  but  with  the  king  of 
Israel,"  so  say  I,  Fight  not  so  much  against  this  sin  or  that,  but  fight  against  your 
murmuring,  which  is  a  mother-sin  ;  make  use  of  all  your  Christian  armour,  make 
use  of  all  the  ammunition  of  heaven,  to  destroy  the  mother,  and  in  destroying  of 
her,  you  will  destroy  the  daughters.  When  Goliath  was  slain,  the  Philistines  fled ; 
when  a  general  in  an  army  is  cut  off,  the  common  soldiers  are  easily  and  quickly 
routed  and  destroyed  :  so  destroy  but  murmuring,  and  you  will  quickly  destroy  dis- 
obedience, ingratitude,  impatience,  distrust,  &c.  {Ibid.)  Misery  of  murmurers : — 
Every  murmurer  is  his  own  tormentor  ;  murmuring  is  a  fire  within  that  will  burn 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  277 

up  all;  it  is  an  earthquake  within  that  will  overturn  all ;  it  is  a  disease  within  that 
will  iufect  all;  it  is  poison  within  that  will  prey  upon  all.     {Ibid.)         lihirmurhu), 
the  luirent  of  other  sins: — As  the  river  Nile  bringeth  forth  many  crocodiles,  and  the 
scorpion  many  serpents  at  one  birth,  so  murmuring  is  a  sin  that  breeds  and  brings 
forth  many  sins  at  once.     It  is  like  the  monster  Hydra — cut  off  one  head,  and 
many  will  rise  up  in  its  room.     It  is  the  mother  of  harlots — the  mother  of   all 
abominations — a  sin  that  breeds  many  other  sins  (Numb.  xvi.  41;  xvii.  10) ;  viz., 
disobedience,     contempt,    ingratitude,    impatience,    distrust,    rebellion,     cursing, 
carnality ;  yea,  it  charges  God  with  folly,  yea,  with  blasphemy.     The  language  of 
a  niU! muring  soul  is  this  :  Surely  God  might  have  done  this  sooner,  and  that  wiser, 
and  the  other  thing  better.     (Ibid.)        Murmuring,  a  time-destroying  sin: — The 
murmurer  spends  much  precious  time  in  musing — in  musing  how  to  get  out  of  such 
a  trouble,  how  to  get  off  such  a  yoke,  how  to  be  rid  of  such  a  burden,  how  to  revenge 
himself  for  such  a  wrong;  how  to  supplant  such  a  person,  how  to  rejiroach  those 
that  are  above  him,  and  how  to  affront  those  that  are  below  him;  and  a  thousand 
other  ways  murmurers  have  to  expend  that  precious  time  that  some  would  redeem 
with  a  world.     Caesar,  observing  some  ladies  at  Rome  to  spend  much  of  their  time 
in  making  much  of  little  dogs  and  monkeys,  asked  them  whether  the  women  in  that 
country  had  no  children  to  make  much  of.     Ah,  murmurers,  murmurers  !  you  who 
by  your  murmuring  trifle  away  so  many  golden  hours  and  seasons  of  mercy,  have 
you  no  God  to  honour?     Have  jou  no  Cliri'  t  io  believe  i*-  ^     Have  you  no  hearts  to 
change,  no  sin  to  be  pardoned,  no  souls  to  s-  /e,  no  bell      escape,  no  heaven  to  seek 
after?     Oh!  if  you  have,  why  do  you  spenc"   so  nyrch  vf  your  precious  time  in 
murmuring    against   God,   against   men,   agaiiist    this    pr    that    thing?      (Ibid.) 
Murmuring  at  joys  : — I  was  tired  of  washing  ui^hes;  I    ,as  tired  of  drudgery.     It 
had  always  been  so,  and  I  was  dissatisfied.     I  never  sat  ^own  a  moment  to  read 
that  Jamie  didn't  want  a  cake,  or  a  piece  of  paper  to  scri.  ble  on,  or  a  bit  of  soap  to 
make  bubbles.     "I'd  rather  be  in  prison,"  I  said  one  da- ,  "  than  to  have  my  life 
teased  out,"  as  Jamie  knocked  my  elbow,  when  I  was  writing  to  a  friend^     But  a 
morning  came  when  I  had  one  plate  less  to  wash,  one  chair  less  to  set  awi?/  by  the 
wall  in  the  dining-room ;  when  Jamie's  little  crib  was  put  away  in  the  garret,  and 
it  has  never  come  down  since.     I  had  been  unusually  fretful  and  discontented  with 
him  that  damp  May  morning  that  he  took  the  croup.    Gloomy  weather  gave  me  the 
headache,  and  I  had  less  patience  than  at  any  other  time.     By  and  by  he  was 
singing  in  another  room,  "I  want  to  be  an  angel,"  and  presently  rang  out  that 
metallic  cough.     I  never  hear  that  hymn  since  that  it  don't  cut  me  to  the  heart ; 
for  the  croup-cough  rings  out  with  it.     He  grew  worse  towards  night,  and  when  my 
husband  came  home  he  went  for  the  doctor.     At  first  he  seemed  to  help  him,  but  it 
merged  into  inflammatory  croup,  and  all  was  soon  over.     "I  ought  to  have  been 
called  in  sooner,"  said  the  doctor.    I  have  a  servant  to  wash  the  dishes  now  ;  and 
when  a  visitor  comes,  I  can  sit  down  and  entertain  her  without  having  to  work  all 
the  time.     There  is  no  little  boy  worrying  me  to  ojien  his  jack-knife,  and  there  are 
no  shavings  over  the  floor.     The  magazines  are  not   soiled  at  looking  over  the 
pictures,   but  stand   prim  and  neat   on  the   reading-table  just  as  I  leave  them. 
"  Your  carpet  never  looks  dirty,"  said  a  weary-worn  mother  to  me.     "  Oh  !  no,"  I 
mutter  to  myself,  " there  are  no  little  boots  to  dirty  it  now."     But  my  fate  is  as 
weary  as  theirs — weary  with  sitting  in  my  lonesome  parlour  at  twilight,  weary  with 
watching  for  the  arms  that  used  to  twine  around  my  neck,  for  the  curls  that  brushed 
against  my  cheek,  for  the  young  laugh  that  rang  out  with  mine,  as  we  watched  the 
blazing  fire,  or  made  rabbits  with  the  shadow  on  the  wall,  waiting  merrily  together 
for  papa  coming  home.     I  have  the  wealth  and  ease  I  longed  for,  but  at  what  a 
price  !     And  when  I  see  other  mothers  with  grown-up  sons,  driving  to  town  or 
church,   and  my  hair  silvered   over  with   giey,    I  wish   I   had   murmured  less. 
Murmuring  foolish  : — Seneca  hath  his  similitude  to  set  out  the  great  evil  of  murmur- 
ing under  small  afflictions.     Suppose,  saith  he,  a  man  to  have  a  very  fair  house  to 
dwell  in,  with  very  fair  orchards  and  gardens,  set  about  with  brave  tall  trees  for 
ornament ;  what  a  most  unreasonable  thing  were  it  in  this  man  to  murmur  because 
the  wind  blows  a  few  leaves  off  the  trees,  though  they  hang  full  of  fruit.     If  God 
take  a  little  and  give  us  much,  shall  we  be  discontent?     If  He  take  our  son  and  give 
us  His  own ;  if  He  cause  the  ti-ees  to  bring  forth  the  fruit,  shall  we  be  angry  if  the 
wind  blow  away  the  leaves?     (J.  Venning.)        Murmuring  injurious  :— It  is  not 
wise  to  fret  under  our  trials  :  the  high -mettled  horse  that  is  restive  in  the  yoke  only 
galls  his  shoulder — the  poor  bird  that  dashes  itself  against  the  bars  of  the  cage  only 
ruffles  her  feathers  and  aggravates  the  sufferings  of  captivity.        The  Lord  tliat 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tt'. 

healeth  thee. — Jehovah-Ropheka  : — No  human  experience  is  uniformly  joyful  or 
sorrowful.     A  great  triumph  is  succeeded  by  a  great  obstacle  and  sometimes  by  a 
great  defeat.     But  there  is  another  equally  constant  fact  to   offset  this.     As  we 
look  at  this  alternation  of  Elims  and  Marahs  in  our  life,  and  recognize  it  as  a  law 
of  our  human  experience,  we  find  it  supplemented  by  something  else  which  is 
equally  a  law  ;  and   that  is  the  economy  of   God  by   which  this   alternation  is 
happily   adjusted.     In  other  words,  I  mean  this:  that  if  it  is  a  law  of  our  life 
that    joy   and  sorrow  succeed  each  other,   it  is   equally   a  law  of   our  life   that 
God  interposes  and  keeps  the  joy  from  corrupting   and  the  sorrow  from  crush- 
ing us.      If   sorrow-  is   a   part   of  God's    economy,   healing    is   equally  a  part. 
You  hear  abundance  of  popular  proverbs  to  the  effect  that  clouds  have  often  silver 
linings  ;  that  calamity  usually  stops  short  of  the  very  worst ;  tbat  time  dulls  grief ; 
that  nature  reacts  from  its  depression,  and  much  more  of  the  same  sort,  all  which 
may  be  more  or  less  true,  but  which  do  not  cover  the  same  ground  as  this  blessed 
name,  "  Jehovah  that  healeth  thee  "  :  which  throw  man  for  his  compensation  for 
sorrow  merely  upon  nature  and  circumstances.     Both  are  lawless  and  accidental, 
the  alleviations  no  less  than  the  sorrow  itself.    But  there  is  a  radical  difference 
between  a  grief  which  is  accidental,  and  a  grief  which  falls  in  with  happier  things 
into  an  order  arranged  to  make  the  man  purer  and  more  blessed.     There  is  a 
radical  difference  between  accidental  mitigations,  and  the  firm,  wise,  tender  touch 
of  an  omnipotent  Healer  upon  a  sorrow  :  and  there  is  a  radical  difference  between 
that  conception  of  sorrow  which  makes  it  an  intrusion  and  an  interruption,  and  a 
conception  which   sees  both    sorrow  and  healing  as   parts  of  one  Divine  plan, 
adjusted  by  that  same  Divine  hand  all  along  the  line  of  man's  life.     With  the 
alleviations  of  son-ow  which  come  in  what  we  call  the  natural  order  of  things,  I 
have  therefoie  nothing  to  do  here.     That  nature  has  certain  recuperative  powers  is 
a  familiar  fact :  that  God  often  uses  these  or  other  natural  means  in  His  own 
processes  of  healing,  as  a  physician  uses  for  medicine  the  herbs  and  flowers  which 
he  gathers  by  the  roadside,  is  an  equally  familiar  fact.    But  we  are  not  concerned 
with  the  question  of  means.     Our  text  leads  us  back  of  the  means.     That  to  which 
alone  sorrow  can  grapple  securely  is  not  means  but  God.     God,  on  this  occasion, 
though  He  uses  a  branch  to  sweeten  the  water,  also  uses  it  to  direct  the  attention 
of  the  people  to  Himself.     When  He  gives  Himself  a  name  by  which  they  are  to 
know  and  remember  Him  all  through  this  desert  journey,  it  is  not,  "  the  God  of  the 
branch,"  nor  "the  God  of  the  rod,"  nor  "the  God  of  the  strong  east  wind,"  but 
simply,  "I  am  Jehovah  that  healeth  thee."     No  matter  what  means  I  use.     If  He 
had  called  Himself  the  God  of  the  rod,  the  people  would  have  despaired  of  heaUng 
in  any  case  where  there  was  not  a  branch  or  a  rod  present.     He  would  have  them 
know  that  healing  was  in  Him,  by  any  means  or  by  no  means  as  He  might  choose. 
And  thus  it  is  well  for  us  to  bring  every  bitter  experience  of  life  at  once  to  God — 
directly.     The  fountain  of  healing  is  there,  and  there  is  no  need  of  our  taking  the 
smallest  trouble  in  seeking  any  lower  source  of  comfort.     God  is  not  like  certain 
great  medical  authorities  who  leave  all  minor  maladies  to  subordinates  and  hold 
themselves  in  reserve  merely  for  consultation  on  cases  of  hfe  and  death.     He 
wrought  the  great  miracle  at  Marah,  not  only  to  relieve  the  people's  thiist  on  that 
occasion,  but  to  encourage  them  to  seek  His  help  in  smaller  matters.     God  some- 
times reduces  a  man  to  terrible  straits  so  that  he  may  learn  that  lesson.     The 
branch  which  he  throws  in  is  this  ;  "Best  in  the  Lord  and  wait  patiently  for  Him." 
When  one  is  in  such  confusion  and  bewilderment,  a  great  deal  of  the  distress  is 
thrown  off  in  the  throwing  off  of  all  responsibility  for  the  way  out.     Many  years 
ago,  while  in  Rome,  I  went  down  into  the  Catacombs.     I  had  not  gone  five  feet 
from  the  entrance  when  I  saw  that  if  I  should  try  to  find  my  way  back,  I  should  be 
hopelessly  lost.     Passages  opened  out  on  every  side,  and  crossed  and  interlaced, 
and  my  life  was  literally  in  the  hands  of  the  cowled  monk  who  led  the  way  with  his 
lighted  taper.     But  that  was  a  relief.     Having  no  responsibility  for  finding  the  way, 
and  having  faith  in  my  guide,  I  could  give  myself  up  to  the  impression  of  the  place. 
There  is  a  beautiful  passage  in  the  one  hundred  and   forty-second  Psalm  which 
brings  out  this  truth.     The  Psalm  is  ascribed  to  David  when  he  was  fleeing  from 
Saul's  persecution  and  wandering  in  a  labyrinth  of  caves  and  secret  paths.    "  When 
my  spirit  is  overwhelmed  within  me,  Thou  knowest  my  path."    Few  things  are 
more  painful  or  humiliating  than  the  sense  of  having  lost  the  way.     The  sweeten- 
ing branch  then  is  just  this  blessed  consciousness  that  Divine  omniscience  knows 
the  path  ;  that  the  knowledge  is  with  one  who  knows  just  how  to  use  it,  who  knows 
the  path  through,  the  path  out,  knows  what  the  trend  of  the  trouble  is  and  Yfhat 


CHAP.  XV.]  EXODUS.  279 

its  meaning  is.  But  let  us  not  forget  the  other  great  truth  of  this  story,  a  truth 
quite  as  important  as  the  first,  and  perhaps  quite  as  hard  to  learn ;  and  that  is, 
that  God's  healing  is  a  lesson  no  less  than  a  comfort.  The  aim  of  a  physician's 
treatment  is  not  merely  to  relieve  his  patient  from  pain.  It  is,  further,  to  get  him 
on  his  feet  for  active  duty.  God  did  not  sweeten  the  waters  of  Marah  in  order  that 
the  people  might  stay  thf  re.  Marah  was  only  a  stage  on  the  way  to  Canaan  ;  and 
the  draught  at  the  sweetened  spring  was  but  to  give  strength  for  a  long  march. 
And  God  never  heals  His  people  simply  to  make  them  easy.  If  He  takes  off  a  load 
it  is  that  they  may  walk  the  better  in  the  way  of  His  commandments.  Whatever 
God  may  say  to  us  by  sickness,  when  He  comes  to  us  as  the  Lord  of  healing  He 
says,  "  I  will  raise  thee  up  that  thou  mayst  do  that  which  is  right  in  My  sight ; 
that  thou  mayst  give  ear  to  My  commandments  and  keep  My  statutes."  Healing 
means  more  toil  and  more  burdens  and  more  conflict,  and  these  will  continue  to 
the  end.  But  let  us  remember  that  God  never  forgets  to  give  rest  along  the  road, 
and  refreshment  at  the  right  places  to  His  faithful  ones.  Even  on  earth  there  will 
be  intervals  of  sweet  rest,  though  the  desert  lie  on  beyond.  {M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.) 
The  Lord  that  healeth  : — It  is  with  healing  power  in  the  lowest  form  of  its  develop- 
ment, viz.,  the  supplying  of  bodily  wants — the  healing  of  physical  diseases — that 
this  precious  name  is  first  brought  to  our  notice.  And  even  this  is  a  blessing  not 
to  be  lightly  esteemed.  But,  if  our  powers  of  perception  were  so  adjusted  that  we 
could  estimate  spiritual  diseases,  as  God  estimates  them ;  then,  we  should  see,  in 
the  walks  of  daily  life,  even  in  the  case  of  those  who  are  said  to  possess  sound 
minds  in  sound  bodies,  sights  sadder  far  than  any  to  be  met  with  in  our  hospitals 
and  asUums  for  physical  and  mental  diseases.  And  the  power  to  heal  which  the 
Lord  claims  when  He  is  pleased  to  reveal  Himself  as  Jehovah-Ropheka,  is  this 
power  in  its  higlier  form — the  power  to  heal  the  diseases  of  the  soul.  I.  He  is  an 
EFFiciKNT  HE.U.ER.  He  puts  His  own  Omnipotence  into  the  gr.ace  by  which  He 
heals ;  and  what  can  resist  that  grace  ?  He  has  fathomed  the  lowest  depths  of 
human  depravity,  and  the  chain  of  His  grace  has  reached  even  unto  that.  II.  He  is 
APKACTicAL  Healer.  It  somctimcs  happens  with  earthly  physicians  that  the  medicine 
is  minsiled  with  our  daily  food,  and  that  the  food  itself  of  which  the  patient  partakes 
is  made  the  means  of  healing.  But  this  is  what  our  heavenly  Healer  does 
continually.  He  connects  the  process  of  His  healing  with  the  food  on  which  the 
souls  of  His  people  live,  and  the  daily  experience  of  life  through  which  they  are 
passing.  III.  He  is  a  universal  Healer.  In  many  of  our  hospitals  there  is  a 
ward  for  incurables.  There  are  cases  which  every  physician  will  decline  to  under- 
take because  he  knows  that  nothing  can  be  done  with  them.  But  Jehovah-Ropheka 
knows  no  such  cases.  In  the  hospital  of  His  grace  there  is  no  ward  for  incurables. 
There  are  no  limits  to  the  range  and  operation  of  His  wisdom  and  power.  He  has 
not  made  a  specialty  of  any  particular  case.  There  is  no  form  of  spiritual  disease 
that  can  be  incurable  to  Him.  IV.  He  is  a  PERiiANENT  Healer.  No  earthly 
physician  will  undertake  both  to  restore  his  patient  to  health,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  give  him  the  assurance  that  the  disease  from  which  he  has  suffered  shall  never 
return  to  him.  This  is  a  matter  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  medical  ability. 
But  it  is  not  so  with  our  heavenly  Healer.  He  undertakes  to  make  His  healing 
work  not  only  perfect  but  permanent.  Two  things  show  us  this.  1.  One  of  these 
is  the  state  into  which  Christ  introduces  the  saved  soul  after  death.  It  is  a  state 
in  which  there  will  be  no  sickness,  sorrow,  or  sin.  And  what  that  state  is,  as  the 
healed  soul  enters  into  it,  it  will  be  for  ever.  It  is  a  "  continuing  city."  2.  And 
then  the  state  of  the  soul  as  it  enters  that  blessed  abode  will  show  the  same  thing. 
"  Presented  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Col.  i.  28).  Y.  He  is  a  glorious  Healer. 
Most  physicians  are  sati.-fied  if  they  can  restore  their  patients  to  the  condition  in 
which  they  were  before  the  disease  seized  upon  them.  If  they  can  heal  a  man's 
wounds  they  are  satisfied.  They  will  not  pledge  that  in  securing  this  result  there 
shall  be  no  disfiguring  scars  remaining.  But  it  is  different  with  our  heavenly 
Healer.  He  restores  the  sin-sick  soul,  not  to  its  original  state,  but  to  one  infinitely 
better  than  that.  The  creation  state  of  the  soul  was  pronounced  good,  the  redeemed 
state  of  the  soul  is  declared  to  be  perfect.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  Lord  that 
healeth  : — "  Many  a  time  have  I  been  brought  very  low,  and  received  the  sentence 
of  death  in  myself,  when  my  poor,  honest,  praying  neighbours  have  met,  and,  upon 
their  fasting  and  earnest  prayers,  I  have  recovered.  Once,  when  I  had  continued 
weak  three  weeks,  and  was  unable  to  go  abroad,  the  very  day  that  they  prayed  for 
me,  being  Good  Friday,  I  recovered,  and  was  able  to  preach  and  administer  the 
sacrament  the  next  Lord's  day ;  and  was  better  after  it,  it  being  the  first  time  that 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

ever  I  administered  it.  And  ever  after  that,  whatever  weakness  was  upon  me,  when 
I  had,  after  preaching,  administered  that  sacrament  to  many  hundred  people,  I  was 
much  revived  and  eased  of  my  infirmities."  "  Oh  how  often,"  he  writes  in  his 
"Dying  Thoughts,"  "have  I  cried  to  Him  when  men  and  means  were  nothing,  and 
when  no  help  in  second  causes  did  appear,  and  how  often,  and  suddenly,  and 
mercifully  hath  He  delivered  me  !  What  sudden  ease,  what  removal  of  long  affliction 
have  I  bad !  Such  extraordinary  changes,  and  beyond  my  own  and  others'  expecta- 
tions, when  many  plain-hearted,  upright  Christians  have,  by  fasting  and  prayer, 
sought  God  on  my  behalf,  as  have  over  and  over  convinced  me  of  special  providence 
and  that  God  is  indeed  a  hearer  of  prayers.  And  wonders  have  I  seen  doue  for 
others  also,  upon  such  prayer,  more  than  for  myself ;  yea,  and  wonders  for  the 
Church,  and  for  public  societies."  "  Shall  I  therefore  forget  how  often  He  hath 
heard  prayers  for  me,  and  how  wonderfully  He  often  hath  helped  both  me  and 
others  ?  My  faith  hath  been  helped  by  such  experiences,  and  shall  I  forget  them, 
or  question  them  without  cause  at  last?"  (Ricliard  Baxter.)  Elim. — 2' he  pil- 
grim's pathway  : — I.  That,  in  life's  pilorimaoe,  God  crowns  His  people  \vith 

CONSTANT  BLESSINGS   AND  DIVERSIFIED   TOKENS  OF  HiS   GOODNESS.       ThcSC    bleSSingS,  aS 

here  implied,  are  of  great  practical  utility ;  they  are — 1.  Essential — *'  Water."  2. 
Eefreshing — "Palm-trees."  3.  Diversified — "Wells  and  palm-trees."  4.  Pro- 
portionate,— "  Twelve  wells  and  threescore   and   ten  palm-trees."     II.  Th.^t,  in 

life's   PILGRIMAGE,  God'S  BLESSINGS   SHOULD  BE  APPROPRIATED  AND    ENJOYED.       "  They 

encamped  there."     III.   That,  in  life's  pilgrimage,  Elim,  with  its  refreshing 

SHADE,  IS  frequently  NOT  FAR  FROM  MaR.VH,  WITH  ITS  BITTER  WATERS.       Therefore,  aS 

pilgrims,  we  should  not  be  too  much  elated  or  depressed  with  our  camping-places. 
In  the  history  of  the  Zion-bound  traveller,  it  should  not  be  forgotten,  that  it  is 
always  better  further  on.     IV.  That,  in  life's  pilgrimage,  we  should  remember 

THAT  WE   are    NOT    YET   HOME,  ONTiY   PILGRIMS   ON    THE    WAY.       Our    immortality    WOuld 

starve  to  death  on  the  richest  oasis  this  desert  world  could  give  us,  if  we  should 
attempt  to  make  it  our  abiding  home.  So,  they  did  not  buy  the  land,  or  build  a 
city,  they  only  "  encamped  there."  (T.  Kelly.)  Marah  and  Elim  : — I.  The 
VARIED  EXPERIENCE  OF  HUMAN  LIFE.  1.  There  are  the  sorrowful  scenes  of  life. 
You  know  well  the  sources  from  whence  these  sorrows  arise.  There  is  the 
sorrow  that  comes  to  us  from  our  disappointments.  We  are  constantly 
deceived  and  disappointed,  partly  because  we  indulge  in  unreasonable  expecta- 
tions, and  partly  because  things  differ  so  much  in  their  reality  from  what 
they  are  in  their  outward  appearance.  Then  there  is  the  sorrow  that  proceeds  from 
physical  suffering.  Another  source  of  sorrow  is  our  bereavements.  A  whole 
generation  fell  in  the  wilderness,  and  as  the  Israelites  travtlled  on^•ard,  they  had 
again  and  again  to  pause  in  their  journey  and  bury  their  dead.  Another  source  of 
Borrow  is  sin.  This  indeed  is  the  great  source  of  all  sorrow,  the  fountain  from 
■whence  these  bitter  waters  flow.  2.  There  are  the  joys  of  life.  Another  day's 
march,  and  the  scene  was  changed  ;  verdure  refreshed  the  eye,  there  was  water  in 
abundance  to  quench  the  thirst,  and  the  weary  pilgrim  could  repose  under  the 
palm-tree's  welcome  shade.  True  type  again  of  human  life — "  Weeping  endures  for 
a  night,  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  "  For  a  small  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee, 
but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee."  The  most  weary  pils^rimage  has  its 
quiet  resting  places,  and  the  saddest  heart  is  not  without  its  joys.  God  is  kind  even 
to  the  unthankful,  for  on  them  He  bestows  His  providential  bounties,  but  "  the 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him."  He  gives  to  them  a  "  peace  which 
passeth  understanding,"  a  "hope  which  maketh  not  ashamed,"  and  "a  joy  that  is 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  Life,  then,  has  a  varied  experience.  II.  But 
WHAT  ARE  THE  REASONS  FOR  IT  ?  There  Can  be  little  doubt  that  if  it  were  left  to  our 
choice,  we  should  choose  a  less  chequered  course — we  should  avoid  the  bitter  waters 
of  Marah,  and  seek  the  palm-trees  of  Elim.  Why  is  it  that  joy  and  sorrow,  hope 
and  fear,  health  and  sickness,  blessings  bestowed  and  blessing  removed,  follow  each 
other  in  such  rapid  succession.  1.  It  is  to  correct  our  self-will.  Many  whose 
hearts  were  stubborn  enough  when  they  began  life,  have  found  life  so  different  to 
what  they  expected,  that  they  have  at  length  confessed— It  is  vain  to  fight  against 
God  ;  henceforth  I  place  myself  under  His  government — His  will,  not  mine,  be  done. 
2.  To  develop  our  character.  If  the  events  of  Ufe  were  exclusively  sorrowful,  then 
the  test  of  our  character  would  be  but  partial ;  so  would  it  be  if  these  events  were 
exclusively  joyful ;  and  therefore  it  is  sorrow  to-day  and  joy  to-morrow.  Thus  our 
whole  character  is  developed.  3.  To  open  our  hearts  to  those  sacred  influences 
•which  soften  and  puiify  them.    {H.J.  Gamble.)        Elim:  the  springs  and  the  palms  : 


CHAP.  XT.]  EXODUS.  81 

— I.  Elim  rises  before  us  as  the  representative  of  the  green  oases,  the  spots  op 
SCNNY  VEUDURE,  the  sccncs  of  heavenly  beauty,  wherewith  God  hath  enriched, 
though  sparingly,  our  wilderness  world.  This  world  is  not  all  bad  ;  its  marches 
Bre  not  all  bare.  "  Cursed  is  the  ground  for  thy  sake  " — and  because  for  thy  sake, 
it  is  not  cursed  utterly.  It  is  not  all  black,  bare,  lifeless,  as  the  crust  of  a  cold  lava 
flood;  a  prison-house  for  reprobates,  instead  of  a  training  school  for  sons.  II. 
The  nearness  of  Elim  to  Marah  opens  up  to  us  a  deep  truth  in  the  spiritual 
history  of  man.  1.  Had  they  pushed  on  instead  of  murmuring  at  Marah,  they 
•would  have  found  all  they  sought,  and  more  than  they  hoped  for,  at  Elim.  Ah  I 
the  time  we  waste  in  repining  and  rebelling — scheming  to  mend  God's  counsels ! 
How  many  Elims  would  it  find  for  us,  if  employed  in  courage  and  faith  1  2.  How 
near  is  the  sweetness  to  the  bitterness  in  every  trial !  it  is  but  a  short  step  to  Elim, 
where  we  may  encamp  and  rest.  The  brightest  spots  of  earth  are  amidst  its  most 
savage  wildernesses,  and  the  richest  joys  of  the  Christian  spring  ever  out  of  his 
sharpest  pains.  The  humbling  pains  of  disappointment  tune  the  soul  for  the  joys 
which  the  next  station  of  the  journey  affords.  It  is  when  we  have  learnt  the  lessons 
of  the  wilderness,  and  are  resolved  to  press  on,  cost  what  it  may,  in  our  heavenly 
path,  that  springs  of  unexpected  sweetness  gush  up  at  our  very  feet,  and  we 
find  shade  and  rest,  which  give  foretaste  of  heaven.  III.  Let  us  endeavour  to  dis- 
cern   THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  THIS  ALTERNATE  SWEETNESS   AND  BITTERNESS  OF    LIFE.       TheSS 

lights  and  shadows  of  nature,  this  glow  and  gloom,  are  caught  from  a  higher  sphere. 
Nature  is  but  the  reverse  of  the  medal  whose  obverse  is  man.  The  ultimate  reason 
of  the  bitterness  of  Marah  is  the  sin  in  the  heart  of  Israel  and  all  pilgrims  ;  the 
ultimate  reason  of  the  sweetness  and  freshneslS  of  Elim  is  the  mercy  that  is  in  the 
heart  of  God.  There  is  a  fearful  power  in  the  human  spirit  to  make  God's  brightest 
blessings  bitter  curses.  Who  was  it  who  wanted  to  die,  because  God  had  found  a 
deliverance  for  a  great  city  in  which  were  half  a  million  of  doomed  men?  At  the 
door  of  your  own  spiiit  lie  all  the  pangs  and  wretchedness  you  have  known.  You 
have  cursed  fate  and  fortune,  and  protested  that  you  were  the  most  wronged  and 
persecuted  of  men.  But  the  mischief  lies  not  in  God's  constitution  of  the  world,  nor 
in  His  government  of  it,  but  in  your  hearts.     (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Sweetness 

not  far  from  bitterness  : — Sorrow  is  not  all  a  wilderness,  even  to  the  most  sorrowful. 
Amid  ail  its  bleakness  and  desolation  it  has  oases  of  beauty  and  fertility.  It  has 
Elims  as  well  as  Marahs,  and  frequently  these  Elims  are  very  near  the  Marahs — if  we 
only  knew  it.  But  six  short  miles  separated  the  twelve  wells  of  water  and  the  three- 
score and  ten  palm-trees  from  the  bitter,  nauseous  well  that  filled  the  hearts  of  the 
thirsting  multitudes  with  disappointment.  And  so  near  in  human  life  is  the 
sweetness  to  the  bitterness  in  every  trial.  A  few  steps  will  take  us  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  out  into  the  green  pastures  and  beside  the  still  waters 
upon  which  it  opens.  Had  the  Israelites  of  old,  instead  of  murmuring  at  Marah, 
pushed  on  a  little  further,  they  would,  in  two  short  hours,  have  found  at  Elim  all 
they  sought  and  more  than  they  expected.  And  so  the  time  we  waste  in  repining 
and  rebelling  would  be  better  employed  in  living  faith  and  active  duty,  for  thus 
would  consolation  be  found.  Instead  of  sitting  down  to  murmur  at  Marab,  let  us 
march  in  faith  under  the  guidance  of  our  tender  Shepherd,  who  will  bring  us  to  the 
next  station,  where  we  may  lie  down  in  green  pastures  and  beside  still  waters. 
(Christian  Age.)  The  conqmrative  duration  of  sorrow  and  joy: — Is  there  ever  a 
Marah  without  an  Elim  near  it,  if  only  we  follow  on  in  the  way  the  Lord  marks 
out  for  us  through  the  wilderness  ?  The  notice  of  Elim  occupies  less  than  four  lines, 
while  there  are  as  many  verses  in  the  record  of  Marah,  and  a  whole  chapter  f  tillowing 
about  the  wilderness  of  sin;  and  we  are  apt  to  draw  the  hasty  inference  that  the 
bitter  experiences  were  the  rule,  and  the  delightful  ones  the  exception.  And  so  it 
often  seems  in  the  checkered  life  of  the  tried  disciple  of  the  Lord.  But  look  again. 
The  bitter  time  at  Marah  was  quite  short,  though  it  occupies  a  great  deal  of  space 
in  the  history .  These  four  verses  tell  the  story  probably  of  as  many  hours  or  less. 
But  the  four  lines  about  Elim  are  the  story  of  three  weeks,  during  which  they 
"  encamped  there  by  the  waters."  When  troubles  come,  the  time  seems  long  ;  when 
troubles  have  gone,  the  time  seems  short ;  and  so  many  are  apt  to  think  that  they  are 
hardly  dealt  with,  whereas  if  they  would  look  more  carefully  into  the  Lord's  dealings 
with  them,  thev  might  find  that  they  have  far  more  to  be  thankful  for  than  to 
grieve  over.    Hours  at  Marah  are  followed  by  weeks  at  Elim.     (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.) 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


CHAPTEB  XVI. 

Vers.  1-12.  The  wilderness  of  Sin. — Moses  in  the  wilderness  of  Sin : — People 
may  be  strong  and  hopeful  at  the  beginning  of  a  project,  and  most  effusively 
and  devoutly  thankful  at  its  close,  but  the  difficulty  is  to  go  manfully 
through  the  process.  1.  Pbocesses  try  men's  temper.  See  how  the  temper  of 
Israel  was  tried  in  the  wilderness!  No  bread,  no  water,  no  rest!  How  do 
processes  try  men's  temper  ?  1.  They  are  often  tedious.  2.  They  are  often 
uncontrollable.  3.  They  often  seem  to  be  made  worse  by  the  incompetency  of 
others.  II.  The  trials  of  processes  are  to  be  met,  not  all  at  once,  but  a 
DAY  at  a  time.  Daily  hunger  was  met  by  daily  bread.  This  daily  display  of 
Divine  care  teaches — 1.  That  physical  as  well  as  spiritual  gifts  are  God's.  2. 
That  one  of  God's  gifts  is  the  pledge  of  another.  "  Not  as  the  world  giveth,  give 
I  unto  you. "  Why  am  I  to  be  easy  about  to-morrow  ?  Because  God  is  good 
to-day!  "He  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  III.  Processes 
SHOW  THE  different  DISPOSITIONS  OF  MEN.  Though  the  people  were  told  in  the 
distinctest  manner  that  there  would  be  no  manna  on  the  seventh  day,  yet  they 
went  out  to  gather  it  just  as  if  they  had  never  been  warned !  Such  men  are  the 
vexation  of  the  world.  They  plague  every  community  of  which  they  are  a 
portion.  1.  We  have  the  means  of  life  at  our  disposal :  the  manna  lies  at  our 
tent-door !  2.  We  are  distinctly  assured  that  such  means  are  given  under  law  : 
there  is  a  set  time  for  the  duration  of  the  opportunity :  the  night  cometh !  IV. 
All  the  processes  of  life  should  be  hallowed  by  religiocs  kxercises.  There 
was  a  Sabbath  even  in  the  wilderness.  1.  The  Sabbath  is  more  than  a  mere  law  ; 
it  is  an  expression  of  mercy.  2.  No  man  ever  loses  anything  by  keeping  the 
Sabbath  :  "  The  Lord  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  days."  3.  He 
is  the  loser  who  has  no  day  of  rest.  V.  Processes  should  leave  some  tender 
AND  HOPE-iNSPiRiNo  MEMORIES  BEHIND  THEM.  "  Fill  an  omer  of  it  to  be  kept,"  &c. 
VI.  The  PROCESS  WILL  END.  Are  you  ready?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  pihjrimage 
of  life : — In  the  anecdote  books  of  our  boyhood  we  used  to  be  told  the  story  of  an 
Indian  faquir  who  entered  an  Eastern  palace  and  spread  his  bed  in  one  of  its  ante- 
chambers, pretending  that  he  had  mistaken  the  building  for  a  caravanserai  or  inn. 
The  prince,  amused  by  the  oddity  of  the  circumstance,  ordered — so  ran  the  tale — 
the  man  to  be  brought  before  him,  and  asked  him  how  he  came  to  make  such  a 
mistake.  "  What  is  an  inn  ?  "  the  faquir  asked.  "  A  place,"  was  the  reply, 
"where  travellers  rest  a  little  while  before  proceeding  on  their  journey."  "  Who 
dwelt  here  before  you  ?  "  again  asked  the  faquir.  "  My  father,"  was  the  prince's 
reply.  "  And  did  he  remain  here?"  "No,"  was  the  answer;  "  he  died  and 
went  away."  "And  who  dwelt  here  before  him?"  "His  ancestors."  "And 
did  they  remain  here  ?  "  "  No  ;  they  also  died  and  went  away."  "  Then," 
rejoined  the  faquir,  "I  have  made  no  mistake,  for  your  palace  is  but  an  inn  after 
all."  The  faquir  was  right.  Our  houses  are  but  inns,  and  the  whole  world  a  cara- 
vanserai. {Clerical  Library.)  Bread,  the  supreme  question  : — During  the  French 
Bevolution  hundreds  of  market-women,  attended  by  an  armed  mob  of  men,  went 
to  Versailles  to  demand  bread  of  the  National  Assembly,  there  being  great  destitu- 
tion in  Paris.  They  entered  the  hall.  There  was  a  discussion  upon  the  criminal 
laws  going  on.  A  fishwoman  cried  out,  "  Stop  that  babbler  I  That  is  not  the 
question  ;  the  question  is  about  bread."  {Little's  "  Historical  Lights.")  Murmur- 
ing, the  result  of  forgetfulness : — What  unbelief  and  sad  forgetfuluessof  God  betrayed 
itself  in  these  words  !  They  quite  forgot  the  bitter  bondage  of  Egypt  under  which 
they  had  sighed  and  groaned  so  long.  They  now  thought  only  of  its  "  flesh-pots" 
and  "  its  bread."  They  altogether  overlooked  the  mercy  and  the  grace  which  had 
spared  them  when  the  firstborn  of  the  Egyptians  were  slain.  The  miracles  of  love 
at  the  Ked  Sea  and  at  Marah,  so  great  and  so  recent,  had  passed  away  from  their 
memories.  They  thought  nothing  of  the  promise  of  the  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  The  argument,  so  evident  and  so  comforting,  "  Can  the  faithful  God 
who  has  brought  us  out  of  bondage  mean  to  let  us  perish  in  the  wilderness  ?  "  did 
not  withhold  them  from  the  impatient  conclusion,  "  Ye  have  brought  us  forth  into 
the  wilderness,  to  kill  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger."  And  if  you  watch  your 
own  hearts,  you  will  find  that  there  is  always  this  forgetfulness  in  a  murmuring 
and  discontented  spirit.  We  forget,  first,  that  we  deserve  nothing  but  punishment 
at  God's  hands ;  and,  secondly,  we  forget  all  the  mercy  and  love  which  He  has 
shown  us  in  His  acts  and  promises.      (G.    Wagner.)  Grumbling,   an  added 


CHAP.  XVI.]  EXODUS.  283 

burden : — If  I  grumble  because  life  is  so  arranged  that  I  tear  my  clothes,  and  get 
many  a  scratch  in  the  upward  journey,  my  grumble  is  only  an  added  burden.  The 
difference  between  a  soul  that  is  soured  by  unbelief  and  a  soul  that  honestly 
struggles  and  strives  as  the  gymnast  does,  who  tries  to  lift  the  heavy  weight, 
knowing  that,  whether  he  succeeds  or  fails,  the  muscular  development,  which  is 
the  end  sought,  is  still  attained,  is  incalculable.  To  trudge  along  tbe  moor  after 
nightfall,  the!  now  knee  deep,  with  the  feeling  that  you  are  going  nowhere,  is 
indeed  discouraging  ;  but  to  do  the  same  thing  with  the  feeling  that  you  are  going 
home  to  the  fireside  of  the  loved  and  expectant,  is  to  keep  both  feet  and  hands 
warm  through  our  power  of  anticipating  the  heat  and  the  welcome  under  the  roof 
tree  not  far  off.  Eude,  discourteous  experience  has  taught  us  that  an  evil  which  is 
all  an  evil  is  a  double  evil,  and  that  an  evil  with  a  joy  behind  it  or  beyond  it  is  the 
healthy  and  invigorating  toil  by  means  of  which  a  man  may  acquire  a  lasting 
good.  Ingratitude  of  the  public  : — Daniel  Webster,  after  his  wonderful  career, 

and  in  the  close  of  his  life,  writes  :  "If  I  were  to  live  my  life  over  again,  with 
my  present  experiences,  I  would  under  no  considerations  allow  myself  to  enter 
public  life.  The  pubUc  are  ungrateful.  The  man  who  serves  the  public  most 
faithfully  receives  no  adequate  reward.  In  my  own  history  those  acts  which  have 
been,  before  God,  most  disinterested  and  the  least  stained  by  selfish  considerations, 
have  been  precisely  those  for  which  I  have  been  most  freely  abused.  No,  no ; 
have  nothing  to  do  with  politics.  Sell  your  iron,  eat  the  bread  of  independ- 
ence, support  your  family  with  the  rewards  of  honest  toil,  do  your  duty  as  a 
private  citizen  to  your  country,  but  let  politics  alone.  It  is  a  hard  life,  a  thank- 
less life.  I  have  had  in  the  course  of  my  political  life,  which  is  not  a  short  one, 
my  full  share  of  ingratitude,  but  the  '  unkindest  cut  of  all,'  the  shaft  that  has 
sunk  the  deepest  in  my  heart,  has  been  the  refusal  of  this  administration  to  grant 
my  request  for  an  office  of  small  pecuniary  consideration  for  my  only  son."  {T. 
Be  Witt  Talmage.)  Ingratitude  of  grumbling  : — I  heard  a  good  man  say  once, 
as  we  passed  the  home  of  a  milUouaire  :  "It  doesn't  seem  right  that  such  a  man 
as  he  is  should  be  rolling  in  wealth,  while  I  have  to  work  hard  for  my  daily 
bread."  I  made  no  reply.  But  when  we  reached  the  home  of  the  grumbler,  and  a 
troop  of  rosy  children  ran  out  to  meet  us,  I  caught  one  in  my  arms,  and,  holding 
him  up,  said  :  "John,  how  much  will  you  take  for  this  boy  ?"  And  he  answered, 
while  the  moisture  gathered  in  his  eyes:  "That  boy,  my  namesake!  I  wouldn't 
sell  him  for  his  weight  in  gold."  "Why,  John,  he  weighs  forty  pounds  at  least, 
and  forty  pounds  of  gold  would  make  you  many  times  a  millionaire.  And  you 
■would  probably  ask  as  much  for  each  of  the  others.  So,  according  to  your  own 
admission,  you  are  immensely  rich.  Yes,  a  great  deal  richer  than  that  cold, 
selfish,  childless  millionaire  whom  you  were  envying  as  we  came  along.  Nothing 
would  tempt  you  to  change  places  with  him.  Then  you  ought  to  be  grateful 
instead  of  grumbling.  You  are  the  favourite  of  fortune,  or,  rather,  of  Providence, 
and  not  he."     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  4.  That  I  may  prove  them. — Life  a  probation  : — There  can  be  nothing  more 
sobering  than  the  truth  that  this  life  is  a  state  of  trial  and  preparation  for  another. 
There  is  at  the  same  time  something  wonderfully  satisfying  in  the  idea.  It  puts 
life  before  us  in  a  point  of  view  which  satisfactorily  explains  it.     I.  This  account 

OF    THE     END    OF    LIFE    SIMPLIFIES     MATTERS    IN     OUB    JOURNEY   THROUGH    LIFE.       The 

principle  of  trial  as  the  end  of  life  shoves  aside  a  multipUcity  of  irrevelent  ends  to 
make  way  for  the  true  one  ;  it  reduces  the  purpose  of  life  to  the  greatest  possible 
simphcity,  reduces  it,  as  we  may  say,  to  a  unit — to  the  effect  upon  the  individual 
himself,  what  he  does  and  how  he  turns  out  under  these  circumstances.  The  idea 
of  probation  thus  gives  a  singular  unity  to  the  whole  design  and  plan  of  Hfe.  It 
throws  the  individual  upon  himself  as  the  rational  of  the  whole.  II.  The 
principle  of  the  end  of  life  being  probative  applies  mainly  to  aU  the  ordinary 
external  advantages  of  life  and  our  pursuit  of  them  ;  but  it  also  affects  another  and 
less  ordinary  class  of  human  objects — the  objects  connected  with  the  good  of 

OTHERS,  those  USEFUL  AND  BENEVOLENT  WORKS  AND  THOSE  PUBLIC  AND  RELIGIOUS  WORKS 

WHICH  GOOD  MEN  PROPOSE  TO  THEMSELVES.  There  is  onc  defect  to  which  good  men 
are  liable  :  they  become  to  much  absorbed  in  the  success  of  their  own  plans.  The 
important  truth  for  such  men  to  realize  is  this  very  principle,  viz.,  that  of  the  end 
of  life  being  trial.  If  they  brought  this  truth  home  to  themselves,  they  would  see 
that  the  only  important  thing  to  them  was,  not  that  a  useful  undertaking  should 
answer,  but  that  they  should  have  done  faithfully  their  best  for  that  purpose.     III. 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

God  makes  use  of  us  as  His  instruments,  but  the  work  that  we  do  as  instruments 

IS  A  FAR   INFERIOR  WORK    TO    THAT  WHICH  WE    DO   TO    FULFIL    OUR   OWN    PERSONAL   TRIAL. 

The  general  end  of  life,  as  trial,  is  superior  to  all  special  ends  ;  it  is  the  end  which 
concerns  the  individual  being,  his  spiritual  condition,  his  ultimate  prospects.  {Prof. 
J.  B.  Mozley.)  The  Divine  bestowal  of  physical  good: — I.  Physical  blessinos 
ARE  GIVEN  TO  SUPPLY  OUR  WANTS.  1.  This  piovision  was  providential.  God's  hand 
directs  the  movements  of  the  tiniest  creatures  in  the  universe.  He  clothes  the 
grass,  and  paints  the  flower.  2.  This  provision  was  abundant.  There  was  enough 
for  each  man,  woman,  and  child.  (1)  The  supply  was  varied — bread  and  meat.  (2) 
The  supply  was  regular — morning  and  evening.  (3)  The  supply  was  constant — 
"  They  did  eat  manna  for  forty  years."  God's  least  thought  is  more  prolific  than 
man's  greatest  abundance.  Nature  is  the  expression  of  God's  fulness.  II. 
Physical  blessings  are  given  to  develop  odr  energies.  1.  The  blessings  of  life 
must  be  secured  by  diligent  application.  "  Go  out  and  gather."  No  prize  is  beyond 
the  reach  of  the  earnest  worker.  2.  The  blessings  of  life  must  be  sought  in  a  patient 
spirit.  "  A  certain  portion  every  day."  We  want  to  accumulate  the  treasures  of 
life  quickly,  to  provide  in  youth  for  age,  and  retire  upon  our  gains.  God  does  not 
forbid  prudence,  foresight;  but  He  sometimes  overturns  our  plans,  and  sends  day 
by  day  our  daily  bread.  To  the  anxious,  fearful  soul.  He  says,  "  Gather,"  "  Trust." 
lil.  Physical  blessings  are  given  to  test  our  obedience.  "  That  I  may  prove 
them,  whether  they  will  walk  in  My  law,  or  no."  God  has  many  ways  of  testing 
the  sincerity  of  His  people.  He  proves  them  by  poverty,  affliction,  persecution,  and 
prosperity.  He  spreads  our  tables  with  dainties,  and  says,  I  will  test  their  love, 
and  liberality,  and  devotion.  1.  The  recipients  of  material  possessions  often  hoard 
their  wealth.  Hoarded  wealth  never  satisfies  the  possessor.  It  begets  selfishness, 
fear,  unrest,  and  disappointment.  2.  The  recipients  of  material  possessions  often 
squander  their  wealth.  (J.  T.  Woodhottse.)  The  manna  a  test  of  faith  : — "  That  I 
may  proye  them,  whether  they  will  walk  in  My  law,  or  no. "  How  did  the  manna 
become  a  test  of  this  ?  By  means  of  the  law  prescribed  for  gathering  it.  There  was 
to  be  a  given  quantity  daily,  and  twice  as  much  on  the  sixth  day.  If  a  man  trusted 
God  for  to-morrow,  he  would  be  content  to  stop  collecting  when  he  had  filled  his 
omer,  tempting  as  the  easily  gathered  abundance  would  be.  Greed  and  unbelief 
would  masquerade  then,  as  now,  under  the  guise  of  prudent  foresight.  The  old 
Egyptian  parallels  to  "  make  hay  while  the  sun  shines,"  and  such  like  wise  sayings 
of  the  philosophy  of  distrust,  would  be  solemnly  spoken,  and  listened  to  as  pearls 
of  wisdom.  When  experience  had  taught  that,  however  much  a  man  gathered,  he 
had  no  more  than  his  omer  full,  after  all — and  is  not  that  true  yet? — then  the 
next  temptation  would  be  to  practise  economy,  and  have  something  over  for  to- 
morrow. Only  he  who  absolutely  trusted  God  to  provide  for  him,  would  eat  up  his 
portion,  and  lie  down  at  night  with  a  quiet  heart,  knowing  that  He  who  had  fed  him 
would  feed.  When  experience  taught  that  what  was  saved  rotted,  then  laziness 
would  come  in,  and  say,  "  What  is  the  use  of  gathering  twice  as  much  on  the  sixth 
day?  Don't  we  know  that  it  will  not  keep?  "  So  the  whole  of  the  gift  was  a 
continual  training,  and  therefore  a  continual  test,  for  faith.  God  willed  to  let  His 
gifts  come  in  this  hand-to-mouth  fashion,  though  He  could  have  provided  at  once 
what  would  have  obviously  lasted  them  all  their  wilderness  life,  iu  ordf-r  that  they 
might  be  habituated  to  cling  to  Him,  and  that  their  daily  bread  might  be  doubly 
for  their  nourishment,  feeding  their  bodies,  and  strengthening  that  faith  which,  to 
them  as  to  us,  is  the  condition  of  all  blessedness.  God  lets  our  blessings,  too, 
trickle  to  us  drop  by  drop,  instead  of  pouring  them  in  a  flood  all  at  once  upon  us, 
for  the  same  reason.  He  does  so,  not  because  of  any  good  to  Him,  from  our  faith, 
except  that  the  Infinite  love  loves  infinitely  to  be  loved.  Bat  for  our  sakes,  that  we 
may  taste  the  peace  and  strength  of  continual  dependence,  and  the  joy  of  continual 
receiving.  He  could  give  us  the  principal  down;  but  He  prefers  to  pay  us  the 
interest  as  we  need  it.  Christianity  does  not  absolutely  forbid  laying  up  money 
or  other  resources  for  future  wants.  But  the  love  of  accumulating,  which  is  so  strong 
in  many  professing  Christians,  and  the  habit  of  amassing  beyond  all  reasonable 
future  wants,  is  surely  scarcely  permitted  to  those  who  profess  to  believe  that 
incarnate  wisdom  forbade  taking  anxious  care  for  the  morrow,  and  sent  its  disciples 
to  lilies  and  birds  to  learn  the  happy  immunities  of  faith.  We,  too,  get  our  daily 
mercies  to  prove  us.  The  letter  of  the  law  for  the  manna  is  not  applicable  to  us  who 
gain  our  bread  by  God's  blessing  on  our  labour.  But  the  spirit  is,  and  the  members 
of  great  commercial  nations  have  surely  little  need  to  be  reminded  that  still  the 
portion  put  away  is  apt  to  breed  worms.    How  often  it  vanishes  !    Or,  if  it  lasts, 


CHAP,  svi.]  EXODUS.  285 

tortures  its  owner,  who  has  more  trouble  keeping  it  than  he  had  in  getting  it ;  or 
fatally  corrupts  his  own  character,  or  ruins  his  children.  All  God's  gifts  are  tests, 
which — thanks  be  to  Him — is  the  same  as  to  say  that  they  are  means  of  increasing 
faith,  and  so  adding  joy.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-15.  Manna. — The  manna  : — I.  Its  mtstic  chabactek.  "  What  is  this  ?  " 
Christ  was  a  mystery  to  His  contemporaries.  So  is  the  Christian  to  his.  "The  world 
knoweth  you  not."  II.  Its  uses.  To  save  from  starvation,  famine,  and  death. 
Christ  is  "the  Bread  that  cometh  down  from  heaven."  1.  The  manna  was  for  all. 
2.  The  manna  was  for  all,  according  to  their  wants — appetites.  The  Saviour  is  to 
us  just  what  we  make  Him  to  be.  AH  fulness  dwells  in  Him,  infinite  satisfaction; 
but  we  are  straitened  in  ourselves,  by  our  limited  cravings,  &c.  III.  The  pre- 
scriptions ATTENDING  IT.  1.  To  be  gathered  early.  2.  To  be  gathered  every 
morning.  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength."  3.  To  be 
used.  4.  To  be  gathered  within  six  days.  Life  has  its  appointed  time  for  salvation. 
If  we  allow  the  end  of  hfe's  week  to  come  without  a  store  of  God's  manna,  we 
shall  find  none  in  the  future.  5.  To  be  gathered  for  others — for  those  who  could 
not  go  out  themselves.  (F.  R.  Yoiiiirj.)  The  manna  : — An  army  must  have  a 
commissary  department  well  administered.  The  ordnance,  or  recruiting,  or  medical, 
divisions  are  not  more  essential  to  its  existence,  whether  in  peace  or  war.  A  soldier's 
pay  is  but  a  trifle  compared  with  the  expense  of  maintaining  him  in  vigour.  Yet 
a  more  strange  venture  and  gross  neglect  would  seem  to  be  recorded  in  the  early 
history  of  Israel  than  hns  ever  since  been  seen.  Here  were  some  two  million  souls 
led  out  of  bondage,  of  whom  it  is  said  :  "  They  had  not  prepared  for  themselves 
any  victual."  Every  hour  increased  the  peril  and  the  need.  Desperation  was  in 
their  threats.  Bread-riots  have  always  been  the  fiercest  outbreaks.  The  great 
camp  was  on  the  verge  of  mutiny.  I.  The  Lord  did  datlt  and  amply 
PROVIDE  FOR  His  PEOPLE.  The  fact  of  abundant  food  is  clear  and  indisputable. 
There  is  no  hint,  however,  as  to  its  immediate  source  or  methods  of  distribution. 
A  similar  mystery  veils  the  agencies  through  which  we  find  our  present 
necessities  met.  Here  the  natural  and  the  supernatural  seem  to  work  together. 
The  political  economist  makes  them  his  study,  and  extremists  undertake 
to  tell  exactly  how  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  kept  alive.  The  farmer,  manu- 
facturer, artisan,  carrier,  trader,  accountant,  teacher,  labouring  with  hand  or  head, 
or  both — each  furnishing  just  that  without  which  the  rest  must  languish — 
constitute  a  most  complex  problem.  Laplace  set  himself  at  no  such  intricate  task 
when  attempting  the  solution  of  the  solar  system.  We  fall  back  on  the  conviction 
that  while  none  can  see  the  vast  organism,  or  all  the  forces  which  are  operative  in 
it,  yet  it  does  move  by  an  instinctive  impulse  under  a  beneficent  direction  whose 
secrets  none  can  wrest,  whose  failure  no  one  can  imagine.  The  suspension  of  one 
class  of  labourers  affects,  more  or  less,  every  other.  But  to  trace,  or  tell,  the 
infinite  processes  through  which  every  person  in  the  land  finds  daily  that  which 
will  maintain  the  body  and  restore  its  energies,  as  they  are  constantly  spent,  is 
beyond  the  ability  of  any  mortal.  Over  all  is  He  upon  whom  all  eyes,  though  so 
blind,  wait.  Men  call  Him  God,  or  Nature,  or  Chance,  or  Law,  each  term  being 
somewhat  of  a  cloak  for  their  ignorance.  II.  The  Lord  required  each  man  to  provide 
FOR  HIMSELF.  The  Combined  wisdom  and  efforts  of  men  could  not  create  a  grain 
of  com.  Yet  each  and  all  must  gather  for  themselves.  The  increase  will  vary  as 
occasions  and  necessities  do.  But  how  often  has  the  world  seen  that  they  who 
would  for  their  own  selfish  ends  heap  up  their  stores  find  to  their  surprise  and 
horror  that  it  breeds  only  loathsome  and  hateful  forms  of  death !  Capital, 
unscrupulously  held  and  M'ielded,  is  becoming  the  terror  even  of  its  possessors. 
Vast  fortunes  have  generally  proved  vast  vexations,  while  Agur's  prayer,  "  Give  me 
neither  poverty  nor  riches,"  &c.,  seems  to  have  its  happiest  answer  in  the  state  of 
those  who  are  most  observant  of  these  very  precepts  given  to  Israel.  To  idle,  or 
hoard,  or  squander,  or  fret,  is  sin  now  as  then.  III.  The  Lord  put  special  honour 
ON  the  seventh.  Good  doctrine  still,  neither  abrogated  nor  superseded,  ye  buoy 
men  in  these  days  of  railroads,  and  steamships,  and  telegraphs,  and  fast  mails,  and 
Sunday  papers,  and  apoplectic  fits  1  Feel  you  not  the  Almighty  hand  on  these  flying 
wheels,  bringing  them  to  pause  ?  Will  you  say,  we  mugt  work  a  few  of  these  forbidden 
houra  to  gain  reprieve  for  the  rest  ?  Will  you  make  hay,  or  post  accounts,  or  write 
your  commercial  letters,  or  draw  out  your  plans  for  greater  barns,  or  repair  your 
machine,  or  set  foot  on  the  train,  to  be  first  at  the  market  on  the  morrow  ?  'J  hua 
yoa  do  but  repeat  their  folly,  who  hoped  to  gather  the  needful  food,  but  failed. 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Emptiness  will  fill  all  yonr  omers  when  the  results  of  such  disobedience  are  weighed. 
(De  W.  S.  Clirkc.)         The  bread  of  the  ivilderness  : — I.  They  broke  up  from  their 

ENCAMPJIKNT  IN  ElIM  IN   AN    ENERVATED    AND    MURMURING    MOOD.       They  had    eaten  of 

the  fat  of  the  wilderness  and  become  wanton,  and  they  began  to  lust  even  for  the 
fat  of  Egypt,  the  slave's  portion  ;  the  lot  of  the  freeman  already  seemed  too  spare 
and  hard.  Wiselj',  indeed,  was  the  wilderness  appointed  for  our  wanderings. 
Wisely  was  Adam  sent  forth  into  the  land  in  which  "  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow  he 
must  eat  b  ead."  Bread  won  more  cheaply  may  fatten  the  body,  but  it  sends 
"  leanness  into  the  soul."  I  never  heard  that  money  won  by  gambling  or  thieving 
brought  a  blessing  with  it  to  its  possessor.  Did  you  ever  hear  of  speculation 
enriching  either  mind  or  heart?  Money  which  comes  cheaply  goes  cheaply,  and 
leaves  no  benediction.  God's  inscription  on  His  coin  is  "Labour."  It  is  of  another 
mintage  when  that  impression  cannot  be  traced.     II.  The  first  stage  of  their 

JOURNEY  brought  THEM  OUT  INTO  A  VAST  SANDY  PLAIN,  WHERE  THERE  WAS  REAL  DANGER, 

TO  THE  EYE  OF  SENSE,  OF  THEIR  DYING  OF  HUNGER.  EHm  had  rc-heartencd  them  after 
Marah.  But  the  wilderness  of  Sin  renewed  their  pains  and  terrors,  and  "  the  whole 
congregation  of  the  Children  of  Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and  Aaron."  Their 
cry  after  the  flesh-pots  was  the  fruit  of  Elim.  They  had  renewed  there  the  blunt 
edge  of  their  lust.  The  old  appetites  resumed  their  sway,  as  they  sat  by  the  waters 
and  ate  of  their  flocks  ;  when  they  went  forth  their  murmurs  broke  out  with  new 
fierceness,  as  of  lust  rekindled,  and  in  spirit,  at  any  rate,  they  gave  themselves  again 
to  be  slaves.  Beware  of  rekindling  the  flame  of  a  dying  lust  or  appetite.  Starve 
it — it  is  the  only  policy.  Let  it  taste  again,  let  it  look  again,  it  flushes  up  into  full 
fever  glow,  and  you  are  once  more  enslaved.  III.  Eephidim  was  the  scene  of  their 
FIRST  battle  and  THEIR  FIR.ST  VICTORY.  In  the  first  great  act  of  the  drama  of 
deliverance,  their  duty  had  been  simply  to  "  Stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of 
God."  The  hour  was  now  come  when  they  must  "  quit  them  like  men  and  fight." 
Not  otherwise  is  it  in  the  Christian  life.  To  rest  on  Christ,  to  "  stand  still  and  see  His 
salvation,"  is  the  true  deliverance  of  a  spirit :  this  is  redemption.  But  we  must  fight 
hard,  as  if  the  victory  depended  on  oursf  Ues — not  for  redemption,  but  as  redeemed, 
if  we  would  reap  all  its  glorious  fruits.  The  first  foes  of  Israel  were  their  kinsmen. 
*'  And  a  man's  foes  shall  be  those  of  his  own  house."  But  come  whence  they  may, 
foes  soon  beset  the  young  pilgrim :  before  he  has  gone  far,  a  long  day's  battle 
will  test  his  courage  and  strain  his  strength.  Lusts  and  passions,  which  he  thought 
he  had  slain  for  ever,  stand  forth  alive,  and  renew  the  conflict.  The  Egyptians  slain, 
new  enemies  throng  around  us.  Our  pilgrimage  must  be  a  war-march,  with  battle- 
music  and  banners :  "  Jehovah  nissi,"  ("  the  Lord  my  banner  ")  we  cry,  and  renew 
the  fight.     (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)        Physical  provid'nce  : — I.  That  God's  physical 

PROVIDENCE    RF.COONIZES    THE    PERSONAL  WANTS    OF   EACH    INDIVIDUAL.       Manna  fell  for 

each,  babe  and  man  ;  not  one  overlooked.  Poverty  is  not  the  institution 
of  heaven.  The  causes  of  poverty  being  with  us,  let  us  seek  to  remove  them.  II. 
That  the  enjoyment  of  God's  physical  providence  depends  on  trustful  labour. 
Each  was  to  gather  for  himself,  and  to  gather  no  more  than  his  portion  for  the  day. 
Labour  is  necessary  to  give  a  relish  and  felt  value  to  our  blessings ;  and  trust  in 
God  is  necessary  to  exclude  all  anxious  thought  about  the  future.     III.  That  an 

avaricious  accumulation  of  the  BLESSINGS  OF  PHYSICAL  PROVIDENCE  WILL  DIS- 
APPOINT THE  POSSESSOR.  Hoardcd  wealth  never  satisfies.  It  is  noisome ;  it  gene- 
rates reptiles.     IV.  That  the  seeking  of  the  blessings  of  physical  providence 

SHOULD   NEVER    INTERFERE    WITH     RELIGIOUS    INSTITUTIONS.         1.      Religion    doCS     HOt 

require  us  to  neglect  the  body.  2.  Religion  has  special  claims.  It  has  to  do  with 
man's  spiritual  nature,  relations,  and  interests.      (Homilist.)  Spiritual  provi- 

dence : — I.  The  manna  was  a  provision  for  a  great  emergency.  "  When  we  were 
yet  without  strength  " — to  do  the  true  work  of  life,  to  prepare  for  death,  to  gain 
acceptance  with  God— "  in  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  II.  The  manna 
cojiES  as  a  miraculous  interposition.  1.  Undeserved.  2.  Unsought.  III.  The 
MANNA  CA3IE  AS  A  UNIVERSAL  SUPPLY.  1.  In  quantities  commensurate  with  the  wants 
of  all.  2.  Within  reach  of  all.  IV.  The  manna  came  with  Divine  directions. 
Gather  for  yourselves,  and  distribute  to  those  who  need  help.  1.  Proportionately. 
2.  Betimes.  3.  Regularly.  Constancy  is  the  condition  of  religious  life  and  growth. 
V.  The  manna  demanded  the  remembrance  of  posterity  (ver.  32).  All  God's 
interpositions  on  behalf  of  the  fallen  world  are  facts  that  shall  be  had  in  everlasting 
remembrance.  For  this  purpose  they  are  recorded  in  His  Word.  His  interposition 
in  Christ  specially  calls  for  our  commemoration  in  the  ordinance  instituted  for  that 
purpose.     (Ibid.)        The  manna : — I.  The  occasion  for  the  manna.     The  supplies 


CHAP.  XVI.]  EXODUS.  287 

brought  from  Egypt  exhausted.  11.  The  moral  purposes  of  the  manna.  1.  To 
test  the  people.  2.  To  give  an  indisputable  proof  of  the  reality  of  their  deliver- 
ance from  Egypt  by  God's  own  hand.  3.  To  show  the  unreasonableness  of  their 
murmurings.  III.  The  typical  significance  of  the  manna.  Lessons  :  1.  This 
standing  miracle  of  forty  years'  duration  is  an  irrefragable  proof  of  all  the  Bible 
assumes  concerning  the  personality,  love,  and  power  of  God.  2.  It  teaches  the 
faithfulness  and  deep  interest  of  our  heavenly  Father,  in  all  His  children.  3.  The 
murmurings  and  loss  of  appetite  for  the  manna  on  the  part  of  the  Israelites  are 
fraught  with  lessons  of  deepest  practical  moment  to  us.  4.  The  constant  depend- 
ence on  Christ  as  the  true  Manna  is  clear  and  emphatic.  5.  The  memorial  pot  of 
manna  in  the  ark  is  a  type  of  the  "hidden  manna"  laid  up  in  heaven  for  the 
believer  (Eev.  ii.  17).  (D.  G.Hughes,  M.A.)  Threefold  aspects  of  Providence  : — 
I.  The  temporal  aspect  of  Providence.  1.  Providence  is  always  timely  in  its 
assistance.  Never  too  soon ,  never  too  late  ;  never  before  the  time,  never  after  the  time. 
Forgetting  this,  we  bring  upon  ourselves  no  end  of  trouble  by  being  over-anxious 
for  the  morrow.  2.  Providence  is  always  ample  in  its  resources.  There  were  many 
mouths  to  be  filled  and  voracious  appetites  to  be  satisfied,  and  yet  we  have  not  heard 
that  the  supply  failed  for  a  single  morning.  You  remember  reading  in  the  account 
of  the  Franco-Prussian  war,  that  the  army  of  Napoleon  III.  loitered  for  days  on 
the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  when  they  ought  to  have  advanced  into  the  heart  of  Ger- 
many. What  was  the  cause  of  this  fatal  delay  ?  Want  of  provision ;  the  com- 
missariat was  inadequate  to  supply  the  demands  of  three  hundred  thousand  soldiers, 
and  at  Sedan  the  campaign  proved  disastrous  to  the  empire.  "  He  that  walketh 
righteously,  and  speaketh  uprightly  .  .  .  bread  shall  be  given  him ;  his  waters  shall 
be  sure."  Providence  is  conditional  in  its  method  of  suj^port.  God  rained  down 
manna  from  heaven  in  small  grain,  like  coriander  seed,  not  in  ready-made  loaves. 
"  Society,"  says  Emerson,  "  expects  every  man  to  find  his  own  loaf."  God  expects 
it  too.  II.  The  spiritual  aspects  of  Providence.  "  See  that  the  Lord  hath  given 
you  the  Sabbath,  therefore  He  giveth  you  on  the  sixth  day  the  bread  of  two  days." 

1.  Its  value  as  a  day  of  rest  for  the  body  is  very  great.  2.  Its  importance  as  a  day 
for  spiritual  contemplation  and  holy  delight  is  incalculable.  III.  The  historical 
ASPECT  OF  Providence.  "This  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord  commandeth,  fill  an 
omer  of  it  to  be  kept  for  your  generations,  that  they  may  see  the  bread  wherewith 
I  have  fed  you  in  the  wilderness."  1.  The  omer  full  of  manna  was  meant  to  teach 
coming  generations  the  greatness  of  God's  power  and  the  faithfulness  of  His 
promise.  "  Power  belongeth  unto  God  "  as  it  belongeth  to  no  other  being,  because 
it  is  absolute  and  independent.  This  is  what  makes  His  promises  "  exceeding  great 
and  precious,"  that  He  has  abundance  of  resources  to  make  good  His  word  to  man. 

2.  The  omer  full  of  manna  was  meant  to  teach  coming  generations  the  evil  of 
hoardmg  up  covetously  the  bounties  of  Providence.  {W.  A.  Griffiths.)  Manna  : — 
The  manna  was  a  type  of  Christ.  I.  As  the  manna  was  a  special  mercy  to  the 
Israelites  in  their  extremity,  so  the  Saviour  is  God's  special  gift  to  sinful 
men.      II.  As  the  Divine  gift  of  the  sianna  appeared  in  the  garb  of  extreme 

SIMPLICITY,  so  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  SaVIOUR  IS  EMBODIED  IN  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF 
LIFE,  THROUGH  WHICH  He  BECOMES  OUR  LIFE.  III.  As  THE  MANNA  WAS  PROPORTIONED 
IN   DAILY   RATIONS,    SO    WE    MUST    HAVE  COMMUNION  WITH  ChRIST  EVERY  DAY.      KellgioUS 

exercises  are  f  i  amed  to  recur.  Thoughts  of  Jesus  and  communion  with  God  cannot 
be  stored ;  they  must  be  repeated.  IV.  The  manna  was  in  perpetual  remem- 
brance  AFTER  THEY   ENTEREp   CaNAAN,  SO   JeSUS  AND   HiS  CrOSS  WILL   BE   THE  THEME 

OF  ETERNITY.  The  manna  was  placed  in  the  golden  pot,  and  put,  with  the  ark,  in 
the  most  holy  place,  when  they  began  to  live  on  the  old  corn  of  the  land.  The  daily 
gathering  was  over,  and  the  journey,  but  the  remembrance  remained.  Faith  must 
make  way  to  sight.  Grand  sight !  We  shall  not  forget  Calvary.  The  scenes  with 
Jesus   must   remain.      (British   Weekly.)  AngeVs  food: — I.  Dh'ine    care.     1. 

Anticipating  human  need.  He  was  before  them  in  the  way  ;  to  turn  "  the  barren 
wilderness  "  into  "  a  fruitful  field."  2.  Providing  a  suitable  supply.  (1)  Suitable 
to  their  bodily  need.  Pl^asant  to  the  taste.  Nourishing.  (2)  Suited  to  a  wander- 
ing life.  No  time  to  sow  and  reap,  even  had  the  soil  permitted.  3.  Furnishing  a 
Bufiicient  supply.  Day  by  day ;  for  forty  years.  4.  Watching  over  spiritual 
interests  in  meeting  physical  need.  The  Sabbath  guarded.  Both  body  and  soul 
cared  for ;  and  at  the  same  time.  II.  Human  duty.  1.  To  expect.  Eyes  of  all 
wait  on  Him.  Tne  manna  to  be  looked  for.  We  are  to  expect  that  God  will  supply 
our  wants.  He  has  promised  to  do  so.  2.  To  collect.  This  work  might  have  been 
saved  them.     It  had  its  use.     Some  collect  for  others.     Young  for  aged,  «&c.     All 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIi.  [chap.  xn. 

secular  labour  in  fields  or  factories,  but  a  collecting  of  the  good  gifts  of  God.  So  is 
prayer,  study  of  the  Bible,  &c.  3.  To  economize.  None  to  be  wasted.  Those  who 
had  gathered  less  were  to  be  supplied  out  of  another's  abundance.  A  wise  distri- 
bution of  our  good  things  is  true  economy.  Sowing  for  eternity.  III.  Spiritual 
INSTRUCTION.  The  manna  a  type  of  Christ.  So  Jesus  Himself  regarded  it  (Johnvi.). 
It  was  so — 1.  Because  unexpected  in  its  coming.  2.  Came  in  time  of  great  need. 
3.  Unostentatious  in  its  form.  4.  Plfasant  to  the  taste.  5.  Spread  silently  over 
the  ground.  G.  Lasted  all  the  journey  through.  7.  The  remembrance  of  it  trea- 
sured for  ever.  8.  Mysterious  in  nature.  "  \Vhatisit  ?  "  Compare  with  "  "Who  is  He?"' 
*'  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness,"  &c.  While  curious  minds  are  trying  to  under- 
stand  a  mystery  into  which  angels  desire  to  look,  let  our  exhortation  be,  "  0  taste 
and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good,"  &c.  Learn — I.  To  trust  in  the  care  of  Provi- 
dence. II.  To  act  in  harmony  with  Providence.  III.  To  seek  the  true  Bread 
of  Life.     (J.  C.   Gray.)  Lessons  from  the  manna  : — 1.  Pt  was  given  in  con- 

eideration  of  a  great  and  urgent  necessity.  A  like  necessity  lies  at  the  founda- 
tion of  God's  gift  of  His  Son  to  the  world;  it  was  not  possible  in  the  nature 
of  things  for  any  other  resource  to  be  found.  2.  The  manna  was  peculiarly 
the  gift  of  God,  coming  freely  and  directly  from  His  hand.  How  striking  a  repre- 
sentation in  this  respect  of  Christ  all  Scripture  may  be  said  to  testify,  as  both  in 
His  person  and  in  the  purchased  blessings  of  His  redemption  He  is  always  pre- 
sented to  sinful  men  as  the  free  gift  of  the  Father's  love.  3.  The  whole  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  is  in  Jesus,  so  that  all  may  receive  as  their  necessities  require.  So  was 
it  also  with  the  manna  ;  there  was  enough  for  all.  4.  Then,  falling  as  it  did  round 
about  the  camp,  it  was  near  enough  to  be  within  the  reach  of  all ;  if  any  should 
perish  for  want,  it  could  be  from  no  outward  necessity  or  hardship,  for  the  means 
of  supply  were  brought  almost  to  their  very  hand.  Nor  is  it  otherwise  in  regard  to 
Cbrist,  who  in  the  gospel  of  His  grace  is  laid,  in  a  manner,  at  the  very  door  of 
every  sinner;  the  word  is  nigh  him;  and  if  he  should  still  parish,  he  must  be 
without  excuse — it  is  in  sight  of  the  Bread  of  Life.  5.  The  supply  of  manna  came 
daily,  and  faith  had  to  be  exercised  on  the  providence  of  God,  that  each  day  would 
bring  its  appointed  provision  ;  if  they  attempted  to  hoard  for  the  morrow,  their  store 
became  a  mass  of  corruption.  In  like  manner  must  the  child  of  God  pray  for  his 
soul  every  morning  as  it  dawns,  "  Give  me  this  day  my  daily  bread."  He  can  lay 
up  no  stock  of  grace  which  is  to  last  him  for  a  continuance  without  needing  to 
repair  to  the  treasury  of  Christ.  6.  Finally,  as  the  manna  had  to  be  gathered  in 
the  morning  of  each  day,  and  a  double  portion  provided  on  the  sixth  day,  that  the 
seventh  might  be  hallowed  as  a  day  of  sacred  rest,  so  Christ  and  the  things  of  His 
salvation  must  be  sought  with  diligence  and  regularity,  but  only  in  the  appointed 
way  and  through  the  divinely-provided  channels.  {A.  Necin,  D.D.)  The  rain  of 
bread  : — I.  The  backward  look  of  this  bit  of  history.  Culminating  point  of  a  fit  of 
murmuring.  Shows  sin  and  folly  of  persistent  distrust.  1.  Murmuring  is  a  most  un- 
profitable state  of  mind.  Never  did  anybody  any  good.  Source  of  all  Israelites' 
troubles.  Once  a  child  was  reading,  apparently  absorbed  in  the  act :  her  parent  asked 
what  was  the  book  ;  and  looking  up,  she  answered,  with  a  sudden  oveiilow  of  tears, 
"  Oh  father,  the  people  have  begun  to  murmur  again,  and  now  God  will  have  to 
punish  them  some  more ! "  2.  Murmuring  is  a  most  delusive  disposition.  It  leads 
to  dangerous  self-deception  in  almost  all  instances.  Christians  reply  to  those  who 
attempt  to  rebuke  them,  "  It  is  my  temperament."  Often  mere  habit.  Should  be 
checked.  3.  Murmuring  is  a  most  unwelcome  indulgence.  It  prejudices  piety. 
Makes  a  Christian  disagreeable.  4.  Murmuring  is  a  growing  sin  in  the  heart. 
Israelites— sullen  at  first — now  suspicious.  They  openly  find  fault.  5.  Murmuring 
is  contagious,  and  propagates  itself  far  and  wide.  II.  The  present  appearance  of 
THIS  bit  of  history.  1.  Mau's  perversity.  Little  vexations  make  us  petulant  and 
revengeful.  2.  God's  patience.  Lord  Bacon  quotes  an  old  Spanish  writer  as  saying : 
"  To  return  evil  for  good  is  devilish ;  to  return  good  for  good  is  human  ;  but  to 
return  good  for  evil  is  even  godlike."  Certainly  this  is  what  our  God  often  does  ; 
but  it  would  not  do  for  any  of  us  to  presume  upon  such  wonderful  long-suffering. 
In  ancient  history  we  are  told  that  there  was  once  a  statue  of  Jupiter  erected  at  Crete  ; 
but  the  Cretans  were  liars,  and  the  maker  of  the  stone  image  had  fashioned  it 
without  ears.  The  exultant  people  may  have  been  pleased  to  think  they  had  a  god 
who  could  not  hear  their  falsehoods ;  but  they  soon  found  that  a  deity  who  had  no 
ears  to  hear  prevarications  had  no  ears  to  hear  prayers  either.  We  must  remember 
that  our  God  knows  all  our  wickedness,  and  bears  with  us  for  a  while ;  but  it  is  to  test 
our  obedience  to  His  law.   3.  Heaven's  sufficiency  is  also  illustrated  here.  For  in  the 


CHS5.  XVI.]  EXODUS.  289 

story  the  promise  takes  a  very  significant  and  beautiful  form  ;  God  says  He  will 
"  rain  bread  from  heaven  "  for  their  need  (see  Psa.  Ixxviii.  22-25  ;  Phil.  iv.  19).   III. 
The  forward  reach  of  this  bit  of  history.   1.  It  was  designed  to  be  a  type  of  Christ. 
(1)  It  came  down  to  earth  from  heaven,  as  He  did.     (2)  Every  man  must  take  of  it 
for  himself  as  he  would  need  to  take  his  own  food.     (3)  It  would  work  an  individual 
experience  of  the  new  life ;  the  book  of  Wisdom  says  that  in  the  day  of  it  the 
manna  tasted  to  every  one  as  he  pleased.     (4)  It  was  free  and  sufficient  for  all :  the 
rich  and  the  poor,  the  sick  and  the  well,  the  young  and  the  old.     (5)  It  must  be 
sought  not  once  for   all,   but   daily.      (6)   It  must  be  eaten ;   it  must  become 
part  of  one's  self.      (7)  It  was  exclusive :  there  was  no  other  food  so  safe  in 
the   desert.      (8)    It    would  cease    only  when  no    longer    needed.      2.    It   was 
accepted  as  a  type  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (see  John  vi.).     (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
The  food  from  heaven: — Manna  was  prepared  for  food  by  grinding  and  baking.     It 
tasted  like  cakes  made  of  meal  and  honey  in  its  natural  state,  and  like  fresh  olive 
oil  when  cooked;  its  shape  resembled  coriander  seed,  and  its  colour  was  white; 
its  supply  continued  for  forty  years,  and  failed  with  their  use  of  the  first  new  corn 
in  the  land  of   Canaan.      That   it  was  altogether   a  miraculous  gift  and  not  a 
product  of  nature  is  clear  from  the  following  considerations.     It  fell  in  enormous 
quantity,  with  unfailing  regularity,  even  in  the  exceptional  failure  of  the  Sabbath- 
day  ;  its  composition  was  exactly  suited  to  the  tastes  of  the  people ;  heat  both 
melted  and  hardened  it;   gathered  in  distrust,  it  bred  worms  and  putrefied;  in 
faith,  it  was  preserved  for  generations.     The  natural  products  of  the  Arabian 
desert  and  other  Eastern  lands,  called  manna,  fail  almost  in   every  particular 
noticed  in  the  miraculous  food  from  heaven.     All  serve  rather  medicinal  than 
nutritious  purposes.      They  can  be  gathered  only  three  months  in  the  year,  and 
not  all  the  year  round,  and  then  only  in  small  quantities,  out  of  all  proportion  to 
the  actual  consumption  of  the  Israelites,  which,  calculating  the  omer  at  three 
English  quarts   (each  man  had  an  omer  a  day,  ver.   16),  could  not   have  been 
less  than  15,00n,000  of  pounds  a  week;  they  may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time, 
may  be  gathered  on  all  days,  indiscriminately,  without  a  perceptible  increase  or 
diminution  in  their  supply.      The  manna  now  found  in  the  Arabian  desert  is  the 
product  of  the  tamarisk   (Tamarix  galUca),  gathered  in   June.      According   to 
Burckhardt,  ' '  it  drops  from  the  thorns  on  the  sticks  and  leaves  with  which  the 
ground  is  covered,  and  must  be  gathered  early  in  the.  day  or  it  will  be  melted  by 
the  sun.      The  Arabs  cleanse  and  boil  it,  strain  it  through  a  cloth,  and  put  it  in 
leather  bottles  ;  and  in  this  way  it  can  be  kept  uninjured  for  several  years.   _  They 
use  it  like  honey  or  butter  with  their  unleavened  bread,  but  never  make  it  into 
cakes  or  eat  it  by  itself.     It  abounds  only  in  very  wet  years,  and  in  dry  seasons 
it  sometimes  disappears  entirely."     The  same  traveller  found  in  the  valley  of 
Jordan  "  manna  like  gum  on  the  leaves  and  branches  of  the  tree  gharrob,  which  is 
as  large  as  the  olive-tree,  having  a  leaf  like  the  poplar,  though  somewhat  broader. 
It  appears  like  dew  upon  the  leaves,  is  of  a  brown  or  grey  colour,  and  drops  on 
the  ground.     When  first  gathered  it  is  sweet,  but  in  a  day  or  two  becomes  acid. 
The  Arabs  use  it  like  honey  or  butter,  and  eat  it  in  their  oatmeal  gruel.      They 
also  use  it  in  cleaning  their  leather  bottles  and  making  them  air-tight.     The 
seasoa  for  gathering  this  is  in  May  or  June.     Two  other  shrubs  which  have  been 
supposed  to  yield  the  manna  of  Scripture  are  the  Alhagi  mmirorum,  or  Persian 
manna,  and  the  Alhagi  desertorum,  thorny  plants  common  in  Syria."     In  addition 
to  what  has  been  said  of  the  miraculous  nature  of  the  manna  supply  and  the 
character  of  the  natural  products  just  specified,  a  brief  reference  to  three  explana- 
tions of  the  manna  may  be  in  place.      1.  It  is  said  to  be  miraculous  food,  that  is, 
dew  changed  into  bread.     "  The  dew  of  heaven  "  promotes  the  fertility  of   the 
earth.     During  the  wanderings  of  Israel  through  the  wilderness,  which  is  "no 
place   of    seed,"   the    dew,    without  sowing,   brought   bread  from  heaven   (ver. 
4 ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  24 ;  cv.  40).      So  that  the  manna  answers  to  the  wine  at  the 
marriage  of  Cana.     2.  The  manna  is  the  same  food  of  the  desert  still  found  in 
the  peninsula  of  Sinai.      This,  of  course,  lands  us   in  the  region   of  mythical 
embellishment,  and  requires  a  degree  of   credulity  which  the   writer  does   not 
possess.      3.  The  manna  is  a  miracle  of  accretion,  answering  to  the  miraculous 
feeding  of  the  multitude  in  the  New  Testament,  and  to  the  increase  of  meal  and 
oil  by  Elijah  in  the  Old.     (J.  I.  Mombert,  D.D.)         Manna  ;— Bonar  gives  the 
following  twelve  reasons  why  manna  cannot  be  identified  with  the  exudation  of 
the  tarfa-tree.      1.  The  tarfa  exudes  only  small  quantities.     The  Arabs  could  not 
live  on  it  for  a  week.     2.  The  tarfa  only  exudes  at  certain  seasons— March  and 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

April.  3.  The  tarfa  does  not  yield  its  exudation  regularly,  even  once  a  year.  4. 
The  exudations  of  the  tarfa  come  out  from  the  branches  of  the  tree,  they  do  not 
come  down  from  the  air  or  sky.  5.  The  tarfa  exudations  are  in  composition  and 
consistency  somewhat  like  honey.  They  are  quite  unfit  for  grinding,  or  pounding, 
or  baking,  or  boiling.  6.  The  taste  of  manna  is  said  to  have  been  as  fresh  oil 
(Numb.  xi.  8).  No  one  who  has  tasted  the  tarfa-manna  would  compare  it  to  oil. 
7.  The  tarfa-manna  does  not  stink,  or  breed  worms,  in  a  single  night.  8.  The 
tarfa-produce  does  not  evaporate  as  soon  as  the  sun  arises  (ver.  21).  9. 
Tarfa-manna  does  not  give  particular  quantities  on  particular  days.  10.  The  tarfa- 
manna  is  purgative  medicine,  not  food.  11.  The  Israelites  knew  well  the  tarfa- 
tree,  but  they  did  not  recognize  the  manna.  12.  Israel  could  not  have  subsisted  so 
long  on   this  one  food.  Dew  and  manna  : — Dew  corresponds  to  that  inward 

truth  which  descends  into  the  soul  from  the  Lord  when  all  is  peaceful  and  happy 
within.  When,  in  a  spiritual  morning,  this  dew  has  descended  upon  him,  fear  is 
unfelt,  solicitude  no  longer  disturbs  him ;  he  relies  with  a  child's  confiding  trust 
on  the  Giver  of  all  good,  and  feels  a  freshness  and  vigour  like  those  of  heaven's 
own  morning  over  the  soul.  This  cheering,  inward,  blessed  sensation  is  often  in 
the  Word  described  by  dew  (Mic.  v.  7 ;  Isa.  xviii.  4;  Hos.  xiv.  5).  When,  on  a 
summer's  morning,  we  walk  forth  in  a  beautiful  country,  the  red  light  of  the 
early  dawn  tinging  the  whole  eastern  horizon  with  golden  siilendour,  a  holy  quiet 
reigning  round,  not  broken,  but  charmed  and  enriched  with  the  thrilling  songs  of 
the  birds,  while  every  leaf,  blade,  hedgerow,  and  flower  are  gemmed  with  pearly 
dew  glittering  like  diamonds  in  the  sun's  new  beams,  there  is  an  image  of  the 
soul — calmed,  illuminated,  and  blessed  with  the  truth  of  peace.  But  after  the 
dew  we  come  to  the  manna — the  substantial  food  which  gave  so  much  pleasure  and 
60  mucli  support.  When  it  is  seen  that  solid  food  in  Divine  language  corresponds 
to  goodness,  which  supplies  the  will  of  every  one  who  is  living  for  heaven  with 
energy  and  delight,  and  remember  that  this  manna  was  given  to  supply  food  to 
the  Israelites  while  they  were  in  the  transition  period  between  living  in  Egypt  and 
living  in  Canaan,  we  shall  easily  perceive  that  it  is  the  symbol  of  that  heavenly 
goodness  which  the  Lord  can  impart  to  the  soul  of  man  while  it  is  in  the  transition 
state,  labouring  to  become  regenerate,  following  the  truth,  fighting  against  its 
evils  as  they  from  time  to  time  present  themselves,  but  not  yet  entered  into  that 
phase  of  the  spiritual  life  in  which  he  feels  at  home  in  heavenly  things.  Hence 
the  manna  describes  the  goodness  and  the  delight  which  the  Divine  mercy  imparts 
to  man  while  labouring  to  become  regenerate.  It  is  small,  because,  as  compared 
with  true  angelic  joy,  it  is  of  little  account.  It  is  round,  because  roundness 
expresses  the  smoothness,  and  also  the  completeness,  of  goodness,  as  compared 
with  truth — truth  is  ever  sharp  and  piercing.  It  is  white,  to  denote  its  purity, 
and  sweet,  to  express  its  deliciousness.  It  is  like  a  thin  cake,  or  wafer,  to  mark  its 
inferiority,  its  shallowness,  so  to  speak,  when  compared  with  true  celestial  joy. 
Yet  feeble  as  it  is,  so  far  does  it  transcend  all  merely  human  and  external 
joy,  that  when  it  is  first  truly  awakened  in  the  soul,  all  other  deligbts  in 
the  estimation  of  the  possessor  become  as  nothing,  and  he  cries  out  in  the 
spirit,  "What  is  this?" — for  he  knows  not  what  it  is.  It  is  a  state  of  peace, 
of  richness,  of  sweetness  that  passeth  all  understanding.  It  may  be  felt,  but  cannot 
be  described.  It  is  as  if  every  fibre  of  the  soul  thrilled  with  joy.  It  is  blessed- 
ness unspeakable.  All  other  deUghts  seem  now  unutterably  poor.  They  are  as  the 
lights  of  earth  in  the  presence  of  the  sun.  By  receiving  each  day  the  food  for  the 
day,  and  no  more,  the  important  lesson  is  conveyed  that  we  should  ever  be  guided 
in  our  wish  to  receive  heavenly  blessings  not  by  the  desire  of  selfish  gratification, 
but  by  the  love  of  use.  So  much  as  we  need  for  our  work,  so  much  should  we 
desire  to  receive.  Seek  food  for  use  and  delight  will  be  given  in.  Seek  it  also  for 
the  duties  of  to-day.  The  only  way  to  make  any  advance  in  heavenly  things  is  to 
do  our  duty  now.  The  good  not  used  now  will  vanish  when  the  sun  of  selfishness 
becomes  vigorous  within  us.  If  we  attempt  to  save  it  for  the  future,  and  to 
deceive  ourselves  with  the  good  we  will  some  day  do,  it  will  breed  the  worms  of 
vain  conceits,  flattering  and  false.  It  may  become  polluted  hypocrisy,  most, 
abhorrent  in  the  sight  of  God  and  angels,  but  can  never  be  saving  good.  The 
lesson  involved  in  the  corruption  of  the  manna  in  the  hands  of  those  who  gathered 
to  hoard  and  not  to  use  is  of  inestimable  value.  To  be  a  miser  is  bad  in  earthly 
things,  but  far  worse  in  heavenly.  And  it  is  to  be  feared  that  spiritual  hoarding  is 
even  more  prevalent  than  natural.  How  many  sermons  do  we  hear  with  delight, 
Dut  whose  influence  goes  no  farther  than  to  stock  our  memories !    How  many  good 


CHAP,  svi.]  EXODUS.  291 

* — 

books  do  we  read  whose  pages  unfold  to  us  exalted  lessons  and  truths  of  sterling 
worth  !  We  hear,  we  read,  and  we  admire,  but  our  hearts  remain  as  cold,  heed- 
less, and  unpractical  as  before.  We  are  no  better,  we  admit ;  but  we  do  not  suspect 
what  is  the  real  truth — that  we  are  worse.  The  manna  we  are  hoping  to  preserve 
for  future  use  is  becoming  corrupted  and  defiled.  We  are  gliding  into  states  of 
self-dependency,  self-complacency,  self -flattery.  We  are  supposing  we  are  righteous, 
or,  at  least,  in  no  danger,  because  we  know  righteous  things,  while  with  every 
effort  we  make  we  are  strengthening  our  inherent  evils,  our  hereditaiy  tendencies. 
We  are  not  searching  out  our  frailties  and  opposing  them,  but  indulging  them  and 
salving  them  over  with  our  religious  knowledge  and  pious  observances.  The 
richest  substances  become,  when  corrupted,  the  most  loathsome;  and  nothing  is 
so  abhorrent  in  the  Divine  sight  as  a  religion  unused  for  good,  pandering  only 
to  self-gratulation  and  deceit.  Our  whole  progress  depends  on  eating  to-day 
what  God  gives  to-day.  The  same  lesson  would  teach  us  also  the  duty  of  doing 
as  it  comes  the  work  of  each  successive  stage  of  our  business  of  life  and  the 
reception  of  its  proper  and  present  blessing.  "Gather  of  it  every  man  according 
to  his  eating,  an  omer  for  every  man.  Let  no  man  leave  it  until  the  morning  " 
(vers.  16,  19).  One  exception  to  this  rule,  however,  there  was  (ver.  29). 
Days  for  the  soul  are  states.  The  six  daj's  of  labour  represent  the  states  of  the 
soul  in  which  it  is  striving  to  obey  a  truth,  although  as  yet  it  is  laborious  to  do 
so  in  consequence  of  oppositions  within  and  without.  The  sixth  day  is  the  end 
of  this  struggle,  when  the  soul  has  succeeded  in  realizing  not  only  the  truth  of 
a  duty  or  a  principle  but  also  the  good,  the  blessedness  of  it.  Two  omers  are  then 
received,  tlie  bread  of  two  days.  One  more  incident  we  would  notice.  The  manna 
was  gathered  by  an  omer  full  at  once,  and  no  otherwise  ;  and  we  are  informed  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  narrative,  "Now  an  omer  is  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  " 
(ver.  36).  There  were  three  chief  measures  for  dry  articles,  each  ten  times  larger 
than  the  other — the  omer,  the  ephah,  and  the  homer  (Ezek.  xlv.  11).  These 
three  measures,  like  the  three  kinds  of  bread  of  the  tabernacle — the  loaf,  the 
cake,  and  the  wafer — we  may  readily  conceive,  have  relatiou  to  the  reception  of 
heavenly  good  by  the  three  grand  classes  of  Christians  who  form  afterwards  the 
three  heavens  of  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  xii.  2).  The  good  which  they  receive  who 
have  entered  fully  into  love  to  the  Lord  as  the  supreme  source  of  all  their 
operations  is  of  the  largest  measure,  the  homer.  The  good  of  those  who  glory 
rather  in  the  light  than  the  love  of  heaven,  though  they  are  true  to  the  light  and 
sons  of  the  light,  is  of  the  second  measure,  the  ephah.  The  good  of  those  who 
are  not  even  intellectual  Christians,  but  still  steadily  obey  what  they  see  to  be 
enjoined  in  the  Word,  is  the  lowest  measure,  the  omer,  which  is  the  tenth  part 
of  the  ephah.  And  this  is  the  measure  by  which  we  all  receive  heavenly  good  in 
our  spiritual  journey.  Our  law  of  duty  is  to  obey  the  Ten  Commandments. 
Each  commandment  obeyed  brings  its  omer  of  blessing.  (J.  Bailey,  Ph.D.) 
Christ  the  true  Manna  : — I  am  told  there  is  a  country  where  men  in  times  of  want 
eat  clay  in  great  lumps,  and  fill  themselves  with  it  so  as  to  deaden  their  hunger.  I 
know  that  many  people  in  England  do  the  same.  There  is  a  kind  of  yellow  clay 
(gold)  which  is  much  cried  up  for  staying  spiritual  hunger  :  heavy  stuff  it  is,  but 
many  have  a  vast  appetite  for  it.  They  prefer  it  to  the  choicest  dainties.  Many 
try  to  stave  off  hunger  by  indifference,  like  bears  in  winter,  which  are  not  hungry 
because  they  ai'e  asleep.  They  would  not  like  to  be  aroused,  because  if  they  were 
they  would  wake  up  to  an  awful  hunger.  I  wish  they  could  be  awakened,  for  that 
hunger  which  they  dread  would  drive  them  to  a  soul-satisfying  Saviour.  Depend 
upon  it,  the  only  way  to  meet  hunger  is  to  get  bread,  and  the  only  way  to  meet 
your  soul's  want  is  to  get  Christ,  in  whom  there  is  enough  and  to  spare,  but 
nowhere  else.     (C    H.    Spurgeon.)  Satisfied  icith  God's  provision: — Another 

time  Billy  Bray  tells  us  that  his  crop  of  potatoes  turned  out  poorly ;  and  as  he 
was  digging  them  in  the  autumn,  Satan  was  at  his  elbow,  and  said,  "  There,  Billy, 
isn't  that  poor  pay  for  serving  your  Father  the  way  you  have  all  the  year?  Just 
see  those  small  potatoes."  He  stopped  his  hoeing,  and  replied,  "Ah,  Satan,  at  it 
again,  talking  against  my  Father,  bless  His  name.  Why,  when  I  served  you,  I 
didn't  get  any  potatoes  at  all.  What  are  you  talking  against  Father  for?  "  And 
on  he  went  hoeing  and  praising  the  Lord  for  small  potatoes.  A  valuable  lesson  for 
us  aU.  Bread  from  God : — Some  time  ago  a  good  Christian  man  was  living 
among  the  hills  of  Scotland.  He  was  very  poor,  but  so  good  that  every  one  who 
knew  him  luve  !  and  honoured  him.  One  winter  there  was  a  violent  snowstorm. 
The  wind  was  high,  and  drifting  snow  blocked  up  the  roads,  and  quite  covered 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tvu 

the  humble  dwelling  of  poor  Caleb,  as  this  good  man  was  called.  For  three  daya 
he  had  been  unable  to  go  out  and  get  food  for  himself  and  family.  They  were  ia 
great  need,  and  had  prayed  earnestly  for  relief.  A  gentleman  living  in  that  neigh- 
bourhood, who  knew  Caleb  well,  awoke  suddenly  one  night.  It  seemed  as  if  a 
voice  was  calling  to  him  which  said,  "  Send  provisions  to  Caleb."  He  thought 
little  of  it,  but  turned  on  his  pillow  and  went  to  sleep  again.  Again  the  voice 
seemed  to  sound  in  his  ears,  "Send  provisions  to  Caleb."  Again  he  slept,  A 
third  time  the  call  came.  Then  he  arose  hastily,  dressed  himself,  called  up  his 
servant,  and  told  him  to  harness  the  horse,  while  he  filled  a  basket  with  provisions 
of  all  kinds.  "  Take  this  basket  to  Caleb,"  said  he,  "  and  if  he  asks  who  sent  it, 
tell  him  it  cotnes  from  God."  The  servant  did  as  he  was  bidden.  A  path  was 
made  through  the  snow.  The  basket  of  food  was  left  at  Caleb's  cottage  :  and  he 
and  his  family  received  it  with  hearty  rejoicings.  They  felt  sure  that  it  was  food 
from  heaven,  just  as  truly  as  the  manna  was  in  the  wilderness  on  which  the 
Israelites  lived,  Moses  secured  the  blessing  of  bread  for  the  Israelites  in  the 
wilderness,  and  Jesus  is  "  the  Prophet  Uke  Moses,"  because  He  secures  this  blessing 
both  for  the  bodies  and  the  souls  of  His  people.     (R.  Neivton.)  Food  providen- 

tiallij  supplied : — At  the  Turners'  banquet  given  in  his  honour  a  short  time  since, 
Mr.  Stanley  alluded  to  the  strange  sufferings  in  which  he  shared  fifteen  or  sixteen 
months  ago.  for  six  weeks  they  had  not  seen  a  bit  of  meat ;  for  ten  days  they 
had  not  seen  a  banana  or  a  grain,  and  the  faces  of  the  people  were  getting  leaner, 
and  their  bodies  were  getting  thinner,  and  their  strength  was  fading  day  by  day. 
One  day  the  officers  asked  him  if  he  had  seen  anything  like  it  in  any  African 
expedition  before.  He  replied  "  No,"  though  he  remembered  on  a  former  occasion 
when  they  were  nine  days  without  food,  and  ended  their  famine  with  a  fight. 
Then,  however,  they  knew  where  there  was  grain,  and  all  tbey  had  to  do  was  to 
hurry  on ;  but  in  the  late  expedition  they  had  been  ten  days  without,  and  they  did 
not  know  when  their  hunger  was  to  tenninate.  They  were  all  sitting  down  at  the 
time,  and  he  expressed  his  belief  that  the  age  of  miracles  was  not  altogether  past. 
Moses  struck  water  out  of  the  Horeb  rock,  the  Israelites  were  fed  with  manna  in 
the  wilderness,  and  he  told  them  that  he  did  not  think  they  should  be  surprised  to 
see  some  miracle  for  themselves — perhaps  on  the  morrow  or  the  folliwing  day. 
He  had  scarcely  finished  when  some  guinea  fowl  flocked  round  them  and  were  at 
once  seized.  Soul  food  necessary  : — A  man  was  leaving  a  church  at  St.  Louis 
■where  Mr.  Bloody  had  been  holding  a  service.  The  eminent  preacher  noticed 
him,  and  gives  the  following  account  of  their  conversation — "  I  said  to  him,  '  My 
friend,  why  is  it  that  you  don't  accept  Christ  ?  '  He  shook  his  head,  and  said  he 
didn't  know.  '  Well,  what  is  your  soul  feeding  on?'  He  said  it  was  feeding  on 
nothing.  '  Well,'  I  said,  '  that  is  pretty  hard  for  the  soul,  isn't  it — giving  it  nothing 
to  feed  on  ? '  He  was  a  man  about  my  age,  forty  years  old,  and  he  had  given  his 
soul  nothing  for  forty  years ;  he  had  been  starving  that  soul.  And  that  man  is  but 
a  type  of  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  in  this  city  to-day  ;  their  poor  souls  are 
starving.  This  body  that  we  inhabit  for  a  day  and  then  leave,  we  take  good  care 
of  that  ;  we  feed  it  three  times  a  day,  and  we  clothe  it  and  take  care  of  it  and  deck 
it,  and  by  and  by  it  is  going  into  the  grave  to  be  eaten  up  by  the  worms  ;  but  the 
inner  man,  that  is  to  Uve  on  and  on  for  ever,  is  lean  and  starved."  Symbolic 
meaning  of  the  manna : — In  the  sixth  chapter  of  St.  John,  where  our  Lord  so 
emphatically  appUes  to  Himself  the  miracle  of  the  manna,  it  will  be  seen  He 
discovers  no  wish  to  take  from  the  high  estimate  which  the  Jews  entertained  ol 
this  ancient  miracle,  so  only  that  it  was  considered  as  a  type,  not  a  mere  inter- 
position of  Providence  to  provide  by  miracles  means  for  their  daily  support.  And 
casting  aside  many  minor  analogies  which  have  been  contended  for,  but  which  are 
too  much  of  the  nature  of  fanciful  refinements,  it  is  not  difficult  to  trace  between 
the  manna  and  Christ,  the  True  Bread,  several  broad  and  instructive  resemblances. 
1,  Thus  both  were  the  free,  tmsolicited  gift  of  heaven,  prompted  by  the  sight  of 
man's  helplessness  and  man's  misery.  "  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread  from 
heaven,"  saith  our  Lord ;  "  but  My  Father  giveth  you  the  true  bread  from 
heaven."  But  observe,  the  gift  in  either  case  was  the  unmerited  bestowment  of 
the  Eternal  Father ;  whether  to  nourish  the  physical  life  of  those  wilderness 
wanderers  or  to  support  the  spiritual  hfe  of  believers  to  the  end  of  time.  Jesus 
Christ  is  a  gift,  the  eternal  life  is  a  gift,  enlightening,  converting  grace  is  a  gift. 
Human  efforts  could  no  more  avail  to  procure  these  things  than  the  sowing  of 
coriander  seed  could  produce  a  harvest  of  manna.  2.  Again,  this  gift  was  to 
preserve  life.     "Ye  have  brought  us  forth  into  the  wilderness,"  said  the  Israelites 


CHAP.  XVI.]  EXODUS.  298 

to  Moses,  "  to  kill  this  whole  assembly  with  hunger."  They  saw  nothing  before 
them  but  certain  death.  The  place  was  desert ;  a  curse  of  barrenness  and  drought 
laid  upon  it.  The  whole  is  a  picture  of  man  in  this  wilderness-world.  His  soul 
perishes  with  hunger ;  he  has  the  sentence  of  death  within  him,  a  prospect  of 
death  before  him.  But  God  has  rained  bread  from  heaven.  Christ,  the  Well- 
spring  of  all  spiritual  life ;  Christ,  the  Source  of  every  active  and  passive  grace  ; 
Christ,  the  energizing  Principle  of  all  acceptable  obedience.  "  Your  fathers  did  eat 
manna  in  the  wilderness,  and  are  dead."  It  saved  them  not  from  the  common  lot 
of  all  men,  this  bread  ye  boast  of,  but  "  I  am  the  living  Bread  which  came  down 
from  heaven.  If  any  man  eat  of  this  Bread  he  shall  hve  for  ever."  3.  Trace  this 
parallel  further,  in  the  universality  of  the  gift.  There  were  in  that  wilderness  all 
diversities  of  character — masters  and  disciples,  owners  of  flocks  and  keepers  of 
flocks  ;  rulers  of  thousands,  and  rulers  of  hundreds,  and  rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers 
of  tens :  yet  to  all  was  to  be  given  the  same  portion,  "  an  omer  to  every  man, 
according  to  the  number  in  their  tents."  And  in  like  manner,  as  far  as  concerns 
the  offer  of  the  blessing,  Christ  is  a  universal  portion.  (D.  Moore,  M.A. )  Manna 
and  dew : — Does  not  the  manner  in  which  this  bread  descended  from  above,  along 
with  the  gentle,  silent  dew,  apply  very  beautifully  to  the  True  Bread  from  heaven  ? 
It  is  not  in  the  bustle  of  the  world  or  in  the  excitement  of  religion,  but  in  secret 
and  in  silence  that  Jesus  descends  upon  the  soul,  when  the  spirit  communes  with 
God — when  the  eye  is  turned  within  in  earnest  searching  self-examination — when 
the  heart  calmly  meditates  on  the  Divine  Word.  And  what  is  the  "  dew  "  on  and 
with  which  He  descends  ?  What  but  the  Spirit  of  God,  of  which  the  dew  is  the 
constant  symbol  in  Scripture?  When  the  Spirit  falls  gently  upon  our  hearts,  then 
Jesus  descends  there.  Where  the  one  is,  the  other  is — yet  they  are  distinct.  It  is 
not  the  Spirit,  but  Christ  in  His  hving  Person  who  is  the  Bread  of  Life.  The  Spirit 
is  as  the  dew ;  Jesus  as  the  manna,  the  Bread  from  heaven.  We  must,  then, 
cherish  every  gentle  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  if  we  would  have  our  souls 
nourished.      {G.  Wagner.)  Sufficiency  of  Providence  : — The  following  anecdote 

of  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  well  authenticated :— On  a  certain  occasion,  when  dming  at  a 
lady's  house  in  Regent's  Park,  with  the  late  Dr.  Brock,  he  (Mr.  S.)  remarked  that 
£2,000  had  to  be  forthcoming  for  his  builder  to-morrow,  and  though  nothing  was 
in  hand,  the  money  would  be  paid  at  ten  o'clock.  "  I  wish  you  would  not  say 
that,"  Dr.  Brock  replied  ;  but  immediately  after,  while  they  were  still  at  the  table, 
a  telegi'am  came  to  say  that  A.  B.  had  just  left  £2,000  for  the  Orphanage;  and 
then,  confessing  that  he  had  never  seen  anything  like  that,  the  doctor  called  upon 
all  to  put  down  their  knives  and  forks  and  return  thanks  to  God.  They  never 
knew  who  A.  B.  was,  nor  whence  he  came.  (Gleanings  in  Harvest  Fields.) 
Supply  of  Providence  : — Harms  of  Hermannsburg,  the  pastor  of  a  poor  village  on 
the  Luneberg  Heath  in  Hanover,  said  in  his  annual  missionary  sermon  in  1857  : 
"  I  have  expended  much  in  the  past  year  in  sending  out  the  ship  with  her  fifteen 
passengers,  for  the  printing  house,  the  press,  and  the  paper,  altogether  14,781 
dollars,  and  I  have  received  altogether  14,796  dollars,  so  I  have  fifteen  dollars  over. 
Is  not  that  a  wonder  ?  So  much  spent,  and  yet  something  over !  And  I  thank 
God  that  He  has  given  us  the  fifteen  dollars  overplus.  Eiches  only  mtke  cares. 
God  has  heard  all  my  prayers.  He  has  given  me  no  riches,  and  I  have  also  no 
debts.  We  have  neither  collected  nor  begged,  bat  waited  patiently  on  God  in 
prayer."  Constancy  of  Providence  : — "  Never  did  man  die  of  hunger  who  served 
God  faithfully,"  was  a  saying  of  Cuthbert,  the  apostle  of  Northumbria,  when  he 
and  his  companions  were  overtaken  by  night  without  food  or  shelter.  "  Look  at 
the  eagle  oveihead,"  he  would  add  ;  "God  can  feed  us  through  him  if  He  wilL" 
And  this  faith  was  on  one  occasion  signally  justified  by  the  bird  in  question  letting 
fall  a  fish,  which  furnished  the  needed  meal.     {J.  E.  Green's  Short  History.) 

Vers.  16-18.  Gather  of  It  every  man  according  to  his  eating. — Spiritual  assimila- 
tion : — Why  did  each  receive  but  three  quarts  a  day  ?  Might  not  a  nutritious  and 
delicious  food  like  this  be  stored,  and  become  an  article  of  merchandise  and  a  source 
of  wealth?  No,  the  Edenic  law  was  not  merely  a  penalty,  but  a  method  of  mercy, 
of  hfe,  and  health.  It  required  labour.  But  there  is  a  profounder  reason  for  the 
prayer,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  We  are  to  get  out  of  to-day  all  we 
can,  and  trust  God  for  to-morrow.  We  possess  only  what  we  can  assimilate,  so  the 
miracle  does  no  more  than  provide  for  one  day.  You  say  that  you  possess  property. 
No ;  another  may  more  truly  possess  it.  I  who  tarry  by  your  garden,  or  the  beggar 
who  feabts  upon  its  beauty  with  appreciating  and  admiring  eyes,  gets  more  out  of 


294  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTItATOR.  [chap.  m. 

it  than  you.     You  hurry  a-way  to  business  early  in  the  morning,  and  are  gone  till 
dark,  too  burdened,  it  may  be,  to  give  it  a  glance.    So  with  your  library  or  pictures. 
He  possesses  who  assimilates.     If  your  wealth  makes  you  anxious,  or  leads  you  to 
dissipation,  then  you  possess  not  wealth,  but  anxiety  and  disease.     You  may  give 
your  child  wealth,  but  it  is  better  to  put  moral  wealth  into  mind  and  heart  than  to 
burden  down  with  money,  which  may  sink  his  soul  in  ruin.     So  with  books  and 
associates.     We  grow  by  what  we  eat.     What  does  that  child  read  ?    WTio  are  his 
friends  ?    We  really  eat  both.     Christ  used  this  figure,  and  said  we  were  to  eat  His 
flesh  and  drink  His  blood.     This  means  the  assimilation  of  spiritual  forces,  the 
incorporation  of  His  life  and  character  as  we  grow  to  be  like  those  we  make  our 
bosom  friends.     Our  character  is  warped,  shrivelled,  and  weakened,  nr  it  is  enriched 
and  ennobled  by  those  with  whom  we  habitually  and  intimately  live,  as  they  are 
mean  and  wicked,  or  pure  and  princely.     {E.  Braislin,  D.D.)        Lessons : — We  are 
hereby  taught — 1.  Prudence  and  diligence  in  providing  food  convenient  for  our- 
selves and  our  households ;    what   God   graciously  gives   we  must  industriously 
gather,  with  quietness  working,  and  eating  our  own  bread,  not  the  bread  either  of 
idleness  or  deceit.    God's  bounty  leaves  room  for  man's  duty.    2.  Contentment 
and  satisfaction  with  a  sufficiency  ;  they  must  gather,  "  every  man  according  to  his 
eating  " ;  enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast,  and  more  than  enough  is  as  bad  as  a  surfeit. 
They  that  have  most  have  for  themselves  but  food  and  raiment  and  mirth ;  and 
they  that  have  least  generally  have  these ;  so  that  "  he  who  gathers  much,"  &c. 
There  is  not  so  great  a  disproportion  between  one  and  another,  in  the  comforts  and 
enjoyments  of  the  things  of  this  life,  as  there  is  in  the  property  and  possession  of 
the  things  themselves.     3.  Dependence  upon  Providence.     "Let  no  man  leave  till 
morning  "  (ver.  19),  but  let  them  learn  to  go  to  bed  and  sleep  quietly,  though  they 
have  not  a  bit  of  bread  in  their  tent,  nor  in  all  their  camp,  trusting  that  God,  with  the 
following  day,  will  bring  them  their  daily  bread.     It  was  surer  and  safer  in  God's 
storehouse  than  in  their  own,  and  would  thence  come  to  them  sweeter  and  fresher. 
{M.  Henry,  D.D.)        Nothing  over  : — It  is   said  that  when  J.  C.  Astor  was  once 
congratulated  by  a  certain  person  for  his  wealth,  he  replied  by  pointing  to  his  pile 
of  bonds  and  maps  of  property,  at  the  same  time  inquiring,  "  Would  you  like  to 
manage  these  matters  for  your  board  and  clothes?  "    The  man  demurred.     "  Sir," 
continued  the  rich  man,  "  it  is  all  that  I  get."    (J.  Denton. )      Self-help  enforced : — 
A  young  man  stood  hstlessly  watching  some  anglers  on  a  bridge.     He  was  poor  and 
dejected.     At  last,  approacliing  a  basket  filled  with  fish  he  sighed,  "  If  now  I  had 
these  I  would  be  happy.   I  could  sell  them  and  buy  food  and  lodgings."  "  I  will  give 
you  just  as  many,  and  just  as  good,"  said  the  owner,  who  chanced  to  overhear  his 
words,  "  if  you  will  do  me  a  trifling  favour."    "And  what  is  that  ?  "  asked  the  other. 
'•  Only  to  tend  this  line  till  I  come  back ;  I  wish  to  go  on  a  short  errand. "     The 
proposal  was  gladly  accepted.     The  old  man  was  gone  so  long  that  the  young  man 
began  to  get  impatient.     Meanwhile  the  fish  snapped  greedily  at  the  hook,  and  the 
young  man  lost  all  his  depression  in  the  excitement  of  pulling  them  in  ;  and  when 
the  owner  returned  he  had  caught  a  large  number.     Counting  out  from  them  as 
many  as  were  in  the  basket,  and  presenting  them  to  the  young  man,  tlie  old  fisher- 
man said,  "  I  fulfil  my  promise  from  the  fish  you  have  caught,  to  teach  you,  when- 
ever you  see  others  earning  what  you  need,  to  waste  no  time  in  foolish  wishing,  but 
cast  a  line  for  yourself."     (W.  Baxendale.)        No  position  ha$  a  surplus  of  happi- 
ness : — When  Napoleon  returned  to  his  palace,  immediately  after  his  defeat  at 
Waterloo,  he  continued  many  hours  without  taking  any  refreshment.     One  of  the 
grooms  of  the  chamber  ventured  to  serve  up  some  coffee,  in  his  cabinet,  by  the 
hands  of  a  child  whom  Napoleon  had  occasionally  distinguished  by  his  notice.    The 
Emperor  sat  motionless,  with  his  hands  spread  over  his  eyes.     The  page  stood 
patiently  before  him,  gazing  with  infantine  curiosity  on  an  image  which  presented 
so  strong  a  contrast  to  his  own  figure  of  simplicity  and  peace ;  at  last  the  httle 
attendant  presented  his  tray,  exclaiming,  in  the  fanuharity  of  an  age  which  knows 
so  little  distinctions ;  "  Eat,  sire ;  it  will  do  you  good."     The  emperor  looked  at 
him,  and  asked:  "Do  you  not  belong  to  Gonesse?  "  (a  village  neai'  Paris).     "No, 
sire;  I  come  from  Pierrefite."     "Where  your  parents  have  a  cottage  and  some 
acres  of  land ?  "     ''Yes,  sire."     "There  is  happiaess,"  replied  the  man  who  was 
still  the  Emperor  of  France  and  King  of  Italy.     (J.  Arvine.)        No  satisfaction  in 
mere  accumulatinn : — "I  once  had  occasion  to  6i>eak  of   a  certain  charity  to  a 
prosperous  mechanic.     He  seemed  not  much  inclined  to  help  it,  but  after  listening 
to  my  representations  awhile,  he  suddenly  gave  way  and  promised  a  handsome 
subscription.     In  due  time  he  paid  it  cheerfully,  and  said,  "  Do  you  know  what 


CHAP.  XVI.]  'EXODUS.  295 

carried  the  point  with  me  that  day  when  you  made  the  application?  "  "  No,"  I 
replied.  "Well,  I'll  tell  you.  I  was  not  so  much  moved  by  anything  you  said  till 
you  came  to  mention  the  fact  about  the  Israelites,  '  He  that  gathered  much  had 
nothing  over,  and  he  that  gathered  little  had  no  lack.'  Thinks  I,  that  is  just  my 
own  history.  Once  I  was  a  poor,  hard-working  young  man ;  now  I've  got  a  good 
deal  of  property,  but  as  for  real  comfort  and  use,  I  get  no  more  out  of  it  now  than 
I  did  then.  Now,  when  I  gather  much,  I've  nothing  over,  and  then,  when  I 
gathered  little,  I  had  no  lack."    (Family  Treasury.) 

Vers.  23-26.  To-day  ye  shall  not  find  it  in  the  field.  —  The  Sabhath  in 
relation  to  secular  toil : — I.  That  man  must  not  engage  in  secular  toil  on  the 
Sabbath.  Men  must  not  even  earn  their  daily  bread  on  the  Lord's  day, — they  must 
provide  it  before.  II.  That  men  engaged  in  secular  toil  on  the  Sabbath  will, 
AS  a  rule,  find  their  labour  vain  and  profitless.     III.  That  men  engaged  in 

SECULAR    toil    ON    THE    SaBBATH  SHOW    PLAINLY   THAT    THEY    HAVE  NO   REGARD  FOR  THE 

commands  OF  God.  They  are  selling  their  souls  for  gain.  IV.  That  men  engaged 
IN  secular  toil  on  the  Sabbath  have  no  delight  in  the  culture  of  their  moral 
NATURE.  It  is  especially  on  the  day  of  rest  that  men  of  secular  toil  have  the  leisure 
and  opportunity  for  soul-culture,  by  inward  meditation,  by  earnest  devotion,  by  wise 
reading,  and  by  the  ministry  of  the  sanctuary.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  day  of  rest : — 
In  one  of  the  most  densely  populated  parts  of  the  city  a  gentleman  lately  visited  the 
house  of  a  poor,  hard-working,  infidel  cobbler.  The  man  was  busy  at  his  last,  and  had 
scarce  time  to  look  up  at  his  unwelcome  visitor.  "That  is  hard  work."  "It  is, 
sir.  "  For  how  many  hours  a  day  have  you  to  labour  here — twelve  ? "  "  Yes,  and 
more,  sir.  I  am  never  off  this  seat  under  a  fourteen  or  fifteen  hours'  spell  of  it." 
"That  is  sore  toil  for  a  bit  of  bread."  " Indeed  it  is,  sir ;  and  very  thankful  am  I 
when  the  week's  end  comes.  What  would  become  of  me,  and  the  likes  of  me,  with- 
out that  rest?"  "And  who,  friend,  think  you,  gave  you  that  rest?  Came  it  by 
accident,  or  arrangement,  or  how?  "  There  came  no  answer  to  that ;  the  cobbler 
hung  his  head ;  the  man  was  honest ;  the  sceptic  was  ashamed.  Queen  Victoria  and 
the  Sabbath  : — One  Saturday  night,  in  this  first  year  of  Queen  Victoria's  reign,  a 
certain  noble  visitor  came  at  a  late  hour  to  Windsor.  He  informed  the  Queen  that 
he  had  brought  down  some  documents  of  great  importance  for  her  inspection,  but 
that,  as  they  would  require  to  be  examined  in  detail,  he  would  not  encroach  on  Her 
Majesty's  time  that  night,  but  would  request  her  attention  the  next  morning. 
"To-morrow  is  Sunday,  my  lord,"  said  the  Queen.  "True,  your  Majesty,  bat 
business  of  the  State  will  not  admit  of  delay."  The  Queen  then  consented  to 
attend  to  the  papers  after  Church  the  next  morning.  The  nobleman  was  somewhat 
surprised  that  the  subject  of  the  sermon  next  day  turned  out  to  be  the  duties  and 
obligations  of  the  Christian  Sabbath.  "How  did  your  lordship  like  the  sermon?  " 
asked  the  Queen  on  their  return  from  Church.  "  Very  much  indeed,  your  Majesty," 
was  the  reply.  "Well  then,"  said  the  Queen,  "  I  will  not  conceal  from  you  that 
last  night  I  sent  the  clergyman  the  text  from  which  he  preached.  I  hope  we  shall 
all  be  improved  by  the  sermon."  Sunday  passed  over  without  another  word  being 
said  about  the  State  papers,  until  at  night,  when  the  party  was  breaking  up,  the 
Queen  said  to  the  nobleman,  "  To-morrow  morning,  my  lord,  at  any  hour  you 
please — as  early  as  seven,  my  lord,  if  you  like— we  will  look  into  the  papers."  His 
lordship  said  he  would  not  think  of  intruding  upon  Her  Majesty  so  early  as  that, 
and  he  thought  nine  o'clock  would  be  quite  early  enough.  "  No,  no,  my  lord," 
said  the  Queen,  "  as  the  papers  are  of  importance  I  should  like  them  to  be  attended 
to  very  early;  however,  if  you  wish  it  to  be  nine,  be  it  so."  Accordingly,  at  nine 
o'clock  next  morning  the  Queen  was  in  readiness  to  confer  with  the  nobleman 
about  his  papers.  (T.  E.  Ball.)  Training  for  Sabbath  observance  : — No  doubt, 
in  the  oppression  and  darkness  of  Egypt,  the  seventh-day  (Sabbath)  observance 
had  fallen  into  partial  disuse ;  though  even  in  Egypt  in  that  era,  as  among  the 
more  eastern  peoples,  the  traditional  seventh-day  rest  seems  to  have  lingered,  and 
therefore  the  usages  of  Egypt  may  not  have  militated  against  the  rest  on  the  seventh 
day.  However  that  may  be,  still  there  was  need  of  this  training  to  the  Sabbath 
observance;  and  this  ordinance  of  the  manna  was  just  the  preparation  needful  for 
their  receiving  heartily  the  statute,  "  Eemember  the  Sabbath  day,"  when  it  came 
to  them  through  Moses  from  the  mount.  (S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  A  lesson  on 
Sabbath  keeping  : — In  all  the  Jewish  history  there  never  again  occurred  as  favour- 
able a  time  for  imposing  the  Sabbath  observance  upon  the  people  as  at  the  giving 
of  the  manna.    For  forty  years,  comprising  more  than  two  thousand  weeks,  they 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap..xvi. 

were  to  subsist  upon  manna  as  their  daily  food.  God  was  to  furnish  it  every  day; 
they  were  to  gather  it  every  day.  Thus  was  presented  the  opportunity  both  for 
God  to  mark  the  day  and  for  man  to  keep  it.  During  all  these  two  thousand  weeks 
God  gave  them  a  double  supply  on  the  sixth  day,  and  preserved  that  given  on  that 
day  fresh  for  two  days  instead  of  one.  Two  thousand  Sabbaths  came,  but  on  them 
no  manna.  It  was  vain  for  them  to  look  for  it.  Soon  they  ceased  to  do  so  alto- 
gether. What  a  lesson  for  beginners !  The  most  stupid  and  the  most  obdurate 
alike  learned  it.  Time  and  the  world  may  be  searched  for  another  series  of  events 
by  which  it  would  be  possible  to  impress  the  idea  of  a  Sabbath  upon  the  minds  of 
the  people  as  effectually  as  by  this.  (A.  M.  Weston,  D.D.)  Sabbath  gains  a 
curse: — Whatever  is  earned  on  the  Sabbath  is  a  curse  in  a  man's  property.  {A. 
Clarke,  D.D.)  Faithful  to  God's  command: — A  delicate  man,  once  a  ring- 
leader in  all  sorts  of  mischief,  was  recently  found  by  some  of  the  Mildmay 
Deaconesses  in  a  common  London  lodging-house,  and  as  it  was  discovered  that 
the  poor  fellow  could  not  work  continuously  at  his  trade,  he  was  started  in 
business  in  a  small  shop.  Late  one  Saturday  night,  as  many,  through  curiosity, 
or  seeing  the  contents  of  the  shop  looking  fresh  and  new,  filled  it  up,  and 
were  asking  one  question  and  another,  one  woman  said  :  "  Here  is  4d.  ;  I'll 
come  in  tomorrow  with  the  other  few  pence,  and  you  .will  give  me  the  parcel 
then."  "This  shop  will  never  be  open  for  traffic  on  the  Lord's  Day,"  was  the 
answer,  at  which  announcement  the  people  all  turned  to  gaze  at  the  speaker.  A 
quiet  look  of  finn  resolve  was  on  his  dehcate  face,  wkich  seemed  to  make  the 
crowd  silent  for  a  minute  or  two;  then  one  laughed,  and  said:  "  Are  you 
religious  ?  "  "  Yes,"  said  the  proprietor ;  "  I  may  as  well  declare  it  from  the  very 
first  night  of  opening.  You  will  never,  with  God's  help,  see  either  buying  or 
selling  here  on  Sundays."  "  Oh  I  "  said  a  scoffer ;  "  then  you  will  soon  shut  shop." 
The  owner  of  the  shop  replied  :  "  Do  you  see  that  little  card  with  the  blue  ribbon 
tying  it  up  ?  "  The  eyes  of  all  were  turned  towards  the  card,  on  which  were  the 
words,  "  Kept  by  the  power  of  God."  "This,"  continued  the  speaker,  "is  my 
motto  ;  He  is  able  to  keep  me,  and  maybe  some  of  you  will  find  out  'tis  better  to 
have  Him  as  a  friend  than  any  one  in  the  world."     (Christian  Herald.) 

Vers.  32-36.  Put  an  omer  full  of  manna  therein. — An  instructive  memorial: — 
I.  By  whom  the  memorial  was  enjoined.  "  The  Lord."  We  have  need  to  set 
up  memorials  in  our  lives  which  shall  call  upon  our  souls  to  remember  the 
benefits  of  the  Lord.  It  is  the  will  of  heaven  that  its  gifts  should  be  held  in 
constant  remembrance.  II.  In  what  the  memorial  consisted.  "  Fill  an  omer  of 
it  to  be  kept  for  your  generations."  1.  This  memorial  was  reasonable.  2.  Expres- 
sive. 3.  Instructive.  4.  Valuable.  Golden  pot  (Heb.  ix.  2).  And  the  memorials  pi 
the  soul  should  not  find  expression  in  valueless  things,  but  in  the  richest  treasures 
of  man.  God  is  worthy  our  best  offerings.  III.  Where  the  memorlvl  was 
deposited.  "  And  lay  it  up  before  the  Lord."  "  So  Aaron  laid  it  up  before  the 
Testimony,  to  be  kept."  And  so  this  memorial  was  laid  up  before  the  Lord,  in  the 
ark  of  the  covenant.  Thus  we  must  keep  the  memorials  of  ihe  soul  in  devout  spirit, 
and  with  a  constant  trust  in  the  mediatorial  work  of  Christ.  IV.  The  design  the 
memorial  contemplated.  "  That  ye  may  see  the  bread  wherewith  I  have  fed  you 
in  the  wilderness."  "  To  be  kept  for  your  generations."  Each  generation  leaves  a 
moral  deposit  behind  it,  for  good  or  evil.  Lessons :  1.  The  soul  must  have  a 
memorial  of  the  Divine  mercy.  2.  The  memorial  of  the  soul  must  consist  of  the 
best  thing  it  possesses.  3.  The  memorial  of  the  soul  will  have  respect  to  the  redempi  ive. 
work  of  Christ.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  An  instructive  memorial: — One  day  when 
George  Moore — now  a  man  of  wealth — was  accompanying  his  friend.  Colonel  Hender- 
son, through  the  Waver  wood  on  a  partridge -shooting  expedition,  a  curious  ram- 
shackle object  appeared  before  them.  It  seemed  to  be  a  sort  of  big  dhrosky  with 
a  long,  broad  trunk  at  the  back  end.  "What  is  that?"  asked  the  colonel. 
"Why,"  said  George  Moore,  "that  is  the  trap  which  I  have  driven  into  every 
market  town  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland !  "  It  was  the  carriage  he  had  used 
whilst  achieving  such  great  success  as  a  commercial  traveller.  (H.  0.  Mackey.) 
Former  mercies  r emember ed  : — Mr.  Kidd,  minister  of  Queensfeny,  near  Edinburgh, 

was  one  day  very  much  depressed  and  discouraged.     He  sent  a  note  to  Mr.  L 

minister  of  Culross,  a  few  miles  off,  informing  him  of  his  distress  of  mind,  and 

desiring  a  visit  as  soon  as  possible.    Mr.  L told  the  servant  he  was  so  busy  that 

he  could  not  wait  upon  his  master,  but  desired  him  to  tell  Mr.  Kidd  to  remember 
Torwood.     When  the  servant  returned,  he  said  to  his  master,  "  Mr.  L could 


CHAP.  XVII.]  EXODUS..  297 

not  come,  but  he  desired  me  to  tell  you  to  remember  Torwood."  This  answer 
immediately  struck  Mr.  Kidd,  and  he  cried  out,  "  Yes,  Lord !  I  will  remember  Thee, 
from  the  hill  Mizar,  and  from  the  Hermonites  ! "  All  his  troubles  and  darkness 
vanished  upon  the  recollection  of  a  day  which  he  had  formerly  spent  in  prayer  along 

with  Mr.  L in  Torwood,  where  he  had  enjoyed  eminent  communion  with  God. 

[TV.  Ba^vendale.)  An  expressive  memorial : — It  was  during  the  wars  that  raged 
from  1G52  to  1G60,  between  Frederick  III.  of  Denmark,  and  Charles  Gustavus,  of 
Sweden,  that  after  a  battle  in  which  the  victory  had  remained  with  the  Danes,  a 
Btout  burgher  of  Flensburg  was  about  to  refresh  himself,  ere  retiring  to  have  his 
wounds  dressed,  with  a  draught  of  beer  from  a  wooden  bottle,  when  an  imploring 
cry  from  a  wounded  Swede  lying  on  the  field  made  him  turn,  and,  with  the  very 
words  of  Sidney — "Thy  need  is  greater  than  mine,"  he  knelt  down  by  the  fallen 
enemy  to  pour  the  liquor  into  his  mouth.  His  requital  was  a  pistol  -  shot 
in  the  shoulder  from  the  treacherous  Swede.  "  Rascal !  "  he  cried,  "  I  would  have 
befriended  you,  and  you  would  murder  me  in  return  !  Now  will  I  punish  you.  I 
would  have  given  you  the  whole  bottle,  but  now  you  shall  only  have  half."  And 
drinking  off  half  himself,  he  gave  the  rest  to  the  Swede.  The  king,  hearing  the  story, 
sent  for  the  burgher,  and  asked  him  how  he  came  to  spare  the  life  of  such  a  rascal. 
•'  Sire,"  said  the  honest  burgher,  "  I  could  never  kill  a  wounded  enemy."  "  Thou 
meritest  to  be  a  noble,"  the  king  said,  and  created  him  one  immediately,  giving  him 
as  armorial  bearings  a  wooden  bottle  pierced  with  an  arrow.  The  family  only  lately 
became  extinct  in  the  person  of  an  old  maiden  lady. 


CHAPTEE  XVn. 


Vers.  1-3.  Give  us  water,  that  we  may  drink. — Rephidim:  ancient  and 
modern : — How  far  have  we  travelled  from  Kephidim  ?  This  is  more  than  a 
question  in  geography  :  it  is  a  profound  inquiry  in  morals.  How  far  have  we 
advanced  morally,  spiritually,  and  in  all  the  higher  ranges  and  Diviner  outlooks  of 
our  being?  Here  we  seem  to  be  still  at  Eephidim.  Geographers  say  they  cannot 
find  out  the  exact  locality.  Verily,  there  need  be  no  difiiculty  about  the  exact 
locahty — it  is  just  where  we  are.  Why  be  so  emphatic  about  our  being  at  Rephi- 
dim ?  I.  Because  the  people  at  Eephidim  were  tormented  bi  a  continual 
CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  NECESSITY.  How  far  havc  we  got  from  necessity  ?  Not  one  inch. 
Necessity  has  followed  us  all  the  time.  We  must  advance  from  the  lower  to  the 
higher.  We  have  it  before  us  as  a  certain  and  indisputable  fact  that  for  the 
support  of  the  body  we  need  external  help :  we  need  the  whole  ministry  of  kind 
and  gracious  nature.  What  wonder  if  in  the  education,  and  culture,  and  strengthen- 
ing of  the  soul  we  need  all  heaven,  with  its  infinite  Trinity  of  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghost  ?  Were  we  pressed  to  affirm  that  necessity  it  would  be  in  strict  consonance 
with  all  the  other  wants  that  follow  and  devour  our  wasting  life.  II.  Because  at 
Eephidim  help  was  found  in  unexpected  places  and  given  ts  unexpected  ways  : 
"  Thou  shall  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  the  people 
may  drink."  We  are  always  helped  by  unexpected  people,  in  unexpected  ways,  and 
at  unexpected  places.  God  would  appear  to  deUght  in  baffling  the  ingenuity  that 
would  forecast  the  future  with  too  exclusive  a  minuteness.  God  will  not  allow  us 
to  trifle  with  His  prerogatives.  He  will  find  water  where  we  should  fiind  none.  Why 
be  so  emphatic  about  still  being  at  Eephidim  ?     III.  Because   peevish  tempers 

WERE  corrected  BY  GREAT  DUTIES  IN  THAT  ANCIENT   LOCALITY.       Israel  fell  iutO  fretful- 

ness,  and  whining,  and  dissatisfaction,  and  rebellion.  What  did  God  do  ?  He  sent 
Amalek  upon  Israel.  That  is  the  function  of  war  among  the  nations.  It  is  no  use 
reasoning  with  peevishness.  It  is  time  wasted  to  try  to  expostulate  with  any  man 
who  is  in  a  whining  mood  of  soul,  displeased  because  of  his  bread,  discontented 
because  of  the  scarcity  of  water,  making  no  allowance  for  the  undulations  of  life — 
reasoning,  remonstrance,  expostulation  would  be  lost.  What  must  be  done  ?  An 
enemy  must  be  raised  up  to  smite  him  with  the  sword.  Then  he  will  come  into  a 
new  mood  of  mind,  forget  his  littleness,  and,  springing  forward  to  a  realization  of 
his  true  power,  he  will  lose  in  service  the  discontent  which  he  contracted  in  unbelief. 
What  we  want  to-day  is  persecution.  We  do  not  want  eloquence,  criticism — new 
learning,  some  new  invention  in  theological  confectionery  that  shall  tempt  appetites 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  xvn 

that  have  been  sated  ;  we  want  war — persecution — the  enemy  at  the  gate.   Then  we 
should  begin  to  forgive  one  another,  to  pray  for  one  another,  to  come  more  closely 
together  at  the  altar  and  more  near  in  that  consent  of  soul  which  is  blessed  with 
insight  into  spiritual  mysteries.     We  have  lost  in  losing  the  enemy.     The  sting  of 
Smithfield  fire  would  correct  our  theology  a  good  deal ;  the  old  gibbet  would  take 
the  f retfulness  out  of  our  tone ;  the  great  earthquake  rocking  our  cities  would  make 
us  forget  our  animosities  and  unite  us  in  bolder  intercession.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Refreshing  thoughts  for  the  hot  season : — I  was  told  by  a  gentleman  who  walked  over 
one  of  the  battle-fields  on  a  hot  summer  night,  after  a  day.  of  carnage,  that  the  cry  of 
the  wounded  was  absolutely  unbearable,  and  after  giving  all  supply  that  he  could, 
he  put  his  fingers  to  bis  ears,  for  the  cry  all  over  the  plain  was  from  hundreds  of 
dying  men,  "Water!     Water!    For  God's  sake,  give  us  water."     Coming  home 
from  the  store  on  a  hot  summer  day,  in  the  eventide,  every  muscle  of  your  body  ex- 
hausted with  fatigue,  what  do  you  first  ask  for  ?     A  cup  of  water — fresh,  clear, 
sparkling  water.   This  Bible  is  all  agleam  with  fountains,  and  rivers,  and  seas.  The 
prophet  sees  the  millennium,  and  cries,  "  Streams  in  the  desert."     David  thinks  of 
the  deep  joy  of  the  righteous,  and  calls  it  "  A  river,  the  streams  whereof  shall  make 
glad  the  city  of  God."    While  the  New  Testament  holds  foith  ten  thousand  chaUccs 
filled  with  living  water  for  a  thirsty  world.     I.  -Water  is  t.vpical  of  the  Gospel, 
because  of  its  brightness.     The  fountain  breaks  forth  from  the  side  of  the  hill, 
flashing  with  gold,  and  silver,  and  beryl,  and  chrysohte ;  and  as  you  see  it,  you 
almost  clap  your  hands  with  gladness.     But  there  is  no  brightness  in  it  compared 
with  this  living  fountain  of  the  Gospel ;  for  in  each  falling  drop  I  see  the  glory  of 
heaven.     II.  Water  typifies  the  Gospel  by  its  refreshment.     How  different  you 
feel  after  you  get  a  glass  of  cool  water,  or  after  you  have  plunged  into  a  bath  !     On 
a  hot  summer  day  there  is  nothing  that  so  soon  brings  you  back  from  a  bad  temper 
or  a  disturbed  spirit,  and  puts  you  into  a  happy  frame  of  mind  and  body,  as  cold 
water.     Blessed  be  God  for  water.     I  love  to  hear  it  fall  in  the  shower  and  dash  in 
the  cascade,  and  to  see  it  rush  from  the  ice  pitcher  into  the  clear  glass.     Hand 
round  this  nectar  of  the  hills  and  drink,  all  of  you,  to  the  praise  of  Him  who  brewed 
it  among  the  mountains.     Thank  God  for  water.     But  there  is  a  better  refreshment 
even  than  that.     There  was  a  time  when  you  were  hounded  by  convictions.     Sinai 
thundered.     The  wrath  of  God  cried,  "Fly."     Justice  cried,  "Fly."    Your  own 
fears  cried,  "  Fly."     Mercy  said,  "  Come,  come!  "  and  you  plunged  like  a  hart  into 
the  water  brooks,  and  out  of  that  flood  your  soul  came  up  cool,  and  clean,  and 
radiant ;  and  you  looked  round  and  said,  "  Come,  and  hear  ye  all  that  fear  God, 
and  I  will  tell  you  what  He  hath  done  for  my  soul."    III.  Water  typifies  the  Gospel 
because  of  its  abundance.    When  we  pour  the  water  from  the  pitcher  into  the  glass 
we  have  to  be  careful,  or  the  glass  will  overflow,  and  we  stop  when  the  water  has 
come  to  the  rim.    But  when  God,  in  summer,  pours  out  His  showers.  He  keeps 
pouring  on  and  pouring  on  until  the  grass  blades  cry,  "  Enough !  "  and  the  flowers, 
"  Enough !  "  and  the  trees,  "  Enough !  "  but  God  keeps  pouring  on  and  pouring  on, 
until  the  fields  are  soaked,  and  the  rivers  overflow,  and  the  cisterns  are  aU  filled 
and  the  great  reservoirs  are  supplied,  and  there  is  water  to  turn  the  wheel,  water  to 
slake  the  thirst  of  the  city,  water  to  cleanse  the  air,  water  to  wash  the  hemisphere. 
Abundance !    And  so  with  this  glorious  gospel.    Enough  for  one,  enough  for  all. 
Just  after  the  battle  of  Antietam,  with  some  of  the  other  members  of  the  Christian 
Commission,  I  went  down  to  help  look  after  the  wounded,  and  on  the  afternoon  of 
a  very  hot  day  I  came  to  a  pump  of  water.     I  saw  a  soldier,  with  musket,  guarding 
the  pump.    I  said,  "  Why  do  you  not  fill  my  cup  ?  "    He  replied,  "  Water  is  scarce  I 
Here  is  a  great  army,  and  we  do  not  know  where  to  get  water  after  this  is  gone ;  and 
I  have  orders  to  give  no  more  than  that."    What  a  poor  supply  for  a  thirsty  man 
on  a  hot  day  I    But,  glory  be  to  God !  that  in  this  gospel  fountain  there  is  water 
enough  for  all  the  armies  of  the  earth,  and  for  aU  the  armies  of  heaven.     You  can- 
not drink  it  dry.    IV.  Water  typifies  the  Gospel  in  the  fact  that  it  is  perennial.    In 
this  hot  summer  weather  some  of  the  fountains  have  dried  up  ;  but  stand  you  on 
the  bank  of  the  Amazon,  or  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  or  of  the  Mississippi,  or  of  the 
Ohio,  and  see  if  it  runs  dry.  No ;  they  have  been  flowing  on  for  thousands  of  years, 
and  they  will  probably  flow  on  for  thousands  of  years  more.    The  trees  of  the  forest 
have  cast  their  leaves  for  ages  into  the  bosom  of  these  waters,  and  the  birds  of 
heaven  have  dipped  their  wings  in  the  wave.     And  so  it  is  with  this  gospel.    It  is 
a  perennial  gospel.     On  earth  we  only  see  a  portion  of  that  great  River  of  Life  ;  but 
after  a  while  the  river  will  rise,  and  it  will  join  the  tides  of  the  celestial  river  that 
flows  hard  by  the  throne  of  God.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  DJ).)        Want  of  water  a 


CHAP,  xvn.]  EXODUS.  299 

terrible  experience  : — About  1858,  while  a  number  of  routes  from  the  proposed,  now 
completed,  Pacific  railway  were  being  surveyed,  E.  T.  Scovill,  of  Cleveland,  was  in 
charge  of  a  corps  of  engineers  in  Nevada.  On  one  occasion  they  were  obliged  to 
leave  their  base  of  supplies  for  a  trip  of  six  days.  On  the  fourth  day's  journey  their 
water  gave  out,  and  the  sufferings  of  men  and  beasts  were  terrible.  The  heat  ap- 
peared to  rise  from  the  sand  like  vapour  and  dance  a  death  dance  before  the 
sufferers'  eyes.  Not  a  breath  of  air  stirred.  The  sun  was  like  a  great  round  furnace. 
The  horses  struggled  on,  their  noses  hung  nearly  to  the  ground,  and  their  eyes 
bulged  out  of  their  heads  like  knots  on  a  tree.  Two  of  the  men  became  delirious 
and  were  bound  in  the  waggons.  Near  night  a  gulch  was  reached  and  all  plunged 
into  it  expecting  to  find  water.  It  was  dry !  The  situation  was  desperate,  when 
Mr.  ScoviU,  taking  in  the  situation  at  a  glance,  directed  some  to  "go  up  the  gulch 
and  some  down  and  the  one  vv'ho  found  water  to  shout.  Some  found  wet  gravel 
and  sand  and  with  their  hands  dug  a  hole  into  which  trickled  water.  It  was 
brackish  and  warm,  but  it  was  water.  Nothing  ever  tasted  sweeter.  They  were 
saved.  Next  morning  by  digging  a  deep  hole  in  the  creek  bed  a  good  supply  of 
water  was  obtained.  As  they  were  about  to  move  away  the  next  morning  the 
thought  struck  Mr.  Scovill  that  some  other  poor  creature  might  come  along  the 
trail,  strike  the  gulch,  find  a  dry  instead  of  a  wet  camp,  and  despair.  So  he  took 
an  empty  flour-barrel  and  scrawled  upon  it :  "  Water  1,000  feet  up  the  gulch,  E.  T. 
Scovill,  chief  of  engineers."  This  he  stuck  in  the  sand  by  the  side  of  the  trail. 
Now  the  scene  of  tbe  story  shifts  to  South  America.  Mr.  Scovill  sat  in  the  Llama 
Club,  Lima.  He  had  gone  to  Peru  to  help  Henry  Meigs  build  those  wonderful  rail- 
ways in  the  mountains.  Here,  to  a  company  of  Americans  and  Enghsh,  he  told 
the  story  of  his  journey  across  the  plains.  There  was  one  man  in  the  party  who 
was  evidently  excited.  As  Mr.  Scovill  reached  the  end  of  the  story,  and  told  how 
he  had  put  up  the  sign  that  water  could  be  found  a  thousand  feet  up  the  gulch,  the 
nervous  stranger,  a  man  of  giant  frame,  leaped  from  his  seat  and  took  Scovill  in 
his  arms  as  if  the  latter  had  been  a  child.  "  Then  you  are  the  man,  are  you  "  ?  he 
exclaimed  ;  "  you  are  the  man  who  saved  my  life.  I  went  across  the  desert  a  few 
days  after  you.  I — my  companions  and  I — suffered  as  you  suffered.  On  the  way 
we  killed  our  horses  and  drank  their  blood.  When  we  finally  reached  the  gulch  we 
had  just  sti-ength  enough  left  to  enable  us  to  crawl  down  into  the  dry  creek  bed. 
There  we  lay  down  to  die,  when  one  of  us  happened  to  see  your  blessed  guide 
board.  A  thousand  feet  up  the  gulch  we  found  water.  If  we  hadn't  I  should  not 
be  here  to-night  to  take  the  hand  of  the  man  who  saved  our  lives." 

Ver.  4-7.  Thou  shalt  smite  the  rock. — Horeb;  or,  great  mercies  from  unlikely 
sources ; — I.  The  secular  department  of  human  history  will  furnish  abundant 
ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE.  1.  DoBS  intelligence  conduce  to  this  end? 
Undoubtedly  knowledge  tends  to  make  men  secularly  happy.  How  often,  then, 
do  you  find  streams  of  intelligence  gushing  from  the  most  unlikely  sources. 
Demosthenes  was  a  stammerer ;  Homer  and  Milton  were  blind  ;  Shakespeare  was 
the  son  of  a  butcher.  2.  Do  philanthropic  institutions  conduce  to  the  secular  well- 
being  of  man?  Unquestionably.  If  you  look  to  the  origin  of  temperance  societies, 
asylums,  provident  associations,  &c.,  you  will  find  they  have  generally  sprung  from 
the  most  unlikely  sources.  3.  Does  political  liberty  conduce  to  the  secular  well- 
being  of  man  ?  Undoubtedly.  It,  too,  has  come  mostly  from  unlikely  sources — 
Moses,  Luther,  &c.  II.  The  spiritual  department  of  human  history  will  furnish 
8TILL  greater  ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  THIS  PRINCIPLE.  1,  ScB  it  exemplified  in  the 
spiritual  Deliverer  of  the  race.  Babe  in  manger;  Son  of  carpenter;  Man  of 
Borrows,  &c. ;  malefactor  on  cross.  "This  rock,"  says  St.  Paul,  "is  Christ" — is 
like  Christ.  How?  (1)  In  the  value  of  the  blessings  which  emanate  therefrom, 
(a)  Most  needed.  (6)  Most  adequate.  (2)  In  the  method  employed  to  secure  the 
blessing.  Eock  smitten.  (3)  In  the  fact  under  notice,  the  unlikelihood  of  the 
source.  2.  See  it  exemplified  in  the  first  preachers  of  the  gospel.  Poor  fishermen, 
&c.  3.  See  it  exemplified  in  the  missionary  enterprise.  Carey,  the  shoemaker ; 
Williams,  the  blacksmith ;  Moffat,  the  gardener,  &c.  Conclusion :  This  subject 
suggests — 1.  Good  ground  for  trusting  God  in  the  greatest  difiSculty.  2.  To  remove 
all  ground  for  glorying  in  your  usefulness.  God  could  make  the  meanest  creatures 
do  all  and  more  than  you  can  accomplish.  (Homilist.)  Crying  unto  the  Lcn-d 
for  help : — Hiacoomes,  an  early  Indian  convert,  was  a  remarkable  man.  Two 
years  after  his  conversion  (1743),  having  in  the  meantime  been  prepared  by  Mr. 
Mayhew,  he  commenced  teaching  to  the  Indians  the  things  of  Christianity.    He 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

was  not  suffered  to  proceed  without  opposition  from  the  Paw-Waws,  Sachems, 
and  other  Indians;  but  he  made  this  improvement  of  the  injustice  done  him. 
"I  had,"  he  remarked,  "one  hand  for  injuries  and  another  hand  for  God; 
while  I  received  wrong  with  the  one,  I  laid  the  faster  hold  on  God  with  the 
other."  These  words  should  be  written  in  gold.  (New  York  Independent.) 
The  needful  things  of  life  providentially  supplied : — I.  That  men  abe  sometimes 

BROUGHT    INTO     GBEAT     STRAITS    THEOOGH    LACK     OF     THE     OBDINABY    THINGS    OF    LIFE. 

"  And  there  was  no  water  for  the  people  to  drink."  Thus  the  Israelites  lacked 
water.  They  had  lacked  bread  only  a  few  days  previously.  1.  It  is  not  the 
lot  of  man  to  be  long  free  from  trial  of  some  kind.  Trials  come  successively. 
Job,  Joseph,  David.  They  are  diversified  according  to  the  station  in  which  our 
tent  is  fixed.  Every  sphere  of  life  has  something  of  perplexity  connected  with 
it,  which  tests  our  moral  nature  and  brings  the  mercy  of  God  near  to  us.  We 
must  learn  both  how  to  want  and  how  to  abound,  to  be  sorrowful  and  yet  always 
rejoicing.  2.  Thus  by  the  varied  trials  of  life  man  is  made  to  feel  that  earth  cannot 
give  him  abiding  satisfaction,  and  he  is  led  to  anticipate  the  rest  of  heaven.  There 
the  wilderness  is  unknown,  and  hunger  and  thirst  are  not  experienced.  The  Lamb 
feeds  them.  They  drink  of  the  Eiver  of  the  Water  of  Life.  3.  But  we  see  from 
this  narrative  that  each  occasion  of  want  on  the  part  of  Israel  was  signalized  by  a 
rich  manifestation  of  the  mercy  of  God.  Their  hunger  was  met  by  the  manna. 
Their  thirst  was  met  by  the  streams  of  Horeb.  The  hour  of  man's  need  is  often 
the  hour  of  God's  richest  gift  and  blessing.    II.  That  when  men  are  brought  into 

GREAT  8TBAIT3  THROUGH  LACK  OF  THE  OBDINABY  THINGS  OF  LIFE,  THEY  OFTEN  APPEAL  TO 

HUMAN  AGENCIES  BATHER  THAN  TO  DiviNE.  "  Wherefore  the  people  did  chide  with 
Moses,  and  said,  Give  us  water  that  we  may  drink."  How  foolish,  for  did  not  he 
Buffer  from  the  same  calamity  ?  nor  was  it  in  his  power  to  create  fountains.  How 
cruel,  for  was  not  he  seeking  their  freedom  ?  How  fickle  the  approbation  of  men, 
it  varies  with  the  circumstances  of  life.  People  often  go  to  the  human  in  trouble 
when  they  ought  to  go  to  the  Divine.     III.  That  when  men  abe  bbouoht  into 

STRAITS  through  THE  LACK  OF  THINGS  THEY  VERY  MUCH  NEED,  THEY  OFTEN  GET  THEM 
IN    THE    PROVIDENCE    OF    GoD    FROM   THE    MOST    UNLIKELY   SOURCES.       "  Bchold,    I    will 

stand  before  thee  there  upon  the  rock  in  Horeb  ;  and  thou  shalt  smite  the  rock, 
and  there  shall  come  water  out  of  it,  that  the  people  may  drink."  Thus  we  see 
that  God  did  not  flash  immediate  judgment  upon  these  rebellious  people.  He  is 
long-suffering  toward  the  race.  We  must  learn  to  be  patient  with  those  who  injure 
us.  God  has  regard  to  human  need,  and  evil  in  men  will  not  turn  Him  away  from 
His  promise.  None  need  despair  of  His  mercy.  When  the  people  chide,  the 
minister  should  pray.  Our  heavenly  Father  is  never  absent  from  the  good ; 
goodness  and  mercy  follow  them  alF  their  days.     IV.  That  when  men  are  bbought 

INTO  straits,  the  WAY  IN  WHICH  THEY  ACT  THEREIN  WILL  LEAVE  IRREPARABLE  MEMORIALS 

OF  SIN  OR  VICTORY.  "And  he  called  the  name  of  the  place  Massah,  and  Meribah, 
because  of  the  chiding  of  the  children  of  Israel,"  &c.  Let  us  not  leave  behind  in 
our  life  memorials  of  strife  and  unbelief,  but  of  faith  and  good  works.  Such 
memorials  are  abiding ;  once  erected,  they  cannot  be  removed ;  hence  the  need 
that  they  should  be  worthy.  Lessons :  1.  That  man  is  frequently  called  upon  in 
this  life  to  endure  great  physical  need.  2.  That  the  physical  needs  of  life  often 
reveal  our  real  and  inner  character.  3.  That  the  physical  needs  of  Ufe  are  no 
indication  that  God  has  failed  us.  4.  That  the  physical  needs  of  life  give  us  a 
great  insight  into  the  wealth  and  method  of  the  Divine  mercy.  (/.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  smitten  rock : — I.  The  rock  a  type  of  Christ.  1.  Its  situation.  In  midst  of 
wilderness.  2.  Its  stability  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  3.  Its  durabihty.  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  JI.  Moses  striking  the  eock.  An  act  of 
violence  required.  When  man  is  to  be  saved,  the  rod  of  Divine  wrath  strikes  the 
Saviour,  and  "  the  rock  "  pours  forth  streams  of  everlasting  salvation.  III.  The 
PURPOSE  OF  the  miracle.   (I.  Sauiiders.)      Water  out  of  the  rock,  a  type  of  Christ : — 

I.    As   A   ROCK    IT  elegantly  TYPED  OUT  JeSUS   ChRIST,  FITLY  COMPAEED   TO  A   ROCK   IN 

FIVE  RESEMBLANCES.  1.  FoT  the  despicable  appearance.  The  rock  is  in  appearance 
dry  and  barren,  the  most  unlikely  thing  in  all  the  world  to  afford  water,  so  as  it 
was  incredible  to  Moses  and  Aaron  themselves  to  fetch  water  out  of  a  rock.  Even 
so  Jesus  Christ  was  (for  outward  form  and  appearance  in  the  world)  most  unlikely 
of  all  men  to  afford  any  such  waters  of  grace  and  salvation  (Isa.  liii.  2).  2.  A 
Eock  for  exaltation  and  advancement.  A  rock  is  a  promontory  lifted  up  above  the 
earth.  Such  a  Hock  was  Christ  advanced  above  the  earth,  yea,  and  the  heavens ; 
advanced  above  aU  men  and  creatures — (1)  In  holiness  and  purity.    (2)  In  power 


CHAP,  xvn.]  EXODUS.  801 

and  authority.  (3)  In  place  and  dignity  (John  iii.  31).  3.  A  Eock  for  firmness  and 
stability.  He  is  the  strength  of  Israel  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  Hence  He  is  a  rock  of 
defence  and  safety  to  His  chosen  ;  and  every  wise  man  builds  his  house  on  this 
Rock.  4.  A  Rock  of  scandal  and  offence  to  wicked  men  (Rom.  ix.  32).  5.  A  Rock 
for  weight  and  danger  and  unavoidable  judgment  upon  His  adversaries,  which,  "  on 
whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind  him  to  powder"  (Matt.  xxi.  44).  II.  It  was  a 
type  of  Christ,  as  it  sent  odt  water  in  abundance  to  the  people  of  Israel  ready 
TO  PERISH  FOR  THIRST.  For  SO  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  Eock  that  sends  from  Him- 
self all  the  sweet  waters  of  life  for  the  salvation  of  His  elect,  otherwise  ready  to 
perish  eternally.  For  explanation  whereof,  mark — 1.  As  from  that  rock  issued 
waters  to  wash  and  cleanse  themselves  and  their  garments,  so  from  this  Rock 
stream  waters  of  ablution  or  washing,  which  serve  to  wash  away  both  the  guilt  of 
sin  and  stain  of  sin.  2.  As  from  that  rock  issued  waters  to  cool  and  comfort  Israel 
in  their  weariness  and  wanderings,  so  from  Jesus  Christ  do  issue  the  waters  of 
refrigeration  and  comfort,  to  cool  and  refresh  the  dry  and  thirsty  soul;  to  allay  the 
heat  of  a  raging  and  accusing  conscience,  and  to  revive  with  new  strength  the 
fainting  soul  in  temptation  or  persecution.  3.  As  from  that  rock  streamed 
abundance  of  waters  to  make  fruitful  that  barren  wilderness  wheresoever  they  ran, 
so  only  from  the  true  Rock  issue  plentiful  waters  of  grace  to  make  our  dry  and 
barren  hearts  fruitful  in  all  works  of  righteousness  (Isa.  xliv.  3,  4).     III.  In  the 

MANNER    OF    ATTAINING    THIS    WATER    ARE    MANY   SWEET   RESEMBLANCES.       1.  The  people 

might  ask  Moses  for  water,  but  Moses  cannot  give  it.  It  is  God  must  give  it,  and 
miraculously  fetch  it  out  of  a  rock.  2.  The  rock  gives  water,  but  not  till  it  be 
smitten  (ver.  C).  3.  It  was  the  rod  in  Moses'  hand  that  smites  and  breaks 
the  rock.  Even  so  it  was  the  Law  given  by  Moses'  hand  and  our  transgression 
against  it  that  breaks  the  true  Rock  (Isa.  liii.  5 ;  Gal.  iii.  13).  4.  The  rock  was 
smitten,  but  it  was  not  so  much  the  striking  on  the  rock,  but  the  Lord's  standing 
upon  it  that  gets  water  for  Israel  (ver.  0).  There  was  no  virtue  in  the  stroke, 
but  all  depended  on  God's  commandment  and  presence ;  even  so  it  is  not 
the  death  of  Christ,  nor  an  abundance  of  price  and  merit  of  His  blood,  nor  the 
striking  on  this  rock  before  men's  eyes  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word  and  sacraments 
that  can  bring  one  drop  of  true  water  of  comfort,  but  by  the  presence  and  word  of 
God's  blessing.  The  efficacy  of  grace  depends  not  on  any  means  or  work  wrought, 
but  it  is  God's  word  and  presence  that  doth  all  in  them.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Help  from  an  unlikely  source  : — The  manna  was  simply  sent  from  heaven,  but  the 
water,  on  the  contrary,  was  brought  out  of  the  smitten  rock — the  most  unlikely 
place  that  could  be  imagined.  Some  men  went  about  collecting  funds  for  an 
important  charity.  They  arrived  in  course  of  time  at  a  very  rich  man's  door  who 
was  kuown  to  be  churlish  in  his  manner  and  niggardly  in  his  gifts ;  whereupon 
they  said  that  there  was  no  need  to  call  on  him,  "  he  is  not  likely  to  give."  How- 
ever, they  entered,  and  laid  their  case  before  him,  and  to  their  surprise  he  at  once 
responded  by  giving  them  the  largest  donation  they  had  yet  received.  Rephidim- 
Rock  was  a  most  unlikely  place  from  which  to  receive  supplies  of  water. 

Ver.  7.  Is  the  Lord  among  us,  or  not  ? — Evidences  of  the  Divine  presence  : — I. 
We  observe  an  increase  of  spiritual  enlightenment  is  an  EVIDENCE  OF  THE  Divine 

PRESENCE    AMONG  A  PEOPLE.       II.    We    OBSERVE    SPIBITUAL-MINDEDNESS  IS   AN    EVIDENCE 

OF  THE  Divine  presence  among  a  people.  III.  We  observe  Christian  love  is 
an  evidence  of  the  divine  presence  among  a  people.  iv.  activity  and 
devotedness  in  the  cause  of  Christ  is  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  presence 
AMONG  A  people.  Wc  havc  three  remarks  in  conclusion — 1.  The  unrenewed  may 
learn  from  this  subject  that  there  is  no  hope  for  him  of  any  radical  improvement 
save  in  the  grace  of  God.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  sole  agent  for  this  work.  2.  The 
Church  of  God  should  learn  from  this  subject  that  the  grace  and  presence  of  the 
Lord  in  the  midst  of  them  is  the  one  thing  needful.  3.  Let  all  know  that  the  Lord 
is  to  be  found  in  the  power  and  sufficiency  of  His  grace  by  all  who  seek  Him 
through  the  Saviour.  (H.  F.  Holmes.)  "  Is  the  Lord  among  ns,  or  not  ?  " — a 
false  inference  : — Notwithstanding  all  the  other  tokens  of  God's  presence  they 
thought  that  their  renewed  difficulties  were  a  proof  that  God  was  no  longer 
amongst  them.  And  are  not  our  hearts  far  too  apt  to  come  to  the  same  con- 
elusion  on  the  same  grounds  ?  We  enter  on  some  new  path,  on  some  fresh  work, 
because  we  think  that  the  hand  of  God  is  leading  us  to  it,  and,  almost  uncon- 
sciously to  ourselves,  we  suppose  tha.t  His  presence  vrill  secure  us  from  any  great 
and  discouraging  difficulties.    Our  expectations  are  disappointed — one  difficulty 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

after  another  presents  itself — one  door  after  another  is  closed.  What  follows? 
Too  often  doubts  begin  to  arise  in  our  minds  whether  God  is  really  with  us.  But 
these  doubts  should  not  be  encouraged.  It  is  altogether  a  false  inference,  that 
because  our  path  is  one  of  difficulty  or  trial,  therefore  the  Lord  is  not  among  us. 
The  very  reverse  will  usually  be  found  to  be  the  true  conclusion.     (G.  Wagner.) 

Ver.  8.    Then  came  Amalek,  and  fought. — Fighting  and  praying  : — "  Then  came 
Amalek  "  ;  that  is,  alter  the  manna  had  fallen,  after  the  rock  had  been  smitten. 
First  food,  then  conflict.     God  spared  His  people  all  battles  in  their  early  days.     In 
our  march  to  heaven,  it  may  happen  that  one  part  of  the  way  is  free  from  conflict ; 
but  let  no  man  wonder  if  things  change.     One  of  these  days  we  shall  read  this 
despatch  from  the  seat  of  war,  "  Then  came  Amalek,  and  fought  with  Israel."    Do 
not  court  attack,  nor  even  desire  it.     When  you  hear  the  older  folk  talk  about  their 
inward  confiicts,  do  not  lament  if  your  chronicle  of  wars  is  a  short  one.     It  has 
often  been  the  Lord's  way  to  give  His  people  space  for  refreshment  before  trying 
them.    We  cannot  work  for  God  too  soon  ;  yet  it  is  possible  to  go  to  work  before 
you  have  sharpened  your  tools.    There  is  a  time  for  every  purpose ;  and  each  thing 
is  good  in  its  season.     Learn,  and  then  teach.    I  would  have  you  serve  the  Lord 
successfully  :  wherefore,  as  God  gave  to  Israel  manna  and  water  before  He  sent  them 
to  fight  with  Amalek,  so  should  every  believer  feed  on  the  truth  himself,  and  then  go 
forth  to  teach  others  also.     Feed,  that  you  may  work,  and  work  because  you  have 
been  fed.    After  the  manna  and  after  the  smitten  rock,  came  the  fight :  "  Then 
came  Amalek."    He  was  a  descendant  of  Esau,  full  of  his  father's  hate.     Note 
well,  that  in  this  battle  of  the  Lord,  there  were  two  kinds  of  fighting.     The  first 
was  the  Joshua-service  ;  and  that  was  done  in  the  plain  by  the  fighting  men.     The 
second  was  the  Moses-service  ;  and  this  was  done  upon  the  side  of  the  hill,  by  the 
men  of  God,  who  communed  with  heaven.     We  need  both  modes  of  warfare.     I. 
To  begin  with,  we  wunt  much  of  the  Joshua-service.  1.  This  is  the  service  of  many. 
Moses  said   to  Joshua,    "  Choose   us  out  men,  and  go  out,  fight  with  Amalek." 
We  have  a  battle  against  sin,  error,  pride,  self,  and  everything  that  is  contrary 
to  God  and  to  His  Christ;  and  in  the  Joshua-service  many  can  be  employed.. 
Every  believer  should   be  a   soldier  in  Christ's  own   army  of   salvation.     2.  In 
this   Joshua-service   all    the   combatants   were  under   due  command.     "  Joshua 
did  as  Moses  had  said  to  him,"  and  the  people  did  as  Joshua  commanded  them. 
In  all  holy  service,  willingness  to  be  led  is  a  great  point.     Certain  workers  may  be 
very  good  personally  ;  but  they  will  never  combine  with  others  to  make  a  conquering 
band.     They  work  very  well  alone,  or  as  fore-horses  in  the  team  ;  but  they  cannot 
trot  in  double  harness.      Soldiers  without    discipline    become    a  mob,  and  not 
an   army.      Friend,    will    you  be   one  of    the  steady  workers  ?      3.    In   Joshua- 
woik  courage  was    required.     "  Go    out,  fight    with  Amalek."     The    Amalekites 
were  fierce,  cruel,  strong.      They  are   said  to    have  been  the    chief    among   the 
nations ;  by  which  I  understand  first  among  the  plunderers  of  the  desert.     The 
soldiers   under  Joshua  had  courage,   and  faced  their   wolfish  foes.     Saints  need 
courage  for  Jesus  in  these  days.     May  God,  in  His  mercy,  make  His  people  bold 
against  scepticism,  superstition,  and  open  wickedness  !     We  are  called,  not  to  flirt 
with  error  and  evil,  but  to  fight  with  it ;  therefore,  let  us  be  brave,  and  push  on  the 
conflict.     4.  Those  fighting  under  Joshua  did  not  grow  weary.     Moses  had   the 
more  spiritual  work,  and  his  hands  grew  heavy :  we  sooner  tire  in  private  devotion 
than  in  public  service.     Joshua  and  his  men  were  not  weary  :  never  let  us  be  weary 
in  well-doing.     Do  you  ever  grow  weary  in  one  peculiar  way  of  serving  God  ?     It 
may  be  useful  to  try  something  else.  I  mean,  do  something  extra.  Variety  of  labour 
serves  for  recreation.     5.  In  the  Joshua-service  they  were  successful,  for  "  they 
discomfited  Amalek  and  his  people  with  the  edge  of  the  sword."    Beloved  workers 
for  the  Lord  :  may  He  grant  you  like  success  against  evil !     The  devil  goes  to  be 
beaten,  and  he  shall  be  beaten.     II.  The  Moses-service — the  service  of  Moses  and 
his  comrades.     These  did  not  go  down  to  the  battle-field  themselves,  but  they 
climbed  the  mountain-side,  where  they  could  see  the  warriors  in  the  conflict ;  and 
there  Moses  lifted  up  the  rod  of  God.     1.  Note,  that  the  Moses-service  was  essential 
to  the  battle  ;  for  when  Moses  held  up  his  hand,  Israel  prevailed ;  and  when  he 
let  down  his  hand,  Amalek  prevailed.     The  scales  of  the  conflict  were  in  the  hand 
of  Moses,  and  they  turned  as  his  prayer   and  testimony  failed  or  continued.     2. 
This  holy  work  was  of  a  very  special  character.    Only  three  were  able  to  enter  into  it. 
I  believe' that,  in  every  Church,  the  deeply  spiritual,  who  prevalently  commune  with 
God,  and  bring  down  the  blessing  upon  the  work  of  the  rest,.aj:e  comparatively  few. 


CHAP,  xvn.]  EXODUS.  803 

3.  This  Moses-service  lay  in  very  close  communion  with  God.  Moses,  and  Aaron, 
and  Hur  were  called  to  rise  above  the  people,  and  to  get  alone,  apart  from  the  com- 
pany.  They  climbed  the  hill  as  a  symbol,  and  in  retirement  they  silently  communed 
with  God.  4.  In  this  sacred  engagement  there  was  a  terrible  strain  upon  the  one 
man  who  led  the  others  in  it.  In  the  process  of  bringing  down  the  Divine  power 
upon  the  people,  the  vehicle  of  communication  was  sorely  tried.  "Moses' hands 
were  heavy."  If  God  gives  you  spiritual  power  to  lead  in  Christian  work,  you 
you  will  soon  find  out  that  the  condition  of  such  leadership  is  a  costly  one.  5.  In 
this  hallowed  service  help  is  very  precious.  "When  Moses'  hands  began  to  drop 
down,  and  he  himself  was  faint,  Aaron  and  Hur  gave  him  substantial  aid.  Are  you 
a  worker?  Have  you  a  leader  fit  to  lead  you?  Bring  a  stone  and  put  under  him : 
cheer  his  heart  with  some  gracious  promise  from  the  Lord's  Word,  or  with  some 
happy  sign  from  the  work  itself.  Cheer  the  good  man  as  much  as  possible.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  battle  behveen  good  and  evil : — I.  That  the  good  are  eequieed 
TO  DO  battle  with  INVETERATE  ENEMIES  (vcr.  8).  1.  Evcry  soul  has  to  contend  with 
the  Amalek  of  (1)  an  evil  heart;  (2)  a  wicktd  world;  (3)  fallen  angels.  2.  The 
soul  is  led  gradually  into  the  moral  battle  of  life.  We  cannot  get  to  heaven  with- 
out being  interrupted  by  many  enemies — by  Satan,  by  poverty,  by  sickness,  by 
prosperity ;    all   these  will  seek  to   stop  or  slay  us.     II.  That  the  good  in  this 

CONFLICT     MUST    COMBINE    PRAYER    WITH     THE    UTMOST    EXERTION    TO    OVERCOME     THEIB 

ENEMIES  (vers.  9-11).  Truth  has  lost  many  a  battle  through  bad  generalship. 
Truth  needs  a  man  like  Luther  to  lead  the  attack.  If  we  would  overcome  evil 
within  us  and  without  us,  we  must  summon  the  best  energies  of  our  mental  and 
moral  nature,  and  put  them  under  the  command  of  Christ ;  then  shall  we  be  led  to 
victory.  Joshua  fought.  Moses  went  up  the  hill  to  pray.  Prayer  is  often  uphill 
work.  And  the  conflict  between  Good  and  Evil  necessitates  the  use  of  prayer  and 
activity.  Man  must  pray  over  his  evil  heart,  and  he  must  also  fight  against  its 
sinful  tendencies.     Sin  is  persistent  in  its  opposition  to  the  soul.     III.  That  the 

GOOD  IN  THIS  CONFLICT  ARE    OFTEN    IMPEDED  BT  THE    WEAKNESS    CONSEQUENT  UPON    THE 

phtsical  CONDITION  OF  LIFE  (ver.  12).  Nature  at  the  strongest  is  weak.  But  the 
hands  of  Moses  were  supported  by  Aaron  and  Hur.  Holy  companionship  is  help- 
ful in  the  hour  of  severe  moral  conflict.  Two  are  better  far  than  one.  Christians 
should  seek  to  hold  up  the  hands  of  ministers.  They  must  bear  one  another's 
burdens.  The  insignificant  members  of  the  Church  may  render  service  to  the 
most  important ;  Hur  may  strengthen  Moses.  The  hands  of  our  heavenly  Inter- 
cessor never  grow  weary  with  pleading  ;  and  the  infirm  Christian  will  soon  be  as 
the  angels.  It  is  consoling  that  God  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that  we  are 
dust.  IV.  That  the  good  in  their  conflict  should  keep  faithful  record  of  theib 
VICTORIES  (vers.  13,  14).  1.  To  aid  memory.  2.  To  inspire  hope.  3.  To  awaken 
gratitude  to  God.  V.  That  the  good  in  this  conflict  should  aschibe  all  the 
GLORY  of  victory  TO  GOD  (vcrs.  15,  16).  Lcssons  :  1.  That  there  are  inveterate 
enemies  to  moral  goodness.  2.  That  these  enemies  are  doomed  to  ultimate  defeat 
and  destruction.  3.  That  the  good  must  pray  and  fight  to  this  end.  4.  There  will 
be  a  final  celebration  of  victory.  (J.  S.  Exell,  31. A.)  War  with  Amalek: — I. 
First,  then,  we  have  here  the  experience  of  every  individual  Christian.  1. 
Observe,  the  Children  of  Israel  were  emancipated  from  bondage,  and  had  left  Egypt 
behind,  even  as  you  and  I  have  been  rescued  from  our  natural  state  and  are  no 
longer  the  servants  of  sin.  2.  The  Children  of  Israel  were  probably  anticipating 
ease,  forgetting  that  the  Promised  Land  was  yet  many  days'  journey  beyond  them. 
Inexperience  made  them  expect  a  continuance  of  uninterrupted  song  and  feasting, 
and  there  was  a  time  when  we  indulged  in  the  same  foolish  hopes.  3.  Like  Israel, 
we  soon  experienced  tribulations.  You  must  fight  if  you  would  win  the  crown, 
and  your  pathway  to  the  other  side  of  Jordan  must  be  the  pathway  of  an  armed 
crusader,  who  has  to  contend  for  every  inch  of  the  way  if  he  is  to  win  it.  4.  In 
proceeding  with  the  narrative  we  notice  that  they  found  opposition  from  an 
unexpected  quarter.  It  is  just  where  we  feel  most  safe  that  we  should  be  most 
cautious.  I  do  not  think  the  Christian  has  so  much  to  fear  from  open  and  avowed 
enemies  as  from  those  deceitful  foes  who  feign  to  be  his  friends.  Sin  is  never  so 
much  a  Jezebel  as  when  it  paints  its  face  with  daubs  of  respectabihty  and  patches 
of  innocence.  Things  dubious  are  more  dangerous  than  things  distinctly  evil.  5. 
When  the  assault  was  made,  the  people  were  commanded  to  exert  themselves.  The 
message  was  given,  "Go,  choose  out  men,  and  fight  with  Amalek."  Israel  never 
fought  with  Egypt.  God  fought  foi^them,  and  they  held  their  peace.  The  yoke 
of  sin  has  been  broken  by  God's  grace  from  off  our  necks,  and  now  we  have  to  fight 


304  THE  BIBLICTAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xvii. 

not  as  slaves  against  a  master,  but  as  freemen  against  a  foe.  6.  Spiritual  fighting 
must  be  conducted  on  most  earnest  and  prudent  principles.  They  were  to  choose 
out  men.  So  we  must  choose  out  our  ways  of  contending  with  sin.  The  best 
part  of  a  man  should  be  engaged  in  warfare  with  his  sins.  7.  This  makes  me 
notice  that  though  the  men  of  Israel  were  to  fight,  and  the  chosen  men  were  to  be 
selected,  yet  they  were  to  fight  under  the  command  of  Joshua,  that  is,  Jesus,  the 
Saviour.  8.  That  where  holy  activity  is  joined  with  earnest  sujiplication,  the 
result  as  to  our  sins  is  absolutely  sure — the  enemy  must  be  defeated  ;  we  shall  put 
our  feet  upon  the  necks  of  all  our  sins.  There  is  no  fear  of  their  overcoming  us  il 
we  do  but  lay  hold  on  Divine  strength.  9.  And,  if  ever  we  overcome  sin  once,  it 
should  be  the  signal  for  proclaiming  a  general  war  against  all  sin.  The  fight  and 
victory  over  Amalek  brought  from  God's  mouth  the  solemn  declaration  that  there 
should  be  war  with  Amalek  for  ever  and  ever.  Have  you  mastered  one  sin  ?  Slay 
the  next,  and  the  next,  and  the  next.  II.  The  whole  narrative  may  be  interpreted 
AS  THE  HISTORY  OF  ANY  ONE  CHRISTIAN  Chorch.  In  any  ouc  Church  there  will  l;e, 
there  must  be,  if  it  be  a  Church  of  God,  earnest  contention  for  the  truth  and  against 
error.  If  we  do  indeed  hold  the  very  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  we  must  fight  fur  it 
valiantly,  for  if  we  do  not  fight  Amalek,  Amalek  will  certainly  fight  us,  and  the 
hindmost  will  always  be  suffering  and  the  weakest  go  to  the  wall.  It  is  on  behalf 
of  the  weaker  brethren,  who  are  easily  perverted,  that  we  must  watch  and  fight 
perpetually.  To  all  Christian  effort  in  every  Church  must  be  added  unceasing  inter- 
cession. III.  But  lastly,  the  history  of  the  whole  Christian  Chorch  is  here 
BEFORE  us  AS  IN  A  PiCTCRE.  The  sacramcutal  host  of  God's  elect  is  warring  still  on 
earth,  Jesus  Christ  being  the  Captain  of  their  salvation.  He  has  said,  "  Lo  !  I  am 
with  you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world."  (C.  H.  Spnrg''07i.)  The  war  of 
truth  : — I.  The  great  warfare.  1.  Not  with  men,  but  with  Satnn  and  error. 
2.  A  most  righteous  warfare.  3.  A  war  of  the  greatest  importance.  4.  Insi- 
dious and  very  powerful  foes.  5.  A  war  of  perpetual  duration.  II.  The 
APPOINTED  means  OF  WARFARE.  1.  Hard  blows.  2.  Hard  prayers.  {Ibid.)  Both 
sides  of  the  shield : — I.  First,  let  us  look  at  persecotion  in  its  double  aspect. 
On  the  one  hand,  notice  that  this  attack  upon  Israel  was  Amalek's  great  sin,  on 
account  of  which  the  nation  was  doomed  to  be  extirpated.  Because  of  this, 
God  said,  "  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under  heaven." 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  this  assault  was  the  result  of  Israel's  sin ;  for  it  is 
significantly  pit  after  the  strife  of  Massah  and  Meribah,  "  Then  came  Amalek, 
and  fought  with  Israel  in  R.^phidim."  The  point  is  this  :  persecution  may 
come  to  you  from  evil  men,  distinctly  from  them,  and  it  may  be  their  wicked  free 
will  which  makes  them  assail  you ;  and  yet,  at  tha  same  time,  it  may  be  yonr  sin 
which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  it,  and  because  you  have  erred  they  have  been  permitted, 
and  even  appointed,  to  bring  trouble  upon  you.  Let  us  think  of  these  two  things. 
1.  Notice  well  that  assaults  upon  us  may  arise  from  the  sins  of  others.  It  is  right 
that  we  should  recognize  this,  lest  in  the  dark  day  we  should  become  unduly 
discouraged.  These  Amalekites  attacked  Israel,  and  greatly  sinned  in  so  doing, 
for  they  were  the  first  that  made  war  against  God's  people.  But  the  impiety  was 
still  worse  ;  for  Amalek  went  out  of  his  way  to  attack  Israel.  The  paople  had  not 
come  into  his  territory ;  they  were  a  good  way  ofif  it,  and  were  passing  quietly  by ; 
but  we  read,  "  Then  came  Amalek."  His  envy  was  stirred  up  so  much  that  he  came 
away  from  his  own  region  to  fight  with  Israel  without  any  provocation.  Moreover, 
Amalek  in  this  act  went  forth  to  fight  against  God  Himself.  It  was  not  with  Israel 
alone  that  he  warred ;  he  battled  also  with  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Israel.  When  you 
are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake,  the  Lord  takes  notice  of  it.  "  Saul,  Saul, 
why  persecutest  thou  Me  ?  "  Let  us  now  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  other  a'-peot  of 
this  subject.  2.  The  guilt  of  ungodly  men  in  persecuting  God's  people  is  not 
inconsistent  with  my  next  statement,  that  assaults  upon  us  may  also  arise  from  our 
own  sins.  We  may  have  brought  the  evil  upon  ourselves.  When  they  had  chided 
with  Moses,  and  murmured  against  God,  "  llien  came  Amalek."  Israel  had  been 
quarrelling  with  God.  Do  you  wonder,  then,  that  other  people  quarrelled  with 
them  ?  You  may  often  read  your  sin  in  its  punishment.  They  put  a  question  about 
God,  "  Is  the  Lord  among  us,  or  not  ?  "  But,  because  they  questioned  God,  God 
makes  it  a  serious  question  between  them  and  Amalek.  If  we  make  God  a  question, 
God  will  make  our  safety  a  question,  and  we  shall  have  a  stern  fight  for  it.  Moreover, 
we  find  that  Israel  had  uttered  threats  against  Moses,  so  that  he  said,  "  They  be 
almost  ready  to  stone  me."  Now,  if  they  wo<ld  stone  the  man  of  God,  is  it  at  all 
wonderful  that  the  men  of  the  world  were  re  xdy  to  kill  them  ?    Xt  you  go  against 


CHAP,  xvn.]  EXODUS.  305 

Moses,  God  will  sent  Amalek  against  you,  for  remember  that  God  does  chasten  His 
people.  So,  there  is  our  first  point.  We  may  sometimes  justly  charge  our 
afiiictions  upon  the  ill  intent  of  ungodly  men ;  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  we  may 
have  to  charge  them  also  upon  ourselves.  II.  In  the  second  place,  let  us  think  of 
iNSTKUMENTAiiTY  IN  ITS  DOUBLE  EELATioN.  Here,  again,  another  contrast  is  to  be 
found  in  the  text  and  its  connection.  If  you  will  notice,  in  the  fifth  verse,  God  says 
to  Moses,  "Take  with  thee  of  the  elders  of  Israel ;  and  thy  rod,  wherewith  thou 
smotest  the  river  "  ;  but  when  Moses  talks  about  the  rod,  in  the  ninth  verse,  which 
forms  our  text,  he  says,  "To-morrow  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the 
rod  of  God  in  mine  hand."  In  both  verses  it  is  the  same  rod  which  is  spoken  of. 
1.  One  side  is  that  God  calls  it  the  rod  of  Moses,  and  so  honours  him.  Wherever 
there  is  an  opportunity  of  doing  honour  to  the  faith  of  His  own  servants,  God  is 
never  slow  to  use  it.  He  is  a  King  who  delights  to  give  glory  to  His  warriors  when 
they  behave  themselves  bravely  in  the  heat  of  battle.  Moreover,  it  really  was  the 
rod  of  Moses,  and  would  not  so  well  have  fitted  any  other  hand.  God  does  not 
put  iuto  a  position  of  influence  a  man  unfit  for  the  post.  Even  Moses  did  network 
wonders  with  the  rod  until  he  had  renounced  the  riches  of  Egypt,  and  borne  the 
burden  of  life  in  the  wilderness.  There  was  a  fituess  in  the  fact  of  the  rod  being 
in  the  hand  of  such  a  man.  Thus,  in  a  very  real  sense,  it  was  the  rod  of  Moses. 
In  addition  to  this,  it  was  the  faith  of  Moses  which  gave  power  to  his  rod ;  he 
himself  was  the  conductor  of  the  Divine  energy.  Had  the  rod  been  wielded  by 
another  man,  self-appointed,  and  lacking  the  confidence  which  Moses  had  come  to 
possess  in  God,  it  would  have  been  simply  a  powerless  stick.  2.  On  the  other  hand, 
Moses  calls  it  the  rod  of  God,  and  so  honours  God.  He  whom  God  uses  gives  God 
the  praise,  for  God  is  ever  the  source  of  our  strength  ;  and  if  any  work  is  done  that 
is  worth  the  doing,  unto  Him  must  be  ascribed  all  the  glory.  "  Not  unto  us,  O 
Lord ;  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name,  give  glory."  Let  us  learn,  from  these 
words  of  Moses,  that  instrumentality  is  not  to  be  decried,  for  God  uses  it ;  but  the 
instrument  must  never  be  allowed  to  usurp  the  place  of  God,  for  it  must  be  always 
remembered  that  it  is  God  who  uses  it.  The  axe  must  not  exalt  itself  against  him 
that  heweth  therewith  ;  but,  when  there  are  trees  to  be  felled,  it  would  be  folly  to 
throw  the  axe  away.  III.  Behold,  in  this  incident,  prudence  in  its  double 
ACTIVITY.  You  have  that  in  the  text.  Moses  said  unto  Joshua,  "  Choose  us  out 
men,  and  go  out,  fight  with  Amalek."  To  which  Joshua  might  have  replied,  "  Yes, 
I  will  gladly  do  that,  and  you  will  go  too,  Moses,  and  fight,  will  you  not  ?  "  No,  no, 
he  will  not.  "  To-morrow  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill  with  the  rod  of  God  in 
mine  hand."  Prudence  prays  with  Moses,  while  it  fights  with  Joshua.  In  like 
manner,  in  the  activities  of  our  holy  faith,  we  must  learn  to  balance  work  and 
worship,  prayer  for  victory  and  conflict  with  the  enemy.  1.  In  the  case  before  us, 
we  see  that  the  means  are  not  neglected.  Moses  did  not  call  all  the  people  to  pray 
when  it  was  time  for  fighting.  He  prayed,  but  at  the  same  time  he  set  the  battle 
in  array.  This  is  true  wisdom,  for  "  faith  without  works  is  dead."  The  means 
must  not  be  neglected.  Observe  how  Moses  prepared  to  fight  the  Amalekites.  He 
said  to  Joshua,  "  Choose  us  out  men."  He  did  not  lose  sight  of  the  necessity  of 
having  the  fittest  warriors,  because  his  trust  was  in  God.  Let  the  Church  always 
see  to  it  that  she  tries  to  get  the  best  men  she  can  to  fight  the  battles  of  the  Lord. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  anybody  will  do  for  Christian  work.  The  leader  was 
also  chosen—"  Moses  said  unto  Joshua."  He  did  not  pick  up  the  first  youth  that 
he  met,  and  say  to  him,  "  Go  and  fight  these  Amalekites."  The  time  for  the 
battle  was  also  chosen.  "  To-morroio  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the  hill.  Why  not 
fight  them  at  once?  Well,  because  the  people  were  not  ready  ;  it  would  take  a  little 
time  to  get  the  fighting  men  in  order.  Choose  the  best  time.  Serve  God  wisely. 
Go  about  the  work  as  if  all  depended  upon  you,  and  then  trust  in  God,  knowing 
that  all  depends  upon  Him.  Note,  again,  that  the  battle  was  most  real.  Moses 
did  not  say,  "  Choose  you  out  men,  and  go  and  drive  Amalek  away  like  a  flock  of 
sheep."  No  ;  but  "  Go  out,  fight  with  Amalek."  BeUeve  me,  we  make  a  great 
mistake  if  we  think  that  this  world  is  to  be  conquered  for  Christ  without  mighty 
efforts.  Some  talk  as  if  the  expenditure  of  a  few  pounds,  and  the  going  forth  of  a 
few  men,  wiU  end  the  whole  war.  2.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  in  this  battle,  reliance 
upon  God  is  not  neglected.  Moses  ascends  the  hiU  holding  up  his  banner,  and  that 
banner  is  the  rod  of  God.  Unfortunately,  in  our  work  for  God,  we  generally  fail 
into  one  of  two  blunders.  Either  we  get  a  lot  of  machinery,  and  think  that  we  shall 
accomplish  everything  by  that ;  or  else  we  are  Uke  some  whom  I  have  known,  who 
have  confided  bo  much  in  prayer  that  they  have  done  nothing  but  pray.    It  is  a  very 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

heinous  fault  to  trust  the  means  -without  God ;  but,  though  it  is  a  much  smaller 
fault  to  trust  in  God,  and  not  use  the  means,  yet  still  it  is  a  fault.  Practical  prudence 
wiU  lead  you  to  do  both.  IV.  Behold  here,  in  a  wondrous  type,  Christ  is  His 
TWOFOLD  CAPACITY.  Christ  is  represented  to  us  here  as  Moses  on  the  hill  pleading, 
and  as  Joshua  in  the  valley  fighting.  1.  Learn,  first,  that  Chii.;t  is  pleading  for  us. 
He  is  not  here :  He  is  risen.  It  is  because  He  intercedes  for  us  that  we  win  the 
victory.  In  His  mediation  is  our  confidence.  2.  But,  then,  do  not  forget  that  He 
is  also  warring  for  us.  On  the  very  eve  of  His  departure.  He  said,  "  Lo,  I  am  with 
you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  This  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  in  Him  Christ  is  always  with  us,  our  greater  Joshua,  fighting  for  the 
people  whom  He  will  one  day  lead  into  the  promised  land,  the  heavenly  Canaan. 
I  think  that  I  see  our  Joshua  now,  sword  in  hand,  chasing  our  adversaries ;  and  I 
turn  my  eye  upwards,  and  see  our  Moses,  rod  in  hand,  pleading  for  His  people.  Let 
us  see  Him  in  both  capacities.  Believe  in  Christ  in  heaven,  and  trust  Him  with 
your  prayers.  Believe  in  Christ  on  earth,  range  yourself  on  His  side,  and  rest 
assured  that  no  foe  will  be  able  to  stand  against  Him.  So,  you  see  that,  though 
two  things  may  look  contradictory,  they  are  often  both  really  true,  and  are  both 
different  sides  of  one  shield.  Try,  then,  always  to  see  both  sides  of  every  truth 
revealed  in  the  Scriptures.  {Ibid.)  The  assintance  of  prayer : — An  unacconnt 
able  revival  broke  out  in  a  congregation  in  a  village,  and  about  one  hundred 
were  converted  in  a  few  weeks.  At  last  the  minister  discovers  the  secret  of 
the  revival,  and  relates  it  thus :  "There  is  a  sister  in  my  Church  who  has 
for  years  been  an  invalid,  and  confined  to  her  bed.  She  lives  several  miles 
from  the  village,  and  the  other  day  I  rode  out  to  see  her.  As  I  sat  by  her 
bedside  she  said,  '  You  have  had  a  very  precious  revival  ?  '  '  We  have,'  I 
answered.  '  I  knew  it  was  coming,'  she  said."  And  then  she  proceeded  to 
give  her  pastor  an  account  of  the  burden  that  had  been  upon  her  fur  weeks, 
and  the  manner  in  which  her  soul  had  gone  out  in  prayer  for  the  unconverted, 
in  midnight  hours  and  at  other  times ;  and  before  the  interview  closed  the 
pastor  felt  that  the  unaccountable  revival  was  accounted  for.  Like  Hur  and 
Aaron,  who  held  up  the  hands  of  Moses,  this  bedridden  sister  had  by  her  prayers 
obtained    victory   for    the    soldiers    of  Christ.  Encouragement : — There  were 

four  boys,  all  brothers,  walking  along  the  banks  of  a  stream,  and  playing  as 
they  went.  Like  most  boys,  their  idea  of  fun  was  to  go  as  far  into  danger  as  they 
could,  and  at  length  one  of  them  fell  into  a  deep  place.  He  could  not  swim,  but 
immediately  his  brother  who  could,  plunged  in  to  rescue  him.  He  got  hold  of  him 
but  could  not  bring  him  to  the  bank,  then  another  brother,  catching  hold  of  a 
branch,  stretched  his  body  out  its  whole  length  so  that  the  swimmer  could  catch 
hold,  and  thus  all  three  were  brought  safe  to  land.  When  they  got  home  they  all 
began  to  tell  their  father  about  the  affair.  "  Now  give  me  time,"  he  said,  "  and  I'll 
hear  you  all."  Turning  to  the  oldest,  he  asked,  '•  When  your  brother  fell  into  tho 
river  what  did  you  do  towards  his  rescue  ?  "  "  Well,  father,  at  first  I  was  paralyzed 
with  fear,  and  I  stood  on  the  bank  for  some  seconds  trembling  for  his  s»fety,  then 
I  recovered  myself  and  plunging  in,  caught  hold  of  him,  and  strove  to  bring  him  to 
shore."  Then  facing  the  second  boy  he  said,  "And  what  did  you  do  to  rescue  your 
brother ? "  "I  could  not  swim,  father,  but  when  I  saw  they  could  not  reach  the 
shore,  I  bridged  the  water  between  them  and  the  bank  so  that  they  might  pull 
themselves  in."  Now  there  only  remained  the  youngest,  a  little  fellow  of  four  years, 
and  turning  to  him  the  father  asked,  "And  what  did  you  do?  "  "Oh,  father,  I 
could  do  nothing.  I  just  stood  on  the  bank  and  clapped  my  hands  and  shouted, 
"  Well  done,  well  done !  "  "Yes,  well  done,  my  boys,  all  of  you,  I  am  proud  to 
have  such  sons,"  exclaimed  the  happy  father.  Christians,  standing  safe  on  the 
bank,  What  have  you  done  for  the  rescue  of  your  brother  ?  At  least  you  can  by 
your  words  and  prayers  encourage  others  who  are  stronger  to  go  to  the  rescue  of 
the  lost.  The  v-orkinci  layman : — We  shall  find  that  the  Church,  like  warring 
nations,  expects  every  man  to  do  his  duty.  If,  as  we  suppose,  Hur  was  not  of  the 
priestly  office,  we  think  the  laymen  of  our  day  may  find  that  this  Scripture  was 
written  for  their  learning.  They  are,  we  fear,  very'f ar  from  walking  in  the  steps  of 
Hur,  and  from  following  his  example.  It  will  be  noticed  that  it  was  a  personal 
service  in  which  he  was  engaged,  one  that  required  not  only  labour  but  the  sacrifice 
of  his  time.  Until  the  going  down  of  the  sun  he  stood  by  Moses  and  stayed  up  his 
hands.  When  Israel  was  at  war  with  Amalek,  he  did  not  content  himself  with 
wishes  for  success,  nor  did  he  rejoice  over  a  victory  which  he  had  not  laboured  to 
win.    He  did  not  serve  God  by  prosy,  nor  send  a  substitute  to  perform  his  personal 


CHAP,  xvn.]  EXODUS.  307 

duties.  When  he  was  needed  upon  the  mount,  he  did  not  beg  to  be  excused  ;  he 
pleaded  no  want  of  leisure  and  no  press  of  worldly  engagements.  It  is  the  great 
want  of  the  Church  in  our  day — working  men  and  working  women,  especially 
working  men  ;  men  with  the  true  missionary  spirit  and  zeal ;  men  who,  like  Hur, 
will  not  grudge  to  spend  a  day  on  the  mount,  to  stay  up  Moses'  hands.  While 
Aaron  and  Hur  stood  on  the  one  side  or  on  the  other,  the  strength  of  Moses  failed 
not.  It  is  in  vain  to  have  officers  if  men  will  not  fight,  or  men  wilHng  to  fight  if 
there  are  no  officers  to  direct  and  guide  them.  There  must  be  the  co-operation  of 
all,  if  we  expect  prosperity.  Our  strength  is  not  to  sit  stiU.  Here  is  a  field  which 
we  all  may  equally  occupy ;  where  wealth  has  no  advantage,  and  where  poverty  is 
no  loss, — the  field  of  religious  influence  and  personal  exertion.  We  all  can  do 
something,  many  of  us  can  do  much,  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  the  Church.  To 
destroy  Amalek,  to  bless  Israel,  we  must  labour  as  well  as  give  ;  we  must  stay  up 
Moses'  hands,  as  well  as  worship  in  the  tabernacle.  If  the  priest  must  pray  and 
preach  and  toil,  no  less  do  we  look  for  them  to  work.  Hur,  on  the  mount  with 
Moses  and  Aaron,  was  a  type  of  a  working  layman.     (G.  F.  Cushman,  D.B.) 

Ver.  9.  The  rod  of  God. — Moses'  rod,  the  emblem  of  potcer  and  faith : — I.  The 
KOD  SEKVED  TO  JOIN  MAN  AND  GoD  IN  THE  woEK  OF  THE  LoRD.  At  the  One  end,  Faith ; 
at  the  other,  Almighty  Power.  II.  The  kod  served  to  increase  the  confidence  of 
THE  people  in  THEIR  GoD.  Succcss  everywhere  attended  the  rod.  III.  The  rod 
served  to  teach  the  people  dependence  upon  God  for  their  success  in  battle.  IV. 
The  rod  served  to  teach  the  people  the  need  of  holy  and  devout  men.  {Homilist.) 
,  3Ian  as  a  servant  of  God : — The  words  (chap.  iv.  17)  lead  us  1o  contemplate  man  as 
a  servant  of  God — a  servant  to  promote  the  true  progress  of  the  race.  They  suggest 
four  things  which  God  requires  man  to  do  in  this  grand  service.     I.  To  use  the 

INSTRUMENT  MOST  AT  HIS  COMMAND.  II.  To  TURN  OLD  THINGS  TO  NEW  USES.  III.  To 
AIM  AT  MIGHTY  ENDS  BY  APPARENTLY  INSIGNIFICANT  MEANS.  IV.  To  FOLLOW  God'S 
WILL,  RATHER  THAN  THE  DICTATES  OF    OUR  OWN  WISDOM.       (Ibid.)       The    old   rod,  OT    the 

inspiration  of  common  ministries  : — Wondrous  is  one  little  line  in  the  history : — 
"  And  thy  rod,  wherewith  thou  smotest  the  river,  take  in  thine  hand,  and  go,"  and 
afterward  Moses,  having  spoken  to  Joshua,  said,  "  I  will  stand  on  the  top  of  the 
hill  with  the  rod  of  God  in  mine  hjuid. "  Never  forget  the  old  rod,  the  old  book, 
the  old  truth  ; — the  sword  that  cut  off  the  head  of  Goliath — "  Give  me  that,"  said 
David,  "  there  is  none  like  it."  Thus  God  hides  inspiration  in  things  of  apparently 
little  value,  and  touches  the  imagination  and  the  faith  by  books,  ministries, 
churches,  altars,  which  we  thought  had  passed  away  into  desuetude,  perhaps 
oblivion.  Your  first  prayer  may  help  you  to-day.  The  faith  of  your  youth 
may  be  the  only  thing  to  win  the  battle  which  now  challenges  your  strength.  One 
little  hour  with  the  old,  old  book  may  be  all  you  need  to  obtain  the  sufliiciency  of 
light  which  will  drive  away  the  cloud  of  mystery  and  bring  in  the  heaven  of  explana- 
tion.    {J.Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Joshua  discomfited  Amalek. — Winning  God's  battles  : — I.  Amalek,  as 
we  learn  from  Deut.  xxv.  18,  had  "  smitten  the  hindmost,  even  all  that  were 
FEEBLE."  The  stragglers  are  always  a  temptation  to  the  foe.  The  hindmost  and 
the  feeble  are  sure  to  be  the  first  attacked,  and  therefore  should  have  special  care. 
II.  Joshua  discomfited  Ajialek,  not  Moses  or  some  other  friend.  Let  us  keep  our 
bitterness  for  sin,  and  our  swords  for  the  King's  enemies.  III.  Amalek  is  not  to  be 
beaten  without  a  fight.  The  struggle  against  sin  is  real,  as  we  shall  find  to  our 
cost  if  we  are  not  wary.  IV.  Moses  was  for  each  ^^NDING  his  own  work,  Joshua  to 
fight,  and  himself  to  take  the  top  of  the  hill.  V.  Moses  on  the  hill  is  an  emblem  op 
PUBLIC  PRAYER.  There  is  a  mystery  about  prayer  that  we  cannot  unravel.  One  of 
the  bravest  of  Christian  soldiers,  scarred  with  many  a  fight,  said,  "  I  will  therefore 
that  men  pray  everywhere,  lifting  up  holy  hands."      VI.  How  much  even  the 

MIGHTIEST  OF  MEN  ARE  DEPENDENT  UPON  OTHERS  MUCH  WEAKER  THAN  THEMSELVES.       It 

was  well  for  the  fortunes  of  the  day  that  Moses  was  not  alone.    VH.  An  altar 

MARKED  THE  PLACE    OF   BATTLE,  AND   GLORY  WAS   GIVEN    TO    THE    LoRD    OF   HOSTS.       The 

soldiers  of  the  Cross  should  call  the  battle-fields  where  they  have  won  their  bravest 
fights  by  the  name  of  Him  to  whom  they  ascribe  all  might  and  majesty.  (T. 
Champness.)  The  battle  of  Amalek,  an  instructive  war  : — I.  As  the  record  of  a 
WAR  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  MOST  MODERN  WARS.  1.  It  was  puTcly  defensive  on  the 
Hebrew  side.  2.  It  was  Divinely  sanctioned  on  the  Hebrew  side.  3.  It  was 
evidently  judicial  on  the  Hebrew  side.    II.  As  the  record  of  a  war  suggesting 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tto. 

PEiNciPLEs  OF  GENERAL  APPLICATION.  1.  The  propagating  influence  of  evil.  I  find 
the  primal  cause  of  this  war  in  the  injury  which  Jacob  perpetrated  upon  his  brother 
Esau  (Gen.  xxvii.  18,  19).  God  only  knows  the  influence  of  one  evil  act.  2.  The 
Divine  liberty  allowed  to  wicked  men.  Full  freedom  to  work  out  revengeful  pas- 
sions. 3.  The  variety  of  instrumentality  by  which  God  works  out  His  designs. 
The  Eternal  ever  works  by  means.  4.  The  dependence  of  man's  progress  on  his 
relation  to  heaven.  5.  The  importance  of  transmitting  to  posterity  the  agency  of 
God  in  history  (see  ver.  14).  III.  As  the  record  of  a  war  symbolizing  the  moral 
STRUGGLE  IN  WHICH  THE  GOOD  ARE  ENGAGED.  1.  That  the  good  liave  Spiritual  enemies 
to  contend  with.  2.  That  the  victory  which  the  good  are  to  obtain  over  their 
enemies  depends  on  the  help  of  others.  3.  That  whatever  may  be  the  amount  of 
help  obtained  in  the  struggle,  the  victorymust  ever  be  ascribed  to  God.  (HomiUst.) 
Israel  and  Amalek : — I.  The  Christian's  example.  1.  To  fight.  (1)  An  aggressive 
fight.  "Go."  (2)  To  be  done  wisely.  "Choose  you  out  men."  (3)  Earnestly 
"  Fight."  No  parley.  (4)  Continually.  2.  To  pray.  (1)  For  those  who  fight. 
(2)  Earnestly.  Not  growing  weary.  (3)  Confidently.  "  The  rod  " — symbol  of 
past  mercies.  (4)  Unitedly.  11.  The  Christian's  encour.agement.  1.  Christ,  our 
Captain — (1)  With  us,  to  cheer.  (2)  With  us,  to  direct.  (3)  With  us,  to  defend. 
2.  Christ,  our  intercessor.  (1)  Prays,  while  we  work.  (2)  Prays  continually.  (3) 
Prays  successfully.  III.  The  Christian's  prospect.  I.  Of  certain  victory.  2.  Of 
certain  glory.      (B.  D.  Macmillan.)         Amalek  and  Israel : — I.  The  battle  was 

FORCED  UPON  THE  VICTORS.  II.  ThE  BATTLE  WAS  HOTLY  CONTESTED.  III.  ThE 
vanquished    OWED    DEFEAT,    AND    THE    VICTORS    VICTORY,    TO    DiVINE     POWER    THROUGH 

HUMAN  INTERCESSION.  LessoDs  :  1.  As  sooH  as  we  become  followers  of  Christ,  war  is 
forced  upon  us.  2.  Every  Christian  possesses  a  Divine  rod  which,  wielded,  will 
bring  him  Divine  help  (Heb.  iv.  16).  3.  Christians  in  their  conflict  have  an  Inter- 
cessor on  the  hill,  and  a  Leader  in  the  valley.  Christ  makes  intercession  (Heb.  vii. 
25) ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  helps  our  infirmities  (Rom.  viii.  26),  and  guides  into  all 
truth  (John  xvi.  13).  {W.  Harris.)  Lessons : — 1.  Hands  of  creature-instruments 
may  be  helpful  under  God,  to  give  His  Church  success  against  its  enemies.  2. 
Such  hands  lifted  up  to  heaven  in  prayer,  and  for  encouragement,  God  doth  assist 
unto  prevalency.  3.  Hands  hanging  down  and  feeble  in  prayer,  may  give  oppor- 
tunity unto  enemies  to  prevail.  4.  Such  languishings  after  strong  strugglings,  God 
sometimes  orders  upon  His  choicest  servants.  6.  Doubtful  muy  be  the  fight  of 
Israel  as  to  success  against  its  enemies  for  a  time  (ver.  11).  6.  Heaviness  of  flesh 
and  spirit  in  contending  with  God  for  Israel  may  sometimes  befall  Moses  (Matt.  xxvi. 
41,  43).  7.  Suitable  support  under  such  delinquencies  are  very  requisite  for  God's 
servants.  Christ  the  stone  to  us.  8.  Good  helpers  to  strengthen  hearts  and  hands 
in  faintings  are  specially  useful.  9.  By  such  helps  souls  may  be  stedfast  and  faith- 
ful unto  God  unto  time  of  victory  (ver.  12).  10.  Moses  praying  and  Joshua  fighting, 
Amalek  must  fall,  when  prayer  puts  the  edge  on  the  sword  it  is  furbished  to  the 
slaughter.  11.  It  is  God's  just  ordering  that  they  who  first  oppress  with  the  sword, 
shall  perish  by  the  sword  (ver.  13).     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 

Ver.  14.  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrajice  of  Amalek. — Lessons: — 1. 
Jehovah's  victories  over  His  Church's  enemies  He  giveth  in  charge  to  be  recorded. 
2.  Writing  and  tradition  are  both  God's  ways  of  recording  His  works  for  future 
ages.  3.  God's  book  is  the  best  record  of  His  mighty  works  done  for  His  Church, 
4.  A  memorial  would  God  have  kept  by  the  records  of  God's  works  to  men.  5. 
God  hath  irreconcilable  displeasure  against  some  enemies  above  the  rest.  6. 
Blotting  out  of  the  names  of  such  enemies  will  God  make,  who  would  blot  out  the 
name  of  His  Church.  {G.Hughes,  B.D.)  Destruction  of  Amalek: — I.  It  is  probable  that 
from  this  time  Moses  began  to  keep  a  journal  of  striking  and  useful  occurrences. 
Great  men  have  frequently  done  the  same  for  intellectual,  and  good  men  for  religious, 
purposes.  II.  Whatever  may  be  said  of  the  pai'ticular  mode,  the  thing  itself  is 
OF  importance.  If  we  are  to  be  affected  with  transactions  and  feelings,  they  must 
be  in  some  way  secured  and  retained.  IH.  A  reason  is  assigned  for  the  recording 
and  rehearsing  of  this  transaction  in  a  dreadful  menace.  The  threatening  was 
executed  partially  by  Saul ;  but  fully  by  David.  IV.  The  Scriptures  cannot  be 
broken.  Whatever  improbabilities  appear — whatever  difiiculties  stand  in  the  way — 
whatever  delays  intervene — God's  counsels  of  old  are  faithfulness  and  truth  ;  not  a 
jot  of  His  Word  shall  fail.  (IF.  Jay.)  Use  of  history  : — Lucius  Lucullus,  being 
appointed  captain-general  over  the  Roman  forces  against  Mithridates,  had  not  great 
experience  or  knowledge  in  war,  but  only  what  he  had  gotten  by  reading  history, 


CHAP,  xvri.]  EJODUS,  309 

yet  proved  a  discreet  and  valiant  commander,  and  vanquished  at  that  time  two  of 
the  greatest  princes  in  the  East.  Thus  it  is'  that  history  is,  and  may  be,  the  director 
of  meanest  men  in  any  of  their  actions,  how  ^ijthers  have  behaved  themselves  upon 
several  occasions,  and  what  hath  followed  thereupon  ;  it  is  a  trusty  counsellor  of 
state,  by  whose  advice  and  direction  a  commdnwealth  may  be  framed,  governed, 
reformed,  and  preserved,  an  army  may  be  ordered,,  enemies  vanquished,  and  victory 
obtained.  In  it,  as  in  a  glass,  we  see  and  behold  God's  providence  guiding  and 
ruling  the  world,  and  men's  actions  which  arrive  often  at  unexpected  events,  and 
even  sometimes  reach  unto  such  ends  as  are  quite  contrary  to  the  actor's  intentions  ; 
it  is  a  punisher  of  vice,  presenting  agel  folly  green  ^nd  fresh  to  posterity;  not 
suffering  sin  to  die,  much  less  to  be  buried  in  oblivioi' ;  it  is  also  a  rewarder  of 
virtue,  reserving  worthy  deeds  for  imitation ;  a  good  wor'f,  though  it  die  in  doing,  is 
a  reward  to  itself,  yet  that  some  dull  natures  might  be  stir.ed  up  the  more,  and  all 
benefited  by  seeing  gracious  steps  before  them,  this  only  i.s  exempted  by  a  firm 
decree  from  the  stroke  of  death,  to  live  in  history.     (J.  Crompton.) 

Ver.  15.  Jehovah-mssi,  the  Lord  my  banner. — I.  The  fight  with  Amalek  was 
Israel's  first  battle,  and  God  made  it  to  them  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  of  all 
BATTLES — the  unseen  spiritual  things  on  which  depend  the  final  issues  of  all  struggles 
and  the  progress  of  the  world.     1.  The  main  purpose  of  Israel's  history  is  the 
revelation  of  the  unseen  influences  which  mould  the  character  and  guide  the  progress 
of  all  people  or  minister  to  their  decay  and  death.     (1)  The  first  apparent  condition 
of  success  was  the  courage  and  skill  of  the  commander  and  of  the  troops.     The 
successes  of  life  are  to  the  capable,  the  brave,  the  enduring  ;  but — and  here  is  the 
great  lesson  of  Eephidim — they  are  to  capacity,  courage,  and  energy  married  to,  and 
not  divorced  from,  the  fear  and  the  love  of  God.    (2)  There  was  a  second  and  higher 
condition.     Joshua  fought  while  Moses  was  praying,  and  while  he  knew  that  Moses 
was  praying.     The  people  had  a  conscious  hold  on  the  strength  of  the  arm  of  God. 
2.  It  may  be  fairly  asked  if  in  all  battles  the  victory  is  with  those  who  can  not  only 
fight,  but  pray.     The  answer  is  that  it  is  only  on  a  very  large  scale  that  we  can  trace 
the  ways  of  God.     Yet  we  may  say  that  in  any  conflict  the  best  reinforcement,  that 
which  stands  a  man  in  best  stead  and  raises  our  surest  hope  of  victory,  is  the  assur- 
ance that  God  is  on  his  side.     11.  The  text  is  the  revelation  to  us  of  the  mystery 
or  the  great  battle  in  which  we  are  all  combatants,  the  battle  of  life.    "  Jehovah- 
nissi  "  must  be  our  watchword,  if  we  would  not  doom  ourselves  to  go  down  before 
the  foe.     1.  The  Lord  is  our  banner  against  self,  that  baser  part  of  us  which  is  ever 
ensnaring,  enslaving,  and  dragging  us  down  into  the  pit.     2.  The  Lord  is  our 
banner  against  the  world.     3.  The  Lord  is  our  banner  against  the  devil.     {J.  B. 
Broun,  B.A.)        Jehovah-nissi : — I.  The  altar  a  memorial  of  an  historic  fact. 
Great  battle  of  Eephidim.     One  of  the  most  remarkable.     The  enemy — crafty,  cruel, 
cowardly — attacked  the  rear  where  the  young,  aged,  women,  &c.  (Deut.  xxv.  17,  18). 
Israelites  unarmed,  unused  to  warfare.     Taken  by  surprise  in  the  rear.     They  could 
succeed-only  by  tbe  help  of  God.     II.  This  altar  a  record  of  religious  duty.     1. 
The  duty  of  diligently  using  the  means  at  hand  in  doing  our  proper  and  appointed 
work.     Moses  chose  the  general.     Joshua  chose  the  fittest  men.     The  men  chose 
their  weapons.     2.  The  duty  of  encouraging  those  who  may  be  in  peculiar  danger. 
Moses  to  Joshua  (ver.  9).     3.  The  duty  of  rendering  willing  sympathy  and  aid. 
Israel  hastening  to  the  rescue  of  the  feeble,  &c.,  who  were  attacked.     III.  This 
altar  an  expression  of  pious  sentiments.     1.  Of  faith.     Flushed  with  success, 
remembering  much  individual  prowess,  they  acknowledge  that  their  victory  was 
from  another  source.     2.  Of  gratitude.     The  altar  left  behind  would  teach  all  desert 
travellers  to  trust  in  the  Lord.     3.  Resolution  for  the  future.     They  would  only 
fight  for  the  right,  and  under  this  banner.     We  too  have  a  banner  (Isa.  xi.  10). 
Must  be  united  (Isa.  xi.  12,  13),  and  rally  round  it  (Psa.  Ix.  4 ;  Song  ii.  4).     (/.  C. 
Gray.)        Jehovah  viy  banner : — There  are  two  names  in  Scripture  conspicuous 
above  all  others,  the  names  Jehovah  and  Jesus ;  the  one  stamped  upon  the  Old 
Testament,  the  other  upon  the  New.     Jesus  is  "the  name  which  is  above  every 
name  " ;  it  is  the  crowning  word  of  Revelation.     And  the  title  Jehovah  is  that  which 
lies  beneath  and  sustains  every  other  name,  that  on  which  all  teaching  about  God 
contained  in  the  Bible,  and  all  true  knowledge  of  Him,  virtually  rest.     It  is  the 
foundation  name  of  Scripture.     With  the  name  of  Jesus  we  are  very  familiar.     But 
the  other  word,  the  proper  name  of  the  God  of  Israel  and  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
is  too  much  overlooked  and  forgotten  by  the  Church.     And  this  greatly  to  our  loss  ; 
for  in  declaring  it  to  Moses  God  said,  "  This  is  My  name  for  ever,  and  My  memorial 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ITuLUSTRATOR.  [c3hap.  xrn. 

unto  all  generations."     And  this  oblivion,  betokens  the  neglect  of  not  a  little  belong- 
ing to  the  fundamental  teaching  abou.'c  God  contained  in  Scripture ;  to  which  la 
turn  we  may  attribute  certain  grave  de,'fects,  paiufully  manifest  in  the  religious  life 
and  experience  of  our  times.     I  meaii  the  lack  of  reverence,  the  decay  of  that  sober, 
serious  piety,  that  "  fear  of  Jehova^A"  in  which  true  wisdom  begins.     It  is  in  rude 
and  violent  surroundings  that  greplt  spiritual  principles  are  often  first  asserted,  and 
out  of  the  throes  of  fierce  conflict  they  come  to  birth.     Upon  this  battle-field,  with 
routed  Amalek  disappearing  over  the  edge  of  the  desert,  "  Moses  built '  his'  altar, 
and  called  the  name  of  it  Jehovah  my  banner."     So  he  lifted  up  this  mighty  name 
and  flung  it  forth  as  the  ensVgn  under  which  God's  Israel  should  march  through  all 
its  pilgrimage  and  warfare  in  the  time  to  come.     This  great  name  of  our  God  was, 
however,  in  later  times  pverlaid  and  almost  destroyed  by  superstition.     After  the 
age  of  prophecy  had  closed,  when  spiritual  faith  died  down  in  Judaism,  it  ceased  to 
be  a  living  word  in  the  mouth  of  Israel.     Through  fear  of  "  taking  the  name  of 
Jehovah  in  vain,"  the  people  no  longer  dared  to  pronounce  it;  and  it  is  a  saying  of 
the  rabbis  that  "  he  who  utters  the  name  as  it  is  wi-itten,  has  no  place  in  the  world 
to  come."    But  w^at  does  this  mysterious  word  mean  ?    I  cannot  give  an  answer 
beyond  all  dispvate.    Its  origin  goes  back  to  the  very  beginnings  of  Hebrew  speech 
and  reUgion.  /The  differences   of  interpretation,  after  all,   lie  within  a  narrow 
compass.    M6st  interpreters  have  taken  it  to  signify  "  He  is."    Others  render  it 
"  He  is  bec;£miing,"  "  He  goes  on  to  be,"  or  "  will  be."   Others  again,  "  He  creates," 
"  He  makes  to  be."     I  have  little  doubt  that  tbe  first  is  the  proper,  or,  at  least,  the 
principai  sense  of  the  word,  although  no  very  clear  or  shai-p  line  can  be  diavra  in 
Hebreyoetween  this  and  the  second  interpretation.    But  the  third  application,  if 
it  we^  certainly  estabhshed,  is  at  any  rate  subordinate  to  the  first.     "  He  is," 
theji^fore  "  He  makes  to  be."    Creation  rests  upon  the  being  of  God.    I.  By  the 
n'yme  Jehovah,  therefore,  God  is  declared  as  the  sopreiie  reality.     So  the  Greeks 
■/^nder  it,  "  He  who  is  ";  and  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,  "  Grace  and  peace  to  you 
from  Him  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  cometh."    No  grace  or  peace,  verily, 
from  things  that  are  not !     "  Say  unto  the  children  of  Israel " — so  He  authenticated 
Moses — "I  AM  hath  sent  me  unto  you."    The  finite  demands  the  Infinite;  the 
chain  of  causes  and  effects  hangs  upon  the  Uncaused ;  all  creatures  unite  to  point 
to  their  Creator,  and  by  their  very  being  proclaim  His,  "  iu  whom  they  live,  and 
move,  and  are."    But  I  hear  some  one  saying,  "  This  is  metaphysics  ;  this  is  very 
obscure  and  transcendental  doctrine,  this  talk  about  the  Absolute  and  Uncaused, 
How  could   ideas  of   this  sort  ever   have  existed   or  been    entertained  in  these 
early  and  barbarous  times  ?    Bat  everything  depends  on  the  way  in  which  you  take 
notions  of  this  kind.    To  ancient  Israel — the  true  Israel  of  spiritual  faith — this 
was  no  philosophical  abstraction,  arrived  at  by  a  process  of  dilficult  reasoning:  it 
was  the  revelation  of  an  immediate  and  self-evidencing  fact.    Behind  all  sensible 
objects,  the  forms  of  nature,  the  movements  of  human  affairs — there  He  is  !     They 
discerned,  they  felt  the  presence  of  Another — the  real,  the  abiding,  the  living  God, 
breathing  on  their  spirits  by  His  breath,  searching  their  hearts  with  holy  eyes,  as 
of  flame;  He  who  said  to  their  souls,  "  I  AM,"  and  concerning  whom  they  could 
say,  as  neither  of  their  mortal  selves  nor  of  the  fleeting  world,  "  Yea,  and  of  a  truth. 
He  is."    Hence  this  name  was  a  standing  protest  and  denouncement  against  all 
idolatry.     "  The  name  of  Jehovah,"  so  their  proverb  ran,  "  is  a  strong  tower;  the 
righteous  runneth  into  it  and  is  safe."    "  I  am  Jehovah,"  says  the  Lord  in  Isaiah, 
"  that  is  My  name  ;  and  My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another,  neither  My  praise  to 
graven  images."    You  see  the  argument.    If  He  is,  then  they  are  not.     His  very 
name  annihilates  them.    It  was  this  sublime  and  solid  faith  in  the  unity  and 
sovereignty  and  spiritual  reality  of  Grod,  that  lifted  the  Jewish  people  above  super- 
stition and  the  fear  of  worldly  power.     See  the  whole  history  of  Israel  gathered  into 
a  single  incident.     "  Thou  comest  unto  me,"  said  David  to  GoUath,  "  with  a  sword, 
and  with  a  spear,  and  with  a  shield ;  but  I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  of 
Hosts,  the  Grod  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied !  "     Here  is  the  one 
immortal  certainty,  the  Rock  of  Ages.    U.  This  glorious  najie  proclaims  the 
eternity  of  God.     His  reality  is  our  strength  ;  His  eternity  our  consolation.    If 
you  turn  to  the  French  Bible  you  will  find  Jehovah  translated,  in  place  of  our 
English  "  Lord,"  by  I'Eternel,  "  The  Eternal."    This  rendering  is  often  singularly 
apt  and  true,  as  for  instance  in  Psahn  cii.,  where  the  Psalmist  in  melancholy  mood 
is  sighing,  "  My  days  are  as  a  shadow  that  declineth,  and  I  am  withered  like  grass." 
But  he  remembers  the  name  of  his  God,  and  he  continues :  "  But  Thou,  O  Eternal, 
sittest  King  for  ever ;  and  Thy  memorial  is  unto  aU  generations."    And  from  that 


CHAP.  XVII.]  EXODUS.  311 

point  in  his  song  he  mounts  up  as  on  the  wings  of  eagles.  God's  name  is  the  He 
Is — a  timeless  present,  a  perpetual  now.  John  expands  it  backwards  and  forwards 
into  the  everlasting  past  and  future :  "  Grace  and  peace  to  you  from  Him  which  is, 
and  which  was,  and  which  cometh."  Men  live  and  die;  empires  rise  and  fall; 
worlds  and  systems  of  worlds  run  through  their  courses,  and  dissolve  and  vanish 
like  a  puff  of  smoke  ;  still  He  Is  ;  always  He  Is ;  the  unchanged,  the  abiding  God, 
whose  being  fills  and  constitutes  eternity.  There  is  no  thought  so  sublime  and 
overwhelming  to  the  human  mind  as  that  of  the  eternity  of  God.  But  there  is  none 
more  restful,  more  soothmg  and  satisfying.  "  We  which  have  believed,"  it  is 
written,  "  do  enter  into  rest."  Here  we  touch  the  calm  of  eternity,  the  "  Sabbath 
of  God."  We  have  found  a  haven  which  no  storm  can  ruffle,  a  rock  to  build  upoa 
which  no  earthquake  will  ever  move.  You  find  great  religious  minds,  like  that  of 
St.  Augustine  in  his  Confessions,  constantly  returning  to  this  thought  as  their  solace 
and  shelter,  hovering  round  it  as  birds  about  their  nest ;  here  they  find  an  ever- 
renewed  spring  of  niental  strength,  of  spiritual  joy  and  courage.  The  Jews  have 
been  not  unfitly  called  "the  people  of  eternity."  Their  monumental  endurance, 
the  toughness  and  indestructible  vitality  of  their  national  fibre,  are  due,  to  no  small 
extent,  to  the  force  with  which  the  doctrine  of  Jehovah  has  possessed  them.  It 
would  seem  that  the  revelation  of  personal  immortality  was  not  made  in  the  early 
ages  to  the  men  of  Israel,  that  tlieir  souls  might  be  the  more  completely  filled  and 
absorbed  with  the  thought  of  God  Himself — His  being,  His  character ;  that  they 
might  find  in  "  Jehovah  the  portion  of  their  inheritance  and  their  cup."  III. 
Jehovah  is  the  specific  name,  the  proper  and  personal  name  of  the  God  of 
REVELATION  AMD  REDEMPTION.  It  is,  SO  to  speak,  the  Divine  autograph  written 
across  the  face  of  Scripture  ;  it  is  nothing  less  than  the  signature  of  the  Eternal 
attached  to  His  covenant  of  grace  ;  its  very  presence  on  the  page,  the  sublimity  of 
its  import,  and  the  transcendent  dignity  and  force  with  which  it  is  employed,  fill 
the  mind  with  awe,  and  compel  one  to  say  as  he  reads  and  listens,  "  Surely  God  is 
in  this  place."  To  the  believing  Israelite  this  name  was  a  summary  of  revelation 
past.  The  call  of  Moses,  the  judgment  upon  Pharaoh,  the  passage  of  the  Eed  Sea, 
the  lawgiving  on  Sinai,  the  conquest  of  Canaan — all  these  and  a  thousand  glorious 
recollections  clustered  round  this  immortal  name,  and  served  for  its  verifying  or 
illustration.  And  it  was  at  the  same  time  the  basis  and  starting-point  of  future 
revelations.  Having  learnt  to  say  He  Is,  they  could  go  on  to  say :  "  He  is  just,  He 
is  wise,  He  is  faithful.  He  is  merciful  and  gracious — Jehovah  of  Hosts,  Jehovah  our 
Righteousness,  Jehovah  our  Peace,  Jehovah  our  Banner."  In  Himself  unchange- 
able, in  His  manifestations  to  mankind  God  is  perpetually  new.  He  is  ever  ad- 
vancing and  unfolding  Himself  to  His  creation.  The  "  He  Is  "  of  the  Bible  is  no 
frozen,  silent  Impersonality,  like  the  Pure  Being  of  Greek  philosophy,  or  like 
Spinoza's  Infinite  Substance.  This  is  the  name  of  the  living,  self-declaring  God, 
whose  revelation  is  the  single  stream  that  runs  through  all  cosmical  and  human 
history,  the  working  of  whose  counsel  forms  the  process  of  the  ages.  His  name, 
like  "  His  mercies,"  is  "  new  every  morning."  IV.  Finally,  this  glorious  name  of 
God  IS  A  CREED,  A  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH.  God  says  to  Moscs,  through  Moses  to 
Israel,  through  Israel  to  the  world,  "  I  AM  "  :  faith  answers  back,  "  He  Is  "  ;  and 
"  this  is  His  name  for  ever,  and  His  memorial  unto  all  generations."  Pronouncing 
it  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  we  "  set  to  our  seal  that  God  is  true."  It  is  the  com- 
munion of  heaven  and  earth,  the  dialogue  between  man  and  his  Creator ;  it  is  the 
Church's  Amen  answering  back  to  God's  self-affirming  Yea.  And  "  Ye  are  My 
witnesses,"  saith  Jehovah,  "  even  Israel  whom  I  have  chosen."  Despite  its  apos- 
tasies and  its  chastisements,  nay,  even  by  virtue  of  them,  the  Jewish  nation  has 
proved  itself  the  people  of  Jehovah,  the  witness  of  the  true  God,  Israel  has  made 
the  nations  hear  the  voice  of  her  God  ;  and  now  they  are  sitting  at  the  feet  of  her 
prophets,  learning  of  His  ways.  It  is  the  flag  of  conflict,  the  symbol  of  a  faith 
which  has  the  world  to  overcome.  So  our  text  continues,  with  a  prophetic  symbol- 
ism that  has  proved  itself  all  too  true :  "  And  Moses  said,  Jehovah  hath  sworn  that 
He  will  have  war  with  Amalek  from  generation  to  generation."  "All  nations 
compassed  me  about,"  said  Israel,  in  worldly  power  the  smallest  and  least  consider- 
able of  the  peoples — "  Yea,  they  compassed  me  about ;  but  in  the  name  of  Jehovah 
I  will  destroy  them  !"  And  what  is  more,  she  has  done  it ;  her  faith,  her  Christ 
have  done  it !  Those  gigantic  and  cruel  empires  of  the  East,  with  their  vile  and 
sensual  idolatries,  have  passed  away  for  ever.  Isaiah  sang  their  doom  ages  before: 
"  They  are  dead,  they  shall  not  live  ;  they  are  deceased,  they  shall  not  rise.  There- 
fore hast  Thou  visited  and  destroyed  them,  and  made  all  their  memory  to  perish." 


31^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

Fact  is  stranger  than  fiction.    The  true  God  has  lived  down  the  false  ones.    The 
"  He  Is  "  must  displace  the  "  are  nots."     As  it  has  been,  so  it  will  be.     Moloch 
and  Belial  and  Mammon — the  gods  of  hale  and  lust  and  greed,  the  gods  of  this  world 
that  still  rule  in  the  nations  and  blind  the  souls  of  men — oldest  of  all  false  gods, 
which  men  fomied  out  of  their  own  evil  passions,  before  they  set  them  up  in  wood 
and  stone — as  the  Lord  liveth,  they  shall  surely  perish  !     If  the  Church  is  worthy 
of  her  faith,  she  will  say  like  David,  "  In  the  name  of  Jehovah  I  will  destroy  them." 
And  these  latest  idols,  which  our  fathers  knew  not,  of  modern  nature-worship  and 
scientific  materialism,  will  they  fare   any  better,  do  you  suppose?      The  name 
Jehovah,  we  have  said,  is  a  confession  of  faith.     It  is  a  personal  confession,  which 
only  personal  experience  qualifies  us  properly  to  make.     It  is  not  enough  to  read 
it  in  the  Bible,  to  understand  and  assent  to  its  theological  and  historical  import ; 
God  Himself  must  pronounce  His  own  "I  AM,"  must  "speak  into  our  soul  His 
name."     Jesus  is  to  us  the  revealer  of  Jehovah.     "  I  have  declared  unto  them  Thy 
name,"  He  said  to  the  Father  in  leaving  this  world,  "  and  will  declare  it."     The 
name  Jehovah — the  Absolute,  the  Eternal,  the  Creator,  the  living  God — Christ  has 
rendered  into  the  tender  yet  no  less  awful  name  of  Father.     (G.  G.  Findlay,  B.A.) 
Jehovah-nissi : — A  flag  is  in  itself  a  simple  thing  enough.    A  piece  of  bunting,  or  of 
silk,  having  on  it  an  emblematic  device — that  is  all  I  and,  when  so  regarded,  it  is 
"  nothing  in  the  world."    But  when  we  view  it  as  a  symbol,  it  forthwith  acquires 
transcendent  importance.     It  becomes  then  the  mark  of  nationality,  and  all  the 
sentiments  of  patriotism  are  stirred  in  us  by  the  sight  of  it.     We  think  of  the 
struggles  of  our  fathers,  when  for  the  first  time  it  fluttered  over  them  in  the  breeze, 
as  they  resisted  injustice  and  oppression.     We  recall  the  many  blooily  fields  over 
which,  amidst  the  smoke  of  battle,  its  streaming  colours  waved  their  proud  defiance. 
The  memories  of  centuries  have  woven  themselves  mto  its  texture  ;  and  as  it  floats 
serenely  over  us,  we  see  in  it  at  once  the  aggregated  result  of  our  history  in  the 
past,  and  the  bright  prophecy  of  our  greatness  in  the  future.     Now,  it  is  quite 
similar  with  the  banner  which  God  has  given  us,  that  it  may  be  disj^laycd  because 
of  the  truth,  and  which,  as  this  inscription  declares,  He  is  Himself.     I.  Jehovah  is 
jina  TOKF.N  OF  DECISION../  In  the  opening  days  of  the  first  French  Revoluiion,  it  is 
said  that  a  timid  trimmer  fixed  a  cockade  beneath  the  lappel  of  his  coat  on  one 
breast,  and  a  tricolour  in  the  corresponding  portion  on  the  other ;  and  that  when 
he  met  a  royalist  he  exposed  the  cockade,  and  shouted,  "  Long  live  the  king  !  "  but 
when  he  met  a  republican  he  showed  the  tricolour,  and  cried,  "  Long  live  the 
Eepublic  ! "  That,  however,  sulliced  only  for  a  short  time :  for  as  the  strife  increased, 
every  man  was  forced  to  make  a  decision  between  the  two.     So  sometimes,  in  times 
of  indifference,  it  has  been  possible  for  men  to  seem  to  combine  the  services  of  God 
and  mammon  ;  but  happily,  as  I  think,  for  us,  we  have  fallen  on  an  earnest  age,  in 
which  it  is  becoming  impossible  even  to  seem  to  be  neutral.     Everywhere  the  cry  is 
raised,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side?  "  and  it  becomes  us  all  to  hoist  our  flag,  and 
display  to  the  world  in  its  expanding  folds  this  old  inscription, "  Jehovah-nissi — the 
Lord  is  my  banner."    When  Hedley  Vicars,  the  Christian  soldier,  was  converted,  he 
knew  that  he  should  be  made  the  butt  of  much  ridicule,  and  the  victim  of  much 
petty  persecution  by  his  comrades  ;  so  he  resolved  to  be  beforehand  with  them,  and 
in  the  morning  on  which  he  made  his  decision  he  took  his  Bible  and  laid  it  down 
open  on  his  table.     Veiy  soon  a  fellow-oflicer  came  in,  and,  looking  at  the  book, 
exclaimed,  "  Hallo,  Vicars  !  turned  Methodist?"     To  which  he  made  reply,  "  Thai 
is  my  flag  ;  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  hope  to  be  true  to  it  as  long  as  I  live." 
That  was  his  Eephidim,  and  there  he,  too,  conquered  Amalek  by  raising  the  banner 
of  the  Lord.      80  let  it  be  with  you.     II.  Jehovah  is  our  m.akk  of  distinction. 
When,  in  travelling  through  England,  one  comes  on  the  stately  residence  of  some 
duke  or  earl,  and  sees  the  flag  floating  in  quiet  dignity  from  its  tuiTct,  he  knows 
from  that  indication  that  the  proprietor  is  himself  within  the  walls.     Now,  the 
distinguishing  peculiarity  of  the  Christian  is  that  God,  to  whom  he  belongs,  is,  by 
His  Spirit,  dwelling  within  him,  and  that  shows  itself  in  many  ways.    It  is  apparent 
in  the  love  by  which  he  is  animated  for  all  who  are  in  suffering,  sorrow,  or  want. 
It  is  seen  in  the  purity  of  speech  and  conduct  which  he  maintains  ;  in  the  earnest- 
ness of  his  devotion  to  the  will  of  Christ ;  and  in  the  eager  efforts  which  he  makes 
to  attain  to  that  perfection  of  character  which  he  sees  in  his  Lord.     HI.  Jehovah  is 
CUB  JOT.     When  we  make  demonstration  of  our  enthusiasm,  we  raise  a  whole  forest 
of  flagstaffs,  and  fix  on  each  an  appropriate  banner.    Let  it  be  the  commemoration 
of  some  victory,  or  the  welcome  to  some  foreign  prince  visiting  our  shores,  and  the 
whole  city  is  gay  with  flags,  while  the  emblems  of  many  nationalities  are  seen 


CHAP.  XVII.]  EXODUS.  313 

fluttering  in  friendly  fellowship  from  the  mastheads  of  the  ships  in  harbour.  So 
we  are  reminded,  by  the  inscription  on  this  altar,  that  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  "  is 
"  the  strength  "  of  the  Christian.  His  life  is  one  of  constant  gladness  ;  his  charac- 
teristic is  what  I  may  call  a  calm  enthusiasm,  or,  to  use  the  phrase  of  Jonathan 
Edwards,  a  "  quiet  rapture."  IV.  God  is  the  pkotector  op  His  people.  There 
is  nothing  of  which  a  nation  is  so  jealous  as  the  honour  of  its  flag,  and  he  who  is 
in  reality  a  citizen  has  a  right  to  the  protection  of  the  government.  Great  Britain 
has  few  prouder  chapters  in  her  recent  history  than  that  which  tells  of  the  expedi- 
tion to  Abyssinia  some  years  ago.  A  great  force  was  landed  on  the  Red  Sea  shore  ; 
a  large,  troublesome,  and  dangerous  march  of  many  days  was  made  into  an  enemy's 
country ;  a  fierce  assult  was  successfully  attempted  on  a  hitherto  impregnable 
fortress ;  many  lives  were  lost,  and  fifty  millions  of  dollars  were  spent — and  all  for 
what  ?  Because  a  brutal  tyrant  was  keeping  in  horrid  imprisonment  two  or  three 
men  who  had  a  right  to  the  protection  of  the  British  flag ;  and  you  can  hardly  con- 
ceive what  an  outburst  of  joy  broke  forth  from  the  nation  when  the  news  came  that 
they  had  been  set  free,  and  that  the  insulting  monarch  had  been  made  to  bite  the 
dust.  But  what  is  the  power  of  the  British  Empire,  in  comparison  with  Omni- 
potence? Yet  he  who  sincerely  raises  this  banner  has  God's  pledge  that  He  will 
protect  him  (see  John  x.  28,  29  ;  xvi.  33 ;  Isa.  xli.  10 ;  liv.  17).  (W.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)  The  Lord  viy  banner  : — I.  In  the  first  place,  this  covenant  banner  is  a 
wonderful  banner  when  looked  at  with  reference  to  its  antiquity.  It  is  very  easy 
indeed  to  tell,  for  ourselves  individually,  when  we  were  first  made  acquainted  with 
this  banner.  With  some  it  was  in  the  lessons  of  earUest  childhood.  With  others, 
it  was  later  on  in  life,  when  our  knowledge  of  it  began.  When  this  banner  was  first 
unfurled,  for  any  of  our  race  to  gaze  upon,  it  is  easy  enough  to  tell.  We  go  back  to 
the  garden  of  Eden.  But  this  is  only  the  date  of  its  first  unfolding.  The  design 
of  it  was  not  first  formed  then.  To  get  at  this,  we  must  go  back  far,  far  beyond 
that  distant  date.  That  takes  us  indeed  to  the  farthest  shores  of  time.  Standing 
there  we  gaze  upon  the  ocean  that  lies  before  us.  It  is  the  shoreless  ocean  of  an 
unmeasured  eternity.  Far  back  in  its  hidden  depths  the  design  of  this  banner  was 
formed.  II.  But  now,  let  us  take  another  look  at  this  banner,  and  we  shall  see 
that  it  is  not  less  wonderful  in  its  mateeial  than  in  its  antiquity.  The  material  of 
which  our  flags  or  banners  are  ordinarily  composed  is  a  coarse  woollen  substance 
known  as  bunting.  True,  we  sometimes  see  banners  made  of  more  costly  materials, 
as  silk  or  satin.  And  gold  and  silver,  and  jems  and  jewels,  are  not  unfrequently 
employed  to  enrich  and  adorn  the  material  employed  in  making  the  banner.  These 
things,  of  course,  very  greatly  enhance  the  value  of  the  banners  on  which  they  are 
employed.  But  when  we  speak  of  the  Lord  as  our  banner,  and  think  of  His  revealed 
truth  as  the  material  of  which  this  banner  is  composed,  and  then  contrast  it  with 
the  material  of  which  our  ordinary  banners  are  made,  how  unspeakable  the  differ- 
ence !  Jehovah -nissi — the  Lord  my  banner.  All  the  names,  or  titles,  or  symbols 
applied  to  God  in  Scripture,  are  the  elements  of  truth  that  make  Him  known.  And 
eo  it  is  when  He  is  spoken  of  as  the  covenant  banner,  unfurled  over  His  people. 
The  folds  of  this  banner  are  woven  out  of  the  truth  of  His  blessed  word — "  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus."  This  constitutes  the  material  of  which  this  banner  is  composed. 
III.  But  in  the  third  place,  it  is  a  wonderful  banner  when  we  consider  the  mottoes 
inscribed  upon  it.  The  banner  of  England  has  in  French  the  words — "  God  and 
my  duty."  The  idea  thus  embodied  is,  "  My  duty  to  God — and  my  duty  to  my 
country."  This  simply  expresses  what  should  be  the  foremost  thought  and  desire 
■with  every  Christian  patriot.  And  the  mottoes  on  the  banners  of  other  nations  are 
of  a  similar  character.  They  are  expressive,  for  the  most  part,  of  some  sentiment 
of  honour,  or  some  principle  of  duty  to  the  country  over  which  they  float.  But  the 
contrast  is  very  striking,  when  we  compare  this  banner  of  the  covenant  with  other 
banners  in  regard  to  the  mottoes  which  they  bear.  Each  other  banner  bears  but  a 
single  motto — while  this  bears  many :  those  mainly  refer  to  some  matter  of  personal 
obligation  and  duty — while  these  refer  to  matters  of  high  and  glorious  privilege. 
Every  page  of  the  volume  of  revealed  truth  may  be  regarded  as  a  distinct  fold  of 
this  covenant  banner  ;  and  emblazoned  on  each  fold  is  one  or  more  of  these  inspir- 
ing mottoes.  IV.  It  is  a  wonderful  banner,  in  the  fourth  place,  when  considered 
with  reference  to  its  influence  on  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  Doubtless  the  flag 
of  every  nation  has  a  history,  in  this  respect,  that  would  be  deeply  interesting  if 
the  incidents  connected  with  it  could  be  collected  and  written  out.  But  who  can 
tell  how  many  hearts  have  been  stirred,  and  how  many  enterprises  of  great  pith  and 
moment  have  been  started,  and  led  on  to  successful  issues,  by  the  influence  of  this 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvra. 

blessed  banner  ?  Every  motto  emblazoned  on  its  waving  folds,  or,  in  other  words, 
every  passage  of  saving  truth  within  the  leaves  of  the  Bible,  has  a  history  of  its  own. 
How  wanderers  have  been  reclaimed  ! — how  slumbering  consciences  have  been 
aroused ! — how  anxious  inquiries  have  been  directed  ! — bow  depraved  hearts  have 
been  renewed  ! — how  sorrowing  spirits  have  been  comforted ! — how  listless  energies 
have  been  quickened  and  consecrated  1 — how  useless  lives  have  been  ennobled  ! — 
and  lost  souls  have  been  saved,  through  the  influence  of  the  mottoes  on  this  banner 
— or  of  particular  passages  of  God's  Word — who  can  tell !  V.  And  then,  lastly, 
this  is  a  wonderful  banner  in  view  of  its  durability.  This  is  a  quality  which  can- 
not be  imparted  to  our  national  banners.  The  materials  of  which  they  are  made  is 
frail — and  subject  to  decay.  But  how  different  it  is  with  the  banner  of  the  covenant 
of  our  salvation  !  This  is  something  which  the  hand  of  violence  cannot  rend.  Time, 
with  his  effacing  finger,  can  make  no  impression  upon  it.  (li.  Newton,  D.D.) 
Jehovah-nissi : — Jehovah  my  banner.  We  acknowledge  and  honour  Him  as  such 
four  ways.  1.  By  voluntarily  and  inflexibly  adhering  to  Him  as  our  Leader  and 
Commander.  2.  By  confessing  Him  the  author  of  every  success  with  which  we 
have  been  crowned.  3.  By  our  courageously  trusting  in  Him  to  enable  us  to  over- 
come  in  every  future  conflict.  4.  By  looking  to  Him  for  the  remuneration  of  victory 
at  last.  As  Jehovah's  banner  floated  over  the  triumphant  host,  bearing  the  sweet 
and  heart-sustaining  inscription  just  explained,  so  should  the  assurance  of  victory 
be  as  complete  as  the  sense  of  forgiveness,  seeing  both  alike  are  founded  upon  the 
great  fact  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again.    (A.  Nevin,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XVni. 


Vers.  1-6. — I,  thy  father-in-law,  Jethro,  am  come  xinto  thee. — Family  gatherings: 
— I.  That  this  family  oathekinq  was  permitted  after  long  absence,  and  afteb 

THE  OCCURRENCE  OF  GREAT  EVENTS.  II.  ThAT  THIS  FAMILY  GATHERING  WAS  CHARACTER- 
IZED BY  COURTESY,  BY  A  RELIGIOUS  SPIRIT,  AND  BY  DEVOUT  CONVERSATION.  III.  ThAT 
THIS  FAMILY  GATHERING  DERIVED  ITS  HIGHEST  JOY  FROM  THE  MORAL  EXPERIENCES  WITH 
WHICH  IT  WAS  FAVOURED.       IV.    ThAT   THIS    FAMILY    GATHERING  WAS  MADE  THE  OCCASION 

OF  A  SACRAMENTAL  OFFERING  TO  GoD.  Lessous  :  1.  That  God  cau  watch  over  the 
interests  of  a  separate  family.  2.  That  God  unites  families  in  a  providential 
manner.  3.  That  united  families  should  rejoice  in  God.  4.  That  the  families  of 
the  good  will  meet  in  heaven,  never  more  to  part.  5.  Pray  for  the  completion  of 
the  Divine  family  in  the  Father's  house.  (/.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Character  Twt 
deteriorated  by  honour : — Nothing  tests  a  man  more  than  his  bearing  toward  his 
former  friends  after  he  has  passed  through  some  experiences  which  have  brought 
him  great  honour  and  prosperity ;  and  when,  as  in  the  present  instance,  he  comes 
back  with  his  old  frankness  and  cordiality,  and  is  not  ashamed  of  his  old  piety,  he 
is  a  great  man  indeed.  Too  often,  however,  prosperity  deteriorates  character,  and 
honour  freezes  the  heart.  The  head  swims  on  the  giddy  height,  and  the  son  returns 
a  comparative  stranger  even  to  his  father's  house  ;  while  the  family  worship,  which 
used  to  be  so  enjoyed,  is  smiled  at  as  a  weakness  of  the  old  people's,  and  avoided 
as  a  weariness  to  himself.  Old  companions,  too,  are  passed  without  recognition  ; 
or,  if  recognized  at  all,  it  is  with  an  air  of  condescension,  and  with  an  effort  like 
that  which  one  makes  to  stoop  for  something  that  is  far  beneath  him.  The 
development  of  character  also  estranges  us  from  those  whom  we  once  knew 
intimately,  and  who  were  once,  it  may  be,  the  better  for  our  fellowship.  But  the 
consolation  in  all  such  cases  is,  that  there  can  be  no  value  in  the  further  friendship 
of  those  who  can  thus  forget  the  past.  He  is  the  really  good  friend— as  well  as  the 
truly  great  man — who,  in  spite  of  his  deserved  eminence,  resumes  with  us  at  the 
point  at  which  we  separated,  and  carries  us  at  length  with  him  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  to  acknowledge  there  our  obligations  to  the  Lord.  There  are  men  whom  one 
meets  from  time  to  time  with  whom  he  has  always  to  begin  anew.  They  are  like  a 
book  in  which  you  never  get  fuUy  interested,  and  which,  whenever  you  take  it  up, 
you  must  commence  to  read  again  at  the  very  preface ;  until,  in  absolute  disgust, 
you  cast  it  away  from  you,  and  never  lift  it  more.  There  are  others  who  are  like  a 
well-beloved  volume,  with  a  bookmark  in  it,  which  you  can  open  at  any  moment, 
and  resume  where  you  broke  off ;  and  which,  though  you  may  be  often  interrupted, 


CHAP,  xvm,]  EXODUS.  315 

you  contrive  to  read  through  to  the  end.  Such  a  friend  was  Moses  to  Jethro,  and 
Jethro  to  Moses ;  and  though  there  came  a  final  separation  of  the  one  from  the 
other  on  earth,  they  would  renew  their  conference  in  heaven.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Ashamed  of  parents  : — A  fellow  student  of  mine  had  very  poor  parents,  but  they 
had  a  great  desire  to  give  their  son  the  very  best  possible  education ;  and  if  you 
had  looked  into  that  home,  you  would  have  seen  much  pinching  and  self-denying 
on  the  part  of  those  parents  to  give  their  boy  a  university  training.  Once,  when 
he  was  away  at  college,  they  went  up  with  proud  hearts  to  see  him,  for  was  it  not 
with  great  efforts  on  their  part  that  he  was  there  ?  He  was  walking  in  the  street 
with  a  fellow  student  when  he  met  them,  and  he  tried  to  avoid  them.  You  ask  me, 
why  ?  Because  he  was  ashamed  of  them  in  their  simple  dress,  and  he  was  not 
going  to  own  them  until  his  friend  had  gone.  That  man  reached  the  Presbyterian 
ministry,  but  he  did  not  long  stay  in  it.  He  fell  from  his  position,  and  the  broken- 
hearted parents  followed  him  step  by  step.  He  went  down  lower  and  lower  until  a 
fellow  minister  and  myself  have  rescued  him  again  and  again  from  police  cells. 
Oh,  the  foulness  of  heart  of  one  who  is  ashamed  to  own  his  mother,  however  poor. 
And  yet  there  is  still  a  greater  sin  ;  to  be  ashamed  of  that  self-sacrificing  love  that 
nailed  to  the  Cross  the  Son  of  God.    {J.  Carstairs.) 

Ver.  7.  They  asked  each  other  of  their  welfare.  —Friends  meeting  after  separation : — 

1.  This  world  is  not  a  scene  adapted  or  intended  to  afford  the  pleasure  and 
BENEFIT  OF  FRIENDSHIP  ENTIRE.  Men  cauuot  coUect  and  keep  around  them  an 
assemblage  of  congenial  spirits,  to  constitute,  as  it  were,  a  bright  social  fire,  ever 
glowing,  ever  burning,  amidst  the  winter  of  this  world.  They  cannot  surround 
themselves  with  the  selectest  portion  of  humanity,  so  as  to  keep  out  of  sight  and 
interference  the  general  character  of  human  nature.  They  are  left  to  be  pressed 
upon  by  an  intimate  perception  of  what  a  depraved  and  unhappy  world  it  is.  And 
so  they  feel  themselves  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth.    II.  It  is  contrary  to 

THE  design  of  GoD  THAT  THE  MORE  EXCELLENT  OF  THIS  WORLD's  INHABITANTS  SHOULD 
FORM  TOGETHER  LITTLE  CLOSE  ASSEMBLAGES  AND  BANDS,  WITHIN  EXCLUSIVE  CIRCLES, 
DETACHED   AS   MUCH   AS   POSSIBLE    FROM   THE    GENERAL    MULTITUDE.       On    the    Contrary, 

it  is  appointed  that  they  should  be  scattered  and  diffused  hither  and  thither,  to  be 
useful  and  exemplary  in  a  great  number  of  situations ;  that  there  should  be  no 
large  space  without  some  of  them.  Thus  it  is  a  world  that  dissociates  friends. 
Nevertheless,  friends  do  sometimes  meet ;  and  then  it  is  quite  natural  to  do  as 
Moses  and  Jethro  did — "  ask  each  other  of  their  welfare."  III.  In  the  meeting  of 
genuine  friends,  after  considerable  absence,  these  feelings  will  be  present.  1. 
Kind  affection.  2.  Inquiry.  3.  Eeflective  comparison.  4.  Gratitude  to  God  for 
watching  over  them  both.  5.  Faithful  admonition  and  serious  anticipation.  (J. 
Foster.)  Family  reunions ; — I.  As  to  the  salutations  at  meeting.  1.  Courteous- 
ness.  This  excludes — (1)  Excessive  familiarity ;  (2)  Rudeness ;  (3)  Pride.  2.  A 
hearty  welcome.     II.  As  to  the  subjects  of  conversation.     1.  On  public  affairs. 

2.  On  social  matters.  3.  With  recognition  of  God.  4.  Fit  for  mutual  response 
(vers.  10,  11).  III.  As  to  the  mode  of  festivity.  1.  That  such  festivity  may 
not  be  confined  to  the  family.    2.  That  it  may  be  preceded  by  an  act  of  worship. 

3.  That  it  should  be  with  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence.  To  eat  as  before 
God  will  make  us — (1)  Happy  and  helpful;  (2)  Temperate;  (3)  Eegardful  of  the 
soul's  progi-ess.  (Z).  G.  Watt,  M.A.)  Lessons : — 1.  It  is  not  unbeseeming  the 
highest  places  or  persons  in  kingdom  or  Church  of  Christ  to  give  due  respect  to 
relations.  2.  Grace  doth  not  unteach  men  manners  and  civil  carriage  respectively 
unto  men.  3.  Natural  affection  and  expressions  of  it  to  friends  beseemeth  God's 
servants.  4.  It  is  a  natural  duty  for  relations  to  inquire  of  and  wish  each  other's 
peace.  5.  Conduct  to  a  tent  for  rest  is  suitable  for  travellers  that  visit  their 
relations  (ver.  7).  {G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Religious  intercourse  betioeen  parents  and 
children : —  One  Sunday  night  I  said,  "  Ah  !  you  mothers  will  say  that  your 
children  are  all  in  bed ;  never  mind,  go  upstairs  and  wake  them,  and  talk  to  them 
about  their  souls."  A  mother  (this  I  know  to  be  true)  went  home,  and  her  little 
girl  was  in  bed  and  asleep.  She  woke  her  and  said,  "  Jane,  I  have  not  spoken  to 
you,  dear  child,  about  your  soul.  The  pastor  has  been  exhorting  us  to-night,  and 
saying  that  even  if  you  were  asleep  you  should  be  wakened."  Then  said  Jane, 
"  Mother,  I  have  often  wondered  that  you  did  not  speak  to  me  about  Christ,  but  I 
have  known  Him  these  two  years."  The  mother  stood  convicted.  She  brought  her 
daughter  round  on  Monday  and  said,  "  Let  this  dear  girl  be  baptized  and  join  the 
church."    I  said  to  her, "  Why  did  you  not  tell  your  mother  ?  "    "  Well,"  said  she, 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

"  you  know,  mother  never  seemed  to  come  up  to  the  subject ;  she  never  gave  me  a 
chance."  Then  the  mother  said,  "  Quite  right ;  I  have  not  been  to  my  children  what 
I  ought  to  have  been  ;  but,  please  God,  there  shall  never  be  another  child  of  mine 
that  shall  steal  a  march  on  her  mother,  and  find  Christ  without  her  mother  knowing 
it."  God  graciously  rebuked  that  mother.  (C.U.  Spur g  eon.)  Religious  conver- 
sation : — Among  the  means  to  be  used  in  times  of  religious  interest  we  may  mention 
conversation.  Many  neglect  it,  but  none  can  deny  its  power  for  good.  Says  Dr. 
Archibald  Alexander,  in  his  book  on  "Religious  Experience":  "Eeligious  conver- 
sation, in  which  Christians  freely  tell  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  their  souls,  has 
been  often  a  powerful  means  of  quickening  the  sluggish  soul  and  communicating 
comfort."  It  is,  in  many  cases,  a  great  consolation  to  the  desponding  believer  to 
know  that  his  case  is  not  entirely  singular ;  and  if  a  traveller  can  meet  with  one 
who  has  been  over  the  difficult  parts  of  the  road  before  him,  he  may  surely  derive 
from  his  experience  some  salutary  counsel  and  warning.  The  Scriptures  are 
favourable  to  such  communications.  "  Come  and  hear,"  says  David,  "  all  ye  that 
fear  God,  and  I  will  declare  what  He  hath  done  for  my  soul."  Dr.  Watts  thought 
so  much  of  the  "talent  for  parlour  teaching,"  that  he  declared  that  the  man  who 
had  it  could  do  more  good  than  the  minister  by  his  public  discourses.  Said  one 
who  was  under  sentence  of  death  :  "  When  the  minister  spoke  to  me  he  seemed 
like  one  who  was  standing  far  above  me  ;  but  when  Alexander,  that  good  man  that 
everybody  knows  is  the  holiest  man  in  the  place,  came  in,  he  stood  like  one  at  my 
side,  and  when  he  classed  himself  with  me,  and  said,  '  Sinners  like  me  and  you,'  I 
could  stand  it  no  longer."  Saurin,  the  great  French  preacher,  said,  in  his  sermon 
on  Christian  conversation  :  "  Are  we  returning  from  a  sermon  ?  Why  not  entertain 
one  another  with  the  subjects  we  have  been  hearing?  Why  not  endeavour  to 
imprint  on  one  another's  memories  the  truths  that  have  been  proved,  and  to  impress 
upon  one  another's  hearts  such  precepts  as  have  been  enforced  ?  Have  we  been 
visiting  a  dying  person  ?  Why  not  make  such  reflections  as  naturally  occur  on  such 
occasions  the  matter  of  our  conversations  ?  Why  not  embrace  such  a  fair  oppor- 
tunity of  speaking  on  the  vanity  of  life,  the  uncertainty  of  worldly  enjoyments,  and 
the  happiness  of  a  pious  departure  to  rest?  Have  you  been  reading  a  good  book? 
Why  not  converse  with  our  companions  on  the  information  we  have  derived  from  it  ?  " 

Vers.  9-12.  Jethro  rejoiced  for  all  the  goodness. — Lessons : — 1.  The  Church's 
friends  rejoice  in  all  the  good  done  for  it,  and  deliverance  of  it.  2.  As  Jehovah  is 
the  cause  of  good  and  deliverance  to  His  Church,  so  He  is  the  object  of  their  joy 
(ver.  9).  3.  Joyful  hearts  for  the  Church's  good  are  thankful  hearts  to  God  for  the 
same.  4.  Deliverance  of  special  relations,  but  especially  of  the  Church,  from  powers 
of  enemies  is  just  matter  of  thanksgiving  (ver.  10).  5.  Experience  of  the  mighty 
works  of  God  perfects  the  knowledge  of  Himself.  6.  The  great  works  of  God  set 
Him  above  all  that  are  so  called.  7.  The  pride  of  enemies  exalts  the  power  of  God 
above  them  (ver.  11).  8.  Knowledge  of  God  is  best  expressed  in  sacrificing  and 
worship  of  Him.  9.  Holy  feasting  is  consistent  with  God's  holy  worship.  10. 
God's  glory  must  terminate  all  sacrificing  and  eating  among  His  people.  11. 
Eminent  members  of  the  Church  may  not  disdain  communion  with  true  proselytes 
(ver.  12).     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 

Vers.  13-16.  Moses  sat  to  judge  the  people. — Lessons  : — 1.  God's  providence 
joins  work  to  sacrifice,  and  His  servants  do  unite  them.  2.  The  morrow  brings  its 
own  work  from  God  unto  His  servants,  not  every  day  the  same.  3.  God's  substitutes 
are  careful  as  to  worship  Him,  so  to  do  judgment  to  God's  people.  4.  Good  rulers 
sit  close  to  deal  judgment  to  their  people.  5.  Providence  puts  hard  work  upon 
God's  ministers  sometimes,  from  morning  to  evening.  6.  It  is  just  to  be  unwearied 
in  giving  and  receiving  judgment  when  God  calleth  (ver.  13).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 
LessoTis : — 1.  The  greatest  and  best  rulers  disdain  not  to  give  an  account  of  their 
judgment  to  reasonable  inquisitors.  2.  The  access  of  souls  unto  rulers  to  inquire 
of  God,  is  a  just  ground  for  them  to  attend  the  work.  3.  The  appeal  of  souls  to 
man's  bar  in  matters,  is  and  should  be  inquiring  after  God  (ver.  15).  4.  Duties 
of  people  and  rulers  are  correlate,  they  come  with  matters,  and  these  must  judge. 
5.  God's  laws  and  statutes  are  the  best  rule  to  order  judgment  between  men.  6.  It 
is  duty  to  rulers  to  make  people  know  the  statutes  and  laws  of  God.  (Ibid.) 
Consulting  with  God: — My  heavenly  Father  is  my  "  other  partner  "  in  my  business. 
I  consult  with  Him.  It  is  remarkable  how  I  am  relieved  from  the  worry  and  anxiety 
so  common  to  business  men.     Frequently,  when  I  desire  to  "  think  over  a  matter," 


CHAP,  xvm.]  EXODUS.  317 

it  is  really  to  consult  with  Him,  after  which  my  way  is  clear.  And  unto  Him  I 
render  one-tenth.  I  often  think  this  order  should  be  reversed,  and  I  take  the  tenth. 
(William  A.  Lay.) 

Vers.  17-22.  Thou  wilt  surely  wear  away. — Undue  application  to  laborious 
duties : — Various  lessons  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  Moses  was  wearing 
himself  away  by  undue  application  to  the  duties  of  his  office,  and  that  by  adopting 
Jetbro's  suggestion  and  dividing  the  labour  he  was  able  to  spare  himself  and  never- 
theless equally  secure  the  administration  of  justice.  I.  We  see  the  goodness  of 
God  in  His  dealings  with  our  race  in  the  fact  that  labour  may  be  so  divided  that 
man's  stbength  shall  not  be  overpassed,  but  cannot  be  so  divided  that  man's 
strength  shall  be  dispensed  with.  II.  It  is  a  principle  sufficiently  evident  in  the 
infirmity  of  man  that  he  cannot  give  himself  incessantly  to  labour,  whether  bodily 
or  mental,  but  must  have  seasons  of  repose.  We  shrink  from  the  thought  and  the 
mention  of  suicide,  but  there  are  other  modes  of  self-destruction  than  that  of  lay- 
ing hands  on  one's  own  person.  Tiiere  is  the  suicide  of  intemperance ;  there  is 
also  the  suicide  of  overlabour.  It  is  as  much  our  duty  to  relax  when  we  feel  our 
strength  overpassed,  as  to  persevere  while  that  strength  is  sufficient.  III.  God  has, 
with  tender  consideration,  provided  intervals  of  repose,  and  so  made  it  man's 
own  fault  if  he  sink  beneath  excessive  lg,bour.  What  a  beautiful  ordinance  is  that 
of  day  and  night  I  What  a  gracious  appointment  is  that  of  Sunday!  When  the 
Sabbath  is  silent  in  the  duties  that  belong  to  it,  its  influence  gives  fresh  edge  to  the 
blunted  human  powers.  IV.  Each  one  op  us  is  apt  to  be  engrossed  with  worldly 
things.  It  is  well  that  some  Jethro,  some  rough  man  from  the  wilderness,  perhaps 
some  startling  calamity,  should  approach  us  with  the  message,  "  The  thing  that 
thou  doest  is  not  good ;  thou  wilt  surely  wear  away."  V.  At  last  we  must  all 
wear  away,  but  our  comfort  is  that,  though  the  outer  man  perish,  the  inner  man 
shall  be  renewed  day  by  day.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Jethro^s  advice  to  Hoses;  or, 
a  icord  to  ministers  of  the  gospel : — I.  The  power  which  ministers  of  the  gospel 
SHOULD  have.  "Be  thou  for  the  people  to  God-ward."  II.  The  work  which 
MINISTERS  OF  THE  GOSPEL  SHOULD  DO.  1.  Couduct  Diviuc  worship  and  establish 
suitable  rules  for  the  government  of  their  people.  2.  Give  the  right  impetus  to  the 
moral  and  religious  life  of  their  people.  3.  Explain  to  their  people  the  duties  de- 
volving upon  them.  III.  The  helps  which  ministers  of  the  gospel  have  (vers.  21, 
22).  IV.  The  qualifications  which  ministers  of  the  gospel  should  possess.  1. 
Devout  piety.  2.  Truthfulness.  3.  Disinterestedness.  4.  Freedom.  (W.  Edwards.) 
Lessons: — 1.  God  may  use  men  of  mean,  calling,  and  endowments  to  help  for  pru- 
dentials, for  government  in  His  Church.  2.  The  most  morally  good  government 
may  not  be  good  in  natural  or  civil  respects  (ver.  17).  3.  Imprudential  over-acting 
in  doing  judgment  may  consume  rulers  and  people.  4.  Good  and  righteous  work 
may  be  too  heavy  for  the  best  and  strongest  shoulders.  5.  Solitariness  in  dealing 
judgment  may  carry  great  weakness  in  it.  6.  It  is  good  prudence  to  undertake 
burdens  proportionable  for  strength  and  no  more  (ver.  18).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 
Liissons : — 1.  Supreme  governors  had  need  of  subordinate  to  carry  on  the  burden  of 
government.  2.  Men  entrusted  with  government  should  be  eminently  qualified 
with  wisdom,  knowledge,  courage,  &c.  Each  endowment  may  give  a  special  obser- 
vation. 3.  Variety  of  bounds  for  power  are  requisite  to  the  various  capacities  of 
rulers  (ver.  21).  4.  Men  so  designed  to  rule  ought  all  times  reasonably  to  attend 
on  judgment.  5.  Matters  of  greatest  moment  have  a  just  way  of  appeal  from  lesser 
to  superior  judges.  6.  Smaller  matters  are  reasonably  to  be  concluded  by  lesser 
hands.  7.  Such  distribution  of  work  in  government  maketh  the  burden  more  easy 
(ver.  22).  8.  Supreme  rulers  managing  their  affairs  by  others  according  to  God's 
command,  walk  safely.  9.  Prosperity  to  prince  and  people  may  be  well  expected 
by  keeping  God's  commands  (ver.  23).  (Ibid.)  The  folly  of  solitary  rulership  : — 
I.  It  causes  an  undue  strain  upon  the  solitary  individual.  Wicked  men  some- 
times kill  themselves  by  excess  of  pleasure.  Good  men  should  not  kill  themselves 
by  excess  of  work  even  in  the  service  of  God.  Many  great  lives  are  lost  to  the 
Church  through  excessive  toils.  The  Divine  Judge  can  never  grow  weary  in  His 
administration  of  the  universe.  II.  It  interferes  with  the  execution  of  the 
higher  part  of  the  judicial  office.  How  often  are  ministers  engaged  with  the 
technical  and  local  when  they  might  be  engaged  in  the  spiritual  and  universal. 
Justice  needs  more  than  administrative  power  ;  it  needs  spiritual  discernment  and 
those  qualities  of  moral  character  which  are  the  outcome  of  moral  nearness  to 
God  ;  hence  it  requires  men  to  be  for  the  people  God-ward.    Jesus  Christ  is  now 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvin. 

for  the  people  God-ward,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man.     UI.  It  leaves 

UNUTILIZED  A  VAST  NUMBER  OF  ABLE  MEN  QUITE  EQUAL  TO  THE  ORDINARY  REQUIREMENTS 

OF  JUSTICE.  Ministers  should  not  do  all  the  work  of  the  Church  ;  they  should  call 
out  latent  talent  for  it.     Society  has  many  unrecognized  judges.     IV.     That  this 

FOLLY    IS    EVIDENT    TO    WISE    OLD    MEN    WHO    SEE    SOLITARY    JUDGESHIPS   IN    OPERATION. 

Others  can  form  a  more  correct  estimate  of  our  work  than  we  can.  We  are  too 
near  it  to  take  the  perspective  of  it.  We  are  too  much  interested  in  it  to  form  unpre- 
judiced judgiuents  concerning  it.  Let  us  be  open  to  the  voice  of  wise  old  men  who 
often  speak  to  young  men  as  in  the  fear  of  God.  Lessons  : — 1.  That  positions  of 
trust  should  not  be  monopolized  by  the  few.  2.  That  the  common  crowds  of  men 
have  unsuspected  abilities.  3.  That  good  men  should  not  be  prodigal  of  their 
physical  and  mental  energy  to  the  shortening  of  their  lives.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
Lessons  on  ver.  17  ; — I.  Others  view  our  acts.     II.  Others  can  often  see  faults 

WHERE    WE    CANNOT.       III.    OTHERS   REPROVING    US   MAY   LEAD   TO   A   BETTER   COURSE    OF 

ACTION.  Or — I.  Men  should  interest  themselves  in  the  acts  of  their  relatives, 
II.  Men  should  be  faithful  in  giving  reproof  and  advice.  Or — I.  The  wisest 
have  some  defects  in  their  conduct.  II.  The  wisest  may  be  benefited  by  the 
advice  OF  others.  (Ibid.)  Jethro's  justice  of  peace  : — Here  is  the  archetype  or 
first  draught  of  magistracy.  Scripture  is  the  best  man  of  counsel  for  the  greatest 
statesman  in  the  world.  1.  It  first  gives  order  for  the  care  and  circumspection  in 
the  choice.  "  Provide."  2.  Secondly,  it  directs  the  choice  by  four  essential 
characters  of  magistrates: — (1)  Men  of  ability.  (2)  Fearing  God.  (3)  Men  of 
truth.  (4)  Hating  covetousness.  3.  Thirdly,  it  applies  these  four  to  magistrates  of 
all  degrees,  in  an  exact  distribution  of  them,  by  way  of  gradation,  descending  step 
by  step,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  "  And  place  such  over  them  to  be  rulers  " 
—(1)  Of  thousands ;  (2)  of  hundreds ;  (3)  of  fifties ;  (4)  of  tens.  4.  Fourthly,  it 
prescribes  to  the  magistrates,  thus  quahfied  and  chosen,  their  offices,  viz.,  to  judge 
the  people  in  the  smaller  causes,  &c.,  and  their  assiduity  and  industry  therein. 
"And  let  tbem  judge  the  people  at  all  seasons,  &c.  And  it  shall  be  that  they  shall 
bring  every  great  matter  to  thee,  but  every  small  matter  they  shall  judge."  5. 
Lastly,  it  propounds  the  blessed  fruit  and  emolument  that  will  necessarily  ensue 
thereupon.  (1)  To  Moses  himself,  "  So  shall  it  be  easier  for  thyself,  and  they  shall 
bear  the  burden  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  able  to  endure."  (2)  To  the  people, 
"  And  all  this  people  shall  go  to  their  place  in  peace."  {T.  Brooks.)  Need  of  a 
heroic  spirit  in  judges : — What  heroical  spirit  had  he  need  have,  that  must  encounter 
the  Hydra  of  sin,  oppose  the  current  of  the  times,  and  the  torrent  of  vice,  that 
must  turn  the  wheel  over  the  wicked  ;  especially  such  roaring  monsters,  and  rebel- 
lious Korahs,  such  lawless  sons  of  Belial,  wherewith  our  times  swarm,  who  stick 
not  to  oppose  with  crest  and  breast,  whosoever  stand  in  the  way  of  their  humours 
and  lusts !  Surely  if  Jethro  called  for  courage  in  those  modest  primitive  times,  and 
among  a  people  newly  tamed  with  Egyptian  yokes,  what  do  our  audacious  and  fore- 
headlef s  swaggerers  require  ?  Our  lees  and  dregs  of  time,  not  unlike  to  those 
wherein  God  was  fain  to  raise  up  extraordinary  judges  to  smite  hip  and  thigh,  &c. 
What  Atlas  shall  support  the  state  of  the  ruinous  and  tottering  world,  in  these 
perilous  ends  of  time  ?  For  all  these  fore-named  purposes,  how  unapt  is  a  man  of 
soft,  timorous,  and  flexible  nature  1  for  whom  it  is  as  possible  to  steer  a  right  course, 
without  swerving  to  the  left  hand  or  right,  for  fear  or  favour,  as  it  is  for  a  cock- 
boat to  keep  head  against  wind  and  tide,  without  help  of  oars  or  sails  :  experience 
ever  making  this  good,  that  cowards  are  slaves  to  their  superiors,  fellow-fools  to 
their  equals,  tyrants  to  their  inferiors,  and  windmills  to  popular  breath,  not  being 
able  to  any  of  these  to  say  so  much  as  No !  {Ibid.)  Divine  ordinances  of 
labour : — How  valuable  is  a  little  common-sense — and  how  scarce !  Here  was 
Moses,  a  man  trained  in  kings'  palaces,  deeply  skilled  in  all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt, 
and  yet  he  has  to  wait  till  Jethro  comes — a  mere  man  of  the  desert,  before  to  a 
self-evident  evil  he  can  apply  a  self-evident  remedy.  Labour  is  good ;  but  if  we 
labour  unwisely,  so  as  to  overtask  and  enervate  our  faculties,  the  labour  which  in 
itself  is  good  becomes,  through  our  perversity,  an  evil.  I.  Labour  is  an  ordinance 
OF  God.  There  is  work  for  all,  and  need  for  every  man's  work,  of  whatever  sort  it 
may  be — from  thinking  the  thoughts  or  pursuing  the  scientific  discoveries  which 
clear  the  road  along  which  the  world  is  to  advance,  down  to  working  a  loom  or 
digging  a  field ;  from  managing  a  large  estate  so  as  to  develop  all  its  manifold 
capabilities  of  service,  down  to  trimming  its  hedges  or  hauling  its  coal.  II.  The 
division  OF  labour  is  an  ordinance  of  God.  It  is  the  wise  division  and  distribution 
of  labour  to  which  we  owe  all  the  services  and  comforts  of  civilized  life  ;  and  the 


OHAP.  xvin.]  EXODUS.  819 

wiser  the  distribution,  the  higher  the  civilization.    It  is  this  division  of  labour 
which  multiplies  the  products  of  labour,  and  not  only  sets  men  free  to  invent  im- 
proved methods  of  labour,  but  also  puts  them  in  the  way  of   inventing  them. 
If,  for  instance,  one  man  could  make  a  tent  in  ten  days,  ten  men,  each  of  whom 
was  trained  to  make  his  separate  part,  would  turn  out  not  ten,  but  fifty  or  a  hun- 
dred tents  in  the  same  time  ;  and  each  of  the  ten,  always  handling  the  same  tools 
and  working  on  the  same  substance — canvas,  or  wood  for  poles  and  pegs,  or  palm 
fibre  or  hemp  for  ropes — would  naturally  improve  his  tools  to  save  his  pains,  and 
discover  qualities  and  capabilities  in  the  substance  which  only  long  familiarity 
could  detect.    From  such  simple  beginnings  as  these  has  risen  that  division  of  the 
whole  civilized  community  into  separate  trades  and  professions,  and  these  trades 
and  professions  again  into  many  component  elements  and  specialities,  which  multi- 
plies its  productive  power  to  an  almost  infinite  extent,  and  keeps  the  discovery  of 
our  means  and  appliances  of  labour  up  to  the  level  of  our  growing  numbers  and 
wants.    III.  The  intbomission  of  labour  is  an  ordinance  of  God.    Not  only  has 
He  given  us  an  inward  monitor  which  warns  us  when  mental  or  vital  powers  are 
overtasked,  to  seek  out  holiday  mirth  and  recreative  sports,  to  change  the  air  we 
breathe  and  the  scenes  on  which  we  look  if  perchance  we  may  thus  change  the 
wearing  current  of  our  thoughts ;  He  has  also  fixed  the  bounds  to  our  labour  be- 
yond which  we  cannot  or  ought  not  to  pass.     Seven  times  a  week  the  day  draws  to 
to  an  end,  and  the  night  comes  on  in  which  most  of  us,  at  least,  are  compelled  to 
rest.    Once  every  week,  too,  there  returns  the  Day  of  Best,  on  which  we  cease  from 
our  toils,  and  withdraw  our  minds  from  the  noisy  labours  and  corroding  anxieties 
of  traffic.     And  when  we  are  over  eager  in  our  labours  for  present  good,  or  what 
we  think   good,    God    sends    some   rugged    Jethro — some    warning   sickness  or 
calamitous  loss,  some  sorrow  that,  passing  through  all  our  defences,  smites  and 
cleaves  our  very  heart.    Not  because  He  grudges  our  prosperity,  or  would  abate  our 
happiness,  but  because  He  would  have  us  rise  to  that  sacred  rest  and  satisfying 
peace  which  even  adversity  cannot  take  away.  He  often  sends  a  chastening  whose 
message,  if  we  will  hear  it,  is,  "  The  thing  thou  doest  is  not  good.     Thou  wilt 
surely  wear  thyself  away,  and  wastefully  expend  thy  life  on  things  which  perish  as 
you  handle  them.     Turn  ye  at  My  reproof ;  for  why  should  ye  die?"     (S.  Cox, 
D.D.)        Jethro^s  advice  : — I.  The  giver  of  this  advice.     Jethro.     1.  An  old  man. 
The  father-in-law  of  Moses,  who  was  now  fully  eighty  years  of  age.    Age  has  had 
experience  of  life.     Time  for  observation.     Old  men  have  seen  and  noted  causes  of 
success  and  failure.    Less  likely  than  the  young  to  give  bad  advice.     Are  less 
moved  by  passion.     Taught  by  memory.     Are  near  to  eternity.    2.  Thoughtful. 
His  advice  shows  his  thoughtfulness.     Thought  founded  on  observation.     He  saw 
the  labour  of  Moses  and  the  extent  of  the  camp.     3.  Affectionate.    He  was  a  rela- 
tive of  Moses.     Looked  kindly  also  on  this  great  host  of  fugitives.     Near  relative."?, 
amongst  those  who  are  most  anxious  for  our  welfare.     4.  Disinterested.     He  had 
nothing  to  gain  personally  by  giving  it,  save  the  satisfaction  of  his  own  mind  and 
conscience.     5.  Pious.     Priest  of  Midian.     Had  a  respect  for  the  God  of  Israel. 
"Eejoiced  for  all  the  goodness  which  the  Lord  had  done  to  Israel"  (Acts  xi.  22-24). 
The  advice  of  men  that  fear  God,  who  are  men  of  prayer,  and  love  the  Bib's,  not 
to  be  slighted  ;  it  will  be  agreeable  to  the  mind  of  God.     II.  The  receiver  of  this 
advice.     Moses.     He  did  not  slight  Jethro's  advice,  although — 1.  He  was  in  direct 
communication  with  God.   And  we  should  respect  the  words  of  good  men,  although 
we  have  also  the  Word  of  God.     We  have  need  to  be  reminded  of  words,  precepts, 
and  promises,  that  we  may  overlook  ;  or  of  laws,  &c.,  that  we  may  not  understand. 
2.  He  had  been  eminently  successful.     Such  a  man,  if  not  humble,  might  have 
been  very  self-reliant ;  and  have  spurned  the  advice  of  another.     Success  makes 
some  unmanageable  and  proud.     3.  He  was  himself  an  aged  man.     Might  have 
thought  himself  too  oM  to  be  taught.     As  competent  to  give  advice  as  Jethro.     In- 
experienced youth  often  puffed  up  by  a  little  knowledge.     The  more  one  really 
knows  the  more  one  feels  his  ignorance.      4.   He  doubtless  laid  the   advice  he 
received  before  the  Lord.     Jethro  made  this  a  condition  (ver.  23).     Are  we  willing 
that  the  advice  we  give  should  be  tested  by  the  Word  of  God  ?     Do  we  so  test 
the  advice  we  receive  ?     5.  He  acted  upon  it,  and  benefited  by  doing  so.     Much 
good  advice  is  lost  in  this  world.     Evaded,  though  good,  because  of  trouble,  or 
indifference,   or    pride.      The    character    of    the    adviser,    or    his    opinion    on 
other  matters,  made  an   excuse  for  neglecting  his  words.      Will  God  excuse  the 
neglecter  ?     Learn — 1.  To  do   good  by  word  and  deed,  as  we  have  opportunity, 
unto  all  men.      2.  To  get  good,  from  all   men,   as  opportunity  offers.      (J.  C. 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvni. 

Gray.)  Exhausting   labour  : — Dr.   Holland,  after  Mr.  Bowles's  death,  wrote 

as  follows :  "  As  I  think  of  my  old  associate  and  the  earnest,  exhausting 
work  he  was  doing  when  I  was  with  him,  he  seems  to  me  like  a  great  golden 
vessel,  rich  in  colour  and  roughly  embossed,  filled  with  the  elixir  of  life,  which  be 
poured  out  without  the  slightest  stint  for  the  consumption  of  this  people.  We  did 
not  know  when  we  tasted  it,  and  found  it  so  charged  with  zest,  that  we  were  tasting 
heart's  blood,  but  that  was  the  priceless  element  that  commended  it  to  our  appe- 
tites. A  pale  man,  weary  and  nervous,  crept  home  at  midnight,  or  at  one,  two,  or 
three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  while  all  nature  was  fresh  and  the  birds  were 
singing,  and  the  eyes  of  thousands  were  bending  eagerly  over  the  results  of  his 
night's  labour,  he  was  tossing  and  trying  to  sleep.  Yet  this  work,  so  terrible  in  its 
exactions  and  its  consequences,  was  the  joy  of  this  man's  life — it  icas  his  life." 
(H.  O.  Mackey.)  A  proposal  for  the  public  good  : — After  Marcus  Valerius  had 
gained  two  great  victories  over  the  Sabines,  in  one  of  which  he  did  not  lose  a  single 
soldier,  he  was  rewarded  with  a  triumph,  and  a  house  was  built  for  him  upon 
Mount  Palatine.  The  doors  of  the  Roman  houses  generally  opened  inwards,  but 
this  was  built  to  open  outwards,  to  show  that  he  who  dwelt  there  was  ready  to 
listen  to  any  proposal  made  to  him  for  the  public  good.  God-fearing  men  for  respon- 
sible  positions : — One  of  Stonewall  Jackson's  peculiarities  was  to  select  for  his  chief 
of  staff,  not  a  military  man,  but  a  Presbyterian  clergyman,  a  professor  in  a  theolo- 
gical seminary,  and  to  clothe  him  with  the  power  of  carrying  out  his  mysterious 
orders  when  he  was  temporarily  absent.  In  this  he  acted  as  did  the  greatest  of  all 
English  commanders — Oliver  Cromwell ;  who  always  surroundt  d  himself  with  men 
of  prayer.  (H.  0.  Mackey.)  Setting  others  to  work : — One  of  the  best  qualifications 
of  aminister  is  the  ability  to  set  the  membership  at  work.  It  is  said  that  Mr.Spurgeon 
asks  evei-y  person  seeking  admission  to  membership  in  his  church.  "  Well,  if  you 
are  received,  what  individual  work  are  j-ou  going  to  take  up  and  carry  on  for  the 
Lord  ?  "  As  a  result,  he  has  now  enrolled  in  his  church  register,  5,756  communi- 
cants, who  represent  just  so  many  willing  workers  under  his  leadership.  He  saves 
his  own  strength  by  doing  nothing  that  bis  hearers  can  do  equally  well.  And 
every  minister  who  tries  can  carry  the  same  rule  into  practice  with  a  membership 
of  one  hundred  as  well  as  five  thousand.  Many  ministers  fritter  away  valuable 
time  in  doing  what  the  laity  might  do  as  well,  and  sometimes  better,  for  them. 
{Christian  Age.)  Justice  to  be  done  in  small  matters  : — In  one  of  the  police  courts 
up  town  in  New  York,  one  morning  not  long  since,  a  very  small  boy  in  knicker- 
bockers appeared.  He  had  a  dilapidated  cap  in  one  hand,  and  a  gieeu  cotton  bag 
in  the  other.  Behind  him  came  a  big  policeman,  with  a  grin  on  his  face.  "  Please, 
sir,  are  you  the  judge  ? "  he  asked  in  a  voice  that  had  a  queer  little  quiver  in  it.  "  I 
am,  my  boy.  What  can  I  do  for  you?"  asked  the  justice,  as  he  looked  wonder- 
ingiy  down  at  the  mite  before  him.  "  If  you  please,  sir,  I'm  Johnny  Moore.  I'm 
seven  years  old,  and  I  live  in  One  Hundred  and  Twenty-third  street,  near  the 
avenue  ;  and  the  only  good  place  to  play  miggles  on  is  in  the  front  of  a  lot  near 
our  house,  where  the  ground  is  smooth.  But  a  butcher  on  the  corner,  that  hasn't 
any  more  right  to  the  place  than  we  have,  keeps  his  waggon  standing  there  ;  and 
this  morning  we  were  playing  at  miggles  there,  and  he  drove  us  away,  and  took  six 
of  mine,  and  threw  them  away  off  over  the  fence  into  the  lot.  And  I  went  to  the 
police-station ;  and  they  laughed  at  me  and  told  me  to  come  here  and  tell  you 
about  it."  The  big  policeman  and  the  spectators  began  to  laugh,  and  the  com- 
plainant at  the  bar  trembled  so  violently  with  mingled  indignation  and  fright  that 
the  marbles  in  his  little  green  bag  rattled  together.  The  justice,  however,  rapped 
sharply  on  the  desk,  and  quickly  brought  everybody  to  dead  silence.  "  You  did  per- 
fectly right,  my  boy,"  said  he,  gravely,  "  to  come  here  and  tell  me  about  it.  You 
have  as  much  right  to  your  six  marbles  as  the  richest  man  in  this  city  has  to  his 
bank  account.  If  every  American  citizen  had  as  much  regard  for  his  rights  as  you 
show,  there  would  be  far  less  crime.  And  you,  sir,"  he  added,  turning  to  the  big 
policeman,  "  you  go  with  this  little  man  to  that  batcher  and  make  him  pay  for  those 
marbles,  or  else  arrest  him  and  bring  him  here."  You  see  this  boy  knew  that  his  rights 
had  been  interfered  with,  and  he  went  to  the  one  having  authority  to  redress  his 
wrongs.  He  did  not  throw  stones  or  say  naughty  words,  but  in  a  manly,  dignified 
way  demanded  his  rights.  (S.  S.  Chronicle.)  Freedom  of  resort : — It  is  an 
honourable  memorial  that  James  the  Fifth,  King  of  Scots,  hath  left  behind  him, 
that  he  was  called  the  poor  man's  king  ;  and  it  is  said  of  Eadolphus  Hapsburgius, 
that  seeing  some  of  his  guard  repulsing  divers  poor  persons  that  made  towards  him 
for  relief,  was  very  much  displeased,  and  charged  them  to  suffer  the  poorest  to  have 


OHAP.xvm.]  :  EXODUS.  821 

access  unto  him,  saying,  that  he  was  called  to  the  empire  not  to  be  shut  up  in  a 
chest,  as  reserved  for  some  few,  but  to  be  where  all  might  have  freedom  of  resort 
unto  him.      (J.   Spencer.)         Spiritual  vocation  the  highest : — Jethro   counselled 
Moses  to  be  "  for  the  people  God-ward,  that  he  might  bring  the  causes  unto  God." 
The  highest  of  all  vocations  is  the  spiritual.     It  is  greater  to  pray  than  to  rule. 
Moses  was  to  set  himself  at  the  highest  end  of   the  individual,   political,   and 
religious  life  of  Israel,  and  to  occupy  the  position  of  intercessor.     He  was  to  be 
the  living  link  between  the  people  and  their  God.     Is  not  this  the  proper  calling 
of  the  preacher  ?  He  is  not  to  be  a  mere  politician  in  the  Church,  he  is  not  to  enter 
into  the  detail  of  organization  with  the  scrupulous  care  of  a  conscientious  hire- 
ling :  he  is  deeply  and  lovingly  to  study  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  that  he  may  be 
prepared  to  enrich  the  minds  and  stimulate  the  graces  of  those  who  hear  him.     He 
is  to  live  so  closely  with  God,  that  his  voice  shall  be  to  them  as  the  voice  of  no  other 
man,  a  voice  from  the  better  world,  calling  the  heart   to  worship,  to  trust,  and  to 
hope,  and  through  the  medium  of  devotion  to  prepare  men  for  all  the  engagements 
of  common  tife.     The  preacher  is  to  live  apart  from  the  people,  in  order  that  he 
may  in  spiritual  sympathy  live  the  more  truly  with  them.     He  is  not  to  stand  afar 
off  as  an  unsympathetic  priest,  but  to  live  in  the  secret  places  of  the  Most  High, 
that  he  may  from  time  to  time  most  correctly  repronounce  the  will  of  God  to  all 
who  wait  upon  his  ministry.     When  preachers  live  thus,  the  pulpit  will  reclaim  its 
ancient  power,  and  fill  all  rivalry  with  confusion  and  shame.    Let  the  people  them- 
selves manage  all  subordinate  affairs  ;  call  up  all  the  business  talent  that  is  in  the 
Church,  and  honcmr  all  its  successful  and  well-meant  experiments ;  give  every  man 
to  feel  that  he  has  an  obligation  to  answer.    When  you  have  done  this,  go  yourself, 
O  man  of  God,  to  the  temple  of  the  Living  One,  and  acquaint  yourself  deeply 
with  the  wisdom  and  grace  of  God,  that  you  may  be  as  an  angel  from  heaven 
when  you  come  to  speak  the  word  of  life  to  men  who  are  worn  by  the  anxieties  and. 
weakened  by  the  temptations  of  a  cruel  woi'ld.     Many  a  man  inquires,  half  in 
petulance  and  half  in  self-justification,  "  What  more  can  I  possibly  do  than  I  am 
already  doing?  "     Let  the  case  of  Moses  be  the  answer.     The  question  in  his  case 
was  not  whether  he  was  doing  enough,  but  whether  he  was  not  doing  too  much  in 
one  special  direction.     Some  of  the  talent  that  is  given  to  business  might  be  more 
profitably  given  to  devotion.    Eule  less,  and  pray  more.     Spare  time  from  the 
business  meeting  that  you  may  have  leisure  for  communion  with  God.     (J.  Parker^ 
D.D.)       Hotv  to  receive  counsel : — He  might  have  thought :  "  what  presumption  fn 
this  Midianite  to  dictate  to  the  ambassador  of  Jehovah  !  "   But  Moses  was  a  man  of 
a  very  diti'erent  spirit.    In  Montreal,  some  years  ago,  a  certain  English  nobleman  who 
had  been  recently  converted,  and  was  preaching  the  gospel  to  large  multitudes  whO' 
gathered  to  hear  him,  unfortunately  had  his  heart  lifted  up  within  him,  and  begani 
to  speak  bitterly  and  scornfully  of  the  Churches  of  Christ  in  the  city.     An  exceli- 
lent  and  revered  Presbyterian  elder  approached  the  young  nobleman  in  the  kindest 
■way,  spoke  with  great  aj^preciation  of  the  value  of  his  work  in  preaching  the  gospel, 
but  suggested  that  it  would  be  better  for  the  cause  if  he  would  cease  abusing  Chris* 
tians  and  Christian  Churches,  and  confine  himself  to  the  preaching  of  Christ.     Ihi 
reply  he  curled  his  lij)  in  scorn,  and  said,  "I  take  my  counsel  from  the  Lewd!  " 
What  a  contrast  between  the  grand  nobleman  of  the  olden  time,  and  the  small  one 
of  yesterday.    Moses  might  with  some  reason  have  claimed  a  monopoly  of  Divine 
couHsel.     God  had  chosen  him  out  from  all  other  men  to  make  known  His  will  to 
him  ;  but  when  Jethro,  though  an  outsider,  and  one  who  had  only  good  common 
sense  on  his  side,  makes  his  suggestion,  Moses  does  not  scorn  to  listen  to  his  advice, 
and  take  it  too.     And  the  event  showed  that  the  Lord  fully  approved  His  servant's 
coarse.     {J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D,)        Division  of  labour: — We  recognize  the  value  of 
the  principle   of  division  of  labour  in  matmfactures,   because  there  it  cheapens 
the  manufactured  article,  but  we  fail  to  see  its  importance  in  our  own  work,  because 
there,  in  the  first  instance,  it  involves  additional  outlay.     We  cannot  get  a  man 
competent  to  be  the  head  of  a  department  without  paying  him  a  handsome  salary  ; 
;tor  responsibility  means  character,  and  character  always  commands  its  price.     So, 
'to  divide  our  work  into  so  many  departments,  and  to  put  over  each  a  thoroughly 
capable  man  whom  we  will  hold  to  a  rigid  account,  requires  the  immediate  expendi- 
ture of  a  large  amount  of  money,  and  we  say  we  cannot  afford  it.     Bat  all  this  is 
a  shortsighted  policy,  for,  in  the  long  run,  the  greater  amount  of  business  done  will 
more  than  reimburse  tlie  original  outlay ;  and,  in  addition,  you  can  go  home,  not 
to  fret  and  worry  over  tiifles,  but  to  be  the  companion  of  your  wife  and  the  guide  and 
director  of  your  childien.     Moreover,  instead  of  breaking  down  hopelessly  undet 

21 


322  THE  BIBLIOAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xn. 

the  strain  of  carrying  everything  on  your  own  shoulders,  and  requiring  to  go  abroad 
for  years,  or,  it  may  be,  to  leave  business  altogether,  your  strength  remains  unim- 
paired— nay,  perhaps  it  even  increases ;  and  you  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing 
your  home  happy,  and  your  children  growing  up  to  follow  in  your  footsteps,  and  to 
de«lare  that  their  God  is  dearer  to  them  because  He  is  the  God  of  their  father. 
.  .  .  One  said  to  me,  when  I  began  my  ministry,  "  Never  do  yourself  what  you  can 
get  another  to  do  for  you  as  well  as  you  can  do  it  yourself " ;  and  though  I  confess  that 
I  have  not  acted  on  the  maxim  as  much  as  I  ought  to  have  done,  I  see  the  wisdom 
of  it  more  clearly,  the  longer  I  live.  "  Divide  et  impera,"  was  the  maxim  of  the  old 
Roman  general — divide  and  conquer ;  and  by  dividing  our  labour  into  many  sec- 
tions, and  holding  some  one  responsible  for  each,  we  shall  do  more,  we  shall  do  it 
better,  and  we  shall  work  longer  than  would  be  otherwise  possible.  (W.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.) 


CHAPTER    XIX. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Wilderness  of  Sinai. — Lessons: — 1.  Months  and  days  from  Egyptian 
bondage  are  fit  to  be  recorded.  2.  Days  are  set  by  God  for  the  Church's  gradual 
progress  to  their  rest ;  it  fails  not  (ver.  1).  3.  From  Rephidim  to  Sinai,  or  from 
straits  and  trials  to  some  rest  and  doctrine  God  removes  His  Church.  4.  The 
Church's  camp  and  God's  mount  are  sweetly  joined  together  (ver.  2).  (G.  Hughes, 
B.D.)  The  wilderness  of  Sinai : — After  their  long  halt,  exulting  in  their  first 
victory,  they  advanced  deeper  into  the  mountain  ranges,  they  knew  not  whither. 
They  knew  only  that  it  was  for  some  great  end,  for  some  solemn  disclosure,  such  as 
they  had  never  before  witnessed.  Onward  they  went,  through  winding  valley,  and 
under  high  cliff,  and  over  rugged  pass,  and  through  gigantic  forms,  on  which  the 
marks  of  creation  even  now  seem  fresh  and  powerful ;  and  at  last,  through  all  the 
different  valleys,  the  whole  body  of  the  people  were  assembled.  On  their  right 
hand  and  on  their  left  rose  long  sucessions  of  lofty  rocks,  forming  a  vast  avenue, 
like  the  approaches  which  they  had  seen  leading  to  the  Egyptian  temples  between 
colossal  figures  of  men  and  of  gods.  At  the  end  of  this  broad  avenue,  rising 
immediately  out  of  the  level  plain  on  which  they  were  encamped,  towered  the 
massive  cliffs  of  Sinai,  like  the  huge  altar  of  some  natural  temple ;  encircled  by 
peaks  of  every  shape  and  height,  the  natural  pyramids  of  the  desert.  In  this 
sanctuary,  secluded  from  all  earthly  things,  they  waited  for  the  revelation  of  God. 
{Dean  Stanley.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings. — Borne  on  eaples'  wings: — God  here 
employs  a  similitude  denoting  the  speed,  the  security  and  the  tender  care  with 
which  they  were,  as  it  were,  transported  from  the  house  of  bondage,  and  which  is 
expanded  in  fuller  significancy  (Deut.  xxxii.  11, 12).  Here  is  a  figurative  illustration 
of  an  important  work.  We  may  apply  it  to  three  things  in  the  history  of  the 
Christian.  1.  To  the  period  of  conversion.  Then  God  bears  sinners  on  eagles' 
wings  and  brings  them  to  Himself.  He  stirs  up  the  nest  of  self-righteousness  and 
carnal  security;  flutters  over  them,  excites  and  teaclies  them  to  fly  towards  heaven 
in  their  desires  and  affections.  2.  It  will  also  apply  to  the  season  of  deUverance, 
and  is  descriptive  of  the  speed  with  which  God  comes  to  the  help  of  His  people, 
and  the  security  He  effects ;  for  the  eagle  is  not  only  a  swift,  but  a  powerful  bird. 
3.  It  will  apply  to  their  final  happiness.  He  will  bear  His  people  on  eagles'  wings 
to  heaven.  It  may  be  He  may  bear  them  through  many  a  dark  and  trying  scene, 
but  they  shall  be  brought  to  glory  at  last.  {A.  Nevin,  D.D.)  God's  deliverances : — 
There  is  great  beauty  and  truth  in  this  expression,  and  it  well  displays  all  that  God 
had  done  for  this  enslaved  people.  The  eagle  is  the  most  powerful  of  the  birds  of 
prey  of  the  ancient  world ;  it  is  the  most  rapid  in  its  flight,  the  highest  and  most 
majestic  in  its  aerial  courses,  and,  at  the  same  time,  one  of  the  most  tender  towards 
its  young.  These  four  qualities  of  the  eagle  admirably  depict — 1.  The  power  with 
which  God  had  delivered  Israel,  destroying  for  them  the  most  formidable  nations, 
raising  tempests  in  the  heavens,  and  the  waves  of  the  sea,  opening  its  aby.'S,  and, 
as  it  is  elsewhere  expressed,  saving  them  "through  a  mighty  hand,  and  by  a 
6trctched-out  arm."  2.  The  astonishing  quickness  of  this  deliverance :  fifty  days 
had  ecarcely  elapsed  since  this  multitude  were  slaves  on  the  borders  of  the  Nile 


CHAP.  XIX.]  EXODUS.  328 

employed  in  making  bricks,  under  the  lash  of  the  task-masters;  and  lo  !  they  were 
all  gathered  together  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  of  Arabia,  having  passed,  like  an 
eagle,  over  deserts  and  seas.  3.  The  majesty  which  God  had  displayed  in  His  inter- 
vention. As  the  eagle  which,  bearing  its  young  upon  its  back,  flies  not  near  the 
earth,  nor  from  tree  to  tree  like  other  birds,  but  soars  majestically  at  the  height  of 
the  clouds,  see  with  what  brilliant  grandeur  God  had  delivered  Israel :  the  Nile  is 
turned  into  blood,  the  sun  darkened,  darkness  covers  the  land  for  three  days, 
thunder  and  hailstones  rend  the  heavens,  the  Destroying  Angel  passes  over  Egypt  in 
the  terrible  night  of  the  death  of  its  firstborn,  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  by  day,  and  the 
pillar  of  fire  by  night  goes  before  the  camp  of  Israel,  the  voice  of  God  is  heard 
with  power  from  the  heights  of  heaven.  4.  The  tender  care  of  the  eagle  for  its 
cherished  young  presents  to  us  a  touching  figure  of  the  conduct  of  God  towards 
Israel.  The  eagle  broods  over  its  young  in  its  nest  in  the  crevice  of  some  rock,  it 
cherishes  them,  it  nourishes  them,  it  carries  them  upon  its  wings,  it  deposits  them 
tenderly,  in  such  places  as  it  deems  good  for  them,  and  soon  teaches  them  to  fly 
alone  in  the  sky.  Well,  such  had  been  the  conduct  of  God  towards  His  people. 
Eead  what  God  Himself  says  about  it  in  Deut.  xxxii.  7-14.  (Prof.  Gaussen.) 
And  brought  you  unto  Myself: — The  IsraeUtes  had,  on  the  one  side,  by  the  Egyptian 
servitude ;  on  the  other,  by  the  Egyptian  idolatry,  with  which  they  had  contami- 
nated themselves,  swerved  far  from  God,  His  purity  and  sanctity— in  a  word,  from 
truth  and  genuine  faith;  now  God,  in  graciously  granting  ihem  His  revelation  and 
His  pure  doctrines,  brings  them  again  back  to  Himself;  He  intends  to  make  them 
"a  kingdom  of  priests  and  a  holy  nation."     {M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  A  peculiar  treasure  unto  Me. — GotVs  people  His  treasure: — 1.  A 
treasure  is  something  searched  for.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  ever  diligently  seeking 
after  Christians.  2.  A  treasure  when  found  is  careluUy  guarded.  As  the  apple  of 
His  eye  God  protects  those  who  trust  Him.  3.  The  finding  of  a  treasure  is  the 
occasion  of  rejoicing.  "There  is  joy  in  heaven,"  etc.  4.  To  obtain  a  treasure  we  will 
make  great  sacrifices.  "God  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,"  <i'c.  (Ilomih' lie  Review.) 
National  ideals  : — The  problem  was  :  How  to  convert  a  horde  of  demoralized  slaves 
into  a  nation  of  virtuous  freemen,  paying  a  free  obedience  to  law,  as  they  had 
before  paid  a  forced  obedience  to  the  lash  of  the  taskmaster?  The  practical 
solution  of  the  problem  involved  the  application  of  tliree  spiritual  forces  or  living 
principles.  We  may  describe  them  thus : — 1.  The  revelation  of  the  new  name  of 
God,  "Jehovah,"  the  Eternal,  the  unchangeable,  the  self-same.  2.  The  revelation 
of  the  ideal  or  standard,  which  the  nation  is  to  keep  steadily  before  mind  and  con- 
science, as  the  thing  to  be  aimed  at  and  striven  after.  This  revelation  is  given 
most  explicitly  and  clearly  in  the  words  of  our  text :  "  A  kingdom  of  priests,  and 
an  holy  nation."  3.  The  actual  legislation  which  is  founded  upon  these  two 
ri3velations : — of  which  legislation  the  law  of  the  Ten  Commandments  is  the  eternal 
and  indestructible  substructure — as  strong  and  durable  now  as  when  it  was  first 
uttered  by  the  voice  of  God  to  Israel — as  much  the  foundation  of  all  legislation 
now  as  of  the  distinctively  Mosaic  legislation  then.  It  was  under  the  operation  of 
these  th:ee  forces  that  Israel  became  and  continued  to  be  a  nation.  It  is  under  the 
operation  of  the  same  or  analogous  forces  that  any  nation  becomes  and  continues  to 
be  a  nation.  When  such  forces  cease  to  operate  upon  a  nation,  it  dies.  To  prove 
and  illustrate  this  point  must  form  the  remainder  of  our  subject.  1.  It  is  impossible 
for  any  of  us  to  overlook  the  importance  of  the  words  which  introduce  the  Ten 
Commaudnipnts.  "I  am  the  Lord" — that  is,  the  Eternal — "thy  God."  They  are 
not  an  ornamental  flourish  or  accidental  prefix.  They  are  the  living  root  of  all 
that  follows.  Again  and  again,  in  the  course  of  the  subsequent  legislation,  the 
words  recur;  even  in  those  parts  of  the  legislation  which  are  most  minute  and 
temporary,  sanitary  or  ceremonial.  The  new  name,  upon  which  the  nation  is  to 
be  built,  is  the  name  "Jehovah,"  the  Eternal;  to  which  is  added  the  old  name, 
"  thy  God,"  as  a  name  to  be  cherished  and  dear  as  ever.  Now,  in  this  name 
Jehovah  is  involved  the  notion  of  permanence,  unchangeableness ;  and  this  notion 
lies  at  the  root  of  law,  whether  laws  of  man,  or  laws  of  nature,  or  laws  of  God. 
But  to  this  tremendous,  this  oppressive,  notion  of  unchangeableness,  there  is  added 
the  tender  grace  of  the  old  name,  "Thy  God" — One  with  whom  every  Israelite 
and  every  human  being  may  plead,  as  the  Psalmist  does,  "0  God,  Thou  art  my 
God."  It  is  the  blending  of  the  two  together;  it  is  the  intertwining  of  the  two 
subtle  and  mighty  spiritual  forces,  implied  in  the  two  names,  that  made  the  revela- 
tion so  poti  nt  for  its  great  purpose — the  creation  of  a  nation,  that  should  be  a 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

kingdom  of  priests,  a  holy  nation.  And  just  in  proportion  as  the  hold  of  those 
names  upon  heart  and  conscience  relaxed,  the  nation  decayed  and  died.  For, 
indeed,  it  is  everlastingly  true,  as  one  of  our  own  poets  has  said,  that  "  by  the  soul 
only  the  nations  can  be  great  and  free."  Any  one  can  see,  that  a  really  free  people 
must  be  a  loyal  or  law-abiding  people ;  and  that  laws,  which  are  to  receive  the  willing 
obedience  of  such  a  people,  must  be  founded  on  the  immutable  principles  of  truth 
and  justice  and  molality.  Nor  can  any  one  doubt  that  the  Mosaic  legislation  is 
founded  on  such  principles.  .2.  But  now  I  wish  to  speak  to  you  about  the  second 
of  those  three  spiritual  forces,  in  the  strength  of  which  Israel  was  to  be  moulded 
into  a  nation.  I  have  already  described  it  as  the  revelation  of  the  ideal  which  the 
nation  was  to  keep  steadily  before  mind  and  conscience,  as  the  thing  to  be  aimed  at 
and  striven  after.  Our  text  words  it  thus :  "  Now,  therefore,  if  ye  will  obey  My 
voice  indeed,  and  keep  My  covenant."  The  destiny — the  calling  and  election — of 
the  nation  of  Israel  was  higher  and  holier  than  the  destiny  of  any  other  nation. 
It  was  chosen  to  bear  witness  to  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  before 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth ;  a  kingdom  of  priests,  a  royal  and  priestly  race,  each 
member  of  it  uniting  in  his  own  person  the  attributes  of  a  king  and  a  priest :  a 
king,  to  rule  right  loyally  over  his  own  lower  and  baser  nature ;  a  priest,  to  offer 
himself  up  in  willing  sacrifice  to  God.  This  pattern  of  righteousness  the  most 
choice  and  elect  members  of  the  nation  did  exhibit.  You  have  only  to  think  over 
the  long  list  of  truly  kingly  and  priestly  characters — from  Moses  to  John  the  Baptist 
— to  be  satisfied  of  this.  The  fact  that  the  election  of  Israel  was  what  it  was,  does 
not  deprive  all  other  nations  of  an  election  of  their  own.  On  the  contrary,  the 
very  words  of  our  text,  which  affirm  most  strongly  the  election  of  Israel,  do  at  least 
suggest  the  thought  of  a  corresponding,  though  inferior,  election  of  all  other  nations. 
At  this  distance  of  time  we  have  not  the  data  for  determining  the  special  calling  of 
Egjpt,  for  example,  or  of  Assyria.  But  we  can  discern  with  very  tolerable  clearness 
the  election,  the  manifest  destiny,  of  Greece  and  of  Rome;  the  call  of  Greece  to 
catch  the  inspiration  of  beauty,  and  to  be  the  nurse  of  freedom ;  the  call  of  Rome 
to  be  the  schoolmaster  of  the  nations,  with  its  iron  rod  of  law  and  order.  We  can 
discern,  also,  with  perfect  clearness,  the  vast  inferiority,  even  of  such  a  calling  and 
election  as  this,  to  the  calling  of  Israel ;  and  can  therefore  fully  justify  the  language 
of  our  text:  "Ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  Me  above  all  people."  But  if 
this  principle  of  a  calling  and  election  of  nations  holds  true  of  the  whole  ancient 
world,  why  should  it  not  hold  true  of  the  whole  modern  world  also?  So  long  as 
national  distinctions  and  national  characteristics  exist  at  all,  there  must  exist 
along  with  them  corresponding  national  duties  and  national  responsibilities.  What 
is  it,  then,  for  England  and  for  us  ?  It  may  be  said,  that  it  is  the  manifest  destiny 
of  England  to  colonize  and  subdue  the  earth — to  girdle  it  with  rails  of  iron  and 
steel,  and  lines  of  telegraph  wire.  It  is  in  words  like  these.  Duty  and  Justice — 
in  the  response  which  they  awaken  in  our  hearts — that  we  English  people  find  the 
revelation  of  our  national  calling  and  election  of  God.  As  a  nation,  we  are  called, 
in  a  special  sense,  to  be  just  and  dutiful.  And  if  our  children  are  to  go  out  into 
distant  lands,  and  among  subject  peoples,  to  be  models  of  duty  and  justice  there, 
they  must  be  nursed  and  trained  in  those  principles  first  at  home.  A  "  kingdom  of 
priests  "  : — yes — and  that  title  belongs  also  to  us,  as  well  as  to  Israel ;  though  to  us, 
not  as  Englishmen,  but  as  Christians.  For  is  it  not  written :  "  Unto  Him  who 
loveth  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  His  Father :  to  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen."  I  need  not  say  that  there  is  no  discrepancy  whatever  between  our 
special  calling  as  Englishmen,  and  our  more  general  calling  as  disciples  of  Christ. 
On  the  contrary,  the  latter  must  and  does  sustain  and  verify  the  former.  Just  in 
proportion  as  we  learn  to  rule,  as  kings,  over  our  lower,  baser,  selfish  nature  ;  and 
to  offer  ourselves  up  as  priests,  living,  reasonable,  and  spiritual  sacrifices,  in  the 
power  and  virtue  of  the  one  perfect  Sacrifice,  to  God ;  just  in  this  proportion  shall 
we  be  enabled  to  do  justice  and  Judgment,  and  to  walk  dutifully  and  uprightly,  and 
80  to  uphold  the  true  glory  of  the  English  name,  in  whatever  circumstances  we 
may  be  placed— whether  at  home,  or  amongst  strangers  and  foreigners  in  some  far 
distant  land.  It  was  so  with  the  heroes  of  England  in  the  past.  (Z).  J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)  Lessons : — 1.  In  covenant-making  or  lawgiving  from  God  there  is  need  of 
some  mediator  to  be  with  God.  2.  God's  call  alone  can  qualify  or  authorize  a 
mediator  between  Him  and  sinners.  3.  It  is  incumbent  on  the  mediator  to  declare 
fully  God's  mind  unto  His  people.  4.  A  due  recognition  of  God's  gracious  acts  for 
souls  against  enemies  is  a  good  preparation  to  receive  His  law.    5.  God's  securing 


CHAP.  XIX.]  EXODUS.  325 

providence  as  well  as  selecting  a  people  to  Himself  prepare  them  to  hear  His 
covenant  (ver.  4).  6.  God's  covenanted  people  are  His  peculiar  treasure  in  the 
world.  7.  It  is  God's  free  grace  who  owneth  all  nations  on  earth  to  make  one  His 
peculiar  above  another  (ver.  5).  8.  Eoyalty,  near  communion  with  God,  and 
sanctity  are  the  pi'ivileges  of  God's  peculiar  ones.  Kings,  priests,  and  saints. 
9.  The  words  of  duty  and  privilege  must  be  spoken  and  made  known  unto  the 
Church  (ver.  6).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  GocVs  promise  to  the  Jews : — I.  The  recital 
OF  His  works.  II.  The  proposals  of  His  love.  III.  The  promises  of  His 
GRACE,  (r.  Mortimer.)  "All  the  earth  is  Mine"  : — I.  God's  assertion  of  uni- 
versal possession  in  the  earth.  1.  Nations.  2.  Lands.  3.  The  animal  and 
vegetable  kingdoms.  II.  God's  assertion  excludes  every  other  being  from 
universal  possession.  1.  It  is  not  man's  earth.  2.  It  is  not  the  devil's.  .H.  It 
does  not  belong  to  any  created  intelligence.  III.  God's  assertion  should  awaken 
confidence  in  His  saints  and  terror  in  sinners.  1.  All  forces  are  under  Hia 
control.  2.  Everything  that  is  not  of  Him  must  fail.  3.  His  possession  of  the 
earth  will  be  fully  manifest  in  the  end.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Explanation  of 
the  Divine  pt  eferences  : — Here  is  the  explanation  of  the  Divine  preferences  which 
have  distressed  so  many  hearts  under  the  cruel  name  of  sovereignty  and  election. 
There  need  be  no  torture  in  using  those  words.  If  we  feel  distressed  by  them,  it  is 
because  we  have  come  upon  them  along  the  wrong  path.  They  are  beautiful  and 
noble  words  when  set  in  their  places  according  to  the  Divine  intent.  "Then  ye 
ehall  be  a  pecuhar  treasure  unto  Me  above  all  people."  Is  that  partiality  in  any 
exclusive  sense  ?  Not  at  all ;  it  is  really  meant  to  be  inclusive.  God  elects 
humanity.  "And  ye  shall  be  unto  Me  a  kingdom."  In  what  sense?  In  the 
ordinary  sense — namely,  a  great  aggregate  of  subjects  ruled  by  one  arbitrary  and 
despotic  king?  In  no  such  sense.  The  literal  meaning  is,  ye  shall  all  be  kings. 
Now  ye  see  the  meaning  of  that  great  name,  "King  oif  kings"— not  king  of  an 
individual  monarch  here  and  there,  as  in  Britain,  or  Bussia,  or  China,  but  of  all 
believers.  All  obedient  souls  are  lifted  up  unto  kinghood.  We  are  royal  equals  if 
we  obey  Heaven's  will,  and  God  is  King  of  kings — King  of  all.  We  are  a  royal 
generation.  All  this  language  is  typical.  Beautiful  is  the  historical  line  when 
seized  and  wisely  applied.  Let  us  attempt  such  seizure  and  application.  The 
firstborn  were  chosen,  and  the  firstborn  were  to  be  priests.  In  what  sense  are  the 
firstborn  chosen?  Not  as  relegating  the  afterborn  to  positions  subordinate  and 
inferior  ;  but  in  the  sense  of  being  their  pledge  and  seal.  God  has  the  eldest  Son, 
and  theref<ire — that  is  the  sacred  logic — He  has  all  the  other  children.  Then  the 
laws  regarding  the  priesthood  underwent  a  change,  and  the  family  of  Aaron  was 
called.  We  proceed  from  an  individual,  namely,  the  firstborn,  to  a  family,  namely, 
the  Aaronic  stock.  But  why  were  they  chosen  ?  That  all  the  children  of  Aaron 
might  also  be  priests,  in  the  truly  spiritual  and  eternal  sense,  though  not  in  official 
and  formal  name  and  status.  Then  the  family  was  deposed  and  a  tribe  is  chosen — 
the  tribe  of  Levi.  Mark  how  the  history  accumulates  and  grows  up  into  a  prophecy 
and  an  argument !  First  the  individual,  then  the  family,  then  the  tribe,  then  the 
Son  of  Man — absorbing  all  the  past,  gathering  up  into  its  true  and  official  meaning 
all  priesthood,  all  intercession.  There  is  one  Advocate  with  the  Father,  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus.  A  new  light  thus  begins  to  dawn  upon  the  cloud.  There  is  nothing 
arbitrary  in  the  movement  of  God  when  we  can  penetrate  its  infinite  philosophy. 
Will  God  have  the  first-fruits  of  the  harvest  field?  He  claims  all  such.  Why  will 
He  claim  the  first-fruits?  That  in  having  the  first-fruits  He  might  have  all  the 
field.  He  will  not  take  the  whole  wheat  acreage  of  the  world  into  His  heavens  and 
devour  our  poor  loaf  of  bread ;  but  He  will  take  the  first  ear  of  corn  that  we  can 
find  in  all  the  fields,  and,  having  taken  that.  He  says :  "  In  giving  Me  this  you 
have  given  Me  all."  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  GocVs  peculiar  treasure  : — Exotic  fiowers 
or  foreign  plants,  if  seeded  on  the  mountain  side,  or  inserted  in  the  meadow  amongst 
the  promiscuous  herbage  growing  there,  soon  become  choked  and  disappear.  Those 
who  wish  to  preserve  the  flaming  glories  of  the  Cape,  or  the  rich  fruits  of  the  tropic, 
must  provide  a  garden  enclosed — must  keep  out  the  weeds  and  rough  weather.  And 
so  God,  anxious  to  preserve  "  His  Holy  Law,"  fenced  in  the  Hebrew  nationality. 
He  secluded  them,  and  walled  them  in,  and  made  them,  as  it  were,  His  own  con- 
servatory— a  conservatory  where  Divine  truth  should  survive  uninjured  until 
Messiah  should  come.  God's  covenant  uniform : — What  covenant  could  this  be, 
containing  such  promises,  and  by  which  a  people  should  be  a  peculiar  treasure  to 
God,  and  above  all  others  upon  the  earth;  yea,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation? 
This  could  be  no  other  than  the  covenant  of  redemption  by  Christ,  to  the  blessings 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

— ♦ — — 

of  which  man  has  no  claim  but  in  grace.  The  covenant  of  God,  as  the  Church  of 
God  itself,  under  every  diversity  of  dispensation  has  been  the  same.  Whatever  of 
a  national  character  was  peculiar  to  Israel,  and  that  ceased  under  a  better  economy, 
was  extraneous  to  this,  and  not  an  essential  constituent  or  feature  thereof.  Uni- 
formity of  design  is  discoverable  through  the  whole  progress  of  Divine  revelation, 
and  under  every  form  of  religious  ceremony.  God  has  not  at  any  period  contra- 
dicted Himself,  or  set  before  man  a  covenant  of  grace  at  one  time,  and  a 
covenant  of  works  at  another,  for  the  hope  of  hfe.  It  would  have  been  contrary  to 
all  that  God  had  done,  and  to  all  that  He  yet  promised  to  do,  as  also  a  break  of  an 
awful  character,  and  the  introduction  of  confusion  into  the  whole  system  of  redemp- 
tion, to  have  here  brought  the  nation  under  a  covenant  of  works,  by  which  they  had 
virtually  perished.  True  it  is,  that  Sinai  and  Zion  are,  by  the  apostle,  placed  in 
contradistinction  :  the  one  as  gendering  to  bondage;  the  other  as  free  :  the  one  as 
characterized  by  the  law  of  condemnation  ;  the  other  by  the  law  of  righteousness : 
but  it  is  in  certain  respects  only  that  that  contrast  holds  good,  not  in  the  essential 
intention  of  things.  The  whole  fabric  of  their  ecclesiastical  polity,  conjoined  in  all 
its  parts  with  exquisite  wisdom,  was  the  workmanship  of  mercy.  By  redemption  it 
was  that  God  claimed  Israel  as  His  own,  a  treasure.  His  best  and  greatest  treasure, 
a  treasure  containing  a  treasure.  His  grace,  His  glory,  the  promised  seed  His  Son. 
All  the  earth  was  His ;  yet  in  all  the  earth  was  nothing  He  so  valued,  nothing  He 
held  so  dear.  Still  this  treasure  so  great  had  been  lost  but  for  the  security  and 
grace  of  the  covenant.  The  intrinsic  value  of  His  people  was  enhanced  beyond  all 
price  by  what  this  covenant  embraced  and  required.  It  cost  much  to  make  them 
His  people,  and  to  secure  them  to  Himself — a  treasure  for  ever.  {W.  Seaton.) 
The  sj>irititaHty  of  the  old  covenant: — The  characteristic  feature  of  the  Sinai 
revelation  is  the  law ;  but  it  is  important  to  observe  that  it  is  not  law  as  a  means  of 
salvation,  but  law  as  a  sequel  of  salvation.  If  this  simple  and  evident  fact  were 
only  borne  in  mind  in  the  reading  of  the  Old  Testament,  endless  perplexities  and 
confusions  of  thought  would  be  avoided.  Observe,  also,  the  kind  of  blessings 
which  are  promised.  How  many  are  there  who  will  persist  in  maintaining  that  the 
old  covenant  offered  mere  temporal  blessings,  while  it  is  the  distinctive  feature  of 
the  new  to  promise  spiritual  blessing.  It  is  trne  that  temporal  blessings  were 
included  under  the  old  covenant,  just  as  they  are  under  the  new ;  and  though  they 
do  hold  a  more  prominent  place  in  the  old,  as  was  indeed  to  be  expected,  yet  it  is  a 
slander  upon  that  covenant  to  say  that  these  were  the  blessings  it  offered.  The 
great  blessings  of  the  old  covenant  were  undoubtedly  spiritual,  as  is  manifest  here: 
"  If  ye  will  obey  My  voice  and  keep  My  covenant,  then  ye  shall  be  to  Me  a  peculiar 
treasure  above  all  people  " ;  "  and  ye  shall  be  unto  Me  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and 
an  holy  nation."  Nearness  to  God,  dearness  to  God,  holiness — these  were  the 
characteristic  blessings  of  the  old  covenant.  These  promises  are  among  the  richest 
and  most  deeply  spiritual  in  the  whole  Bible  ;  and  it  is  with  great  reluctance  that, 
yielding  to  the  exigency  of  our  plan,  we  refrain  from  entering  into  the  wealth  of 
meaning  which  each  separate  word  conveys.  Let  me  only  notice  in  leaving  it,  that 
when  the  apostle  Peter  wishes  to  express  in  the  very  strongest  terms  the  highest 
privileges  of  the  children  of  God  under  the  new  dispensation,  he  can  do  nothing 
better  than  quote  these  old  but  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  "  (1  Pet. 
ii.  9).  {J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  Holiness  ensured: — A  writer  tells  of  going  down 
with  a  party  into  a  coal  mine.  On  the  side  of  the  gangway  grew  a  plant  which  was 
perfectly  white.  The  visitors  were  astonished  that  there,  where  the  coal-dust  was 
continually  flying,  this  little  plant  should  be  so  clean.  A  miner  who  was  with  them 
took  a  handful  of  black  dust  and  threw  it  on  the  plant,  but  not  a  particle  of  it 
adhered.  There  was  a  wonderful  enamel  on  the  plant  to  which  no  finest  speck 
could  cling.  Living  there,  amid  clouds  of  dust,  nothing  could  stain  its  snowy 
whiteness.  This  is  a  picture  of  what  every  Christian  life  should  be.  Unholy 
influences  breathe  incessantly  about  us  and  upon  us.  But  it  is  our  mission  to  be 
pure  amid  all  this  vileness,  undefiled,  unspotted  from  the  world.  If  God  can  make 
a  little  plant  so  wondrously  that  no  dust  can  stain  its  whiteness,  surely  He  can,  by 
His  grace,  so  transform  our  heart  and  life  that  sin  shall  not  cling  to  us.  He  who 
can  keep  the  plant  stainless  and  white  as  snow  amid  clouds  of  dust,  can  guard  us  in 
purity  in  this  world  of  sin.  A  kingdom  of  priests. — Priests  to  the  world: — TLey 
were  to  be  the  trustees,  for  humanity  at  large,  of  the  revelations,  promises,  and 
ordinances  which  God  communicated,  and  they  were  to  keep  them  for  the  benefit  of 
all  mankind.  For  a  time,  indeed,  these  heavenly  communications  w^ere  to  be 
reserved  to  themselves;   only,  however,  that  they  might  be  the  more   securely 


CHAP.  XIX.]  -EXODUS.  827 

1 

preserved ;  but  at  length  all  restrictions  would  be  broken  down,  and  that  which,  in 
its  ritual  exclusivism,  had  been  confined  to  them  would,  in  its  spiritual  persuasive- 
ness, become  the  heritage  of  every  true  believer  who  should,  like  them,  enter  into 
covenant  with  the  Lord,  not  over  a  merely  typical  sacrifice,  but  over  the  true  and 
real  atonement  which  Christ  would  make  for  the  sins  of  men.  Thus,  in  this 
peculiar  promise,  which  looks  at  first  as  if  it  conferred  a  patent  of  protected 
privilege,  we  see  that  the  present  protection  is  in  order  to  the  future  diffusion ; 
and  we  have  an  echo  of  the  Abrahamic  blessing,  "In  thee  aud  in  thy  seed  shall 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  What  the  Levitical  tribe  ultimately  was 
among  the  Israelites  themselves,  that  the  Israelites  were  to  be  among  the  nations  ; 
and  the  more  faithfully  they  performed  their  duties,  the  richer  would  be  the 
ultimate  blessing  to  the  Gentiles.  Eeading  these  words  in  the  light  of  the  history 
to  which  they  form  the  introduction,  it  needs  no  keenness  of  insight  to  perceive 
the  bearing  of  these  principles  upon  ourselves ;  for  we  Christians  are  now  the 
world's  priests,  custodians  of  those  spiritual  blessings  by  which  our  fellow-men  are 
to  be  benefited ;  and  only  in  proportion  as  we  maintain  holiness  of  character  shall 
we  discharge  our  duties  to  mankind  at  large.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do. — Lessons  : — 1.  Command 
received  from  God  by  His  ministers — they  must  go  and  call  them  whom  they  must 
bespeak.  2.  Orderly  proceeding  to  acquaint  the  people  of  God's  wUl  by  their  heads 
is  rational.  3.  Proposition  and  exposition  of  God's  words  must  be  made  to  souls 
that  they  may  know  them.  4.  All  God's  words,  aud  no  more  but  His,  Jehovah 
commands  His  ministers  to  speak  to  His  people  (ver.  7).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 
God^s  revelation  of  Himself,  dx. : — The  subject  of  this  paragraph  (vers.  7-24)  is  God's 
revelation  of  Himself, — the  call  to  receive  it,  the  manner  in  which  it  was  made. 
I.  When  God  reveals  Hijiself  man  is  summoned  to  attend.  This  is  uniformly 
God's  method.  First  the  call,  then  the  revelation.  "  Hear,  0  Israel,"  then,  "  the 
Lord  thy  God  is  one  Lord."  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  hear  ye  Him,"  then  the  New 
Testament  dispensation.  Moses  was  a  type  of  the  ministry  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and 
an  example  to  Christian  ministers  in  the  manner  in  which  he  summoned  men  to 
God.  He  spoke — 1.  Authoritatively.  2.  Clearly.  3.  Completely.  4.  Successfully. 
5.  Moses  spoke  for  the  people  to  God.  So  does  Christ  combine  our  poor  prayers 
with  the  mighty  eloquence  of  His  intercession.  II.  When  God  reveals  Himself, 
MAN  MUST  BE  PREPARED  FOR  THE  REVELATION  (vers.  10-15).  1.  Man  must  attend  to 
the  herald  who  proclaims  God's  coming.  2.  Man  must  be  prepared  by  personal 
sanctification.  3.  Man  must  be  prepared  by  a  ready  acquiescence  in  all  that  God 
commands.  4.  Man  must  be  prepared  at  the  appointed  time.  "  Be  ready  against 
the  third  day."  (1)  God  has  now  appointed  times  in  which  He  promises  to  reveal 
Himself  to  men.  The  Lord's  day.  All  times  of  duty  and  religious  privilege.  Let 
no  man  be  unprejDared,  or  plead  excuses,  or  make  other  engagements.  (2)  God  has 
now  appointed  times  which  He  has  not  chosen  to  reveal.  Death,  judgment.  We 
"  know  not  the  day  nor  the  hour  when  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  Hence  the 
wisdom  of  immediate  and  constant  preparation.  "  Watch  and  pray."  III.  When 
God  REVEALS  Himself  it  is  in  a  manner  suited  to  the  occasion.  It  was  necessary 
that  He  should  speak  to  men  who  for  years  had  been  surrounded  by  idolatrous 
associations,  and  who  had  become  debased  by  years  of  servitude,  in  a  most  solemn, 
startling,  aud  impressive  form.  God  has  other  methods  than  those  employed  here. 
Abraham,  Elijah.  Bethlehem,  Pentecost,  Patmos,  &c.  So  in  each  individual  case. 
Learn  then — 1.  To  listen  when  God  speaks.  Faith  has  a  faculty  not  only  of  sight, 
but  of  hearing.  2.  When  God  calls  obey  that  call,  and  be  prepared  for  the  pubho 
revelation  which  that  call  precedes.  "  God  now  commandeth  every  man  to  repent " 
(2  Cor.  vii.  1).  3.  Beceive  God's  revelation  of  Himself  in  His  own  way.  {J.  W. 
Burn.)  A  commendable  engagement  rashly  made  and  repeatedly  broken : — I.  A 
COMMENDABLE  ENGAGEMENT.  1.  Becausc  of  its  rightcousness.  2.  Because  of  its 
advantageousness.  (1)  The  highest  character.  "  A  holy  nation."  (2)  The  highest 
service.  "Unto  Me  a  kingdom  of  priests."  (3)  The  highest  privilege.  "A 
peculiar  treasure  unto  Me."  3.  Because  of  its  unanimity.  "  AU  the  people 
answered  together."  II.  A  commendable  engagement  rashly  made.  1.  Without 
due  consideration.  2.  Without  earnest  purpose,  3.  Without  hearty  concurrence 
with  the  will  which  they  promised  to  obey.  4.  Without  any  realization 
of  their  need  of  Divine  help  in  order  that  they  may  keep  it.  "  How 
easily  overween  we  our  own  abilities  1 "  III.  A  commendable  engagement 
BEPEAXEDLY  AND  TEEEiBLY  BEoxEN.    Their  siu  in  violating  this  solemn  promise  was 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  nx. 


the  more  heinous  because  of  (1)  God's  great  goodness  to  them.     (2)  His  invari^le 
faithfulness  in  His  portion  of  the  covenant.     (3)  The  comparatively  trivial  circum- 
stances and  slight  influences  which  proved  suflicient  to  induce  them  to  break  their 
engagement.     Notwithstanding  the  strongest  obligations  to  fulfil  their  promise, 
they  broke  it  upon  the  slightest  provocation.     Conclusion — 1.  Let  us  heed  well  our 
obligation  to  do  all  that  the  Lord  commands.    2.  Let  us  be  careful  in  the  utterance 
of  religious  vows.     3.  Let  us  be  humbled  by  the  recollection  of  the  many  religious 
vows  we  have  made  but  not  kept,  and  seek  forgiveness  for  our  failures.     4.  Let  U8 
endeavour  to  perform  our  vows,  looking  to  God  for  strength  to  enable  us  to  do  so. 
{William  Jones.)         The  response  of  the  j)eople  to  God's  call : — I.  The  call  (ver.  7). 
1.  The  elders  represented  the  people.     In  dealing  with  so  great  a  multitude  some 
such  arrangement  was  necessary.     So  it  is  in  many  things — in  the  nation,  the 
family,  the- Church.     2.  God's  commands  were  faithfully  communicated.     "Laid 
before  their  faces  all,"  &c. :  nothing  was  added  and  nothing  kept  back.    The  will  of 
God  was  made  known  so  plainly  that  none  could  plead  ignorance  ;  so  particularly 
that  none  could  plead   excuse.     The   truth   was   communicated   to   every  man's 
conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.     H.  The  response  (ver.  8).     "  And  all  the  people 
answered  together,"  &c.     1.  Prompt.     There  was  no  hesitancy.   2.  Hearty.    There 
was  no  reservation.     8.  Unanimous.    There  was  no  dissentient  voice  (Acts  ii.  1). 
How  grand  the  spectacle !   The  mighty  multitude  as  with  one  heart  and  voice  pro- 
claimed their  submission  to  God.     But,  alas  !  tbe  sequel  showed,  tbat  mixed  with 
their  apparent  sincerity  and  enthusiasm  there  was  much  of  ignorance,  presumption, 
and  self-conceit.     III.  The  beport  to  God.     "  And  Moses  returned  the  words  of 
the  people  unto  the  Lord  "  (cf.  ver.  9).     Such  report  was  necessary  to  secure  the 
favour  of   God  and   the   faith   of   the  people.     It   tended  to — 1.  Exoneration  of 
conscience.     2.  Relief  of  the  heart.     3.  Invigoration  of  hope.     4.  Accrediting  of 
character.     5.  Success  of  ministry.    Nothing  works  more  to  give  a  man  power  with 
men   than   the  belief  that  he  has  power  with  God.     {William  Fomyth.)         The 
preparation  for  meeting  with  God : — Moses  acted  throughout  according  to  Divine 
command.     I.  The  people  were  called  to  sanctify  themselves.    There  must  be 
separation  from  what  is  not  of  God,  in  order  to  fellowship  with  what  is.     Self- 
consecration  required  (Psa.  xxvi.  6;  Isa.  i.  16-18;  Eom.  xii.  1;  1  Cor.  vi.  9-20). 
n.  The  people  were  charged  to  be  ready  at  the  appointed  time  (ver.  11).     Come 
into  God's  presence  with  humility,  prayer,  hope.  III.  The  people  were  commanded 
to  observe  the  prescribed  laws  and  ordinances  as  to  approach  to  God.     Bounds 
fixed  as  to  place,   action,   behaviour  (vers.  12-14 ;  see  1  Cor.  xiv.  10).      {Ibid.) 
Pleasantness  of  obedience : — The  pleasantest  thing  in  the  world  is  to  be  obedient. 
1.  Because  it  is  so  pleasant  to  know  what  we  have  to  do.     The  word  "  law  "  comes 
from  the  verb  "  to  lay  "  ;  it  means  "  something  laid  down."     The  "  law  "  is  some- 
thing that  God  has  laid  down  quite  plain  for  us  to  do.    2.  Because  it  is  a  proof  that 
God  loves  us.     Do  you  remember,  when  Peter  was  so  unhappy,  Christ  said  to  him : 
"  Peter,  feed  My  sheep,  feed  My  lambs  "  ?     Christ  said  that  to  show  that  He  trusted 
Peter  again.     Therefore,  if  God  tells  you  to  do  anything,  be  sure  God  loves  you. 
3.  Because  it  is  practising  for  heaven.       To  obey  the  "  law  "  is  to  prepare  for 
heaven.     There  all  will  be  obedience.     Sir  Henry  Lawrence  said,  just  before  he 
died,  "I  wish  this  to  be  on  my  tombstone:  '  Here  lies  Henry  Lawrence,  who  tried 
to  do  his  duty.'  "     Duty  is  preparing  for  heaven.     Somebody  perhaps  will  say, 
"  Oh,  but  it  is  so  difficult  to  do  one's  duty — to  love  the  '  law.'  "     Listen  to  what  a 
little  girl  said  to  her  brother:  "I  tried  with  all  my  might  to  be  good,  and  I  prayed 
and  read  my  Bible,  but  I  was  no  better.     At  last  I  found  Christ,  and  when  I  found 
Christ  it   was   all   easy ;  and  from  that   time    I   have  been  so  happy."     {Prof. 
Drummond.)     Disobedience  unhappy  : — A  boy,  when  he  entered  his  lirst  place  of 
employment,  made  an  engagement  with  his  master  that  he  was  to  be  in  his  place  at 
nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.     For  a  while  the  boy  was  always  to  be  found  at  his 
post  at  the  appointed  hour,  but  he  began  to  notice  that  his  master  did  not  come  in 
until  a  quarter  to  ten,  and  he  thought  it  would  not  matter  if  he  did  not  come  in 
nntil  ten  minutes  past  nine,  for  his  master  would  never  know.     He  got  on  very 
well  for  a  time,  but  at  length  he  began  to  grow  very  miserable.   He  had  a  feeling  that 
he  was  cheating  his  master,  consequently  he  was  unhappy  ;  he  felt  he  had  lost  his 
faithfulness,  and  made  up  his  mind  to  go  in  at  the  hour  appointed,  and  when  be 
did  so  his  peace  and  joy  returned,  because  he  was  conscious  that  he  was  doing 
right.    It  is  the  same  with  Christians  in  their  daily  life.    As  long  as  they  are  obeying 
God's  commandments  they  are  happy,  but  whenever  they  break  one  of  them  they 
become  miserable.    Want  of  faithfulness  in  the  most  trivial  things  ofttn  breaks. our 


CHAP.  XIX.]  EXODUS.  ;  329 

peace,  and  stops  communion  with  God.  {George  Milller.)  An  inconsiderate 
promise: — A  story  is  told  of  a  gentleman  who  visited  President  Lincoln,  and  who 
was  in  tbe  habit  of  making  promises  more  freely  than  he  kept  them.  In  order  to 
induce  one  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  boys,  to  sit  on  his  lap,  the  gentleman  offered  to  give 
him  a  charm  which  he  wore  on  his  watch  chain.  The  boy  climbed  into  his  lap. 
Finally  the  gentleman  arose  to  go,  when  Mr.  Lincoln  said  to  him, "  Are  you  going 
to  keep  your  promise  to  my  boy  ?  "  "What  promise?"  said  the  visitor.  "You 
said  you  would  give  him  that  charm."  "  Oh,  I  could  not,"  said  the  visitor.  "It 
is  not  only  valuable,  but  I  prize  it  as  an  heirloom."  "  Give  it  to  him,"  said  Mr. 
Lincoln,  sternly.  "  I  would  not  want  him  to  know  that  I  entertained  one  who  had 
no  regard  for  his  word."  The  gentleman  coloured,  undid  the  charm,  and  handed  it 
to  the  boy,  and  went  away  with  a  lesson  which  he  was  not  likely  soon  to  forget,  and 
which  others  may  profit  by  learning. 

Vers.  10,  11.  The  third  day  the  Lord  will  come  down. — Lessons : — 1.  The 
Mediator  willingly  cometh  from  God  to  impart  His  will  to  His  people.  2.  The 
true  Mediator  is  as  ready  to  sanctify  His  people  as  God  would  have  Him.  3. 
Souls  must  follow  their  Mediator's  command  forsanctification  (ver.  14).  4.  It 
is  the  Mediator's  care  to  prepare  a  people  for  God  at  His  time,  to  whom  He  is 
sent.  5.  Lawful  enjoyments  in  the  flesh  sometimes  must  be  denied  for  better 
attendance  on  God.  6.  Great  is  the  fitness  required  in  souls  for  receiving 
rightly  the  law  from  God  (ver.  15).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Getting  ready  for 
worship : — What  was  the  signification  of  this  Divine  command  ?  God  gets  at  the 
mind  through  the  senses  ;  and  He  doubtless  intended  to  instruct  the  people  by  this 
act  that  their  minds  should  be  purified,  and  their  hearts  prepared  for  His  service. 
And  to  us  it  points  out  the  necessity  of  our  hearts  being  cleansed  from  sin,  from 
the  defilement  and  the  love  of  it,  before  we  can  serve  the  Lord  acceptably ;  it 
teaches  us  also  that  we  must  not  rush  heedlessly  into  the  presence  of  God,  even  in 
private  prayer.  This  becoming  reverence  for  the  presence  of  the  Divine  Majesty 
will  likewise  show  itself  in  our  demeanour  in  the  house  of  God.  "  Let  them  wash 
their  clothes,  and  be  ready  against  the  third  day."  This  will  bring  a  man  in  time 
to  the  house  of  God.  He  will  feel  with  David,  "  I  was  glad  when  they  said.  Let  us 
go  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  ;  and  if  by  any  unavoidable  circumstance  he  is  later 
than  he  ought  to  be,  his  very  step  will  testify  his  concern  that  it  should  be  so,  and 
a  solicitude  lest  he  disturb  the  solemnity  of  the  worship  of  others.  In  tbe  man 
who  fulfils  the  spirit  of  this  command  there  will  be  no  wandering  eye,  but  that 
general  decorum  of  manner  which  shows  that  he  has  put  off  his  shoes  from  his 
feet,  for  the  place  whereon  he  stands  is  holy  ground.  [George  Breay,  B.A.) 
Salutary  bounds : — A  traveller  relates  that,  when  passing  through  an  Austrian 
town,  his  attention  was  directed  to  a  forest  on  a  slope  near  the  road,  and  he  was 
told  that  death  was  the  penalty  of  cutting  down  one  of  those  trees.  He  was 
incredulous  until  he  was  further  informed  that  they  were  the  protection  of  the  city, 
breaking  the  force  of  the  descending  avalanche  which,  without  this  natural  barrier, 
would  sweep  over  the  homes  of  thousands.  When  a  Russian  army  was  there  and 
began  to  cut  away  the  fence  for  fuel,  the  inhabitants  besought  them  to  take  their 
dwellings  instead,  which  was  done.  Such,  he  well  thought,  are  the  sanctions  of 
God's  moral  law.  On  the  integrity  and  support  of  that  law  depeuds  the  safety  of 
the  universe.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die,"  is  a  merciful  proclamation. 
"  He  that  offends  in  one  point  is  guilty  of  all,"  is  equally  just  and  benevolent.  To 
transgress  once  is  to  lay  the  axe  at  the  root  of  the  tree  which  represents  the  security 
and  peace  of  every  loyal  soul  in  the  wide  dominions  of  the  Almighty.  {Family 
Treasury.)  Importance  of  holiness  : — God  has  no  ultimate  use  for  a  man  that 

is  not  holy.  A  rose-tree  that  does  not  blossom  is  of  no  use  in  a  garden.  A  vine 
that  bears  no  grapes  is  of  no  use  in  a  vineyard.  A  criminal  has  no  place  in  the 
State.  In  that  everlasting  kingdom  in  which  the  glory  of  God  and  the  perfection 
of  man  will  be  at  last  revealed,  there  can  be  no  place  for  those  that  have  not  an 
intense  passion  for  holiness,  and  who  do  not  themselves  illustrate  its  dignity  and 
beauty.  {R.  W.  Dale.)  Purity  of  soul  essential  .-—"My  son,"  said  Nushirvan,  king 
6f  Persia,  in  the  directions  of  his  last  will  to  his  successor,  "present  yourself  often  at 
the  gate  of  heaven  to  implore  its  succour  in  your  need,  but  purify  your  soul  beforehand." 

Vers.  16-25.  To  meet  with  God.— Lessons  :— 1.  Upon  Churches  preparation,  and 
sanctification  God  is  ready  to  appear  to  them.  2.  God  will  keep  His  day.  His 
third  day  of  appearance  to  His  people.      3.  In  God's  appearance  for  covenant- 


330  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xix. 

making  He  giveth  the  discovery  of  Himself  as  He  pleaseth.  4.  Terrible  signals 
God  nseth  sometimes  to  declare  His  majesty  to  men  (Psa.  xviii.  9).  5.  The  law 
given  by  Moses  differs  from  Christ's  in  darkness  and  deadliness  (Heb.  xii.).  6. 
Suitable  affections  unto  terrible  appearances  of  God  may  be  from  nature  and  grace 
(ver.  16).  It  might  be  a  spirit  of  bondage  in  some,  but  of  free  grace  in  others. 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Lessons  : — 1.  God's  terrors  in  the  law  are  not  to  drive  men 
from  Him,  but  to  bring  them  humbly  to  Him.  2.  God  hath  appointed  a  Mediator 
to  bring  souls  unto  Him.  They  come  not  of  themselves.  3.  Upon  the  Mediator's 
conduct  souls  may  be  bold  to  approach  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  4.  Sinners  must 
keep  their  standing  appointed  by  the  Mediator  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  God  (ver, 
17).  (Ibid. )  Lessons : — 1.  Great  is  the  condescension  of  Jehovah  unto  men  in  giving 
law  and  covenant  to  them.  2.  In  God's  humbling  Himself  He  keeps  His  distance 
and  place  above  men.  3.  In  giving  His  law  to  men  God  calleth  the  Mediator  to  be 
by  Him.  4.  God  withholds  no  discovery  from  His  Church  but  that  which  would  be 
deadly  to  them  (ver.  21).  5.  Among  the  congregation  God  hath  appointed  some  to 
office  for  ministering  to  Him.  6.  Such  persons  must  be  sanctified  in  their  special 
place  according  to  God's  will.  7.  The  more  holy  the  persons  and  office  are,  the 
more  deadly  is  their  transgression.  8.  Threatenings  of  death  are  primarily  in 
grace  to  give  life  to  souls  (ver.  22).  (Ibid.)  Lessons ; — 1.  God  seeth  need  for  His 
ministers  testifying  and  pressing  on  people  His  will  when  men  do  not.  2.  The 
Mediator's  descent  to  men  hinders  not  His  ascent  to  God  again  for  their  good. 
3.  None  but  mediators  must  come  so  near  to  God  as  He  appoints  them.  4.  Such  as 
db,  though  under  pretence  of  holiness,  must  perish  (ver.  24).  5.  The  Mediator,  as 
He  must,  so  is  He  willing  to  be  with  God's  people  at  the  law-giving.  6.  It  is 
Mediator's  work  to  teach  all  to  souls  that  may  fit  them  to  a  due  reception  of 
God's  covenant  (ver.  25).  (Ibid.)  God  on  Mount  Sinai : — I.  The  greatness  op 
God.  All  powers  of  nature  under  His  control.  IL  The  nearness  of  God 
(see  iv.  7-12).  III.  The  mtsteriodsness  of  God  (see  Psa.  xcvii.  2).  IV.  The 
holiness  of  God  (see  chap.  xv.  11 ;  Isa.  vi.  1,  2 ;  Rev.  iv.  8  ;  1  Pet.  i.  16).  V.  The 
sovereignty  and  mercy  of  God  (see  Deut.  v.  24).      (W.  Forsyth.)  The  highest 

ministry  (ver.  17) : — The  essence  of  religion  is  to  realize  the  presence  of  God. 
Therefore  we  should  hail  as  our  highest  benefactor  the  man  who  does  for  us  as 
Moses  did  for  Israel.  "  And  Moses  brought  forth  the  people  out  of  the  camp  to 
meet  with  God."  I.  In  the  operations  of  nature.  Poets  have  sung  of  the 
sublimities  and  beauties  of  nature,  and  philosophers  explain  ber  secrets ;  but  he 
does  the  noblest  work  who  brings  us  face  to  face  with  nature's  God.  II.  The 
events  of  providence.  Many  writers  have  done  well  in  history  and  fiction,  and 
have  depicted  with  wondrous  skill  the  varieties  of  character  and  incident,  and  the 
strange  vicissitudes  of  human  life ;  but  he  does  best  who  shows  us  that  there  is  a 
providence  in  the  affairs  of  men,  and  that  the  Lord  our  God  ruleth  over  all  in 
righteousness  and  love.  IH.  The  ordinances  of  the  gospel.  Preachers  may  be 
learned  and  eloquent,  but  it  is  only  as  they  manifest  God's  law  to  the  conscience 
and  God's  love  to  the  heart  that  they  do  us  real  good.  Prayer  and  praise  are  proper 
duties,  but  unless  in  them  we  rise  to  God  they  are  meaningless  and  vain,  (Ibid.) 
Vain  curiositxj  (ver.  21)  : — I.  It  pries  into  secrets.  II.  Breaks  through  hodnd- 
aries.  III.  Sackifices  reverence  and  self-respect.  IV.  Recklessly  rushes  into 
danger.  V.  Multiplies  confusions  and  perils.  Remember  Eve,  Uzziah.  (J.  S. 
Exell,  3I.A.)  To  meet  with   God. — Coming  to   church  to   meet    God: — "The 

people  stood  at  the  nether  part  of  the  mount  " ;  they  listened  with  this  very  end 
in  view :  they  came  out  of  the  camp  to  meet  God,  as  God  had  commanded  they 
should  do.  When  you  come  up  to  the  house  of  God  keep  this  in  view.  There  is, 
in  the  present  day,  as  there  was  in  the  days  of  the  apostle,  such  a  thing  as  having 
"  itching  ears,"  looking  to  man,  instead  of  an  humble  and  reverent  desire  to  meet 
God.  Brethren,  be  much  in  prayer ;  and  when  you  leave  your  closets  to  attend 
public  worship,  say,  "  I  am  now  going  to  meet  with  God."  As  you  enter  His  house, 
reflect,  "  This  is  none  other  than  the  house  of  God,  this  is'the  gate  of  heaven  "  ;  oh 
that  I  may  meet  my  Saviour ;  oh  that  His  love  may  be  shed  abroad  in  my  heart ; 
oh  that  I  may  understand  more  of  God's  plan  for  the  salvation  of  sinners  ;  oh  that 
I  may  get  my  heart  warmed  by  close  communion  with  my  God,  and  have  my  soul 
lifted  up  above  the  cares  and  pleasures  of  this  sinful  world  !  Were  all  our  congrega- 
tions to  assemble  thus,  oh  what  a  savour,  and  unction,  and  blessing  we  should  experi- 
ence 1  (George  Breay,  B.A.)  Communion  tcith  God : — The  windows  of  Somerset 
House  that  face  the  Strand  are  all  double-cased,  so  as  to  deaden  the  roar  of  the 
traffic  outside.     It  would  be  impossible  to  do  mental  work  unless  some  such  system 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS,  381 

were  adopted.  There  is  but  one  way  to  be  "  in  the  world  and  not  of  it  " ;  it 
is  to  be  shut  in  with  God,  away  from  the  din  of  its  cares,  temptations,  and 
strifes.  Outside,  confusion,  hurly-burly;  inside,  quiet,  peace,  under  the  shadow 
of  the  Almighty.  Communion  with  God  : — When  we  think  of  Moses  coming 

so  near  to  Jehovah  in  His  majesty,  wielding  the  terrific  agencies  of  flood  and 
storm  and  fire,  of  darkness  and  lightning  and  the  voice  of  trumpet  exceeding 
loud — Mount  Sinai  rocking  beneath  His  feet,  and  Moses  alone  drawing  near  the 
Awful  Presence  and  talking  with  God  face  to  face  there — what  shall  we  say  of  the 
possibilities  of  communion  between  man  and  his  Maker  ?  Whatever  speculations 
we  may  have  as  to  the  means  and  methods  by  which  the  thought  of  God  was 
borne  to  the  mind  of  Moses,  and  the  thought  of  Moses  to  the  mind  of  God,  the 
great  fact  of  communion  of  mind  with  mind — thought  meeting  thought — of 
command  from  the  superior  party,  received  and  obeyed  by  the  inferior — is  on  the 
outer  face  of  the  whole  history  and  admits  of  no  question.  God  can  speak  to  man 
so  that  man  shall  know  the  voice  to  be  His,  and  comprehend  perfectly  its  sig- 
nificance. Relations  of  obedience,  confidence,  and  love  on  the  part  of  man  toward 
his  Maker,  are  established,  and  God  meets  them  with  appropriate  manifestations 
of  His  favour,  (H.  Cowles,  D.D.)  Moses  and  Aaron  united  in  the  mount : — The 
association  of  Aaron  with  Moses  in  the  mount  intimates  evangelical  instruction.  It 
was  the  design  of  God,  not  only  to  declare  the  condemnation  of  sin,  but  to  point 
out  the  way  of  justification  and  life.  Their  ministry  united,  the  people  cannot 
perish.  It  was  in  the  presence  of  both  that  the  words  of  the  covenant  were 
pronounced,  showing  that  the  functions  of  each  were  concerned  in  that  dispensa- 
tion. Moses  would  declare  the  law  to  the  people ;  Aaron  make  reconciliation 
for  sin.  Infinitely  glorious  the  surety  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  our  Divine 
JRedeemer,  of  whom  Moses  in  his  prophetical  ofiice,  and  Aaron  in  his  priestly, 
were  but  imperfect  types.  In  Him  was  every  qualification  to  mediate,  and  every 
right,  that  none  need  despair  of  redemption  who  trust  in  Him.     (W.  Sealon.) 


CHAPTER  XX. 


Vers.  1,  2.  God  spake  all  these  words. — The  Ten  Words  of  God: — I.  Those 
Ten  Commandments  were  to  the  Jews  the  very  utterance  of  the  Eternal, 
and  they  hold  in  their  grand  imagination  that  the  souls  of  all  Jews  even  yet 
unborn  were  summoned  to  Sinai  in  their  numbers  numberless  to  hear  that 
code ;  so  that,  in  the  East,  to  this  day,  if  a  Jew  would  indignantly  deny  the 
imputation  of  a  wrong,  he  exclaims,  "My  soul  too  has  been  on  Sinai."  And 
not  to  Jews  only  but  to  all  mankind  there  is  this  proof  that  the  Ten  Words 
were  indeed  the  oracles  of  God,  that,  if  they  be  written  upon  the  heart,  they 
are  an  "  It  is  written  "  sufiicient  for  our  moral  guidance — they  are  a  great  nori 
licet  strong  enough  to  quell  the  fiercest  passions.  For  the  laws  of  the  natural 
universe  may  mislead  us.  One  tells  us  that  they  are  just  and  beneficent ;  another 
that  they  are  deadly  and  remorseless  :  but  of  these  moral  Laws  we  know  that 
they  are  the  will  of  God.  No  man  has  seen  His  face  at  any  time.  He  seems  far 
away  in  His  infinite  heaven;  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him.  Yes; 
but  righteousness  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His  seat.  And  this  was  the 
very  idea  which  the  Jews  wished  to  symbolize  in  the  building  of  their  Tabernacle. 
They  hung  it  with  purple  curtains ;  they  overlaid  it  with  solid  gold ;  they  filled 
its  oute.-  court  with  sacrifices,  its  inner  chambers  with  incense  ; — but  when  the 
High  Pi  test  passed  from  the  Holy  into  the  Holy  of  Holies — when  on  the  great  Day 
of  Atonement  he  stood  with  the  censer  in  his  hands,  and  the  ardent  Urim  on  his 
breast,  before  what  did  he  stand  ?  Not  before  Visible  Epiphany ;  not  before 
Bculptuved  image.  There  was  total  darkness  in  the  shrine ;  no  sunlight  streamed, 
no  lamp  shed  its  silver  radiance ;  through  the  awful  silence  no  whisper  thrilled ; 
bai,  through  the  dim  gleam  of  the  glowing  thurible  and  the  smoke  of  the  wreathing 
incense,  he  saw  only  a  golden  Ark  over  which  bent  the  golden  figures  of  adoring 
Cherubim — and  within  that  Ark,  as  its  only  treasure,  lay  two  rough  hewn  tables  of 
venerable  stone,  on  which  were  carved  the  Ten  Commandments  of  the  fiery  Law. 
Those  stony  Tables,  that  Ark,  that  Mercy-seat,  those  adoring  Cherubim  seen  dimly 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XX. 

through  the  darkness,  were  to  him  a  visible  symbol  of  all  creation,  up  to  its  most 
celestial  hierarchies,  contemplating,  with  awful  reverence,  and  on  the  basis  of 
man's  spiritual  existence,  the  moral  Law  of  God.  II.  And  is  that  Law  abrogated 
NOW,  OK  SHORN  OF  ITS  SIGNIFICANCE  ?  Naj,  it  remains  for  the  Gentile  no  less  than 
for  the  Jew — for  the  nineteenth  century  after  Christ  no  less  than  for  the  fifteenth 
before  Him — the  immutable  expression  of  God's  will.  God,  as  the  Italian  proverb 
says,  does  not  pay  on  Saturdays.  He  is  very  patient,  and  men  may  long  deny 
His  existence  or  blaspheme  His  name,  but  more  than  in  the  mighty  strong  wind 
which  rent  the  mountains,  and  more  than  in  fire,  and  more  than  in  earthquake,  is 
God  in  that  still  small  voice  which  is  sounding  yet.  Oh,  it  is  not  in  Exodus  alone, 
or  in  Deuteronomy  alone,  but  in  all  nature  that  we  hear  His  voice.  In  scene  after 
scene  of  history,  in  discovery  after  discovery  of  science,  in  experience  after  expe- 
rience of  life,  have  we  heard  these  words  rolling  in  thunder  across  the  centuries  the 
eternal  distinction  of  right  and  wrong.  Confidently  I  appeal  to  you,  and  ask,  Have 
you  not,  at  some  time  in  your  lives,  heard  the  voice  of  God  utter  to  you  distinctly 
these  Commandments  of  the  moral  Law  ?  Is  there  one  here  who  has  ever  dis- 
obeyed that  voice  and  prospered  ?  If  there  be  one  here  who  feels,  at  this  moment, 
in  the  depths  of  his  soul,  a  peace  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away, 
is  it  not  solely  because  by  the  aid  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  he  has  striven  to  obey  it  ? 
Yes,  its  infinite  importance  is  that  it  is  as  old  not  as  Sinai,  but  as  humanity,  and 
represents  the  will  of  God  to  all  His  children  in  the  great  family  of  man  ;  so  that 
if  in  this  life  we  be  passing  from  mystery  to  mystery,  it  is  our  surest  proof  that  we 
are  passing  also  from  God  to  God.  What  matters  it  that  we  know  not  either 
whence  we  came  or  what  we  are,  if  "  He  hath  shown  thee,  oh,  man  !  what  is  good, 
and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to 
walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ?  "  HI.  And  thus  it  is,  lastly,  that  if  we  be  faithful 
THE  Law  may  lead  us  to  the  Gospel.  For  his  must  indeed  be  a  shallow  soul 
who  thinks  it  an  easy  thing  to  keep  the  Commandments.  When  we  observe  that 
the  summary  of  the  first  Table'  is  that  life  is  worship,  and  of  the  second  that  lite  is 
service ;  wben  we  notice  that  the  first  Table  forbids  sin  against  God,  first  in 
thought,  then  in  word,  then  in  deed ;  while  the  second,  proceeding  in  a  reverse 
order,  forbids  gins  against  our  neighbour  first  in  deed,  then  in  word,  and  then  in 
thought ;  so  that,  unlike  every  other  code  that  the  world  has  ever  known,  the 
Commandments  begin  and  end  with  the  utter  prohibition  of  evil  thoughts,  which 
of  us  is  not  conscious  that  we  have  utterly  broken  God's  Law  in  this,  that  out  of 
the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts  ?  And  when  we  go  from  Moses  to  Jesus,  from  Sinai 
to  Galilee,  will  Christ  abolish  the  Law  ?  will  He  teach  us  that  we  may  keep  both 
our  sin  and  our  Saviour,  and  that  there  is  no  distinction  between  a  state  of  sin  and 
a  state  of  grace?  There  are  no  dim  presences,  no  thundering  clouds,  no  scorching 
wilderness,  no  rolling  darkness  around  the  trembling  hill,  but  the  sweet  human 
voice  of  one  seated  in  the  dawn  on  the  lilied  grass  that  slopes  down  to  the  silver 
lake — but  does  that  voice  abrogate  the  Law  ?  Nay,  more  stringently  than  to  them 
of  old  time  come  the  ten  commandments  now.  JIurder  is  extended  to  a  furious 
thought ;  adultery  to  a  lascivious  look  ;  and  at  first  it  might  seem  as  if  our  last 
hope  were  extinguished,  as  if  now  our  alienation  from  God  be  permanent,  since 
admitted  into  a  holier  sanctuary  we  are  but  guilty  of  a  deadlier  sin.  And  when 
this  has  been  indeed  brought  home  to  us,  and  we  see  the  unfathomable  gulf  which 
yawns  before  a  God  of  infinite  holiness  and  a  heart  of  desperate  corruption,  then 
indeed — and  above  all  in  the  meeting  of  calamity  with  crime — then  cometh  the 
midnight.  But  after  that  midnight  to  the  faithful  soul  there  shall  be  light.  With 
the  per.-^onal  conviction  that  the  Law  worketh  wrath,  come  also  the  personil  expe- 
rience that  Christ  hath  delivered  us  from  its  curse.  In  Him  comes  ihe  sole 
antidote  to  guilt,  the  sole  solution  to  the  enigma  of  despair.  True,  He  c'eepened 
the  obligation  of  the  Law,  but  for  our  sake  He  also  fulfilled  it.  And  thus  by 
love,  and  hope,  and  gratitude,  and  help.  He  gives  us  a  new  impulse,  a  new  inspi- 
ration, and  this  is  Christianity;  and  this  Christianity  has  redeemed,  has  ennobled, 
has  regenerated  the  world.  The  "  thou  must "  of  Sinai  becomes  the  "  I  ought," 
"I  will,"  "I  can."  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Him  that  strengthent+h  me." 
And  then  for  us  the  Law  has  done  its  work.  It  has  revealed  to  us  the  will  of  God, 
it  has  revealed  to  us  the  apostacy  of  man,  it  has  driven  us  to  know  and  to  embr'aie 
the  deliverance  of  Christ.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  Ten  Commandments : — The 
Ten  Commandments  bold  a  conspicuous  position  in  that  prolonged  revelation  of 
Himself — His  character.  His  will,  and  His  revelations  to  mankind — which  God  made 
to  the  Jews.    They  can,  therefore,  never  become  obsolete.     I.  The  Ten  Command- 


CHAP,  XX.]  EXODUS.  833 

ments  rest  on  the  principle  that  God  claims  authority  over  the  moral  life  of  man. 
II.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  God  intended  that  these  commandments  should  be 
KEPT.  They  are  not  merely  to  bring  us  to  a  sense  of  our  guilt,  as  some  seem  to 
imagine.  III.  These  commandments  deal  chiefly  with  actions,  not  with  mere 
thought  or  emotion.  IV.  Before  God  gave  these  commandments  to  the  Jewish 
people,  He  wrought  a  magnificent  series  of  miracles  to  effect  their  emancipation 
from  miserable  slavery  and  to  punish  their  oppressors.  He  first  made  them  free, 
and  then  gave  them  the  law.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  Comprtliensive  summary  of  the 
Ten  Commandments  : — 1.  Its  uniqueness :  Compare  this  law  with  other  so-called 
legislations — e.g.,  Lycurgus,  Draco,  Solon,  the  Twelve  Tables.  Tbere  is  found  no 
counterpart ;  there  is  a  gulf  betwixt  them  and  it.  2.  Its  origin  :  What  is  it  that 
makes  this  separation  but  its  divinity?  Said  a  lawyer  of  eminence,  who  was  led 
to  renounce  his  infidelity  by  the  study  of  the  Decalogue:  "I  have  been  looking  into 
the  nature  of  that  law  :  I  have  been  trying  to  see  whether  I  can  add  anything  to  it, 
or  take  anything  from  it,  so  as  to  make  it  better.  Sir,  I  cannot ;  it  is  perfect." 
And  then,  having  shown  this  to  be  so,  he  concluded  :  "  I  have  been  thinking  where 
did  Moses  get  that  law  ?  I  have  read  history.  The  Egyptians  and  the  adjacent 
nations  were  idolaters  :  so  were  the  Greeks  and  Romans  :  and  the  wisest  and  best 
Greeks  and  Eomans  never  gave  a  code  of  morals  like  this.  Where  did  he  get  it  ? 
He  could  not  have  soared  so  far  above  his  age  as  to  have  devised  it  himself.  It 
came  down  from  heaven.     I  am  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  religion  of  the  Bible." 

3.  Its  scope  :  Were  we  to  keep  this  law,  we  should  need  no  other  codes  and  edicts — 
no  courts  and  prisons.  It  would  fill  the  sky  with  sunshine  and  the  earth  with 
righteousness.  4.  Its  simplicity  :  It  is  so  easily  interpreted.  5.  But  the  attempt  to 
keep  the  law  in  its  f-pirit  will  lead  to  the  revelation  of  self,  and  disclose  both  a 
disinclination  and  au  inability ;  and,  when  this  is  the  case,  the  law  becomes  a 
schoolmaster  to  lead  to  Christ.  (L.  0.  Thompson.)  Neijativc  Commandments  : — 
The  emphatic  and  repeated  "  Thou  shalt  not "  from  God  teaches — I.  Man's 
capacity  for  evil.  II.  Man's  tendency  to  evil.  III.  God's  knowledge  of  this 
capacity  and  tendency  cf  man.  IV.  God,  knowing  this,  nevertheless  prohibits 
BIN.  This  indicates— 1.  The  guilt  of  sin.  2.  The  care  of  God.  (U.  R.  Thomas.) 
The  Commandments : — I.  The  origin  of  these  commandments.  1.  The  Bible  thus 
commits  itself  unequivocally  to  the  highest  origin  for  these  laws.  (1)  Their  Divine 
origin  bespeaks  their  holy  and  righteous  nature,  and  their  absolute  authority.  (2) 
Their  Divine  origin  bespeaks  the  deep  interest  we  should  take  in  their  study,  as  well 
as  in  obeying  them.  2.  Di\ine  as  they  are  in  their  origin,  they  were  transmitted 
first  by  the  ministry  of  angels  to  Moses,  and  by  Moses  to  us.  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  17  ; 
Acts  vii.  53  ;  Gal.  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  ii.  2  ;  Deul.  v.  5,  x.  1-4.)  II.  The  nature  of  these 
commandments.  Lessons  :  1.  The  awe-inspiring  circumstances  of  the  giving  of  the 
law  suggest  the  solemnity  of  our  relations  to  God.  2.  Positive  institutions  of 
religion  are  a  necessity.   3.  They  must  be  of  God,  or  they  are  worse  than  worthless. 

4.  Those  which  bear  the  evidence  of  their  Divine  origin  are  alone  worthy  of 
obedience.  5.  The  only  worthy  obedience  is  that  which  is  hearty  and  complete. 
(D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  character  of  the  Decalogue  : — I.  The  Decalogue  is  in 
form  prohibitive,  a  solemn  witness  to  the  Fall.  A  bell  to  awaken  conscience, 
II.  Although  the  Decalogue  is  in  form  prohibitive,  yet  in  spirit  it  is  affirmative. 
A  negative  pole  implies  a  positive.  The  Ten  Words  are  divinely  covenantal,  rather 
than  divinely  statutory.  Law  is  never  as  imperial  as  love.  III.  The  Ten  Wordsor  Com- 
mandments are  in  their  character  germinal  and  suggestive,  rather  than  unfolded 
and  exhaustive.  They  are  the  rudimental  principles  of  morality,  the  germs  of  ethics, 
the  seminary,  or  seedplot,  of  religion.  IV.  But  although  the  Ten  Commandments  are 
rudimental  in  their  form,  they  are  also  elemental  in  their  meaning,  and  therefore 
universal  and  IMMORT.VL  IN  THEIR  APPLICATION.  Just  bccause  they  are  genns,  they  are 
capable  of  all  growth,  or  unfolding  along  the  lines  suggested  in  theembryo.  In  brief,  the 
Ten  Commandments  are  the  axioms  of  morals,  the  summary  of  ethics,  the  itinerary 
of  mankind,  the  framework  of  society,  the  vertebral  column  of  humanity.  {G.  D. 
Boardman.)  Characteristics  of  the  Decalogue  .-—The  Law  of  the  Ten  Words 
constitutes  the  very  heart  or  kernel  of  the  entire  Mosaic  system.  It  was  the  Law 
•which  lent  to  Mosaism  its  peculiar  character  as  a  temporary  interlude  in  the  history  of 
revelation.     I.  In  the  first  place,  every  circumstance  attending  its  promulgation 

WAS  ADJUSTED  SO  AS  TO  LEND  TO    IT  A  SOLEMN  AND  AWFUL  EMPHASIS.       II.  ThE  SANCTION 

OF  THE  Decalogue  was  fear.  In  the  infancy  of  the  individual,  when  as  yet  the 
immature  conscience  lacks  the  power  to  enforce  its  convictions  of  duty  upon  the 
nututored  passions,  the  first  step  in  moral  training  consists  in  impressing  upon  the 


834  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

child's  mind  a  wholesome  dread  for  the  constituted  authorities  of  the  home.  Love 
is  a  preferable  impulse  to  law-keeping,  no  doubt ;  but  love  cannot  be  wholly  depended 
on  till  the  habit  of  obedience  has  been  formed  and  principle  has  come  to  the  aid  of 
affection.  III.  It  belongs  to  the  same  juvenile  or  primary  character  of  this  code, 
as  designed  for  an  infant  people,  that  its  requirements  are  concrete,  and  expressed 
IN  A  negative  or  PROHIBITORY  FORM.  WhcD  you  have  to  deal  with  children,  you  do 
not  enunciate  principles  but  precepts.  You  do  not  bid  a  child  revere  all 
that  is  venerable  in  the  social  order;  but  you  say:  "Honour  thy  father  and 
mother."  You  do  not  tell  a  rude  populace  that  hatred  drives  God  out  of  the 
soul,  but  you  say  simply:  "Do  not  kill!"  Everything  must  be,  at  such  a  stage 
of  moral  education,  concrete,  portable,  and  unmistakable.  For  the  same 
reason,  it  will  usually  take  the  shape  of  a  prohibition  rather  than  of  a  command  :  a 
"  Do  not  "  rather  than  a  "  Do."  IV.  While  these  remarks  must  be  borne  in  mind 
if  we  would  understand  the  archaic  mould  in  which  this  code  is  cast,  there  is  at  the 
same  time  an  admirable  breadth  and  massiveness  abodt  its  contexts.  In  Ten 
Words  it  succeeds  in  sweeping  the  whole  field  of  duty.  V.  I  have  assumed  above 
— what   is  indeed  apparent  to  every  careful  reader — that  the  Decalogce   wa8 

DESIGNED  primarily  TO    BE  THE  CODE    OF   A    COMMONWEALTH.       In    the    aucicnt    WOrld, 

and  perhaps  in  the  infancy  of  all  societies,  the  idea  of  the  community  takes 
precedence  over  the  idea  of  the  individual.  The  family,  the  clan,  the  tribe,  the 
nation  :  these  are  the  ruling  conceptions  to  which  the  interests  of  the  private 
individual  are  subordinated.  Then,  each  man  exists  as  one  of  a  larger  body — heir 
of  its  past  and  parent  of  its  future.  VI.  It  is  when  one  views  the  Decalogue  under 
this  aspect,  that  one  can  best  see  how  it  came  to  include  two  parts,  a  sacred  and  a 
civil.  In  a  theocracy  there  can  be  no  such  sharp  distinction  as  we  make  between 
Church  and  State.  Indeed,  such  a  distinction  would  have  been  unintelligible  to 
any  ancient  people.  So  far  from  comprehending  the  modern  ideal  of  "  a  free  Church 
in  a  free  State,"  every  people  of  antiquity  took  for  granted  that  the  Church  and  the 
State  were  one.  Every  public  function  was  discharged,  every  expedition  undertaken, 
every  victory  gained,  under  the  immediate  counsel  and  patronage  of  the  Deity.  All 
this  was  just  as  strongly  felt  by  the  devotees  of  Bel  or  Nebo,  of  Osiris,  Chemosh  or 
Baal,  of  Athenii  or  Jove,  as  by  the  Hebrew  worshippers  of  Jehovah.  So  that,  again, 
when  it  pleased  God  to  throw  into  the  form  of  a  theocracy  His  peculiar  relationship 
to  Israel  as  a  vehicle  for  teaching  to  the  world  a  world-wide  revelation  of  grace.  He 
was  simply  accommodating  His  gracious  ways  to  the  thoughts  of  men  and  the  fashions 
of  the  age  that  then  was.  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  Law  given  from  Mount 
Sinai  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  man,  and  of  ttniversal  adoption : — I.  Some 
preliminary  remarks.  1.  Man  is  a  being  possessed  of  a  religious  capacity.  2.  Man 
is  a  moral  agent.  3.  It  is  possible  for  the  reason,  the  understanding,  and  the  moral 
sense  of  man  to  be  brought  to  such  a  state,  that  he  can  have  a  right  to  have  an 
opinion  both  upon  morals  and  religion.  II.  The  Law  itself  (vers.  3-17).  There 
are  two  parts  of  this  law — that  relating  to — 1.  Religion.  Here  are  four  things — (1) 
The  object  of  worship.  (2)  A  mode  of  worship.  (3)  The  inculcation  of  habitual 
reverence  with  respect  to  sacred  things.  (-1)  An  appointed  season  for  the  cultivation 
and  perfection  of  the  religious  capacity.  2.  Morals.  Here  is — (1)  Filial  "  honour." 
(2)  Respect  for  life.  (3)  Reverence  for  purity.  (4)  Respect  for  property.  (5)  Respect 
for  reputation.  (6)  Respect  and  regard  to  the  source  of  all  virtue— thine  own  htart. 
III.  A  few  observations  tending  to  show  that  this  law,  as  we  have  it  here,  is 
suited  to  the  circumstances  of  man,  and  of  universal  adaptation.  It  is  suited  to 
humanity — 1.  In  that  it  meets  the  essential  capacities  and  elements  of  human 
nature. '  2.  In  its  accidents  ;  that  is,  not  only  in  its  principles,  but  also  in  the  mode 
in  which  these  principles  are  to  be  carried  out.  3.  In  spite  of  some  of  the  accidental 
and  peculiar  topics  which  are  here  and  there  introduced  into  it.  4.  If  we  consider 
what  the  world  would  be  were  this  law  universally  obeyed ;  and  what  if  it  were 
universally  disobeyed.  IV.  The  preceding  point  being  made  out,  then  I  think  the 
presumptions  are  in  favour  of  this  law  having  been  given  by  God.  1.  The  history 
of  man  and  the  tendencies  of  human  nature  show  that,  if  the  original  state  of  man 
had  been  barbarism,  he  never  would  have  risen  out  of  it  by  his  own  efforts,  and 
never  would  have  discovered  such  principles  as  are  here  put  forth.  2.  In  the  most 
refined  ages  of  ancient  times,  no  moral  system  equal  or  even  approaching  in 
rationality,  purity,  and  simplicity  to  this  was  ever  taught  either  by  philosopher, 
statesman,  or  priest.  3.  Even  in  our  own  times  our  philosophers,  they  who  have 
rejected  revelation  and  have  given  us  moral  systems,  have  taught  principles 
subversive  of  these — Bolingbroke,  Blount,  Hume.     4.  This  law  unquestionably  was 


CHAP,  y.x.]  EXODUS.  335 

g'.ven  about  the  time  it  was  said  to  be.  We  find  that  it  must  have  been  given  by 
iVloses.  From  whom  did  he  obtain  it?  5.  We  now  have  the  fact — "God  spake  all 
these  words."  V.  Practical  remarks.  1.  Eeflect  on  the  internal  evidence  of  the 
superhuman  character  of  the  Bible.  2.  Notice  that  infidelity  is  always  associated 
with  impurity  and  blasphemy.  8.  Meditate  deeply  how  you  stand  in  relation  to  the 
Law.  4.  Accept,  in  addition  to  the  law  of  judgment,  the  gospel  of  mercy.  (T. 
Binnry.)  The  composition  of  the  Law  of  God  : — There  is  a  bell  in  the  cathedral 
of  Cologne,  made  by  the  melting  together  of  French  cannon.  It  would  have  been  a 
very  difficult  task,  indeed,  to  analyze  the  bell  and  determine  whence  the  cannon 
came.  Something  like  this,  however,  is  the  task  before  those  who  adopt  the  extreme 
iheories  of  the  rationalistic  critics  of  the  Pentateuch.  You  must  be  supposed  to 
show  in  the  minute  literary  traits  of  this  series  of  documents  the  dates  of  their 
trigin,  the  dates  of  their  combination,  and  the  dates  of  subsequent  editorial  super- 
visions. Even  if  it  were  to  be  granted  that  documents  drawn  from  many  polytheistic 
nations  and  ages  were  the  original  constituents  of  the  Pentateuch,  we  have  not 
touched  the  doctrine  of  the  inspiration  of  the  combined  mass  at  all.  The  mass  is 
strangely  purified  from  all  false  doctrine.  A  Divine  fire  has  burned  all  adulterate 
elements  wholly  out  of  it,  and  fused  the  constituents  in  a  combination  wholly  new. 
These  cannon  are  one  set  of  objects  ;  melted  together  into  a  bell,  hung  in  a  cathedral 
tower,  they  are  another  object  altogether.  Mere  white  dust  is  one  thing ;  compacted 
into  marble,  in  a  vase,  it  has  a  ring,  and  is  quite  another.  These  cannon,  melted 
and  hung  aloft  in  the  form  of  a  bell,  are  no  longer  cannon.  They  are  an  inspired 
work.  It  is  our  business,  indeed,  to  know  all  we  can  as  to  the  composition  of  this 
bronze  ;  but  our  highest  business  is  to  ring  the  bell  in  the  cathedral  tower.  The 
moral  law,  and  the  ethical  monotheism  of  the  Pentateuch,  have  proved  their 
resonance  as  often  as  they  have  been  put  in  practice,  age  after  age.  The  Pentateuch 
hung  in  the  cathedral  tower  of  the  world  has  uttered  God's  voice,  and  it  is  oar 
business  to  ask  how  we  can  ring  the  bell  in  the  heights  of  history,  rather  than  how 
it  originated  by  the  melting  together  of  many  fragments.  (Joseph  Cook.)  The 
itiexhauxtihility  of  the  Laic  of  God: — I  have  many  times  essayed  thoroughly  to 
investigate  the  Ten  Commandments,  but  at  the  very  outset,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy 
God,"  I  stuck  fast ;  that  very  one  word,  I,  put  me  to  a  iioii-jylus.  He  that  has  but 
one  word  of  God  before  him,  and  out  of  that  word  cannot  make  a  sermon,  can  never  be 
a  preacher.  {Luther's  Table  Talk.)  Usefulness  of  God's  Commandments  : — Eeconcili- 
ationtoGod  is  like  entering  the  gate  of  a  beautifulavenue,  which  conducts  to  a  splendid 
mansion.  But  that  avenue  is  long,  and  in  some  places  it  skirts  the  edge  of  dangerous 
cliffs,  and,  therefore,  to  save  the  traveller  from  falling  over  where  he  would  be  dashed 
to  pieces,  itis  fenced  all  the  way  by  a  quick-set  edge.  That  edge  is  the  Commandments. 
They  are  planted  there  that  we  may  do  ourselves  no  harm.  But,  like  a  fence  of  the 
fragrant  briar,  they  regale  the  pilgrim  who  keeps  the  path,  and  they  only  hurt  him 
when  he  tries  to  break  through.  Temperance,  justice,  truthfulness  ;  purity  of  speech 
and  behaviour ;  obedience  to  parents  ;  mutual  affection ;  sanctification  of  the  Sabbath ; 
the  reverent  worship  of  God  ;  all  these  are  righteous  requirements,  and  in  keeping 
them  there  is  a  great  reward.  Happy  he  who  only  knows  the  precept  in  the  perfume 
which  it  sheds,  and  who,  never  having  kicked  against  the  pricks,  has  never  proved 
the  sharpness  of  its  thorns.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  The  Laiiijirer  : — 1.  Let  us 
recognize  that  this  Law  has  its  source  in  God.  It  comes  to  us  from  His  will  whose 
authority  is  beyond  question,  and  our  obligation  to  obey  is  complete.  Since  "  God 
spake  all  these  words,"  we  find  in  them  the  law  of  our  being.  The  conscience  hears 
His  voice,  acknowledsjes  His  rightful  authority,  and  bows  before  Him.  2.  There  is 
great  need  of  the  "  I  ought  "  power  being  developed  in  our  nature  so  that  it  controls 
our  lives  ;  a  need  at  least  as  great  in  this  age  and  in  this  country  as  it  was  in  that 
early  age  and  in  the* wilderness  of  Sinai.  To  be  swayed  not  by  impulse,  nor  by 
intense  desire,  nor  by  aroused  wilfulness,  but  by  a  sense  of  obligation  to  God,  insures 
a  manhood  which  is  a  success  in  itself.  What  better  start  in  life  can  the  young  have 
than  a  firm  determinatioti  to  obey  God  ?  Can  there  be  a  better  guide  in  life,  in  the 
perplexities  of  society,  of  business  or  of  politics,  than  this  same  principle  of  obedience 
to  God  ?  3.  While  this  law  coming  from  God  binds  the  consi'ience,  it  at  the  same 
time  secures  true  liberty  of  conscience.  Nothing  can  bind  the  conscience  beyond 
or  contrary  to  this  law.  It  is  the  comprehensive  and  only  law  of  the  conscience. 
4.  This  law  coming  from  Gjd  repels  many  of  the  assaults  of  infidelity  upon  the 
Bible.  Infidelity  finds  it  impossible  to  account  for  the  exisience  of  this  law  in  the 
Bible.  Besides,  infidelity  is  forced  to  honour  the  moral  law  in  making  it  its  standard 
of  criticism.     Much  of  its  fault-finding  of  lives  and  mensnres  is  an  unintended 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  xx. 


tribute  to  the  law  of  God.     5.  The  fact  that  this  law  comes  from  God,  carries  with 
it  another  lesson  and  one  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us.     His  authority  run.^ 
through  all  the  divisions  of  the  law.     (1)  Both  tables  must  be  fully  observed,  or  the 
whole  law  is  broken.     We  cannot  be  devoted  to  God,  correct  in  matters  of  faith  and 
zealous  in  His  worship,  while  we  neglect  charity  of  f  eeUng,  word  and  act  toward  our 
brother.     Neither  can  we  truly  love  our  neighbour  while  we  neglect  God,  for  we     i 
cannot  keep  any  part  of  the  law  without  supreme  reverence  for  Him  who  commands.    | 
Neither  can  we  truly  love  our  neighbour  with  recognizing  that  we  are  boih  and    I 
equally  creatures  of  God.   (2)  There  is  a  tendency  also  to  separate  the  commandments, 
and  to  claim  virtue  for  keeping  some  while  we  make  hght  of  breaking  others.    Now, 
the  violation  of  one  precept  is  not  an  actual  violation  of  another,  but  it  is  the 
breaking  of  the  whole  law  in  that  it  sets  aside  the  authority  of  God.     If  he  keeps 
other  commandments,  it  must  be  from  other  considerations.     Ey  breaking   one 
commandment  he  shows  he  has  the  spirit  of  breaking  them  all,  for  he  does  not    \ 
submit  to  the  authority  of  God.  {F.  S.  Schenck.)     For  wfwm  is  the  Law  intended  ? —    ' 
In  the  preface  to  the  Law,  God  describes  Himself  not  only  as  the  self-existing 
Creator,  but  as  having  entered  into  close  personal  relation  with  the  Israelites  through 
promises  made  to  their  fathers,  some  of  which  had  just  been  faithfully  fulfilled  in 
conferring  great  blessings  upon  them.     So  He  appeals  not  only  to  their  respect  for 
His  authority,  but  to  the  relation  to  Him  which  they  had  inheiited  and  accepted, 
and  to  the  gratitude  they  should  have  for  such  benefits  received.     This  preface  does    i 
not  limit  the  following  law  to  the  Israelites,  but  makes  a  special  appeal  to  them.    | 
The  law  is  general,  for  all  mankind,  the  original  law  of  their  being,  since  it  appeals    ; 
to  and  arouses  the  universal  conscience  ;  but  a  special  revelation  of  God  and  rich   j 
favours  bestowed  form  a  strong  appeal  for  the  most  hearty  obedience.   God  describes    ' 
Himself  to  the  full  extent  in  which  He  had  at  that  time  revealed  Himself.     What- 
ever increase  of  revelation  we  have  received  strengthens  the  appeal.     This  shows  / 
the  kind  of  obedience  we  should  give :  not  reluctant,  but  eager ;  not  forced,  but  J 
spontaneous;  not  irkf-ome,  but  with  delight;  not  heartless,  but  with  the  enthusiasm  ( 
of  love.     Created  things  obey  the  laws  of  their  being  joyously.     Stars  shine,  flowers 
bloom,  birds  sing.     Surely  intelligent  beinps,  recognizing  the  law  of  their  being, 
should  joyously  obey  it,  especially  when  God  reveals  Himself  fully  and  confers 
richest  blessings   upon  them.     (Ibid.)       Of  the   Covimandments  :—l.  Questions. 
1.  What  is  the  difference  between  the  moral  law  and  the  gospel?     (1)  The  law 
requires  that  we   worship    God    as   our    Creator ;    the   gospel   requires  that   we 
worship  God  in  and  through  Christ.     God  in  Christ  is  propitious  ;  out  of  Christ  we 
may  see  God's  power,  justice,  holiness,  in  Christ  we  see  His  mercy  displayed. 
(2)  The  moral  law  requires  obedience,  but  gives  no  strength,  as  Pharaoh  required 
brick,  but  gave  no  straw,  but  the  gospel  gives  strength.    2.  Of  what  use,  then,  is  the 
moral  law  t©  us  ?     A  glass  to  show  us  our  sins,  and  drive  us  to  Christ.     3.  Is  the 
moral  law  still  in  force  to  believers  ?   In  some  sense  it  is  abolished  to  believers.    (1) 
In  respect  of  justification  ;  thoy  are  not  justified  by  their  obedience  to  the  moral 
law.     Believers  are  to  make  great  use  of  the  moral  law,  but  they  must  trust  only  to 
Christ's  righteousness  for  justification  ;  as  Noah's  dove  made  use  of  her  wings  to 
fly,  but  trusted  to  the  ark  for  safety.     (2)  The  moral  law  is  abolished  to  believers, 
in  respect  of  the  malediction  of  it ;  they  are  freed  from  the  curse  and  damnatory 
power  of  it  (Gal.  iii.  13).     4.  How  was  Christ  made  a  curse  for  us  ?     As  our  pledge 
and  surety.     Though  the  moral  law  be  not  their  saviour,  yet  it  is  their  guide ; 
though  it  be  not  a  covenant  of  life,  yet  it  is  a  rule  of  hving ;  every  Christian  is  bound 
to  conform  to  the  moral  law,  and  write,  as  exactly  as  he  can,  after  this  copy:  "  Do 
we  then  make  void  the  law  through  faith  ?  God  forbid."  Though  a  Christian  is  not 
under  the  condemning  power  of  the  law,  yet  he  is  under  the  commanding  power. 

II.    EULES   FOR    THE    RIGHT   trXDERSTANDINO  OF  THE  DECAIiOGUE.       1.    The    COmmauds 

and  prohibitions  of  the  moral  law  reach  the  heart.  2.  In  the  commandments  there 
is  a  synecdoche,  more  is  intended  than  is  spoken.  Where  any  duty  is  commanded, 
there  the  contrary  sin  is  forbidden,  &c.  3.  Where  any  sin  is  forbidden  in  the 
commandment,  there  the  occasion  of  it  is  also  forbidden .  4.  where  one  relation  is 
named  in  the  commandment,  there  another  relation  is  included.  5.  Where  greater 
sins  are  forbidden,  there  lesser  sins  are  also  forbidden.  6.  The  law  of  God  is 
copulative.  The  first  and  second  tables  are  knit  together, — piety  to  God,  and  equity 
to  our  neighbour ;  these  two  tables  which  God  hath  joined  together  must  not  be  put 
asunder.  7.  God's  law  forbids  not  only  the  acting  of  sin  in  our  own  persons,  but 
being  accessory  to,  or  having  any  hand  in  the  tins  of  others.  8.  The  last  rule 
about  the  commandments  is  this,  that  though  we  cannot,  by  our  own  strength,  fulfil 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  337 

all  these  commandments,  yet  doing  what  we  are  able,  the  Lord  hath  provided 
encouragement  for  us.  There  is  a  threefold  encouragement.  (1)  That  though  we 
have  not  ability  to  obey  any  one  command,  yet  God  hatli,  in  the  new  covenant, 
promised  to  work  that  in  us  which  He  requires  :  "  I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  My 
statutes."  The  iron  hath  no  power  to  move,  but  when  the  loadstone  draws  it, 
it  can  move;  "Thou  also  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us."  (2)  Though 
we  cannot  exactly  fulfil  all  the  moral  law,  yet  God  will,  for  Christ's  sake,  mitigate 
the  rigour  of  the  law,  and  accept  of  something  less  than  He  requires.  (3) 
Wherein  our  personal  obedience  comes  short,  God  will  be  pleased  to  accept  us 
in  our  surety:  "He  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the  beloved."  {T.  Watsou) 
I  am  the  Lord  thy  God. — The  i)reface  of  the  Laio  : — In  this  style  or  authority 
are  three  parts,  according  to  three  titles.  1.  The  first  title,  of  His  name — 
"Jehovah."  2.  Secondly,  the  title  of  His  jurisdiction— " thy  God."  3.  Thirdly, 
the  title  of  that  notable  act  He  did  last — "  which  brought  thee  out  of  the 
land   of   Egypt,"   &c.      (Bishop   Andrewes.)  The  preface: — I.   The    Speaker 

AND  Giver  of  these  commandments.  1.  It  is  the  Lord,  particularly  Jesus  Christ, 
who  gave  this  Law  in  the  name  of  the  Trinity.  This  is  plain  from  the 
Scripture  (Acts  vii.  38 ;  Heb.  xii.  2J:-26).  2.  The  speech  itself,  wherein  we 
have  a  description  of  the  true  God,  bearing  three  reasons  for  the  keeping 
His  commands.  (1)  From  His  sovereignty;  He  is  the  Lord.  (2)  From  His 
covenant-relation  to  His  people — thy  God.  (3)  From  the  great  benefit  of 
redemption,  and  deliverance  wrought  for  them.  fhe  preface  : — I.  I  begin  with 

the  first,  THE  preface  to  the  preface  :  "  God  spake  all  these  words,  saying,"  &c. 
This  is  like  the  sounding  of  a  trumpet  before  a  solemn  proclamation,  "  God 
spake  "  ;  other  parts  of  the  Bible  are  said  to  be  uttered  by  the  mouth  of  the 
holy  prophets,  but  here  God  spake  in  His  own  Person.  1.  The  Lawgiver : 
"  God  spake."  There  are  two  things  requisite  in  a  lawgiver.  (1)  Wisdom. 
Laws  are  founded  upon  reason  ;  and  he  must  be  wise  that  makes  laws.  God,  in 
this  respect,  is  most  fit  to  be  a  lawgiver:  "  He  is  wise  in  heart  ";  He  hath  a 
monopoly  of  wisdom:  "the  only  wise  God."  (2)  Authority.  God  hath  the 
supreme  power  in  His  hand ;  and  He  who  gives  men  their  lives  hath  most  right 
to  give  them  their  laws.  2,  The  Law  itself :  "  all  these  words  " ;  that  is,  all  the 
words  of  the  moral  Law,  which  is  usually  styled  the  Decalogue,  or  Ten  Com- 
mandments. It  is  called  the  moral  Law,  because  it  is  the  rule  of  life  and 
manners.  St.  Chrysostom  compares  the  Scripture  to  a  garden,  the  moral  Law  is 
a  chief  flower  in  it ;  the  Scripture  is  a  banquet,  the  moral  Law  the  chief  dish  in 
it.  (1)  The  moral  Law  is  perfect:  "The  Law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect."  It  is  an 
exact  model  and  platform  of  religion ;  it  is  the  standard  of  truth,  the  judge  of 
controversies,  the  polestar  to  direct  us  to  heaven.  (2)  The  moral  Law  is 
unalterable  ;  it  remains  still  in  force.  (3)  The  moral  Law  is  very  illustrious  and 
full  of  glory.  See  Exod.  xix.  10,  12  ;  xxxi.  18 ;  Deut  xxxii.  Use  1.  Here  we  may 
take  notice  of  God's  goodness  who  hath  not  left  us  without  a  Law :  therefore  the 
Lord  doth  often  set  it  down  as  a  demonstration  of  His  love  in  giving  His  Com- 
mandments. See  Psa.  cxlvii.  20 ;  Neh.  ix.  13  ;  Eom.  vii.  14.  The  Law  of  God  is 
a  hedge  to  keep  us  within  the  bounds  of  sobriety  and  piety.  Use  2.  If  God  spake 
all  these  words,  viz.,  of  the  moral  Law,  then  this  presseth  upon  us  several  duties : 
(1)  If  God  spake  all  these  words,  then  we  must  hear  all  these  words.  The  words 
which  God  speaks  are  too  precious  to  be  lost.  (2)  If  God  spake  all  these  words, 
then  we  must  attend  to  them  with  reverence.  f3)  If  God  spake  all  these  words 
of  the  moral  Law,  then  we  must  remember  them.  Those  words  are  weighty 
which  concern  salvation.  (4)  If  God  spake  all  these  words,  then  we  must 
believe  them.  Shall  we  not  give  credit  to  the  God  of  heaven?  (5)  If  God 
spake  all  these  words,  then  love  the  Commandments :  "  Oh,  how  love  I  Thy 
Law !  it  is  my  meditation  all  the  day."  (6)  If  God  spake  all  these  words,  then 
teach  your  children  the  Law  of  God :  "  These  words  which  I  command  thee  this 
day  shall  be  in  thy  heart,  and  thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  to  thy  children." 
He  who  is  godly,  is  both  a  diamond  and  a  loadstone ;  a  diamond  for  the  spark- 
ling of  his  grace,  and  a  loadstone  for  his  attractive  virtue  in  drawing  others  to  the 
love  of  God's  precepts ;  a  good  man  doth  more  good  to  his  neighbours  than  to 
himself.  (7)  If  God  spake  all  these  words,  then  the  moral  Law  must  be  obeyed. 
II.  The  preface  itself.  1.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God."  Here  we  have  a 
description  of  God — (1)  By  His  essential  greatness  :  "  I  am  the  Lord" — Jehovah. 
Let  us  fear  Him  (Deut.  xxviii.  58).  (2)  By  His  relative  goodness  :  "Thy  God." 
How  ?    Through  Jesus  Christ — Emmanuel.      (3)  How  may  we  come  to  know  this 

22 


3r8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xX. 

covenant  union,  that  God  is  our  God?  (a)  By  having  His  grace  planted  in  us. 
Kings'  children  are  known  by  their  costly  jewels  :  it  is  not  having  common  gifts 
which  shows  we  belong  to  God,  many  have  the  gifts  of  God  without  God,  but  it  is 
grace  gives  us  a  true  genuine  title  to  God.  In  particular,  faith  is  the  grace  of 
union ;  by  this  we  may  spell  out  our  interest  in  God.  (b)  ^Ye  may  know  God  is 
our  God,  by  having  the  earnest  of  His  Spirit  in  our  hearts.  God  often  gives  the 
purse  to  the  wicked,  but  the  Spirit  only  to  such  as  He  intends  to  make  His  heirs. 
Have  we  had  the  consecration  of  the  Spu-it  ?  (c)  We  may  know  God  is  our  God,  if 
He  hath  given  us  the  hearts  of  children.  Have  we  obediential  hearts  ?  do  we  sub- 
scribe to  God's  commands,  when  His  commands  cross  our  will  ?  A  true  saint  is 
like  the  flower  of  the  sun  :  it  opens  and  shifts  with  the  sun,  he  opens  to  God  and 
shuts  to  sin.  If  we  have  the  hearts  of  children,  then  God  is  our  father.  {d)  We 
may  know  God  is  ours,  and  we  have  an  interest  in  Him,  by  our  standing  up  for  His 
interest,  (e)  We  may  know  God  is  ours,  and  we  have  an  interest  in  Him,  by  His 
having  an  interest  in  us  :  "  My  beloved  is  Mine,  and  I  am  His."  Use  1.  Above  all 
things,  let  us  get  this  great  charter  confirmed,  that  God  is  our  God.  Deity  is  not 
comfortable  without  propriety.  Use  2.  To  all  such  as  can  make  out  this  covenant 
union,  it  exhorts  to  several  things.  (1)  If  God  be  our  God,  let  us  improve  our 
interest  in  Him,  cast  all  our  burdens  upon  Him,  the  burden  of  our  fears,  wants,  sins. 
(2)  If  God  be  our  God,  let  us  learn  to  be  contented,  though  we  have  the  less  of 
other  things.  Contentment  is  a  rare  jewel ;  it  is  the  cure  of  care.  If  we  have  God 
to  be  our  God,  well  may  we  be  contented,  (a)  God  is  a  sufi&cient  good.  Not  only 
full  as  a  vessel,  but  as  a  spring.  The  heart  is  a  triangle,  which  only  the  Trinity 
can  fill,  (b)  God  is  a  sanctifying  good.  He  sanctifies  all  our  comforts,  and  turns 
them  into  blessings.  He  sanctities  all  our  crosses  ;  they  shall  polish  and  refine  our 
grace.  The  more  the  diamond  is  cut  it  sparkles  the  more.  God's  stretching  the 
strings  of  His  viol,  is  to  make  the  music  the  belter,  (c)  God  is  a  choice  good.  All 
things  under  the  sun  are  but  the  blessings  of  the  footstool ;  but  to  have  God  Him- 
self to  be  ours  is  the  blessing  of  the  throne,  (rf)  God  is  the  chief  good.  In  the 
chief  good  there  must  be,  first,  delectability.  "At  God's  right  hand  are  pleasures." 
Secondly,  in  the  chief  good  there  must  be  transcendency,  it  must  have  a  surpassing 
excellency.  Thus  God  is  infinitely  better  than  all  other  things ;  it  is  below  the 
Deity  to  compare  other  things  with  It.  Who  would  go  to  weigh  a  feather  with  a 
mountain  of  gold  ?  Thirdly,  in  the  chief  good  there  must  be  not  only  fulness,  bat 
variety;  where  variety  is  wanting  we  are  apt  to  nauseate  ;  to  feed  only  on  honey 
would  breed  loathing  ;  but  in  God  is  all  variety  of  fulness.  (3)  If  we  can  clear  up 
this  covenant  union  that  God  is  our  God,  let  this  cheer  and  revive  us  in  all  condi- 
tions. To  be  content  with  God  is  not  enough,  but  to  be  cheerful.  What  greater 
cordial  can  you  have  than  union  with  Deity?  (4)  If  God  be  our  God,  then  let  us 
break  forth  into  doxology  and  praise  (Psa.  cxviii.  28).  (5)  Let  us  carry  ourselves 
as  those  who  have  God  to  be  their  God.  Live  holily.  2.  The  second  part  of  the 
preface :  "  which  have  brought,"  &c.  God  mentions  this  deUverance,  because  of — 
(1)  Its  strangsness.  (2)  Greatness.  3.  The  third  part  of  the  pi-eface  :  "out  of  the 
house  of  bondage."  (1)  God's  children  may  sometimes  be  under  sore  afilictions. 
(a)  For  probation,  or  trial.  Affliction  is  the  touchstone  of  sincerity,  (b)  For 
purgation ;  to  purge  our  corruption.  "  God's  fire  is  in  Zion."  This  is  not  to  con- 
sume, but  to  refine  ;  what  if  we  have  more  affliction,  if  by  this  means  we  have 
less  sin.  (c)  For  augmentation  ;  to  increase  the  craces  of  the  Spirit.  Grace 
thrives  most  in  the  iron  furnace;  sharp  frosts  nourish  the  corn,  so  do  shaip  afflic- 
tions grace  :  grace  in  the  saints  is  often  as  fire  hid  in  the  embers,  affliction  is  the 
bellows  to  blow  it  up  into  a  flame,  (d)  For  preparation  :  to  fit  and  prepare  us  for 
glory.  (2)  God  will  in  His  due  time  bring  His  people  out  of  their  afflicted  state. 
The  tree  which  in  the  winter  seems  dead,  in  the  spring  revives :  after  darkness 
Cometh  sunshine.  Affliction  may  leap  on  us  as  the  viper  did  on  Paul,  bat  at  last 
this  viper  shall  be  shal^en  off.  {1\  Watson.)  The  revelation  of  the  Divine  Xame  : — 
I.  God  in  covenant  with  man  is  the  condition  of  the  existence  and  develop- 
ment OF  man's  spiritual  life.  The  despair  of  the  sinner,  but  for  God's  mercy, 
would  crush  him.  And  what  know  we  of  God's  mercy  ?  For  ages  our  forefathers 
have  been  living  consciously  in  a  covenant,  and  all  our  ideas  of  God  have  been 
formed  by  it.  But  ask  that  agonized  father,  plunging  the  bare  knife  into  the 
throat  of  his  daughter,  or  flinging  his  tender  infant  into  that  seething  cauldron  of 
fire,  what  man,  ignorant  of  the  covenant,  knows  of  the  mercy  and  forgiveness  of 
God.  Man  lives  on  the  covenant ;  he  builds  his  life  on  the  promises ;  it  is  the 
condition  of  his  living  at  all  in  the  sense  in  wLicb  a  man  may  live.    II.  God  was 


CHAP,  sx.]  EXODUS.  899 

SEEKING  THE  COVENANT,  NOT   MAN.      It  is  God  wlio  acts,  man  who  accepts  ;  God 
who  gives,  man  who  receives;  and  thus  the  hope  of  man  has  its  strong  resting- 
place,  not  on  the  strivings  of  his  own  weak  will,  not  on  the  searchings  of  his  own 
too  easily  bewildered  and  blinded  intellect,  but  on  the  eternal  purpose  and  love  of 
God.      God  cannot  dispense  with  man's  heart,  will,  and  intellect ;  He  ltd  that 
people  there  that  He  might  engage  them  in  His  service.     Refuse  Him  that  service, 
and  the  covenant  is  worthless  to  you,  nay,  is  a  witness  against  you  to  condemna- 
tion ;  yield  them  lo  Him,  and  rest  in  the  assurance  that  your  salvation  depends 
not  on  your  own  weak  work  but  on  the  strong  arm  of  God.     IH.  You  will  find  two 
grand  features  in  that  which  was  transacted  there  on  the  Mount  of  God:  God  ke- 
VEALiNG  Himself — God    declaring    His    Law.      This   was   God's   covenant ;    the 
people  had  but  to  say  in  heart  and  with  voice  "  Amen."     1.  Nature,  circumstance, 
the  currents  of  life,  master  us,' till  we  know  tie  Divine  Name.     We  know  ourselves 
in  knowing  Him,  and  find  in  ourselves  the  broken  features  of  His  likene-s.      The 
first   step   towards   the  establishment  of  the  covenant  was  the  revelation  of  the 
Divine  name.      2.  It  was  a  merciful  name  which  the  Lord  made  known :  "  I  am 
the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  laud  of  Egypt,  out  of  the 
house  of  bondage.     I  am  the  God  of  thy  fathers."     How  tender,  how  blessed  the 
assurance!     3.  The  Lord's  name  is  holy.      "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  holy  Lord." 
A  sensual-hearted  man  will  fashion  gods  like  unto  himself.      A  wise  and  earnest- 
hearted  man  will  "  give  thanks  at  the  remeiabrnnce  of  God's  holiness."     {J.  B. 
Brown,  B.A.)         The  Jeicinh  knowledge  of  God  : — To  the  Jews,  Jehovah  was  not  a 
mere  idea  or  a  system  of  attributes.      They  did  not  think  of  Him  as  the  Necessary 
Cause  of  the  universe,  or  as  a  Being  inaccessible  to  human  knowledge,  but  whom  it 
was  their  duty  to  invest  with  whatever  perfections  could  exalt  and  glorify  Him — 
iniinite  wisdom,  infinite  power,  awful  ri^ihteousnes^,  inflexible  truth,  and  tenderest 
love.      It  never  occurred  to  them  to  suppose  that  they  had  to  think  out  a  God  for 
themselves  any  more  than  it  occurred  to  them  that  they  had  to  think  out  a  king 
of  Egypt.      They  knew  Jehovah  as  the  God  who  had  held  back  the  waves  like  a 
wall  while  they  tied  across  the  sea  to  escape  the  vengeance  of  their  enemies  ;  they 
knew  Him  as  the  God  who  had  sent  thunder,  and  lightning,  and  hail,  plagues  on 
cattle,  and  plagues  on  men,  to  punish  the  E;.'yptians  and  to  compel  tliem  to  let 
the  children  of  Israel  go  ;  they  knew  Him  as  the  God  whose  angel  had  slain  the 
firstborn  of  their  oppressors,  and  filled  the  land  from  end  to  end  with  death,  and 
agony,  and  terror.     He  was  the  same  God,  so  Moses  and  Aaron  told  them,  who  by 
visions  and  voices,  in  promises  and  precepts,  had  revealed  Himself  long  before  to 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.     We  learn  what  men  are  from  what  they  say  and  what 
they  do.     A  biography  of  Luther  gives  us  a  more  vivid  and  trustworthy  knowledge 
of  the  man  than  the  most  philosophical  essay  on  his  character  and  creed.     The 
story   of    his  imprisonment  and    of   his    journey    to    Worms,    his    Letters,    his 
Sermons,    and    his    Table    Talk,    are   worth    more    than    the    most    elaborate 
speculations  about  him.      The  Jews  learnt  what   God   is,  not   from   theological 
dissertations  on  the  Divine  attributes,   but  from  the  facts  of  a  Divine  history. 
They  knew  Him  for  themselves  in  His  own  acts  and  in  His  own  words.      {R.   W. 
Dale,  D.D.)  Man's  religions  craving  satisfied  : — Man's  nature  is  religious.      He 

instinctively  worships  some  being,  whom  he  regards  as  God.  It  is  the  nature  of 
religious  worship  to  assimilate  the  character  of  the  worshipper  to  that  of  the  being 
worshipped.  The  objects  of  worship,  everywhere  throughout  the  ancient  world, 
were  corrupt  and  corrupting.  In  order  to  man's  moral  improvement,  he  must 
have  a  holy  object  of  worship.  It  is  obviously  impossible  for  an  imperfect  and 
einful  man  to  originate  the  idea  of  a  perfect  and  sinless  God.  The  gods  whom  men 
invented  and  set  up  were  as  imperfect  and  wicked  as  themselves  ;  and  from  the 
nature  of  the  case,  they  could  not  be  otherwise.  Moses,  on  the  contrary,  revealed 
a  holy  and  a  perfect  God.  How  pure,  how  amiable,  how  sublime,  how  transcen- 
dently  glorious  the  character  with  which  this  God  is  invested  by  the  Hebrew  law- 
giver !  How  striking  the  contrast  which  his  sublime  delineation  of  Jehovah  as 
the  Maker,  Proprietor,  and  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  invested  with  every  conceiv- 
able excellence,  presents  to  the  grovelling  mythology  of  the  most  enlightened 
portions  of  the  ancient  world,  in  which  the  objects  of  religious  worship  were 
pictured  with  the  passions  and  vices  of  the  fierce  and  licentious  chieftains  of  the 
primitive  ages  !  The  publication  of  such  a  theology  in  such  an  age,  when  poly- 
theism had  covered  the  earth  with  the  temples  and  altars  of  its  monster  gods, 
cannot  be  satisfactorily  accounted  for  without  allowing,  and  is  satisfactorily 
accounted  for  by  allowing,  the  truth  of  the  Mosaic  history,  and  the  establishment 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

of  the  Mosaic  constitution  by  Divine  authority.       {E.  C.  Wines,  D.D.)  "I  am 

the  Lord  thy  God  " — a  ivord  to  rest  on  in  death  : — When  Ebenezer  Erskine  lay 
on  his  deathbed,  one  of  his  elders  said  to  him,  "  Sir,  you  have  given  us  many  good 
advices ;  may  I  ask  what  you  are  now  doing  with  your  own  soul  ?  "  "I  am  jus  , 
doing  with  it,"  he  replied,  "  what  I  did  forty  years  ago  :  I  am  resting  on  that  word 
— '  I  am  the  Lord  tby  God.'  "  Out  of  the  lajid  of  Egypt. — God's  deliverance 

of  His  people: — Bearing  in  mind  the  universality  of  the  Decalogue,  this  "  land  of 
Egypt  "  and  "  house  of  bondage  "  must  have  a  far  deeper  and  wider  signification 
than  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  Egypt  is  a  synonym  for  an  ungodly  world,  which 
captivates  the  heart  of  man,  and  from  which  the  grace  of  God  relcMses  the  re- 
newed soul.  The  Law  of  God  is,  therefore,  in  its  holiness,  justice,  and  goodness, 
held  up  to  those  who  have  been  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  It  is  not  so 
held  up  to  the  ungodly — they  cannot  love  it,  they  cannot  see  its  beauty.  By  the 
Lord's  telling  us  that  He  has  already  brought  us  out  of  Egypt  and  bondage.  He 
does  not  say  when  He  gives  us  the  Law :  "  Do  this  and  live,"  but  "  Since  ye  live, 
do  tins  "  ;  "  Since  My  grace  has  redeemed  you,  and  you  rejoice  in  the  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God,  use  My  Law,  the  reflection  of  My  perfections,  as  j-our  beloved 
guide."  There  is  one  other  expression  in  this  preface  which  should  be  noted.  It 
is  the  use  of  the  second  person  singular,  "  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt."  There  are  two  thoughts  connected  with  this  use.  1.  The  first  is  that 
God  deals  with  all  Israel  as  one  man.  He  expects  them  to  be  one,  of  one  mind 
and  one  heart,  before  Him.  There  must  be  no  antagonisms  among  God's  people. 
He  has  taken  us  out  of  the  contentious  world,  not  that  we  should  be  only 
another  contentious  world,  but  that  we  should  show  our  distracted  earth  the 
harmony  of  heaven.  He  wishes  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  Himself.  Sin 
divides  men,  grace  unites  them.  2.  The  other  thought  regarding  the  use  of  the 
second  person  singular  here  is  this :  God  treats  man  individually.  Man  enters 
heaven  or  hell,  not  in  companies  or  battalions,  but  in  naked  individuality.  It  waa 
thyself  personally  that  wert  delivered  from  that  dark  Egypt  of  condemnation,  was 
it  not  ?  And  so  you  can  say  :  "  Who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  {H. 
Crosby,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  Me. — The  First  Commandment : — I. 
This  Commandment  does  not  tell  the  Jews  that  the  gods  worshipped  by  other 
NATIONS  HAVE  NO  EXISTENCE  ;  it  tcUs  him  that  he  must  offer  them  no  homage,  and 
that  from  him  they  must  receive  no  recognition  of  their  authority  and  power.  The 
Jew  must  serve  Jehovah,  and  Jehovah  alone.  This  was  the  truest  mothod  of 
securing  the  ultimate  triumph  of  monotheism.  A  religious  dogma,  true  or  false, 
perishes  if  it  is  not  rooted  in  the  religious  affections  and  sustained  by  religious 
observances.  But  although  the  First  Commandment  does  not  declare  that  there 
is  one  God,  the  whole  system  of  Judaism  rests  on  that  sublime  truth,  and  what  the 
Jews  had  witnessed  in  Egypt  and  since  their  escape  from  slavery  must  have  done 
more  to  destroy  their  reverence  for  the  gods  of  their  old  masters  than  could  have 
been  effected  by  any  dogmatic  declaration  that  the  gods  of  the  nations  were  idols. 
II.  The  Fibst  Commandment  sut  appear  to  have  no  direct  practical  value 
FOR  ourselves.  It  would  be  a  perversion  of  its  obvious  intention  to  denounce 
covetousness,  social  ambition,  or  excessive  love  of  children.  These  are  not  the 
sins  which  this  Commandment  was  meant  to  forbid.  It  must  be  admitted  that 
there  is  no  reason  why  God  should  say  to  any  of  us,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other 
gods  before  Me. "  If  He  were  to  speak  to  many  of  us,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
condemn  us  for  having  no  god  at  all.  The  appalling  truth  is,  that  many  of  us  have 
sunk  into  atheism.  We  all  shrink  from  contact  with  God.  And  vet  He  loves  us. 
But  even  His  love  would  be  unavailing  if  He  did  not  inspire  those  who  are  filled 
with  shame  and  sorrow  by  the  discovery  of  their  estrangement  from  Him,  with  a 
new  and  supernatural  life.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D-D".)  The  First  Commandment : — I. 
All  want  of  a  positive  allegiance  to  Jehovah  is  a  positive  allegiance  to 
ANOTHER  Elohim  OR  SUPREME  GoD.  A  Self-reliant  man,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the 
word,  never  yet  existed.  Man's  nature  is  such  that  he  looks  without  him  for 
support,  as  the  ivy  feels  for  the  tree  or  the  wall.  If  he  has  not  the  true  and  living 
God  as  his  stay,  then  he  is  an  idolater.    II.  All  allegiance  to  God  that  does 

NOT  recognize  HiM  AS  He  HAS  REVEALED  HiMSELF  IS  ALLEGIANCE  TO  A  FALSE  GOD. 

So  a  view  of  God  as  careless  of  personal  holiness  in  His  creatures,  or  as  too  exalted 
to  notice  all  their  minute  acts  and  thoughts,  or  as  tyrannical  and  arbitrary  in  His 
dealings  with  them,  or  as  appeasable  by  self-denials  and  penances,  is  a  view  of  a 


CHAP,  XX.]  EXODUS.  341 

false  god,  and  not  a  view  of  Jehovah,  the  only  living  and  true  God.  And  the  man 
who,  despising  or  neglecting  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  trusting  to  his  reason  or  his 
dreams,  or  to  nature,  or  to  nothing,  holds  such  a  god  before  his  mind,  is  an 
idolater  ;  he  has  put  another  Elohim  before  Jehovah  Elohim.  Becau^  the  thought 
of  the  Divine  Being  which  he  thus  introduces  into  his- heart  becomes  The  substitute 
for  the  true  motion  that  should  guide  his  life,  he  puts  the  helm  into  as  false  hands 
as  if  he  had  delivered  it  to  Mammon.  Several  subordinate  thoughts  naturally 
follow.  1.  The  help  of  the  true  God,  Jehovah-Jesus,  should  be  sought  by  us  to 
overthrow  our  false  gods.  By  that  very  act  we  should  offer  rightful  allegiance,  and, 
in  so  doing,  consecrate  our  life  to  the  rightful  service  of  Him  who  is  our  rightful 
King.  2.  How  watchful  we  should  be  in  this  earth,  where  the  false  gods  are  not 
only  plenty,  but  exactly  after  the  fashion  of  our  own  depraved  hearts  !  It  was  said 
of  Athens  "that  at  each  corner  there  was  a  new  god,  and  some  have  even  said  that 
in  population  Athens  had  more  gods  than  men.  It  is  so  with  our  unseen  gods  of 
the  unregenerate  heart.  They  abound  with  different  names  and  different  charac- 
ters, according  to  the  tastes  and  characters  of  different  men.  3.  The  Word  of 
God  ought  to  be  in  our  hands  all  the  while.  This  is  the  only  offensive  weapon 
against  our  false  gods.  (H.  Crosby,  D.D.)  The  First  Commandment: — This 
Commandment,  as  all  the  rest,  hath  a  positive  part  requiring  something,  and  a 
negative  part  prohibiting  something.  I.  We  shall,  in  the  first  place,  speak  to  what  is 
REQUIRED  here,  and  we  take  it  up  in  these  three  things.  1.  And  first,  it  requireth 
the  right  knowledge  of  God ;  for  there  can  be  no  true  worship  given  to  Him,  there 
can  be  no  right  thought  or  conception  of  Him,  or  faith  in  Him,  till  He  be  known. 
2.  It  requireth  from  us  a  suitable  acknowledging  of  God  in  all  these  His  properties. 
As— (1)  That  He  be  highly  esteemed  above  all.  (2)  Loved.  (3)  Feared.  (4) 
Beheved  and  trusted  in.  (5)  Hoped  in.  (6)  Adored.  (7)  Honoured.  (8)  Served 
and  obeyed.  And  so — (9)  He  must  be  the  supreme  end  in  all  our  actions  that 
should  mainly  be  aimed  at  by  us.  3.  It  requireth  such  duties  as  result  from  His 
excellency,  and  our  acknowledging  Him  to  be  such  a  one.  As — (1)  Dependence 
upon  Him.  (2)  Submission  to  Him,  and  patience  under  cross  dispensations  from 
Him.  (3)  Faith  resting  on  Him.  (4)  Prayers  put  up  to  Him.  (5)  Eepentance  for 
wronging  Him.  (6)  Communion,  and  a  constant  walking  with  Him.  (7)  Delighting 
in  Him.  (8)  Meditating  on  Him  ;  and  such  other  as  necessarily  may  be  inferred 
as  duties  incumbent  on  creatures  in  such  a  relation  to  such  a  God,  whose  excellency 
and  worth  calleth  and  inviteth  men  to  all  suitable  duties.  4.  Next,  it  is  necessary 
that  we  add  some  advertisements  to  these  generals.  (1)  That  the  Commandment 
requireth  all  these,  and  in  the  highest  and  most  perfect  degree.  (2)  That  it  not  only 
requireth  them  in  ourselves,  but  obligeth  us  to  further  them  in  all  others,  according 
to  our  places  and  callings.  (3)  That  it  requireth  the  diligent  use  of  all  means  that 
may  help  and  further  us  in  these ;  as  reading  and  meditation,  study,  &c.  (4) 
That  these  things,  which  in  some  respect  may  be  given  to  creatures,  as  love,  fear, 
&c.,  yet,  when  they  are  required  as  duties  to  God,  they  are  required  in  a  far  more 
imminent  way.  II.  In  the  next  place,  we  should  consider  the  negath^e  part  of 
this  Commandment,  for  the  extent  thereof  will  be  best  discerned  by  considering 
what  is  forbidden  therein,  and  how  it  may  be  broken.  This  idolatry  is  either — 
1.  Doctrinal,  or  idolatry  in  the  judgment,  when  one  professedly  believeth  such  a 
thing  besides  God  to  have  some  divinity  in  it;  as  heathens  do  of  their  Mars  and 
Jupiter ;  or — 2.  Practical,  wben  men  believe  no  such  thing,  and  will  not  own  any 
such  opinion,  yet  are  guilty  of  the  same  thing,  as  covetous  men,  &c.  3.  It  maybe 
distinguished  into  idolatry  that  hath  something  for  its  object,  as  the  Egyptians 
worshipped  beasts,  and  tbe  Persians  the  sun  or  fire,  and  that  which  has  nothing 
but  men's  imaginations  for  its  object,  as  these  who  worship  feigned  gods;  in 
which  respect  the  apostle  saith,  "  an  idol  is  nothing  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  4).  4.  We  would 
distinguish  betwixt  the  objects  of  idolatry  ;  and  they  are  either  such  as  are  in 
themselves  simply  sinful,  as  devils,  profane  men  ;  or  they  are  such  as  are  good  in 
themselves,  but  abused  and  wronged,  when  they  are  made  objects  of  idolatry,  as 
angels,  saints,  sun,  moon,  &c.  5.  Distinguish  betwixt  idolatry  that  is  more  gross 
and  professed,  and  that  which  is  more  latent,  subtle,  and  denied.  This  distinction 
is  like  thai  before  mentioned,  in  opinion  and  practice,  and  much  coincideth  with 
it.  6.  Distinguish  betwixt  heart-idolatry  (Ezek.  xiv. ;  chap.  xiv.  11,  12,  and  xvi. 
,2,  3),  and  external  idolatry.  The  former  consisteth  in  an  inward  heart-respect  to 
some  idol,  as  this  tumultuous  people  were  enslaved  to  their  ease  and  bellies  in  the 
last  two  fore-cited  places  ;  the  other  in  some  external  idolatrous  gesture  or  action. 
(James  Durham.)        The  First  Commandment : — First,  there  is  the  positive  declara 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

— f,  ■ . 

tion  of  a  personal  God  ;  and  secondly,  His  claim  to  be  worshipped  as  the  one  true 
and  living  God.     The  most  obvious   errors  requiring  our  attention  are  four  in 
number — Atheism,  Polytheism,  Pantheism,  and  Deism.      1.  Except  as  a  cloke  for 
immorality  and  sinful  indulgence,  I  am  inclined  to  doubt  the  existence  of  Atheism, 
and  the  study  of  history  confirms  me  in  the  doubt.     2.  But  what  of  the  Polytheist, 
the  worshipper,  that  is,  of  many  gods ;  in  this  respect,  at  least,  the  very  opposite  to 
the  last  ?     It  is  not  difficult  to  trace  his  origin.     When  time  was  young,  men  lived 
together  in  families,  tribes,  or  small  communities  ;  beyond  the  circle  of  these  they 
very  rarely  travelled.     Before  they  were  able  to  realize  the  idea  of  the  oneness  of 
the  human  race,  each  family  would  not  unnaturally  aim  at  being  complete  in 
itself ;  and  as  tending,  especially  to  this,  they  would  place  themselves  under  the 
protection  of  some  one  particular  god,  and  then  gods  multiplied,  as  a  necessary 
consequence,  upon  the  increase  of  people  and  subdivision  of  tribes.     This  was  one 
cause.     We  might  discover,  without  difficulty,  others  of  a  different  nature.     To 
take  one  instance,  in  times  of  ignorance,  when  the  mind  was  unable  to  grasp  the 
Infinite,  men  seized  upon  what  was  best  in  themselves,  or  what  was  noblest  in 
nature,  and  deified  this  ;  and  so  at  one  time  we  find  Earth,  Air,  Fire,  and  Water, 
receiving  the  homage  of  men  ;  and  at  another  we  see  temples  arising  to  Faith,  or 
Modesty,  or  Constancy,  or  Hope.     But  all  this,  whatever  its  origin,  was  openly 
denounced  by  the  simple  declaration  standing  at  the  head  of  the  first  table :  "I 
am,"  &c.     3.  Of  the  Pantheist  I  shall  only  speak  briefly.     The  meaning  of  the 
term  is  :  "  one  who  believes  that  everything  is  God,  and  God  is  everything."    He 
deifies  all  that  is  best  in  nature,  especially  the  intellect  or  mind,  and  His  Supreme 
Being  is  a  combination  of  the  united  intelligences  of  the  world.     But  if  all  that  is 
intelligent,  all  that  is  best  in  created  things,  is  God,  then  that  which  is  best  in 
myself  is  God,  and  demands  my  worship  and  adoration.     And  what  is  this  but  to 
give  to  the  creature  what  belongs  and  is  due  to  the  Creator  alone  ?    4.  The  Deist 
believes  in  a  God,  as  his  name  implies,  but  does  not  believe  that  that  God  has  ever 
revealed  Himself  to  man ;  and  this  is  to  deny  the  Bible,  to  deny  Christianity,  to 
deny  Christ.     He  holds  that  when  the  Supreme  Being  finished  the  creation  of  the 
world,  He  assigned  to  nature  "  Laws  that  should  never  be  broken,"  and  then  with- 
drew Himself  from  the  government  of  the  universe.     Again,  besides  the  fact  that 
the  Deist  will  not  allow  to  God  any  superintendence  or  control  over  the  works  of 
His  bands,  thereby  cutting  off  from  man  his  most  consoling  faith  in  an  all-wise  and 
merciful  Providence,  He  casts  him  adrift  on  the  wide  ocean  of  life,  with  no  compass 
to  steer  by,  and  no  chart  to  preserve  his  vessel  from  shoals  and  rocks,  and  all  the 
countless  perils  of  the  deep.     If  God  has  not  revealed  Himself  to  man,  then  what  can 
he  know  of  a  future  life,  what  of  the  immortality  of  his  soul  ?     And  with  this 
unknown,  it  matters  not  what  be  his  life  and  conduct  on  earth,  for  death  is  the 
close  of  all  things,  and  there  is  nothing  but  darkness  beyond  the  grave !     (if.  M. 
Luckock,  D.D.)         On  going  after  other  gods  : — Going  after  other  gods  is  a  snare  of 
the  spiritual  life  into  which  we  are  liable  to  drift  before  suspecting  any  danger,  for 
it  does  not  necessarily  mean  the  pursuit  of  things  evil  in  their  nature,  but  of  things, 
innocent  enough  perhaps  in  themselves,  which,  by  impressing  us  with  an  exag- 
gerated idea  of  their  importance  or  blessing,  absorb  that  devotion  which  we  owe  to 
God,  and  demand  from  us  a  service  which  is  due  to  Him  alone.     I.  There  is  the 
God  of  PUBLIC  OPINION.     There  is  such  a  thing  as  healthy  public  opinion ;  but  there 
are  times  when  its  tone  becomes  lowered,  and  a  very  imperfect  standard  of  conduct 
is  all  that  is  needed  to  satisfy  its  requirements.     It  involves  a  moral  effort  to  which 
many  are  unequal  to  retain,  in  its  integrity,  the  sense  of  sinfulness  attached  to  any 
course  of  conduct  which  God  forbids  when  public  opinion  gives  its  sanction.    II. 
There  is  the  god  of  pleasuke.     This  is  a  deity  which,  when  once  installed  in  the 
heart  of  a  man,  is  insatiable  in  its  demands.     Instead  of  remaining  the  handmaid 
of  duty,  it  becomes  its  sworn  foe ;  instead  of  being  the  solace  and  refreshment  of 
toil,  it  harasses  and  interferes  with  our  work.      The  man  who  is  a  slave  to  pleasure" 
looks  upon  all  work  as  a  grievance  more  or  less  ;  to  be  shirked  altogether,  if  possible, 
or  to  be  got  through  as  quickly  as  may  be.     His  main  interest  in  life  is  not  centred 
in  duty,  but  in  amusement.    But  this  exacting  deity  not  only  grudges  every  moment 
of  our  time  which  is  not  given  up  to  its  service,  it  grudges,  too,  every  penny  of  our 
money  which  is  not  spent  for  its  gratification.     III.  There  is  the  god  of  success. 
The  dangers  of  the  spiritual  life  attached  to  the  worship  of  this  god  are  very  real. 
The  man  who  worships  success,  who  in  his  innermost  heart  values  it  more  than 
anything  else,  and  looks  upon  it  as  the  one  object  to  set  before  himself,  by  a  natural 
law  of  his  being,  is  prepared,  if  the  need  arises,  to  make  any  sacrifice  for  it, 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS,  8i3 

including  even  the  incurring  of  God's  displeasure.  There  is  no  more  dangerous 
rival  deity  which  we  can  admit  into  our  hearts  than  success.  It  blinds  us  to  all 
that  is  by  the  way.  It  makes  us  inconsiderate  and  unscrupulous  in  the  struggle  of 
life  ;  and  as  the  competition  of  life  increases,  and  the  chances  of  getting  on  become 
fewer,  we  are  tempted  to  subordinate  all  higher  considerations  to  the  one  idea  of 
personal  advancement.  Another  and  by  no  means  the  least  mischievous  effect  of 
putting  too  great  store  by  success  in  any  shape,  is  that  it  leads  us  to  look  to  it  for 
our  sole  encouragement  and  reward  in  the  efforts  both  of  spiritual  and  secular  life. 
As  "  it  is  not  in  man  to  command  success,"  it  follows  that  those  who  make  success 
their  god  can  have  nothing  to  fall  back  upon  in  the  hour  of  failure.  (M.  Tweddell, 
M.A. )  The  First  Commandment  .-—How  shall  we  conceive  of  God  ?  Who  is  He  ? 
What  is  His  name  ?  The  First  Commandment  answers  these  questions.  The 
language  is  local,  but  the  meaning  is  universal.  I.  The  meaning  of  the  First 
Commandment  foe  the  ancient  Jew.  II.  The  meaning  of  the  First  Command- 
ment FOR  ourselves.  1.  The  Divine  declaration.  (1)  The  name  "  Jehovah." 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  Deity  in  exposition — the  Word  of  God.  See  how  the  "  I  am  " 
of  the  burning  bush  reappears  in  the  "I  am"  of  the  Nazarene  (Matt,  xviii.  20; 
xxviii.  20 ;  John  viii.  58 ;  xiv.  3 ;  xvii.  24  ;  Rev.  i.  8).  (2)  The  Divine  relation. 
Who  is  Jehovah's  Israel  in  our  day  and  land?  It  is  the  Church  of  the  Living  God 
(see  Rom.  ii.  28,  29  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  27).  If  we  really  belong  to  Christ,  truly  loving  Him 
and  obeying  Him  and  sharing  His  character,  we  are,  in  spite  of  all  our  diversities, 
one  Christian  personality ;  for  in  Christ  Jesus  there  can  be  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile, 
neither  Greek  nor  Scythian,  neither  male  nor  female ;  for  all  in  Christ  are  one, 
and  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.  (3)  The  Divine  deliverance.  As  it  is  the  Church 
that  is  the  true  Israel,  so  it  is  Diabolus  who  is  the  true  Pharaoh,  and  Sin  which  is 
the  true  Egypt,  and  Jesus  who  is  the  true  Deliverer.  2.  The  Divine  prohibi- 
tion. We  ourselves  need  this  prohibition  no  less  than  did  ancient  Israel.  For, 
although  Christendom,  theoretically  speaking,  is  monotheistic,  yet  Christendom, 
practically  speaking,  is  largely  polytheistic.  Recflll,  for  example,  the  practical 
tritheism  of  many  Trinitarians,  conceiving  the  three  Persons  in  the  Trinity 
as  three  distinct  Gods  ;  or  the  practical  dualism  of  many  Christians,  con- 
ceiving the  Father  as  the  God  of  wrath,  and  the  Son  as  the  God  of  love : 
or,  again,  conceiving  the  Creator  as  the  God  of  nature,  and  the  Redeemer  as 
the  God  of  Scripture.  Behold  in  the  Pantheon  of  our  Christendom  how  many 
niches  there  are  for  various  gods — the  god  of  the  deist,  the  god  of  the  materialist, 
the  god  of  the  fatalist,  the  god  of  the  sentimentahst,  the  god  of  the  churchman,  the 
god  of  the  pantheist.  Concluding  Lessons  :  1.  Our  indebtedness  to  the  Jew  for 
monotheism.  2.  Jehovah  is  to  be  worshipped.  3.  Jehovah  alone  is  to  be  wor- 
shipped. (G.  D.  Boardma?!.)  The  First  Commandment : — I.  What  is  it  to  make 
God  to  be  a  God  to  us?  1.  To  acknowledge  Him  for  a  God.  Deity  is  a  jewel  that 
belongs  only  to  His  crown.  2.  To  choose  Him.  An  act  of  mature  deliberation  and 
self-dedication.  3.  To  enter  into  a  solemn  covenant  with  Him.  4.  To  give  Him 
adoration.  (1)  Reverence.  (2)  Worship.  5.  To  fear  Him.  This  fearing  of  God  ia 
(1) —  To  have  God  always  in  our  eye,  "I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me  "  ; 
"  mine  eyes  are  ever  towards  the  Lord."  He  who  fears  God,  imagines  tbat  what- 
ever be  is  doing  God  looks  on,  and,  as  a  Judge,  weighs  all  his  actions.  (2)  To  fear 
God,  is  when  we  have  such  a  holy  awe  of  God  upon  our  hearts  that  we  dare  not  sin; 
"  Stand  in  awe  and  sin  not."  It  is  a  saying  of  Anselm,  "If  hell  were  on  one  side 
and  sin  on  the  other,  I  would  rather  leap  into  hell  than  willingly  sin  against  my 
God."  G.  To  love  Him.  In  the  godly,  fear  and  love,  kiss  each  other.  7.  To  obey 
Him.  II.  That  we  must  have  no  other  God.  1.  There  is  really  no  other  God. 
(1)  There  is  but  one  First  Cause.  (2)  There  is  but  one  Omnipotent  Power.  2.  We, 
must  have  no  other  God.  This  forbids— (1)  Serving  a  false  God.  (2)  Joining  a 
-false  God  with  a  true.  III.  What  is  it  to  have  other  gods  besides  the  true  God  ? 
1.  To  trust  in  anything  more  than  God.  (1)  Riches.  (2)  Arm  of  flesh.  (3) 
Wisdom.  (4)  Civility.  (5)  Grace.  2.  To  love  anything  more  than  God.  (1)  Oar 
estate.  (2)  Our  pleasures.  (3)  Our  belly.  (4)  A  child.  If  we  love  the  jewel  more 
than  Him  that  gave  it,  God  will  take  away  the  jewel,  that  our  love  may  return  to 
Him  again.  Use  1.  It  reproves  such  as  have  other  gods,  and  so  renounce  tlie  true  God. 
(1)  Such  as  set  up  idols  ;  "  According  to  the  number  of  thy  cities  are  tliygods,  O 
Judah  "  ;  "  Their  altars  are  as  heaps  in  the  furrows  of  the  field."  (2)  Such  as  seek 
to  familiar  spirits  (see  2  Kings  i.  6).  Use  2.  It  sounds  a  retreat  in  our  ears.  Let  it  call 
us  off  from  the  idolizing;  any  creature  ;  and  renouncing  other  gods,  let  us  cleave  to 
the  true  God  and  His  service.     If  we  go  away  from  God,  we  know  not  where  to 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap;  xx. 


mend  ourselves.  (1)  It  is  honourable  serving  of  the  true  God  ;  it  is  more  honour 
to  serve  God  than  to  have  kings  serve  us.  (2)  Serving  the  true  God  is  delightful, 
"  I  will  make  them  joyful  in  My  house  of  prayer."  (3)  Serving  the  true  God  is 
beneficial ;  they  have  great  gain  here — the  hidden  manna,  inward  peace,  and  a  great 
reward  to  come.  (4)  You  have  covenanted  to  serve  the  true  Jehovah,  renouncing 
all  others.  You  cannot  go  back  from  God  without  the  highest  perjury.  (5)  None 
had  ever  cause  to  repent  of  cleaving  to  God  and  His  service.  (T.  Watson.)  The 
First  Commandment : — I.  Four  things  are  here  required.  1.  That  we  must 
have  a  God— against  atheism.  2.  That  we  must  have  the  Lord  Jehovah  for 
our  God— which  forbids  idolatry.  3.  That  we  must  have  the  only  trne  God 
the  Lord  Jehovah  alone  for  our  God.  4.  It  requires  that  all  these  services 
and  acts  of  worship,  which  we  tender  unto  the  true  and  only  God,  be  per- 
formed with  sincerity  and  true  devotion.  This  is  implied  in  that  expression 
"  before  Me,"  or  in  My  sight.  And  this  forbids  both  profaneness  on  the  one 
hand  and  hypocrisy  on  the  other.  II.  It  forbids  cs  four  things.  1.  Atheism, 
or  the  belief  and  acknowledgment  of  no  God.      2.   Ignorance  of  the  true  God. 

3.  Profaneness,   or  the   wretched  neglect   of    the   worship  and   service  of    God. 

4.  Idolatry,  or  the  setting  up  and  worshipping  of  false  gods.  [Bp.  E.  Hopkins.) 
The  First  Comma 7idme7it :— The  object  of  religious  devotion  has  to  be  defined,  and 
it  has  to  be  set  into  some  ascertained  relationship  with  ourselves.  I.  Wbat  we 
have  first  to  look  at,  therefore,  is  the  self-disclosure  of  God,  upon  which  He 
grounds  His  claim  to  Israel's  devotion.  God  is  a  Person  ;  a  personal  Spirit  like  our 
own;  a  self-existent,  eternal  Spirit,  apart  from  and  above  His  world;  a  Person 
capable  of  entering  into  converse  with  men,  and  acting  towards  them  as  Deliverer 
and  Saviour  from  evil.  What  follows  ?  Tliis  follows—"  This  God  shalt  thou  have 
for  thy  God ;  and  thou  shalt  have  no  other  !  "  A  tie  on  both  its  sides  solitary  and 
unique  must  bind  the  human  person  with  the  Divine;  saved  with  Saviour; 
Jehovah's  people  with  Jehovah's  self.  II.  We  are  now,  you  perceive,  in  a  position 
to  examine  our  fundamenial  law,  or  First  CJommandment,  defining  the  Object  or 
Worship.  It  has  resolved  itself  into  this — a  mutual  relationship  exists  betwixt 
God  and  His  human  people>  absolutely  unique  and  exclusive.  Besides  Jehovah, 
Israel  has  no  other  Saviour ; .  Israel,  therefore,  ought  to  know  no  other  God. 
Jehovah  is  not  simply  first ;  He  is  first  without  a  second.  He  is  not  the  highest  of 
a  class  of  beings,  but  in  His  class  He  stands  alone.  Other  Helper  have  we  nowhere ; 
beneath  the  covert  of  His  everlasting  wings  must  we  run  to  hide.  If  we  are  not  to 
people  the  heavens  with  shadowy  powers,  half  Divinu,  or  parcel  earth  among  forces 
of  nature,  as  the  provinces  of  an  empire  are  parcelled  among  satraps,  or  elevate 
human  aid  into  the  remotest  competition  with  the  Almighty's ;  if  to  us  there  is  but 
one  seat  of  power,  source  of  help,  well-head  of  blessing.  Author  and  Finisher  of 
deliverance  from  every  species  and  form  of  evil :  then,  what  undivided  dependence 
upon  God  results !  what  absoluteness  of  trust!  what  singleness  of  loyalty  1 
what  unstinted  gratitude !  what  perfect  love  !  More  is  shut  out  than  polytheistic 
rites.  Superstition  is  shut  out,  which  trusts  in  mechanical  aids  and  not  in  the 
free,  living,  and  righteous  Will.  Magic  is  shut  out,  which  seeks  to  extort  deliverance 
by  spells  from  unholy  spirits.  Luck  is  shut  out,  and  the  vague  hope  in  what  will 
turn  up.  Spiritual  tyranny  is  shutout,  which  makes  one  man  the  lord  of  another's 
faith  and  conscience.  Policy  is  shut  out,  or  godless  state-craft,  with  its  trust  in 
human  foresight,  but  none  in  the  justice  of  Providence.  Irreligion  is  shut  out, 
which  doubts  if  prayer  avail  or  God  can  help,  and  puts  its  confidence  only  in  the 
strongest  battalions.  Everything,  in  short,  which  divides  the  deep  trust  aid  hope 
of  the  heart  between  God  and  that  which  is  not  God,  becomes  a  breach  of  loyalty 
to  the  unique,  the  solitary  Deliverer.  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  First  Command- 
ment:— 1.  It  is  quite  evident  that  this  Commandment  prescribes  a  general  "fitnes' 
of  things,"  the  proper  relation  of  man  to  God  ;  aims  to  promote  the  highest  happi- 
ness, directing  man  to  seek  his  good  in  the  highest  source — God  Himself;  and 
describes  the  nature  of  man,  setting  forth  a  great  principle  of  his  being,  that  he  is 
capable  of  giving  allegiance  to  God,  has  faculties  and  powers  capable  of  knowing 
and  loving  God.  Our  power  of  knowing  and  loving  Him  in  the  distinguishing 
power  of  man,  separating  him  from  the  brutes  with  whom  he  is  in  many  other 
respects  allied.  Not  to  exercise  this  power  is  to  cast  away  the  crown  of  our  man- 
hood. Of  course,  we  cannot  know  God  fully.  Our  weak,  limited  minds  cannot 
comprehend  the  Infinite  One.  If  we  could  comprehend  God,  we  would  be  greater 
than  He.  The  unknowable  in  God  leads  us  to  worship  the  God  we  know.  This 
command  calls  us  to  a  constant  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  so  securing  the 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  345 

activity  and  development  of  our  power  of  knowing,  and  making  it  our  duty  to 
carefully  attend  to  the  revelation  He  has  n|ade  of  Himself.  This  certainly 
commends  the  study  of  nature ;  not  only  the  poetic  Hstening  to  its  subtle 
teaching,  but  the  scientific  research  for  its  great  truths.  This  certainly 
commends  the  study  of  the  Scriptures.  Every  neglected  Bible  should  thrill  the 
conscience  with  the  charge,  "  You  have  not  yet  taken  the  first  step  towards  obeying 
this  commandment."  God's  revelation  of  Himself  in  the  Bible  is  progressive.  It 
had  reached  a  certain  stage  at  the  time  the  Law  was  given  at  Sinai,  sufiiciently 
clear  and  full  to  make  man's  duty  plain.  But  it  did  not  stop  there.  It  unfolded 
through  succeeding  ages  until  it  culminated  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  So  this  first 
commandment  makes  it  our  duty  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  reject 
Him  is  not  merely  to  reject  an  offer  of  mercy ;  it  is  to  refuse  to  receive  the  complete 
revelation  of  God  made  in  His  Son.  2.  The  prohibitory  form  of  the  Commandment 
shows  that  there  are  tendencies  in  our  nature  to  break  this  law  of  our  being.  We 
are  prone  to  give  supreme  allegiance  to  and  find  our  highest  good  in  some  person 
or  thing  other  than  God.  3.  But  even  if  we  had  full  and  accurate  knowledge  of 
the  one  true  God,  and  were  free  from  all  debasing  superstitions,  we  would  still  have 
tendencies  drawing  us  away  from  entire  consecration  to  Him.  Whatever  we  value 
more  than  God,  is  our  god.  Wherever  a  man  makes  the  gratification  of  himself  his 
chief  aim,  he  takes  the  crown  belonging  to  God  and  crowns  himsrff.  (1)  There  is 
a  strong  tendency  to  make  the  gratification  of  even  the  lowest  portion  of  our  nature 
our  chief  aim  and  greatest  delight.  He  only  can  have  the  highest  animal  enjoy- 
ment who  remembers  that  he  is  more  than  an  animal,  and  honouring  God,  seeks  to 
discover  and  obey  His  laws  of  healthful  hving.  (2)  One  would  think  that  the 
exercise  of  our  reasoning  powers  would  lead  the  soul  to  God,  yet  there  is  a  very 
strong  tendency  to  make  this  exercise  end  in  itself.  Many  of  the  great  thinkers  of 
the  world  have  been  worshippers  of  their  own  powers  of  thinking,  and  we  who  can 
with  difficulty  follow  their  great  thoughts  are  prone  to  worship  our  own  intellectual 
culture  and  acquirements,  and  to  claim  a  considerable  amount  of  incense  from  our 
fellow-men.  (3)  How  prone  we  are  to  make  our  loved  ones  idols  !  Now  the  idolatry 
of  loved  ones  does  not  consist  in  loving  them  too  much,  but  in  not  loving  them 
enough.  The  father  who  allows  his  child  to  so  absorb  his  love  that  he  has  no 
thought  of  or  love  for  God,  does  not  love  his  child  as  an  immortal  spiritual  being, 
nor  does  he  rej^ard  himself  as  such.  (4)  Above  the  animal,  the  intellectual,  and 
the  social  nature  in  man,  is  the  spiritual.  To  ignore  this  nature,  or  dwarf  it, 
is  to  degrade  man.  To  have  this  nature  in  healthful  control,  and  giving 
supreme  allegiance  to  God,  is  to  bring  the  whole  man  into  obedience  to  this 
Commandment ;  it  is  to  ennoble  his  social,  inspire  bis  intellectual,  and  elevate  his 
animal  natures ;  it  is  to  reach  the  noble  manhood  God  designs  for  us.  (F.  S.  Schenck.) 
The  First  Commandment : — I.  The  question  we  are  now  to  try  and  answer  is,  What  is 
IT  TO  HAVE  A  GoD  ?  I  mean  by  this  a  true  God,  such  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Chi-ist  is  to 
us.  1.  To  have  a  God  is  to  have  one  who  can  do  three  things  for  us.  (1)  The  first 
thing  we  want  our  God  to  be  able  to  do  is,  always  to  help.  The  little  cbild  always 
needs  the  help  of  its  mother.  The  blind  man  always  needs  the  help  of  some  one 
to  guide  him.  The  sick  man  always  needs  the  help  of  a  physician.  We  need  some 
one  who  can  always  help  us.  Then  it  must  be  some  one  who  is  present  in  every 
place,  whose  eye  never  slumbers,  and  whose  arm  never  grows  weary.  Is  there  such 
a  one  to  be  found  ?  Yes,  God  our  Saviour  is  just  such  a  one.  (2)  The  second  thing 
we  want  our  God  to  be  able  to  do  is,  always  to  save  us.  Our  bodies  are  often  in 
danger  as  well  as  our  souls,  and  we  want  a  God  who  can  save  them  both.  We  can't 
preserve  ourselves ;  and  our  best  friends  can't  preserve  us.  Jesus  says,  "  Look  unto 
Me,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth ;  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else.  Besides  Me 
there  is  no  Saviour."  We  need  a  God  who  can  always  save.  (3)  But,  then,  there 
is  a  third  thing  that  we  expect  God  to  be  able  to  do  for  us,  and  that  is,  always  to 
make  us  happy.  When  we  are  in  health,  and  have  affectionate  parents  and  kind 
friends,  and  many  comforts  and  enjoyments  around  us,  we  do  not  feel  so  much  our 
need  of  God.  2.  But,  then,  there  are  three  things  that  He  who  is  our  God  has  a 
right  to  expect  from  us.  (1)  He  has  a  right  to  expect  our  highest  love.  He  is  good ; 
He  is  holy.  "  God  is  love."  He  expects,  and  He  deserves,  our  highest  love.  It  is 
right  to  love  Him  better  than  any  one  else  ;  but  it  is  neither  rif^ht  nor  possible  to 
love  any  one  else  in  this  way.  (2)  The  second  thing  He  has  a  right  to  expect  from 
us  I-F-  our  unquestioning  obedience.  It  may  not  be  always  right  to  obey,  without 
questioning,  all  that  others  command  us ;  but  it  is  always  right  to  obey,  without 
questioning,  everything  that  God  commands.    He  never  does  wrong  Himself,  and 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx. 

never  commands  others  to  do  wrong.  (3)  Then  there  is  a  third  thing  God  expects 
from  us,  and  that  is,  sincere  worship.  Sincere  means  that  which  is  true  or  pure. 
Worship.  Let  us  see  what  this  means.  Worship  is  a  word  made  up  of  two  other 
words,  viz.,  "  worth,"  and  "  ship  "  or  "  shape."  It  means,  then,  that  we  should 
put  ourselves  in  the  position  or  shape  that  is  worthy  of  God.  Or,  it  means  that  we 
should  render  to  Him  the  service  that  is  worthy  of  Him.  And  what  is  the  proper 
shape  or  position  for  sinners  such  as  we  are  to  put  ourselves  in  before  God  ?  David 
tells  us,  when  he  says,  "  0  come,  let  us  worship  and  fall  down  ;  and  kneel  before  the 
Lord  our  Maker."  Yes,  a  position  of  humble  reverence  is  what  we  should  put 
ourselves  in  when  we  would  worship  God.  This  is  the  shape  or  condition  worthy 
of  God  for  sinful  creatures  to  appear  in.  But  the  shape  of  a  thing  denotes  its  use 
or  service.  If  you  see  iron  put  in  the  shape  of  a  bright,  sharj)  blade,  you  know  it 
is  designed  to  cut.  If  you  see  it  put  into  a  round  shape,  like  a  ball,  you  know  it  is 
designed  to  roll.  If  you  see  a  pile  of  wood  broken  up  into  the  shape  of  kindling, 
you  know  it  is  designed  to  burn.  And  if  you  see  a  man  in  the  form  of  a  servant, 
with  an  apron  on,  and  his  sleeves  rolled  up,  you  know  he  is  designed  for  work.  And 
so  when  we  appear  before  God  as  His  worshippers — in  the  form  or  shape  worthy  of 
Him — we  mean  to  say  that  we  are  ready  to  offer  Him  our  prayers  and  praises,  and 
that  we  desire  to  serve  Him.  And  when  we  do  this  honestly  and  earnestly,  with 
all  our  hearts,  tlmt  is  sincere  worship.  This  is  the  service  God  deserves.  He  is 
worthy  of  it.  II.  The  reason  why  we  should  have  no  other  gods  than  the  Lord. 
I  wish  to  speak  of  three  reasons.  1.  The  first  reason  is,  because  it  is  very  foolish  to 
do  so.  (1)  God  is  too  rich  for  any  one  to  take  His  place.  All  the  gold  and  silver, 
all  the  gems  and  jewels  and  precious  things  in  the  world,  and  in  all  other  worlds, 
belong  to  Him.  He  has  need  of  them  to  supply  the  wants  of  His  creatures.  It  is 
very  foolish  to  have  any  one  else  than  the  Lord  for  our  God,  because  no  one  else  is 
rich  enough  to  be  our  God.  (2)  God  is  too  great  for  any  one  to  take  His  place.  He 
is  the  greatest  of  all  beings.  How  foolish  it  would  be  to  blot  out  the  sun  from  the 
sky,  and  then  try  to  light  up  the  world  with  candles  !  Yet  -it  would  be  easier  to  do 
this  than  to  put  anything  in  the  place  of  God.  (3)  And  then  God  is  too  wise  for 
any  one  to  take  His  place.  How  strange  it  is  that  anybody  should  ever  think  of 
putting  stupid  idols  of  wood  or  stone  in  the  place  of  God  1  2.  The  second  reason 
why  we  ought  to  have  no  other  gods  than  the  Lord  is,  because  it  is  very  injurious. 
(1)  To  have  any  other  God  than  the  Lord  is  injurious  in  two  ways  :  one  way  in  which 
it  is  so  is,  that  it  leaves  us  without  help.  Wouldn't  it  be  very  injurious  to  a  sick 
man  to  leave  him  in  a  place  where  he  could  get  no  physician,  no  medicine,  and  no 
nurse?  Wouldn't  it  be  very  injurious  to  a  hungry  man  to  leave  him  in  a  position 
where  he  could  get  no  food  ?  (2)  The  other  way  is  this :  it  exposes  us  to  many 
troubles.  We  ai-e  told  in  the  Bible,  "  Their  sorrows  shall  be  greatly  multiplied  who 
go  after  other  gods."  All  who  are  not  Christians  have  some  other  godbut  the  Lord. 
And  all  who  do  this  will  be  made  to  feel  how  very  injurious  it  is.  When  trouble  and 
sorrow  come  upon  them,  they  will  have  none  to  comfort  them.  When  their  sins 
press  upon  them  as  a  heavy  burden,  they  will  have  none  who  can  give  them  pardon, 
and  so  lift  off  that  burden.  When  they  come  to  die,  they  wiU  have  no  one  to  lean 
on  as  they  go  through  the  dark  valley.  At  the  judgment  seat  they  will  have  no  one 
to  be  their  friend.  In  eternity  they  will  have  nothing  to  make  them  happy.  3.  The 
third  and  last  reason  is,  that  it  is  very  wicked.  There  are  two  things  about  this 
which  show  how  wicked  it  is.  (1)  There  is  robbery  in  it.  And  it  is  not  robbing  our 
friends,  or  our  relations,  or  our  fellow-creatures,  or  the  angpls  of  heaven.  Any  of 
these  would  be  bad  enough ;  but  this  is  worse  than  all  of  them  put  together.  It  is 
robbing  God !  (2)  There  is  treason  in  it.  (R.  Newton,  D.JD.)  God  supple- 
mented : — "  No  other  gods  before  Me."  That  is,  "  No  other  gods  in  My  presence  ; 
in  sight  of  Me."  God  will  not  share  His  sovereignty  with  any  being.  And  this  is 
the  commonest  way  of  breaking  this  Commandment  in  our  day.  There  is  no  danger 
of  breaking  it  through  over-loving  a  fellow-creature,  through  loving  a  child,  or  a 
wife,  or  a  parent,  or  a  friend,  too  dearly.  It  is  a  frightful  error  to  suppose  that.  But 
it  is  possible  for  us  to  think  that  God's  power  must  be  supplemented  by  man's  power, 
by  man's  influence,  by  man's  wealth,  by  man's  work.  A  pastor  may  lean  on  God — 
and  a  rich  member  of  his  congregation  ;  but  not  without  breaking  the  First  Com- 
mandment. A  pohtician  may  think  that,  besides  God's  favour,  he  must  have 
popular  favour,  to  give  him  success.  A  business  man  may  have  it  in  his  mind  that 
public  sentiment — even  against  strict  right — must  be  yielded  to  in  his  businc",s, 
althou^ih  he  believes  in  God  as  above  all.  A  parent  may  feel  that  fashion  and  wealth 
have  a  power  that  cannot  be  dispensed  with  in  giving  his  child  a  desirable  place  in 


CHAP,  xs.]  EXODUS.         _^  347 

life.  A  professed  Christian  may  feel  that  Jesus  Christ  will  save  him,  if  only  he  does 
enough  for  his  own  salvation.  All  these  are  ways  of  breaking  the  First  Command- 
ment ;  not  very  uncommon  ways,  either  !     (H.  C.  Trumbull.) 

Vers.  4-6.  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them. — The  law 
of  worship  : — I.  A  revelation  of  the  will  of  God,     1.  What  is  forbidden  is  not 
the  culture  of  the  plastic  arts,  but  their  abuse  in  furnishing  symbols  for  purposes 
of  devotion.     Statuary  is  lawful,  and  painting  is  lawful ;  but  sculptor  and  artist 
are  alike  restricted  from  attempting  to  represent  the  Deity ;   and  all  men  are 
prohibited  from  taking  such  representations  as  objects  of  worship.     2.  There  was 
a  special  reason  for  this  prohibition  as  it  affected  the  Hebrews.     They  had  come 
away  from  Egypt — a  country  where   the  employment  of   beasts  and  images  in 
religious  symbolism  had  descended  to  the  very  nadir  of  human  degradation.     They 
were  on  their  way  to  Canaan,  a  land  given  to  them  because  its  inhabitants  had  out- 
raged all  forbearance  by  the  filthy  r.nd  bloody  rites  of  Baal  and  Astarte.   Above  all, 
the  chief  reason  of  their  own  election  as  the  chosen  nation  was  that  they  might 
become  faithful  witnesses  of  Jehovah.     3.  The  bearing  of  this  law  upon  Christian 
duty  is  manifest.    Material  images  are  forbidden,  but  mental  images  may  be  framed, 
provided  always  that  they  be  fashioned  out  of  the  Divine  manifestations.     Every 
historic  act,  in  which  God  is  seen  by  tae  individual  or  the  community,  is  a  revelation 
of  God  ;  and  the  sum  of  such  revelations  gives  a  mental  image  of  the  Divine  Being 
which  we  can  and  may  adore.    Furthermore,  the  focus  of  all  God's  self-revelation 
is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     II.  A  re\'elation  of  the  chaeacteb  of  God.     1.  God  is 
jealous  for  the  truth  of  His  own  nature.     How  could  any  graven  image  ever  be  an 
accurate  or  an  adequate  similitude  of  the  infinite  invisible  Spirit  ?   2.  God  is  jealous 
for  the  character  of  His  people.   By  the  act  of  homage  men  acknowledge  themselves 
inferior  to  that  which  they  adore  ;  so  that  every  degradation  of  the  Object  of  worship 
involves  a  simultaneous  abasement  of  the  worshipper.     3.  God  is  jealous  for  the 
influence  of  His  people  upon  the  world.     Israel  was  appointed  to  be  a  guardian  of 
truth,  an  apostle  of  the  one  God,  a  harbour-light  for  benighted  nations  upon  the 
sea  of  time.     It  was  peculiarly  wounding  to  the  King  of  Heaven  that  they  should 
insult  Him  by  representing  Him  as  a  calf  of  gold,  and  should  degrade  themselves 
by  their  debasing  homage.     III.  A  revelation   of  the  providence  of  God.     1. 
Hereditary  penalties  follow  the  breach  of  this  law  of  spiritual  worship.     Sensuous 
worship  leads  to  sensuous  living  ;  and  the  fruits  of  sensuous  living  may  linger  on 
in  miseries  untold  which  our  children  shall  suffer  when  we  who  did  the  wrong  lie 
forgotten  in   the  grave.     2.  On  the  other  hand,  hereditary  blessings  follow  the 
keeping  of  this  law.     True  spiritual  life  begets  true  spiritual  Ufe,  and  hands  on  a 
heritage  of  reward  to  succeeding  generations.     8.  And  it  is  the  fittest  which  survives 
the  longest !     Evil  is  for  a  time  ;  good  is  for  eternity.     (W.  J.  Woods, B. A.)        The  %, 
Second  Commandment : — I.  The  Divine  prohibition.     1.  Observe  precisely  what 
this  second  commandment  forbids.     (1)  And,  first,  negatively:  It  does  not  forbid  all 
use  of  art  in  worship.    For  Jehovah  Himself  commanded  Moses  to  adorn  the 
tabernacle  with  figures  of  cherubim,  and  trees,  and  flowers,  and  pomegranates,  and 
bells,  and  all  manner  of  cunning  workmanship.     The  imaging  faculty,  or  faculty  of 
making  images — imagination  in  the  primary  sense  of  the  term — is  itself  a  Divine 
endowment,  and  must  therefore  be  cultivated.     (2)  What,  then,  does  the  second 
commandment  forbid  ?     It  forbids  all  idolatrous  representations  of  Deity  (see  John 
iv.  24).    We  must  worship  God  according  to  His  nature;  His  nature  is  spiritual, 
and,  therefore,  we  must  worship  Him  spiritually — spirit-wise,  not  image-wise  ;  for 
only  what  is  spiritual  in  us  can  worship  what  is  spiritual  above  us.     2.  The  prohi- 
bition, then,  of  the  second  commandment  is  a  universal  need.     (1)  The  Jew  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Sinai  needed  it.    He  had  just  emerged  from  idolatrous  Egypt — that 
Egypt  which  was  wholly  given  over  to  image-worship.     (2)  Modern  Christianity 
needs  it.    We  need  not  go  to  the  Koman  Catholic  Church  for  examples  of  image- 
worship.    Behold  our  own  Protestant  Ecclesiolatry,  or  worship  of  the  Church  as  an 
institution,  bowing  down  before  her  ordinances  as  though  they  were  ends  instead  of 
using  them  as  means,  worshipping  her  sacraments  and  creeds  and  traditions  and 
ceremonies.     Behold  our  Protestant  Bibliolatry,  or  rabbinic  worship  of  the  Bible  as 
a  letter  and  even  sacrament.     These,  and  such  as  these,  are,  practically  speaking, 
more  or  less  revered  as  symbols  of  Deity.    II.  The  Divine  reason  for  the  prohi- 
bition.    1.  Jehovah  our  God  is  a  jealous  God.     2.  Law  of  heredity  (see  Gal.  vi.  7). 
(1)  The  merciless  aspect  of  heredity.     Everybody  knows  that  there  are  hereditary 
diseases ;  for  instance,  leprosy,  scrofula,  consumption,  insanity,  and  a  nameless 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XX. 

disease  far  more  dreadful.  And  as  there  are  hereditary  diseases,  so  there  are 
hereditary  vices  ;  for  example,  indolence,  mendacity,  avarice,  intemperance,  crime. 
Moral  habit  is  as  hereditable  as  bodily  gait.  As  Dr.  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  has 
somewhere  stated :  "  A  man  is  an  omnibus,  in  which  all  his  ancestors  are  seated." 
Yes ;  the  soul,  not  less  than  the  body,  has  its  physiology.  This  law  it  is  which 
accounts  for  the  sad  fact  of  the  universal  sinfulness.  But  you  interrupt  me  with 
an  objection.  "  This  law  of  heredity,"  you  tell  me,  "  tends  to  quench  personal 
responsibility."  Learn,  then,  I  answer,  a  lesson  from  the  analogy  of  the  human 
body  :  although  confessedly  propagated,  it  is  also  confessedly  a  separate,  indepen- 
dent individuality.  Again  :  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  this  discussion  to 
keep  clearly  and  steadily  in  mind  the  distinction  between  personal  guilt  and 
inherited  disaster,  or,  as  the  philosophers  phrase  it,  unfortunate  "environment." 
But  I  hear  another  objection  :  "  This  law  of  heredity,"  you  tell  me,  "  is  unjust  and 
cruel ;  it  makes  the  innocent  suffer  for  the  guilty.  How,  then,  will  you  reconcile 
the  awful  working  of  this  law  of  heredity  with  the  characier  of  a  holy  and  loving 
God  ?  "  Answer  :  Man  is  mortal.  How,  then,  shall  the  continuance  of  the  race  on 
earth  be  secured?  I  can  conceive  of  but  two  ways.  First,  by  the  continuous 
creation  of  men,  or  a  perpetual  repetition  of  the  miracle  of  Eden,  the  ceaseless 
bringing  into  the  world,  fresh  from  the  Maker's  hand,  of  a  succession  of  created 
Adams,  or  parentless  Melchizedeks.  But  under  such  a  condition  of  things  there 
would  be,  in  all  probability,  a  repetition  of  Adam's  painful  story.  Secondly,  the 
continuance  of  the  race  on  earth  can  be  secured  in  the  way  in  which  the  Creator 
does  actually  secure  it — namely,  by  the  law  of  propagation.  Heredity  it  is  which 
renders  this  profound  fact — Society — possible.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  man-kind, 
because  there  is  such  a  thing  as  men-kinned.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  overestimate 
the  value  of  consanguinity  as  a  curbing,  uplifting,  unifying  force.  Heredity  !  Why 
it  is  my  real  hope  under  God  for  humanity.  (2)  Merciful  aspect  of  heredity.  This 
law  is  a  real  inspiration  for  foreign  missions.  Special  pains  must  be  taken  to  save 
the  heathen  children ;  for  converted  children  are,  according  to  God's  own  law,  the 
mighty  hope  of  our  world's  future.  Lessons  :  1.  Heredity  the  key  to  social  regenera- 
tion. Men,  not  less  than  animals,  can  be  improved  by  stirpiculture,  or  selective 
breeding.  2.  A  summons  to  personal  heroism.  God  judges  us,  not  by  our 
capacities,  but  by  our  efforts.  3.  Worship  the  Divine  Man  Himself.  He  is 
the  Image  of  tlie  Invisible  God,  and  we  need  no  other.  (G.  D.  Boardman.) 
Idolatry : — I.  The  nature  of  idolatry.  A  giving  to  something  below  God  of 
that  worship  which  is  due  to  God  alone.  It  may  be  outward,  or  inward ;  an  act 
of  the  body,  or  an  act  of  the  mind.  II.  The  evil  of  idolatry.  1.  It  has  a  strange 
power  to  perpetuate  and  increase  itself.  2.  It  ever  engenders  falsehood  and  deceit. 
3.  It  is  almost  always  accompanied  with  cruelty.  "  The  dark  places  of  the  earth," 
}  says  Scripture,  "  are  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty,"  and  all  experience  confirms 
the  saying.  Think  of  Mexico,  as  she  was  when  first  discovered,  and  of  her  fearful 
hecatombs  of  slaughtered  men.  Think  of  our  country,  and  of  other  countries 
around  it,  in  Druidical  times.  Follow  Captain  Cook  in  his  voyages  from  island  to 
island  in  the  great  Pacific.  Wherever  we  find  idols  we  find  bloodshed,  bloodshed 
for  those  idols.  As  for  idolatrous  Eome,  I  will  not  speak  of  her  wholesale  slaughters 
in  years  gone  by.  4.  There  is  one  point  more  which  I  wished  to  notice,  it  is  the 
licentiousness  that  accompanies  idolatry,  arising,  beyond  doubt,  in  part  out  of  it. 
English  minds  cannot  conceive  the  extent  of  this,  nor  the  nature  of  it.  III.  There 
is  another  thing,  far  more  fearful  than  the  idolatry  of  Kome,  and  far  more  difficult 
to  keep  ourselves  from — the  idolatry  of  the  mind  and  heart.  We  may  have  idols 
within  us,  and,  as  for  worshipping  them,  it  may  be  the  main  business  of  our  lives. 
(G.  Bradley.  M.A.)  Image-worship  : — To  set  up  an  image  to  represent  God  is  a 
debasing  of  the  Deity,  it  is  below  God.  If  one  should  make  images  of  snakes  or 
spiders,  saying  he  did  it  to  represent  his  prince,  would  not  the  prince  take  this  in 
high  disdain  ?  What  greater  disparagement  to  God,  than  to  represent  the  infinite 
God  by  that  which  is  finite, — the  living  God,  by  that  which  is  without  life,  and  the 
Maker  of  all,  by  a  thing  which  is  made  ?  1.  To  make  a  true  image  of  God  is 
impossible.  What  is  invisible  cannot  be  portrayed.  2.  To  worship  God  by  an 
image  is  both  absurd  and  unlawful.  (1)  It  is  absurd  and  irrational ;  for,  the 
workman  is  better  than  the  work :  "  he  who  hath  builded  the  house  hath  more 
honour  than  the  house."  If  the  workman  be  better  than  the  work,  and  none  bow 
to  the  workman,  how  absurd  then  is  it  to  bow  to  the  work  of  his  hands  !  Is  it  not 
an  absurd  thing  to  bow  down  to  the  king's  picture,  when  the  king  himself  is  present? 
more  so  to  bow  down  to  an  image  of  God,  when  God  Himself  is  everywhere  present. 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  849 

(2)  It  is  unlawful  to  worship  God  by  an  image ;  for  it  is  against  the  homily  of 
the  Church;  "the  images  of  God,  our  Saviour,  the  Virgin  Mary,  are  of  all  others 
the  most  dangerous ;  therefore  the  greatest  care  ought  to  be  had  that  they  stand 
not  in  temples  and  churches."  Use  :  Take  heed  of  idolatry,  namely,  image- 
worship.  (1)  Get  good  principles,  that  you  may  be  able  to  oppose  the  gainsayer. 
(2)  Get  love  to  God.  (3)  Pray  God  to  keep  you.  (T.  Watson.)  The  Second 
Commandment,  and  its  influence  upon  the  Jeivs : — Some  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  it 
forbad  the  Jew  to  make  any  carved  work  at  all.  Certainly,  judging  by  national 
results,  it  would  almost  seem  as  if  Israel  had  so  understood  it.  The  Jews  are  a 
people  famous  for  many  things,  for  intellectual  and  administrative  ability,  and  for 
a  marvellous  power  of  sustaining  themselves  in  the  midst  of  the  most  difficult 
circumstances.  But  whilst  there  have  been  Jewish  warriors  and  poets,  statesmen 
and  financiers,  musicians  and  singers  of  world-wide  reputation,  where  are  their 
artists  and  architects  ?  The  very  temple  of  Solomon  was  a  Phoenician  structure. 
You  may  count  easily  a  half-dozen  distinguished  musical  Jewish  composers — 
Mozart,  Beethoven,  Meyerbeer,  Mendelssohn,  and  Kossini — but  where  is  the 
distinguished  Jewish  sculptor  or  painter  ?  Still,  whilst  all  this  is  very  suggestive 
as  to  the  formative  influence  of  the  commandment,  it  seems  most  reasonable  to 
decide  that  the  sentence,  "Thou  sbalt  not  make,"  is  qualified  by  the  sentence, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  nor  worship."  The  Jews  were  really  only  forbidden  to 
make  carved  images  as  symbols  of  Deity,  as  objects  of  adoration.  (W.  Senior,  B.A.) 
The  offence  of  symbolism : — It  becomes  obvious  that  an  imaged  representation  of 
the  Invisible  One  must  involve  dishonour.  Before  the  Infinite  One  can  be  bodied 
forth  He  must  first  of  necessity  be  sensualized.  Here  is  the  deep  insult.  And  the  guilt 
of  irreverance  clings  to  the  human  mind  in  the  very  fact  that  it  thinks  itself  capable 
of  such  an  impossibility,  and  fails  to  perceive  how  it  befouls  what  it  touches. 
What  difference  then  is  there  between  the  image  of  the  artist  and  an  intellectual 
conception  of  God  ?  None  in  reality.  WTiat  is  the  image  ?  It  is  more  than  the 
carving  of  the  sculptor ;  it  is  first  his  thought.  The  image  is  really  thought 
embodied.  Words  may  be  used  instead  of  marble,  or  wood,  or  colours,  but 
essentially  they  are  the  same  if  they  present  to  the  imagination  a  shape,  a  form, 
or  an  intellectual  conception.  In  this  sense  words  are  as  finite  as  images  or  symbols, 
and  therefore  maybe  as  guilty  of  degradation.  Thus  it  follows  that  the  reason  of 
man  has  no  more  right  to  touch  the  Invisible  Creator  than  the  hands.  God  refuses 
also  to  be  the  subject  of  the  human  intellect.  That  the  human  mind  should  think 
itself  capable  of  compassing  the  Infinite  is  to  insult  Him  with  deepest  irreverence. 
"  Who  by  searching  can  find  out  God  ?  "  God  Himself  must  instruct  us  how  to 
conceive  of  Him,  and  by  what  faculties  of  our  nature  we  must  draw  near  to  Him. 
And  this  He  has  done.  Through  Abraham  and  through  Moses,  through  David 
and  the  prophets,  and,  including  all  and  perfecting  all,  through  Jesus  Christ  the 
Divine  Son,  He  has  made  Himself  known  toman.  (Ibid.)  A  jealous  God. — I. 
Eeverently,  let  us  remember  that  the  Lord  is  exceedingly  jealous  of  His  Deity. 
The  whole  history  of  the  human  race  is  a  record  of  the  wars  of  the  Lord  against 
idolatry.  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  dashed  in  pieces  the  enemy  and  cast 
the  ancient  idols  to  the  ground.  Behold  the  heaps  of  Nineveh  I  Search  for  the 
desolations  of  Babylon  I  Look  upon  the  broken  temples  of  Greece  !  See  the  ruins 
of  Pagan  Rome  !  Journey  where  you  will,  you  behold  the  dilapidated  temples  of 
the  gods  and  the  mined  empires  of  their  foolish  votaries.  The  Lord  hath  made  bare 
His  arm  and  eased  Him  of  His  adversaries,  for  Jehovah,  whose  name  is  Jealous, 
is  a  jealous  God.  With  what  jealousy  must  the  Lord  regard  the  great  mass  of  the 
people  of  this  country,  who  have  another  god  beside  Himself !  Even  believers  may 
be  reproved  on  this  subject.  God  is  very  jealous  of  His  Deity  in  the  hearts  of  His 
own  people.  II.  The  Lokd  is  jealous  of  His  sovereignty.  He  that  made  heaven 
and  earth  has  a  right  to  rule  His  creatures  as  He  wills.  1.  This  reminds  us  of  the 
Lord's  hatred  of  sin.  Every  time  we  sin,  we  do  as  much  as  say,  "  I  do  not  acknow- 
ledge God  to  be  my  Sovereign  ;  I  will  do  as  I  please."  2.  Surely  if  sin  attacks  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  self -righteousness  is  equally  guilty  of  treason  :  for  as  sin  boasts, 
"I  will  not  keep  God's  law,"  self -righteousness  exclaims,  "I  will  not  be  saved  in 
God's  way  ;  I  will  make  a  new  road  to  heaven."  III.  The  Lord  is  jealous  of  His 
GLORY.  God's  glory  is  the  result  of  His  nature  and  acts.  1.  How,  careful,  then, 
should  we  be  when  we  do  anything  for  God,  and  God  is  pleased  to  accept  of  our  doings, 
that  we  never  congratulate  ourselves.  The  worms  which  ate  Herod  when  he  gave 
not  God  the  glory  are  ready  for  another  meal ;  beware  of  vain  glory !  2.  How 
careful  ought  we  to  be  to  walk  humbly  before  the  Lord.     The  moment  we  glorify 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

ourselves,  since  there  is  room  for  one  glory  only  in  the  universe,  we  set  ourselves 
up  as  rivals  to  the  Most  High.  3.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  never  misrepresent  God, 
so  as  to  rob  Him  of  His  honour.  If  any  minister  shall  preach  of  God  so  as  to 
dishonour  Him,  God  will  be  jealous  against  that  man.  IV.  In  the  highest  sense, 
THE  Lord  is  jealous  over  His  own  people.  1.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  I 
now  speak,  is  very  jealous  of  your  love,  0  believer.  2.  He  is  very  jealous  of  your 
trust.  He  will  not  permit  you  to  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh.  3.  He  is  also  very  jealous 
of  our  company.  It  were  well  if  a  Christian  could  see  nothing  but  Christ.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  jealousy  of  God : — Jealousy  is  but  the  anger  and  pain  of  injured 
and  insulted  love.  When  God  resents  the  illegitimate  transfer  to  material  symbols 
of  the  devotion  inspired  by  His  own  acts,  it  is  not  because  His  greatness  suffers  any 
diminution  or  because  His  authority  is  impaired.  It  is  His  love  which  is  wounded. 
He  cannot  endure  to  lose  any  of  the  affection,  trust,  or  reverence  by  which  He  has 
stirred  our  souls.  One  of  the  fairest-looking  falsehoods  by  which  men  excuse 
themselves  for  living  a  life  in  which  God  has  no  place,  is  the  plea  that  the  infinite 
God  cannot  care  for  the  love  and  reverence  of  such  creatures  as  we  are.  When 
will  men  understand  that  no  father  can  ever  be  gi'eat  enough  to  be  indifferent  to 
the  affection,  the  obedience,  and  the  confidence  of  his  children  ?  (R.  IF.  Dale,  D.D.) 
Visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children. — Visiting  the  sins  of  the 
fathers  on  the  children : — I.  That  the  denunciation  and  sentence  relate  to  the 
SIN  OF  idolatry  in  pakticulab,  if  not  to  that  alone.  II.  That  it  relates  to 
temporal,  or,  more  properly  speaking,  to  family  prosperity  and  adversity.  III. 
That  it  relates  to  the  Jewish  economy,  in  that  particular  administration  of  a 

VISIBLE  providence  UNDER  WHICH  THEY  LIVED.  IV.  ThaT  AT  NO  RATE  DOES  IT  AFFECT 
(or   was    EVER    MEANT    TO   AFFECT)    THE  ACCEPTANCE  OR    SALVATION  OF   INDIVIDUALS  IN  A 

FUTURE  LIFE.  (Archdeacon  Paley.)  The  children  bearing  the  fathers^  iniquities  : — 
I.  As  to  THE  MATTER  OF  FACT — that  God  docs  visit  on  the  children  the  iniquities  of 
the  fathers — the  evidence  is  so  broad  and  conclusive  that,  without  a  singular  careless- 
ness it  cannot  be  overlooked.  The  sin  of  one  man  brought  death  into  the  world, 
and  caused  that,  throughout  the  vast  spreadings  of  humanity,  wretchedness,  both 
physical  and  moral,  shall  hold  a  kind  of  undisputed  supremacy.     II.  Whether 

SUCH   A  visitation    CONSISTS   WITH  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF   JUSTICE    AND  EQUITY.      In  mOSt 

men's  minds,  when  this  question  is  proposed,  there  is  a  feeling  that  the  visitation 
is  not  thus  consistent :  we  think  it  a  righteous  procedure  that  every  man  should 
bear  his  own  burden  ;  but  we  see  no  equity  in  the  appointment  that  the  innocent 
should  suffer  for  the  fault  of  the  guilty.  It  is,  however,  worthy  of  observation,  that 
the  proceeding  after  all  cannot  be  repugnant  to  our  notions  of  justice,  since  its  exact 
parallel  occurs  in  human  legislation.  If  the  statute-book  of  the  country  enact  the 
visiting  on  children  the  sin  of  the  father,  it  will  be  hard  to  show  that  the  visitation 
is  counter  to  common  sense  and  equity.  In  casss  of  treason,  we  all  know  that  it 
is  not  the  traitor  alone  who  is  punished :  his  estates  are  confiscated,  his  honours 
destroyed  ;  so  that,  in  place  of  transmitting  rank  and  affluence  to  his  son,  he  trans- 
mits him  nothing  but  shame  and  beggary.  We  do  not  say  that  the  thing  must 
be  just  because  enacted  by  human  laws  ;  we  only  say  that  there  can  be  no  felt  and 
acknowledged  contradiction  between  the  proceeding  and  the  principles  of  equity, 
since  human  laws  involve  the  children  in  the  doom  of  the  parent.  If  you  can  show 
the  child  to  be  innocent,  and  therefore  to  deserve  nothing  of  what  it  receives,  you 
will  have  made  good  your  point  that  the  visitation  is  unjust ;  but  to  maintain  the 
thorough  innocence  of  the  child  would  be  to  maintain  the  purity  of  human  nature. 
Still,  you  will  say,  the  child  is  confessedly  worse  off  than  it  would  have  been  had 
the  parent  not  sinned  ;  and  though  we  may  deserve  all  we  endure  for  ourselves,  we 
still  practically  suffer  for  the  misdoings  of  another.  We  admit  this ;  but  at  the 
same  time  we  contend  that  you  are  shifting  the  argument.  If  the  child  endured  no 
more  than  it  has  deserved  you  admit  that  the  course  of  justice  is  unimpeached — and 
this  is  the  main  thing  we  are  anxious  to  establish  :  but,  if  after  conceding  the  strict 
justice  of  the  measure,  you  profess  to  think  it  hard  that  the  child  should  endure 
what,  but  for  the  parent's  offence,  it  would  not  have  deserved,  we  are  ready  to 
follow  you  into  the  new  field  of  debate,  and  to  show  you,  as  we  think,  the  errone- 
ousness  of  your  opinion.  The  child,  for  example,  is  of  a  diseased  constitution,  of 
a  dishonoured  name,  of  a  broken  fortune  ;  these  constitute  the  visitation  of  whose 
hardship  you  complain  ;  but  who  can  prove  to  us  that  the  child  is  really  injured  by 
the  visitation  ?  Nay,  who  can  prove  to  us  that  the  child  is  not  really  advantaged  ? 
If  we  were  told  that,  because  the  parent  died  in  unrighteousness,  the  child  also 
must  be  shipwrecked  for  eternity,  the  wrought  injury  would  be  tremendous  and 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  851 

overwhelming :  but  there  is  not  the  least  ground  for  supposing  that  the  threatened 
visitation  extends  to  the  next  world ;  on  the  contrary,  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture 
— inasmuch  as  salvation  is  offered  to  all — requires  us  to  believe,  that  the  conse- 
quences to  the  children  of  the  father's  transgressions  lie  confined  within  our  present 
sphere  of  being.  Why  then  is  it  certain  that  the  child  is  dealt  with  injuriously,  if 
sentenced  for  the  parent's  iniquity  to  penury  and  affliction  ?  Are  penury  and 
affliction  never  overruled  for  good  ?  Is  it  necessarily  an  evil  to  have  been  born 
poor  in  place  of  rich — to  be  of  weak  health  instead  of  strong — to  struggle  with 
adversity,  in  place  of  being  lapped  in  prosperity?  No  man  who  feels  himself 
immortal,  who  is  conscious  that  this  confined  theatre  of  existence  is  but  the  school 
in  which  he  is  trained  for  a  wider  and  nobler  still,  will  contend  for  the  necessary 
Injuriousness  of  want  and  calamity :  and  yet  unless  this  necessary  injuriousness  is 
supposed,  it  cannot  be  proved  that  the  children  who  are  visited  for  the  father's 
iniquity  are  on  the  whole  worse  off  than  they  would  have  been  had  there  been  no 
visitation.  Thus  the  argument  against  the  goodness  of  the  Almighty  as  much  falls 
to  the  ground  as  that  against  His  justice  ;  for  proceeding  on  the  principle  that 
physical  evil  is  never  subservient  to  moral  good,  we  overthrow  our  position  by 
assuming  what  we  know  to  be  false.  {U.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Inherited  character: — 
An  old  man  died  a  few  years  ago  in  the  Massachusetts  State  Prison.  He  was 
seventy-six  years  old,  and  had  spent  the  last  eight  years  of  his  life  in  a  cell  in  that 
gloomy  gaol.  His  wife  for  years  had  been  a  prisoner  there  too,  and  so  had  his 
daughter,  and  seven  of  his  sons.  Were  not  "  the  iniquities  of  the  father  visited 
upon  the  children  "  ?  In  that  same  State,  seventy  years  ago,  a  good  minister  died, 
who  for  forty-one  years  had  been  a  beloved  pastor  over  the  same  church.  He  was 
the  fourteenth  eldest  son  of  that  same  name  and  family  who  had  been  a  preacher 
of  the  gospel.  Since  his  death,  one  hundred  of  his  descendants  have  been  Chris- 
tians, and  eight  of  his  sons  and  grandsons  have  also  been  ministers.  Through  that 
blessed  family,  for  many  long  years,  the  Great  Father  of  love  has  been  "  showing 
mercy  to  thousands  in  them  that  love  Him  and  keep  His  commandments." 
Showing  mercy  unto  thousands. — The  place  of  mercy  in  the  government  of  God .- — 
Look  carefully  at  a  very  important  feature  of  the  appeal  which  is  not  brought  out 
clearly  in  our  English  translation.  He  visits  iniquity  "  unto  the  third  and  fourth," 
and  shows  mercy  "  unto  the  thousandth,"  the  commandment  reads.  Our  trans- 
lators have  supplied  the  word  "generation  "  in  italics  to  the  first  numeral,  and 
evidently  they  were  right  in  doing  so,  but  they  should  have  supplied  for  the  same 
reasons  the  same  word  to  the  second  numeral :  "  He  visits  iniquity  unto  the  third 
and  fourth  generation,"  "  He  shows  mercy  unto  the  thousandth  generation."  The 
third  and  fourth  show  an  indefinite  number,  the  thousandth  is  also  an  indefinite 
number,  but  it  is  a  much  larger  number.  The  principle  of  the  Divine  government 
has  a  very  decided  leaning  to  the  side  of  mercy.  Now,  perhaps  you  will  say  :  "  I 
Bee  that  this  feature  of  the  Divine  government  works  with  absolute  impartiality, 
with  strict  justice,  but  I  can  see  no  indication  of  its  leaning  to  the  side  of  mercy." 
Then  look  again,  and  more  closely,  at  the  race  and  the  individual.  1.  Look  at  the 
individual  first.  A  child  inherits  an  impaired  constitution.  Two  features  of  the 
Divine  government  respond  at  once.  First,  the  restorative  forces  within  the  child, 
the  recuperali-  e  powers  of  man's  nature ;  and  second,  the  restorative  forces  without, 
the  whole  realm  of  remedies  and  skill  awakened  in  others  in  their  application.  The 
child  of  ignorant  parents  is  ignorant.  Two  features  here  also  are  on  the  side  of 
mercy.  The  innate  thirst  of  the  mind  for  knowledge,  present  though  weak  in  the 
child  ;  and  tVip  intelligence  of  the  community  in  wh'ch  the  child  lives,  the  atmo- 
sphere  of  ei  liglitenment  which  he  must  breathe  while  he  lives.  The  child  of 
irreligious  parents  is  irreligious.  Here,  too,  there  are  two  principles  on  the  side  of 
mercy.  However  corrupt  he  may  be,  there  is  something  in  the  soul  of  the  child  at 
unrest  for  God  which  may  be  touched  into  power ;  and  the  surrounding  Christianity 
— the  Christ  who  has  loved  and  died  to  save — lives  in  many  believing  hearts  through 
whom  He  seeks  to  save  the  child.  2.  Now,  concerning  the  race,  it  may  be  said 
that  the  limit  of  degradation  seems  to  be  fixed,  but  the  limit  of  progress  cannot  be 
even  imagined.  How  far  man  will  advance  in  the  control  and  use  of  the  powers 
of  nature,  we  who  witness  to-day  the  stupendous  achievements  of  Christian  civiliza- 
tion will  not  even  dare  to  conjecture.  And  how  far  man  will  be  lificd  up,  in  the 
knowledge  and  fellowship  of  God,  the  Bible  tells  us  that  we  cannot  even  imagine. 
In  the  whole  race,  also,  the  two  principles  we  have  seen  working  in  individuals  on 
the  side  of  mercy  exist.  However  corrupted  in  idolatry  men  may  become,  however 
great  the  ascendancy  of  the  flesh  over  the  spirit  in  man,  the  spirit  still  exists,  and 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

in  its  very  nature  cannot  be  satisfied  until  it  finds  and  lays  hold  upon  the  living 
God.  There  is  something  within  men  that  cannot  be  satisfied  witla  idolatry,  or 
with  sensual  corruption,  something  that  may  be  touched  into  strong  and  glorious 
life.  And  there  is  something  to  touch  it.  God  makes  the  appeal  of  His  infinite 
love  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  at  infinite  cost  taken  away  sin  and  brought  in  new 
life  to  all  who  receive  Him.  And  we  who  receive  Him,  as  He  lives  in  us,  will  touch 
all  the  dark  souls  we  cpm  reach  with  His  light  and  life.  We  have  received  from 
our  fathers  the  elevation  and  happiness  of  our  Christian  land.  Let  us  cherish  and 
transmit  to  our  children  the  glorious  inheritance,  and  let  us  send  the  light  into  the 
whole  earth.  Let  us,  receiving  forgiveness  and  new  life  in  our  Saviour,  bring  our 
whole  being  into  a  shape  worthy  of  God  in  moral  likeness.  (F.  S.  Sclienck.) 
God's  mercies  : — I.  What  are  thk  qualifications  ?  1.  The  spring  of  mercy  which 
God  shows  is  free  and  spontaneous.  Say  not  then,  I  am  unworthy  ;  for  mercy  is 
free.  If  God  should  show  mercy  only  to  such  as  deserve  it.  He  must  show  mercy 
to  none  at  all.  2.  The  mercy  God  shows  is  powerful.  How  powerful  is  that  mercy 
which  softens  a  heart  of  stone  I  Of  what  sovereign  power  and  efficacy  is  that 
mercy  which  subdues  the  pride  and  enmity  of  the  heart,  and  beats  ofif  those  chains 
of  sin  in  which  the  soul  is  held!  3.  The  mercy  which  God  shows  is  superabundant ; 
"  abundant  in  goodness,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands."  The  vial  of  God's  wrath 
doth  but  drop  ;  but  the  fountain  of  His  mercy  runs.  4.  The  mercy  God  shows  is 
abiding  (Paa.  ciii.  17).  II.  How  many  ways  is  God  said  to  show  mercy?  1.  We 
are  all  living  monuments  of  God's  mercy.  He  shows  mercy  to  us  in  daily  supplying 
us.  2.  God  shows  mercy  in  lengthening  out  our  gospel  liberties.  3.  God  shows 
mercy  in  preventing  many  evils  from  invading  us.  4.  God  shows  mercy  in  delivering 
us.  5.  God  shows  mercy  in  restraining  us  from  ein  ;  lusts  within,  are  worse  than 
lions  without.  6.  God  shows  mercy  in  guiding  and  directing  us.  7.  God  shows 
mercy  in  correcting  us.  God  is  angry  in  love  ;  He  smites  that  He  may  save.  Every 
cross  to  a  child  of  God  is  like  Paul's  cross  wind,  which  though  it  broke  the  ship, 
it  brought  Paul  to  shore  upon  tbe  broken  pieces.  8.  God  shows  mercy  in  pardoning 
us  ;  "  who  is  a  God  like  Thee,  That  pardonest  iniquity  ?  "  It  is  mercy  to  feed  us, 
rich  mercy  to  pardon  us.  9.  God  shows  His  mercy  in  sanctifying  ua  (Lev.  xx.  8). 
This  prepares  for  happiness,  as  the  seed  prepares  for  harvest.  10.  God  shows 
mercy  in  hearing  our  prayers.  God  may  sometimes  delay  an  answer,  when  He  will 
not  deny.  You  do  not  presently  tbrow  a  musician  money,  because  you  love  to  hear 
his  music :  God  loves  the  music  of  prayer,  therefore  doth  not  presently  let  us  hear 
from  Him,  but  in  due  season  He  will  give  an  answer  of  peace.  11.  God  shows 
mercy  in  saving  us  :  "  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us."  This  is  the  top-stone 
of  mercy,  and  it  is  laid  in  heaven.  Now  mercy  displays  itself  in  all  its  orient 
colours  ;  now  mercy  is  mercy  indeed,  when  God  shall  perfectly  refine  us  from  all  the 
lees  and  dregs  of  corruption.  As  an  argument  against  despair  :  see  what  a  great 
encouragement  here  is  to  serve  God, — He  shows  mercy  to  thousands.  (1)  Hope  in 
God's  mercies,  "  the  Lord  takes  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  Him,  and  hope  in  His 
mercy."  (2)  If  God  shows  mercy  to  thousands,  labour  to  know  that  His  mercy  is 
for  you,  "He  is  the  God  of  my  mercy."  A  man  that  was  ready  to  drown  saw  a 
rainbow ;  said  he,  "  What  am  I  the  better,  though  God  will  not  drown  tbe  world,  if 
I  drown  ?  "  so,  what  are  we  the  better  God  is  merciful,  if  we  perish  ?  Let  us  labour 
to  know  God's  special  mercy  is  for  us.  (T.  Watson.)  "  'Them  that  love  Me  "  : — 
I.  How  MUST  OUR  LOVE  TO  GoD  BE  QUALIFIED  ?  1.  Love  to  God  must  be  pure  and 
genuine ;  He  must  be  loved  chiefly  for  Himself.  We  must  love  God,  not  only  for  His 
benefits,  but  for  those  intrinsic  excellencies  wherewith  He  is  crowned ;  we  must 
love  God  not  only  for  the  good  which  flows  from  Him,  but  the  good  which  is  in 
Him.  2.  Love  to  God  must  be  with  all  the  heart,  "  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy 
God  with  all  thy  heart."  We  must  not  love  God  a  Utile, — give  God  a  drop  or  two 
of  our  love, — but  the  main  stream  of  our  love  must  run  after  Him  ;  the  mind  must 
think  of  God,  the  will  choose  Him,  the  affections  pant  after  Him.  3.  Love  to  God 
must  be  flaming  ;  to  love  coldly  is  all  one  as  not  to  love.  II.  How  may  we  know 
WHETHER  WE  LOVE  GoD  ?  1.  He  that  loves  God  desires  His  sweet  presence  ;  lovers 
cannot  be  long  asunder,  they  have  their  fainting  fits,  they  want  a  sight  of  the  object 
of  their  love.  A  soul  deeply  in  love  with  God  desires  the  enjoyment  of  Him  in  His 
ordinances,  in  word,  prayer,  sacraments.  2.  He  who  loves  God  doth  not  love  sin  ; 
•'  ye  that  love  the  Lord  hate  evil."  The  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  sin  can  no  more 
mix  together  than  iron  and  clay ;  every  sin  loved  strikes  at  the  being  of  God,  but 
he  who  loves  God  hath  an  antipathy  against  sin.  3.  He  who  loves  God  is  not  much 
ialove  with  anything  else  ;  his  love  is  very  cool  to  worldly  things;  his  love  to  God 


CHAP,  xs.]  EXODUS.  353 

moves  as  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  swiftly ;  his  love  to  the  world  moves  as  the  sun 
on  the  dial,  very  slow.     4.  He  who  loves  God  cannot  live  wit  bout  Him.     5.     He 
who  loves  God  will  be  at  any  pains  to  get  Him.     Doth  he  love  his  friend  that  will 
not  make  a  journey  to  see  him  ?     6.  He  that  loves  God  prefers  Him  before  estate 
and  life.     Before  estate :  "  For  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things."     Who 
that  loves  a  rich  jewel  would  not  part  with  a  flower  for  it  ?     Before  life :  "  They 
loved  not  their  lives  to  the  doath."     Love  to  God  carries  the  soul  above  the  love  of 
life  and  the  fear  of  death.     7.  He  who  loves  God  loves  His  favourites,  namely,  the 
Faints  (1  John  v.  1).    8.  If  we  love  God,  as  w»  cannot  but  be  fearful  of  dishonouring 
Him  (the  more  a  child  loves  his  father,  the  more  he  is  afraid  to  displease  him),  so 
we  weep  and  mourn  when  we  have  offended  Him.     III.  What  are  the  incentives 
TO  PROVOKE  AXD   INFLAME  OUR  LOVE  TO  GoD  ?     1.  God's   benefits  bestowed  on  us. 
Great  is  the  love  that  is  excited  by  love.     Kindness  works  on  a  brute ;  the  ox  knows 
his  owner.     2.  Love  to  God  would  make  duties  of  religion  facile  and  pleasant.     3. 
It  is  advantageous  (1  Cor.  ii  9) .     4.  By  our  loving  God  we  may  know  that  He  loves 
us  (1  John  iv.  19).     If  the  ice  melts,  it  is  because  the  sun  has  sinned  upon  it ;  if  the 
frozen  heart  melts  in  love,  it  is  because  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  hath  shined  upon 
it.     IV.  What  means  may  be  used  to  excite  our  love  to  God?     1.  Labour  to  know 
God  aright.     2.  Make  the  Scriptures  familiar  to  you.     3.  Meditate  much  of  God, 
and  this  will  be  a  means  to  love  Him;  "while  I  was  musing,  the  fire  burned." 
Meditation  is  the  bellows  of  the  affections.     Who  can  meditate  on  God's  love  ?  who 
can  tread  on  these  hot  coals,  and  his  heart  not  burn  in  love  to  God  ?  {Ibid.)     "  And 
keep  My  commcuidments"  : — Love  and  obedience,  like  two  sisters,  must  go  hand  in 
hand.     A  good  Christian  is  like  the  sun,  which  doth  not  only  send  forth  light,  but 
goes  its  circuit  round  the  world  :  so  he  hath  not  only  the  light  of  knowledge,  but 
goes  his  circuit  too,  and  moves  in  the  sphere  of  obedience.     In  what  manner  must 
we   keep   God's   commandments?     1.  Our  keeping  the  commandments  must   be 
fiducial.    Our  obedience  to  God's  commandments  must  spring  from  faith  ;  therefore 
it  is  called  "  the  obedience  of  faith."     2.  Our  keeping  the  commandments  must  be 
uniform.     We   must  make  conscience  of  one  commandment  as  well  as  another ; 
"then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when  I  have  respect  to  all  Thy  commandments." 
Physicians  have  a  rule,  when  the  body  sweats  in  one  part,  but  is  cold  in  another,  it 
is  a  sign  of  a  distemper  :  so  when  men  seem  zealous  in  some  duties  of  religion,  but 
are  cold  and  frozen  in  others,  it  is  a  sign  of  hypocrisy.     We  must  have  respect  to 
all  God's  commandments.     3.  Our  keeping  God's  commandments  must  be  willing; 
"  if  ye  be  willing  and  obedient."   A  musician  is  not  commended  for  playing  long,  but 
for  playing  well  ;  it  is  obeying  God  willingly  is  accepted ;  the  Lord  hates  that  which 
is  forced,  it  is  rather  paying  a  tax  than  an  offering.     If  a  willing  mind  be  wanting, 
there  wants  that  flower  which  should  perfume  our  obedience,  and  make  it  a  sweet 
smelling  savour  to  God.     That  we  may  keep  God's  commandments  willingly,  let 
these   things   be   well   weighed.       Our    willingness   is   more    esteemed  than   our 
service  ;  therefore  David  counsels  Solomon  not  only  to  serve  God,  but  with  a  willing 
mind.     The  will  makes  sin  to  be  worse,  and  makes  duty  to  be  better.     To  obey 
willingly  shows  we  do  it  with  love ;  and  this  crowns  all  our  services.     There  is 
that   in  the  Lawgiver,  which  may  make  us  willing  to  obey  the  commandments, 
namely,    God's     indulgence    to    us.       There    is   that    in   God's    commandments 
which  may  make  us  willing ;  they  are  not  burdensome.     1.  For  a  Cbristian,  so  far 
as  he  is  regenerate,  consents  to  God's  commands — "  I  consent  to  the  law  that  it  is 
good."      2.  God's   commandments   are   sweetened  with   joy   and   peace.      Cicero 
questions  whether  that  can  properly  be  called  a  burden  which  one  carries  with 
delight  and  pleasure.     If  a  man  carries  a  bag  of  money  given  him,  it  is  heavy,  but 
the  delight  takes  off  the  burden  ;  when  God  gives  inward  joy,  tbat  makes  the  com- 
mandments delightful.    3.  God's  commandments  are  advantageous.    (1)  Preventive 
of  evil.     Had  He  not  set  them  as  a  hedge  or  bar  in  our  way,  we  might  have  run  to 
hell,  and  never  stopped.     (2)  Nothing  in  them  but  what  is  for  our  good.     Not  so 
much  our  duty  as  our  privilege.    4.  God's  commandments  are  ornamental.    It  is  an 
honour  to  be  employed  in  a  king's  service.     5.  The  commands  of  God  are  infinitely 
better  than  tli^  commands  of  sin,  these  are  intolerable.     Many  have  gone  with  more 
pains  to  hell  tlian  others  have  to  heaven.     This  may  make  us  obey  the  command- 
ments  willing,  iv.     6.  Willingness   in   obedience    makes   us  resemble    the    angels. 
Use :  It  reproves  them  who  live  in  a  wilful  breach  of  God's  commandments, — in 
malice,  uncleanness,  intemperance, — they  walk  antipodes  to  the  commandment.    To 
live  in  a  -     fni  breach  of  the  commandment  is — 1.  Against  reason.     2.     Against 
equity,     b.  Against   nature.     4.  Against   kindness.     (Ibid.)        Keeping  tlie  com,' 

23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xx. 

mandments  : — I.  One  condition,  then,  of  obtaining  God'8  mercy  is  obedience.  But 
what  am  I  to  obey  ?  But  I  desire  to  ask  whether,  at  heart,  some  of  you  do  not 
know  sufficiently  the  answer  that  should  be  given  ?  Can  you  say  that  you  know  no 
difference  between  right  and  wrong  ?  Is  the  liar  and  the  man  of  truth  the  same  to 
you  ?  May  we  go  together,  then,  thus  far,  that  we  admit  tho  difference  between 
right  and  wrong?  A  second  step  will,  I  think,  be  then  admitted — to  right  and 
wrong  we  must  add  the  words  "ought"  and  "ought  not."  In  other  words,  the 
distinction  between  right  and  wrong  brings  with  it  the  words  "ought,"  "ought 
not,"  "  responsibility,"  "  duty."  Here  it  may  be  well  further  to  remind  you  that  in 
this  word  "  duty  "  lies  hid  an  inexplicable  treasure  of  infinite  value — I  mean  our 
freedom.  In  the  "  I  ought  "  is  practically  included  the  "  I  can."  But  let  me  ask 
you,  yet  again,  whence  comes  this  power  to  distinguish  right  from  wrong?  Here 
■we  may  differ  in  words,  but  in  the  existence  of  the  power  itself  many  will  agree. 
We  may  call  it  moral  feeling,  moral  sense,  Divine  reason,  or  use  the  word  to  which 
we  have  been  accustomed — conscience.  But,  once  more,  why  do  we  give  to  this 
mysterious  power  so  much  importance  7  Why,  if  this  moral  feeling,  this  conscience, 
is  part  of  ourselves,  why  not  deal  with  it  as  we  please,  and  listen  or  not  as  it  may 
Berve  our  turn  ?  The  real  answer,  I  believe  (though  all  may  not  be  able  to  give  it), 
is  because  conscience  does  not  speak  as  for  herself,  but  as  for  another.  She  brings 
us  to  a  bar  of  another,  whom  we  fear  and  may  resist,  but  One  higher  than  ourselves, 
even  God.  Here  is  surely  a  point  worthy  of  your  most  careful  consideration.  II.  The 
text  offers  mercy  for  thousands,  mercy  for  all,  but  on  two  conditions — obedience  and 
love.  Obedience  of  a  kind  we  may  practise  to  the  moral  law ;  but  love  requires 
PERSONALITY.  We  must,  by  God's  help,  rise  above  the  contemplation  of  the  law  to 
the  Person  of  the  Lawgiver,  and  love  the  law  for  His  sake — "  Lord,  what  love  have 
I  unto  Thy  law  !  " — and  then  love  Him  because  He  is  what  He  is.  1.  The  first  test 
I  would  suggest  to  you  is  this — what  use  do  you  make  of  your  Bible  ?  The  step 
from  obedience  to  love,  we  said,  implied  the  step  from  an  impersonal  law  to  the 
personal  Lawgiver,  and  this,  the  belief  in  one  Personal  God,  we  said,  required  for 
its  fulness  the  aid  of  Divine  revelation.  Here,  then,  is  one  test — our  Bible.  Let 
me  say  it  as  plainly  as  I  can:  if  you  neglect  the  study,  the  habitual  devotional 
Btudy,  of  the  one  Book  that  above  all  others  makes  known  to  you  the  one  Persona) 
God,  you  will  be  in  danger  of  living  a  mere  moral  life — fulfilling,  in  a  sense,  the 
condition  of  obedience,  but  falling  short  of  the  higher  condition  of  love,  and  a  narrow, 
Belfish,  unloving,  uninfluential  humanity  will  be  the  result.  2.  Let  me  offer  you 
another  test  which  each  can  easily  make  for  himself.  What  is  your  relation  to 
prayer?  Prayer  is  the  test  of  beUef  in  a  Personal  God.  The  man  who  never  prays, 
never  rises  above  himself,  may  be  moral,  may  be  obedient  to  the  moral  law,  but  he 
has  lost  one  proof  of  his  belief  in  a  Personal  Lawgiver,  to  wh(  m  the  law  was 
intended  to  lead  him  ;  has  lost  one  proof  that  he  has  a  Personal  Guide  through  the 
perils  of  his  life  ;  has  lost  one  proof  that  he  is  preserving  the  condition  of  love.  If 
we  can  pray,  we  have  faith  in  a  Personal  God  ;  we  may  deplore  our  coldness  from 
time  to  time,  we  may  even  pray  from  a  sense  of  duty  many  times,  but  we  have  not 
lost  the  great  condition  of  love,  and  we  know  by  experience  how  our  hearts  may 
become  again  as  the  rivers  in  the  south — dry  water-beds  for  a  season,  but  in  due 
time  flowing  like  a  flood.  3.  Let  me  give  you  but  one  more  tfst,  by  which  you  may 
know  whether  you  are  fulfilling  this  condition  of  love,  the  great  condition  on  which 
God's  plentiful  mercy  may  be  obtained.  It  is  the  test  of  the  love  of  our  neighbour. 
(Bp.  E.  King.) 

Ver.  7.  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain. — The  Third 
Commandment : — The  name  of  God  stands  for  Himself  and  for  that  which  He  has 
revealed  of  Himself,  not  for  our  thoughts  about  Him.  It  is  not  surprising  that  this 
great  name  was  invested  with  a  superstitious  sanctity.  Even  the  Jews  used  it 
rarely.  There  is  a  tradition  that  it  was  heard  but  once  a  year,  when  it  was  uttered 
by  the  high-priest  on  the  great  day  of  atonement.  In  reading  the  Scriptures  it 
became  customary  never  to  pronounce  it,  but  to  replace  it  with  another  Divine  name, 
which  was  regarded  as  less  awful  and  august.  The  Third  Commandment  requires 
something  very  different  from  this  ceremonial  homage  to  His  name.  His  name 
stands  for  Himself,  and  it  is  to  Him  that  our  reverence  is  due.  I.  We  mat  trans- 
gress THE  COMMANDMENT  IN  MANY  WAYS.  1.  By  pcrjury.  2.  By  swearing,  d'.  By 
the  practice  of  finding  material  for  jesting  in  Holy  Scripture.  4.  By  the  habit  of 
scoffing  at  those  who  profess  to  live  a  religious  life,  and  taking  every  opportunity 
of  sneering  at  their  imperfections.    II.  It  is  not  enough  to  avoid  the  sin  of  profanity ; 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS,  355 

WE  ARE  BOUND  TO  CULTIVATE  AND  TO  MANIFEST  THAT  REVERENCE  FOR  God'S  MAJESTT  AND 

HOLINESS  WHICH  LIES  AT  THE  ROOT  OF  ALL  RELIGION.  We  have  to  worship  Him.  It 
is  the  "  pure  in  heart "  who  see  God,  and  only  when  we  see  God  face  to  face  can  we 
worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  {R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  On  takinj  God's  name 
in  vain : — I.  The  fii-st  expression  to  which  I  refer  is,  "  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy 
God,"  or  strictly,  "  the  name  of  Jehovah  thy  God."  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  not, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  mere  articulate  sound  by  which  the  mouth  expresses  the  idea  of 
Deity,  nor  is  the  phrase,  on  the  other  hand,  a  simple  synonym  for  God.  It  holds  up 
God  in  His  special  character  of  Jehovah,  the  covenant-making  and  covenant-keeping 
God  of  His  own  dear  people.  "The  name  of  Jehovah"  means  God,  known  and 
served  under  His  revealed  aspect  of  mercy,  God  appreciated  as  the  pardoner  of  sin 
and  giver  of  the  Spirit,  the  Jehovah  or  keeper  of  His  precious  promises  to  His 
people.  For  example,  of  the  antediluvian  piety  it  is  said  :  "  Then  began  men  to 
call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  " — i.e.,  it  was  th^n  that  distinctive  recognition  was 
made  of  God's  special  provision  of  mercy  for  sinners.  His  name  of  Jehovah  was 
received  as  indicating  His  relation  to  His  believing  people.  A  name  is  an  expression 
of  the  personal  substance — an  exhibition  of  the  essential  character.  God's  name 
by  which  He  delights  to  be  known  among  men,  is  Love.  His  character  of  com- 
passion is  especially  displayed  in  His  Word,  and  hence  the  Psalmist  says  :  "  Thou 
hast  magnified  Thy  Word  above  all  Thy  name" — tliat  is,  of  all  revelations  of  God's 
character,  all  expressions  of  His  being,  the  written  Word  is  most  full  and  complete. 
Here  is  the  way  of  pardon  and  acceptance  clearly  portrayed.  Another  conspicuous 
display  of  God's  character,  but  only  local  and  temporary  in  its  personal  contact, 
while  universal  in  its  possible  application,  is  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  and  so 
Jesus  is  in  a  high  sense  "  the  name  of  Jehovah."  II.  Tbe  second  expression  to 
which  our  attention  should  be  directed  is  the  phrase,  "  To  take  in  vain."  The 
literal  rendering  is,  "  Thou  shalt  not  lift  up  the  name  of  Jehovah  thy  God  lightly." 
Taking  God's  name  in  vain  is  the  flippant  and  thoughtless  use  of  God's  name.  It 
is  the  taking  up  the  name  in  the  vacant,  purposeless  way  in  which  we  pluck  off  a 
leaf  as  we  pass  along  the  road — the  use  of  the  name,  not  only  where  the  purpose  is 
evil,  but  where  there  is  no  defined  purpose  at  all.  Again,  there  may  be  not  only  an 
absence  of  evil  purpose,  but,  beyond  an  absence  of  all  purpose,  there  may  even  be 
a  purpose  of  good,  but  this  purpose  may  be  seized  upon  in  so  rash  and  ill-advised  a 
way  that  the  use  of  the  Divine  name  in  it  is  a  taking  the  name  in  vain,  just 
as  Uzzab's  touching  the  ark  of  God,  even  to  stay  it  upon  the  cart  and  prevent  its 
fall,  was  a  sin  of  profanity,  and  called  for  the  Divine  punishment.  1.  In  respect 
to  Gi  d's  verbal  name,  we  are  not  to  be  satisfied  with  our  freedom  from  the  coarse 
profanity  which  culture  and  good  breeding  forbid,  but  we  are  to  remove  the  habit  of 
using  the  holy  name  in  ordinary  conversation  in  which  the  use  has  no  religious 
character.  We  are  not  tocall  a  wretched  and  forlorn  person  or  thing  "  God-forsaken," 
or  to  hail  a  gift  as  a  "  God-send,"  when,  in  using  these  epithets,  we  have  no  design 
tp  use  their  full  meaning,  and  therefore  have  not  the  proper  attitude  of  mind  for 
Their  utterance.  2.  In  respect  to  God's  written  Word,  we  are  to  take  it  up  with 
reverence  both  in  our  hearts  and  on  our  tongues.  3.  But  chiefly,  in  relation  to 
Jesus  and  the  great  eternal  truths  which  the  Holy  Spirit  introduces  to  the  soul. 
To  each  snan  comes  through  his  conscience  a  summons  from  God  to  give  heed 
to  his  future  spiritual  and  eternal  condition.  If  you  slight  that  summons, 
given  to  you  in  the  gospel,  you  are  taking  God's  name  in  vain.  (H.  Crosby, 
D.D.)  The    Third   Commandment: — I,    The   Divine   prohibition — 1.  Forbids 

perjury.  2.  Forbids  hy]Docrisy — insincere  worship.  3.  Forbids  profanity.  II. 
The  Divine  warning.  Being  in  its  very  nature  the  most  godless  of  sins,  God 
from  His  very  nature  cannot  allow  it  to  go  unpunished.  Did  you  ever  read  that 
remarkable  assertion  of  the  famous  mathematician,  Charles  Babbage,  in  the  "  Minth 
Bridgwater  Treatise,"  to  the  eiiect  that  the  slightest  word,  though  it  be  but  a  whis- 
pered interjection,  vibrating  in  the  air,  sets  in  operation  a  series  of  changes  which 
undulate  to  the  very  outskirts  of  creation,  rising  and  falling  like  an  everlasting 
tide  ?  The  whole  material  universe  is  a  mighty  whispering-gaUery,  in  which  the 
Infinite  One  is  everlastingly  hearing  every  word,  every  whisper,  breathed  by  every 
human  being,  from  the  day  Adam  pronounced  his  first  vocable  in  Eden  to  the  day 
when  human  time  shall  be  no  more.  If,  then,  the  scarcely  audible  rustle  of  an 
unconscious  aspen  leaf  sets  in  inexorable  motion  atom  after  atom — from  leaf  to  tree, 
from  tree  to  earth,  from  earth  to  star,  till  the  whole  material  creation  responds  in 
undulation — think  you  that  an  oath,  spoken  by  conscious,  responsible  man,  will  ever 
die  away,  or  go  unpunished  ?     Oh,  no  !  Jehovah  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

taketh  His  name  in  vain.  (G.  D.  Boardman.)  The  Third  Commandment: — There 
are  other  ways  besides  making  an  image  of  Him  by  which  the  conception  of  Deity 
can  be  lowered.  Man  by  his  words  embodies  his  thoughts  of  God  as  really  as  when 
by  his  hands  he  carves  an  image  of  Him.  It  bears  significantly  upon  certain  usages 
which  tend,  though  perhaps  unconsciously,  to  dissociate  the  name  of  God  from  the 
deep  reverence  which  should  invest  it.  Among  these  is  the  habit,  formed  often 
unthinkingly,  of  using  frequent  and  almost  meaningless  repetitions  of  the  name  of 
God  in  prayer.  Akin  to  this  evil,  and  one  equally  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  the  Third 
Command,  is  the  familiar  and  endearing  use  of  God's  name  in  prayer.  Some,  while 
praying,  employ  epithets  as  if  they  were  on  terms  of  special  intimacy,  and  almost 
of  equality,  with  their  Heavenly  Father.  Christ  has,  indeed,  taught  us  to  call  God 
"Father";  but  He  has,  in  the  same  breath,  bid  us  gather  around  the  name  these 
reverent  words,  "which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  Thy  name."  And  there  is 
nothing  in  Scripture  to  indicate  a  less  hallowed  aspect  toward  Christ  in  prayer  than 
toward  the  Father.  With  what  unvarying  reverence  do  Paul  and  .^ohn,  in  their 
Epistles,  refer  to  the  ascended  and  glorified  Redeemer!  A  true  acquaintance  with 
God  produces  reverence  for  Him  ;  a  correct  knowledge  of  Christ  exalts  Him  far 
above  all  principality  and  power,  and  gives  Him  a  name  that  is  above  every  name. 
(P.  B.  Davis.)  The  Third  Commandment : — I.  What  is  required.  The  holy  and 
reverent  use  of  God's  names,  titles,  attributes,  ordinances,  words,  and  works.  II. 
What  is  forbidden.  All  profaning  or  abusing  of  anything  whereby  God  makes 
Himself  known.  This  command  is  broken  two  ways — 1.  By  not  using  the  name  of 
God  as  is  required  (Mai.  ii.  2).  So  as  many  duties  as  are  required,  so  many  sins 
there  are  in  omitting  these  duties.  Hence  this  command  is  broken  by  our  not 
hallowing  and  glorifying  God's  name,  by  not  taking  up  the  name  of  God  into 
our  minds,  lips,  and  lives.  2.  By  profaning  or  abusing  of  the  name  of  God ; 
that  is,  anything  whereby  God  makes  Himself  known.  1.  When  it  is  used 
ignorantly,  as  it  was  by  the  Athenians,  whom  the  apostle  Paul  charges  with 
worshipping  God  ignorantly  (Acts  xviii.  23).  2.  When  it  is  used  vainly  and 
irreverently,  that  is,  lightly  and  rashly.  3.  When  the  name  of  God  is  used 
superstitiously.  4.  When  it  is  used  profanely  and  wickedly.  (1)  Profane  swearing. 
(2)  Sinful  imprecations  or  cursings,  whereby  people  pray  for  .ome  ,,vil  against 
themselves  or  others,  whether  absolutely  or  conditionally.  (3)  Perjury  is  falsehood 
confirmed  with  an  oath.  (4)  Blasphemy,  which  is  a  wronging  of  the  majesty  of 
God,  by  speeches  tending  to  His  reproach.  Having  spoken  of  the  more  gross  and 
palpable  breaches  of  this  command,  I  shall  now  eonsider  other  ways  how  the 
Lord's  name  is  abused  and  taken  in  vain.  1.  With  respect  to  His  names  and  titles. 
They  are  taken  in  vain — (1)  When  they  are  not  improved  for  those  uses  to  which 
they  natively  attend  (see  Mai.  i.  G).  (2)  When  we  make  an  ill  use  of  them,  either 
to  encourage  ourselves  in  sin  by  them,  or  to  drive  us  away  from  Him  by  terror,  or 
to  any  other  use  dishonourable  to  God,  and  contrary  to  the  intent  of  the  revelation 
of  them  to  us.  2.  With  respect  to  His  attributes,  God's  name  is  abused — (1)  By 
the  working  of  unbelief  against  them,  doubting  of,  questioning,  and  denying  them. 
(2)  By  the  aversion  of  the  heart  unto  them,  and  its  rising  against  thf^iii  (Rom.  viii. 
7).  (3)  By  using  them  to  wrong  ends  and  purposes.  Thus  the  mercy  of  God  is 
abused  to  encouragement  in  sin  ;  His  patience  to  continuance  in  it ;  His  justice  to 
desperation,  &c.  (Eccles.  viii.  11 ;  Rom.  ii.  4,  5).  3.  With  respect  to  His  ordinances. 
The  name  of  God  is  abused  in  ordinances  when  we  do  not  go  about  them  after  the 
right  manner,  &c.  4.  With  respect  to  His  Word,  men  are  guilty  of  profaning  the  name 
of  God — (1)  By  misimproving  and  misapplying  the  Word  of  God,  as  the  Pharisees 
did  (Matt.  v. ;  Ezek.  xiii.  19).  (2)  Jesting  upon  it  (Jer.  xxiii.  33).  (3)  Using  it  to 
the  maintenance  of  erroneous  principles,  unprofitable  questions,  and  vain  jangUngs 
(2  Tim.  ii.  14,  15).  5.  With  respect  to  His  works,  men  are  guilty  of  profaning  the 
name  of  God,  when  they  use  the  works  and  creatures  of  God  to  sinful  lusts  and 
practices.  6.  Men  profane  the  name  of  God,  in  respect  of  religion,  and  the  profes- 
sion of  it.  (1)  By  maligning,  scorning,  and  reviling  religion,  and  the  profession  of 
it.  (2)  By  a  hypocritical  profession,  (3)  By  a  scandalou?  walk.  III.  The  reason 
ANNEXED.  This  is,  that  however  the  breakers  of  this  commandment  may  escape 
punishment  from  men,  yet  the  Lord  our  God  will  not  suffer  them  to  escape  His 
righteous  judgment.  1.  Whence  it  is  that  men  think  so  lightly  of  the  profaning  of 
the  name  of  God,  so  that  in  effect  they  hold  themselves  guiltless.  (1)  It  proceeds 
from  that  wicked  and  malicious  spirit  the  devil  (James  iii.  6).  (2)  It  springs  from 
the  low  and  mean  thoughts  they  have  of  God  and  His  dreadful  name  (Psa.  xxxvi. 
1,  2).     (3)  There  are  many  profanations  of  the  name  of  God,  that  untender  men 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  857 

will  not  allow  to  be  such.  They  are  not  and  will  not  be  convinced  of  a  fault  in 
them,  as  in  obseciations,  appeals  to  God,  adjurations,  &c.  But  a  due  sense  of  the 
majesty  of  that  name  would  clear  people's  minds  in  these  things  (Matt.  v.  37).  (4) 
There  are  many  profanations  of  that  name  which  men  do  not  at  all  observe,  as 
profaning  that  holy  name  in  duties  by  formality,  and  want  of  faith  and  fervency. 
(5)  It  proceeds  from  the  passion  of  anger  or  malice.  (6)  Custom  in  taking  the 
name  of  God  in  vain  takes  away  the  sense  of  it.  (7)  Swearing  proceeds  from 
unwatchfulness.  (8)  In  some  it  proceeds  from  vanity  and  hellish  bravery.  2. 
Whence  it  is  that  profaners  of  the  name  of  God  escape  punishment  from  men.  (1) 
Little  zeal  for  God's  honour.  (2)  Those  who  ought  to  put  in  operation  the  laws 
against  swearing  are  themselves  often  guilty  of  that  sin.  3.  I  proceed  to  show  how 
God  will  not  let  men  escape  with  it ;  that  He  will  by  no  means  hold  them  guiltless. 
Consider  that  ihe  profaning  of  the  name  of  God  is  a  sin — (1)  That  brings  wrath 
upon  a  land  (Hos.  iv.  1,  2 ;  Jer.  v.  7,  9).  (2)  It  brings  wrath  upon  families 
(Zech.  V.  3,  4).  (3)  It  brings  a  curse  upon  particular  persons.  4.  What  is  the 
great  evil  of  this  sin,  that  it  is  so  severely  punished  ?  (1)  It  is  a  sin  that  is  directly 
against  God,  His  glorious  greatness  and  infinite  majesty.  (2)  It  is  a  direct  violation 
of  the  law  of  God,  "  Swear  not  at  all  "  ;  "  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 
thy  God  in  vain."  Have  you  no  respect  to  the  authority  of  God  ?  (3)  It  is  not  only 
a  violation  of  the  law  of  God,  but  a  breach  of  meu's  laws.  (4)  It  is  a  sin  that  has 
a  peculiar  contempt  of  God  in  it,  striking  most  directly  against  His  honour  (Psa. 
cxxxix.  20).  (5)  It  is  most  directly  contrary  to  the  great  end  of  all  Divine  revela- 
tion. The  first  petition  in  the  Lord's  Prayer  is,  "  Hallowed  be  Thy  name."  (6)  It 
has  a  particular  malignity  in  it,  and  in  a  most  special  manner  proceeds  from  the 
devil,  as  it  has  less  to  carry  us  to  it  than  ordinary  sins  have.  What  profit  or 
pleasure  can  be  derived  from  it?  (7)  Common  swearers  and  cursers  will  be  found 
to  be  men  either  of  consciences  already  seared,  or  next  door  to  it.  I  shall  conclude 
all" with  a  very  short  word  of  improvement.  1.  How  can  these  lands  escape  a  stroke 
that  have  so  much  of  this  guilt  to  answer  for  ?  2.  I  warn  all  gross  profaners  of  the 
name  of  God  to  repent  and  flee  to  the  blood  of  Christ  for  pardon ;  certifying,  that 
if  ye  do  not,  ye  shall  lie  under  the  wrath  of  God  for  ever.  3.  Let  us  endeavour 
not  only  to  reform  ourselves,  but  contribute  to  the  reformation  of  others  in  this 
point.  {T.  Boston.  D.D.)  The  Third  Commandment : — I.  What  is  meant  by  the 
NAME  OF  God  ?  II.  How  is  God's  name  taken  in  vain  ?  1.  We  take  God's  name  in 
vain  when  we  use  it  lightly  or  without  thinking.  2.  It  is  taking  this  name  in  vain 
when  we  use  it  falsely,  or  speak  what  is  not  true  in  connection  with  it.  3.  But  we 
break  this  commandment  also  when  we  use  God's  name  profanely.  III.  Why  should 
WE  not  take  this  name  in  vain  ?  1.  Because  it  is  useless.  2.  Because  it  is  cowardly. 
3.  Because  it  ia  vulgar.  4.  Because  it  is  wicked.  5.  Because  it  is  dangerous.  (R. 
Netcton,  D.D.)  The  guilt  of  profaneness  : — 1.  God  has  forbidden  all  profane 
language,  in  a  manner  the  most  solemn,  and  best  adapted  to  make  the  deepest 
impression  on  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men.  2.  Taking  the  name  of  God  in 
vain  is  destructive  of  all  religion.  A  profane  person  cannot  love,  nor  fear,  nor  obey, 
nor  trust  m  God.  3.  The  profanation  of  God's  name  tends  to  weaken  and  destroy 
the  force  and  obligation  of  every  civil  government.  TLe  profanation  of  God's  name 
directly  tends  to  bring  religion  and  oaths  into  contempt ;  and  when  these  are  brought 
into  contempt,  how  can  civil  government  be  administered  to  preserve  the  property, 
liberty,  or  lives  of  the  subjects  ?  4.  Profane  swearing  is  the  most  unnatural  sin  in 
this  wicked  world.  It  does  not  originate  from  any  natural  propensity,  instinct,  or 
appetite  in  the  human  mind,  but  is  contrary  to  every  dictate  of  reason  and  con- 
science. No  one  ever  heard  profane  language  for  the  first  time  without  being  shocked. 
No  child  ever  uses  it  until  he  has  learned  it  from  others.  5.  To  use  profane  language 
is  below  the  dignity  of  any  man.  It  requires  no  superior  knowledge,  learning,  or 
intellectual  talentB  to  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain,  or  to  rise  to  the  highest  attain- 
ments in  the  art  of  swearing.  6.  Profane  swearing  is  a  vice  which  never  lives  alone. 
Who  ever  knew  a  profane  swearer  that  was  free  from  every  other  vice  ?  It  is  true, 
a  profane  swearer  may  not  be  a  liar,  a  thief,  or  a  drunkard;  but  it  is  the  nature  and 
tendency  of  his  profaneness  to  lead  him  into  these  and  all  other  vices.  For  it  takes 
off  the  most  powerful  restraints  that  can  be  laid  upon  the  human  mind.  7.  Profane 
swearing  is  a  land-defiling  iniquity.  It  is  a  moral  infection,  a  spreading  leprosy, 
and  mole  infectious  than  any  natural  disease.  It  is  a  sin  which  can  be  more  easily  and 
oftener  repeated  than  any  other  sin.  The  profane  man  can  utter  his  oaths  and 
imprecations  every  hour  in  the  day,  and  every  day  in  the  week,  wherever  he  is,  a»id 
wherever  he  goes,  as  long  as  he  lives.     8.  Profane  swearing  is  a  sin,  which  exhibits 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 


infallible  evidence,  that  those  who  are  guilty  of  it  are  pursuing  the  broad  road  which 
leads  to  future  and  endless  ruin.      (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)         Taking  God's  name  in 

vain: There  is  a  three-fold  swearing  forbidden.     1.  Vain  swearing  ;  when  men  ia 

their  ordinary  discourse  let  fly  oaths.  2.  Vile  swearing  ;  horrid,  prodigious  oaths 
not  to  be  named.  3.  Forswearing;  this  is  a  heaven-daring  sin:  "Te  shall  not 
swear  by  My  name  falsely,  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of  thy  God."  Per- 
jury is  a  calling  God  to  witness  to  a  lie.  In  righteousness,  therefore,  it  must  not  be 
an  unlawful  oath.  In  judgment,  therefore,  it  must  not  be  a  rash  oath.  In  truth, 
therefore,  it  must  not  be  a  false  oath.  4.  We  take  God's  name  in  vain  by  rash  and 
unlawful  vows.  (T.  Watson.)  The  law  of  reverence  : — What  God  approves  is  not 
the  parade  of  homage  for  the  letter,  but  the  inward  homage  of  the  soul  for  what 
the  name  represents.  I.  In  kelation  to  public  duty.  1.  Perjury.  Worthily  to 
take  an  oath  being  one  of  the  loftiest  of  human  actions,  it  follows  that  to  take  it 
unworthily  is  one  of  the  most  infamous  of  crimes.  The  perjurer  professes  to 
believe  in  God.  His  pretence  is  that  he  confides  in  the  presence,  truth,  majesty, 
justice  of  God.  Yet  he  dons  this  fair  cloak  of  piety  that  he  may  get  a  lie  beheved ! 
It  is  a  dastardly  attempt  to  make  the  righteous  God  his  partner  in  wronging  the 
innocent,  by  leading  a  jury  to  an  unjust  verdict,  and  a  judge  to  an  unrighteous 
sentence.  2.  Blasphemy :  to  impute  evil  to  God ;  to  scoff  at  the  holiness  and 
power  of  God  ;  to  assume  the  prerogatives  of  God.  II.  In  kelation  to  private 
SPEECH.  1.  Profane  swearing.  Leave  expletives  to  those  who  have  more  words 
than  ideas,  and  more  tongue  than  brains.  Be  sure  that  reverence  is  the  saving  salt 
of  society,  and  the  very  soul  of  virtue.  2.  Flippant  talk  of  sacred  things.  III. 
In  p.KLATioN  TO  DiviNE  WORSHIP.  1.  They  who  are  in  the  pulpit  are  there  on  purpose 
to  lift  up  the  name  of  God  like  a  standard.  Let  them  beware  that  they  do  not, 
through  utterance  of  false  doctrine,  lift  it  for  a  lie !  Let  them  beware  of  turning 
their  piety  into  a  mercantile  profession,  or  using  it  for  unworthy  ends  !  Let  them 
beware  of  preaching  Christ  out  of  strife,  and  of  the  opposite  vice  of  perfunctory 
utterance ;  or  unawares  they  may  lift  up  the  name  of  God  for  a  thing  of  nought  I 
2.  They  who  are  in  the  pew  need  the  warning  also.  We  want  reverence  in  the 
house  of  prayer — reverence  in  attitude,  reverence  in  demeanour,  reverence  in 
worship.      (W.   J.   Woods,  B.A.)  On  oaths: — 1.   For  the  matter  of   an  oath, 

assertory  oaths  must  be  of  things  that  are— (1)  True.  (2)  Weighty.  (3)  They  must 
be  such  to  our  knowledge.  Again,  promissory  oaths  must  be  things  just  and  lawful, 
possible,  profitable,  and  in  our  power,  and  which  to  our  knowledge  are  such.  2.  The 
form  must  be,  By  the  true  God,  it  being  a  pecuhar  part  of  His  worship.  3.  Its  rise 
must  be  edification,  that  is,  God's  glory,  our  own  vindication,  or  our  neighbour's 
good,  or  the  call  of  a  magistrate  putting  us  to  it.  4.  As  to  the  expressions  in  which 
it  is  conceived,  or  the  thing  sworn,  it  is  required  that  it  sought  not  only  truth  to,  and 
in  the  man's  meaning  that  sweareth,  but  that  the  expressions  be  plain  and  intelligible 
to  his  meaning  and  understanding  to  whom  the  oath  is  given  ;  otherwise  it  deludeth, 
but  doth  not  clear.  5.  As  to  the  right  manner  of  swearing,  these  things  ought  to 
be  noticed — (1)  That  it  be  in  judgment,  that  we  understand  the  thing  we  swear, 
and  the  nature  of  our  oath,  and  Him  we  swear  by  (Jer.  iv.  2).  (2)  Fear  aud 
reverence  in  going  about  it,  as  being  in  an  especial  way  in  God's  own  sight.  (3) 
Sinpleness  in  the  end,  that  it  be  not  to  deceive  any,  but  to  express  the  truth  only  and 
faithfully,  called   righteousness    (Jer.  iv.  2).      (./.  Durham.)  The   Third  Com- 

mandment .-— "  For  the  Lord,"  dc.  1.  This  implies  that  the  sin  under  consideration 
may  be  lightly  thought  of,  and  rarely  punished,  among  men.  2.  It  is  an  aggravation 
of  this  sin,  that  there  seems  to  be  very  little  temptation  to  the  commission  of 
it.  3.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  a  sin  most  pernicious  to  those  who  indulge  it,  and  to 
those  with  whom  they  are  connected.  4.  In  conclusion,  I  observe  that  God  notices, 
records,  and  will  certainly,  in  this  world  or  the  next,  avenge  the  insults  done  to  His 
majesty  by  a  violation  of  this  command.  (G.  Clayton.)  Rules  to  avoid  prof anitij : — 1. 
Btware  of  the  first  rudiments  and  beginnings  of  oaths,  if  thou  wouldst  not  learn  them. 
2.  Subdue,  as  much  as  you  can,  all  inordinate  passion  and  anger.  3.  Labour  to 
possess  thy  heart  and  over-awe  it  with  the  most  serious  considtrations  and 
apprehensions  of  the  greatness  and  majesty  of  God.  (Bp.  E.  Hopkins.)  A 
froper  use  to  be  made  of  the  gift  of  speech  : — The  Third  Ckimmandment  shows  man 
at  the  head  of  the  material  creation  with  the  crowning  glory  of  inteUigent  speech, 
and,  as  a  social  being,  possessing  the  power  of  speech  as  the  highest  instrument  of 
his  social  nature.  God  reveals  Himself  to  him  by  word,  by  name,  as  to  a  speaking 
Ijfeing,  making  language  a  bond  of  union  between  Him  and  man.  God  commands 
him  to  use  this  great  gift  in  His  worship,  in  honouring  Him.    1.  The  tongue  ia  the 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  359 

glory  of  man,  and  the  glory  of  the  tongue  is  to  voice  the  praises  of  God.  All  nature 
praises  God  as  it  obeys  His  laws.  Man  stands  at  the  head  of  creation  to  take  up 
its  many  notes  of  praise  and  give  them  intelligent  utterance.  He  stands  thus  not 
as  a  single  individual,  a  great  High  Priest,  but  as  a  race  whose  mjriad  voices  are 
to  join  and  mingle  in  a  vast  chorus  of  intelligent  and  harmonious  praise.  We  are 
to  speak  of  Him,  and  to  Him,  with  adoration.  He  is  our  Creator,  Preserver,  Gover- 
nor, and  Judge.  We  are  to  speak  of  Him,  and  to  Him,  with  love  and  praise.  Our 
lips  should  quiver  with  emotion  when  we  speak  of  Him  who  is  our  Father  and  our 
Saviour.  We  are  to  speak  to  Him  in  His  worship,  and  of  Him  to  each  other,  only 
in  such  a  wav  as  shall  promote  His  worship  in  our  own  hearts  and  in  the  hearts  of 
others.  2.  The  command  is  in  the  prohibitory  form.  Man  has  broken  this  law, 
and  is  prone  to  break  it.  His  voice  is  silent  often  when  it  should  be  praising  God. 
A  man  uses  the  name  of  God  as  an  exclamation  of  surprise  at  some  trivial  thing  or 
assertion  of  another,  or  to  sustain  some  unimportant  statement  of  his  own.  Some- 
times a  story  is  dull,  and  the  story-teller  seasons  it  with  a  few  oatbs ;  or  some  joke  is 
without  point,  and  so  a  curse  is  used  to  awaken  a  laugh.  Man  calls  God  to  make 
sport  for  him.  A  man  has  become  accustomed  to  exaggerate  or  to  speak  falsely,  and, 
conscious  that  others  hesitate  to  believe  him,  he  continually  calls  upon  the  truth- 
loving  God  to  witness  to  his  lies.  Sometimes  he  becomes  heated  in  argument,  or  angry 
under  contradiction,  or  in  a  quarrel,  and  he  calls  upon  God  to  curse  him  if  he  is  not 
right,  or  in  his  anger  he  calls  upon  God  to  curse  the  one  who  irritates  him.  Some- 
times he  so  loses  control  of  himself  that  curses  pour  out  of  his  lijjs  as  dense  smoke 
out  of  a  chimney.  {F.  S.  Schenck.)  No  excuse  for  ficeariufi : — The  swearer  tries 
to  excuse  himself.  "I  did  not  mean  it.  I  was  only  in  fun."  There  are  some 
things  not  the  proper  subjects  of  fun.  Surely  a  man  ought  not  to  make  fun  of  God, 
or  of  invoking  the  wrath  of  God  upon  himself  or  others.  But  the  swearer  says:  "  It 
is  a  relief  for  me  to  swear.  It  cools  off  my  heated  spirits."  Often  it  is  the  reverse, 
adding  fuel  to  the  flame,  not  only  to  himself,  but  to  others,  especially  those  he 
curses.  But  if  it  is  a  relief,  what  is  it  a  relief  of  ?  It  is  a  relief  to  the  storm-cloud 
to  throw  out  its  lightnings,  because  it  is  over-charged  with  electricity.  So  it  is  a 
relief  for  you  to  throw  out  your  cursing  because  you  are  over-charged  with  cursing. 
Your  heart  is  so  full  of  hatred  that  when  stirred  in  anger  it  overflows  in  curses. 
You  had  far  better  bring  such  a  heart  to  God  with  a  strong  cry  for  mercj.  Again 
the  swearer  says  :  "  I  know  it  is  wi-ong,  but  it  is  a  habit  I  have  fallen  into  to  such 
an  extent  Ihat  I  often  swear  without  knowing  it."  Do  you  not  see  that  habit  does 
not  excuse  but  rather  aggravates  the  offence  ?  No  one  can  become  wicked  at  once. 
Your  habit  only  shows  how  often  you  have  sinned,  how  fur  vou  have  gone  down  in 
this  kind  of  wickedness.  Again  the  swearer  says  :  "I  may  as  well  say  it  as  think 
it."  You  should  not  think  an  oath  or  curse.  But  it  is  worse  to  speak  it.  The  letter 
of  the  law  forbids  the  word,  and  so  checks  the  evil  in  the  heart,  and  at  any  rate  pre- 
vents its  injuring  others.  You  gain  inward  control  by  outward  control.  Come 
toward  the  spirit  of  the  law,  checking  the  thought  by  obeying  the  letter.  You  keep 
yourself  also  from  being  a  curse.  The  swearer  is  a  moral  blight  in  a  community, 
his  oath-speaking  is  a  spreading  infection,  he  is  himself  a  curse  to  others.  {Ibid.) 
Speakin(]  of  God : — The  positive  side,  underlying  the  negative,  is  the  requirement 
that  our  speech  of  God  shall  fit  our  thought  of  God,  and  our  thought  of  Him  shall 
fit  His  name  ;  that  our  words  shall  mirror  our  affection,  and  our  affection  be  a  true 
reflection  of  His  beauty  and  sweetness  ;  that  cleansed  lips  shall  reverently  utter  the 
name  above  every  name,  which,  after  all  speech,  must  remain  unspoken  ;  and  that 
we  shall  feel  it  to  be  not  the  least  wondeiful  or  merciful  of  His  condescensions,  that 
He  is  "extolled  with  our  tongues."'  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  God  not  to  he  trifled 
with : — It  is  enough  to  make  the  blood  curdle,  to  think  of  the  name  of  God  bandied 
about  as  a  bauble  and  plaything  of  fools.  This  offence  cannot  go  unpunished.  If 
there  be  a  God,  He  must  vindicate  His  own  majesty  and  glory.  It  is  the  very  spirit 
and  essence  of  all  evil,  the  very  core  of  iniquity.  If  you  could  see  it  as  it  is,  in  the 
naked  enormity  of  its  guilt,  you  would  flee  from  it  as  from  the  very  pestilence  of 
death.  You  may  sport  with  the  whirlwind  and  trifle  with  the  storm,  you  may  lay 
your  hand  upon  the  lion's  mane  and  play  with  the  leopard's  spots,  you  may  go  to 
the  very  crater  of  a  burning  volcano,  and  laugh  at  the  lava  which  it  belches  out  in 
thunder;  you  may  trifle  with  any  and  everything;  but  trifle  not  with  God.  Let 
there  be  one  boly  thing  upon  which  you  dare  not  lay  a  profane  hand,  and  let  that 
be  the  name  of  God.  {J.  H.  Thornwell,  D.D.)  Reverence  : — To  swear  by  his  gods 
was  the  most  common  usage  of  the  heathen ;  and  it  grew  out  of  a  worship  that  of 
necessity  debased  the  heart  of  moral  reverence.  Unbelief  comes  oftener  from  irrevcr 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 


rent  association  than  intellectual  doubt.  The  sneer  of  a  Voltaire  has  killed  more 
than  all  his  arguments;  for,  in  Paley's  keen  words,  "who  can  refute  a  sneer?" 
The  youth  who  grows  in  the  midst  of  profane  minds  imbibes  a  scorn  of  truth  before 
he  has  searched  a  single  doctrine,  as  the  breath  of  an  infected  garment  may  engender 
disease.  In  this  light  you  perceive  how  this  old  commandment  covers  the  whole 
ground  of  our  Christian  conduct.  So  shall  we  build  our  piety,  as  Israel  built  the 
Temple  ;  without,  the  costliest  work  that  faith  could  rear  ;  the  walls  overlaid  with 
gold,  each  door  carved  with  cherubim  and  palms  and  open  flowers  :  each  pillar  with 
its  chapiters  and  wreaths  ;  its  vessels,  its  lamps,  its  censers  of  the  beaten  gold  of 
Ophir ;  a  house  of  God,  finished  throughout  all  the  parts  thereof ;  but  withm,  the 
Holy  of  Holies,  where  the  unseen  God  dwells  alone  behind  the  veil  of  the  lieart  I 
{E.  A.  Wa»hbum,  D.D.)  Frivolous  H«e  of  Scripture  .-—Nothing  is  more  easy  than 
to  create  a  laugh  by  a  grotesque  association  of  some  frivolity  with  the  grave  and 
solemn  words  of  Holy  Scripture.  But  surely  this  is  profanity  of  the  worst  kind.  By 
this  Book  the  religious  life  of  men  is  quickened  and  sustained.  It  contains  the 
highest  revelations  of  Himself  which  God  has  made  to  man.  It  directly  addresses 
the  conscience  and  the  heart,  and  all  the  noblest  faculties  of  our  nature,  exalting 
our  idea  of  duty,  consoling  us  in  sorrow,  redeeming  us  from  sin  and  despair,  and 
inspiring  us  with  the  hope  of  immortal  blessedness  and  glory.  Listening  to  its  words, 
millions  have  heard  the  very  voice  of  God.  It  is  associated  with  the  sanctity  of 
many  generations  of  saints.  Such  a  book  cannot  be  a  fit  material  for  the  manu- 
facture of  jests.  For  my  own  part,  though  I  do  not  accept  Dr.  Johnson's  well-known 
saying,  that  "  a  man  who  would  make  a  pun  would  pick  a  pocket,"  I  should  be  dis- 
posed to  say  that  a  man  who  deliberately  and  consciously  uses  the  words  of  Christ, 
of  apostles,  and  of  prophets,  for  mere  purposes  of  merriment,  might  have  chalked  a 
caricature  on  the  wall  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  or  scrawled  a  witticism  on  the  sepulchre 
in  Joseph's  garden.  {R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  Irreverence  in  prayer :— An  aged 
minister  told  me,  says  a  correspondent  of  the  ULrrninj  Star,  that  when  he  was  a 
young  man,  he  had,  on  a  certain  occasion,  been  praying  in  a  family,  and  in  his 
prayer  he  had  made  a  very  frequent  and  energetic  use  of  the  terms  "  Good  God," 
and  "  God  Almighty."  At  the  close  of  his  prayer,  a  little  child,  about  four  years  of 
ape,  came  to  his  mother  and  said,  "  Mother,  I  don't  like  to  hear  that  minister  pray." 
"  Why  ?  "  inquired  the  mother.  "  Because,"  replied  the  child,  "  he  swears  so  when 
he  prays."  This  reproof  from  the  child  broke  the  minister  of  swearing  when  he 
prayed.  Prayer  is  petition,  and  no  one  would  use  the  name  of  a  ruler  to  whom  he 
was  making  a  petition  in  as  harsh  a  manner  as  many  use  the  name  of  the  great  God. 
Profanity  known  to  God: — A  coachman,  pointing  to  one  of  his  horses,  said  to  a 
traveller,  "  That  horse,  sir,  knows  when  I  swear  at  him."  "  Yes,"  replied  the  tra- 
veller; "and  so  does  your  Maker."  Swearer  rebuked: — Mr.  Meikle, a  gentleman 
of  eminent  piety,  was  a  surgeon  at  Carnwath,  in  Scotland.  He  was  ouce  called  to 
attend  a  gentleman  who  had  been  stung  in  the  face  by  a  wasp  or  bee,  and  found  him 
very  impatient,  and  swearing,  on  account  of  his  pain,  in  great  wrath.  "  Oh,  doctor," 
said  he,  "  I  am  in  gieat  torment;  can  you  any  way  help?  "  "  Do  not  fear,"  replied 
Mr.  M.,  "  all  will  be  over  in  a  little  while."  Still,  however,  the  gentleman  continued 
to  swear,  and  at  length  his  attendant  determined  to  reprove  him.  "  I  see  nothing 
the  matter,"  said  he,  "  only  it  might  have  been  in  a  better  place."  "  Where  might 
it  have  been  ?  "  asked  the  sufferer.  "  Why,  on  the  tip  of  your  tongue."  Payment 
for  swearing  : — "  What  does  Satan  pay  you  for  swearing  ?  "  asked  one  gentleman  of 
another.  "He  don't  pay  me  anything,"  was  the  reply.  "  Well  you  work  cheap — 
to  lay  aside  the  character  of  a  gentleman  ;  to  inflict  so  much  pain  on  your  friends 
and  civil  people ;  to  suffer ;  and,  lastly,  to  risk  your  own  precious  soul,  and  for 
nothing — you  certainly  do  work  cheap,  very  cheap  indeed."  Satanic  swearing : — A 
thoughtless,  conceited  young  man  was  boasting  of  the  number  of  languages  he  knew. 
In  French  he  was  a  complete  Parisian  ;  Spanish  and  Portuguese  weie  as  familiar  to 
him  as  his  old  gloves.  In  Italy  he  had  passed  for  a  native.  Now  and  then  he  popped 
out  an  oath,  swearing  that  he  thought  he  knew  almost  all  languages.  An  elderly 
man,  who  had  listened  attentively  to  his  address,  suddenly  stopped  him  by  asking 
him  if  he  were  at  all  acquainted  with  "  the  language  of  Canaan."  (•/.  Cope.) 
Sicearing  reprbved  : — A  good  old  man  was  once  in  company  with  a  gentleman,  who 
occasionally  introduced  into  conversation  the  words  "  devil,  deuce,"  Ac,  and  who 
at  last  took  the  name  of  God  in  vain.  "  Stop,  sir,"  said  the  old  man,  "  I  said 
nothing  while  you  only  used  freedoms  with  the  name  of  your  own  master,  but  I 
insist  upon  it  that  you  shall  use  no  freedoms  with  the  name  of  mine."  A  ivise 
prohibition : — It  is  interesting  to  know  that  when  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  was  in  build- 

l 


CHAP,  xs.]  EXODUS.  361 

ing,  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  the  architect,  caused  a  printed  notice  to  be  affixed  to  the 
scaffolding,  threatening  with  instant  dismissal  any  workman  guilty  of  swearin;^ 
within  those  sacred  precincts.  Profanity  subjects  the  sotil  to  Satan : — In  ancient 
feudal  times,  when  a  man  paid  a  small  "  peppercorn  rent "  to  the  landlord,  it  was  in 
token  of  submission.  It  was  no  onerous  burden.  But  when  the  "  landholder  "  fell 
to  fighting  with  some  neighbouring  chief  or  baron,  or  when  he  was  summoned  by 
the  king  to  join  the  royal  army  into  France,  the  "  peppercorn  submission  "  brought 
its  corresponding  penalty  and  danger.  The  payee  was  bound  to  follow  in  the  baron's 
train,  to  make  any  sacrifices  required  by  the  landholder,  and  encounter  any  dangers, 
even  death,  in  his  service.  Such  are  "  profane  expressions."  They  are  tokens  of 
submission  to  Satan,  and  the  prince  of  darkness  does  not  scruple  to  make  the 
utterers  testify  their  allegiance  whenever  it  suits  him.  Oaths  are  light  things. 
Blasphemies  are  rents  too  readily  paid  to  the  "  prince  of  this  world  "  ;  but  they 
bring  in  their  train  heavy  responsibilities  from  which  there  is  no  escape,  except  by 
sincere  repentance.  Profanity : — The  perniciousness  of  profanity  is  its  vulgar- 
izing names  that  should  never  be  uttered  save  with  reverence  and  awe.  The  old 
monks,  in  their  cloistered  work  on  sacred  manuscripts,  wiped  the  pen  and  breathed 
an  invocation  before  writing  the  name  of  the  Most  High.  A  great  deal  of  the  re- 
ligious apathy  of  our  day  is  the  natural  recoil  of  the  heart  from  language  about 
Deity  and  sacred  things  which  shocks  the  sensibilities  and  makes  piety  seem  akm 
to  blasphemy.  lleverence  for  God's  name : — That  great  and  good  man,  the  Hon. 
Eobert  -Boyle,  a  nobleman,  a  statesman,  and  an  author,  during  his  lifetime,  before 
he  ever  said  the  name  of  God,  always  made  a  hush,  a  pause  !  A  signal  light : — 
I  once  knew  a  sweet  little  girl  called  Mary.  Her  papa  was  the  captain  of  a  big  ship, 
and  sometimes  fhe  went  with  him  to  sea,  and  it  was  on  one  of  these  trips  that  the 
incident,  of  which  I  am  going  to  tell  you,  happened.  One  day  she  sat  on  a  coil  of 
rope,  watching  old  Jim  clean  che  signal  lamps.  "  What  are  you  doing?  "  she  asked. 
"I  am  trimming  the  signal  lamps,  miss,"  said  old  Jim.  "What  are  they  for?  " 
asked  Mary.  "  To  keep  other  ships  from  running  into  us,  miss  ;  if  we  do  not  hang 
out  our  lights,  we  might  be  wrecked."  Mary  watched  him  for  some  time,  and  then 
she  ran  away  and  seemed  to  forget  all  about  the  signal  lights ;  but  she  did  not,  as 
was  afterwards  sho^vn.  The  next  day  she  came  to  watch  old  Jim  trim  the  lamps, 
and  after  he  had  seated  her  on  the  coil  of  rope,  he  turned  to  do  his  work.  Just 
then  the  wind  carried  away  one  of  his  cloths,  and  old  Jim  began  to  swear  awfully. 
Mary  slipped  from  her  place  and  ran  into  the  cabin  ;  but  she  soon  came  back,  and 
put  a  folded  paper  into  his  hand.  Old  Jim  opened  it,  and  there,  printed  in  large 
letters — for  Mary  was  too  young  to  write — were  these  words  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  take 
the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain,  for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that 
taketh  His  name  in  vain."  The  old  man  looked  into  her  face,  and  asked  :  "  What 
is  this,  Miss  Marj'  ?  "  "  It  is  a  signal  light,  please.  I  saw  that  a  bad  ship  was 
running  against  you  because  you  did  not  have  your  signal  lights  hung  out,  so  I 
thought  you  had  forgotten  it,"  said  Mary.  Old  Jim  bowed  his  bead  and  wept  like  a 
little  child.  At  last  he  said  :  "  You  are  right,  missy.  I  had  forgotten  it.  My  mother 
taught  me  that  very  commandment  when  I  was  no  bigger  than  you  ;  and  for  the 
future  I  will  hang  out  my  signal  lights,  for  I  might  be  quite  wrecked  by  that  bad 
ship,  as  you  call  these  oaths."  Old  Jim  has  a  large  Bible  now,  which  Mary  gave  him, 
and  on  the  cover  he  has  painted  :  "  Signal  lights  for  souls  bound  for  heaven."  {Great 
Thoughts.)  Clothed  with  cursing  : — I  remember,  some  time  since,  hearing  of  a 
rich  man  who  had  a  larj/e  plantation.  He  was  the  most  terribly  profane  man  that 
had  ever  been  known  in  the  neighbourhood.  He  could  hardly  speak  a  word  on  any 
subject  without  mingling  it  with  oaths.  It  was  perfectly  shocking  to  hear  him  speak. 
At  length  he  was  seized  with  a  stroke  of  something  like  paralysis.  This  left  him  in 
good  health,  only  he  had  lost  the  use  of  his  limbs.  And  the  remarkable  thing  about 
it  was,  that  the  power  of  speech  was  taken  away  from  him,  except  that  he  could 
still  swear.  Profane  words  were  all  that  he  could  utter.  He  used  to  be  carried  about 
his  plantation  by  his  servants  in  a  sort  of  hand-carriage,  and  the  only  words  that 
ever  fell  from  his  lips  were  dreadful  oaths  and  curses.  How  awfnl  this  must  have 
been  !  What  a  terrible  illustration  it  affords  of  that  passage  of  Scripture  in  which 
God  says  that  because  the  wicked  "  love  cursing  it  shall  come  into  their  bones  like 
oil,  and  they  shall  clothe  themselves  with  cursing  like  a  garment ! "  (Psa.  cix.  17-19). 
Surely  this  man  was  so  clothed.  A  dreadful  garment  it  must  have  been  to  wear ! 
A  just  reproof :— As  the  Rev.  Dr.  Gifford  was  one  day  showing  the  British  Museum 
to  some  strangers,  he  was  much  shocked  by  the  profane  language  of  a  young  gentle- 
man belonging  to  the  party.     Taking  down  an  ancient  copy  of  the  Septuagint,  he 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

showed  it  to  the  youth,  who,  on  seeing  it,  exclaimed,  "  Oh  1  I  can  read  this." 
"  Then,"  said  the  doctor,  "  read  that  passage,"  pointing  to  the  Third  Command- 
ment. 

Vers.  8-11.  Remember  the  Sabbath  Day. — The  Fourth  Commandment : — I.  The 
first  word  of  the  Fourth  Commandment  reminds  us  that  the  Sabb\th  Day  was 
ALREADY  ESTABLISHED  among  the  IsraeUtcs  when  the  law  was  delivered  on  Sinai. 
That  law  created  nothing.  It  preserved  and  enforced  what  God  had  already  taught 
His  people  to  observe  by  another  method  than  that  of  formal  decrees.     II.  In  this 

ComiAND.MENT  WORK  IS  ENJOINED,  JUST  AS  MUCH  AS  REST  IS  ENJOINED.       Man's  sin  haS 

turned  work  into  a  curse.  God  has  redeemed  and  restored  work  into  a  blessing  by 
uniting  it  again  to  the  rest  with  which,  in  His  Divine  original  order,  it  was 
associated.  III.  God  rests  ;  therefore  He  would  have  man  rest.  God  works ; 
therefore  He  would  have  man  work.  Man  cannot  rest  truly  unless  he  remembers  his 
relation  to  God,  who  rests.  IV.  It  is  not  wonderful  that  the  Jews  after  the 
Captivity,  as  they  had  been  schooled  by  a  long  discipline  into  an  understanding 

OK  THE  meaning  OF  THE  SeCOND  COMMANDMENT,  SO  HAD  LEARNT  ALSO  TO  APPRECIATE  IN 

SOME  DEGREE  THE  WORTH  OF  THE  FouRTH.  Nehcmiah  speaks  frequently  and  with 
great  emphasis  of  the  Sabbath  as  a  gift  of  God  which  their  fathers  had  liglitly 
esteemed,  and  which  the  new  generation  was  bound  most  fondly  to  cherish.  Hia 
words  and  acts  were  abused  by  the  Jews  who  lived  between  hi.q  age  and  that  of  our 
Lord's  nativity,  and  when  Christ  came,  the  Sabbath  itself,  all  its  human  gracious- 
ness,  all  its  Divine  reasonableness,  were  becoming  each  day  more  obscured.  V. 
Jesus,  as  the  Mediator,  declared  Himself  to  be  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath,  and 
PROVED  Himself  to  be  so  by  turning  what  the  Jews  made  a  curse  into  a  blessing. 
He  asserted  the  true  glory  of  the  Sabbath  Day  in  asserting  the  mj  stery  of  His  own 
relation  to  God  and  to  His  creatures.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  Jewish 
Sahbath: — 1.  The  Jewish  Sabbath  was  founded  on  a  definite  Divine  command.  2. 
The  particular  day  which  was  to  be  kept  as  a  Sabbath  was  authoritatively  determined. 
3.  The  purpose  of  the  day  was  expressly  defined.  4.  The  manner  in  which  the 
Sabbath  was  to  be  kept  was  very  distinctly  stated.  5.  The  sanction  which  defended 
the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  most  severe.  The  only  similarity  between  the  Lord's 
Day  and  the  Jewish  Sabbath  is  that  both  recur  once  a  week,  and  that  both  are 
religious  festivals.  To  the  idea  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath  rest  was  essential,  worship 
was  an  accident ;  to  the  idea  of  the  Christian  Sunday  worship  is  essential,  rest  an 
accident.  The  observance  of  Sunday  as  a  religious  institution  is  a  question  of 
privilege,  not  of  duty.  (R.  W.  Dale,D.D.)  Tlie  Sabbath  Day: — I.  The  design 
OF  the  Sabb.ath.  1.  A  day  of  rest  from  physical  toil.  2.  A  day  of  holy  employment. 
•*  Keep  it  holy."  (See  also  Deut.  v.  12,  Isa.  Iviii.  13,  14).  It  is  to  be  a  day  of  rest, 
but  not  a  day  of  idleness.  H.  Wh.^t  is  the  practical  religious  value  of  the 
Sabbath  ?  1.  It  is  a  perpetual  reminder  of  spiritual  things.  2.  It  is  a  great 
conservative  of  good,  and  a  poweiful  barrier  against  evil.  III.  The  duty  and 
privilege  of  keeping  this  day.  1.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  God.  He  made  the 
Sabbath.  He  commands  us  to  keep  it.  2.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  ourselves.  As 
a  day  of  rest  it  is  essential  to  the  highest  condition  of  physical  health.  As  a  day  of 
holy  meditation  and  worship,  it  is  essential  to  our  spiritual  education  and  growth. 
3.  It  is  a  duty  we  owe  to  our  fellow-men.  You  cannot  violate  the  Sabbath  without 
influencing  your  brother  to  do  the  same.  {George  Brooks.)  The  Fourth  Command- 
ment : — This  Commandment  holds  a  remarkable  position  in  the  Decalogue.  It  lies 
between  those  which  touch  our  duty  to  God  and  those  which  touch  our  duty  to  man. 
It  belongs  to  both  branches  of  the  Decalogue.  Its  position  tells  us  that  a  breach 
of  the  Sabbath  is  a  direct  insult  to  God,  and  is  also  a  direct  injury  to  man, 
weakening  the  power  of  a  day  which  is  eminently  a  blessing  to  the  human  race. 
This  remarkable  position  of  the  Sabbath  Commandment  is  proof  incontrovertible 
of  its  binding  character  for  all  men  in  all  time.  There  are  two  expressions  in  the 
command  itself  which  testify  to  this  universality  of  application.  1.  "  Remember 
the  Sabbath  Day."  It  is  no  new  institution  which  you  are  now  to  learn  about  for 
the  first,  but  it  is  an  old  observance,  not  Israelitish,  but  human,  Noachic,  and 
Adamic,  which  you,  God's  Israel,  are  to  remember,  that  you  may  sustain  it  in  its 
purity,  just  as  you  are  to  sustain  a  true  and  spiritual  worship  as  against  idolatry. 
2.  The  other  espre.-sion  which  proves  the  universality  of  its  application  (in  addition 
to  its  very  position  in  the  Decalogue)  is  the  reason  given  for  the  Divine  order — 
"  because  in  six  days  Jehovah  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  sea  and  all  that  in  them 
is,  and  rested  the  seventh  day ;  wherefore  Jehovah  blessed  the  Sabbath  Day  and 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  363 

hallowed  it."    The  reason  began  at  the  creation,  and  therefore  the  observance 
began  at  the  creation.     I.  What  is  the  idea  of  the  Sabbath  ?     It  had  its  origin  in 
God's  resting  on  that  day.     II.  What  is  its  proper  observance  ?     God  has  given  it 
His  own  holy  name — "  The  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  tliy  God,"  and  the  Holy  Spirit  calls 
it  "  the  Lord's  Day,"  in  the  New  Testament.     This  fact  shows  us  that  its  rightful 
observance  must  have  regard  to  our  right  relation  to  God.  The  soul  must  be  turned 
Godward.     (H.  Crosby,  D.D.)        The  Sabbath  cheerful  and  holy  : — Let  us  alway 
make  the  Sabbath  a  cheerful  day,  as  Phariseeism  does  not,  and  let  us  always  make 
it  a  holy  day,  as  worldliness  does  not.     (Ibid.)         Sunday  and  suicide  : — There  is 
no  one  thing  that  kills,  exhausts,  or  sends  to  the  lunatic  asylum  more  of  the  active 
and  strong  men  of  this  country  (United  States)  than  the  breach  of  the  Fourth 
Commandment.   1.  "  He  kept  no  Sunday."  You  may  safely  write  that  epitaph  over 
hundreds  of  graves  that  will  be  dug  this  year  for  ambitious,  prosperous,  influential 
men,  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  the  race  of  life.     There  are  suicides  in  scores  where  no 
apparent  cause  exists  for  what  the  newspapers  call  "  the  rash  act."     The  man  was 
doing  well ;  his  business  was  prospering  ;  his  family  relations  were  pleasant  and 
affectionate.     2.  No  law  of  God  is  arbitrary.     It  is  for  man's  good  that  God  has 
established  all  His  statutes.     Clear  as  that  truth  is  about  them  all,  it  is  especially 
clear  about  the  day  of  rest.     3.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  is  no  rest,  no  relaxation, 
so  utter  as  that  offered  by  a  well-kept  Sunday.     There  is  perfect  rest  and  quiet  for 
the  body,  and,  to  the  worker  with  his  hands,  that  may  be  the  main  point.     But 
there  is  far  more  than  this.     The  mind  is  called  away  from  all  its  cares  and  all  its 
common  vulgar  interests.     The  man  is  called  to  rise  out  of  the  changing  into  the 
unchanging,  out  of  the  temporary  into  the  eternal,  out  of  the  low  into  the  infinitely 
lofty,  out  of  the  strife  into  the  deep  calm  of  the  eternal  peace.     4.  It  is  the  neglect 
of  this  provision  of  God  that  is  the  root-cause  of  the  deaths  and  suicides  from  over- 
work, which  shock  us  almost  daily  in  the  current  items  of  news.     5.  We  are  not 
placing  this  thing  on  the  highest  motive,  because  the  highest  motive  is  powerless 
to  touch  the  traiisgressnrs.     We  only  say  the  transgression  does  not  pay.     And  by 
working  on  Sunday  we  do  not  mean  only  the  formal  going  to  the  office  or  counting- 
room.     We  mean  the  carrying  a  man's  business  about  with  him  on  that  day  ;  the 
taking  it  home  and  poisoning  the  fireside  with  it ;  the  taking  it  to  church  and 
poisoning  the  church  with  it.     (2?p.  H.  M.  Thompson.)         The  manner  of  keeping 
the  Sabbath : — I.  Let  us  first  take  the  negative  view.     1.  We  are  forbidden  to 
do  any  work  upon  the  Sabbath.     2.  We  are  forbidden  to  make  the  Sabbath  a  day 
of  pleasure  (Isa.  Iviii.  13,  14).     3.  The  Sabbath  is  not  to  be  a  day  of  sloth.     II. 
Notice  the  positive  duties  implied  in  keeping  the  Sabbath  holy.     1.  Portions  of 
the  Sabbath  should  be  devoted  to  public  religious  worship.     2.  Portions  of  the 
Sabbath  are  due  to  epecial  private  devotion.     3.  Portions  of  the  Sabbath  should  be 
devoted  to  religious  reading.   4.  A  portion  of  the  Sabbath  is  very  properly  adjudged 
to  Sunday-school  work.     5.     What  remains  of  the  Sabbath,  deducting  the  time  for 
necessary  temporal  cares,   should  be  devoted  to  family  religion.     {H.  Winslow.) 
The  Fourth  Commandment : — I.  Duties  enjoined.     1.  The  duty  of  work.     This  is 
man's  normal  condition.     (1)  For  the  soil's  sake.    Nature's  capacities  are  latent 
as  well  as  vast,   and  need   the   quickening,   unfolding,  marshalling   power  of   a 
tireless,  and  skilful  labour.     (2)  For  man's  own  sake.     He  who  does  not  use  his 
faculties  is  as  though  he  had  none.   Indolence  and  barbarism  go  hand  in  hand.   (3) 
For  God's  sake.     Stewardship.     2.  The  duty  of  rest.     The  seventh  day  is  to  be  a 
day  of  rest  for  the  body,  jaded  with  the  toils  of  the  week  :  a  day  of  rest  for  the  mind, 
jaded  with  the  cares  of  the  week  :  a  day  of  rest  for  the  heart,  jaded  with  the  griefs 
of  the  week.     3.  The  duty  of  worship.     "  Keep  it  holy."     The  Sabbath,  if  I  may 
so  say,  is  God's  weekly  toll  on  mankind,  the  periodical  tribute  which  He  demands 
in  token  of  human  fealty.    II.  Reason  assigned.     1.  Cessation  of  creative  process. 
2.  The  Creator's  resting.     Holy,  blessed,  festal  contemplation.     3.  The  Creator's 
sanctification  of  the  seventh  day.  III.  Christ's  doctrine  of  the  Sabbath  (see  Mark 
ii.  23-28.)     1.  Man  himself  is  the  basis  of  the  Sabbath.     (1)  He  needs  it — for 
his  secular  nature,   alike  bodily  and  mental ;    (2)  for  his  religious  nature.     (3) 
What  man  needs,  God  has  appointed.     2.  Man  is  greater  than  the  Sabbath.    It  is 
to  be  used  as  a  means,  not  as  an  end.     Man  is  more  sacred  than  ordinances.    IV. 
True  method  of  keeping  the  Sabbath.    It  is  to  be  kept  in  such  a  way  as  will 
unfold  man  heavenward  the  most  thoroughly,  totally,  symmetrically.    The  Sabbath 
being  made  for  man,  he  must  use  it  religiously;  for  the  faculty  of  worship  is 
man's  chief  definition.     But  full  unfolding  of  man's  spiritual  nature  is  possible 
only  in  the  sphere  of  edification — that  is,  society  building.     The  Sabbath  summons 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XX. 

man  to  conjugate  life  in  a  new  mood  and  tense ;  but  still  in  the  active  voice.  And 
here  the  Son  of  Man  is  our  teacher  and  blessed  model.  No  one  truly  keeps  the 
Sabbath  unless  he  keeps  it  as  the  Divine  Man  kept  it :  and  He  went  about  doing 
good,  and  healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil.  Indeed,  I  cannot  conceive 
how  a  young  man  can  unfold  himself  more  thoroughly  or  symmetrically  than  by 
devoting  himself  vigorously  to  study  during  the  week,  and  then  setting  apart  Sunday 
as  a  day  of  restful  worship,  first  praising  God  in  His  sanctuary,  and  then  praising 
Him  in  works  of  mercy,  visiting  the  sick,  comforting  the  sorrowful,  teaching  the 
ignorant,  reclaiming  the  outcast.  V,  Change  of  day.  Saturday  was  the  Sabbath 
of  nature,  Sunday  is  the  Sabbath  of  grace ;  Saturday  the  Sabbath  of  a  rejected, 
executed,  entombed  Jesus,  Sunday  the  Sabbath  of  a  risen,  exalted,  triumphant 
Christ ;  Saturday  Creator's  day,  Sunday  Eedeemer's  day.  VI.  Lastly  : 
Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  our  Sabbath,  alike  its  origin,  its  meaning, 
AND  ITS  END.  In  fact,  the  final  cause  of  the  Sabbath  is  to  sabbatize  each  day  and 
make  all  life  sacramental.  And  Jesus  Christ  being  our  true  Sabbath,  Jesus  Christ 
is  also  our  true  rest,  even  tbe  spirit's  everlasting  Eden.  (G.  D.  Boardman.) 
The  Sabbath : — I.  Its  perpetual  obligation.  1.  Its  early  Divine  institution. 
2.  The  uninterrupted  observance  of  this  day.  3.  Though  the  day  be  changed 
under  the  Christian  dispensation,  the  obligation  of  it  remains  unaltered.  4.  God 
has  eminently  honoured  and  signally  blessed  this  day  in  every  age  of  time.  "  There- 
fore the  Lord  blessed  the  Sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it."  II.  The  manner  of  its 
OBSERVANCE.  1.  This  requires,  first,  that  we  should  diligently  prepare  for  its  approach. 
2.  We  must  carefully  watch  against  the  profanation  of  it.  3.  There  is  required  by 
this  command  an  entire  cessation  from  secular  and  worldly  occupations.  4.  The 
observation  of  the  Sabbath  requires  tbe  religious  appropriation  and  occupation  of 
all  its  hours.  6.  We  should  guard  against  the  two  extremes,  of  excessive  rigour  on  the 
one  hand,  and  of  excessive  relaxation  on  the  other  hand,  in  our  regard  to  this  sacred 
institution.      (G.    Clayton.)  The   Sabbath   under   the  law   of  Moses: — I.   The 

endeavour  to  displace  the  Fourth  Commandment  is  an  open  invasion  of  the  first 
PRINCIPLES  both  OF  FAITH  AND  OBEDIENCE.  For  everything  conspires  to  cast  an 
importance  around  the  Ten  Commandments  peculiar  to  themselves.  As  the  First 
command  fixes  the  object  of  worship,  and  the  Second  the  means,  and  the  Third  the 
reverential  manner,  so  the  Fourth  determines  the  time.  II.  But  we  proceed  to  show, 
that  dven  when  the  ceremonial  usages  were  in  their  greatest  vigour,  the  Sabbath 
APPEARED  high  AND  DISTINCT  ABOVE  THEM.  For  first,  after  the  record  of  the  promul- 
gation of  the  Decalogue,  three  chapters  of  judicial  statutes  follow  ;  but  in  *,he  midst 
of  these,  the  people  are  reminded  of  the  essential  importance  of  the  Sabbath,  in  a 
manner  quite  distinct  and  peculiar.  Again,  after  six  chapters  more  concerning  the 
tabernacle  and  its  various  services  and  sacrifices,  the  whole  communication  of  the 
forty  days'  abode  on  the  mount  is  concluded  with  a  re-inculcation  of  the  Sabbath- 
rest,  in  a  manner  the  most  solemn  and  affecting.  III.  But  proceed  we  to  show 
that,  in  the  latter  ages  of  the  Jewish  Church,  the  weekly  Sabbath  was  insisted  upon 

BY  THE  PROPHETS  AS  OF  ESSENTIAL  MORAL  OBLIGATION,  AND  AS  DESTINED  TO  FORM  A  PART 

OF  THE  GOSPEL  DISPENSATION.  IV.  Let  US  then  turn  from  these  discussions  to  some 
PRACTICAL  POINTS  which  may  affect  our  hearts.  1.  Let  us  learn  to  give  to  the  holy 
day  of  rest  that  prominency  in  our  esteem  which  Moses  was  instructed  to  give  it  in 
his  dispensation.  2.  And  to  this  end,  let  us  imbibe  the  spirit  of  love  and  delight  in 
the  worship  of  God,  which  the  Psalms  and  Prophets  display.  3.  But  add  to  these 
motives  the  awful  indignation  of  Almighty  God  against  the  contempt  of  His  name 
and  His  day.  (D.  Wilson,  M.A.)  The  pearl  of  days  : — The  Sabbath  was  spoken 
of  as  the  "  Prince  and  Sovereign  of  Days  "  by  a  good  man,  long  ago.  It  might  be 
called  the  "  King  of  days."  I  wish  I  could  get  you  to  love  it,  so  that,  instead  of  it 
being  a  dull,  wearisome  day,  and  as  coming  after  Saturday,  just  like  passing  out  of 
bright  sunshine  into  a  dark  night — or  out  of  a  palace  into  a  prison,  it  should  be 
wearied  for,  all  the  week  round,  and  received  with  songs  of  welcome  when  it  comes. 
The  Sabbath  comes  to  us  as  a  holy  visitant — as  a  messenger  of  love.  It  bears  its 
message  in  its  very  name — Rest.  I.  Eeasons  for  observing  the  Sabbath.  1.  We 
have  God's  command.  This  of  itself  should  be  enough  for  us.  2.  We  have  God's 
example.  He  does  Himself  what  He  bids  us  do.  3.  God  claims  it  as  His  own  day. 
Here  is  His  own  direction — "  Not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine  own 
pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words,  on  My  holy  day."  4.  God  is  pleased  and 
honoured  by  the  keeping  of  it.  5.  It  is  a  memorial  of  a  completed  creation  work  and  of 
Christ's  resurrection.  In  an  ironmonger's  shop  in  a  country  town  in  Scotland,  the 
ehopkeeper  sat  at  his  desk  at  the  window.     A  young  apprentice  in  the  cellar  below 


CHAP,  xs.]  EXODUS.  365 

had  stuck  the  candle  which  he  carried  in  a  barrel  of  gunpowder ;  the  gunpowder 
exploded,  the  shop  window  was  blown  out,  and  the  good  man  who  sat  in  it  was 
carried  in  the  current  of  air  to  the  top  of  the  street,  and  there  landed  safely  on  his 
feet,  while  the  apprentice  was  blown  to  pieces.  It  was  such  a  wonderful  deliverance 
that  the  ironmonger  observed  the  day  as  a  day  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving  to  the  end  of 
his  life.  Is  it  difficult  to  understand  how  he  should  have  done  so  ?  And  shall  we  not 
gladly  commemorate  our  deliverance — our  emancipation — the  announcement  that  the 
sinner's  salvation  was  complete,  by  the  rising  of  Jesus  from  the  dead  ?  Shall  v/e  ever 
suffer  ourselves  to  be  deprived  of  a  day  that  has  such  happy  and  hallowed  associations? 
Sabbath-breaking  is  a  sin: — This  Commandment  is  more  than  the  setting  forth  of  a 
need  of  our  nature,  more  than  advice  for  our  own  good.  It  is  a  command  of  God. 
Breaking  the  Sabbath  is  therefore  more  than  an  error,  more  than  a  mistake.  It  is 
a  sin.  1.  It  is  a  sin  because  it  contemns  the  authority  of  God,  and  that  is 
the  essence  of  all  sin.  2.  It  is  a  sin  further  against  the  love  of  God.  As  a  father 
invites  his  children  home  to  a  family  gathering  because  he  loves  to  have  them  in 
his  presence,  so  God  would  have  us.  His  children,  come  to  Him  on  the  Sabbath  day 
because  He  loves  us.  3.  It  is  a  sin  further  against  our  higher  nature.  God  calls 
us  to  remember  our  spiritual  nature  and  to  guard  against  degrading  ourselves  to 
mere  sensual  beings.  (F.  S.  Schenck.)  Soine  blessings  of  the  rest  day  : — Here, 
as  everywhere,  in  keeping  God's  commandments  there  is  great  reward.  There  is 
great  blessedness  that  comes  from  keeping  the  rest  day  holy — to  the  one  keeping  it  so, 
and  to  his  fellow-men.  I.  Consider  the  blessings  to  our  fellow-men.  1.  The  holy  or 
religious  observance  of  the  day  bestows  the  rest  day  upon  mankind.  The  unbelieving 
world  may  rail  against  God  and  His  Church,  but  while  it  does  so  it  is  receiving  from 
Him  through  the  Church  the  rich  gift  of  the  only  rest  day  it  has  from  grinding  labour. 
2.  The  religious  observance  of  the  day  also  preaches  a  powerful  thougb  silent  sermon 
to  the  non-church-goer,  telling  him  he  is  a  man,  not  a  beast  of  burden  ;  that  there  is 
a  God  whom  he  should  worship  ;  that  there  is  an  eternal  life  beyond  this  fleeting 
one  for  which  he  should  prepare.  3.  The  religious  observance  of  the  day  does  much 
also  to  educate  the  conscience  of  a  community.  4.  The  religious  observance  of 
the  day  further  secures  tbe  continuance  and  progress  of  Christianity  in  the  world. 
The  procession  of  secular  days  bears  rich  material  gifts  to  man.  The  Holy  day 
spreads  heaven's  glories  over  the  earth.  II.  The  religious  observance  of  the  day 
brings  also  rich  blessing  to  the  one  so  observing  it.  1.  Communion  with  God, 
to  refresh  and  strengthen  the  soul.  2.  A  clear  view  of  our  heavenly  home,  the 
eternal  holy  rest  from  all  this  world's  toil  and  care.  (Ibid.)  Reasons  for  observ- 
ing the  Sabbath  : — I.  The  first  consideration  which  I  shall  suggest  is,  that  if  the 
Sabbath  is  abolished,  the  Christian  religion  will  be  abolished  with  it.  The 
question  whether  this  day  is  to  be  observed  or  desecrated,  is  just  a  question  of  life 
and  death  in  regard  to  Christianity.  In  former  generations,  attempts  were  made  to 
destroy  the  gospel  by  the  sword  and  the  fagot ;  but  all  such  attempts  were  foiled. 
Imperial  power  attempted  to  crash  it ;  but  imperial  power  found  its  arm  too  weak 
to  contend  with  God.  Argument  and  sophistry  were  then  employed  ;  ridicule  lent 
its  aid,  and  contempt  pointed  the  finger  of  scorn  ;  but  all  was  in  vain.  Christianity 
survived  all  these,  and  rose  with  augmented  power  and  more  resplendent  beauty — 
and  would  do  so  to  the  end  of  time.  But  there  is  one  weapon  which  the  enemy  has 
employed  to  destroy  Christianity,  and  to  drive  it  from  the  world,  which  has  never 
been  employed  but  with  signal  success.  It  is  the  attempt  to  corrupt  the  Christian 
Sabbatb  ;  to  make  it  a  day  of  festivity  ;  to  cause  Christians  to  feel  that  its  sacred 
and  rigid  obligation  has  ceased ;  to  induce  them  on  that  day  to  mingle  in  tbe  scenes 
of  pleasure,  or  the  exciting  plans  of  ambition.  The  "  Book  of  Sports,"  did  more  to 
destroy  Christianity  than  all  the  ten  persecutions  of  the  Roman  Emperors ;  and 
the  views  of  the  second  Charles  and  his  court  about  the  Lord's-day,  tended  more  to 
drive  religion  from  the  British  nation  than  all  the  fires  that  weie  enkindled  by 
Mary.  II.  The  second  reason  why  this  subject  demands  now  the  special  attention 
of  Christians  is,  that  if  the  Sabbath  is  not  regarded  as  holy  time,  it  will  be 

REGARDED  AS  PASTIME  ;  rP  NOT  A  DAY  SACRED  TO  DEVOTION,  IT  WILL  BE  A  DAY  OF  RECRE- 
ATION, OF  PLEASURE,  OF  LICENTIOUSNESS.  The  Sabbath  is  not  essentially  an  arbitrary 
appointment,  for  it  is  required  in  the  very  nature  of  the  animal  economy  that  there 
should  be  periodical  seasons  of  relaxation.  We  must  have  periodical  rest  in  all  the 
functions  of  our  nature.  Buonaparte  once  passed  tbree  entire  days  and  nights  with- 
out sleep,  but  he  could  no  longer  contend  against  a  great  law  of  nature,  and  sank  to 
sleep  on  his  horse.  There  is  not  a  muscle  in  the  animal  economy  that  does  not 
demand  rest  after  effort,  .that  will  notihav£  .it.    Jf  it  is  not  granted  voluntarily,  it 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

will  be  taken.  In  demanding,  therefore,  that  the  animal  and  mental  economy 
should  be  allowed  a  day  of  periodical  repose,  God  has  acted  in  accordance  with  a 
great  law  of  nature.  III.  A  third  reason  why  this  subject  demands  the  attention 
of  Christians  in  a  special  manner  now  is,  that  there  is  a  state  of  things  in  this 

LAND  THAT  IS  TENDING  TO  OBLITERATE  THE  SaBBATH   ALTOGETHER.       The    Sabbath    haS 

more  enemies  in  this  land  than  the  Lord's  Supper,  than  baptism,  than  the  Bible, 
than  all  the  other  institutions  of  religion  put  together.  At  the  same  time  it  is  more 
difficult  to  meet  the  enemy  here  than  anywhere  else — for  we  come  in  conflict  not 
with  argument,  but  with  interest,  and  pleasure,  and  the  love  of  indulgence,  and  of 
gain.  {A.  Burnes,  D.D.)  The  holy  day  : — The  old  principles  of  Mosaism,  I  con- 
tend, ai"e  doing  duty  still  under  higher  forces  in  the  new  Ufe  in  Christ.  They  are 
not  abolished,  only  transformed.  The  idea  of  circumcision  has  been  elevated  and 
spiritualized  into  membership  of  the  body  of  Christ  with  baptism  as  the  sign  and 
seal ;  and  the  whole  sacrificial  system  has  been  transfigured  into  the  sacrifice  of 
praise  and  thanksgiving  in  the  Holy  Communion,  &c.  It  seems,  therefore,  natural 
to  expect  that  so  prominent  and  important  a  part  of  the  law  as  the  principle  of 
devoting  time  to  God  would  reappear  also  in  a  higher  but  yet  definite  form  as  these 
parts  have  done,  that  is,  in  fact,  in  the  form  of  the  Lord's  Day.  There  are  two 
considerations  which  strongly  support  this  expectation.  1.  There  is  in  the  Com- 
mandment more  than  a  Jewish  ordinance.  It  expresses  a  physical  law— a  law  of 
nature — and  it  does  so  most  precisely.  How  all  this  suggests  the  beneficence  of 
Jehovah  I  2.  The  second  suggestive  consideration  is  the  real  purpose  of  the 
Sabbath  as  given  to  the  slave-nation.  That  purpose  was  beneficent,  from  every 
point  of  view.  Do  you  not  see  that  in  a  time  when  men  as  men  had  no  rights,  this 
law  brought  a  right  of  rest  to  the  most  helpless  and  defenceless  ?  Do  you  not  see 
that  it  imposed  a  check  upon  the  greed  and  rapacious  selfishness  which  is  natural 
to  those  who  have  their  fellow-creatures  under  their  power?  Without  this  law 
where  would  the  poor  slaves  have  been?  (IF.  Senior,  B.A.)  Reason  for  change 
of  day  : — Now  there  is  a  grand  reason  for  changing  of  the  Jewish  Sabbath  to  the 
Iiord's  Day,  because  this  puts  us  in  mind  of  the  "  mystery  of  our  redemption  by 
Christ."  Great  was  the  work  of  creation,  but  greater  was  the  work  of  redemption. 
As  it  was  said,  "  the  glory  of  the  second  temple  was  greater  than  the  glory  of  the 
first  temple  "  ;  so  the  glory  of  the  redemption  was  greater  than  the  glory  of  the 
creation.  Great  wisdom  was  seen  in  curiously  making  us,  but  more  miraculous 
wisdom  in  saving  us.  Great  power  was  seen  in  bringing  us  out  of  nothing,  but 
greater  power  in  helping  us  when  we  were  worse  than  nothing.  It  cost  more  to 
I'edeem  us  than  to  create  us.  In  the  creation  there  was  but  "  speaking  a 
word  "  ;  in  the  redeeming  us,  there  was  shedding  of  blood.  In  the  creation  God 
gave  us  ourselves  ;  in  the  redemption  He  gave  us  Himself.  By  creation,  we  have  a 
life  in  Adam  ;  by  redemption,  we  have  a  life  in  Christ.  By  creation,  we  had  a  right 
to  an  earthly  paradise  ;  by  redemption,  we  have  a  title  to  an  heavenly  kingdom.  So 
that  well  Christ  might  change  the  seventh  day  of  the  week  into  the  first,  because 
this  day  puts  us  in  mind  of  our  redemption,  which  is  a  more  glorious  work  than 
the  creation.  (T.  Watson.)  Honouring  the  Sahhath  : — Dr.  Edward  W.  Hitchcock 
says  :  "  While  he  was  minister  of  the  American  Chapel  in  Paris,  General  Grant  was 
invited  by  the  President  of  the  Eepublic  of  France  to  occupy  the  grand  stand  at  "  Le 
Grand  Prix,'  the  great  day  of  the  races,  which  comes  on  Sunday.  Such  an  invita- 
tion from  the  chief  magistrate  of  a  great  nation  is  an  honour  which  is  almost  a 
command.  But  General  Grant,  replying  in  a  note  to  the  President,  said  in 
substance,  '  It  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  my  countrymen,  or  with  the 
spirit  of  my  religion,  to  spend  Sunday  in  this  way.  I  beg  that  you  will  permit  me 
to  decline  the  honour.'  Instead  of  accepting  the  invitation,  he  attended  public 
worship  at  the  American  Chapel."  Sabbath  breakers  reproved  .-—The  late  Dr. 
Lockhart  of  the  College  Church,  Glasgow,  when  travelling  in  England,  was  sojourn- 
ing at  an  inn  when  the  Sabbath  came  round.  On  entering  the  public-room,  and 
about  to  set  out  for  church,  he  found  two  gentlemen  preparing  for  a  game  of 
chess.  He  addressed  them  in  words  to  this  aiJect,  "  Gentlemen,  have  you  locked  up 
your  portmanteaus  carefully  ?  "  "  No  !  What  I  are  there  thieves  in  this  house  ?  " 
"  I  do  not  say  that,"  replied  the  doctor,  "  only  I  was  thinking  that  if  the  waiter 
comes  in  and  finds  you  making  free  with  the  Fourth  Commandment,  he  may  think  of 
making  free  with  the  E«£r /(?/!."  The  gentlemen  said  there  was  something  in  that, 
and  so  laid  aside  their  game.  Benefit  of  keeping  the  Sabbath  : — In  the  "  Life  of 
Frank  Buckland,"  the  eminent  naturalist,  who  devoted  himself  so  thoroughly  to  the 
scientific  and  practical  study  of  the  river  and  sea  fisheries  of  Great  Britain,  there  is 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  867 

the  following  testimony  to  the  value  of  Sunday  rest : — March,  1866.  I  am  now 
working  fwrn  8  a.m.  to  6  p.m.,  and  then  a  bit  in  the  evening — fourteen  hours  a 
day ;  but,  thank  God,  it  does  not  hurt  me.  I  should,  however,  collapse  if  it  were 
not  for  Sunday.  The  machinery  has  time  to  get  cool,  the  mill-wheel  ceases  to 
patter  the  water,  the  mill-head  is  ponded  up,  and  the  superfluous  water  let  off  by  an 
easy,  quiet  current,  which  leads  to  things  above."  Jiesult  of  a  weekly  rest : — 
"  Tell  me,"  said  a  gentleman,  addressing  a  clean,  tidy  cabman,  "  how  is  it  that  some  of 
the  men  on  the  stand  look  so  smart  on  a  Monday  morning — they  have  clean  shirts, 
and  are  much  happier-looking  than  the  other  men ;  and  their  horses  are  sprightlier, 
too.  What  is  the  cause  of  the  contrast  ?  "  "  Oh,  they  are  six-day  men,  sir.  They 
have  green  plates ;  their  cabs  don't  run  on  Sundays ;  both  men  and  horses  have 
now  a  weekly  rest.  That's  the  reason  why  they  are  not  jaded  like  the  others,  sir." 
Sabbath  kept  under  difficulties : — The  Mayflower,  a  name  now  immortal,  had 
crossed  the  ocean.  It  had  borne  its  hundred  passengers  over  the  vast  deep,  and 
after  a  perilous  voyage  had  reached  the  bleak  shores  of  New  England,  in  the  begin- 
ning of  winter.  The  spot  which  was  to  furnish  a  home  and  a  burial-place  was  now 
to  be  selected.  The  shallop  was  unshipped,  but  needed  repairs,  and  sixteen  weary 
days  elapsed  before  it  was  ready  for  service.  Amidst  ice  and  snow  it  was  then  sent 
out,  with  some  half-a-dozen  pilgrims,  to  find  a  suitable  place  where  to  land.  The 
spray  of  the  sea.  says  the  historian,  froze  on  them,  and  made  their  clothes  like 
coats  of  iron.  Five  days  they  wandered  about,  searching  in  vain  for  a  suitable 
landing-place.  A  storm  came  on,  the  snow  and  the  rain  fell,  the  sea  swelled,  the 
rudder  broke,  the  mast  and  the  sail  fell  overboard.  In  this  storm  and  cold,  without 
a  tent,  a  house,  ci-  the  shelter  of  a  rock,  the  Christian  Sabbath  approached,  the  day 
which  they  regarded  as  holy  unto  God,  a  day  on  which  they  were  not  to  "  do  any 
work."  What  should  be  done  ?  As  the  evening  before  the  Sabbath  drew  on,  they 
pushed  over  the  surf,  entered  a  fair  sound,  sheltered  themselves  under  the  lee  of  a 
rise  of  land,  kindled  a  fire,  and  on  that  little  island  tbey  spent  the  day  in  the 
solemn  worship  of  their  Maker.  On  the  next  day  their  feet  touched  the  rock,  now 
sacred  as  the  place  of  the  landing  of  the  pilgrims.  Nothing  more  strikingly  marks 
the  character  of  this  people  than  this  act,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  could  refer  to  a 
better  illustration,  even  in  their  history,  showing  that  theirs  was  the  religion  of 
principle,  and  that  this  religion  made  them  what  they  were.  (A.  Barnes.)  Grief 
at  profatiatioit  of  the  Sabbath  : — Truly  it  should  be  a  matter  of  grief  to  us  to  see  so 
much  Sabbath  profanation.  When  one  of  Darius'  eunuchs  saw  Alexander  setting 
his  feet  on  a  rich  table  of  Darius',  he  fell  a-weeping  ;  Alexander  asked  him  why  he 
wept  ?  He  said  it  was  to  see  the  table  which  his  master  so  highly  esteemed  to  be 
now  made  a  footstool.  So  we  may  weep  to  see  the  Sabbath,  which  God  so  highly 
esteems,  and  Las  so  honoured  and  blessed,  made  a  footstool,  and  trampled  upon  by 
the  feet  of  sinners.  (T.  Watson.)  Heaven  seen  on  the  Sabbath  : — A  gentleman  was 
once  directing  the  attention  of  his  friend  to  the  objects  of  interest  visible  from  his 
observatory.  "Just  beyond  the  river,"  he  said,  "  is  a  city  which  on  the  Sabbath 
Day  can  be  distinctly  seen."  "  Why,"  asked  the  friend,  "can  it  be  better  seen  on 
the  Sabbath  than  on  other  days  ?  "  "  Because,"  was  the  reply,  "on  other  days  the 
smoke  from  its  chimneys  settles  about  the  city  and  hides  it  from  sight ;  but  on  tbe 
Sabbath,  when  the  factories  are  still  and  the  smoke  is  gone,  the  city,  with  its  glitter- 
ing spires,  is  clearly  seen."  So  on  the  Sabbath,  when  the  smoke  and  dust  of  earth 
and  its  cares  have  settled  away,  through  the  clear  transparent  air  can  be  distinctly 
seen  the  City  of  God  and  the  pathway  leading  thither.  (P.  B.  Davis.)  Bible 
law  recognized  .-—A  motion  was  once  made  in  the  House  of  Commons  for  raising 
and  embodying  the  militia,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  saving  time,  to  exercise  them  on 
the  Sabbath.  When  the  resolution  was  about  to  pass,  an  old  gentleman  stood  up, 
and  said,  "  Mr.  Speaker,  I  have  one  objection  to  make  to  this  ;  I  believe  in  an  old  book 
called  the  Bible."  The  members  looked  at  one  another,  and  the  motion  was  dropped. 
The  Sabbiith  appointed  i,y  God  : — The  Governor  Turnusrupis  oncsasked  Eabbi  Akiba, 
"  What  is  this  day  you  call  the  Sabbath,  more  than  any  other  day?"  The  Eabbi 
responded,  "What  art  thou,  more  than  any  other  person?"  "lam  superior  to 
others,"  he  replied,  "  bt-cause  the  Emperor  has  appointed  me  governor  over  them." 
Then  said  Akiba,  "The  Lord  our  God,  who  is  greater  than  your  Emperor,  has 
appointed  the  Sabbath  day  to  be  holier  than  the  other  days."  (Talmud.) 
Honouriny  the  Sabbath  .-—When  King  George  III.  was  repairing  his  palace  at  Kew, 
one  of  tiie  workmen,  a  pious  man,  was  particularly  noticed  by  His  Majesty,  and  he 
often  held  conversations  with  him  upon  serious  subjects.  One  Monday  morning 
the  king  went  as  usual  to  watch  the  progress  of  the  work,  and  not  seeing  this  man 


c 


368  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

in  his  customary  place,  inquired  the  reason  of  his  absence.  He  was  answered 
evasively,  and  for  some  time  the  other  workmen  avoided  telling  His  Majesty  the 
truth  ;  at  last,  however,  upon  being  more  strictly  interrogated,  they  acknowledged 
that,  not  having  been  able  to  complete  a  particular  job  on  the  Saturday  night,  they 
had  returned  to  finish  it  on  the  following  morning.  This  man  alone  had  refused  to 
comply,  because  he  considered  it  a  violation  of  the  Christian  Sabbath ;  and  in 
consequence  of  what  they  called  his  obstinacy,  he  had  been  dismissed  entirely  from 
his  employment.  "  Call  him  back  immediately,"  exclaimed  the  good  King  ;  "  the 
man  who  refused  doing  his  ordinary  work  on  the  Lord's  Day  is  the  man  for  me. 
Let  him  be  sent  for."  The  man  was  accordingly  replaced,  and  the  King  ever  afttr 
showed  him  particular  favour. 

Ver.  12.  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother. — The  Fifth  Commandment : — I. 
The  relationship  in  which  we  stand  to  our  parents,  a  relationship  based  upon  the 
fact  that  we  owe  our  existence  to  them,  that  we  are  made  in  their  image,  that  for 
BO  long  a  time  we  depend  on  them  for  the  actual  maintenance  of  life,  and  that,  as 
the  necessary  result  of  all  this,  we  are  completely  under  their  authority  during 
childhood.  This  relationship  is  naturally  made  the  highest  symbol  of  our  relation- 
Bhip  to  God  Himself.  II.  Honouring  our  parents  includes  respect,  love,  and 
OBEDIENCE,  as  long  as  childhood  and  youth  continue,  and  the  gradual  modification 
and  transformation  of  these  affections  and  duties  into  higher  forms  as  manhood 
and  womanhood  draw  on.  III.  The  promise  attached  to  the  Commandmeut  is  a 
PROMISE  OF  PROLONGED  NATIONAL  STABILITY.  St.  Paul,  slightly  changing  its  form, 
makes  it  a  promise  of  long  life  to  individuals.  Common  experience  justifies  the 
change.  IV.  There  is  one  consideration  that  may  induce  us  to  obey  this  Command- 
ment which  does  not  belong  to  the  other  nine :  the  time  will  come  when  it  will 

BE    NO    LONGER   POSSIBLE    FOR    C8   TO    OBEY    IT.       (R.   W.  Dale,  D.D.)  I'lie    cluti''!l   of 

youth: — I.  Consider  variods  ways  in  which  a  man  iuy  honour  his  father  and  mother. 
1.  By  doing  his  best  in  the  way  of  self-improvement.  2.  By  habits  of  care  and 
frugality.  3.  By  keeping  himself  in  soberness,  temperance,  and  chafctity.  II, 
Honour  to  parents  is  only  the  principal  and  most  important  application  of  a 
GENERAL  PRINCIPLE.  The  apostlc  bids  us  honour  all  men,  and  again,  "In  lowliness 
of  mind  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  themselves."     IH.  From  the  conception 

OF   love   due    to    FATHER   AND    MOTHER     WE     RISB     TO     THE     CONCEPTION    OF    THE    LOVB 

DUE  TO  God.  By  what  heavenly  process  shall  we  melt  the  cold,  hard  law  which 
forbids  idolatry,  into  the  sweet,  gentle  principle  of  heart-worship  and  love?  I 
believe  that  in  this  respect  the  First  Commandment  is  much  indebted  to  the  Second, 
which  is  like  unto  it,  "  Honour  thy  father."  And  so,  when  God  condescends  to  call 
Himself  our  Father,  the  clouds  which  conceal  Him  from  our  sight  seem  to  break 
and  vanish,  and  we  feel  that  we  can  love  and  honour  Him,  not  merely  acknowledge 
Him,  and  refuse  to  accept  others  besides  Him :  not  merely  fear  Him,  as  one  too 
powerful  to  be  safely  set  at  naught ;  not  merely  philosophize  about  Him,  and  try 
to  express  His  Infinite  Being  in  some  scientific  formula  of  human  words.  No ;  but 
love  Him  as  a  father  ought  to  be  loved — with  all  our  hearts,  and  souls,  and  strength, 
{Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.)  A  promise  and  a  duty  : — I.  The  promise.  Expanded  in 
Deut.  V.  16.  The  promise  is  of  a  long  and  prosperous  life.  It  is  so  plain  that  it 
can  admit  of  no  other  interpretation.  The  only  question  can  be,  "  Is  it  an  indi- 
vidual or  a  national  life  that  is  here  meant  ?  "  But  this  is  answered,  first,  by 
noticing  that  the  comm«nd  can  only  be  kept  by  an  individual  person,  and  by  a 
nation  only  as  a  number  of  individuals  ;  and  hence,  as  the  comma-nd  is  only 
addressed  to  the  individual,  the  prolongation  of  the  individual  life  must  be  intended. 
The  "thy"  of  "  thy  days"  must  refer  to  the  same  person  as  the  "  thy"  of  "thy 
father  and  thy  mother."  It  is  answered,  secondly,  that  a  long  national  career  of 
prosperity  presupposes  and  implies  a  goodly  degree  of  personal  longevity  and 
prosperity,  and  that  the  latter  is  a  cause  of  the  former,  while  the  former  could  in  no 
sense  be  considered  a  cause  of  the  latter.  II.  The  nature  of  the  duty  enjoined. 
The  word  "  cabbed  "  is  very  strong  :  it  strictly  means  "load  with  honour,"  and  is 
often  used  in  reference  to  the  Deity ."7  Obedience  is  only  one  of  the  more  prominent 
practical  forms  of  this  honour.  Thehonour  strikes  deeper  than  mere  obedience — 
it  touches  the  heart,  it  bespeaks  the  affections.  It  is  a  reverence  inwoven  in  the 
very  nature,  connected  with  all  the  chords  of  being,  and  so  coming  to  the  surface  in 
obedience  and  outward  respect.  We  notice — 1.  That  the  command  is  not "  Honour 
thy  father  and  thy  mother  when  they  do  right."  Our  parents,  like  ourselves,  are 
frail,  and  may  commit  error.     If  their  error  absolved  their  children  from  respect. 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  369 

there  could  be  no  filial  piety  in  the  world.  While  the  honour  due  to  parents  will 
not  go  to  wicked  or  foolish  lengths,  it  will  goto  all  reasonable  and  allowable  lengths. 
It  will  submit  to  inconvenience  and  loss ;  it  will  hold  its  private  judgment  of  what 
is  better  in  abeyance ;  it  will  even  keep  its  own  clearly  superior  wisdom  subject  to 
the  parental  prejudice.  So  long  as  conformity  to  the  views  ami  expressed  wishes  of 
parents  does  not  harm  any  thirtl  party,  a  right  respect  for  father  and  mother  will 
gracefully  yield  and  lay  the  self-denial  on  the  altar  of  filial  piety.  2.  The  command 
is  not,  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother  while  thou  art  a  little  child."  Many 
act  as  if  they  had  no  parents  after  they  had  reached  their  full  stature,  and  some  use 
this  theory  even  earlier.  Now,  if  to  anybody  this  command  is  not  given,  it  is  to  the 
little  cLild,  for  in  his  case  nature  and  necessity  teach  some  degree  of  obedience  and 
respect  to  parents,  and  hence  the  ^command  is  comparatively  unnecessary  to  these^ 
z'  III.  Lastly  I  would  ask  if  there  is  not  need  that  God's  will  in  this  matter  be 
OFTEN  REHEARSED  IN  ouB  EAE6.  I  would  Say  not  to  little  children,  "  Be  obedient  to 
your  parents,"  but  rather  to  parents,  "  Make  your  children  obedient."  It  is  all  in 
your  power.  If  you  indulge  your  little  ones  in  little  irreverences  and  little  dis- 
obediences because  it  looks  "  so  cunning,"  and  foolish  friends  urge  you  to  the 
dangerous  pastime,  tben  you  will  have  the  little  disobedient  children  grow  to  be  big 
disobedient  children,  and  they  will  bring  down  your  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the 
grave.  Or  if,  through  sheer  carelessness  and  selfish  laziness,  you  avoid  the  active 
watchfulness  and  discipline  that  are  necessary  to  ensure  obedience,  and  to  promote 
an  obedient  habit,  you  will  obtain  the  same  disastrous  result.  Beware,  too,  how,  in 
your  anxiety  to  have  your  boy  a  man  before  the  time,  you  consent  to  his  consequen- 
tial swagger  at  sixteen,  and  furnish  him  with  a  night-key  as  a  help  to  independence, 
in  which  you  are  destroying  the  bonds  of  dutiful  humility  and  respectful  submission 
with  which  God  bound  him  to  you  to  preserve.  It  is  in  this  way  I  would  apply  the 
Fifth  Commandment  to  young  children  through  the  parents,  who  are  resjjonsible 
before  God  and  man.  But  I  also  make  the  special  application  of  the  text  to  children 
of  maturer  growth.  Let  our  continued  reverence  for  parent  or  parents  still  living, 
be  of  itself  a  glorious  example,  deeply  written  on  the  thoughts  and  future  memories 
of  your  own  children.  Surround  the  old  age  which  adorns  and  honours  your  house- 
hold with  the  tribute  of  your  assiduous  caie,  jealous  of  its  comfort  and  its  dignity, 
and  cover  its  defects  with  the  mantle^ot  of  jour  charity, but  of  your  filial  love  and 
sympathy.  (H.  Crosby,  D.D.)  J^P^'e  Fifth  Commandment:—!.  The  Divine 
"MANDATE.  1.  It  is  Hot  an  arbitraryedict ;  but  a  natural  principle,  having  its  consti- 
tutional basis  in  the  very  essence  of  the  relation  which  subsists  between  parents  and 
children.  The  parent  is  to  his  child,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  representative  and 
Bymbol  of  God.  It  is  a  significant  fact  that  the  Eomans  denoted  dutifulness  to  the 
gods  and  dutifulness  to  parents  by  the  same  word,  namely,  p/etas.  Allegiance,  or 
amenability  to  law,  this  is  a  constitutional,  constituent  part  of  manhood.  And  it  is 
the  parent  (father  and  mother  equally)  who  is  the  natural  symbol  of  authority. 
Parentage,  in  simple  virtue  of  its  being  parentage,  is  inherently  imperative ;  it  is  of 
the  very  essence  of  parentage  that  it  is  constitutively  and  rightfully  authoritative. 
■Anthorhood,  genealogically  as  well  as  etymologically,  is  the  sire  of  authority.  2. 
But  you  interrupt  me  with  a  question,  "  Must  the  child  always  obey  his  parents?  " 
In  the  sphere  of   fundamental  moral  obligations,  my  father  and  I  stand  on  an 

•  equality  before  God  ;  in  this  sphere  he  has  no  more  right  to  command  me  than  I 

•  have  to  command  him.     But  in  the  sphere  of  incidental,  shifting  duties,  my  father 
•is  over  me,  and  has  a  right  to  command  me.    II.  The  Divine  promise.    Nothing  is 

more  certain,  at  least  in  a  physiological  way,  than  this:  Eespect  for  parental 
authority  tends  to  longevity  ;  filial  reverence  is  itself  an  admirable  hygiene.  What 
was  it  that  gave  to  Home  its  long-continued  tremendous  power  and  majesty?  It 
was  the  patria  potestas,  or  paternal  authority,  before  which  every  Koman  youth 
unquestioningly  bowed  ;  for  loyalty  is  the  sire  of  royalty.  Even  China  herself, 
although  her  civilization  was  long  ago  arrested  and  petrified,  owes,  I  doubt  not,  her 
preservation  through  millenniums  to  the  fealty  of  her  children  to  their  ancestral 
commandments  and  traditions.  III.  The  parent  is  a  symbol  of  the  State.  What 
the  parent  is  to  the  child,  that  the  State  in  many  particulars  is  to  the  citizen,  only 
vastly  augmented.  In  fact,  no  sooner  is  the  infant  bom  than  he  enters  the  juris- 
diction of  law.  As  soon  as  he  is  able  to  notice  relations  and  reason  about  them,  so 
soon  does  he  perceive  that  he  is  under  authority.  One  of  the  first  lessons  he  learns 
is  this :  There  are  some  things  which  he  must  do,  and  some  things  which  he  must 
not  do ;  and  these  commands  and  prohibitions  awaken  the  ideas  of  law  and  sub- 
ordination.    As  he  grows  older,  these  ideas  become  more   vivid  and  dominant. 

24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

And,  finally,  when  he  leaves  home  to  take  his  position  as  a  memher  of  society,  he 
finds  that  the  authority  which  had  hitherto  resided  in  his  parents  has  been  trans- 
ferred to  the  State.  Accordingly,  parental  authority  is  the  grand,  divinely-appointed 
educator  for  citizenship.  Loyalty  to  parental  law  prepares  the  way  for  loyalty  to 
civic  law.  IV.  Our  theme  is  especially  pertinent  to  our  ov.n  times.  There  are 
two  tendencies  in  our  land  and  age  which  make  the  discussiun  of  the  Fifth  Com- 
mandment particularly  appropriate.  1.  And  first,  our  age  is  an  age  of  innovation. 
Eage  and  frenzy  will  pull  down  more  in  half  an  hour  than  prudence,  deliberation, 
and  foresight  can  build  up  in  a  hundred  years.  Therefore  do  I  lift  up  my  voice 
in  behalf  of  reverend  antiquity;  doubly  reverend,  first,  because  it  is  antiquity; 
and  secondly,  because,  being  antiquity,  it  is  an  oracle.  2.  Secondly,  our  age  is  an 
age  of  anarchy  or  moral  lawlessness.  V.  Hum.^  parentage  is  a  symbol  op  the 
DrviNE.  The  Creator  ordained  it,  not  so  much  for  man's  sake  as  for  His  own  sake, 
meaning  that  it  should  serve  as  the  ladder  by  which  we  may  ascend  to  His  own 
blessed  fatherhood,  and  joyously  feel  His  paternal  sway.  And  this  is  majesty  indeed. 
It  is  told  of  Daniel  Webster  that,  when  a  party  of  distinguished  gentlemen  were 
dining  with  him  at  his  Marshfield  home,  and  one  of  his  guests  asked  him  what 
single  thing  had  contributed  most  to  his  personal  success,  the  famous  statesman 
paused  for  a  moment,  and  then,  with  great  solemnity,  replied,  "  I  think  that  the 
most  fruitful  and  elevating  influence  I  have  ever  felt  has  been  my  impression  of  my 
obligation  to  God."  Believe  me,  no  man  is  ever  so  sublime  as  when  he  is  con- 
sciously loyal  to  the  King  of  kings  ;  no  man  is  ever  so  supremely  blessed  as  when 
he  reverently  sits  at  the  feet  of  the  Infinite  Father.  (G.  D.  Boardman.)  Tlieparent 
and  the  nation  : — 1.  First,  Jehovah  is  the  source  of  all  life.  "  In  Him  we  have  our 
being."  But  the  parent  is  God's  means  by  which  He  imparts  life,  the  human 
channel  through  which  Divine  life  creates.  The  parent  is  the  shrine  of  Divine 
power  working  creatively.  The  parent,  therefore,  as  the  secondary  author  of  life, 
is  to  the  child  a  representative  of  God.     A  Divine  sacredness,  a  reflection  of  the 

'  Creator,  invests  parents  through  whom  life  came  and  grew  and  was  begotten  into 
time.  In  the  mysterious  law  of  life,  the  link  between  the  child  and  God  is  the 
parent.  2.  Secondly,  it  is  true  that  parental  honour  is  here  set  down  as  a  statute 
law  of  Israel,  but  have  we  yet  to  learn  that  these  "  Ten  Words  "  express  the  pro- 
foundest  principles  of  human  life  ?  We  may  rest  assured  that  the  honour  which 
God  claims  for  father  and  mother  forms  the  germ  of  man  at  his  best  and  noblest 
state.  Plato  would  fain  liave  reconstructed  the  Athenian  national  life  without  the 
family  lifO  Disraeli  once  said  in  the  House  of  Commons,  "  The  family  is  the  unit 
of  the  nation."  Plato  came  to  the  opposite  conclusion,  viz.,  the  family  life  is  the 
bane  of  the  nation.  He  thought  it  bred  selfishness,  that  it  was  detrimental  to 
courage,  that  it  narrowed  men's  interests  and  dulled  the  spirit  of  patriotism,  which 
prefers  coimtry  to  everything.  Blot  out  reverence  for  parents  and  life  neither  at 
the  beginning  nor  the  end  is  safe.  What  is  the  true  wealth  of  a  nation?  Is  it  not 
patriotic  men  and  virtuous  women  ?  But  family  life  alone  can  produce  these  ;  the 
family  life  which  is  overshadowed  by  a  sense  of  God.  "^ome  obedience  is  the  spirit 
which  expands  into  the  fine  feeling  of  the  sanctity  of  law  J  Parental  honour  develops 
into  loyalty  to  the  Queen  and  reverence  for  the  constitution.  The  love  of  home  and 
its  dear  ones  grows  big  with  the  love  of  country  and  with  the  self-sacrificing  energies 
of  patriotism.  But  so  it  is  also  that  the  decline  of  homo  life,  the  loss  of  parental 
and  filial  feeling,  is  the  sure  precursor  of  national  decline.  Loyalty,  reverence, 
faith — lose  these,  and  the  soul  is  lost  out  of  the  body  politic.  Its  very  heart  and 
strength  are  gone  when  these  are  gone.  But  these  are  the  fruit  of  home.f  There 
are  three  sources  of  danger — literary,  political,  and  social.  1.  As  to  the  first,  all 
atheistic  theories  which  take  away  the  glory  from  the  head  of  the  parent  rob  the 
parental  tie  of  its  highest  sanctity.  When  life  is  only  the  result  of  material  laws, 
reverence  cannot  rise  higher  than  the  nature  of  the  fact.  A  mere  flesh  and  blood 
relationship  will  not  yield  a  spiritual  feeling.  Eeverence  cannot  sustain  itself  on 
humanity  alone,  without  God  in  the  background  ;  no,  neither  reverence  for  man  as 
man,  nor  for  woman  as  woman.  All  lustre  dies  away,  and  only  commonness 
remains,  barren  of  the  emotions  which  are  the  riches  of  human  life.  2.  Again,  in 
the  sphere  of  polities  it  has  begun  to  look  wise  and  liberal,  and  the  only  practical 
thing,  to  separate  civil  life  from  religion,  and  to  draw  a  line  of  distinction  between 
Christianity  and  the  nation.  The  tendency  is  setting  in  to  look  to  citizenship  in 
the   narrowest   sense  of  commerce  and  material  progi'ess.     As  certain  as  moral 

•Reeling  is  the  traih  of  manhood,  so  certain  is  it  that  education  or  legislation  which 
forgets  or  ignores  the  heart  is  guilty  of  a  fatal  defect.     When  cleverness  is  divorced 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  871 

from  the  fear  of  God,  rational  selfishness  takes  the  place  of  honour  and  faith.  It  is 
this  radical  bias  of  the  heart  which  will  confound  all  the  hopes  of  mere  secularists. 
Morals  need  to  be  sustained  in  the  affections  or  they  are  barren  precepts  only;  and 
they  cannot  be  sustained  there  except  by  a  power  which  is  able  to  cope  with  our 
radical  selfishness  and  overcome  it.  We  have  strong  reasons,  derived  fi-om  history 
and  human  nature,  for  believing  that  Christianity  alone  is  capable  of  this.  The 
immoral  or  even  the  selfish  will  never  think  rightly.  Stop  wrong  feeling  in  one 
direction,  it  will  burst  out  in  another.  Out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life.  The 
voice  of  prudence  will  never  be  the  law  of  morals.  It  is  an  infei'ence  almost  as 
certain  as  actual  fact  tbat  the  spirit  of  atheistic  communism  has  had  no  true  home, 
that  is,  no  true  moral  training  of  the  heart.  It  drifted  loose  from  true  feeling  before 
it  drifted  loose  from  true  reasoning,  though  the  two  processes  were  doubtless  deeply 
and  inextricably  intermingled.  3.  But  let  us  turn  to  the  enemies  of  home  in  the 
social  sphere.  I  pass  by  the  danger  of  conceited  superficiality  at  home.  But  there 
is  one  danger  to  the  English  home  which  must  be  patent  to  all,  vast,  portentous, 
fearful — the  public-house.  It  swallows  up  comforts,  decencies,  and  every  possibility 
of  religiousness  and  good  citizenship.  Materially  and  morally  it  works  an  awful 
ruin.  Homes  being  deteriorated  and  parents  degraded,  then  young  people  abandon 
them  as  early  as  possible.  Novelty  and  sensation  are  the  order  of  the  day.  Like  a 
fever  it  penetrates  the  very  blood.  To  sit  still,  to  meditate,  to  enjoy  home  is  getting 
beyond  us.  The  Church,  too,  has  been  compelled  to  enter  into  the  competition. 
She  must  do  it  to  fight  against  social  temptations  and  moral  decline.  But  let  the 
Church  of  Christ  ever  keep  her  high  purpose  in  view.  Let  her  not  degrade  herself 
into  a  mere  rival  of  sensational  amusement.  She  is  the  mother  of  the  nation,  the 
ideal  of  the  true  home.  Let  her  seek  to  restore  it  on  the  Divine  pattern  by  setting 
up  the  family  altar  and  the  Word  of  God.  So  shall  it  be  well  with  us,  and  so  will 
our  children  live  long  on  the  earth.  (If.  Senior,  B.A.)^  Parent  and  child  : — The 
command  is  reflexive.  It  speaks  to  the  child  and  says,  "  Honour  "  ;  but  in  that 
very  word  it  springs  back  upon  the  parent  and  says,  "  Be  honourable;  because  in 
your  honourableness  your  child  shall  grow  reverent."  Of  all  things  in  this  world 
the  soul  of  a  reverent  child  is  the  most  beautiful  and  precious,  and  therefore  of  all 
things  in  this  world  honourable  parents  are  the  most  important.  One  thing  cannot 
be  too  strongly  insisted  on.  Parental  goodness  must  be  genuine  and  unaffected,  of 
the  heart,  flowing  easily  through  the  life,  in  order  to  evoke  reverence.  Unreality  is 
sure  to  be  detected  by-and-by,  and  when  children  find  out  unreality  in  tliose  who 
stand  in  the  place  of  God — God  help  them !  It)  never  does  to  give  precept  instead 
of  example.  Children  have  strangely  sensitive  natures.  They  don't  see  through 
pretence,  but  after  a  while  they  do  more,  they  feel  it.  Brethren,  there  is  much  talk 
of  culture  now-a-days.  I  venture  to  suggest,  in  the  light  of  the  requirements  of 
this  Commandment,  that  the  finest  culture  of  all  lies  within  the  spliere  of  home  life, 
the  life  we  seem  to  be  in  danger  of  losing.  The  finest  culture  would  come  from  the 
endeavour  to  be  worthy  of  a  child's  reverence,  and  trust,  and  love.  What  does  it 
ne'?d  in  the  parent  to  be  the  child's  ideal  ?  It  needs  the  cultivation  of  truthfulness, 
and  love,  and  unselfishness.  To  your  own  selves,  to  your  own  higher  nature,  yon 
must  first  be  true  in  order  to  be  true  to  them.  The  true  heaven  of  home  can  only 
be  entered  by  the  parents  becoming  as  their  own  darling  child  in  innocence,  sweet- 
ness, and  goodness.  There  is  even  something  higher  still.  It  is  through  true 
parentage  that  the  heart  of  God  is  best  understood,  and  best  realized.  He  calls 
Himself  "  Father,"  and  likens  Himself  to  a  "  Mother."  The  names  are  revelations  ; 
they  are  profound  instructions.  God  wants  to  shine  down  into  His  chihiren's 
hearts  through  father  and  mother.  fjOnly  two  last  words.  1.  First,  to  the  young 
unmarried.  Some  may  be  thinking  of  marriage.  Well,  marriage  is  of  God,  but 
mark  the  solemn  importance  with  which  this  Commandment  invests  it.  It  is  for 
God  also.  Marriage  means  parentage,  and  parentage  involves  all  this  home  life,  all 
these  influences  of  which  we  have  been  speaking.  Are  you  morally  equal  to 
marriage  ?  Are  you  fit  to  be  a  parent  when  you  think  of  all  that  is  in  this  word 
"honour  "  ?  What  sort  of  a  mother  shall  you  give  your  children?  What  sort  of 
a  father  ?  2.  Secondly,  a  word  to  the  married  who  have  children.  It  is  iu  the 
nature  of  things  that  parents  love  their  children  more  than  children  love  their 
parents.  The  world  is  all  new  to  the  young,  their  interests  fly  abroad.  The  parents 
have  more  or  less  gone  through  that  phase  of  life,  and  now  concentrate  their 
thoughts  and  hopes  upon  the  children's  welfare.  The  child  turns  from  the  parent 
after  the  illusions  of  life,  the  parent  begins  to  live  over  again  in  the  child.  The 
child  accepts  all  the  thoughts,  and  love,  and  sacrifice  as  a  matter  of  course,  unabk, 


872  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xx. 


c 


in  fact,  to  realize  the  hidden  life  below  them.     Yes,  such  times  bring  moments  of 
almost' anguish,  butjiarents  see.     We  are  only  feeling  in  our  turn  what  our  parents 
felt  before  over  us^/Love  on,  and  knowledge  of  you  and  reverence  sLall  surely 
come  to  your  children^  You  shall  have  your  reward,  it  may  be,  even  beie,  in  the 
protecting  love  which  clings  to  your  old  age,  and  warms  and  beautifies  it,  and  pro- 
longs the  joys  of  home  to  the  very  gates  of  death,  and  fills  beyond  them  with 
visions  of  union  and  perfect  bliss.     But  if  not  here,  then  when  the  green  sod  covers 
you  yonr  reward  shall  come  in  tears  which  melt  the  soul  of  your  wilful  boy  back  into 
your  arms ;  ia  memories  which  make  your  wayward  girl  long  passionately  to  be 
pressed  to  a  mother's  bosom.     Then,  I  say,  your  love  shall  have  its  due  reward. 
Only   be   true   and    faithful,    and    kind    and    upright,    and   father    and    mother 
shall    be    known    at    last.      Be    comforted,    your   love    is    never    lost.      (Ihid.) 
The  Fifth  Commandment  .-—I.  Who  is  meant  here  by  "  fathek  "  ?     1.  The  poHtical 
father,  the  magistrate.     These  fathers  are  to  be  honoured ;  for,  (1)  Their  place  de- 
serves honour.      (2)  God  hath  promoted  kings,  that  they  may  promote  justice. 
These  political  fathers  are  to  be  honoured:  "  honour  the  king."     And  this  honour 
is  to  be  shown  by  a  civil  respect  to  their  persons,  and  a  cheerful  submission  to 
their  laws,  so  far  as  they  agree  and  run  parallel  with  God"s  law.     2.  There  is  the 
grave  ancient  father  who  is  venerable  for  old  age,  whose  grey  hairs  are  resembled  to 
the  white  flowers  of  the  almond-tree.     There  are  fathers  for  seniority,  on  whose 
wrinkled  brows,  and  in  the  furrows  of  whose  cheeks  is  pictured  the  ninp  of  old  age. 
These  fathers  are  to  be  honoured :  "  thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,  and 
honour  the  face  of  the  old  man."     3.  There  are  spiritual  fathers,  as  pastors  and 
ministers.     The  spiritual  fathers  are  to  be  honoured.     (1)  In  respect  of  their  office 
(Mai.  ii.  7 ;  2  Cor.  v.  20).     (2)  Ministers,  these  spiritual  fathers,  are  to  be  "  honoured 
for  their  work's  sake."     4.  There  is  the  economical  father,  that  is,  the  master  ;  he 
is   the   father   of   the   family,   therefore   Naaman's  servants  called   their  master, 
"  father."     And  the  centurion  calls  his  servant,  "  son."     (1)  In  obeying  his  master 
in  things  that  are  lawful  and  honest  (1  Pet.  ii.  18).     (2)  In  being  diUgent  in  his 
service.     (3)  By  being  faithful.     That  servant  who  is  not  true  to  his  master,  will 
never  be  true  to  God  or  his  own  soul.     (4)  The  servant  is  to  honour  his  master  by 
serving  him,  as  with  love,  for  willingness  is  more  than  the  work,  so  with  silence, 
tliat  is,  without  repining,  and  without  replying:  "  exhort  servants  to  be  obedient  to 
their  masters,  not  answering  again  "  ;  Greek,  "  not  giving  cross  answers."     5.  The 
natural  father,  the  father  of  the  flesh.     Honour  thy  natural  father.     Children  are 
the  vineyard  of  the  parent's  planting,  and  honour  done  to  the  parent  is  some  of  the 
fruit  of  the  vineyard.     II.  Wherein  are  children  to  show  their  honour  to  their 
PARENTS?     1.  In  a  reverential  esteem  of  their  persons.     (1)  Inwardly,  by  fear  mixed 
with  love.     (2)  Outwardly,  in  word  and  gesture.     2.  In  a  careful  obedience.     (1)  In 
hearkening  to  their  counsel.     (2)  In  subscribing  to  their  commands.     (3)  In  reliev- 
ing their  wants.     It  is  but  paying  the  just  debt.     The  young  storks,  by  the  instinct 
of  nature,  bring  meat  to  the  old  storks,  when  by  reason  of  age  they  are  not  able  to 
fly.     The  memory  of  Eneas  was  honoured,  for  carrying  his  aged  father  out  of  Troy 
when  it  was  on  fire.     (T.  U'at.wn.)         The  law  of  subordination  : — The  importance 
of  this  commandment  is  indicated  by  1.  Its  positive  form  ;  2.  Its  relative  place  ;  and, 
3.  Its  accompanying  promise.     I.  The  scope  of  this  precept  embraces  an  univebsal 
LAW  of  suBOBDiN.'iTioN  WITH  CORRESPONDING  RELATIVE  DUTIES.     1.  A  law  of  Subordi- 
nation is  impUed  in  the  relation  of  a  child  to  its  parent.     2.  This  law  of  subordi- 
nation is  seen  in  similar  relations  to  be  the  foundation  of  society.     (1)  Everywhere 
the   older  men   are   in   authority,  and  the  new  comers  must  accept  subjection. 
(2)  Eank,  wealth,  station,  genius,  scholarship,  and  other  phases  of  power  exist 
around   us,   distinguishing  certain   individuals,    and   enriching   them   with    defi- 
nite  advantages  which   in   effect   do   subordinate   other   persons   to   them.      (3) 
The  king  is  the  father  of  a  larger  household.     Patriotism  is  the  love  of  home 
upon    a    grander    scale.      3.  "The  law   of    subordination  being  thus  the  broad 
foundation  of   society,  and  the ,  pi-inciple  on  which  it  is  evidently  constituted, 
this   Divine   order  witnesses   for   the    Divine   origin   of    man.      Society  is   now 
seen  to  be  not  a  heap  of  unconnected  sand,  but  a  living  tree,  whose  multitudinous 
branches,  meeting  in  one  stem,  have  their  root  in  Him  "  from  whom  every  father- 
hood in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  named."     II.  Some  of  the  more  prominent  appli- 
cations OF  this  law.     All  these  include  responsibility  as  well  as  authority  in  the 
superior,  and  therefore  rights  as  well  as  duties  in  the  subordinate.     1.  There  is  first 
the  typical  case  of  parent  and  child.     2.  Closely  connected  with  the  relation  of 
parent  and  child,  and  even  influencing  it,  is  that  mutual  bond  of  husband  and  wife 


CHAP.  XX,]  EXODUS.  373 

which  affords  the  next  great  instance  of  the  law  of  subordination.  In  her  mother- 
hood woman  is  the  equal,  in  her  wifehood  the  subordinate  of  man.  3.  There 
are  manifold  other  relations  which  illustrate  the  law  of  subordination — teachers  and 
pupils,  seniors  and  juniors,  masters  and  servants,  monarchs  and  subjects,  magis- 
trates and  citizens,  pastors  and  people.  {IV.  J.  Woods,  B.  A. )^r  Lessons  from  the 
2)o.ntion  of  the  Fifth  Commandment : — The  position  of  this  Craimandment  among 
the  others  has  important  teachings. fl  It  is  the  centre,  the  heart  of  the  whole  law. 
Not  only  has  God  given  us  the  power  to  love,  but  He  has  placed  us  in  relationships 
which  call  this  power  into  exercise  and  give  it  right  direction,  especially  the  rela- 
tionship of  parents  and  children.  God  says  here  to  i^areuts :  "  As  you  love  your  /± 
children,  so  I  love  you.  As  you  yearn  for  their  responsive  love,  so  I  yearn  for  yours. 
I  am  your  Father."  God  says  here  to  children  :  "  Love  your  parents,  and  therein 
learn  to  love  Me,  your  Father.''^  The  position  of  this  Commandment  among  the 
others  has  a  further  teaching  of  great  importance.  The  place  of  division  into  the 
Two  Tables  of  the  Law  is  somewhat  indistinct.  It  is  in  this  Commandment,  but 
whether  it  belongs  to  the  First  Table,  or  to  the  Second,  is  not  quite  clear.  It  cer- 
tainly treats  of  duties  to  man,  and  so  must  belong  to  the  Second  Table.  But  holdl 
May  not  the  parents  be  regarded  as  the  representatives  of  God  ?  Then  it  belongs 
to  the  First  Table.  There  is  certainly  a  strong  analogy  in  the  relationships.  The 
parents  are  the  nearest  cause  to  the  child  of  its  being,  its  continued  existence  and 
its  welfare,  and  this  through  that  wonderful  thing  God  has  given  them,  parental 
love,  which  allies  them  so  closely  to  Himself.  We  need  not  try  to  determine  what 
God  seems  purposely  to  have  left  indistinct.  In  the  indistinctness  is  the  lesson. 
We  are  apt  to  consider  duties  to  man  separately,  but  God  joins  them  indissolubly 
with  duties  to  Himself.  The  position  of  the  Commandment  in  this  indistinctness 
also  shows  its  great  importance.  Considering  it  as  the  last  of  the  First  Table  we 
see  that  in  order  that  children  shall  become  men  and  women  worshipping  God  in 
spirit  and  in  truth,  they  are  to  be  taught  and  trained  by  honouring  their  parents. 
Considering  it  as  the  first  of  the  Second  Table,  we  see  that  in  order  that  children 
shall  become  men  and  women  fulfilUng  their  duties  in  the  various  relations  of  life, 
they  are  to  be  taught  and  trained  by  honouring  their  parents.  Both  religion  and  .^ 
morality  have  their  foundations  laid  in  the  home  life  of  children.  [F.  S.  Schenck.)  ^ 
Beasons  for  honouring  parents : — 1.  The  first  and  greatest  is  because  God  com- 
mands. His  command  is  written  in  our  own  natures  and  in  this  holy  law. 
This  reason  is  above  all  others  and  embraces  all.  2.  Such  conduct  gives  the 
greatest  pleasure  to  our  parents,  as  the  reverse  conduct  brings  to  their  hearts  the 
keenest  suffering.  We  can  never  fully  appreciate  all  the  care  and  love  father  and 
mother  have  bestowed  upon  us  in  infancy  and  youth,  in  sickness  and  in  health, 
and  the  yearning  of  their  hearts  for  our  love.  Surely  we  should  respond  to  their 
love — we  should  seek  their  happiness.  3.  Such  conduct  is  itself  excellent.  There 
is  something  within  us  that  approves  it,  and  condemns  the  reverse.  4.  The  Com- 
mandment itself  contains  a  reason  for  obedience,  in  that  it  gives  a  promise,  an 
assurance  that  in  the  providence  of  God  obedience  to  this  Commandment  will  result 
in  long  life  and  prosperity.  This  sets  forth  a  general  rule  in  the  Divine  government 
of  the  race,  promoting  stability  in  social  welfare.  The  child  honouring  his  parents 
learns  self-control,  and  obedience  to  law,  submission  hearty  and  prompt  to  rightly 
constituted  authority  as  a  principle  of  action.  Such  a  child  will  in  all  probability 
become  a  man  of  like  character.  He  will  obey  the  laws  of  health.  Entering  busi- 
ness he  will  obey  the  laws  of  success,  industry,  perseverance,  economy,  enterprise. 
His  powers  under  full  control,  he  will  be  also  a  law-abiding  citizen  in  society.  Such 
character  tends  to  long  life  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  of  God.  A  good  citizen 
enjoys  the  protection  of  the  state  not  only,  but  helps  to  form  a  condition  of  social 
well-being.  The  child,  on  the  other  hand,  who  is  disobedient  and  disrespectful  to 
his  parents,  who  sets  aside  their  authority  and  God's  authority,  is  cultivating  a 
law-breaking  character.  He  will  in  all  probability  become  a  self-willed  man,  setting 
at  defiance  the  laws  of  God  and  man.  Such  a  life  tends  to  the  undermining  of 
health  by  excesses,  to  the  waste  of  property  by  abuse,  to  the  running  into  dangers 
recklesslv,  and  to  the  overthrow  of  social  well-being.  Such  a  character  tends  to 
shorten  Mfe  and  to  forfeit  the  gifts  of  God.  [Ibid.)  r'^Forbearance  towards  erring 
parents  : — How  is  a  religious  son  or  daughter  to  act  Wtrards  an  irrehgious  parent? 
To  answer  that  question  in  detail  would  require  a  long  discourse.  Circumstances 
sometimes  make  the  duty  of  a  child  very  perplexing.  When  a  father  comes  home 
drunk  three  times  a  week,  violently  abuses  his  daughter  who  opens  the  door  for  him 
half  dead  with  weariness  and  fright,  curses  her,  sometimes  strikes  her,  drinks  half 


""/ 


M 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

her  wages  and  nearly  all  his  own,  what  ought  she  to  do  ?     The  principle  which 
determines  her  duty  is  clear.     The  obligation  to  honour  her  father  is  not  relaxed. 
You  are  not  released  from  a  debt  because  the  man  to  whom  you  owe  it  is  a  drunkard 
or  a  profligate ;  and  so  irreligion,  or  even  vice  in  a  parent,  cannot  release  a  child 
from  filial  duty.     The  application  of  the  principle  to  particular  eases  is,  I  acknow- 
ledge, sometimes  extremely  difficult.     Parental  cruelty  occasionally  becames  intoler- 
able.    For  a  child  to  remain  in  some  houses  is  to  suffer  perpetual  misery.     But  the 
noble  and  Christian  course,  as  long  as  your  strength  is  not  utterly  exhausted,  is  to 
manifest  the  charity  which  "  endureth  all  thin;.s."     If  your  religion  makes  you 
more  sensitive  to  the  vices  which  disgrace  the  character  of  jour  parents,  it  should 
also  enable  you  to  bear  their  ill-treatment  with  more  meekness  and  patience.     The 
consciousness  of  your  own  sins  should  make  you  more  merciful  to  theirs.     (R.  W. 
Dale,  D.D.)  ^   Filial  duty: — Tenderness  and  sjinpathy  were  conspicuously  dis- 
played in  the  character  of  the  late  Dr.  Alexander  Waugh.     A  young  man  of  unim- 
peachable character  was  desirous  of  entering  upon  missionary  labour,  and  was 
recommended  to  the  notice  of  the  London  Missionary  Society.     He  had  passed 
through  the  usual  examination,  but  stated  that  he  had  one  difficulty — he  had  an 
aged  mother  dependent  upon  an  elder  brother  and  himself  for  maintenance ;  in  case 
of  his  brother's  death,  he  wished  to  be  at  liberty  to  return  home  to  support  her. 
Scarcely  had  he  made  this  natural  request  than  he  heard  the  voice  of  one  of  the 
directors  exclaim,  "  If  you  love  your  mother  more  than  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  won't 
do  for  us."     The  young  man  was  abashed  and  confounded,  and  he  was  asked  to 
retire  while  his  case  was  considered.     Upon  his  return.  Dr.  Waugh,  who  was  in  the 
chair,  addressed  him  with  patriarchal  dignity,  telling  him  that  the  committee  did 
not  feel  themselves  at  liberty  to  accept  his  services  on  a  condition  involving  un- 
certainty as  to  the  term ;  but  immediately  added,  "  We  think  none  the  worse  of  you, 
my  good  lad,  for  your  beautiful  regard  to  your  aged  parent.     You  are  following  the 
example  of  Him  whose  gospel  you  wish  to  proclaim  among  the  heathen,  who,  when 
He  hung  upon  the  cross  in  dying  agonies,  beholding  His  mother  and  His  beloved 
disciple  standingby,  said  to  the  one,  "  Behold  thy  son  ! "  and  to  John,  "  Behold 
thy  mother  I  "     ]~ Filial  piety  : — David  Livingstone  is  said  to  have  learned  Gaelic 
in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to  read  the  Bible  to  his  mother  in  that  language, 
which  was  the  one  she  knew  best.         Obligation  to  parents  : — The  celebrated  Jona- 
than Edwards,  who  had  the  advantage  of  being  trained  by  singularly  pious  and 
judicious  parents,  wrote,  when  about  twenty  years  of  age,  in  his  diary:  "I  now 
plainly  perceive  what  great  obligations  I  am  under  to  love  and  honour  my  parents. 
I  have  great  reason  to  believe  that  their  counsel  and  education  have  been  my 
making ;  notwithstanding  in  the  time  of  it,  it  seemed  to  do  me  so  little  good."        A 
noble  se7itiment : — A  little  boy  hearing  a  party  of  gentlemen  applauding  the  senti- 
ment, "  an  honest  man  is  the  noblest  work  of  God,"  boldly  said,  "  No  "  ;  and  being 
a«ked,  "  What  do  you  think  is  the  noblest  work  of  God  ?  "  replied,  "  My  mother." 
That  boy  made  a  good  man.     Who  can  doubt  it?        Archbishop  Tilh  tsm's  re»pect 
for  his  father : — There  are  some  children  who  are  almost  ashamed  .o  own  their 
parents,  because  they  are  poor,  or  in  a  low  situation  of  life.     We  will,  therefore, 
give  an  examp'e  of  the  contrary,  as  displayed  by  the  Dean  of  Canterbury,  afterwards 
Archbishop  Tillotson.     His  father,  who  was  a  plain  Yorkshireman,  approached  the 
house  where  his  son  resided,  and  inquired  whether  "  John  Tillotson  was  at  home." 
The  servant,  indignant  at  what  he  thought  his  insolence,  drove  him  from  the  door ; 
but  the  Dean,  who  was  within,  hearing  the  voice  of  his  father,  came  running  out, 
exclaiming,  in  the  presence  of  his  astonished  servants,  "  It  is  my  beloved  father !  " 
and  falling  down  on  his  knees,  asked  for  his  blessing.         Honouring  a  parent : — 
Frederick  the  Great  one  day  rang  his  bell  several  times,  and  nobody  came.     He 
opened  the  door,  and  found  his  page  asleep  in  an  arm-chair.     Advancing  to  awake 
him,  he  perceived  the  corner  of  a  note  peeping  out  of  his  pocket.     Curious  to  know 
what  it  was,  he  took  it,  and  read  it.     It  was  a  letter  from  the  mother  of  the  youth, 
thanking  him  for  sending  her  part  of  his  wages,  to  relieve  her  poverty.     She  con- 
cluded by  telling  him,  that  God  would  bless  him  for  his  good  conduct.      The  king, 
after  having  read  it,  went  softly  into  his  room,  took  a  purse  of  ducats,  and  slipped 
it,  with  the  letter,  into  the  pocket  of  the  page.     He  returned,  and  rang  his  bell  so 
loud,  that  the  page  awoke,  and  went  in.     "  Thou  hast  slept  well !  "  said  the  king. 
The   page  wished   to  excuse   himself,   and    in    his   confusion   put    his  hand  by 
chance  into  his  pocket,  and  felt  the  purse  with  astonishment.     He  drew  it  out, 
turned  pale,  and  looking  at  the  king,  burst  into  tears,  without  being  able  to  utter 
a  word.     "What  is  the  matter?"  said  the  king;    "what  hast  thou?"     "Ah! 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  375 

Sire,"  replied  the  youth,  falling  on  his  knees,  "  they  wish  to  ruin  me;  I  do  not 
know  how  this  money  came  into  my  pocket."  "  My  friend,"  said  Frederick,  "  God 
often  sends  us  blessings  while  we  are  asleep.  Send  that  to  thy  mother,  salute  her 
from  me,  and  say  that  I  will  take  care  of  her  and  thee."  Honour  thy  parents : — 
An  amiable  youth  was  lamenting  the  death  of  a  most  affectionate  parent.  His 
companions  endeavoured  to  console  him  by  the  reflection  that  he  had  always 
behaved  to  the  deceased  with  duty,  tenderness,  and  respect.  '•  So  I  thought," 
replied  the  youth,  "  whilst  my  parent  was  living ;  but  now  I  recollect,  with  pain 
and  sorrow,  many  instances  of  disobedience  and  neglect ;  for  which,  alas  !  it  is  too 
late  to  make  atonement."  Pleasing  parents : — Epaminondas,  the  Theban,  after 
winning  a  battle,  said,  "  My  chief  pleasure  is,  that  my  parents  will  hear  of  my 
victory."  Begin  right : — If  you  begin  to  put  up  a   house,  and  lay  the  foun- 

dation wrong,  or  to  build  a  ship,  and  make  a  mistake  in  laying  the  keel,  you'll 
have  to  take  it  all  down  and  begin  again.  Oh,  it  is  very  important  to  begin  right ! 
It  is  so  in  everything.  And  it  is  so  in  trying  to  do  our  duty  to  our  neighbour.  The 
Fifth  Commandment  shows  us  how  we  must  begin  to  do  this.  We  must  begin  at 
home.  You  show  me  a  boy  or  girl  who  is  not  a  good  son  or  daughter,  who  does 
not  honour  father  and  mother,  and  I  will  show  you  one  who  will  not  make  a  good 
man  or  woman.  [R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Kindness  to  parents  .-—There  is  a  celebrated 
charity  Bchool  in  London,  called  the  "Blue  Coat  School."  It  bears  this  name 
because  the  scholars  there  all  wear  blue  coats  with  long  skirts  to  them.  I  remem- 
ber reading  about  one  of  the  boys  in  this  school,  who  was  in  the  habit  of  saving 
part  of  his  own  meals,  and  all  the  bits  and  scraps  he  could  gather  from  the  table 
after  their  meals  were  over.  He  used  to  put  them  in  a  box  near  his  bed,  and  keep 
them  there.  This  led  the  other  scholars  to  talk  against  him  very  much.  At  tint 
they  thought  he  was  gi-eedy,  and  kept  them  there  to  eat  at  night,  when  the  rest 
were  asleep.  Some  of  them  watched  him,  but  he  was  never  seen  to  eat  them. 
Once  or  twice  a  week  he  used  to  make  a  bundle  of  the  contents  of  the  box,  and  go 
away  with  it.  Then  the  boys  thought  that  he  meant  to  sell  them  and  keep  the 
money.  They  concluded  that  he  was  a  mean,  miserly  fellow.  They  refused  to  let 
him  play  with  them.  They  joked  about  him,  and  called  him  hard  names,  and  per- 
secuted him  in  many  ways.  But  he  bore  it  all  patiently,  and  still  went  on,  saving 
and  carrying  away  all  he  could  honestly  get.  At  last  they  complained  of  him  to 
their  teacher.  The  boy  was  watched  when  he  took  away  the  next  bundle.  He  was 
seen  to  go  into  an  old,  worn-out  building,  occupied  by  some  of  the  poorest  people 
in  the  city.  There  he  made  his  way  up  to  the  fourth  storey  of  the  building,  and 
left  his  bundle  with  a  poor  old  couple.  On  inquiry  it  was  found  that  these  were 
his  parents.  They  were  honest,  worthy  people,  whom  age  and  jjoverty  had 
reduced  to  such  a  condition  of  want  that  their  chief  dependence  was  the  food  thus 
furnished  by  their  son.  He  was  willing  to  deprive  himself  of  food,  and  bear  the 
reproach  and  persecution  of  his  schoolmates,  in  order  to  do  what  he  could  for  tbe 
support  of  his  parents.  When  the  managers  of  the  school  heard  of  it,  they  pro- 
vided relief  for  the  poor  boy's  parents,  and  gave  him  a  silver  medal  for  his  praise- 
worthy conduct.  Dr.  Johnson  and  his  father  : — The  great  Dr.  Johnson  was  a 
very  learned  man ;  he  wrote  a  "  dictionary."  I  know  what  I  am  going  to  say  is 
true.  He  lived  in  Uttoxeter.  His  father  was  a  bookseller,  not  in  a  very  grand  way, 
because  he  Uf-ed  to  sell  his  books  in  the  market-place.  One  day  he  asked  his  son 
Samuel  (for  that  was  the  Christian  name  of  Dr.  Johnson)  to  come  down  and  help 
him  in  the  sale  of  his  books  in  the  market-place.  Little  Samuel  was  rather  a  sort 
of  a  dandy,  a  conceited  fellow;  and  he  thought  it  beneath  his  dignity  to  sell  books 
in  the  maiket-place.  "  He  demean  himself  to  stand  in  the  market-place  to  sell 
books,  indeed,  for  his  father  !  He  was  too  great  a  gentleman  for  that !  "  Fifty 
years  passed  away,  and  Dr.  Johnson  had  become  now  an  old  man.  It  haunted  him  ; 
he  could  not  forget,  though  more  than  fifty  years  had  passed, — what  he  had  done 
to  his  father,  in  refusing  to  sell  books  in  the  market-place.  He  was  very  sad  and 
unhappy  about  it.  So,  one  day,  the  doctor  took  off  his  hat,  and  went  and  stood  in 
the  same  market-place,  on  the  very  spot  where  he  said  he  would  not  stand  to  sell 
books  for  his  lather.  And  all  the  boys  laughed  at  him ;  but  there  he  stood  with 
his  bald  head,  not  feeling  the  rain,  or  caring  for  the  boys'  laughter,  that  he  might 
do  a  sort  of  act  of  penance,  to  ease  his  conscience  !  He  did  not  "  honoiir  his  father  " 
when  a  boy,  and  he  remembered  it  fifty  years  after,  and  it  wf  s  a  pain  to  him.  A 
statue  to  Dr.  Johnson  now  stands  on  the  spot,  and  this  noble  act  of  his  is  depicted 
upon  it.  (J.  Vaitghan.)^  Parents  are  God's  representatives  : — In  battle,  men  will 
give  their  lives  to  prevent  the  ragged  and  shot-torn  colours  of  their  country  from 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xx. 

falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  These  ragged  colours  represent  their  country. 
The  dust-covered  messenger  who  carries  private  despatches  to  an  embassy  in  a 
foreign  country  is  received  with  all  respect,  because  he  represents  his  king.  Even 
the  child  who  carries  an  important  message  is  treated  with  the  reveience  due 
to  the  sender  of  the  message.  So  parents  are  to  be  honoured,  not  alone  as  parents, 
but  as  the  representatives  of  God  Himself.  (S.  S.  I'imes.)  [2,  That  thy  days 
maybe  long. — Lonfi  life: — 1.  My  design  is  to  show  you  that  practical  religion  is 
the  friend  of  long  life,  and  I  prove  it  first  from  the  fact  that  it  makes  the  care  of 
our  physical  health  a  positive  Christian  duty.  The  Christian  man  lifts  this  whole 
problem  of  health  into  the  accountable  and  the  Divine.  He  says  :  "  God  has  given 
me  this  body,  and  He  has  called  it  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  deface  lis 
altars,  or  mar  its  walls,  or  crumble  its  pillars,  is  a  sacrilege."  The  Christian  man 
says  to  himself  :  "  If  I  hurt  my  nerves,  if  I  hurt  my  brain,  if  I  hurt  any  of  my 
physical  faculties,  I  insult  God  and  call  for  dire  retribution."  An  intelligent 
Christian  man  would  consider  it  an  absurdity  to  kneel  down  at  night  and  pray,  and 
ask  God's  protection,  while  at  the  same  time  he  kept  the  windows  of  his  bedroom 
tight  shut  against  fresh  air.  The  careof  all  your  physical  forces — nervous,  muscular, 
bone,  brain,  cellular,  tissue — for  all  you  must  be  brought  to  judgment.  2. 
Again,  I  remark  that  practical  religion  is  a  friend  of  long  life  in  the  fact 
that  it  is  a  protest  against  all  the  dissipations  which  injure  and  destroy  the 
health.  Bad  men  and  women  live  a  very  short  life ;  their  sins  kill  them. 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  lived  only  just  beyond  raid-life,  then  died  at  St.  Helena, 
and  one  of  his  doctors  said  that  his  disease  was  due  to  excessive  snuffing. 
The  hero  of  Austerlitz,  the  man  who  by  one  step  of  his  foot  in  the  centre  of  Europe 
shook  the  earth,  killed  by  a  snuff-box!  Ob,  how  many  people  we  have  known  who 
have  not  lived  out  half  their  days  because  of  their  dissipations  and  indulgences ! 
Now,  practical  religion  is  a  protest  against  all  dissipation  of  any  kind.  3.  Again, 
religion  is  a  friend  of  long  life  in  the  fact  that  it  takes  the  worry  out  of  our  tempor- 
alities. It  is  not  work  that  kills  men;  it  is  worry.  When  a  man  becomes  a 
genuine  Christian  he  makes  over  to  God  not  only  his  affections,  but  his  family,  hia 
business,  his  reputation,  his  body,  his  mind,  his  soul — everything.  Oh,  nervous 
and  feverish  people  of  the  world,  try  this  mighty  sedative  !  You  will  live  twenty- 
five  years  longer  under  its  soothing  power.  It  is  not  chloral  that  you  want,  or 
more  time  that  >  ou  want ;  it  is  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  Again,  practical 
religion  is  a  friend  of  long  life  in  the  fact  that  it  removes  all  corroding  care  about 
a  future  existence.  You  have  been  accustomed  to  open  the  door  on  this  side  the 
sepulchre ;  this  morning  I  open  the  door  on  the  other  side  the  sepulchre.  Glory 
be  to  God  for  this  robust,  healthy  religion.  It  will  have  a  tendency  to  make  you 
live  long  in  this  world,  and  in  the  world  to  come  you  will  have  eternal  longevity. 
{Dr.  Talmage.)  Vindication  of  God's  faithfulness,  in  the  j^erformance  of  the 
promise  of  lon(i  life  : — We  may  boldly  challenge  long  life,  when  all  the  circum- 
stances of  it  will  tend  to  our  everlasting  welfare.  But  God,  who  knows  how  frail  and 
yielding  the  best  of  us  are,  and  in  the  series  of  His  Divine  Providence  seeth  what 
prevailing  temptations  we  shall  be  exposed  unto,  doth  oftentimes,  in  mercy,  abridge 
this  promise;  and  takes  us  from  the  world,  lest  the  world  should  take  us  from  Him ; 
and  deals  with  us,  as  princes  deal  with  duellists,  they  make  them  prisoners,  that 
they  might  preserve  them  :  so  God,  that  He  might  preserve  His  people  from  their 
great  enemy,  commits  them  to  safe  custody  of  the  grave.  And,  if  this  be  to  be 
unfaithful,  certainly  His  faithfulness  would  he  nothing  else  but  an  ait  to  circumvent 
and  undo  us  ;  should  He,  only  to  keep  that  inviolate,  perform  those  promises,  which 
would  be  to  our  hurt  and  detriment.  Nor,  indeed,  can  any  man,  whom  God  hath 
blessed  with  a  right  judgment  and  due  esteem  of  things,  be  willing  to  compound  for 
the  continuance  of  this  present  life,  with  the  hazard  or  diminution  of  his  future 
happiness.     (Bp.  E.  Hopkins.)  O 

Ver.  13.  Thou  shalt  not  kilL — The  Sixth  Commandment: — I.  That  this  Com- 
mandment  WAS   INTENDED,   AS   SOME   SUPPOSE,    TO   FORBID   THE    INFLICTION    OF   CAPITAL 

PUNISHMENT,  IS  INCONCEIVABLE.  The  Mosaic  law  itself  inflicted  death  for  murder, 
Sabbath-breaking,  and  the  selling  of  a  Jew  into  slavery.  The  root  of  the  Com- 
mandment lies  in  the  greatness  of  human  nature  ;  man  is  invested  with  a  super- 
natural and  Divine  glory  ;  to  maintain  the  greatness  of  man  it  may  be  sometimes 
necessary  that  the  murderer,  who  in  his  malice  forgets  the  mystery  and  wonderf ul- 
ness  of  his  intended  victim,  should  be  put  to  death.  II.  Does  the  Commandment 
ABSOLUTELY  FORBID  WAE  BETWEEN  NATIONS  ?     Certainly  not.    The  nation  to  which  it 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  377 

was  given  had  a  strict  military  organization,  organized  by  the  very  artliority  from 
which  the  Commandment  came.  Moses  himself  prayed  to  God  that  the  hosts  of 
Israel  might  be  victorious  over  their  enemies.  Wars  of  ambition,  wars  of  revenge 
— these  are  crimes.  But  the  moral  sense  of  the  purest  and  noblest  of  mankind 
has  sanctioned  and  honoured  the  courage  and  heroism  which  repel  by  force  of  arms 
an  assault  on  a  nation's  integrity,  and  the  great  principle  which  underlies  this 
Commandment  sanctions  and  honours  them  too.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  The  Sixth 
and  Seventh  Commandments  : — There  are  very  sad  and  fearful  thoughts  connected 
with  these  Commandments.  But  there  are  also  very  blessed  thoughts  connected 
with  them.     I.  Is  it  nothing  to  remember  that  the  Lord  God  Himself  watches 

OVER   THE    LIFE    OF   EVERY    ONE     OF     CS,     POOR     CREATURES    AS    WE    ARE,    that     He   haS 

declared,  and  does  declare,  how  precious  it  is  in  His  eyes  ?  Our  life  is  subject  to  a 
thousand  accidents.  All  things  seem  to  conspire  against  it.  Death  seems  to  get 
Ihe  mastery  over  it  at  last.  But  no  ;  He  has  said,  "  Death,  I  will  be  thy  plague." 
As  every  plant  and  tree  seems  to  die  in  winter  and  revive  in  spring,  so  He  says  to 
this  more  wonderful  life  in  our  bodies,  "  It  shall  go  on,  and  this  is  the  pledge  and 
witness  that  it  shall :  the  Head  of  you  all,  the  Son  of  man,  the  only-begotten  Son 
of  God,  died  Himself  and  rose  again.  God's  coniiict  with  death  is  accomplished. 
The  grave  shall  not  kill."  II.  And  so,  again,  the  Lord  is  the  God  over  the 
HOUSEHOLD.  He  who  says,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  bids  us  understand  that  it  is 
well  to  pour  out  blood  as  if  it  were  water  rather  than  to  become  base  and  foul 
creatures,  beasts  instead  of  His  servants  and  children.  That  was  the  reason  He 
sent  the  Israelites  to  drive  out  the  Canaanites.  They  were  corrupting  and  defiling 
the  earth  with  their  abominations.  It  was  time  that  the  earth  should  be  cleared 
of  them.  The  God  who  gave  these  Commandments  is  King  now,  and  there  is  no 
respect  of  persons  with  Him.  III.  Christ  died  to  take  away  the  sins  of  men. 
He  died  to  unite  men  to  the  righteous  and  sinless  God.  The  Lord  our  God,  who 
has  redeemed  us  out  of  the  house  of  bondage,  will  always  deliver  us  from  sin,  will 
give  us  a  new,  right,  and  clean  heart.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  Sixth 
Commandment : — I.  The  sin  forbidden.  In  this,  "  thou  shalt  not  kill,"  is  meant 
the  not  injuring  another.  1.  We  must  not  injure  another  in  his  name.  We  injure 
others  in  their  name  when  we  calumniate  and  slander  them.  No  physician  can 
heal  the  wounds  of  the  tongue.  2.  We  must  not  injure  another  in  his  body.  The 
life  is  the  most  precious  thing ;  and  God  bath  set  this  Commandment  as  a  fence 
about  it,  to  preserve  it.  All  these  sins  which  lead  to  murder  are  here  forbidden  : 
As  (1)  Unadvised  anger.  Anger  boils  up  the  blood  in  the  veins,  and  oft  produceth 
murder  ;  "  in  tbeir  anger  they  slew  a  man."  (2)  Envy.  Anger  is  sometimes  "  soon 
over,"  like  fire  kindled  in  straw,  which  is  quickly  out ;  but  envy  is  a  radicated  thing, 
and  will  not  quench  its  thirst  without  blood ;  "who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  ? " 
(3)  Hatred.  How  many  ways  is  murder  committed  ?  We  may  be  said  to 
murder  another  :  1.  With  the  hand :  as  Joab  killed  Abner  and  Amasa ;  "  he 
smote  him  in  the  fifth  rib,  and  shed  out  his  bowels."  2.  Murder  is  committed  with 
the  mind.  Malice  is  mental  murder ;  "  whoso  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer." 
3.  Murder  is  committed  with  the  tongue,  by  speaking  to  the  prejudice  of  another, 
and  causing  him  to  be  put  to  death.  4.  Murder  is  committed  with  the  pen. 
Uriah.  5.  By  consenting  to  another's  death.  Saul.  6.  By  not  hindering  the 
death  of  another  when  in  our  power.  Pilate.  7.  By  unmercifulness.  8.  By  taking 
away  that  which  is  necessary  for  the  sustentation  of  life.  9.  By  not  helping  him 
when  he  is  ready  to  perish.  We  must  not  injure  another's  soul.  Who  do  this  ? 
(1)  Such  as  corrupt  others  by  bad  example.  (2)  Such  as  entice  others  to  sin.  (3) 
Ministers  are  murderers,  who  starve,  poison,  or  infect  souls.  (4)  Such  as  destroy 
others,  by  getting  them  into  bad  company,  and  so  making  them  proselytes  to  the 
devil.  2.  The  second  thing  forbidden  in  it  is,  the  injuring  one-self  ;  "  thou  shalt 
not  kill "  :  thou  shalt  do  no  hurt  to  thyself.  1.  Thou  shalt  not  hurt  thy  own  body. 
One  may  be  guilty  of  self-murder,  either  (1)  Indirectly  and  occasionally;  as, 
first,  when  a  man  thrusts  himself  into  danger  which  he  might  prevent.  Secondly, 
a  person  may  be  in  some  sense  guilty  of  his  own  death,  by  neglecting  the  use  of 
means.  If  sick,  and  use  no  physic,  if  he  hath  received  a  wound  and  will  not 
apply  balsam,  he  hastens  his  own  death.  Thirdly,  by  immoderate  grief :  "  the 
sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death"  ;  when  God  takes  away  a  dear  relation,  and 
one  is  swallowed  up  with  sorrow.  How  many  weep  themselves  into  their  graves  ! 
Queen  Mary  grieved  so  excessively  for  the  loss  of  Calais,  that  it  broke  her  heart. 
Fourthly,  by  intemperance,  excess  in  diet.  Surfeiting  shortens  life  ;  "  more  die  of 
it  than  by  the  sword  "  ;  many  dig  their  grave  with  their  teeth  ;  too  much  oil  chokes 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

the  lamp ;  the  cup  kills  more  than  the  cannon.  (2)  One  may  be  guilty  of  self" 
murder,  directly  and  absolutely.  First,  by  envy.  Envy  corrodes  the  heart,  dries 
up  the  blood,  rots  the  bones  ;  "  envy  is  the  rottenness  of  the  bones."  It  is  to  the 
body,  as  the  moth  to  the  cloth,  it  eats  it,  and  makes  its  beauty  consume ;  envy 
drinks  its  own  venom.  Second,  by  laying  violent  hands  on  himself,  and  thus  he  is 
felo  de  se  ;  as  Saul  fell  upon  his  own  sword  and  killed  himself.  A  man's  self  is 
most  near  to  him,  therefore  this  sin  of  self-murder  breaks  both  the  law  of  God,  and 
the  bonds  of  nature.  Self-murderers  are  worse  than  the  brute-creatures;  they  will 
tear  and  gore  one  another,  but  no  beast  will  go  to  destroy  itself.  Self-murder  is 
occasioned  usually  from  discontent ;  discontent  is  joined  with  a  sullen  melancholy. 
The  bird  that  beats  herself  in  the  cage,  and  is  ready  to  kill  herself,  is  the  true 
emblem  of  a  discontented  spirit.  2.  Here  is  forbidden  hurting  one's  own  soul. 
Who  are  they  that  go  about  desperately  to  murder  their  own  souls?  1.  Snch 
wilfully  go  about  to  murder  their  souls,  who  have  no  sense  of  God,  or  the  other 
world  ;  they  are  "  past  feeling."  2.  Such  as  are  set  wilfully  to  murder  their  own 
souls,  are  they  who  are  resolved  upon  their  lusts,  let  what  will  come  of  it.  Men 
will,  for  a  drop  of  pleasure,  drink  a  sea  of  wrath.  3.  They  murder  their  souls,  who 
avoid  all  means  of  saving  their  souls.  4.  They  do  voluntarily  murder  their  souls, 
who  suck  in  false  prejudices  against  religion  ;  as  if  religion  were  so  strict  and 
severe,  that  they  who  espouse  holiness,  must  live  a  melancholy  life,  like  hermits 
and  anchorites,  and  drown  aU  their  joy  in  tears.  This  is  a  slander  which  the  devil 
hath  cast  upon  religion :  for  there  is  no  true  joy  but  in  believing.  5.  They  are 
wilfully  set  to  murder  their  own  souls,  who  will  neither  be  good  themselves,  nor 
suffer  others  to  be  so.  II.  The  duty  implied.  That  we  should  do  all  the  good 
we  can  to  ourselves  and  others.  1.  In  reference  to  others.  (1)  To  preserve  the  life 
of  others.  Comfort  them  in  their  sorrows,  relieve  them  in  their  wants,  be  as  the 
good  Samaritan,  pour  wine  and  oil  into  their  wounds.  Grace  makes  the  heart 
tender,  it  causeth  sympathy  and  charity ;  as  it  melts  the  heart,  in  contrition  to- 
wards God,  so  in  compassion  towards  others.  (2)  Love.  Love  loves  mercy  :  it  is  a 
noble  bountiful  grace.  Love,  like  a  full  vessel,  will  have  vent ;  it  vents  itself 
in  acts  of  liberality.  To  communicate  to  the  necessities  of  others,  is  not 
arbitrary,  it  is  not  left  to  our  choice  whether  we  will  or  no,  but  it  is  a  duty  incum- 
bent; "charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world  that  they  do  good,  that  they 
be  rich  in  good  works."  God  supplies  our  wants,  and  shall  not  we  supply  the 
wants  of  others  ?  Shall  we  be  only  as  a  sponge  to  suck  in  mercy,  and  not  as  breasts 
to  milk  it  out  to  others  ?  (3)  It  is  implied,  that  we  should  endeavour  to  preserve 
the  souls  of  others  ;  counsel  them  about  their  souls,  set  life  and  death  before  them, 
help  them  to  heaven.  2.  In  reference  to  ourselves.  The  Commandment,  "  thou 
shalt  not  kill,"  requires  that  we  should  preserve  our  own  life  and  soul.  1.  It  is 
engraven  upon  every  creature,  that  we  should  preserve  our  own  natural  life.  2. 
This  Commandment  requires,  that  we  should  endeavour,  as  topre.serve  our  own  life, 
BO  especially,  to  preserve  our  own  souls.  {T.  Watson. )  The  Sixth  Commandment : — 
This  command  forbids  the  illegal  and  unrighteous  taking  of  life.  What  a  terrible 
commentary  upon  the  condition  of  man  that  there  needs  to  be  such  a  command  as 
this,  "Thou  shalt  not  kill"!  Sin  is  its  only  e.Kplanation.  Consider — I.  The 
MURDERER.  1.  This  Crime  comes  as  the  sequence  to  a  life  of  terrible  guilt.  2.  It 
subjects  him  to  the  extreme  penalty  of  the  law,  and  holds  him  up  as  a  monster 
unfit  for  human  fellowship  and  life.  3.  It  does  violence  to  the  highest  interests  of 
his  soul.  II.  The  murdered  man.  1.  Murder  cuts  him  off  in  the  midst  of  his 
days.  2.  It  destroys  all  his  earthly  interests,  and  does  him  the  greatest  injustice. 
No  time  given  to  set  business  in  order  or  provide  for  household.  3.  It  endangers 
his  eternal  welfare.  III.  Society.  1.  Murder  outrages  the  rights  of  life  and 
property.  (1)  It  brings  disgrace  to  the  relations  of  the  murderer.  (2)  It  injures 
the  connections  of  the  murdered  one.  (3)  It  disturbs  the  peace  of  society,  and  even 
threatens  the  stabihty  of  good  government.  2.  Hence  to  defend  life  becomes  a  duty 
(Psa.  Ixxxii.  3,  4;  Job  xxix.  13).  (1)  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  take  our  own  hfe 
(Acts  xvi.  28).  (2)  When  a  man  is  attacked  he  should  defend  himself ;  or,  if  others 
need  help,  he  should  assist  them  (Prov.  xxiv.  11,  12).  (3)  The  welfare  of  society 
demands  that  the  life  of  the  murderer  should  be  exacted  by  the  government,  or  that 
he  should  be  kept  in  perpetual  durance  (Gen.  ix.  6).  IV.  Applications.  1.  We 
should  keep  the  heart  free  from  hatred  and  the  like.  2.  We  should  cultivate  a  sweet 
disposition  and  control  over  temper  and  passion.  The  passionate  man  may  commit 
murder  in  the  frenzy  of  his  excitement.  3.  We  should  avoid  everything  tbat  tends 
toward  this  crime,  such  as  quarrels,  differences,  stroug  drink,  and  all  other  thinj^s 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  879 

whose  tendency  is  to  evolve  passion  and  destroy  self-control.  (L.  0.  Thompson.) 
The  Sixth  Cuimnandment : — Man  alone  has  the  inspiration  of  Deity.  This  Divine 
inbreathing  is  the  august  peculiarity  which  separates  man  discretively  and  ever- 
lastingly from  the  animal  creation.  On  his  body  side  he  sprang  from  dust ;  on  his 
soul  side  he  sprang  with  the  animals  ;  on  his  spirit  side  he  sprang  from  God.  Thus 
in  his  very  beginning,  in  the  original  make-up  of  him,  man  was  a  religious  being. 
Coming  into  existence  as  Jehovah's  inbreathing,  man  was,  in  the  very  fact  of  being 
Divinely  inbreathed,  God's  Son  and  Image.  Hence  it  is  that  the  human  body  is  such 
a  sacred  thing.  It  is  the  shrine  of  God's  Son,  God's  image,  God's  likeness,  God's 
spirit,  God's  breath.  As  such  it  is  the  priceless  casket  of  unknown  sacred 
potentialities.  Hence,  murder  is,  in  the  intensest  sense  of  the  word,  sacrilege  :  not 
only  a  crime  against  man,  but  a  crime  against  God,  in  whose  image  man  is  made. 
But  murder  may  be  of  varying  degrees  of  atrocity.  Accordingly,  let  us  now  glance 
at  some  of  the  various  forms  of  murder.  1.  And,  first,  there  is  the  murder  which 
is  born  of  mahce,  or  murder  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term.  Murder  of 
this  kind,  whether  perpetrated  swiftly,  as  by  the  bullet,  or  slowly,  as  by  arsenic,  is 
the  most  fiendish  of  crimes.  And  nature,  in  an  especial  manner,  ever  waits  to 
avenge  it.  Nor  is  this  strange ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  man,  on  his  body  side,  is 
linked  with  the  material  creation.  The  same  elements  which  compose  our  physical 
organism  compose,  although  in  different  proportions,  the  water  we  drink,  the  food 
we  eat,  the  air  we  breathe,  the  dust  we  await.  Hence  nature  herself  often 
becomes  a  principal  factor  in  the  detection  of  the  murderer.  She  ever  stands  ready 
to  be  murder's  avenger,  supplying  the  prosecuting  attorney  with  her  re-agents,  even 
with  blood-corpuscles  themselves.  2.  Again,  there  is  the  murder  which  is  born  of 
sudden  passion  :  the  murder,  for  example,  of  lynch-law,  when  a  mob  usurps  the 
functions  of  a  court  of  justice ;  the  murder  of  sudden  vengeance,  as  when  an  out- 
raged husband  encounters  and  slays  the  destroyer  of  his  home  ;  the  murder  of 
manslaughter,  whether  voluntary  or  involuntary,  whether  provoked  by  insult,  by 
menace,  or  by  alcohol.  3.  Again,  there  is  the  murder  which  is  boin  of  despair. 
Suicide,  when  committed  by  a  sane  person,  is  murder.  Indeed,  how  often  the  two 
crimes  are  committed  by  the  same  person — the  murderer  first  slaying  his  victim, 
then  slaying  himself.  Justly  does  the  law  pronounce  a  suicide  B,felo  de  se — that  is, 
one  who  makes  a  felon  of  himself,  suicide  being  felonious  self-murder.  4.  Again, 
there  is  the  murder  which  is  born  of  shame  :  I  mean  infanticide.  5.  Again,  there 
if  the  murder  which  is  born  of  harmful  occupations.  First  in  this  list  I  would  put 
the  dram  shop  ;  it  matters  not  that  the  killing  is  slow  ;  the  killing  is  moral  murder ; 
and  before  every  saloon  I  would  post  a  placard  bearing  the  Sinaitic  legend:  "  Thou 
shalt  not  kill."  Again,  there  is  the  sale,  when  not  prescribed  by  the  physician,  of 
narcotic  drugs,  in  their  various  forms,  from  opium  joints  to  chloral  drops.  Again, 
there  are  the  slow  murders  which  are  perpetrated  in  houses  of  nameless  sin — 
murders  which  are  particularly  sacrilegious,  because,  as  we  have  seen,  the  body  is 
the  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  6.  Again,  there  is  the  murder  which  is  born  of 
thoughtlessness  (see  Deut.  xxii.  8).  It  is  one  of  the  cheering  signs  of  the  times 
that  the  public  is  awakening  to  the  sense  of  its  grave  responsibility  in  this  direction, 
for  example,  demanding  that  life  shall  not  be  imperiled  by  the  failure  to  provide 
substantial  structures,  fire-escapes,  life-preservers,  railway  precautions,  sanitary 
arrangements  of  fresh  air  and  wholesome  food  and  pure  water  and  clean  streets, 
isolated  refuges  for  sufferers  from  contagious  and  infectious  diseases,  competent 
physicians  and  druggists  and  nurses,  sufficient  hours  for  rest  on  the  part  of  opera- 
tives, excursions  for  childi'en,  sanitariums  for  the  poor,  parks  and  recreation 
grounds — in  brief,  hygienic  regulations  in  general.  7.  And  now  let  us  ponder  Christ's 
interpretation  of  the  law  against  murder  (Matt.  v.  21,  22).  According  to  Him, 
murder  is  not  a  matter  of  outward  act,  but  of  inward  feeling :  not  a  question  of 
standing  before  the  community,  but  of  character  before  the  All-seeing.  No  murder 
was  ever  committed  which  did  not  begin  in  the  heart.  Who  of  us  has  kept  the  Sixth 
Commandment  as  the  Divine  Man  has  interpreted  it?  Who  of  us  has  not  been 
angry,  passionate,  revengeful,  petulant?  Remembering,  then,  these  quarrels  of 
ours,  these  grudges  and  "^jnes  and  faults  of  temper,  who  of  us  is  not  in  danger  of 
the  eternal  Gehenna  ?  Lilc  we  are  not  yet  through  with  the  Sixth  Commandment. 
Although  it  is  prohibitive  in  form,  saying,  Thou  shalt  not  kill,  yet  it  is  affirmative  in 
spirit,  saying,  Thou  shalt  love.  [G.  D.  Boardman.)  The  law  of  mercy  : — I.  The 
ESSENTIAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  THIS  COMMANDMENT.  1.  In  preferring  the  old  Prayer  Book 
reading,  "  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,"  the  revisers  have  done  well.  Killing  may  be 
no  murder.    The  right   of   self-defence  belongs  both  to  the  individual  and  the 


380  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

community.  2.  Human  life  is  sacred,  but  not  so  sacred  as  the  end  for  which  it  is 
given,  viz.,  that  man  created  in  the  image  of  God  should  do  His  will.  That  is  the 
paramount  obligation.  The  will  of  God  may  make  it  right  for  us  to  lay  down  our 
lives,  or  right  to  defend  them  at  the  cost  cf  death  to  others.  II.  The  Mosaic 
ENUNCIATION  OF  THIS  COMMANDMENT.  1.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  great  law-giver 
can  have  read  it  in  the  sense  of  an  absolute  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill."  (1)  If  he  had 
condemned  killing  in  self-defence,  he  could  not  have  formed  the  regulation  in  chap, 
xxii.  2.  (2)  If  he  had  condemned  killing  by  public  justice,  he  would  not  have 
ordained  capital  punishment,  as  he  did  not  only  for  murder,  but  also  for  kidnapping, 
insolence  to  parents,  adultery,  sorcery,  blasphemy,  and  Sabbath-breaking.  (3)  If 
he  had  condemned  killing  in  war,  he  would  neither  have  engaged  in  it  himself  nor 
have  left  it  as  a  solemn  legacy  to  his  successor.  (4)  Against  actual  murder  the  law 
of  Moses  was  uncompromising  (see  Deut.  xix.  11-13  ;  Exod.  xxi.  14.)  2.  In  this  stern 
impartiality  the  Hebrew  legislator  rose  head  and  shoulders,  not  only  above  his 
contemporaries,  but  above  generations  very  far  subsequent  to  him.  Even  in 
Christian  England,  and  in  our  own  day,  we  tolerate  in  connection  with  many 
offences,  an  alternative  of  "  fine  or  imprisonment "  ;  a  bad  remainder  of  feudal 
times,  which  lets  the  rich  man  lightly  off,  but  crushes  his  poorer  neighbour — an 
inequality  with  which  Moses  could  not  be  charged.  But  he  went  further  than  this. 
He  laid  down  the  principle  that  criminal  carelessness  and  selfish  indiffei'ence  to 
human  life  ought  to  be  regarded  as  tantamount  to  murder  (see  chap.  xxi.  28,  29). 
If  our  own  British  laws  were  as  clear  as  this  in  their  denunciation  of  criminal  care- 
lessness and  wicked  recklessness  of  human  Ufe,  it  would  be  vastly  to  the  public 
advantage.  What  of  the  jerry-builders  heaping  rotting  garbage  into  the  foundations 
of  houses,  putting  cheap  arsenicated  papers  on  the  walls,  and  scamping  drains  that 
they  may  net  exorbitant  rents  at  the  price  of  human  lives  ?  What  of  smug 
railway-directors  sweeping  in  golden  dividends,  but  leaving  poor  signalmen  to  toil 
for  such  long  hours  that  exhausted  nature  muddles  the  points,  and  horrible  collisions 
foUow?  What  of  the  chemist  who  adulterates  his  drugs,  the  inn-keeper  who  puts 
damp  sheets  on  the  traveller's  bed,  and  the  butcher  who  sends  diseased  meat  into 
market  ?  The  plain  truth  is,  that  these  people  are  murderers.  We  are  yet  as  to 
legislation  a  long  way  behind  the  brave  old  ruler  who  said  out  forcibly  what  such 
criminals  should  suffer ;  but  our  moral  sense  sees  clearly  that  they  inflict  death 
upon  innocent  people,  a  death  as  sure  as  if  they  had  put  knife  to  the  throats  or 
revolver  to  the  hearts  of  their  victims,  a  death  often  flower  and  more  cruel  in  its 
torture.  III.  The  Saviour's  comment  upon  this  word  (see  Matt.  v.  21,  22). 
Nothing  condemned  by  Moses  as  a  breach  of  the  sixth  word  is  excused  by  Jesus. 
Instead  of  loosing.  He  tightens  the  reins.  He  tracks  the  lurking  murder  in  many 
an  unsuspected  heart.  He  marks  three  degrees  of  murderous  guilt,  all  of  which 
may  be  manifested  without  a  blow  being  struck  :  secret  anger  ;  spiteful  jeer  ;  open, 
unrestrained  outburst  of  violent,  abusive  speech.  IV.  The  positive  interpretation 
OF  THIS  Commandment  will  lift  us  to  the  true  platform  of  Christian  morality  by 
transfiguring  it  into  a  law  of  mercy.  The  same  essential  principle  which  forbids 
murder  ordains  brotherhood.  {W.  J.  Wood^,  B.A.)  Injuring  man  prohibited  : — 
We  now  come  to  the  commandments  which  refer  exclusively  to  our  duty  to  man. 
Of  these  there  are  five.  The  first  four  we  group  together.  They  each  read :  "  Thou 
shalt  not  injure  thy  fellow-man."  We  cannot  injure  God — we  can  only  act 
irreverently  and  carelessly  toward  God,  and  so  injure,  not  Him,  but  ourselves.  Sin 
has  made  us  natural  enemies  to  one  another — Ishmaelites,  whose  hands  ai'e  against 
every  man,  and  every  man's  hand  against  us.  Man's  conditiou  by  nature  is  not 
seen  in  man's  condition  in  England,  France,  or  civilized  America,  but  in  man's 
condition  in  the  savage  island  of  the  Pacific,  where  the  heavenly  rays  of  the 
gospel  have  least  penetrated.  The  civilizations  of  Christianity  exhibit,  not 
humanity,  but  Christianity.  The  civilizations  of  ancient  Persia,  Greece,  and  Rome 
(although  a  little  revelation  filtered  through  upon  them)  exhibit  humanity,  in  its 
best  estate,  as  a  refined  selfishness,  where  eveiy  man  seeks  (adroitly,  perhaps,  and 
not  openly)  to  injure  his  neighbour.  The  injury  which  man  can  do  to  his  fellow- 
man  can  be  divided  into  four  kinds — injury  to  person,  injury  to  society,  injury  to 
property,  and  injury  to  reputation.  {H.  Crosby,  D.D.)  Personal  application  of 
the  Commandment : — The  Commandment  is  addressed  to  each  man,  and  applies  to 
his  own  life  and  the  life  of  his  neighbour.  1.  His  own  life  he  is  forbidden  to 
take.  He  is  commanded  to  care  for  it.  Man  does  not  own  himself,  has  no 
title  in  his  own  life  as  before  God,  has  no  right  to  destroy  it,  but  should  take  good 
care  of  it,  for  it  belongs  to  God.    We  are  here  forbidden  to  brood  over  our  troubles. 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  881 

It  is  wrong  to  cultivate  a  melancholy  spirit,  or  a  rebellious  one.  We  should  strive 
against  these  natural  tendencies  which  threaten  life  and  dishonour  God.  God 
requires  us  further  to  have  that  high  regard  for  our  lives  which  shall  lead  us  to 
guard  and  maintain  them  in  the  best  possible  condition.  We  are  to  become  familiar 
with  the  laws  of  health,  and  obedient  to  them.  The  Commandment  tells  us  how 
we  shall  dress.  Adornment  should  be  subordinate  to  comfort.  Thin  shoes  and  bare 
arms  venture  out  to  a  late  party  on  a  winter's  night ;  a  severe  cold  sometimes 
follows,  and  a  speedy  death.  We  say.  What  a  mysterious  providence  to  take  one 
so  young  1  Do  we  not  know  that  the  laws  of  providence  are  in  favour  of  good 
health  and  long  life,  and  that  sickness  and  death  often  come  directly  from  our  dis- 
obedience of  these  laws.  This  Commandment  directs  us  in  the  conduct  of  our 
business.  In  gaining  our  living  we  are  not  needlessly  to  risk  our  lives.  We  are  to 
be  masters  of  our  business,  not  mastered  by  it.  2.  God  requires  further  that  each 
one  shall  hold  the  life  of  others  sacred  as  well  as  his  own.  He  is  forbidden  to  take 
it.  He  is  commanded  to  care  for  it.  The  contentious  spirit  is  to  be  checked  in  its 
small  beginnings,  for  its  natural  tendency  is  to  hard  feelings  and  deadly  hatred. 
Our  pride  is  not  to  be  cultivated,  for  an  over-estimate  of  our  own  importance  is  sure 
to  be  cut  to  the  quick  by  the  slights  of  others,  and  arousing  into  anger  will  cherish 
the  desire  for  revenge.  High  temper  quickly  flies  into  anger  when  provoked,  and 
often  acts  and  speaks  in  the  heat  of  passion,  adding  fuel  to  its  own  flame  and 
striking  fire  into  other  hearts.  It  is  said  that  Julius  Gassar  won  many  victories  over 
his  own  spirit  by  the  simple  rule  never  to  speak  or  act  when  provoked  until  he  had 
repeated  slowly  the  Roman  alphabet.  We  are  to  beware  of  having  any  prejudice 
against  our  neighbour.  We  are  to  think  of  him  kindly,  and  speak  of  him  and  to 
him  kindly,  no  matter  what  he  thinks  of  us,  or  how  he  speaks  of  us  or  to  us,  or 
even  if  he  will  not  speak  to  us  at  all.  All  private  grudges  and  neighbourhood  feuds, 
if  they  stand  at  all,  must  stand  under  the  frowning  face  of  this  Commandment. 
Ueither  can  cool  indifference  to  our  neighbour's  welfare  find  any  place  in  our  hearts 
'nnder  this  law  of  God.  In  the  social  arrangements  of  the  day  lives  are  often  placed 
in  the  charge  of  others.  Those  having  this  charge  should  pay  special  attention  to 
^this  Commandment.  The  owner  of  a  tenement  house,  if  he  regards  this  Command- 
ment at  all,  will  seek  the  health,  comfort,  and  welfare  of  his  tenants.  Builders  of 
roads,  bridges,  and  houses,  if  they  regard  this  Commandment  at  all,  will  seek  not 
only  good  wages,  but  mainly  to  do  good  work,  that  men's  lives  may  be  safe.  This 
Commandment  directs  us  to  be  good  citizens  and  to  seek  the  health  and  welfare  of  all 
the  members  of  the  community  where  we  dwell.  The  sanitary  arrangements  of  city, 
town,  and  village,  are  commended  to  our  attention.  We  may  not  neglect  them  without 
guilt.  The  sacredness  of  life  enjoined  in  the  Commandment  covers  not  merely  the 
bodily  life,  it  lies  specially  in  our  spiritual  life,  in  the  image  of  God.  Is  life  worth 
living  ?  asks  the  worldly  philosopher,  as  if  there  was  some  doubt  about  it.  Worth 
living  ?  Surely  it  is,  since  our  spiritual  life  though  fallen  may  be  brought  into  a  shape 
worthy  of  God  our  Father.  Herein  we  see  the  highest  realm  of  this  Commandment, 
the  true  sacredness  of  life.  We  are  carefully  to  avoid  in  ourselves  and  in  our  in- 
fluence all  those  things  which  would  have  any  tendency  to  destroy  the  soul.  {F.  S. 
Schenck.)  Anger  leading  to  murder  : — I  remember  when  I  was  a  boy  at  school  a 
case  of  this  kind  occurred.  One  of  the  scholars,  whose  name  was  James,  had  a 
terrible  temper.  The  least  thing  that  displeased  him  would  throw  him  into  a  rage, 
and  then  he  would  act  in  the  most  violent  manner.  He  never  seemed  to  feel  how 
dreadfully  wicked  it  was,  or  to  be  afraid  of  the  consequences  that  might  follow  from 
it.  One  day,  during  recess,  he  stretched  himself  on  a  bench  to  take  a  nap.  One 
of  the  boys  thought  he  would  have  a  little  fun  with  James.  He  took  a  feather,  and 
leaned  over  the  bench,  and  began  to  tickle  him  in  the  ear.  James  shook  his  head, 
and  cried  "  Quit  that."  Presently  he  felt  the  feather  again.  "  You  quit  that,  I  say  !  " 
he  exclaimed,  very  angrily.  The  boy  very  thoughtlessly  went  on  with  his  mischief. 
Then  James  sprang  from  the  bench,  seized  a  pair  of  compasses  lying  on  the  desk 
near  him,  and  threw  them  at  the  boy  with  all  his  might.  They  struck  him  on  the 
side  of  the  head.  They  entered  his  brain.  He  fell  down,  never  spoke  again,  and 
was  carried  home  a  corpse.  How  dreadful  this  was  !  Here  was  the  young  serpent 
that  had  been  allowed  to  nestle  in  this  boy's  heart  springing  up  suddenly  to  its  full 
growth,  and  making  a  murderer  of  him.  Oh,  watch  against  these  young  serpents  ! 
(R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Refusing  to  fight  a  duel: — Colonel  Gardiner,  having  received 
a  challenge  to  fight  a  duel,  made  the  following  truly  noble  and  Christian  reply :  "  I 
fear  sinning,  though  you  kno-w,  sir,  I  do  not  fear  fighting  "  ;  thus  showing  his  con- 
viction of  a  fact  too  often  forgotten,  that  the  most  impressive  manifestation  of 
courage  is  to  "  obey  God  rather  than  man." 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

Ver.  14.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery. — The  Seventh  Commandment: — I. 
What  it  fokbids.  1.  Unchastity  in  thought  and  desire  (Matt.  v.  28 ;  Prov.  vi.  18). 
2.  Unchastity  ia  conversation  (Eph.  v.  3,  4).  3.  Sensuality  in  all  its  forms  and 
actions.  II.  What  it  requires.  1.  To  avoid  temptation,  by  carefully  keeping  the 
heart  (Prov.  iv.  23).  2.  To  cherish  a  regard  for  God  and  His  will  (Prov.  v.  21).  3. 
To  keep  the  body  pure  as  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  17,  18).  4.  To 
seek  lawful  wedlock  when  chastity  cannot  otherwise  be  retained  (1  Cor.  vii.  2).  5. 
To  honour  the  estate  of  matrimony  (Heb.  xiii.  4).  III.  Its  penalties.  1.  It 
consumes  the  body  and  destroys  the  foul  (Prov.  v.  11 ;  vi.  32).  2.  It  destroys  a 
man's  name  and  family  (Prov.  vi.  33).  3.  It  involves  others  in  guilt.  4.  It  breaks 
down  moral  principles,  and  does  violence  to  all  the  virtues.  5.  It  incurs  the 
displeasure  of  God.  He  has  denounced  this  sin  in  almost  every  book  of  the  Bible. 
G.  It  excludes  from  heaven,  unless  the  sin  be  repented  of  and,  by  the  help  of  God, 
forsaken  (Eph.  v.  5).  7.  It  will  be  visited  by  condign  punishment  (Heb.  xiii.  4  with 
X.  31).  (L,  O.  Thompson.)  The  Seventh  Commandment : — The  faithful  observance  of 
the  matrimonial  contract  is  guarded  by  this  Commandment.  Marriage  holds  both 
socially  and  morally  a  quite  exceptional  rank  among  contracts.  I,  Glance  for  a 
moment  at  its  social  consequences,  which  are  those  that  bulk  most  largely  in  the 
view  of  a  civil  legislator.  No  community  can  be  more  orderly,  healthy,  rich,  or  happy, 
than  the  sum  of  the  families  which  compose  it.  II.  The  moral  aspects  of  marriage, 
however,  are  those  which  in  this  place  deserve  the  most  careful  attention.  1.  The  law 
of  marriage  is  a  restraint  upon  the  relations  of  the  sexes  which  at  first  sight  mayappear 
arbitrary  or  conventional.  It  is  less  so  than  it  looks.  Monogamy  is  suggested  by  the 
proportion  which  exists  between  males  and  females  in  the  population,  and  is  found 
to  be  conducive  both  to  individual  well-being  and  to  the  growth  of  society.  Mani- 
festly, therefore,  it  has  its  roots  in  the  nature  of  man  himself,  and  is  in  harmony 
with  the  best  conditions  of  his  being.  Still,  it  is  a  restraint ;  and  a  restraint 
imposed  just  where  the  animal  nature  of  man  is  most  pronounced  and  his  personal 
passions  are  most  head-strong.  The  limitations  of  the  marriage-bond  constitute 
only  a  single  department  (though  an  important  one)  of  that  old-fashioned  and  manly 
virtue  called  "  temperance,"  or  the  due  control  of  oneself.  It  is  a  virtue  which  has 
to  be  learned  in  youth  ;  and  in  learning  it  we  need  to  bear  in  remembrance  what  St. 
Peter  says,  that  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are  the  peculiar  foes  of  the  spiritual  life  ;  its 
incessant  and  its  mortal  foes  :  "  Beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  sojournerSrand  pilgrims, 
JiQ~  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul."_J2.  There  is  jr7 
[second  aspect  of  this  law  of  marriage  to  which  I  must  venture  to  invite  your  ' 
I  attention.  I  have  said  that  it  testifies  to  the  need  for  restraint  upon  the  pbysical 
'  appetites.  It  shows  no  less  the  extreme  consequence  of  associating  the  strongest 
and  most  necessary  of  all  appetites  with  a  whole  cluster  of  higher  moral  and  social 
affections  before  it  can  be  worthy  of  human  beings.  The  union  of  true  husband 
and  wife  in  holy  wedlock  involves  a  crowd  of  complex  elements,  many  of  which 
touch  the  spiritual  nature.  It  assumes  a  "  marriage  of  true  minds  "  ;  for  that  is 
not  an  ideal  marriage  which  is  not  first  a  union  of  souls  before  the  "  twain  become 
one  flesh."  It  reposes  upon  mutual  esteem.  It  presupposes  common  tastes  and 
establishes  a  most  perfect  system  of  common  interests.  It  is,  to  begin  with,  a 
friendship,  although  the  closest  of  all  friendships.  It  leads  to  a  noble  dependence 
of  weakness  upon  strength,  and  a  chivalrous  guardianship  of  strength  over  weakness. 
It  asks  for  a  self-renunciation  on  the  part  of  each  to  the  welfare  of  the  other,  which 
is  the  very  perfection  of  disinterested  love.  It  engages  principle  and  honour  to 
sustain  mere  inclination,  and  raises  what  would  otherwise  be  the  passion  of  an  hour 
I  into  a  i^ermanent  devotion.  By  means  of  all  this,  the  nobler  social  and  moral 
I  emotions  are  enlisted  in  the  service  of  "  love,"  so  that  there  emerges  that  lofty  / 
J  ideal  of  chaste  wedded  affection  in  which  lies  the  chief  poetry  of  common  livg£_J 
'  (j.'O.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  Seventh  Commandment : — Leighton,  in  explaining  this 
precept,  saj  s,  I  purpose  not  to  reckon  up  particularly  the  several  sorts  and  degrees 
of  sin  here  forbidden,  for  chastity  is  a  delicate,  tender  grace,  and  can  scarcely 
endure  the  much  naming  of  itself,  far  less  of  those  things  that  are  so  contrary  to  it. 
If  you  would  be  freed  from  the  danger  and  importunity  of  this  evil,  make  use  of 
these  usual  and  very  useful  rules  :  1.  Be  sober  and  temperate  in  diet :  withdraw 
fuel.  2.  Be  modest  and  circumspect  in  your  carriage.  Guard  your  ears  and  eyes, 
and  watch  over  all  your  deportment.  Beware  of  undue  and  dangerous  familiarities 
with  any,  upon  what  pretence  soever.  3.  Be  choice  in  your  society,  for  there  is 
much  in  that.  4.  In  general  flee  all  occasions  and  incentives  to  uncleanness.  But 
the  solid  cure  must  begin  within,  otherwise  all  outward  remedies  will  fail.     Then, 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  S83 

(1)  Seek  a  total  entire  change  of  heart  and  to  find  the  sanctifying  Spirit  of  grace 
within  YOU.  (2)  Labour  to  have  the  heart  possessed  with  a  deep  apprehension  of 
the  holiness  and  purity  of  God,  and  then  of  His  presence  and  eye  upon  all  your 
actions  and  thoughts.  (3)  Acquaint  yourselves  with  spiritual  enjoyments.  (4) 
Increase  in  the  love  of  Christ.  Alas !  the  misery  which  the  sin  here  forbidden 
produces!  The  Seventh  Commandment: — I.  God  forbids  unfaithfulness  towards 
HUSBAND  or  WIFE.  Any  previous  step  in  course  of  infamy — any  kind  of  incentive  to 
impurity.  Indecent  conversation.  Immodesty  in  dress.  Evil  thoughts.  II. 
Rules  favourable  to  moral  chastity.  1.  Mortify  any  evil  propensity.  2.  Strengthen 
spirituality  of  mind.  3.  Seek  society  and  friendship  of  good  and  holy.  4.  Fill  up 
time  with  wholesome  and  right  employment.  5.  Observe  temperance  in  all  things 
— eating,  sleeping,  drinking.  (W.  B.Noel,  31. A.)  The  Seventh  Commandment : — I. 
The  essential  unity  of  man  and  woman.  1.  Community.  Woman  is  man's  com- 
plement, his  essential  peer,  his  alter  ego,  his  second  self  ;  constituting  with  him  the 
genus  mankind,  or  Homo.  2.  Diversity,  Man  and  woman  are  the  two  poles  of  the 
sphere  of  mankind— the  one  implying  the  other.  Like  the  stars,  they  differ  in  their 
glory.  II.  Marriage  a  Divine  institution.  A  constituent  elemental  fact  of 
humanity.  III.  The  marriage  relation  takes  precedence  of  every  other  human 
relation  (Gen.  ii.  24).  None  but  the  Lord  who  joins,  can  disjoin.  "  Thou 
shalt  not  commit  adultery."  It  is  the  Divine  Lawgiver's  ordinance,  guarding 
the  chastity  of  marriage,  the  sanctity  of  home,  the  blessedness  of  the  house- 
hold, the  preservation  of  society,  the  upbuilding  of  mankind.  Let  earth's 
civic  authorities,  then,  take  exceeding  care  that  they  legislate  and  administer 
in  this  supreme  matter  of  marriage  according  to  the  Divine  oracle.  Would  God 
they  all  conceived  it  according  to  the  standard  and  in  the  spirit  of  the  Nazarine 
Teacher !  And  so  we  pass  from  the  Seventh  Commandment  itself  to  the  Divine 
Man's  exposition  of  it  (Matt.  v.  27-32).  Here  at  least  is  freshness  of  moral  state- 
ment, radiant  in  beauties  of  holiness,  born  from  the  morning,  sparkling  with  the 
dew  of  pei-petual  youth.  Our  topic,  I  must  sorrowfully  add,  is  pertinent  to  our 
age  and  land.  Loose  notions  touching  marriage,  divorce,  re-marriage,  are  painfully, 
alarmingly  prevalent.  We  need  not  go  so  far  as  Utah  to  find  Mormons,  theoretical 
and  practical.  Let  it  be  thundered  from  the  pulpit,  from  the  academy,  from  the 
forum,  that  divorce  (absolute  divorce,  allowing  re-marriage),  saving  for  one  solitary 
cause,  is  a  threefold  crime — a  crime  against  home,  a  crime  against  society,  a  crime 
against  God.  And  now  let  us  ponder  the  Divine  Man's  prescription  for  the 
cure  of  unchastity :  "  If  thy  right  eye  causeth  thee  to  stumble,  pluck  it  out,  and 
cast  it  from  thee  :  and  if  thy  right  hand  causeth  thee  to  stumble,  cut  it  off, 
and  cast  it  from  thee."  No  ;  Christ's  asceticism  is  not  asceticism  for  its  own 
sake,  but  asceticism  for  the  sake  of  the  moral  discipline  and  rectification  of 
character.  Enough  that  I  simply  remind  you  that  whatever  fosters  or  suggests 
unchaste  desire  or  thought — whether  it  be  painting  or  statuary,  opera  or  dance, 
romance  or  song,  ambiguous  allusion  or  the  figment  of  one's  own  imagination,  as 
in  the  prophet  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  chambers  of  imagery — it  must  be  instantly, 
remorselessly,    everlastingly    renounced.      (G.    D.    Boardman.)  The    Seventh 

Commandment : — I.  The  duties  required.  1.  The  preservation  of  our  own 
chastity  and  purity.  There  is  a  twofold  chastity.  (1)  In  single  life  ;  when  it  is  led 
in  purity,  it  is  like  the  angelical;  when  in  impurity,  it  is  devilish.  (2)  There  is 
conjugal  chastity,  when  married  persens  keep  themselves  witbin  the  bounds  of  the 
law  of  that  state.  This  lies  in  two  things,  {a)  With  respect  to  all  others,  keeping 
thenaselves  pure  and  uncorrupted.  (b)  With  respect  to  one  another,  keeping 
themselvts  witbin  the  bounds  of  Christian  sobriety  and  moderation.  2.  This 
command  requires  us  to  preserve  the  chastity  of  others,  and  that  so  far  as  we  can, 
in  their  hearts,  lips,  and  lives.  Our  duty  in  this  point  may  be  reduced  to  these  two 
heads.  (1)  That  we  may  do  nothing  which  may  ensnare  others.  For  whosoever 
lays  the  snare  is  pailuet  lU  IIjh  siu  iLal  comes  Dy  it^  (2)  That  we  do  everything 
incumbent  on  us  to  preserve  the  chastity  of  others,  in  heart,  speech,  aud  behaviour. 
Let  married  persons  iive  together  in  due  love  and  aftection  to  one  another: " Tjet 
each  one  be  an  example  of  purity  to  others.  Let  those  whom  ye  see  in  danger  be 
rescued  by  all  means,  whether  by  force  or  persuasion,  as  the  circumstances  require. 
And  let  none  bring  others'  guilt  on  their  own  heads,  by  being  silent  when  they  see 
the  smoke,  till  the  flame  rise  and  discover  itself.  Let  parents  and  masters  do  what 
they  can  to  prevent  tne  ruin  of  their  children  and  servants,  by  rebuking  any 
hghtness  about  them,  exhorting  them,  and  praying  for  them  ;  keeping  them  out  of 
ill  comp:^ny,  not  suffering  them  to  be  idle  or  vague,  and  seasonably  disposing  of 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xr, 

children  in  marriage.  II.  The  sins  forbidden.  1.  Uncleanness  in  heart,  all 
speciilative  filthiness,  unclean  imaginations,  thoughts,  purposes,  and  affections, 
though  people  do  not  intend  to  pursue  them  to  the  gross  act  (Matt.  v.  28).  2. 
Uncleanness  in  words,  all  filthy  communications  and  obscene  language  (Eph.  iv.  29). 
3.  Uncleanness  in  actions.  Besides  the  gross  acts,  there  are  others  leading 
thereunto,  which  are  there  also  forbidden.  As,  (1)  Wanton  looks  :  there  are  "  eyes 
full  of  adultery  "  (2  Peter  n.  14) ;  "  wanton  eyes  "  (isa.  iii.  ib).  (2)  Impudent  and 
light  bfliavionr,  and  immnde-^t  gestures  (Isa.  ill.  16) ;  indecent  postures,  conti'&ry 
fj  xeligfon  and  good  manners.  (3)  Luxurious  embraces  and  dalliances.  These  are 
as  61]fl6ke"going  before  ihe  name,  and  were  practised  Dy  the  adulterous  whore  (Prov. 
vii.  13).  I  shall  next  make  some  improvement  of  this  subject.  1.  Let  those  that 
have  fallen  into  the  sin  of  uncleanness,  repent,  and  walk  humbly  all  the  days  o£ 
their  life  under  the  sense  of  it.  2.  Let  those  that  stand  take  beed  lest  they  fall. 
Labour  to  get  your  hearts  possessed  with  a  dread  of  this  sin,  and  watch  against  it, 
especially  ye  that  are  young  people,  seeing  it  is  a  sin  most  incident  to  youth  when 
the  passions  are  most  vigorous  ;  which  yet  may  stick  fast  with  the  blue  marks  of 
God's  displeasure  upon  you  when  you  come  to  age.  For  motives,  consider — (1)  It  is 
not  only  a  Bin,  but  ordinarily,  if  not  always  a  plague  and  punishment  for  other  sins. 
(2)  It  is  a  sin  that  very  few  ever  get  grace  to  repent  of.  It  stupefies  the  conscience, 
and  wastes  all  sense  of  sin  from  it  (Hos.  iv.  11).  (3)  It  dishonours  and  debases 
the  body  (1  Cor  vi.  18).  (4)  It  leaves  an  indelible  stain  upon  their  reputation ; 
their  honour  is  sunk,  and  there  is  no  recovering  of  it  (Prov.  vi.  33).  (5)  Poverty 
and  want  oft-times  follow  it.  It  natively  tends  to  poverty  (Prov.  v.  10),  and  there 
is  a  secret  curse  of  that  nature  that  often  accompanies  it  (Prov.  vi.  20).  (G)  It  is 
ruining  to  the  soul  (Prov.  vi.  32).  "He  that  doth  it" — commit  adultery  with  a 
woman — "  destroyeth  his  own  soul."  It  ruins  it  here,  in  bo  far  as  it  defiles  the 
conscience,  fetters  the  affections,  blinds  the  mind,  utterly  unfits  for  communion 
with  God,  till  the  guilt  be  washed  off  by  the  application  of  Christ's  blood,  after  a 
frightful  awakening  of  the  conscience.  And  if  they  do  not  repent  of  this  sin,  it  will 
destroy  the  soul  for  ever.  Let  these  Scriptures  imprint  a  horror  of  it  on  the  minds 
of  all  (Heb.  xiii.  4;  1  Cor.  vi.  9  ;  Gal.  v.  19;  Rev.  xxi.  8).  {T.  Boston,  D.D.)  The 
Seventh  Commandment : — I.  That  which  is  here  literally  and  expressly  fokbidden 
is — 1.  That  detestable  and  loathsome  sin  of  adultery.  There  are  two  things  in  this 
sin  of  adultery  that  make  it  so  exceeding  heinous.  (1)  The  luxury  and  incon- 
tinency  of  it :  in  letting  loose  the  reins  to  a  brutish  concupiscence;  and  \ielding  up 
the  body  to  pollution  and  the  soul  to  damnation.  (2)  The  injustice  of  it :  being  a 
deceit  of  the  highest  and  most  injurious  nature  that  can  be.  2.  This  Command- 
ment forbids  the  uncleanness  of  fornication.  Which,  properly,  is  the  sin 
committed  betwixt  two  single  persons.  And,  though  it  hath  not  some  aggravations 
that  belong  to  the  other,  yet  it  is  an  abominable  sin  in  the  sight  of  God  (see  1  Cor. 
vi.  9, 10 ;  Rev.  xxii.  15  ;  Gal.  v.  19  ;  Col.  iii.  5).  3.  Here,  likewise,  are  forbidden  all 
incestuous  mixtures ;  or  uncleanness  between  those  who  are  related  to  each  other 
within  the  degrees  of  kindred  specified  (Lev.  xviii.  6-18).  4.  Here  is  likewise 
forbidden  polygamy,  or  a  taking  a  wife  to  her  sister  ;  that  is,  to  another  (Lev.  xviii. 
18).  5.  Here  also  are  foi-bidden  all  those  monsters  of  unnatural  lust,  and  those 
prodigies  of  villainy  and  filthiness,  which  are  not  fit  to  be  named  among  men  ;  but 
thought  fit  to  be  punished  upon  beasts  themselves  :  as  ye  may  i-ead  (Lev.  xx.  15, 
16,  xviii.  22,  23).  6.  All  those  things  tbat  may  be  incentives  to  last  and 
add  fuel  to  this  fire  are  likewise  iorbidden  in  this  Command.  7.  Because  this  law 
is  apifitnal.  therefore  it  not  only  forbids  the  gross  outward  acts  of  filthiness  but  the 
inward  uncleanness  of  the  heart;  all  lustful  contemplations,  and  ideas,  and  evil 
"concupiscences,  ii.  J  he  greatness  and  heinous  nature  of  this  sin  appears — 1, 
In  that  it  is  a  sin  which  murders  two  80uls  at  once,  and,  therefore,  the  most 
uncharitable  sin  in  the  world.  2.  This  is  the  most  degrading  sin  of  all  others, 
3.  This  is  a  sin  that  doth,  most  of  all  others,  obscure  and  extinguish  the 
light  of.  a  man's  natural  reason  and  understanding.  4.  This  is  a  sin  justly 
the  most  infamous  and  scandalous  amongst  men  (Prov.  vi.  32,  33).  5.  Consider, 
that  this  sin  of  uncleanness  is  a  kind  of  sacrilege;  a  converting  of  that 
which  is  sacred  and  dedicated  unto  a  profane  use.  6.  Consider,  if  aU  these 
things  will  not  prevail,  the  dreadful  punishment  that  God  threatens  to  inflict 
upon  all  who  are  guilty  of  this  sin.  Yea,  He  speaks  of  it  as  a  sin  that  Ha 
can  hardly  be  persuaded  to  pardon ;  a  sin  that  puzzles  infinite  mercy  to  forgive 
(Jer.  V.  7,  8,  9).  And,  indeed,  God  doth  often,  in  this  life,  visit  this  sin  :  sometimes, 
by  filling  their  loins  with  strange  and  loathsome  diseases  (Prov.  vi.  26),  sometimes, 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODtJS.  385 

by  reducing  them  to  extreme  beggary ;  for  this  sin,  as  Job  speaks,  is  a  fire  that 
consumeth  to  destruction,  and  would  root  out  all  his  increase.  Yea,  this  very  sin  is 
so  great  a  punishment  for  itself  that  the  Wise  Man  tells  us  (Prov.  xxii.  14)  that 
those  whom  God  hates  shall  fall  into  it.  III.  Let  me  now  give  you  some 
CAUTIONARY  RULES  AND  DIRECTIONS,  by  obscrving  of  which  you  may  be  preserved 
from  it.  1.  Be  sure  that  you  keep  a  narrow  watch  over  your  senses.  For  those 
are  the  sluices  which,  inste;id  of  letting  in  pleasant  streams  to  refresh,  do  commonly 
let  in  nothing  but  mud  to  pollute  tlie  soul.  2.  Addict  thyself  to  sobriety  and 
temperance ;  and,  by  these,  beat  down  thy  body  and  keep  it  in  subjection  to  thy 
reason  and  religion.  3.  Continually  exercise  thyself  in  some  honest  and  lawful 
employment.  Lust  grows  active  when  we  grow  idle.  4.  Be  earnest  and  frequent 
in  prayer:  and,  if  thou  sometimes  joinest  fasting  with  thy  prayers,  they  will  ba 
shot  up  to  heaven  with  a  cleaner  strength.  For  this  sin  of  uncleanness  is  one  of 
those  devils  that  goes  not  out  but  by  fasting  and  prayer.  God  is  a  God  of  purity. 
Instantly  beg  of  Him,  that  He  would  send  down  His  pure  and  chaste  Spirit  into  thy 
heart,  to  cleanse  thy  thoughts  and  thy  affections  from  all  unclean  desires.  {Bp.  E. 
Hopkins.)  The  Seventh  Commandment : — I.  Something  isiplied — that  the  ordinance 
of  marriage  should  be  observed  ;  "  let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  let  every 
woman  have  her  own  husband,"  "  marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  and  the  bed  un- 
defiled."  Marriage  is  a  type  and  resemblance  of  the  mystical  union  between  Christ 
and  His  Church.  Special  duties  belonging  to  marriage  are  love  and  fidelity.  1. 
Love.  Love  is  the  marriage  of  the  affections.  2.  Fidelity.  Among  the  Eomans, 
on  the  day  of  marriage,  the  woman  presented  to  her  husband  fire  and  water  :  fire 
refines  metal,  water  cleanseth ;  hereby  signifying,  that  she  would  live  with  her 
husband  in  chastity  and  sincerity.  II.  Something  rnnRTniw^jj — the  infecting  our- 
selves with  bodily  pollution  and  uncleanness  :  "  thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery." 
The  fountain  of  this  sin  is  lust.  Siuce  the  fall,  holy  love  is  degenerated  to  lust. 
Lust  is  the  fever  of  the  sou).  There  is  a  twofold  adultery:  1.  Mental; 
"  whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adultery 
with  her  already  in  his  heart."  As  a  man  may  die  of  an  inward  bleeding, 
so  he  may  be  damned  for  the  inward  boilings  of  lust,  if  they  be  not  morti- 
fied. 2.  Corporal  adultery,  when  sin  hath  conceived,  and  brought  forth  in 
the  act.  Wherein  appears  the  heinousness  of  this  sin  of  adultery  ?  1.  In  that 
adultery  is  the  breach  of  the  marriage  oath.  2.  The  heinousness  of  adultery  lies  in 
this,  that  it  is  such  a  high  dishonour  done  to  God.  3.  The  heinousness  of 
adultery  lies  in  this,  that  it  is  committed  with  mature  deliberation.  First,  there  is 
the  contriving  the  sin  in  the  mind,  then  consent  in  the  will,  and  then  the  sin  is 
put  forth  in  act.  To  sin  against  the  light  of  nature,  and  to  sin  deliberately,  is  like 
'the  dye  to  the  wool,  it  gives  sin  a  tincture,  and  dyes  it  of  a  crimson  colour.  4. 
That  which  makes  adultery  so  heinous  is,  that  it  is  a  sin  after  remedy.  God  hath 
provided  a  remedy  to  prevent  this  sin  ;  "  to  avoid  fornication,  let  every  man  have 
his  own  wife."  Therefore  after  this  remedy  prescribed,  to  be  guilty  of  fornication 
or  adultery,  is  inexcusable ;  it  is  like  a  rich  thief,  that  steals  when  he  hath  no  need. 
It  is  matter  of  lamentation  to  see  this  Commandment  so  slighted  and  violated 
among  us.  Now,  that  I  may  deter  you  from  adultery,  let  me  show  you  the  great 
•evil  of  it.  First,  it  is  a  thievish  sin.  Adultery  is  the  highest  sort  of  theft;  the 
adulterer  steals  from  his  neighbour  that  which  is  more  than  his  goods  and  estate, 
he  steals  away  his  wife  from  him,  "  who  is  flesh  of  his  flesh."  Secondly,  adultery 
clebaseth  a  person ;  it  makes  him  resemble  the  beasts ;  therefore  the  adulterer  is 
described  like  a  horse  neighing:  "every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbour's  wife." 
Nay,  this  is  worse  than  brutish ;  for  some  creatures  that  are  void  of  reason,  yet,  by 
the  instinct  of  nature,  obierve  a  kind  of  decorum  of  chastity.  The  turtle-dove  is  a 
chaste  creature,  and  keeps  to  its  mate  ;  the  stork,  wherever  he  flies,  comes  into  no 
nest  but  his  own.  Naturalists  wi-ite,  it  a  stork,  leaving  his  own  mate,  joineth  with 
any  other,  all  the  rest  of  the  storks  fall  upon  him  and  pull  his  feathers  from  him. 
Adultery  is  worse  than  brutish,  it  degrades  a  person  of  his  honour.  Thirdly, 
adultery  doth  pollute  and  befilthy  a  person.  The  body  of  a  harlot  is  a  walking 
dunghill,  and  her  soul'  a  lesser  hell.  Fourthly,  adultery  is  destructive  to  the  body. 
Uncleanness  turns  the  body  into  a  hospital,  it  wastes  the  radical  moisture,  rots  the 
skull,  eats  the  beauty  of  the  face.  As  the  flame  wastes  the  candle,  so  the  fire  of 
lust  consumes  the  bones.  Fifthly,  adultery  is  a  purgatory  to  the  purse  :  as  it 
wastes  the  body,  so  the  estate,  by  means  of  a  whorish  woman  a  man  is  brought 
to  a  piece  of  bread.  Sixthly,  adultery  blots  and  eclipseth  the  name  ;  "  whoso  com- 
mitteth  adultery  with  a  woman,  a  wound  and  dishonour  shall  he  get,  and  btis^ 

25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

reproach  shall  not  be  wiped  away."  Some  while  they  get  wounds,  get  honour. 
The  soldier's  wounds  are  full  of  honour  ;  the  martyr's  wounds  for  Christ  are  full  of 
honour;  these  get  honour  while  they  get  wounds:  but  the  adulterer  gets  wounds 
in  his  name,  but  no  honour  :  "his  reproach  shall  not  be  wiped  away."  Seventhly, 
this  sin  doth  much  eclipse  the  light  of  reason,  it  steals  away  the  understanding,  it 
stupefies  the  heart  ;  "  whoredom  takes  away  the  heart."  It  eats  out  all  heart  for 
good.  Solomon  besotted  himself  with  women,  and  they  enticed  him  to  idolatry. 
Eighthly,  this  sin  of  adultery  ushers  in  temporal  judgments.  This  sin,  like  a 
scorpion,  carries  a  sting  in  the  tail  of  it.  The  adultery  of  Paris  and  Helena,  a 
beautiful  strumpet,  ended  in  the  ruin  of  Troy,  and  was  the  death  both  of  Paris  and 
Helena.  "  Jealousy  is  the  rage  of  a  man  "  ;  and  the  adulterer  is  oft  killed  in  the 
act  of  his  sin.  Ninthly,  adultery,  without  repentance,  damns  the  soul.  How  may 
we  abstain  from  this  sin  of  adultery  ?  I  shall  lay  down  some  directions,  by  way  of 
antidote,  to  keep  you  from  being  infected  with  this  sin.  1.  Come  not  into  the 
company  of  a  whorish  woman;  avoid  her  house,  as  a  seaman  doth  a  rock  ;  "come 
not  near  the  door  of  her  house."  2.  Look  to  your  eyes.  3.  Look  to  your  lips.  4. 
Look  in  a  special  manner  to  your  heart.  5.  Look  to  your  attire.  A  wanton  dress 
is  a  provocation  to  lust.  6.  Take  heed  of  evil  company.  7.  Beware  of  going  to 
plays.  A  play-house  is  oft  the  preface  to  a  whore-house.  8.  Take  heed  of  mixed 
dancing.  Dances  draw  the  heart  to  folly  by  wanton  gestures,  by  unchaste  touches, 
by  lustful  looks.  9.  Take  heed  of  lascivious  books  and  pictures.  10.  Take  heed  of 
excess  in  diet.  The  flesh  pampered  is  apt  to  rebel.  11.  Take  heed  of  idleness. 
When  a  man  is  out  of  a  calling,  now  he  is  fit  to  receive  any  temptation.  12.  To 
avoid  fornication  and  adultery  let  every  man  have  a  chaste,  entire  love  to  his  own 
wife.  Ttisr]|pt  the  having  a  wife,  but  the  lovinga  wife  makes  a  man  live  chastely.  He 
who  loves  his  wife,  whom  Solomon  calls  his  fountain,  will  not  go  abruild  Lo  drink  of 
muddy,  poisoned  waters.  13.  Labour  to  get  the  fear  of  God  into  your  hearts,  "by 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil."  As  the  banks  keep  out  the  water,  so 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  keeps  out  uncleanness.  Such  as  want  the  fear  of  God,  want 
the  bridle  that  should  check  them  from  sin.  14.  Set  a  delight  in  the  Word  of  God. 
"  Let  the  Scriptures  be  my  chaste  delights."  The  reason  why  persons  seek  after 
unchaste,  sintul  pleasures  is  because  they  have  no  better.  He  that  hath  once 
tasted  Christ  in  a  promise,  is  ravished  with  delight ;  and  how  would  he  scorn  a 
motion  to  sin  1  15.  If  you  would  abstain  from  adultery,  use  serious  consideration. 
Consider,  (1)  God  sees  thee  in  the  act  of  sin.  (2)  Few  that  are  entangled  in  the 
sin  of  adultery,  recover  out  of  the  snare;  "none  that  go  to  her  return  again." 
Soft  pleasures  harden  the  heart.  (8)  Consider  what  the  Scripture  saith,  that  it 
may  lay  a  bar  in  the  way  to  this  sin,  "  I  will  be  a  swift  witness  against  adulterers." 
(4)  Consider  the  sad  farewell  this  sin  of  adultery  leaves :  it  leaves  a  hell  in  the 
conscience  (Prov.  v.  3,  4).  16.  Pray  against  tliis  sin.  It  the  body  must  be  kept 
pure  from  defilement,  much  more  the  soul  of  a  Christian  must  be  kept  pure.  {T. 
Watson.)  The  laic  of  chantity  : — I.  The  law  of  chastity  is  that  which  kfgdlates 
THE  iNTERCouitSE  OF  THE  SEXES,  whether  in  wedlock  or  other  relations.  1.  Marriage 
is  the  union  of  one  man  with  one  woman  until  death  do  them  part.  (1)  A  mutual 
compact.  (2)  A  civil  contract.  (3)  A  vital  and  spiritual  union.  (4)  A  Divine 
institution.  2.  The  sacredness  of  the  marriage  contract  as  between  one  man  and 
one  woman  was  among  the  first  things  to  be  sullied  by  the  fall,  and  through  the 
lingering  progress  of  many  centuries  has  but  slowly  recovered.  II.  The  essential 
PRINCIPLE  OF  THIS  LAW  OF  CHASTITY.  1.  The  man  and  the  woman  are  the  two  halves 
of  God's  image.  Not  the  masculine  qualities  alone,  but  also  the  feminine;  not 
man's  strength  alone  and  vigour,  but  also  woman's  beauty  and  gentleness,  are 
reflections  of  what,  in  the  archetype,  is  found  in  God  alone.  2.  In  this  principle 
that  the  sexes  are  complemental  to  each  other,  together  making  one  reflection  of 
the  image  of  God,  we  must  learn  that  as  a  rule  marriage  is  the  appointed  instrument 
for  our  highest  moral  development.  When  souls  are  wedded,  when  husband  and 
wife  alike  are  baptized  into  the  Divine  secret  of  utter  self-abnegation,  so  that  every 
drudgery  is  glorified,  and  every  sacrifice  made  sweet,  earth  has  no  fairer  picture 
of  celestial  joys.  III.  The  leading  violations  of  the  law  of  chastity.  (W.J. 
Woods,  B.A.)  The  scope  of  the  Seventh  Commandment : — The  Jewish  tradition  in 
the  time  of  our  Lord  taught  that  it  forbad  simply  the  act  of  adultery.  More,  says 
Christ  (Matt.  v.  27,  28),  it  forbids  all  impure  thoughts  and  desires.  Let  us  be  as 
practical  as  possible  about  guarding  against  the  beginnings  of  this  sin.  We  who 
are  parents  should  guard  against  its  beginning  in  our  children.  We  all  agree  that 
ignorance  is  not  the  mother  of  devotion,  and  yet  act  as  if  ignorance  was  the  mother 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  387 

of  purity.    Knowledge  is  the  basis  of  true  religion,  and  the  safeguard  of  virtue. 
Our  children  will  learn  concerning  the  new-born  passions  which  fire  their  imagina- 
tion, either  from  impure  companions  or  from  you,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  tremendous 
importance  whether  they  learn  purely  or  impurely.     These  new-born  passions  Lave 
a  wise  purpose  in  the  will  of  God,  and  governed  by  His  law  they  become  the  source 
of  the  purest  and  richest  blessings.     They  are  as  God's  gift  of  fire  to  us.     Controlled, 
it  makes  our  firesides  places  of  comfort  and  clieer ;  uncontrolled,  it  consumes  our 
homes  and  leaves  us  miserable  wanderers  over  a  wintry  waste.     They  are,  like  fire, 
excellent  servants  but  terrible  masters.     It  is  well  to  know  their  nature  and  God's 
law  for  their  control.    We  will  all  do  well,  and  especially  the  young,  to  cultivate 
a  taste  for  purity,  so  keen  and  sensitive  that  it  will  instinctively  turn  from  the  sugges- 
tion of  impurity  with  loathing.  We  can  do  this  in  selecting  our  reading,  and  there  is 
much  need  of  it.     There  are  many  novels  and  poems  of  insinuating  vice  and  sugges- 
tive impurity.     It  is  wise  to  let  our  novel-reading  be  a  very  small  jjroportion  of  the 
whole,  simply  for  needed  recreation,  and  then  only  the  very  best,  of  noble  characters 
and  heroic  deeds  ;   and  our  poetry,  of  fair  ideals  and  beautiful  scenes.     We  should 
cultivate  the  taste  for  purity  in  the  choice  of  our  companionsbip.  Let  our  acquaint- 
anceship even,  as  far  as  it  is  a  matter  of  our  choice,  be  of  those  whose  delight  is  in 
pure  thinking  and  feeling,  in  clean  speaking  and  living;  and  let  our  friendship, 
which  is  altogether  a  matter  of  choice,  be  only  with  the  pure.     We  strive  to  have  in 
our  gardens  the  most  beautiful  flowers,  and  the  finest  flavoured  fruit,  but  we  are 
careful  to  have  no  poison  vine,  however  brilliant  its  co'ours,  trail  over  the  flowers, 
no  poison  berries,  however  tempting  to  the  sight,  hang  side  by  side  with  the  fruit. 
Let  us  take  at  least  as  good  care  of  our  minds  and  hearts  as  we  do  of  our  gardens. 
Now  we  may  approach  the  subject  of  marriage.     A  high  ideal  of  marriage  is  a  great 
incentive  to  purity  of  heart.     If  young  people  anticipate  a  pure  n)arriagc,  every  step 
towards  it  must  be  in  the  way  of  virtue.     If  you  wish  to  wiu  a  pure  white  soul  for 
your  lifelong  companion,  you  will  be  unwilling  to  give  less  than  you  wish  to  receive. 
You  will  keep  your  own  soul  sweet  and  cleiin.     (F.   S.  Scltenck.)        Marriage  : — 
MaiTiage  is  a  Divine  institution  founded  in  the  nature  of  man  as  created  by  God. 
Tbere  is  no  1  g'ler  mode  of  living  for  man  and  woman  than  to  be  husband  and  wife. 
It  is  the  most  miiniate  and  sacred  union  tbat  can  exist  on  earth,  to  which  all  other 
relations  are  to  give  place.     It  is  the  union  of  one  man  and  one  woman  for  hfe, 
whose  duties  are  not  only  to  each  otber  and  to  society,  but  to  God.     The  legitimate 
power  of  the  State  is  simply  to  enforce  the  law  of  God.     If  the  State  attempts  to 
separate  those  whom  God  hath  joined  together,  or  to  unite  those  whom  God  forbids 
to  unite,  her  laws  are  nullities  at  the  bar  of  conscience.     God's  institution  of  mar- 
riage is  the  foundation  of  the  family,  and  the  family  is  the  foundation  of  society, 
the  State,  and  the  Church.     Eome  rose  by  tbe  sanctity  of  her  family  life,  and  fell 
when  it  was  undermined,  as  any  fabric  however  stately  will  fall  when  the  foundation 
is  removed.     Her  rise  was  through  the  courage  of  her  men  and  the  virtue  of  her 
women.     The  perpetual  fire  on  the  altar  of  the  Temple  of  Vesta,  tended  by  a  chosen 
band  of  white-robed  virgins,  was  a  true  symbol  of  her  strength.     But  the  days  of 
degeneration  came,  and  the  fire  flickered  and  went  out.     There  were  no  divorces  in 
the  early  years  of  her  history.     There  were  many  easily  obtained  divorces  in  the 
years   of  her   luxury.     Mutual  consent  was  all  that  was  needed  to  break  the  tie. 
Now  the  Roman  laws  in  their  later  laxness  are  at  the  basis  of  much  of  our  [Ameri- 
can] legislation,  and  have  displaced  the  law  of  God.     We  should  be  aroused  from 
indifference  by  her  experience.     Like  cause  will  produce  like  effect.     Beyond  love 
of  our  country  Christian  sentiment  should  arouse  in  its  strength,  and  impress  God's 
law  of  marriage  upon  the  statute  books  of  our  States.     It  is  enough  to  enshrine 
marriage  in  our  regard,  that  it  is  ordained  by  God  and  governed  by  His  law.     Now 
all  God's  laws  are  for  the  highest  good  of  man,  and  hence  we  find  many  inestimable 
blessings  flowing  from  marriage.     It  confers  happiness  upon  the  married.     True, 
there  are  unhappy  marriages.     Those  who  marry  for  property  will  be  very  apt  to 
find  the  husband  or  wife  an  encumbrance.     Those  who  marry  heedlessly  will  find 
here  as  everywhere  that  heedlessness  brings  disaster.     But  the  great  majority  of 
married  people  are  happier  for  the  marriage,  as  happy  as  their  circumstances  and 
character  will  allow.     Poverty  can  never  have  the  pleasures  of  wealth,  but  can  have 
more  pleasure  in  a  loving  marriage  than  in  single  loneliness.     Love  makes  many  a 
cottage  happy.     Covetousness  can  never  have  the  pleasure  of  generosity,  but  in  a 
loving  marriage  it  finds  dwarfing  influences,  and  so  becomes  a  smaller  barrier  to 
happiness.     Selfishness  in  whatever  form  can  never  have  real  happiness,  but  true 
love  in  marriage  tends  to  destroy  selfishness.     Marriage  is  God's  grand  institution 


888  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

for  cultivating  love  in  human  hearts.  What  would  this  sin-stricken  world  be  with- 
out the  affections  of  the  family  circle,  the  love  of  husband  and  wife,  jiareuts  and 
children,  brothers  and  sisters  ?  What  refining  influences  come  into  this  world  with 
a  little  child  !  How  seltish  and  narrow  and  hard  our  hearts  and  lives  would  become 
were  it  not  for  God's  gift  of  children,  awakening  gratitude  to  Him,  self-saciificing 
love  for  them,  and  all  the  sweet  sympathies  and  tender  patient  ministries  of  the 
home  1  What  more  helpless  than  a  babe  ?  God  in  marriage  secures  the  might  of 
love  for  its  helplessness.  W' hat  more  ignorant  ?  God  secures  teachers  whose 
patience  is  well-nigh  inexhaustible.  Is  there  danger  the  child  may  become  rough 
and  selfish  ?  In  the  required  yielding  to  one  another  of  brothers  and  sisters 
of  different  ages  is  found  an  antidote  of  selfishness,  and  the  cultivation  of  gentle 
manners.  Certainly  the  child  will  need  government.  The  family  is  God's  place 
for  cultivating  obedience  to  law  from  the  earliest  hours  of  childhood.  Submi.-sion 
to  right  authority  is  the  spirit  of  a  good  child,  of  a  good  citizen,  of  a  good  Christian. 
Is  there  any  wonder,  then,  that  God  guards  this  blessed  institution  of  marriage 
against  all  that  would  pollute  and  destroy  it  ?  If  the  frequency  and  earnestness  of 
the  warnings  of  the  Holy  Scripture  against  any  sin  measure  the  tendency  of  man  to 
commit  that  sin,  then  impurity  is  one  of  the  most  fearfully  prevalent  and  dreadful 
sins  of  the  race;  and  so  the  history  of  tLe  past  and  of  to-day  plainly  teiiciies.  Our 
laws  are  lax  here  too.  They  do  not  regard  adultery  and  its  hideous  kindred  as 
crimes.  To  steal  ten  dollars  sends  a  man  to  prison.  To  steal  happiness  and 
•honour  only  gives  a  right  to  sue  for  damages.  And  has  society,  the  State,  no 
interest  in  such  things  ?  Surely  adultery  is  a  crime.  However  silent  our  laws  may 
be,  let  us  never  forget  that  God  is  not  silent.  The  Bible  does  not  wLisper,  it 
thunders  peal  on  peal  the  hot  denunciations  of  Divine  wrath  against  the  adulterer. 
Marriage  is  further  ennobled  in  our  thought  since  God  has  chosen  this  most  inti- 
mate and  sacred  union  to  illustrate  the  union  between  Christ  and  His  Church.  On 
the  plains  of  Northern  Italy  there  stauds  an  ancient  and  beautiful  city.  Near  its 
centre  rises  a  building  of  pure  white  marble,  wonderful  for  its  grandeur  and  beauty, 
seeming  more  like  a  dream  from  heaven  than  a  creation  of  the  earth.  As  one 
stands  upon  the  roof  of  this  cathedral  of  Milan,  surrounded  by  the  multitude  of  its 
dazzling  pinnacles  and  spires,  he  may  look  far  off  to  the  north,  over  the  plains 
and  hills,  until  his  eye  rests  upon  the  snowclad  summits  of  the  Alps,  those  other 
pinnacles  and  spires  which  God  Himself  created,  and  clothed  with  the  ever  pure 
white  garments  of  the  skies.  So,  from  this  purest  of  earth's  relationships,  we  lift 
our  thoughts  to  the  mystical  union  of  life  and  love,  between  the  heaven  and  the 
earth,  the  marriage  of  the  Church  to  her  Divine  Lord.  Who  shall  speak  of  the 
love  and  faithfulness  of  this  Divine  Bridegroom,  the  love  which  knows  no  changing, 
■which  led  Him  to  lay  down  His  life  for  His  Church?  How  steadily  and  warmly 
should  her  love  go  out  to  Him!  {Ibid.)  Purity  outicard  and  innard  : — Sir 
Edward  Coke  was  very  neat  in  his  dress,  and  it  was  one  of  his  sentiments,  "  that 
the  cleanness  of  a  man's  clothes  ought  to  put  him  in  mind  of  keeping  all  clean 
within."  Value  of  purity  : — A  Greek  maid,  being  asked  what  fortune  she  would 
bring  her  husband,  answered:  "  I  will  bring  him  what  is  more  valuable  than  any 
treasure — a  heart  unspotted,  a  virtue  without  a  stain,  which  is  all  that  descended 
to  me  from  my  parents."  No  woman  could  have  a  more  valuable  dowry  !  The 
■potoer  of  passion : — One  bright  July  morning  I  was  driving  to  town.  As  I  came  to 
the  top  of  the  hill  just  above  the  bridge,  on  the  outskirts  of  the  place,  a  little  boy, 
from  a  cottage  on  the  north  side  of  the  road,  fired  off  a  small  cannon.  He  was  so 
near  the  road,  the  cannon  made  so  great  a  noise,  and  the  whole  thing  came  so  un- 
expectedly, that  my  little  bay  pony  took  fright,  and  shied,  with  a  spring,  to  the 
other  side  of  the  road.  He  not  only  overturned  the  carriage  in  doing  fo,  but  was 
with  great  difficulty  reined  in  and  prevented  from  running  away.  "  You  should 
not  fire  your  cannon  so  near  the  road,"  said  I  to  the  boy;  "you  frightened  my 
horse  badly,  and  nearly  made  him  run  away."  "  I  didn't  mean  to  do  it,  '  said  he, 
"  but  it  got  agoing  before  I  saw  the  horse,  and  then  I  couldn't  stop  it."  I  said  no 
more,  but  drove  on,  thinking  of  the  boy's  answer,  as  I  have  often  thought  of  it 
since,  though  all  this  happened  years  ago.  "  Couldn't  stop  it."  How  often,  when 
we  start  "  lust,"  there  is  no  stopping.  Do  not  begin,  and  the  difficulty  will  not 
arise — it  will  not  get  "  a-going." 

Ver.  15.  Thou  Shalt  not  steal. — The  Eighth  Commandment : — I.  In  this  Command- 
ment THE  INSTITUTION  OF  PBOPEETY  IS  EECOGNIZED  AND  SANCTIONED    BY  THE  AUTHORITY 

Gt  God.     The  institution  of  property  is  necessary — 1.  For  increasing  the  produce 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  389 

of  the  earth ;  2.  For  preserving  the  produce  of  the  earth  to  maturity ;  3.  For  the 
cultivation  and  development  of  the  nature  of  man  ;  4.  For  the  intellectual  develop- 
ment of  man.  II.  The  institution  of  property  imposes  upon  all  men  the  duty  of 
INDUSTRY  IN  THEIR  CALLINGS  ;  the  duty  of  maintaining  independence ;  the  duty  of 
avoiding  any,  even  the  least,  invasion  of  the  rights  of  others  ;  the  duty  of  self- 
restraint  in  expenditure,  as  well  as  of  honesty  in  acquisition.  III.  If  property  is  a 
Divine  institution,  founded  on  a  Divine  idea,  protected  by  Divine  sanction,  then  in 
THE  USE  OF  ir  God  should  be  remembered,  and  those  whom  God  has  entrusted 
to  our  pity  and  onr  care.  {R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  The  Eighth  Commandment : — To 
steal,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  a  universal  temptation,  common  to  all  sorts  of  people. 
It  often  springs  from  the  sense  of  necessity  :  this  it  is  whicb,  as  you  remember, 
gives  such  tragic  power  to  Victor  Hugo's  "  Les  Miserables,"  whose  hero,  Jean  Val- 
jean,  stole  a  loaf  of  bread.  Again  the  temptation  to  steal  springs  from  indolence, 
or,  to  use  a  good,  or  rather  bad,  old  French-Latin  word,  laziness  ;  for  there  are  not 
a  few  persons  who,  instead  of  getting  an  honest  living  by  working,  prefer  to  get  it 
by  what  they  call  their  wits,  resorting  to  all  sorts  of  shifts  and  tricks,  which  are 
really  stealings.  Again,  the  temptation  to  steal  springs  from  dissolute  or  what  is 
called  fast  living ;  how  many  of  the  embezzlements  which  so  often  startle  the 
community  spring  from  the  fact  that  the  embezzlers  had  entered  on  careers  of 
personal  debaucbery !  Again,  the  temptation  to  steal  springs  from  the  love  of 
display ;  how  many  of  the  defalcations  which  land  our  citizens  in  prison  or  in 
Canada  are  owing  to  their  passion  for  equipage,  for  furniture,  for  jewelry,  for 
fashion!  Again,  and  chiefly,  the  temptation  to  steal  springs  from  the  haste  to 
become  rich ;  how  true  it  is  that  the  love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  kinds  of  evil  I 
Let  us  first  glance  at  the  case  of  private  stealings.  For  example  :  there  is  the 
taking  advantage  of  the  ignorant  in  a  bargain.  Again,  there  is  the  taking  advan- 
tage of  the  necessitous,  when  they  lie  prostrate  and  helpless,  demanding  from  them, 
for  instance,  extortionate  interest  for  the  use  of  money,  exorbitant  rent  for  premises 
or  tools,  or  extravagant  prices  for  commodities.  Again,  there  is  the  refusing,  I 
will  not  say  lawful  wages,  but  I  do  say  fair  wages— that  is,  just  compensation  to 
servants,  whether  in  the  family,  the  farm,  the  factory,  the  store,  or  the  bank ;  for 
every  man  born  into  this  world  is  entitled,  by  the  very  fact  of  his  existence  upon 
this  footstool  of  God,  to  a  living.  Again,  there  is  the  delay  in  the  payment  of 
debts  when  due.  Again,  there  is  the  contracting  of  debts  beyond  any  reasonable 
possibility  of  paying  them,  the  indulgence  in  venturesome  speculations,  the  living 
beyond  income — these,  and  such  as  these,  morally  surveyed,  are  stealings.  Again, 
there  is  the  practice  of  endorsing,  or  going  security.  It  is  right  for  you  to  help 
your  friend  when  he  is  in  trouble;  but  it  is  not  right  for  you  to  help  him,  however 
much  in  trouble,  if  your  endorsement  of  his  note  is  going  to  cost  some  other  friend 
of  yours  his  comfortable  home.  To  aid  one  man  by  endorsing  him  may  result  in 
stealing  from  many  men.  Again,  there  is  the  habit  of  begging  for  endorsements ; 
for  example :  tempting  one  to  misrepresent,  on  the  one  hand,  the  amount  of  assetn, 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  amount  of  liabilities  ;  contracting  liabilities  without 
the  knowledge  of  the  endorser  ;  keeping  up  appearances  when  insolvent ;  in  brief, 
offering  a  premium  for  the  use  of  your  name.  Again,  there  is  the  evading  of 
government  taxes  and  custom-house  duties  by  making  defective  or  ambiguous 
returns — a  mode  of  stealing  which,  I  regret  to  say,  is  not  altogether  unfashionable 
among  people  of  position.  Once  more,  there  is  the  lazy  subsistence  or  dependence 
on  charity  (and  there  is  a  great  deal  more  of  this  than  we  at  first  recognize) ;  the 
dependence  on  friends  to  eke  us  out,  when,  if  we  had  been  a  little  less  slothful  in 
diligence  as  well  as  a  little  more  ffervent  in  spirit,  we  might  not  have  needed  their 
aid  ;  the  sluggard,  I  take  it,  is  quite  a  prince  among  thieves.  Let  me  now  speak 
of  the  case  of  official  stealings,  no  matter  what  the  office  is,  whether  public  or 
private,  whether  in  a  bank,  or  in  a  store,  or  in  an  institution,  or  under  the  govern- 
ment. Office  is  in  its  very  nature  a  trust ;  and  as  such  it  is  a  sacred  thing.  And 
to  betray  a  trust  is  the  worst,  because  the  meanest,  kind  of  stealing.  And  now  let 
me  pass  from  official  stealings  to  what  I  may  call  associated  or  corporate  stealings. 
There  is  something  in  the  very  nature  of  the  organization  of  a  company  which 
somehow  tends  to  the  extinction  of  personal  responsibihty.  It  is  well  understood 
that  many  a  man  will,  as  a  member  of  a  corporation — no  matter  what  kind, 
whether  a  trust  company,  like  a  bank  or  a  charitable  institution,  or  an  executive 
company,  like  a  railroad  or  a  telegraph  organization — do  things  as  a  manager  of 
that  company  which  he  would  scorn  himself  for  doing  as  a  private  individual  on 
Ms  own  personal  responsibility.     In  fact,  it  has  become  an  aphorism  that  corpora- 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

tions  have  no  souls.  And  monopolies,  or  corporations  granted  the  exclusive  privi- 
lege of  manufacturing  or  selling  certain  articles  of  commerce  : — what  are  they  but 
oftentimes  organized  robberies  of  society,  thefts  of  your  purse  and  my  purse  ? 
But  there  are  other  kinds  of  property  besides  those  which  we  call  real  and  personal, 
which  may  also  be  stolen.  For  example  :  There  is  the  stealing  of  time  ;  and  time, 
you  know,  or  will  know,  is  money.  When  a  man  comes  and  takes  up  twice  the 
time  that  is  necessary  in  arranging  with  me  for  his  own  advantage,  or  even  the 
advantage  of  a  good  institution,  he  steals  my  time,  and  in  stealingmy  time,  he  steals 
my  patience  as  well  as  my  money.  Again,  then-  is  the  petty  larceny  of  writing  a 
letter  of  inquiry  for  your  own  advantage,  and  omitting  to  enclose  a  postage  stamp ; 
for  he  that  is  faithful  in  a  very  little  is  faithful  also  in  mnch ;  and  he  that  is 
unrighteous  in  a  very  little  is  unrighteous  also  in  much.  Again,  there  is  the  steal- 
ing of  another's  time  and  opportunity  and  serenity  when  you  keep  him  waiting  and 
fumiug  through  your  own  failure  to  keep  your  engagement  with  him  punctually. 
Again,  there  is  the  theft  of  plagiarism,  the  stealing  of  ideas,  the  withholding  of  credit 
or  praise  when  credit  or  praise  is  due.  Again,  there  is  the  stealing  of  reputation  or 
character.  Lastly,  irreligion  is  the  typical  specimen  of  perfect  theft.  For 
while  man  in  relation  to  his  fellow-man  has  right  to  own  property  on  his  own 
account,  yet  man  in  his  relation  to  his  God  is  but  a  trustee.  Steal  not, 
then,  O  friend,  from  a  greater  than  thy  neighbour,  even  thy  Divine  Master! 
Language  fails  you  when  you  undertake  to  denounce  a  defaulter  against  man. 
Eut  where  is  your  language  when  you  think  of  a  defaulter  against  Almighty 
God?  {G.  D.  Boardman.)  Property  sacred  : — I.  Property  as  a  sacred  right. 
A  man's  right  in  justly-acquired  property  is  a  reflection  of  God's  rights  in  all 
His  works.  All  property  is  the  outgrowth  of  life,  the  results  in  houses,  harvests, 
machinery,  manufactures,  commerce,  and  art  of  creative  power.  But  that  crea- 
tive power  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  therefore  both  its  rights  and  responsibilities 
Lave  their  foundation  and  standard  in  God  Himself.  The  property  belongs  to  the 
man,  but  the  man  belongs  to  God.  Thus  the  honest  gains  of  toil,  skill,  judgment, 
self-denial,  and  good  fortune  are  a  man's  own  by  a  Divine  right  of  which  the  civil 
right  is  the  echo.  IL  Property  as  a  sacred  trust.  The  same  fact  which  makes 
property  sacred  gives  birth  to  sacred  responsibilities.  As  in  old  feudal  days  lands 
were  given  by  the  king  on  certain  conditions  of  service,  so  now  God's  gifts  have 
always  duties  attached  to  them.  Sacredly  given,  they  are  to  be  sacredly  used. 
Application  : — 1.  As  to  our  use  of  our  money.  Is  it  not  signi6cant  that  God 
claimed  tithes  ?  Not  to  pay  a  tenth  of  His  income  into  the  temple  treasury  God 
considered  a  sacrilege  in  a  Jew.  Do  we  give  a  tenth  to  God  ?  2.  Our  use  of  our- 
selves. Wealth  is  more  than  money.  It  comprises  all  that  God  gives  us,  our 
talents,  our  influence,  our  whole  self.  He  who  might  do  good,  who  might  heal  and 
comfort  and  bless  if  he  would,  and  yet  does  not,  is  guilty  of  unfaithfulness.  (W. 
Senior,  B.A.)         The  Eighth  Commandment: — I.  We  may  cause  injury  to  others 

TBROUGH  lending  AND  BORROWING.  II.  We  SHALL  DO  WRONG  TO  COR  FELLOW-MEN 
BY   INFLICTING    INJURY  ON  PROPERTY  THAT  18  OPEN,  THROUGH  KINDNESS  OF  THE  OWNERS, 

TO  THE  PUBLIC,  as  gardens,  private  picture-galleries,  &c.  It  is  mean,  dishonourable, 
to  do  hurt  to  such  property.     III.  Through  incurring  of  debts  or  obligation  to 

OUK  FELLOW-JIEN.       IV.    ThE  WRONGS  DONE  IN  MERCANTILE  PURSUITS.       This  is  doDO 

1.  By  selling  to  customers  goods  of  inferior  value.  2.  By  inferior  weights.  3.  By 
tlje  adulteration  of  merchandise.  4.  By  false  pretences.  The  placing  the  best 
strawberries  or  apples  on  top  of  the  measure,  &c.  V.  Breaches  of  trust. 
VI.  Gambling.  Property  is  a  trust.  Yon  have  po  right  to  squander  your  own,  or 
to  lead  another  to  squander  what  he  has  in  trust.  [W.  Ormiston,  D.D.)  The 
law  of  property  : — I.  Consider,  first,  what  it  means — the  rights  of  property.  1. 
In  a  country  like  this,  long  occupied  and  thickly  peopled,  almost  everything  belongs 
to  somebody ;  and  most  of  us  possess  a  few  things  that  we  call  our  own,  either 
earned  or  inherited,  or  otherwise  received.  In  a  new  country  the  first-comers  enter 
upon  unoccupied  ground,  and  each,  while  making  his  own  claim,  recognizes  the 
claims  of  others.  The  relations  of  property  are  expressed  by  the  possessive  pro- 
nouns, and  it  is  remarked  that  these  are  found  in  all  languages.  On  what,  then,  is 
this  right  of  property  grounded?  Not  on  social  compact,  not  on  the  law  of  the 
land,  not  on  the  principle  of  utility,  but  on  the  will  of  God  revealed  in  the  constitu- 
tion of  our  nature,  and  in  the  ttaching  of  His  Word.  AH  acquiied  property  is  the 
))roduct  of  labour,  or  the  fruits  of  labour ;  and  why  do  men  labour  ?  Is  it  not  for 
the  means  of  living?  If,  then,  the  constitution  of  our  nature  is  such  that  we  must 
labuur  for  the  means  of  living,  it  must  be  the  wUl  of  Him  who  made  us  that  wo 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  3^1 

should  leceive  and  possess  the  fruits  of  our  labour  (see  Prov.  xvi.  2G  ;  Eph.  iv.  28  ; 
2  Thess.  iii.  10).  2.  The  principle  of  possession  excludes  the  principle  of  com- 
munism. If  the  fruit  of  my  labour  is  mine,  the  fruit  of  another  man's  labour  is  his 
to  do  as  he  will  with  it.  Communism  has  always  ended  in  disaster;  and  always 
must.  It  is  a  tissue  of  mistakes.  It  is  wrong  in  its  original  inference  that  the 
principle  of  property  is  the  cause  of  destitution,  whereas  the  real  cause  is  selfish- 
ness and  sin  ;  it  is  wrong  in  its  ruling  idea  that  all  should  share  and  share  alike,  a 
notion  which  would  tax  industrious  people  for  the  benefit  of  idlers,  and  rob  the 
skilful  for  the  advantage  of  the  incompetent ;  it  is  wrong  in  its  proposed  method, 
for  force  is  no  remedy,  and  the  circumstances  of  men  can  only  be  mended  by  mend- 
ing the  men  themselves ;  and  it  is  \vrong  in  its  cherished  hopes,  for  if  by  some  fatal 
success  the  communists  should  break  down  the  present  social  system  and  suppress 
private  wealth,  the  result  would  be  to  take  all  heart  of  enterprise  out  of  the  world's 
workers,  to  dry  up  the  waters  of  progress  at  their  source,  and  to  crush  the  humaa 
race  under  a  final  incubus  of  intolerable  woe.  Not  in  the  suppressiou  of  property, 
but  in  a  wise  understanding  of  its  uses,  and  in  a  right  direction  of  its  powers,  lies 
the  redress  of  human  wrongs,  with  the  hope  of  a  good  time  coming.  II.  What  it 
ensures — the  dse  of  pkopeuty.  1.  Property  has  economical  uses.  It  increases, 
protects,  and  stores,  the  produce  of  the  earth.     2.  Property  has  also  its  moral  uses. 

(1)  Its  steady  s'imulation  of  labour  is  alone  a  mighty  helper  of  our  manhood.  It  is 
where  men  have  to  work  that  they  acquire  robustness  of  frame,  alertness  of  mind, 
and  firmness  of  moral  fibre.  (2)  The  way  in  which  a  man  acquires  property,  and 
the  way  in  which  he  uses  it — resisting  temptation  to  get  it  unlawfully,  and  making 
it  a  field  for  exercise  of  all  the  virtues ;  or  dealing  oppositely,  so  as  to  win  it  by 
fraud,  and  use  it  for  vice — these  things  make  all  the  difference  between  a  hero  and 
a  scoundrel,  between  a  son  of  God  and  a  child  of  the  devil.  III.  What  it  forbids — 
THE  VIOLATION  OF  PRoPEETY.  1.  There  are  robberies  over  and  above  those  which 
pohcemen  investig  ite.  Private  gambling.  Betting.  Extravagance  and  petty  theft 
on  the  part  of  domestic  servants.  2.  Fraud,  or  the  withholding  of  a  man's  due. 
"  Trade  practices."  IV.  What  it  involves — the  kesponsibilities  of  property. 
We  are  God's  stewards.  (IF.  J.  Woods,  B. A.)  The  Eighth  Coramandment : — I. 
What  it  forbids.  II.  What  it  requires.  1.  It  requires  restitution  of  whatever 
we  have,  at  any  time,  unjustly  taken  or  detained.  For,  that  being  in  right  not  our 
own,  but  another's  ;  keeping  it  is  continuing  and  carrying  on  the  injustice.  2. 
This  Commandment  also  requires  industry ;  without  which,  the  generality  of 
persons  cannot  maintain  themselves  honestly.  3.  To  observe  it  well,  frugality 
mu^t  be  joined  with  industry,  else  it  will  be  all  labour  in  vain.  4.  This  Command- 
ment requires  in  the  last  place,  that  we  neither  deny  ourselves,  or  those  who  belong 
to  us,  what  is  fit  for  our  and  their  station,  which  is  one  kind  of  robbeiy ;  nor  omit 
to  relieve  the  poor  according  to  our  ability,  which  is  another  kind.  For  whatever 
we  enjoy  of  worldly  plenty  is  given  us  in  trust,  that  we  should  take  our  own  share 
with  moderation,  and  distribute  out  the  remainder  with  liberality.  [Abp.  Seeker.) 
The  Eighth  Commandment : — I.  Whence  doth  theft  arise  ?  1.  The  internal  causes 
are  :  (1)  Unbelief.  A  man  hath  an  high  distrust  of  God's  providence  :  "  can  God 
furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness?  "  So  saith  the  unbeliever,  "can  God  spread  a 
table  for  me?  no,  He  cannot."  Therefore  he  is  resolved  he  will  spread  a  table  for 
himself,  but  it  shall  be  at  other  men's  cost,  and  both  first  and  second  course  shall 
be  served  in  with  stolen  goods.  (2)  Covetousness.  The  Greek  word  for  covetous- 
ness  signifies  "  an  immoderate  desire  of  getting"  ;  this  is  the  root  of  theft.  A  man 
covets  more  than  his  own,  and  this  itch  of  covetousness  makes  him  scratch  what  he 
can  from  another.  2.  The  external  cause  of  theft  is,  Satan's  solicitation :  Judas 
was  a  thief ;  how  came  he  to  be  a  thief  ?  "Satan  entered  into  him."  The  devil 
is  the  great  master-thief,  he  robbed  us  of  our  coat  of  innocency,  and  he  persuades 
men  to  take  up  his  trade  ;  he  tells  m^n  how  bravely  they  shall  live  by  thieving,  and 
how  they  may  catch  an  estate.  II.  How  many  sorts  or  thefts  are  there  ?  1.  There 
is  stealing  from  God  ;  and  so  they  are  thieves,  who  rob  any  part  of  God's  day  from 
Him.  2.  There  is  a  stealing  from  others.  (1)  A  stealing  away  their  souls  ;  and  so 
heretics  are  thieves,  by  robbing  men  of  the  truth,  they  rob  them  of  their  souls. 

(2)  A  stealing  away  their  money  and  goods  from  them ;  and  under  this  head  of 
stealing  away  other's  money,  there  maybe  several  an'aigned  for  thieves.  The  high- 
way thief  who  takes  a  purse  contrary  to  the  letter  of  this  Commandment.  The 
house-thief,  who  purloins  and  filches  out  of  his  master's  cash,  or  steals  his  wares  and 
drugs.  The  house-thief  is  a  hypocrite,  as  well  as  a  thief ;  he  hath  demure  looks, 
and  pretends  he  is  helping  his  master,  when  he  only  helps  to  rob  him.     The  thief 


392-  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  k. 

that  shrouds  himself  under  law,  as  the  unjust  attorney  or  lawgiver,  who  prevaricates 
and  deals  falsely  with  his  client.  This  is  to  steal  from  the  client.  The  church- 
thief  or  pluralist,  who  holds  several  benefices,  but  seldom  or  never  preacheth  to  the 
people;  he  pets  the  golden  fleece,  but  lets  his  Hock  starve.  The  shop-thief;  he 
steals  in  selling,  who  useth  false  weights  and  measures,  and  so  steals  from  others 
what  is  their  due.  The  usurer  who  takes  of  others  even  to  extortion  ;  he  seems  to 
help  another  by  letting  bim  have  money  in  his  necessity,  but  gets  him  into  bonds, 
and  sucks  out  his  very  blood  and  marrow.  The  feoffe  in  trust,  who  hath  the 
orphan's  estate  committed  to  him ;  he  is  deputed  to  be  his  guardian,  and  manage 
his  estate  for  him,  and  he  curtails  the  estate,  and  gets  a  fleece  out  of  it  for  himself, 
and  wrongs  tbe  orphan.  This  is  a  thief ;  this  is  worse  than  taking  a  purse,  because 
he  betrays  his  trust,  which  is  the  highest  piece  of  treachery  and  injustice.  The 
borrower,  who  borrows  money  from  others,  with  an  intention  never  to  pay  them 
again.  The  receiver  of  stolen  goods.  The  root  would  die  if  it  were  not  watered, 
and  thievery  would  cease  if  it  were  not  encouraged  by  the  receiver.  III.  What  are 
THE  AGGRAVATioxs  OF  THIS  SIN  OF  STEALING?  1.  To  Steal  when  onc  has  no  need. 
To  be  a  rich  thief.  2.  To  steal  sacrilegiously.  To  devour  things  set  apart  to  holy 
uses.  3.  To  commit  the  sin  of  theft  against  checks  of  conscience,  and  examples  of 
God's  justice :  this  is  like  the  dye  to  the  wool,  it  doth  dye  the  sin  of  a  crimson 
colour.  4.  To  rob  the  widow  and  orphan;  "ye  shall  not  afflict  any  widow  or 
fatherless  child  "  ;  it  is  a  crying  sin  ;  "  if  they  cry  unto  Me,  I  will  surely  hear  them." 
6.  To  rob  the  poor.  (T.  Watson.)  The  Eighth  Commandment: — I.  Stealing  by 
FORGETFCLNEss.  People  with  these  bad  memories  borrow  things  from  their  neigh- 
bours and  friends,  and  forget  to  return  them.  Now,  to  the  persons  who  lend  those 
things,  it  is  just  as  bad  as  if  a  thief  should  come  into  their  house  and  steal  them. 
Umbrellas,  and  books,  and  things  of  that  kind  are  most  likely  to  suffer  in  this  way. 
II.  Conning,  is  another  branch  of  it.  Did  you  ever  see  a  counterfeit  bank-note? 
It  passes  for  a  good  note,  though  it  is  not  worth  a  straw.  And  gold  and  silver  coin 
are  counterfeited  in  the  same  manner.  Tbe  people  who  make  them  think  them- 
selves very  cunning.  But  they  are  not  a  bit  better  than  thieves.  But  a  great  many 
other  things  may  be  counterfeited  as  well  as  money.  When  God  shall  come  to 
reckon  with  them  at  last,  they  will  find  that  the  real  name  for  what  they  called 
smartness  was  stealing.  Th's  is  the  name  by  which  God  calls  it.  III.  Those  who 
break  the  Eighth  Commandment  by  ueceit.  For  instance,  a  lady  goes  into  a  shop 
to  buy  a  dress.  She  finds  one  of  the  colour  she  wants.  If  she  could  be  sure  that 
the  colours  would  not  fade  s'le  would  take  it.  She  says  to  the  shopkeeper,  "  Will 
these  colours  stand  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  madam,  they  are  the  very  best  colours  to  wear. 
They  will  stand  as  long  as  the  dress  lasts."  The  lady  buys  the  dress  on  this 
assurance,  though  all  the  while  the  shopkeeper  knows  the  colours  will  not  stand  at 
all.  In  this  way  he  steals  the  lady's  money.  IV.  Those  who  break  the  Command- 
ment by  EXTOKTiox.  V.  Those  who  break  the  Commandment  by  violence  and 
iKADD.  We  must  resist  little  temptations.  Everything  must  have  a  beginning.  I 
remember  reading  once  about  a  man  who  was  going  to  be  hung  for  robbeiy  and 
murder.  On  the  scaffold,  he  said  he  began  to  steal  by  taking  a  farthing  from  his 
mother's  pocket  while  she  was  asleep.  Many  children  begin  to  steal  at  the  sugar- 
bowl  or  the  cake-ba!iket.  To  take  the  smallest  thing  that  does  not  belong  to  us, 
without  permission,  is  stealing.  And,  then,  there  is  another  thing  to  do:  we  must 
pray  to  God  to  keep  us  from  temptation.  {R.  Neuton,  D.D.)  True  honesty  : — 
There  is  an  anecdote  told  of  a  brave  general  of  tlie  American  Eevolution,  that  he 
one  day  overheard  the  remark  of  a  grandson,  that  "  he  hoped  to  be  middling 
honest."  The  old  gentleman  stopped,  turned  short  upon  the  speaker,  and  broke 
out :  "  What  is  that  I  hear  ?  Middling  honest !  let  me  never  hear  again  such  a 
\»ord  from  your  lips.  Strictly  honest  is  the  only  thing  you  ought  ever  to  think 
of  being."  Praying  bitter  than  stealing  : — Some  poor  families  lived  near  a  large 
■wood-wharf.  In  one  of  the  cabins  was  a  man  who,  when  he  was  sober,  took  pretty 
good  care  of  his  family  ;  but  the  public-house  would  get  his  earnings,  and  then  they 
suffered.  In  consequence  of  a  drunken  frolic  he  fell  sick.  The  cold  crept  into  his 
cabin,  and  but  one  stick  was  left  in  his  cellar.  One  night  he  called  his  eldest  boy, 
John,  to  the  bedside,  and  whispered  something  in  his  ear.  "  Can't  do  it,  father," 
said  John  aloud.  "Can't — why  not?"  asked  his  father,  angrily.  "Because  I 
learned  at  Sabbath-school  '  Thou  shalt  not  steal,' "  answered  John.  "  And  did 
you  not  learn  'Mind  your  parents,'  too?"  "Yes,  father,"  answered  the  boy. 
"  Well,  then,  mind  and  do  what  I  tell  you."  The  boy  did  not  know  how  to  argue 
■with  his  father,  for  his  father  wanted  him  to  go  in  the  night  and  steal  some  sticks 


CH.VP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  893 

from  the  wood-wharf;  so  John  said  to  his  father  :  "  I  can  pray  to-night  for  some 
wood  ;  it's  better  than  stealing  I  know."  And  when  he  crept  up  into  the  loft  where 
his  straw  bed  was,  he  did  go  to  God  in  prayer.  He  prayed  the  Lord's  Prayer,  which 
his  Sabbath-school  teacher  taught  him,  only  he  put  something  in  about  the  wood, 
for  he  knew  God  could  give  wood  as  well  as  "  daily  bread."  The  next  noon,  when 
he  came  home  from  school,  what  do  you  think  he  caught  sight  of,  the  first  thing 
after  turning  tbe  corner?  A  load  of  wood  before  the  door,  his  door.  Yes,  there  it 
was.  His  mother  told  him  the  overseers  of  the  poor  sent  it ;  but  he  did  not  know 
who  they  were.  He  believed  it  was  God  ;  and  so  it  was.  What  is  stealing  ? — 
Two  old  men  were  once  arguing  upon  the  question  of  venial  sin.  Their  faces  one 
could  not  forget.  One  said,  "  Well,  after  all  you  have  to  say,  you  will  not  tell  me 
that  the  theft  of  a  pin  and  a  guinea  are  the  same."  The  other  said,  "  When  you 
tell  me  the  difference  between  a  pin  and  a  guinea  to  God,  I  will  give  you  an  answer." 
It  at  once  settled  the  point ;  and  there  was  no  more  said  about  venial  sin.  The 
rights  of  property  defended : — It  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  sufferings  and 
crimes  which  are  incident  to  the  institution  of  property  are  so  grave  as  sometimes 
to  provoke  the  inquiry  whether,  after  all,  the  institution  itself  can  be  defended. 
Selfishness,  covetousness,  dishonesty,  fierce  and  angry  contention,  are  among  the 
worst  vices  of  which  men  can  be  guilty  ;  and  it  may  almost  seem  as  though  we 
might  escape  from  them  all  by  abolishing  the  rights  of  property.  What  are  the 
grounds,  then,  on  which  the  maintenance  of  these  rights,  in  some  form  or  another, 
can  be  defended  ?  Archdeacon  Paley,  in  one  of  the  chapters  of  his  "  Moral  Philo- 
sophy," has  illustrated  some  of  the  advantages  of  the  institution  of  property,  with 
his  usual  clearness  and  felicity.  He  shows  that  it  both  increases  the  produce  of 
the  earth,  and  preserves  it  to  maturity.  Houses,  ships,  furniture,  clothes, 
machinery,  pictures,  statues,  books,  require  a  great  amount  of  labour  to  produce 
them ;  the  stimulus  to  production  would  be  altogether  destroyed  if  after  they  were 
produced  they  belonged  to  nobody,  and  if  people  who  had  done  no  work  were  as 
free  to  use  them  as  those  by  whose  self-denial  and  labour  they  were  produced.  No 
mines  would  be  worked,  no  fields  would  be  cleared,  no  waste  land  would  be  brought 
into  cultivation,  no  marshes  would  be  drained,  unless  the  men  who  did  the  work 
had  the  hope  either  of  owning  the  property  which  they  created,  or  of  receiving  in 
some  other  form  compensation  for  their  labour.  The 'material  wealth  of  the  world 
would  almost  disappear,  and  the  poorest  and  most  wretched  would  have  even  less 
than  they  have  now,  if  the  rights  of  property  were  abolished.  But  there  are  other 
grounds  on  which  the  institution  may  be  defended.  '  The  rights  of  property  are 
essential  not  only  to  the  creation  and  preservation  of  material  wealth,  but  to  the 
cultivation  and  development  of  the  nature  of  man.  It  is  only  because  corn  belongs 
to  the  farmer,  and  coal  to  the  mine  proprietor,  and  bread  to  the  baker,  and  meat  to 
the  butcher,  it  is  only  because  clothes  belong  to  the  tailor,  and  houses  to  the  builder, 
and  because  the  law  protects  every  one  of  them  in  thtf  possession  of  his  property 
until  he  is  willing  to  part  with  it,  that  men  work  in  oVder  that  they  may  get  coal, 
and  corn,  and  bread,  and  meat,  and  clothes,  and  houfee  room.  The  Indian  would 
sit  idle  in  his  cabin  if  the  game  he  hunted  did  not  become  his  own.  Excessive 
physical  labour  is  no  doubt  a  great  evil ;  but  the  evils  of  indolence  are  still  greater. 
There  are  parts  of  the  world  where  it  is  hardly  necessary  for  men  to  work  at  all  in 
order  to  get  the  bare  necessaries  of  life,  and  the  result  is  a  miserable  want  of  physical 
vigour  and  a  portentous  development  of  vice.  We  were  made  to  work.  It  is  by 
work  that  muscle  is  created  and  the  whole  body  kept  free  from  disease.  Work  as  a 
rule  is  good  for  health,  and  good  for  morality  and  happiness  too.  Moreover,  the 
institution  of  property  supplies  a  most  powerful  motive  to  intellectual  exertion.  We 
want  food,  clothmg,  and  a  thousand  other  things ;  but  they  belong  to  people  who 
■will  not  part  with  them,  except  for  the  results  of  our  own  work.  Inventive  genius 
is  stimulated  to  improve  the  processes  of  manufacture ;  administrative  skill  is 
exercised  in  lessening  the  cost  of  production  ;  merchants  watch  the  rise  and  fall  of 
the  markets  in  remote  countries,  estimate  the  effect  of  good  and  bad  seasons  and  of 
political  events  on  the  probable  price  of  commodities.  There  is  not  a  counting 
house  however  small,  there  is  not  a  workshop  in  a  back  court,  where  business  can 
be  carried  on  without  thought.  The  institution  of  property  secures  an  amount  and 
variety  of  intellectual  activity  for  which,  perhaps,  we  have  never  given  it  credit.  It 
has  also  very  important  relations  to  the  moral  life  of  man.  The  whole  organization 
of  the  world  is  intended  to  discipline  our  moral  nature ;  and  the  very  variety  of  the 
sins  to  which  the  existence  of  property  gives  occasion,  illustrates  the  variety  of  the 
virtues  which  it  is  intended  to  exercise.     {R.    W.  Dale,  D.D.)        Dishonesty  in 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

trade  : — If  a  manufacturer  charges  you  twenty  pounds  for  a  hundred  yards  of  cloth 
and  sends  you  only  half  the  quantity,  he  as  really  steals  ten  pounds  as  though  he 
broke  open  your  cash  box  and  took  out  a  ten  pound  note.  If  be  engages  to  send  you 
cloth  of  a  certain  quality  and  charges  you  for  it,  and  then  sends  you  cloth  which  is 
worth  in  the  market  only  two-thirds  the  price,  he  is  just  as  much  a  thief  as  though 
he  stood  behind  you  in  a  crowd  and  robbed  you  of  your  purse.  No  one  disputes 
this.  The  same  principle  holds  in  every  business  transaction.  To  give  short  weight 
or  short  measure,  is  to  steal.  To  supply  an  article  of  inferior  quality  to  that  which 
it  is  understood  that  the  buyer  expects,  is  to  steal.  To  take  a  Government  contract 
and  send  to  Weedon  or  Portsmouth  articles  which  you  know  will  be  worthless,  or 
which  you  know  are  of  a  worse  kind  than  it  was  understood  that  you  would  furnish,  is 
to  steal.  To  take  advantage  of  your  superior  knowledge  in  order  to  pass  off  on  any 
man  articles  for  which  he  would  never  give  the  price  that  he  pays  for  them  but  for 
his  confidence  in  your  integrity,  is  to  steal.  To  start  a  company  and  to  mduce 
people  to  take  shares  in  it  by  false  representations  of  the  amount  of  the  subscribe  I 
capital  and  of  its  probable  success,  is  to  steal.  If  a  woikman  who  is  paid  to  work 
ten  hours,  takes  advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  master  or  foreman  to  smoke  a  pipe 
and  read  a  newspaper  for  one  hour  out  of  the  ten,  he  steals  one-tenth  of  his  day's 
wages.  He  does  the  very  thing  that  a  shopkeeper  would  do  who  gave  him  fourteen 
ounces  of  butter  or  sugar  instead  of  a  pound,  or  nine  yards  of  calico  when  the  bill 
charged  ten.  An  assistant  in  a  shop,  who  instead  of  caring  for  his  master's  interests 
as  if  they  were  his  own,  puts  no  heart  into  his  work,  exercises  no  ingenuity,  treats 
customers  carelessly  instead  of  courteously,  and  so  diminishes  the  chances  of 
their  coming  again,  gets  his  salary  on  false  pretences,  does  not  give  the  kind  of 
service  which  he  knows  his  employer  expects,  and  which  he  would  expect  if  he 
were  an  employer  himself.  (Ibid.)  An  example  of  honesty  : — Speaking  of  the 
early  American  prairie  settlements,  a  modern  historian  says:  "Theft  was  almost 
unknown  ;  the  pioneers  brought  with  them  the  same  rigid  notions  of  honesty  which 
they  had  previously  maintained.  A  man  in  Mancoupin  County  left  his  waggon, 
loaded  with  corn,  stuck  in  the  prairie  mud  for  two  weeks  near  a  fre(iuented  road. 
When  he  returned  he  found  some  of  his  corn  gone,  but  there  was  money  enough 
tied  in  the  sacks  to  pay  for  what  was  taken.  Honesty  : — In  Abrnham  Lincoln's 
youthful  days  he  was  storekeeper's  clerk.  Once  after  he  had  sold  a  woman  a 
little  bill  of  goods  and  received  the  money,  he  found,  on  looking  over  the  account 
again,  that  she  had  given  him  six  and  a  quarter  cents  too  much.  The  money 
burned  in  his  hands  until  he  had  locked  the  shop  and  started  on  a  walk  of  several 
miles  in  the  night  to  make  restitution  before  he  slept.  On  another  occasion,  after 
weighing  and  delivering  a  pound  of  tea,  he  found  a  small  weight  on  the  scales.  He 
immediately  weighed  out  the  quantity  of  tea  of  which  he  had  innocently  defrauded  the 
customer  and  went  in  search  of  her,  his  sensitive  conscience  not  permitting  any 
delay. 

Ver.  16.  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness. — The  Ninth  Commandment : — I.  This 
Commandment  is  a  recognition  of  those  tbibonals  which  are  necessary  to  the 
PEACE  AND  TO  THE  VERY  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  State.  II.  In  this  Commandment  there 
is  A  Divine  recognition  of  the  importance  of  the  moral  judgments  which  men 
PRONOUNCE  ON  EACH  OTHER  :  the  judgments  which  individual  men  form  of  other  men 
as  the  result  of  the  testimony  to  which  they  have  listened,  whether  it  was  true  or 
false;  the  judgments  which  large  classes  of  men  or  whole  communities  form  of 
individuals,  and  which  constitute  what  we  call  the  opinion  of  society  concerning 
them.  III.  Many  ways  might  be  mentioned  in  which  we  may  avoid  bearing  false 
WITNESS  against  OUR  NEIGHBOUR.  1.  We  should  try  to  form  a  true  and  just 
judgment  of  other  people  before  we  say  anything  against  them.  2.  We  have  no 
right  to  give  our  mere  inferences  from  what  we  know  about  the  conduct  and 
principles  of  others  as  though  they  were  facts.  3.  We  have  no  ri^ht  to 
spread  an  injurious  report  merely  because  somebody  brought  it  to  us.  (R.  W. 
Dale,  D.D.)  The  law  of  truth: — 1.  There  is  no  engine  by  which  we  help  or 
harm  one  another  more  than  by  our  speech.  In  one  aspect  words  are  mere 
counters,  but  he  who  supposes  them  to  be  only  that  is  greatly  mistaken;  more 
often  they  are  very  children  of  our  inner  selves,  out-growing  quickly  the  control  of 
their  parents,  and  entering  upon  an  independent  career  which  may  be  full  as 
sunshine  is  of  blessing,  or  more  destructive  than  a  prairie-fire.  2.  What  is  truth  ? 
It  stands  for  the  relation  which  God  has  established  between  things,  the  relation  in 
which  their  harmony  consists.     It  expresses  conformity  to  fact— v^Lat  really  is 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  395 

seen  as  it  is.     It  accords  with,  and  is,  the  constitution  of  all  things.     It  is  of  the 
essential  substance  of  God  ;  for  if  God  were  not  true  He  would  not  be  God.     The 
more  we  think  about  this  sublime  theme,  the  more  we  see  its  ineffable  dignity, 
and  that  the  law  which  guards  truth  must  be  of  supreme  importance.    I.  Consider 
this  law  IN  RELATION  TO  conRTS  OF  JUSTICE.     1.  The  literal  form  of  the  precept 
implies  the  existence  of  a  court  of  justice.     Here  is  a  definite  acknowledgment,  at 
least  by  implication,  of  the  i^rinciple  of  state  tribunals ;  and  if  of  tribunals,  then 
also  of  governments,  and  of  the  necessary  machinery  of  government.     2.  Courts  of 
justice  exist,  as  their  name  implies,  in  order  that  justice  may  be  done  ;  and  justice 
can  only  be  done  in  proportion  as  truth  prevails.     The  supreme  business  of  every 
member  of  the  court,  from  the  judge  to  the  humblest  official,  is  with  truth.     II. 
Consider  this  law  in  relation  to  public  opinion.     1.  It  is  not  by  any  means  an 
ideal  bar,  this  of  public  opinion  :  inconsistent  in  much,  inconsequent  in  more ;  not 
patient  in  sifting  evidence,  nor  impartial  in  hearing  both  sides,  nor  cautious  in 
coming  to  conclusions ;  liable  also  to  bursts  of  impulse,  when,  as  in  a  wind-swept 
cornfield,  all  heads  are  bowed  one  way  only  to  bend  back  again  at  the  next  breath : 
often   its   judgments   are   hasty,   not   seldom   warped,  sometimes  cruelly  unjust. 
Nevertheless,  public  opinion  is  a  great  natural  assize,  where  every  one  of  us  passes 
judgment  upon  others,  and  where  others  pass  judgment  upon  every  one  of  us — a 
court  with  wider  jurisdiction  than  any  other  in  the  world,  a  court  always  sitting,  a 
court  everywhere  present.     The  special  moment  and  consequence  of  its  decisions 
lies  in  the  fact  that  they  affect  our  reputation.     This  being  so,  every  man  has  a 
right  to  demand  of  every  other  man,  and  every  man  is  bound  to  accord  to  every 
other  man,  a  true  and  rifthteous  witness.     2.     In  glancing  at  the  more  conspicuous 
forms  of   false  witness  in  the  court  of  public  opinion,  one  dark  and  monstrous 
shape  demands  immediate  notice.     I  mean  slander,  the  deliberate  invention  of  a 
lie  to  injure  a  neighbour.     All  forms  of  wilful  misrepresentation,  base  insinuation, 
wanton  detraction,  damning  with  faint  praise,  and  guilty  silence  that  does  the  work 
of  open  defamation,  belong  to  this  category.     Next  to  slander,  I  must  mention  tale- 
bearing, which   signifies   the  spreading  of  evil  reports.     We  ought  not   to  carry 
stories   to  our  neighbours'  discredit,  even  if  they  are   true  (Lev.  xix.   16).     III. 
Consider    this  law  in   relation   to  the   pebsonal  conscience.      1.    When    the 
Commandment  says,  "  Thy  neighbour  must  not  be  wronged  by  untruthful  words," 
it  manifestly  says  also,  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  a  liar."    Unless  we  are  true,  how  can 
our  witness  be  true  ?    And  if  we  are   true,  how  can  our  witness  be  other  than 
true  ?     Three   elements    enter   into   a   falsehood.      It    is    a  statement  of   what 
is  not  true  ;  it  is  intended  to  deceive,  and  it  violates  a  promise  or  obligation 
to  speak  the  truth.     2.  In  this  view  of  the  obligation  of  every  man  to   "  put 
away  lying  and  speak  truth  with  his   neighbour,"  the   paramount   importance 
of  the  law  of  truth  stands  forth  conspicuous.     Equivocation  is  seen  to  be  nothing 
but  a  lie   complicated  with  the  meanness  of  evasion.     Mental  reservations  are 
detected  as  lies  blackened  by  breach  of  contract.     Exaggerations  and  extenuations, 
fibs  and  white  lies,  are  shown  to  be  inexcusable.     Pious  frauds  are  branded  as 
fraudulent  piety.     And  the  one  only  course  open  to  a  Christian  man  in  his  dealings 
with  his  neighbour  is  to  speak  truth.     "  Dare  to  be  true  ;  nothing  can  need  a  lie  I  " 
{IV.  J.  Woods,  B.A.)         The  Ninth  Commandment: — This  Commandment  hath  a 
prohibitory,  and  a  mandatory  part  :  the  first  is  set  down  in  plain  words,  the  other 
is   clearly  implied.     1.  The  prohibitory  part  of  the   Commandment,  or,  what   it 
forbids  in  general.     It  forbids  anything  which  may  tend  to  the  disparagement  or 
prejudice  of  our  neighbour.     More  particularly,  two  things  are  forbidden  in  this 
Commandment.     (1)  Slandering  our  neighbour.    The  scorpion  carries  his  poison  in 
his  tail ;  the  slanderer  carries  his  poison  in  his  tongue.     Slandering  is  to  I'eport 
things  of  others  unjustly ;  "  they  laid  things  to  my  charge  which  I  knew  not." 
Eminency  is  commonly  blasted  by  slander.   Holiness  itself  is  no  shield  from  slander. 
The  lamb's  innocency  will  not  preserve  it  from  the  wolf.     We  must  not  only  not 
raise  a  false  report,  but  not  take  it  up.     He  that  raiseth  a  slander,  carries  the  devil 
in  his  tongue:  and  he  that  receives  it,  carries  the  devil  in  his  ear.     (2)  The  second 
thing   forbidden   in   this   Commandment  is   false   witness.     Here  three  sins  are 
condemned:  (a)  Speaking  that  which  is  false;  "  lying  lips  are  an  abomination  to 
the  Lord."     There  is  nothing  more  contrary  to  God  than  a  lie.    Imitate  God  who 
is  the   pattern   of   truth.      Pythagoras   being  asked    what  made  men    like   God 
answered,  "  When  they  speak  truth. "     It  is  made  the  character  of  a  man  that  shall 
go  to  heaven ;  "  he  speaketh  the  truth  in  his  heart."     {b)  That  which  is  condemned 
in  the  Commandment  is  witnessing  that  which  is  false  ;  "  thou  shalt  not  bear  false 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

witness."  There  is  a  bearing  of  false  -witness  for  another,  and  a  bearing  false 
witness  against  another,  (c)  That  which  is  condemned  in  the  Commandment  is 
swearing  that  which  is  false.  When  men  take  a  false  oath,  and  by  that,  take  away 
the  life  of  another.  The  Scythians  made  a  law,  when  a  man  did  bind  two  sins  to- 
gether, a  lie  with  an  oath,  he  was  to  lose  his  head,  because  this  sin  did  take  away  all 
truth  and  faith  from  among  men.  The  devil  hath  taken  great  possession  of  such 
who  dare  swear  to  a  he.  2.  The  mandatory  part  of  this  Commandment:  that 
is,  "that  we  stand  up  for  others  and  vindicate  them,  when  they  are  injured  by 
lying  lips."  A  man  may  wrong  another  as  well  by  silence  as  by  slander  when  he 
knows  him  to  be  wrongfully  accused,  yet  doth  not  speak  in  his  behalf.  If  others 
cast  false  aspersions  on  any,  we  should  wipe  them  off.  When  the  primitive 
Christians  were  falsely  accused  for  incest,  and  killing  their  children,  Tertullian 
made  a  famous  apology  in  their  vindication.  This  is  to  act  the  part  both  of  a  friend 
and  of  a  Christian,  to  be  an  advocate  for  another,  when  he  is  wronped  in  his  good 
name.  (T.  Watson.)  The  scope  of  the  Ninth  Commandment: — This  Command- 
ment checks  all  propensities  to  lying,  and  commands  truthfulness  of  speech  to  and 
about  our  neighbour.  It  is  very  difficult  to  over-estimate  the  value  of  truth  or  the 
importance  of  being  truthful  in  character  and  speech.  There  is  a  reality  to  the 
things  and  the  laws  which  surround  us  and  are  within  us  which  we  call  truth. 
When  our  thoughts  exactly  correspond  with  this  reality  we  have  apprehended  truth. 
When  we  conform  ourselves  to  this  we  are  true.  If  our  thought  does  not  exactly 
correspond  with  this  reahty  we  are  in  error,  and  error  is  a  mischief  to  us.  We 
disobey  the  laws,  we  abuse  the  things  about  us,  we  are  like  blind  men  striking 
against  obstacles,  falling  into  pits.  The  nature  of  things  remains  unchanged,  the 
laws  are  immutable,  but  we  are  false  to  them.  Truth  is  not  merely  to  be  known, 
it  is  to  be  transmitted  into  life.  Man  is  to  be  so  hearty  in  his  allegiance  to  the 
truth  he  knows,  that  he  lives  it  and  speaks  it.  The  man  who  knows  the  truth  and 
disobeys  it,  is  false  in  his  nature.  He  may  not  deceive  his  neighbours  as  to  himself. 
Every  one  may  know  he  is  a  false  man,  but  his  whole  life  is  bearing  false  witness 
as  to  the  truth,  and  as  to  it  may  deceive  many.  The  greater  part  of  the  truth  we 
possess  we  have  derived  from  others.  There  is  an  exchange  of  truth.  Men  who 
search  in  one  realm  give  the  truth  they  find  to  their  fellows  who  are  searching  in 
other  realms,  and  receive  truth  from  them  in  return,  and  each  generation  leaves  its 
rich  legacy  of  inherited  and  acquired  truth  to  the  following,  and  thus  the  race 
advances  in  the  knowledge  of  truth.  Wide  is  the  realm  of  truth,  in  earth  and  sky, 
in  matter  and  spirit,  in  time  and  eternity.  Man  should  not  shut  his  fellow  out  from 
any  portion  of  it.  If  any  one  bears  false  witness  to  any  part  of  the  wide  realm  of 
truth,  it  is  always  against  his  neighbour,  depriving  him  wrongfully  of  that  which  is 
of  the  greatest  importance  to  his  well-being.  Great  is  the  difference  between  truth 
and  falsehood.  Infinity  and  eternity  cannot  measure  it.  Of  God  it  is  said  ;  "  He 
is  light.  He  is  the  truth."  Of  the  devil  it  is  said :  "  There  is  no  truth  in  him. 
He  is  a  liar  and  the  father  of  it."  Hell  is  the  home  of  universal  falsehood  and 
distrust.  Each  one  there  is  alone  in  the  midst  of  others,  deceiving  and  being 
deceived,  distrusting  and  being  distrusted.  Heaven  is  the  home  of  universal  truth 
and  confidence.  The  more  we  follow  truth,  the  nearer  we  advance  to  God.  The 
truths  in  nature  are  His  thoughts,  wTitten  on  the  heavens  in  light,  on  the  earth  in 
beauty,  on  our  souls  in  virtue.  As  we  express  truth  we  help  others  to  advance  to 
Him,  by  small  steps  or  large,  according  to  the  importance  of  the  truths  we  speak. 
The  Commandment  requires  truth  in  ordinary  conversation.  Conjecture  and 
partial  information  must  be  spoken  of  as  such,  not  made  to  pass  for  complete 
knowledge.  We  must  strive  to  know  fully,  that  we  may  speak  clearly.  Vivid, 
sprightliness,  and  colour  may  be  employed  to  interest  in  and  set  forth  the  truth, 
not  to  gain  applause,  and  all  exaggeration  must  be  avoided.  Our  aim  must  not  be 
selfish,  to  be  considered  as  having  had  a  wonderful  experience,  or  as  having  fine 
descriptive  powers,  or  as  being  well  informed,  but  simply  to  convey  truth  to  our 
neighbour.  In  all  those  cases  in  which  we  speak  to  our  neighbour  with  intent  to 
lead  him  to  a  desired  Hne  of  conduct,  our  self-interest  may  be  aroused  against  oar 
loyalty  to  truth.  Mental  reservation,  double  meaning,  significant  silence,  the  end 
justifies  the  means,  and  all  kindred  evasions,  may  quiet  a  confused  conscience,  but 
will  never  do  to  plead  before  a  truth-loving  God.  But,  says  the  business  man, 
must  I  reveal  the  defects  in  the  property  I  am  trying  to  sell  ?  Must  I  reveal  the 
fact  I  have  skilfully  acquired,  that  prices  in  the  market  will  be  much  lower  to- 
morrow ?  Certainly,  you  must,  or  you  will  both  lie  and  steal  in  one  act.  We  are 
to  speak  truth,  again,  not  only  to  our  neighbour,  but  about  him.     This  Command- 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS,  397 

ment  guards  a  man's  reputation — gives  each  man  a  right  to  have  his  reputation  the 
exact  expression  of  his  character.  We  should  guard  against  secret  prejudice 
against  our  neighbour,  or  envy  of  him,  and  should  cultivate  such  love  for  him  that, 
we  will  rejoice  in  his  good  qualities  and  in  his  good  name,  that  we  will  sorrow  over 
the  faults  in  him  we  cannot  help  seeing,  and  throw  over  them  the  garment  of 
Christian  charity,  rather  than  exulting  to  proclaim  them  to  the  world.  This 
Commandment  should  govern  not  only  our  tongues,  but  our  hearts  and  ears  as  well. 
It  forbids  an  appetite  for  gossip,  a  desire  to  hear  detraction,  and  a  tendency  to  form 
unfavourable  opinions  of  others.  By  holding  our  peace  when  we  have  it  in  our 
power  to  defend,  by  failing  to  mention  the  good  when  the  evil  is  spoken  of,  by 
encouraging  the  telling  of  evil  by  eager  listening,  we  assault  the  reputation  of  our 
neighbour  by  the  assent  of  our  silence.  There  is  a  modern  statue  of  Truth,  instinct 
with  the  fire  of  genius,  which  strongly  incites  an  opposite  spirit  and  action.  A 
stately  woman  in  pure  white  marble,  with  beautiful  and  firm  face,  wears  on  her 
head  a  helmet  and  carries  a  sword  in  her  hand.  At  her  feet  lies  a  mask  touched 
by  the  point  of  her  sword.  She  has  just  smitten  it  from  the  face  of  Slander,  and 
now  she  proudly  draws  her  robe  away  from  its  polluting  touch.  (F.  S.  Sc]ienck.) 
Ihe  Ninth  Commandment : — I.  This  command  prohibits  lying.  1.  What  a  lie  is. 
(1)  A  lie,  according  to  St.  Austin's  definition  of  it,  is  a  voluntary  speaking  of  an 
untruth,  with  an  intent  to  deceive.  (2)  Lies  are  usually  distinguished  into  three 
kinds,  (a)  There  is  a  jocular  lie  :  a  lie,  framed  to  excite  mirth  and  laughter  ;  not 
to  deceive  the  hearer,  only  to  please  and  divert  him.  (b)  There  is  an  officious  lie  : 
which  is  told  for  another's  benefit  and  advantage  ;  and  seems  to  make  an  abundant 
compensation  for  its  falsehood,  by  its  use  and  profit,  (c)  There  is  a  malicious  and 
pernicious  lie  :  a  lie,  devised  on  purpose  for  the  hurt  and  damage  of  my  neighbour. 
2.  Now,  for  the  aggravations  of  this  sin,  consider — (1)  It  is  a  sin,  that  makes  you 
most  like  unto  the  devil.  (2)  Consider,  that  it  is  a  sin  most  contrary  to  the 
nature  of  God,  who  is  truth  itself.  (3)  Consider,  that  it  is  a  sin,  tbat  gives  in  a 
fearful  evidence  against  us,  that  we  belong  to  the  devil,  and  are  his  children.  (4) 
Consider,  how  dreadfully  God  hath  threatened  it  with  eternal  death  (Eev.  xxii.  15). 
(5)  A  lie  showeth  a  most  degenerous  and  cowardly  fear  of  men,  and  a  most  daring 
contempt  of  the  great  God.  (6)  Mankind  generally  account  it  the  most  infamous 
and  reproacbful  sin  of  all  others.  (7)  It  is  a  sin  that  God  will  detect ;  and  exposeth 
those  who  are  guilty  of  it  to  shame  and  contempt  (Prov.  xii.  19).  II.  There 
remain  two  other  violations  of  this  Commandment :  the  one  is,  by  slandeb  and 
DETRACTION  ;  the  other,  by  base  flattery  and  soothing.  And  both  these  may  respect 
either  ourselves  or  others.  1.  Indeed  slander  and  detraction  seem  somewhat  to 
differ.  For  slander,  propeily,  is  a  false  imputation  of  vice;  but  detraction  is  a 
causeless,  diminishing  report  of  virtue.  (1)  If  thou  wouldst  keep  thyself  from  being 
a  slanderer  of  others,  addict  not  thyself  violently  to  any  one  party  or  persuasion  of 
men.  (2)  If  thou  wouldst  not  be  guilty  of  slander,  be  not  busy  in  other  men's 
affairs.  (3)  If  thou  wouldst  not  be  guilty  of  slander,  be  frequent  in  reflecting  upon 
thine  own  miscarriages ;  or  thy  proneness  to  fall  into  the  same,  or  greater  faults. 
(4)  If  you  would  not  be  guilty  of  slander,  listen  not  unto  those  who  are  slanderers 
and  detractors.  (5)  If  you  would  not  be  slanderers  of  others  be  not  self-lovers. 
For  self-love  always  causeth  envy  ;  and  envy  detraction.  (6)  Be  not  too  easy  and 
facile  to  entertain  suspicious  and  evil  surmises  against  others.  III.  The  third  sin 
against  this  Commandment  is  base  flattery  and  soothing  ;  which  is  a  quite 
opposite  extreme  to  the  other,  as  both  are  opposite  to  truth.  Now  this  is,  either  self- 
flattery,  or  the  flattering  of  others.  1.  There  is  a  self-flattery.  Learn,  therefore, 
O  Christian,  to  take  the  just  measure  of  thyself.  2.  There  is  a  sinful  flattering  of 
others  :  and  that,  either  by  an  immoderate  extolling  of  their  virtues ;  or,  what  is  worse, 
by  a  wicked  commendation  even  of  their  very  vices.  This  is  a  sin  most  odious  unto 
God,  who  hath  threatened  to  cut  off  all  flattering  hps  (Psa.  xii.  3).  (lip.  E.Hopkins.) 
Slander  : — A  man  of  overweening  curiosity  who  looked  down  his  neighbour's 
chimney  to  see  what  he  was  cooking  for  supper,  not  only  failed  to  find  out  what 
he  desiied  to  know,  but  was  nearly  blinded  by  the  smoke.  Somebody  has  con- 
veyed a  well-deserved  rebuke  to  such  unamiable  people,  who  said,  "  If  we  would 
sit  down  by  our  neighbour's  tire  occas^ionally,  instead  of  looking  down  his  chimney, 
we  would  see  many^  good  points  in  his  character  that  smoke  will  certainly  obscure.'' 
There  are  so  many  ways  of  kindling  a  flame  by  the  poisonous  breath  of  slander, 
that  only  a  ftw  of  them  can  now  be  refeiTcd  to.  I.  Perverting  one's  words  or 
ACTIONS  IS  AN  EVEEY-DAY  OCCURRENCE.  II.  Another  way  by  which  flames  are  often 
kindled  to  the  damage  -of  one's  good  name,  is -the  habit  of  jumping  to  conclusions 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i£) 

WITHOUT  sDFFiciEXT  EVIDENCE  TO  SUSTAIN  THEM.  While  WilbcrfoTce  occupied  his 
prominent  place  in  the  British  parliament  he  was  exceedingly  annoyed  by  finding 
himself  chronicled  in  opposition  papers  as  "  St.  Wilberfoi-ce."  "  He  was  lately 
seen,"  said  tbe  slanderous  print,  "walking  up  and  down  in  the  pump-room  at 
Bach,  reading  his  prayers,  like  his  predecessors  of  old,  who  prayed  at  the  corners  of 
the  streets  to  be  seen  of  men  !  "  Mr.  Wilberforce,  who  was  not  more  distinguished 
for  his  brilliant  mental  gifts  than  for  his  unobtrusive  goodness,  remarked  upon  this 
wanton  falsehood :  "  As  there  is  generally  some  slight  circumstance  which  perverse- 
ness  turns  into  a  charge  or  reproach,  I  began  to  reflect,  and  I  soon  foi  nd  the 
occasion  of  the  calumny.  I  was  walking  in  the  pump-room,  in  conversali  n  with 
a  friend  ;  a  passage  from  Horace  was  quoted,  the  accuracy  of  which  was  questioned, 
and  as  I  had  a  copy  of  the  Latin  poet  in  my  pocket,  I  took  it  out  and  read  the 
words.  This  was  the  plain  "  bit  of  wire  "  which  factious  malignity  sharpened 
into  a  pin  to  pierce  my  reputation."  It  is  pitiful  to  think  how  many  ugly  pins 
have  been   fashioned  out  of  smaller  bits  of  wire  than   that  1      IH.  The   crueij 

PURPOSES  OF  bLANDEK  MAT  ALSO  BE  ACCOMPLISHED  BY  SLY  INSINUATIONS  AND  CRAFTY 
QUESTIONS   CALCULATED    TO    AROUSE    SERIOUS    AND   DAMAGING    SUSPICIONS.       When     any 

one  spoke  evil  of  another  in  the  presence  of  Peter  the  Great,  he  would  promptly 
stop  him  and  say,  "  Well,  now  ;  but  has  he  not  got  a  bright  side  ?     Come,  tell  me 
what  good  you  know  of  him.     It  is  easy  to  splash  mud ;  but  I  would  rather  help  a 
man   to  keep-  his   coat  clean ! "      IV.  Slander   is   encouraged   by    those    who 
PATIENTLY  LISTEN  TO  IT,  and  who  prompt  the  cruel  person  to  vent  his  venom  on 
the  innocent.     (J.  H.  Norton,  D.D.)         Violations  of  the  law  of  truth: — I.  Mis- 
representation.    It  is  an  ingenious  method  to  class  an  opponent  with  those  whom 
the  world  has  already  condemned  as  heterodox.     It  is  still  another  to  make  his 
truth  responsible  for  all  the  folly  that  unwise  minds  have  added  to  it.    II.  Insinua- 
tion.    A  whisper  dropped  carelessly  in  some  corner  among  the  combustibles,  a 
look,  a  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  a  sneer,  a  laugh  may  serve  the  purpose.     Rumour 
with  most  minds  is  presumptive  evidence,  and  they  will  say  with  a  knowing  air, 
"  There  must  be  some  fire  in  so  much  smoke."     III.  Detraction.     If  we  be  unable 
to  find  evil  in  the  opinions  or  actions  of  another,  we  can  attribute  his  good  to 
doubtful  motives.     IV.  Talebearing.     Is  there,  I  pray  you,  a  creature  more  con- 
temptible than  this,  who  fattens  on  the  griefs  of  others,  and  passes  day  and  night 
in  such  petty  larceny  ?     How  few  dream  of  their  responsibility  in  this !     We  know 
the  power  of  strychnine  or  arsenic,  but  not  of  a  word.     What  undesigned  phrases 
we  drop  in  conversation,  and  forget  as  soon  as  passed,  yet  they  are  never  forgotten  1 
What   insignificant  insects  may   have   a  fatal   sting !     (£.  A.    WaKhbum,  D.D.) 
The  Ninth  Commandment : — This   Commandment  requires  us,  as  the  Catechism 
says,  "to  keep  our  tongues  from  evil-speaking,  lying,  and  slandering."     Slandering 
means  saying  anything  that  will  injure  the  character  of  another  person.     There 
was  a  company  of  ladies  once  at  the  house  of  a  clergyman.     As  he  entered  the  room 
he  heard  them  speaking  in  a  low  voice  of  an  absent  friend.     "  She's  very  odd,"  says 
one.     "  Yes>,  very  singular  indeed,"  says  another.     "  Do  you  know,  she  often  does 
so  and  so  ?  "  says  a  third,  mentioning  certain  things  to  her  discredit.     The  clergy- 
man asked  who  it  was.     When  told,  he  said,  "  Oh  yes,  she  is  odd  ;  she's  very  odd ; 
she's  remarkably  singular.     Why,  would  you  believe  it  ?  "  he  added,  in  a  slow, 
impressive  manner ;  "  she  was  never  heard  to  speak  ill  of  any  absent  friends !  "     A 
clergyman  was  once  examining  the  children  of  an  infant  school  upon  the  Command- 
ments.    He  put  his  hand  on  the  head  of  a  little  boy,  and  said,  "  My  little  man,  can 
you  tell  me  what  the  Ninth  Commandment  means  by  "  bearing  false  witness  against 
thy  neighbour"?     The  boy  hesitated  a  whilp,  and  then  said,  "  It  means  telling 
lies,  sir."     The  minister  didn't  exactly  like  this  answer,  so  looking  at  a  httle  girl 
who   stood   next   to  him,   he  asked,   "What  do   you  say?"     Without  waiting  a 
moment,  she  replied,  "It's  when  nobody  does  nothing,  and  somebody  goes  and 
tells  of  it."     "Very  good,"  said  the  minister.     The  little  girl's  answer  was  a  very 
funny  one  ;  but  the  little  boy's  was  true.     Bearing  false  witness  is  telling  lies,  and 
telling  lies  is  bearing  false  witness.    We  break  the  Ninth  Commandment  every  time 
we  tell  a  lie.     I.  The   first  reason  why  we  should  never   bear  false  witness   or 
tell  a  lie  is,  because  it  is  a   mean  thing.     Who  was  the  first  person  of  whom 
•we  know  that  ever  told  a  lie  ?     Satan.     Where  was  this  lie  told  ?     In  the  garden  of 
Eden.     Satan  bore  false  witness  against  God.     He  contradicted  God.     This  was 
mean  of  Satan.     He  did  it  out  of  spite.     A  gentleman  once  sent  his  servant  to 
market  with  the  direction  to  bring  home  the  best  thing  he  could  find.     He  carried 
home  tk  tongue.    He  was  sent  again  with  the  direction  to  bring  home  the  worst 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  899 

thing  he  could  find.  Again  he  brought  home  a  tongue.  This  was  right ;  for  the 
tongue  is  the  best  thing  in  the  world  when  properly  used,  or  the  worst  when  not  so 
used.  II.  The  second  reason  why  we  should  not  do  it  is,  because  it  is  an 
UNPKOFiTABi.E  thing.  People  generally  expect  to  make  something  when  they  tell  a 
lie.  III.  The  third  reason  why  we  ought  not  to  do  this  is,  because  it  is  danoekods. 
Lying  is  like  letting  water  through  a  bank.  When  it  once  begins  to  run,  there  is 
no  telliug  where  it  will  stop.  Now,  suppose  it  were  possible  all  at  once  to  draw 
every  bolt  aud  fastening  out  of  that  ship  as  she  sails  over  the  ocean,  what  would 
become  of  her?  She  would  fall  to  pieces  directly,  and  all  her  cargo  would  be  lost. 
Well,  every  family,  every  village  or  town,  is  like  such  a  ship.  It  is  made  up  of  a 
number  of  persons  bound  together.  And  what  binds  them  together  ?  Why,  truth 
or  confidence.  Truth  among  people  in  society  is  like  the  bolt  in  the  shijD.  If 
nobody  told  the  truth,  and  people  had  no  confidence  in  one  another,  they  could  no 
more  live  together  in  families  or  communities,  and  do  business  together,  than  a 
number  of  pieces  of  timber  without  bolts  to  fasten  them  together  could  make  a  ship. 
Would  it  not  be  very  dangerous  to  have  a  person  on  board  a  ship  who  had  a  machine 
for  drawing  the  bolts  out,  and  who  was  trying  to  use  it  all  the  time?  Certainly  it 
would.  Well,  lying  is  such  a  machine.  IV.  Our  fourth  and  last  reason  is,  we 
ought  not  to  do  it  because  it  is  a  wicked  thing.  This  is  shown  by — 1.  What  God 
says  of  liars  (see  Prov.  vi.  19 ;  xii.  5).  2.  What  God  does  with  liars  (seeBev.  xxi.  8). 
(R.  Newton,  D.D.)         On  the  sin  of  bearing  false  loitness  : — I.  First,  what  aee  the 

DIFFERENT  SENSES  In  WHICH  A  MAN  MAY  BE  SAID  TO  BEAR  FALSE  WITNESS  AGAINST  HIS 
NEIGHBOUR.        II.    ThE    ENORMITY     OF     THE     SIN     OF     BEARING     FALSE     WITNESS.       The 

malignity  of  an  offence  arises  either  from  the  motives  that  prompted  it  or  the 
consequences  produced  by  it.     The  most  usual  incitement  to  defamation  is  envy, 
or  impatience  of  the  merit,  or  success  of  other  ;  a  malice  raised  not  by  any  injury 
received,  but   merely   by  the   sight  of  that  happiness  which  we   cannot  attain. 
Calumnies  are  sometimes  tbe  offspring  of  resentment.     When  a  man  is  opposed  in 
a  design  which  he  cannot  justify,  and  defeated  in  the  prosecution  of  schemes  of 
tyranny,   extortion,  or  oppression,  he  seldom  fails  to  revenge  his   overthrow  by 
blackening  that  integrity  which  effected  it.     The  consequences  of  this  crime,  what- 
ever be  tbe  inducement  to  commit  it,  are  equally  pernicious.     He  that  attacks  the 
reputation  of  another,  invades  the  most  valuable  part  of  his  property,  and  perhaps 
the  only  part  which  he  can  call  his  own.     (Bp.  J.  Taylor,  D.D.)        Breaches  of 
the  Nintlt    Connnnndment : — I.    In    heart    a    man   may   fail — 1.    By   suspecting 
others  unjustly,  this  is  called  evil  surmising  (1  Tim.  vi.  4),  which  is  when  men 
are  suspected  of  some  evil  without  ground,  as  Potiphar  suspected  Joseph.     2.  By 
rash  judging,  and  unjust  concluding  concerning  a  man's  state,  as  Job's  friends  did  ; 
or  his  actions,  as  Eli  did  of  Hannah,  saying,  that  she  was  drunk,  because  of  the 
moving  of  her  lips.     3.  By  hasty  judging,  too  often  passing  sentence  in  our  mind 
from  some  secniing  evidence  of  that  which  is  only  in  the  lieart,  and  not  in  the  out- 
ward prarttice;  this  is  but  to  judge  before  the  time,  and  hastily  (Matt.  vii.  1).     4. 
There  is  light  judging,  laying  the  weight  of  conclusions  upon  arguments  that  will 
not  bear  it,  as  Job's  friends  did,  and  as  the  barbarians  suspected  Paul,  when  they 
saw  the  viper  on  his  hand,  to  be  a  murderer  (Acts  xxv.  4).     5.  The  breach  of  this 
commind  in  the  heart  may  be  when  suspicion  of  our  neighbour's  failing  is  kept  up, 
and  means  not  used  to  be  satisfied  about  it,  contrary  to  that  (Matt,  xviii.  15).     If 
thy  brother  offend  thee,  (fee,  and  when  we  seek  not  to  be  satisfied,  but  rest  on  pre- 
sumptions, when  they  seem  probable.  II.  In  gesture  this  command  may  be  broken, 
by  nodding,  winking,  or  such  like  (and  even  sometimes  by  silence),  when  these 
import  in  our  accustomed  way  some  tacit  sinistrous  insinuation,  especially  when 
either  they  are  purposed  for  that  end,  or  when  others  are  known  to  mistake  because 
of  them,  and  we  suffer  them  to  continue  under  this  mistake.     III.  By  writing  this 
command  may  be  broken,  as  Ezra,  v.  6. ;  Neh.  vi.  5,  where  calumniating  rebels 
are  written,  aud  sent  by  their  enemies  against  the  Jews  and  Nehemiah  ;  in  which 
respect  many  fail   in  these   days.     IV.  But  words   are   most  properly   the  seat 
wherein  this  sin  is  subjected,  whether  they  be  only  or  merely  words,  or  also  put  in 
writing,    because   in  these   our  conformity  or  disconformity  to  truth   doth   most 
appear.     [James  Durham.)         Slander  : — The  false  witness  which  was  born  against 
the  Puritans  by  the  profligate  wits  of  the  court  of  Charles  II.,  produced  in  the 
mind  of  this  country  a  strong  antagonism  to  the  great  principles  for  which  the 
Puritans  contended.     The  calumnies  which,  during  the  first  two  centuries,  were 
flung  at  the  Christians,  made  many  upright  heathen  believe  that  Christianity  itself 
was  an  execrable  superstition.     Slander  a  clergyman  and  you  help  to  make  the 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

principle  of  an  Established  Church  odious,  and  yoa  try  to  win  the  cause  of 
ecclesiastical  freedom  before  the  tribunal  of  public  opinion  by  "  false  witness  " 
against  your  neighbour.  Slander  a  Nonconformist  and  you  help  to  make  Non- 
conformity odious,  and  you  try  by  "  false  witness  "  against  your  neighbour  to  induce 
the  tribunal  of  public  opinion  to  pronounce  in  favour  of  religious  establishments. 
Pick  up  and  circulate  any  scandal  you  may  happen  to  hear — no  matter  how  un- 
trustworthy the  authority  for  it — to  the  dishonour  of  a  religious  man,  and  vou  do 
what  lies  in  your  power  to  create  a  conviction  in  the  public  mind  that  all  religious 
men  are  hypocrites,  and  that  religion  itself  is  an  imposture.  It  is  by  the  opinion 
which  society  forms  on  individuals  that  its  general  opinions  on  all  questions,  moral, 
religious,  and  political,  are  to  a  very  large  extent  created  ;  and  to  bear  "  false 
witness  "  either  for  or  against  any  man  is  to  attempt  to  deceive  and  to  mislead  that 
great  Tribunal — whose  decisions  affect  not  merely  the  happiness  and  the  reputation 
of  particular  men,  but  the  formation  of  the  conscience  and  the  judgment  of  the 
whole  nation.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  False  icitness  : — There  was  a  boy  of  the 
name  of  John  Busby.  He  said  once,  "  What  a  wicked  man  Mr.  Bradburry  is."  A 
gentleman  said  to  him,  "  I  do  not  think  he  is  wicked  ;  I  tbink  he  is  very  good  ;  he 
is  always  on  the  line  of  his  duty."  "  I  only  know,"  said  John,  "  that  he  went  to 
church  last  Sunday,  and  he  slept  all  through  the  sermon."  The  otber  was  very 
much  surprised,  because  he  thought  Mr.  Bradburry  was  a  very  good  man ;  so  he 
said  to  the  boy,  "  Can  you  tell  me  what  the  text  was  ?  "  "  No,  I  can't,"  said  John  ; 
"  but  I  can  tell  you  Mr.  Bradburry  was  asleep  all  tbe  time."  "  Then,"  said  the 
gentleman  to  him,  "I  happen  to  know  the  text;  for  Mr.  Bradburry  told  me  not 
only  the  text,  but  all  about  the  sermon.  You  say  he  was  fast  asleep ;  but  I  can 
tell  you  he  has  got  very  weak  eyes,  nnd  there  is  a  gas  lamp  between  him  and  the 
pulpit ;  and  he  is  obliged  to  shut  his  eyes  because  he  cannot  stand  the  light."  Do 
you  see,  that  was  "  bearing  false  witness  "  on  the  part  of  John  Busby;  tliat  was 
slander,  taking  away  his  character.  We  must  not  bear  "  false  witness."  We  used 
sometimes  to  play  a  game  called  "  Scandal."  It  is  a  very  good  game.  You  all  sit 
round  in  a  circle,  and  somebody  tells  a  person  at  one  end  a  story  he  lias  heard 
about  something  or  somebody — anything  you  like.  He  whispers  it  to  the  next  one, 
and  he  again  whispers  it  to  the  next,  and  he  to  the  next,  and  to  the  next.  Wbeu 
it  comes  to  the  last  person,  he  is  to  say  aloud  what  he  has  had  wliispered  to  him, 
and  the  first  is  to  say  what  he  had  said.  Often  the  act  of  repeating  it  all  around 
makes  it  seem  quite  a  different  story.  That  is  called  "  Scandal  "  or  "  Slander." 
Y'ou  try  that  game  some  day,  and  it  will  teach  you  the  importance  of  being  very 
exact  in  repeating  what  you  hear,  if  you  would  not  "bear  false  witness."  (J. 
Vauglian.)  A  cure  for  backbiting  : — A  gentleman  writes  that  he  once  saw  tne 
title  "  Slander  Book,"  printed  on  the  back  of  a  small  ledger  in  a  friend's  house. 
On  examining  it,  he  found  that  the  various  members  of  the  household  were  charged 
so  much  for  every  piece  of  slander  they  were  found  uttering.  The  accounts  were 
very  neatly  and  correctly  kept,  credits  entered,  &c.,  as  in  a  merchant's  office.  The 
plan  originated  with  a  good  young  girl,  who  had  observed  the  wretched  effects  of 
evil-speaking  in  families  and  in  the  neighbourhood.  ScawrfaZ  .-—The  story  is  told 
of  a  woman  who  freely  used  her  tongue  to  the  scandal  of  others,  and  made  con- 
fession to  the  priest  of  what  she  had  done.  He  gave  her  a  ripe  thistle  top,  and 
told  her  to  go  out  in  various  directions  and  scatter  the  seeds,  one  by  one.  Wonder- 
ing at  the  penance,  she  obeyed,  and  then  returned  and  told  her  confessor.  To  her 
amazement,  he  bade  her  go  back  and  gather  the  scattered  seeds ;  and  when  she 
objected  that  it  would  be  impossible,  he  replied,  that  it  would  be  still  more  difficult 
to  gather  up  and  destroy  all  evil  reports  which  she  had  circulated  about  others. 
Any  thoughtless,  careless  child  can  scatter  a  handful  of  thistle-seed  before  the  wind 
in  a  moment,  but  the  strongest  and  wisest  man  cannot  gather  them  again. 

Ver.  17.  Thou  shalt  not  coyet. — The  Tenth  Commandment : — I.  The  history  6i 
the  world  is  stained  and  darkened  by  the  crimes  to  which  nations  have  been 
DRIVEN  BY  the  SPIRIT  OF  covETOusNESs.  Covctousncss  is  forbidden  not  merely  to 
prevent  the  miseries,  and  horrors,  and  crimes  of  aggressive  war,  but  to  train  the 
spirit  of  nations  to  the  recognition  of  God's  own  idea  of  their  relations  to  each 
other.  Nations  should  see  underlying  this  Commandment  the  Divine  idea  of  the 
unity  of  the  human  race ;  they  should  learn  to  seek  greatness  by  ministering  to 
each  other's  peace,  security,  prosperity,  and  happiness.  II.  iNDrviPUALS,  as  well 
AS  NATIONS,  may  VIOLATE  THIS  LAW.  They  may  do  it — 1.  By  ambition.  2.  By 
discontent  and  envy.     3.  By  the  desire  to  win  from  another  man  the  love  which  ia 


CHAP.  XX.]  BXODUS.  401 

the  pride  and  joy  of  his  life.  The  very  end  for  which  Christ  came  was  to  redeem 
us  from  selfishness.  The  last  of  the  Ten  Commandments  touches  the  characterislio 
precept  of  the  new  law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  (li.  W.  Dale, 
D.D.)  Coveting  prohibited  : — I.  What  is  coveting?  The  Hebrew  word  is  really 
but  expressive  of  a  strong  controlling  desire.  This  is  not  forbidden  ^jcr  se  in  the 
Commandment,  but  a  special  form  of  coveting,  determined  by  the  objects  enumerated. 
Prussic  acid  in  itself  is  not  bad — it  is  just  as  good  as  bread  or  milk ;  but  it  would  be 
evil  in  me  to  use  or  seek  prussic  acid  as  my  food,  because  its  relation  to  me  in  that 
case  would  be  pernicious.  II.  What  aee  the  objects  which  we  must  not  covet  ? 
If  anything  belongs  to  our  neighbour,  either  by  the  tie  of  property,  as  a  house,  or 
by  the  tie  of  domestic  union,  as  a  wife,  it  thereby  partakes  of  the  sacredness  of  his 
own  person,  and  is  so  to  be  viewed  by  us.  The  coveting  any  such  object  for  our- 
selves is  directly  at  war  with  this  view.  It  pollutes  this  sanctity,  it  destroys  in  our 
heart  the  harmony  of  things  and  introduces  confusion.  Anything  appertaining  to 
our  neighbour  is  in  such  relation  to  us  as  to  condemn  all  coveting.  The  elements 
of  his  wrath,  his  happiness,  his  fame,  his  success,  are  all  included.  His  time, 
his  talents,  his  opportunities,  his  advantages,  so  far  as  they  are  peculiarly  his  and 
are  not  common  to  all,  are  in  the  same  category.  III.  What  is  the  harm  of 
COVETING  ?  1.  It  degrades  our  neighbour  in  our  heart.  2.  We  are  nursing  the 
brood  of  sin  in  our  soul.  It  is  spiritual  corruption — gangrene.  You  are  carefully 
cherishing  the  eggs  of  envy,  jealousy,  malice,  anger,  and  revenge,  when  you  indulge 
in  your  unhallowed  desires ;  and  these  dire  monsters  will  be  batched  and  become 
your  irresistible  masters  before  you  are  aware.  IV.  How  shall  we  avoid  this  evil 
COVETING  ?  "  Set  your  affection  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth."  The 
desires  of  the  heart  are  not  to  be  annihilated,  man  is  not  to  be  reduced  to  an  inert 
lump,  his  passions  are  to  burn  as  brightly  as  ever,  his  eager  heart  to  beat  as 
strongly  as  before,  yet  not  for  worldly  jewels,  but  for  heaven's  crown.  The  current 
is  to  run  as  swiftly  as  before,  but  now  in  a  new  channel.  We  are  to  seek  first — 
that  is,  as  chief — the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,  (H.  Crosby,  D.D.) 
Inordinate  dedre  forbidden  : — Love  is  compatible  with  desire,  but  it  is  not  consistent 

■  with  inordinate  desire.  I.  The  violation  of  this  command  arraigns  the  wisdom 
OF  Providence.  II.  The  violation  of  this  command  distobbs  the  balance  of 
society.  III.  The  violation  of  this  command  produces  criminal  deeds.  IV.  The 
violation  of  this  command  embitters  existence.  V.  This  command  can  only  be 
kept  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  {W.  Burrows,  B. A.)  The  law  of  motive  : — 
1.  Human  laws  cannot  meddle  with  a  man's  desires  ;  they  may  control  his  conduct, 
may  even  punish  bis  utterances  ;  but  any  attempt  to  fetter  his  wishes  would  be  as 
futile  as  to  chain  the  free  winds,  or  restrain  the  ocean's  tides.  Therefore,  when 
this  Commandment  says,  "  Thou  shalt  notcovet,"  Ac,  it  gives  a  plain  warning  that 
the  Decalogue  is  something  more  than  a  criminal  code.  2,  Again,  a  man's  desires 
can  only  be  known  to  God  and  himself,  and  no  other  person  has  any  right  to  rule 
them.  Therefore,  when  this  Commandment  lays  claim  to  such  a  right,  it  manifestly 
speaks  in  the  name  of  God.  I.  What  is  the  essential  principle  of  this  Command- 
ment ?     1.  What  is  forbidden  is  unlawful  desire.     We  are  to  cherish  contentment ; 

•  to  avoid  discontent  and  envy.     (1)  What  is  there  in  repining  to  induce  success  ? 

'Grumbling  makes  mischief,  but  it  does  no  work.  It  sours  men  ;  renders  them  un- 
thankful to  God,  and  unjust  to  their  neighbours  ;  destroys  their  peace  and  paralyzess 

'their  courage;  blinds  them  to  their  blessings,  so  that  they  become  "poor  itt 
abundance,  and  famished  at  a  feast " ;  but  far  from  helping  them  in  the  race  of 
life  it  is  the  direst  of  hindrances.  (2)  And  discontent  is  no  whit  wiser  when  it  takes 
the  name  of  ambition.  He  that  would  be  wretched  all  his  days,  cold  in  the  sun- 
shine, and  parched   beside  the  running  stream,  let  him  be  ambitious !     He   that 

'"would  sow  scorpions  to  torment  his  latter  days,  let  him  be  ambitious  !  "  By  that 
sin  fell  the  angels."  2.  But  of  all  violations  of  this  Commandment,  the  Scriptures 
single  out  for  especial  reprobation  the  greed  of  money.  Even  when  there  is  no 
apparent  disregard  of  the  rights  of  others,  the  inordinate  love  of  gain — "  accursed 

t hunger  of  pernicious  gold" — is  stigmatized  with  the  name  of  covetousness.  But, 
it  may  be  asked,  if  it  is  lawful  to  make  money,  why  is  it  unlawful  to  love  money? 

The  answer  is, 'that  money  should  be  only  a  means  to  an  end,  the  end  being  the 
glorifying  of  God  with  our  substance ;  but  a  man  cannot  serve  two  masters.  If  we 
love  the  means,  we  cease  to  love  the  end;  and  the  love  of  money  is  forbidden 
because  it  kills  the  love  of  God.  II.  The  special  function  of  this  Commandment. 
1.  To  awaken  a  conviction  of  moral  failure.     The  ordinary  course  of  many  a  man's 

^zaoral  iife  might  be  compared  to  tlie  glassy  surface  ot  a  river,  smooth  because  un- 

2G 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

disturbed.  If  in  that  swift  torrent,  at  mid-channel,  some  firmly-bedded  rock 
obtrudes  itself,  there  is  a  sudden  swirling  and  commotion,  the  opposition  reveals  the 
current.  Like  that  rock  is  this  law  of  motive.  It  does  not  cause,  does  not  reverse 
the  stream,  but  it  discovers  it.  Oh,  terrible  illumination  !  2.  So  in  the  providence 
of  God  the  way  is  prepared  for  a  gospel  of  grace  and  truth.  III.  The  secbet  of 
THIS  law's  FULriLMENT.  We  Can  perfectly  keep  no  CommanJment  except  as  we 
have  learned  the  law  of  motive  ;  and  we  can  keep  the  law  of  motive  only  as  we  do 
it  with  loving  hearts.  1.  Without  love  no  law  can  be  truly  obeyed,  whether  to  God 
or  our  neighbour  ;  but  he  that  loves  as  Christ  loved,  will  love  rightly ;  he  that  loves 
rightly  will  desire  rightly ;  and  he  that  desires  rightly  will  keep  both  this  Command- 
ment and  all  the  Decalogue.  2.  This  spirit  of  neighbourly  love  needs  to  be  em- 
powered by  the  grace  of  Christ.  Our  Saviour  is  not  only  the  Pattern,  but  also  the 
Source  of  it.  (IF.  J.  Woods,  B.A.)  The  Tenth  Commandment :  —I.  Let  us  inquire, 
What  is  covetousness  ?  1.  Covetousness  is  the  unlawful  desire  of  temporal  good  ; 
when  we  wish  for  that  which  we  have  not,  or  when  we  wish  for  that  which  is  another's. 
2.  Covetousness  consists  in  an  inordinate  desire  after  natural  good,  although  the 
desire  itself  be  not  unlawful.  In  the  one  case,  the  matter  of  the  desire  is  to  be 
condemned ;  in  this  case  the  measure  and  degree  in  which  that  desire  is  cherished 
and  indulged.  3.  An  undue  delight  and  satisfaction  in  created  good,  is  another 
form  of  covetousness.  4.  All  discontentment  of  spirit,  envious  repining,  and  un- 
charitable judging  towards  our  neighbour,  his  prosperity  and  possessions,  partake 
of  the  nature  of  covetousness  ;  discontent  with  the  lot  and  station  which  God  has 
appointed  us ;  envious  repinings  at  the  prosperity  and  success  of  others.  II.  I  am 
now  to  show  you  ITS  high  cihminality;  or,  to  use  the  language  of  Scripture,  its 
"  exceeding  sinfulness."  1.  That  it  stands  directly  opposed  to  the  benevolence 
of  Deity ;  God  is  infinitely  good,  and  He  is  infinitely  kind.  2.  This  is  a  sin 
which  is  peculiarly  dishonouring  to  God,  as  well  as  expressly  contrary  to  His 
revealed  will.  3.  This  disposition  of  mind  is  a  direct  and  too  prevalent  impediment 
to  the  introduction  of  Divine  truth  into  the  heart  of  man.  It  is  the  pre-occupancy 
which  the  world  has  insured  in  our  thoughts,  and  affections,  and  desires,  which 
keeps  us  at  a  distance  from  Christ,  and  the  blessing  of  his  redemption.  4.  This 
sin  is  peculiarly  destructive  of  the  peace  and  happiness  of  human  society.  5.  This 
sin,  above  all  others,  deludes,  hardens,  and  destroys.  It  deludes.  Few  persons, 
who  are  under  the  influence  of  covetousness,  ever  suspect  it.  It  conceals  itself 
under  very  plausible  names,  and  specious  disguises,  such  as  prudence  and  foresight, 
frugality  and  good  thrift.  Terms  much  misapplied.  And  this  sin  not  only  deludes, 
but  hardens.  "  Take  heed,  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness 
of  sin,"  and  more  particularly  this  sin.  There  is  nothing  which  so  indurates  the 
soul,  depriving  it  of  its  finest  sensations,  eradicating  its  tenderest  sympathies,  and 
drying  up  its  noblest  sensibilities,  as  covetousness.  It  tends  to  throw  an  armour 
of  proof  around  the  mind  under  its  tyranny,  which  no  arrow  of  conviction  can 
pierce,  and  of  which  it  is  most  difficult  to  strip  the  possessor.  Whatever  men  may 
think  or  say,  this  sin,  without  intervening  pardon  and  repentance,  will  assuredly 
destroy  the  soul.  6.  This  is  a  sin  which,  of  all  others,  inflicts  upon  the  subject  of 
it  the  worst  miseries  here,  while  it  prepares  for  eternal  misery  hereafter.  (G. 
Clayton.)  The   Tenth   Commandment: — I.  The  duties  beqi  ired.      1.   I  shall 

consider  the  duty  of  this  command  as  it  respects  ourselves.  A  thorough  weaned- 
ness  from  and  indifferency  to  all  those  things  that  we  have,  in  which  our  desire 
may  be  too  eager.  There  are  some  things  whereof  our  desire  cannot  be  too  much, 
as  of  God,  Christ,  grace,  victory  over  sin  ;  and  therefore  we  read  of  a  holy  lusting 
(Gal.  V.  17).  There  are  other  things  to  which  our  desires  may  be  carried  out  too 
eagerly  and  inordinately.  Thus  we  may  sin,  not  only  in  the  inordinate  desire  of 
sensual  things,  as  meat,  drink,  &c.,  but  in  rational  things,  as  honour,  esteem,  <fec, 
(1)  Hearty  renunciation  of  our  own  will,  saying,  with  the  pattern  of  contentment, 
"  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  We  must  no  more  be  choosers  for  ourselves  of 
our  own  lot ;  but  as  little  children  standing  at  the  table,  not  to  carve  for  themselves, 
but  to  take  the  bit  that  is  given  them.  (2)  Absolute  resignation  to  the  will  of  the 
Lord  (Matt.  xvi.  24 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18).  2.  We  are  to  consider  the  duty  of  this  com- 
mand, as  it  respects  our  neighbour.  And  that  is  a  right  and  charitable  or  loving 
frame  of  spirit  towards  himself  and  all  that  is  his.  (1)  Love  to  our  neighbour's 
person,  as  to  ourselves  (Eom.  xiii.  9).  (2)  An  upright  respect  to  what  is  his,  for  hia 
sake.  As  we  are  to  love  himself  for  God's  sake,  so  what  is  his  for  his  sake  (Deut. 
xxii.  1).  (3)  An  hearty  desire  of  his  welfare  and  prosperity  in  all  things,  as  of  our 
own,  his  honour,  Hfe,   chastity,  wealth,  good  name,  and   whatever  is  his.    (4) 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  403 

A  real  complacency  in  his  welfare  and  the  welfare  of  what  is  his  (Rom.  xii.  15).  (5) 
A  cordial  sympathy  with  him  in  any  evil  that  befalls  him  (Rom.  xii.  20).  II.  The 
SINS  FORBIDDEN.  This  Command  is  a  curb  and  bridle  to  the  distempered  heart  of 
man,  which  of  all  parts  of  man  is  the  hardest  to  be  commanded  and  kept  within 
bounds.  Men  may  be  of  a  courteous  obliging  behaviour,  keep  in  their  hands  from 
killing,  or  what  tendeth  thereunto,  their  bodies  from  uncleanness,  their  hands  from 
stealing,  and  their  tongues  from  lying ;  while,  in  the  meantime,  the  heart  in  all 
these  respects  may  be  going  within  the  breast  like  a  troubled  sea,  unto  which  this 
command  by  Divine  authority  saith,  "Peace,  be  still."  The  heart  distempered 
by  original  sins  runs  out  in  the  irascible  faculty  in  tormenting  passions,  bearing  an 
aversion  of  the  heart  to  what  the  Lord  in  His  wisdom  lays  before  men.  I  will  show 
the  evil  of  discontentment,  and  paint  out  this  sin  in  its  black  colours.  It  is  the 
hue  of  hell  all  over.  1.  Discontent  is,  in  the  nature  of  it,  a  compound  of  the 
blackest  ingredients,  the  scum  of  the  corrupt  heart  boiling  up,  and  mixed  to  make 
up  the  hellish  composition.  (1)  Unsubjection  to  and  rebellion  against  the  will  of 
God  (Hos.  iv.  16).  (2)  Sorrow  of  heart  under  the  Divine  dispensation  towards 
them.  (3)  Anger  and  wrath  against  their  lot  (Jude  16).  Thus  the  discontented  do 
in  their  hearts  bark  at  the  mountains  of  brass  (Zech.  vi.  1);  as  dogs  do  at  the 
moon,  and  with  the  same  success.  2.  If  ye  view  discontentment  in  the  rise  of  it, 
ye  will  see  further  into  the  evil  of  it.  It  takes  its  rise  from — (1)  A  blinded  judgment 
which  puts  darkness  for  liyht,  and  light  for  darkness,  and  cnnnot  see  into  the 
wisdom  if  the  conduct  of  Providence.  (2)  A  proud  heart.  (H)  An  unmortified 
affection  to  the  creature  (1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10).  (4)  A  spirit  of  unbelief.  3.  View  it  in 
the  effect,  and  it  will  appear  very  black.  The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.  (1)  It 
mars  communion  with  and  access  to  God.  (2)  It  quite  unfits  a  man  for  holy  duties, 
so  that  he  cannot  perform  them  rightly  or  acceptably,  for  speaking  to  God  in  prayer, 
or  His  speaking  to  them  by  His  Word.  (3)  Nay,  it  unfits  people  for  the  work  of 
their  ordinary  calling.  It  is  not  only  an  enemy  to  grace,  but  to  gifts  too,  and 
common  prudence.  (4)  It  mars  the  comfort  of  society,  and  makes  people  uneasy 
to  those  that  are  about  them.  (.5)  It  is  a  torment  to  oneself,  and  makes  a  man  his 
own  tormentor  (1  Kings  xxi.  4).  (6)  It  is  not  only  tormenting  to  one's  mind,  but  is 
ruinous  to  the  body  (Prov.  xvii.  22).  (7)  It  sucks  the  sap  out  of  all  one's  enjoy- 
ments. As  a  few  drops  of  gall  will  embitter  a  cup  of  wine,  and  a  few  drojjs  of 
ink  will  blacken  a  cup  of  the  clearest  liquor ;  so  discontent  upon  one  ground 
will  embitter  and  blacken  all  other  enjoyments.  (8)  Hence  it  always  makes  one 
unthankful.  Let  Providence  set  the  discontented  man  in  a  paradise,  the  fruit  of 
that  one  tree  which  is  forbidden  him,  and  which  he  is  so  uneasy  about,  will  so  em- 
bitter him  that  he  will  not  give  God  thanks  for  all  the  variety  of  other  delights 
which  the  garden  is  furnished  with.  For  all  these  avail  him  nothing  while  that  is 
kept  out  of  his  reach.  When  once  it  entered  into  Adam's  heart,  it  made  him  at 
one  stroke  break  through  all  the  Ten  Commandments.  2.  The  branch  that  runs 
against  our  neighbour's  condition  is  envying  and  grudging.  The  object  of  this  sin 
is  the  good  of  our  neighbour  ;  and  the  better  the  object  is,  the  worse  is  the  sin.  1. 
View  it  in  the  ingredients  thereof,  whereof  it  is  made  up.  (1)  Sorrow  and  grief  for 
the  good  of  our  neighbour  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4).  (2)  Fretting  anger  at  their  good  (Psa. 
xxxvii.  1).  2.  View  it  in  the  springs  and  rise  thereof.  (1)  Covetousness  of  what  is 
their  neighbour's.  (2)  Discontent.  (3)  Pride  and  selfishness.  3.  View  it  in  the 
effects  thereof.  It  has  almost  the  same  as  those  of  discontent,  which  may  be  well 
applied  thereto.  I  will  only  say  that  envy  is  a  sword,  and  wounds  three  at  once. 
(1)  It  strikes  against  God,  being  highly  offensive  and  dishonourable  to  Him.  It 
quarrels  His  government  of  the  world,  and  accuses  Him  of  folly,  partiality,  and 
injustice  (Matt.  xx.  15).  (2)  It  strikes  against  our  neighbour.  It  is  a  bitter  dis- 
position of  spirit,  wishing  his  ill-fare,  and  grudging  his  good  ;  and  not  only  binds 
up  men's  hands  from  doing  him  good,  but  natively  tends  to  loose  them  to  his  hurt. 
It  will  be  at  him  one  way  or  other  in  word  or  deed,  and  there  is  no  escaping  the 
evil  of  it  (Prov.  xxvii.  4).  (3)  It  strikes  at  oneself  (Job  v.  2).  "  Envy  slayeth  the 
silly  man."  Though  it  be  so  weak  as  to  do  no  execution  on  others,  yet  be  sure  it 
never  misses  a  man's  self  ;  and  it  wounds  oneself  the  deeper,  that  it  cannot  do  much 
hurt  to  the  party  envied.  (T.  Boston,  D.I).)  The  Tenth  Commandment : — I.  The 
ain  here  prohibited  is  concupiscence,  or  an  unlawful  lusting  after  what  is  another 
man's.  For  since  God  had,  in  the  other  Commandments,  forbidden  the  acts  of  sin 
against  our  neighbour.  He  well  knew  that  the  best  means  to  keep  men  from  com- 
mitting sin  in  act  would  be  to  keep  them  from  desiring  it  in  heart ;  and  therefore 
He,  who  is  a  Spirit,  imposeth  a  law  upon  our  spirits,  and  forbids  us  to  covet  what 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XI.' 

before  He  had  forbidden  us  to  perpetrate.  There  are  four  degrees  of  this  sinful 
concupiscence.  1.  There  is  the  first  film  and  shadow  of  an  evil  thought,  the  imperfect 
embryo  of  a  sin  before  it  is  well  shaped  in  us,  or  hath  received  anv  liniaments  and 
features.  And  these  the  Scripture  calls  the  imaginations  of  the  thougi  ts  of  men's 
hearts  (Gen.  vi.  5).  2.  A  farther  degree  of  this  concupiscence  is  wh^n  these  evil 
motions  are  entertained  in  the  sensual  mind  with  some  measure  of  complacency  and 
delight.  3.  Hereupon  follows  assent  and  approbation  of  the  sin  in  the  practical 
judgment.  4.  Wiien  any  sinful  motion  hath  thus  gotten  an  allowance  an  i  pass  from 
the  judgment,  then  it  betakes  itself  to  the  will  for  a  decree.  II.  I  shall  close  up  all 
with  some  practical  use  and  improvement.  1.  Learn  here  to  adore  the  unlimited 
and  boundless  sovereignty  of  the  great  God.  2.  Content  not  tbyself  with  an  outward 
conformity  to  the  law,  but  labour  to  approve  thy  heart  in  sincerity  and  purity  unto 
God  ;  otherwise  thou  art  but  a  pharisaical  hypocrite,  and  washest  only  the  outside  of 
the  cup,  when  within  thou  art  still  full  of  unclean  lusts.  3.  See  here  the  best  and  the 
surest  methods,  to  keep  us  from  the  outward  violation  of  God's  laws ;  which  is  to 
mortify  our  corrupt  concupiscence  and  desires.  And  therefore  the  wisdom  of  God 
hath  set  this  Commandment  in  the  last  place,  as  a  fence  and  guard  to  all  the  rest. 
{Bp.  E.  Hopkins.)  The  Tenth  Commandment  .-—We  have  here  at  the  close  a  startling 
enough  reminder  that  the  calling  of  Israel  to  be  a  state  or  commonwealth  did  not 
exhaust  its  calling.  It  is  very  easy  to  see  that  the  idea  thus  introduced  at  the  close 
of  the  covenant  was  sure  to  exert  a  profound  influence  on  the  Israelites  whole  con- 
ception of  duty.  1.  For  one  thing,  it  served  to  lay  emphasis  upon  the  stainless 
purity  required  in  each  individual  soul.  To  be  a  good  citizen,  it  told  him,  might 
be  enough  in  an  earthly  kingdom,  but  not  in  the  kingdom  of  Jehovah.  Jehovah 
looks  upon  every  heart.  He  is  each  man's  God  as  well  as  King  over  all  the  citizens  ; 
Lord  of  the  conscience  and  the  interior  life.  The  individual,  therefore,  must  be 
holy  as  well  as  the  state  ;  and  if  innocence  from  statutory  transgression  be  much, 
purity  in  the  soul  is  more.  2.  In  the  next  place,  this  sudden  revelation  of  a  deeper 
righteousness,  which  is  so  unexpectedly  flashed  out  upon  us  at  the  close  of  the 
Commandments,  flings  its  piercing  light  back  upon  all  that  had  gone  before.  The 
truth  is  that  illicit  conduct  always  has  its  root  in  illicit  desire.  3.  In  the  next 
place,  it  was  by  thus  appending,  as  it  were,  a  rider  to  every  other  Commandment  of 
the  Ten  that  this  last  one  awoke  in  earnest  Hebrews  the  conviction  not  only  of 
failure  but  of  hopeless  failure.  A  fatal  commandment,  truly,  to  one's  self-righteous 
conceit  1  Not  content  with  disclosing  ghastly  depths  of  evil  beneath  the  surface  of 
a  decorous  and  well-ordered  life,  it  insists  on  probing  the  motives  of  our  best  con- 
duct; it  puts  us  upon  an  effort  to  "cleanse  the  very  thoughts  of  our  hearts,"  not 
•'  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  but  by  our  own  exertions ;  till  the  poor 
soul,  stung  to  death  by  evil  thoughts  which  it  cannot  expel,  evil  desires  which  it 
cannot  prevent,  and  evil  passions  which  it  cannot  master,  is  reduced  to  an  extremity 
of  despair  :  "  Who  shall  dehver  me  out  of  this  body  of  death  ?  "  4.  It  is  in  this 
way,  finally,  that  the  last  of  the  Ten  Words  educated  the  Hebrew  for  the  New 
Testament  revelation  of  "grace  and  truth  by  Jesus  Christ."  (-/.  0.  Dyhes,  D.D.) 
On  covetousness : — I.  W'e  should  not  covet,  in  the  first  place,  because  it  is  cnsatis- 
FTiNG.  If  we  get  the  things  we  covet,  instead  of  being  satisfied,  we  shall  only  want 
more.  Our  covetous  desires  are  hke  a  tub  without  a  bottom,  and  trying  to  get 
satisfied  by  indulging  them  is  just  like  trying  to  fill  a  tub  with  water  when  there  is 
no  bottom  to  it.  "  How  strange  it  is,"  said  a  young  man  one  day  to  Dr.  Franklin, 
"that  when  men  get  rich  they  are  just  as  unsatisfied  and  anxious  to  make  money 
as  when  they  were  poor."  There  was  a  little  child  playing  in  the  room  near  them. 
"Johnny,  come  here,"  said  Dr.  F.  The  little  fellow  came  up  to  him.  "Here,  my 
man,  is  an  apple  for  you,"  said  he,  handing  one  from  a  fruit-1  asket  on  the  table. 
It  was  so  large  that  the  child  could  hardly  grasp  it.  He  then  gave  it  a  second, 
which  filled  the  other  hand ;  and  picking  out  a  third,  remarkable  for  its  size  and 
beauty,  he  said,  "  Here's  another."  The  child  tried  hard  to  hold  this  last  apple 
between  the  other  two,  but  it  dropped  on  the  carpet,  and  rolled  away  over  the  floor. 
"  See, '  said  Dr.  F.,  "  there  is  a  little  man  with  more  riches  than  he  can  enjoy,  but 
not  satisfied."  II.  Again,  we  should  not  covet,  because  it  is  disgraceful.  A 
person  who  covets  is  very  nearly  related  to  a  thief.  Here  is  a  chicken  almost  ready 
to  be  hatched,  and  there  is  a  chicken  that  is  already  hatched.  What  is  the  difference 
between  them  ?  Why,  one  is  in  the  shell,  while  the  other  is  mtt  of  it.  That  is  all 
the  difference.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  but  the  thickness  of  that  thin  shell 
which  separates  one  of  them  from  the  other.  A  slight  tapping,  a  very  little 
pecking  on  the  end  of  that  shell,   and  it    is    broken  through,   and   then  out 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  405 

comes  the  chicken,  as  lively  and  active  as  its  little  brother  that  came 
out  yesterday.  Now,  just  such  is  the  relation  that  exists  between 
a  covetous  person  and  a  thief.  There  is  nothing  but  a  thin  shell  that  separates 
them  from  each  other.  The  covetous  person  is  a  thief  in  the  shell ;  the  thief  is  a 
covetous  person  out  of  the  shell.  III.  We  should  not  covet,  because  it  is  injcriods. 
Some  years  ago  there  was  a  large  ship,  called  the  Kent,  going  from  England  to  the 
East  Indies.  On  her  voyage  she  caught  fire.  The  flames  could  not  be  put  out. 
While  she  was  burning  another  vessel  came  in  sight,  and  offered  to  takeoff  her  crew 
and  passengers.  The  sea  was  very  rough,  and  the  only  way  to  get  the  people  off  the 
burning  ship  was  to  let  them  down  by  ropes  from  the  end  of  a  boom  into  the  little 
boats,  that  were  tossed  about  like  corks  by  the  rough  waves  below.  One  of  the 
sailors,  who  knew  that  the  mate  had  a  large  quantity  of  gold  in  his  possession, 
determined  to  get  it  and  take  it  with  him.  So  he  broke  into  the  mate's  cabin,  forced 
open  his  desk,  and  taking  about  four  hundred  pounds  in  gold  pieces,  put  them  in  a 
belt,  and  fastened  it  round  his  waist.  His  turn  came  to  leave  the  burning  ship.  He 
got  out  to  the  end  of  the  boom,  slipped  down  the  rope,  and  let  go,  expecting  to  drop 
right  into  the  boat  that  was  beneath  him.  But  a  sudden  movement  of  the  waves 
carried  the  boat  out  of  his  reach,  and  he  was  plunged  into  the  sea.  He  was  an 
excellent  swimmer,  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  gold  he  had  coveted,  he  would 
have  risen  like  a  cork  to  the  surface,  and  soon  been  safe  in  the  boat.  But  the  weight 
of  the  money  round  his  waist  made  him  sink  like  lead  in  the  mighty  waters.  He 
never  rose  again  to  the  surface.  Ah,  as  he  felt  the  golden  weight  dragging  him 
deeper  and  deeper  down  into  the  vast  ocean,  he  must  have  understood  plainly  enough 
how  injurious  covetousness  is  !  IV.  The  fourth  and  last  reason  why  we  should  not 
covet  is,  because  it  is  sinfcl.  It  breaks  this  Commandment.  And  the  worst  thing 
you  can  say  of  any  sin  is  that  it  breaks  God's  law.  But  by  coveting  we  break  two 
Commandments  at  once.  Besides  breaking  the  Tenth,  we  at  the  same  time  break  the 
First  Commandment  by  committing  this  sin.  You  know  the  First  Commandment 
forbids  idolatry.  It  says,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  Me."  But  the 
Bible  tells  us  that  "  covetousness  is  idolatry  "  (Col.  iii.  5).  This  means  that  when, 
people  become  covetous  they  put  their  gold  in  the  place  of  God.  They  love  it  more 
than  they  love  God  ;  they  think  of  it  more  than  they  think  of  God ;  they  trust  to  it 
more  than  they  trust  to  God.  But  there  is  even  more  than  this  to  be  said  about 
covetousness.  The  covetous  man  breaks  the  whole  Ten  Commandments  at  once. 
You  know  our  Saviour  said  the  Ten  Commandments  were  all  embraced  in  two,  viz., 
to  love  God  with  all  our  hearts,  and  to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.  But  the 
covetous  man  loves  his  gold  with  all  his  heart :  by  this  he  breaks  the  first  four  Com- 
mandments. He  loves  his  gold  more  than  he  loves  his  neighbour  :  by  this  he  breaks 
the  last  six  Commandments.  What  a  dreadfully  wicked  thing  covetousness  is !  {R. 
Neioton,  D.I).)  The  sin  of  covetousness  : — Covetousness  is — 1.  A  subtle  sin.     It 

is  called  "a  cloak"  (1  Thess.  ii.  5),  because  it  cloaks  itself  under  the  name  of 
frugality  and  prudence.  2.  It  is  a  dangerous  sin.  It  hinders  the  efficacy  of  the 
preached  Word  (Matt.  xiii.  7),  and  makes  men  have  "  a  withered  hand,"  which  they 
cannot  stretch  out  to  the  poor  (see  Luke  xvi.  14).  3.  It  is  a  mother-sin,  a  radical 
vice  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  4.  It  is  a  sin  dishonourable  to  religion.  How  disgraceful  for 
those  who  say  their  hopes  are  above  to  have  their  hearts  below — for  those  who  say 
they  are  born  of  God  to  be  buried  in  the  earth !  5.  It  exposes  to  God's  abhorrence. 
6.  It  shuts  men  out  of  heaven  (Eph.  v.   5).      (A.   Nevin,  D.D.)  The  Tenth 

Commandment : — I.  It  forbids  covetousness  in  general  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet." 
It  is  lawful  to  use  the  world ;  yea,  and  to  desire  so  much  of  it  as  may — 1.  Keep  us 
from  the  temptation  of  poverty  :  "  Give  me  not  poverty,  lest  I  steal,  and  take  the 
name  of  my  God  in  vain."  2.  As  may  enable  us  to  honour  God  with  works  of 
mercy  :  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance."  But  all  the  danger  is  when  the 
world  gets  into  the  heart.  The  water  is  useful  for  the  sailing  of  the  ship  ;  all  the 
danger  is  when  the  water  gets  into  the  ship  ;  so  the  fear  is  when  the  world  gets  into 
the  heart.  What  is  it  to  covet  ?  There  are  two  words  in  the  Greek  which  set  forth 
the  nature  of  covetousness — 1.  Pleonexia,  which  signifies  an  "insatiable  d>'sire  of 
getting  the  world."  Covetousness  is  a  dry  dropsy.  2.  P/iiZar/zz/ria,  which  signifies  an 
"  inordinate  love  of  the  world."  He  may  be  said  to  be  eovetons,  not  only  wlio  gets  the 
world  uni  igliteou8ly,but  who  loves  the  world  inordinately.  But,  for  a  more  full  answer 
to  the  question,  What  is  it  to  covet  ?  I  shall  show  you  in  six  particulars  when  a  man 
may  be  said  to  be  given  to  covetousness.  1  When  his  thoughts  are  wholly  taken 
up  about  the  world.  2.  A  man  may  be  said  to  be  given  to  covetousness  when  he 
takes  more  pains  for  the  getting  of  earth  than  for  the  getting  of  heaven.   The  Gauls, 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

•who  were  an  ancient  people  of  France,  after  they  had  tasted  of  the  sweet  wine  of 
the  Italian  grape,  inquired  after  the  country,  and  never  rested  till  they  had  arrived 
at  it ;  so  a  covetous  man,  having  had  a  relish  of  the  world,  pursues  after  it,  and 
never  leaves  it  till  he  hath  got  it ;  but  he  neglects  the  things  of  eternity.     3.  A  man 
may  be  said  to  be  given  to  covetousness  when  all  his  discourse  is  about  the  world. 
4.  A  man  is  given  to  covetousness  when  he  doth  so  set  his  heart  upon  worldly 
things  that  for  the  love  of  them  he  will  part  with  heavenly ;  for  the  "  wedge  of 
gold  "  he  will  part  with  the  "  pearl  of  great  price."    5.  A  man  is  given  to  covetous- 
ness when  he  overloads  himself  with  worldly  business.     He  takes  so  much  business 
upon  him  that  he  cannot  find  time  to  serve  God  ;   he  hath  scarce  time  to  eat 
his  meat,  but  no  time  to  pray.     6.  He  is  given  to  covetousness  whose  heart  is 
so  set  upon  the  world  that,  to  get  it,  he  cares  not  what  unlawful  indirect  means 
he  useth ;  he  will  have  the  world,  "  by  right  or  wrong  " ;  he  will  wrong  and  defraud, 
and  raise  his  estate  upon  the  ruins  of  another.      I  shall  prescribe  some  remedies 
and  antidotes  against  this  sin.    1.  Faith  :  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith."    The  root  of  covetousness  is  the  distrust  of  God's  provi- 
dence ;  faith  believes  God  will  provide — God,  who  feeds  the  birds,  will  feed  His 
children,  He  who  clothes  the  hlies  will  clothe  His  lambs  ;  and  so  faith  overcomes 
the  world.    2.  The  second  remedy  is  judicious  consideration.    (1)  What  poor  things 
these  things  below  are  that  we  should  covet  them.     (2)  The  frame  and  contexture 
of  the  body.     "  God  hath  made  the  face  to  look  upward  towards  heaven."    Can  it 
be  imagined  that  God  gave  us  intellectual,  immortal  souls  to  covet  only  earthly 
things  ?     What  wise  man  would  fish  for  gudgeons  with  golden  hooks  ?     Did  God 
give  us  glorious  souls  only  to  fish  for  the  world  ?     Sure  our  souls  are  made  for  a 
higher  end — to  aspire  after  the  enjoyment  of  God  in  glory.  (3)  The  examples  of  those 
who  have  been  contemners  and  despisers  of  the  world.  The  righteous  are  compared 
to  a  palm-tree.     Philo  observes  that  whereas  all  other  trees  have  their  sap  in  their 
root,  the  sap  of  the  palm-tree  is  towards  the  top  :  the  emblem  of  the  saints,  whose 
hearts  are  above  in  heaven,  where  their  treasure  is.     Covet  spiritual  things  more, 
and  you  vdll  covet  earthly  things  less.    Covet  grace  ;  grace  is  the  best  blessing — it 
is  the  seed  of  God,  the  angels'  glory.   Covet  heaven ;  heaven  is  the  region  of  happi- 
ness, it  is  the  most  pleasant  climate.     Did  we  covet  heaven  more,  we  should  covet 
earth  less.    II.  I  shall  speak  of  it  more  particularly  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy 
neighbour's  house,  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,"  &c.     Obser\'e  here 
THE  HOLINESS  ANT)  PERFECTION  OF  God'b  LAW  ;  it  forbids  the  first  motions  and  risings 
of  sin  in  the  heart :  "Thou  shalt  not  covet."    The  laws  of  men  take  hold  of  the 
actions,  but  the  law  of  God  goes  further — it  forbids  not  only  the  actions,  but  the 
affections.  Though  the  tree  bears  no  bad  fruit,  it  may  be  faulty  at  the  root;  though 
a  man  doth  not  commit  any  gross  sin,  yet  who  can  say  his  heart  is  pure  ?    Let  us 
be  humbled  for  the  sin  of  our  nature,  the  risings  of  evil  thoughts,.coveting  that 
which  we  ought  not.     Our  nature  is  a  seed-plot  of  iniquity  ;  it  is  like  charcoal  that 
is  ever  sparkling  ;  the  sparkles  of  pride,  envy,  covetousness,  arise  in  the  mind.    How 
should  this  humble  us  !     If  there  be  not  sinful  actings,  there  are  sinful  covetings. 
Let  us  pray  for  mortifying  grace  which  may  be  like  the  water  of  jealousy  to  make 
the  thigh  of  sin  to  rot.     Why  is  the  house  put  before  the  wife?     In  Deuteronomy 
the  wife  is  put  first :  "Neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's  wife,  neither  shalt 
thou  covet  thy  neighbour's  house."     Here  the  house  is  put  first.     In  Deuteronomy 
the  wife  is  set  down  first,  in  respect  of  her  value.     She,  if  a  good  wife,  is  of  far 
greater  value  and  estimate  than  the  house  ;  "  her  price  is  far  above  rubies."  When 
Alexander  had  overcome  King  Darius  in  battle,  Darius  seemed  not  to  be  much  dis- 
mayed ;  but  when  he  heard  his  wife  was  taken  prisoner,  now  his  eyes,  like  spouts, 
did  gush  forth  water.     The  nest  is  built  before  the  bird  is  in  it  ;  the  wife  is  first 
esteemed,  but  the  house  must  be  first  provided.      1.  Then,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet 
thy  neighbour's  house."     How  depraved  is  man  since  the  Fall !     Man  knows  not 
how  to  keep  within  bounds,  but  is  ever  coveting  more  than  his  own.     It  is  only  the 
prisoner  lives  in  such  a  tenement  as  he  may  be  sure  none  will  go  about  to  take  from 
him.     2.  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife."     This  Commandment  is  a 
bridle  to  check  the  inordinancy  of  brutish  lusts.    3.  "Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy 
neighbour's  manservant,  nor  his  maidservant."      Servants,  when  faithful,  are  a 
treasure.    But  this  sin  of  coveting  servants  is  common  ;  if  one  hath  a  better  servant, 
others  will  be  inveigling  and  laying  baits  for  him,  and  endeavour  to  draw  him  away 
from  his  master.   4. "  Nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  anything  that  is  thy  neighbour's." 
Were  there  not  coveting  of  ox  and  ass,  there  would  not  be  so  much  stealing.     First 
mai  break  the  Tenth  Commandment  by  coveting,  and  then  they  break  the  Eighth 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  407 

Commandment  by  stealing.  But  what  means  may  we  use  to  keep  us  from  coveting 
that  which  is  our  neighbour's  ?  The  best  remedy  is  contentment.  If  we  are  content 
with  our  own,  we  shall  not  covet  that  which  is  another's.  {T.  Watson.)  Covetous- 
ness — its  insidiousness  : — Beware  of  growing  covetousness,  for  of  all  sins  this  is  one  of 
the  most  insidious.  It  is  like  the  silting  up  of  a  river.  As  the  stream  comes  down 
from  the  land,  it  brings  with  it  sand  and  earth,  and  deposits  all  these  at  its  mouth, 
so  that  by  degrees,  uuless  the  conservators  watch  it  carefully,  it  will  block  itself 
np,  and  leave  no  channel  for  ships  of  great  burden.  By  daily  deposit  it  impercep- 
tibly creates  a  bar  which  is  dangerous  to  navigation.  Many  a  man  when  he  begins 
to  accumulate  wealth  commences  at  the  same  moment  to  ruin  his  soul,  and  the 
more  he  acquires,  the  more  closely  he  blocks  up  his  Uberality,  which  is,  so  to  speak, 
the  very  mouth  of  spiritual  life.  Instead  of  doing  more  for  God,  he  does  less;  the 
more  he  saves  the  more  he  wants,  and  the  more  he  wants  of  this  world  the  less  he 
cares  for  the  world  to  come..  Coveting  driven  out  by  love  : — It  may  be  said  that 

this  is  a  hard  saying,  and  that  it  is  one  of  the  impossible  precepts  of  which  there 
are  so  many  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  But  what  is  the  moral  idea  on 
which  it  rests  ?  It  is  only  another  form  of  the  great  Commandment :  "  Thou  shalt 
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  If  we  can  obey  that  law,  we  can  obey  this.  It 
affords  us  more  pleasure  to  see  those  who  are  dear  to  us  prosperous  than  to  be  pros- 
perous ourselves.  I  venture  to  say  that  if  any  man  who  had  himself  been  senior 
wrangler  bad  a  son  who  achieved  the  same  honour,  he  would  have  greater  pride  in 
his  soil's  success  than  in  his  own ;  and  that  a  prime  minister  would  listen  with 
greater  delight  to  the  cheers  with  which  his  son  was  received  on  entering  the  House 
of  Commonci  after  being  appointed  to  a  high  political  office,  than  to  the  cheers 
which  he  '^«nself  received  when  he  first  took  his  seat  as  leader  of  the  House.  We 
never  covet  what  belongs  to  those  whom  we  love.  This  Commandment  has  its  root 
in  the  Divine  idea  of  the  mutual  relations  which  should  exist  among  mankind. 
God  means  us  to  love  our  neighbours  as  we  love  ourselves.  (B.  IV.  Dale,  D.D.) 
God's  great  root -extractor : — Suppose  that  we  were  farmers.  We  move  out  to  the 
West  and  buy  a  farm.  A  large  part  of  our  farm  is  covered  with  forest  trees.  We 
want  to  clear  a  portion  of  it,  and  turn  it  into  fields,  where  we  can  raise  Indian  corn 
or  wheat.  We  cut  down  the  trees  and  split  up  and  haul  away  the  timber.  But  after 
all  this  the  stumps  remain  in  the  ground,  and,  if  nothing  is  done  to  them,  they  will 
soon  begin  to  sprout  up  again.  It  is  very  important  for  us  as  farmers  to  get  those 
Btumps  removed.  Somebody  has  invented  a  machine  that  is  called  a  "  root- 
extractor."  It  has  great  strong  iron  hooks.  These  are  fastened  to  the  roots,  and 
then,  by  turning  a  wheel  or  crank  connected  with  some  very  powerful  machinery, 
the  tough,  crooked,  gnarled  roots  are  torn  out  by  main  force.  It  would  be  a  grand 
thing  for  us  on  our  western  farm  to  have  one  of  these  root-extractors.  Then  how 
nicely  we  should  get  our  field  cleared  !  We  should  go  to  work  with  one  stump  after 
another,  and  in  a  little  while  they  would  be  all  gone,  and  we  should  have  no 
more  trouble  with  them.  My  dear  children,  our  hearts  are  like  a  field  full 
of  trees.  This  field  has  to  be  cleared.  The  trees  here  are  our  sins  —  the 
wicked  feelings  and  tempers  that  belong  to  us.  When  we  are  converted,  and  our 
hearts  are  renewed  by  the  grace  of  Jesus,  then  these  trees  are  cut  down.  But  the 
roots  of  them  remain.  Even  when  we  become  Christians  we  find  the  roots  of  our 
old  sins  springing  up  again.  And  covetousness  is  the  worst  of  these  roots.  You 
remember  tbat  Paul  says,  "  The  love  of  money  "  (this  means  coveting  or  desiring 
money)  "  is  the  root  of  all  evil  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  It  is  very  important  for  us  to  have 
these  roots  removed.  Now  the  Tenth  Commandment  may  well  be  called  God's 
great  "  root-extractor."  If  we  pray  to  Him  for  grace  to  understand  and  keep  it,  we 
shall  find  tbat  it  pulls  up  sin  by  the  roots  from  our  hearts,  and  prevents  it  from 
growing  tbere.  This  is  what  the  Commandment  was  intended  to  do ;  and  this  is 
what  it  does,  wherever  it  is  properly  kept.     (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Penalty  of 

covetousness: — In  1853  I  knew  a  youug  girl  whose  great  besetment  was  a  love  of 
dress.  She  looked  pale  and  wretched  whenever  she  saw  any  one  among  her  com- 
panions better  dressed  than  herself.  She  always  lamented  she  was  too  poor  to  buy 
fine  clothes.  It  happened  that  her  aunt  kept  a  lodging-house  at  a  watering-place, 
and  this  girl  lived  with  her  as  a  servant.  A  lady  from  London  went  down  to  lodge 
in  their  house,  and  on  the  very  night  of  her  arrival  she  was  seized  with  the  worst 
form  of  cholera,  and  died  in  a  few  hours.  The  clothes  the  lady  had  on  when  she 
was  attacked  with  the  disease  the  doctor  ordered  should  be  burned,  for  fear  of  infec- 
tion. There  had  not  previously  been  a  case  of  cholera  in  the  town,  and  the  authorities 
were  anxious  to  take  very  vigorous  measures,  if  possible,  to  stay  the  pestilence. 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

Now  the  lodger  had  worn  a  very  handsome  silk  gown.  Jane  noticed  it  with  covetous 
eyes  when  the  poor  lady  came.  She  heard  the  order  given  that  the  clothes  should 
be  buint,  to  which,  of  course,  the  lady's  friends  made  no  objection,  and  Jane's  aunt 
threw  out  a  large  bundle  from  the  window  into  an  iron  pot  in  the  yard,  in  which 
there  was  some  lighted  tow.  But  Jane  managed  to  get  away  the  silk  gown.  She 
did  not  consider  that  she  stole  it,  because  it  was  condemned  to  the  flames.  She 
coveted  it,  and  yielded  to  the  temptation.  Now,  some  people  think  that  cholera  is 
not  infectious,  and  I  cannot  venture  to  say  whether  it  is  or  not ;  but  I  know  that 
no  one  shared  the  poor  lady's  fate  but  Jane.  Ten  days  elapsed  ;  she  took  an  oppor- 
tunity to  wear  that  gown  when  she  went  to  see  her  mother,  and  was  taken  ill  with 
it  on,  and  died  after  three  days'  illness,  apparently  from  cholera.  "  Thou  shalt  not 
covet."     (Mrs.  Balfour.)  The  folly  of  covetousness  proved  at  death  : — It  is  told 

of  Alexander  the  Great  that  he  gave  orders  that  when  he  should  die  his  hands 
should  Le  left  outside  his  coi3Sn,  so  that  his  friends  might  see  that,  though  he  had 
conquered  the  world,  he  could  take  nothing  of  his  conquests  into  the  hereafter.  In 
like  manner,  the  famous  Saladin,  it  is  said,  ordered  a  long  spear  with  a  white  flag 
attached  to  it  to  be  carried  through  his  camp  bearing  this  inscription  :  "The 
mighty  King  Saladin,  the  conqueror  of  all  Asia  and  Egypt,  takes  with  him,  when  he 
dies,  none  of  his  possessions  except  this  linen  flag  for  a  shroud."  Covetousruss  : — 
The  covetous  man  pines  in  plenty — like  Tantalus,  up  to  the  chin  in  water,  and  yet 
thirsty.     (T.  Adavis.) 

Vers.  18-21.  They  removed,  and  stood  afar  off. — Israel  and  Sinm  : — I.  That 

ALL    MEN    AS    SINNERS    MUST    BE    BBOCGHT     INTO     CONSCIOUS   CONTACT    WITH9  MORAL   LAW. 

The  guarantees  of  this  conscious  contact  are  found — 1,  lu  the  law  of  »tu  spiritual 
nature.  2.  In  the  special  Providence  that  is  over  us.  3.  In  the  provisions  of  the 
gospel.     4.  In  the  transactions  of  the  final  retribution.     II.  That  tuis  conscious 

CONTACT    is   ever   ASSOCIATED    WITH    FEELINGS    OF    THE     MOST    TERRIBLE     ALARM.        III. 

That  under  the  influence   of  this  most  terrible  alarm  there  will  arise  a 

CONSCIOUS  NECESSITY    FOR    A    MEDIATOR.      IV.    ThaT  HeAVEN  HAS  GRACIOUSLY  PROVIDED 

SUCH  A  Mediator,  who  is  equal  to  the  emergency.      (Homilist.)  The  super- 

Jicial  and  the  profound  : — I.  SupERncuL  views  of  Divine  proceedings  induce 
FEAB.  II.  Profound  views  of  Divine  proceedings  encourage  confidence.  III. 
Profound  views  of  Divine  proceedings  lead  to  a  correct  understanding  op 
Divine  purposes.  IV.  The  unenlightened  and  the  fearing  stand  afaii  off. 
♦'  And  the  people  stood  afar  off."  There  is  no  reason  to  keep  away  from  God. 
Why  should  we  shut  out  the  light  of  a  Father's  compassion  ?  V.  But  the  Heaven- 
taught    ARE    TAKEN    INTO    THE    THICK    DARKNESS    WHERE    THE    TRUE    LIGHT    APPEARS. 

Moses  drew  near,  or  more  correctly,  was  made  to  draw  near,  unto  the  thick  dark- 
ness where  God  was.  (W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  God's  revelation  of  Himself: — I.  The 
MODE  OF  THIS  REVELATION  WAS  STRIKING  (vcr.  18).  1.  Such  a  mode  was  necessary — 
(1)  To  reveal  God's  majesty — to  men  familiar  with  the  puerilities  of  heathen 
worship ;  (2)  to  show  that  God  was  not  to  be  trifled  with,  and  His  laws  broken  with 
impunity ;  (3)  to  meet  the  case  of  those  open  only  to  impressions  made  on  their 
fear.  2.  Such  a  mode  served  some  of  the  most  important  functiins  of  the  old 
dispensation.  (I)  Preparatory ;  (2)  symbolic.  3.  Such  a  mode  was  appropriate,  as 
accompanying  judicial  proceedings.  II.  The  reception  of  this  revelation  was 
WHAT  God  intended  it  should  be.  1.  Intelligent.  2.  Reverent.  3.  Prayerful. 
III.  The  comfort  of  this  revelation  disarmed  it  of  all  its  terrors.  1.  The 
God  of  their  fathers  had  spoken.  2.  God  had  spoken  for  their  encouragement.  3. 
God  had  ppoken  but  to  prove  their  loyalty  to  Him.  If  they  could  stand  the  test, 
what  could  harm  them  ?  (Rom.  viii.  39).  4.  God  had  spoken  for  their  moral  eleva- 
tion. (1)  "  TLat  His  fear  may  be  before  your  faces."  (2)  "  That  ye  sin  not  "  (1 
John  ii.  1,  2).  Learn — 1.  Not  to  dread  God's  revelation.  2.  To  approach  God 
through  the  one  new  and  hving  way  which  is  ever  open.  3.  To  keep  all  God's  laws 
in  the  strength  of  the  comfort  which  His  presence  brings.  (J.  If.  Burn.)  The 
feriousmss  of  life : — The  Hebrews  had  come  up  out  of  Egypt,  and  were  standing 
in  front  of  Sinai.  Tbey  turn  to  Moses  and  beg  him  to  stand  between  them  and 
God.  At  first  it  seems  as  if  their  feeling  were  a  strcnge  one.  This  is  their  God 
who  is  speriking  to  them.  Would  it  not  seem  as  if  they  would  be  glad  to  have 
Him  come  to  them  directly,  to  have  Him  almost  look  on  them  with  e.\  es  that  they 
could  see  ?  That  is  the  first  question,  but  very  speedily  we  feel  how  natural  that 
is  which  actually  did  take  place.  The  Hebrews  had  delighted  in  God's  mercy. 
They  had  come  singing  up  out  of  the  Eed  Sea.     They  had  followed  the  pillar  of 


CHAP,  xs.]  EXODUS.  409 

fire  and  the  pillar  of  cloud.  But  now  they  were  called  on  to  face  God  Himself. 
In  behind  all  the  superficial  aspects  of  their  life  they  were  called  on  to  get  at 
its  centre  and  its  heart.  There  they  recoiled.  We  are  willing  to  know  that  God 
is  there.  We  are  willing,  we  are  glad,  that  Moses  should  go  into  His  presence 
and  bring  us  His  messages.  But  we  will  not  come  in  sight  of  Him  ourselves.  Life 
would  be  awful.  "Let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die !  "  I  want  to  bid  you 
think  how  natural  and  how  common  such  a  temper  is.  There  are  a  few  people 
among  us  who  are  always  full  of  fear  that  life  will  become  too  trivial  and  petty. 
There  are  always  a  great  many  people  who  live  in  perpetual  anxiety  lest  life  should 
become  too  awful  and  serious  and  deep  and  solemn.  There  is  something  in  all  of 
us  which  feels  that  fear.  We  are  always  hiding  behind  effects  to  keep  out  of  sight 
of  their  causes,  behind  events  to  keep  out  of  sight  of  their  meanings,  behind  facts 
to  keep  out  of  sight  of  principles,  behind  men  to  keep  out  of  the  sight  of  God.  We 
have  all  known  men  from  whom  it  seemed  as  if  it  would  be  good  to  lift  away  some 
of  the  burden  of  life,  to  make  the  world  seem  easier  and  less  serious.  Some  such 
people  perhaps  we  know  to-day;  but  as  we  look  abroad  generally  do  we  not  feel 
sure  that  such  people  are  the  exceptions?  The  great  mass  of  people  are  stunted 
and  starved  with  superficialness.  They  never  touch  the  real  reasons  and  meanings 
of  living.  They  turn  and  hide  their  faces,  or  else  run  away,  when  those  profoundest 
things  present  themselves.  They  will  not  let  God  speak  with  them.  So  all  their 
lives  lack  tone  ;  nothing  brave,  enterprising,  or  aspiring  is  in  them.  For  we  may 
lay  it  down  as  a  first  principle  that  he  who  uses  superficially  any  power  or  any  person 
which  he  is  capable  of  using  profoundly  gets  harm  out  of  that  unacce^jted  oppor- 
tunity which  he  lets  slip.  You  talk  with  some  slight  acquaintance,  some  man  of 
small  capacity  and  little  depth,  about  ordinary  things  in  very  ordinary  fashion ; 
and  you  do  not  suffer  for  it.  You  get  all  that  he  has  to  give.  But  you  hold  con- 
stant intercourse  with  some  deep  nature,  some  man  of  great  thoughts  and  true 
epiritual  standards,  and  you  insist  on  dealing  merely  with  the  surface  of  him, 
touching  him  only  at  the  most  trivial  points  of  living,  and  you  do  get  harm.  The 
unused  capacity  of  the  man — all  which  he  might  be  to  you,  but  which  you  are 
refusing  to  let  him  be— is  always  there  demoralizing  you.  But — here  is  the  point — for 
this  man  with  his  capacities  to  live  in  this  world  with  its  opportunities  and  yet  to 
live  on  its  surface  and  to  refuse  its  depths,  to  tarn  away  from  its  problems,  to  reject 
the  voice  of  God  that  speaks  out  of  it,  is  a  demoralizing  and  degrading  thing.  It 
mortifies  the  unused  powers,  and  keeps  the  man  always  a  traitor  to  his  privileges 
and  his  duties.  Take  one  part  of  life  and  you  can  see  it  very  plainly.  Take  the 
part  with  which  we  are  familiar  here  in  church.  Take  the  religious  life  of  man. 
True  religion  is,  at  its  soul,  spiritual  sympathy  with,  sphitual  obedience  to,  God. 
But  religion  has  its  superficial  aspects — first  of  truth  to  be  proved  and  accepted,  and 
then,  still  more  superficial,  of  forms  to  be  practised  and  obeyed.  Now  suppose 
that  a  man  setting  out  to  be  religious  confines  himself  to  these  superficial  regions 
and  refuses  to  go  further  down.  He  learns  his  creed  and  says  it.  He  rehearses  his 
ceremony  and  practises  it.  The  deeper  voice  of  his  religion  cries  to  him  from  its 
unsounded  depths,  "  Come,  understand  your  soul !  Come,  through  repentance 
enter  into  holiness  !  Come,  hear  the  voice  of  God."  But  he  draws  back  ;  he  piles 
between  himself  and  that  importunate  invitation  the  cushions  of  his  dogma  and  his 
ceremony.  "Let  God's  voice  come  to  me  deadened  and  softened  through  these," 
he  says.  "  Let  not  God  speak  to  me,  lest  I  die.  Speak  thou  to  me,  and  I  will 
hear."  So  he  cries  to  his  priest,  to  his  sacrament,  which  is  his  Moses.  Is  he  not 
harmed  by  that  ?  Is  it  only  that  he  loses  the  deeper  spiritual  power  which  he  might 
have  had  ?  Is  it  not  also  that  the  fact  of  its  being  there  and  of  his  refusing  to  take 
it  makes  his  life  unreal,  fills  it  with  a  suspicion  of  cowardice,  and  puts  it  on  its 
guard  lest  at  any  time  this  ocean  of  spiritual  life  which  has  been  shut  out  should 
burst  through  the  barriers  which  exclude  it  and  come  pouring  in  ?  Suppose  the 
opposite.  Suppose  the  soul  so  summoned  accepts  the  fulness  of  its  life.  It  opens 
its  ears  and  cries,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  Thy  servant  heareth."  It  invites  the  infinite 
and  eternal  aspects  of  life  to  show  themselves.  Thankful  to  Moses  for  his  faithful 
leadership,  it  is  always  pressing  through  him  to  the  God  for  whom  he  speaks. 
Thankful  to  priest  and  church  and  dogma,  it  will  always  live  in  the  truth  of  its 
direct,  immediate  relationship  to  God,  and  make  them  minister  to  that.  What  a 
consciousness  of  thoroughness  and  safety ;  what  a  certain,  strong  sense  of  resting 
on  the  foundation  of  a  1  things  is  there  then  !  Oh !  do  not  let  your  religion  satisfy 
itself  with  anything  less  than  God.  Insist  on  having  your  soul  get  at  Him  and 
hear  His  voice.    Never,  oecause  of  the  mystery,  the  awe,  perhaps  the  perplexity 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

and  doubt  which  come  with  the  great  experiences,  let  yourself  take  refuge  in  the 
superficial  things  of  faith.   It  is  better  to  be  lost  on  the  ocean  than  to  be  tied  to  the 
shore.     Therefore  seek  great  experiences  of  the  soul,  and  never  turn  your  back  on 
them  when  God  sends  them,  as  He  surely  will !    The  whole  world  of  thought  is  full 
of  the  same  necessity  and  the  same  danger.     A  man  sets  himself  to  think  of  this 
world  we  live  in.      He  discovers  facts.     He  arranges  facts  into  what  he  calls  laws. 
Behind  his  laws  he  feels  and  owns  the  powers  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of  force. 
He  will  go  no  further.    He  dimly  hears  the  depth  below,  of  final  causes,  of  personal 
purposes,  roaring  as  the  great  ocean  roars  under  the  steamship  which,  with  its 
clamorous  machineries  and  its  precious  freight  of  life,  goes  sailing  on  tbe  ocean's 
bosom.    You  say  to  him,  "  Take  this  into  your  account.     Your  laws  are  beautiful, 
your  force  is  gracious  and  sublime.    But  neither  is  ultimate.   You  have  not  reached 
the  end  and  source  of  things  in  these.     Go  further.     Let  God  speak  to  you."     Can 
you  not  hear  the  answer?   " Nay,  that  perplexes  all  things.   That  throws  confusion 
into  what  we  have  made  plain  and  orderly  and  clear.     Let  not  God  speak  to  us,  lest 
we  die  1  "     You  think  what  the  study  of  Nature  might  become  if,  keeping  every 
accurate  and  careful  method  of  investigation  of  the  way  in  which  the  universe  is 
governed  and  arranged,  it  yet  was  always  hearing,  always  rejoicing  to  hear,  behind 
all  methods  and  governments  and  machineries,  the  sacred  movement  of  the  personal 
will  and  nature  which  is  the  soul  of  all.    The  same  is  true  about  all  motive.    How 
men  shrink  from  the  profoundest  motives  !   I  ask  you  why  you  toil  at  your  business 
day  in  and  day  out,  year  after  year.     I  beg  you  to  tell  me  why  you  devote  yourself 
to  study,  and  you  reply  with  certain  statements  about  the  attractiveness  of  study 
and  the  way  in  which  every  extension  or  increase  of  knowledge  makes  the  world 
more  rich.    All  that  is  true,  but  it  is  slight.     This  refusal  to  trace  any  act  back 
more  than  an  inch  into  that  world  of  motive  out  of  which  all  acts  spring,  this 
refusal  especially  to  let  acts  root  themselves  in  Him  who  is  the  one  only  really 
worthy  cause  why  anything  should  be  done  at  all — this  is  what  makes  life  grow  so 
thin  to  the  feeling  of  men  who  live  it ;  this  is  what  makes  men  wonder  sometimes 
that  their  brethren  can  find  it  worth  while  to  keep  on  working  and  living,  even  while 
they  themselves  keep  on  at  their  life  and  work  in  the  same  way.     "  Let  us  be  quiet 
and  natural,"  men  say,  "  and  all  will  be  well."    But  the  truth  is  that  to  be  natural 
is  to  feel  the  seriousness  and  depth  of  life,  and  that  no  man  does  come  to  any  worthy 
quietness  who  does  not  find  God  and  rest  on  Him  and  talk  with  Him  continually. 
The  whole  trouble  comes  from  a  wilful  or  a  blind  under-estimate  of  man.    "  Let 
not  God  speak  to  me,  lest  I  die,"  the  man  exclaims.     Is  it  not  almost  as  if  the  fish 
cried,  "  Cast  me  not  into  the  water,  lest  I  drown  "  ?  or  as  if  the  eagle  said,  "  Let  not 
the  sun  shine  on  me,  lest  I  be  blind"  ?    It  is  man  fearing  his  native  element.     He 
was  made  to  talk  with  God.     It  is  not  death,  but  his  true  life,  to  come  into  the 
Divine  society  and  to  take  his  thoughts,  his  standards,  and  his  motives  directly  out 
of  the  hand  of  the  eternal  perfectness.    We  find  a  revelation  of  this  in  all  the 
deepest  and  highest  moments  of  our  lives.     Have  you  not  often  been  surprised  by 
seeing  how  men  who   seemed  to  have  no  capacity  for  such  experiences  passed 
into  a  sense  of  Divine  companionship  when  anything  disturbed  their  lives  with 
supreme  joy  or  sorrow  ?    Once  or  twice,  at  least,  in  his  own  life,  almost  every  one 
of  us  has  found  himself  face  to  face  with  God,  and  felt  how  natural  it  was  to  be 
there.     And  often  the  question  has  come,  "What  possible  reason  is  there  why 
this  should  not  be  the  habit  and  fixed  condition  of  our  life  ?     Why  should  we 
ever  go  back  from  it?"     And  then,  as  we  felt  ourselves  going  back  from  it,  we 
have  been  aware  that  we  were  growing  unnatural  again.    And  as  this  is  the  revela- 
tion of  the  highest  moments  of  every  life,  so  it  is  the  revelation  of  the  highest  lives ; 
especially  it  is  the  revelation  of  the  highest  of  all  lives,  the  life  of  Christ.     Men 
had  been   saying,  "  Let  not   God  speak  to   us,  lest  we  die  "  ;   and  here  came 
Christ,  the  man — Jesus,  the  man ;  and  God  spoke  with  Him  constantly,  and  yet 
He  lived  with  the  most  complete  vitality.     And  every  now  and  then  a  great  man 
or  woman  comes  who  is  Uke  Christ  in  this.     There  comes  a  man  who  naturally 
drinks  of  the  fountain  and  eats  of  the  essential  bread  of  life.     Where  you  deal 
with  the  mere  borders  of  things,  he  gets  at  their  hearts ;  where  you  ask  counsel 
of  expediencies,  he  talks  with  first  principles ;  where  you  say,  "  This  will  be  profit- 
able," he  says,  "This  is  right."     And  in  religion,  may  I  not  beg  you  to  be  vastly 
more  radical   and  thorough  ?    Do   not  avoid,  but  seek,  the  great,  deep,  simple 
things  of  faith.     {Bp.  Phillips  Brooks. ) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Ye  shall  not  make  wltli  Me  gods  of  silver. — God's  voice,  but  not 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  411 

a  form: — I.  God's  voice.  Indicative  of  the  Divine  personality.  II.  God's  abhcb- 
RENCE  OF  IDOLATRY.  OuT  loftiest  couceptioDs,  embodied  in  the  most  costly  and 
precious  material  forms,  must  fall  short  of  Infinite  perfectness.  III.  God's  love 
OF  siMPLiciTT.  Altars  of  earth,  and  altars  of  unhewn  stone.  The  simplest  is  often 
the  purest  and  the  divinest.  Man's  superb  altars  lead  to  degrading  conceptions  of 
the  Infinite.  IV.  God's  respect  to  appearances.  "  Neither  shalt  thou  go  up  by 
steps  unto  Mine  altar,  that  thy  nakedness  be  not  discovered  thereon."  Let  all 
things  be  done  decently  and  in  order,  is  the  injunction  of  two  economies.  V.  God's 
superiority  to  splendid  structures.  In  all  places  where  God's  name  is  recorded 
there  He  will  come,  and  there  He  will  bless.  (W.  Burroics,  B.A.)  Public 
worship  : — 1.  The  end  for  which  God  reveals  Himself  is,  that  we  should  worship 
Him.  2.  God's  revelation  of  Himself  should  be  kept  in  perpetual  memory  by  acts 
of  public  worship.  3.  God,  having  made  a  spiritual  revelation  of  Himself,  should 
not  be  worshipped  under  any  symbolic  form.  I.  Public  worship  involves  cost. 
II.  Public  worship  can  dispense  with  elaborate  ritual.  IH.  Public  worship 
carefully  excludes  all  idea  of  merit  on  the  part  of  the  worshipper.  IV. 
Public  worship  is  not  confined  to  set   places.      V.  Public  worship  does  not 

DEPEND    ON    THE    MATERIAL    OR    INTELLECTUAL     QUALIFICATIONS     OF    THE     WORSHIPPER. 

VI.    Public  worship  must  be   conducted   with   proper   decency.      VII.   Publio 

WORSHIP,    when    properly    CONDUCTED,    IS    UNIFORMLY     ATTENDED     WITH     A    BLESSING. 

1.  The  Divine  presence.     2.  The  Divine  benediction.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  24.   In  all  places  where  I  record  My  name,   I  will  come  unto  thee. — 

The  gospel  in  Exodus  : — I.  That  God  demands  from  His  creature  man  reverent 

AND  intelligent  WORSHIP.  II.  ThAT  SUCH  WORSHIP,  TO  BE  ACCEPTABLE  TO  GoD, 
MUST  ALWAYS  BE  ASSOCIATED  WITH  DiVINELY-APPOINTED  SACRIFICE.  III.  ThAT  SUCH 
WORSHIP   AND    SACRIFICE    OBTAIN    FOR    MAN    THE    BEST    BLESSINGS    OF   HEAVEN.        {F.     W. 

Brown.)  God's  promised  presence  essential  to  constitute  a  Church  : — I.  The 
EXTENT  OF  THE  PROMISE.  What  and  where  are  the  places  where  we  are  to  receive 
this  blessing  ?  Before  God  gave  the  promise.  He  gave  instructions  to  the  children 
of  Israel  about  sacrifices — what  kind  of  offerings  to  bring,  what  animals  to  offer, 
what  kind  of  altars  to  build  ;  and  having  given  these  instructions,  He  follows  them 
by  the  promise  that  "  in  all  places  where  I  record  My  name,  I  will  come  unto  thee 
and  bless  thee."  We  must  easily  see  that  the  places  where  God  recorded  His 
name  were  places  where  altars  were  built  to  Him — where  lambs  bled  in  sacrifice, 
and  where  the  ordinances  and  commands  of  God  were  observed  by  the  people.  II. 
The  blessing  promised.     1.   "I  will  come  to  thee."     God's  gracious  presence. 

2.  "  I  will  bless  thee."  Eemind  Him  of  His  promise.  3.  Make  this  a  house  of 
prayer.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Sanctuary  blessings: — I.  What  is  meant  by 
RECORDING  THE  NAME  OF  THE  LoRD  IN  ANY  PLACE  ?  1.  By  the  name  of  the  Lord  is 
often  understood  God  Himself,  or  the  display  of  His  infiiiite  perfections  in  those 
works,  whereby  He  makes  His  being  and  nature  known. — Thus,  Psa.  xx.  1.  But 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  when  used  in  a  particular  reference  to  the  covenant  of  grace, 
always  respects  God  considered  as  a  Eedeemer ;  and  expresses  His  Divine  perfec- 
tions, as  they  are  gloriously  displayed  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.  2.  Let  us  now 
see  in  what  respects  that  name  may  be  said  to  be  recorded  in  any  place.  The 
words  might  be  rendered,  "  In  all  places  where  I  shall  fix  the  memory  of  My 
name";  or,  "In  all  places  where  I  shall  make  My  name  to  be  invoked."  The 
Chaldaic  paraphrase  has  it,  "  In  every  place  where  I  shall  make  My  majesty  to 
dwell."  The  phrase,  agreeably  to  either  of  these  translations,  evidently  refers  to 
the  public  worship  of  God,  and  has  respect  both  to  the  place  when,  and  the  manner 
in  which,  it  was  to  be  celebrated.  It  is  well  known  that  the  tabernacle  was  the 
place  of  public  worship  which  God,  exclusively  of  all  others,  determined  for  the 
IsraeUtes  while  they  were  in  the  wilderness.  After  they  had  possession  of  the 
promised  land,  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was  lodged  at  Shiloh,  and  there,  for  a  long 
while,  the  people  celebrated  Divine  service.  When  the  temple  was  finished,  Jeru- 
salem was  fixed  upon  as  the  permanent  seat.  3.  If  you  now  inquire  how  the  name 
of  the  Lord  was  recorded  in  all  these  places,  and  by  what  means  it  might  be  said 
that  He  made  Himself  to  be  there  remembered  as  the  God  of  Salvation ;  we  refer 
you,  for  a  general  answer,  to  the  genius  and  scope  of  the  Mosaic  institution.  4. 
But  this  great  end  was  more  especially  attained  by  the  sacrifices  and  burnt-offerings, 
which  formed  an  essential  part  of  the  daily  worship  in  Israel.  Believers  were  then 
looking  for  the  appearance  of  the  promised  Seed  who  was  not  yet  come.  What  could 
be  better  calculated  to  assist  their  faith,  to  establish  their  hope,  and  instruct  them 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

in  the  method  of  salvation,  than  to  be  commanded  of  God  to  substitute  a  bloody 
offering  in  their  own  stead,  and  thus  transfer  the  legal  guilt  and  punishment 
upon  a  sacrifice  ?  In  this  act  of  worship,  the  bleeding  lamb  and  smoking  altar 
directed  them  to  the  promised  Surety,  the  precious  Lamb  of  God,  who,  by  Hia 
Bufferings  and  death,  was  fully  to  atone  for  His  people,  and,  by  one  perfect 
sacrifice,  became  the  Author  of  salvation  unto  all  that  obey  Him.  II.  The 
IMPORT  OF  THESE  WORDS,  "  I  will  come  uuto  thee,  and  bless  thee."  The  blessing 
of  the  Lord  is  always  upon  His  people  in  every  place.  He  hears  their  prayers  in 
secret,  and  in  their  families.  He  has  never  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,  "  Seek 
ye  Me  in  vain."  But  to  public  worship  peculiar  mercies  are  annexed.  1.  The 
Lord  blesses  His  Church  when  He  gives  it  a  pure  and  faithful  ministry.  2. 
The  Lord  blesses  His  Church  when,  in  His  good  Providence,  He  preserves  His 
people  together  in  mutual  peace,  and  prevents  confusion,  animosities,  and 
schisms.  3.  But  especially  He  blesses  His  people  in  the  place  where  He  records 
His  name,  when  He  bestows  that  blessing  of  all  blessings,  the  Holy  Spirit.  4. 
The  protection  and  defence  of  the  Most  High,  whereby  He  preserves  His 
Churches  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  privileges,  and  continues  His  blessing  from 
the  fathers  to  the  children.  Application :  1.  We  learn,  "  that  the  Son  of  God, 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  world,  gathers,  defends,  and  preserves  to 
Himself,  by  His  Spirit  and  Word,  out  of  the  whole  human  race,  a  Church  chosen 
to  everlasting  life  and  agreeing  in  true  faith."  2.  We  learn,  that  there  is  forgive- 
ness with  our  God,  that  He  may  be  feared  ;  and  thus  a  foundation  laid  for  true  and 
spiritual  worship.  3.  We  see,  that  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  like  their  Divine 
Author,  are  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  {J.  H.  Livingstone,  D.D.) 
The  promise  of  Qod  at  Sinai : — I.  The  promise  is  evidently  of  universal 
APPLICATION.  Its  language  implies  or  rather  asserts  this.  It  speaks  of  "  all 
places,"  and  consequently  it  takes  in  or  may  take  in  the  whole  world,  and  every 
spot  in  the  world.  The  Lord  "  records"  His  name  in  a  place,  when  He  declares 
His  perfections  and  makes  Himself  known  there ;  when  He  tells  us  what  He  is ; 
unfolds  to  us  His  character.  Now  comes  the  question,  Where  has  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  thus  revealed  Himself  ?  Where  has  He  thus  recorded  His  great  name  ? 
It  is  engraven  on  the  face  of  universal  nature.  The  Cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
is,  in  fact,  the  one  great  manifestation  of  a  hidden  God.  II.  Let  us  go  on  to 
consider  His  promise.  1.  It  encourages  us  to  expect  in  this  house  of  prayer  the 
presence  of  God  with  us.  "I  will  come  unto  thee."  And  what  more  can  we 
desire  ?  It  is  rest  to  the  soul ;  a  something  which  not  only  quiets,  and  strengthens, 
and  raises  it,  but  leaves  it  nothing  to  wish  for;  it  is  the  "  fulness  of  joy";  no 
cistern  of  happiness,  which  a  few  moments  or  hours  of  enjoyment  can  empty,  but 
a  fountain  of  life,  a  spring  that  eternity  cannot  dry  up  nor  a  universe  exhaust.  "  I 
■will  come  unto  thee,  and  I  will  bless  thee  " ;  "  so  bless  thee,  that  My  presence 
shall  be  known  by  the  happiness  I  communicate,  and  the  mercies  I  bestow."  2. 
We  are  warranted  then  to  look  for  blessings  from  heaven  in  this  place,  and  these 
real  blessings,  great  blessings,  mercies  which  God  Himself  esteems  blessings.  But 
here  we  must  remember  that  anything,  in  order  to  be  a  blessing,  must  be  adapted 
to  the  situation  and  condition  of  those  to  whom  it  is  given.  Hence  when  the  Lord 
Jehovah  says,  "  I  will  bless  thee,"  before  we  can  uuderstand  His  words,  we  must 
have  some  acquaintance  with  the  character  and  circumstances  of  those  to  whom 
they  are  addressed.  If  spoken  to  an  angel  or  a  redeemed  saint  in  heaven,  they  may 
mean  one  thing  ;  addressed  to  this  sinner  on  the  earth,  another  thing  ;  and  sent 
home  to  the  heart  of  that  poor  child  of  the  dust,  yet  something  different.  We  must 
look  to  ourselves  then.  We  must  ask  where  we  are  standing  and  whither  we  are 
going  ;  where  we  are  and  what  we  are.  And  to  what  a  multitude  of  thoughts  do 
such  questions  as  these  give  rise  !  What  wants,  and  burdens,  and  sins,  and  fears, 
do  they  bring  before  us!     (C.   Bradley,   M.A.)  TJie  presence  of  God  in  His 

Church: — "  I  will  come  unto  thee,  and  I  will  bless  thee,"  said  a  faithful  God  on 
Sinai.  And  did  the  words,  as  they  died  on  His  lips,  pass  away  from  His  remem- 
brance ?  No  ;  His  Church  in  the  wilderness  beheld  and  owned  His  presence.  He 
shone  forth  between  the  cherubim;  He  met  His  people  in  His  tabernacle,  and 
"  made  them  joyful  in  His  house  of  prayer."  And  when  a  temple  was  built  at 
Jerusalem  for  His  rest.  He  dwelt  visibly  in  it.  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the 
house  of  the  Lord  "  ;  and  this  was  His  promise  concerning  it,  "I  have  chosen  this 
place  to  Myself  for  an  house  of  sacrifice.  Now  Mine  eyes  shall  be  open,  and  Mine 
ears  attend  unto  the  prayer  tnat  is  made  in  this  place.  Mine  eyes  and  Mine  heart 
ehall  be  there  perpetually."    And  when  He  left  the  heaven  of  His  glory,  and  came 


CHAP.  XX.]  EXODUS.  418 

down  "a  Man  of  sorrows"  to  the  earth,  was  Sinai  forgotten  amidst  His  labours  and 
griefs  ?  A  thousand  years  had  not  erased  from  His  memory  one  word  of  the  promise 
He  had  uttered  there.  He  remembers  it ;  He  takes  it  up  as  His  own  ;  He  confirms 
and  extends  it.  "  In  all  places,"  was  His  language  on  the  mountain  ;  "  Whereso- 
ever any  are  gathered  together,"  is  His  language  now.  "  I  will  come  unto  thee," 
said  He  to  the  hosts  of  Israel ;  He  says  to  us,  "  Where  only  two  or  three  are  met 
together,  I  am."  "  I  will  come,"  was  His  promise  in  the  wilderness  ;  but  this  is 
His  declaration  in  His  Church,  "I  am  come;  there  am  I  in  the  midst "  ;  His 
presence  is  no  longer  a  mercy  to  be  hoped  for,  it  is  a  blessing  to  be  enjoyed.  But 
all  this,  it  may  be  said,  was  addressed  to  His  disciples  ;  and  was  intended  only  for 
the  early  ages  of  His  Church.  He  foresaw  the  objection.  Hear  Him  again  ;  "  Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  WTiat  then  is  this  house  of 
prayer  ?  It  is  a  place  where  we  are  to  meet  our  God.  We  see  Him  not,  perhaps 
we  think  not  of  His  presence;  but  if  only  two  or  three  of  us  are  seeking  our  happi- 
ness in  Him,  He  is  here,  and  here  to  bless  us.  His  own  faithful  lips  have  told  us 
so.  May  His  Spirit  grant  that  our  own  experience  may  often  tell  us  the  same  I 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  25.  Thou  shalt  not  build  it  of  hewn  stone.— The  altar  of  "  unheicn  stone  "  : 
simplicity  of  worship  : — I.  Eitualism  is  not  a  necessity  of  worship.  There  can  be 
worship  at  the  rough  "  altar  of  unhewn  stones,"  as  well  as  in  the  temple  where 
wealth  has  lavished  its  contributions  and  art  exhausted  its  genius.  Worship  is  not 
a  form,  but  a  spirit ;  not  a  service,  but  a  life.  And  a  life  has  many  functions.  II. 
Mekitoeiousness  must  be  excluded  from  worship.  No  "tool"  to  be  used  in 
constructing  this  altar.  To  culture  the  soul  in  true  devotion,  as  God  requires,  is  a 
harder  task  than  to  give  money,  &c.  III.  Universality  is  a  characteristic  of 
WORSHIP.  1.  Not  confined  to  places.  2.  Not  confined  to  persons.  As  mere 
earthen  altars  will  do,  where  is  the  man  who  cannot  build  them?  (Homilist.) 
The  Jewish  altar  as  typical  of  Clirist: — One  can  hardly  help  connecting  the  words 
with  Daniel's  vision  of  "  a  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands,"  which 
was  a  vision  of  Christ.  The  rough  stone  fashioned  by  no  human  instrumentality, 
this  alone  might  be  an  altar  of  the  Lord.  It  was  forbidden  that  man  fihould 
attempt  by  devices  of  his  own  to  adorn  the  altar ;  if  he  made  the  endeavour,  he 
utterly  profaned  and  polluted  the  structure  :  and  in  all  this,  was  it  not,  as  though 
it  had  been  said  expressly  to  man,  "  Thou  shalt  have  a  Mediator,  an  Altar,  on 
which  thme  offerings  being  laid,  shall  be  consumed  by  the  fires  of  Divine  accept- 
ance ;  but  if  thou  shouldst  attempt  to  add  anything  of  thine  own  to  the  worthiness 
of  this  Mediator,  if  thou  wouldst  carve  the  altar,  or  ornament  it  with  human  merit 
or  righteousness,  the  effect  shall  be  that  for  yourself  the  altar  shall  be  stripped  of 
all  virtue,  and  no  flame  break  forth  from  the  heavens  to  burn  up  the  oblation  "  ? 
Now,  we  believe,  that  so  soon  as  man  had  fallen,  God  instituted  a  system  of 
sacrifice,  and  taught  those  who  had  sullied  their  immortality  tbat  its  lustre  should 
be  restored  through  a  propitiation  for  sin.  As  we  conclude  that  God  first  ordained 
sacrifice,  we  may  also  conclude  that  it  was  under  His  direction  tbat  the  first  altars 
were  reared.  Observe  two  things:  an  altar  supported  the  gift,  and  an  altar 
sanctified  the  gift.  We  believe  that  in  both  these  respects  Christ  Jesus  may  be 
designated  as  an  altar,  whether  you  consider  His  Person  or  the  work  which  He 
effects  on  our  behalf.  1.  If  we  look  first  at  the  Person  of  the  Mediator,  shall  we 
not  find  the  two  properties  of  the  altar,  that  it  supported  and  sanctified  the  oblation 
which  Christ  made  to  the  Almighty?  The  Person  of  Christ  Jesus,  as  you  know, 
was  a  Divine  Person,  whilst  in  it  were  gathered  two  natures,  the  human  and  the 
Divine.  It  was  the  human  nature  which  was  sacrificed,  the  Divine  being  inacces- 
sible to  suffering  and  incapable  of  pain.  So  that  if  you  simply  look  at  the  Person 
of  the  Mediator,  and  consider  that  it  was  the  design  of  the  altar  to  support  the  gift 
that  was  presented  in  sacrifice,  you  must  see  that  the  Divine  nature  so  bore  up  the 
human,  that  it  so  served  as  a  platform  on  which  the  oblation  might  be  laid  when 
the  fire  of  God's  justice  came  down  in  its  purity  and  its  intenseness,  that  with  as 
much  reason  as  Christ  Jesus  is  described  as  a  sacrifice,  may  He  also  be  described 
as  an  altar.  2.  Not,  however,  that  the  altar  only  sustained  the  gift ;  it  also 
sanctified  the  gift ;  and  the  fitness  of  considering  the  Divine  nature  in  the  Person 
of  Christ  as  the  altar  on  which  the  human  was  presentpd,  will  be  still  more 
apparent  if  you  bring  into  account  this  sanctifying  virtue.  We  have  already  stated 
that  the  Divine  nature  was  of  necessity  incapable  of  suffering,  and  that  t  was, 
therefore,  the  human  which  made  the  Redeemer  accessible  to  anguish  ;  but  it  was 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

the  Divinity  which  gave  worth  to  the  sufferings  of  the  humanity,  and  rendered 
them  efficacious  to  the  taking  away  sin.  The  Divine  was  to  the  human  what  the 
altar  was  to  the  sacrifice :  it  sanctified  the  gift  and  made  it  acceptable.  Yes, 
blessed  Saviour,  we  most  thankfully  own  that  through  Thee,  and  Thee  only,  can 
we  offer  unto  God  any  acceptable  service.  And  here  we  would  remind  you  of  a 
very  emphatic  question  put  by  our  Lord  to  the  Pharisees — "  Whether  is  greater, 
the  gift,  or  the  altar  that  sanctifieth  the  gift  ?"  We  have  to  allude  to  the  supposed 
efficacy  in  repentance,  and  the  presumed  virtue  in  the  tears  which  the  sinful  may 
shed  over  their  offences  against  God.  The  guilt  of  sin  is  removed  by  Christ's 
blood,  not  by  man's  tears.  It  is  the  altar  that  sanctifieth  the  gift.  I  depreciate 
not  repentance,  I  strip  it  not  of  moral  excellence,  nor  of  moral  prevalence,  but  we 
affirm  that  without  the  altar  the  gift  would  be  unavailing,  without  Christ  the  most 
contrite  would  perish  with  the  most  hardy.     (£f.  Melvill,  B.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Vek.  1.  These  are  the  Judgments. — The  judgments : — These  judgments  stood 
related  to  the  second  table  of  the  Law,  just  as  the  regulations  concerning  the 
worship  of  the  altar  stood  related  to  the  first.  It  is  to  be  remembered  also  that 
these  "  judgments,"  and  those  of  the  same  kind  which  afterward  were  added  as 
occasion  arose,  are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  moral  law,  not  only  as  applying  to 
the  state  rather  than  the  individual,  but  also  as  local  and  temporary  in  their  nature, 
representing  not  what  was  ideally  best,  but  only  what  was  then  practically  possible 
in  the  direction  of  that  which  was  best.  Some  very  superficial  people  criticise  them 
as  if  they  were  intended  for  the  nineteenth  century  1  The  Decalogue  was,  and  is, 
intrinsically  perfect;  the  "judgments"  were  adapted  to  the  circumstances  and 
wants  of  Israel  at  the  time.  And  it  would  be  a  good  thing  if  reformers  of  modern 
times  would  always  remember  the  same  wise  and  necessary  distinctions,  between 
that  which  is  ideally  perfect  and  that  wbich  alone  may  be  practically  possible.  Still 
further  it  is  to  be  remembered,  that  these  judgments  were  suitable  to  "  the  Theo- 
cracy "  of  Israel ;  and  hence  those  are  entirely  wrong  who  attempt  to  use  them  as 
precedents  for  general  legislation  in  the  limited  monarchies  and  republican  govern- 
ments, and  otherwise  entirely  altered  circumstances,  of  modern  times.  Yet  if  we 
could  only  compare  these  "  judgments  "  with  the  laws  and  customs  of  the  nations 
around,  we  should  see  by  force  of  contrast  how  exceedingly  pure,  wise,  just,  and 
humane  they  are ;  and  especially  where  private  relations  are  dealt  with,  we  have 
touches  which  would  not  shame  the  New  Testament  itself,  however  much  they  may 
in  another  sense  shame  us,  as  for  instance  Exod.  xxiii.  4,  5.  The  third  division  of 
the  book  of  the  covenant  has  to  do  with  matters  which  relate  neitber  to  worship 
exclusively,  nor  to  civil  relations  exclusively,  but  to  both.  These  are  the  Sabbath 
year,  the  Sabbath  day,  and  the  yearly  festivals  (xxiii.  10-19).  As  for  the  Sabbath 
year  and  the  festivals,  they  will  come  up  again  in  the  fuller  details  given  from  the 
tabernacle  and  recorded  in  Leviticus.  And  as  for  the  Sabbath  day,  we  may  simply 
remark  the  significance  of  its  presence  here  in  the  book  of  the  covenant,  as  well  as 
in  the  Dei  alopue,  indicating  that  while  in  its  principle  it  belongs  to  universal  and 
unchangeable  law,  in  its  letter  it  formed  part  of  that  national  covenant  which  was 
merged  in  the  new  and  better  covenant  of  the  later  age.  (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.) 
The  Hebrew  commomvealth  founded  on  religion: — There  is  a  very  common  reflection 
upon  the  Hebrew  lawgiver,  which,  though  it  does  not  call  in  question  any  particular 
law,  is  yet  designed  to  vitiate  and  weaken  the  impression  of  the  whole — that  he  was 
a  fatern  and  relentless  ruler,  who  may  indeed  have  understood  the  principles  of 
justice,  but  whose  justice  was  seldom  tempered  with  mercy.  This  impression  is 
derived  partly  at  least  from  the  summary  way  in  which  in  several  instances  he  dealt 
with  rebellion.  To  this  kind  of  argument  there  is  one  brief  and  sufficient  answer : 
All  bodies  of  men  are  acknowledged  to  have  the  right  to  resort  to  severe  penalties 
when  encompassed  by  extraordinary  dangers.  The  children  of  Israel  were  in  a 
position  of  great  peril,  and  their  safety  depended  on  the  wisdom  and  firmness  of  one 
man.  Never  had  a  ruler  a  more  difficult  task.  Moses  did  not  legislate  for  the  ideal 
republic  of  Plato,  a  community  of  perfect  beings,  but  for  a  people  bom  in  slavery, 


CHAP.  XXI.]  EXODUS.  416 

from  which  they  had  but  just  broken  away,  and  that  were  in  danger  of  becoming 
ungoveruable.  Here  were  two  millions  and  a  half  who  had  not  even  a  settled  place 
of  abode,  mustered  in  one  vast  camp,  through  which  rebellion  might  spread  in  a 
day.  Moses  had  to  govern  them  by  his  single  will.  ...  To  preserve  order,  and  to 
guard  against  hostile  attacks,  all  the  men  capable  of  bearing  arms  were  organized 
as  a  military  body.  ,  .  .  He  suppressed  rebellion  as  Cromwell  would  have  suppressed 
it :  he  not  only  put  it  down,  but  stamped  it  out ;  and  such  prompt  severity  was  the 
truest  humanity.  But  it  is  not  acts  of  military  disciphne  that  provoke  the  criticism 
of  modern  humanitarians,  so  much  as  those  religious  laws  which  prescribed  the 
God  whom  the  Hebrews  should  worship,  and  punished  idolatry  and  blasphemy  as 
the  greatest  of  crimes.  This,  it  is  said,  transcends  the  proper  sphere  of  human 
law ;  it  exalts  ceremonies  into  duties,  and  denounces  as  crimes  acts  which  have  no 
moral  wrong.  Was  not,  then,  the  Hebrew  law  wanting  in  the  first  principle  of  justice 
— freedom  to  all  religions  ?  Now  it  is  quite  absurd  to  suppose  the  Hebrews  had  con- 
scientious Fcruijles  against  this  worship,  or  seriously  doubted  whether  Jehovah  or 
Baal  were  the  true  God.  They  had  been  rescued  from  slavery  by  a  direct  interposi- 
tion of  the  Almighty,  they  had  been  led  by  an  Almighty  Deliverer  ;  and  it  was  His 
voice  which  they  heard  from  the  cliffs  of  Sinai.  But  it  was  not  merely  because  their 
religion  was  true,  and  the  only  true  worship,  that  they  were  required  to  accept  it ; 
but  because  also  of  the  peculiar  relation  which  its  Divine  Author  had  assumed 
towards  the  Hebrew  state  as  its  founder  and  protector.  They  had  no  king  but  God  ; 
He  was  the  only  Lord.  As  such,  no  act  of  disobedience  or  disrespect  to  His 
authority  could  be  light  or  small.  Further  :  the  unity  of  God  was  a  centre  of 
unity  for  the  nation.  The  state  was  one  because  their  God  was  one.  The  worship 
of  Jehovah  alone  distinguished  the  Hebrews  from  all  other  people,  and  preserved 
their  separate  nationality.  Admit  other  religions,  and  the  bond  which  held  together 
the  twelve  tribes  was  dissolved.  How  long  could  that  union  have  lasted  if  the  prophets 
of  Baal  had  had  the  freedom  of  the  camp  and  been  permitted  to  go  from  tribe  to  tribe 
and  from  tent  to  tent,  preaching  the  doctrine  of  human  sacrifices  ?  Hence  Moses  did 
not  suffer  them  for  an  hour.  False  prophets  were  to  be  stoned  to  death.  .  .  .  Such 
was  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  a  state  founded  in  religion.  Was  it  therefore 
founded  in  fanaticism  and  folly,  or  in  profound  wisdom  and  far-seeing  sagacity? 
"  Eeligion,  true  or  false,"  says  Coleridge,  "  is,  and  ever  has  been,  the  centre  of 
gravity  in  a  realm,  to  which  all  other  things  must  and  will  accommodate  them- 
selves." Would  it  not  be  well  if  some  of  our  modern  pretenders  to  statesmanship 
did  not  so  completely  ignore  its  existence  and  its  power?  The  religion  which 
Moses  gave  to  the  Hebrews  was  not  one  merely  of  abstract  ideas  ;  it  was  incarnated 
in  an  outward  and  visible  worship  by  which  it  addressed  the  senses.  Even  in  the 
desert  the  tabernacle  and  the  altar  were  set  up,  and  the  daily  sacrifice  was  offered ; 
the  smoke  and  the  incense  below  ascending  towards  the  pillar  of  cloud  above,  and 
the  fire  on  the  altar  answering  to  the  pillar  of  fire  in  the  midnight  sky.  This  daily 
and  nightly  worship  made  religion  a  real  because  a  visible  thing  ;  it  appealed  to  the 
senses  and  touched  the  imagination  of  the  people,  and  held  their  spirits  in  awe. 
The  feeliug  that  God  dwelt  in  the  midst  of  them  inspired  them  with  courage  for 
great  efforts  and  great  sacrifices.     (H.  M.  Field,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-6.  If  thou  buy  an  Hebrew  servant. — Slavery  and  sovereignty  : — These 
judgments  of  God  are  the  declarations  of  human  rights.  I.  These  judgments  dealt 
WITH  AN  EXISTING  INSTITUTION.  The  circumstauces  under  which  an  Hebrew  might 
be  rejluced  to  servitude  were — 1.  Poverty.  2.  The  commission  of  theft.  3. 
The  exercise  of  paternal  authority.  II.  This  admitted  institution  does  not  sanc- 
tion MODEEN  SLAVERY.  There  is  in  the  Divine  revelation  a  spirit  ever  working  to  the 
enfranchisement  of  the  race.  More  closely  consider  the  conditions  of  Mosaic 
slavery — III.  This  system  asserted  the  slave's  personal  sovereignty.  In  modern 
systems,  the  man  is  a  mere  chattel,  but  in  the  Mosaic  system  the  slave's  manhood 
is  declared.  He  is  sovereign  over  himself,  and  is  allowed  the  power  of  choice.  The 
Southern  slaveholder  would  not  permit  his  slave  to  say,  "  I  will  not " ;  but  the 
Hebrew  slave  is  permitted  to  say,  "  I  love  my  master,  my  wife,  and  my  children  ;  I 
will  not  go  out  free."  IV.  This  system  declared  the  slave's  right  to  be  a  man  of 
feeling.  The  man  was  not  to  be  separated  from  the  wife  he  had  chosen  prior  to 
his  da,ys  cf  servitude.  This  part  of  the  Mosaic  regulations  would  not  harmonize 
with  the  painful  scenes  which  took  place  at  slave  marts.  V.  This  system  pro- 
claimed the  slave's  right  to  freedom,  and  that  it  is  the  highest  condition. 
The  Hebrew  slave  worked  on  to  the  day  of  happy  release.  This  term  of  service  was 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixi. 

no  longer  than  a  modern  apprenticeship.  The  bells  of  the  seventh  year  rang  out 
the  old  order  of  slavery,  and  rang  in  the  new  glorious  order  of  freedom.  VI.  This 
system  typically  sets  forth  that  the  service  of  love  is  the  highest,  and  alone 
ENDURING.  He  only  was  to  serve  "  for  ever  "  who  cbose  continued  servitude  on 
account  of  love  to  his  master,  and  love  to  his  wife  and  his  children.  The  service  of 
love  outstrips  in  dignity  and  surpasses  in  duration  all  other  forms  of  tervice.  (IF. 
Burrous,  B.A.)  Attachment  to  a  master: — The  following  anecdote  is  furnished 
by  an  ofiicer  who  went  through  the  campaign  in  Egypt  against  the  French  in  the 
time  of  the  first  Napoleon.  "I  am  glad,"  he  says,  "to  recall  to  my  memory  the 
remembrance  of  a  deed  done  by  a  brave  and  faithful  servant.  While  in  Egypt,  the 
plague  broke  out  in  the  2nd  Begiment  of  Guards.  A  large  tent  was  immediately 
set  apart  as  a  hospital  for  the  stricken.  It  was,  naturally,  regarded  with  extreme 
dread  by  the  unfortunate  sufferers,  who  despaired  of  ever  leaving  it  alive.  The 
surgeon  of  the  Guards,  discovering  that  he  had  symptoms  of  the  disorder  about  him, 
bravely  gave  himself  up  as  an  inmate  of  the  plague  tent.  His  servant,  who  was 
greatly  attached  to  htm,  was  in  despair.  'At  least,'  he  said,  '  let  me  go  with  you, 
and  nurse  you.'  His  master,  however,  made  answer  that  such  a  step  was  impos- 
sible, since  the  tent  was  guarded  by  sentinels,  who  had  orders  to  admit  no  one 
without  a  pass.  The  breach  of  this  rule  was  punishable  with  death.  The  man  was 
silenced  for  the  moment,  but  at  nightfall,  regardless  of  the  danger  of  di.^ease  or 
detection,  he  crept  on  hands  and  knees  past  the  sentinels,  and  slipping  under  the 
cords  of  the  doomed  tent,  he  presented  himself  at  his  master's  bedside.  Here  he  went 
through  many  days  of  patient  and  tender  nursing  of  the  sick  man,  till  the  plague 
claimed  another  victim,  and  the  good  surgeon  died.  Then  the  servant  walked 
quietly  out  of  the  tent  dr  ir,  and  went  through  the  usual  form  of  disinfection,  after 
that  returning  to  his  regiment,  where  he  was  received  with  open  arms.  To  have 
dared  so  much  for  a  beloved  master  raised  him  to  the  rank  of  a  hero,  both  among 
officers  and  men.  He  had  shown  that  love  for  a  fellow-man  was  stronger  even  than 
the  love  of  life  in  his  breast,  and  those  who  might  not  have  been  brave  enough  to 
dare  such  fearful  risks,  were  noble  enough  to  own  their  admiration  of  one  who  had 
done  so.  Such  faithful  service  is  registered  in  heaven,"  the  writer  adds.  (Great 
Thoughts.)  Love  for  a  master: — In  the  latter  days  of  Sir  Walter  Scott,  when 
poverty  stared  him  in  the  facj,  he  had  to  announce  to  his  servants  his  inability  to 
retain  them  any  longer.  But  they  begged  to  be  allowed  to  stay,  saying  they  would 
be  content  with  the  barest  fare  if  only  they  might  remain  in  his  employ.  This  was 
permitted,  and  they  clung  to  him  until  the  last.  (H.  0.  Mackey.)  The  ear  bored 
with  an  aid: — We  are  going  to  use  this  as  a  type,  and  get  some  moral  out  of  it. 

1.  And  the  first  use  is  this.  Men  are  by  nature  the  slaves  of  sin.  Some  are  the 
slaves  of  drunkenness,  some  of  lasciviousness,  some  of  covetousness,  some  of  sloth  ; 
but  there  are  generally  times  in  men's  lives  when  they  have  an  opportunity  of 
breaking  loose.  There  will  happen  providential  changes  which  take  them  away 
from  old  companions,  and  so  give  them  a  little  hope  of  liberty,  or  there  will  come 
times  of  sickness,  which  take  them  away  from  temptation,  and  give  them  oppor- 
tunities for  thought.  Abovp  all,  seasons  will  occur  when  conscience  is  set  to  work 
by  the  faithful  preaching  of  the  Word,  and  when  the  man  pulls  himself  up,  and 
questions  his  spirit  thus  : — "  Which  shall  it  be  ?  I  have  been  a  servant  of  the  devil, 
but  here  is  an  opportunity  of  getting  free.  Shall  I  give  up  this  sin  ?  Shall  I  pray 
God  to  give  me  grace  to  break  right  away,  and  become  a  new  man ;  or  shall  I  not  ?  " 

2.  Our  text  reads  us  a  second  lesson,  namely,  this.  In  the  forty-first  Psalm,  in  the 
sixth  verse,  you  will  find  the  expression  used  by  our  Lord,  or  by  David  in  prophecy 
personifying  our  Lord,  "  Mine  ear  hast  thou  opened,"  or  "  Mine  ear  hast  thou 
digged."  Jesus  Christ  is  here,  in  all  probability,  speaking  of  Himself  as  being  for 
ever,  for  our  sakes,  the  willing  servant  of  God.  Will  you  not  say,  "  Let  my  ear  be 
bored  to  His  service,  even  as  His  ear  was  digged  for  me  "?  I.  Eirst,  let  us  speak 
upon  our  choice  of  perpetual  service.  1.  The  first  thing  is,  we  have  the  power  to 
go  free  if  we  will.  2.  We  have  not  the  remotest  wish  to  do  so.  3.  We  are  willing 
to  take  the  consequences.  The  boring  of  our  ear  is  a  special  pain,  but  both  ears 
are  ready  for  the  aul.  The  Lord's  service  involves  ^peculiar  trials,  for  He  has  told 
OS,  "  Every  branch  that  beareth  fruit  He  purgeth  it."  Are  we  willing  to  take  the 
purging  ?  II.  Now,  secondly,  our  reasons  for  it.  A  man  ought  to  have  a  reas6n 
for  so  weighty  a  decision  as  this.  What  reasons  can  we  give  for  such  decided 
language  ?  1.  We  can  give  some  reasons  connected  with  Himself.  The  servant  in 
our  text  who  would  not  accept  his  liberty,  said,  "  I  love  my  master."  Can  we  say 
that  ?    The  Bervant  in  our  text,  who  would  not  go  free,  plainly  declared  that  he 


CHAP.  XXI.]  EXODUS.  417 

Ipved  his  wife,  so  that  there  are  reasons  connected  not  only  with  his  Master,  but 
with  those  in  his  Master's  house,  which  detain  each  servant  of  Jesus  in  happy 
bondage.  Some  of  us  could  not  leave  Jesus,  not  only  because  of  what  He  is,  but 
because  of  some  that  are  very  dear  to  us  who  are  in  His  service.  How  could  Heave 
my  mother's  God  T  Besides,  let  me  add,  there  are  some  of  us  who  must  keep  to 
Christ,  because  we  have  children  in  His  family  whom  we  could  not  leave — dear 
ones  who  first  learned  of  Christ  from  us.  2.  There  are  reasons  also  why  we  cannot 
forsake  our  Lord  which  arise  out  of  ourselves  ;  and  the  first  is  that  reason  which 
Peter  felt  to  be  so  powerful.  The  Master  said,  *'  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  "  Peter 
answered  by  another  question.  He  said,  ^'  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go?  "  3.  And 
why  should  we  go  ?  Can  you  find  any  reason  why  we  should  leave  Jesus  Christ  ?  Can 
you  imagine  one?  4.  And  when  should  we  leave  Him  if  we  must  leave  Him? 
Leave  Him  while  we  are  young?  It  is  then  that  we  need  Him  to  be  the  guide  of 
our  youth.  Leave  Him  when  we  are  in  middle  life  ?  Why,  then  it  is  we  want  Him 
to  help  us  to  bear  our  cross,  lest  we  sink  under  our  daily  load.  Leave  Him  in  old 
age?  Ah,  no!  It  is  then  we  require  Him  to  cheer  our  declining  hours.  Leave 
Him  'in  life  ?  How  could  we  live  without  Him  ?  Leave  Him  in  death  ?  How  could 
we  die  without  Him  ?  No,  we  must  cling  to  Him  ;  we  must  follow  Him  whitherso- 
ever He  goeth.  III.  In  the  last  place,  I  want  to  bore  your  ear.  Do  you  mean 
to  be  bound  for  life?  Christians,  do  you  really  mean  it?  Come,  sit  ye  down  and 
count  the  cost.  1.  And,  first,  let  them  be  bored  with  the  sharp  awl  of  the  Saviour's 
sufferings.  No  story  wrings  a  Christian's  heart  with  such  anguish  as  the  griefs  and 
woesof  Cliriftt.  The  bleeding  Lamb  enthralls  me.  I  am  His,  and  His  for  ever.  That  is 
one  way  of  marking  the  ear.  2.  Next,  let  your  ear  be  fastened  by  the  truth,  so  that 
you  are  determined  to  hear  only  the  gospel.  The  gospel  ought  to  monopolize  the 
believer's  ear.  3.  Furthermore,  if  you  really  give  yourself  to  Christ,  you  must  have 
your  ear  opened  to  hear  and  obey  the  whispers  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  thai  you 
yield  to  His  teaching,  and  to  His  teaching  only,     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver8.*7-ll.  If  a  man  sell  his  daughter  to  be  a  maidservant. — Degraded  condition 
of  girls  in  Africa : — The  condition  of  girls  in  Africa  is  thus  described  by  a  mis- 
sionary :  "A  father  looks  upon  his  girl  as  being  of  the  value  only  of  so  many 
goats,  and  he  is  ready  to  sell  her  as  soon  as  any  man  dflfers  him  the  required  pay- 
ment,. Thus,  while  she  is  quite  young — perhaps  only  four  or  five — her  life  and 
liberty  may  have  been  sold  away  by  her  own  father,  ard  sooner  or  later  she  must 
become  the  wife,  the  slave,  the  drudge  of  her  owner.  While  at  Mayumba,  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Congo  river,  I  one  afternoon  heard  a  child  screaming  frantically 
behind  the  house  where  I  was  staying,  and  going  out  I  found  a  little  IBavilla  girl, 
not  more  than  four  years  old,  who  had  just  been  brougb'  down  the  lagoon  from  her 
home  away  in  the  Mamba  hills,  where  she  had  been  bought  by  a  Mayumba  man.  The 
crew  of  the  canoe  in  which  she  had  been  brought  down — six  big,  fierce-looking  men 
— were  standing  around  the  little  prisoner,  pointing  their  guns  and  spears  at  her 
just  for  the  sport  of  seeing  her  shake  and  scream  with  fright ;  and  a  band  of 
women  were  dancing  with  wild  delight  at  the  heartless  -game.  It  was  possible  to 
save  the  poor  child  from  the  cruel  treatment  just  then,  but  that  was  only  the 
beginning  of  a  hfetime  of  suffering  for  her  in  the  midst  of  a  strange  people,  with 
no  friend  at  hand  to  help  or  protect  her." 

Vers.  12-14.  Shall  be  surely  put  to  death. — Cases  of  homicide  : — I.  Homicide  in 
EFFECT.  "  He  that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."  Anger  in  the  heart  gives 
unconscious  mahcious  power  to  the  will.  The  man  is  responsible  for  the  effects  of 
his  anger,  even  though  these  effects  are  more  disastrous  than  he  intended.  II. 
Homicide  by  mistake.  Cities  of  refuge.  And  in  the  final  adjustment  of  human 
affairs,  merciful  consideration  will  be  dealt  out  to  thoae  who  have  done  vast 
mischief  by  mistake ;  upon  sins  of  ignorance  will  fall  the  blessed  light  of  Divine 
mercy.  Embrace  the  glorious  truth  that  through  the  sternest  code  the  Divine  love 
cannot  help  revealing  its  gracious  tendencies.  III.  Homicide  by  design.  Death 
is  to  be  his  portion.  Life  is  God's  most  sacred  gift.  He  bestows  largely  for  ita 
unfolding.  He  provides  many  safeguards  for  its  preservation.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 
Capital  crimes  in  the  Mosaic  code  : — Complaint  has  been  made  against  Moses  on 
account  of  the  number  of  crimes  made  capital  in  his  code.  But  great  injustice  has 
been  done  him  in  this  particular.  The  crimes  punishable  with  death  by  his  lawa 
were  either  of  a  deep  moral  malignity  or  such  as  were  aimed  against  the  very  being 
of  the  state.    It  wUl  be  found,  too,  on  examination,  that  there  were  but  four  clasMg 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  XXL 

of  capital  offences  known  to  his  laws — treason,  murder,  deliberate  and  gross  abuse 
of  parents,  and  the  more  unnatural  and  horrid  crimes  arising  out  of  the  sexual 
relation.  And  all  the  specifications  under  these  classes  amounted  to  only  seven- 
teen ;  whereas  it  is  not  two  hundred  years  since  the  criminal  code  of  Great  Britain 
numbered  one  hundred  and  forty-eight  crimes  punishable  with  death — many  of 
them  of  a  trivial  nature,  as  petty  thefts  and  trespasses  upo.i  property.  But  no 
injury  simply  affecting  property  could  draw  down  upon  an  Israelite  an  ignominious 
death.  The  Mosaic  law  respected  moral  depravity  more  than  gold.  Moral  turpi- 
tudes, and  the  most  atrocious  expressions  of  moral  turpitude,  these  were  the  objects 
of  its  unsleeping  severity,     (i.'.  C.  Wines,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  He  that  smiteth  Ma  father. — God's  indignation  against  the  vnfilial 
spirit: — I.  The  unfilial  spirit  in  two  aspects.  1.  He  that  smiteth  his  father  or 
his  mother.  (1)  A  child  may  smite  his  parent  literally,  as  in  the  case  of  those 
brutes  we  read  of  in  the  newspapers  every  week.  (2)  A  child  may  smite  his 
parents'  authority  by  rebellion  in  thought,  word,  or  deed ;  e.g.,  Absalom.  (3)  A 
child  may  smite  his  parents'  wealth  by  extravagance  or  carelessness.  (4)  A  child 
may  smile  his  parents'  character  by  an  incautious  revelation  of  domestic  secrets. 
(5)  A  child  may  smite  his  parents'  health,  and,  by  misconduct,  bring  their  grey 
hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave ;  e.g.,  Joseph's  brethren.  (G)  A  child  may  smite  his 
parents'  heart,  and  break  it  by  disobedience  and  wilfulness;  e.g.,  sons  of  Eli. 
2.  "He  that  curseth  {lit.  revileth)  his  father  or  his  mother."  (1)  A  child  may 
revile  his  parents  by  an  assertion  of  personal  independence.  (2)  A  child  may  revile 
his  parents  by  speaking  of  them  in  a  careless  and  irreverent  way.  (3)  A  child  may 
revile  his  parents  by  speaking  to  them  in  a  familiar  or  impertinent  way.  (4)  A 
child  may  revile  his  parents  by  treating  their  counsels  wi^h  contempt ;  and  (5) 
Alas!  a  child  may  revile  his  parents  by  cursing  them  to  their  face.  II.  The  uni- 
form puNii-HMENT  OF  THE  ONFiLiAL  SPIRIT.  "  bhall  surcly  be  put  to  death."  The 
letter  of  tliis  condemnation  is  now  repealed,  but  its  spirit  lives  on  through  the  ages. 
1.  An  unfilial  child  dies  to  the  respect  of  civilised  society.  2.  An  untilial  child  is 
morally  dead.  If  the  sign  of  the  moral  life  is  "  love  of  the  brethren,"  how  dead 
must  he  be  in  whom  filial  respect  and  love  is  extinct !  3.  An  unfilial  child,  inas- 
much as  he  breaks  a  moral  law,  and  a  law  that  partakes  of  the  qualities  of  both 
tables  and  combines  them,  dies  in  a  more  terrible  sense.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth 
it  shall  die."  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Filial  impiety  : — The  books  tell  us  of  an  old  man 
whose  son  dragged  him,  by  his  hoary  locks,  to  the  threshold  of  his  door,  when  the 
father  said  :  "  Now  stop,  my  son,  that  is  as  far  as  I  dragged  my  father  by  his  hair." 
There  is  still  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth.  He  makes  Himself  known  by  the 
judgments  which  He  executeih.  Who  has  ever  seen  any  one  a  loser  by  filial  piety, 
or  a  gainer  by  the  want  of  it  ?  There  still  lives  a  man  who,  in  a  passion,  cursed 
his  own  father,  and  then  struck  him  several  times  with  a  horsewhip.  Judgment 
against  this  evil  work  was  not  executed  speedily.  Time  rolled  on,  but  no  in- 
genuous repentance  followed.  After  some  time  the  cruel  son  was  blasting  rock 
in  a  well.  The  fuse  caught  fire,  and  he  was  blown  up  with  the  loss  of  both  bis 
eyes,  and  his  right  hand,  with  which  he  had  struck  his  father.  Soon  after  this  sad 
occurrence  he  was  received  in  the  year  1868  as  a  pauper  at  the  county  workhouse. 
He  has  habitually  been  restless  and  miserable.  He  is  happy  nowhere.  He  has 
gone  to  another  couuty  and  to  another  workhouse.  But  he  is  well  known  as  a  very 
wretched  man.  By  the  law  of  Moses,  cursing  father  or  mother  was  punished  with 
death.  No  reason  for  the  law  is  given,  but  the  atrocious  nature  of  the  act.  WTiat 
fearful  force  is  in  such  words  as  these  :  "  Whoso  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother, 
his  lamp  shall  be  put  out  in  obscure  darkness."  "  The  eye  that  mocketh  at  his 
father,  the  ravens  of  the  valley  shall  pick  it  out,  and  the  young  eagles  shall  eat  it " 
(Prov.  XX.  20;  xxx.  17).  (IF.  S.  Plumer.)  Cruelty  to  a  mother: — A  young  man,  of 
whom  I  once  heard,  was  often  spoken  to  and  often  prayed  for  by  his  mother,  until  he 
said  to  her,  "  Mother,  if  you  don't  give  up  that  praying  for  me,  I  will  run  away  to 
sea."  He  ran  away.  Before  he  wfent,  his  mother  packed  his  box.  She  put  the 
writing  paper  at  the  top,  and  all  she  begged  of  him  was,  "  My  boy,  when  you  are 
far  away  from  me,  write  to  me.  I  will  write  to  you ;  but  send  me  an  answer." 
He  went  away ;  he  stayed  three  years,  and  never  sent  a  single  syllable  to  that 
loving  mother,  who  oftentimes  was  kneeling  by  her  bedside  praying  for  that  runa- 
way boy.  At  last  he  went  back  to  the  old  village  to  see  how  she  was.  As  he 
walked  down  the  street  his  heart  misgave  him.  He  walked  up  the  path  to  the 
bouse,  he  knocked  at  the  door ;  it  was  opened  by  a  person  whom  he  did  cot  know. 


CHAP.  XXI.]  EXODUS.  419 

He  asked  for  Mrs.  So-and-so.  "  How  is  she  ?  "  The  woman  looked  blank  at  him. 
He  said,  "  Is  not  she  here?  "  "  Oh,"  said  the  woman,  "  you  mean  the  old  woman 
who  used  to  live  here.  She  died  eight  months  ago  of  a  broken  heart.  She  had  a 
bad  son,  who  went  away  to  sea  and  left  her,  and  she  wrote  to  him,  and  he  never 
wrote  back  again."  He  turned  away  and  went  into  the  village  churchyard.  He 
looked  at  the  graves,  he  found  the  one  he  sought,  and  threw  himself  down  upon  it, 
saying,  "  Oh,  mother,  I  never  meant  it,  I  never  meant  it !  "  But  he  did  it.  {Dr. 
Morgan.) 

Ver.  16.  He  that  stealeth  a  man. — About  kidnapping  : — The  same  law  is  repeated 
in  Deut.  xxiv.  7  ;  from  which  passage  it  is  evident  that  it  treats  of  kidnapping  a 
Hebrew.  And  thus  the  severity  of  the  punishment,  death,  without  the  possibility 
of  redemption,  cannot  appear  surprising.  For  all  Israelites  are  considered  as  free 
citizens  with  inalienable  and  equal  rights,  of  which  they  can  never  be  entirely 
divested.  Now  it  is  natural  that  he  who  steals  an  Israelite  will,  in  the  rarest 
cases,  keep  him  as  his  slave  or  sell  him  to  an  Israelite,  as  the  injured  person  could, 
in  the  Holy  Land,  easily  find  means  to  inform  the  authorities  of  his  fate,  and  thus 
cause  the  punishment  of  his  criminal  master.  The  latter,  therefore,  generally  sold 
the  kidnapped  individual  to  foreign  merchants  into  distant  lands,  either  to 
Egyptians,  who  commanded  the  land  commerce  to  the  south,  or  to  Phcenicians, 
wijo  influenced  the  trade  to  the  west ;  and  opportunities  of  selling  must  have  easily 
offered  themselves,  as  Palestine  was  situated  in  the  exact  centre  of  the  commerce 
of  the  East.  But  by  such  sole,  free  Israelites  became  permanent  slaves  ;  they  for- 
feited with  their  liberty  their  chief  characteristic  as  Hebrews,  and  were  thus  lost 
to  the  Hebrew  community,  the  mote  so,  as  the  exclusive  intercourse  with  pagans 
must  necessarily  defile  the  purity  of  their  faith,  and  gradually  accustom  their 
thoughts  to  id,olatry.  For  this  reason  it  was.  in  the  Mosaic  law,  interdicted  to  sell 
even  thieves  into  foreign  countries,  because  thereby  i<ouls  are,  as  it  were,  extirpated 
from  Israel.  Thus  he  who  kidnapped  Israelites  and  sold  them  to  other  countries 
justly  deserved  death,  especially  if  we  consider  the  mr  st  melancholy  and  bitter  lot 
to  which  the  slavesof  heathen  nations  were  generally  doomed.  {M.  M.  Kalisch,Ph.D. ) 
Unrighteousness  of  slave  holding  : — At  the  time  slaves  were  held  in  the  State  of 
New  York,  one  of  them,  escaping  into  Vermont,  was  captured  and  taken  before  the 
court  at  Riiddlebury  by  his  owner,  who  asked  the  court  to  give  him  possession  of 
his  slave  property.  Judge  Harrington  listened  attentively  to  the  proofs  of  owner- 
ship, but  said  that  he  was  not  convinced  that  the  title  was  perfect.  Then  the 
counsel  asked  what  more  was  required.  "  Until  you  bring  me  a  bill  of  sale  from 
God  Abuighty  you  cannot  have  this  man."     (/.  Sicinton.) 

Vers.  18,  19.  If  men  strive  together. — Lessons : — 1.  Passions  and  contentions 
breed  uiany  sad  events  among  neighbours.  2.  Smitings,  and  wounds,  and  sickness, 
and  d<  aih  .ire  usual  effects  of  sudden  passions.  3.  In  case  it  proceed  not  to  death, 
God  will  not  suffer  injuries  unpunished  by  men.  4.  Not  only  the  death,  but  the 
hurts  of  men,  are  in  God's  heart  to  prevent  (ver.  18).  5.  It  is  just  with  God  that  he 
who  wounds  must  look  to  thorough  healing  of  his  neighbour.  6.  Man's  loss  of  time, 
as  well  as  health,  God  will  have  recompensed  by  the  injurious.  7.  Security  and 
prosperi  y  of  creatures  is  the  end  of  God's  judgments  against  violent  men  (vers.  18, 
19).  (G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Human  strife: — Are  our  little  personal  strifes  noted  in 
heaven  ?  Ye^,  every  one  of  them.  But  can  men  strive  together  ?  Properly  looked 
at  that  would  seem  to  be  the  harder  question  of  the  two.  Coming  suddenly  upon 
a  line  of  this  kind  we  should  exclaim  in  surprise,  "  The  assumption  is  impossible. 
We  must  begin  our  criticism  of  a  statement  of  this  kind  by  rejecting  its  probabihty, 
and,  that  being  done,  there  is  no  case  left.  How  can  men  strive  together?  Men 
are  brothers,  men  are  rational  creatures,  men  recognize  one  another's  rights,  and 
interests,  and  welfare;  society  is  not  a  competition,  but  a  fraternal  and  sacred 
emulation ;  therefore,  the  assumption  that  men  can  strive  together  is  a  false  one, 
and,  the  foundation  Ijeing  false,  the  whole  edifice  totters  down."  That  would-be 
fine  t'eory,  that  would  be  sweet  poetry,  it  might  almost  be  thrown  into  rhyme,  but 
there  are  the  facts  staring  us  in  the  face.  What  are  those  facts  ?  That  all  life  is 
a  strife,  that  every  man  in  some  way  or  degree,  or  at  some  time,  begrudges  the 
room  which  every  other  man  takes  up.  The  tragedy  of  Cain  and  Abel  has  never 
ceased,  and  can  never  cease  until  we  become  children  of  the  Second  Adam.  Great 
degrees  of  modification  may,  of  course,  take  effect.  The  vulgarity  of  smiting  may 
be  left  to  those  who  are  in  a  low  state  of  life — who  are,  in  fact,  in  barbarous  con- 


420  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xsl 

ditioDB ;  but  they  who  smite  with  the  fist  are  not  the  cruellest  of  men.  There  is  a 
refined  smiting — a  daily,  bitter,  malignant  opposition ;  there  is  a  process  of  mutual 
undermining,  or  outreaching,  or  outrunning,  in  the  very  spirit  of  which  is  found 
the  purpose  of  murder.  But  mark  how  beneficence  enters  into  the  arrangement 
here  laid  down.  Not  only  is  the  man  who  smote  his  brother  to  pay  for  the  loss  of 
his  brother's  time  ;  that  would  be  a  mere  cash  transaction.  There  are  men  ready 
enough  to  buy  themselves  out  of  any  obligation ;  a  handful  of  gold  is  nothing. 
Their  language  is,  "  Take  it,  and  let  us  be  free."  That  would  be  poor  legislation 
in  some  cases,  though  heavy  enough  in  others.  To  some  men  money  has  no 
meaning ;  they  have  outlived  all  its  influences ;  they  are  so  rich  that  they  can 
bribe  and  pay,  and  secure  silence  or  liberty  by  a  mere  outputting  of  the  hand.  But 
the  beneficence  is  in  the  next  clause,  "  and  shall  cause  him  to  be  thoroughly 
healed."  The  man  must  be  made  as  good  as  he  was  before,  tberefore  he  must  be 
inquired  about ;  he  must  be  taken  an  interest  in  ;  he  must  become  a  quantity  in 
the  life  of  the  man  who  injured  him,  and,  however  impartial  the  man  who  inflicted 
the  injury  may  become  under  such  chafing,  the  impatience  itself  may  be  turned  to 
good  account.  Some  men  can  only  be  taught  philanthropy  by  such  rough  and 
orgent  schoolmasters.     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  If  a  man  smite  his  servant. — Masters  and  servants  :  — 1.  It  is  sup- 
posed that  masters  in  the  Church  of  God  may  be  cruel  in  correcting  servants,  but  it 
is  sin.  2.  It  is  possible  that  death  may  follow  upon  such  cruel  smiting.  3.  In  such 
case  the  life  of  the  vilest  slaves  is  precious  with  God,  and  He  requireth  it  with  death 
(ver.  20).  4.  Correction  due  unto  servants  which  endangers  not  life,  is  supposed 
lawful.  5.  No  governor  is  guilty  by  God's  law  upon  such  due  chastening.  6.  Servants 
are  the  due  purchase  of  their  lords  for  their  labours  not  for  their  Uvea.  7.  The 
hves  and  comforts  of  poorest  slaves  are  dear  to  God  and  secured  by  Him  (ver. 
21).     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 

Vers.  22-25.  Li'e  for  life. — The  criminal  late:  was  it  written  in  blood? — The 
only  sense  in  which  retaliation  was  authorized  was  as  a  maxim  of  law,  which 
helped  to  fix  the  measure  of  punishment  for  crime.  It  was  the  mode  of  punish- 
ment which  was  at  once  the  simplest,  the  most  natural,  and  the  most  easily 
administered.  Indeed,  in  many  cases  it  was  the  only  mode  possible.  How  would 
our  modern  reformers  punish  such  offences?  By  putting  the  malefactor  in 
prison  ?  But  where  was  the  prison  in  the  desert  ?  In  the  desert  the  only  possible 
penalty  was  one  which  could  be  inflicted  on  the  person  of  the  offender,  and  here 
the  principle  of  strict  retaliation  for  the  crime  committed,  rigid  as  it  may  seem, 
was  perfectly  just.  It  was  right  that  he  who  inflicted  a  wound  upon  his 
neighbour  should  feel  himself  how  sharp  and  keen  a  wound  may  be  ;  that  he  who 
ferociously  tore  his  brother's  eye  from  its  socket  should  forfeit  his  own.  The  law 
against  murder  followed  the  same  inexorable  rule — "  life  for  life  "  ;  a  law  in  which 
there  was  no  element  of  pardon  or  pity.  But  Moses  did  not  create  it ;  it  had  been 
the  law  of  the  desert  long  before  he  was  born.  When  that  old  bearded  sheik  of  all 
the  Bedaween  of  Sinai,  sitting  under  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  the  desert, 
explained  to  us  the  operation  of  the  lex  talionis  in  his  tribe,  he  set  before  us  not  only 
that  which  now  is,  but  that  which  has  been  from  the  very  beginning  of  time.  It 
was  somewhat  startling,  indeed,  to  find  that  laws  and  customs  which  we  had 
supposed  to  belong  only  to  an  extreme  antiquity  still  lingered  among  these  moun- 
tains and  deserts.  The  avenger  of  blood  might  follow  with  swift  foot  upon 
the  murderer's  track,  and  if  he  overtook  him  and  put  him  to  death  the  law 
held  him  free.  But  at  the  same  time  it  gave  the  criminal  a  chance  for  his  life.  In 
the  cities  of  refuge  the  manslayer  was  safe  until  he  could  have  a  fair  trial.  .  .  . 
Perhaps  nothing  shows  more  the  spirit  of  a  law  than  the  modes  of  execution  for 
those  who  are  to  suffer  its  extreme  penalty.  It  is  not  two  hundred  years  since 
torture  was  laid  aside  by  European  nations.  James  the  Second  himself  witnessed 
the  wrenching  of  "the  boot"  as  a  favourite  diversion.  The  assassin  who  struck  Henry 
the  Fourth  was  torn  limb  from  limb  by  horses,  under  the  eye  of  ladies  of  the  court. 
The  Inquisition  stretched  its  victims  on  the  rack.  Other  modes  of  execution,  such 
as  burning  alive,  sawing  asunder,  and  breaking  on  the  wheel,  were  common  in 
Europe  until  a  late  period.  The  Turks  impaled  men,  or  flayed  them  aliv6 ;  and 
tied  women  in  sacks  with  serpents,  and  threw  them  into  the  Bosphorus.  Among  the 
ancients,  ponishments  were  still  more  excruciating.  The  Roman  people,  so  famous 
for  the  justice  of  their  laws,  inflicted  the  supreme  agony  of  crucifixion,  in  which  the 


CHAP.  XXI.]  EXODUS.  421 

victim  lingered  dying  for  hours,  or  even  days.  After  the  capture  of  Jerusalem' 
Titus  ordered  two  thousand  Jews  to  be  crucified.  How  does  this  act  of  the  imperial 
Eomans  compare  with  the  criminal  law  of  "a  semi-savage  race"?  Under  the 
Hebrew  code  all  these  atrocities  were  unknown.  Moses  prescribed  but  two  modes  of 
capital  punishment — the  sword  and  stoning.  .  .  .  And  is  this  the  law  that  was 
•'  written  in  blood  "?  No,  not  in  blood,  but  in  tears  ;  for  through  the  sternness  of 
the  lawgiver  is  continually  breaking  the  heart  of  man.  Behind  the  coat  of  mail 
that  covers  the  breast  of  the  warrior  is  sometimes  found  the  heart  of  a  woman. 
This  union  of  gentlenef^s  with  strength  is  one  of  the  most  infallible  signs  of  a  truly 
great  nature.  It  is  this  mingling  of  the  tender  and  the  terrible  that  gives  to  the 
Hebrew  law  a  character  so  unique — a  majesty  that  awes  with  a  gentleness  that 
savours  more  of  parental  affection  than  of  severity.  Crime  and  its  punishment  is 
not  in  itself  a  pleasing  subje  t  to  dwell  on  ;  but  when  on  this  dark  background  is 
thrown  the  light  of  such  provisions  for  the  poor  and  the  weak,  the  effect  is  like  the 
glow  of  sunset  on  the  red  granite  of  the  Sinai  mountains.  Even  the  peaks  that 
were  hard  and  cold,  look  warm  in  the  flood  of  sunlight  which  is  poured  over  them  all. 
Thus  uniting  the  character  of  the  supporter  of  weakness  and  protector  of  innocence 
with  that  of  the  puuisher  of  crime,  Moses  appears  almost  as  the  divinity  of  his 
nation — as  not  only  the  founder  of  the  Hebrew  state,  but  as  its  guardian  genius 
through  all  the  periods  of  its  history.  When  he  went  up  into  Mount  Nebo,  and 
Btretched  out  his  arm  toward  the  Promised  Land,  he  gave  to  that  land  the  inesti- 
mable blessings  of  l«ws  founded  in  eternal  justice  ;  and  not  only  in  justice,  but  in 
which  humanity  was  embodied  almost  as  much  as  in  the  precepts  of  religion.  Nor 
was  that  law  given  for  the  Israelites  alone.  It  was  an  inheritance  for  all  ages  and 
generations.  That  mighty  arm  was  to  protect  the  oppressed  so  long  as  human 
governments  endure.  Moses  was  the  king  of  legislators,  and  to  the  code  which  he 
left  rulers  of  all  times  have  turned  for  instruction.  (H.M.  Field,  D.D.)  Lessons  : — 
1.  God  supposeth  the  cruel  smitings  of  masters,  but  alloweth  them  not.  2.  God  fore- 
Beeth  the  sufferings  of  poor  slaves,  and  provides  in  His  law  against  it.  3.  The  perish- 
ing of  the  least  member  of  servants,  even  of  a  tooth,  God  will  require  of  superiors 
(ver.  26).  4.  God  by  His  law  depriveth  those  men  of  lordship,  who  abuse  their  power 
cruelly  over  servants.  5.  Bond  and  free  are  equally  considered  by  God  in  His  law 
without  respect  of  persons.  He  makes  the  oppressed  free  (vers.  26,  27).  (G.  Hughes, 
B.D.)  Stripe  for  stripe : — A  boy  was  one  day  sitting  on  the  steps  of  a  door.  He  had  a 
broom  in  one  hand,  and  in  the  other  a  large  piece  of  bread-and-butter,  which  somebody 
had  kindly  given  bitu.  While  he  was  eating  it,  and  merrily  humming  a  tune,  he  saw 
a  poor  little  dog  quietly  sleeping  not  far  from  him.  He  called  out  to  him  :  "  Come 
here,  poor  fellow  !  "  The  dog,  hearing  himself  kindly  spoken  to,  rose,  pricked  up 
his  ears,  and  wagged  his  tail.  Seeing  the  boy  eating,  he  came  near  him.  The  boy 
held  out  to  him  a  piece  of  his  bread-and-butter.  As  the  dog  stretched  out  his  head 
t®  take  it,  the  boy  hastily  drew  back  his  hand,  and  hit  him  a  hard  rap  on  the  nose. 
The  poor  dog  ran  away,  howhng  most  dreadfully,  while  the  cruel  boy  sat  laughing 
at  the  mischief  he  had  done.  A  gentleman  who  was  looking  from  a  window  on  the 
other  side  of  the  street,  saw  what  the  wicked  boy  had  done.  Opening  the  street 
door,  he  called  to  him  to  cross  over,  at  the  same  time  holding  up  a  sixpence 
between  his  finger  and  thumb.  "  Would  you  like  this  ?  "  said  the  gentleman. 
"  Yes,  if  you  please,  sir,"  said  the  boy,  smiling;  and  he  hastily  ran  over  to  seize 
the  money.  Just  at  the  mon  ent  that  he  stretched  out  his  hand,  he  got  so  severe  a 
rap  on  the  knuckles  from  a  cane  which  the  gentleman  had  behind  him,  that  he 
roared  out  like  a  bull.  "  What  did  you  do  that  for  ?  "  said  he,  making  a  very  long 
face,  and  rubbing  his  hand.  "  I  didn't  hurt  you,  nor  ask  you  for  the  sixpence." 
"  What  did  you  hurt  that  poor  dog  for  just  now?"  said  the  gentleman.  "He 
didn't  hurt  you,  nor  ask  you  for  your  bread-and-butter.  As  you  served  him,  I  have 
served  you.  Now,  remember  dogs  can  feel  as  well  as  boys,  and  learn  to  behave 
kindly  towards  dumb  animals  in  future."  {Great  Thoughts.)  Life  for  life : — 
Herbert  was  yet  of  tender  age  when  his  father,  the  huntsman  of  Farmstein,  was,  in 
the  heart  of  the  forest,  shot  down  by  an  unknown  poacher.  His  mother  brought 
up  her  fatherless  boy  as  well  as  she  could,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty,  when  he  had 
become  a  skilful  forester,  he  obtained  his  father's  situation.  It  happened  that  one 
day,  when  Herbert  was  hunting  in  the  forest  with  many  hunters,  he  shot  at  a  large 
Btag,  and  missed  it.  Presently  a  voice  exclaimed  piteously  in  the  copse,  "  Oh, 
heaven !  I  am  shot."  Herbert  moved  forward,  and  found  an  old  man,  who  was 
uttering  loud  groans,  as  he  lay  covered  with  blood.  The  whole  company  of  hunters 
gathered  around  the  dying  man.     Herbert,  however,  knelt  down  beside  him.  and 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxi. 

begged  his  forgiveness,  protesting  that  he  had  not  seen  him.  The  dying  man, 
however,  said,  "  I  have  nothing  to  forgive  you,  for  that  which  has  hitherto  been 
concealed  from  all  the  world  shall  now  come  to  light.  I  am  the  poacher  who  shot 
your  father  just  here,  under  this  old  oak.  The  very  ground  where  we  now  are  was 
dyed  with  his  blood  ;  and  it  has  evidently  been  destined  that  you,  the  son  of  tho 
murdered  man,  should  on  this  precise  spot,  without  any  thought  or  intention  of 
such  a  thing,  avenge  the  act  on  me.  God  is  just !  "  he  exclaimed,  and  presently 
expired.  Equitable  Judgment : — "  A  Teuton  made  a  little  fortune  here  not  long 
ago  in  the  milk  business,  and  decided  to  return  to  Germany  and  enjoy  it  in  his  old 
home.  In  the  ship  that  was  bearing  him  homeward  was  a  mischievous  monkey. 
The  monkey,  prying  around  one  day,  found  a  heavy  bag  and  ran  np  to  the  mast- 
head with  it.  The  German  clasped  his  hands  in  despair  at  seeing  the  bag  ;  it  was 
his  money,  all  in  gold.  The  monkey  in  a  leisurely  way  pulled  out  a  piece  and 
flung  it  down  to  the  deck,  when  the  ex-milkman  gathered  it  up.  Then  the  beast 
tossed  a  second  piece  into  the  sea.  Thus  alternately  the  pieces  went,  one  into  the 
ocean  and  the  next  into  the  distracted  man's  pocket.  '  Ah,'  said  the  ex-milkman, 
as  he  pocketed  just  half  of  what  he  bad  started  with,  '  it  is  just.  One-half  of  that 
milk  I  have  sold  was  milk,  and  the  money  for  it  comes  back  ;  the  other  half  was 
water,  and  half  goes  back  to  water.'  " 

Vers.  28-36.  If  an  ox  gore. — God's  regard  for  the  safety  of  man  and  beast: — I. 
God  caees  for  the  safety  of  man.  1.  If  an  ox  injured  a  man  for  the  first  time, 
the  life  of  the  ox  only  was  forfeited  (ver.  28).  But — 2.  If  the  owner  of  the  ox, 
acquainted  with  the  proved  vicious  character  of  his  beast,  neglected  to  put  him 
under  restraint,  and  the  ox  killed  his  victim — as  culpably  negligent, — (1)  the  owner 
was  put  to  death  ;  or — (2)  his  life  commuted  for  a  fine.  II.  God  cares  for  the 
SAFETY  of  the  BEAST.  Other  Scriptures  demonstrate  this  (Matt.  vi.  26,  &c.).  III. 
Provision  for  the  safety  of  others  should  be  made.  1.  This  provision  should 
be  made  promptly.  2.  This  provision  should  be  permanent.  Application :  1. 
Beware  of  injuring  your  neighbour's  soul  by  an  unguarded  inconsistency.  2. 
Beware  of  injuring  your  neighbour's  friendship  by  any  unguarded  passion.  3. 
Beware  of  injuring  your  neighbour's  character  by  any  unguarded  word.  4.  Beware 
of  injuring  your  neighbour's  peace  by  any  unguarded  look  or  action.  5.  In  all 
matters  concerning  your  neighbour,  remember  that  "  Whatsoever  ye  would,"  &c. 
{J.  W.  Bum.)  The  penalties  of  carelessness  : — I.  Life  is  superior  to  property. 
The  ox  that  had  gored  a  man  to  death  was  to  be  killed,  and  put  out  of  the  way. 
The  ox  is  stoned  to  death;  and,  legally,  it  would  involve  physical  uncleanness  to 
eat  of  the  flesh.  II.  The  careless  man  is  culpable.  If  the  animal  had  been 
known  to  gore ;  if  this  fact  had  been  testified  to  the  owner,  and  proper  precautions 
had  not  been  taken,  then  the  owner  was  in  some  measure  participant  in  the  evil 
doings  of  the  vicious  creature.  Carelessness  is  culpable.  He  that  knoweth  to  do 
good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin.  To  prevent  evil  by  wise  precaution  is  our 
"bounden  duty,  and  is  an  indirect  method  of  doing  good.  All  life  is  precious;  but  it 
seems  to  be  indicated  that  some  lives  are  more  precious  than  others.  Thirty 
shekels  is  a  high  price  for  some  ;  but  a  hundred  shekels  would  be  a  low  price  for 
others.  After  death  has  visited,  then  estimates  nearer  the  truth  of  a  man's  worth 
will  be  formed.  III.  Man  is  responsible  fob  preventable  evil.  If  into  the 
uncovered  pit  an  ox  or  an  ass  fall,  the  owner  of  the  pit  shall  make  good  the  damage. 
Will  the  Almighty  hold  us  responsible  for  the  moral  pits  we  have  left  uncovered  ? 
We  have  not  placed  precautionary  signals  in  sufficient  number  along  those  high- 
ways where  moral  pits  and  quagmires  abound.  {W.  Burrows,' B. A.)  Punishment 
of  criminal  carelessness  : — If  Moses  had  to  regulate  our  legislation  in  reference  to 
railway  accidents,  he  would  put  it  on  altogether  a  new  basis.  If  half-a-dozen 
people  were  killed  and  a  score  seriously  injured  through  the  mail  running  into  a 
goods  train,  and  Moses  found  that  the  engine  driver  who  missed  the  signal  had 
been  on  his  engine  twelve  or  fourteen  hours,  or  that  the  pointsman  who  turned  the 
mail  into  the  goods  siding  had  been  kept  at  his  post  for,  perhaps,  a  still  longer 
period,  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  managers  and  directors  would  stand  a  chance 
of  ha^dng  a  much  sharper  punishment  than  they  commonly  receive  now.  And  if 
criminal  carelessness  which  might  be  fatal  to  hfe  was  punished  by  Moses  w-.th 
death,  I  think  that  fraudulent  acts  which  are  certain  to  injure  the  health  and 
perhaps  the  life  of  the  community,  would  have  been  punished  by  him  not  lesa 
severely.  He  would  certainly  have  approved  the  sentence  under  which  a  few 
months  ago  a  large  farmer,  greatly  to  his  own  astonishment  and  the  astonishment 


CHAP,  xm.]  EXODUS.  423 

of  his  frien<^s,  was  put  in  prison  for  sending  diseased  meat  to  market ;  only  I  think 
that  the  old  Jewish  legislator  would  have  inflicted  a  still  heavier  punishment — a 
few  years'  penal  servitude  instead  of  a  month  or  two's  imprisonment.  Chemists, 
who  adulterate  the  drugs  on  which  the  rescue  of  life  depends — the  rescue  of  the  life 
not  only  of  ordinary  members  of  the  community  like  ourselves,  whom  also  Mosea 
would  have  protected,  but  of  men  of  science,  poets,  and  statesmen,  whose  death 
would  be  a  calamity  to  the  nation,  and  to  the  world — would  I  think,  have  been 
made  responsible  by  him  for  the  death  of  those  who  perished  through  their  fault ; 
and  if  they  were  not  stoned  or  hung  for  murder,  which  I  think  would  have  been 
possible,  a  crimin^ii  penalty  so  heavy  would  have  been  inflicted  on  them,  and  they 
would  liave  been  branded  with  such  imfamy,  that  other  evil-disposed  persons  would 
liave  feared  to  repeat  tbe  crime.  {R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  Re.ipongilnlity  respectinrf 
life  : — We  have  this  principle  certainly  in  our  law,  but  with  what  beneficial  eiiect 
a  much  wilder  application  of  it  might  be  made  !  Look  at  a  few  instances  of  care- 
lessness. There  is  a  block  of  crowded,  unventilated,  and  badly-drained  houses, 
into  which  necessity  drives  the  poor  to  herd,  and  where  they  sicken  and  die. 
Think  you  this  principle  would  not  lay  hands  on  the  owner  of  such  property? 
Would  it  spare  a  corporation  if  it  neglected  to  deal  with  a  pestilence  breeding 
quarter?  Neither  would  trifling  carelessness  escape.  What  is  trifling?  A  travel- 
ler goes  to  a  strange  hotel,  and  retires  to  damp  sheets,  and  ever  afterwards  suffers 
from  ill-health,  sometimes  speedily  loses  life.  Think  of  the  thousands  who  travel, 
and  follow  even  one  stricken  one  into  a  sorrowful  and  bereaved  family  1  Careless- 
ness, when  seen  in  its  consummation,  speaks  for  itself.  But  worse  than  careless- 
ness is  selflshness  which  pursues  its  ends  regardless  of  others.  In  the  sloppy 
■winter  of  tlie  Franco-German  war,  an  army  contiactor  furnished  boots  with  paper 
soles  to  the  French.  In  the  Crimean  war  we  heard  of  manufacturers  who  supplied 
blankets  which,  so  to  speak,  rotted  on  the  backs  of  our  soldiers.  How  much  death 
and  disaster  was  due  to  this  selflshness  1  Because  we  cannot  count  the  victims  is 
there  no  guilt?  Moses  would  say,  if  life  be  lost  and  can  be  traced  to  a  man,  let 
him  atone  for  it ;  results  must  be  dealt  with.  Life  is  the  one  sacred  thing.  Nor  is 
it  difficult  to  see  that  such  a  principle  applies  itself  to  the  selfishness  of  those  who 
by  their  trickery  and  roguery  in  business  ruin  the  commerce  of  their  country. 
Alas  !  for  the  advice  because  it  is  Utopian,  and  more  because  it  is  needed,  but  it  is 
true  that  no  tribunal  would  better  serve  England  at  this  juncture  than  one  which 
held  the  terror  of  moral  justice  over  manufacturers  who  send  out  worthless  goods 
and  taint  our  honest  name,  and  impair  our  credit  the  wide  world  over.  They  rob 
others,  and  they  destroy  their  country.  There  are  traitors  to-day  as  real  as  those 
who  in  olden  days  took  a  Irlbe  and  sold  their  armies  or  their  castles  to  the  enemy. 
{W.  Senior,  B.A.)  A  needful  warning  : — On  a  cold  Sabbath  morning  in  February, 
a  gentleman  was  walking  along,  somewhat  hastily,  through  the  snow.  He  noticed 
a  bright-looking  little  lad  standing  upon  the  pavement,  with  his  cap  in  his  hand  and 
his  eyes  fixed  upon  one  spot  on  the  sidewalk.  As  he  appr^  'ached  him  he  looked  up  to 
him,  and  pointiug  to  the  place,  said,  "  Please  don't  step  there,  sir.  I  slipped  there 
and  fell  down."  What  a  different  world  this  would  be  if  all  Christians  were  as 
particular  as  this  lad  to  warn  others  against  dangers,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual. 
{Christian  Herald.)  A   danger  signal: — At    Saltcoats,  not  very  far  from  the 

shore,  stands  a  beacon  in  the  winter.  If  you  were  to  ask  any  one  who  belongs  to 
that  place,  why  it  is  theie,  you  would  be  told  this  story: — "A  merchant  from 
Glasgow,  with  his  family,  was  residing  there  for  the  summer  months.  One  morn- 
ing the  merchant  went  out  to  bathe  before  breakfast,  and  he  thought  he  was  quite 
safe  aslong  as  he  kept  near  the  shore.  But  there  was  a  pit  there  which  he  did  not  know 
anything  of,  and  into  this  pit  he  fell,  and  nothing  more  was  seen  or  heard  of  him. 
After  this  accident  a  beacon  was  put  up  as  a  warning  to  all  others  to  keep  from  the 
spot."  What  were  the  feelings  that  prompted  this  beacon  to  be  put  up?  It  must 
have  been  feeUngs  of  love  to  keep  all  others  from  danger.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Vers.  1-5.  If  a  man  steal. — The  law  of  robbery  .-  —  God  made  provision  not  only 
for  the  acquisition  of  property,  but  for  its  security.    Hence  this  law,  which  respects 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILZUSTEATOE:  [chxp,  XTO. 

1.  Theft.      2.  Housebreaking.      I.  Theft   (vers.   1-4).      As  the  wealth  of  an 

Israelite  consisted  mainly  in  flocks  and  herds,  the  depredations  of  the  thief  were 
directed  for  the  most  part  against  them.  II.  Housebreaking  (vers.  2,  3).  Learn — 
1.  That  God's  providence  extends  to  property  as  well  as  persons.  Both  are  His 
gift.  2.  That  those  who  endeavour  to  thwart  that  providence -play  a  losing  game. 
3.  That  the  recognition  of  that  providence  is  not  inconsistent  with,  but  demands 
the  use  of,  means.  It  is  an  abuse  and  perversion  of  it  to  tamely  submit  to  wrong 
when  the  legitimate  prevention  of  wrong  is  within  our  reach.  4.  That  providence 
protects  even  the  life  of  the  wrong-doer,  and  no  man  must  wantonly  interfere  with 
that  protection,     (J.  W.  ISurn.)        Actual  and  virtual  criminality  .—I.  Men  must 

BUFFEB  FOR  CRIME.  II.  MeN  MUST  SUFFER,  UNAVENGED,  THE  EXTREME  CONSEQUENCES 
OF  CRIMINAL  CONDUCT.  III.  MeN  MOST  LEARN,  BY  DEGREES  OF  SUFFERING,  THAT  THERE 
ARE  DEGREES  OF  CRIMINALITY.      IV.    MeN  MOST  LEARN  THAT  PROPERTY  HAS  RIGHTS.       V. 

Men  MUST  learn  to  consider  the  welfare  of  their  neighbours.  (?F.  Burrows, 
B.A.)  How  to  get  at  a  thief :— This  is  the  only  way  of  getting  at  a  thief.  Tou 
cannot  reason  with  him.  He  dismissed  his  reason  before  he  committed  his  felony. 
He  bad  first  to  strangle  his  reason  ;  he  committed  murder  in  the  sanctuary  of  his 
soul  before  he  committed  theft  in  the  fields  of  his  neighbour.  What,  then,  is  to  be 
done  with  him  ?  He  must  be  made  to  feel  the  folly  of  theft ;  he  must  be  made  to 
feel  that  theft  is  a  bad  investment ;  he  must  be  made  to  feel  that  he  has  played  the 
fool  even  in  the  excess  of  Lis  cleverness.  The  thief  would  be  made  to  know  what 
dishonesty  is,  when  for  the  one  ox  he  must  pay  five  in  its  place.  He  could  have 
evaded  an  argument ;  he  could  have  doubled  upon  a  covenant,  and  have  quibbled 
about  the  ambiguity  of  its  terms  ;  but  he  could  not  shuffle  out  of  this  four-square 
arithmetical  arrangement.  Five  oxen  for  an  ox,  four  sheep  for  a  sheep  ;  and  by  the 
time  the  thief  had  played  at  that  game  two  or  three  days,  he  would  have  put  on 
the  garb,  at  least,  of  an  honest  man  !  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Substitutionary  resti- 
tution : — A  coal  merchant  in  one  of  our  American  cities  was  approached  by  a 
minister  in  regard  to  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  The  merchant  declared  it  an  im- 
possibility for  him  ever  to  become  a  Christian.  He  gave  as  a  reason  his  mode  of 
business.  For  a  long  term  of  years,  he  had,  according  to  a  too  general  custom,  given 
short  weight.  He  had  thus  grown  rich,  and  now  felt  the  inconsistency  of  seeking 
religion  without  restitution.  This  was  impossible :  many  of  his  customers  were 
dead,  others  beyond  his  knowledge.  The  thought  of  the  poor  who  had  paid  for  coal 
they  had  never  received  rested  heavily  on  him.  He  asked  the  minister  if  he  thou«ht 
the  substitution  of  a  gift  to  the  poor  would  be  acceptable  to  God.  The  minister 
advised  him  to  try  it.  A  large  donation,  more  than  equal  in  amount  to  his  unjust 
gains,  was  made,  and  the  merchant  sought  God  in  earnest.  He  was  happily  con- 
verted, and  is  to-day  a  prominent  member  of  the  church.  Tardy  restitution: — 
As  a  gentleman  in  London  entered  his  house,  he  found  a  well-dressed  female  sitting 
on  the  stairs,  who  asked  pardon  for  the  liberty  she  had  taken,  saying  that,  hearing 
the  alarm  of  a  mad  dog,  she  had  taken  refuge  in  his  house.  On  hearing  her  story, 
he  gave  her  some  refreshment ;  and  she  left,  thanking  him  for  his  civility.  In  the 
evening  his  lady  missed  her  gold  watch  ;  and  it  was  concluded  the  female  was  the 
thief.  Fifteen  years  afterwards,  the  watch  was  returned,  with  a  note  from  this 
woman,  saying  the  gospel  had  changed  her  heart,  and  she  desired  to  return  the 
tvatch  to  its  rightful  owner.  Unrighteous  restitution  : — WTiat  a  shame  then  is  this 
to  Christians,  who  minding  nothing  less  than  restitution,  make  ex  rapina  holo- 
caustum :  out  of  a  world  of  ill-gotten  goods,  they  cull  out  some  small  fragments  to 
erect  some  poor  hospital ;  having  cheated  thousands,  build  alms-bou'-es  for  some 
few,  and  then  set  a  glorious  inscription  in  front,  whereas  this  one  word,  Aceldama, 
would  be  far  more  proper.  (J.  Speticer.)  Compensation  for  damage  : — A  man  in 
New  Jersey  told  me  the  following  circumstances  respecting  himself  and  one  of  his 
neighbours.  "  I  once  owned  a  large  flock  of  hens.  I  generally  kept  them  shut  up. 
But  one  spring  I  concluded  to  let  them  run  in  my  yard,  after  I  had  clipped  their 
wings  so  that  they  could  not  fly.  One  day,  when  I  came  home  to  dinner,  I  learned 
that  one  of  my  neighbours  had  been  there  full  of  wiath,  to  let  me  know  that  my 
hens  had  been  in  his  garden,  and  that  he  had  killed  several  of  them,  and  thrown 
them  over  into  my  yard.  I  determined  at  once  to  be  revenged.  I  sat  down  and  ate 
my  dinner  as  calmly  as  I  could.  By  the  time  I  had  finished  I  thought  that  perhaps 
it  was  not  best  to  fight  with  my  neighbour  about  hens,  and  thereby  make  him  my 
bitter  enemy.  I  concluded  to  try  another  way,  being  sure  that  it  would  be  better. 
After  dinner,  I  went  to  my  neighbour's.  He  was  in  his  garden.  I  went  out  and 
found  him  in  pursuit  of  one  of  my  hens  with  a  club,  trying  to  kill  it.    I  accosted 


CHAP.  XXII.]  EXODUS.  425 

him.  He  turned  upon  me,  his  face  inflamed  with  wrath,  and  broke  out  in  a  great 
fury,  •  You  have  abused  me.  I  will  kill  all  your  hens,  if  I  can  get  them.  I  never 
was  so  abused.  My  garden  is  ruined.'  '  I  am  sorry  for  it,'  said  I :  '  I  did  not  wish 
to  injure  you  ;  and  now  see  that  I  have  made  a  great  mistake  in  letting  out  my  hens. 
I  ask  your  forgiveness,  and  am  willing  to  pay  you  six  times  the  damage.'  The  man 
seemed  confounded.  He  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  it.  He  looked  up  to  the 
sky,  then  down  at  the  earth,  then  at  his  neighbour,  then  at  his  club,  then  at  the 
poor  hen  he  had  been  pursuing,  and  said  nothing.  '  Tell  me  now,'  said  I, '  what  is 
the  damage  and  I  will  pay  you  six-fold  ;  and  my  hens  shall  trouble  you  no  more. 
I  will  leave  it  entirely  for  you  to  say  what  I  shall  do.  I  cannot  afford  to  lose  the 
love  and  goodwill  of  my  neighbours,  and  quarrel  with  them,  for  hens  or  anything 
else.'  '  I  am  a  great  fool ! '  said  my  neighbour ;  '  the  damage  is  not  worth  talking 
about ;  and  I  Lave  more  need  to  compensate  you  than  you  me,  and  to  ask  your  for- 
giveness than  you  mine.'  "     {Mrs.  CJdld's  Letters  from  Neio  York.) 

Ver.  6.  If  fire  break  out. — Responsibility  for  actions: — In  the  twenty-second 
chapter  of  Exodus  the  rights  of  property  are  defended,  and  the  text  before  us  may 
be  considered  as  the  law  of  fire  insurance  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  The  law 
was  a  constant  lesson  to  the  people  on  their  vast  responsibility  for  the  consequences 
of  their  conduct.  God's  law  thus  showed  that  Omnipotence  identified  itself  with 
every  just  claim,  and  would  insist  on  compensation  for  every  wrong  inflicted.  I.  This 
ancient  law  brings  into  view  the  general  doctbise  of  liability  fob  the  conse- 
quences OF  OCR  actions  AND  NEGLECT.  Nothing  is  more  difiScult  than  to  raise  in  most 
men's  minds  a  vivid  sense  of  the  widespreading  results  of  their  own  character  and 
conduct.  They  readily  acknowledge  the  responsibility  of  others,  but  not  their  own. 
Men  never  take  so  modest  a  view  of  their  own  individuality,  as  when  the  object  is 
to  set  forth  the  insignificance  of  their  own  contribution  to  "  the  evil  that  is  in  the 
world."  But  such  calculations  are  founded  on  a  gross  delusion.  The  most  common- 
place sinner  has  a  power  of  mischief  in  him  which  might  sadden  the  blessed  as  they 
look  at  it.     II.  The  dormant  sense  of  liability  for  the  consequences  of  our  conduct 

OUGHT  SURELY  TO  BE  AWAKENED  BY  CONSIDERING  HOW  WE  HOLD  OTHER  MEN  RESPONSIBLE 
IN  COMMON  LIFE.  III.  ThE  BIGHT  CONCEPTION  OF  JUDGMENT  TO  COME  IS  THE  BBINGINO 
TO  THE  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  THE  FINITE  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  INFINITE  IN  THIS  REGARD. 

"  This,  hast  thou  done."  He  who  subverts  the  faith  or  the  conscience  of  one  soul 
subverts  in  effect  the  faith  and  conscience  of  all  souls,  and  "  their  blood  will  I  re- 
quire at  the  watchman's  hand."  IV.  These  considerations  should  impress  the 
mind  with  a  new  sense  of  the  infinite  bearings  of  our  thoughts,  words,  and 
ACTIONS  ;  and  should  make  us  "  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath."  Let 
to-day  be  the  day  of  salvation  by  becoming  the  day  of  judgment,  for  "  if  we  would 
judge  ourselves,  we  should  not  be  condemned  with  the  world."  (E.  White.)  The 
penalty  of  carelessness  : — Learn — 1.  To  be  careful  of  your  neighbour's  material, 
intellectual,  and  spiritual  interests,  and  do  not  damage  them  by  a  careless  word  or 
action.  2.  In  order  that  these  interests  may  not  be  invaded,  put  a  strong  check  on 
those  loose  and  vagrant  so-called  interests  of  your  own.  3.  In  order  to  prevent  any 
possibility  of  the  transgression  of  these  interests,  see  that  those  passions  of  avarice, 
envy,  ami  revenge  which  cause  so  much  mischief  in  the  world,  are  quenched.  4. 
If  these  interests  are  invaded,  render  a  frank,  manly,  and  ample  restitution.  (1) 
Confess  your  fault.  (2)  In  the  case  of  loss  make  it  up.  (3)  In  the  case  of  injury 
to  character,  let  the  acknowledgment  be  co-extensive  with  the  slander.  (4)  Let 
those  who  have  been  injured  forgive  as  they  hope  to  be  forgiven.  (J.  W.  Bum.) 
No  trifling  with  bread  .-—This  is  right.  The  Bible  really  builds  upon  granite  bases  ; 
there  is  nothing  merely  fanciful  in  this  legislation.  This  is  sound  common-sense, 
and  common-sense  in  the  long  run  wins  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  the  world. 
No  man  may  trifle  with  bread.  Bad  enough  to  burn  down  any  kind  of  property ; 
but  to  consume  stacks  of  corn  is  to  commit  murder  with  both  hands  ;  to  light  the 
standing  corn  when  it  waves  in  the  fields  is  to  thrust  a  knife,  not  into  one  heart, 
but  into  the  very  life  of  society.  How  can  restitution  be  made  ?  It  cannot  be  made. 
You  cannot  replace  corn  ;  money  bears  no  relation  to  corn ;  corn  is  not  an  arith- 
metical quantity.  Destroyed  bread  is  destroyed  life.  Who  destroys  bread  ?  He 
who  makes  poison  of  it ;  he  who  turns  it  into  a  drink  that  takes  away  the  reason 
and  deposes  the  conscience  of  men.  He  who  holds  back  the  bread-stuff  until 
the  time  of  famine  that  he  may  increase  his  own  riches  by  an  enhanced  market 
value  is  not  a  political  economist,  unless,  under  such  circumstances,  a  political 
economist  is  a  heartless    murderer.    And   if  it  is  wicked  to  set  fire  to  corn. 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

is  it  a  light  or  frivolous  matter  to  set  fire  to  convictions,  faiths — the  bread-stufl 
of  the  soul?  Is  he  guiltless  who  takes  away  the  bread  of  life,  the  bread  sent 
down  from  heaven  ?  Is  he  a  pardonable  incendiary  who  bums  down  the  altar  which 
was  a  stairway  to  the  light,  or  reduces  to  ashes  the  Church  which  was  a  refuge  in 
the  day  of  storm  ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Who  kindled  the  fire  ? — This  statute  had 
a  peculiar  necessity  in  such  a  hot,  dry  country  as  Palestine,  where  there  was  a 
peculiar  danger  from  accidental  conflagrations.  If  a  man  burned  over  his  stubble 
field,  it  was  necessary,  before  the  dry  grass  was  lighted,  to  see  that  the  wind  was 
in  the  right  quarter,  and  every  precaution  taken  that  the  flames  should  not  kindle 
upon  the  property  of  a  neighbour.  The  sound  principle  that  underlies  this  law  is 
that  men  must  suffer  for  the  evil  they  do  through  thoughtless  recklessness,  as  well 
as  for  what  they  do  with  malicious  intent.  1.  If  I  invite  a  group  of  young  men  in 
my  house  to  surround  a  card-table,  I  may  simply  design  to  furnish  them  an  hour's 
amusement.  But  perhaps  a  lust  for  gambling  may  lie  latent  in  some  young  man's 
breast,  and  I  may  quicken  it  into  life  by  my  offer  of  a  temptation.  There  is  fire  in 
that  pack  of  cards.  And  I  dehberately  place  that  fire  amid  the  inflammable  passions 
of  that  youthful  breast.  On  me  rest  the  consequences  of  that  act,  as  well  as  upon 
him  whom  I  lead  into  temptation.  The  motive  does  not  alter  the  result  by  one 
iota.  2.  Among  social  virtues  none  is  more  popular  than  that  of  hospitality.  When 
bountifully  practised  toward  the  needy,  it  rises  to  the  dignity  of  a  Christian  grace. 
And  ordinary  hospitalities  may  be  set  to  the  credit  of  a  generous  spirit.  But  here 
is  the  master  or  mistress  of  a  house  who  spread  their  table  with  a  lavish  provision 
for  the  entertainment  of  their  evening  guests.  Among  the  abundant  viands  of  that 
table  the  lady  of  the  house  places  the  choicest  brands  of  Madeira  wine,  and  on  a 
side-board  she  sets  out  a  huge  bowl  of  inviting  punch.  And  among  the  invited 
guests  of  the  evening  comes  a  man  who  has  promised  the  wife  of  his  early  love  that 
he  will  never  again  yield  to  his  awful  appetite,  and  turn  their  sweet  home  into  a 
hell.  He  sees  the  tempter  in  that  accursed  punch-bowl,  and  is  pressed  very 
courteously  to  "  take  a  glass."  The  fire  "  catches  in  the  dry  thorns  "  in  an  instant. 
He  drinks.  He  goes  reeling  into  his  own  door  that  night,  and  his  whole  household 
is  in  a  flame  of  excitement  and  terror,  and  agony  and  shame.  Now,  who  kindled 
that  fire  ?  Let  her  who  put  the  bottle  to  her  neighbour's  lips  make  answer.  3. 
The  artillery  of  this  Divine  law  against  incendiarism  has  a  wide  range.  It  is  pointed 
against  that  social  nuisance,  the  slanderer.  "  Behold  how  great  a  matter  his  little 
fire  kindleth."  The  utterance  of  evil  reports  may  be  well  likened  to  playing  with 
fire.  4.  This  law  against  incendiarism  applies  to  every  utterance  of  spiritual  error 
and  infidelity.  He  who  utters  a  devilish  suggestion  to  corrupt  the  innocence  of 
chastity  sets  fire  to  passion,  and  becomes  the  incendiary  of  a  soul.  He  who  scatters 
a  pernicious  literature  comes  under  the  same  condemnation.  He  who  sows  scepticism, 
by  tongue  or  pen,  sets  fire  to  the  "  standing  corn  "  of  righteous  opinion.  Beware 
how  you  play  with  the  sparks  of  falsehood.  Beware  how  you  play  with  the  fire  of 
wicked  suggestion,  that  may  kindle  a  blaze  of  sin  in  another's  heart.  (2'.  L.  Cuyler, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  7-13.  If  a  man  shall  deliver  unto  his  neighbour  money  or  stuff  to  keep.— • 
The  law  of  trusts  : — 1.  God's  law  provides  strictly  to  keep  men  faithful  to  their 
trusts  by  men.  2.  Theft  may  abuse  and  frustrate  the  trust  of  the  most  faithful 
men.  8.  Such  theft  discovered  is  punished  with  double  restitution  by  Gi^d.  4.  In 
theft  undiscovered  and  upon  suspicion,  trustees  are  bound  to  clear  themselves  by 
oath.  5.  A  right  oath  as  it  terminates  upon  God,  so  ought  in  some  cases  to  be  taken 
before  magistrates  (ver.  8).  6.  In  doubtful  cases  about  trust,  civil  powers  are 
enabled  to  try  men,  and  judge  by  oath.  7.  The  falsifier  of  trust  convicted  must 
restore  double  (ver.  9).  8.  Living  stuff  trusted  to  any  and  dying,  none  knowing  how, 
the  trustee's  oath  must  clear  him  (vers.  10,  11).  9.  Living  goods  trusted  to  keeping 
upon  consideration  if  stolen,  must  be  made  good  by  the  keeper  (ver.  12).  10.  No 
law  binds  men  to  restore  what  Providence  takes  away  from  men  by  wild  beasts 
(ver.  13).     (G.  Hughes,  B.D.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  If  a  man  borrow. — Borrowing  : — 1.  God  in  His  law  provideth  against 
hurting  our  neighbour's  goods  by  borrowiug.  2.  Hurt  and  death  may  come  to  things 
borrowed  without  the  sin  of  the  borrower.  3.  In  case  of  the  borrower's  fuultlessness 
in  hurt,  no  restitution  doth  God  award.  4.  In  case  of  wilful  hurt  and  spoil  the 
borrower  by  God's  law  must  make  it  good.  5.  Things  wilfully  hurt  which  are 
borrowed  bj  hire  must  be  satisfied  by  God's  law.    6.  Perishing  of  such  in  a  lawful 


CHAP,  xm.]  EXODUS.  427 

use  of  them,  God's  law  accounts  satisfied  by  their  hire  (vers.  14, 15).  {G.  Hughes, 
B.D.)  Concerning  borrowing : — Learn:  1.  On  the  one  hand — (1)  To  be  obliging. 
If  you  can  do  a  needy  neighbour  a  good  turn  by  lending  advice  or  material  assis- 
tance, do  so.  (2)  Don't  make  your  needy  but  obliged  neighbour  answerable  for  any 
accident  that  may  occur  through  your  own  misfortune  or  fault.  2.  On  the  other  hand 
— (1)  Be  careful  not  to  abuse  that  which  is  in  kindness  lent  you  ;  or — (2)  Forget  to 
return  it,  and  thus  render  evil  for  good.  Book- borrowers  should  note  this.  But — • 
(3)  Bather  both  in  principle  (2  Kings  vi.  5)  and  in  action  suffer  the  loss  than  inflict 
it.     (J.  W.  Burn.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  If  a  man  entice  a  maid. — Lessons  : — 1.  Providence  may  suffer  men 
through  strength  of  lust  to  entice  and  defile  virgins.  2.  Such  enticing  and  polluting 
is  giievous  sin  against  God  and  man  abhorred  of  the  Lord.  3.  In  case  of  such  sin 
God  hath  judged  recompense  to  men,  as  He  executeth  vengeance  for  Hunself. 
(G.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Waiit  of  wariness  : — Flamingoes  are  very  shy  and  timid  birds, 
and  shun  all  attempts  of  man  to  approach  them  ;  the  vicinity  of  animals,  however, 
they  disregard.  Any  one  who  is  acquainted  with  this  fact  can  take  advantage  of  it 
so  as  to  effect  the  slaughter  of  these  beautiful  animals  by  dressing  himself  up  in 
the  skin  of  a  horse  or  an  ox.  Thus  disguised,  the  sportsman  may  get  close  to  them 
and  shoot  them  down  at  his  ease.  So  long  as  their  enemy  is  invisible  they  still 
remain  immovable,  the  noise  of  the  gun  only  stupefying  them,  so  that  they  refuse 
to  leave,  although  their  companions  are  dropping  down  dead  around  them.  They 
are  taken  in  by  appearances  ;  and  so  long  as  the  man  is  disguised  they  accept  him 
as  the  creature  which  he  pretends  to  be,  even  though  his  actions  clearly  indicate 
that  he  is  something  else.  Shy,  beautiful,  and  harmless,  the  unfortunate  bird 
meets  destruction  simply  for  want  of  wariness.  Many  a  lovely  human  being  with 
the  like  quahties  has  met  her  doom  for  want  of  that  same  trait.  {Scientijic  IlluS' 
tr  at  ions.) 

Ver.  18.  Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  wltcli  tolive. — Spiritualism — modem  witchcraft: — 
The  Bible  regards  witchcraft — 1.  As  a  stem  and  diabolical  reality  (Lev.  xx.  27 ; 
Deut.  xviii.  9).  2.  As  unlawful  trafficking  with  the  unseen  world  (Lev.  xix.  31  ; 
Isa.  viii.  19,  "  For  the  living  to  the  dead,"  i.e.,  on  behalf  the  Uving  to  the  dead).  3. 
As  sometimes  trickery  and  imposture  (Isa.  viii.  19),  "  that  peep  and  mutter " 
(probably  ventriloquise.  See  art.  Pythoness,  Smith's  Die.  Bible).  4.  As  filthy 
defilement  (Lev.  xix.  31).  5.  As  deserving  death  (Lev.  xx.  6.  cf.  text).  6.  As  one 
of  the  crimes  for  which  the  Canaanites  were  destroyed.  7.  As  inconsistent  with  a 
trust  in  God  (Isa.  viii.  19).  8.  As  frustrated  by  God  (Isa.  xUv.  25).  9.  As  a  power 
from  which  the  godly  have  nothing  to  fear,  for  there  is  no  solitary  prayer  in  the 
whole  Bible  to  be  protected  from  its  enchantments,  and  no  thanksgiving  for  deliver- 
ance from  them.  In  this  country  we  only  meet  with  it  now  in  the  form  of 
spiritualism,  and  as  such — I.  It  is  dangekous.  1.  Because  it  destroys  all  faith  in 
the  person  and  providence  of  God,  and  hence  imperils  the  hopes,  aspirations,  and 
safety  of  the  soul.  2.  Because  it  tends  to  debase  man's  moral  standards,  and  to 
obUterate  the  fact  of  sin.  3.  Because  its  direct  aim  is  to  subvert  Chiistianity,  and 
to  abolish  the  Word  of  God.  4.  Because  it  comes  before  the  imagination  and  the 
affections  with  plausible  appeals.  II.  It  shuns  the  light.  1.  Its  performances, 
like  the  old  witchcraft,  take  place  in  the  dark,  and  under  circumstances  the  force  of 
which  requires  the  exertions  of  the  strongest  will.  On  the  contrary,  the  grand  facts 
of  both  Old  and  New  Testamen's  were  "  not  done  in  a  corner,"  but  in  the  hght  of 
day.  2.  It  is  chary  of  the  open  exhibition  of  its  credentials  to  the  critic  and  the 
unbeliever  ;  this  privilege  is  reserved  for  those  who  first  believe  in  the  magician  and 
in  his  powers.  The  miracles  and  other  credentials  of  the  Bible — court  scrutiny — • 
were  mainly  for  the  conviction  of  those  who  disbelieved.  3.  And  why  does  it  shun 
the  light  ?  For  the  old  reason  (John  iii.  19-21).  III.  It  is  unlawful.  1.  Because 
expressly  forbidden  in  the  Word  of  God.  Christ  and  His  apostles  meet  the  spirits 
not  in  darkened  cabinets  but  with  open  exorcism.  2.  Because  of  its  avowed  mission 
to  pry  into  and  traffic  with  the  unrevealed  matters  of  the  spirit-world.  God  has 
emphatically  set  His  face  against  this  (Deut.  xxix.  29).  3.  Because  it  is  "  another 
gospel  "  (Gal.  i.  8).  IV.  It  is  partly  gross  imposture.  1.  Spiritual  realities  are 
solemn  and  imposing,  and  worthy  in  every  way  of  the  high  source  from  which  they 
emanate.  When  God  communicated  to  the  prophets  and  apostles  we  do  not  hear 
that  it  was  on  dancing  tables,  illegible  inscriptions  on  slates,  or  through  books 
made  luminous  by  phosphoric  oil.    We  do  not  hear  of  angels  or  spirits,  whether  in 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxo. 

Old  Testament  or  New,  pulling  men's  hair,  scattering  sweetmeats,  rapping  on  walls, 
hurling  bed  pillows,  appearing  in  regimentals,  or  liandling  hot  coals.  2.  Spiritual 
realities  in  the  Bible  were  never  discovered  to  be  small  tricks.  3.  Spiritual  realities 
in  the  Bible  have  never  been  explained  by  natural  phenomena  as  have  much  of  the 
legerdemain  of  modem  magic.  V.  It  is  uniformly  cseless.  1.  For  harm  (Isa.viii. 
19),  when  there  is  a  firm  trust  in  God.  2.  For  good  (Luke  xvi.  27-31),  when  there 
is  no  such  trust.     (J.  W.  Bum.) 

Ver.  21.  Neither  vex  a  stranger. — The  stranger  : — The  spirit  of  the  Hebrew  law 
was  broader  than  race,  or  country,  or  kindred.  Among  the  ancients  generally  a 
foreigner  had  no  rights  in  any  country  but  his  own.  In  some  languages  the  very 
word  "  stranger  "  was  synonymous  with  enemy.  Against  these  race  hatreds  Moses 
Bet  up  this  command.  Not  only  were  foreigners  to  be  tolerated ;  they  were  to 
receive  the  fullest  protection  '(see  Lev.  xxiv.  22).  (H.  M.  Field,  D.D.)  Sound 
policy : — This  was  not  only  a  humane  law ;  but  it  was  a  sound  poUcy.  Do  not  wrong 
a  stranger  ;  remember  ye  were  strangers.  Do  not  oppress  a  stranger ;  remember 
ye  were  oppressed.  Therefore  do  unto  all  men  as  you  would  they  should  do  to  you. 
Let  strangers  be  well  treated  among  you,  and  many  will  come  among  you,  and  the 
strength  of  your  country  will  be  increased.  If  refugees  of  this  kind  be  treated  well, 
they  will  become  proselytes  to  your  religion,  and  thus  their  souls  may  be  saved. 
{A.  Clarke,  D.D.)  She  was  a  stranger : — A  missionary  was  requested  to  go  out  to 
a  new  settlement  to  address  a  Sabbath-school.  He  had  preached  in  the  morning,  and 
vras  wearied  and  felt  quite  unfitted  for  the  task,  but  reluctantly  consented  to  go. 
When  he  found  himseli  at  the  spot,  he  looked  round  the  assembly  with  gieat  mis- 
givings, not  kno\ving  what  to  say  to  them.  He  noticed  a  Mttle  girl,  shabbily  dressed 
and  barefooted,  shrinking  in  a  corner,  her  httle  sunburnt  face  buried  in  her  hands, 
the  tears  trickling  between  her  small  brown  fingers,  and  sobbing  as  if  her  heart  would 
break.  Soon,  however,  another  little  girl,  about  eleven  years  old,  got  up  and  went 
to  her,  whispered  kindly  to  her,  and  taking  her  by  the  hand,  led  her  toward  a  brook, 
then  seated  her  on  a  log,  and  kneeling  beside  her  she  took  off  her  ragged  sun- 
bonnet,  and  dipping  her  hand  in  the  water,  bathed  her  hot  eyes  and  tear-stained 
face,  and  smoothed  her  tangled  hair,  talking  in  a  cheery  manner  all  the  while.  The 
little  one  brightened  up,  the  tears  all  went,  and  smiles  came  creeping  around  the 
rosy  mouth.  The  missionary  stepped  forward  and  said :  "  Is  that  your  little  sister, 
my  dear?"  "  No,  sir,"  answered  the  noble  child,  with  tender,  earnest  eyes,  "I 
have  no  sister,  sir."  "  Oh,  one  of  the  neighbours'  children,"  replied  the  missionary ; 
"a  httle  school-mate,  perhaps  ?  "  "No,  sir;  she  is  a  stranger.  I  do  not  know 
where  she  came  from  ;  I  never  saw  her  before."  "  Then  how  came  you  to  take  her 
out  and  have  such  a  care  for  her  if  you  do  not  know  her  ?  "  "  Because  she  was  a 
stranger,  sir,  and  seemed  all  alone,  and  needed  somebody  to  be  kind  to  her." 
"  Ah,"  said  the  missionary  to  himself,  "  here  is  a  text  for  me  to  preach  from — 
•  Because  she  was  a  stranger,  and  seemed  all  alone,  and  needed  somebody  to  be 
kind  to  her.'"  The  words  came  to  him,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one 
of  the  least  of  these  My  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  Me."  So,  taking  the  little 
girls  by  the  hand,  he  went  back  to  the  school-room  and  told  the  people  the  simple 
story ;  then  spoke  of  the  great  love  that  all  should  bear  to  one  another,  even  as  the 
dear  Saviour  sought  out  those  who  were  humble  and  of  low  estate,  making  them 
His  pecuhar  care.  The  missionary  forgot  his  weariness,  and  felt  that  God  had  put 
a  good  word  in  his  mouth. 

1  Vers.  22-24.  Ye  shall  not  afflict  any  widow,  or  fatherless  child. — God's  care  for 
the  widow  and  fatherless  : — I.  That  widows  and  orphaks  have  claims  upon  odb 
BEGABD.  1.  They  have  claims  upon  our  sympathy.  Their  stay,  comfort,  defence 
is  gone.  What  state  can  be  more  sorrowful  and  helpless !  2.  They  have  claims 
upon  our  protection  and  help.  Our  resources  are  only  held  in  stewardship  for  God's 
purposes,  and  to  what  better  purpose  could  they  be  applied,  both  as  regards  its 
intrinsic  merits  and  the  Divine  will  concerning  it.  U.  That  widows  and  orphans 
HAVE  SPECIAL  PRIVILEGES.  1.  God  has  legislated  for  them.  Not  in  the  dry  and 
hard  manner  in  which  penal  and  ceremonial  codes  are  obliged  to  be  enacted,  bat  in 
a  way  which  throws  them  on  the  broad  and  better  principles  of  humanity  and  love. 
2.  God  stands  in  a  peculiar  relation  to  them  (Psa.  Ixviii.  5).  In  the  absence  of  their 
natural  guardians  He  takes  them  under  His  wing.  3.  God  is  always  ready  to  help 
them  ;  to  hear  their  cry  (ver.  23 ;  Jer.  xlix.  11).  HI.  That  any  oppression  of  the 
WIDOW  AND  fatherless  WILL  BE  EiGOBOusLY  PUNISHED  (ver.  24).    1.  The  oppressor  is 


CHAP.  XXII.]  EXODUS.  429 

left  to  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  who  will  surely  avenge  His  own  (Luke  xviii. 
7).  2.  The  oppressor  is  left  to  the  tenible  retribution  of  a  hard  and  cruel  heart, 
which  inflicts  as  much  punishment  on  the  subject  as  on  the  object.  3.  The  oppressor 
is  left  to  the  certain  contempt  and  execration  of  his  fellow-men.  Husbands  and 
fathers,  learn — 1.  To  provide  for  the  wants  of  those  whom  you  may  leave  behind 
to  mourn  your  loss.  (1)  Make  diligent  use  of  your  time,  and  save  all  you  can  for 
them.  (2)  Your  life  is  uncertain,  insure  it.  (3)  We  don't  know  what  a  day  or  an 
hour  may  bring  forth,  have  all  your  affairs  in  order  so  as  not  to  add  perplexity  to 
trouble  already  too  heavy  to  be  borne.  It  is  "afflicting  them,"  not  to  do  so  (see 
1  Tim.  V.  8).  2.  Then,  having  made  a  proper  use  of  means,  leave  them  with  calm 
faith  in  the  power  and  goodness  of  their  "  Father  in  heaven."  3.  Help  the  widow 
and  the  orphan,  as  your  wife  may  be  left  a  widow  and  your  children  fatherless. 
{J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  25-27.  Any  of  My  people  that  is  poor. — Judgment  on  an  usurer : — There  was 
once  in  this  church  a  poor  widow,  and  she  wanted  £20  to  begin  a  small  shop. 
Having  no  friends,  she  came  to  me,  her  minister  ;  and  I  happened  to  know  a  man 
— not  of  this  church — who  could  advance  the  money  to  the  poor  widow.  So  we 
went  to  this  man — the  widow  and  I — and  the  man  said  he  would  be  happy  to  help 
the  widow.  And  he  drew  out  a  bill  for  £20,  and  the  widow  signed  it,  and  I  signed 
it  too.  Then  he  put  the  signed  paper  in  his  desk,  and  took  out  the  money  and  gave 
it  to  the  widow.  But  the  widow,  counting  it,  said,  "  Sir,  there  is  only  £15  here." 
"It  is  all  right,"  said  the  man  ;  "  that  is  the  interest  I  charge."  And  as  we  had 
no  redress,  we  came  away.  But  the  widow  prospered.  And  she  brought  the  £20  to 
me,  and  I  took  it  myself  to  the  office  of  the  man  who  lent  it,  and  I  said  to  him, 
"Sir,  there  is  the  £20  from  the  widow."  And  he  said,  "Here  is  the  paper  you 
signed  ;  and  if  you  know  any  other  poor  widow,  I  will  be  happy  to  help  her  in  the 
same  way."  I  said  to  him,  "You  help  the  widow!  Sir,  you  have  robbed  this 
widow,  and  you  will  be  damned  1  "  And,  my  friends,  I  kept  my  eye  on  that  man. 
Before  six  months  were  over  God  smote  him,  and  he  died.  {Win.  Andernon,  D.D.) 
Regard  for  the  poor  and  needy  : — While  General  Grant  was  President  of  the  United 
States,  he  was  at  one  time  the  guest  of  Marshall  Jewell,  at  Hartford,  Conn.  At  a 
reception  tendered  him  by  the  Governor,  where  all  the  prominent  men  of  the  State 
were  gathered,  a  roughly-pencilled  note,  in  a  common  envelope,  signed  by  a  woman, 
was  handed  him.  It  was  put  into  his  hands  by  a  young  politician,  who  thought  it 
a  good  joke  that  "  an  old  woman  in  tatters"  should  presume  to  intrude  upon  the 
President  at  such  a  time.  "  You  need  not  bother  about  her  ;  I  sent  her  away — told 
her  you  weie  not  here  to  be  bored,"  the  young  man  said  to  Grant.  The  President's 
answer  much  surprised  the  politician.  "  Where  is  this  woman  ;  where  can  I  find 
her?  "he  inquired,  hurrying  from  the  room.  The  letter  he  held  in  his  hand, 
written  poorly  in  pencil,  told  a  sorrowful  story.  It  said  in  substance:  "  My  son 
fought  in  your  army,  and  he  was  killed  by  rebel  bullets  while  fighting  for  you. 
Before  he  died  he  wrote  me  a  letter  which  told  how  noble  a  man  you  were,  and  said 
you  would  look  out  for  his  mother.  I  am  poor,  and  I  haven't  had  money  or 
influence  to  get  anybody  interested  in  me  to  get  a  pension.  Dear  General,  will  yoa 
please  help  me  for  my  dead  boy's  sake?  "  Sadly  the  woman  had  turned  away  from 
the  mansion,  her  last  hope  dead.  A  servant  pointed  her  out  to  President  Grant, 
walking  slowly  up  the  street.  The  old  soldier  overtook  her  quickly.  She  was 
weeping,  and  turned  towards  him  a  puzzled  face  as  he  stopped  her  and  stood  bare- 
headed in  the  moonlight  beside  her.  The  few  words  the  great,  kind  man  spoke 
turned  her  tears  into  laughter,  her  sorrow  into  joy.  The  pension  before  refused  her 
came  to  her  speedily,  and  her  last  days  were  spent  in  comfort.  (Christian  Age.) 
Take  care  ofthepoor  : — "  Take  care  of  the  poor,  and  the  Lord  will  take  care  of  you," 
was  the  wise  counsel  of  a  bishop  to  a  candidate  for  ordination.  The  profit  of 
helping  the  poor  .—The  welfare  of  the  lowest  is  bound  up  with  that  of  the  highest, 
so  that  the  "  injury  done  to  the  meanest  subject  is,"  as  Solon  said,  "  an  insult  upon 
the  whole  constitution,"  and  a  blow  at  the  prosperity  of  all.  Sir  Eobert  Peel  gave 
his  daughter,  on  her  birthday,  a  splendid  riding-habit,  and  rode  by  her  side  for  an 
airing  in  the  park,  his  heart  swelling  with  pride  that  he  could  call  such  a  maiden 
daughter !  At  once,  however,  she  fell  sick  of  the  most  malignant  type  of  typhus 
fever,  and  despite  all  medical  skill  and  parental  care  died.  A  careful  inquiry  as  to 
the  source  of  the  germs  of  the  fatal  disease  revealed  the  fact  that  the  poor  seam- 
stress, who  had  embroidered  that  robe  in  a  wretched  attic,  had  been  compelled  to 
ase  it  to  cover  her  husband  when  he  shivered  with  the  chills  of  the  deadly  fever. 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

And  from  that  garret  of  poverty  the  infection  of  death  passed  into  the  mansion  of 
the  Premier.  Society  has  her  own  ways  of  avenging  our  neglect  of  her  poorest  and 
neediest  ciiildren.  In  one  bundle  are  we  all  bound  up,  for  weal  or  woe.  We  give, 
though  we  do  not  always  know  it,  to  save  ourselves,  not  alone  to  save  others. 
Ignorance  and  idleness  are  handmaids  of  vice,  as  intelligence  and  industry  are 
handmaids  of  virtue.  God  sees  that  no  one  is  so  much  profited  as  ourselves  by 
those  gifts  to  His  poor,  which  are  corrective  of  self-indulgence,  expansive  of  our 
noblest  sympathies,  educative  of  our  highest  nature,  and  which,  while  they  help  to 
lift  humanity  to  a  higher  level,  as  surely  lift  ourselves  with  the  rest.  {Christian 
Age.)  Fious  poverty  ; — I  have  no  legacy  to  leave  my  children  but  pious  poverty, 
God's  blessing,  and  a  father's  prayers.     (R.  Prideaux.) 

Ver.  28.  The  ruler  of  thy  people. — The  Divine  right  of  magistrates  to  respect :  — 

1.  That  the  poweks  that  be  are  obdained  of  God  (Rom.  xiii.  1-5 ;  1  Peter  ii. 
13-15).  II.  That  magistrates  must  be  treated  with  respect,  both  their  persons 
and  their  decisions  (Josh  i.  16-18).  1.  Because  they  administer  that  which,  when 
it  is  law  at  all,  is  based  on  the  will  and  authority  of  God  (Rom.  xiii.  2).  2.  Because 
they  administer  that  which  is  the  bulwark  of  national  stability  and  personal  safety 
(Rom.  xiii.  3).  III.  That  magistrates  must  receive  respect,  irrespective  of  the 
effect  of  their  decision  (Prov.  xvii.  2G).  1.  Because  they  are  but  the  servants 
of  the  law.  2.  Because  if  through  human  infirmities,  justice  should  occasionally 
miscarry,  it  is  better  to  suffer  than  to  bring  the  law  into  disrepute  (Prov.  xxiv.  21, 
22).  3.  IJut  if  their  decisions  violate  conscience,  then  Acts.  iv.  19,  20  ;  v.  29.  IV. 
That  magistk.\tes  must  be  secure  against  all  hostile  action  (Prov.  xvii.  26  ; 
Job  xxxiv.  17,  18).  1.  Fear  will  warp  the  judgment.  2.  Fear  will  divert  the 
course  of  justice.  V.  Th.t  magistrates  are  not  only  entitled  to  respect,  but  to  odb 
sympathy  and  prayers  (Psa.  xxii.  1,  2;  Ezra  vi.  10;  1  Tim.  ii.  2).  VI.  That  dis- 
respect to  maoistratkb  is  severely  condemned  (Jude  8).  Let  magistrates,  all 
who  are  in  authority  and  all  who  administer  law  whether  civil  or  domestic,  whether 
in  law  courts,  homes,  or  houses  of  business,  remember — 1.  That  they  are  responsible 
to  God  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  3).  Let  them  see  (1)  that  they  accurately  know  the  law,  and 
(2)  that  their  administration  is  conscientious  and  courageous  (Psa.  Ixxii. ;  iv.  12-14). 

2.  That  they  are  responsible  to  man.  Upon  their  decisions  depend  the  well-being 
of  the  citizen,  and  the  stability  of  the  realm.  3.  That  their  title  to  sympathy  and 
veneration  is  recognized  by  the  people  at  large.     (J.  W.  Burn.) 

Vers.  29,  30.  The  firstborn. — First-fruits  to  God  : — God  asks  for  nothing  that  we 
have  not  to  give.  He  asks  that  we  will  give  to  Him  of  what  He  has  given  to  us, 
that  we  will  put  to  its  true  and  highest  use  what  He  for  that  end  has  bestowed.  We 
cannot  give  fruit  that  we  do  not  bear,  or  that  is  green  and  unripe,  but  only  that  which 
is  fresh  and  mature,  waiting  to  be  gathered  in.  I.  God  asks  for  the  first  ripe  fruits 
of  our  epucation.  The  wise  man's  education  is  never  finished.  To  cease  to  learn 
is  to  cease  to  grow ;  to  cease  to  grow  is  to  decay  in  force  and  faculty.  Yet  there  is 
a  special  sense  in  which  education  ceases.  The  youth  leaves  school,  the  scholar  the 
university,  the  apprentice  is  ♦'  out  of  his  time."  Then  we  have  to  think  and  act  for 
ourselves,  and  use  the  knowledge  we  have  acquired.  We  have  to  face  the  great 
questions  that  concern  man's  life  and  destiny.  Then  God  asks  from  us  the  first 
ripe  fruits  of  our  education  in  the  use  of  our  intelligence  and  feeling  and  con- 
science. He  asks  us  to  face  these  great  questions ;  to  think  soberly  and  ponder 
the  path  of  our  feet.  II.  God  asks  from  us  the  first  ripe  fruits  of  our  toil.  The 
Jews  gave  this  in  kind — from  flock,  vineyard,  or  field.  We  give  an  equivalent — 
money.  The  first  money  earned  is  the  first-fruits  of  toil.  From  that  lay  by  some- 
thing for  God.  III.  God  asks  from  us  the  first  ripe  fruits  of  our  conversion.  I 
have  often  seen  a  child  so  overcome  with  an  unexpected  gift  that  he  has  forgotten 
to  say  "  Thank  you,"  but  surely  Christ  does  not  expect  such  f orgetfulness  from  those 
whom  He  has  snatched  from  the  burning.  IV.  Then  there  are  some  first-fruits  of 
experience  which  Gud  commands  us  to  offer  to  Him.  "  I  have  learned  by  ex- 
perieiiee  "  is  the  confession  sometimes  of  self-convicted  folly,  sometimes  of  grateful 
wonder.  How  near  have  we  been  to  spiritual  death !  How  well  hidden  the  pit- 
falls under  our  feet !  How  strong  the  arms  that  have  held  us  up  !  How  wonderful 
the  consolations  !  How  sweet  the  grace  of  the  Divine !  So  experience  enriches  the 
soil  in  which  we  are  planted  to  produce  a  lustier  and  richer  growth.  Now  to  offer 
to  God  the  first  ripe  fruits  of  experience  is  surely  to  learn  and  profit  by  its  lessons. 
It  is  to  remember ;  to  take  warning ;  to  know  our  own  selves — our  peculiar  weak- 


CHAP,  xxin,]  EXODUS.  431 

nesses  and  danger;  it  is  to  trust  God  more  and  self  less ;  to  look  for  larger  answers 
to  prayer,  and  more  wonderful  vindications  of  faith.     V.  Does  not  God  want  those 

liOVELY  AND    PKECIOOS   FRUITS  WHICH    GROW  ON  THE    HOUSEHOLD   VIKE  ?      The  Onlj  trUe 

dedication  of  children  to  God  is  that  Christian  nurture  which  leads  to  their  dedi- 
cating themselves.     (B.  B.  Brindley.) 


CHAPTER  XXin. 


Ver.  1.  Thou  Shalt  not  raise  a  false  report. — Slander  characterized,  prohibited, 
and  punished : — I.  Slander  is  characterized.  1.  Originating  a  false  report.  It 
may  be  from — (1)  Envy.  (2)  Carelessness.  (3)  Hasty  conclusions.  2.  Listening 
to  false  reports.  3.  Circulating  a  false  report.  II.  Slander  is  prohibited.  1. 
Affecting  antecedents.  2.  Affecting  character.  3.  Affecting  family  or  social 
relations.  4.  Affecting  goods.  HI.  Slander  is  punished.  The  slanderer  is — 1. 
Excluded  from  religious  fellowship  (Psa.  xv.  3).  2.  Exposed  to  contempt  of  man- 
kind (Prov.  X.  IS).  3.  Object  of  Divine  vengeance  (Psa.  x.  5).  4.  Excluded  from 
kingdom  of  heaven  (Rev.  xxii.  15).  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Description  of  slander: — 
The  tongue  of  the  slanderer  is  a  devouring  fire,  which  tarnishes  whatever  it  touches  ; 
which  exercises  its  fury  on  the  good  grain  equally  as  on  the  chaff,  on  the  profane  as 
on  the  sacred :  which,  wherever  it  passes,  leaves  only  desolation  and  ruin ;  digs 
even  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  fixes  itself  on  things  the  most  hidden  ;  turns 
into  vile  ashes  what  only  a  moment  before  had  appeared  to  us  so  precious  and 
brilliant ;  acts  with  more  violence  and  danger  than  ever  in  the  time  when  it  was 
apparently  smothered  up  and  almost  extinct ;  which  blackens  what  it  cannot 
consume,  and  sometimes  sparkles  and  delights  before  it  destroys.  (Massillon.) 
Envious  slander : — The  worthiest  persons  are  frequently  attacked  by  slanders,  as 
we  generally  find  that  to  be  the  best  fruit  which  the  birds  have  been  pecking  at. 
{Bacon.)  Hoio  to  avoid  slander  : — The  celebrated  Boerhaave,  who  had  many 
enemies,  used  to  say  that  he  never  thought  it  necessary  to  repeat  their  calumnies. 
"  They  are  sparks,"  said  he,  "  which,  if  you  do  not  blow  them,  will  go  cut  of  them- 
selves. The  surest  method  against  scandal  is  to  live  it  down  by  perseverance  in 
well-doing,  and  by  prayer  to  God,  that  He  would  cure  the  distempered  minds  of 
those  who  traduce  and  injure  us."  It  was  a  good  remark  of  another,  that  "  the 
malice  of  ill  tongues  cast  upon  a  good  man  is  only  like  a  mouthful  of  smoke  blown 
upon  a  diamond,  which,  though  it  clouds  its  beauty  for  the  present,  yet  it  is  easily 
rubbed  off",  and  the  gem  restored,  with  little  trouble  to  its  owner."  Slander 
reproved  : — When  any  one  was  speaking  ill  of  another  in  the  presence  of  Peter  the 
Great,  he  would  shortly  interrupt  him,  and  say,  "  Well  now  ;  but  has  he  not  a  bright 
side?  Come,  tell  me  what  have  you  noticed  as  excellent  in  him  !  It  is  easy  to 
splash  mud  ;  but  I  would  rather  help  a  man  to  keep  his  coat  clean."  Listening  to 
slander : — Calumny  would  soon  starve  and  die  of  itself,  if  nobody  took  it  in,  and 
gave  it  lodging.  (Leighton.)  There  would  not  be  so  many  open  months  if  there 
were  not  so  many  open  ears.  (Bishop  Hall.)  The  progress  of  slander  : — It  is 
yElian's  observation,  how  that  men  being  in  danger  to  be  stung  by  scorpions,  use 
to  place  their  bsds  in  water,  yet  the  politic  serpents  have  a  device  to  reach  them  : 
they  get  up  to  the  top  of  the  house,  where  one  takes  hold,  the  next  hangs  at  the 
end  of  him,  a  third  upon  the  second,  a  fourth  upon  the  third,  and  so  making  a 
kind  of  serpentine  rope,  they  at  last  wound  the  man.  And  thus  it  is,  that  amongst 
scandalizers  and  slanderers,  one  begins  to  whisper,  another  makes  it  a  report,  a 
third  enlargeth  it  to  a  dangerous  calumny,  a  fourth  divulgeth  it  for  a  truth.  So  the 
innoct^nt  man's  good  name,  which,  like  a  merchant's  wealth,  got  in  many  years, 
and  lost  in  an  hour,  is  maimed,  and  so  secretly  traduced,  that  it  is  somewhat  hard 
to  find  out  the  villain  that  did  it.  (J.  Spencer.)  False  reports  : — The  Rev.  C. 
H.  Spurgeon  has  given  publicity  to  the  following  letter :  "  Dear  Mr.  Spurgeon, — As 
I  see  that  you  are  still  occasionally  put  to  the  trouble  of  answering  inquiries  as  to 
the  truth  of  vaiious  anecdotes,  &c.,  concerning  yourself ,  I  thought  the  following  brief 
statement  might  interest  you,  or  some  of  your  numerous  reailers,  if  you  think  it 
well  to  publish  it.  About  seventeen  years  ago  I  was  for  some  time  at  a  well-known 
health  resort  on  the  south  coast.  At  the  table  d'Jwte  I  sat  next  to  a  young  married 
lady,  who  was,  alas !  consumptive,  and  of  that  temperament  which  is  so  common  in 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxui. 

Buch  cases,  tres  spirituelle,  and  very  learned  and  accomplished.  You  may  be  sure 
she  never  lacked  auditors  for  her  lively  conversation.  At  dessert  one  day  she  was 
•  telling  stories'  (in  the  literal  and  juvenile  sense  of  the  phrase)  abuut  your.->elf.  I 
let  her  go  on  for  some  time,  until  I  thought  the  fun  was  getting  a  little  too  fast ; 

and  then  I  said,  '  I  hope  Mrs. ,  you  do  not  believe  the  stories  you  are  detailing, 

because  I  assure  you,  I  heard  nearly  all  of  them  in  my  boyhood,  before  Mr. 
Spurgeon  was  born,  and  that  most  of  tliem  were  tben  attributed  to  Rowland  Plill — 
doubtless  with  equal  lack  of  authenticity.'     She  looked  me  calmly  in  the  face,  with 

a  comical  expression,  and   replied,    'Ob,   Mr. ,   we   never   ask   whetber  such 

stories  are  true  ;  it  is  quite  sulHcient  if  we  find  them  amusing.'  '  Well,'  I  said,  '  so 
long  as  that  is  understood  all  round,  by  all  means  keep  on.'  The  poor,  brilliant, 
thoughtless  woman  and  her  husband  also  have  many  years  since  passed  away  ;  but 
she  has  many,  many  successors,  who  are  without  her  wit,  and  not  quite  so  good- 
humonredly  candid  as  to  their  practice.  If  only  you  can  get  it  '  understood  all 
round  '  that  such  folk  really  do  not  consider  whether  their  '  anecdotes '  are  true  or 

not,  it  might  save  you  some  trouble.    Yours  faithfully ."     Mr.  Spurgeon  himself 

adds  :  "  This  is  quite  true,  but  it  is  a  pity  that  people  should  lie  in  jest.  The  lady 
was  let  off  very  easily.  Our  friend  has  touched  the  root  of  the  matter.  It  is  not 
malice,  but  the  passion  for  amusement,  which  creates  the  trade  in  falsehood,  which 
never  seems  to  decline."  Description  of  calumny : — Apelles  painted  her  thus  : 
There  sits  a  man  with  great  and  open  cars,  inviting  Calumny,  with  his  hand  held  out, 
to  come  to  him  ;  and  two  women.  Ignorance  and  Suspicion,  stand  near  him.  Calumny 
breaks  out  in  a  fury ;  her  countenance  is  comely  and  beautiful,  her  eyes  sparkle 
like  fire,  and  her  face  is  inflamed  with  anger;  she  holds  a  lighted  torch  in  her  left 
hand,  and  with  her  right  twists  a  young  man's  neck,  who  holds  up  his  hands  in 
prayer  to  the  gods.  Before  her  goes  En%7,  pale  and  nasty  ;  on  her  side  are  Fraud 
and  Conspiracy  ;  behind  her  follows  Repentance,  clad  in  mourning,  and  her  clothes 
torn,  with  her  head  turned  backwards,  as  if  she  looked  for  Truth,  who  comes  slowly 
after.  (.-1.  Tooke.)  False  insinuations :— Often  are  the  most  painful  wrongs 
inflicted  through  the  medium  of  covert  inuendoes  and  malignant  insinuations. 
Half  of  a  fact  is  a  whole  falsehood.  He  who  gives  the  truth  a  false  colouring  by  a 
false  manner  of  telling  it  is  the  worst  of  liars.  Such  was  Doeg  in  his  testimony 
against  the  priests.  He  stated  the  facts  in  the  case,  but  gave  them  such  an  artfid 
interpretation  as  to  impart  to  them  the  aspect  and  influence  of  the  most  flagrant 
falsehoods.  It  was  through  the  same  mode  of  precedure  that  our  Lord  was  con- 
demned. An  unrighteous  witness. — The  duties  of  witiwsses  : — I.  Not  to  cooperate 
IN  AN  UNniGHTEOCS  CAUSE  (vcr.  1).  This  "  commandment  is  exceeding  broad,"  and 
conveys  a  lesson — 1.  To  judicial  witnesses.  (1)  Personal  friendships.  (2)  The 
guilt  of  the  accused  on  some  other  point.  (3)  A  show  of  justice  must  not  influence 
us.  2.  To  all  partisans,  controversialists,  politicians.  3.  To  trades  unionists,  &c 
II.  Not  to  co-operate  in  any  unrighteous  cause  because  it  is  popular  (ver.  2).  1. 
Because  majorities  are  no  test  of  truth.  Multitudes  may  be  roused  by  passion, 
prejudice,  or  self-interest.  2.  Because  men  should  be  weighed  as  well  as 
counted.  3.  Because  righteousness,  from  the  constitution  of  human  nature,  is  often 
unpopular  and  in  the  minority.  III.  Not  to  co-operate  in  an  unrighteous  causb 
BECAUSE  IT  IS  APPARENTLY  BENEVOLENT  (vcr.  3  ;  Lcv.  XIX.  15).  1.  Bccausc  wc  may 
be  putting  a  premium  on  vice  which  is  the  source  of  all  misery.  (1)  By  endea- 
vouring to  conceal  the  crime.  (2)  By  extolling  other  virtues,  so  as  to  minimize  the 
enormity  of  guilt.  But  to  what  purpose  is  it  if  we  extol  a  man's  honesty,  if  he  ia 
lazy,  or  a  drunkard  ;  or  his  sobriety,  if  a  thief?  2.  Because  justice  is  above  mere 
sentiment,  and  for  the  well-being  of  the  whole  community,  and  not  for  the  exclusive 
benefit  of  a  class.  3.  Because  of  its  influence  on  the  object  himself.  Let  a  man 
feel  that  you  do  this  or  that  for  him  simply  because  he  is  poor,  and  he  will  see  no 
advantage  in  helping  himself.  Learn  then — 1.  To  entertain  none  but  righteoaa 
considerations.     2.  To  pursue  them  at  all  cost.     {J.  W.  Burn.) 

Ver.  2.  Thou  shalt  not  follow  a  mtiltitude  to  do  evil. — Following  the  multitude 
prohibited  : — I.  Explain  the  nature  of  this  precept.  1.  It  is  here  assumed  that 
the  multitude  do  evil.  This  may  be  inferred — (1)  From  the  review  of  past  ages. 
(2)  From  the  cruel  persecutions  which  have  been  raised  against  the  righteous  in 
various  ages  of  the  world.  (3)  From  the  common  conduct  of  mankind.  Is  not 
vice  more  general  than  virtue?  2.  Secondly,  the  precept  in  the  text  supposes  that 
we  are  in  danger  of  copying  the  example  of  the  multitude.  We  may  infer  this — 
(1)  From  the  innate  tendencies  we  have  to  evil.    (2)  From  the  prevalence  of  bad 


CHAP,  xsin.]  t::SODUS,  483 

example.  3.  From  a  variety  of  melancholy  facts.  The  multitude  who  now  do 
evil  were  not  always  such  adepts  in  depravity;  when  they  first  entered  into  the 
broad  way  their  feet  were  not  swift  to  do  evil ;  they  proceeded  with  hesitating 
steps,  but  b}'  practice  became  hardened  in  crime.  II.  Urge  reasons  to  induce  va 
TO  OBSERVE  IT.  The  multitude  doing  evil  should  not  be  imitated,  because  they  are 
— 1.  Unlawful  and  unconstituted  guides.  2,  Bad  guides.  3.  Dishonourable  guides. 
4.  Unprofitable  guides.  5.  Dangerous  guides.  III.  Impart  advice  for  the  direc- 
tion OF  those  who  wish  to  escape  the  ensnaring  wiles  of  the  multitcde.  1.  Get 
your  minds  deeply  and  thorouphly  impressed  with  the  awf  ulness  of  your  situation. 
Dangers  uneeHii  willbe  unavoided.  2.  Seek  the  regenerating  grace  of  God.  3.  Be  on 
your  guard  against  the  seductive  wiles  and  insinuating  influence  of  the  multitude. 
Sinners  will  entice  you ;  but  come  out  from  among  them ;  have  no  communion 
with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness  (Psa.  i.  1).  4.  Follow  the  happy  few  who 
strive  to  do  good.  Sliow  that  you  are  with  Christ  by  being  with  His  people.  Oh, 
say,  "This  people  shall  be  my  people,  and  their  God  my  God."  Inferences — (1) 
That  the  measures  of  i-ight  and  wrong  are  not  to  be  determined  by  the  majority. 
Good  and  evil  are  fixed  immutable  principles  ;  and  their  natures  are  unchangeable, 
whether  many  or  few  follow  them.  (2)  What  gratitude  is  due  to  God  for  the  revela- 
tion of  His  Will,  which  marks  the  boundaries  of  right  and  wrong;  and  for  the  gift 
of  His  Son  to  redeem  us  from  this  present  evil  world :  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever 
and  ever.  Amen.  (Sketches  of  Sermons.)  Individual  responsibility  : — There  is, 
I  suppose,  no  doctrine  more  clearly  set  forth  in  Scripture  than  the  doctrine  of  per- 
sonal responsibility.  There  is  no  doctrine  more  readily  owned,  no  doctrine  more 
insisted  upon  by  men.  Yet  I  think  I  can  show  you  that,  in  its  application  to  a 
great  number  of  particular  cases,  you  would  not  only  act  as  though  you  disbelieved 
it,  but  you  would  unconsciously  maintain  in  words  doctrines  directly  opposed  to  it. 
The  words  which  I  have  just  read  to  you  suggest  one  of  the  most  universally  em- 
ployed modes  of  denying  this  universally  received  doctrine  of  individual  responsi. 
bility.  "Thou  shalt  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil,"  was  said  long  ago  by  the 
Jewish  law.  I  think  you  will  find  that  the  present  condition  of  things,  in  whatever 
place  or  class  we  are  thinking  of,  grew  up  from  something  very  small,  and  that  by 
degrees  the  sin  acquired  strength  from  the  power  and  position,  and  then  from  the 
mere  number  of  its  perpetrators,  until  in  time  it  acquired  positive  dignity  and  be- 
came correct,  or  according  to  the  absurd  modern  phraseology,  became  "  good  form," 
from  the  multitude  of  transgressors.  I  will  begin  with  the  sex  which  since  the 
creation  of  the  world  has  almost  uniformly  carried  its  point  against  the  opposite 
sex,  and  which,  nevertheless,  is  still  facetiously  called  the  weaker.  They  will,  I  be- 
lieve, if  you  ask  them,  readily  own  themselves  responsible  for  their  use  of  time  and 
of  money.  Well,  they  certainly  spend  an  excessive  amount  of  the  latter,  money, 
as  I  daresay  their  husbands  know,  in  purchasing;  and  of  the  former,  time,  as 
everybody  knows,  in  adjusting  those  ever-changing  and  most  cumbrous  absur- 
dities which  they  pile  upon  themselves,  and  with  which  they  surround  themselves 
to  the  general  inconvenience  of  everybody  and  everywhere.  They  do  this  until  I. 
should  think  they  must  feel  uncomfortable,  and  I  know  that  they  look  deformed.. 
Why  do  they  do  it  ?  Ask  any  one,  and  you  will  hear  it  all  condemned  at  once, 
solemnly,  perhaps  piously  condemned  at  once,  the  responsibility  being  shifted  im- 
mediately from  the  individual  to  fashion,  and  that  is  to  everybody.  What  does, 
all  that  mean  ?  Their  conscience  is  reUeved  by  the  multitude  whom  they  follow. 
Let  us  go  a  little  further  and  take  another  view  of  the  matter.  Public  bodies,  I  believe^ 
parliaments,  ministries,  corporations,  towh  commissioners.  Poor  Law  guardians, 
boards  of  all  kinds,  and  committees  of  all  kinds,  are  known — every  one  of  you 
knows  it  as  well  as  I  do — to  be  guilty  of  negltct  of  duties  and  violations  of  honour  of. 
which  none  of  their  members  singly,  in  private  transactions,  would  for  one  momentj, 
be  capable.  Take  another  set  of  instances.  Look  at  the  recognized  dishonesties  ofe 
different  trades  and  businesses.  The  man  who  keeps  light  weights  for  selling,  and 
heavy  weights  for  buying,  as  I  once  knew  a  most  "  pious  "  man  do  ;  the  man  who' 
adulterates  food ;  the  man  who  puts  bad  work  or  bad  material  where  it  is  not  to  be 
detected  ;  the  servant  who  robs  his  master  "  in  the  usual  way  " ;  "  the  workman  who 
to  no  greater  extent  than  others  of  his  craft  plunders  his  employer  ";  none  of  these 
desire  by  any  means,  I  fancy,  to  have  their  children  taught  at  school  that  the 
Eighth  Commandment  has  no  meaning.  They  Uke  to  hear  it  every  Sunday.  Why? 
Because  they  have  an  unwritten  tradition  in  the  craft  or  trade,  by  which  it  is  dis* 
pensed  with.  But  I  am  going  into  more  dangerous  ground  now.  In  the  present 
day,  the  multitude  has  come  to  be  considered  something  more  than  an  ezcuser  of 

28 


434  THE  BIBLlCAi:  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiH. 

deviations  from  strict  principles  in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life.  It  is  beginning  to 
assume  the  functions  of  the  highest  authority  on  religious  matters.  To  call  in 
question  its  decision,  or  refuse  submission  to  its  commands,  no  matter  how  unin- 
structed  it  may  be,  is  coming  to  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  standing  up  against  an 
inspired  prophet.  It  does  not  occur  to  the  thoughtless  thronfr,  who  will  rush  any- 
where to  hear  anybody,  or  to  see  anything,  that  when  the  mulutude  appears  to  have 
taken  a  "  pious  "  turn  it  can  be  wrong  to  follow  it  whithersoever  it  leads.  It  does 
not  seem  to  occur  to  them  that  when  the  multitude  is  longing  to  take  Jesns  by 
force  and  make  Him  a  king,  it  may  have  just  as  little  perception  of  His  mission  as 
when  it  clamorously  demands  His  crucifixion.  No,  they  are  afraid  to  gainsay  what 
the  multitude  asserts  ;  they  are  afraid  to  do  anything  but  echo  its  assertions,  and 
thus  each  one  among  a  multitude  perpetuates  the  delusion  of  the  others  as  to  his 
real  opinion,  by  being  afraid  to  say  it  out,  and  act  in  conformity  with  it.  This  is  the 
very  spirit  by  which  multitudes  are  created,  by  which  they  are  enabled  to  assume 
formidable  proportions,  to  become  powerful  for  evil.  The  silence  of  cowardice  is  re- 
garded as  satisfactory  consent,  and  everybody's  echo  of  what  everybody  else  says  is 
vaunted  as  the  concurrence  of  numerous  independent  testimonies.  Persons  of  this 
kind  are  the  genuine  followers  of  the  multitude  who  are  condemned  in  the  text. 
(J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.)  The  sin  of  following  the  multitude  to  do  evil: — I.  It  im- 
plies THAT  THE  MAJORITY  OR  GREAT  MASS  OF  MANKIND  ARE  UNIFORMLY  AND  CONSTANTLY 
ENGAGED  IN  DOING  EVIL.  II.  ThE  PROHIBITION  WHICH  WE  ARE  CONSIDERING  IMPLIES 
THAT  EVERY  PERSON  IS  NATURALLY  DISPOSED  TO  FOLLOW  A  MULTITUDE  TO  DO  EVIL.       III. 

The  PRoniHiTioN  in  the  text  implies  that  those  are  altogether  criminal  who 

FOLLOW  the  evil    EXAMPLES  OF  EVn--D0ER8,  THOUGH  THEY  ARE   THE  GREAT  MAJORITY  OF 

MANKIND.  For — 1.  They  are  free  and  voluntary  in  following  the  examples  of  those 
who  do  evil.  2.  Every  person  acts  contrary  to  his  reason  and  conscience  in  follow- 
ing a  multitude  to  do  evil,  which  renders  him  altogether  criminal  and  inexcusable. 
Conclusion  :  1.  If  men  are  apt  to  follow  bad  examples,  as  has  been  said,  then  there  is 
reason  to  think  that  bad  examples  are  the  great  source  of  moral  corruption  in  every 
part  of  the  world.  2.  If  men  are  naturally  disposed  to  follow  the  multitude  to  do 
evil,  then  the  truly  godly  have  much  more  concern  in  spreading  moral  corruption, 
and  obstructing  the  cause  of  relicion  than  they  are  apt  to  imagine.  3.  Since  men 
are  naturally  disposed  to  follow  the  bad  examples  of  the  multitude,  it  is  easy  to  see 
why  a  people,  declining  in  religion,  are  so  apt  to  be  insensible  of  their  religious 
declensions.  The  minority  are  blended  with  the  majority,  and  they  are  all  im- 
perceptibly dechning  together.  4.  If  all  men  are  naturally  disposed  to  follow  the 
multitude  to  do  evil,  then  the  rising  generation  are  always  in  a  peculiarly  danger- 
ous situation.  5.  If  it  be  criminal  to  follow  bad  examples,  it  must  be  far  more 
criminal  to  set  bad  examples.  G.  If  men  are  naturally  disposed  to  follow  the  multi- 
tude to  do  evil,  then  every  one  in  a  state  of  nature  has  a  great  reason  to  fear  that 
he  shall  live  and  die  in  his  present  unsanctified  and  impenitent  state.  Your  belong- 
ing to  the  majority  will  not  help  you  to  turn  about,  but  powerfully  tend  to  hinder 
you.  What  will  you  say  when  He  punishes  you  ?  (N.  Emmom,  D.D.)  Multi- 
tude no  prevailing  argument : — The  Lord  that  made  us  knoweth  our  mould  and 
!how  easily  we  are  persuaded  to  taste  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  how  prone  to  be 
carried  headlong  to  error,  and  therefore  gives  us  a  caveat,  and  sets  a  bar  and  a 
stop  in  our  way,  that  we  run  not  to  evil  because  we  see  others  run  or  lead  the  way 
before  us.  And  we  shall  do  well  by  the  way  to  take  notice  of  our  own  corruption,  as 
the  Lord  doth,  that  in  the  same  we  may  see  the  necessity  of  this  precept ;  for  first, 
nature  corrupt  is  as  attractive  of  evil  as  the  adamant  naturally  draws  iron  ;  just  as 
a  spark  to  tinder  or  gunpowder.  Secondly,  evil  is  diffusive  of  itself,  and  such  an 
acquaintance  there  is  between  it  and  us,  as  the  plague  cannot  so  easily  infect  our 
bodies  as  sin  doth  poison  and  suddenly  infect  our  souls.  Thirdly,  our  nature  is 
social,  and  not  as  the  brutes  ;  we  readily  thrust  into  company,  and  therefore  being 
naturally  enemies  to  solitariness,  we  are  ready  to  follow  if  any  one  lead  us  the 
way ;  but  if  many  or  a  multitude  (as  here)  then  we  run,  and  for  haste  never  stay  to 
reason  the  case,  neither  in  what  way  nor  upon  what  errand.  And,  therefore,  the 
Lord  would  have  His  people  to  fence  themselves  with  a  rule  of  prudence,  that  they 
be  not  misled  by  the  crooked  steps  of  others  and  their  own  perverse  inclinations. 
1.  One  reason  is  in  the  text :  because  a  multitude  may  err  and  run  to  evil,  and 
may  decline  to  overthrow  truth.  2.  Multitudes  cannot  make  that  to  be  good  which 
is  evil  in  itself,  neither  in  doctrine  nor  manners ;  well  they  may  make  an  evil 
worse,  but  none  better.  3.  Multitudes  cannot  keep  off  the  revenge  of  evil ;  one  evil 
mate  may  help  his  fellow  into  sin,  but  cannot  help  him  out  of  punishment.    4, 


CHAP,  xxni.]  EXOLUS.  435 

Multitudes  and  most  men  are  commonly  the  worst.  The  way  to  hell  is  broad  and 
the  gate  wide  that  leads  to  destruction,  and  many  go  in  thereat  (Matt.  vii.  13). 
"  Hell  enlargeth  itself"  (Isa.  v.  14).  "Tophet  is  large  and  wide"  (chap  xxx.  33).  And 
therefore  it  cannot  be  the  safest  way  which  the  most  walk  in.  Contrarily,  the 
fewest  are  commonly  the  best ;  pearls  are  rare  ;  many  hundred  false  prophets  to  one 
poor  Mieaiah ;  God's  part  in  the  world  was  ever  but  a  gleaning  and  a  small  rem- 
nant ;  and  the  apostle  (1  John  v.  19)  pronounceth  in  the  name  of  believers,  "We 
know  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  unrighteousness."  5.  It 
is  better  to  walk  the  right  way  alone  than  to  wander  out  of  the  way  with  company  ; 
better  go  to  heaven  alone,  or  with  a  few,  than  with  multitudes  to  hell.  Come  we 
now  to  application  of  this  point.  1.  If  it  be  so  dangerous  to  follow  a  multitude  to 
evil,  what  a  fearful  thing  it  is  to  lead  a  multitude  to  evil !  as  the  magistrate  that 
enacts  and  commands  evil ;  like  Jeroboam  that  made  all  Israel  to  sin.  Or  the 
minister  that  shall  be  weak  as  another  man  by  whose  example  many  are  corrupted, 
through  loose  speeches,  unseemly  behaviours,  libertine  courses,  fellowship  with  the 
abject,  opposing  the  persons  and  strict  courses  of  such  as  fear  God.  2.  See  how 
desperately  many  men  frame  their  courses  while  they  live  as  if  to  do  as  the  most 
do,  were  a  good  and  waiTantable  plea.  Because  the  most  are  irreligious,  without 
the  fear  of  God,  and  without  conscience  :  so  are  tbey.  The  most  scorn  to  attend 
God's  ordinance:  so  do  they.  Commit  a  felony,  riot,  robbery,  or  rebellion  with  a 
multitude,  and  try  if  in  thy  trial  before  the  judge  it  will  be  a  good  plea  to  say,  "  I 
was  led,  and  followed  the  multitude. "  What  then  would  you  have  us  to  do?  In  mat- 
ters of  faith  build  upon  a  surer  foundation  than  upon  numbers  and  multitudes, 
whom  it  was  never  safe  to  follow  ;  nor  was  it  ever  a  good  argument  either  of  the 
truth  or  true  Church.  In  Christ's  time  the  multitude  followed  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  but  not  Christ  nor  His  apostles  ;  and  all  the  multitude  cried,  "  Crucify 
Him."  And  how  uncertain  a  rule  this  is  the  father  tells  us  who  observed, 
that  in  synods  and  councils  the  greater  side  doth  ofteutimes  overcome  the  better  ; 
and  another  who  saith,  that  in  all  Divine  cases  we  must  not  number  voices,  but 
weigh  them.  What  sure  ground  can  be  expected  from  the  rude  multitude,  than 
which  nothing  is  more  fickle  and  uncertain  ?  But  we  have  a  surer  word,  "  Being  built 
upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the 
chief  corner-stone  "  (Eph.  ii.  20  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  11).  And  we  say  asHushai  to  Absolom 
(2  Sam.  xvi.  18)  "Nay,  but  whom  the  Lord  and  this  people,  and  all  the  men  of 
Israel  chose,  his  will  I  be,  and  with  him  will  I  abide."  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Thou 
shalt  not  folloic  a  multitude  to  do  evil  : — I.  Imitation  is  one  of  the  great 
CHAR-iCTERisTics  OF  THE  HUMAN  SPECIES.  The  Same  passion  that  impels  us  to 
society,  impels  us  to  take  part  with  our  companions  in  their  interests  and  in- 
clinations. Insensibly  and  without  thought  we  fall  into  their  customs  and  their 
manners  ;  we  adopt  their  sentiments,  their  passions,  and  even  their  foibles,  and  ^ 
follow  the  same  course  as  if  we  were  actuated  by  the  same  spirit.     II.  By  what 

MEANS  WE  ARE  TO  KEEP  OURSELVES  FROM  FOLLOWING  A  MULTITUDE  TO  DO    EVIL.       1.    Let 

us  be  early  and  firmly  established  in  the  principles  of  an  holy  faith.  It  is  educa- 
tion chiefly  that  forms  the  human  character  ;  and  it  is  a  virtuous  and  religious  edu- 
cation that  forms  the  character.  2.  Let  us  beware  with  what  company  we  associate. 
3.  Let  us  acquire  firmness  and  fortitude  of  mind.    (James  Logan.)  The  multi- 

tude an  tinaafe  guide : — It  is  said  of  the  roes  and  hinds  that  they  are  most 
tender  and  fearful  of  all  beasts,  affrighted  with  any  noise,  checked  with  the  least 
foil,  turned  out  of  course  with  the  snapping  of  a  stick,  presently  make  head  another 
way,  and  «hen  they  are  once  out  of  their  wonted  walk  they  run  they  know  not  ' 
whither,  even  to  their  own  death.  Such  is  the  natural  disposition  of  the  multitude 
or  common  people,  soon  stirred  up,  quickly  awry,  sometimes  running  fuU  head  one 
way,  on  a  sun  den  turned  as  much  another,  easily  set  agog,  delighted  with  novel- 
ties. (-/.  Spencer.)  The  multitude  not  to  be  followed : — Said  Horace  Bushnell  to 
his  younuer  brother,  who  had  been  to  a  cheap  show  and  came  home  crestfallen, 
"  The  next  time  that  you  see  the  whole  world  doing  something,  be  sure  not  to  go 
with  tliem  unless  you  have  some  better  reason."  That  was  the  germ  of  manly  in- 
dependence out  of  which  the  sturdy  manhood  of  that  remarkable  thinker  grew.  The 
sooner  a  young  man  learns  that  there  are  in  this  world  more  silly  people  than  wise, 
more  weak  ttinn  strong,  the  better  his  chances  of  being  a  man.  Custom  not  the 
standard  of  riijlit : — "  Know  that  the  Lord  has  set  apart  him  that  is  godly  for  Him- 
self." Therefore  it  is  no  excuse  for  him  to  say,  *'  I  do  but  as  others  do."  He  is  to  reckon, 
his  hours  by  the  sun,  not  the  town  clock  ;  to  take  God's  direction,  not  the  vice  of 
the  multitudes,  as  one  of  their  stamp  and  at  liberty  to  comply  with  their  fashions. 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.) 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

Vers.  4,  5.  Thine  enemy's  ox. — On  duties  to  enemieg : — I.  That  duties  to  enemies 
ABE  ENJOINED  (Piov.  xxiv.  17;  1  Thcss.  V.  15).  1.  It  is  our  duty  to  protect  the 
interests  of  our  enemy.  (1)  If  they  are  damaged,  we  should  endeavour  to  retrieve 
them.  (2)  If  they  are  in  danger  of  damage,  we  should  endeavour  to  prevent  them 
(James  v.  19,  20).  2.  It  is  our  duty  to  help  the  difficulties  of  our  enemy.  (1)  His 
mind  may  be  in  difficulties.  (2)  His  soul  may  be  in  difficulties.  (3)  His  material 
interests  may  be  in  difficulties.  II.  That  duties  to  enemies  abe  difficult  :  "  and 
wouldest  forbi  ar  to  help  him."  1.  Such  duties  are  against  the  grain  of  human 
nature.  2.  Such  duties  are  apparently  against  self-interest.  3.  Such  duties 
require  self-denials  and  sacrifices.  III.  That  duties  to  enemieh  are  kewabded 
(Prov.  XXV.  21,  22 ;  Matt.  v.  44,  45  ;  Eom.  xii.  20).  IV.  That  neglect  of  duties 
TO  enemies  is  punished  (Job  xxxi,  29 ;  Prov.  xxiv.  18).  In  conclusion — 1.  Our 
text  applies  to  all  enmity,  whether  polemical,  political,  or  national.  2.  Its  precepts 
Bhould  be  obeyed,  because  we  may  be  in  the  wrong  and  our  enemy  in  tbe  right. 
3.  Because  God  has  Himself  set  us  the  subhme  example.  "  When  we  were  enemies, 
we  were  reconciled  by  the  death  of  His  Son."  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Neighbourly  con- 
duct : — The  horse  of  a  pious  man  living  in  Massachusetts,  North  America,  happening 
to  stray  into  the  road,  a  neighbour  of  the  man  who  owned  the  horse  put  him  into 
the  pound.  Meeting  the  owner  soon  after,  he  told  him  what  he  had  done  ;  "  And  if  I 
catch  him  in  the  road  again,"  said  he,  "I'll  do  it  again."  "Neighbour,"  replied 
the  other,  •'  not  long  since  I  looked  out  of  my  window  in  the  night  and  saw  your 
cattle  in  my  meadow,  and  I  drove  them  out  and  shut  them  in  your  yard  ;  and  I'll 
do  it  again."  Struck  with  the  reply,  the  man  liberated  the  horse  from  the  pound, 
and  paid  the  charges  himself.  "  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath."  A  humane 
dis23osition  : — In  one  of  my  temperance  pilgrimages  through  Illinois  I  met  a  gentle- 
man who  was  the  companion  of  a  dreary  ride  which  Mr.  Lincoln  made  in  a  light 
waggon,  going  the  rounds  of  a  circuit  court  where  he  had  clients  to  look  after.  The 
•weather  was  rainy,  the  road  "  heavy  "  wit'i  mud.  Lincoln  enlivened  the  way  with 
anecdotes  and  recital,  for  few  indeed  were  the  incidents  that  relieved  the  tedium  of 
the  trip.  At  last,  in  wallowing  through  a  slough,  they  came  upon  a  poor  hog,  which 
was  literally  fast  in  the  mud.  The  lawyers  commented  on  the  poor  creature's 
pitiful  condition  and  drove  on.  About  half  a  mile  was  laboriously  gone  over,  when 
Lincoln  suddenly  exclaimed,  "  I  don't  know  how  you  feel  about  it,  but  I've  got  to 
go  back  and  pull  that  pig  out  of  the  slough."  His  comrade  iau.^hed,  thinking  it 
merely  a  joke  ;  but  what  was  his  surprise  when  Lincoln  dismounted,  left  him  to  his 
reflections,  and  striding  slowly  back,  like  a  man  on  stilts  picking  his  way  as  his 
long  walking  implements  permitted,  he  grappled  with  the  drowning  swine,  dragged 
him  out  of  the  ditch,  left  him  on  its  edge  to  recover  his  strength,  slowly  measured 
off  the  distance  back  to  his  waggon,  and  the  two  men  drove  on  as  if  nothing  had 
happened.  The  grand  and  brotherly  nature  which  could  not  consent  to  see  the 
lowest  of  animals  suffer  without  coming  to  its  rescue  at  great  personal  discomfort 
was  nurtured  by  years  of  self-abnegation  for  the  great  struggle,  when  he  should  be 
strong  enough  to  "  put  a  shoulder  to  the  wheel,"  that  should  lift  tbe  chariot  of 
State  out  of  the  mire  and  set  a  subject  race  upon  its  feet.     {Frances  E.  Willard.) 

Vers.  6-8.  Thou  shalt  not  wrest  the  Judgment. — Duties  of  judges : — I.  That 
judges  should  be  impartial.  1.  In  particular  towards  the  poor  (ver.  6).  (1) 
Because  the  poor  are  most  open  to  the  oppression  of  the  powerful.  (2)  Because 
the  poor  are  often  at  a  disadvantage  for  the  want  of  technical  knowledge  or  means 
to  procure  legal  assistance.  (3)  Because  the  poor  are  easily  overawed.  2.  In 
general  towards  the  right  (ver  7,  first  clause).  Not  to  aid  or  abet  a  wrong  cause. 
II.  That  judges  should  be  cautious,  particularly  with  regard  to  matters  relating  to 
capital  punishment.  "  The  innocent  and  righteous  slay  thou  not."  1.  The  case 
must  be  clearly  proved.  2.  The  accused  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.  3. 
Because  justice  would  be  done.  If  the  criminal  escaped  an  earthly  doom,  God 
would  "  not  justify  the  wicked "  (Prov.  xi.  21).  III.  That  judges  should  be 
incorrupt  (ver.  8),  either  in  the  shape  of  direct  bribe  or  indirect  present.  1. 
Because  the  bribe  may  blind  him  to  the  true  merit  of  the  case  ;  and — 2,  Because 
the  bribe  may  weigh  down  and  pervert  his  judgment  on  the  wrong  side.  IV.  That 
judges  should  be  considerate  (ver.  9),  particularly  in  regard  to  foreigners.  Because 
1.  They  had  been  foreigners  themselves,  and  had  suffered  for  the  want  of  con- 
sideration. 2.  They  therefore  knew  something  of  the  sufferings  of  foreigners.  (1) 
Foreigners  may  be  ignorant  of  the  law  and  unwittingly  break  it.  (2)  When  broken, 
they  may  know  nothing  of  legal  technicalities,  or  be  unable  to  pay  legal  expenses. 


CHIP.  XXIII.]  EXODUS.  437 

(J.  W.  Biirn.)  The  administration  of  jngtice: — There  was  a  close  connection 
between  the  civil  and  the  military  constitution  of  the  Hebrews.  The  same  men 
who  were  captains  of  thousands  and  captains  of  hundreds  in  war  were  magistrates 
in  time  of  peace.  In  every  Oriental  state  the  point  of  greatest  weakness  is  the 
administration  of  justice.  Those  who  have  lived  long  in  the  East  testify  that  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  justice;  thut  no  cadi,  sitting  in  the  ^ilace  of  judjjment,  ever 
pretends  to  such  exceptional  virtue  as  to  be  above  receiving  bribes.  The  utmost 
that  can  be  expected  is  the  hypocrisy  which  is  the  homage  of  vice  to  virtue;  and 
even  this  is  seldom  rendered,  for  where  bribery  is  universal  no  one  is  constrained 
by  shame  to  conceal  it.  Against  this  terrible  demoralization  no  rock  can  stand 
but  that  of  the  Divine  authority.  In  the  administration  of  justice  a  theocracy  is 
an  ideal  government,  for  it  is  Divinity  enthroned  on  earth  as  in  heaven  ;  and  no 
other  form  of  government  enforces  justice  in  a  manner  so  absolute  and  peremptory. 
In  the  eyes  of  the  Hebrew  lawgiver,  the  civil  tribunal  was  as  sacred  as  the  Holy  of 
Holies.  The  office  of  the  judge  was  as  truly  authorized  and  his  duty  as  solemnly 
enjoined  as  that  of  the  priest.  "  The  judgment  is  God's,"  said  Moses;  and  he  who 
gave  a  false  judgment  disregarded  the  authority  of  Him  whose  nature  is  justice  and 
truth.  Tbe  judgment-seat  was  a  holy  place,  which  no  private  malice  might  pro- 
fane. Evidence  was  received  with  religious  care.  Oaths  were  administered  to  give 
solemnity  to  the  testimony  (Lev.  v.  1).  Then  the  judge,  standing  in  the  place  of 
God,  was  to  pronounce  equitably,  whatever  might  be  the  rank  of  the  contending 
parties  (Deut.  i.  17).  He  recognized  no  distinctions  ;  al!  were  alike  to  him.  The 
judge  was  to  know  no  difference.  He  was  not  to  be  biased  even  by  sympathy  for 
the  poor  (chap,  xxiii.  3  ;  Lev.  xix.  15).  Magistrates  were  not  allowed  to  aicept  a 
gift,  for  fear  of  bribery.  (II.  M.  Field,  D.D.)  Bribery  resisted : — Persuaded 
tbat  Marvell  would  be  theirs  (the  Administration's)  for  properly  asking,  they  sent 
his  old  schoolfellow,  the  Lord  Treasurer  Danby,  to  renew  acquaintance  with  him  in 
his  garret.  At  parting,  the  Lord  Treasurer,  out  of  pure  affection,  slipped  into  his 
hand  an  order  upon  the  Treasury  for  £1,000,  and  then  went  to  his  chariot. 
Marvell,  looking  at  the  paper,  called  after  the  Treasurer,  "  My  lord,  I  request 
another  momtnt."  They  went  up  again  to  the  garret,  and  Jack,  the  servant-boy, 
was  called.  "Jack,  child,  what  had  I  for  dinner  yesterday?"  "Don't  you 
remember,  sir?  You  had  the  Utile  shoulder  of  mutton  that  y)u  ordered  me  to 
bring  from  the  woman  in  the  market."  "Very  right,  child.  What  have  I  for 
dinner  to-day  ?  "  "  Don't  you  know,  sir,  that  you  bade  me  lay  by  the  blade-bone 
to  broil?"  " 'Tis  so;  very  right,  child;  go  away.  My  lord,  do  you  hear  that? 
Andrew  Marvell's  dinner  is  provided.  There's  your  pie3e  of  paper — I  want  it  not. 
I  know  the  sort  of  kindness  you  intended.  I  live  here  to  serve  my  constituents. 
The  Ministry  may  seek  men  for  their  purpose.  I  am  not  one."  (Coleridge.) 
Bribes  declined : — "  Why,"  at-ked  one  of  the  English  Tories  of  the  Tory  Governor 
of  Massachusetts— "  why  hath  not  Mr.  Adams  been  taken  off  from  his  opposition 
by  an  office?"  To  which  the  Governor  replied,  "Such  is  the  obstinacy  and 
inflexible  disposition  of  the  man,  that  he  never  would  be  conciliated  by  any  office 
whatever."  His  daughter  used  to  say  that  her  father  refused  a  pension  from  the 
British  Government  of  £2,000  a  year.  Once,  when  a  secret  messenger  frum  General 
Gage  threatened  him  with  a  trial  for  treason  if  he  persisted  in  his  opposition  to  the 
Government  and  promised  him  honours  and  wealth  if  he  would  desist,  Adams  rose 
to  his  feet  and  replied,  "  Sir,  I  trust  I  have  long  since  made  my  peace  with  the 
King  of  kings.  No  personal  consideration  shall  induce  me  to  i-b  indon  the  righteous 
cause  of  my  country."  A  judge  to  refuse  bribes  : — I  dare  say  many  of  you  may 
have  heard  of  the  celebrated  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  that  he  was  in  the  habit  of  receiving 
a  present  from  a  person  annually;  and  it  happened  once,  that  about  the  usual  time 
when  this  friend  made  him  the  present,  that  he  was  accused  of  some  offence,  and 
was  to  appear  as  an  accused  person  before  Sir  Matthew  Hale.  On  this  occasion  Sir 
Matthew  Hale  returned  him  the  present,  lest  it  should  afford  even  the  shadow  of  a 
suspicion  that  the  purity  of  judicial  imparliality  should  be  disturbed,  or  seem  to  be 
disturbed,  by  a  gift  from  one  who  was  to  appear  before  the  court  accused  of  an 
offence,  and  demanding  a  fair  trial.  And  I  believe  still  it  would  be  thought  the 
most  scandalous  outrage  upon  our  constitution,  and  every  judge  would  repudiate  it 
with  scorn  and  disdain,  were  any  one,  expecting  to  have  his  cause  tried  by  that 
judge,  to  attempt,  to  propitiate  his  favour  by  gifts.  Now,  this  beautiful  rule — so 
just,  so  reasonable,  so  proper — was  anticipated  and  was  known,  you  observe,  three 
thousand  years  ago,  and  was  first  revealed  by  Him  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all 
wisdom   and   instice.     (J.    Cumming,  D.D.)         Bribery  resisted : — A   speculator 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [chap.  xxm. 

heard  that  an  amalgamation  between  two  joint-stock  companies  was  projected, 
which  would  afford  an  opportunity  to  make  a  large  sum  of  money  by  prompt  pur- 
chases of  shares.  He  was  acquainted  with  an  official  holding  a  subordinate  and 
poorly  paid  position  in  one  of  the  companies,  and  went  to  him  to  obtain  reliable 
information.  But  the  official  was  a  Christian  and  a  man  of  honour,  and  knowing 
the  information  would  operate  to  the  disadvantage  of  his  employers,  refused  to  say 
whether  the  amalgamation  was  contemplated  or  not.  "  I  can  make  £00,000  by  my 
speculation  if  you  will  tell  me,"  said  the  tempter,  "  and  I  will  give  you  half."  "  I 
cannot  betray  my  trust,"  was  the  reply.  "  You  need  not  speak,"  said  the 
speculator ;  "  just  wink  your  eye  and  I  shall  know,  and  you  shall  have  £30,000." 
The  temptation  was  fierce,  but  the  Christian  conquered  it.  A  few  cays  afterwards, 
when  the  amalgamation  was  completed,  the  speculator  reproached  his  acquaintance  . 
for  not  giving  the  information,  but  he  was  told  that  an  approving  conscience  was 
above  price.  It  is  satisfactory  to  learn  that  the  faithful  official  prospered  in  his 
subsequent  career,  and  is  now  receiving  a  salary  of  £5,000  a  year. 

Yer.  9.  Thou  shalt  not  oppress  a  stranger,  for  ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger. 

The  Ionic  of  law  : — The  argument  is  that  our  conduct  is  to  spring  out  of  our 
experience ;  we  are  to  go  back  upon  our  own  history  and  consciousness  for  the  law 
that  shall  guide  us  in  the  treatment  of  our  fellow-men.  Wliy,  ctiuld  we  do  so,  no 
more  should  we  hear  the  rasping  voice  of  rancour,  hostile  criticism,  mean  remark, 
or  severe  demand.  1.  Thou  shalt  not  oppress  the  struggling  man,  for  thou  thyself 
hast  had  thy  struggle.  Do  not  be  hard  upon  those  who  are  going  up-hill.  2.  Thou 
shall  not  oppress  a  doubting  man,  for  thou  thyself  hast  had  thy  doubts,  if  thou  art 
more  than  half  a  man.  3.  The  text  has  a  meaning  in  reference  to  ourselves,  as 
well  as  to  others.  Thou  shalt  not  renew  old  fears,  for  all  thy  fears  have  been  round, 
black,  blatant  liars.  Six  fears  have  been  with  you,  have  lied  to  you,  have  made 
you  play  the  fool  in  all  the  higher  relations  and  issues  of  life,  and  yet  I  detect  you 
this  morning  talking  in  the  corner  to  a  member  of  the  same  false  family  !  Why 
do  you  not  throw  it  fiom  you,  or  order  it  behind  you,  or  mock  it  with  the  jibing  of 

perfect  rest  in  God  1    4.  "Thou  shalt  not ,  because ."     That  is  the  logic 

of  the  text.  Now,  what  must  He  be  who  gave  such  laws?  In  the  character  of  the 
laws,  find  the  character  of  the  legislator.  God  must  be  tender ;  He  takes  care  of 
strangers.  Not  only  so ;  He  must  be  aware  of  human  history  in  all  its  changes 
and  processes.  He  knows  about  the  strangers  who  were  in  the  land  of  Egypt ;  He 
knows  about  their  deliverance  ;  He  knows  that  strangers  are  a  tribe  that  must  be 
on  the  earth  from  age  to  age  ;  He  knows  us  altogether.  He  speaks  a  word  for  the 
stranger.  Oh,  man,  friendless,  lonely  man,  you  should  love  God.  Oh,  woman, 
mother,  sister,  sinning  woman,  you  should  love  Christ.  Oh,  little  children,  frail 
flowers  that  may  wither  in  a  moment,  you  should  put  out  your  little  hands,  if  in 
but  dumb  prayer,  and  long  to  touch  the  Son  of  God.  Oh,  working  man,  led  away 
by  the  demagogue,  made  to  scoff  where  you  ought  to  pray,  the  Bible  has  done  more 
for  you  than  any  other  book  ever  attempted  to  do ;  this  is  a  human  book,  a  book 
for  the  nursery,  the  family,  the  market-place,  the  parliament,  the  universe  1  {J. 
Parker, D.D.)  Kindly  qualities  developed  by  adversity  : — I  suppose  it  is  adversity 
that  develops  the  kindly  qualities  of  our  nature.  I  believe  the  sense  of  common 
degradation  has  a  tendency  to  make  the  degraded  amiable — at  least  among  them- 
selves. I  am  told  it  is  found  so  in  the  plantations  in  slave-gangs.  {Lord  Beacoju- 
field.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  The  seventh  year  thou  shalt  let  It  rest. — Tlie  Sabbatic  year : — 
This  law  was  intended — 1.  To  show  the  fertility  of  the  land  of  promise.  Every 
seventh  year,  without  skill  or  toil,  the  land  would  produce  of  itself  sufficient  for  the 
poor  and  the  beasts  of  the  field.  2.  To  encourage  habits  of  thrift  and  forethought, 
so  that  they  might  provide  for  the  year  of  rest.  3.  To  test  (1)  their  faith  in  the 
providence,  and  (2)  their  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God.  The  subject  suggests — I. 
That  pekiods  mat  akeive  by  the  oedek  ob  pebmission  of  God  when  woek  must  be 
LAID  ASIDE.  Commercial  depression,  sickness,  old  age.  II.  That  the  peospect  of 
SUCH  PEEioDS  should  LEAD  US  TO  PEoviDE  FOB  THEM.  We  are  Hot  like  "  fowls  of  the 
air,"  or  "grass  of  the  field,"  which  have  to  be  literally  fed  and  clothed  by  the 
providence  of  God,  and  are  utterly  unable  to  forecast  and  provide  for  contingencies. 
III.  That  the  peospect  of  such  peeiods  should  teach  us  besionation  to  the  will 
OF  God  and  faith  in  His  goodness  (Matt.  vi.  25-34J.    1.  There  remaineth  "  a  rest" 


CHAP,  xxni.]  EXODUS.  ii§ 

for  the  people  of  God.  2.  Prepare  for  that  rest  by  faith  and  obedience.  (<7.  W, 
Burn.) 

Ver.  12.  On  the  se^venth  day  thou  shalt  rest. — Labour  and  rest : — I.  That  rest  is 
NEEDFCL — "May  be  refreshed."  1.  Rest  is  needful  that  the  exhausted  faculties 
may  repose  after  past  work.  2.  Eest  is  needful  that  those  faculties  may  be 
invigoi'ated  for  future  service.  3.  Rest  is  needful  that  work  may  not  become 
irksome;  for  if  so  (1)  it  will  be  done  slovenly;  and  (2)  done  imperfectly.  4.  Rest 
is  needful  that  work  may  be  free  and  joyous.  II.  That  rest  is  mercifcllt  peo- 
viTJED.     1.  This  rest  is  provided  by  God,  lest  man  should  overlook  its  necessity. 

2.  This  rest  is  provided  by  God  lest  the  servant,  the  foreigner,  or  the  beast  should 
be  defrauded  of  their  right  to  it.  III.  That  rest  should  be  diligently  earned. 
"  Six  days  shalt  thou  do  thy  work."     1.  Not  lounge  over  it ;  2.  Not  neglect  it ;  but 

3.  Do  it  earnestly,  conscientiously,  and  well.  Application:  1.  A  lesson  to  employers. 
God  has  provided  this  rest ;  beware  how  you  steal  what  God  has  given  to  man.  2. 
A  lesson  to  working-men.  This  rest  is  yours  by  right.  Then  (1)  claim  it ;  (2)  don't 
abuse  it ;  (3)  don't  curtail  that  of  others ;  (4)  work  during  your  own  time,  rest 
during  God's.  3.  A  lesson  to  the  world  at  large.  Sabbath-breaking  is  the  direct 
cause  of  (1)  intellectual  evils ;  overtaxed  brains,  &c. ;  (2)  moral  evils ;  nep;lect  of 
the  rights  of  God  and  man  ;  (3)  physical  evils.  Science  has  demonstrated  the  need 
of  one  day's  rest  in  seven.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Need  of  rest :  —  We  know  well  enough 
that  if  trains  are  run  at  fifty  miles  an  hour  over  roads  built  to  endure  only  a  speed  of 
thirty  miles  an  hour,  everything  in  a  short  time  begins  to  give  way,  and  to  wear 
out,  and  the  whole  road  and  all  the  rolling  stock  gets  into  a  dangerous  condition. 
Every  rail,  every  tie,  every  joint,  every  nail,  every  wheel  and  bit  of  machinery  feels 
the  strain  and  wear.  The  human  mechanism  is  not  less  sensitive  than  are  railroads 
and  locomotives.  The  tendency  of  the  time  is  to  increase  the  speed  of  individual 
movement  and  progress.  The  over-driven  human  being  needs  constant  rest  and 
repairs,  as  do  railroads  and  locomotives,  and  a  thousand-fold  more,  for  his  mechanism 
is  infinitely  more  complicated  and  delicate.  Instead  of  adding  more  fuel  to  a  dis- 
ordered engine  to  make  it  go,  we  would  send  it  to  the  repair  shop,  and  let  it  be 
restored  by  skilled  workmen  to  soundness.  So  when  the  mind  and  body  are  worn 
and  weary,  send  them  to  the  repair  shop  for  rest.  Sleep,  quiet,  nutritious  food,  the 
absence  of  all  stimulants  and  whips,  and  goads — these  skilled  positive  and  negative 
workmen  of  nature  will  restore  (if  anything  can)  the  wasted  vitality,  and  bring  back 
health  and  strength  and  soundness.     (Christian  Advocate.) 

Ver.  13.  Be  circmnspect. — Circurmpection: — I.  In  genebal.  "In  all  things." 
Moses  is  drawing  to  the  close  of  these  precepts,  and  looking  back  upon  them,  he 
says — "  Be  circumspect."  The  original  suggests — 1.  That  we  should  be  fully 
awake  to  the  importance  of  the  Divine  commands.  (1)  Give  them  intelligent  and 
reverent  examination.  (2)  Store  them  up  in  the  memory.  (3)  Study  them  in  their 
beneficent  operation.  2.  That  we  should  be  on  our  guard  against  temptations  to 
break  the  Divine  commands.  Temptations  are  (1)  sudden ;  (2)  insidious ;  (3) 
deceiving.  3.  That  we  should  be  careful  "  to  remember  His  commandments  to  do 
them."  (1)  There  is  a  danger  lest  an  exaggerated  estimate  of  human  weakness 
should  lead  to  despair  on  the  one  hand,  and  recklessness  on  the  other.  (2)  God 
would  not  command  the  impossible.  (3)  There  is  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need." 
II.  In  particulab,  "  make  no  mention,"  &c.  Because — 1.  That  would  be 
uncircumspect  in  the  first  and  greatest  commandment.  2.  That  would  be  to  forfeit 
the  help  promised  to  the  circumspect.  3.  That  would  be  to  yield  to  a  tendency  i;o 
be  uncircumspect  in  everything.  Christians — 1.  "  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into 
temptation."  2.  Live  so  as  "  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  your  Saviour  in  all  things." 
(J.  W.  Burn.)  Circumspection  needed : — The  mysteriouo  perturbation  of  a  ship's 
compass  is  reported  in  a  scientific  journal.  It  appears  that  the  compass  of  the  ship 
Penguin,  recently  anchored  off  Australia,  was  deflected  fifty-five  degrees,  and  had  a 
dip  of  eighty-three  degrees.  After  the  ship  left  the  anchorage  and  proceeded  on 
her  voyage  the  disturbance  ceased.  At  two  miles  from  the  point  the  variation  was 
quite  normal.  The  captain  spent  a  day  in  investigating  the  phenomenon.  He 
passed  two  or  three  times  over  the  point  where  he  had  anchored,  and  found  that 
whenever  the  ship  crossed  it,  the  compass  was  disturbed  as  before,  and  recovered 
when  at  a  distance  of  two  miles  in  any  direction.  This  satisfied  him  that  the 
•centre  of  the,  submarine  disturbance  was  limited  to  a  circle  of  less  than  two  miles 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiir. 

magnetic  minerals  at  the  sea  bottom.  The  joarnal  repoi-ting  his  observation  says : 
"  Great  as  is  the  gain  to  the  navigator  to  be  thus  warned  of  a  formidable  danger  in 
certain  places,  it  lays  upon  him  the  imperative  duty  of  being  always  on  his  guard 
against  such  sources  of  disaster  elsewhere,  and  of  promptly  i-eporting  any  new 
magnetic  disturbance,  as  he  would  a  rock  or  shoal."  Similar  vigilance  is  necessary 
on  the  part  of  every  voyager  through  life. 

Ver.  16.  The  feast  of  harvest. — The  feast  of  harvest : — I.  The  instruction  it 
COMMUNICATES.  1.  It  exhibits  the  wonderful  power  of  God.  2.  We  have  an  establish- 
ment of  the  faithfulness  and  truth  of  God.  3.  We  have  a  manifestation  of  the 
goodness  and  bounty  of  God.  4.  It  displays  the  mercy  and  forbearance  of  God. 
6.  It  shows  us  the  connection  between  means  and  the  end.  II.  What  feelings  ix 
SHOULD  PRODUCE.  It  should  produco  feelings — 1.  Of  deep  humiliation.  2.  Of 
heartfelt  gratitude.  3.  Our  constant  dependence  upon  God.  4.  A  constant  desire 
to  please  Him.     III.  What  practical  influence  the  subject  should  exert  upon  us. 

1.  To  labour  for  the  provision  suited  to  our  soul?.  2.  To  do  good  in  our  respective 
spheres  and  stations  in  life.  3.  Prepare  for  the  final  harvest.  Application  :  1.  Let 
us  gratefully  enjoy  the  bounties  of  Providence.  Many  are  abusing,  many  forgetting, 
&c.  2.  Let  us  be  especially  anxious  about  the  blessings  of  eternal  life.  3.  Let  us 
always  act  in  reference  to  the  final  harvest  of  the  world.  (-7.  Burns,  D.D.)  Pil- 
grimage feasts  : — I.  Keligious  feasts  are  memorials.     1.  Of  God's  past  dealings. 

2.  Of  our  dependence  on  God's  care.  3.  Of  our  present  condition.  Pilgrims. 
This  earth  is  not  our  rest.     II.  Eeligious  feasts  are  not  to  interfere  with  the 

DUTIES  OF  life.       III.    STATED  RELIGIOUS   FEASTS  ARE  HELPFUL   TO   A  RELIGIOUS  SPIRIT. 

IV.  Religious  feasts  must  promote  the  soci.al  and  benevolent  instincts  of  oub 
NATURE.  V.  The  offerings  at  religious  feasts  must  be — 1.  Pure.  2.  Of  the 
best.  (W.  Burrou's,  B.A.)  The  feast  of  harvest  : — This  was  their  Pentecost ;  so 
called  from  a  Greek  word  signifying  "fifty" — because  it  occuned  on  the  fiftieth  day 
from  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread.  It  was,  properly,  a  harvest  festival,  in  which 
the  Jew  offered  thanksgiving  unto  God  for  the  ripened  fruits  of  the  earth.  To 
understand  the  peculiar  interest  the  Jew  took  in  this  holiday,  you  must  remember 
that  the  Israelites,  after  their  establishment  in  Canaan,  were  almost  entirely  a 
nation  of  farmers.  The  peasant  and  the  noble,  in  their  respective  spheres,  were 
alike  husbandmen.  And  the  whole  land  of  Israel  was  in  the  highest  state  of 
cultivation.  Now,  to  such  a  people,  inhabiting  such  a  country,  the  feast  of  harvest 
was  necessarily  a  grand  festival.  1.  We,  too,  want  great  national  and  religious 
hoUdays,  to  keep  in  mind  great  national  providences.  2.  We  need  them,  moreover, 
as  verily  as  the  Jews,  for  their  conservative  political  influence — to  counteract  the 
sectional  and  unsocial  tendencies  of  our  great  tribal  divisions.  If  we  could  come 
up  nationally  to  such  Pentecosts,  then  no  living  man  would  ever  again  dare  breathe 
of  discord  and  disunion — for  chords,  tender  as  our  loves  and  stronger  than  our  lives 
woven  of  religion  and  holy  with  old  memories,  as  the  memorial  festivals  uniting 
Judah  and  Ephraim,  would  bind  us  together  and  bind  us  to  God  !  3.  Meanwhile 
we  need  such  pentecostal  holidays  for  those  personal  advantages  which  they 
brought  to  the  Hebrews.  They  furnish  that  harmless  relaxation  so  constitutionally 
necessary  to  our  highest  well-being.  Eeal  pleasure,  as  well  physical  as  moral,  is 
always  the  true  law  of  life.  True  virtue  is  genial  and  joyous,  walking  earth  in 
bright  raiment,  and  with  bounding  footsteps.  And  the  nervous,  restless, 
unreposing,  devouring  intensity  of  purpose  wherewith  our  men  follow  their 
business,  is  as  disastrous  to  the  nobler  moral  bloom  and  aroma  of  the  heart, 
as  a  roaring  hurricane  to  a  garden  of  roses.  Above  all,  our  religious  nature  needs 
them.  The  true  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  Christian's  strength.  Cheei-fulness  is  a 
very  element  of  godliness.  4.  This  is  our  Pentecost — our  feast  of  harvest.  And 
even  in  its  lowest  aspect,  as  a  grateful  acknowledgment  of  God's  goodness,  in 
preserving  for  our  use  the  kindly  fruits  of  the  earth,  it  is  a  fitting  occasion  of 
thankfulness.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  over-estimate  the  importance  of  agriculture. 
It  surpasses  commerce  and  manufacture,  as  a  cause  is  superior  to  its  effects — as  an 
inner  life  is  of  more  moment  than  its  various  outward  functions.  Meanwhile,  the 
reflex  influences  of  industrial  agriculture  on  our  physical  and  social  well-being  are 
as  well  incalculable.  After  all,  the  finest  products  of  our  farm-lands  are  found  in 
our  farm-houses.  Things  better  than  corn  and  cabbages  are  grown  on  plough- 
ground — bone,  muscle,  sinew,  nerve,  brain,  heart ;  these  all  thrive  and  strengthen 
by  agriculture.  The  specimens  of  strong,  hale,  common-sense  manhood  seen  at 
our  annual  fairs  are  a  finer  show  than  all  the  fat  cattle  and  sheep,  and  noble  horses. 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  EXODUS.  441 

and  the  brave  array  of  farm-fruits  and  implements.  Agriculture  purifies  morals, 
chastens  taste,  deepens  the  religious  element,  develops  the  individual  man.  5.  Our 
thanksgiving  is  partly  in  view  of  the  ripened  fruits  of  the  earth  ;  but  mainly  in  view 
of  other  and  higher  blessings.  And  in  this  regard  as  well,  it  is  properly — a  feast  of 
harvest.  In  respect  of  all  things— not  merely  the  natural  fruits  of  the  earth,  but 
all  great  human  interests,  political,  intellectual,  religious — we  may  be  said  to  live 
in  the  world's  great  harvest  time.  We  have  reaped,  and  are  reaping,  the  ripened 
and  ripening  fiuits  of  all  earth's  past  generations.  Consider  this  a  little.  (1)  First: 
This  is  true — politically.  Philosophically  considered,  the  grand  end  and  aim  of  all 
civil  progress  is  human  freedom — the  highest  development  and  culture  of  the 
individual  and  free  manhood.  Monarchy  the  one-man-power,  oligarchy  the  few- 
men-power,  are  but  the  successive  stages  of  the  growing  life,  up  to  the  ripened 
product  of  the  true  democracy — the  all-men-power.  To  tuis  end  hath  tendered  all 
political  progress ;  and  beyond  this  there  is  no  progi'ess.  This  is  the  harvest  of 
earth's  long  political  husbandry,  and  we  are  reaping  it.  (2)  Then  passing  from  the 
political,  the  same  thought  is  true  in  regard  of  the  intellectual.  It  is  a  thought  well 
worthy  our  pondering,  on  an  occasion  like  this — that  we  live  in  the  harvest-time  of 
mind  and  thought !  Carefully  considered,  the  development  of  the  "  mental "  follows 
the  law  of  material  development.  "First,  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the 
full  corn  in  the  ear."  Genius  is  first  poetical,  then  practical.  First,  the  flaunting 
blossom  ;  then  the  substantial  fruit.  From  the  beginning,  man's  law  of  intellectual 
progress  has  been  from  the  abstract  to  the  practical — from  ideas  to  facts.  The 
practical,  being  the  fruit  of  the  imaginative,  as  the  ripened  corn  is  the  fruit  of  the 
plant's  inner  life.  In  past  generations,  intellect  has  been  busy  in  a  rudimental 
husbandry — felling  the  great  forests ;  draining  the  low  marshes ;  subduing  the 
rugged  soil ;  scattering  the  seed  ;  and  watching  and  waiting  for  the  increase.  The 
old  philosophy ;  the  old  civilization  ;  the  old  polities,  civU  and  ecclesiastical ;  the 
old  chivalry ;  the  old  poetrj' — these  were  the  thought-germs,  the  thought-leaves,  the 
thought-blossoms,  which  have  ripened,  and  are  ripening  around  us  into  God's 
glorious  fruit !  We  live  in  earth's  prodigal  and  luxuriant  autumn — in  times  when 
marvellous  things  are  the  rule,  and  mean  things  the  exception — in  an  economy 
of  prodigies,  each  one  a  seemingmiracle  to  men'"  "arlier  comprehension,  and  yet  all, 
only  the  ripened  development  of  their  own  thought-germs.  And  if  the  law  of  all 
husbandry  be  "to  sow  in  tears  and  reap  in  joy,"  then  our  thanksgiving,  that  we  live 
in  these  eventful  times,  should  be  unto  God,  this  day,  a  great  feast  of  harvest !  (3) 
Passing  this,  we  observe  once  more,  and  finally.  That  this  same  law  of  develop- 
ment we  have  been  tracing  through  the  political  and  intellectual,  will  be  found  to 
rule  in  the  spiritual — and  in  this  regard  should  we  mainly  rejoice  that  we  live  in 
Life's  harvest-time.  6.  In  respects,  then,  like  these,  political,  intellectual,  religious, 
we  live  in  times  of  unexampled  blessedness.  We  have  come  up  to  Zion  from  hills 
purple  with  vintage,  and  valleys  golden  with  corn,  in  the  rapturous  harvest-home 
of  the  mortal !  And  it  becomes  us  to  keep  festival  before  God  as  the  old  Jew  kept 
his  Pentecost.  As  men,  as  patriots,  as  philanthropists,  as  Christians,  our  cup  of 
joy  mantles  brightly.  What  more  could  God  have  done  for  us  that  He  hath  not 
done?  What  people  can  be  happy  before  God,  if  we  are  not  happy?  Living  here, 
in  this  nineteenth  century,  free  men — free  Christians — we  seem  to  stand  on  the 
very  mount  of  God,  flung  up  in  the  waste  of  ages,  for  the  enthronement  of  His 
great  man-child  !  We  look  backward,  and  lo  I  all  the  past  has  been  working 
together  for  our  national  and  individual  beatitude.  Patriarchs,  prophets,  bards, 
sages,  mighty  men,  conquerors,  have  all  been  our  servants.  Generation  after 
generation,  that  have  lived  and  died — great  empires,  that  have  risen  and  flourished, 
and  trod  imperial  paths,  and  passed  away  for  ever — seem  to  rise  from  their  old 
death-dust,  and  march  in  vision  before  us,  laying  down  all  their  accumulated 
thoughts,  and  arts,  and  honours — all  the  trophies  of  their  mighty  triumphs,  in 
homage,  at  our  feet  !  We  look  forward,  and  the  eye  is  dazzled  with  the  vision  of 
the  glory  about  to  be  accorded  to  God's  kingly  creature,  man !  when  standing  upon 
this  redeemed  world,  he  shall  assert  his  birthright — a  child  of  God  here  !  an  heir  of 
God  for  ever !  Verily,  we  have  cause  for  thanksgiving.  "  The  Lord  hath  done 
great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad."  Let  us  give,  then,  free  course  to  our 
grateful  emotions  !  Thankful  for  the  present,  trustful  for  the  future,  let  us  rejoice 
before  God  "  with  the  joy  of  harvest."    (C.  Wadsworth.) 

Ver.  19.  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid. — Cherish  the  finer  instincts : — The  pro- 
hibition  suggests  the  duty  of  cherishing  the  finer  instincts  of  our  nature.    The  aot 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

here  forbidden  could  hardly  be  called  cruelty,  the  kid  being  dead,  but  it  was 
unnatural.  It  is  beautiful  to  see  the  ancient  Law  inculcating  this  rare  and  delicate 
fineness  of  feeling.  The  lesson  is  that  everything  is  to  be  avoided  which  would  tend 
to  blunt  our  moral  sensibilities.     {J.  Orr.) 

Ver.  20.  To  bring  thee  into  the  place  which  I  have  prepared. — Life's  pil- 
grimage : — The  angel,  the  way,  the  prepared  place.  It  is  the  Divine  key  to  the 
mystery  of  life.  Life  is  emphatically  away.  Not  by  the  way  of  the  sea — a  prompt 
and  easy  path— but  by  the  way  of  the  wilderness,  of  old  God  led  His  pilgrims. 
The  vision  of  the  angel  in  the  way  lights  up  the  wilderness.  Consider  the  sugges- 
tion of  the  text  as  to — I.  The  pilgrim's  condition.  God's  children  must  be  pilgrims, 
because  this  world  is  not  good  enough,  not  bright  enough,  not  capable  of  being 
blessed  enough,  for  the  pilgrim  in  his  home.  For — 1.  The  instructed  soul  sees  the 
touch  of  essential  imperfection  and  the  bounds  of  close  limitation  in  everything 
here.  2.  There  is  a  constant  aching  of  the  heart  through  memoiy  and  hope.  3. 
Life  is  a  pilgrimage  because  it  is  far  away  from  the  Friend  whom  we  supremely  love. 
II.  The  pilgrim's  Guide.  1.  God  has  sent  His  angel  before  us  in  t)ie  pfrson  of 
His  Son.  2.  He  sends  His  angel  with  us  in  the  person  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  III. 
The  pilgrim's  way  to  the  pilgrim's  home.  1.  It  is  a  way  of  purpcsed  toil  and 
difficulty,  of  wilderness,  peril,  and  night.  Suffer  we  must  in  the  wilderness  ;  the 
one  question  is,  Shall  it  be  with  or  without  the  angel  of  the  Lord  ?  2.  It  is  a  way 
of  stern,  uncompromising  duty.  God  asks  us  now  simply  to  do  and  to  bear,  and  to 
wait  to  see  the  whole  reason  and  reap  the  whole  fruit  on  high.  We  must  train 
ourselves  to  the  habit  of  righteous  action,  and  leave  the  results  to  God  and  eternity. 
3.  It  is  a  way  of  death.  God  promises  to  none  of  us  an  immunity  from  death. 
The  shadow  hangs  round  life  as  a  drear  monitor  to  all  of  us.  He  only  who  can  e\e 
it  steadily  and  fix  its  form  will  see  that  it  is  angelic  and  lustrous  with  the  glory 
beyond.  The  grave  is  but  the  last  step  of  the  way  by  which  the  angel  leads  us  to 
the  place  which  He  has  prepared.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Divine  guidance  : — I. 
There  is  a  Divine  way.  1.  Through  the  wilderness.  2.  Beset  with  enemies.  3. 
Many  privations.  4.  Contr^'-y  to  mere  human  liking.  God's  way  is  not  out  way  ! 
Ours  may  be  pleasant  at  firt.  but  bitter  at  last,  but  God's  way  is  the  reverse  ;  and 
yet  not  exactly,  for  swee;?  are  graciously  mingled  with  the  bitters.  There  is 
hunger,  but  there  is  manna  There  is  thirst,  but  there  is  clear  water  from  the 
smitten  rock.  There  is  per  ilexity,  but  there  is  an  angel  to  guide  and  protect.  II. 
This  way  leads  to  Divinel".  -prepared  places.  Heaven  is  a  specially  prepared  place. 
"  I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you."  A  place  in  the  best  of  all  places.  A  home  in 
the  best  of  homes.  A  dwelling-place  where  all  the  abodes  are  mansions.  A  seat 
where  all  the  seats  are  th'ones.  A  city  where  all  the  citizens  are  kings.  What 
matters  it  though  the  way  b.-  long  and  sometimes  dreary,  so  long  as  the  place  is  so 
attractive  ;  and  we  canno*  fail  to  reach  it  if  we  obey  Divine  directions.     III.  The 

TRAVELLERS    ON    THIS   WAY    ARE    FAVOURED    WITH    A    DiVINE    GUIDE.      JcSUS    Christ,  the 

Angel  of  the  new  covenant,  is  fnlly  competent  to  direct  and  protect.  He  has 
trodden  every  inch  of  the  way.  IV.  Divine  promises  are  contingent  on  the  faith- 
ful PURSUIT  or  Divine  methods  (ver.  21).  The  Divine  methods  are— Caution, 
obedience,  self-restraint,  and  the  entire  destruction  of  all  that  has  the  remotest 
tendency  to  damage  the  moral  nature.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  The  angel  of  the 
covenant : — I.  His  nature  was  Divine.  1.  Equal  with  God.  (1)  Bearing  the 
Divine  name;  "My  name  is  in  Him."  The  incommunicable  covenant  name  of 
Jehovah.  (2)  Performing  Divine  actions ;  "  Mine  angel  shall  go,"  &c.,  "  I  will 
cut  them  off."  So  New  Testament,  "  I  and  My  father  are  one."  2.  Distinct  from 
the  personality  of  the  speaker,  "  I  send,"  so  New  Testament,  "  The  Father  which 
sent  Me."  II.  His  office  was  to  conduct  the  covenant  people  to  the  fulfilment 
OF  God's  covenant  engagement.  1.  Providence.  "To  keep  thee  in  the  way." 
So  Christ  "  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power."  "  In  Him  all  things 
consist."  Generally  and  particularly  He  preserves  those  who  trust  in  Him  (John  x. 
28).  2.  Eedemption.  "To  bring  thee  into  the  place  which  I  have  prepared." 
Israel's  redemption  is  only  half  accomplished  as  yet.  So  Christ's  eternal  redemp- 
tion is  not  complete  till  the  last  enemy  is  destroyed  (John  xiv.  2,  3).  III.  The 
PROPER  attitude  TOWARDS  HiM.  1.  Fear.  Carefulness  not  to  displease  Him. 
Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  those  only  who  believe  in  Him.  To  others  He  is  a  "  savour 
of  death  unto  death."  2.  Obedience.  "  Obey  His  voice."  So  says  the  Father  in 
the  New  Testament  (Matt.  xvii.  5) ;  and  Himself  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  This  implies — 
(1)  Trust  in  His  person.    (2)  Subjection  to  His  authority.    (3)  The  prosecution  of 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  EXODUS.  443 

BQs  commands.  IV.  The  be wabd  of  obedience  to  Him  (vers.  22,  23).  1.  Identifi- 
cation and  sympathy  with  us  in  our  cause.  "  I  will  be  an  enemy,"  &c.  2.  Victory 
over  our  foes  (1.  Cor.  xv.  57),  world,  flesh,  devil,  death,  &e.  3.  Inheritance  in  the 
promised  land.  Learn — 1.  (2  Tim.  i.  9),  That  God's  grace  has  been  manifested  in 
Jesus  Christ  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  2,  That  God's  grace  has  been, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  with  His  people  up  to  the  present  moment.  3.  And  will  be 
till  the  end  of  the  world.  (J.  W.  Burn.)  Christ  at  the  head  of  the  column  : — 
It  is  said  when  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  on  one  occasion,  rode  up  to  his  retreating 
army,  a  soldier  happened  to  see  him  first  and  cried  out :  "Yonder  is  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  ;  God  bless  him  !  "  and  the  retreating  army  had  courage  to  nerve  itself 
afresh  and  went  forward  and  drove  the  enemy  away.  One  has  said  that  the  Duke 
of  Wellington  was  worth  more  at  any  time  than  five  thousand  men.  So  it  would 
be  if  we  had  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  in  front,  we  would  go  forward.  How 
gloriously  would  this  Church  contend  if  Christ  were  visibly  in  front  of  them  !  But 
the  army  was  sometimes  without  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  There  was  a  place 
where  he  could  not  be.  And  if  Christ  were  visibly  present,  He  would  be  present  at 
the  same  time,  only  at  one  church  in  one  locality ;  it  might  be  in  Philadelphia,  but 
what  of  the  thousand  other  cities  ?  But  an  unseen  Saviour  is  at  the  head  of  the 
column  everywhere.  We  know  He  is  there.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  is  where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  in  His  Name  to  inspire  us  ;  and  to-day,  in  every  city  on 
the  face  of  this  globe,  where  the  columns  meet  to  march,  His  voice  sounds 
"  Onward  !  "  in  their  ears.  (M.  Simpson,  D.D.)  The  angel  in  life : — Laws  with- 
out angels  would  turn  life  into  weary  drudgery.  Life  has  never  been  left  without 
some  touch  of  the  Divine  presence  and  love.  From  the  very  first  this  has  been 
characteristic  of  our  history.  The  solemn — the  grand,  fact  is,  that  in  our  life  there 
is  an  angel,  a  spirit,  a  presence ;  a  ministry  without  definite  name  and  altogether 
without  measurableness  !  a  gracious  ministry,  a  most  tender  and  comforting  service, 
always  operating  upon  our  life's  necessity  and  our  heart's  pain.  Let  us  rest  in 
that  conviction  for  a  moment  or  two  until  we  see  how  we  can  establish  it  by 
references  to  facts,  experiences,  consciousness  against  which  there  can  be  no  wit- 
ness. See  how  our  life  is  redeemed  from  baseness  by^the  assumption  that  an  angel 
is  leading  it.  Who  can  believe  that  an  angel  has  heiin  appointed  to  conduct  a  life 
which  must  end  in  the  grave?  The  anticlimax  is  i shocking ;  the  suggestion  is 
charged  with  the  very  spirit  of  profanity.  If  an  ang(,l  is  leading  us,  is  he  leading 
us  to  the  grave  ?  What  is  it  within  us  that  detests  thj  grave,  that  turns  away  from 
it  with  aversion,  that  will  not  be  sent  into  so  low  ana.mean  a  prison  ?  It  is  "  the 
Divinity  that  stirs  within  us."  Then  again,  who  could  ask  an  angel  to  be  a  guest 
in  a  heart  given  up  to  evil  thoughts  and  purposes  ?  Given  the  consciousness  that 
an  angel  is  leading  us,  and  instantly  a  series  of  prepai^tions  must  be  set  up  corres- 
ponding with  the  quality  and  title  of  the  leading  ^yigel  of  our  pilgrimage.  We 
prepare  for  some  guests.  According  to  the  quality  o^i  the  guest  is  the  range  and 
costliness  of  our  preparation.  Whom  our  love  expects  our  love  provides  for. 
When  we  are  longing  for  the  coming  one,  saying,  "The  presence  will  make  the 
house  the  sweeter  and  the  brighter,  and  the  speech  will  fill  our  life  with  new  poetry 
and  new  hope.  Oh,  why  tarry  the  chariot  wheels  ?  "  then  we  make  adequate — 
that  is  to  say,  proportionate — preparation.  The  touch  of  love  is  dainty,  the  inven- 
tion of  love  is  fertile,  the  expenditure  of  love  is  without  a  grudge  or  a  murmur, — 
another  touch  must  be  given  to  the  most  delicate  arrangement ;  some  addition  must 
be  made  to  the  most  plentiful  accommodation  ;  love  must  run  over  the  programme 
just  once  more  to  see  that  every  line  is  worthily  written.  Then  the  front  door  must 
be  opened  widely,  and  the  arms  and  the  heart,  and  the  whole  being  to  receive  the 
guest  of  love.  And  that  is  so  in  the  higher  regions.  If  an  angel  is  going  to  lead 
me,  the  angel  must  have  a  chamber  in  my  heart  prepared  worthy  of  myself. 
Chamber  ! — nay,  the  whole  heart  must  be  the  guest-room  ;  he  must  occupy  every 
corner  of  it,  and  I  must  array  it  with  robes  of  purity  and  brightness  that  he  may 
feel  himself  at  home,  even  though  he  may  have  come  from  heaven  to  do  some 
service  for  my  poor  life.  Any  appeal  that  so  works  upon  every  kind  of  faculty, 
upon  imagination,  conscience,  will,  force,  must  be  an  appeal  that  will  do  the  life 
good.  It  calls  us  to  perfectness,  to  preparedness,  to  a  nobility  corresponding  in 
some  degree  with  the  nobility  of  the  guest  whom  we  entertain.  The  Divine  presence 
in  life,  by  whatever  name  we  may  distinguish  it,  is  pledged  to  two  effects,  supposing 
our  spirit  and  our  conduct  to  be  right.  God  undertakes  our  cause  as  against  our 
enemies.  Would  we  could  leave  our  enemies  in  His  hands  !  I  do  not  now  speak 
altogether  of  merely  human  enemies — because  where  there  is  enmity  between  maa 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  chap.  Tarn. 

and  man,  though  it  never  cr.n  be  justified,  yet  it  admits  of  such  modification  in  the 
system  of  words  as  to  throw  responsibility  upon  both  sides — but  I  speak  of  other 
enemies, — the  enmity  expressed  by  evil  desire,  by  the  pressure  of  temptation,  by 
all  the  array  against  the  soul's  health  and  weal  of  the  principalities  of  the  power  of 
the  air,  the  princes  of  darkness,  the  spirits  of  evil.  Send  the  angel  to  fight  the 
angel ;  let  the  angel  of  light  fight  the  angel  of  darkness.  The  second  effect  to  which 
the  Divine  presence  in  our  life  is  pledged  is  that  we  shall  be  blessed  with  the  con- 
tentment which  is  riches.  Thus  we  have  mysteries  amongst  us  which  the  common 
or  carnal  mind  cannot  understand.  Men  asking  God's  blessing  upon  what  appears 
to  be  unblest  poverty — men  saying  it  is  enough  when  we  can  discover  next  to 
nothing  in  the  hand  uplifted  in  recognition  of  Divine  goodness.  Thus  we  hear 
voices  coming  from  the  bed  of  affliction  that  have  in  them  the  subdued  tones  of 
absolute  triumph ;  thus  the  sick-chamber  is  turned  into  the  church  of  the  house,  and 
if  we  would  recover  from  dejection,  and  repining,  and  sorrow,  we  must  go  to  the 
bedside  of  affliction  and  learn  there  how  wondrous  is  the  ministry  of  God's  angel, 
how  perfecting  and  ennobling  the  influence  of  God's  grace.     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  By  little  and  little  I  will  drive  them  out  before  thee. — The  gradual 
processes  of  God  : — It  is  important,  not  only  to  see,  but  to  love,  the  gradual  processes 
of  God.  There  is  more  love  in  doing  the  little  thing  than  in  doing  the  great  thing. 
A  great  mind  is  never  so  great  as  when  it  is  throwing  itself  into  something  exceed- 
ingly minute.  The  special  subject  to  which  the  text  spiritually  and  allegorically 
refers  is  the  conquest  of  sin.  For  such  as  the  old  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Canaan 
*were  to  Israel,  such  the  old  inhabitants  of  our  hearts  are  to  us.  But  now  here  let 
me  draw  what  appears  to  me  to  be  a  very  important  distinction  before  I  proceed. 
If  the  processes  of  sanctification  are  exceedingly  small,  the  work  of  justification  is 
complete — perfectly  complete — in  its  one  defined  isolated  act.  Never  confound  this 
— the  advancement  of  your  holiness  with  the  perfection  of  your  pardon.  There  are 
no  degrees  of  pardon.  Nevertheless,  though,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  being  set  up  in 
his  heart,  sin  has  gone  down,  and  grace  is  in  the  ascendancy — the  sin  is  there — and 
there  it  is  in  tremendous  rebellion  and  awful  conflict.  Make  the  distinction  of  the 
sin  dominant,  and  the  sin  subservient,  but  rebellious  against  the  grace  dominant. 
Yet  still,  though  the  sin  be  thus  so  far  subdued,  it  lives.  Only  "  little  by  little," 
after  it  is  put  down  from  its  throne,  is  it  expelled.  It  goes  on  to  that  expulsion — 
till  at  last,  as  the  condemnation  of  sin  was  exchanged  for  the  rebellion  of  sin,  the 
rebellion  of  sin  is  exchanged  for  the  removal  of  the  presence  of  sin,  and  sin  is  no 
longer  there.  Now  I  want  to  lead  you  to  see  the  benefits  of  this  "  little  by  little." 
It  is  in  infinite  mercy.  It  is  the  discipline  of  life.  And  not  only  in  the  external 
event,  but  in  the  internal  experiences,  to  a  believer,  it  is  all  discipline.  And  that 
very  gradual  overcoming  of  sin  is  a  great  part  of  the  discipline  of  Life — to  exercise 
many  graces,  patience,  faith,  waiting  upon  God,  praypr,  humiliation.  And  not  only 
so,  but  remember  in  this  discipline  of  life,  God  has  His  punishments.  And  do  you 
know  what  God's  heaviest  punishment  is  ?  Sin.  He  makes  sins  scourge  sins ! — 
often  a  sin  we  hate  to  scourge  a  sin  we  love — often  a  sin  of  action  to  chasten  a  sin 
of  feeling — often  a  sin  of  conscience  to  humble  us  in  the  dust  and  make  us  discover 
a  sin  of  emotion.  Sins  punish  sins.  Therefore,  as  the  old  Canaanites  were  kept  in 
the  land  of  Canaan  for  this  very  end — that  they  might  \  e  thorns  in  the  side  of  the 
Israelites,  and  whenever  the  Israelites  fell  into  idolatry — for  their  grievous  sin 
some  were  allowed  to  rise  up  and  overcome  them  for  awhile,  till  God  raised  up  some 
judge  to  overcome  that  nation,  so  it  is  in  your  heart.  And  not  only  is  it  thus 
discipline  and  punishment — but  remember  it  is  for  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  who  exhibits  His  power  and  grace  in  the  process  of  converting  sinners 
into  saints.  Or  look  at  it  again  thus.  I  do  not  beheve  that  we  could  bear  now  to 
be  perfectly  holy.  That  inward  light,  if  so  unclouded,  would  be  of  such  a  bright- 
ness as  would  wither  us  and  scorch  us.  The  body  would  not  be  capable  of  it — the 
mind  would  not  be  capable  of  it.  But  when  we  have  the  disembodied  spirit,  or 
when  we  have  the  *'  spirit  clothed  upon  with  the  new  body,"  then,  and  then  only, 
we  shall  be  capable  of  perfect  saintliness.  And  till  that,  it  must  be  "  little  by  little," 
— a  gradual  approaching  to  that  state  which  we  could  not  bear  if  introduced  to  at 
once.  Now,  just  in  conclusion,  observe  the  expression  "  I  will  drive  them  out."  It 
is  one  of  God's  high  works ;  it  requires  the  power  of  Omnipotence  to  eradicate  sin 
from  the  human  soul.     {J.  Vaughan  M.A.)        The  power  of  little  things  : — I.  It  is 

THROUGH  LITTLE  THINGS  THAT  A  MAN  DESTROYS  HIS  SOUL  ;   he  fails  tO  take  UOte  of  little 

things,  and  they  accumulate  into  great ;  he  relaxes  in  little  things,  and  thus  in  time 


CHAP,  xxin,]  EXODUS.  445 

loosens  every  bond.  II.  It  is  by  little  and  little  that  men  become  great  in 
PIETY.  We  become  great  in  holiness  through  avoiding  little  faults,  and  being  exact 
in  little  duties.  III.  There  is  great  difficulty  in  little  things.  In  daily  dangers 
and  duties,  in  the  petty  anxietits  of  common  life,  in  the  exercise  of  righteous 
principles,  in  trifles — in  these  we  must  seek  and  find  the  opportunity  of  ejecting  "  by 
little  and  little  "  the  foes  we  have  sworn  to  expel  from  our  hearts.  (H.  3Ielvill,  B.D.) 
Little  things  : — I.  Great  things  are  m.vde  up  of  little  things.  Highest  mountain 
of  grains  of  dust.  Atlantic  of  drops  of  water.  Year  of  31,536,000  seconds.  Deepest 
snow-fall  came  down  one  flake  at  a  time.  II.  Great  things  depend  on  little  ones. 
Falling  of  apple  from  tree  insignificant  enough  ;  yet  led  to  discovery  of  law  of 
gravitation.  III.  Great  things  spring  from  little  ones.  Oak  once  an  acorn. 
Greatest  hero  once  an  infant.  Explosion  in  coal-pit  which  destroyed  life  and 
property  was  caused  by  spark  from  match.  Tract  sent  by  child  to  India  fell 
into  hands  of  a  chief,  who  was  brought  to  Christ  through  reading  it ;  missionary 
was  sent  out  and  hundreds  converted.  IV.  Great  works  are  accomplished  by 
little  and  little.  Pyramids  raised  one  stone  at  a  time.  Greatest  paintings  done 
stroke  by  stroke.  Michael  Angelo,  when  pointing  out  what  progress  he  had  made 
in  a  piece  of  sculpture  on  which  he  was  engaged,  was  met  with  the  remark, "  But  these 
are  trifles."  He  replied,  "  Trifles  make  perfection  ;  but  perfection  is  no  trifle." 
V.  CHiiEACTER  IS  FORMED  BY  LITTLE  AND  LITTLE.  Good  charactcrs  are  built  up  of  little 
acts  of  kindness,  industry,  generosity,  obedience,  and  integrity.  One  mean  or  dis- 
honest act  may  destroy  a  reputation  which  it  has  taken  years  to  acquire.  {W.  H. 
Booth.)     The  power  of  moral  forces  : — I.  The  strength  of  moral  forces.     II.  The 

POWER  of  little,  BACKED  BY  MORAL  FORCE.  III.  MoBAL  FORCES  MOVE  TO  THE  PRO- 
DUCTION OF  DISTANT  RESULTS.     IV.   ThE  MOVEMENTS  OF  MOBAL  FORCES  ABE  NOT  HURRIED. 

V.  Moral  forces  will  continue  to  move  until  the  purpose  is  finally  accomplished. 

VI.  Moral  forces  are  EVER  ON  THE  side  OF  RIGHT  doers.  (W.  Burrows,  B. a.)  The 
covqucring  life  : — The  upward  road  to  success  must  always  be  over  difliculties, 
and  these  are  only  overcome  "  little  by  little."  The  man  who  would  conquer  must 
not  expect  to  do  so  at  once,  by  one  headlong  charge.  Yes,  a  man  to  succeed  must 
be  self-reliant,  he  must  trust  to  God  and  his  own  right  arm.  When  Stephen 
Colon na  was  taken  prisoner  by  his  enemies,  and  they  sneeringly  asked  him, 
"  Where  is  now  your  stronghold? "  he  laid  his  hand  upon  his  heart,  and  answered, 
"  Here."  A  man  must  dare  to  stand  alone.  If  Clive  had  leaned  upon  others  instead 
of  himself,  he  would  not  have  matched  his  few  European  and  native  troops  against 
the  overwhelming  masses  of  Bengal,  and  have  won  the  Battle  of  Plussey.  If 
Columbus  had  been  discouraged  by  delays,  and  obstacles  and  disappointments,  he 
would  never  have  found  America.  We  have  seen,  then,  that  success  means  the 
overcoming  of  difliculties,  by  determination,  by  self-reliance,  by  patience,  "  little  by 
little."  This  is  equally  true  of  the  noblest  of  all  pursuits,  the  pursuit  of  holiness, 
of  the  grandest  and  purest  work,  work  for  God  ;  of  the  hardest  and  most  splendid 
of  victories,  victory  over  self.  The  victories  which  have  been  gained  over  ourselves 
will  be  remembered  when  the  triumphs  of  Caesar  and  Hannibal  are  uncared  for. 
"He  conquered  himself"  is  a  better  epitaph  than  "He  conquered  the  world." 
Well,  then,  in  this  daily  life  of  ours  we  all  have  a  Canaan  to  cmquer;  and  God 
promises  that  if  we  do  our  part.  He  will  drive  out  our  foes  "  little  by  Httle."  No 
one  becomes  bad  all  at  once,  nor  good  all  at  once.  Our  life,  if  it  be  the  true  life, 
will  be  a  gradual  growth  in  grace,  a  daily  dying  to  sin,  and  rising  again  unto 
righteousness,  a  daily  mortifying  of  our  evil  and  corrupt  affections,  and  a  daily 
proceeding  in  ell  virtue  and  godliness  of  living,  (fl.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.) 
Destructive  power  of"  little  "  things  : — How  does  it  commonly  come  to  pass,  that  a 
man  who  had  been  thoroughly  alive  to  his  moral  responsibihty,  and  who  had  acted 
under  a  manifest  consciousness  of  the  account  which  must  one  day  be  rendered 
at  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  falls  away  from  the  striving  for  salvation,  and 
mingles  with  the  multitude  that  walks  the  broad  road  ?  Is  it  ordinarily  through 
one  powerful  and  undisguised  assault,  that  he  is  turned  from  the  path — the  enemies 
of  his  soul  combining  their  strength  in  one  united  attack,  and  coming  down  on  bini 
with  every  weapon  which  their  malice  could  suggest  and  their  power  obtain  ?  Nay, 
not  so  ;  it  is  invariably  through  "  Httle  "  things,  that  such  a  man  destroys  his  soul. 
Like  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  man  of  piety  moves  in  a  resisting  medium,  as  he 
revolves  about  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  which  is,  and  must  be,  the  centre  of  our 
system.  It  may  be  only  a  very  minute  fraction  of  velocity,  that  this  resisting 
medium  is  able  at  any  one  time  to  destroy ;  but  its  operation  is  constant,  and 
therefore  if  the  destroyed  fraction  remain  unobserved  and  unrepaired,  the  waste  will 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxzn. 

go  oil,  till  the  whole  motion  is  lost,  and  the  star  recedes  from  its  pathway  of  light. 
As  Christians  we  profess  ourselves  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth  ;  we  are  not 
at  home,  and  the  atmosphere  of  the  earth  is  one  which  tends  to  retard  our  movements, 
and  diminish  the  speed  with  which  we  might  otherwise  run  the  race  set  before  us  ; 
and  although,  beyond  doubt,  the  world  may  occasionally  put  huge  impediments  in 
the  way,  which  may  tend  to  block  up  the  path,  and  force  us,  on  a  sudden  either  to 
standstill  or  tarn  aside,  yet  our  chief  danger  lies  in  the  almost  imperceptible  influence 
exerted  by  the  world,  like  that  of  the  resisting  medium  on  the  planets — a  hindrance 
which  offers  no  violent  opposition  to  our  principles,  but  which,  confining  itself 
to  trifles,  is  perhaps  allowed  to  act  undisturbed,  as  though  either  there  could  be 
trifles  when  the  soul's  good  is  in  debate,  or  as  though,  if  there  were,  trifles  upon 
trifles  would  not  make  up  large  amounts.  There  is  a  sort  of  continued  attraction, 
resulting  from  our  necessary  intercourse  with  the  world,  which  of  itself  deadens 
the  attainments  of  the  soul.  There  is,  moreover,  a  continued  temptation  to  yield 
in  little  points  under  the  impression  of  conciliating,  to  indulge  in  little  things,  to 
forego  little  strictnesses,  to  omit  little  duties,  and  all  owing  to  the  idea,  that  what 
looks  so  slit-'ht  cannot  be  of  real  moment.  (H,  Melvill,  B.D.)  Gradual  saiicti- 
fication  : — We  here  have — I.  A  gracious  promise,  on  God's  part,  to  those  who  are 
NOW  His  true  Israel,  and  who  look  for  a  better  possession  than  the  earthly 
Can.aan.  II.  An  admirable  criterion  by  which  to  discover  the  sincerity  of  oob 
profession  ;  and  our  progress  in  it.  III.  A  warning  that  the  work  of  sanctifi- 
CATioN  must  be  GRADUAL.  God  does  not  give  us  a  rapid  victory  over  our  sins.  1. 
In  order  to  keep  us  humble  ;  2.  To  incite  us  to  prayer,  watchfulness  and  exertion  ; 
3.  To  increase  our  desires  after  that  land  where  peace  and  purity  reign  for  ever. 
IV.  A  guarantee  of  future  victory,  though  IT  MAY  BE  PROGRESSIVE.  {P.  Maitlatid, 
B.A.)  The  dtficulty  of  little  things :—"  By  little  and  little."  My  brethren,  think 
often  of  the  mode  in  which  God  thus  declares  that  He  will  drive  out  before  Israel 
the  Hivite,  the  Perizzite,  and  the  Jebusite :  it  is  the  very  mode  by  which  His  grace 
will  enable  you  to  drive  out  from  your  hearts  those  principles  of  evil  which  oppose 
the  complete  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  of  His  Son.  The  difficulty  in  religion  is  the 
taking  up  the  cross  daily,  rather  than  the  taking  it  up  on  some  set  occasion,  and 
under  extraordinary  circumstances.  The  serving  God  in  little  things,  the  carrying 
religious  principle  into  all  the  minutife  of  life,  the  discipline  of  our  tempers,  the 
regulation  of  our  speech,  the  domestic  Christianity,  the  momentary  sacrifices,  the 
secret  and  unobserved  self-denials — who  that  knows  anything  of  the  difliculties  of 
piety  does  not  know  that  there  is  greater  danger  of  his  falling  in  these,  than  in 
trials  which  apparently  call  for  higher  and  sterner  endurance  ?  If  on  no  other 
account  than  from  the  very  absence  of  what  looks  important,  are  trifles  likely  to 
throw  him  oft  his  guard,  make  him  careless  or  confident,  and  thereby  almost  ensure 
defeat.  It  is  not  comparatively  hard  to  put  the  armour  on,  when  the  trumpet 
sounds,  but  it  is  to  keep  the  armour  on  when  there  is  no  alarm  of  battle  ;  and  our 
warfare  with  our  spiritual  enemies  is  not  warfare  in  a  series  of  pitched  battles,  with 
intervals  for  rest  and  recruiting — it  is  rather  daily,  hourly,  momentary  fighting. 
This  is  the  "  driving  out  by  little  and  Uttle,"  to  which  the  Almighty  promises  "  the 
reward  of  the  inheritance."  Understand,  therefore,  and  remember,  that  there  is 
great  difficulty  in  little  things.  Be  assured  that  daily  dangers  and  duties,  the  Uttle 
unevennesses  which  may  ruffle  the  temper,  the  petty  anxieties  of  common  life,  the 
exercise  of  righteous  principle  in  trifles — in  these  must  you  seek,  and  in  these  will 
you  find  the  opportunity  of  ejecting  "  by  little  and  little  "  the  foes  which  you  have 
sworn  to  expel  from  the  heart,  but  which  still,  like  the  Canaanites  against  Israel, 
dispute  the  territory  with  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  And  if  the  warfare  be  tedious, 
forget  not  that  you  fight  for  an  incorruptible  crown.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Im- 
portance of  little  things  : — Giotto,  a  distinguished  Eoman  painter,  was  desired  by 
one  of  the  Popes  to  paint  a  panel  in  the  Vatican.  Some  doubt  of  his  ability, 
however,  being  entertained,  the  Pope's  messenger  first  asked  him  for  an  example 
of  his  art.  Giotto's  study  was  adorned  with  his  paintings,  but  instead  of  offering 
any  of  these,  he  took  a  sheet  of  white  paper,  and  with  a  single  stroke  of  his  pencil 
drew  a  perfect  circle,  and  handed  it  to  his  visitor.  The  latter,  in  surprise,  reminded 
him  that  he  had  asked  for  a  design.  •' Go,"  said  Giotto ;  "  I  tell  you,  his  Holiness 
asks  nothing  else  of  me."  He  was  right,  for  the  evidence  of  his  command  of  the 
pencil  was  accepted  as  conclusive,  and  his  eccentric  though  reasonable  reply  gave 
rise  to  the  proverb,  "  Round  as  Giotto's  0."  To  do  a  small  thing  well  is  the  best 
proof  of  ability  to  do  what  is  great.  Progressive  sanctification : — Those  persons 
must  have  a  very  inadequate  knowledge  of  the  scheme  of  salvation,  who  suppose  that 


CHAP,  xxni.]  EXODUS.  447 

the  work  of  sanctification  is  sudden  and  rapid  in  its  effects.     And  why  ?    Because 

we  find  a  consistency  maintained  between  God's  natural  government  of  the  world, 

and  the  plan  of  salvation  as  displayed  in  the  gospel.   And  hence  we  are  led  to  argue, 

that  both  must  proceed  from  the  same  Divine  hand.   Now,  when  persons  first  resign 

this  world  as  their  portion,  and  give  themselves  up  to  the  service  of  God,  they 

frequently  set  out  with  highly  raised  expectations  and,  not  fully  conscious  of  the 

dilficulties  which  lie  in  their  path,  suppose  that  the  victory  over  sin  will  be  easily 

accomplished,  and  a  rapid  progress  made  in  the  ways  of  godliness.     It  is  with  the 

inexperienced  Christian,  as  it  is  with  the  young  in  the  spiing-tideof  their  existence. 

Then  all  is  bright  and  glittering  ;  and,  exulting  in  the  present,  and  buoyed  up  with 

joyous  hopes  for  the  future,  they  know  not  of  the  cloud  gathering  in  the  horizon. 

And  this  expectation  is,  in  a  measure,  aided  by  the  fact,  that  in  the  earlier  stages 

of  a  Christian  course,  a  much  more  rapid  advance  is  frequently  made  than  is  found 

to  be  the  case  in  after  years.     Moreover,  the  Christian,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  his 

course,  is  not  fully  aware  of  the  extent  of  obedience  which  the  law  of  God  demands, 

and  is  not  sufficiently  conscious  of  the  deep  depravity  of  his  own  heart.     Hence  the 

tei-ms  of  the  gospel,  which  demand  an  irreconcileable  war  with   every  lust  and 

passion,  and  call  for  a  continued  and  persevering  struggle  with  every  known  sin, 

cannot  be  fully  appreciated,  because  these  are  not  discovered.    But  it  is  the  office  of 

the  Holy  Spirit,  gradually  to  make  this  discovery  to  the  mind  of  the  Christian.  But  has 

God  ever  undertaken  that  Satan  and  the  world  and  the  flesh  shall  at  once  be  beaten 

down  beneath  your  feet  ?    No !     What  says  my  text ?     "By  little  and  little."    But, 

whilst  it  is  only  right.  Christians,  that  I  should  thus  set  before  you  the  difficulties 

which  beset  your  path,  at  the  same  time  that  you  take  warning  from  the  text  not  to 

expect  a  more  rapid  victory  over  sin  than  God  has  prescribed,  take  also  toyourselvesthe 

encouragement  which  it  affords.     Here  is  the  promise  of  Him  who  cannot  lie,  that 

He  will  eventually  make  us  more  than  conquerers,  though  it  will  be  by  little  and 

little,  and  not  so  rapidly  as  we  could  desire.     "  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing, 

that  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  will  perform  it  unto  the  day  of  Jesua 

Christ."     It  will  be  gradual,  but  effectual — it  will  be  progressive,  but  abiding ;  if 

left  to  yourselves,  indeed,  your  strength  must  fail ;  and  vain  would  be  the  attempt 

to  contend  successfully  with  your  sins  and  infirmities.     "  The  Lord  is  my  strength 

and  my  song,  and  is  become  my  salvation,"  says  the  Psalmist;  and  what  he  here 

speaks  of — God's  loving-kindness — is  only  that  which  is  the  portion  of  every  true 

believer.     "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,"  says  the  prophet,  "  and  to  them  that 

have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength."    How  cheering  are  such  assurances  to  those 

who  feel  the  burden  of  their  sin,  and  how  calculated  to  set  at  rest  all  doubts  and 

misgivings  with  respect  to  our  future  perseverance  !     But,  for  this,  let  it  ever  be 

remembered  that  continued  and  fervent  suppUcation  must  be  made.     "  For  all 

these  things  "  are  the  words  of  God,  "  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel, 

to  do  it  for  them."     And  never  let  us  complain  that  our  enemies  are  mighty,  and 

that  we  make  so  slow  a  progress  against  them,  whilst  we  neglect  to  plead  in  prayer 

•with  the  Almighty  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  own  promises.     And  here  let  me  turn 

to  the  well-tried  Christian — to  such  as  are  firmly  established  and  grounded  in  the 

faith  ;  and  I  would  ask,  whether  you  cannot  bear  testimony  to  the  faithfulness  with 

which  the  promise  of  the  text  is   verified  ?     You,   as   well  as  others,  need  the 

encouragement  which  it  affords,  because,  the  more  you  grow  in  holiness,  the  more 

you  will  perceive  how  infinitely  short  you  come  of  the  standard  at  which  you  aim. 

But  have  you  not  reason  from  the  past,  to  trust  God  for  the  future?    With  St, 

Paul,  thank  God,  and  take  courage  ;  and,  whenever  it  shall  happen  (as  it  sometimes 

will  with  the  holiest  and  best  of  men)  that  you  entertain  doubts  and  misgivings  with 

respect  to  your  ultimate  safety,  owing  to  your  unworthiness,  recall  to  your  minds 

the  promise  of  my  text,  and  others  of  a  similar  character.     Let  these  reassure  and 

animate  you:  God  is  still  the  same  unfailing  Protector  of  those  who  trust  in  Him  as 

He  ever  wa^,  and  will  never  forsake  the  true  sheep  of  His  pasture,  but  gradually 

drive  out  their  enemies  from   before  them,  until  they  are  established  in  their 

promised  possession.    (P.  Maitland,  B.A.) 

Vers.  31-33.  They  shall  not  dwell  in  thy  land. — Lessons  : — 1.  God  is  the  sovereign 
boundmaker  to  all  nations  on  the  earth.  2.  Among  all  God  hath  promised  to  set 
the  bounds  of  His  Church  on  earth.  3.  God's  suppression  of  His  adversaries  is  a 
token  01  His  settling  His  Church's  habitation  (ver.  3i).  4.  No  covenant  with 
idolatrous  adversaries  must  be  made  by  the  Church  against  God's  will.  5.  No 
covenant  can  be  made  with  idolaters,  but  it  will  be  with  their  idols,  viz.,  devils  (ver. 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

32).  6.  Converse  with  idolaters  is  very  dangerous  to  make  men  such  sinners  against 
God.  7.  Such  sinning  with  idolaters  is  a  snare,  which  will  keep  souls  to  destruction. 
8.  All  such  sins  must  be  avoided,  that  God's  promise  of  good  may  be  obtained  (ver. 
33).  {G.  Hnghes,  B.D.)  Associating  with  the  ungodly  : — Those  who  willingly 
associate  with  the  sinful  are  like  the  river  Thames,  which  is  a  sweet  and  pretty  river 
enough  near  its  source ;  but  in  the  great  metropoUs  it  has  kept  company  with  drains 
and  sewers  under  the  belief  that  its  current  was  too  powerful  and  too  pure  to  be 
injured  by  them.  It  was  meant  that  the  river  should  purify  the  sewer ;  but, 
instead  of  that,  the  sewer  has  corrupted  the  river.  (Union  Magazine.)  Thf.  snare 
of  worldliness  : — Serious  people  often  complain  of  the  snares  they  meet  with  from 
worldly  people,  and  yet  they  must  mix  with  them  to  get  a  livelihood.  I  advise 
them,  if  they  can,  to  do  their  business  with  the  world  as  they  c!o  it  in  the  rain. 
If  their  business  calls  them  abroad,  they  will  not  leave  it  undone  for  fear  of 
being  a  little  wet ;  but  then,  when  it  is  done,  they  presently  stek  shelter,  and 
will  not  stand  in  the  rain  for  pleasure.  So,  providential  and  necessary  calls  of 
duty,  that  lead  us  into  the  world,  will  not  hurt  us,  if  we  find  the  spirit  of  tbe 
world  unpleasant,  and  are  glad  to  retire  from  it,  and  keep  out  of  it,  as  much 
as  our  relative  duties  will  permit.  That  which  is  our  cross  is  not  so  likely 
to  be  our  snare ;  but  if  that  spirit  which  we  should  always  watch  and  pray  against, 
infects  and  assimilates  our  minds  to  itself,  then  we  are  sure  to  suffer  loss,  and 
act  below  the  dignity  of  our  profession.     (Newton's  Letters  to  a  Nobleman.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Vers.  1-8.  Behold  the  blood  of  the  covenant. — The  sprinkling  of  blood  .-—I.  He 
sprinkled  the  book  in  his  band.  It  was  the  Bible  of  his  day,  and  yet  it  needed 
sprinkling.  And  we  hold  our  Bibles — do  they  need  sprinkling  ?  The  Bible  is  the 
transmitted  mind  of  God — it  is  perfect  truth,  it  is  essential  holiness — must  it  ba 
sprinkled  ?  Human  words  are  all  unclean.  The  mind  of  God  must  pass  to  men 
through  the  organs  of  the  human  voice — and  that  humanity  mingling  even  with 
the  revelation  of  God,  wants  washing.  The  materials  of  which  the  book  is  made 
are  human.  And  again  and  again  with  our  defiled  hands  we  have  soiled  it — and 
we  never  open  the  book  but  it  is  a  sinner's  hand  that  touches  it.  Our  Bibles  need 
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  II.  And  he  sprinkled  the  altar — for  he  had 
reared  it.  The  altar  was  a  holy  thing — dedicate,  consecrated,  yet  for  the  manhood 
which  was  af>sociated  with  it,  it  needed  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood.  And  we  have 
our  altars.  You  rise  in  the  morning,  and  you  set  up  your  altar  on  your  bedside — 
and  when  you  rise  from  your  knees,  how  many  wandering  thoughts,  what  coldness 
and  dulness  of  soul,  what  mixture  of  motive,  calls  out  for  mercy.  The  altar  of  the 
bedroom — it  must  be  sprinkled.  You  come  down,  and  you  gather  round  the  family 
altar.  But  is  there  no  one  there,  in  that  little  assembly,  whose  heart  is  wrong  with 
God  ?  Does  the  worship  of  the  family  all  go  up  in  purity  ?  Is  it  not  a  dull  thing 
— that  family  prayer  each  morning — a  mere  routine  ?  And  does  not  it  want  tbe 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  III.  Moses  sprinkled  the  people.  There  is  no 
part  of  man  that  does  not  need  that  sprinkling.  IV.  The  sprinkUng  of  the  blood 
was  the  token  that  whatever  it  touched  became  covenant.  We  have  our 
covenanted  Bibles  and  our  covenanted  altars ;  we  ourselves  are  in  covenant  with 
Christ.  Do  you  know  that  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  on  you  ?  And  all 
that  you  must  recognize  if  you  would  obey  God.  You  must  not  rely  upon  "  All 
the  words  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do."  But  you  must  go  as  a  sprinkled 
and  covenanted  people,  or  you  will  not  go  at  all.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Theblood 
of  the  covenant : — I.  The  sacredness  of  blood.  This  is  taught  both  in  Old  and 
New  Testament.  II.  The  Christian  covenant  is  a  covenant  of  blood.  The  blood 
of  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  shed  on  Calvary,  sprinkled  on  the  high  altar  of  heaven 
and  on  all  who  approach  with  penitence  and  faith,  IH.  The  covenant  which 
Christ  has  instituted  with  His  people  is  the  most  sacred  covenant  which  God 
EVER  MADE  WITH  MAN.  IV.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  a  memorial  and  a  solemn  publio 
ratification  of  this  Divine  blood  covenant.  It  sprinkles  us  afresh  with  the 
blood  of  the  great  atonement.  (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  covenant : — L 
Divinely  revealed.     1.  Eevealed  faithfully.     (1)  "  Words,"  for  direction  and 


CHAP.  xxiT.l  EKODVS.  449 

encouragement.  (2)  Judgment,  for  warning.  2.  Bevealed  intelligently.  (1)  Not 
an  appeal  to  superstition  and  credulity.  (2)  In  language  which  all  could  understand. 
(3)  Under  circumstances  attesting  Divine  origin.  (4)  An  appeal  to  reason,  piety, 
interest.  II.  Accepted  by  man.  1.  Unanimously.  2.  Heartily.  3.  Specifically. 
4.  Speedjly.  HI.  Pebmanently  embodied.  A  written  revelation  is — 1.  Necessary. 
2.  Advantageous.  3.  Important.  IV.  Arrangements  carefully  and  impressively 
PREPARED.  1.  Altar  and  pillars — representing  God  and  people.  2,  Young  men — 
symbolizing  strength  and  earnestness  that  should  be  exerted  in  keeping  covenant 
engagement.  3.  Sacrifices.  (1)  Burnt-offerings,  to  signify  dedication  of  people  to 
Jehovah.  (2)  Peace-offerings,  as  typifying  Jehovah's  reconciliation  with  people. 
V.  Ratified  with  blood.  In  conclusion — 1.  Christ  is  the  Mediator  of  a  better 
covenant.  2.  That  His  blood  is  sprinkled  on  the  altar  of  God  (Heb.  ix,  12),  and  in 
th«  heart  of  His  people  (Heb.  ix.  13-15).  3.  That  He  has  instituted  a  "  perpetual 
memorial  of  His  precious  death  until  His  coming  again  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  25).  (/.  IV. 
Burn.)  God'^  covenant  with  Israel: — I.  The  preparation  and  separation.  God 
and  Israel  were  to  bind  themselves  in  sacred  oath.  God  was  ready.  Was  man 
ready  ?  Reverence  and  humility  were  required,  a  deep  sense  of  the  full  meaning 
of  all  that  was  to  be  said  and  done.  Special  preparation  is  always  demanded  for 
special  exhibitions  of  the  Divine  glory  and  power,  and  for  special  feasons  of 
covenanting  with  God.  Man  is  never  ready  for  pledges  of  love  and  loyalty  until 
he  has  sanctified  himself  through  penitence  and  prayer.  II.  The  people  informed. 
Let  the  leaders  of  God's  host  plainly  point  out  the  path.  The  need  of  our  age  is 
not  speculation  but  declaration  of  things  revealed  by  those  who  have  been  on  the 
mount  with  God,  have  beheld  His  glory,  and  have  received  a  message  for  dying 
men.  The  people  would  know  what  God  has  said,  not  what  men  imagine  or  guess. 
How  about  our  Father  in  heaven  ?  What  are  His  purposes  of  grace  ?  What  are 
,the  conditions  of  blessing  ?  These  are  the  burning  questions  of  our  age  and  oi  all 
ages.  If  any  one  has  been  on  the  mount  and  heard  the  voice,  let  him  come  down 
and  tell  us  what  he  knows.  The  world  is  waiting.  III.  Ratification  of  thk 
covenant.  Deliberation  is  always  demanded  before  pledges  of  acceptance  and 
obedience  are  made.  No  act  of  human  life  is  more  solemn  than  that  of  cove- 
nanting with  God.  Before  men  begin  to  build,  they  should  count  the  cost.  Many 
who  run  well  for  awhile  afterwards  halt  and  turn  back  because  they  started  under 
the  impulse  of  a  sudden  and  ill-considered  emotion.  Christianity  is  righteous 
principle  put  in  practice.  IV.  Sealing  the  covenant.  Remember  the  hour,  the 
■spot,  all  the  circumstances  attending  your  public  avowal  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ, 
and  your  covenanting  with  God  and  with  His  people.  How  have  these  vows  been 
kept  ?  How  have  the  conditions  of  blessing  been  fulfilled  ?  God  has  never  failed 
you.  Have  you  failed  Him?  Oh,  these  covenants!  How  many  have  been 
broken !  These  vows !  How  many  have  been  slighted !  We  should  frequently 
go  back  to  the  altar  "  under  the  hill,"  and  recall  the  sealing  blood.  V.  New  visions 
OF  God.  This  doubtless  was  a  far  more  distinct  vision  than  the  former,  when  the 
law  was  given  amid  clouds  and  darkness  and  tempest.  That  was  a  display  of: 
majesty  ;  this  is  of  love.  The  language  of  the  former  was :  Obey  and  thou  shalt 
live.  The  language  of  the  latter  is  :  Love  and  confide.  A  little  while  before  the 
vision  was  of  a  Law-giver.  Now  it  is  of  a  Saviour,  inspiring  confidence  and  peace. 
The  mercy-seat  appears.  God's  glory  is  seen  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  typified 
by  the  sapphire  stone  and,  as  I  suppose,  by  the  dimly  outlined  form  of  the  world's 
Redeemer.  (J.  E.  Twitchell.)  The  strictness  of  God's  law  : — "  The  Bible  is  so. 
strict  and  old-fashioned,"  said  a  young  man  to  a  grey-haired  friend  who  was 
advising  him  to  study  God's  Word  if  he  would  learn  how  to  live.  "  There  are 
plenty  of  books  written  now-a-days  that  are  moral  enough  in  their  teaching,  and. 
do  not  bind  one  down  as  the  Bible."  The  old  merchant  turned  to  his  desk,  and 
took  out  two  rulers,  one  nf  which  was  slightly  bent.  With  each  of  these  he  ruled' 
a  line,  and  silently  handed  the  ruled  paper  to  his  companion.  "  Well,"  said  the: 
lad,  "  what  do  you  mean  ?  "  "  One  line  is  not  straight  and  true,  is  it  ?  When  you 
mark  out  your  path  in  life,  do  not  take  a  crooked  ruler!"  [S.  S.  Chromcle.y 
Belief  and  disobedience : — Suppose,  says  the  late  Archbishop  Whately,  two  men 
each  received  a  letter  from  his  father,  giving  directions  for  his  children's  conduct ; 
and  that  one  of  these  sons  hastily,  and  without  any  good  grounds,  pronounced  the 
letter  a  forgery,  and  refused  to  take  any  notice  of  it ;  while  the  other  acknowledged 
it  to  be  genuine,  and  laid  it  up  with  great  reverence,  and  then  acted  without  the 
least  regard  to  the  advice  and  commands  contained  in  the  letter  :  you  would  say 
that  both  of  these  men,  indeed,  were  very  wrong;  but  the  latter  was  much  the  more 

29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  TLLUSTBATOR.  fcHA».  TXty. 

nndutiful  son  of  the  two.  Now  this  is  the  case  of  a  disobedient  Christian,  as  com- 
pared with  infidels.  He  does  not  Uke  them  pronounce  his  Father's  letter  a  forgery; 
that  is,  deny  the  truth  of  the  Christian  revelation ;  but  he  acts  in  defiance  in  his 
life  to  that  which  he  acknowledges  to  be  the  Divine  command.  The  nealing  of 
tht  coeenant : — I.  What  occukred  ?  The  Law  had  been  given,  amplitjed  (chaps, 
xxi.-xxiii.),  and  endorsed  by  the  people  (xxiv.  3).  Necessary  now  to  uncover  that 
atonement  which  is  ever  the  ground  of  God's  dealings  with  man.  Hence  the  altar. 
No  soul  was  to  touch  it,  for  the  atonement  is  the  creation  of  God.  Still  man  had 
a  part  in  these  covenantal  transactions,  hence  twelve  pillars  =  twelve  tribes.  But 
sacrifice  on  the  altar — the  burnt  offering  =  life  surrendered — and  the  peace  offering 
=  communion  with  God  and  one  another.  The  sacrifices  were  slain  by  young 
men  =  the  flower  of  Israel.  The  Levitical  priesthood  not  yet.  Every  age  has  its 
own  special  service  for  God.  The  blood  was  preserved.  Now  the  blood  stands  for 
life.  Half  disappeared  in  fire  on  the  altar.  Gone !  =  forfeited  life  of  the  sinner. 
Half  thrown  back  upon  the  people  =  life  restored  to  man.  How  Israel  ascended  to 
a  higher  plane  of  life  (ver.  9).  In  the  only  possible  way — representatively.  Then  came 
the  vision  of  God  (ver.  10).  Then  the  banquet  (see  Song  of  Sol.  ii.  3,  4).  II.  What 
DID  IT  MEAN  ?  1.  Salvation  has  its  ground  in  God  and  God  alone.  Calvary  potentially 
before  the  Christian  era,  actually  since,  the  Divine  ground  of  salvation.  2.  For- 
feited life  is  given  back  to  man  on  the  ground  of  Christ's  atonement.  Life,  capacity, 
faculty,  are  all  given  back  now  to  be  man's  very  own.  3.  Now  again  to  be  given 
back  to  God  in  consecration.  Being  now  my  very  own  (in  the  sense  just  hinted), 
I  give  my  own  to  God.  This  self-surrender  is  vital.  The  surrender  is  to  be  com- 
plete in  intent  and  purpose.  And  the  obligation  presses  now.  Delay  is  disloyalty. 
4.  There  will  then  be  peace.  With  God  ;  with  ourselves  ;  with  men.  5.  Life  will 
move  on  a  higher  level  (vers.  9,  12,  13).  (Emphasize  the  meaning  in  the  words 
"And  BE  there":  "And  Moses  went  up  into  the  Mount  of  God.")  Valley  men  have 
no  idea  of  the  bracing  atmosphere,  the  brilliant  light,  the  wider  view,  the  grander 
visions,  to  be  found  on  the  mountain-plateau.  It  is  so  in  Switzerland ;  so  with  the 
mountains  celestial.  6.  There  shall  be  visions  of  God  (ver.  10).  Bnshnell  says: 
"  So  gloriously  has  my  experience  of  God  opened  His  greatness  to  mc,  I  seem  to 
have  got  beyond  all  physical  images  and  measures,  even  those  of  astronomy,  and 
simply  to  think  God  is  to  find  and  bring  into  my  feeling  more  than  even  the 
imagination  can  reach.  I  bless  God  that  it  is  so.  I  am  cheered  by  it,  encouraged, 
sent  onward,  and,  in  what  He  gives  me,  begin  to  have  some  very  faint  impression 
of  the  glory  yet  to  be  revealed."  7.  And  banquetings  and  satisfactions  of  soul 
(ver.  11).  As  the  body  has  its  nutriment,  so  the  soul.  No  more  "  husks."  High 
thought  befitting  immortal  man.  Manna :  "  Hidden  manna."  Here  on  earth. 
At  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb.  Thereafter  to  all  eternity.  (H.  T.  Robjohns, 
BA.) 

Vers.  9-11.  They  saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  drink. — The  vision  of  God,  and  the 
feast  before  Him : — These  are  strangely  bold  words,  both  for  the  assertion  with 
which  they  begin,  and  for  the  juxtaposition  of  the  two  things  which  they  declare. 
They  come  at  the  close  of  the  solemn  ceremonial  by  which  God  and  Israel  entered 
into  covenant.  Lightly-uttered  vows  of  obedience  to  all  that  God  could  speak  had 
echoed  among  the  rocks.  On  the  basis  of  that  promise  a  covenant  was  formed  and 
ratified  by  sacrifice.  They  pass  within  the  fence,  they  witness  that  access  to  God  is 
possible  on  the  footing  of  covenant  and  sacrifice.  They  behold,  as  I  suppose, 
unclouded,  the  material  and  fiery  symbol  of  His  presence:  witness  that  men  through 
sacrifice  and  covenant  can  see  God.  But  our  eyes  are  stayed  on  the  pavement 
beneath  His  feet.  No  form  is  described.  Enough  for  ns  that  there  is  spread 
beneath  Him  that  which  is  blue  and  gleaming  as  the  cloudless  heaven  above  Sinai. 
"  They  eat  and  drink  " — witness  that  men  who  draw  nigh  to  God,  on  the  footing 
of  sacrifice  and  covenant,  and  thereby  behold  His  face,  have  therein  festal  abun- 
dance for  all  their  need.  So  this  incident,  in  its  form  adapted  to  the  infantile 
development  of  the  people  that  first  received  it,  carries  in  its  symbols  the  deepest 
truths  of  the  best  communion  of  the  Christian  life,  and  may  lend  itself  to  the  fore- 
shadowing of  the  unspoken  glories  of  the  heavens.  From  that  point  of  view  I 
want  to  look  at  it.  LI  ask  you  to  consider  the  vision  of  God  possible  for  us. 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Eevealer.  This  generation  is  very  fond  of  saying,  "  No  man 
hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  nor  can  see  Eim."  It  is  a  pity,  but  they  would  go  on 
with  the  quotation  and  say,  "  the  only-begotten  Sen,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father,  He  hath  declared  HimJ'    The  eradiation  of  His  brightness,  "  and  the 


CHAP,  sxiv,]  EXODUS.  451 

express  image  of  His  person,"  is  that  Divine  man,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  The 
knowledge  of  God  which  we  have  in  Jesus  Christ  is  real,  as  sight  is  real.  It  is  not 
complete,  but  it  is  genuine  knowledge.  We  know  the  best  of  God,  if  I  may  use 
such  a  phrase,  when  we  know  what  we  know  in  Christ,  that  He  is  a  loving  and  a 
righteous  will ;  when  we  can  say  of  Him  "  He  is  love,"  in  no  metaphor  but  in 
simple  reality,  and  His  will  is  a  will  towards  all  righteousness,  and  towards  all 
blessing,  anything  that  heaven  has  to  teach  us  about  God  afterwards  is  less  than 
that.  We  see  Him  in  the  reality  of  a  genuine,  central,  though  by  no  means  com- 
plete, knowledge.  Our  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  is  as  sight,  in  reference  to 
certitude.  People  say,  "Seeing  is  believing."  I  should  turn  it  the  other  way 
about,  and  say,  "Believing  is  seeing."  For  we  may  be  a  great  deal  surer  of  God 
than  ever  we  can  be  of  this  outer  world.  And  the  witness  which  is  borne  to  us  in 
Christ  of  the  Divine  nature  is  far  more  reliable  than  even  the  evidence  that  is 
borne  to  us  by  sense  of  an  eiternal  universe.  Then  remember,  too,  that  where  we 
have  learned  to  know,  and  absolutely  to  rely  upon,  and  vividly  to  realize  our 
Father's  presence  through  Jesus  Christ,  there  we  shall  see  Him  in  all  things  and 
every wheie.  Then,  remember,  further,  that  the  degree  of  this  vision  depends 
upon  ourselves,  and  is  a  matter  of  cultivation.  "  Blessed  are  the  pare  in  heart,  for 
they  shall  see  God."  There  are  three  things  wanted  for  sight — something  to  see  ; 
something  to  see  by ;  something  to  see  with.  God  has  given  us  the  two  first,  and 
He  will  help  us  to  the  last  if  we  like.  But  we  have  to  bring  the  eye,  without  which 
the  sunbeam  is  vain,  and  that  which  it  reveals  also.  Christ  stands  before  us,  at 
once  the  Master-Light  of  our  seeing,  and  the  Object  that  we  are  to  behold.  But 
for  us  there  is  needed  that  the  eye  sliall  be  pure  ;  that  the  heart  shall  turn  towards 
Him.  Faith  is  the  eye  of  the  soul.  Meditation  and  habitual  occupation  of  mind 
and  heart  with  Jesus  Christ,  the  Revealer  of  God,  are  needed  if  we  are  to  "see 
God."  II.  Secondly,  notice  the  feast  in  the  Divine  pkesexce.  "  They  did  eat 
and  drink."  That  suggests  in  the  singular  juxtaposition  of  the  two  thmgs,  that 
the  vision  of  God  is  consistent  with,  and  consecrates,  common  enjoyment  and 
everyday  life.  Even  before  that  awful  blaze  these  men  sat  down  and  fed,  "  eating 
their  meal  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,"  and  findiug  no  contradiction  nor 
any  profanity  in  the  close  juxtaposition  of  the  meal  and  the  vision.  There  is  no 
false  asce'icism  as  the  result  of  the  Christian  sight  of  God.  It  takes  nothing  out  of 
life  that  ought  to  be  in  it.  If  we  see  God  there  is  only  one  thing  that  we  shall  be 
ashamed  to  do  in  His  presence,  and  that  is  to  sin.  For  all  the  rest  the  vision  of 
God  blends  sweetly  and  lovingly  with  common  service  and  homely  joys.  It  will 
interpret  life.  Nothing  is  small  with  such  a  background ;  nothing  common-place 
when  looked  at  in  connection  with  Him.  It  will  ennoble  life  ;  it  will  gladden  life. 
But  there  is  another  thought  here  to  which  I  must  refer  for  a  moment.  That 
strange  meal  on  the  mountain  was  no  doubt  made  on  the  sacrifices  that  had  pre- 
ceded, of  which  a  part  were  peace-offerings.  The  ritual  of  that  species  of  sacrifice 
partly  consisted  in  a  portion  of  the  sacrifice  being  partaken  of  by  the  offerers. 
The  same  meaning  lies  in  this  meal  on  the  mountain  that  lay  in  the  sacrificial 
feast  of  the  peace-offering,  the  same  meaning  that  lies  in  the  great  feast  of  the  new 
covenant,  "This  is  My  body;  this  is  My  blood."  God  spreads  in  His  presence 
a  table,  and  the  food  on  that  table  is  the  "Bread  which  came  down  from  heaven 
that  it  might  give  life  to  the  world."  The  vision  of  God  and  the  feast  on  the 
mountain  are  equally  provided  and  made  possible  by  Christ  our  Passover,  who  was 
sacrificed  for  us.     III.  And  so,  lastly,  we  may  gather  out  of  this  incident  a  glimpse 

OF  A  PROPHETIC  CHAP.ACTER,  AND  SEE    IN    IT  THE  PEKFECTINO  OF  THE  VISION  AND  OF   THE 

FEAST.  We  know  the  apostle's  wonderful  statement  of  the  difference  between  the 
beatific  knowledge  of  heaven  and  the  indirect  and  partial  knowledge  of  earth. 
Here  we  "  see  in  a  glass  darkly  ;  there  face  to  face."  It  is  not  for  us  to  try  before 
the  time  to  interpret  the  latter  of  these  statements ;  only  this,  let  us  remember  that 
whatever  may  be  the  change  in  manner  of  knowledge,  and  in  measure  of  appre- 
hension, an.l  in  proximity  of  presence,  there  is  no  change  in  heaven  in  the  medium 
of  revelation.  For  heaven  as  for  earth  God  is  the  King  invisible;  for  heaven  as 
for  earth  no  man  can  see  Him,  the  only  begotten  Son  declares  Him.  Christ  is  for 
ever  the  Manifester  of  God,  and  the  glorified  saints  see  God  as  we  see  Him  in  the 
face  of  Jesus  Christ,  though  they  see  that  Face  as  we  do  not.  Yonder  there  are  new 
capacities  indeed.  When  there  are  more  windows  in  the  house  there  will  be  more 
sunshine  in  the  rooms.  When  there  is  a  new  speculum  in  the  telescope  galaxies 
will  be  resoh  ed  that  are  now  nebulous,  and  new  brightnesses  will  be  visible  that 
axe  now  veiled.    But  with  all  the  new  powers  and  the  extension  of  present  vision. 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnv. 


there  will  be  no  corrections  in  the  present  vision.    We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  and 
learn  that  what  we  knew  of  Him  in  Christ  here  is  true  for  ever.     And  on  that 
perfect  vision  will  follow  the  perfect  meal,  which  will  still  be  the  feeding  on  the 
sacrifice.     For  there  were  no  heaven  except  "  He  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins 
for  ever,"  and  tliere  is  no  spiritual  life  above  except  a  life  derived  from  Him.     The 
feast  means  perfect  satisfaction,  perfect  repose,  perfect  gladness,  perfect  companion- 
ship.    (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)         The  God  of  Sinai  approached  through  sacrifice: — 
Two  distinct  aspects  of  the  Divine  character  had  already  been  made  known  to  the 
Israelites— His  goodness  and  His  severity.  His  tenderness  and  His  rigliteousuess. 
Now  a  third  lesson  is  given  them.     The  awful  God  of  Sinai  may  be  approached 
and  communed  with  ;  they  need  not  be  terrified  away  for  ever  from  Him,  or  be 
afraid  to  approach  Him.     I.  The  awful  God  of  Sinai  mat  be  approached  by  sinful 
MEN  through  sacrifice.     "  UpoH  the  nobles  of  Israel  He  laid  not  His  hand." 
II.  The  awful  God  of  Sinai  is  seen  by  sinful  men  through  sacrifice.     "  Also  they 
»aw  God."    III.  The  awful  God  of  Sinai  is  communed  with  by  sinful  men  through 
■acbifice.     "Also  they  did  eat  and  drink."     There  is  safety  for  the  transgressor 
only  under  the  shadow  of  the  sacrifice— the  atonement  of  Jesns  Christ.     Socrates 
once  cried,  "  Plato,  Plato,  perhaps  God  can  forgive  wilful  sin."    You  see  the  gospel 
of  Socrates— "  Perbaps."    "But,"  he  added,  "  I  do  not  see  how."     In  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  there  is  no  "  perhaps."     "  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  siuners."    There  is 
no   "perhaps"  about  tbat.      Socrates  said,   "I  do  not  see  how."     We  do  see 
how.       "  Through   this   Man    is    preached  forgiveness   of    sins."      {R.    Roberts.) 
A  gloriom  vision : — I.  Glorious  ascension.     Mountain  climbing  is  always  whole- 
some.    The  more  we  climb,  the  less  will  be  our  difficulty,  on  the  summit  of  Divine 
mountains  are  gracious  manifestations  to  reward  the  praying  climbers.     II.  Blessed 
VISION.     "  And  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel ;    and  there  was  under "  &c.      Calm 
repose.    We  mav  rest  sweetly  on  the  Divine  fidelity.     III.  Glorious  preservation. 
God's  hand  wilf  ever  be  laid  on  the  spiritual  nobility.     They  are  under  His  pro- 
tecting,  preserving   care.     IV.    Wondrous  festivity.      The  saints  sball  eat  and 
drink  in  the  Divine  presence.     Heavenly  manna.     New  wine.     (W.  Burrows,  B. A.) 
Man's  approach  to  God  : — I.  That  man's  approach  to  God  is  commanded  (ver.  1). 
This  is  both  reasonable  and  necessary.     Servant  to   master ;  scholar  to  teacher ; 
child  to  parent ;    sinner  to  Saviour.     II.    That  man's  approach  to  God  must  bb 
through  A  MEDUTOR ;  "  worsliip  thou  afar  off,  and  Moses  alone  shall   come  near 
unto  the  Lord."     So  Jesus  has  entered  into  the  holy  place  for  us.     He  is  the  "  one 
mediator,"  &c.,  "  the  new  and  living  way  "  (John  xiv.  6).     We  must  remember  that 
this  was  in  answer  to  their  own  prayer  (xx.  19).     III.  That  man's  approach  to  God 
must  be  reverent.     "Worship  ye  afar  off."    IV.  That  man's  approach  to  God 
is  rewarded  by  a  manifestation  op  the  Divine  glory  (ver.  10).     Not  a  literal  or 
physical  vision  of  "  the  king  " — invisible  (Deut.  iv.  2;  1  Tim.  vi.  16);  but  spiritual 
(Isa.  vi.  ;  Acts  ix.  3,  4,  and  refs. ;  1  Cor.  xii.  2).     V.  That  man's  approach  to  God 
is  not  to  be  dreaded,  but  welcomed  and  enjoyed.     "  They  find  His  presence  no 
more  a  source  of  disturbance  and  dread,  but  radiant  in  all  the  bright  loveliness  of 
supernal  glory  :  a  beautiful  sign  that  the  higher  religion  and  state  of  conformity  to 
law,  now  established,  shall  work  onward  to  eternal  blessedness."     (J.  W.  Bum.) 
A  glorious  sight  and  a  holy  feast : — I.  The  sight  of  God,  to  which  the  nobles  of 
Israel  were  admitted.     H.  The  safety  and  comfort  which  they  enjoyed.     III. 
The  feast  with  which  they  were  provided.     They  ate  of  the  peace-offerings  which 
had  been  recently  sacrificed,  and  drank  of  the  Hbations  which  had  just  been  offered, 
on  the  ratification  of  the  covenant.     Even  thus  are  the  disciples  of  Christ  invited  to 
partake  of  Him  by  faith,  and  that  in  joy  and  gladness,  as  the  great  peace-offering  of 
the  Church.      Thus  are  they  seated  at  the  table  of  their  adorable  Lord,  in  token  of 
gracious  communion  with  the  family  in  heaven  ;  and  thus  is  their  fellowship  mani- 
fested with  the  Father  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.     In  this  fellowship  His 
children  truly  see  God  in  Christ.     They  behold,  and  they  partake,  the  glory  of  His 
person,  the  glory  of  His  covenant,  the  hidden  glory  of  His  Word,  the  glory  of  His 
redeeming  and  everlasting  love.     {R.  P.  Buddicom,  M.A.)         The  vision  of  God : — 
We  have  here  the  conjunction  of  that  which  is  the  highest  attainment  of  faith, 
namely,  the  vision  of  God,  with  that  which  is  the  commonest  act  of  our  hves, 
namely,  eating  and  drinking.     Again,  eating  and  drinking  is  only  one  form,  and 
that  one  of  the  lowest  forms  of  human  enjoyment.     Therefore,  if  the  vision  of  God 
be  compatible  with  that,  it  may  be,  it  must  be,  equally  so  with  every  proper  mode 
of  employment  or  enjoyment  among  men.     I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  let  it  bo 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  EXODUS.  453 

noted,  THAT  THERE  ARE  SOME  WHO  EAT  AND  DRINK  WITHOUT  SEEIKG  GoD.       TMs  is   tl'Ue 

in  the  very  lowest  sense  in  which  the  words  can  be  employed  ;  for,  unhappily,  there 
are  multitudes  who  partake  of  their  ordinary  food  without  any  perception  of  the  fact 
that  they  are  indebted  for  it  to  a  higher  power.  In  the  same  way  there  are  many 
successful  men  of  business,  who  enjoy  the  blessings  of  prosperity  without  seeing 
that  God  has  had  any  hand  in  the  bestowment  of  them.  They  are,  as  the  phrase 
is,  "  self-made."  They  have  been  the  architects  of  their  own  fortunes.  Similarly, 
there  are  those  who  have  risen  to  places  of  power  and  influence,  alike  in  the  world 
and  in  the  Church,  who  never  think  of  God  in  their  enjoyment  of  their  eminence. 
It  has  come  to  them,  so  they  say,  all  in  the  way  of  cause  and  effect.  They  have 
been  able,  diligent,  and  persevering,  and,  therefore,  their  prosperity  or  popularity  is 
nothing  more  than  the  natural  result  of  their  use  of  appropriate  means.  And  to 
mention  only  one  other  form  of  the  same  disposition  :  there  are  men  among  us 
whose  delight  it  has  been  to  unravel  the  secrets  of  the  external  world,  and  discover 
the  operations  of  those  forces  which  play  so  important  a  part  in  the  physical  uni- 
verse. Their  meat  and  their  drink  is  to  sit  at  the  spectroscope,  and  by  their 
wondrous  analysis  to  bring  out  the  composition  of  the  sun,  and  of  the  various 
members  of  the  planetary  sphere.  Their  joy  is  to  chain  the  lightning  to  their 
messages,  and  make  it  carry  their  words  to  the  world's  ends.  They  rise  into 
ecstasies  over  the  detection  of  some  new  fact  which  witnesses  to  the  uniformity  of 
law ;  and  they  become  enthusiastic  at  the  prospect  of  being  able  to  trace  the  mystery 
of  the  universe  a  step  farther  back  than  their  predecessors  have  gone.  But  all  this 
while  they  see  nothing  of  God.  No  thrill  of  affection  vibrates  in  their  hearts  to  any 
personal  agent ;  and  their  emotions  are  similar  to  those  which  one  feels  as  he  looks 
upon  a  mighty  machine  moving  on  in  rhythmic  regularity  at  its  unceasing  work.  I 
do  not  need  to  say  that  all  our  men  of  science  are  not  such  as  I  have  now  described, 
but  every  one  acquainted  with  the  recent  utterances  of  some  of  them  will  admit  that 
these  confirm  what  I  have  said.  Now  I  have  grouped  all  these  together  because 
they  are  all  alike  practical  atheists.  They  eat  and  drink,  but  they  do  not  see  God. 
II.  In  the  second  place,  let  it  be  remarked  that  there  are  some  who  see  God,  bdt 
CANNOT  eat  or  DRINK.  They  ha ve  a  vivid  sense  of  the  personal  existence  of  Jehovah, 
and  they  feel  Him  always  near,  but  they  take  no  comfort  in  His  presence.  Eather, 
it  seems  to  haunt  them  as  a  spectre,  and  to  threaten  them  as  an  executioner. 
Now  how  shall  we  account  for  this?  The  answer  is  not  far  to  seek.  It  is  caused  by 
a  sense  of  guilt.  They  have  never  entered,  through  Jesus,  into  covenant  with  God. 
But  even  among  those  who  have  done  this,  there  are  some  who  seem  to  have  had 
their  happiness  poisoned  by  the  thought  of  God.  They  see  Him,  they  are  always 
seeing  Him ;  but  the  vision  seems  to  have  paralyzed  them,  and  they  go  through  life 
baiting,  solemn,  and  severe.  If  they  would  "  see  God,  and  eat  and  drink,"  they 
must  rise  out  of  service  into  sonship,  and  learn  to  think  and  speak  of  God  as  their 
Father  in  heaven.  This  will  give  sincerity  and  naturalness  to  their  devotions, 
activity  to  their  lives,  happiness  to  their  hearts,  and  cheerfulness  to  their  deport- 
ment, so  that  men,  as  they  behold  them,  will  be  won  by  the  very  radiance  of  their 
joy  to  Him  from  whom  their  gladness  springs.  But  there  are  still  others  who,  at 
certain  times  of  their  history,  have  had  a  vivid  perception  of  the  nearness  of  God,  while 
yet  they  could  neither  eat  nor  drink.  Affliction  has  come  upon  them.  They  have 
felt  God  very  near  them,  but  then  they  have  felt  as  if  He  were  having  a  controversy 
with  them,  as  if,  somehow,  He  were  alienated  from  them,  and  that  has  made 
their  sorrow  all  the  deeper.  But  all  this  has  sprung  from  a  misinterpretation 
of  His  providence,  and  that  again  has  its  root  in  lack  of  faith  in  His  father- 
hood. Ill,  Finally,  let  it  be  observed,  that  there  are  some  who,  like  those 
here  described,  "  SEE  GoD  AND  DO  EAT  AND  DRINK."  They  are  reconciled  to 
God  through  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son  ;  they  have  learned  to  call  Him  Father,  and 
the  joy  of  their  lives  is  that  they  have  a  constant  sense  of  His  presence.  When 
they  say,  "  Thou  God  seest  me,"  it  is  not  with  a  feeling  of  uneasiness,  like  that  of  a 
suspected  person  who  feels  himself  watched  by  some  detective  ;  but  rather  mth  an 
emotion  of  satisfaction,  because  they  know  that  One  is  beside  them  who  can  make 
provision  for  every  emerging  necessity,  and  find  for  them  also,  as  for  Hagar,  a 
fountain  in  the  desert.  When  they  think  of  Him,  it  is  not  so  much  as  the  Great 
Creator,  Euler,  and  Judge,  as  the  Father ;  and  because  they  can  say  "  Our  Father," 
they  have  a  sense  of  ownership  in  all  His  attributes  and  possessions.  They  have 
accepted  His  own  assurance,  "I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,"  and  His  omnipresence  is 
the  very  joy  and  rejoicing  of  their  hearts.  It  is  not  a  melancholy  thing,  which 
poifions  every  other  experience.    It  is  not,  like  the  sword  of  Damocles,  a  threatening 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

thing,  that  keeps  us  from  sitting  down  to  the  feast.  Rather  it  is  itself  that  which 
gives  the  feast  its  real  glory,  and  the  festival  to  us  is  twice  a  feast  because  He  is 
there.  He  makes  the  brightest  element  in  our  blessings ;  He  gives  to  us  the  real 
joy  of  our  prosperity.  And  when  affliction  comes  He  mitigates  it  with  His  sj  mpathy 
and  cheers  us  under  it  with  His  fellowship.  He  comes  to  us  not  as  a  spectre  in  the 
night,  but  as  a  father,  to  lap  us  in  the  mantle  of  His  love.  "  Bane  and  blessing, 
pain  and  pleasure,"  alike  are  sanctified  by  His  presence,  and  no  darkness  for  us 
could  be  so  dense  as  that  which  would  envelop  us  if  we  were  to  be  deprived  of  Him. 
(W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  distinguishing  itrii-Uege  of  God's  faithful  servants: — 
That  a  sight  of  God  in  Christ,  and  a  holy  familiarity  with  Him,  with  all  safety,  is 
the  privilege  of  God's  covenant-people,  especially  in  these  solemn  approaches  to 
which  He  calls  them.     I.  To  show  what  is  that  sight  or  God  in  Chkist,  which  is 

THE  privilege  OF  HiS  PEOPLE  IN  THEIR  SOLEMN  APPROACHES  TO  HiM. There  is  a  twO- 

fold  solemn  approach  of  God's  people  to  Him.  There  is  a  right  approach.  1. 
When  God  calls  them  up  to  the  mount  of  myrrh,  where  our  Lord  abides  till  the  day 
break  (Song  of  Sol.  iv.  6) ;  when  He  calls  them  to  come  up  to  the  hill  of  God  in 
Emmanuel's  land,  where  stands  the  King's  palace,  namely  heaven.  This  call  comes 
to  the  beheving  soul  at  death.  2.  When  God  calls  them  to  come  up  to  the  mount  of 
ordinances  to  meet  Him  at  the  sacred  feast,  as  the  nobles  of  Israel  in  the  text,  and 
as  we  at  this  time  are  called  to  feast  on  the  great  sacrifice  in  the  sacrament.  This 
is  a  solemn  approach.  Now,  what  is  the  sight  of  God  in  Christ  which  is  the 
privilege  here  ?  As  to  this  we  observe — (1)  That  it  is  a  believing  sight  of  God  in 
their  nature  (John  i.  14.).  (2)  That  it  is  a  sight  of  this  God  in  the  place  of  His 
special  residence;  on  the  mount  to  which  they  were  invited,  where  He  stood,  as  it 
were,  onta  pavement  of  sapphire.  (3)  It  is  a  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  place  of  His 
feet  (ver.  10).  (4)  It  is  a  sight  of  God  as  reconciled  in  Christ.  They  saw  God,  and 
did  eat  and  drink  as  in  the  house  of  their  frieud  (2  Cor.  v.  18-20).  (5)  It  is  a  sight 
of  God  as  their  God.  They  saw  the  God  of  Israel.  Here  lay  the  surpassing  sweet- 
ness of  their  sight.  (6)  It  is  a  sight  of  transcendent  glory  in  Him.  Nothing  is 
described  but  what  was  under  His  feet.  For,  search  the  universe,  there  is  no  person, 
no  thing  like  Him.  But  the  best  things  on  earth  are  not  sufficient  to  set  forth  the 
glory  even  of  this,  and  therefore  it  is  added,  "  as  if  it  were  the  body  of  heaven  in 
His  clearness."  They  who  see  Him,  see  that  of  which  they  can  never  see  the  like. 
We  are  now — II.  To  show  what  is  that  holy  familiarity  which  is  the  privilege 
OF  God's  people  in  their  solemn  approaches  to  Him. — It  is  a  believing,  holy, 
humble  freedom  before  their  Lord  (Eph.  iii.  12) !  "  In  whom  we  have  boldness  and 
access,  with  confidence,  by  the  faith  of  Him."  1.  They  were  allowed  to  come  for- 
ward to  God,  when  others  must  stand  back  (Isa.  Ivi.  6,  7)  ;  when  others  must  abide 
at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  believers  may  come  up  to  the  mount  and  are  welcome.  2. 
They  were  allowed  to  feast  on  the  sacrifice  set  before  them.  Christ  the  sacrifice 
typically  slain,  and  beUevers  are  allowed  to  feast  on  this  sacrifice,  to  eat  His  flesh 
and  drink  His  blood  ;  to  make  a  believing  application  of  a  whole  Christ  to  their  own 
souls  for  their  spiritual  nourishment :  "  Take,  eat,  this  is  My  body  broken  for  you."  3. 
They  were  allowed  to  converse  vrith  God  freely,  as  one  at  the  table  of  his  friends. 
4.  They  were  allowed  to  be  in  His  secrets,  to  see  what  others  have  no  access  ^to. 
They  saw  God.  Believers  are  allowed  to  see  the  glory  of  His  person  (John  i.  14). 
The  glory  of  His  covenant  (Psalm  xxv.  14).  The  glory  of  His  redeeming.  His 
everlasting  love  to  them  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  The  hidden  glory  of  His  word  (Luke  xxiv. 
32).  5.  They  were  allowed  to  lay  elII  their  wants  on  Him.  III.  To  make  some 
practical  improvement.  1.  To  show  that  it  is  a  wonder  of  grace  that  siuful 
creatures  are  admitted  to  see  God,  and  be  familiar  with  Him.  We  think  -we  need 
say  little  for  proof  of  this.  Only  consider — (1)  The  infinite  distance  that  there  is 
between  God  and  the  creature  in  respect  of  perfection.  (2)  That  it  is  the  same  God 
who  is  such  a  severe  and  dreadful  avenger  of  sin  (Psalm  v.  5).  2.  To  show  that  it 
is  a  wonder  of  grace  that  sinful  creatures,  in  their  solemn  approaches  to  God,  and 
when  they  are  thus  favoured,  come  off  safe.  This  will  appear  if  we  consider— (1)  The 
infinite  holiness  and  spotless  purity  of  that  God  before  whom  the  sinful  creature 
appears.  He  is  glorious  in  holiness,  and  fearful  in  praises  (chap.  xv.  11).  (2)  That 
the  best  carry  a  sinful  nature  even  up  into  the  mount  with  them.  (8)  That  sinful 
creatures  never  miss  to  leave  the  marks  of  their  foul  feet,  even  when  they  are  on 
holy  ground  (Rom.  vii.  2).  (4)  The  particular  jealousy  which  God  has  manifested 
about  His  worship.  3.  To  explain  how  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  safety  of  God's 
people,  when  thus  favoured,  is  secured.  It  is  so — (1)  Because  they  are  God's 
covenant-people  by  marriage  with  His  Son.     (2)  Because  they  come  up  under 


CHiiP.  XXIV.]  EXODUS,  455 

the  covert  of  the  Kedeemer's  blood  (Heb.  xii.  22-24).  (3)  Because  God  looks 
on  them  as  in  His  own  Son,  and  not  as  in  themselves ;  and  so  after  a  sort  He 
overlooks  their  infirmities  (Numb,  xxiii.  21).  (4)  Because,  though  they  be  unclean 
creatures,  they  come  up  into  the  mount,  to  bathe  in  the  fountain  opened  there,  for 
sin  and  for  uncleanness  (Zech.  xiii.  1).  (5)  Because  it  is  the  end  of  the  covenant,  to 
bring  them  to  God.  1.  Let  us,  then,  nevermore  think  lightly  of  solemn  approaches  to 
God,  whether  in  private  or  in  public  ordinances.  2.  Let  this  commend  Christ  and  the 
covenant  to  us,  especially  to  those  who  stand  off  from  Him  and  His  covenant.  3.  Let 
us  long  for  tbat  day  which  will  put  an  end  to  our  sinfulness,  weakness,  and  imper- 
fection, when  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is,  without  any  danger  of  sinning  or  suffering, 
which  is  far  better  (Phil.  i.  23).  It  would  be  a  token  for  good  that  we  had  seen  the 
Lord,  if  we  were  now  longing  for  that  blessed  day.  (T.  Bonton,  D.D.)  Seeing 
God : — The  soul  has  eyes.  There  are  hours  not  related  to  the  clock ;  there  are 
birthdays  for  which  the  calendar  provides  no  line  of  registry.  How  natural  is  this 
endeavour  to  make  the  conception  plain  by  a  visible  picture,  and  how  visible  pictures 
are  lifted  up  to  new  meanings  and  clothed  with  new  solemnities  by  such  sacred  uses. 
There  have  been  times,  even  in  our  cold  experience,  when  nature  has  had  to  be 
called  in  to  help  the  expression  of  the  soul's  dehght.  Every  heart  has  its  own  image, 
or  parable,  or  symbol,  by  which  it  sets  forth  to  itself  the  best  aspect  of  its  supreme 
dehght.  When  we  want  to  represent  God,  and  our  view  of  Him,  how  naturally  we 
turn  to  the  heavens.  No  earthly  object  will  suffice.  There  burns  in  us  a  sacred 
contempt  for  all  things  measurable.  We  want  all  the  broad  brilliance  of  noonday, 
all  the  tender  glory  of  the  midnight,  all  the  pomp  of  the  summer  sky.  There  is 
verily  a  natural  religion  ;  it  is  a  poor  deity  that  can  be  set  forth  in  clay,  and  iron, 
and  carved  stone.  Find  any  race  that  has  lifted  up  its  religious  conceptions  so  as 
to  require  for  their  imaging  all  heaven,  and  surely  you  have  found  a  race  that  may 
at  any  moment  alight  upon  the  true  God.  \Vhat  Ezekiel  saw  was  as  the  appearance 
of  the  likeness  of  a  throne.  John  said  that  the  face  he  saw  was  like  a  jasper  and 
a  sardine  stone,  and  the  rainbow  which  gave  tenderness  to  the  throne  was  iu 
sight  like  unto  an  emerald.  When  Jesus  was  transfigured.  His  face  did  shine  as  the 
sun,  and  His  raiment  was  white  as  the  light.  Do  not  take  these  as  equivalents, 
but  as  hints — some  idea  of  the  majesty  which  must  have  beamed  upon  the  eyes  of 
worship  as  they  gazed  with  religious  awe  up  5n  sights  for  which  there  is  no  language. 
It  does  us  good  to  be  wrought  into  passions  which  transcend  all  adequate  speech- 
yes,  it  does  the  soul  good  to  pray  itself  into  silence.  We  may  have  clear  vision  of 
God  to  such  an  extent  as  to  have  every  word  taken  away  from  our  use  and  be  left 
dumb  in  the  eloquence  of  silence.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12-18.  Come  up  to  Me  into  the  mount. — Divine  preparations: — I.  Each  onb 

HAS  HIS  OWN  POSITION  TO  OCCUPY.       II.  EaCH  MAN  HAS  HIS  OWN  DiVINE  VISION.       To-dsy 

we  may  experience  Divine  chidings,  and  to-morrow  we  may  be  on  the  Mount  of 
Beatitude.  HI.  But  there  are  specialities  of  work.  IV.  Therefore  there  must 
BE  speciality  IN  THE  PREPARATIONS.  Lcam  to  be  much  in  the  right,  much  in  prayer, 
much  in  mountain  solitude  ;  but  much  also  with  the  people.  Let  waiting  and 
working  go  hand  in  hand.  Above  all  things,  obey  the  Divine  voice.  (IF.  Burrows, 
B.A.)  Communion  with   God: — I.  That  communion  with   God   is   necessary. 

1.  For  religious  teachers.  2.  For  those  engaged  in  business.  3.  For  parents,  &c. 
II.  That  SPECIAL  PLACES  are  appointed  for  communion  with  God.     1.  House  of  God. 

2.  Privacy  of  own  chamber.  IH.  That  preparation  should  be  made  for  communion 
with  God  (ver.  14 ;  see  Matt.  vi.  6).  1.  Guard  against  interruptions  from  without. 
2.  Drive  away  worldly  and  anxious  thoughts  withiru  IV.  That  communion  with 
God  should  be  most  frequently  alone.  1.  Presence  of  others  may  distract  mind 
or  embarrass  thoughts.  2.  Presence  of  others  may  divert  attention  from  personal 
concerns  of  soul.  3.  Private  sins  and  wants  to  be  laid  bare.  V.  That  in  communion 
with  God,  THE  presence  of  others  is  sometimes  helpful  and  even  necessary. 
Family  worship — prayer  meetings— for  those  who  have  common  wants,  interests, 
&c.  Vl.  That  communion  with  God  is  the  condition  upon  which  man  may 
witness  the  Divine  glory  (vers.  16,  17  ;  see  Isa.  vi.)  VII.  That  communion  with 
God  may  re  protracted,  and  man  must  not  weary  of  it.  VIII.  That  among  the 
purposes  of  communion  with  God,  are  recognition  of  the  Divine  authority  and 
preparation  for  future  work.  (•/.  W.  Bum.)  The  best  recommendation: — A 
young  man  once  came  to  London  bearing  a  letter  of  introduction  to  Baron  Rothschild 
with  the  request  that  he  would  give  him  employment.  The  great  banker  received 
Lim  warmly,  but  expressed  his  regret  that  he  had  no  position  for  him.    Aa  tha 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixr. 

young  man  was  going,  the  baron  put  on  his  hat  and  \ralked  along  with  him, 
pointing  out  the  various  objects  of  interest.  Passing  a  bank  the  rich  man  went  in 
to  transact  some  business.  Afterwards  the  young  man  applied  at  that  very  bank 
for  work,  and  they  asked,  "  Are  you  not  the  young  man  who  was  walking  with  the 
baron  this  morning  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Well,  you  were  in  good  company  :  and  since  we 
need  a  young  man  we  will  consider  this  a  sufficient  recommendation."  To  walk 
with  God  is  the  best  recommendation.  When  men  of  the  world  have  need  of  an 
assistant  or  helper,  they  will  be  likely  to  consider  such  a  fact  as  a  commendation. 
(A.  J.  Gordon.)  On  the  mount  with  God : — Moses  would  never  have  been  the  law- 
giver he  was  had  he  not  remained  there  on  the  mount,  in  sight  of  the  glory  and  in 
communion  with  his  God.  The  disciples  would  never  have  wrought  as  they  did, 
had  they  not  tarried  in  Jerusalem.  Eminent  preachers  and  teachers  would  never 
have  thrilled  and  won  hearts  to  Christ  as  they  have,  had  they  not  gained  their  power 
in  long  seasons  of  prayer  and  communion  with  God.  1.  Spiritual  endowment  is 
always  the  measure  of  success  in  work  for  Christ.  Preachers  fail  and  teachers  fail 
because  they  are  bo  little  on  the  mount  with  God.  2.  The  want  of  Christian 
workers  everywhere  is  revelation  of  the  Divine  glory.  From  this,  power  springs. 
God  can  use  us  only  as  we  become  equipped  by  vision  of,  and  communion  with, 
Him.  We  can  tell  only  as  we  know.  We  know  only  as  we  are  taught  of  God. 
Have  we  been  on  the  mount,  under  the  cloud  ?  Have  we  seen  the  glory  and  heard 
the  voice  ?     What  is  our  message  from  God  to  men?     (<7.  E.  Twitchell.) 


CHAPTER  XXV 


Vers.  1-9.  Make  Me  a  sanctuary. — God  dwelling  with  men  : — I.  The  dwelt<ino 
or  God  among  us  in  Christ  Jescs,  when  it  is  a  realitj',  and  not  merely  an  idea  or  a 
phrase,  imports  and  of  necessity  secures  the  passing  away  from  us  of  the  things 
WE  have  most  reason  to  fear.  When  God  comes  to  dwell  amoiig  us,  which  can 
only  be  by  dwelling  in  us  individually,  sin  goes  from  us,  in  its  guilt  and  its  pre- 
dominating power.  II.  God  comes  thus  to  dwell  with  men,  for  the  development 
OF  char-vcter,  and  for  the  nourishment  of  all  goodness.  The  putting  away  of  sin 
is  but  the  negative  part  of  salvation.  The  presence  in  its  place  of  truth  and  duty 
and  love  and  obedience — this  is  what  makes  a  saved  man.  III.  For  how  long 
DOES  God  dwell  with  men  ?  Deep  philosophy  as  well  as  high  faith  sanctions  the 
conclusion  that  the  God  of  grace,  who  makes  covenant  with  man  and  dwells  with 
him,  is  "  our  God  for  ever  and  ever,"  and  that  He  "  will  never  leave  us  or  forsake 
us."  {A.  Raleifih,  D.D.)  The  holy  tent : — I.  We  should  mark  that  God  makes 
Himself  dependent  on  the  will  of  man.  "  Let  them  make  Me."  This  is  true, 
not  only  of  material  wealth,  but  of  man's  nature.  1.  God  wants  human  nature.  He 
seems  to  covet  to  have  the  affection  of  our  life,  and  yearns  to  be  lunked  to  by  the 
creature  He  has  made.  Let  us  not  cheat  Him,  for  we  shall  rob  ourselves  most  of 
all.  2.  God  may  be  thwarted  by  man.  II.  In  this  Divine  conception  of  the  Church, 
iHERE  18  A  place  FOR  THE  RICH.  •  It  is  uot  impossible  for  rich  men  to  be  good  men. 
It  is  not  easy,  but  still  it  can  be  done.  God  has  given  them  a  place.  '•  This  is  the 
offering  which  ye  shall  take  of  them  :  gold."  God  would  not  have  accepted  planks 
from  those  who  had  gold,  and  so  God  will  not  accept  industry  in  His  service  in  the 
place  of  wealth.  III.  Labour  has  its  place.  There  wai  a  great  deal  of  timber 
leiiuired ;  the  wood  of  the  acacia  tree  was  used  for  the  framework.  Here  was  work 
which  the  poorest  could  do.  Is  it  not  so  to-day  ?  In  building  the  Church,  what 
room  for  a  holy  industry !  IV.  Woman  has  her  rights  here.  We  read  in  chap. 
XXXV.  24,  tJ5,  of  women  that  were  wise-hearted,  who  did  spin  with  their  hands,  &c. 
Influence  of  Christian  mothers.  Sunday-school  workers.  Mothers'  meetings.  Let 
woman  do  her  work  well.  We  must  have  her  work,  or  we  cannot  finish  ours.  V. 
There  is  room  for  genius.  "Precious  stones"  are  required.  The  onyx  stones, 
and  other  jewels,  took  up  but  small  room,  but  they  added  beauty  and  splendour  to 
the  rest.  God  does  not  create  genius  every  day.  Many  rhymers,  but  few  poets.  VI. 
Still,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  meanest  is  acceptable,  if  it  is  the  best  we  can 
bring.  There  are  times  when- cleverness  is  baffled,  and  wealth  is  powerless.  But 
see  to  it  God  has  your  best.    Acacia  wood  will  not  be  accepted  in  the  place  of  any- 


CHAP.  XXV.]  EXODUS.  457 

thing  else.  But  if  the  axe  and  saw  are  your  talents,  by  all  means  use  them.  VII. 
Our  best  and  our  ail  is  of  no  avail  without  the  atonement.  Alms  and  deeds  are 
only  safe  as  they  rest  upon  Christ's  merits.  {T.  Champness.)  The  Tabernacle  and 
priesthood : — I.  The  Tabernacle.  1.  Its  general  character.  2.  Its  contents.  II. 
The  priesthood  for  the  Tabernacle.  III.  The  symbolic  meaning  of  both  Taber- 
nacle AND  priesthood.  1.  Scriptural  evidence  of  the  symbolic  character  of  these. 
(1)  The  Mosaic  ritual,  as  a  whole,  is  declared  to  be  this  (Heb.  x.  1).  (2)  Parts  of  it 
declared  symbolic  (Heb.  ix.  6-9).  2.  Some  of  its  symbols  explained.  (1)  The 
propitiatory  in  the  "  Holy  of  Holies  "  (1  John  ii.  2).  (2)  The  veil  dividing  the 
"  holy  place  "  from  the  "  most  holy  "  (Heb.  x.  19,  20).  (3)  The  sacrifices  of  the 
Mosaic  ritual  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  3.  The  priesthood  a  symbol.  (1)  In  its  appoint- 
ment (Heb.  V.  1-5,  viii.  1-5,  ix.  11,  12).  (2)  In  its  contrast  (Heb.  vii.  11-28,  ix. 
23-28,  X.  1-13).  Lessons :  1.  The  importance  and  duty  of  studying  the  Old 
Testament  in  order  to  understand  the  New  Testament.  2.  The  marked  superiority 
of  the  Christian  over  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  3.  Our  weightier  responsibilities 
over  those  of  old.  4.  The  all-sufficiency  of  Christ  as  Redeemer,  Priest,  and  Friend. 
5.  Our  paramount  duties— to  accept,  trust,  and  obey  Him.  {D.  C.  Hughes,  31. A.) 
The  Tabernacle  : — I.  The  grand  purpose  of  the  Tabernacle  was  that  the  Israelites 
might  realize  God's  presence  with  them.  1.  The  unity  of  God  had  been  lost  in 
the  gradual  transference  of  separate  and  independent  sovereignty  to  every  attempted 
representation  or  localization  of  the  Deity.  This  evil,  God  now  corrects  by  the 
strict  confinement  of  His  localization  to  one  spot.  2.  The  conception  of  the  Deity 
had  been  demoralized  through  the  forms  in  which  men  sought  to  represent  God. 
And  so  the  God  of  Israel  refuses  to  allow  any  image  or  outward  representation  of 
Himself.  II.  The  manifestation  of  God's  presence  was  secured  by  the  construc- 
tion AND  furniture  OF  THE  Tabernacle.  1.  The  ark  was  constructed  out  of  the 
freewill  offerings  of  the  people.  2.  The  Tabernacle  in  its  costliness  was,  in  all  the 
circumstances  of  the  case,  wonderfully  appreciative  of  the  Divine  Majesty.  3. 
The  Tabernacle  was  constructed  in  all  respects  according  to  Divine  pattern. 
(IF.  Roberts,  M.A.)  Nature  and  design  of  the  Tabernacle  : — I.  Its  nature.  1. 
It  was  a  simple  structure.  The  materials  of  which  it  was  composed  were  costly 
indeed.  There  was  also  much  of  artistic  grace  and  beauty  wrought  up  into  its 
composition,  and  yet,  compared  with  the  splendid  cathedrals  Ac.  which  men  have 
erected,  how  simple  and  unpretending!  2.  It  was  a  structure  of  Divine  origin. 
Indebted  for  nothing  to  the  force  of  man's  creative  faculty.  God  planned  it.  II. 
Its  DESIGN.  1.  In  reference  to  the  Jews.  (1)  The  source  of  present  blessing.  The 
bright  spot  in  the  midst  of  a  dark  and  desert  world  ;  for  God  was  there,  and  walked 
in  the  midtt  of  His  people,  to  bless  and  deliver  them  from  their  enemies.  (2)  A 
pledge  or  promise  to  them  of  future  good.  A  heaven-devised  symbol,  pre- 
figuring God's  salvation.  2.  In  reference  to  ourselves.  (1)  An  illustration  of  the 
blessings  of  the  gospel.  The  relation  which  God  sustained  to  Israel  as  a  nation, 
He  now  sustains  to  His  people  as  individuals.  He  shades  them  by  day,  and 
enlightens  them  by  night ;  strengthens  and  comforts  ;  guides  and  blesses  them  as 
their  own  personal  God.  (2)  The  Tabernacle  furnishes  us  with  a  figurative  view  of 
our  relation  to  the  heavenly  world  (see  Heb.  ix.  23).  We  are  often  tempted  to  think 
and  feel  as  if  that  world  must  be  at  an  immense  distance,  a  vast  remove  from  us. 
A  proper  consideration  of  the  Tabernacle  would  seem  to  correct  this  impression. 
Here  you  see  the  Holy  Place,  or  the  Church  on  Earth,  and  the  Most  Holy  Place,  or 
the  Church  in  Heaven,  in  the  closest  possible  contiguity  to  each  other.  There  is 
only  that  thin  material  veil  to  separate  them.  In  conclusion  the  subject  we  have 
now  considered  sngcests  to  us — How  thankful  we  should  be  for  the  day  in  which 
we  live !  It  is  "  the  day  of  salvation  "  ;  the  dispensation  of  the  substance  which 
succeeded  to  that  of  the  shadow ;  the  time  of  direct  and  full  revelation  as  opposed 
to  the  time  of  type  and  figure.  It  is  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Tabernacle  what  the 
hour  of  noon,  with  its  radiant  splendour,  is  to  the  hour  of  early  dawn,  with  its  dim 
twilight  and  its  gloom.  In  regard  to  light,  and  grace,  and  privilege,  our  position 
under  the  gospel  is  exalted  indeed.  And  if  it  be  true  that  "  to  whom  much  is  given, 
of  them  much  will  be  required,"  then  it  becomes  us  to  see  well  to  it,  that  we 
improve  dihgently  our  privileges.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  Tabernacle  a  symbol 
of  holier  things  : — 1.  The  Tabernacle  was  the  dwelling  place  of  God.  It  tells  us  God 
is  great.  It  was  a  costly  Tabernacle.  The  value  of  the  structure  was  probably  not 
much  less  than  £300,000.  There  was  mystery.  The  Israelites  were  not  to  enter 
the  Tabernacle,  but  only  the  priests.  Only  the  high  priest  could  enter  into  the 
Holy  of  Holies,  and  that  bat  once  a  year.    Thus  God  surrounded  Himself  with  an 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv, 

impenetrable  veil  of  mystery.  It  has  been  said,  "  God  is  the  greatest  mystery  ia 
the  universe."  But,  if  there  is  mystery,  there  is  mercy.  There  was  also  justice, 
holiness,  and  majesty.  2.  The  IsraeUtes  no  doubt  looked  upon  the  Tabernacle  as 
the  palace  of  tbeir  King.  The  furniture  was  palace  furniture,  and  the  priests  were 
ministers  of  state.  3.  The  Tabernacle  was  set  up  in  the  wilderness.  In  all  our 
wanderings  God  is  with  us.  4.  The  Tabernacle  was  the  first  religious  structure,  in 
which  Jehovah  condescended  to  dwell.  Symbol  of  Divine  grace.  Erected  in 
midst  of  sinners.  5.  God's  presence  is  the  cause  of  holiness  and  it  alone  removes 
the  curse.  God  came  down  to  dwell  with  His  people,  not  because  they  were  holy, 
but  to  make  them  so.  No  place  is  holy  without  God.  That  place — wherever  it  may  be 
— is  holy  if  God  is  there.  6.  The  Tabernacle  was  a  place  of  worship.  It  was 
called  "  the  tent  of  the  congregation  "  (chap.  xl.  22).  They  had  a  property  in  it. 
It  was  the  palace  of  their  King.  It  was  the  house  of  their  God.  There  they  came 
to  confess  their  sin.  There  was  no  other  place  of  the  kind.  It  was  the  one 
Tabernacle  for  all  the  tribes,  and  for  all  the  individual  members  of  those  tribes.  7. 
The  Tabernacle  was  not  a  model  for  our  imitation,  but  "  a  shadow  of  heavenly 
things"  (Heb.  viii.  5).  The  substance  having  come,  we  need  not  go  back  to  the 
shadow.  In  the  Tabernacle  we  have  "  the  figures  of  the  true  "  (Heb.  is.  24).  In 
the  gospel  we  have  reality.  Its  blessings  are  everlasting.  Jesus  is  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life.  He  is  the  truth  of  every  figure,  the  way  to  a  holy  God,  and  the 
life  of  all  who  believe.  (R.  E.  Sears.)  The  Divine  purpose  in  the  erection  of  a 
Tabernacle : — This  introductory  sentence  of  the  symbolical  dispensation  involved 
much.  It  reiterated  the  great  promise  given  at  the  fall,  that  man,  although  lapsed, 
should  not  be  left  unaided  ;  that  there  should  be,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  an  inter- 
ference on  his  behalf  of  the  most  remarkable  character ;  and  that,  to  prepare  men's 
minds  for  its  reception,  it  should,  first  of  all,  be  presented  in  a  figure.  I.  God  dwelt 
iNATAnEKNACLE.  In  this  a  glorious  reality  was  forcshadowed  (John  i.  14;  Tim.iii.16; 
Gal.  iv.  4 ;  Heb.  ii.  14).  II.  In  that  'Tabebnacle  He  dwelt  amongst  His  people 
IsBAEL.  Christ  is  the  great  centre  round  which  all  His  people  are  grouped — those 
nearest  to  Him,  the  family  within  the  veil ;  the  glorified  ones,  who,  having  finished 
their  service  here  below,  are  at  rest — while  the  outer  circle  is  the  Church  militant, 
that  portion  of  the  family  which  is  still  in  the  midst  of  tribulation  and  conflict. 
But  He  is  the  great  centre.  To  Him  all  eyes,  all  hearts  are  turned  ;  from  Him  all 
supplies  are  derived.  The  one  see  Him  in  actual  fruition  and  enjoyment ;  tbe 
other  realize   Him   by  faith.      (J.    Ridgeway,   M.A.)  The   Tabernacle  of  the 

testimony  : — So  many  things  of  a  covenant  form  and  character  required  to  be 
placed  under  the  security  and  covering  of  a  covenant  habitation,  a  habitation 
having  relation  to  both  God  and  His  people.  The  Lord  Himself  had  said,  "  I  will 
dwell  among  them."  Here  was  His  habitation.  Look  at  the  model  after  which  it 
was  formed  (ver.  40).  God  was  His  own  architect,  nor  were  there  any  deviations  in 
after  thought  from  His  original  plan :  the  design  was  perfect.  But  why  such  exact- 
ness in  relation  to  this  temporary  residence,  this  wilderness  habitation  of  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  earth  ?  A  prefiguration  of  the  body  of  Christ  was  intended.  His 
assumption  of  our  form  and  flesh,  and  which  was  an  act  of  condescension,  a  veiling 
of  the  glories  of  His  Godhead,  a  coming  down  to  dwell  in  concealment.  The 
personal  assumption  of  our  nature,  therefore,  made  it  of  moment  tliat  what  was  to 
contain  the  inhabitation  of  Deity,  like  the  body  of  Christ,  curiously  wrought,  as  it 
is  said,  in  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth,  should  be  of  a  form,  and  be  put  together 
exactly  as  God  Himself  had  given  the  model  to  Moses  in  the  mount.  It  was 
especially  of  God.  In  the  spiritual  worship  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  in  the 
doctrines  of  grace,  nothing  is  suffered  to  be  misplaced,  nothing  left  to  be  introduced. 
There  is  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will-worship,  an  appearance  of  reverence  and 
humility,  but  none  in  reahty.  If  we  worship  God,  we  must  worship  Him,  after 
His  own  instructions,  and,  under  whatever  dispensation,  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 
The  design  was  God's,  but  the  execution  of  the  work  was  man's.  1.  Many 
hearts  were  in  the  work.  As  soon  as  required  to  be  constructed,  the  people 
had  a  heart  to  it,  and  well  they  might,  since  it  was  bringing  God  nearer  to  them, 
and  more  visibly  with  them  than  He  had  been.  How  interesting  the  union  of 
hearts  in  such  a  work,  men  and  women,  and,  we  might  think,  even  children  too, 
wise  and  willing  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  1  Delightful  was  it  to  have  their  hearts 
in  what  had,  from  eternity,  employed  the  heart  of  God,  His  whole  will  and  under- 
standing. His  counsels,  grace,  and  love.  How  are  our  hearts  affected  towards  the 
spiritual  temple  that  is  rising  in  this  world  of  sin?  Sweet  tbe  frame  of  mind  David 
was  in  when  he  said  (1  Chron.  xxix.  14,  &c.).     Their  hearts  were  their  offerings  : 


CHAP.  XX7.]  EXODUS.  499 

there  were  no  niggardly  restraints  of  covetousness.  At  what  expense  are  many  to 
support  the  pride  of  life,  and  to  maintain  the  superfluities  of  naughtiness  1  The 
day  is  coming  when  they  will  bitterly  lament  the  misapplication  of  wealth,  and  the 
want  of  a  heart,  in  their  fulness,  for  a  ready  yieldance  to  God.  2.  Many  hands, 
as  well  as  many  hearts,  were  in  the  work  (chap.  xxxv.  26).  And  how  de- 
lightful is  it  to  see  the  spiritual  temple  rising,  and  each  employed  as  skill  given 
him  1  Where  there  are  hearts,  hands  will  not  be  wanting.  We  see  many  employed 
about  the  great  building  God  has  in  progress,  and  what  has  set  them  to  work  but 
love  ?  It  is  this  that  is  the  great  moving  power  in  the  machinery  of  those  many 
institutions  which  are  in  truth  the  bulwark  and  glory  of  the  land.  (W.  Seaton.) 
The  Tabernacle  entire  : — We  think  the  Tabernacle  in  its  entireness  was  emblematical 
of — 1.  The  incarnation.  The  glory  of  Jehovah  filled  it.  2.  The  Church.  Unity 
in  diversity,  and  diversity  in  unity.  3.  The  believer.  As  respects  both  his  (1) 
present,  and  (2)  future  being.  Weak  and  imperfect  now  ;  to  be  glorified  hereafter. 
4.  The  millennial  kingdom  (Eev.  xxi.  3,  4).  {W.  Mudge.)  Design  and  use  of  the 
ceremonial  law  : — 1,  It  served  to  cherish  the  religious  sentiment.  The  Israelite 
was  reminded  by  it  in  all  his  relations,  even  the  most  significant  and  external,  of 
God ;  the  thought  of  God  was  introduced  into  the  very  midst  of  the  popular  life. 
2.  It  required  the  recognition  of  sin,  and  thus  called  forth  the  first  thing  essential 
for  the  reception  of  redemption,  a  sense  of  the  need  of  redemption.  The  law  was, 
and  was  intended  to  be,  a  heavy  yoke,  and  therefore  would  awaken  a  longing  after 
the  Kedeemer.  3.  It  served  to  separate  Israel  from  the  heathen  ;  it  erected  between 
the  two  a  wall  of  separation,  by  which  communication  was  prevented.  4.  Many 
things  in  the  Ceremonial  Law  served,  by  impressions  on  the  senses,  to  awaken 
reverence  for  holy  things  among  a  sensual  people.  5.  One  principal  object  of  the 
Ceremonial  Law  lay  in  its  symbolic  meaning.  The  people,  enthralled  in  visible 
objects,  were  not  yet  capable  of  vitally  appropriating  supersensual  truth  in  words, 
the  form  most  suited  to  their  nature.  It  was  needful  for  the  truth  to  condescend,  to 
come  down  to  their  power  of  apprehension,  to  prepare  itself  a  body  from  visible 
things,  in  order  to  free  the  people  from  the  bondage  of  the  visible.  Would  we 
rather  not  speak  at  all  to  the  dumb  than  make  use  of  signs  ?  The  Ceremonial  Law 
was  not  the  opposite  to  the  worship  of  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  but  only  an 
imperfect  form  of  the  same,  a  necessary  preparation  for  it.  The  accommodation  wa3 
only  formal,  one  which  did  not  alter  the  essence,  but  only  presented  it  in  large 
capital  letters  to  children  who  could  not  yet  read  a  small  running-hand.  {E.  W, 
HeHgste7iberg,  D.D.)  The  basis  of  symbolism : — The  altar  was  the  basis  of  the 
sacred  places,  the  priesthood  was  the  basis  of  the  sacred  persons,  the  burnt-offerings 
were  the  basis  of  the  sacred  rites,  and  the  Sabbath  was  the  basis  of  the  sacred  times. 
Here  we  discover  the  links  that  connect  the  Ceremonial  Laws  given  by  Moses  with 
the  primeval  ordinances  of  religion.  In  the  altar  set  up  in  the  family  of  Adam 
we  have  the  genesis  of  the  Tabernacle  and  Temple.  At  the  beginning  the  minister 
of  sacrifice  was  the  patriarch  of  the  existing  family,  and  his  sacred  office  passed 
over  to  the  Mosaic  priesthood.  In  the  offering  of  the  blood  by  Abel  and  the  offering 
by  fire  of  Noah,  we  discover  the  germs  of  the  Jewish  ritual.  The  Sabbath  ordained 
in  Paradise  became  the  central  institute  in  the  sacred  times  appointed  by  Moses. 
{E.  P.  Humphreij,  D.D.)  The  Tabernacle  a  tent : — The  Tabernacle  was  a  tent; 
it  was  a  costly  building,  but  still  it  was  a  tent ;  it  was  God's  tent  in  which  He  lived 
and  walked  with  His  people  in  the  wilderness  (chap.  xxv.  8  ;  Num.  ix.  15  ;  2  Sam. 
vii.  6  ;  Acts  vii.  38-50).  As  His  people  were  dwelling  in  tents,  God  would  have  a 
tent,  and  would  Uve  with  them  as  their  Guide  and  their  Guard,  their  Father  and  their 
King ;  but  afterward,  when  they  were  settled  in  the  land  of  Canaan  and  dwelt  in 
ceiled  houses,  He  permitted  them  to  build  Him  a  house  at  Jerusalem,  which  He 
then  filled  with  His  presence  as  He  had  before  filled  the  Tabernacle.  As  God 
dwelt  in  the  Tabernacle  and  afterwards  in  the  Temple,  and  as  men  must  then  come 
to  the  Tabernacle  or  to  the  Temple  to  get  to  God,  so  God  dwells  in  Christ  (2  Cor.  v. 
19),  and  all  who  would  come  to  God  must  come  to  Christ :  in  no  other  way  can  any 
one  get  to  God  (John  xiv.  6  ;  vi.  37).  Moreover,  as  there  was  but  one  Tabernacle, 
so  there  is  but  one  Christ,  and  none  can  be  saved  from  the  wrath  to  come  but  those 
who  come  to  Him  ;  and  as  a  man  must  come  out  of  the  camp  to  get  to  the 
Tabernacle,  so  a  man  must  come  out  from  the  world,  must  be  separated  from  it  in 
spirit,  before  he  can  be  really  in  Christ.  {G.  Rodgers.)  The  edifice  of  the 
Tabernacle : — Moses  received  on  Sinai  not  only  a  command  to  make  the  Tabernacle, 
but  plans  and  specifications  according  to  which  the  work  was  to  be  executed.  Ita 
ground-plan  was  a  parallelogram  forty-five  feet  in  length,  and  fifteen  feet  in  width. 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

The  material  was  of  ehittim,  a  species  of  acacia,  the  timber  of  which  has  a  rich 
black  colour  like  ebony,  and  is  eminently  light,  solid,  strong,  and  smooth.  The 
frame  of  the  Tabernacle  consisted  of  forty-eight  pieces  of  this  acacia  wood  standing 
on  end.  Eight  of  them  were  at  the  rear,  and  twenty  on  each  side ;  the  front  being 
left  open  to  be  covered  with  a  curtain.  They  were  each  fifteen  feet  long,  and, 
unless  the  two  outside  pieces  on  the  rear  end  were  exceptions,  twenty-seven  inches 
wide.  The  description  of  the  comer  planks  is  obscure,  but  favours  the  opinion 
that  each  consisted  of  two  pieces  fastened  together  at  a  right  angle  ;  so  that  it  was 
a  comer-plank  not  merely  because  it  stood  at  the  corner,  but  because  it  formed  an 
angle.  On  the  lower  end  of  each  of  the  planks,  two  tenons  were  wrought,  to 
correspond  with  mortises  in  the  sills  on  which  it  was  to  stand.  Possibly  there 
were  also  tenons  and  mortises  on  the  edges  where  the  planks  came  together ;  but  of 
this  we  have  no  certain  knowledge.  Such  a  connection  of  one  plank  with  another, 
by  tenon  and  mortise,  would  give  greater  strength  to  the  frame,  but  might  not  be 
necessary  in  addition  to  the  horizontal  bars  which  bound  the  planks  together. 
There  were  five  such  bars  on  each  side,  and  five  on  the  rear,  made  of  acacia  wood, 
and  overlaid  with  gold.  These  gilded  planks  when  erected,  stood  on  a  base,  or  sill,  of 
silver,  which  extended  perhaps  a  little  way  both  outward  and  inward,  from  the  wall 
formed  by  the  planks,  and  was  divided  into  twice  as  many  pieces  as  there  were 
planks  ;  so  that  each  of  the  latter  stood  on  two  separate  pieces  of  the  base,  one  of 
its  two  tenons  being  inserted  into  a  corresponding  cavity  in  each  division  of  the 
base.  Besides  the  planks  which  formed  the  wall  of  the  Tabernacle,  there  were  four 
pillars,  to  support  a  curtain  across  the  interior  of  the  building,  dividing  it  into  two 
apartments,  and  five  pillars  to  support  another  curtain  over  the  entrance  at  the  east 
end  of  the  edifice.  The  four  pillars  for  the  partition-curtain  stood  on  sills,  or 
socket-pieces  of  silver,  and  the  five  for  the  entrance-curtain  on  sills  of  copper. 
The  wooden  frame  of  the  Tabernacle  having  been  prepared,  it  was  necessary  to 
cover  it  with  suitable  hangings,  or  curtains.  Of  these  there  were  four  layers ;  the 
innermost  so  far  excelling  the  others  in  importance,  that  it  was  sometimes 
denominated  "  The  Tabernacle,"  as  if  all  else  appertaining  to  the  edifice  were 
subsidiary  to  this.  The  frame,  indeed,  seems  to  have  been  chiefly  designed  to  give 
support  to  the  beautiful  drapery  with  which  it  was  covered.  In  the  conception  of 
a  Hebrew  travelling  through  the  wilderness  from  Sinai  to  Canaan,  the  Tabernacle 
where  Jehovah  dwelt  was  of  cloth,  as  was  his  own  habitation.  It  was,  indeed,  of 
a  more  beautiful  fabric  than  the  other  tents  of  the  encampment,  which  were 
doubtless  of  goats'  hair,  like  those  of  the  nomadic  inhabitants  of  the  same  region 
at  the  present  day,  while  the  Tabernacle  of  God  was  of  fine  linen  variegated  with 
brilliant  colours.  The  several  parts  of  the  sanctuary  having  been  constructed,  it 
still  remained  to  make  an  enclosure  for  the  court  in  which  it  was  to  stand.  The 
prescribed  dimensions  of  this  area  were  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  for  the  length, 
and  seventy-five  feet  for  the  width.  It  was  to  be  enclosed  with  hangings  of  cloth 
made  of  fine  white  linen,  not  interwoven,  like  the  curtains  of  the  Tabernacle,  with 
figures  and  colours,  but,  so  far  as  appears,  woven  plain.  That  portion  of  it, 
however,  which  covered  the  entrance-way  at  the  east  end  of  the  court,  was 
variegated  with  colours  of  blue,  purple,  and  crimson.  The  height  of  these 
hangings  was  seven  feet  and  a  half  ;  and  they  were  suspended  on  pillars  by  means 
of  silver  hooks,  the  pillars  standing  on  sills  of  copper.  The  distance  between  these 
pillars  was  equal  to  the  height  of  the  hangings,  i.e.,  seven  and  a  half  feet.  They 
were  connected  by  a  silver  rod,  or  fillet,  extending  from  one  capital  to  another. 
The  Tabernacle  was  to  stand  near  the  western  end  of  this  enclosure,  and  midway, 
doubtless,  between  its  northern  and  southern  curtains.  A  large  area  was  therefore 
left  in  front  of  the  edifice  for  the  performance  of  those  rites  of  worship  which  were 
appropriate  to  the  place.  {E.  E.  Atwater.)  The  oneness  of  the  Tabernacle: — (see 
chap.  xxvi.  6).  It  is  to  be  one  Tabernacle — not  in  the  sense  of  singleness  and 
uniqueness,  as  if  God  had  forbidden  more  than  one  Tabernacle  to  be  constructed 
for  His  service — but  in  the  sense  of  a  real  and  profound  unity.  By  the  golden 
taches  or  clasps  binding  together  the  curtains  which  covered  it,  the  whole  stiucture 
was  made  one  tent  or  tabernacle,  and  all  its  parts  and  objects  were  united.  Unity 
is  the  hall-mark  which  God  stamps  upon  all  His  works.  It  is  His  autograph 
•written  in  the  stars  of  heaven  and  in  the  flowers  of  the  field,  attesting  that  they 
all  proceed  from  the  same  Mind.  The  universe  is  a  great  kaleidoscope  which  He 
is  perpetually  turning  round,  in  which  a  few  simple  elements  are  exhibited  in 
endless  diversity  ;  in  which  the  variety  is  not  more  wonderful  than  the  unity.  1. 
In  unfolding  this  sublime  lesson,  let  us  look,  in  the  first  place,  at  the  illastration 


CHAP.  XXV.]  EXODUS.  461 

of  it  which  the  Tabernacle  itself  afforded.  This  remarkable  structure  was  one  in 
regard  to  its  parts.  Each  vessel  has  its  own  distinct  use,  and  each  can  be  viewed 
apart  from  the  others ;  and  yet  in  every  act  of  priestly  service,  all  are  joined 
together,  and  are  in  active  operation  at  the  same  time.  It  needs  the  combination 
of  the  whole  to  make  a  complete  and  perfect  act  of  worship,  just  as  it  needs  the 
harmonious  action  of  all  the  members  of  the  body  to  constitute  the  act  of  living. 
And  just  as  the  golden  taches  link  the  curtains  of  the  Tabernacle  together,  and 
make  of  them  one  covering  for  one  structure,  so  the  smaller  golden  vessels  attached 
to  the  golden  candlestick,  the  altar  of  incense,  and  the  shewbread  table — the  tongs, 
snuff-dishes,  spoons,  and  censer — linked  together  the  different  vessels  of  the 
sanctuary  into  one  ministration,  forming  in  this  way  one  golden  chain  of  service 
simultaneously  carried  on  in  the  presence  of  God  in  behalf  of  Israel.  2.  The 
words  of  the  Lord  to  Moses  have  a  wider  reference  than  to  the  immediate  object 
which  called  them  forth.  They  may  be  applied  to  nature.  It  may  be  said  that  the 
Tabernacle  pointed  back  to  the  creation.  It  was  a  symbol  of  the  great  world  of 
nature,  as  at  once  manifesting  and  concealing  God.  It  was,  indeed,  as  a  Eosetta 
stone,  to  explain  to  man  the  spiritual  hieroglyphics  in  the  typology  of  nature,  which 
had  become  dark  and  insignificant  to  him  when  he  sinned  and  fell,  that  God 
devised  the  clearer  tvpology  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  set  the  cherubim,  which  were 
the  symbols  of  creation  in  connection  with  the  redemption  of  man,  above  the 
mercy-seat  in  its  holiest  place,  and  embroidered  them  on  the  veil  that  divided  the 
outer  from  the  inner  sanctuary.  There  was  no  typical  object  or  service  in  the 
Tabernacle  which  might  not  have  been  seen  in  nature  if  man  had  not  lost  the  key 
of  interpretation.  If  the  creation  be  thus  a  greater  Tabernacle,  in  which  all  the 
objects  are  meant  to  show  forth  the  praise  of  God,  and  to  symbolize  His  work  of 
grace,  we  should  expect  to  find  in  it  the  same  unity,  the  same  oneness  of  design 
and  harmony  of  all  parts,  that  we  see  in  the  Jewish  Tabernacle  ;  and  this  is  wh&t 
we  actually  find.  This  is  the  great  lesson  which  modern  science  has  taught  us  so 
effectually.  3.  But  not  only  did  the  Tabernacle  repeat  in  miniature  the  whole 
creation  as  God's  dwelling-place,  it  also  more  especially  typified  the  new  creation — 
the  Church  of  God.  Under  all  the  varying  dispensations  of  His  grace,  God's 
Church  has  been  one  The  Jews  were  m  the  outer  court  because  the  way  into  the 
holiest  was  not  yet  made  manifest.  Gentiles,  by  the  new  and  living  way  opened 
up  through  the  rent  veil  of  Christ's  flesh,  have  entered  into  the  inner  shrine.  But 
Jews  and  Gentiles  alike  are  now  united  in  one  communion  and  fellowship  in  Christ. 
The  Saviour  the  Jews  looked  forward  to  in  rites  and  sacrifices,  we  look  back  to  in 
the  ordinances  of  the  gospel.  The  religion  that  was  veiled  to  them  has  been 
unveiled  to  us.  They  saw  the  types  and  shadows ;  we  behold  the  living  and 
glorious  realities.  Over  all  is  the  tabernacling  of  the  same  God  ;  and  the  Church 
of  Jews  and  Gentiles  is  "  built  upon  the  foundation,"  &c.  4.  The  Tabernacle  was 
the  Bible  of  the  Israelites.  God  taught  them  by  its  object-lessons  in  their  child- 
hood and  pupilage  in  the  wilderness.  But  that  age  of  shadows  and  symbols  has 
disappeared ;  man  has  passed  from  the  childhood's  stage  of  education  into  the 
higher  school.  We  have  been  trained  for  a  clearer  perception  and  a  fuller 
possession  of  the  truth.  God  has  given  to  us  His  own  written  Word,  in  which  His 
thoughts  are  woven  with  man's  thoughts,  making  of  the  whole  Book  the  speech 
to  the  world  of  Emmanuel,  God  with  us,  5.  Man's  body  is  a  tabernacle — the 
greatest  of  all  temi^les.  It  is  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  the  very  highest 
possible  form  of  organization,  the  masterpiece  of  creation.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
Means  of  interpretation  : — There  are  means  of  interpretation  by  the  aid  of  which 
one  may  decipher  the  symbols  of  the  Hebrews  as  correctly  as  ChampoUion  de- 
ciphered the  hieroglyphics  of  Egypt.     I.  First  in  the  table  may  be  placed  the 

PAKALLELISM     BETWEEN     THE    MoSAIC     SYSTEM,    AS     OTHERWISE    ASCERTAINED,    AND    ITS 

SYMBOLIC  REPRESENTATION.  The  Writings  of  Moses,  like  the  Greek  translation  of 
the  Eosetta  stone  give  a  clue  to  the  meaning  of  what  otherwise  might  be  illegible. 
II.  Another  key  of  interpretation  is  found  in  the  Scriptural  explanation  of 
SYMBOLS.  For  instance,  in  the  Apocalypse  incense  is  explained  as  symbolizing  the 
prayers  of  the  holy ;  and  fine  linen  is  explained  as  meaning,  when  used  for  garments, 
that  those  thus  arrayed  were  holy.     III.    The   design  of  the  Tabernacle  as 

DECLARED    IN    THE    DIRECTIONS   FOR   ITS     rONSTRUCTION,    EQUIPMENT,   AND    SERVICES,    IS 

K  KEY  TO  ITS  SIGNIFICANCE.  If  the  edifice  was  a  symbol  it  signified  that  Jehovah 
dwelt  among  the  Israelites.  It  represented  His  true  habitation,  wherever  and  of 
whatever  nature  it  may  be,  and  the  spiritual  intercourse  between  Him  and  those 
who  worship.    Moreover,  it  was  equipped  in  such  a  manner  as  to  provide  for 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

ministrations  expressive  of  atonement,  restoration  to  favour,  assurance  of  recon- 
ciliation, and  acceptable  service  ;  and  was  thus   both  a  sign  and  a  seal  of  the 
covenant  relation  and  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah.     IV.  The  Scriptural  appella- 
tions OF  THE  Tabernacle  are  a  means  of   interpretation.     V,    The  symbolism 
of  nature  is  an  important   means   of   interpretation.     VI.   Another  means   of 
interpretation  is  the  artificial  symbolism  of  the  ancients.     Kings  wear  crowns, 
and    sit    on    thrones;    and   so  crowns   and   thrones   indicate    royalty.      Among 
the  ancients  purple  was  worn  by  those  in  authority,  and  so  became  the  badge  of 
power  and  distinction.     The  temples  of  the  Hindoos,  the  Chinese,  the  Chaldeans, 
and  the  Egyptians,  were  built  with  an  adherence  to  certain  forms,  proportions,  and 
repetitions,  which  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  their  sacred  architecture  was 
significant,  and  that  with  some  difference  in  the  ideas  expressed,  and  some  variety 
in  the  mode  of  expressing  the  same  ideas,  they  employed  the  relations  of  geometry 
and  arithmetic  to  represent  the  objects  of  their  religious  thought.     Colour  was 
employed  for  the  same  purpose.   The  three  kingdoms  of  nature— animal,  vegetable, 
mineral — were  also  made  to  subserve  this  artificial  symbolism.      (E.  E.  Atxcater.) 
Gold,  and  silver,  and  brass. — Symbolism  of  viinerals : — Gold,  silver,  and  jewels  have 
in  all  ages  and  countries  been  regarded  as  significant  of  wealth,  rank,  power.    The 
use  of  the  precious  metals  for  money  has,  however,  rendered  it  impossible  that  they 
should  exert  in  modern  times  as  much  influence  on  the  imagination  as  when  used 
only  as  insignia.     1.  It  is  quite  certain  that  in  the  time  of  Moses  gold  had  not  been 
coined,  and  was  not  often  used,  even  by  weight,  as  a  medium  of  exchange.     There 
is  a  warrant  in  nature  as  well  as  in  the  universal  custom  of  antiquity,  for  this 
emploj-ment  of  the  most  splendid  of  the  metals  to  illustrate  the  highest  possible 
dignity  and  glory  ;  for  it  never  fails  to  excite  in  the  mind  of  the  beholder  feelings 
of    admiration   and    awe.      Hence,   as  an  emblem,   it  was  among  metals   what 
purple  was  among  colours,  and  found  its  most  appropriate  place  on  the  persons 
and  in  the  habitations  of  kings  and  gods.     Tlie  dedication  of  a  large  amount  of 
gold  to  the  service  of  religion  was,  therefore,  not  peculiar  to  the  Hebrews.     It  was 
the  universal  custom  of  the  age  thus  to  do  homage  to  the  objects  of  worship. 
But,  as  Mosaisra  allowed  no  images  of  Jehovah,  the  symbolism  of  gold  must  be 
confined  to  His  habitation  and  its  furniture.     It  is  worthy  of  observation,  then, 
that  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  dwelt  in  a  golden  house.     2.  If  the  Tabernacle  of 
Jehovah  was  splendid  by  contrast  between  it  and  the  ordinary  tents  of  the  surround- 
ing encampment,  it  seems   to  have  been  designedly  rendered  still  more  splendid 
by  the  ordained  distinction  between  the  Tabernacle  and  its  court.     For  while  the 
walls  of  the  dwelling  and  all  its  utensils  were  of  gold,  so  that  (with  the  exception 
of  the  sill)  no  other  metal  was  visible  within,  the  furniture  of  the  court  must, 
according  to  the  specifications  furnished  to  Moses,  be  of  copper.     The  significance 
of  copper  seems  to  depend  chiefly  on  its  rank   among  the  metals,  being  more 
esteemed  than  iron,  and  less  so  than  silver  and  gold.    As  a  metal  of  honour  and 
beauty,  it  was  an  appropriate  material  for  the  utensils  of  Divine  service,  and  by  its 
inferiority  to  gold  furnished  a  background  on  which  the  latter  seemed  more  splendid 
by  contrast.     Its  resemblance  to  gold  deepened  the  symbolic  significance  conveyed 
by  the  exclusive  use  of  one  of  the  metals  in  the  court,  and  of  the  other  within  the 
habitation.     3.    Between  the  copper  outside  and  the  gold  inside,  silver  was  the 
mediating  metal,  being  found  both  on  the  sill  of  the  sanctuary  and  on  the  caps  of 
the  pillars  around  the  sacred  enclosure,  to  indicate  by  another  sign  that  the  house 
was  higher  in  honour  than  the  area  in  front,  so  much  higher  tbat  its  sill  was  of 
the  same  matf  rial  as  the  crowning  ornament  of  the  court.     Silver  was  at  that  time 
in  common  use  as  money  ;  if  not  in  the  shape  of  coin,  certainly  of  bullion,  which, 
when  weighed,  was  current  with  the  merchant  (Gen.  xxiii.  16).     Now,  this  silver 
which  had  been  wrought  partly  into  the  sill  of  the  Tabernacle  and  partly  into  the 
caps  of  the  pillars  around  the  court,  had  been  used  as  money.     Indeed,  it  came 
into  the  possession  of  Moses  in  half -shekels,  which  the  people  had  paid  as  "atone- 
ment money,"  "  every  man  a  ransom  for  his  soul "  (chap.  xxx.  12, 16).   The  services 
of  the  court  culminated  in  redemption,   and  not  till  they  were  redeemed   could 
the  people,  even  representatively,  enter  the  sanctuary.     The  shining  silver  on  the 
top  of  the  pillars  of  the  enclosure  was  ' '  a  memorial  to  the  children  of  Israel  before 
Jehovah  to  make  an  atonement  for  their  souls  "  (chap.  xxx.  16),  i.e.,  a  permanent 
reminder  that  their  sins  were  expiated  ;  and  the  sill  of  the  sanctuary,  into  which 
the  greater  part  of  the  ransom-money  had  been  molten,  was  a  token  that  in  conse- 
quence of  their  redemption  God  dwelt  among  them,  and  received  them  to  His 
fellowship.    The  silver,  "  as  an  expiation  for  souls,  pointed  to  the  unholiness  of 


CHAP.  xxT.]  EXODUS.  463 

Israel's    nature,    and  reminded  the  people   continually   that  by   nature  it  was 

alienated  from  God,  and  could  only  remain  in  covenant  with  the  Lord,  and  live  in 

His  kingdom,  on  the  ground  of  His  grace  which  covered  its  sin."     May  not  the 

apostle  have  had  this  ransom-money  in  mind  when  he  said  to  the  people  of  the  new 

covenant,  "  Ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  but 

with   the   precious   blood   of   Christ "  ?        {Ibid.)  Gifts  of   materials  for   the 

con^tructio7i  of  the  Tabernacle : — Many  chapels  are  burdened  with  a  load  of  debt 

occasioned  by  the  bad  habit  of  congregations  building,  either  wholly  or  in  part, 

with  borrowed  money.    But  the  Hebrews  acted  more  nobly  than  such  builders,  for 

they  collected  by  voluntary  contributions  the  entire  materials   with  which  the 

sanctuary  was  constructed  ere  they  began  to  build  (chap.  xxv.  1-9,  xxxv.  4-9,  20- 

30).     Their  free-will  offering  f.r  the  work  of  the  Tabernacle  is,  in  many  respects, 

the  most  splendid  one  that  was  ever  given  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  place  of 

worship.     (W.  Broicn.)        Gold: — Foremost  in  the  procession  of  willing-hearted 

offerers  came  men  and  women  bringing  "  bracelets,  and  ear-rings,  and  seal-rings, 

and  tablets,"  all  of  gold  (chap.  xxxv.  22),  till  the  heap  comprised  many  thousands 

of  articles,  and  weighed  no  less  than  29  talents  and  730  shekels  (chap,  xxxviii.  24), 

equal  to  43,865  ounces,  the  value  of  which  at  the  present  day  is  £180,000  sterling. 

{Ibid.)        Silver  : — Gold  was  contributed  by  men  and  women,  but  silver  by  men 

only.     This,  however,  was  not  on  account  of  the  women,  who  cheerfully  gave  their 

gold  ornaments,  refusing  to  part  with  their  silver  ones,  but  because  silver  was  to  be 

taken  from  none  but  adult  males,  who  were  required  to  give  half  a  shekel  each  as  a 

ransom  for  the  soul  (person)  (chap.  xxx.  11-16).    The  sum  of  the  silver  brought  was 

100  talents  and  1775  shekels,  or  301,775  shekels  (chap,  xxxviii.  25-27),  which  proves 

that  every  one  of  the  603,550  men  comprising  the  Hebrew  encampment  paid  the 

price  of  his  redemption.    This  was  done,  however,  not  by  compulsion,  but  freely  ; 

the  silver  as  well  as  the  gold  was  to  be  a  free-will  offering  (chap.  xxv.  2,  3).     The 

whole  was  equal  to  150,887J  ounces,  and  would  now  realize   £40,000  sterling, 

Silver  appears  to  have  been  the  only  metal  used  as  money  by  the  Hebrews,  at  least 

up  to  the  period  of  the  Exodus,  and  this  circumstance  no  doubt  accounts  for  the 

ransom  price  being  paid  in  silver  (Gen.  xxiii.  15,  xxxvii.  28).     {Ibid.)        Brass  : — 

Gold  and  silver  were  the  most  precious  metals,  but  brass  (copper)  was  also  needed 

for  the  work  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  those  who  possessed  it — and  amongst  them 

might  be  some  who  had  no  gold  to  bestow — brought  70  talents  and  2,400  shekels 

(chap,  xxxviii.  29),  equal  to  106,200  ounces.     The  original  word  rendered  brass  in 

the  text  is  from  a  Hebrew  root  signifying  to  shine.     {Ibid.)         Typical  import  of 

materials  : — 1.  Gold.     Type  of  the  Divine  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  Son  of  God. 

2.  Silver.     The  preciousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  Kimsom  for  the  sinner.     3. 

Brass.    The  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  endure  the  cross,  because  He  is  God.    4. 

Blue.     The  manifestation  of  God  as  love,  in  the  ways  and  death  of  Christ.     5. 

Purple.      The  manifestation  of  the  God-Man,  God  manifest   in  the  flesh.      6. 

Scarlet.     The  manifestation  of  the  true  dignity  and  glory  of  man  as  seen  in  the 

Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  Man.     7.  Fine  linen.     The  righteous  man  exhibiting 

to  the  eye  of  faith  "  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace 

and  truth."     8.  Goats'  hair.     The  memorial  of  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the 

offering  for  sin.     9.  Rams'  skins  dyed  red.     The  outward  aspect  of  Christ  as  the 

Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief.   Born  in  this  world  to  die.   10.  Badgers' 

skins.     The  outward  aspect  of  Christ,  as  having  no  form  nor  comeliness  to  the 

heart  of  the  natural  man.     11.  Shittim  wood.     The  Lord  Jesus,  the  incorruptible 

Man.     "  That  holy  thinp,"  the  Son  of  God.     12.  Oil  for  the  hght.    The  Lord  Jesus 

as  the  Hght ;  filled  with  the  Spirit.     13.   Spices  for  anointing  oil.     The  graces  of 

the  Spirit  in  all  their  fulness  manifested  by  the  Christ.     14.  Spices  for  sweet 

incense.    The  fragrant  graces  of  Christ  made  manifest  on  the  cross,  and  perpetuated 

in  His  intercession.     1-5.  Onyx  stones,  and  stones  to  be  set  in  the  ephod  and  the 

breastplate.     The  glory  and  brilliancy  of  the  Heavenly  One  reflected  also  in  His 

saints.     {H.   W.  Soltau.)         Offerings  accovipanied  with  devotion: — Almost  every 

hill  in  Mongolia  is  adorned  with  a  cairn  of  stones  on  the  very  top.     This  cairn  is  a 

thing  of  the  Mongolian  religion.    When  it  is  determined  to  erect  one,  men,  women, 

and  children  turn  out  and  gather  stones,  repeating  prayers  over  each  stone  ;  and 

thus  the  raised  heap  repr'  sents  much  devotion  on  the  part  of  the  gatherers.     Oh, 

that  all  contributions  in  Christian  lands  for  Christian  objects  were  raised  in  the 

same  way.     Gifts  are  gooft,  but  gifts  accompanied  by  heart- felt  devotion  are  better. 

(iS.  -S.  Chronicle.)         The  jacket  converted  : — John  Wesley  used  to  say  that  he  never 

believed  in  a  man's  conversion  until  his  pocket  was  converted.        A  Divine  plan 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap.  xxt. 

for  building : — There  is  a  beautiful  story  told  of  the  plan  by  which  Strasburg 
Cathedral  was  made.  The  architect,  Erwin  von  Steinbach,  who  was  given  the 
commission  to  build  it,  was  greatly  troubled  lest  he  should  not  get  his  plan 
sufi&ciently  noble.  He  had  a  daughter  named  Sabine.^ho  was  skilful  in  drawing, 
and  one  night,  after  they  had  wept  together  over  the  plans,  she  said  to  her  father, 
"Don't  despair;  God  will  help  us."  After  she  fell  asleep  she  dreamed  that  a 
beautiful  angel  came,  and  when  she  had  told  her  story,  said;  "  You  shall  make  the 
plan  for  the  minster."  The  angel  and  Sabine  then  set  to  work,  and  soon  the  plan 
was  done.  When  she  awoke  she  uttered  a  loud  scream,  for  there  was  a  paper  before 
her  covered  with  wonderful  drawing.  Her  father  exclaimed,  "  Child,  it  was  no 
dream.  The  angel  really  visited  you,  bringiug  the  inspiration  from  heaven  to  help 
us."  He  built  the  cathedral  after  the  plan,  and  it  was  so  beautiful  that  the  people 
really  believed  the  story.  {Great  Thoughts.)  Blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and 
fine  linen. — SijmhoUsm  of  colour  : — The  symbolism  of  colour  in  tlie  Tabernacle  was 
confined  to  the  curtains  of  the  edifice  and  the  garments  of  its  priesthood,  both  of 
which  were  of  fine-twined  linen,  blue,  purple,  and  crimson.  The  four  colours 
indicated  all  inhered  in  the  same  material  subjected  to  different  processes  of 
manufacture;  the  fine  thread  of  the  byssus  being  in  one  process  bleached  to  the 
greatest  possible  whiteness,  and  in  the  other  three  dyed  with  blue,  puqjle,  and 
crimson.  1.  That  white  linen  was  employed  as  a  symbol,  appears  from  many 
passages  of  the  New  Testament,  where  its  significance  is  declured  and  explained. 
It  was  a  representative  of  light,  resembhng  it  somewhat  in  colour  (Matt.  xvii.  2), 
but  more  in  brightness  (Luke  ix.  29,  xxiv.  4 ;  Mark  ix.  3),  and  purity  (Rev.  xix. 
8,  14,  XV.  6).  2.  The  Hebrew  word  rendered  "  blue  "  is  primarily  the  name  of  a 
ehell-fish,  and  derivatively  of  the  dye  yielded  by  it.  If  Moses  would  represent  that 
Jehovah,  whose  dwelling  is  in  heaven,  had  come  down  to  earth  to  dwell  with  His 
covenant  people,  how  could  he  do  it  better  than  by  employing  in  the  habitation 
made  with  hands  the  azure  hue  of  the  visible  heaven  ?  If  he  wished  to  teach  that 
the  priests,  and  the  sacrifices  they  offered  were  an  "  example  and  thadow  of  heavenly 
things,"  how  pertinent  would  it  be  to  weave  into  their  official  attire  threads  of  that 
cerulean  tint,  which  in  his  day  communicated  such  thoughts  to  the  eye  as  are  now 
conveyed  to  the  ear  by  the  audible  pronunciation  of  the  word  "  heaven  "  !  3.  Cloth 
of  purple  was  much  prized  by  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  who  included  under  this 
appellation  a  wide  range  of  colour,  extending  from  red  slightly  tinged  with  blue  to 
shades  in  which  the  blue  was  predominant ;  the  dye  being  in  all  cases  derived  from 
shell-fish.  In  the  earlier  days  of  Rome,  purple  had  been  worn  only  by  magistrates 
as  a  badge  of  office ;  but  the  progress  of  wealth  and  luxury  was  afterward  so  great, 
that  the  first  of  the  emperors  thought  it  necessary  to  put  restriction  on  the  use  of 
it  in  order  to  preserve  the  significance  of  the  ancient  symbol ;  and  eventually  certain 
fabrics  of  this  colour,  including  those  held  in  highest  estimation,  were  entirely 
interdicted  to  the  Roman  citizens,  and  reserved  for  the  exclusive  use  of  the  imperial 
household.  In  the  employment  of  purple  as  a  mark  of  official  distinction,  the 
Romans  followed  the  custom  of  some,  if  not  all  older  nations  (see  Judges  viii.  26  ; 
Dan.  v.  7,  margin).  Not  only  kings,  emperors,  and  their  subordinates  in  civil 
authority,  wore  this  colour,  but  sometimes  priests,  as  a  mark  of  honour  to  their 
office  and  the  deities  they  served.  Even  the  images  of  the  gods  were  adorned  with 
raiment  of  purple.  The  appearance  of  this  colour,  then,  in  the  curtains  of  the 
Hebrew  Tabernacle  marked  that  central  edifice  as  the  habitation  of  the  Ruler  of  the 
encampment.  The  purple  in  the  garments  of  the  priests  indicated  that  they 
belonged  to  the  royal  household,  and  were  officers  of  the  King.  4.  The  two  Hebrew 
words  which  taken  together  are  rendered  "  scarlet,"  denote  a  colour  derived  from 
an  insect  called  by  naturalists  coccus  tlicis,  found  in  large  quantities  on  certain 
species  of  the  oak.  The  Arabic  name  of  the  insect  is  kermes,  the  root  of  our  word 
"crimson."  The  only  natural  object  to  which  the  tint  is  applied  in  the  Old 
Testament  is  the  lips  (Song  of  Sol.  iv.  3).  It  seems  probable  (see  Gen.  xxxviii.  28  ; 
Lev.  xiv.  4-7 ;  Num.  xix.  6 ;  Josh.  ii.  18)  that  tijis  colour  was  used  as  a  symbol  of 
life  ;  deriving  this  significance  from  blood,  which  was  itself  the  vehicle  and  repre- 
sentative of  the  vital  force.  (E.  E.  Atwater.)  The  colours: — 1.  Blue,  being  the 
colour  of  the  heaven,  as  it  appears  to  man  looking  up  into  it,  may  be  regarded  not 
unnaturally  as  speaking  of  God.  The  Israelites  were  bidden  to  have  fringes  on  the 
borders  of  their  garments,  and  upon  the  fringe  of  the  borders  a  ribband  of  blue 
(Num.  XV.  38),  doubtless  to  be  a  perpetual  reminder  to  them  in  their  daily  life  that 
they  were  the  people  of  God.  2.  Scarlet,  or  red,  is  the  colour  which,  after  blue, 
occurs  most  frequently  in  connection  with  the  Tabernacle.    As  blue  speaks  of  God 


CHAP.xxT.]  EXODUS.  465 

the  Creator,  so  red,  or  scarlet,  speaks  of  the  world,  or  of  man  the  creature.  8. 
Purple  is  formed  from  the  interminghng  of  scarlet  and  blue,  and  thus  corresponds 
to  twelve  among  numbers,  which  is  the  result  of  three  multiplied  into  four,  and  is, 
therefore,  the  colour  of  the  Incarnation.  In  the  Tabernacle,  purple  appears  side  by 
side  with  blue  and  scarlet  in  the  interior  hangings,  in  the  veils,  and  in  the  vestments 
of  the  high-priest.  When  we  remember  that  the  Tabernacle,  as  a  whole,  was  a 
type  of  the  Word  who  "  tabernacles  in  us  "  (John  i.  14),  we  shall  not,  I  think,  find 
it  difficult  to  acquiesce  in  the  suggestion  of  a  devout  and  learned  writer,  that  "  the 
purple  appears  to  have  foreshadowed  the  hypostatical  union,  i.e.,  the  union  of  the 
Divine  and  human  natures  in  the  person  of  our  Lord."  It  would  seem  to  have  been 
selected  to  reveal  the  intimacy  and  perfection  of  this  union  ;  and  the  constituent 
colours  of  purple,  red,  and  blue,  to  have  been  set  in  juxtaposition  with  it,  to  teach 
that,  although  the  two  natures  are  thus  combined  in  Him,  yet  are  they  not  absorbed 
in  each  other,  as  if  the  Divine  had  been  lost  in  the  human,  or  the  human  in  the 
Divine,  but  ever  remain  to  co-exist,  notwithstanding  their  most  perfect  union.  4. 
The  three  colours  already  spoken  of  were  conjoined  with  the  whiteness  of  fine  linen. 
White  is  symbolic  of  cleansing  from  sin  (Isa.  i.  18;  cf.  Kev.  vii.  14;  Psa.  li.  7). 
White  is  also  symbolical  of  perfect  dazzling  holiness  (Dan,  vii»  9 ;  cf.  Rev.  vi.  2, 
xiv.  14,  xix.  11,  XX.  11).  In  the  Tabernacle  the  fine  white  linen  would  tell  of  the 
purity  and  holiness  which  results  from  that  union  of  the  Divine  with  the  human 
which  was  already  indicated  by  the  three  colours  with  which  it  was  conjoined.  The 
great  lesson,  therefore,  which  everywhere  met  the  eye  of  the  worshipper  in  the  fine 
linen  hangings  of  the  outer  court,  and  in  the  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarlet,  and 
fine-twined  linen  of  the  veils,  and  sacerdotal  vestments,  was  none  other  than  this, 
"Ye  shall  be  holy,  for  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy."  {E.  F.  Willis,  M.A.) 
Goats'  hair : — Goats'  hair  formed  part  of  the  free- will  offerings  of  the  Israelites 
(chap.  XXXV.  2S).  Many  of  the  goats  of  the  East  have  black  hair,  of  which  cloth 
is  made  for  tent  coverings,  but  there  are  some  species  of  goats  which  have  fine  white 
silky  hair,  among  which  is  the  Angora  goat,  and  not  a  few  writers  are  of  opinion 
that  it  was  hair  of  this  sort  with  which  the  tent  of  the  Tabernacle  was  made.  {W. 
Broicn.)  Rams'  skins. — The  Israelit(^s,  being  rich  in  flocks  and  herds,  would  have  no 
difficulty  in  supplying  rams'  skins.  Those  brought  by  the  Israelites  (chap.  xxxv.  23) 
were  dyed,  and  probably  tanned.  "  Leather  of  this  very  description  (says  Dr. 
Thomson)  is  still  sold  in  Syrian  towns.  From  time  out  of  mind  the  southern  part  of 
Syria  and  Palestine  has  been  supplied  with  mutton  from  the  great  plains  and  deserts 
.  in  the  north,  east,  and  south  ;  and  the  shepherds  do  not  ordinarily  bring  the  females 
to  market.  The  vast  flocks  which  annually  come  from  Armenia  and  northern 
Syria  are  nearly  all  males.  The  leather,  therefore,  is  literally  '  rams'  skins  dyed 
red,'  "  (Ibid.)  Badgers'  skins  : — The  Hebrews  brought  badgers'  (tachash)  as  well 
as  rams'  skins.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  "  badger  "  is  a  wrong  interpretation 
of  the  Hebrew  word  "  tachash,^'  but  the  learned  are  not  agreed  as  to  what  animal  is 
intended.     Some  are  of  opinion  that  it  was  a  fish,  and  others  that  it  was  a  quad- 

■  ruped ;  but  whether  it  swam  the  ocean  or  ranged  the  forest,  it  was  likely  a  large  and 
powerful  creature,  since  its  skin  was  used  for  the  sacred  tent's  outer  covering,  which 
doubtless  required  to  be  of  a  tough  and  strong  nature.    This  would  not,  however, 

.prevent  the  skins  from  being  made  suitable  for  ornamental  purposes.  Sandals 
formed  of  these  skins  appear  to  have  been  worn  by  ladies  when  dressed  in  the  most 
costly  and  splendid  attire,  and  decked  with  the  most  precious  ornaments ;  "  I  have 
shod  thee  with  badgers'  skins  "  (Ezek.  xvi.  10) ;  so  there  can  be  little  doubt  that, 

.  the  outer  covering  or  roof  of  the  Tabernacle  was  not  only  strong,  but  also  beautiful 
and  ornamental.    It  is  not  improbable  that  the  shoes  or  sandals  of  the  Israelites 

■  were  also  made  of  this  material ;  and  if  they  were,  it  was  as  effectual  in  defending' 
their  feet  as  it  was  in  preserving  the  Tabernacle  from  those  influences  that!, 
might  have  been  hurtful  to  it.      "  Tuy  foot  did  not  swell  these  forty  years." 

'  (Ibid:) 

Vers.  10-16.  Make  an  ark. — The  ark  : — I,  The  veil,  by  which  the  abk  wa* 
HIDDEN  FEoii  VIEW.  This  Veil  of  the  Tabernacle  was  the  same  as  that  which  subse- 
'  quently  hung  in  the  Temple,  and  was  rent  in  twain  when  our  Lord  expired  on  the- 
•  Cross.  We  may  look  at  it  from  two  points  of  view,  considering  what  it  symbolized, 
"when  it  was  an  unrent  veil,  and  what  the  rending  of  it  signifies.  The  unrent  veil 
■•■was  a  symbol  of  darkness  and  difficulty.  To  the  Jew,  it  shut  out  his  view  of 
heavenly  things,  and  obstructed  his  way  of  approach  to  them.  That  veil  was  a 
■concealing  thing.     All  that  stood  behind  it  was  effectually  hidden  fi'om  sight.    But 

30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv, 

that  Most  Holy  Place  represented  heaven.  And  thus,  by  the  uni-ent  veil,  as  St. 
Paul  says :  "  The  Holy  Ghost  thus  signified,  that  the  way  into  the  Holiest  of  all  was 
not  yet  made  manifest  "  (Heb.  ix.  8).  That  unrent  veil  was  a  darkening  thing.  It 
was  at  the  same  time  an  obstructing  thing.  It  barred  the  entrance  to  the  heavenly 
place.  The  holiest  and  best  of  God's  people  could  not  pass  v.Ithin  that  veil.  The 
high-priest  alone  might  enter,  and  he  but  once  a  year.  But  what  does  the  rent  veil 
signify  ?  of  course  the  opposite  of  that  which  the  unrent  veil  represented.  Jesus, 
we  know,  came  as  "the  light  of  the  world."  He  is  the  revealer  of  secrets;  the 
unraveller  of  mysteries.  II.  The  place  in  which  the  ark  stood.  The  dimensions 
of  this  part  of  the  Tabernacle  were  those  of  a  cube.  The  measure  of  its  sides,  its 
ceiling,  and  its  floor  was  all  the  same.  The  cube  is  the  most  perfect  of  all  forms, 
the  natural  emblem  of  perfection.  And  as  the  form  of  this  place  denoted  its 
perfection,  so  did  the  material  of  which  it  was  composed.  Gold,  pure  gold  was  the 
material.  This  met  the  eye  on  every  side.  Gold  is  the  purest  and  most  precious 
of  the  metals.  In  its  way,  too,  gold  stands  as  the  symbol  of  perfection.  When  we 
say  of  a  thing  that  it  reaches  the  golden  stage,  we  say  that  which  expresses  the 
highest  idea  of  its  development.  And  then  the  furniture  of  this  hallowed  place 
spoke  the  same  language.  This  told  of  perfection  too.  And  what  was  this  ?  One 
object  alone  met  the  eye  here.  This  was  that  great  central  object  of  interest  in 
this  whole  sacred  structure — that  keystone  of  this  arch — that  sun  in  the  midst  of 
this  grand  system — tbat  gem  in  the  heaven-formed  ring  of  these  hallowed  services 
— the  ark  of  the  covenant.  III.  The  structure  of  the  ark.  This  ark  was  a 
symbol  of  Christ.  The  constituent  parts  of  it  seemed  to  represent  the  two  natures 
of  our  Saviour.  The  wood  of  the  ark  aptly  emblemized  the  human  nature  of  Christ. 
The  tree  from  which  this  wood  was  obtained  had  its  growth  in  the  wilderness.  And 
so  in  the  development  of  Pis  humanity,  it  was  declared  of  Christ  that  "  He  should 
grow  up  like  a  root  out  of  •  dry  ground."  The  acacia  wood  was  incorruptible.  It 
was  not  subject  to  decay.  And  it  is  just  so  with  the  humanity  of  Christ.  That 
humanity  experienced  no  <  cay  in  life;  it  was  the  subject  of  none  in  death.  He 
saw  no  corruption  in  the  ave.  He  will  see  none  for  ever.  And  in  like  manner 
the  gold  of  the  ark  repre  nted  Christ's  Divinity.  IV.  The  contents  of  the  abk. 
The  two  tables  of  the  la\  were  preserved  in  the  ark.  This  was  a  very  significant 
fact.  It  illustrates  two  it  >ortant  truths.  It  proclaims  the  perfect  righteousness 
and  the  absolute  securitj  "^  the  children  of  the  covenant.  In  conclusion  :  How 
striking  are  some  of  the  -ints  of  contrast  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian 
ark.  The  one  was  comp  id  of  created  materials.  The  time  had  been  when  the 
wood  and  the  gold,  wrou)  v  up  into  the  form  of  the  ark,  had  no  existence.  The 
other,  as  to  the  most  imj  .rtant  part  of  His  being,  at  least,  was  constituted  "from 
everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  world  was."  (R.  Neicton,  D.D.)  The 
ark  of  the  testimony  :  the  transient  symbol  of  an  eternal  truth  : — I.  The  ark  may  be 
taken  as  stmrolical  of  the  Divine  presence,  or  the  Divine  plan  in  human  life. 
It  was  a  visible  form  of  an  invisible  power.  1.  In  the  ark,  for  example,  you  find  law. 
See,  too,  the  peculiar  place  occupied  by  law :  the  ark  is  in  the  Tabernacle ;  not  only 
in  the  Tabernacle,  but  in  the  most  sacred  part  of  that  sacred  place ;  not  only  in  the 
holiest  part  of  the  holy  house,  but  actually  in  the  midst  of  the  ark  is  found  the 
immutable  law  of  God.  Thus  we  have  law  at  the  very  centre  and  heart  of  things  1 
That  which  is  at  the  heart  of  things  is  right :  not  something  fickle,  eccentric, 
tantalizing ;  but  law,  righteousness,  God  I  2.  But,  happily,  the  ark  represents 
something  morf» than  law;  and  every  reflective  man  will  acknowledge  that  in  the 
system  within  which  we  live,  there  is  a  mystery  for  which  some  gentler  name  than 
law  must  be  found.  The  lid  of  the  ark  was  the  seat  of  mercy.  It  signified 
propitiation,  favour,  mediation,  ground  and  medium  of  communion  with  God. 
Study  that  tender  symbol  a  moment,  if  you  please.  Law,  in  coming  up  from  the 
centre,  comes  through  the  lid  or  covering  of  mercy ;  it  is,  so  to  speak,  attempered, 
or  it  would  come  like  a  sword,  or  a  fire,  or  a  judgment  terrible  in  righteousness.  On 
the  other  hand,  starting  the  movement  from  the  outside,  in  our  appeal  to  law  we  go 
through  the  medium  of  mercy.  We  do  not,  dare  not,  challenge  the  law  in  its  own 
name  or  on  its  own  merits.  "By  the  deeds  of  the  law  shall  no  flesh  living  be 
justified."  Our  approach  is  through  mercy,  and  our  daily  prayer  is,  "  God  be 
merciful  unto  me  a  sinner."  II,  We  now  pass  onward  to  notice  a  few  remarkable 
points  in  the  history  of  the  ark.  In  doing  this,  we  shall  be  more  careful  about 
the  spiritual  teaching  than  about  the  mere  chronology  of  that  history,  and  thus  we 
shall  secure  closer  continuity  of  doctrine  and  illustration.  1.  As  our  song  is  to  be 
of  mercy  and  judgment,  it  will  be  grateful  to  us  first  to  see  how  the  mercy  of  the 


CHAP.  XXV.]  EXODUS,  467 

Lord  was  revealed  amongst  His  people  (see  Num.  x.).  Unquestionably  there  is  a 
law  of  movement.  We  must  go  forward.  How?  Into  darkness ?  Into  danger? 
Into  thickening  mj'steries  that  bring  with  them  sevenfold  darkness,  and  trouble 
that  makes  the  soul  afraid?  No;  we  are  offered  guidance,  defence,  and  rest!  2. 
As  we  have  thus  seen  the  goodness  of  the  Lord,  we  may  now  behold  also  His 
severity,  as  shown  here  and  there  in  the  history  of  the  ark.  Fall  of  Jericho,  Dagon, 
Bethshemesh,  Uzza.  Will  man  attempt  to  eke  out  the  failing  strength  of  Omnipo- 
tence ?  Doth  it  become  us  to  watch  the  stars  lest  they  fall,  or  to  open  the  clouds  at 
dawn  lest  the  sun  should  miss  his  way  ?  Shall  we  appoint  ourselves  the  special 
guardians  of  the  truth,  and  surround  it  with  our  defences,  lest  God  should  have  no 
foothold  on  His  own  earth  ?  III.  We  now  come  still  more  closely  to  practical 
APPLICATIONS.  Here  and  there  in  the  course  of  the  study  we  have  indicated  one  or 
two  modern  bearings  of  the  subject,  which  admit  of  obvious  amplification.  Let  us 
look  at  one  or  two  others.  The  Israelites  had  a  visible  symbol  of  tbe  Divine  presence 
so  long  as  they  retained  the  ark  in  their  midst.  It  was  something  to  look  at* — 
something  for  the  heart  to  stay  itself  upon  in  the  time  of  fear  and  trouble.  But 
look  at  our  own  case.  Are  we  not  left  without  a  centre  that  can  be  seen,  and  with- 
out a  locality  sanctified  above  all  other  places  ?  Have  we  not  fallen  on  mean  times 
— all  poetry  dead  and  gone,  all  music  hushed  for  ever  ?  To  such  questionings  the 
Scriptures  give  a  distinct  reply.  They  tell  us  that  ours  are  the  brightest  and 
noblest  of  all  the  days  of  time  (see  2  Cor.  iii.  7,  8 ;  Jer.  iii.  16).  The  local  has 
become  tbe  universal,  and  all  things  are  inscribed' — "  Holy  unto  the  Lord."  That 
law  and  mercy  are  still  at  the  heart  of  things  is  a  truth  which  is  acknowledged  in 
some  form  even  by  others  than  Christian  believers  ;  but  by  Christian  believers  it 
ought  to  be  ardently  and  gratefully  maintained  as  at  once  the  glory  and  the  security 
of  life.  And  yet  we  are  not  left  without  a  visible  sign- of  God's  presence.  So  long 
as  we  have  the  Bible  we  have  the  ark  of  the  crf\cnant.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  ark  : — Of  all  the  appurtenances  of  the  Tabernacle,  tbe  highest  in  the  estimation 
of  the  Hebrews  was  a  chest  of  acacia  wood  three  fff»f  If  nd  nine  inches  in  length, 
two  feet  and  three  inches  both  in  width  and  in  height,  elated  within  and  without 
with  gold,  which  they  called  the  ark.  Around  it  was  c  baud  of  gold  called  a  crown. 
This  name  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  band  w-i  •  wrought  in  imitation  of 
leaves  and  flowers,  a  crown  having  originally  consisted  of  such  materials,  and 
having  retained  the  semblance  of  them  when  the  pern  liable  chaplet  gave  place  to 
the  unfading  gold.  The  specifications  do  not  state  huw  far  from  the  base  of  the 
ark  this  crown  was  attached ;  and  some  have  assum^othat,  as  a  croicn,  it  must 
necessarily  have  been  placed  at  the  top.  It  may  hUifeever  have  been  merely  an 
ornamental  band  of  gold,  wrought  in  imitation  of>^  leaves  and  flowers,  and 
attached  just  above  the  rings  and  staves,  by  means  of  which  the  ark  was  borne 
from  place  to  place.  The  rings  just  mentioned  were  of  solid  metal,  like  the 
ornamental  cincture,  and  four  in  number,  one  at  each  corner.  They  held  in  place 
two  staves  of  acacia  wood  overlaid  with  gold,  by  means  of  which  the  Levites 
might  bear  the  ark  on  their  shoulders.  The  lid  of  the  ark  was  of  pure,  solid  gold ; 
and  two  cherubs  of  the  same  material  stood  upon  it,  one  at  each  end,  face  to  face, 
and  stretching  forth  their  wings  over  the  ark.  The  position  and  attitude  of  these 
figures  make  it  necessary  to  infer  that  they  were  of  small  size;  but  their  exact 
measure  is  not  known.  This  golden  cover  was  called  the  mercy-seat,  or  throne  of 
grace ;  and  is  sometimes  mentioned  by  this  name,  as  if  it  were  something  inde- 
pendent of  the  ark.  More  frequently,  however,  it  is  in  some  wi.y  connected  with 
the  sacred  coffer  beneath.  It  was  in  particular  what  the  whole  Tabernacle  was,  the 
dwelling-place  of  .Jehovah,  the  place  where  He  would  meet  His  people  ;  it  was  the 
point  in  which  the  significance  of  the  whole  institution  centred.  Within  the  ark 
were  deposited,  according  to  the  direction  given  to  Moses,  the  two  tablets  of  stone 
on  which  Jehovah  had  written  with  His  own  finger  the  words  of  the  Ten  Command- 
ments. There  has  been  a  difference  of  opinion  on  the  question  whether  the  ark 
contained  anything  more  than  the  two  tablets  of  stone.  From  statements  in  chap, 
xvi.  33,  34  and  Num.  xvii.  6-10,  it  appears  that  Aaron's  rod  and  the  pot  of  manna 
were  deposited  near,  but  not  within,  the  ark.  But  this  does  not  forbid  the 
supposition  that  afterward  (see  Heb.  ix.  4,  5)  they  were  kept  within  the  ark,  till, 
in  some  way  unknown  to  us,  they  were  lost.  On  such  an  hypothesis,  the  passage 
in  1  Kings  viii.  9,  which  testifies  of  what  was  the  case  on  the  day  when  the  ark 
was  deposited  in  the  Temple,  has  a  deeper  significance  than  if  the  ark  had  never 
contained  anything  but  the  tablets  of  stone.  The  appointed  place  for  the  ark  of 
the  covenant  was  in  the  holy  of  holies  ;  where  it  probably  stood  in  the  middle  of 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap,  xxv. 

the  chamber,  with  the  longer  sides  toward  the  east  and  the  west  respectively,  and 
the  cherubs  looking  northward  and  southward  toward  each  other.  (E.  E.  Ahvater.) 
The  ark  : — Was  the  ark  a  treasure  chest  ?  In  Christ  dwelleth  all  the  f ulnesn  of  the 
Godhead.  Was  it  a  small  chest  ?  Christ  made  Himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant.  Was  it  made  after  a  heavenly  pattern?  Christ 
came  down  from  heaven.  Was  it  made  of  wood  ?  Behold  the  Man  !  Was  it 
made  of  incorruptible  wood  ?  Behold  the  purity  of  His  character  !  Was  it  over- 
laid within  and  without  with  gold?  Behold  your  God  !  God  was  in  Ch.ist.  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  upon  Him.  Had  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  about  ?  Behold 
your  King  1  Had  it  rings  and  staves  that  it  might  be  moved  from  place  to  place  ? 
"  I  will  give  to  Jerusalem  one  that  bringeth  goootidings."  Were  the  staves  always 
to  be  in  the  rings  ?  Christ  is  always  ready  to  bless  and  to  save.  "  The  Lord  was 
ready  to  save  me."  The  staves  in  the  rings  give  a  warning  to  the  careless. 
Privileges  despised  may  soon  be  removed.  (R.  E.  Sears.)  And  shalt  make 
upon  it  a  crown  of  gold  round  about. — The  crowns  of  gold  around  the  holy  vessels 
of  the  tabernacle  .-—There  is  nothing  insignificant  in  God's  universe.  Everything 
that  He  has  made  has  a  meaning  and  a  purpose.  There  is  not  a  curl  in  a  cloud, 
or  a  curve  in  a  leaf,  or  a  tint  on  a  blossom,  but  has  a  reason  for  it,  and  speaks  of 
its  origin.  We  may  be  sure  that  the  Jews  at  the  time  read  in  these  objects  moral 
and  spiritual  truths  that  had  a  direct  practical  bearing  upon  their  daily  religious 
life.  I  wish  to  deal  in  this  manner  with  one  of  the  details  in  the  construction  of 
the  Tabernacle,  to  which  attention  is  not  usually  directed,  because  it  seems  a  very 
insignificant  and  unimportant  feature.  You  place  under  the  microscope  a  S'ngle 
hair  of  cotton-wool,  which  to  the  naked  eye  is  so  fine  as  to  be  little  more  than 
visible.  In  this  magnified  fibre  you  see  a  pecuUar  twist,  produced  by  its  mode  of 
growth  in  the  cotton-pod.  You  would  think  that  twist  of  no  consequence  or 
meaning,  and  yet  it  is  by  means  of  this  peculiarity  that  the  fibre  can  unite  with 
other  fibres,  and  form  together  a  thread  strong  enough  to  be  woven.  Without  this 
apparently  accidental  irregularity  on  the  surface  of  a  hair,  it  would  be  impossible 
to  spin  cotton  thread  or  to  weave  cotton  cloth  ;  and  thus  one  of  the  staple  manu- 
factures of  one  of  the  greatest  nations  in  the  world  would  not  have  come  into 
existence,  and  mankind  would  have  lacked  the  principal  material  of  tlieir  clotbing. 
You  see  about  the  end  of  June,  hanging  out  of  the  ears  of  the  green  corn  when  it 
is  in  flower,  slender  white  filaments  tipped  with  a  powdery  substance.  These  are 
the  vital  organs  by  which  the  grains  of  com  are  formed  and  filled ;  and  without 
their  agency,  the  whole  produce  of  the  fields  would  fail,  and  there  would  be  no 
bread  for  man.  As  it  is  with  these  details  of  nature  that  seem  so  insignificant, 
and  yet  in  reality  are  S)  important,  so  it  is  with  the  crown  of  gold  that  was  round 
about  the  ark,  and  the  table  of  shewbread  and  the  altar  of  incense,  which  seems  at 
first  an  insignificant  detail.  It  was  purposely  designed  by  God,  and  is  full  of 
meaning  to  us.  Now  what  did  this  feature  mean  ?  The  word  translated  "  crown  " 
in  the  text  occurs  only  in  connection  with  the  holy  vessels  of  the  tabernacle.  It 
means  literally  a  border  or  rim  of  wreathed  work  ;  and  it  comes  from  a  root  which 
signifies  to  bind  together.  This  border  or  rim  was  put  upon  the  top  of  the  ark,  and 
of  the  table  of  shewbread,  and  of  the  altar  of  incense,  projecting  a  little  beyond 
the  sides  of  these  vessels,  in  order  that  the  objects  placed  upon  them  might  not  slip 
off.  Usually  there  was  no  dangpr  of  this  when  the  vessels  remained  in  their 
appointed  places  in  the  stationary  Tabernacle.  But  from  time  to  time  the  Tabernacle 
had  to  be  taken  down  when  the  Israelites  required  to  remove  their  camp  and 
journey  to  another  place  in  the  wilderness.  These  vessels  had  therefore  to  be 
transported  along  with  them.  But  there  was  this  significant  distinction  between 
them  and  the  rest  of  the  furniture  and  frame  work  of  the  Tabernacle— that  while 
the  other  articles  were  removed  in  waggons  by  means  of  oxen,  the  holy  vessels 
had  to  be  carried  by  the  hands  of  man.  For  this  purpose  they  were  furnished 
with  rings  at  their  sides,  through  which  staves  were  passed,  by  the  help  of 
which  the  Levites  bore  them  in  front  of  the  cavalcade,  without  daring  to  touch 
them.  It  may  be  asked  why  was  it  of  so  much  consequence  that  the  objects 
belonging  to  the  sacred  vessels  should  be  kept  unmoved  in  their  proper  places  ? 
Look  first  at  the  mercy-seat  or  Ud  of  the  ark — why  must  it  not  be  displaced  in 
the  slightest  degree  ?  The  ark,  we  know,  contained  the  two  tables  of  stone,  on 
which  was  inscribed  the  law  which  promised  life  on  condition  of  obedience,  but 
threatened  death  without  mercy  against  transgression.  At  Sinai  the  Israelites 
entered  into  a  solemn  covenant  with  God  which  bound  them  to  obedience,  and 
bound  God  to   punish   disobedience.      But,  as   we  all   know,  the  covenant  was 


CHAP,  sxv.]  EXODUS.  469 

speedily  broken.  The  Israelites  who,  in  their  ignorant  self-confidence,  had 
resolved  that  "all  that  the  Lord  hath  said  will  we  do,"  almost  immediately 
sinned  grievously  against  the  Lord,  so  that  Moses  broke  the  first  tables  of  the 
law,  and  the  law,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  said,  "  was  found  unto  death."  It  ended 
in  the  ministration  of  condemnation.  But  while  the  Israelites  thus  bound  judg- 
ment upon  themselves,  God  devised  an  expedient  by  which  the  failure  and  ruin 
might  be  remedied.  In  the  midst  of  wrath  He  remembered  mercy  :  He  com- 
manded the  ark  to  be  formed  in  order  that  the  tables  of  the  law  might  be  put 
into  it,  and  it  might  thus  shut  out  of  sight  the  ministration  of  death.  The  law 
was  to  be  carefully  preserved,  but  it  was  to  be  no  less  carefully  concealed,  so  that 
its  ministration  of  death  should  not  break  out  in  vengeance.  The  cover  of  the 
mercy-seat  was  put  over  the  ark,  so  as  exactly  to  fit  it.  By  this  expressive  symbol 
it  was  indicated  that  mercy  triumphed  over  judgment — that  mercy  is  the  deepest 
element  in  every  judgment,  and  the  end  for  which  it  is  graciously  designed ;  the 
first  sentence  against  our  fallen  first  parents  being  the  key  to  all  other  judgments. 
God,  while  inflexibly  just,  could  still  pardon  the  sinner.  But  if  by  accident  or 
intention  the  lid  of  the  mercy-seat  were  to  be  displaced,  the  law  would  have  no 
cover  or  concealment ;  it  would  break  forth  and  carry  out  without  hindrance  the 
threatened  punishment  of  sin,  and  all  Israel  would  be  destroyed,  for  they  had  aU 
sinned,  and  broken  God's  commandments.  We  are  told  that  on  one  occasion  the 
inhabitants  of  Bethshemesh  looked  into  the  ark  while  it  rested  on  a  great  stone  in 
their  fields,  and  many  of  them  were  smitten  to  death  in  consequence  of  their 
unhallowed  curiosity.  They  had  removed  the  mercy-seat  and  so  let  loose  the  law 
to  carry  out  its  threatened  vengeance  against  sin  without  restraint.  Equally 
important  was  the  use  of  the  crown  of  gold  round  about  the  table  of  shewbread. 
That  table  symbolized  the  provision  which  God  made  for  the  spiritual  wants  of 
His  people.  The  twelve  loaves  upon  it  indicated  that  each  tribe  had  its  own 
portion  prepared  for  it  before  the  Lord,  of  the  same  weight  and  of  the  same  size. 
The  bread  was  changed  from  week  to  week  ;  for,  after  remaining  during  that 
period  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  it  was  afterwards  partaken  of  by  the  priests, 
,  who  were  thus  specially  strengthened  and  refreshed  for  their  service  in  the  Taber- 
nacle. But  it  was  ever  the  same  bread.  It  was  called  the  "  continual "  shew- 
bread, because  it  was  always  before  the  Lord.  And  the  object  of  the  golden  crown 
or  raised  rim  round  about  it,  was  to  keep  the  shewbread  securely  in  its  position  on 
the  table,  so  that  it  might  not  fall  to  the  ground,  or  have  its  place— which  was 
carefully  arranged— altered  in  the  least  degree,  through  the  stuiiibling  of  theLevites 
who  bore  it  on  their  shoulders  in  their  journeys  through  the  wilderness.  Unchanged 
by  the  wanderings  of  His  people,  unhindered  by  their  frequent  murmurings  and 
backslidings — the  crown  of  gold  around  the  table  of  the  shewbread  kept  the  bread 
securely  in  its  place.  The  mercy-seat  kept  on  the  ark  by  its  golden  crown  indicated 
God's  unchanging  mercy  ;  and  the  shewbread,  kept  in  its  place  by  the  golden  crown 
of  its  table,  indicated  God's  unvarying  care  for  His  people.  The  crown  of  gold 
around  the  altar  of  incense  was  also  most  significant.  The  altar  of  incense  was 
not  for  sacrifice,  for  no  victim  was  offered  upon  it ;  it  was  ordained  in  order  that  the 
fragrance  of  sweet  spices  might  constantly  ascend  from  it  to  God.  It  indicated 
not  atonement  for  sin,  but  the  cleansing  of  the  sinner  from  sin,  and  his  acceptance 
before  God.  It  was  ministered  to  by  the  priests  only.  But  it  was  most  closely 
connected  with  the  brazen  altar  of  burnt-offering  outside,  to  which  all  Israel  had 
access  ;  for  it  was  through  the  death  of  the  victim  that  the  sinner  was  accepted, 
and  through  the  blood  of  atonement  that  he  had  communion  with  God.  The  coals 
of  fire  that  were  put  on  the  incense  altar  to  burn  the  fragrant  spices,  were 
previously  taken  from  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  on  which  the  victim  had  been 
reduced  to  ashes.  The  golden  vessel  was,  therefore,  of  especial  importance, 
because  it  indicated  the  highest  priestly  ministration.  The  crown  of  gold  which 
encircled  it  at  the  top  was  meant  to  keep  the  coals  of  fire  and  the  holy  spices  on  it 
from  being  scattered  or  displaced.  Morning  and  evening  and  all  the  night  long  the 
priests  had  to  burn  incense  before  the  Lord.  During  the  journeys  of  the  Israelites 
the  coals  were  to  remain  burning,  and  the  spices  were  not  to  be  removed.  The 
incense  offering  was  to  be  continuous  and  uninterrupted  even  while  the  altar  was 
being  carried  by  the  Levites  from  one  place  to  another.  There  was  to  be  no 
cessation  of  the  service  during  the  transit.  From  its  top  a  cloud  of  fragrance  was 
to  rise  up  constantly  to  heaven,  typifying  an  ever  active  unceasing  ministry  in 
God's  presence.  The  office  of  the  golden  crown  was,  therefore,  to  enable  the  altar 
to  fulfil  this  important  function,  to  keep  the  materials  of  the  offering  in  their 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ew. 

— * 

proper  position  while  the  altar  was  stationary,  or  while  it  was  being  carried  on  the 
shoulders  of  the  Kohathites.  Were  the  live  coals  to  be  extinguished,  or  to  fall  off 
the  altar,  were  the  cloud  of  incense  to  cease  travelling  onwards  with  the  host  of 
Israel,  then  there  would  be  no  Divine  intercession  on  their  behalf.  Their 
murmurings  because  of  the  difficulties  and  privations  of  the  way  would  have 
nothing  to  screen  them  from  the  judgment  of  heaven.  The  crown  of  gold  around 
the  holy  vessels  might  seem  of  no  use  when  the  Tabernacle  was  stationary  and  all 
its  furniture  fixed.  And  yet  its  very  existence  testified  silently  of  the  faithfulness 
of  God.  Looking  upon  this  interesting  and  significant  feature  of  all  the  holy 
vessels,  the  priests  realized  that  God  was  not  a  capricious  Being,  moved  by  impulse 
in  regard  to  the  provision  which  He  made  for  the  wants  of  His  people,  but  was 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  ;  that  the  qualities  of  giace  in  Him  were 
eternal  qualities,  and  not  merely  assumed  for  the  occasion.  His  provision  of  grace 
was  not  one  called  forth  by  the  necessity  of  the  time,  but  was  pre-ordained  and  pre- 
ananged  from  all  eternity.  But  it  was  on  the  march  that  the  active  use  of  the 
golden  crown  was  called  forth.  When  the  vessels  were  in  transit,  the  crown  was 
indispensable  to  keep  their  contents  in  their  places.  It  was  when  they  were 
journeying  from  place  to  place  that  the  Israelites  required  most  to  realize  the 
uninterrupted  grace  of  God,  for  it  was  then  that  they  were  most  inclined  to  stumble 
and  fail,  because  of  the  difficulties  and  privations  of  the  wilderness.  Now,  what 
is  the  use  to  us  who  live  under  the  Christian  dispensation  of  this  interesting 
feature  of  the  Old  Testament  ritual  ?  It  means  to  us  now  that  God  remains  true 
to  His  original  purpose  of  grace  ;  and  that  His  idea  in  the  creation  and  redemp- 
tion of  man  will  yet  be  realized.  God  never  forsakes  the  work  of  His  own 
hands.  The  Christian  Church  corrupted  its  ways  and  went  to  awful  lengths  of 
worldliness  and  ungodliness,  but  still  His  long-suffering  faithfulness  opened  a 
vision  of  hope  in  the  darkest  days.  Around  all  the  symbols  and  tokens  of  His 
grace  is  the  golden  crown  of  His  faithfulness  to  the  primeval  promise  that  the 
seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  head  of  the  serpent;  and  He  looks  forward 
steadfastly  to  a  time,  far  over  the  gulf  of  ages,  when  a  great  salvation  shall 
compensate  for  all  the  misery  of  the  world,  and  Christ  shall  see  of  the  travail  of 
His  soul  and  be  satisfied.  And  to  the  individual  believer  is  it  not  an  inspiring 
thought  that  the  golden  crown  is  still  around  the  mercy-seat ;  that  it  is  kept  ever 
unshaken  amid  all  his  stumblings  and  backslidings  by  God's  unchanging  purpose 
of  love  ?  Mercy  that  endureth  for  ever  has  been  established  on  the  ground  of 
everlasting  righteousness.  You  who  believe  in  Christ  are  not  under  the  law,  but 
under  grace;  and  God  is  not  merely  pitiful  and  merciful,  but  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  all  your  iniquities.  How  comforting,  too,  is  the  thought  that  the  golden 
crown  is  ever  around  the  table  of  shewbread,  securing  and  maintaining  unshaken 
all  your  blessings  in  Christ !  Having  given  you  His  own  Son,  God  with  Him  will 
freely  give  you  all  things.  And  lastly,  how  comforting  is  the  thought  that  around 
the  altar  of  incense  is  ever  the  golden  crown  ;  assuring  you  that  the  sweet  savour 
of  Christ's  name,  and  the  very  person  of  the  once  crucified  but  now  glorified 
Redeemer,  are  ever  a  fragrant  memorial  on  your  behalf  in  the  presence  of  God  I 
Jesus  Christ  ever  hveth  to  make  intercession  for  you.     (H.  MacmiUan,  D.D.) 

Vers.  17-22.  Put  the  mercy-seat  above  upon  the  ark. — The  ark  and  the  mercy- 
seat : — It  was  a  leading  and  distinctive  feature  of  Jewish  worship  that  no  image 
was  to  represent  Jehovah,  and  yet  the  Jews  were  taught  that  the  omnipotent  God 
resided  specially  in  the  Tabernacle,  or  Temple,  of  their  nation,  and  special  rites  and 
prohibitions  guarded  it,  as  if  the  great  King  were  indeed  there.  1.  The  Jewish 
holy  of  holies  was  empty  of  any  image  of  Deity,  and  was  entered  by  the  high-priest 
alone,  and  by  him  only  once  a  year.  The  centre  of  interest  in  the  room  was  the 
ark  of  God,  a  chest  of  acacia  wood,  about  four  feet  long  and  two  feet  six  inches 
broad  and  deep.  It  contained  the  tables  of  testimony,  the  written  agreement  or 
covenant  between  God  and  the  people  of  Israel.  2.  That  was  not  all.  The 
lesson  taught  at  Sinai  was  not  all  that  the  Jewish  ark  taught,  for  the  ark  had  a  lid 
or  covering  known  as  the  "  mercy-seat."  Inside  the  ark  and  below  was  the  law  ; 
above  and  upon  the  ark  was  that  vacant  space  associated,  through  the  sprinkling  of 
blocd,  with  the  coverins;  or  forgiving  of  the  people's  transgressions ;  and  with  this 
seat  of  mercy  and  pardon  above,  rather  than  with  the  seat  of  law  below,  the  pre- 
sence of  God  was  associated.  The  material  arrangements  taught  the  Jews  great 
spiritual  lessons  :  (1)  That  the  law  had  been  broken.  (2)  That  mercy  prevails 
over  law.     (3)  That  the  mercy-seat  needed  to  be  sprinkled  with  blood.     (T.  If. 


CHAP,  XXV.]  EXODUS.  471 

Herbert.)  The  mercy -seat ;  its  symbolic  substance: — Although  there  is  but  one 
piece  of  beaten — or  very  pure  and  malleable  gold — yet  the  plate,  or  lid  of  the  chest, 
is  obviously  distinguished  from  the  cherubim ;  and  therefore  let  us  treat  them 
severally.  I.  It  is  obvious  that  the  deposit  of  the  tables  in  the  body  of  the  ark  is 
no  guaranty  of  their  protection  and  safety,  so  long  as  there  is  no  cover  to  it.  The 
precious  contents  are  still  exposed,  though  nearly  surrounded  with  golden  walls. 
But  place  on  it  this  plate  of  soUd  gold,  of  adequate  thickness,  and  of  length  and 
breadth  fully  commensurate  with  the  chest  itself,  and  of  course  with  the  tables 
within,  and  you  complete  the  idea  of  protection  and  safety.  What  then  does  this 
shield  of  protection  physical  represent  in  the  typical  or  symbolical  substance  ?  The 
answer  cannot  be  mistaken;  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Protector  and  Fulfiller  of  law. 
He  only  does  all  things  well.  Thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness.  He 
is  the  Lord  our  Eighteousness.  1.  The  law  prohibits  certain  things  from  being 
done ;  and  it  must  be  specially  noted,  that  the  Decalogue  presents  law  to  us  in  the 
negative  form  chiefly  ;  eight  of  the  Ten  Commandments  are  formal  negations,  yet 
involving  substantial  affirmatives.  A  ninth  also,  viz.,  the  Fourth  Commandment,  is 
largely  a  negation.  The  Fifth  alone  is  purely  affirmative.  In  this  form  our  Ee- 
deemer  fulfilled  all  law ;  He  did  no  evil,  nor  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth.  2. 
But  the  Divine  law  is  not  a  mere  negation.  Law  ia  positive.  It  requires  active 
exercise  of  all  the  talents  bestowed,  and  it  exhibits  positive  benefits  as  the  rewards 
of  active  obedience.  Thus  did  our  Eedeemer  fulfil  law.  The  only  positive  word  of 
the  ten.  He  observed  I'igidly — He  was  obedient  to  His  parents  until  He  began  to  be 
about  thirty  years  of  age.  Equally  full  and  complete  was  His  compliance  with  all 
positive  requirements  of  law.  As  is  the  mercy-seat  to  the  material  substance  of 
the  tables,  so  is  Christ  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  substance  of  the  inscribed  law. 
II.  We  proceed  with  the  cherubim.  "  The  generic  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  word 
cherub,  the  plural  of  which  is  cherubim,  is  not  settled  with  certainty.  Some  critics 
refer  it  to  au  Arabic  source,  and  infer  the  meaning  to  be  nearness,  contiguity — 
hence,  a  minister  or  servant ;  and  thus  cherubim  are  the  servants  of  God.  Others 
deduce  it  from  two  Arabic  words  which  signify  '  as  '  or  '  like  to  a  boy.'  "  They  are 
most  probably  correct  who  form  the  word  from  a  Hebrew  term  that  means  to  ride 
(raukab)  by  an  interchange  of  two  of  the  letters.  We  have  the  original  and  the  derived 
word  brought  into  immediate  connection  inPsa.  xviii.  10 :  "  The  Jehovah  rode  upon 
a  cherub,  and  did  fly."  With  a  very  slight  modification,  the  word  here  translated, 
rode,  is  used  to  signify  the  car  or  vehicle  of  the  cherub,  in  1  Chron.  xxviii.  18. 
What  then  are  the  Mosaic  or  Sinaitic  cherubim  designed  and  adapted  to  set  forth  ? 
1.  They  spring  from  the  mercy-seat,  are  a  unit  with  it,  and  are  upbeld  by  it. 
Here  are  symbolized — (1)  The  issuance  of  the  messengers  of  salvation  from  the 
Saviour  Himself.  (2)  They  are  of  the  same  piece  of  gold  ;  this  teaches  the  official 
anity  of  Christ  and  His  ministry.  (3)  Permanent  and  constant  dependence  ;  as 
the  cherubim  rest  their  weight  on  the  mercy-seat,  so  ministers  of  the  gospel  depend 
Qpon  Christ.  2.  They  have  the  human  form  and  face.  These  proclaim  the  intel- 
ligence and  kindly  sympathies  of  the  men  who  minister  in  holy  things.  3.  They 
have  the  lion-face — the  courage  necessary  to  meet  and  defy  danger  and  death.  4. 
They  have  the  ox-face — patient  endurance  of  labour  and  toil.  5.  They  have  the 
eagle-face — symbol  of  intelligence  and  lofty  aims.  6.  They  have  the  wings,  which 
spread  out  over  the  mercy-seat,  and  betoken  their  readiness  and  ability  to  waft  to 
all  the  world  the  glad  tidings,  that  the  law  has  been  fulfilled  and  justification  secured 
to  all  who  believe  in  their  jewel-crowned  King.  7.  They  have  their  faces  turned 
downward  to  the  mercy-seat  and  the  law  it  covers.  This  indicates  their  chief  study 
of  these  things,  into  which  the  angels  desire  to  look.  8.  Their  faces  are  turned 
inward,  which  teaches  the  restrictions  and  limitations  of  that  dispensation  ;  where- 
as those  of  Ezekiel  and  John  turn  outward  and  in  all  directions  ;  because  the  times 
referred  to  by  their  ministry  are  aggressive ;  the  Sinai  restrictions  of  the  Abraha- 
mic  covenant — that  middle  wall  of  partition  is  broken  down  and  the  Abrahamic 
covenant  goes  forth  to  make  Abraham  the  father  of  many  nations,  the  heir  of  the 
world.      {George  Junkin,  D.D.)         The  gospel  under  the  law  : — I.  We  have  hebe 

THE    VERY  CORE    OF    THE    SYMBOLICAI,    ORDINANCES    OF    THE    JEWISH    ChDRCH.      At  thiS 

point  all  the  interest  of  the  dispensation  is  concentrated.  The  days  of  that  people's 
life  as  a  spiritual  community  all  array  themselves  around  that  day,  when  their  high - 
priest,  their  daysman — who  represented  their  nation  in  shadow,  as  Christ,  in  sub- 
stance, represents  the  world — entered  that  inner  sanctuary  with  the  incense  of  his 
people's  prayers  and  the  blood  of  his  people's  sacrifice,  and  received  commission 
from  the  Lord  God  who  dwelt  between  the  cherubim,  to  lay  the  sins  of  the  nation 


472"  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

on  a  victim,  •who  should  bear  them  into  the  wilderness  away.  Here,  then,  is  the 
focus  of  the  spiritual  power  of  the  dispensation,  I  mean  its  power  to  order  man's 
spiritual  relations  with  all  things  and  with  God.  And  hither,  to  this  mercy-seat 
above  the  ark,  we  are  to  look — if  my  principle,  that  this  is  a  typical  people,  typical 
of  you  and  me,  be  a  right  one — for  those  elements  of  the  good  word  of  God  to  the 
men  of  that  dispensation,  which  relate  it  to  the  universal  gospel  of  God  to  man 
and  to  all  worlds — God's  method  of  "  reconciling  all  things  to  Himself."   II.  Let  us 

PASS  WITHIN  THE  SHRINE,  AND  BEHOLD  WHAT  IT  HAS  TO  REVEAL.      1.  What  is  the  Supreme 

symbol  here  ?   The  last,  the  highest,  the  crown  of  the  whole,  is  the  mercy-seat.  And 
this  appears  to  me  to  mean  more,  infinitely  more,  than  a  promise  of  forgiveness, 
upon   certain   terms.     The  fact  that  with   the   mercy-seat   God   completed   and 
crowned  the  symbolism  of  the  Jewish  dispensation ;  that  He  only  felt  it  fit  to  be 
His  habitation  and  organ  of  expression  when  that  mercy-seat  was  set  there  over 
the  ark ;  that  till  then  it  was  a  mere  shell  of  a  dispensation — as  Adam's  body  was  a 
mere  shell  of  a  man  until  God  had  breatbed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life — 
but  that  when  the  mercy-seat  was  set,  it  became  capable  of  entertaining  the  Divine 
glory,  and  became,  in  fact,  inspired;  this  fact,  I  say,  is  the  broad,  grand  declaration 
to  Judaism  of  the  essential  nature  of  God.    It  was  the  utterance  to  that  age,  of  the 
word  which  by  ten  thousand  half-articulate  voices  has  been  uttering  itself  to  man 
since  the  first  days  of  the  creation,  and  has  now  become  fully  articulate  in  Christ — 
God  is  love.     The  truth  is  the  same  for  them  and  for  us ;  the  substance  of  the  pro- 
clamation is  the  same ;  the  difference  lies  here,  they  heard  the  word,  and  saw  the 
glory,  but  "  Hereby  know  we  the  love  of  God,  because  He  laid  down  His  life  for 
us."     2.  Beneath  the  mercy-seat,  within  its  bosom,  as  it  were,  was  the  ark  of  the 
testimony,  and  in  it  the  word  of  the  law.     The  image  here  reveals  a  harmony — the 
tables  of  stone  in  the  ark,  the  mercy-seat  above  it,  crowning  it,  and  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  enveloping  the  whole.     The  two  ideas  are  inseparable — mercy  and  righteous- 
ness— when  we  connect  them  with  the  Divine  name.     "  Mercy  and  truth  have  met 
together,  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  eacli  other,"  in  every  manifestation 
of  the  love  of  God  to  man.   3.  The  third  lesson  of  the  symbol,  perhaps  the  highest, 
is  to  be  gathered  from  the  contemplation  of  its  unity.     We  have  considered  it  in 
its  parts,  but  it  is  essentially  one.    An  ark,  with  a  mercy-seat  above  it,  the  cheru- 
bim shadowing  both,  and  the  Divine  glory,  the  light  which  was  the  sign  of  God's 
personal  presence,  bathing  the  whole.     It  tells  us  that  mercy  only  crowns  us  fully 
with  its  benediction,  when  the  Divine  testimonies  are  hidden  within  the  heart. 
Man  is  the  true  Sbekinah.    The  glory  shines  from  him  when  the  Word  is  enshrined 
within  him.     "  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth."     In  Him  it  is  no  law  of  words  addressed  sternly  to  the  understanding, 
but  a  law  of  life  shrined  lovingly  within  the  soul.     {J.  B.  Brown,  B. A.)         The 
■mercy-seat : — There  was  no  seat  in  the  Tabernacle  for  the  priests,  because  their 
work  was  never  done.     They  stood  to  minister  in  the  holy  place.     "  And  every 
priest  standeth  daily  ministering,  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices,  which 
can  never  take  away  sins.     But  this  Man  (Christ),  after  He  had  offered  one  sacri- 
fice for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God  "  (Heb.  x.  11,  12).     The 
only  seat  there  was  belonging  to  the  Tabernacle  was  the  mercy-seat,  the  throne  of 
God  really,  where  mercy  reigned,     Mercy  signifies  goodness  bestowed  on  the  un- 
worthy and  undeserving.     The  mercy-seat  represented  Jesus  Christ,  "  whom  God 
hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  "  or  mercy-seat,  "  througa  faith  in  His  blood,  to 
declare  His  righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  "  (Rom.  iii.  25).     Jesus  is  the 
true  mercy-seat  or  throne  of  grace,  where  "  grace  reigns  through  righteousness 
unto  eternal  life  "  (Rom.  v.  21).     This  is  the  throne  we  are  urged  to   approach 
boldly,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  (Heb.  iv. 
16).     God  has  two  thrones,  a  throne  of  mercy  and  a  throne  of  judgment.     He  now 
sits  on  the  throne  of  mercy,  dispensing  mercy  and  grace  to  every  one  that  comes  to 
Him.     That  seat  will  soon  be  removed,  and  the  judgmpnt  seat  will  be  put  in  its  place, 
and  God  will  sit  upon  it  to  judge  all  men  according  to  their  works.  (G.  Rodgers.) 
The  mercy-seat: — Our  mercy-seat,  our  reconciliation-residence  is  Jesus,  the  Divine 
Saviour,  the  God-man  mediator.     And  all  the  typical  teachings  of  this  branch  of 
our  subject  may  be  drawn  out  in  the  attempt  to  answer  one  question,  viz.  :  What 
sort  of  a  mercy-seat  have  we  in  Christ  ?     I.  In  replying  to  this  inquiry,  I  desire  to 
show  that  we  have  in  Christ,  in  the  first  place,  an  authorized  mercy-seat.     He  who 
occupies  this  mercy- seat  is  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour."'   No  violence  is  done  to  any 
principle  of  honour,  or  of  justice  in  the  g'overnment  of  the  universe  by  the  dis- 
pensing of  grace  from  this  mercy-seat.    The  Divine  law  is  magnified  and  made 


CHAP.  XX7.]  EXODUS.  473 

honourable.  Every  attribute  of  the  Divine  character  is  vindicated.  II.  But  I 
observe  secondly  of  the  mercy-seat  which  we  are  bidden  to  approach  in  Christ 
that  it  is  an  encoukaging  mercy-seat.  Christ,  in  the  glory  of  His  finished 
righteousness,  is  the  medium  through  which  God  looks  at  all  His  believing 
children.  He  sees  them  only  "  in  the  face  of  His  anointed."  Hence  it  is  said  of 
believers  in  Christ  that  "  they  are  righteous  "  in  God's  sight,  "  even  as  He,"  i.e., 
Christ  "  is  righteous."  III.  But  thirdly  I  observe  respecting  this  mercy-seat  that 
it  is  FOLL  OF  PEiviLEGE  FOB  THE  PRESENT.  Supposc  you  wcrc  travelling  in  a  foreign 
land.  You  are  cut  off  from  intercourse  with  all  whom  you  most  love  on  earth. 
There  is  only  one  channel  through  which  you  can  hear  from  home,  and  obtain 
the  supply  of  all  that  is  necessary  to  meet  your  daily  wants.  How  precious 
that  channel  of  communication  would  be  to  you  I  How  you  would  prize  it ! 
How  anxious  and  careful  you  would  be  to  keep  it  open !  The  thought  of  having 
it  interrupted,  or  cut  off,  would  be  insupportable  to  you.  Yet  this  is  but  a 
faint  image  of  the  Christian's  position  here  in  the  world,  and  of  the  relation 
of  the  mercy- seat  to  Him.  IV.  There  is  only  one  other  point  of  view  from 
which  we  may  glance  at  the  mercy-seat,  and  thus  contemplated  it  shines  before 
us  as  BRIGHT  WITH  HOPE  FOB  THE  FUTURE.  Hilh  rto  it  has  always  been  true  of 
Jehovah  that,  "  verily  He  is  a  God  that  hideth  Himself."  But  the  time  cometh, 
when  of  all  that  pertains  to  the  character  and  work  of  God,  it  may  be  said, 
"  There  hath  been  nothing  hid  that  will  not  be  made  manifest."  "  What  we  know 
not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter. "  The  true  Shekinah  upon  the  mercy-seat  will  have 
no  single  dark  point  connected  with  it.  Over  all  its  outspread  surface  the  cloud 
will  be  lighted  up  with  the  splendours  of  Divinity.  You  have  often  seen  a  mass  of 
clouds  in  the  western  sky,  unillumined  by  the  sun's  rays,  as  the  day  was  drawing 
to  a  close.  You  know  how  dark  and  unattractive  that  mass  appeared.  But  pre- 
sently you  see  the  sun  pass  behind  it,  and  what  a  wondrous  transformation  is 
wrought  in  its  appearance  !  How  radiant  the  whole  mass  becomes !  How  every 
point  in  it  glows  and  sparkles  with  the  splendours  of  the  sun  that  shines  through 
it !  So  will  it  be  with  the  cloud  upon  our  mercy-seat.  When  Jesus  was  on  earth 
the  coarse  garments  of  humanity  were  upon  Him.  Then  the  shekinah  cloud  was 
dark.  But  the  redeemed  shall  look  upon  that  cloud  again  amidst  the  glory  of  the 
heavenly  kingdom.  Then  all  darkness  will  have  passed  away.  The  sun  of  uncreated 
Deity  will  be  pouring  all  its  brightness  through  it.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The 
mercy -seat : — I.  The  design  of  the  appointment.  "  And  there  I  will  meet  with  thee." 
Meeting  with  God — communion  with  God ;  and  instruction  from  God — these  are  in 
the  text  the  declared  purposes  of  the  solemnities  observed  before  the  ark,  and  they  are 
also  the  great  objects  to  be  always  associated  with  the  public  assemblies  of  the 
Christian  Church.  II.  Some  of  the  peculiarities  of  this  institution. — 1.  It  was 
altogether  of  Divine  appointment.  2.  Another  significant  fact  is  that  the  name 
"  mercy-seat "  is  manifold  in  its  meaning.  By  St.  Paul,  in  Romans  iii.  25,  the 
mercy-seat  is  called  a  propitiation.  The  mercy-seat  is  the  place  of  propitiation, 
whither  the  sacrificial  blood  was  carried,  and  the  red  showers  were  cast  around  by 
God's  high  priest.  "  There  I  will  meet  with  thee,"  saith  the  Divine  word.  Only 
through  a  sacrifice  can  God  be  approached.  The  mercy-seat  is  also  called  a 
"  covering,"  because,  as  it  concealed  in  the  thick  darkness  the  contents  of  the  ark,  it 
so  became  an  emblem  of  the  completeness  of  the  process  of  Divine  forgiveness 
(Psalm  xxxii.  1).  The  Hebrew  word  for  the  mercy-seat  is  Capporeth,  derived  from 
Caphar,  a  covering,  the  word  which,  in  Genesis  vi.  14,  represents  God  as  directing 
Noah  to  pitch  the  ark  within  and  without.  About  eighty  times  the  word  is  used 
in  the  Old  Testament,  and  is  rendered  in  our  version  atone,  or  atonement.  Thus 
early,  even,  as  the  ministry  of  Noah,  the  doctrine  of  shelter  through  substitution  was 
preached  to  the  world.  The  position  occupied  by  the  mercy-seat  is  equally  signifi- 
cant ;  it  was  "  upon  the  ark,"  within  which  was  contained  the  handwriting  of  God 
— the  covenant;  the  promises  of  God,  and  His  requirements.  III.  The  spiritual 
blessings  which  were  typified  by  the  mercy-seat.  1.  To  the  mercy-seat  we 
must  resort  to  obtain  the  assurance  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  2.  To  the  mercy- 
seat  we  repair  in  all  times  of  trial  and  distress.  So  long  as  communion  with  God 
is  unimpaired  we  have  a  specific  for  all  human  woe.  3.  Thither  also  we  repair  for 
renewed  supplies  of  grace  and  strength.  We  can  only  rightly  perform  our  work  for 
the  Lord,  as  we  obtain  from  Him  fresh  impartations  of  heavenly  power.  4.  It  is 
thither  that  we  must  by  faith  bear  the  wants  of  the  Church  and  the  world.  [W.  G. 
Lewis.)  The  mercy -seat : — I.  Consider  the  typical  properties  of  the  mEECT- 
SEAT.     1.  It  was  intended  as  a  covering  to  the  ark,  the  latter  being  overlaid,  and  the 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xX7. 

former  made  of  pure  gold.  In  the  ark,  covered  with  the  mercy-seat,  were  deposited 
the  two  tables  of  the  law,  given  to  Moses  at  Mount  Sinai.  This  rich  and  splendid 
symbol  afforded  a  striking  representation  of  the  incomparable  worth  and  excellence 
of  the  Saviour,  who  in  due  time  should  become  the  true  propitiatory.  The  way  of 
salvation  by  the  cross  of  Christ,  agrees  with  the  strictest  principles  of  justice  ;  and  to 
justice  and  equity  it  is  frequently  ascribed,  as  well  as  to  the  richest  grace  (Psa.  1.  5,  6 ; 
Isa.  i.  27  ;  Eom.  iii.  25).  2.  As  the  mercy-seat  covered  the  ark,  so  the  cherubims  of 
glory  covered,  or  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  overshadowed  the  mercy-seat.  To  this 
the  apostle  Peter  seems  to  allude,  when  he  speaks  of  the. angels  as  looking  with 
eager  expectation  into  the  wonders  of  human  redemption  (1  Pet.  i.  12).  The  holy 
angels  love  the  Redeemer,  worship  Him,  and  rejoice  in  the  reconciliation  of  sinners 
to  God  through  Him.  3.  The  mercy-seat,  and  cherubims  overshadowing  it,  formed 
a  glorious  throne,  in  which  the  Shekinah  or  visible  presence  of  the  Deity  resided ; 
and  hence  the  Lord  is  said  to  dwell  between  the  cherubims  (Psa.  Ixxx.  1 ;  Isa.  xxxvii. 
16).  Thus  all  the  gracious  manifestations  of  the  Divine  nature  are  through  the 
Redeemer.  4.  The  most  solemn  acts  of  worship,  under  the  Levitical  dispensation, 
had  a  more  immediate  reference  to  the  mercy-seat.  All  of  which  prefigund  the 
substitution  of  Christ  in  the  sinner's  stead,  the  necessity  of  His  atonement,  and 
the  bearing  away  of  the  sins  of  His  people  which  were  laid  upon  Him.  5.  The 
mercy-seat  was  the  fountain  of  all  good  to  Israel ;  from  hence  proceeded  their 
choicest  blessings.  There  it  was  that  God  gave  an  audience  to  His  people,  and  a 
favourable  answer  to  their  prayers,  through  the  medium  of  an  intercessor;  and 
though  they  were  not  permitted  personally  to  approach,  yet  all  their  supjilications 
were  directed  towards  it.  Nor  can  a  word  of  mercy  or  of  peace  be  heard,  or  any 
prayers  be  answered,  but  through  Christ,  who  is  our  mercy- seat.     II.  The  piuvileges 

CONNECTED  WITH    THE  MERCY-SEAT,  AS  THE  MEDIUM  OF   APPBOACH  TO  GoD  :    "  There  will 

I  meet  with  thee,  and  I  will  commune  with  thee."  1,  "I  will  meet  with  thee," 
saith  the  Lord.  Not  as  He  once  met  Moses  at  the  ion,  and  sought  to  slay  him  ;  nor 
as  the  angel  met  Balaam,  with  a  drawn  sword  in  his  hand  ;  nor  as  the  Lord  once 
threatened  to  meet  with  Ephraim,  as  a  bear  bereaved  of  her  whelps.  But  as  an 
affectionate  parent  or  tender  friend,  which  implies  a  drawing  nigh  on  one  part,  and 
sensible  manifestation  on  the  other.  2.  "I  will  commune  with  tbee."  Communion 
generally  denotes  that  tender  intercourse  which  one  person  has  with  another  ;  and 
here  it  is  expressive  of  that  sacred  fellowship  which  subsists  between  God  and  His 
people.  This  puts  the  greatest  honour  upon  the  creature,  and  discovers  the  most 
amazing  condescension  on  the  part  of  God.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Lessons: — 1. 
Is  there  a  mercy-seat?  and  may  we  bring  our  sins,  our  wants,  and  sorrows  to  it? 
Oh,  let  us  avail  ourselves  of  the  inestimable  privilege.  A  seat  of  mercy  in  a  fallen 
world  1  how  does  this  bespeak  the  character  and  benignity  of  God  !  Why  will  ye 
die  ?  2.  Is  it  possible  to  realize  communion  with  the  Holy  One  in  our  present 
lapsed  and  miserable  condition  ?  There  will  I  commune  with  thee,  is  the  promise 
of  His  grace.  Let  then  the  children  of  God  seek  the  closest  intimacy  with  the 
Father  of  their  spirits.  The  glorious  brightness  of  the  eternal  Godhead  is  attem- 
pered to  our  enfeebled  powers  in  the  human  sympathies  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
His  bosom  is  the  bosom  of  a  friend.  3.  Will  the  Lord  open  unto  us  His  word, 
and  reveal  unto  us  the  purposes  of  His  love  ?  Yes  ;  He  will  do  so,  if  ye  will  wait  in 
meditative  and  prayerful  expectation  upon  Him  (Psa.  Ixii.  5).  4.  Amidst  the  pain- 
ful bereavements  and  separations  we  are  often  called  to  experience  here,  may  we 
entertain  a  well-grounded  confidence  of  a  blessed  re-union  in  eternity  ?  Assuredly  we 
may.  All  Israel  had  but  one  seat  of  mercy  :  God  in  Christ  is  also  the  sinner's 
friend  and  the  mourner's  comforter.  In  meeting  Him,  we  meet  each  other  in  Him. 
All  the  sun's  bright  rays  of  light  centre  in  a  common  focus :  all  believers  are  but  the 
several  radiations  of  a  single  Saviour,  and  all  will  converge  to  that  central  Lord 
again.  (W.  Mudge.)  The  cherubim: — The  etymology  of  the  word  cherub  being 
lost,  the  name  renders  us  no  assistance  in  the  interpretation  of  the  symbol.  It  is  note- 
worthy, however,  that  Ezekiel  applies  to  similar  composite  figures  the  appellation 
♦•living  creatures";  and  St.  John  a  similar  designation,  unfortunately  translated 
"  beasts."  Following  this  clue,  we  inquire  if  there  is  anything  in  the  composite  form 
itself  to  carry  us  onward  in  this  line  of  interpretation.  The  cherubs  of  the  Taber- 
nacle  are  not  described  in  the  specifications,  but  mentioned  as  if  the  form  were 
already  so  well  known  as  to  need  no  delineation  for  the  sake  of  the  general  reader. 
Doubtless  the  artists  were  furnished  with  minute  directions.  The  living  creatures 
seen  by  Ezekiel  are  described  by  him  with  considerable  amplifieatiou  (chap.  i.  5-25). 
They  were  compounded  of  four  animals — ox,  lion,  eagle,  man, — each  excelling  in 


CHAP.  XXV.]  EXODUS.  475 

some  one  life-power.  The  combination  suggests  a  being,  real  or  ideal,  uniting  in 
himself  the  qualities  in  which  these  four  different  manifestations  of  life  are  severally 
eminent.  The  human  form  is  the  ground- work  of  the  composition ;  and  the  additions 
to  it  are  suggestive  of  an  improvement  on  man  by  adding  to  his  faculties  those  in 
which  other  animals  are  his  superiors ;  as,  e.g.,  the  power  of  vision  and  motion 
peculiar  to  the  eagle,  the  strength  of  the  lion,  and  the  submission  of  the  ox.  The 
cherubs  seen  by  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  were  different  in  appearance  from  those 
described  by  Ezekiel,  each  having  for  its  ground-form  one  of  the  four  animals  already 
mentioned ;  but  the  recurrence  of  these  four,  notwithstanding  this  diversity,  con- 
firms the  deductions  already  stated.  The  idealization  of  earthly  creatural  life  by 
the  combination  of  its  highest  manifestations  was  projected  into  shape  as  a  compo- 
site animal  figure,  not  constant  in  form,  but  varying  as  one  element  or  another 
prevailed  in  the  ideal  conception.  The  presence  of  all  these  four  animal  forms  in 
the  visions  both  of  Ezekiel  and  of  John,  renders  it  probable  that  the  four  were 
wholly,  or  in  part,  contained  in  the  cherubic  figures  of  the  Tabernacle.  Was,  then, 
this  idealization  of  life  designed  to  represent  beings  actually  existing  in  the  high 
grade  of  life,  or  did  it  point  backward  to  what  man  was  before  the  fall,  and  forward 
to  what  he  is  to  be  in  the  restored  paradise  ?  There  is  no  passage  of  Scripture  which 
indisputably  teaches  the  actual  existence  of  beings  represented  by  these  composite 
animal  figures.  In  most  cases,  cheiubs  appear  in  scenes  which  are  plainly  symbolic 
or  poetic.  The  passage  in  Genesis  iii.  24,  properly  understood,  affirms  of  the  cherubs 
only  that  they  were  placed  in  the  east  of  the  garden,  or  near  its  entrance,  for  doubt- 
less Eden,  like  the  Tabernacle  in  the  wilderness,  fronted  the  rising  sun.  The 
inference  is  that  they  were  placed  there  to  have  the  same  significance  as  they  had 
in  the  Tabernacle,  in  the  Temple  and  in  the  Apocalyptic  vision  of  heaven.  If,  under 
the  Mosaic  and  Christian  dispensations,  these  composite  figures  symbolized  humanity 
redeemed,  sanctified,  and  glorified,  probably  they  had  a  parallel  meaning  when 
employed  in  the  symbolism  of  earlier  times.  What  they  signified  in  the  Tabernacle 
and  in  the  Temple  being  the  very  point  to  be  illuminated,  we  pass  at  once  from  the 
first  scene  in  the  history  of  redemption  where  they  appear,  to  the  vision  of  heaven 
in  which  a  Christian  Hebrew  beheld  these  symbolic  beings  before  and  around  the 
throne  of  God  (see  Rev.  v.  9,  10).  What  clearer  evidence  than  this  do  we  need 
that  the  composite  animal  figures  of  Hebrew  symbolism  represented  humanity  raised 
from  its  death  in  Adam  to  fulness  of  life  in  Christ  ?  They  were  "  living  ones  " 
because  Christ  having  died  for  them,  and  risen  again,  had  made  them  partakers  ol 
His  life.  (E.  E.  Ativater.)  The  cherubim: — That  it  cannot  be  the  angels,  who 
are  intended  by  these  mysterious  representations,  is  rendered  perfectly  clear  when 
you  consider  that  they  were  part  and  parcel  of  the  ark  itself.  Tlfey  were  not  some- 
thing placed  upon  it,  or  added  to  it,  but  they  were  something  made  of  it,  or  for  it. 
They  were  beaten  out  of  the  very  materials  of  the  ark  itself.  The  same  gold  which 
covered  the  mercy-seat  was  wrought  out  into  the  form  of  the  cherubim.  Thia 
could  have  no  significancy  as  applied  to  the  angels.  They  are  indeed  "  ministering 
spirits  unto  the  heirs  of  salvation,"  but  they  stand  in  no  such  intimate  relation  to 
the  covenant  of  redemption  as  is  indicated  by  the  position  which  the  cherubim 
occupied.  There  can  be  no  question  on  this  point.  It  is  not  the  angels  who  are 
represented  by  the  cherubim.  To  whom  then,  or  to  what  do  they  refer  ?  They  are 
doubtless  to  be  regarded,  not  perhaps  as  actual  existences  at  all,  but  as  symbols  of 
the  glorious  qualities  or  attributes  of  Christ  our  Saviour,  in  carrying  on  the  great 
work  of  our  redemption,  and  of  attributes  or  qualities  which  His  ransomed  people 
shall  share  with  Him  in  the  glory  of  His  heavenly  kingdom.  Let  us  look  then  at 
the  qualities  indicated  by  the  four-fold  faces  of  the  cherubim.  1.  The  first  is  the 
face  of  a  man.  This  stands  before  us  as  the  natural,  and  admitted  index  of  know- 
ledge, or  intelligence.  And  this  we  know  is  a  quality  or  attribute  which  Christ,  in 
His  position  as  our  Redeemer,  the  crowning  glory  of  our  ark  of  the  covenant, 
possesses  in  the  fullest  measure.  "  In  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge."  2.  But  the  cherubim  are  representative  of  our  humanity  in  its 
glorified  state.  And  looking  at  it  from  this  point  of  view  we  may  gaze  upon  the 
*'  face  of  a  man  "  in  this  mysterious  symbol  till  it  seems  to  have  a  voice  and 
utterance,  and  to  speak  to  us  in  eloquent  terms  of  the  grand  disclosures,  the 
marvellous  unfoldings,  of  what  are  now  bidden  things,  awaiting  us  in 
that  bright  world  to  which  we  are  hastening.  3.  The  second  face  which  the 
cherubim  bore  was  "the  face  of  a  lion."  Two  qualities  are  here  indicated,  viz., 
courage  and  majesty.  Now  the  great  Captain  of  our  salvation,  in  the  campaign 
which  He  undertook,  when  He  resolved  to  put  down  the  rebellion  which  had  broken 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

out  in  this  province  of  His  Father's  dominions,  afforded  the  grandest  exhibition  of 
this  noble  quality  which  the  world  or  the  universe  has  ever  witnessed.     And  this 
quality  is  a  characteristic  of  redeemed  humanity  as  well  as  of  Him  who  redeemed 
it.    It  applies  to  true  Christians  even  now.   "The  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion, "  says 
the  wise  man.     But  it  will  apply  to  them  much  more  truly  hereafter.     It  is  said  of 
them  that — "  they  shall  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment."    But  "  the  face  of 
the  lion  "  was  indicative  of  majesty  as  well  as  courage.     This  is  the  halo  round 
Christ's  character — the  radiance  formed  by  this  shining  forth  of  His  own  glory. 
He  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  person." 
But  this  is  a  quality,  too,  which  will  mark  the  condition  of  the  redeemed,  in  the 
glory  of  their  future  state.    True,  with  them  it  will  not  be  an  inherited,  but  an 
imparted  quality.     In  themselves,  of  their  own,  they  have  nothing  attractive,  or 
majestic.     But  they  do  have  that  imparted  to  them,  by  their  glorious  Lord,  which 
makes  them  so.    4.  The  third  face  which  the  cherubim  bore  was  "  the  face  of  an 
ox."    The  quality  which  this  represents  is,  manifestly,  that  of  strength  for  service. 
This,  we  know,  is  a  glorious  attribute  of  our  Divine  Redeemer.     It  is  one  which 
He  possesses,  too,  in  absolute  perfection.    But  it  symboUzed  the  same  quality  as 
marking  the  condition  of  His  people  in  that  glorious  kingdom  to  which  it  is  His 
gracious  purpose  eventually  to  bring  them.    It  is  the  covenant  privilege  of  the 
redeemed,  even  now,  in  the  imperfection  of  this  fallen  state,  to  be  "  strong  in  the 
Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His  might."    They  "  take  hold  of  His  strength,"  and  this 
enables  them  to  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  to  "run  and  not  be  weary,  to  walk 
and  not  faint."    But  the  ark,  and  the  cherubim  upon  it,  point  us  onward  to  the 
heavenly  world.     It  is  a  quality,  or  property,  of  redeemed  humanity  in  the  glory  of 
the  resurrection  state  to  which  the  symbol  now  before  us  refers.     There  will  then 
be  bliss  in  every  service,  and  rest  in  every  motion.     5.  The  last  face  associated 
with  this  mysterious  symbol  was  "  the  face  of  an  eagle."    Now,  one  of  the  things 
for  which  an  eagle  is  remarkable,  is  its  keenness  of  vision.    And  all  the  power,  or 
quickness  of  vision,  which  the  eagle  possesses  is  but  a  symbol  of  a  corresponding 
attribute  of  character  pertaining  to  Christ.     His  eyes  are  in  every  place.     "  He 
seeth  the  end  from  the  beginning."    He  knoweth  our  necessities  before  we  ask.    6. 
But  how  does  this  apply  to  the  redeemed  in  the  glory  of  their  future  state  (see  Heb. 
vi.  5)  ?  which  certainly  refers  to  faculties,  attributes,  or  qualities,  mental,  moral,  or 
physical,  to  be  possessed  by  the  redeemed  of  Christ  amidst  the  glory  and  blessedness 
of  the  world  to  come.    Again,  when  I  read  Isaiah  xxxiii.  17,  I  feel  that,  if  I  am  a 
believer  in  Jesus,  I  have  here  a  promise,  in  symbol,  of  such  an  enlargement  of 
perceptive  faculty  and  power  of  vision  as  quite  passes  my  capacity  at  present  to 
comprehend.    7.  But  quickness  of  motion,  or  speed  of  flight  is  another  characteristic 
quality  of  the  eagle.     And  this  we  know  is  a  quality  which  strikingly  marks  the 
character  of  Christ  in  carrying  on  the  work  of  our  redemption.     It  was  so  when  He 
was  on  earth.     What  He  did  for  those  who  sought  His  gracious  intervention.  He 
did  quickly.     This  quality  marks  His  character  still.     It  is  only  by  the  practical 
development  of  it  that  He  can  make  good  His  word  when  He  engages  in  one  place 
to  be  to  all  His  people  "  a  very  present  help  in  trouble  "  ;    and  in  another  to  be 
always  "  a  God  at  hand,  and  not  afar  off "  ;  or  when,  in  still  another  place,  His 
promise  runs — "Before  they  call  I  will  answer,  and  while  they  are  yet  speaking  I 
will  hear."    It  is  clearly  manifest  how  "  the  face  of  the  eagle  "  upon  the  cherubim 
points  to  this  feature  of  our  Lord's  character.     8.  But  what  bearing  has  this  on  the 
position  of  the  redeemed  in  glory  ?    I  answer,  a  very  natural  and  necessary  bearing. 
It  teaches  us  that  quickness  of  motion,  or  speed  of  flight,  will  be  a  characteristic  of 
that  state.     (R.  Newton,  D.D.)         The  chertibim  ;— It  is  very  instructive  to  observe 
that  the  first  time  we  read  about  the  cherubim  is  in  Gen.  iii.  24,  where  they  are 
seen  with  flaming  swords  guarding  the  way  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  ready  to  destroy 
any  man  who  might  be  bold  enough  to  try  and  force  his  way  through  to  that  tree; 
and  the  next  time  we  read  of  them  is  in  (Exod.  xxv.),  where  they  are  guarding  the 
throne  of  mercy ;  and  here,  blessed  be  God,  they  hold  no  flaming  swords  in  their 
hands,  but  they  are  bending  over  the  mercy-seat,  and  looking  at  the  blood  sprinkled 
there.     They  are  not  looking  under  the  mercy-seat ;   there   was   the  law,  the 
ministration  of  death.    They  do  not  turn  their  faces  eastward  and  look  out  at  the 
people ;  had  they  done  so,  they  would  have  beheld  a  multitude  of  sinners  :  but  they 
look  at  that  which  conceals  and  covers  up  the  ministration  of  death.    Their  eyes 
are  fixed  on  the  propitiation  for  sin — on  that  which  is  an  atonement  for  sin.    They 
are  looking  at  Jesus;  there  they  find  their  joy  and  rest.    And  I  would  look  where 
they  look :  my  mind  would  be  occupied  with  that  which  gives  joy  to  the  highest 


CHAP.  XXV.  EXODUS.  477 

rank  of  angels,  the  ministers  who  stand  nearer  to  the  throne  of  God  than  any  other 
beings  in  the  universe.  {G.  Rodgers.)  There  I  will  meet  with  thee. — Meeting 
with  God  : — I.  To  the  Jews,  God  set  apart  one  special  place  for  sacrifice,  one 

SPECIAL    PLACE    FOR    CLOSEST    COMMUNION,    AND    HE    WHO    WANTED    SOME   DIRECT    ORACLE 

FROM  GOD  MUST  GO  TO  THAT  SPOT  TO  GET  HIS  ANSWER.  The  OHcness  continues,  but 
now  it  is  not  oneness  of  spot,  but  it  is  oneness  of  path.  And  there  the  spot  lies,  at 
the  end  of  the  path — it  is  one  path.  All  the  oneness  of  the  types  of  the  Mosaic 
law  go  to  make  the  oneness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  as  on  that  one  grand 
spot,  "  between  those  cherubims,"  God  declared  He  would  meet  and  commune  with 
Israel,  so  now,  at  that  one  spot,  Christ,  God  covenants  that  He  will  meet  with  you, 
and  commune  with  you.  Christ  is  God's  mercy-seat.  Christ  is  the  gold  of  His 
Deity,  and  the  wood  of  His  humanity,  and  all  to  enshrine,  to  keep  the  law,  the  law 
for  man.  In  after  times,  two  other  things  were  placed  in  the  ark,  of  which  we  will 
not  speak  now — the  rod  of  Aaron,  emblem  of  the  eternal  priesthood  of  Christ,  and 
the  pot  of  manna,  showing  that  Christ  is  the  bread  and  the  nourishment,  the 
sustenance  of  His  people  in  the  journey  of  life.  II.  It  was  upon  such  a  mercy-seat, 
God  said,  "I  will  meet  with  thee,  and  commune  with  thee."  You  see,  then, 
that  your  interviews  with  God,  your  holy  communings,  depend  upon  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  According  to  your  views  of  Christ,  according  to  your  nearness  to 
Christ,  so  will  be  your  experience  here  in  private  of  communion  with  God. 
Accustom  yourself  to  lay  out  in  order  the  ark,  and  all  that  went  to  make  that 
mercy-seat,  and  that  glory,  and  those  communings.  And  the  more  you  lay  out  in 
order  before  your  mind  the  attributes,  and  the  glory,  and  the  work  of  Jesus,  the 
more  you  will  hear  still  small  voices,  the  more  you  will  enjoy  those  "  times  of 
refreshing,"  tbe  more  God  will  reveal  Himself  to  you  as  He  does  not  to  the  world, 
the  more  you  will  "  acquaint  yourself  with  Him,  and  be  at  peace."  If  you  have  not 
real  communion  with  God,  the  reason  lies  simply  there — Christ  is  not  in  His  place 
— the  ark  is  not  set  up — you  are  not  honouring  Christ — you  have  low  views  of 
Christ — you  have  been  looking  at  wrong  things — you  are  expecting  communion 
apart  from  your  Saviour.     III.  There  could  be  no  true  throne  of  God  in  the 

WORLD,  IF  MERCY  WERE    SEPARATED    FROM    JUSTICE.       But    nOW  it    is   jUSt  in    God  tO  be 

merciful,  because  of  the  deep  things  that  that  ark  tells  us.  Therefore  if  any  of  you 
are  worshipping  God  in  fear,  if  there  are  any  downcast  and  depressed,  any  who 
think  they  hear  condemning  sounds,  any  to  whom  God  presents  Himself  in  the 
light  of  a  Master,  One  whom  they  fear,  remember,  God  sits  upon  a  mercy-seat. 
It  is  in  mercy  He  communes  with  you.  He  has  no  word  but  mercy.  Judgment  is  a 
strange  word.  He  loveth  mercy — mercy  dwells  with  God — it  is  all  mercy.  Go  to 
Him  for  mercy,  let  it  be  a  poor  sinner  communing  with  his  God  upon  a  mercy-seat. 
{J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Communitij  between  God  and  man  : — I.  That  in  Christ  we 
meet  with  God  as  a  Being  of  immutable  rectitude.  In  Christ  the  moral  law  was — 
1.  Perfectly  embodied  ;  2.  Powerfully  enforced.  II.  That  in  Christ  we  meet  with 
God  as  a  Being  disposed  to  exercise  clemency.  1.  Christ  is  the  highest  expression 
of  God's  mercy.  2.  Christ  is  the  greatest  demonstration  of  God's  mercy.  3.  Christ 
is  the  mightiest  agent  of  God's  mercy.  The  messenger  of  infinite  love.  HI.  That 
in  Christ  we  meet  with  God  as  the  Lord  of  angelic  intelligences.  (Homilist.) 
The  mercy-seat : — I.  In  the  mercy-seat,  or  in  Christ,  we  meet  the  Law  of  God.  1. 
Christ  gives  a  new  view  of  law.  2.  Christ  introduces  a  new  relation  in  reference  to 
law.  3.  Christ  creates  in  His  people  an  affection  for  the  law.  II.  In  the  mercy- 
seat,  or  in  Christ,  we  meet  the  mercy  of  God.  1.  The  atonement  of  Christ  is  the 
medium  for  the  exercise  of  mercy.  2.  The  atonement  of  Christ  is  the  evidence  of 
the  value  of  mercy.  III.  In  the  mercy-seat,  or  in  Christ,  we  meet  the  glory  of  God. 
1.  This  may  be  applied  to  the  very  essence  of  God.  2.  Christ  in  the  Scriptures  is 
represented  as  reflecting  the  moral  attributes  of  God.  IV.  In  the  mercy-seat,  or  in 
Christ,  we  meet  the  angels  of  God.  [Caleb  Morris.)  Condition  of  communion 
with  God  : — Birds  cannot  converse  with  men  unless  they  had  a  rational  nature  put 
into  them,  nor  can  men  converse  with  God  unless,  being  made  new  creatures,  they 
partake  of  the  Divine  nature.  Communion  with  God  is  a  mystery  to  most ;  every 
one  that  hangs  about  the  court  doth  not  speak  with  the  king  ;  all  that  meddle  with 
holy  duties  and,  as  it  were,  hang  about  the  court  of  heaven,  hath  not  communion 
with  God ;  it  is  only  the  new  creature  enjoys  God's  presence  in  orduiances,  an^ 
sweetly  converses  with  Him,  as  a  child  with  a  father.     (T.  Watson.) 

Vers.  23-30.  Set  upon  the  table  shewbread.— T^  table  of  sheubread : — I.  Th« 
first  lesson  we  learn  here  is  taught  us  by  the  nature  of  the  bread  upon  the  table 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxy. 

This  we  know,  on  the  very  best  authority,  was  a  symbol  of  Christ.  Jesus  taught  us 
this  distinctly  and  clearly  when  He  said,  "  I  am  the  Bread  of  Life."  That  bread 
upon  the  table  points  to  Jesus.  How  apt  a  type,  or  emblem  of  Him,  it  was  !  The 
bread  was  a  prepared  substance.  A  compound  substance.  A  necessary  substance. 
As  suitable  as  necessary.  II.  Our  second  lesson  is  furnished  by  observing  the  way 
IN  WHICH  THIS  itREAD  WAS  MANIFESTED.  Two  things  Were  required  to  this  end,  viz., 
the  light  which  shone  from  the  golden  candlestick,  and  the  table  to  lift  up,  or  elevate 
the  bread  so  that  it  could  be  distinctly  seen.  If  the  candlestick  were  not  lighted, 
and  casting  forth  its  illuminating  beams,  the  bread  might  be  upon  the  table,  but 
darkness  would  envelope  it.  The  officiating  priest  could  never  see  it.  And  so  it  is 
only  the  light  of  revelation,  the  illuminating  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
can  make  manifest  Christ,  the  true  bread  from  heaven,  to  the  souls  of  famishing 
sinners.  III.  The  third  lesson  it  teaches  us  is  suggested  by  the  abundance  of  the 
SUPPLY  placed  upon  it.  The  table  bore  twelve  loaves.  There  was  one  for  each  of 
the  tribes.  No  part  of  God's  family  was  overlooked,  or  neglected,  in  the  symbolical 
provision  thus  made  for  their  necessities.  And  what  was  true,  in  this  respect,  of 
the  symbol,  is  equally  true  of  the  thing  symbolized.  Jesus,  whom  the  bread  upon 
the  golden  table  represented,  is  an  infinite  Saviour.  The  resources  of  His  sufficiency 
are  exhaustless.  IV.  We  are  taught  a  lesson  by  the  time  fob  the  renewing  of  the 
bread  upon  it.  By  an  ordinance  of  God  this  was  always  to  be  done  upon  the 
Sabbath.  Thus  God  would  put  honour  upon  the  Sabbath,  and  associate  it,  in  the 
minds  of  His  people,  with  the  thought  of  obtaining  the  supply  of  their  spiritual 
necessities.  V.  We  learn  a  lesson  from  the  continual  freshness  of  the  bread  set 
out  upon  it.  Christ  never  grows  old.  His  people  are  often  weary  of  other  things  ; 
they  grow  weary  of  themselves — weary  of  their  sins  and  sorrows,  and  weary  of  the 
world  and  its  vanities — but  they  never,  never  grow  weary  of  Jesus.  Having  once 
eiaten  of  the  bread  which  He  gives,  which  He  constitutes,  it  is  literally  true  that 
they  "  never  hunger  "  for  the  husks  the  world  can  offer.  VI.  We  gather  our  sixth  and 
last  lesson  from  the  covering  of  frankincense  which  we  see  spread  out  over  the 
TOP  OF  the  bread.  When  we  remember  that  these  loaves  were  a  figure  of  Christ, 
and  that  frankincense  is  a  token  of  that  which  is  pleasing,  or  grateful,  we  seem  to 
have  exhibited,  in  beautiful  symbol  before  us,  the  acceptableness  of  Christ  and  His 
work  to  the  Father.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  table  in  God's  house: — "Table," 
gives  us  the  idea  of  fellowship,  social  intercourse,  friendship,  satisfaction  ;  all  which 
we  find  in  the  house  of  God.  "  Truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with 
His  Son  Josus  Christ."  What  a  sacred  privilege  it  is  to  eat  bread  in  the  presence  of 
God.  And  not  only  to  eat  in  His  presence,  but  to  eat  the  "  Presence  Bread."  "  He 
shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God,  both  of  the  most  holy  and  of  the  holy."  At  God's 
table  there  is  social  intercourse.  The  saints  commune  one  with  another  and  all 
commune  with  God.  "We  are  all  partakers  of  that  one  bread."  Sweet  is  the 
intercourse  of  God  with  His  people  at  the  table  of  His  grace.  It  is  a  proof  of 
friendship.  "  I  have  eaten  my  honeycomb  with  my  honey  ;  I  have  drunk  my  wine 
with  my  milk  :  eat  0  friends;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved."  Here  we 
find  sacred  satisfaction.  "  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  provision.  I  will  satisfy  her 
poor  with  bread."  "  They  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied  with  the  fatness  of  Thy 
house."  "  The  meek  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied."  "  Thou  preparest  a  table  before 
me  in  the  presence  of  mine  enemies :  Thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil,  my  cup 
runneth  over."  There  is  no  stint  where  God  is  tbe  host.  In  His  house  there  is 
bread  enough  and  to  spare.  He  fills  our  cup  to  overflowing  with  consolation,  and 
with  joy.  Those  who  dwell  in  God's  house  will  never  come  to  an  empty  table,  nor 
find  God  absent  from  His  throne  of  mercy.  "  Surely  goodness  " — to  supply  my 
wants — "and  mercy," — to  pardon  my  sins — "shall  follow  me  all  the  days  of  my 
life:  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for  ever."  (R.  E.  Sears.)  .  The 
tables  of  grace  and  glory : — The  incorruptible  wood  may  be  an  emblem  of  grace, 
the  gold  an  emblem  of  glory.  God's  table  on  earth  is  the  table  of  His  grace.  His 
table  in  the  heavenly  world  is  the  table  of  His  glory.  If  we  are  guests  at  the  table 
of  grace,  we  shall  be  entertained  at  the  table  of  glory.  Grace  is  glory  began.  Glory 
is  grace  perfected.  Grace  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance.  Glory  is  the  possession 
of  the  estate.  By  grace  we  are  prepared  for  glory.  When  the  work  of  grace  is 
completed,  we  shall  hear  the  welcome,  "  Come  up  higher."  By  faith  we  sit  at  the 
table  of  grace.  At  the  table  of  glory  faith  will  be  changed  to  sight.  Both  tables  are 
furnished  with  the  same  provision.  Christ  the  true  Bread  of  Life  is  the  spiritual 
food  of  the  believer  on  earth  :  and  in  heaven  we  shall  eat  the  same  Divine  celestial 
Sread.     "  The  Bread  of  God  "  is  the  nourishment  of  the  spiritual  life  ;  and  it  is  the 


CHAP.  XXV.]  EXODUS.  479 

joy  of  the  eternal  life.  {Ibid.)  The  table  of  sheichread : — Made  of  acacia  wood, 
aud  plated  with  gold,  it  was  three  feet  long,  one  foot  and  six  inches  wide,  two  feet 
and  three  inches  high.  Around  its  verge  was  an  ornamental  cincture  of  solid  gold, 
similar  to  that  which  adorned  the  ark.  Beneath  this  was  a  border  of  wood  four 
inches  and  a  half  wide,  plated,  of  course,  with  gold,  and  adorned  with  another 
crown  of  gold.  The  table  was  furnished  with  golden  rings  at  the  corners,  and  with 
staves  which  were  put  through  these  rings  when  the  table  was  to  be  carried  on  the 
shoulders  of  the  Levites,  but  removed  when  the  tabernacle  had  been  erected  in  a 
new  encampment,  and  the  bearers  had  deposited  their  burden  in  its  appointed 
position.  The  rings  were  attached  at  the  same  height  as  the  wooden  border ;  but 
tiie  specifications  do  not  intimate  how  far  above  the  ground  this  was  affixed.  {E.  E. 
Atwater.)  The  shewbrend,  <&c.  : — The  table  was  furnished  with  two  dishes  for 
bread,  two  for  frankincense,  and  probably  two  for  wine.  Twelve  flat  loaves  of 
bread  in  two  piles,  constantly  stood  on  it,  fresh  loaves  being  brought  every  Sabbath, 
aud  the  loaves  which  were  removed  being  eaten  by  the  priests  only.  The  number 
of  the  loaves  doubtless  indicates  that  the  whole  covenant  people,  the  twelve  tribes 
of  Israel,  were  to  iiarticipate  in  this  offering  to  their  covenant  God.  On  the  top  of 
each  pile  was  a  dish  of  frankincense,  and  near  by  were  cups  of  wine,  as  seems 
probable  from  the  description  of  the  dishes  as  suitable  to  pour  with  (ver.  29  margin). 
The  Septuagint  calls  them  bowls  and  cups ;  and  the  Jewish  tradition  is,  that  they 
contained  wine  for  a  libation  or  drink-offering,  such  as  accompanied  every  food- 
offering  at  tlie  altar  in  the  court.  The  table  of  shewbread  was  in  some  sense  an 
altar,  being  the  appointed  place  where  certain  offerings  to  Jehovah  were  to  be  placed 
before  Him.  The  materials  of  these  sacrifices  were  the  same  as  those  of  the  food- 
offerings  and  drink-offerings  in  the  court.  Corn  and  wine,  or  bread  and  wine,  being 
the  product  of  the  life-work  of  the  Hebrews,  represented,  in  the  symbolism  of  the 
Tabernacle,  the  frui^of  work  in  the  higher  sphere  where  one  labours  not  for 
perishable  food,  but  for  that  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life.  This  is  the  true 
bread  from  heaven  of  which  wheat,  manna,  and  other  kinds  of  food,  are  figures  ;  it 
is  not  only  the  life-product  of  those  who  have  been  born  again,  but  their  chief 
enjoyment,  the  sufficient  reward  of  all  their  labour.  Knowing,  however,  that  God 
has  even  more  desire  for  the  sanctification  of  His  people  than  they  themselves  have, 
they  wish  Him  to  enjoy  with  them  the  fruits  of  this  spiritual  husbandry.  It  is  this 
fellowship  of  God  with  His  people  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  sanctification  which 
the  shewl>rea,d  represents.  (Ibid.)  Significance  of  the  golden  table: — May  not 
the  golden  table  point  to  the  abundant  supply  of  good  things  prepared  in  the 
heavenly  temple,  for  all  those  whom  Christ  will  make  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
for  ever  ?  There  a  table  is  spread  before  His  face,  that  is  continually  furnished 
with  new  wine  aud  heavenly  manna,  with  which  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  will  be 
refreshed,  and  made  glad  :  "  In  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy  ;  at  Thy  right  hand 
there  are  pleasures  for  evermore."  [W.Broion.)  The  shewbread: — The  bread 
was  made  of  fine  flour  (Lev.  xxiv.  5-9),  and  was  unleavened.  Twelve  cakes,  in  piles 
of  six  each,  always  stood  on  the  table ;  hence  it  was  called  the  perpetual  bread.  It 
was  also  named  the  bread  arranged  in  order,  the  meaning  of  which  is  obvious.  Its 
more  significant  name  we  will  notice  presently.  On  the  top  of  each  pile  was  placed 
frankincense,  probably  in  the  cups  we  have  spoken  of.  It  is  thought  by  some  that 
this  frankincense  was  burned  once  a  week,  when  the  bread  was  being  renewed  ;  and 
by  others  that  it  was  ever  burning,  which  does  not  appear  very  likely,  as  the 
quantity  consumed  would  be  very  great ;  but  there  may  have  been  some  means  by 
which  it  was  very  slowly  consumed,  and  kept  always  burning ;  in  that  case  the  holy 
place  would  be  ever  fragrant.  The  bread  was  called  the  "  shewbread  "  (Hebrew, 
"  bread  of  faces,"  or  "  presence  bread  ")  because  it  was  before  the  symbol  of  God's 
presence — the  veil  only  intervening.  The  bread  was  renewed  every  Sabbath  by 
fresh  loaves  ;  those  which  were  removed  belonged  to  the  priests,  and  could  be  eaten 
only  by  them,  and  in  the  holy  place  and  nowhere  else.  All  thank-offerings  were 
holy — this  one  was  peculiarly  so  :  "  It  is  most  holy  unto  Him  of  the  offerings  made 
by  fire  "  (Lev.  xxiv.  9).  Only  the  shewbread  and  the  incense  offerings  were 
presented  in  the  holy  place ;  all  the  other  offerings  were  brought  to  the  brazen  altar 
in  the  court.  The  ceremonies  connected  with  all  the  sacrifices  were  soon  over, 
except  in  the  case  of  the  shewbread,  which  was  a  ceaseless  offering.  The  bread 
was  ever  on  the  table  before  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  The  shewbread: — This  bread 
was  made  of  fine  flour.  Fine  flour  is  bread-corn  which  has  been  bruised  until  it  is 
smooth  and  even.  Christ  is  the  bread-corn  bruise*,  and  in  Him  there  is  no  rough- 
ness or  unevenness.    In  us  there  is  much  unevenness ;  we  are  soft  and  smooth  one 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv. 

day,  and  changed  and  rough  the  next.  But  it  was  not  so  with  Christ.  The  circum- 
stances in  which  He  was  placed  were  ever  changing,  yet  He  remained  always  the 
same — unchanged  and  unchangeable.  Leaven  is  the  emblem  of  evil :  it  is  a  corrupt 
and  a  corrupting  thing  (Matt.  xvi.  6-12;  Mark  viii.  15  ;  Luke  xii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  v.  6-8  ; 
Gal.  V.  9).  Christ  was  before  God  during  the  whole  of  His  life,  as  the  bread  was 
before  God  in  the  Tabernacle  seven  days.  The  number  seven  is  the  symbol  of 
perfection ;  it  is  a  complete  period.  And  as  God  discovered  no  leaven  in  the  bread 
during  the  time  it  was  before  Him  on  the  table,  so  He  found  no  evil  in  Jesus  during 
His  life  on  earth ;  and  as  the  bread  was  taken  from  the  table  and  given  to  the 
priests,  so  Christ  is  given  to  the  saints,  the  spiritual  priests,  that  they  may  live  on 
Him.  He  is  our  food,  our  daily  bread.  And  as  we  must  have  bread  every  day  on 
our  tables,  whatever  else  of  sweet  or  savoury  food  we  may  have  beside,  so  we  must 
have  Christ  to  feed  upon  every  day.  We  may  have  many  other  things  and  many 
other  friends,  but  we  cannot  do  without  Christ.  No  one  can  be  healthy  and  strong 
who  does  not  get  good  food ;  and  no  soul  can  be  truly  healthy  that  does  not  feed  on 
Jesus  Christ.  To  eat  a  book  is  to  consider  it  well,  and  to  eat  the  flesh  and  to  drink 
the  blood  of  Christ  is  to  consider  Him  with  faith  and  love  ;  it  is  to  receive  Him  into 
the  heart.  This  is  the  soul-refreshing,  soul-satisfying,  and  imperishable  food  of 
the  Father's  house.  Feeding  on  this  blessed  food  will  keep  us  from  longing  after  the 
husks  that  swine  feed  on.  In  Christ  God  has  provided  a  feast  for  fainting  and 
famishing  souls ;  and  hungry  souls  thankfully  receive  Him,  but  others  turn  away. 
None  but  priests  could  feed  on  this  bread  (Matt.  xii.  4  ;  Mark  ii.  26).  And  a  man 
must  now  be  a  priest  before  he  can  enter  into  the  true  Tabernacle  and  eat  the  food 
of  the  Father's  house.  Not  even  the  priests  could  eat  the  shewbread  outside  of  the 
Tabernacle  :  they  must  eat  it  in  the  holy  place  (Lev.  xxiv.  9).  So  a  man  must  be 
holy  to  find  full  enjoyment  in  Christ.  Happiness  and  holiness  are  twin  sisters,  and 
they  travel  side  by  side  :  they  are  never  separated,  so  you  cannot  have  one  without 
the  other.  The  more  we  feast  on  this  heavenly  bread,  the  holier  and  happier  we 
must  become.  Eating  and  drinking  are  acts  which  one  cannot  perform  for  another. 
The  food  may  be  very  good,  but  it  does  not  minister  strength  and  nourishment  to 
my  body  till  I  eat  it ;  by  this  act  I  make  it  my  own.  So  we  must  receive  Christ  by 
faith,  receive  Him  for  ourselves,     (G.  Rodgers.) 

Vers.  31-37.    A  candlestick  of  pare  gold. — The  golden  candlestick : — I.    This 

LIGHT    SHINES    BECAUSE    IT    IS    LIGHT,    WITDODT    EFFORT,    SPONTANEOUSLY.      If  the  lamp 

is  kindled  it  will  shine ;  and  so  this  emblem  has  its  beautiful  felicity  in  that  it 
points,  as  the  highest  definition  of  all  Christian  men,  to  the  effortless,  spontaneous 
irradiation  and  streaming  out  from  themselves  of  tbe  fire  that  lies  within  them. 
Like  a  light  in  an  alabaster  vase,  that  shines  through  its  transparency  and  reveals 
the  lovely  veining  of  the  stone,  so  the  grace  of  God  in  a  man's  heart  will  shine 
through  him,  turning  even  the  opacity  of  his  earthly  nature  into  a  medium  for 
veiling  perhaps,  but  also  in  another  aspect  for  making  visible  the  light  that  is  in 
him.  II.  The  light  was  derived  light  ;  and  it  was  fed.  We  have  a  priest 
who  walks  in  His  temple  and  trims  the  lamps.  The  condition  of  the  hght  is 
keeping  close  to  Christ,  and  it  is  because  there  is  such  a  gap  between  you  and  Him 
that  there  is  so  little  brightness  in  you.  The  candlestick  was  really  a  lamp  fed  by 
oil  ;  that  symbol,  as  Zechariah  tells  us,  stands  for  the  Divine  influence  of  God's 
quickening  Spirit.  III.  The  light  was  clustered  light.  The  seven-branched 
candlestick  represented  the  rigid,  formal  unity  of  the  Jewish  Church.  In  the 
New  Testament  we  have  the  seven  candlesticks  diverse,  but  made  one  because  Jesus 
Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  them.  In  this  slight  diversity  of  emblem  we  get  the 
whole  difference  between  the  hard  external  unity  of  tbe  ancient  Jewish  polity  and 
the  free  variety  in  unity  and  diversity  of  the  Christian  Church,  with  its  individual 
development  as  well  as  with  its  binding  association.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
candlestick  : — Look  at  the  text  as  typical  of  Christ  and  His  Church.  I.  Perfection 
OF  light.  He  was  "the  true  Light,"  <fec.  (John  i.  9).  He  came  to  shed  light  on 
every  important  subject ;  to  let  us  know — 1.  What  God  is,  "in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ."  To  let  us  know — 2.  What  man  is — in  his  sin,  his  spiritual  relations,  his 
wants,  his  destiny,  &c.  To  let  us  know — 3.  The  future — to  bring  to  light  life  and 
immortality.  II,  Perfection  of  union.  Branches  united  to  one  stem,  and  both 
of  same  material.  {The  Study.)  The  candlestick  : — It  was  composed  of  a  main 
shaft,  with  its  connecting  branches,  1.  If  these  branches  represent  the  Church  of 
Christ,  the  central  shaft  may  .well  be  regarded  as  representing  Christ  Himself. 
From  Christ  the  Church  springs,  and  by  Him  it  is  supported,  as  the  outspreading 


CHAP,  xrv.]  EXODUS.  481 

arms  of  the  candlestick  are  by  its  central  shaft.  The  Church  is  united  to  Him, 
and  sustained  by  Him.  2.  Notice  next  the  branches  of  the  candlestick.  These 
sprang  from  the  central  shaft,  and  were  of  the  same  material  with  each  other,  and 
with  it.  So  it  is  with  Christ  and  His  people.  "  He  who  sanctifieth,  and  they  who 
are  sanctified  are  all  of  one."  3.  Notice  next  the  ornaments  upon  the  candlestick. 
(1)  There  were  "  bowls  like  almonds"  wrought  upon  it.  In  these  the  branches 
terminated,  forming  appropriate  receptacles  for  the  lamps  of  the  candlestick.  The 
almond,  being  the  first  tree  to  bud  in  the  spring,  was  a  fit  type  of  Him  who  is  "  the 
First-born  from  the  dead."  (2)  The  next  ornament  was  the  k7iops.  These  may 
have  been  swelling  buds,  from  which  the  branches  of  the  candlestick  sprang, 
expressing  the  idea  that  these  spreading  arms  owed  both  their  existence  and  fruit- 
fulness  to  the  parent  stem.  (3)  The  other  ornaments  were  the  flowers.  Natural 
emblems  of  beauty,  representing  spiritual  loveliness  of  Christ's  people.  Lessons  : 
1.  The  necessity  of  a  Divine  revelation.  Without  the  light  of  the  candlestick, 
darkness,  the  most  profound,  must  have  filled  the  Tabernacle.  And  just  such 
would  have  b§en  our  condition,  spiritually  considered,  without  the  light  of  Divine 
revelation.  Reason,  the  natural  sun  in  the  mental  world,  can  shed  no  light  upon 
the  soul's  concerns.  There  is  no  window  in  the  soul  through  which  the  light  of 
this  natural  luminary  can'  shine.  The  priest  in  the  sanctuary  could  only  see  his 
way  and  discharge  his  duties  by  the  help  of  light  from  the  candlestick,  and  this  was 
light  from  heaven,  a  Divine  revelation.  And  it  is  only  by  the  aid  of  such  a  revela- 
tion that  we  can  see  our  way  in  reference  to  spiritual  things.  2.  The  benefits  of 
such  a  revelation.  We  perceive  this  the  moment  we  look  around  us,  in  the  holy 
place,  and  observe  what  the  light  of  the  candlestick  discloses  to  our  view.  See, 
over  against  it  stands  the  golden  table  with  its  shewbread.  The  candlestick,  with 
its  heavenly  light,  enabled  the  priest,  as  he  entered  the  holy  place,  to  see  where  to 
find  this  bread.  He  could  not  have  seen  it  without  this  light.  And  so  it  is  only 
the  light  of  Divine  revelation  which  reveals  Christ,  the  heavenly  bread,  to  souls 
that  are  hungering  and  perishing  for  the  want  of  it.  3.  The  perfection  of  this 
revelation.  Seven  lamps.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  golden  candlestick: — The 
candlestick  of  the  Tabernacle  was  to  burn  continually  in  the  holy  place  (Lev.  xxiv. 
2) ;  continually  let  us  question  ourselves  with  respect  to  our  attainments,  state,  and 
prospects.  In  individuality  of  character  let  each  one  ask — 1.  Have  I  seriously  and 
deliberately  sought  the  illumination  of  my  understanding  in  the  things  of  God  from 
above?  I  read,  "If  thoncriest  after  knowledge,  and  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  under- 
standing ;  if  thou  seekest  her  as  silver,  and  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures  ; 
then  shalt  thou  understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God  " 
(Prov.  ii.  3-5).  Do  I  thus  cry  and  lift  up  my  voice  in  supplication  for  heavenly 
wisdom  ?  And  is  God's  Law  really  better  to  me  than  thousands  of  gold  or  silver  ? 
The  blessing  is  annexed  to  the  precept;  can  I  expect  the  one  without  a  compliance 
with  the  other  ?  2.  Am  I  walking  in  the  light  and  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
As  both  a  Teacher  and  a  Comforter  is  the  Spirit  given.  Does  He  lead  me  in  the 
way  everlasting  (Psa.  cxxxix.  24),  and  cheer  me  with  tokens  of  good  (Psa.  Ixxxvi. 
17)  ?  3.  Do  I  realize  the  constant  inspection  of  the  Son  of  Man  amidst  the  con- 
gregations of  His  people  ?  He  walks  among  the  golden  candlesticks.  Is  the 
preacher  free  from  all  unbecoming  fear  of  his  fellow-mortals  on  the  one  hand,  and 
is  there  no  lurking  latent  aiming  after  worldly  popularity  on  the  other  ?  Does  the 
hearer  listen  as  for  life,  cultivating  a  child-like  spirit  before  the  Lord,  and  cherish- 
ing no  needless  or  refined  fastidiousness  about  voice  or  manner  in  the  teacher  ? 
{W.  Mud<je.)  Of  the  golden  candlestick  : — The  pure  gold  signified  how  excellent 
the  Word  of  God  is  :  "  More  to  be  desired  are  they  than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine 
gold  (Psa,  xix.  10).  We  are  not  curiously  here  to  seek  the  difference  of  the  knops, 
branches,  and  flowers,  but  only  to  rest  in  the  general — that  the  candlestick  signified 
the  Word.  The  candlestick  had  seven  branches;  it  signified  the  divers  gifts 
bestowed  upon  His  Church  by  the  Word,  and  John  alludeth  to  the  seven  branches 
of  this  candlestick  :  "  And  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  one  like  the  Son 
of  Man  clothed  with  a  garment "  (Rev.  i.  13).  This  was  but  typus  arbitraritis,  or 
an  allusion  ;  for  the  golden  candlestick  was  not  made  to  be  a  type  of  the  seven 
Churches  of  Asia,  but  it  is  only  an  allusion  to  it.  So  "  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is 
a  tree  of  life  "  (Prov.  xi.  30),  here  is  an  allusion  only,  that  it  is  like  to  the  tree  of 
life.  The  oil  which  was  in  this  candlestick  was  pure  oil.  "  Command  the  children 
of  Israel  that  they  bring  unto  thee  pure  oil  olive,  beaten  for  the  light,  to  cause  the 
lamps  to  burn  continually"  (Lev.  xxiv.  2).  This  pure  oil  is  called  golden  oil,  or 
gold  for  the  purity  of  it,  because  the  oil  was  bright,  clear,  and  glistering,  like  gold 

31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxr. 

(Zech.  iv.  12).  So  "  Gold  cometh  out  of  the  north  "  (Job  xxxvii.  22) ;  that  is,  fair 
and  clear  weather.  It  wa3  beaten  oil,  to  signify  with  what  pain  and  travail  the 
Word  is  prepared,  and  with  patience  preached  and  made  to  shine  in  His  Church. 
The  Lord  commanded  to  make  snuffers  of  pure  gold  for  the  snuffing  of  the  lamps, 
and  snuff-dishes  to  receive  the  snuff.  He  would  have  the  snuff  taken  from  the 
light,  to  signify  that  He  would  have  the  Word  kept  in  sincerity  and  purity ;  and 
He  would  have  the  snuffers  of  gold,  to  teach  them  to  be  blameless  and  holy  who 
are  censurcrs  and  correctors  of  others ;  and  He  would  have  the  snuff-dishes  of  gold, 
to  teach  them  that  the  covering  of  the  offences  of  their  brethren  was  a  most 
excellent  thing.  Lastly,  in  what  manner  the  priests  dressed  the  lamps.  When 
the  lamp  was  out  he  lighted  it,  and  when  it  was  not  oat  he  dressed  it.  When  the 
middlemost  lamp  was  out  he  lighted  it  from  the  altar  ;  but  the  rest  of  the  lamps 
every  one  he  lighted  from  the  lamp  that  was  next;  and  he  lighted  one  after  another, 
to  signify  that  one  Scripture  giveth  light  to  another  ;  and  they  say  in  the  Talmud 
that  the  cleansing  of  the  innermost  altar  was  before  the  trimming  of  the  five  lamps; 
and  the  trimming  of  the  five  lamps  before  the  blood  of  the  daily  sacrifice  ;  and  the 
blood  of  the  daily  sacrifice  before  the  trimming  of  the  two  lamps  ;  and  the  trim- 
ming of  the  two  lamps  before  the  burning  of  incense.  That  the  priests  should 
order  and  trim  the  lamps  signifieth  how  Christ  and  His  ministers  should  continually 
look  unto  the  purity  of  doctrine  and  preaching  of  the  light  of  the  gospel  from 
evening  to  morning  in  the  dark  place  of  this  world,  "  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the 
day  star  arise  in  our  hearts"  (Kev.  i.  13;  2  Pet.  i.  19).      (Jolin  Weenies.)  The 

candlestick  a  type  of  Christ: — I.  It  was  the  only  thing  tuat  held  the  light 
WHICH  ENLIGHTENED  THE  SANCTUARY  !  From  Christ  all  the  light  of  grace  comes  for 
the  benefit  of  His  Church.  II.  It  had  seven  lamps  (ver.  37),  to  signify  that 
perfection  of  light  that  is  in  Christ.  III.  It  was  placed  in  the  sanctuaby.  So 
is  Christ  as  a  glorious  light  placed  in  His  Church.  IV.  It  had  an  upright  stem, 
which  bore  the  many  branches  issuing  from  it.  V.  The  branches  were  adorned 
WITH  bowls,  knobs,  FLOWERS,  &C.  So  are  Christ's  ministers  adorned  with  many 
graces.  VI.  A^vron  dressed  those  lamps  and  renewed  their  oil  daily.  So  out 
High  Priest  is  the  only  enhghtener  of  His  faithful  ministers.  VII.  The  candle- 
stick  HAD   snuffers   AND   SNUFF-DISHES   OF   PURE   GOLD;     whicb    might    figUIC    forth 

the  good  and  godly  discipline  of  the  Church  whereby  evil  persons  who  hinder  its 
glory  are  taken  away.     (B.  Keach.)  The  golden  chavdelur : — This  consisted  of 

a  main  shaft  with  three  branches  diverging  from  it  on  each  side.  It  was  made 
wholly  of  gold.  If  hollow,  it  eould  hardly  have  been  beaten  into  shape  with  the 
hammer,  but  must  have  been  cast,  perhaps  in  separate  pieces,  and  afterwards 
soldered  together.  The  weight  of  it,  including  the  lamps  and  a  few  small  utensils 
used  in  trimming  them,  was  a  Hebrew  talent,  or  about  one  hundred  and  thirteen 
pounds  troy ;  which  in  gold  coin  would  be  equivalent  to  £5,500.  There  was  a 
threefold  ornamentation  in  the  chandelier,  repeated  four  times  in  the  main  shaft, 
and  thrice  in  each  of  the  branches,  described  as  a  bowl,  a  knob,  and  a  flower,  and 
by  some  supposed  to  represent  the  cup-shaped  calyx,  the  round  fruit,  and  the  open 
blossom  of  an  almond  tree.  The  word  translated  "  flower"  signifies,  however,  a 
stem ;  and  the  order  in  which  the  triad  is  arranged  indicates  that  the  first  was  the 
flower,  the  second  the  fruit,  and  the  third  the  stem.  The  three  pairs  of  branches 
came  out  of  the  main  stem  at  the  three  places  of  junction  between  its  four  sections 
of  calyx,  fruit,  and  stem.  On  the  upper  extremities  of  the  chandelier  were  seven 
eye-shaped,  or  almond-shaped  lamps  ;  the  wick  of  the  middle  lamp  projecting  from 
its  west  end,  and  the  wicks  of  the  others  from  the  end  of  the  lamp  nearest  to  the 
main  shaft.  These  lamps  were  not  fastened  to  the  chandelier,  but  so  placed  upcm 
it  that  the  priest  could  remove  them  when  he  came  in  the  morning  to  extinguish 
and  trim  them,  and  in  the  evening  to  light  them  for  the  night.  But,  though  not 
fastened  to  the  stand  as  a  part  of  it,  they  had  each  its  appointed  place  in  the 
row,  and  never  exchanged  places.  It  seems  so  natural  that  the  row  of  lamps 
should  have  been  parallel  with  the  south  wall  of  the  Tabernacle,  near  which 
V  it  stood,  that  almost  all  writers  have  passed  over  the  testimony  of  Josephus  to 
the  contrary;  who  is  careful  to  state  that  "the  lamps  looked  to  the  east  and 
to  the  south,  the  candlestick  being  placed  obliquely."  (E.  E.  Atwater:) 
Significance  of  the  lamp-stinid : — The  light  emitted  by  the  lamps  may  have  been 
sometimes  useful  to  the  priests  in  their  ministrations  ;  but  their  aggregation  on  one 
stand,  and  the  significant  seven  by  which  the  number  of  them  is  determined,  indicate 
that  they  were  placed  here  to  assist  in  the  representation  of  religious  thought. 
Their  position  with  reference  to  the  table  suggests  the  possibUity  that  the  light  was, 


CHAP.  XXV.]  EXODUS.  IBS 

♦ — 

in  its  symbolism,  the  complement  of  the  shewbread.  With  this  hint  in  mind,  we 
ask.  What  is  it  of  which  light  is  the  natural  emblem  ?  Sometimes  it  is  used  for 
knowledge,  and  especially  for  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  relations  to  man. 
Knowledge  is  light  ;  and  to  impart  knowledge  is  to  enlighten.  But  the  import  of 
light  in  Scripture  extends  beyond  the  sphere  of  the  intellect  into  that  of  the  con- 
science, covering  the  domain  of  duty  as  well  as  of  verity.  The  children  of  light  are 
those  who  obey,  as  well  as  perceive,  the  reality  of  the  invisible  and  eternal.  Hence 
those  who  are  the  light  of  the  world  not  only  impart  knowledge  to  the  ignorant,  but 
reproof  to  the  erring.  In  short,  light  in  Hebrew  symbolism,  includes  holiness,  as 
well  as  knowledge.  The  offering  of  light  which  the  covenant  people  brought  as  an 
accompaniment  to  the  fruit  of  their  life-work  was  the  symbol  of  sanctified  character. 
The  two  symbols  are  mutually  complementary.  The  prayers  and  tlie  alms  of  a 
good  man  come  up  as  a  memorial  before  God  ;  and  his  example,  by  holding  forth  the 
word  of  life,  diffuses  an  assimilating  influence.  But  this  light  of  holiness  man  is 
as  unable  to  produce  of  himself  as  is  a  lamp  to  shine  without  oil,  and  oil  is  the 
symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ;  so  that  the  oblation  of  light  which  the  covenant  people 
presented  to  Jehovah  in  the  Tabernacle  contained  in  itself  a  declaration  that  they 
were  sanctified  by  the  indwelling  Spirit  of  God.  The  same  idea  was  again  brought 
to  view  in  the  number  of  the  lamps ;  seven  representing  a  transaction  between  God 
and  man,  and  therefore  in  Mosaism  standing  for  the  covenant  itself.  The  illumina- 
tion was  effected  by  the  co-operation  of  the  infinite  and  the  finite  ;  and  the  lamps 
were  seven  because  that  is  the  sum  of  the  numerical  signatures  of  the  two  parties 
united  in  producing  the  light.  The  lamp-stand  served  not  merely  to  bear  the  lamps, 
but  to  assist  in  the  symbolism.  It  represents  the  coveuaut  people,  the  organized 
community,  who  by  the  example  of  their  obedience  shine  for  the  illumination  of  the 
world.  The  seven  branches  indicate  that  it  is  not  a  merely  human  institution,  but 
that  God  is  in  the  midst  of  it.  {Ibid.)  T}te  light  of  Christ: — "A  friend  told 
me  that  the  electric  light  was  so  much  under  control  that  a  gentleman  had  it 
in  his  scarf-pin  at  a  meeting  to  discuss  the  utility  of  the  new  light.  When  he 
stepped  on  to  the  platform,  the  gas  was  lowered  ;  be  then  touched  two  little  springs 
placed  on  each  side  of  his  body,  and  the  brilliant  light  shone  out  imder  his  chin, 
giving  light  to  all  around.  In  a  similarly  brilliant  manner  the  light  of  Christ 
should  radiate  from  every  part  of  living  Christians  ;  their  eyes  should  shine  with 
it,  their  tongues  sparkle  with  it,  their  hands  should  be  gentle,  and  their  feet 
should  be  swift  to  let  others  know  about  Jesus,  the  Light  of  the  world."  Increas- 
ing lumiitousness  the  duty  of  Christ's  Church : — It  should  grow  as  rapidly  in  this 
grace  as  it  does  in  any  other.  The  world  has  advanced  in  nothing,  perhaps,  more 
marvellously  than  in  the  betterment  of  its  light-producing  contrivances.  The 
improvement  made  during  the  last  century  is  very  marked.  Mankind's  lamp  one 
hundred  years  ago  smoked  almost  as  much  as  it  shone.  Its  wick,  being  round  and 
bulky,  brought  up  more  oil  than  could  be  consumed.  The  first  change  was  to  a  flat 
thin  wick.  This  gave  a  wider  surface  for  the  air  to  act  upon.  Those  particles  of 
carbon  which  had  previously  passed  off  as  soot  were  changed  from  smoke  to  flame. 
The  lamp  became  still  more  brilliant  when  the  Argand  burner  was  invented.  This 
is  cylindrical  and  hollow.  Through  its  centre  rushes  a  current  of  air.  The  flame 
is  thus  both  enlarged  and  intensified.  The  chimney,  afterwards  added,  caused  a 
stronger  draught  and  a  fiercer  combustion.  Mr.  Gurney  went  a  step  further  when 
he  arranged  to  substitute  a  current  of  pure  oxygen  for  common  air.  The  light  pro- 
duced resembled  sunshine,  and  when  introduced  to  the  House  of  Commons,  super- 
seding the  two  hundred  and  forty  wax  candles  previously  used,  rendered  it 
unprecedently  bright.  Then  came  coal-gas,  and  now,  last  of  all,  has  blazed  upon 
us  the  electric  light,  which  is  veritable  lightning.  {J.  Brekenridge.)  A  blended 
radiance  : — The  seven-branched  candlestick  of  the  ancient  Tabernacle  and  Temple 
represented  the  rigid,  formal  unity  of  the  Jewish  Church.  We  go  to  the  New 
Testament,  and  instead  of  one  hard,  external  unity,  represented  by  that  upright 
stem,  and  its  three  arms  on  each  side,  we  have  the  seven  candlesticks,  diverse,  but 
made  one  because  Jesus  Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  them.  And  in  that  slight 
diversity  of  emblem  we  get  the  whole  difference  between  the  hard,  external  unity  of 
the  ancient  Jewish  polity  and  the  free  variety  in  unity  and  diversity  of  the 
Christian  Church,  with  its  individual  development  as  well  as  with  its  binding 
association.  But  for  all  that,  the  Church  is  one  light.  The  rings  of  light  in  our 
gas-stands  are  pierced  with  a  great  number  of  little  holes  round  each  circle,  but 
when  you  light  each  tiny  jet  they  all  run  into  one.  So  the  highest  form  of  Christian 
witness  is  not  when  a  maa  starts  off  from  his  brethren  and  sets  himself  alone  in  .a 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

_4 — 

corner,  but  when  he  is  content  to  blend  his  radiance  with  his  brethren's  radiance, 
and  not  to  mind  about  his  own  prominence  so  long  as  he  contributes  t)  the  general 
light  of  all.     {A.  Maclaren,  D.I).)  The  golden  candlestick  : — Christ   and  the 

Church  are  both  seen  here.  The  base  and  stock,  or  main  pillar,  represent  Christ. 
The  branches  represent  the  Church  of  Christ.  Jesus  was  bruised,  and  His  people 
are  bruised.  Christ  was  made  "  perfect  through  suffering  "  (Heb.  ii.  10).  And 
the  people  of  God  have  to  be  bruised  (Phil.  iii.  10).  It  was  the  duty  of  the  high 
priest  to  trim  the  lamps  twice  every  day,  when  he  came  with  his  golden  snuffers 
and  removed  any  dead  material  which  hindered  the  light  from  shining.  So  Christ, 
our  High  Priest,  walks  among  His  golden  candlesticks,  and  He  has  often  to  apply 
the  snuffers,  and  to  cut  off  something  which  hinders  the  lamp  from  sending  forth  its 
light  as  it  did  in  times  past.  When  the  high  priest  came  with  his  snuffers  he 
brought  the  oil-vessel  at  the  same  time  ;  so  when  Christ  removes  a  something  which 
we  love,  but  which  hinders  us  from  giving  forth  that  light  which  ought  to  shine  out 
from  us.  He  gives  us  more  of  the  oil  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  power  and  grace,  so  that 
our  afflictions  may  really  make  us  brighter  and  better  Christians.  We  read  about 
snuffers  and  snuff-dishes  in  connection  with  the  candlestick,  but  not  a  word  is  said 
about  an  extinguisher.  No  extinguisher  was  needed,  because  the  light  was  never  to 
go  out.  Our  High  Priest  never  comes  to  us  to  put  out  our  light ;  He  would  have  it 
burn  on  all  the  time  we  remain  in  the  wilderness.  Let  the  Christian  remember 
this,  and  never  mistake  the  snuffers  for  the  extinguisher.  As  the  candlestick  faced 
the  table  of  shewbread,  and  so  enabled  the  priests  to  find  their  food,  it  may 
represent  the  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  shines  on  Christ,  the  true  bread.  The 
table  is  prepared,  the  food  is  there,  but  without  the  light  of  the  Spirit  we  shall  never 
find  it.  We  should  thank  God  as  much  for  the  Spirit  as  for  the  Son,  for  one  will 
be  of  no  use  to  us  without  the  other.    (G.  Rodgers.) 

Ver.  40.  Their  pattern,  which  was  shewed  thee  in  the  meant. — Heaven's  teaching 
on  earth's  duties : — I.  Th.^t  notuino  is  too  trivial  foe  God  to  notice.     II.  That 

WE  SHOULD  SPEAK  TO  GOD  ABOUT  ORDINARY  WORK,  EVEN  IN  OUR  SEASONS  OF  HIGHEST 
SPIRITUAL  COMMUNION.  III.  ThAT  EVEN  SLIGHT  DEVIATIONS  FROM  God's  DIRECTIONS  ARE 
FORBIDDEN.       IV.    Th.\T  WHAT    WE  ARE  CALLED    UPON    TO    DO    HAS    FAR    MORE    DEPENDING 

UPON  IT  THAN  WE  SUPPOSE.  {A.  Bou'land,  LL.B.)  Purpose  in  life ;  a  lesson  to  the 
ymtng : — I.  The  necessity  of  a  deliberate  purpose  in  life.  When  an  architect, 
or  builder,  or  engineer,  undertakes  the  construction  of  a  house,  the  first  thing  he 
does  is  to  get  perfect  his  plans,  and  to  be  sure  they  are  correct,  so  that  he  knows 
well  what  the  future  house,  or  bridge,  or  railway,  will  be  like.  If  he  went  at  his 
work  in  a  haphazard  manner,  it  would  end  in  failure  and  disappointment.  So 
with  life.  II.  This  purpose  of  life  should  be  formed  on  tqe  model  shown  us  by 
God.  1.  The  highest  life  is  the  holiest  life,  for  it  is  nearest  to  the  model  set  us  by 
God.  2.  The  plan  by  which  we  are  to  mould  our  temporal  concerns  is  already  given 
us.  Look  at  Mount  Sinai  for  laws  to  obey ;  at  the  Mount  of  Olives  for  loving 
directions :  at  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration  for  anticipation,  hope  of  glory ;  at 
Mount  Calvary  for   forgiven   sin.      (Homilist.)  The  pattern  m  the  mount: — I. 

MoSES  DID  his  work  FROM  A  PLAN,  AND  DID  NOT  GET  HIS  PLAN    FROM  HISWORK.      Reality 

is  prior  to  the  show  of  itself.  There  are  no  planless  seeds.  A  far-reaching  plan  is 
the  best  one.  Calculation  is  better  than  caprice.  We  are  wiser  in  the  long  reach  of 
thought  than  in  the  short  reach.  We  are  lost  in  the  woods  because  we  have  no 
room  for  a  long  look.  You  say  life  is  short.  Better  live  on  the  short  arc  of  a  long 
circle  than  describe  a  little  circle  with  the  same  line.  Immediate  results  are  meagre 
results.  Plan  solidifies.  Power  is  measurable  by  purpose.  Shiftlessness  is  a  name 
for  aimlessness.  To-morrow  depends  on  to-day,  but  to-day  depends  on  to-morrow 
also.  Past  and  present  sustain  each  other.  Plan  gives  moral  safeguard.  Adam 
fell  because  he  had  nothing  to  do,  and  the  first  act  in  the  redemptive  scheme  was  to 
set  him  to  work.  Satan  recruits  his  ranks  from  the  vagrants.  The  apostles  were 
working  men.  The  drifting  boat  drifts  down  stream.  Young  aimlessness  is  the 
beginning  of  old  iniquity.  Employment  is  a  subsidiary  means  of  conversion. 
Character,  purpose  and  apprenticeship  are  not  far  apart.  II.  Moses  brought  down 
HIS  pattern  from  the  mount.  There  is  a  celestial  way  of  doing  earthly  things. 
Earthly  success  is  a  quotation  from  overhead.  Our  ideals  are  from  patterns  in  the 
mount.  There  is  something  in  them  we  never  put  into  them.  Whence  are  our 
ideals  ?  We  have  never  seen  a  perfect  thing.  What  do  we  mean  by  using  the 
word  ?  We  must  go  with  Moses  to  the  mount  for  the  answer.  In  nothing  do  men 
have  so  much  faith  as  in  their  ideals,  and  there  is  nothing  which  it  is  so  hard  to 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  EXODUS.  485 

explain.  We  do  not  make  laws,  but  find  them.  We  cannot  enact  truth  any  more 
than  gravity.  There  may  be  a  myth  about  Sinai,  but  it  is  one  we  were  bound  to 
invent  if  it  never  was  reality.  The  problem  of  life  is  to  make  the  ideal  real.  Once 
it  was  done  in  Galilee.    The  two  meet  in  Jesus.     (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Vers.  1-14.  Curtains. — The  curtains  of  the  Tabernacle : — I.  That  the  glory  of 
God  is  hidden  to  all  who  stand  outside  Jesds  Christ.     Man   cannot   surprise 
God  and  penetrate  His  secrets.     U.  That  in  Christ  the  glory  of  God  is  most 
brightly  revealed.      1.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  regarding  Christ  from  the  out- 
side ;  and  then,  as  the  Jews,  we  see  no  beauty  in  Him.     2.  There  is  such  a  thing 
as  knowing  Christ  as  a  great  Teacher,  a  great  Example  ;  "  the  goats'  hair  curtains 
hooked  with  brass."     3.  But  it  is  only  when  we  believe  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of 
God,  and  rest  in  Him  as  such,  that  we  behold  the  fulness  of  His  glory.     The 
colours  are  the  symbols  of  the  different  names  of  God ;  blue  signifies  the  special 
revelation  of  God,  being  the  colour  of  heaven  and  ether  ;  red  denotes  the  highest 
dignity,  majesty,  and  royal  power ;  crimson  is  that  which  fire  and  blood  have  in 
common,  and  symbohzes,  therefore,  life  in  its  full  extent.     In  Christ,  the  love,  the 
life,  the  beauty,  the  majesty  of  God  are  most  brightly  expressed.     III.  That  in 
Christ  is  everlasting  security  and  blessedness.     (JF.   L.    Watkinson.)         The 
curtains  and   the   coverings  : — I.    Let   us  look   at  the  beautiful  curtains  that 
FORMED  THE  Tabernacle.     1.  If  wc  vicw  the  Tabernacle  as  an  emblem  of  Christ  in 
His  incarnation,  the  beautiful  curtains  of  cunning  work  were  emblematical  of  the 
attributes  and  perfections  of  Jehovah,  "  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the 
Godhead  bodily."     Here  every  perfection  meets  and  shines.     2.  These  beautifully- 
wrought  curtains  were  emblems  of  the  perfect  graces  which  adorned  the  human 
nature  of  Jesus.     3.  May  we  not  see  in  this  beautiful  piece  of  taj^estry  the  various 
characters  of  Christ?     Here  by  faith  we  behold  the  Priest  and  His  sacrifice,  the 
King  and  His  golden  crown,  the  Prophet  and  His  teaching,  the  Mediator  and  His 
fulness.  Here  by  faith  we  behold  the  Shepherd  and  His  watchful  care,  the  Husband 
and  His  everlasting  love,  the  Friend  and  His  faithful  counsel.     Here  in  a  mystery 
of  grace  we  may  discover  the  Hoot  and  the  tree,  the  Vine  and  the  branches,  the 
Head  and  the  members.     4.  The  curtains  were  the  same  in  the  holiest  as  in  the 
holy  place.      The  Church  triumphant  and  the  Church  militant  have  the  same 
Christ.     5.  These  curtains  were  fastened  together  by  blue  loops  and  taches  of  gold 
so  as  to  form  one  Tabernacle.   The  loops  and  tacbes  were  exactly  over  the  vail  (ver. 
33).     This  may  teach  us  the  connection  between  Christ's  work  in  heaven  and  His 
work  on  earth.     6.  These  curtains  were  full  of  cherubim.     May  not  these  cherubim 
be  emblems  of  believers  who  are  Christ's  mystical  body  ?     Christ  and  His  members 
are  one.     7.  These  curtains  are  emblems  of  the  Churches  of  Christ  adorned  with 
the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     8.  The  loops  and  golden  clasps  which  united  the 
curtams  together  show  us  the  place  for  little  deeds  of  kindness  and  little  deeds  of 
love.    Kind  words  fitly  spoken  are  golden  clasps.     There  is  far  more  power  in  kind 
words  than  some  people  think.     Kind  words  are  very  uniting.     9.  The  Tabernacle 
was  divided  into  two  parts,  but  it  was  only  one  Tabernacle.     The  saints  in  heaven 
and  the  saints  on  earth  make  but  one  Church.     II.  We  may  now  look  at  the 
tent    of    goats'    hair,    which   formed    a   covering   for    the  Tabernacle.     The 
curtains  of  goats'  hair  were  emblematical  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  which  is 
the  justification  of  the  Church.     These  curtains  were  joined  together  by  clasps  of 
brass.     "  And  he  made  fifty  taches  of  brass  to  couple  the  tent  together,  that  it 
might  be  one."    Brass  is  an  emblem  of  strength.      "In  the  Lord  shall  one  say, 
have  I  righteousness  and  strength."     "In  the  Lord  Jehovah  " — Jehovah  Tsidkenu 
— "  is  everlasting  strength."  May  we  not  have  an  emblem  in  these  two  large  goats' 
hair  curtains,  of  righteousness  in  its  twofold  aspect  ?     Christ's  righteousness  im- 
puted is  our  justification.    Christ's  righteousness  imparted  is  our  eanctification. 
We  cannot  have  one  without  the  other ;  they  must  be  in  our  experience  "  coupled 
together."     Jesus  Christ  is  our  Eighteousness  and  our  Sanctification  (1  Cor.  i.  30). 
Christ  for  us  is  our  perfect  righteousness.    Christ  in  us  is  our  perfect  sanctification. 
III.  Over  the  tent  was  a  covering  of  rams'  skins  dyed  red.     Beautiful  emblem 
of  the  protecting  blood  of  Christ.    IV.  Above  the  covering  of  bams'  skins  dyed 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxn. 
_4 — 

BEB  WAS  A  covEBiNG  OF  BADGEEs'  SKINS.  Thcsc  skins  Were  probably  dyed  blue. 
Perhaps  a  part  were  dyed  purple.  If  so  there  would  be  seen  on  the  outside,  as  well 
as  the  inside,  "the  blue,  purple,  and  scarlet."  This  outside  covering  teaches  us 
that  the  Church  is  under  the  protection  of  heaven.  The  blue  skins  were  over  the 
red  skins.  Heaven  only  protects  the  blood  marked.  "  Kept  by  the  power  of 
God."      (R.  E.  Sears.)  The  beauty   of  holiness  within: — Observe:  1.  As   the 

outside  of  the  Tabernacle  was  coarse  and  rough,  the  beauty  all  lying  within,  so 
those  in  whom  God  dwells  must  labour  to  be  better  than  they  seem  to  be.  Hypo- 
crites put  the  best  side  outward,  like  whited  sepulchres,  but  "the  king's  daughter  is 
all  glorious  within  "  (Psa.  xlv.  13) ;  in  the  eye  of  the  world  black  as  the  tents  of 
Kedar,  but  in  the  eye  of  God  comely  as  the  curtains  of  Solomon  (Cant.  i.  5).  Let 
onr  adorning  be  that  of  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart  which  God  values  (1  Pet.  iii. 
4).  2.  Where  God  places  His  glory.  He  will  create  a  defence ;  even  on  the  habi- 
tations of  the  righteous  there  shall  be  a  covert  (Isa.  vi.  5,  6).  The  protection  of 
Providence  shall  always  be  upon  the  beauty  of  holiness  (Psa.  xxvii.  5).  (A.  Nevin, 
D.D.)  The  curtains: — The  materials  used  in  the  manufacture  of  this  fabric 
were  precisely  the  same  as  those  which  formed  the  vail ;  a  diiierent  arrangement, 
however,  is  adopted  as  to  the  "  fine  linen."  In  the  vail,  the  blue  first  meets  the 
eye  ;  and  the  fine  linen  is  last  in  the  series.  In  these  curtains,  the  fine  linen  stands 
first,  succeeded  by  the  blue  and  the  other  colours.  The  vail,  we  know  from  Heb. 
X.  20,  was  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  and  was  rent  when  He 
yielded  up  the  ghost.  The  curtains,  fastened  together  by  golden  taches,  seem  to 
foreshadow  Christ  in  resurrection.  The  same  glorious  display  of  God  and  man, 
woudrously  united,  meets  the  eye  of  faith,  whether  the  blessed  Lord  be  contemplated 
when  sojourning  on  this  earth  or  raised  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high. 
Kusurrection  added  to  Him  no  new  perfections ;  for  He  was,  while  on  earth,  the 
Resurrection  and  the  Life.  He  was  ever  perfect.  (H.  W.  Soltau.)  Analogies  : — 
The  beautiful  and  costly  cherub-curtained  habitation  bears  some  analogy  to  the 
believer,  to  the  Church,  to  Christ,  and  to  heaven.  I.  To  the  believer.  God, 
who  dwelt  within  these  curtains,  condescends  to  dwell  graciously  in  the  heart  of 
every  true  Israelite — "  saints  are  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  As  the 
Tabernacle  was  more  beautiful  within  than  without,  so  are  God's  children.  They 
are  clothed  with  the  spotless  robe  of  Emmanuel's  righteousness,  and  adorned  with 
humility,  love,  holiness,  and  heavenly-mindedness.  II.  To  the  Church. 
Believers,  of  whom  the  Church  is  composed,  although  scattered  among  many 
sects  of  professing  Christians,  are  yet  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  As  the  curtains 
though  woven  separately  were  afterwards  sewed  together  and  formed  two  gi'eat 
curtains,  which,  when  hung,  were  united  into  one  by  means  of  loops  of  blue  and 
clasps  of  gold,  so  God's  children  are  knit  together  by  the  silver  ties  of  affection 
and  bound  together  by  the  golden  clasps  of  love.  III.  To  Cheist.  He  was  the 
true  Tabernacle,  which  "  the  Lord  pitched  and  not  man."  IV.  To  heaven. 
There  angels  and  saints  behold  God  shining,  not  by  a  mere  symbol  as  He  did 
within  the  cherub-curtains,  but  in  the  "  face  of  Jesus  Christ !  "  There  are  those 
glorious  beings  who  are  mighty  in  strength  (and  whose  perfections  probably  were 
shadowed  forth  in  the  cherubs  that  stood  upon  the  mercy-seat  and  adorned  roof 
and  walls),  even  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  holy  angels,  guardians  of  the 
saints  while  on  earth,  and  their  companions  and  fellow-worshippers  for  ever  in  the 
heavenly  temple.  (IT'.  Brown.)  The  golden  and  brazen  taches: — Fifty  taches, 
or  clasps  of  gold,  linked  together  the  innermost  or  beautiful  curtains  of  the  taber- 
nacle. Fifty  taches  of  brass  coupled  the  goats'-hair  curtains.  By  the  former  one 
tabernacle — by  the  latter  one  tent  was  made.  The  vail,  which  divided  the  interior 
into  two  unequal  portions,  was  hung  up  imder  the  taches.  As  long  as  that  vail 
remained  entire,  there  might  be  said  to  be  two  tabernacles.  At  the  same  time, 
there  was  an  intimation  that  the  whole  interior  was  but  one  holy  place,  in  the  fact 
of  the  curtains  that  covered,  being  connected  by  the  taches,  and  forming  one 
tabernacle,  and  one  tent  above  it.  All  priestly  service  is  now  conducted  in  the 
holiest.  Heaven  itself  is  the  place  where  Christ  appears  in  the  presence  of  God  for 
us.  The  fifty  taches  of  gold  may  be  so  many  distinct  presentations  of  the  glories 
of  Christ,  expressed  in  His  various  names  and  titles,  as  seen  crowned  with  glory 
and  honour  upon  the  throne  of  God.  The  taches  of  brass  may  exhibit  the  same 
names  and  titles  as  appertaining  to  Him  when  He  was  on  earth,  the  Second  Man, 
the  Lord  from  heaven  ;  as  it  will  be  found  that  the  brass  is  used  as  a  type  of  the 
Lord  on  earth  in  suffering  and  trial ;  while  the  gold  has  a  resurrection  aspect  of 
the  same  glorious  One.    He  has,  as  risen  from  the  dead,  retaken  His  own  glorions 


CHAP,  xxn.]  EXODUS.  iS*7 

titles ;  having,  for  the  joy  set  before  Him,  endured  the  cross.  The  brazen  tacbes 
seem  appropriately  to  knit  together  the  curtains  of  goats'  hair,  which  proclaim  to 
us  His  sorrows  and  sufferings  on  the  tree  ;  while  the  golden  taches,  as  appropriately 
coupled  together  the  beautiful  curtains,  which  manifest  Him  as  received  up  in  glory, 
because  of  the  perfection  of  His  labour  and  service  in  suffering  on  earth.  {H.  W. 
Soltau.)  The  coverings  of  the  Tabernacle  : — The  coverings  of  the  Tabernacle  were 
four  in  number,  viz.,  badgers'  skins,  rams'  skins  dyed  red,  goats'  hair,  and  the 
embroidered  covering.  Much  difficulty  has  been  felt,  and  is  still  felt,  as  to  the 
animal  which  in  our  translation  is  called  a  badger.  Some  think  it  was  a  seal,  and 
that  the  entire  Tabernacle,  excepting  the  east  end  where  the  door  was  placed,  was 
covered  with  seals'  skin.  Others  think  that  this  covering  was  made  of  the  skins 
of  a  species  of  stag  goat ;  but  be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  clear  that  the  outer  covering 
was  made  of  some  hard  and  durable  substance ;  so  hard  was  it  that  shoes  were 
sometimes  made  of  the  same  material  (Ezek.  xvi.  10).  In  this  covering  there 
was  nothing  beautiful  or  attractive.  I  can  suppose  a  man  to  have  stood  at  the  top 
of  some  high  hill,  and  to  have  looked  down  on  the  long,  dark,  coffin-like  structure, 
and  to  have  said,  "Well,  I  have  heard  much  about  the  Tabernacle  as  being  a  very 
costly  building,  but  I  see  no  beauty  at  aU  in  this  long,  dark  tent "  ;  but  the  priests 
who  had  been  within  could  tell  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  the  richest  embroidery  to 
be  seen  there.  It  was  all  glorious  within,  but  rough  and  unsightly  without.  This 
badger  skin  covering  sets  forth  the  humility  of  Christ  when  on  earth  among  men, 
who,  judging  of  Him  according  to  the  outward  appearance,  said,  "  He  hath  no  form 
nor  comeliness  ;  there  is  no  beauty  in  Him  that  we  should  desire  Him  "  ;  so  they 
despised  and  rejected  Him  (Isa.  liii.  2,  3).  But  we  know  there  was  much  in  Christ 
which  did  not  meet  the  eye  of  men  generally ;  and  those  who,  taught  of  the  Father, 
knew  Him  as  the  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God  (Matt.  xvi.  16,  17)  were  attracted 
to  Him,  for  He  was  to  them  the  "  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  and  altogether  lovely" 
(Song  of  Sol.  V.  10, 16).  The  rough  badger  skin  outside  was  as  needful  as  was  the  beau- 
tiful covering  underneath;  and  the  humility  of  Christ  was  as  needful  for  us,  and  for 
the  glory  of  God,  as  was  His  exaltation.  This  covering  of  badgers'  skins  was  thick 
enough  and  hard  enough  to  be  an  effectual  protection  from  the  rain,  dew,  and  fine 
sand  of  the  desert,  and  nothing  could  get  through  it  to  stain  the  fine  linen  or  to 
dim  the  gold  within.  This  shadows  forth  to  us  the  holy  determination  of  Christ 
to  stand  as  a  faithful  and  true  witness  for  God  on  earth  :  the  truth  was  in  Him, 
and  He  kept  it  to  the  end.     {G.  Rodgers.)  The  rams'  skins  dyed  red  : — This  red 

covering  was  probably  made  of  the  skins  of  rams  which  had  been  devoted  to  God, 
and  had  suffered  death  as  burnt-offerings — not  as  sin-offerings.  The  skin  of  the 
sin-offering  was  burnt  to  ashes  outside  the  camp  (Lev.  iv.  11,  12),  but  the  skin  of 
the  burnt-offering  belonged  to  the  priest  who  offered  it  to  God  (Lev.  vii.  8).  If  the 
badger-skin  covering  sets  forth  the  humility  of  Christ,  this  covering  dyed  red  sets 
forth  the  depth  of  His  humility.  This  blood-red  skin  reminds  me  of  Him  who 
when  pressed,  crushed,  and  distressed  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  did  "sweat 
as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood."  (Ibid.)  The  goats' -hair  covering  : — This  was  the 
only  covering  that  was  permitted  to  hang  over  any  part  of  the  east  end  of  the  Taber- 
nacle. The  eleventh  breadth,  hanging  over  the  door,  would  meet  the  eye  of  the 
worshipper  the  moment  he  came  within  the  gate  of  the  court.  The  spiritual 
teaching  of  this  I  think  to  be  of  the  greatest  importance,  as  we  shall  see  when  we 
understand  what  particular  aspect  of  our  blessed  Jesus  this  covering  was  designed 
to  tt^ach.  Observe,  first  of  all,  that  the  sin-offering  whose  blood  was  carried  into 
the  holy  of  holies,  and  sprinkled  on  the  mercy-seat,  and  before  the  mercy-seat,  to 
make  an  atonement  for  the  people  of  Israel,  was  a  goat  (Lev.  xvi.  15,  16).  This 
was  "  the  blood  of  sprinkling,"  of  which  we  read  so  much  in  the  Bible.  With 
this  blood  in  his  hand,  the  high  priestentered  once  a  year,  and  stood  in  the  presence 
of  God.  This  was  the  blood  which  he  offered  for  the  errors  of  the  people,  and  which 
made  atonement  for  them.  This  was  the  blood  at  which  God  looked,  and  with 
which  He  was  satisfied ;  it  had  a  voice,  and  spoke  better  things  than  the  blood  of 
Abel.  When  it  was  sprinkled  on  the  mercy-seat,  which  covered  up  the  tables  of 
the  law,  it  seemed  to  speak  to  God  of  punishment  which  had  been  borne  and  of  a 
life  which  had  been  given  up.  Observe  again,  the  animal  that  bore  away  the  sins 
of  the  people  into  the  wilderness,  where  they  were  found  no  more,  was  a  goat.  I 
refer  to  the  scapegoat,  of  which  we  read  in  Lev.  xvi.  This  goat  going  away  with 
the  people's  sins  would  show  those  outside  of  the  Tabernacle  what  the  blood  of  the 
slain  goat  had  done  within  the  vail,  viz.,  that  it  had  put  away  sin  and  had  set 
them  free  ;  and  as  they  gazed  on  the  folded  part  of  goats'-hair  cloth,  as  it  hung 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

over  the  east  end  of  the  Tahernacle,  it  would  seem  to  preach  the  gospel  to  them  by 
reminding  them  how  their  sin  was  put  away  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh 
month.  It  would  speak  of  abounding  grace,  telling  them  that  they  had  received 
double  for  all  their  sins.  The  first  covering  told  us  of  the  humility  of  Clirist ;  the 
next  told  us  of  the  depth  of  His  humility  ;  this  tells  us  of  the  blessed  results  of  His 
suffering  and  deatb,  viz.,  that  the  sins  of  the  Lord's  people  are  put  away,  for  ever 
put  away.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  15-30. — Boards  for  the  Tabernacle. — The  Tabernacle  boards  and  bars : — I. 
That  invincible  strength  underlies  the  apparent  weakness  of  the  gospel.    II. 
That    the  gospel,  despite  all  its  natural  and  human  aspects,   has  a  Divine 
character  and  basis.     Our  faith  rests  in  the  power  of  God.     III.  That  out  of 
the  strength  of  Christ  spring  the  highest  glory  and  joy  (ver.  29).    Let  the 
Church  seek  to  realize  its  full  privilege  in  Christ.     In  character,  we  are  often  satis- 
fied with  the  bare  boards  of  mere  honesty  and  uprightness  ;  in  experience,  we  are 
content  with  the  boards  and  bars,  a  mere  sense  of  safety  ;  in  hope,  we  rest  content 
with  the  bare  expectation  of  pulling  through  in  the  judgment.     The  gilded  boards 
of  the  Tabernacle  are  eloquent  illustrations  of  the  New  Testament  doctrine  that  in 
Christ  we  must  rise  to  beauty,  to  brightness,  to  bliss.     IV.  That  Christ  is  an 
everlasting  dwelling -place  to  His  people.     Tabernacle  built  of  boards  of  acacia, 
a  wood  so  durable  it  does  not  rot  even  in  water.     The  strength  of  Christ  is  ever- 
lasting.    {W.  L.  Watkinson.)         The  boards  and  bars  . — Each  board  of    shittim- 
wood,  overlaid  with  gold,  seems  to  pourtray  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself,  the  Son  of  God, 
the  Son  of  Man.     The  shittim  wood,  incorruptible  wood,  being  a  shadow  of  that 
great  truth,  that  He  "partook  of  flesh  and  blood"  ;  "  the  seed  of  the  woman": 
"the  Second  Man  "  ;  "  from  heaven  "  ;  yet  "  the  Son  of  David  "  ;  "  of  the  fruit  of 
His  loins  " ;  and  at  the  same  time  "  the  Son  of  the  Highest "  ;  born  of  the  Virgin, 
"  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  "  ;  made  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  "  ;  though,  unlike 
any  other  man  that  ever  lived  on  earth,  incorrupt  and  incorruptible  ;  having  a  body 
prepared  for  Him  by  God,  in  order  that  He  might  die;    but   without  taint  of 
mortality  or  death  in  Him.     The  gold  also  presents  the  other  great  truth,  that  He 
is  "  the  mighty  God  "  ;  "  the  brightness  of  God's  glory  "  ;  "  the  only  begotten  of 
the  Father  "  ;  "the  Son  "  from  everlasting,  and  to  everlasting.     The  boards  are 
like  the  ribs  of  truth,  the  massive  framework,  without  which  no  dwelling-place  of 
God  could  be  created ;  no  meeting-place  between  God  and  man  provided.     If  the 
wood  could  corrupt,  or  if  the  fine  gold  could  become  dim,  if  the  taint  of  mortality, 
or  mouldering  flesh,  be  connected,  by  human  theory  or  speculation,  with  the  glorious 
Emmanuel,  the  Tabernacle  of  God  must  tremble  and  totter;  the  great  truths  of  sal- 
vation are  shaken,  and  a  mis-shapen  mass  of  ruin  takes  the  place  of  the  divinely- 
ordered  palace  of  the  Most  High.     The  massive  framework  of  the  golden  boards 
and  bars  formed  a  compact  structure,  over  which  the  curtains  and  coverings  were 
suspended.     They  were  to  the  curtains  what  the  poles  are  to  a  tent.     They  upheld 
and  sustained  the  glorious  display  of  the  blue,   purple,  scarlet,  and  fine  linen 
cherubim,  as   also   the  goat^'-hair  curtains.     Thus  what  the  Lord  Jesus  Him- 
self was  and  is,  viz..  Son  of  God,  Son  of  Man — that  He  has  made  manifest  in  His 
life,  and  above  all,  in  His  death  ;  and  His  blessed  work  there  derives  all  its  un- 
speakable value  and  eternal  efficacy  from  Himself.     It  is  faith  in  Him  that  is 
salvation.      {H.  W.  Soltau.)  The  boards  of  the  Tabernacle: — The   Church   of 

Christ  is  here  seen  in  type  as  tii9  dwelling-place  of  God.  It  was  set  upon  the  earth 
and  God  dwelt  in  it.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  composed  of  many  persons  separated 
from  the  world,  and  built  upon  the  sure  foundation,  which  is  Christ.  And  as  those 
boards  were  covered  with  gold,  60  the  people  of  God  are  made  \  artakers  of  the 
Divine  nature  (2  Peter  i.  4) ;  as  they  had  been  separated,  cut  off  from  the  place 
in  which  nature  had  placed  them,  so  the  members  of  the  true  Church  of  Christ  have 
been  cut  off  from  the  place  in  which  they  stood  by  nature,  which  was  one  of  guilt 
and  condtmnation,  and  they  have  been  joined  by  living  faith  to  the  living  Jesus. 
Nature  provided  no  foundation  on  which  to  build  the  Tabernacle,  and  nature  has 
provided  no  foundation  on  which  the  sinner  can  build  his  hope ;  but  as  God 
provided  a  foundation  for  the  Tabernacle  in  the  redemption-money  of  the  people, 
so  now  He  has  provided  a  foundation  for  His  people  in  the  redemption  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus.  And  as  no  board  could  be  a  part  of  the  Tabernacle  without  being  built 
upon  the  silver  foundation,  so  no  person  can  be  any  part  of  the  true  Church  of  God 
if  he  be  not  built  by  faith  upon  Christ.  (G.  Rodgers.)  Believers  typified  by  the 
boards: — Were  they  golden  boards?    Every  believer  is  a  partaker  of  the  Divine 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  EXODUS.  489 

nature  (2  Peter  i.  4).  They  are  bom  from  above,  and  they  are  heavenly  minded. 
Their  affection  is  set  on  things  above.  God's  people  are  a  holy  people.  "  The 
beauty  of  holiness  "  is  the  gold  with  which  God  will  beautify  and  adorn  His  people. 
The  knots  and  grains  of  the  wood  were  all  hidden  from  view  beneath  plates  of  pure 
gold.  God  hides  all  our  imperfections  from  view  beneath  the  gold  of  His  perfect 
righteousness.  (R.  E.  Sears.)  Sockets  of  silver.— r/ie  sockets  ;— It  is  perhaps 
worthy  of  notice  here  that  the  whole  of  the  redemption  money,  amounting  to  100 
talents  and  1775  shekels,  was  identified  with  the  supporting  or  bearing  up  of  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  Tabernacle.  The  100  talents  formed  the  foundations  and  sup- 
ported the  walls  of  gilded  boards  which  were  the  stay  of  the  two  sets  of  curtains 
and  the  two-fold  skin  roof ;  and  the  1775  shekels  (little  more  than  half  a  talent) 
were  used  up  in  making  silver  hooks  for  the  court  pillars,  and  in  overlaying  the 
capitals  of  these  pillars  and  their  connecting  rods  (fillets)  which  rested  on  them, 
and  from  which  the  court  hangings  were  suspended.  These  odd  shekels  bore  up 
the  hnen  court  walls,  and  the  100  talents  bore  up  the  sanctuary.  The  hundred 
ransom  silver  sockets  being  worth  £40,000  sterling,  constituted  a  very  costly 
basis,  from  which,  whether  it  had  a  typical  import  or  not,  our  thoughts  not  un- 
naturally rise  to  an  infinitely  more  valuable  one,  even  to  Him"  who  gave  Himself  a 
ransom  for  all."  Prophets  and  apostles  alike  testify  that  He  is  that  sure  foundation 
on  which  the  spiritual  edifice  rests.  Had  the  sockets  not  been  made  of  the  atone- 
ment money  as  commanded  (chap.  xxx.  16,  xxxviii.  27),  but  of  some  other  material, 
God  certainly  would  not  have  acknowledged  the  Tabernacle  which  rested  on  them  as 
His  palace-temple.  He  never  would  have  enthroned  Himself  in  visible  symbol  on  the 
mercy-seat.  In  hke  manner,  those  who  substitute  their  own  good  works,  or  any- 
thing else  in  the  room  of  the  Redeemer,  on  which  to  build  their  hope  of  salvation, 
are  building  on  the  sand,  and  cannot  form  a  part  of  that  building  which  is  an 
♦'  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit,"  for  "  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than 
is  laid,  which  is  Christ  Jesus."  (W.  Brown.)  Tenons.— Tenons  .-—Although 
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  are  resting  on  the  Eock  laid  in  Zion,  it  is  able  to 
bear  the  weight  of  countless  millions  more,  and  can  never  by  any  possibility  be 
overburdened.  Those,  however,  who  would  build  on  it,  must  do  so  in  the  way 
pointed  out  in  the  Scripture,  or  it  will  not  avail  them.  It  was  by  means  of  the 
tenons  (Hebrew  "  hands")  that  the  boards  took  hold  of,  and  rested  on  the  silver 
bases.  Faith  is  the  hand  by  means  of  which  sinners  lay  hold  of  and  rest  on  the 
Redeemer.  Remember  that  the  boards  required  to  be  not  merely  on,  but  in  their 
respective  sockets,  or  they  would  not  have  been  upheld.  In  like  manner  sinners, 
in  order  to  be  saved,  must  not  only  be  on,  but  in  the  spiritual  foundation.  Unless 
they  are  by  faith  rooted  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  the  boards  by  their  tenons  were  rooted 
in  the  ransom  money,  they  cannot  stand.  {Ibid.)  Bars. — The  bars  : — The  bars 
were  all  overlaid  with  gold.  One  of  the  bars  passed  through  the  centre  of  the 
•  boards  from  end  to  end ;  holes  being  made,  no  doubt  for  that  purpose.  Thus  the 
boards  became  one  solid  wall.  But  that  they  might  be  more  firmly  united,  each 
board  had  four  gold  rings  fastened  to  it,  and  through  these  rings  the  other  four  bars 
were  passed.  L  There  was  a  sevenfold  bond  of  union.  The  five  bars,  the  silver 
sockets,  and  the  corner  boards.  Paul  gives  us  the  gospel  meaning  of  this  in  his 
Epistle  to  the  lilphesians  (iv.  4-6).  2.  The  centre  bar  which  passed  through  the 
boards  from  one  end  to  the  other,  was  a  lively  type  of  the  indwelling  of  the  God- 
head in  all  believers.  All  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Trinity  are  spoken  of  as  dwell- 
ing in  the  renewed  heart.  "Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory."  "Jesus  answered 
and  said  unto  him,  if  a  man  love  Ve,  he  will  keep  My  words ;  and  My  Father  will 
love  him,  and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  Our  abode  with  him."  "  What  I 
know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  you,  which 
ye  have  of  God,  aad  ye  are  not  your  own."  What  a  glorious  bond  of  union  is  this  1 
Christians  of  all  denominations  are  one  here  ;  for  without  the  love  of  the  Father, 
the  grace  of  the  Son,  and  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  no  man  can  be  a  Christian. 
3.  These  bars  remind  us  of  the  encircling  arms  of  love  and  mercy.  "  Underneath 
are  the  everlasting  arms."  "  As  the  mountains  are  round  about  Jerusalem,  so  the 
Lord  is  round  about  His  people  from  henceforth  even  for  ever. "  All  Christians 
are  one  in  the  Divine  protection.  "All  His  saints  are  in  thy  hand."  4.  All 
Christians  are  one  in  love  to  God.  5.  Another  bond  of  union  is  reverence  for  the 
Word  of  God.  Christians  may  differ  in  their  interpretations  of  the  Word.  All  may 
not  have  the  same  measure  of  wisdom  to  understand  its  mysteries ;  but  all  Chris- 
tians are  one  in  their  esteem  and  love  for  the  grand  old  Book !  Is  it  not  the  ona 
revelation  of  the  Divine  will  ?     {R.  E.  Sears.) 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvt. 

Vers.  31-37.  And  thou  ebaltmake  a  vail. — The  Tabernacle  vails  : — I.  These  vailb 

SIONIFT   THAT   THE    HIGHEST    VISION    AND   FELLOWSHIP    OF    GoD  AEE    AS    YET     DENIED    TO 

MAN.  God's  presence  is  fenced  about  from  sinful  man.  II.  Whilst  these  vails 
KEMOVE  God  from  the  approach  of  man,  they  give  the  promise  of  a  fuller 
revelation.  The  God  of  mercy,  and  love,  and  life,  shines  through  the  obscuration. 
III.  That  these  vails  are  taken  away  in  Christ  (Mark  xv.  38).  In  Christ  we 
stand  "  within  the  vail."  In  Him  we  realize  the  presence  and  joy  of  God.  (W.  L. 
Watkinson.)  The  vail  of  the  holiest : — 1.  It  was  glorious,  of  embroidered  work  : 
this  faith  guild  signified  the  body  of  Christ,  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God,  or 
beautified  with  all  the  most  excellent  graces  of  the  Spirit.  2.  It  was  replenished 
and  wrought  full  of  cherubim,  noting  thereby  that  serviceable  and  ready  attendance 
of  the  angels  on  Christ's  natural  and  mystical  body.  3.  It  was  borne  up  by  costly 
pillars,  to  show  that  the  humanity  of  Christ,  especially  in  His  sufferings,  should  be 
borne  up  by  His  Deity.  4.  By  the  vail  only,  there  was  entry  into  the  holiest  place 
of  all  :  60  by  the  vail,  i.e.  the  flesh  of  Christ,  which  was  rent,  as  it  were,  upon  the 
cross,  a  new  and  living  way  is  made  for  us  to  the  Father.  {B.  Keach.)  Tlie 
cherubims  on  the  vail : — The  Tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  was  divided  into  two 
compartments — the  holy  place  and  the  holy  of  holies — by  a  vail.  That  vail  was 
stretched  upon  four  pillars  of  wood  overlaid  with  gold.  It  consisted  of  one  huge 
screen  of  fine-twined  linen,  reaching  from  the  roof  to  the  floor,  and  from  one 
side  to  the  other.  On  the  ground-work  of  linen  were  spread,  in  various  orna- 
mental patterns,  the  simple  colours  known  to  the  ancients — blue,  purple,  and 
Bcarlet.  The  holy  of  holies  was  shut  in  by  this  vail  from  every  human  eye. 
No  worship  was  carried  on  there.  When  first  seen  on  earth,  the  cherubims 
were  placed  at  the  gate  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree 
of  hfe.  The  flaming  sword  with  which  they  were  associated,  which  turned  in 
every  direction,  was  the  symbol  of  God's  judgment,  the  witness  of  the  terrible 
majesty  of  God's  holiness  which  had  been  insulted  by  man's  sin,  telling  our 
fallen  first  parents  that  so  long  as  the  sin  continued,  the  flaming  sword  would  shut 
up  every  avenue  against  their  return  to  their  original  happy  state.  The  cherubims, 
on  the  contrary,  were  placed  there  as  an  image  of  mercy  and  hope,  to  signify  that 
for  the  creation  that  had  become  alienated  from  God  was  destined  a  happy 
reconciliation.  The  same  great  truth  was  signified  by  the  golden  cherubims  that 
covered  the  mercy-seat  with  their  wings,  and  between  which  God  met  and 
communed  with  the  high  priest.  Now,  what  I  want  to  draw  particular  attention  to 
is  the  fact  that,  secluded  as  was  the  holy  of  holies  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  guarded 
by  the  most  solemn  prohibitions,  its  mystery  was  not  left  altogether  unknown. 
The  most  conspicuous  feature  of  the  vail — that  which  at  once  arrested  every  eye — 
was  the  cherubims  embroidered  over  its  whole  surface,  in  such  a  way  that  it  seemed 
to  have  been  fashioned  of  nothing  else.  Thus  on  the  vail  that  concealed  the  awful 
shrine  of  Jehovah  from  mortal  eye  was  revealed  one  of  the  most  characteristic  and 
significant  objects  of  that  shrine.  In  this  way  the  priests,  who  were  not  permitted  to 
enter  the  holy  of  holies,  could  have  some  conception  of  what  was  within  it.  The 
cherubims  pourtrayed  on  the  vail  and  on  the  curtains  were  no  doubt  faint  and  inade- 
quate pictures  of  the  originals  on  the  mercy-seat.  They  could  not  have  been  otherwise. 
They  were  a  flat  representation  of  objects  that  stood  out  in  the  sacred  shrine  in  the 
clearest  and  fullest  relief.  They  were  an  embroideiy  in  perishing  materials,  at 
comparatively  slight  cost  of  labour,  of  a  work  of  the  highest  art,  beaten  out  in  the 
purest  gold,  with  the  most  unwearied  industry  and  the  most  consummate  skill.  But 
with  all  these  necessary  imperfections,  the  needlework  of  the  vail  and  of  the  curtains 
gave  a  fair  idea  of  the  cherubims  which  stood  in  the  most  holy  place,  in  their 
invisible  and  unapproachable  glory.  The  Jewish  priests  and  worshippers  were  not 
left  in  complete  ignorance.  There  were  witnesses  to  picture  to  them  that  which 
they  could  not  see.  They  had  shadows  of  the  realities  behind  the  vail.  Their  faith 
had  elements  of  sight  to  support  it.  I  wish  to  make  use  of  this  most  interesting 
fact  as  a  graphic  illustration  of  the  great  truth,  which  is  true  throughout  the 
universe,  that  things  concealed  from  us  have  their  shadows  manifested  in  the  things 
we  see.  The  universe  is  a  great  tabernacle  divided  by  a  vail  and  curtains  into  an 
outer  and  inner  compartment,  as  it  were.  From  the  inner  we  are  shut  out,  and  we 
cannot  see  with  our  bodily  eyes  the  things  that  are  contained  in  it.  And  yet  we 
have  representations  of  these  hidden  mysteries  before  our  eyes  every  day,  which 
give  us  a  more  or  less  satisfactory  idea  of  them.  Here  we  see  in  part,  and  prophecy 
in  part.  The  horizon,  for  instance,  is  a  vail  that  comes  down  to  conceal  from  us 
what  is  beyond.     Many  of  us  will  never  be  able  to  visit  foreign  countries,  and 


CBAP.  XXVI.]  EXODUS.  491 

ascertain  with  our  own  eyes  what  the  nature  of  these  countries  and  the  mode  of  life 
in  them  may  be  ;  and  yet,  within  the  horizon  in  which  we  spend  our  life  we  have 
shadowy  intimations  of  the  most  distant  regions  of  the  earth.  Ships  come  to  U3 
with  their  produce ;  our  houses  are  full  of  objects  brought  from  them  ;  books 
describe  them  to  us ;  and  letters  from  friends  make  us  partakers  of  their  larger 
experience.  Even  the  scenery  around  our  homes  is  not  so  dissimilar  to  that  of 
foreign  lands  as  we  might  suppose.  Between  us  and  the  lofty  summits  of  a  great 
mountain  range  there  is  a  vail  often  woven  of  cloud  and  mist.  Elevated  far  above 
the  busy  common-place  haunts  of  man,  these  sublime  peaks  seem  to  dwell  apart, 
to  retire  into  a  more  awful  solitude  than  exists  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  And 
yet  the  lofty  summit  of  the  mountain  sends  down  into  the  valley  by  the  streams 
that  chanuel  its  flanks  waifs  of  brilliant  Alpine  flowers,  which  take  root  and  grow 
among  the  common  lowland  plants:  and  thus  the  dweller  at  the  foot  of  the 
mountain  knows  what  kind  of  vegetation  abounds  in  the  upper  regions  as  truly  as 
if  he  had  actually  scaled  the  heights.  Many  who  live  far  inland  have  a  vail  of 
mountain  ranges  between  them  and  the  great  ocean.  They  may  never  be  able  to 
stand  on  its  shore,  gaze  on  its  foaming  billows,  or  listen  to  the  beating  of  its  mighty 
pulse.  And  yet,  up  the  reaches  of  the  quiet  inland  river,  into  the  heart  of  the 
mountains,  into  the  midst  of  shady  woods,  the  ocean  sends  its  tidal  waters,  its  fresh 
invigorating  breezes,  and  its  white-winged  sea-birds,  so  that  the  inland  inhabitants 
may  have  some  idea  of  the  vast  world  of  waters  that  extends  far  beyond  their  horizon. 
The  vail  of  daylight  hides  from  us  the  other  worlds  in  space  ;  and  the  darkness  of 
night  which  brings  out  the  stars  only  increases  their  mystery.  But  the  vail  which 
conceals  also  reveals.  Spectrum  analysis  has  made  known  to  us  the  chemistry  of 
the  sun  and  stars,  the  physical  constitution  of  the  most  distant  worlds.  This 
wonderful  science  shows  to  us  that  the  substances  of  the  stars  are  identical  with 
those  of  our  own  earth.  Not  a  single  new  or  unknown  element  has  been  discovered 
in  the  remotest  stellar  ray  subjected  to  its  scrutiny.  Upon  the  very  vails  that 
separate  us  from  the  inmost  and  remotest  sanctuaries  of  nature  we  see  impressed 
the  images  of  the  objects  which  they  hide  from  our  view.  But  it  is  not  only 
natural  things  that  thus  reveal  themselves  by  that  which  conceals  them ;  the 
realities  of  the  spiritual  world  are  also  manifested  to  us  on  the  vail  of  earthly  things. 
We  have  numberless  analogies  in  nature  which  make  plain  to  our  understandings 
the  mysteries  of  grace.  Our  Lord  revealed  to  His  disciples  and  to  the  multitude 
what  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  was  like  by  showing  to  them  its  shadows  on  the  vail 
of  common  objects  and  common  processes,  in  His  parables.  The  Kingdom  of 
Heaven  is  like  everything  we  see  and  deal  with.  The  youngest  person  can  see  the 
meaning  of  the  great  truths  of  salvation  in  some  degree  and  measure  by  the  help  of 
the  figure  of  them  which  his  own  experience  presents  to  him.  The  doctrine  of  the 
atonement  is  in  remarkable  keeping  with  the  sympathetic  nature  which  God  has 
imparted  to  children,  by  which  they  feel  for  others,  and  can  therefore  understand 
how  one  person  may  carry  his  loving-kindness  to  such  an  extent  as  to  give  up  his 
life  for  his  friend.  The  forgiveness  of  God  has  a  shadow  of  it  in  the  sorrow  which 
all  truly  sensitive  minds  feel  when  they  have  offended  one  dear  to  them,  and  in 
the  joy  which  the  sense  of  being  reconciled  and  accepted  by  the  one  from  whom 
their  faults  had  estranged  them  imparts.  There  is  thus  not  a  mystery  of  the 
holy  of  holies  of  Divine  truth  but  may  be  seen  in  dim  yet  true  shape,  embroidered, 
as  it  were,  upon  the  vail  of  natural  objects  around  us,  and  of  our  own  common 
instincts  and  experiences.  But  I  go  on  further  to  show  that  the  realities  of  the 
eternal  world  are  manifested  to  us  by  the  things  of  time.  The  vail  of  death,  which 
no  human  hand  can  lift,  hides  the  scenes  beyond  from  our  view.  The  Bible  speaks 
to  us  of  the  existence  of  that  happy  land,  and  discloses  its  glory  in  forms  which 
far  transcend  our  earthly  imagination.  It  calls  our  future  home  a  new  heaven  and 
*a  new  earth.  The  ascension  of  our  Lord  to  heaven,  with  all  the  attributes  of 
perfect  man,  the  resurrection  of  man  in  a  body  strictly  identical  with  his  present 
body,  prove  beyond  doubt  that  the  scene  of  our  translation,  with  all  its  circum- 
stances, must  be  accommodated  to  the  nature  of  man.  From  the  very  constitution 
of  our  nature,  we  form  our  anticipations  of  the  future  from  our  past  experiences. 
The  objects  and  experiences  of  earth  are  preparations  for  those  which  await  us 
above.  On  the  vail  that  hides  our  future  home  from  us,  we  see  pictured  the 
cherubims  of  glory.  Yes  ;  the  cherubims  of  heaven  are  seen  on  the  vail  of  earth. 
Heaven  is  filled  with  objects  long  endeared  to  us,  and  with  pleasure  which  we  have 
already  enjoyed  in  part,  and  learned  from  the  foretaste  to  long  for  the  full  fruition. 
We  have  now  the  earnest  of  the  purchased  possession — the  first-fruits  of  the  great 


493  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

harvest.  Now,  what  is  the  practical  outcome  of  thoughts  like  these  ?  Does  it  not 
teach  us  that  we  have  no  excuse  for  sinful  ignorance,  seeing  that  God  has  brought 
within  the  range  of  our  touch  and  vision  in  earthly  images  His  perfect  heavenly 
things,  and  placed  us  so  that  we  can  understand  the  things  that  belong  to  our 
spiritual  life  by  the  things  that  belong  to  our  daily  life  ?  Do  not  these  gUmpses  and 
foreshadowings  of  unseen  and  eternal  things  also  inspire  us  with  a  deeper  interest 
in  them  ?  And  more  than  all,  does  not  the  fact  of  the  cherubims  upon  the  vail 
being  the  same  as  those  in  the  shrine  show  to  us  that  our  life  is  continuous  here 
and  hereafter — that  it  is  one  history  and  one  development  ?  If  you  are  to  behold 
and  enjoy  the  glorious  cherubims  of  the  heavenly  world,  you  must  have  them 
represented,  as  it  were,  upon  the  vail  of  your  earthly  tabernacle.  Your  hearts  must 
be  turned  now  to  the  heavenly  harmonies.  When  certain  conditions  of  light  are 
present,  if  you  look  through  a  window  at  a  particular  angle  into  the  street,  you  see 
a  flame  apparently  outside,  flickering  strangely  in  the  air.  It  is  only  the  reflection 
of  the  fire  in  the  room  on  the  window-pane.  Is  not  the  heaven  you  see  beyond 
the  window  of  this  life,  the  projected  reflection  of  your  present  experience  ?  What 
you  are  now  determines  your  future  ;  and  the  heaven  of  each  man  is  just  what  he 
himself  makes  it,  according  as  the  fire  of  love  and  holiness  burns  more  or  less 
brightly  on  the  hearth  of  his  heart.  {H.  Macviillan,  D.D.)  Significance  of  the 
cherubim  in  Exodus  : — Many  have  supposed  that  the  Church  is  symbolized  by  the 
cherubim  in  Exodus.  But  the  fact  of  their  forming  the  vail  seems  to  preclude 
this  interpretation.  As  the  vail  shadows  forth  Christ  in  the  flesh,  we  cannot  suppose 
tiiat  any  type  would  be  given  representing  the  union  of  the  Church  with  Him  then  ; 
as,  before  death,  the  corn  of  wheat  abode  alone  :  it  must  die,  in  order  to  bring  forth 
fruit.  The  union  of  the  believer  with  Christ  is  in  life,  quickened  together  with 
Him  :  seated  in  heavenly  places  in  Him.  He  was  the  Substitute  in  death  ;  but  He 
is  the  last  Adam,  the  head  of  the  new  family,  and  source  of  its  existence  in  resur- 
rection. The  lion  (one  of  the  four  faces  of  the  cherubim)  is  classed  with  the  king, 
against  whom  there  is  no  rising  up,  in  Prov.  xxx.  30,  31 ;  and  is  also  described  as 
going  well,  and  being  comely  in  going  ;  and  as  strongest  among  beasts,  turning  not 
away  from  any.  Majesty,  strength,  and  courage  are  therefore  here  typified.  The  ox, 
in  addition  to  its  well-known  character  for  patient  enduring  labour,  is  also  recognized 
in  Scripture  as  knowing  its  owner ;  herein  it  may  prefigure  the  persevering 
resolution  of  Him  who  unflinchingly  set  His  shoulder  to  the  arduous  work  committed 
to  Him  by  His  Father,  and  who  always  recognized  His  Father's  will,  and  delighted 
to  do  it.  The  way  of  an  eagle  in  the  air  is  alluded  to  in  Prov.  xxx.  19,  as  too 
wonderful  to  be  known  :  referring  probably  to  the  astonishing  extent  and  accuracy 
of  its  vision  as  to  things  of  earth,  when  poised  aloft,  and  to  its  swiftness  of  flight 
when  the  object  of  its  search  is  discovered.  Fit  emblem  this  of  Him,  whose  eyes 
search  the  depths  of  the  heart,  and  who  is  as  rapid  in  discovering  where  the  lawful 
prey  is,  as  in  delivering  it  from  the  power  of  the  destroyer.  These  three  faces, 
combined  with  the  human  face  and  form,  completed  the  cherubim  :  for  all  this 
power,  labour,  activity,  and  quickness  of  perception,  were  put  forth  under  the 
control  and  guidance  of  perfect  wisdom  and  sympathy.  Wings  were  also  spread 
abroad  over  the  surface  of  the  vail,  proceeding  from  the  cherubim  ;  denoting  the 
heavenly  origin  and  unearthly  ways  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who  was  "  from  above,"  and 
who  could  say,  even  while  here,  "The  Son  of  Man,  who  is  in  heaven."  {H.  W. 
Soltau.)  The  pillars  of  the  vail : — The  pillars  of  the  vail  were  four  in  number. 
Unlike  those  on  which  hung  the  curtain  for  the  Tabernacle  door,  they  had  no 
capitals ;  thus  they  lacked  the  ordinary  completeness  of  a  pillar.  May  not  our 
thoughts  be  directed  by  this,  to  the  contemplation  of  those  Scriptures,  which  speak 
of  the  Lord  as  cut  off?  (see  Isa.  liii.  8;  Psa.  cii.  23,  24).  And  yet  the  very  fact  of 
this  seemingly  abrupt  termination  of  the  Ufa  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh,  1  a^  made  Him  to  be  unto  us  "  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and 
redemption"  ;  a  fourfold  perfection,  meeting  our  fourfold  need ;  to  which  possibly 
the  number  of  vail-pillars  may  allude.  {Ibid.)  The  door  of  the  tent. — The  door 
of  the  Tabernacle : — 1.  This  was  the  only  door  of  the  Tabernacle ;  it  must  therefore 
have  been  an  emblem  of  Jesus  Christ  (John  x.  9).  There  was  only  one  entrance 
into  the  court,  only  one  door  into  the  holy  place,  and  only  one  way  into  the  holy 
of  holies.  Jesus  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life.  No  man  cometh  unto  the 
Father,  but  by  Him.  The  curtain  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  was  made  of  blue, 
and  purple,  and  scarlet.  Here  we  have  an  emblem  of  the  Saviour's  threefold  Name. 
Lord — Jesus — Christ.  He  is  Lord  of  all  power,  majesty,  dominion,  and  glory. 
May  not  the  "  blue,  and  the  purple,  and  the  scarlet,"  be  figurative  of  Jesus  in  His 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  EXODUS.  493 

threefold  office,  as  Priest,  King,  and  Prophet?  The  scarlet  shows  His  priestly 
sacrifice.  The  purple  His  kiugly  dignity.  The  blue  His  heavenly  teaching  as  the 
prophet.  It  is  only  as  we  see  Jesus  in  His  threefold  office,  tbat  He  is  the  Door.  As 
the  Priest,  He  is  the  sacrificial  Way.  As  the  Prophet,  He  is  the  Truth.  As  the 
King,  He  reigns  to  give  Life.  As  Jesus,  He  is  our  saving  Priest ;  as  Christ,  He  is 
our  anointed,  instructing  Prophet ;  and  as  Lord,  He  is  our  ruling  King.  In  Him 
these  offices  are  united.  We  may  distinguish  between  them,  but  we  must  not 
separate  them.  2.  May  not  the  five  pillars  which  held  up  the  curtains  at  the  Door, 
be  emblems  of  gospel  ministers,  whose  work  it  is  to  hold  up  Christ  before  the  people  ? 
3.  These  pillars  had  sockets  of  brass.  Brass  being  in  Scripture  an  emblem  of 
strength,  we  may  here  see  the  servants  of  God  strengthened  for  their  work.  May 
we  not  see  Jesus  Himself  in  the  sockets  of  brass  ?  "  His  feet  are  like  fine  brass.'' 
Jesus  upholds  His  servants  with  His  own  strength.  "Lo,I  am  with  you  alway, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  He  who  holds  the  stars  in  His  right  hand, 
upholds  His  servants  as  pillars  in  the  house  of  God.  Were  the  pillars  beautiful  ? 
So  are  ministers  abounding  in  their  work  (Isa.  liii.  7).  (R.  E.  Sears.)  The  door 
of  the  Taberruicle : — The  hanging,  which  formed  the  door,  was  made  of  the  same 
materials  as  the  vail ;  the  only  difference  being  that  in  the  former  the  colours  were 
skilfully  intermixed,  whereas  in  the  latter  a  pattern  of  cherubim  was  cunningly  or 
ingeniously  embroidered.  The  priests,  who  entered  within  the  door  of  the  Taber- 
nacle, alone  beheld  the  cherubim  of  glory  worked  into  the  vail  and  roof,  whilst  the 
worshippers  in  the  court  saw  the  same  colours  intermingled  in  the  door-curtain. 
May  not  this  be  intended  to  teach  us,  that  every  worshipper  of  God  recognizes  the 
beauty  and  perfection  of  Christ,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  as  his  eye  rests  upon  the 
door-curtain.  But  the  nearer  we  approach  to  God  as  His  priests,  the  more  intimate 
our  fellowship  with  Him  in  heavenly  places,  the  more  shall  we  discern  the  glories 
of  Jesus,  and  realize  rlrs  power,  majesty,  and  strength.  He  will  be  the  one  object 
that  fills  our  soul,  and  under  the  shadow  of  His  wings  shall  we  abide.  (H.  W. 
Soltau.) 


CHAPTER  XX Vn. 


Vebs.  1-8.  An  altar  of  ahittlm  wood. — The  altar  of  burnt-offering  : — T.  The 
altar  of  burnt-offering  was  made  partly  of  wood,  and  partly  of  brass.  The  wood 
was  incorruptible ;  and  was  therefore  a  lively  type  of  the  incorruptible  humanity  of 
Jesus.  II.  The  altar  of  burnt-offering,  was  not  a  golden  altar ;  but  a  brazen  altar. 
Brass  is  a  durable  metal,  and  an  emblem  of  strength.  Christ  was  equal  to  His 
mighty  work.  "  I  have  laid  help  upon  one  that  is  mighty."  He  is  "  mighty  to 
save,"  and  strong  to  plead  the  cause  of  His  people.  III.  The  altar  was  foursquare. 
There  were  firmness,  stability  and  strength.  The  purposes  of  Divine  love  cannot 
be  overturned.  The  atonement  Christ  has  made  is  perfect  and  complete.  Our 
altar  presents  a  bold  front  to  the  enemy.  It  is  a  solid  mass  of  strength.  IV.  It 
was  A  horned  altar.  In  Christ  we  have  sovereignty,  protection,  dignity  and  glory. 
Horns  in  Scripture  are  almost  invariably  emblems  of  power — regal  power.  Christ 
is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  V.  It  was  an  anointed  altar.  The  holy 
anointing  oil  was  poured  upon  it,  and  thus  it  was  sanctified ,  and  became  most  holy. 
Christ  was  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows.  The  fulness  of  the 
Spirit  was  upon  Him.  VI.  The  sanctified  altar  sanctified  all  that  was  laid  upon 
it.  *'  Whatsoever  toucheth  the  altar  shall  be  holy."  The  altar  was  therefore 
greater  than  the  sacrifice.  It  is  the  altar  that  sanctifieth  the  gift.  The  Divine 
nature  of  Christ  sustained  His  human  nature,  and  gave  efficacy  to  His  sacrifice- 
Christ's  glorious  Person  is  the  only  Altar  on  which  we  can  offer  acceptable  sacrifices 
to  God.  VII.  Christ  is  a  Spiritual  Altar,  and  on  it  we  may  offer  spiritual  sacrifices. 
To  this  Altar  we  must  bring  our  prayers.  If  we  pray  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  we 
give  wings  to  our  feeble  breathings.  To  this  Altar  we  must  bring  our  praise.  "By 
Him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,  that  is,  the 
fruit  of  our  lips  giving  thanks  to  His  name."  No  service  of  song  can  be  acceptable 
to  God  apart  from  Jesus  Christ.  VIII.  It  was  a  sacrificial  altar.  On  this  altar 
was  offered  the  daily  sacrifice — a  lamb  every  morning,  and  a  lamb  every  evening. 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God !  "    Christ  is  the  Lamb  of  God's  providing.    IX.  It  waa 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

a  BCRNiNG  ALTAE.  On  the  altar  sacrifices  were  continually  burning.  The  fire  was 
never  to  go  out.  Perfection  was  not  to  be  found  under  the  old  dispensation. 
Christ's  sacrifice  was  one ;  and  it  was  offered  but  once.  "  Christ  was  once  offered 
to  bear  the  sins  of  many."  "  By  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that 
are  sanctified."  At  the  Jewish  altar  the  fire  consumed  the  sacrifices;  but  the  sacri- 
fice Christ  offered  consumed  the  fire.  "  It  is  finished."  X.  The  altar  of  burnt- 
offering  was  God's  altar  (Psa.  xliii.  3,  4).  Jesus  is  the  Christ  of  God.  He  is  God's 
beloved  Son.  In  coming  to  Christ  we  come  to  the  altar  of  God's  providing ;  we 
come  to  the  altar  of  God's  appointment.  XI.  It  is  the  sinner's  altar.  The  altar 
was  erected  on  purpose  for  the  guilty;  and  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners. 
XII.  It  is  A  BLOOD-STAINED  ALT.4.B.  Where  the  blood  is,  it  is  safe  for  the  sinner  to 
go.  Being  sprinkled  with  blood,  it  is  a  protecting  altar.  XIII.  The  altar  of  brass 
was  A  NOOEisniNG  ALTAR.  The  priests  had  a  portion  of  the  sacrifices  for  their  food 
(1  Cor.  ix.  13).  "We  have  an  altar" — the  glorious  Person  of  Christ — "whereof 
they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  Tabernacle."  The  old  dispensation  has 
passed  away.  The  present  dispensation  is  spiritual.  Having  "  the  heavenly  things 
lliemselves,"  we  have  no  need  of  "  the  patterns."  In  Christ  we  have  all  the  "good 
things,"  of  which  the  Tabernacle  and  its  services  were  "shadows."  All  behevers  are 
priests.  All  wait  at  the  altar.  All  live  on  Christ.  XIV.  It  was  a  conspicuods 
ALTAR.  No  one  could  enter  the  court  of  the  Tabernacle  without  seeing  the  brazen 
altar.  Christ  must  be  the  preacher's  theme.  Christ  is  the  only  object  of  saving 
faith,  and  Jesus  only  must  be  the  subject  of  our  ministry.  {R.  E.  Sears.)  The 
size  of  the  altar : — It  is  observable  in  Scripture  that  Moses'  altar  was  but  five  cubits 
in  length,  and  five  in  breadth,  and  three  in  height  (ver.  1) ;  but  Solomon's 
altar  was  much  larger  (2  Chron.  iv.  1).  Now  the  reason  hereof  seems  to  be  this, 
because  Moses  was  in  a  warfare,  in  an  unsettled  condition,  in  the  wilderness,  in 
continual  travel,  full  of  troubles,  and  could  not  conveniently  carry  about  an  altar 
of  that  bigness  ;  but  Solomon  was  on  his  throne  in  a  tranquil  state,  settled  in  quiet 
possession  of  his  kingdom,  and  as  his  name  was,  so  was  he  a  true  Solomon,  that  is, 
peaceable.  Thus  it  ought  to  be  with  all  good  men,  that  when  they  have  more  peace 
and  prosperity  than  others,  their  service  of  God  should  be  proportionable.  Solomon's 
Temple  must  outstrip  Moses'  Tabernacle  in  beauty  and  glory,  and  Solomon's  altar 
must  exceed  the  bigness  of  Moses'  altar.  In  their  peace  and  plenty,  their  holiness 
should  outshine  others  that  are  in  want  and  misery,  when  God  lays  not  so  much 
sorrow  upon  them  as  upon  others,  they  should  lay  the  more  duty  upon  themselves. 
If  God  send  them  fewer  crosses  and  more  comforts,  they  are  to  return  more  service 
and  commit  less  evils.  (J.  Spencer.)  The  altar  of  brass  : — The  altar  was  four- 
square, and  it  had  four  horns.  The  animals  offered  in  sacrifice  were  horned  animals, 
and  were  doubtless  bound  by  their  horns  to  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and  then  slain 
(Psa.  cxviii.  27),  so  that  the  ground  round  about  the  altar  would  be  always  red  and 
wet  with  blood.  Life  is  in  the  blood ;  to  shed  the  blood  is  to  sacrifice  the  life ;  and 
the  first  thing  that  meets  our  eye  as  we  enter  tlie  gate  of  the  court,  and  look  at  the 
earth  on  which  we  are  walking,  is  blood — sacrificed  life.  To  this  altar  the  sinner 
came  leading  his  sin-offering.  Here  he  stood  before  God,  and  his  sins  were  confessed, 
and  transferred  or  imputed  to  the  unblemished  and  innocent  animal,  which  had 
then  to  suffer  and  to  die  for  sin,  but  not  for  its  own  sin.  The  innocent  one  died  for 
■the  guilty  one.  These  sacrifices  were  typical  of  Christ's  sacrifice.  He  suffered,  the 
Just  for  the  unjust:  on  Him  our  sins  were  laid  ;  He  bore  them  in  His  body  on  the 
tree.  He  was  made  sin,  or  a  sin-offering,  for  us,  and  by  His  stripes  we  are  healed. 
His  blood  was  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  now  it  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin 
(1  Pet.  iii.  18  ;  Isa.  liii.  5,  6  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Matt  xxvi.  28;  1  John  i.  7). 
Christ  is  our  Altar,  our  Sacrifice,  and  our  Priest.  He  offered  Himself  for  us.  And 
having  met  most  fully  all  God's  claims,  He  now  meets  and  supplies  all  the  penitent 
beUeving  sinner's  need.  Every  saved  sinner  has  come  to  this  spot — has  seen  Jesns 
as  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  (John  i.  29).  We  have 
seen  Christ  as  the  liedeemer,  and  as  the  Gate  or  Way  to  God,  and  now  we  see  Him 
as  the  Altar,  Priest,  and  Sacrifice.  Here  we  stand  with  our  hand  of  faith  on  His 
head,  and  we  feel  that  as  our  Sin-offering  He  has  suffered  for  our  sin,  and  has  put 
it  away.  Our  life  was  forfeited,  but  Christ  who  loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us, 
has  sacrificed  His  own  life  to  save  us  from  eternal  death  (Eph.  v.  25  ;  John  x.  11, 15). 
{G.  Rodgers.)  Significance  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  : — In  other  cases  an  altar 
was  said  to  be  built,  or  elevated ;  but  the  portable  structure  used  as  such  in  the 
Tabernacle  is  spoken  of  as  made,  or  constructed,  because  it  had  a  frame  of  wood 
overlaid  with  copper.    This  frame  was  probably  filled  with  earth  to  answer  the 


ca^.  xxvnj  EXODUS.  495 

requirements  of  the  general  statute.  There  is  no  intimation  of  this,  indeed,  in  the 
writings  of  Moses  ;  but  neither  does  he  mention  any  other  expedient  for  holding  the 
fire  in  place.  Copper  as  dug  out  of  the  ground,  similar  to  it  in  colour,  and  inferior 
to  that  metal  which  among  metals  represented  celestial  glory,  was  appropriately 
associated  with  earth  in  an  altar  belonging  to  a  permanent  and  yet  portable  institu- 
tion. By  the  affinity  of  the  copper  with  the  earth,  this  frame  of  an  altar,  which 
could  be  carried  from  place  to  place,  fulfilled  the  same  end  in  the  expression  of 
thought,  as  an  altar  of  earth.  The  wood  being,  in  the  first  place,  designed  for  a 
frame  on  which  the  copper  might  be  fastened  so  as  to  give  sufficient  size  and  strength 
without  too  great  weight,  was  of  acacia  for  the  same  reason  which  required  this 
particular  species  of  timber  in  the  planks  of  the  house,  and  the  pillars  of  the  court. 
The  Tabernacle  being  a  place  of  life,  acacia  wood,  on  account  of  its  superiority  to 
decay,  was  sought  for  every  purpose  which  was  to  be  answered  with  wood,  whether 
in  the  edifice  or  its  furniture.  Not  only  the  frame,  or  wall  of  the  altar,  was  of 
acacia  covered  with  copper,  but  also  the  horns  ;  and  this  fact  may  help  to  determine 
the  significance  of  these  projections.  The  horn  is,  in  cornute  animals,  the  instru- 
ment of  power,  and  thence  becomes  an  emblem  of  strength,  and  as  such  is  congruous 
with  all  the  other  elements  combined  in  the  altar  as  a  symbol.  It  has,  accordingly, 
been  commonly  understood  that  the  horns  of  the  altar  represented  the  power  of  its 
ministrations.  But  recently  it  has  been  suggested  that  among  the  metaphorical 
significations  of  the  horn,  height  was  no  less  appropriate  than  strength  as  an  attri- 
bute of  an  altar.  The  horn  is  the  highest  part  of  the  animal,  carried  aloft  as  a 
badge  of  power  and  the  honour  consequent  on  power,  and  therefore  used  as  a  sign 
of  elevation.  To  lift  up  the  horn  is  to  exalt,  either  in  the  physical  or  in  a  figurative 
sense.  The  horns  of  an  altar  may  be  intended,  therefore,  to  symbolize  still  more 
emphatically  the  elevation  of  the  earth  on  which  the  sacrifice  is  offered  toward 
heaven,  the  residence  of  the  Being  to  whom  it  is  presented.  The  copper  with  which 
the  horns  were  overlaid  seems  to  countenance  this  interpretation.  May  not  both 
shades  of  meaning  be  comprehended  in  one  and  the  same  emblem  ?  The  horns 
elevating  the  place  of  sacrifice  nearer  to  heaven,  the  efficacy  of  the  altar  was 
especially  conspicuous  in  these  symbols  of  elevation.  (E.  E.  Atwater.)  The 
brazen  altar  .-—This  altar  of  burnt-sacrifice,  with  the  ofierings  presented  upon  it, 
stands  before  us  as  a  type  of  Christ  and  His  cross.  And  the  materials  of  which 
the  altar  was  composed  point  strikingly  to  His  twofold  nature.  His  humanity,  if 
found  alone,  would  have  been  consumed  by  the  fire  of  Divine  justice,  which  blazed 
forth  against  Him  when  He  stood  as  our  siibstitute  and  bore  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree.  And  then,  on  the  other  hand,  His  Divinity,  if  found  alone,  like 
the  altar,  if  all  of  brass,  would  have  been  too  oppressive  for  us.  It  would  have 
made  us  afraid  by  its  excellency,  and  would  have  overwhelmed  us  by  its  majesty. 
But  blended  with  the  humanity,  and  tempered  and  softened  by  its  transmission 
through  the  vail  of  flesh,  it  meets  our  necessities  in  every  respect,  and  furnishes  us 
with  just  the  help  and  comfort  that  we  need.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Lessons  : — L 
Look  now  at  the  position  which  God  assigned  to  the  altar  of  sacrifice  in  the  Jewish 
Tabernacle,  that  heaven-sketched  symbol  of  the  Church.  Behold  one  of  the  marks 
of  a  true  Church.  It  will  give  great  prominence  to  the  altar,  the  cross  of  Christ,  or 
the  doctrine  of  His  atoning  sacrifice.  II.  The  relation  which  it  bore  to  every 
OTHER  PART  OF  Ti/2  Tabernacle.  It  was  the  most  important  part  of  the  whole 
Tabernacle.  Liie  the  root  to  the  tree,  like  the  foundation  to  the  building,  like  the 
fountain  to  the  stream,  like  the  mainspring  to  the  watch,  like  the  heart  to  the  body, 
it  was  that,  on  which  every  other  part  of  the  sacred  structure  depended,  and  from 
which  it  derived  all  its  value.  This  altar  represents  the  cross  of  Christ,  As  we 
look  at  it  from  tbis  point  cf  view,  we  seem  to  see  written  on  it  as  with  a  sunbeam, 
the  great  practical  truth,  that  the  way  to  heaven — the  only  way  by  which  any  of  our 
ruined  race  can  enter  there — lies  over  Calvary.  There  is  no  pardon,  no  renewal,  no 
acceptance,  no  righteousness,  no  peace,  no  grace,  no  blessing,  no  salvation  to  any  of 
Adam's  children,  but  through  the  sacrifice  once  offered  upon  the  cross.  And  this  is 
true  not  of  our  persons  only,  but  of  our  services  also.  "Accepted  in  the  beloved," 
is  the  great  underlying  doctrine  of  the  gospel.  Our  prayers,  our  praises,  our  sighs, 
our  tears,  our  repentance,  our  faith,  our  words,  our  actions,  our  labours,  our  suffer- 
ings, our  vows,  our  almg-givings,  our  sermons,  our  sacraments— all  things  that  may 
be  crowded  into  the  entire  cu'cle  of  our  services — have  worth,  or  merit,  not  in  them- 
selves, bat  only  as  they  stand  connected  with  the  sacrifice  which  Jesus  offered  on  the 
cross,  and  are  sprinkled  with  His  atoning  blood,  in  all  its  prevailing  efficacy.  III. 
"Our  third  lesson  from  this  altar  is  suggested  by  the  continoiiy  of  the  offerings  pre. 


496  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

sented  upon  it.  There  was  to  be  no  cessation,  no  suspension,  or  interruption  of  the 
service  here  rendered.  The  sacrifiee  on  the  Jewish  altar  was  an  imperfect  sacrifice, 
and  hence  the  necessity  for  its  repetition.  They  were  "  sacrifices,"  as  St.  Paul  says, 
"  offered  year  by  year  continually,  which  could  never  make  the  comers  thereunto 
perfect."  Our  sacrifice,  offered  upon  the  cross,  is  a  perfect  sacrifice,  and  therefore 
it  needs  no  repetition.  It  was  offered  "once  for  all";  and  by  this  one  offering, 
Jesus,  our  great  High  Priest,  "  perfects  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified  "  ;  i.e.,  all 
His  believing  people.  The  offermg  was  once  made,  but  the  merit-),  the  influence, 
the  efficacy  of  the  offering,  abide  continually.  And  because  it  thus  abides,  there 
needs  no  repetition  of  it.  IV.  Our  fourth  lesson  is  taught  us,  when  we  consider  the 
EFFICACY  OF  THE  oFFEUiNGS  presented  on  the  brazen  altar.  You  may  say,  indeed, 
that  we  have  just  spoken  of  their  imperfection,  and  that  is  true.  They  were  not 
intended  to  do  for  the  Jews  what  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  does  for  us.  They  were 
only  types,  or  shadows  of  that  sacrifice.  Of  course  they  could  only  have  a  typical, 
or  shadowy  efficacy.  This,  however,  they  had  in  perfection.  And  here  the  brazen 
altar  points  significantly  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  It  speaks  to  us,  in  eloquent 
tones,  of  the  thorough  efficacy,  the  absolute  perfection  of  the  sacrifice  He 
offered.  V.  The  fifth  and  last  lesson  taught  us  by  this  altar  is  seen,  when  we 
observe  the  extent  of  its  benefits.  It  was  open  to  all.  (Ibid.)  The 
brazen  altar  of  burnt-offiring : — In  this  we  have  a  significant  type  of  our  Lord, 
regarded  more  particularly  in  His  Divine  nature.  This  view  "is  supported  by  our 
Lord  Himself,  when  He  says  that  the  altar  is  greater  than  the  sacrifice  (Matt, 
xxiil  19).  Both  sacrifice  and  altar  were  but  shadows,  and  derived  their  importance 
wholly  from  the  reality  to  which  they  referred.  But  as  a  shadow  of  Christ's 
sacrifice,  the  importance  of  the  legal  victims  was  immeasurable  ;  and  yet  our  Lord 
says  the  greatness  to  which  the  altar  pointed  transcends  it.  Then  lies  not  the 
thought  very  near,  that  the  altar  pointed  to  His  Divinity  ?  And  still  further  is  this 
conclusion  justifiable  by  the  additional  saying  of  our  Lord,  that  the  altar  sanctifies 
the  sacrifice  ;  for  was  it  not  the  union  of  His  Divine  with  His  human  nature  which 
imparted  to  the  latter  its  majesty  inconceivable,  and  to  His  sacrifice  its  miraculous 
and  eternal  efficacy  ?  "  A  remarkable  confirmation  of  this  view  is  found  in  the 
fact  that  the  altar,  during  removal,  was  covered  with  a  purple  cloth,  which  colour 
symbolized  the  hypostatic  union.  The  construction  of  the  altar  pointed  another 
lesson.  The  outer  covering  of  brass  concealed  and  protected  an  interior  of  wood. 
In  fact,  the  altar  was  said  to  be  made  of  wood.  Now  in  Hebrew,  wood  and  tree  are 
synonymous,  and  trees  are  frequently  spoken  of  in  the  Bible  as  emblematic  of  God's 
saints.  By  the  wood  of  the  altar  was  signified  the  members  of  Christ :  "  It  was  a 
visible  parable  of  the  mistical  union  between  Christ  and  His  people.  As  the  wood 
was  hidden  within  the  altar,  so  in  God's  eye  were  they  hid  in  Him."  And  the 
lesson  thus  taught  by  the  altar  was  this  :  Rom.  viii.  1.  "  The  altar  was  surmounted 
by  four  horns,  the  well-known  emblems  of  power ;  and  these  horns  were  deeply 
marked  with  sacrificial  blood  ;  and  it  fell  from  them  as  it  fell  from  Him  whom  the 
altar  typified  in  the  garden  and  on  the  cross.  These  horns  were,  therefore,  at  once 
symbols  of  might  and  reconciliation,  and  were  outstretched  to  the  four  comers  of 
the  earth,  to  call  men  to  flee  unto  Christ  to  be  saved."  [E.  F.  Willis,  M.A.,  with 
quotations  from  H.  Douglas,  M.A.)  The  altar  of  burnt-ojffering  : — This  altar  was 

the  foundation  of  all  the  Tabernacle  worship.  The  priests  could  not  enter  into  the 
holy  place  except  on  the  ground  of  sacrifice  presented  on  the  brazen  altar.  Nor 
could  the  high  priest  on  the  great  atonement  day  enter  the  holy  of  holies  without 
having  fii-st  offered  not  only  the  ordinary  sacrifice,  but  an  additional  sin-offering  on 
the  altar  in  the  court.  Not  only  was  the  Shekinah  glory  within  the  vail  impossible 
of  access,  but  the  bread  of  the  presence,  the  light  of  the  lamps,  the  privileges  of  the 
altar  of  incense,  were  all  closed  until  a  sacrifice  had  been  offered  upon  the  altar. 
Q  hus  were  the  children  of  Israel  taught,  and  thus  too  are  we  taught,  that  the  first 
thing  for  the  sinner  to  do,  before  he  can  taste  the  heavenly  bread,  before  he  can  see 
the  heavenly  light,  before  he  can  even  pray  with  acceptance,  is  to  avail  himself  of 
the  atonement  which  God  has  provided.  The  altar  was  the  people's  place  of  meet- 
ing with  God.  It  was  free  to  all.  The  call  was  addressed  to  every  child  of  Israel : 
"  Come  into  His  courts  and  bring  an  offering  with  you."  The  atonement  which 
God  provides  is  free  to  all  without  exception,  and  without  distinction.  (J.  M. 
Gibson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-19.    The  court  of  the  Tabernacle. — The  court  of  the  Tahemacle : — I.  This 
court  may  be  ai^  emblem  of  thai  sacbed  enclosube  which  always  sdbbounds  ihs 


CHAP,  sxvii.]  EX03VS.  497 

Church.     "  A  garden  enclosed  is  my  sister,  my  spouse."     God  Himself,  with  all 
His  infinite  perfections  and  attributes,  is  round  about  His  people.     Every  attribute 
of  God  is  a  pillar  in  our  protecting  wall,  power,  sovereignty,  justice,  righteousness, 
truth  and  faithfulness,  appear  in  perfect  harmony  with  love,  benevolence,  mercy, 
tenderness,  compassion  and  goodness.     All  unite  to  uphold  tbe  separating  wall 
between  the  Church  and  the  world.     II.  We  may  look  upon  this  court  as  emblem- 
atical of  THE  LIFE  AND  MINISTRY  OF  Christ.     Only  the  ti'ue  Christian  can  enter 
into  Christ,  bat  a  sinner  may  read  His  life.     As  the  court  led  to  the  Tabernacle,  so 
the  reading  of  the  life  of  Christ  has  often  been  the  means  of  the  soul  believing  in 
Jesus.     In  the  life  of  Christ  we  have  a  perfect  model  for  the  Christian's  imitation. 
Christ  has  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps.     III.  We  may  view 
the  court  of  the  Tabernacle  as  an  emblem  or  the  Holy  Scriptures.     We  cannot 
come  to  God  without  entering  the  court  of  revelation.    He  that  loves  the  Bible  has 
entered  the  outer  court  of  the  Tabernacle.     Eeverence  for  the  Word  of  God  is  a 
good  sign.     IV.  The  court  of  the  Tabernacle  was  a  place  of  worship.     Here  the 
Israelites  came  with  their  various  sacrifices  ;  and  here  God  accepted  them.     If  we 
would  be  accepted  by  God,  we  must  observe  God's  order,  and  come  to  the  place  He 
has  appointed.     We  must  also  come  in  a  right  spirit.     V.  In  the  court  of  the 
Tabernacle  we  have  a  figure  of  the  professing  Church.     1.  Not  all  who  entered 
the  court  entered  the  Tabernacle.   Not  all  who  make  a  profession  of  religion  possess 
it.     The  heart,  as  well  as  the  lip,  must  be  right.     The  court  was  the  way  to  the 
Tabernacle.     There  is  no  evidence  that  a  man  possesses  grace  while  he  neglects  the 
means  of  grace.     If  a  man  has  no  love  to  God's  house,  he  can  have  no  love  to  God. 
If  we  have  no  desire  to  be  numbered  with  God's  people,  there  cannot  be  much 
desire  after  God  Himself.     (R.  E.  Sears.)        Hangings  of  the  court : — It  is  likely 
that  those  hangings  would  he  of  open  work,  and  that  the  people  would  be  able  to 
look  through  this  linen  fence,  and  see  what  was  being  done  inside.     This  would  set 
forth  the  guilelessness  of  Christ's  character.    He  was  no  deceiver ;  there  was  no 
guile  in  His  lips.     He  lived  in  a  very  hollow  age,  when  deceit  was  the  order  of  the 
day;  but  He  was  a  transparent  Man,  an  unselfish  Man,  a  perfect  Man.     At  the  east 
end  was  a  hanging  called  the  gate.     The  basis  of  this  gate  would  be  the  same  as 
the  fine  linen  in  other  parts  of  the  court,  and  the  meshes  would  be  nearly  filled  up 
with  blue,  purple,  and  scarlet  wools.     This  gate  is  Christ,  the  one  gate,  the  one 
only  door  to  God  and  to  happiness  in  this  life,  or  in  the  life  which  is  to  come. 
Those  white  hangings  were  suspended  from  upright  pillars,  standing  in  blocks  of 
brass.     The  pillars  were  strong  enough  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  hangings,  and 
they  were  high  enough  to  keep  the  fine  linen  from  touching  the  ground,  or  con- 
tracting defilement  in  any  part.     So  our  Lord  Jesus  was  sustained  in  His  holy 
conduct  in  every  part  of  His  hfe  by  those  upright  principles  which  He  had  in  Hia 
holy  nature.     (G.  Rodgers.)      Fine  linen: — The  fine  linen  was  a  thing  of  the  earth. 
It  had  grown  from  seed  which  had  been  cast  into  the  ground,  and  had  died  there, 
after  which  life  came  up  out  of  death ;  there  was  death  and  resurrection.     After 
this  it  went  through  many  processes  before  it  was  seen  about  the  dwelling-place  of 
God.     So  the  Christian  has  to  learn  death  and  resurrection.     We  have  to  die,  and 
to  be  quickened  to  life,  and  we  have  to  pass  through  some  painful  processes.    Satan 
himself  is  sometimes  permitted  to  sift  us  and  to  twist  us,  and  he  handles  the  soul 
roughly  ;  but  it  is  all  needed  to  make  us  the  fine-twined  linen  such  as  God  would 
have  us  be.     All  things  do  indeed  work  together  for  our  good,  if  they  help  to 
conform  us  to  the  image  of  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  28,  29).     {Ibid.)         The  gate  of  the 
court: — The  word  "hanging"  is  in  the  Hebrew  exclusively  used  for  the  vail,  the 
door  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  the  gate  of  the  court ;  and  serves,  therefore,  to  connect 
together  these  three  in  type.     Each  of  ihi-se  hangings  covered  or  hid  the  interior 
from  the  eyes  of  one  approaching  from  the  outside.    Each  had  the  character  of  a 
door.     All  three  were  made  of  the  same  materials  arranged  in  precisely  the  same 
order  ;  and  all  three  were  of  the  same  dimensions  as  regards  their  area.     The  same 
truth  seems,  therefore,  to  be  embodied  in  each  of  these  typical  curtains.     The  same 
Jesus,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  is  pourtrayed  in  each.     There  could  be  no  access 
to  God  of  any  kind,  whether  of  comparatively  distant  worship  or  of  closest  intimacy, 
but  through  the  one  door,  the  Lord  Jesus  (John  x.  7).     Cain  was  the  first  who  tried 
another  path  ;  and  instead  of  being  able  to  draw  near,  his  very  attempt  ended  in 
his  going  out  from  the  presence  of  God  into  the  land  of  banishment.     Thousands 
follow  in  his  footsteps,  and  think  to  worship  and  to  offer  without  passing  through 
*he  door.     {H.  W.  Soltau.)        The  hanging  of  fine  linen : — The  court  itself,  with  tbe 
exoeDtion  of  the  gate,  was  closed  by  a  hanging  of  fine-twined  linen,  five  cubits  high. 

32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

Fine  linen  seems  to  be  used  in  Scripture  as  a  type  of  righteousness — a  righteousness 
equal  to  all  the  demands  of  God — enabling  him  who  possesses  it  to  stand  in  God's 
glory ;  in  contrast  with  sin,  by  reason  of  which,  all  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God. 
The  Israelite,  who  entered  through  the  gate  of  the  court,  would  be  encompassed, 
shut  in,  and  protected  by  this  hanging  of  fine-twined  linen.  Though  in  a  wilderness, 
he  stood  on  holy  ground ;  and  the  fine  Unen  by  which  he  was  surrounded  shut  out 
from  his  eye  the  dreary  barren  prospect,  through  which  he  was  wending  his  way. 
The  lovely  Tabernacle  of  God  stood  partially  revealed  to  his  gaze.  The  courts  of 
the  Lord's  house,  overshadowed  by  the  cloud  of  glory,  were  before  him.  The  altar, 
with  its  lamb  for  the  burnt-offering,  sent  up  an  odour  of  a  sweet  savour  on  his 
behalf.  The  laver,  filled  with  water,  told  him  of  a  fountain  filled  with  Ufe  and 
purity,  which  would  cleanse  away  even  the  ordinary  defilement  contracted  whilst 
passing  through  a  wilderness  of  death.  He  had  entered  through  the  gate  of  the 
court,  the  appointed  doorway  ;  within,  every  object  proclaimed  life,  peace,  righteous- 
ness, acceptance,  and  nearness  to  God.  Moreover,  no  deadly  foe  could  enter  these 
precincts.  Thus  the  court  presented  a  place  of  security,  of  holiness,  and  of  inter- 
course with  God .  Jerusalem  on  earth  will  hereafter  afford  some  such  place  of 
refuge  for  the  nations  of  the  earth.  {Ibid.)  The  pins  : — By  means  of  these  pins 
of  brass,  the  Tabernacle  and  the  court  were  securely  fastened  to  the  desert  ground, 
so  that  no  storm  or  flood  of  waters  could  sweep  away  this  structure,  although  many 
of  the  materials  were  such  as  to  be  easily  affected  by  the  wind  or  rain.  May  we  not 
be  reminded  by  this  type,  of  the  stedfast  pui-pose  of  Christ,  to  pursue  the  path 
marked  out  for  Him  by  the  counsels  of  God,  even  though  that  path  ended  in  the 
storm  of  judgment  and  in  the  billows  of  wrath.  What  a  wondrous  object  of  con- 
templation is  the  blessed  Lord,  as  revealed  to  us  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth.  Weak, 
yet  immovably  firm.  Himself  the  mighty  God,  yet  dependent  for  everything  on 
God  His  Father.  Oh  !  tbe  wondrous  power  of  that  weakness.  Oh !  the  marvellous 
victory  of  that  death.  Oh  !  the  eternal  stability  of  Him  laid  low  in  the  depths  of 
the  grave.     (Hid.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  Pure  oil  olive  beaten  for  the  light. — Symbolic  references  :—I.  The 
puRin  OF  THE  LIGHT  (Psa.  xxvi.  9).  n.  The  perfection  of  the  light,  in.  The 
PERPETUITY  OF  THE  LIGHT.  Christ  cau  nevcr  be  Superseded.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Oil 
for  the  light : — 1.  The  source  whence  the  oil  was  obtained — the  "  olive."  Thus  is 
grace,  free  and  full,  obtained  from  Christ,  the  "  Plant  of  renown."  2.  The  qualifi- 
cation it  was  to  possess — it  was  to  be  "  pure."  All  the  grace  which  comes  from 
Christ  is  pure  and  unalloyed.  3.  The  instruments  of  its  dispensation — "  the 
children  of  Israel."  The  children  of  God  are  now  the  recipients  and  dispensers  of 
Christ's  grace.  4.  The  uses  to  which  it  was  put— it  caused  "  the  lamp  to  burn 
always."  Grace  causes  the  life  of  each  Christian  to  shine  with  a  brighter  glow. 
(S.  Thomas.)  Lamps  burning  always: — It  is  difficult  to  understand  from  the 
various  passages  bearing  on  the  subject,  whether  the  lamps  burned  both  day  and 
night,  or  only  during  the  night — some  passages  apparently  favouring  the  one  view, 
and  some  the  other ;  thus,  "  To  cause  the  lamp  to  burn  always "  (ver.  20) ; 
and,  "  Command  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  bring  unto  thee  pure  olive  oil, 
beaten  for  the  light,  to  cause  the  lamps  to  burn  continually  "  (Lev.  xxiv.  2).  These 
passages  seem  to  teach  that  the  lamps  burned  both  day  and  night.  If  thty  do  not 
teach  that,  the  meaning  must  be  that  "  continual"  and  "  always  "  signify  at  regular 
intervals,  as  in  the  case  of  some  ordinances  and  offerings  which  are  called  perpetual, 
though  occurring  only  at  intervals.  The  other  view,  that  they  burned  only  during 
the  night,  seems  to  be  supported  by,  "Aaron  and  bis  sons  shall  order  it  from 
evening  to  morning  "  (ver.  2]) ;  "  And  Aaron  shall  burn  thereon  (the  golden  altar) 
sweet  incense  every  morning,  when  he  dresseth  the  lamps"  (chap.  xxx.  7,  8). 
From  these  texts  it  would  appear  that  the  lamps  burned  only  during  the  night.  II 
they  were  not  intended  to  teach  that,  the  meaning  must  be  that  the  lamps  were 
dressed  in  the  morning,  probably  one  after  another,  not  necessitating  more  than 
one  being  extinguished  at  a  time,  and  after  being  dressed  and  lighted,  burned 
during  tbe  day,  the  lamps  receiving  such  further  attention  in  the  evening  as 
admitted  of  their  burning  till  the  morning.  As  there  were  no  windows  in  the 
Tabernacle,  and  the  priests  had  duties  to  perform  during  the  day  in  the  holy  place, 
it  is  almost  certain  that  the  lamps  burned  always.  {W.  Broivn.)  Light 
symbolism : — As  the  first  apartment  in  the  Tabernacle  was  illuminated  by  the 
sevenfold  light  of  the  candlestick,  and  as  the  Church,  composed  of  aU  genuine 
believers  on  earth  in  every  age,  is  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  will  the 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  EXODUS.  499 

■ • ' • — 

Church  triumphant  in  heaven,  that  great  temple  not  made  with  hands,  be  a  place 
of  glorious  light ;  and  the  light  shall  never  go  out,  it  will  burn  always ;  so  that 
there  shall  be  no  night  there,  nor  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars  shall  shine  in  that 
happy  place,  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.  {Ibid.) 
Burning  tcithpure  oil: — It  is  related  in  the  biography  of  one  who  lived  to  become 
a  devoted  Christian  man,  that  while  he  was  yet  a  little  boy,  the  passage  read  from 
the  Bible  in  the  family  on  a  certain  occasion  was  ver.  20,  describing  the  oil  used  in 
the  vessels  of  the  Tabernacle.  The  meaning  and  application  of  the  verse  was 
explained  by  other  passages  from  the  New  Testament.  This  boy  was  then  but  five 
years  old,  and  it  was  not  supposed  that  he  could  understand  or  feel  the  slightest 
interest  in  a  subject  considered  far  beyond  his  age.  The  older  children  left  the 
room  after  family  worship,  but  the  little  boy  was  detained,  as  usual,  to  be  taught 
some  simple  verses  of  the  Bible  by  his  mother,  and  to  pray  with  her.  He  kneeled 
down  at  length  to  pray,  and  in  the  midst  of  his  prayer  he  paused,  and  exclaimed, 
earnestly,  "  0  my  God,  make  me  to  burn  this  day  with  pure  oil !  "  The  morning 
lesson  had  not  been  lost  upon  him ;  he  had  understood  its  import.  "  Most 
evidently,"  says  his  biographer,  "  was  this  prayer  heard  and  answered  throughout 
the  day  of  his  life."  How  appropriate  is  this  petition  for  the  morning  oft'ering  of 
every  Christian,  "  Make  me  to  burn  this  day  with  pure  oil "  !  If  He  who  hath  all 
hearts  in  His  keeping  vouchsafe  a  gracious  answer  to  that  prayer,  the  example  of 
the  disciple  must  be  one  that  will  glorify  the  name  of  Jesus.  Such  a  man  will 
walk  with  God.  No  unhallowed  fires  will  be  lighted  in  his  bosom.  Neither 
revenge  nor  hate  can  burn  there.  The  peace  and  joy  of  the  believer  will  fill  his 
soul. 


CHAPTEK  XXVIII. 


Vee.  1.  The  priest's  office. — Interpretation  of  the  priesthood: — The  Hebrew 
priesthood  was  instituted  because  the  people  were  not  qualified  to  draw  near  to  God 
in  person.  By  virtue  of  their  election,  the  people  of  Jehovah  were  entitled  to  dwell 
in  His  habitation,  but  their  consciousness  of  sin  made  them  afraid  of  Him:  there- 
fore, in  condescension  to  their  inability  to  understand  the  greatness  of  His  love, 
He  provided  a  class  of  persons  who,  as  the  representatives  of  His  elect,  might  in 
their  stead  enter  the  Tabernacle.  To  draw  near  to  God,  and  to  be  a  priest,  are 
equivalent  expressions.  Aaron  drew  near  in  behalf  of  those  who  were  elected  to 
have  spiritual  communion  with  God,  but  were  not  yet  delivered  from  bondage  to 
fear ;  and  his  admission  within  the  habitation  signified  that  they  were  entitled  to 
a  corresponding  access  in  spirit,  that  they  were  called  a  kingdom  of  priests  for  the 
reason  that  they  might  thus  draw  near  to  God  in  spiritual  fellowship.  By  his 
office  he  was  qualified  to  do  outwardly  and  symbolically  what  all  might  do  in  spirit 
and  in  truth.  But,  before  Aaron  could  enter  the  holy  habitation  in  behalf  of  the 
people,  he  must  ofiiciate  at  the  altar  of  sacrifice,  and  expiate  sin ;  for  his  con- 
stituents were  sinful,  and  the  representation  of  their  approach  to  God  as  members 
of  His  household  mast  be  preceded  by  signs  that  their  sin  was  taken  away :  other- 
wise it  might  be  inferred  that  Jehovah  was  indiiierent  whether  His  people  were  holy 
or  unholy.  The  Hebrew  priesthood  therefore  symbolized  in  general,  the  expiation 
of  sin,  and  the  admission  to  filial  intercourse  with  God  effected  thereby.  (E.  E. 
Atwater.)  The  priests  : — I.  Qualifications.  Every  applicant  for  the  priesthood 
had  to  prove  his  descent  from  Aaron,  and  had  to  be  free  from  bodily  defect  or 
blemish  (see  Lev.  xxi.).  This  restriction  pointei  to  the  dignity  and  holy  character 
of  the  position  occupied  by  a  priest,  and  to  the  inward  purity  requisite  for  the 
proper  discharge  of  his  sacred  duties.  II.  Duties.  The  chief  duty  of  the  priests 
was  to  offer  or  present  offerings  and  sacrifices  to  God.  They  had  sometimes  to  kill 
the  victims  (Lev.  xvi.)  and  always  to  sprinkle  and  pour  out  their  blood,  and  also  to 
burn  their  carcases,  or  part  of  them,  on  the  altar.  They  had  the  charge  of  the 
altar  and  the  sanctuary ;  they  had  to  see  that  the  fire  was  ever  burning  on  the 
altar ;  they  made  loaves  of  shewbread,  trimmed  and  lighted  the  lamps  of  the  golden 
candlestick,  and  evening  and  morning  burned  incense  on  the  golden  altar,  and,  in 
general,  conducted  the  sacred  services  of  the  Tabernacle  worship.  Their  duties 
were  not,  however,  confined  to  the  performance  of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  that 


500  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxyhi. 

—4 — 

worship ;  for  the  law  being  committed  to  their  custody,  they,  with  the  Levites, 
were  intiiisted  with  the  rehgious  instruction  of  the  nation  (Deut.  xxxiii.  10) ;  and 
the  people  were  exhorted  to  seek  knowledge  at  the  priests'  lips.  III.  Maintenance. 
The  priests  were  not  permitted  to  follow  any  secular  calling.  Their  time  was 
entirely  devoted  to  their  sacred  work;  hence  it  was  necessaiy  and  just  that  their 
maintenance  should  be  provided  for  at  the  expense  of  those  for  whose  spiritual  and 
temporal  welfare  they  ministered.  The  remuneration  consisted  principally  of  the 
redemption  money  paid  for  the  first-born  Israelites,  the  first-fruits  of  the  field, 
the  fruit  of  trees  in  the  fourth  year,  parts  of  various  of  the  offerings,  and  a 
tenth  of  the  tithes  which  fell  to  the  Levites.  They  were  not  able,  of  course,  to 
reap  all  thi-se  dues  till  they  reached  the  promised  land.  (TF.  Brorcii.)  The  priest- 
hood : — Previous  to  this  time,  there  was  probably  no  separate  order  of  priesthood 
in  the  Church  of  God ;  but  every  father  was  the  priest  of  his  family,  as  in  killing 
the  lamb  of  the  passover  and  sprinkling  the  blood,  or  each  worshipper  had  been  at 
liberty  to  transact  the  business  of  sacrifice  as  he  pleased.  So  far,  in  the  history  of 
Israel  as  redeemed  from  Egypt,  Moses  seems  to  have  officiated  occasionally  as 
priest,  as  in  the  case  of  offering  the  sacrifice  and  sprinkhng  the  blood  of  the 
covenant ;  or  he  selected  young  men  as  temporary  priests.  But  the  erection  of  a 
special  place  of  worship,  most  notably  carried  with  it  the  setting  up  an  order  of 
priesthood,  with  ritual  of  worship.  The  very  name  "  cohen,"  which  we  translate 
"  priest,"  is  supposed  to  denote  the  idea  of  a  familiar  friend  of  God.  The  distinc- 
tive function  of  the  office  was  to  receive  and  present  to  God,  as  His  nearest  friend 
and  associate,  that  which  belonged  to  Him.  The  three  great  elements  entering  into 
the  idea  of  their  position  and  office  were :  1.  That  they  are  chosen  by  Jehovah 
Himself  to  be  His.  2.  That  they  are  officially  holy  in  a  pre-eminent  sense.  3. 
That  they  have,  by  reason  of  their  election  and  holiness,  the  privilege  of  drawing 
near  to  God,  as  holding  a  position  intermediate  between  man  and  God,  and  there- 
fore of  mediators.     (5.  Rohimon,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Holy  garments  for  Aaron. — The  vestments  of  our  High  Priest : — The 
vestments  appointed  by  God  for  the  high  priest  when  he  went  into  the  holy  place 
were,  besides  those  which  he  wore  in  common  with  the  other  priests,  four :  the 
ephod,  with  its  "curious  girdle";  the  breastplate;  the  robe  of  the  ephod ;  and 
the  mitre.  1.  And  speaking  of  these  garments  generally,  you  will  notice  that  it 
was  God's  especial  command  that  they  should  all  be  made  of  linen,  which,  being  a 
material  of  a  very  simple  and  natural  kind,  has  always  been  understood  by  the 
Church  to  be  typical  of  that  human  nature  which  Christ  wears  still  in  His  glorified 
state,  and  in  which,  as  man,  we  are  distinctly  to  understand  that  He  now  executes, 
as  our  Representative,  all  the  services  of  His  exalted  Priesthood.  2.  And,  further, 
it  is  to  be  observed  generally,  that  all  the  garments  were  carefully  fastened  together 
so  as  to  be  one.  The  girdle  binding  the  ephod,  and  the  ephod  the  robe,  and  the 
breastplate  carefully  joined  to  the  ephod  by  chains  of  gold  ;  signifying,  again,  the 
complete  unity  which  there  is  in  all  Christ's  work  for  His  people,  so  that  it  cannot 
be  divided ;  for  if  we  have  Him  in  one  of  His  offices  so,  necessarily,  we  hold  Him 
in  all.  A  Ijlessed  truth  !  there  is  no  such  thing  as  anything  partial  in  the  work  of 
Jesus ;  no  partial  pardon ;  no  partial  peace !  If  you  have  one  promise,  you  have 
every  promise  !  3.  And  yet,  once  more,  generally,  you  will  see  that  (unlike  the 
description  of  our  Saviour's  garments  in  the  59th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and  unlike  that 
which  is  provided  for  the  believer  in  the  6th  chapter  of  Ephesians)  aU  these  are 
robes,  not  of  war,  but  of  peace.  Indicating  that  the  warfare  is  now  accomplished, 
and  that  our  Saviour,  having  triumphed  over  His  enemies  and  ours,  is  now  set 
down  in  the  calm  and  quiet  of  His  holy,  peaceful  functions.  A  thought  which 
should  be  one  of  unselfish  joy  to  the  Christian.  4.  The  robe  of  ephod  repre- 
sents the  perfect  robe  of  the  obedience  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  He  wore  as 
man,  and  which  He  will  always  present  to  the  Father  for  our  sakes.  Its  seamless 
fabric  denotes  the  perfectness  and  the  unity  of  the  righteousness  which  He  has 
wrought.  5.  The  ephod  itself  was  a  closer  vestment — long  behind,  and  short  in 
front — which  was  worn  over  the  robe,  and  fastened  by  clasps,  or  "  ouches,"  over 
the  shoulders  ;  it  was  also  "  for  beauty  and  for  glory" — "of  gold,  of  blue,  and  of 
purple,  of  scarlet,  and  fine-twined  linen,  with  cunmng  work,"  costly  and  magnificent. 
Upon  each  shoulder,  in  the  "  ouches,"  was  placed  an  onyx  stone,  and  on  either  onyx 
stone  were  engraven  the  names  of  six  of  the  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel,  placed 
according  to  their  seniority.  Concerning  this  engraving,  God  was  very  express : 
*'  With  the  work  of  an  engraver  in  stone,  like  the  engravings  of  a  signet,"  that  is, 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  EXODUS.  501 

. ■ — . — _ — — — — . ■ — — — — — — 4 — 

very  accurately,  very  deeply,  very  beautifully,  "  shalt  thou  engrave  the  two 
stones  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel :  thou  shalt  make  them  to  be  set  in 
ouches  of  gold.  And  thou  shalt  put  the  two  stones  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  ephod 
for  stones  of  memorial  unto  the  children  of  Israel :  and  Aaron  shall  bear  their 
names  before  the  Lord  upon  his  two  shoulders  for  a  memorial."  And,  then,  the 
ephod  was  girt  about  with  a  girdle  of  the  same  kind.  Here,  then,  we  have  our 
great  High  Priest  continually  standing  in  heaven,  and  always  of  necessity  bearing, 
as  part  of  His  own  glory,  the  names  of  all  His  people  in  holy  remembrance  before 
God.  He  both  remembers  us,  and  causes  us  to  be  remembered.  We  are  held  in 
perpetual  remembrance.  The  weakest  and  the  strongest^tbe  greatest  saint  with 
the  unworthiest  and  guiltiest  sinner — we  are  all  remembered :  everything  which 
goes  to  make  our  name  is  there  :  the  smallest  work,  the  secret  sorrow  that  the 
world  knows  nothing  of  :  it  is  all  in  the  memorial  :  our  prayers,  and  tears,  and 
sighs — they  are  all  gone  there  !  they  are  all  rivetted  there !  There  they  are  1 
They  are  knit  into  the  dignity  of  Jesus,  into  the  glory  and  the  excellency  of  Jesus  !  6. 
The  breastplate  teaches  that  Christ  not  only  bears  His  people  on  His  shoulders  for 
strength,  but  lays  them  separately  on  His  heart  for  love.  He  identities  His  interest 
with  ours.  It  becomes  a  dear  and  fond  thing  to  Him  to  have  us  upon  His  breast, 
that  He  may  save  us  and  magnify  us  for  ever !  We  live  always  in  His  love,  and 
God  sees  us  there  ;  in  that  love,  loves  us — unloveable  though  we  be— for  the  love 
He  has  to  us.  And,  living  on  His  heart,  each  one  in  his  own  proj^er  place  and  order, 
we  hold  in  Him  safe  and  privileged  intercourse.  7.  The  high  priest  wore  a  mitre 
of  linen,  with  this  inscription,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  Now  observe  the  comfort 
of  this  thought.  Here  we  all  are  assembled,  in  our  holy  devotions  before  the  mercy' 
seat  of  God,  but  every  prayer  we  have  put  up  this  day  is  stained,  and  every  ser- 
vice is  unclean  before  Him  "  who  chargeth  His  angels  with  folly  "  !  Presently, 
your  petitions  will  go  up  in  your  own  bedroom  ;  and  the  very  supplication,  in  which 
you  ask  for  pardon,  only  goes  to  increase  the  amount  of  the  guilt  that  has  to  be  par- 
doned. It  is  all  unclean  !  The  brand  of  sin,  the  degradation  of  sin,  is  everywhere  ! 
But  He,  in  His  very  character  and  being,  as  our  Representative,  is  standing  before 
God ;  and  high  emblazoned  upon  His  front  is  His  own  proper  righteous  title, 
"  Holiness  to  the  Lord  " — not  for  Himself,  He  needs  it  not,  but  for  us  !  He 
"  bears  the  iniquity  of  our  holy  things  " — what  a  thought  !  even  as  if  we  were  the 
holy,  we  poor  worms — as  if  we  were  the  holy — we  stand  before  God  :  "  Holiness 
to  the  Lord."  A  poor  sinner,  incapable  of  one  pure  thought,  lifts  himself  up  in 
Christ,  and  looks  in  the  face  of  God,  and  stands  there,  in  his  High  Priest — "  Holi- 
ness to  the  Lord  " ; — and  God  recognizes  His  own  eternal  counsel,  and  acknowledges 
the  unworthiest  services  of  the  poorest  sinner  to  be — "  Holiness  to  the  Lord." 
(J.  Vaughan,  3I.A.)  The  priestly  garments : — They  signified — 1.  The  function  to 
be  glorious  and  excellent.  2.  The  fitness  of  their  persons  to  that  office.  3.  The 
glory  of  the  true  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  of  whom  Aaron  was  but  a  figure.  For 
all  the  glistering  show  of  these  priestly  garments  set  forth  the  more  angelical 
brightness  of  all  the  virtues  which  should  shine  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  priestly 
garments  appointed  by  God  were  ten  in  number ;  of  which  four  belonged  to  the 
inferior  priests  (vers.  40,  42).  1.  A  linen  garment.  Which  signified  the  white 
garment  of  Christ's  righteousness  and  innocency ;  which  they  were  to  appear  in 
before  the  Lord,  if  they  would  be  acceptable  in  their  persons  and  duties.  Noting  to 
us  by  the  way,  that  every  godly  minister  wears  a  white  linen  garment,  not  woven  and 
made  by  men,  but  by  God  ;  not  without  him,  but  within  him  ;  not  a  shadow  or  cere- 
mony, but  the  substance  and  truth,  to  which  all  shadows  give  place.  Nay,  there  is 
no  private  man  that  is  godly,  but  he  must  wear  this  white  linen  garment,  having 
put  it  on  in  the  laver  of  regeneration :  as  Gal.  3,  27.  2.  A  girdle  (ver.  40). 
Which  signifies  constancy  and  stability  in  the  truth,  both  in  our  High  Priest,  Jesus 
Christ,  who  was  not  a  reed  shaken,  but  a  firm  rock  :  as  also  in  His  members,  who 
are  commanded  to  stand  fast,  their  loins  girt  with  verity  (Eph.  vi.  14).  Hence 
follows,  that  the  minister's  word  must  be  yea  and  nay ;  his  course  must  be  con- 
stantly gracious  and  watchful.  And  for  private  Christians  (Heb.  xiii.  9).  3.  A 
bonnet  (ver.  40).  A  symbol  and  sign  to  them  of  God's  protection  still  covering 
them  in  their  faithful  service  :  signifying  to  us  the  Lord's  cover  and  faithful 
protection  both  over  our  head,  and  over  His  members  for  His  sake.  4.  The 
breeches  (ver.  42).  Putting  more  comeliness  upon  the  uncomely  parts.  Signifying 
to  them  and  us— (1)  What  reverence  we  ought  to  use  in  the  service  of  God  ;  far 
removing  thence  every  uncomely  thing.  (2)  Shadowing  out  the  true  and  perfect 
holiness,  with  which  Christ's  humanity  was  clothed ;  and  not  only  with  that,  but 


50f2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvni. 


-nith  the  majesty  of  His  Deity,  which  highly  graced  and  honoured  the  despised  and 
frail  humanity,  which  had  no  form  nor  beauty  (Isa.  liii.  2).     (3)  Not  darkly  repre- 
senting that  care  and  respect  which  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ  hath  of  His 
inferior,  base,  and  despised  both  ministers  and  members  through  the  world  (Isa. 
xli.  14).    To  the  high  priest  belonged  six  peculiar  garments:  I.  First  the  ephod 
(ver.  4),  in  which — 1.  The  matter.    It  was  not  wool  or  silk,  but  linen,  which  riseth 
cut  of  the  earth  (Ezek.  xliv.  17).     Signifying  that  holy  flesh  of  Christ  which  veiled 
His  Deity  as  a  garment ;  and  that  it  was  taken  not  from  heaven,  but  from  His 
mother  on  earth,  as  the  matter  of  that  garment  grew  immediately  out  of  earth. 
2.  The  form.    It  was  a  long  white  garment :  signifying  the  long  white  garment  of 
Christ's  absolute  righteousness ;  white,  innocent  and  unspotted  ;  and  long,  to  cover 
all  our  nakedness,  without  patching  of  merits.     3.  The  ornament  of  it.    In  it  were 
set  two  onyx  stones,  and  in  them  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  engraven, 
which  Aaron  carried  upon  his  shoulders;  signifying — (1)  That  the  names  of  the 
godly  are  not  lightly  written,  but  fast  engraven  in  the  love  and  memory  of  Christ. 
as  those  names  were  engraven  in  very  hard  stones.     (2)  That  Christ  doth  still  carry 
His  Church  on  His  shoulders  ;  lifting  them  up  out  of  dust  and  misery,  and  bearing 
them  upon  the  shoulders  of  His  power  and  providence,  as  on  eagles'  wings  (Isa.  xl.  31) . 
II.  The  second  garment  peculiar  to  the  high  priest  was  called  the  breabtpi^te 
OF    JUDGJiENT    (ver.   15),   the  most  precious    part    of  all  his  garments.      1.    In 
respect  of  the  twelve  costly  and  glittering  stones,  which  were  set  in  four  rows, 
according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes  (ver.  17-22).     In  which— (1)  The  shining  ol 
these  stones  signified  the  shining  purity  and  innocency  of  Jesus  Christ,  both  in 
Himself  and  in  His  members.    If  they  be  pure  as  the  sun,  fair  as  the  moon, 
what  is  He?     (2)  Their  price  of  great  value  and  worth  signified  what  a  price  the 
Lord  Jesus  valued  His  Church  at.     (3)  Their  place  or  situation.     They  are  set  in  the 
pectoral,  and  Aaron  must  carry  them  on  his  heart  :  signifying  that  Christ  hath  as 
much  care  of  His  Church,  as  if  it  were  enclosed  in  His  heart ;  lets  out  His  blood  to 
make  room  in  His  heart  for  them.     (4)  Their  number  ;  twelve,  according  to  all  the 
tribes  :  ncting  that  there  is  room  in  the  heart  of  Christ  for  every  one  of  the  elect. 
None  can  anticipate  or  prevent  the  other.    With  Him  is  plentiful  redemption.     The 
former  without  the  latter  shall  not  be  perfected  (Heb.  xi.  40).    (5)  Their  order.    They 
stand  in  four  rows  in  a  comely  quadrangle  :  signifying  the  comely  order  ihat  Christ 
hath  established  in  the  Church  :  some  in  higher  places,  some  in  lower,  some  in  one 
rank  and  office,  and  some  in  another,  as  those  stones,  but  all  stand  seemly  and 
fitly.    And  this  order  we  must  maintain,  keeping  our  ranks  as  they  did.     (6)  The 
figure.     The  foursquare  (ver.   16),  signifying  the  stabihty  and   firmness  of    the 
Church,  as  a  foursquare,   turn  it   any  way  'tis  firm.      Satan   and   all  deceivers 
shall  not  pick  one  stone  out  of  Christ's  pectoral.    The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against  him  that  is  fixed  in  that  rock  and   stone  of  Israel.     (7)  Their  use.     That 
Aaron,  who  before  bare  the  names  of  Israel  on  his  shoulders  before  the  Lord,  might 
now  bear  them  on  his  heart  continually  for  a  remembrance  before  the  Lord,  when 
he  goeth  into  the  holy  place  (ver.  29).     Signifying— (a)  The  ardent  love  of  Jesus 
Christ  towards  His  Church,  who  bears  it  not  only  on  His  shoulders  as  a  shepherd, 
or  only  in  His  arms  as  a  nurse  ;  but  upon  His  heart,  and  in  His  heart,  never  to 
forget  our  good,     {h)  Bearing  of  the  names  continually  before  the  Lord  on  His 
heart  signitieth  the  continual  mindfulness  and  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ  for  His 
Church   in  that  heavenly  sanctuary  (Heb.   vii.  25).     By  virtue  of  which  all  our 
prayers  get  audience  and  acceptance.     (8)  The  quantity.    As  all  the  names  of  Israel 
were  gathered  into  a  narrow  compass  :  so  Jesus  Christ  our  Mediator  shall  gather  to- 
gether into  one  all  the  dispersed  sons  of  God,  and  present  them  before  God  as 
the  most  beautiful  and  precious  parts  of  the  world  (John  xi.  52).    (T.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  garments  of  the  priesthood,  and  their  significance : — In  almost  every  modern 
nation  there  are  some  remnants  of  the  ancient  custom  of  representing  ofiice  by 
garments  of  peculiar  material,  shape,  and  colour.     History  registers  the  decline  of 
the  custom,  but  not  its  birth  and  growth ;  for  it  was  as  powerful  as  ever  in  the 
earliest  age  which  has  transmitted  to  us  its  records.    In  the  time  of  Moses,  both 
kings  and  priests  in  every  country  were  clothed  in  a  garb  not  only  distinctive  but 
emblematic.     In  interpreting  the  significance  conveyed  by  the  garments  of  the 
Levitical  priesthood,  it  will  be  convenient  to  treat  first  of  the  four  pieces  worn  by 
priests  of  ordinary  rank,  and  then  of  those  peculiar  to  their  chief.     Is  there,  then, 
no  significance  in  the  fact  that  this  official  costume  consisted  of  four  pieces?    As 
four  limits  the  colours  of  the  tapestry,  the  ingredients  of  the  incense,  the  spices  of 
the  holy  anointing  oil,  the  composite  parts  of  the  cherubs,  we  conclude  that  the 


CHAP,  xri'iii.]  EXODUS.  503 

same  signature  of  the  kingdom  of  God  was  designedly  impressed  on  the  official 
costume  of  those  who  were  elected  to  draw  near  to  Jehovah.  This  judgment  is 
confirmed  by  the  recurrence  of  four  as  the  number  of  pieces  additional  to  the  dress 
of  the  ordinary  priests  which  the  head  of  the  order  was  required  to  wear  in  the 
performance  of  official  duty.  The  numerical  signature  of  the  Tabernacle  was  thus 
impressed  on  the  official  garments  of  its  priesthood.  The  garments  of  the  priests 
of  ordinary  rank  were  all  of  pure  white  except  the  girdle.  The  drawers,  the  coat, 
and  the  bonnet  were  of  shesh,  bleached,  but  not  dyed.  White  raiment  was  emblem- 
atic of  ethical  purity.  It  was  "  the  righteousness  of  the  saints."  As  worn  by  the 
priest,  it  signified  that  those  who  were  admitted  to  intimacy  with  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel  must  be  pure  in  heart  and  life.  The  material  also  contributed  something  to 
the  significance  of  the  dress.  The  garments  must  all  be  of  linen  ;  and  in  the  vision 
of  Ezekiel  the  directions  given  for  the  official  raiment  of  the  priests  add  to  the 
requirement  of  linen  the  express  prohibition  of  anything  woollen .  The  reason  of 
the  requirement  lies,  doubtless,  in  the  greater  cleanliness  possible  in  a  warm 
climate  to  one  whose  garments  are  exclusively  of  this  material.  Not  only  was  the 
costume  of  a  priest  significant  in  its  material,  colour,  and  number  of  pieces,  but 
each  of  the  four  garments  of  which  it  was  composed  contributed  an  element  peculiar 
to  itself.  The  coat,  or  tunic,  was  first  in  importance,  as  it  was  in  size.  Reaching 
from  the  neck  to  the  ankles,  it  was  merely  coincident,  as  a  covering  of  the  person, 
with  the  whole  costume ;  so  that  the  other  three  garments  were  supplements  to 
this,  rather  than  its  equals.  Its  import,  as  might  be  expected,  is  also  nearly  the 
same  as  that  of  the  whole  dress.  As  the  entire  costume  of  four  pieces,  by  means  of 
its  material  and  its  dominant  colour,  was  suggestive  of  holiness,  so  was  the  coat  in 
particular,  as  it  invested  the  person  from  the  neck  to  the  ankles  with  linen  white 
and  shining  as  light.  Moreover,  this  garment  was  woven  in  one  piece  to  represent, 
by  this  sort  of  integrity,  moral  wholeness  or  holiness.  The  tunic  of  the  priest  was 
also  woven  so  as  to  exhibit  checks  like  the  pattern  called  damask  ;  for  such  is  the 
meaning  of  the  descriptive  adjective  which  the  English  translators  incorrectly 
regarded  as  equivalent  to  "  broidei-ed."  The  coat  was  therefore  covered  throughout 
with  four-sided  figures  of  small  size.  Bahr  thinks  that  these  were  symbols  of  like 
import  with  the  precious  stones  in  the  breastplate  of  the  high  priest  ;  as  if  every 
member  of  the  sacerdotal  family  bore  on  his  person  visible  signs  that  as  a  priest  he 
was  the  representative  of  the  tribes  of  Israel,  these  symbols  designedly  having,  in 
the  case  of  the  subordinate  priests,  only  a  reflection  of  the  glory  and  beauty  of 
those  which  distinguished  the  head  of  the  order.  A  girdle  of  some  kind  was  in 
ancient  times,  as  it  is  even  now,  essential  to  the  completeness  of  an  oriental  costume ; 
and,  by  means  of  diversity  in  material,  size,  shape,  and  ornamentation,  was  easily 
made  a  badge  of  office.  The  girdle  of  the  Hebrew  priest  seems  to  have  been,  more 
than  any  other  article  of  his  attire,  an  official  badge.  According  to  the  traditional 
law  of  the  Hebrews,  the  priest  must  remove  his  girdle  when  he  ceased  to  officiate, 
but  might,  if  more  convenient,  continue  to  wear  the  other  official  garments  through 
the  day.  How  the  girdle  of  the  priest  symbolized  his  office  as  an  attache  of  the 
Tabernacle,  is  evident  when  we  consider  its  peculiar  ornamentation.  Like  the 
other  garments  it  was  of  white  linen  ;  but,  unlike  them,  it  was  interwoven  with 
threads  of  blue,  purple,  and  crimson.  The  four  colours  of  the  Tabernacle  signified 
that  the  wearer  belonged  to  the  institution.  This  badge  of  office  certified  that  he 
had  a  right  to  enter  the  habitation  where  these  significant  colours  were  dominant. 
The  Arab  wears  on  his  head  a  cap  similar  to  the  Tmkish.  fez,  which  he  calls  a 
tarhush.  The  Bedouin  spreads  over  it  a  handkerchief  folded  so  that  thi'ee  of  the 
four  corners  hang  down  on  the  back  and  shoulders,  and  binds  it  in  place  with  a 
twisted  rope  of  goat's  hair  or  camel's  hair,  reaching  around  his  head.  The  Syrian 
Arab,  if  he  wishes  any  addition  to  his  tarbush,  ties  a  handkerchief  over  it,  or  winds 
around  it  a  shawl  of  wool,  silk,  or  cotton,  so  as  to  form  a  turban.  The  oriental 
turban  has  exhibited  both  in  modem  times  and  in  the  remotest  antiquity,  a  great 
variety  of  form,  material,  and  colour.  By  means  of  this  diversity  it  has  served  to 
distinguish  between  men  of  different  nations,  and  of  different  classes  in  the  same 
nation.  As  an  ancient  Assyrian  king  was  distinguished  by  a  head-dress  of  a  peculiar 
shape  and  ornamentation,  as  a  descendant  of  Mohammed  is  known  by  the  colour 
of  his  turban,  so  the  dignity  of  the  Hebrew  priest,  as  an  attendant  on  Jehovah  in 
His  holy  habitation,  was  symbolized  by  a  turban  peculiar  to  his  order  in  its 
material,  its  colour,  and  perhaps  its  shape.  The  priests  must  wear  drawers  while 
officiating,  to  cover  their  nakedness  ;  and  neglect  to  do  so  was  to  be  punished  with 
death,  even  if  no  exposure  of  the  person  resulted.     The  covering  was  therefore 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

symbolic.     It  was  a  removal  from  the  significant  tableau  in  which  the  prieat  was 
engaged,  of  those  parts  of  his  person  which,  as  excretory,  were  especially  represen- 
tative of  defilement.     The  significance  of  the  costume  of  the  Hebrew  priest  cannot 
be  fully  seen  by  one  who  overlooks  the  fact  that  it  left  his  feet  uncovered.    An 
oriental  does  not  wear  a  shoe  or  sandal  for  protection  from  cold,  but  from  filth,  and 
lays  aside  at  least  the  outermost  covering  of  his  feet  when  he  enters  a  house, 
because  he  will  not  need  such  protection  in  such  a  place,  and  because  his  shoe 
might  bring  tilth  into  the  house.     The  costume  of  the  high  priest  consisted  of  the 
four  pieces  worn  by  his  subordinates,  and  of  four  others  peeuhar  to  him  as  the  head 
of  the  order.     Over  the  tunic  he  wore  the  robe  of  the  ephod,  the  -significance  of 
which  resulted  from  its  blue  colour  and  the  ornamental  fringe  which  hung  from  its 
border  at  the  bottom.     To  understand  the  meaning  of  this  fringe  see  Num.  xv.  38, 
39.     The  ornaments  were  intended  to  remind  the  wearer  of  the  commandments  of 
Jehovah,  and  were  connected  with  his  garment,  whatever  its  colour,  by  a  cord  or 
ribbon  of  blue,  to  signify  the  heavenly  origin  of  that  which  he  was  to  keep  in  re- 
membrance.    But  this  fringe,  in  the  case  of  the  high  priest,  consisted  of  tassels  in 
the  shape  of  pomegranates,   alternated  with   little  golden  bells.     If,   as  seema 
probable,  the  pomegranates  symbolized  the  law  in  its  totality  as  including  every 
specific  requirement,  it  is  at  least  a  plausible  conjecture  that  the  bells  with  which 
they  alternated  signified  that  the  high  priest,  or  rather  the  covenant  people  whom 
he  represented,  were  not  only  to  remember  the  commandments  of  Jehovah,  but  by 
obeying  to  proclaim  them.     So  far  as  they  remembered  and  obeyed  it,  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  sounded  out  from  them.     The  specifications  for  the   ephod  make  its 
shoulder-pieces  so  prominent  that  the  Greek  and  Latin  versions  give  it  names  in 
those  languages  which  characterize  it  as  a  shoulder-garment.    But  the  shoulder  as 
the  seat  of  strength  was,  in  the  early  times,  when  the  strongest  ruled,  the  seat  of 
authority,  and  the  most  appropriate  position  for  an  emblem  of  government.     We 
infer,  then,  that  the  ephod  was  a  symbol  of  rank ;  and  from  the  materials  of  which 
it  was  made,  that  it  invested  the  wearer  as  a  badge  of  royalty.     This  garment  was 
provided  for  the  high  priest  as  the  representative  of  the  holy  nation,  that  the 
jewels  on  its  shoulders,  and  the  threads  of  beaten  gold  woven  into  it  throughout, 
might  signify  that  they  were  kings  as  well  as  priests.    The  breastplate  of  judgment 
was  closely  connected  in  significance  with  the  ephod,  indicating  that  the  wearer 
was  a  ruler  endowed  with  wisdom  for  the  decision  of  important  questions  relating 
to  the  public  welfare.    He  wore  it  on  his  heart  because  the  heart  was  regarded  as 
the  seat  of  wisdom.    The  head-dress  of  the  high  priest  was  distinguished  from  that 
of  his  subordinates  not  only  by  its  shape,  but  by  its  plate  of  gold  bearing  the 
inscription,  "  HoUness  to  Jehovah."    This  plate,  peculiar  to  him  as  the  bead  of 
the  priesthood,  and  of  the  nation  as  a  kingdom  of  priests,  was  another  badge  of 
rank,  and  equivalent  in  meaning  to  a  crown.   The  inscription,  peculiarly  important 
from  its  position  on  the  forehead,  proclaimed  that  the  high  priest,  through  his 
election,  his  physical  faultlessness,  his  separation  from  common  life,  his  invest- 
ment with  the  robes  of  office,  and  his  consecration,  was  so  holy  that  he  might  not 
only  approach  Jehovah,  but  could  take  away  the  sins  of  his  people  (ver.  38).   Their 
iniquity  was  taken  away,  and  they  were  accounted  holy  because  their  representative 
was  holy.     {E.  E.  Atwater.)  The  robes  of  glory  and  beauty  : — Aaron  had  not  in 

himself  the  proper  qualifications  for  shadowing  forth  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  great 
High  Priest ;  so  the  requisite  beauty  and  glory  were  put  on  him  symbolically. 
Arrayed  in  those  beautiful,  costly,  and  Divinely-appointed  garments,  he  was 
symbolically  what  Jesus  Christ  is  in  reahty,  and  he  could  minister  about  the 
Tabernacle  as  a  t.ype  of  Him  who  is  the  true  Minister  and  the  ever-living  Saviour. 
These  garments  were  said  to  be  "for  glory  and  for  beauty  "  (ver.  2).  They  were 
very  costly  and  very  beautiful,  and  everything  belonging  to  them  was  significant 
in  some  way  of  the  manifold  excellencies  and  glories  of  the  blessed  Jesus.  They 
are  so  many  glasses  which  God  has  given  to  us,  by  which  we  may  see  Jesus  in 
various  aspects,  as  manifested  to  us  in  all  His  moral  comeliness,  and  beauty,  and 
spiritual  excellences.  I  love  to  see  Jesus  as  set  forth  here,  because  He  is  so  lovely. 
"  He  is  altogether  lovely  "  (Song  of  Sol.  v.  16).  And  yet  even  here  we  do  but  see 
through  a  glass  darkly ;  we  only  know  Him  in  part ;  we  do  not  see  Him  face  to  face 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  He  is  here  looking  forth  at  the  windows,  and  showing  Himself 
through  the  lattice  (Song  of  Sol.  ii.  9),  and  it  is  very  blessed  to  see  Him  thus  ;  but  it 
will  be  much  better  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  with  no  window  or  lattice  between  Him 
and  ourselves  (Phil.  i.  23  ;  1  John  iii.  2).     (G.  Eodgers.) 


eHAP.  xxvni.]  EXODUS.  505 

Vers.  6-14.  The  epho&.—The  ephod  .-—The  ephod,  with  its  "  curious  girdle  '  and 
the  oynx  stones  upon  its  shoulder-pieces,  was  the  distinctive  priestly  garment. 
It  hung  upon  the  shoulders  down  to  the  waist,  and  was  formed  of  the  most  costly 
and  beautiful  materials,  corresponding  exactly  to  those  employed  in  the  interior 
decoration  of  the  holy  place.  The  girdle  was  made  of  the  same  materials,  with 
the  same  combination  of  colours.  As  garments  were  associated  in  the  Hebrew 
mind  with  character,  and  the  girdle  with  energy  in  work,  we  find  in  the  corre- 
spondence of  both  with  the  interior  of  the  holy  place,  a  memorial  of  the  necessity 
that  those  who  enter  the  house  of  the  Lord  must  be  themselves  holy  and  beautiful 
in  character,  and  be  engaged  in  high  and  holy  service.  But  the  most  important 
parts  of  the  ephod  were  the  shoulder-pieces,  on  which  were  set  two  oynx  stones, 
with  the  names  of  the  tribes  engraven  on  them  (see  ver.  12).  Here  we  have  the 
idea  of  representation  clearly  and  beautifully  symbolized.  The  shoulders,  to  a 
Hebrew  mind,  were  the  symbol  of  strength ;  and  the  idea  was,  that  when  the  high 
priest  entered  the  holy  place  he  did  not  go  alone,  but  carried  with  him  on  his 
strong  shoulders  the  children  of  Israel  whom  he  represented  ;  and  the  estimation 
in  which  the  people  were  held  was  expressed  in  the  value  of  the  precious  stones  on 
which  the  names  were  engraved,  and  the  setting  of  pure  gold  with  which  they 
were  surrounded.  {J.  31.  Gibson,  D.D.)  The  ephod: — The  ephod,  with  the 
breastplate  and  girdle  fastened  to  it,  and  put  upon  the  person  of  Aaron,  consti- 
tuted him  a  worshipper  ;  adorned  with  this  he  could  draw  near  and  worship  in 
the  holy  place.  It  was  put  on  over  the  blue  robe,  and  is  supposed  to  have  been 
much  shorter  than  that  garment,  reaching  a  little  below  the  knees,  whilst  the  blue 
robe  reached  down  to  the  feet.  It  fitted  closely  to  the  person,  and  was  kept  in  its 
place  by  the  girdle.  It  was  made  of  gold,  blue,  purple,  scarlet,  and  fine  Unen. 
These  materials  represent  the  purity,  loveliness,  and  glory  of  Christ  as  the  Man 
Jesus  Christ  and  the  mighty  God.  It  would  spangle  with  gold,  and  the  colours 
would  be  so  blended  as  to  display  their  richness  and  beauty  in  the  best  possible 
way.  The  four  materials  were  the  same  as  the  vail  was  made  of,  viz.,  fine  linen, 
blue,  purple,  and  scarlet,  which  represent  the  manhood  of  Christ  in  all  its  perfec- 
tion as  such  (Heb.  x.  19,  20)  ;  but  in  the  gold  thread  with  which  that  cloth  was 
embroidered  (chap,  xxxix.  3),  I  see  the  Godhead  of  the  Lord,  and  the  two  are  so 
joined  together  that  you  cannot  have  one  without  the  other.  The  back  and  front 
parts  of  the  ephod  were  joined  at  the  shoulders,  by  means  of  the  shoulder-pieces 
from  which  it  was  suspended.  In  each  shoulder-piece  was  a  precious  stone  set  in 
gold — an  oynx  stone,  a  beautiful  white  and  half -transparent  stone.  In  these 
precious  stones  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  were  engraven.  Aaron 
carried  the  names  of  his  people  upon  his  shoulders.  He  presented  them  thus 
before  the  Lord,  and  when  God  looked  down  upon  Aaron,  He  saw  the  names  of 
His  people  indelibly  engraven  in  white  stones.  The  shoulder  is  the  place  of 
strength.  The  omnipotent  strength  of  Christ  is  ours.  He  carries  His  people's 
burdens  and  themselves  too  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9,  xl.  11,  xlvi.  4 ;  Psa.  Iv.  22).  The 
government  is  upon  His  shoulder,  and  the  crown  is  upon  His  head.     (G.  Rodger s.) 

Vers,  15-30.  The  breastplate  of  judgment. — The  breastplate  : — A  full  descrip- 
tion of  the  breastplate  is  given  twice  over  in  the  Book  of  Exodus,  and  from  it  we 
may  gather  certain  useful  lessons  as  to  the  Church  in  all  ages.  I.  There  were 
twelve  stones  in  the  breastplate,  each  of  them  diffekent,  and  each  beaeing  a 
DIFFERENT  NAME.  This  shows  what  variety  there  is  among  believers.  So  long  as 
the  human  race  differs  so  much  in  mental  structure,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  think 
alike,  even  in  those  things  that  are  spoken  of  in  Holy  Writ.  There  are  differences 
with  regard  to  worship,  differences  in  religious  feelings  and  experiences ;  the  stones 
are  not  alike,  yet  they  are  all  on  the  same  breastplate.   II.  This  brings  us  to  another 

truth THE     UNITY     OF    THE     ChURCH,    ALL     DIFFERING,   YET   ALL     ON     THE     HEART    OF 

Christ.  The  enemy  has  only  to  show  himself,  and  men  who  differ  amongst 
themselves  agree  to  drive  him  back.  III.  They  were  all  precious  stones  ;  not  one 
WAS  MEAN  or  CONTEMPTIBLE.  God's  Church  has  ever  been  costly.  No  jewel  is 
what  it  afterwards  becomes  when  first  found.  Let  not  the  stone  which  sparkles  in 
its  setting  sneer  at  that  which  only  looks  like  a  pebble.  The  Master  has  chosen 
it ;  He  knows  that  He  has  put  within  its  rude  exterior  that  which  only  needs  time 
and  skill  to  make  it  "  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  IV.  Why  were  those 
precious  stones  put  upon  the  breastplate  ?    They  were  not  on  the  mitre  ;  they 

WERE     UPON     THE    HEART,     TEACHING     US     THAT     THE      ChURCH     IS    BELOVED.        EvCry 

believer  is  on  the  heart  of  God.      V.  Great  pains   were  taken  to  keep  ihb 


506  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxnn. 

BREASTPLATE  FEOM  BEING  LOST.  It  WES  not  Only  fastened  to  the  shoulders  by 
chains,  but  the  bottom  part  of  the  breastplate  was  fastened  by  two  rings  lashed  to 
the  two  rings  in  the  ephod.  This  tells  us  of  the  Church's  security.  (T.  Champ- 
ness.)  The  breastplate  : — As  the  heart  is  the  place  of  affection,  and  the  shoulder 
the  place  of  strength,  Aaron  had  to  carry  the  names  of  his  people  on  his  heart,  to 
show  that  he  loved  them,  and  on  his  shoulder,  to  show  that  he  was  ever  ready  to 
serve  them.  The  typical  and  spiritual  meaning  of  this  is  very  sweet.  Jesus  Christ 
is  our  great  High  Priest,  and  the  names  of  all  His  people  are  not  upon,  but  in,  His 
heart.  His  omnipotent  strength  and  His  infinite  love  are  ours — ours  for  ever.  He 
never  forgets  one  of  His  people,  nor  fails  to  love  them.  They  are  His  jewels,  His 
special  treasures,  His  Father's  love-gifts,  and  He  values  them  because  His  Father 
gave  them  to  Him.  The  time  is  coming  when  He  wiU  count  up  His  jewels,  and  it 
will  then  be  found  that  not  one  soul  given  to  Christ  by  the  Father  will  be  missing. 
As  every  ray  of  light  that  fell  upon  Aaron  would  fall  upon  the  names  of  Aaron'3 
people,  so  every  smile  that  God  gives  to  Christ  is  given  also  to  the  people  of  Christ; 
for  Christ  and  His  people  are  one,  and  God  never  looks  upon  Christ  without  seeing 
His  people — all  His  people,  for  they  are  in  Him — loved  as  He  is  loved.  (G.  liodgers.) 
The  topaz  : — The  topaz  is  a  beautiful  jewel,  of  a  bright  orange  or  golden  colour, 
though  they  are  sometimes  found  green,  blue,  and  red.  It  is  very  hard,  being  next 
to  the  ruby  in  this  respect.  I  saw  lately  an  account  of  a  fine  old  topaz  seal  among 
the  curiosities  in  a  museum  in  England.  What  is  called  the  field  of  the  seal  was 
blue.  On  this  there  were  three  arrows.  On  the  top  or  crest  of  the  seal  was  the 
head  of  a  dragon  on  a  crown.  And  round  the  seal  was  this  inscription  or  motto — 
"  Sola  bona  qua.  honesta."  The  meaning  of  this  is  "  Honesty,  which  is  the  only  good 
thing."  And  this,  according  to  the  old  proverb,  might  be  rendered,  "Honesty  is  the 
best  policy."  The  topaz  is  considered  to  represent  honesty.  Most  people  think 
that  if  they  don't  cheat  when  they  get  a  chance,  and  don't  steal  from  those  about 
them,  they  are  honest.  True  honesty  means  to  give  to  all  persons  whatever  belongs 
to  them.  I  want  to  speak  of  four  different  kinds  of  temptations,  and  to  show  how 
this  precious  jewel,  the  Bible  topaz,  will  be  a  safeguard  to  you  against  them  all. 
I.  The  first  kind  of  temptation  in  which  this  jewel  will  be  a  safeguard  to  us  are 
TEMPTATIONS  FOR  THE  EYE.  You  kuow  when  an  army  is  besieging  a  walled  city  or 
fortress  how  very  careful  those  inside  of  it  are  to  protect  the  gates.  But  our  souls 
are  like  walled  cities  or  fortresses.  Satan  is  the  enemy  trying  to  get  in.  And  the 
eye  is  one  of  the  gates  of  entrance.  We  must  guard  this  gate  well  if  we  want  to 
keep  our  souls  safe.  Job  said  he  had  "  made  a  covenant  with  his  eyes  "  not  to 
look  on  anything  that  it  was  not  right  to  look  at.  David  used  to  pray — "  Turn 
away  mine  eyes  from  beholding  vanity. "  And  if  we  keep  this  precious  Bible  jewel,  the 
topaz  of  true  honesty,  about  us,  it  will  be  a  safeguard  to  us  in  temptations.  The 
first  temptations  from  which  it  will  save  us  are  temptations  for  the  eye.  II.  The 
second  kind  of  temptations  in  which  this  Bible  jewel,  the  topaz  of  true  honesty, 
will  be  a  safeguard  to  us  are  temptations  for  the  ear.  This  is  another  of  the 
principal  gates  of  entrance  to  the  soul.  And  it  is  a  very  important  gate.  It  ought 
to  be  most  carefully  guarded.  We  receive  a  great  deal  of  good,  and  a  great  deal 
of  harm,  through  the  ear.  If  onr  souls  are  saved  at  last,  they  will  be  saved  by 
what  we  hear  ;  and  if  our  souls  are  lost  at  last,  they  will  be  lost  by  what  we  hear. 
III.  The  third  kind  of  temptations  from  which  this  jewel  will  save  us  are  tempta- 
tions FOR  THE  tongue.  Oh,  how  much  sin  people  commit  by  means  of  the 
tongue !  If  we  could  keep  from  saying  what  is  wrong,  how  nicely  we  should  get 
along  !  Well,  if  we  carry  this  Bible  jewel,  the  topaz  of  true  honesty,  about  us  all 
the  time,  it  will  keep  us  safe  from  these  temptations.  IV.  The  fourth  and  last 
kind  of  temptations  we  are  to  speak  of  from  which  this  jewel  keeps  us  are 
temptations  for  the  HAND.  I  mean  by  this,  the  temptation  to  take  or  to  keep 
what  does  not  belong  to  us.  If  we  keep  this  jewel  about  us — that  is,  if  we 
remember  God's  presence  and  try  honestly  to  please  Him — it  will  save  us  from  ever 
taking  or  keeping  what  does  not  belong  to  us.  If  you  want  to  keep  this  jewel 
about  you  all  the  time,  so  as  to  be  kept  from  temptation,  there  is  one  text  yon 
must  always  remember.  It  is  this,  "  Thou,  God,  seest  me."  Oh  !  pray  God  to 
write  that  text  on  your  memory.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  The  emerald : — The 
emerald  is  a  jewel  of  a  beautiful,  soft,  rich  green  colour.  Ireland  is  called  the 
•'  Emerald  Isle "  because  the  grass  which  covers  its  hills  and  valleys  is  such  a 
beautiful  green.  When  you  look  at  this  island  from  the  deck  of  a  vessel  far  off  at 
6e&,  it  looks  like  a  great  jewel — a  great  emerald  rising  out  of  the  ocean.  Th  e 
emerald  stands,  in  value  among  jewellers,  next  to  the  ruby.    It  is  spoken  of  several 


CHAP.  XXVIII.]  EXODVS.  607 

times  in  the  Bible.  In  old  times  people  used  to  think  that  the  emerald 
had  certain  wonderful  or  magical  powers.  It  was  not  true  that  it  had 
any  such  powers.  But  hope,  which  is  the  Bible  jewel  represented  by  the 
emerald,  does  have  them.  I  wish  to  speak  of  three  of  these  powers.  This  will 
give  us  three  reasons  why  hope  may  be  compared  to  an  emerald.  I.  And  the 
first  reason  why  hope  may  be  compared  to  an  emerald  is  because  it  makes  U3 
iNDDSTKious.  People  used  to  think  that  the  emerald  had  the  power  of  curing  idle- 
ness or  of  making  men  industrious.  If  it  only  had  this  power  the  emerald  would 
be  the  most  valuable  of  all  jewels.  Then,  when  boys  and  girls  were  put  to  school, 
it  would  only  be  necessary  to  hang  an  emerald  round  each  one's  neck,  and  there 
would  be  no  lazy  scholars.  The  owners  of  all  our  workshops  and  factories  would 
want  to  have  a  good  supply  of  emeralds.  I  need  not  tell  you,  however,  that  the 
emerald  never  had  any  such  power  as  this.  But  hope,  the  beautiful  Bible  jewel, 
that  which  the  emerald  represents,  does  have  this  power.  If  people  hope  to  get 
rich  they  know  that  they  must  be  industrious  and  work  hard.  II.  Again,  people 
used  to  think  that  the  emerald  had  the  power  of  taking  away  fear.  And  this  leads 
us  to  speak  of  the  second  reason  why  hope  may  be  compared  to  an  emerald, 
because  it  makes  us  courageous.  The  Bible  tells  us  that  "  hope  maketh  not 
ashamed  "  (Eom.  v.  5).  In  one  place  in  the  Bible  hope  is  compared  to  a  helmet. 
And  a  soldier  who  had  his  head  covered  with  a  good  helmet  would  be  very  bold 
and  courageous.  He  would  not  be  afraid  when  the  arrows  were  flying  thick  around 
him.  In  another  place  in  the  Bible  hope  is  compared  to  an  anchor  (Heb.  vi.  19). 
Suppose  that  you  and  I  are  at  sea  on  board  a  vessel.  A  storm  is  driving  our  vessel 
right  on  towards  a  rocky  and  dangerous  coast.  If  we  have  no  anchor  on  board  we 
may  well  be  afraid,  for  pretty  soon  we  shall  be  dashed  against  the  rocks  and  perish. 
But  suppose  we  have  a  good  anchor,  and  a  strong  cable  to  hold  it  by  on  board  our 
vessel.  We  drop  our  anchor  in  the  sea.  It  sinks  to  the  bottom  and  is  buried  in 
the  mud  and  sand,  or  takes  hold  of  the  rocks  there.  It  keeps  the  vessel  from 
drifting  towards  the  shore.  We  are  safe.  Our  fear  is  gone.  Let  the  winds  blow, 
and  the  waves  roar  ever  so  much,  they  can't  hurt  us.  The  anchor  gives  us  hope, 
and  this  hope  makes  us  bold  or  courageous.  And  it  is  just  so  when  we  become 
Christians.  Then  we  love  Jesus.  We  have  hope  in  Him.  That  hope  is  to  our 
souls  just  like  what  the  anchor  is  to  the  sailor.  It  keeps  us  from  being  afraid. 
III.  Another  strange  power,  which  it  used  to  be  supposed  the  emerald  had,  was 
that  of  taking  away  gloom  and  sadness  from  the  minds  of  people.  Of  course 
this  was  a  mistake.  It  never  had  any  such  power.  But  this  points  out  to  us  a 
third  reason  why  hope  may  be  compared  to  an  emerald.  It  is  because  it  makes  ua 
CHEERFUL.  Hope  is  a  bright,  sunshiny  thing.  You  know  how  beautiful  the 
rainbow  is !  Hope  is  sometimes  compared  to  the  rainbow.  And  it  may  very 
properly  be  so  compared,  because  it  seems  to  paint  in  bright  colours  the  things  it 
leads  us  to  look  for,  and  to  put  rainbows  all  about  them.  There  is  a  steam  ferry- 
boat on  the  river  Mersey  in  England.  It  runs  from  Liverpool  to  Birkenhead  and 
back.  Several  years  ago  passengers  on  that  ferry-boat  would  sometimes  see  on  a 
warm  bright  day  a  poor  crippled  boy.  His  body  was  grown  almost  to  a  man's  size, 
but  his  limbs  were  withered  and  helpless,  and  not  bigger  than  the  limbs  of  a  child. 
He  used  to  wheel  himself  about  in  a  small  carriage,  like  those  that  boys  use  in 
their  play.  He  had  a  little  musical  instrument  called  a  concertina,  and  on  this  he 
used  to  play  some  sweet  simple  tunes.  He  never  asked  for  anything,  but  yet  very 
few  of  the  passengers  could  hear  his  touching  music,  or  look  at  his  honest,  cheerful 
face,  without  dropping  a  penny  or  two  into  his  carriage.  One  day  a  lady  was 
standing  near,  looking  at  him  with  great  pity.  She  thought  how  sad  and  lonely  he 
must  feel,  unable  to  help  himself,  and  with  no  prospect  of  ever  being  any  better  in 
this  world.  She  said  to  a  lady  who  was  with  her,  but  not  intending  that  he 
should  hear  it — "Poor  boy!  what  a  sad  life  he  has  to  lead;  and  nothing  in  all 
the  futiire  to  look  forward  to  !  "  But  he  did  hear  it.  And  in  stepping  out  of  the 
boat  that  lady  saw  a  tear  in  his  eye  and  a  bright  smile  on  his  face  trying  to 
chase  the  tear  away,  as  he  said — "  I'm  expecting  to  have  wings  some  day, 
lady."  {Ibid.)  The  sapphire : — I  want  to  find  out  what  this  jewel  stands  for  or 
represents.  Well,  when  I  come  to  read  about  the  sapphire,  I  find  that  in  old  time3 
people  used  to  think  that  if  you  carried  one  of  these  jewels  on  your  heart,  or  in 
your  bosom,  it  would  have  the  effect  of  making  you  strong.  And  then  we  have 
only  to  ask  ourselves  which  of  the  Bible  jewels,  or  Christian  graces,  is  it  which  haa 
the  greatest  power  to  mak«  people  strong  ?  We  see  in  a  moment  that  it  is  faith. 
And  so  we  feel  safe  in  saying  that  the  sapphire  stands  for  faith  or  trust  in  God; 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxviii» 


Faith  may  be  compared  to  the  sapphire  because  it  makes  us  strong.    I  wish  to 
speak  of  two  things  for  which  faith  makes  us  strong.      I.  In  the  first  place,  faith 
makes  us  steono  to  suffer.    II.  The  second  reason  why  faith  may  be  compared 
to  the  sapphire  is  because  it  makes  us  strong  to  serve.    Now,  my  dear  children, 
if  you  want  to  have  this  Bible  jewel,  you  must  ask  Jesus  to  give  it  to  you.    You 
can't  find  it.    You  can't  buy  it.    Your  parents,  or  teachers,  or  friends,  can't  get  it 
for  you,  or  give  it  to  you.     Nobody  but  Jesus  can  give  it  to  you.     It  is  only  Hia 
grace  that  can  put  it  in  your  hearts.     If  you  pray  earnestly  to  Jesus  to  give  you  a 
believing,  trusting  heart.  He  will  give  it  to  you.     This  precious  jewel,  trust  in 
Jesus,  is  all  we  need  to  make  us  comfortable  and  happy  here,  and  all  we  need  to 
save  our  souls  and  take  us  to  heaven  at  last.     It  is  faith,  simple  faith,  or  trust  in 
Jesus,  that  saves  us.    (Ibid.)        The  diamond  .-—Every  true  Christian  is  a  spiritual 
diamond,  one  of  God's  jewels.    Let  us  look  at  this  diamond  and  see  what  there  is 
about  it  on  account  of  which  a  Christian  may  bo  compared  to  it.    I.  Its  hardness. 
It  is  one  of  the  hardest  things  in  the  world.      1.  It  will  bear  a  great  deal  of  rough 
handling  without  being  scratched  or  injured  at  all.     And  Christians  are  just  like 
diamonds  on  this  account.     They  can  bear  trial  or  hard  treatment  without  being 
injured  by  it.    2.  It  can  make  marks  that  cannot  be  rubbed  out.    When  we  become 
Christians,  we  are  like  diamonds  in  this  respect.     One  day  the  superintendent  of  a 
Sunday  school  in  this  city  was  going  along  near  Third  and  Dock  Streets.     He  saw 
one  of  the  large  boys  belonging  to  his  school  coming  out  of  a  drinking-saloon.   The 
boy's  name  was  George  Simpson.      As  the  superintendent  passed  by  he  raised  hia 
finger,  and  shaking  it  gently,  he  said,  in  a  kind,  but  serious  way,  "  Take  care, 
George,  take  care."     Some  ten  or  twelve  years  passed  away.    He  had  forgotten  all 
about  it.    But  one  day  a  very  genteel-looking  man  came  up  to  him  in  the  street, 
and,  bowing  to  him,  said,  "I  think,  sir,  this  is  Mr.  P.,  who  used  to  be  superin- 
tendent of    such  a   Sunday   school?"      "That  is  my  name,   sir,   but  I   don't 
remember  you."     *'  Don't  you  remember  a  boy  named  George  Simpson  who  used 
to  belong  to  your  school  ?  "    "  No,  I  can't  recollect  the  name."      "  Well,  sir,  don't 
you  remember  meeting  him  one  day  coming  out  of  a  drinking-place  near  the  corner 
of  Third  and  Dock  Streets,  when  you  shook  your  finger  at  him,  and  said,  '  Take 
care,  George '  ? "     "Oh,  yes,  I  remember  that."    "  Well,  sir,"  said  the  young  man, 
"I  am  George  Simpson,  and  I  want  to  thank  you  for  what  you  did  and  said  that 
day.     It  was  a  little  thing,  but  it  saved  me  from  ruin.     I  was  just  beginning  to  go 
in  the  drunkard's  ways.     But  something  in  your  words  and  manner  made  a  great 
impression  on  me.     I  gave  up  drinking.    Not  long  after,  I  joined  the  Church.  Now 
I  am  living  in  the  West,  and  am  quite  well  off ;  but,  my  dear  sir,  I  owe  it  all  to 
you."    Here  you  see  how  the  superintendent  was  like  a  diamond,  making  a  mark 
that  never  can  be  rubbed  out.     II.  Its  brightness.     The  most  brilliant  of  all 
jewels.     It  gives  up  freely  the  rays  of  hght  that  God  freely  bestows  upon  it.     And 
this  is  what  makes  it  look  so  bright  and  beautiful.  And  so  you  see  that  when  Jesua 
said,  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give,"  it  is  about  the  same  as  if  He  had  said, 
«'  Be  like  the  diamond,  which  gives  back  again  so  freely  the  light  which  it  receives." 
A  piece  of  coal  does  not  reflect  any  light.     All  the  light  that  falls  on  it  is  swallowed 
up  and  kept  to  itself.     This  is  what  makes  it  look  so  black,  so  dark,  and  disagree- 
able.    Selfish,  miserly  people  are  like  coal  in  this  respect.      They  don't  reflect  or 
scatter  about  them  anything  they  receive.    Whatever  God  gives  them  they  swallow 
up  and   keep  to  themselves.     III.  But  there  is  a  third   thing  connected  with 
diamonds,  on  account  of  which  Christians  may  be  compared  to  them,  and  that  is 
THE  WAY  TO   FIND   OUT   COUNTERFEITS.      There  are  many  counterfeit  diamonds. 
Men  can  make  imitation  diamonds.     And  these  often  look  so  very  much  like  the 
real  that  it  is  difiBcult  to  tell  one  from  the  other.    And  then  God  sometimes  makes 
stones  that  appear  so  much  like  diamonds  that  hardly  one  person  out  of  twenty  can 
tell  the  difference  between  them.     Sometimes  even  the  merchants  who  are  engaged 
in  buying  and  selling  diamonds  can  hardly  tell  a  real  jewel  from  an  imitation. 
There  are  one  or  two  tests,  however.     A  real  diamond  can't  be  scratched.   Another 
way  is  by  putting  it  beside  a  true  diamond  and  comparing  them  together.     And  so, 
if  you  wish  to  tell  if  a  person  is  a  true  Christian,  you  must  compare  him  with  Jesus, 
and  see  if  he  is  like  Him.    Jesus  was  gentle,  loving,  and  kind.    And  the  Bible  says 
that  "  unless  the  same  mind  be  in  us  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  are  none  of  His." 
This  means  that  unless  we  are  like  Him  we  are  not  true  Christians.      And  then 
there  is  another  way  by  which  you  can  tell  a  real  diamond  from  a  counterfeit. 
If    you  put  them  in  water,  the  diamond  will    still    look    bright  and    shine ; 
the  counterfeit,    instead   of   shining,  will    look    dark    and    dull.      The    Bible 


CHAP,  xxvra.]  EXODUS.  609 

compares  affliction  or  trial  to  water ;  and  yon  can  easily  tell  a  true  Christian 
from  a  counterfeit  by  seeing  how  he  acts  when  affliction  comes  upon  him.  {Ibid.) 
The  agate  : — In  old  times  people  used  to  think  that  this  jewel  had  the  power  of 
securing  success.  It  was  supposed  that  if  persons  only  had  an  agate  with  them  they 
would  be  sure  to  get  the  victory  over  their  enemies.  The  agate  was  considered  as 
the  conqueror's  jewel.  And  now  what  is  the  Bible  jewel  that  will  always  give  us 
the  victory — that  will  make  us  "  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  hath 
loved  us  "  ?  It  is  the  grace  of  God.  This  is  the  Bible  jewel  that  we  may  compare 
to  the  agate.  And  there  are  two  things  over  which  this  jewel,  the  grace  of  God,  will 
make  us  conquerors,  if  we  have  it  in  our  hearts.  Each  of  these  things  begins  with 
the  letter  S.  I.  The  first  thing  over  which  this  Bible  jewel,  the  grace  of  God,  will 
make  us  conquerors  is  sin.  The  Bible  tells  us  that  we  are  born  in  sin.  Our  hearts 
are  full  of  sin.  Unless  we  get  this  sin  driven  out,  and  overcome,  we  never  can  be 
happy,  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come.  We  read  a  great  deal  in  the 
Bible  about  the  wrestling,  and  struggling,  and  fighting,  that  Christians  have  to  do. 
And  the  thing  they  have  to  fight  against  all  the  time  is  sin.  When  two  people  are 
fighting,  it  generally  happens  that  they  keep  on  at  it  till  either  one  or  the  other  of 
them  gets  the  victory.  And  so  it  is  in  the  great  battle  we  have  to  fight  with  sin. 
Either  we  must  conquer  it,  or  it  will  conquer  us.  But  we  never  can  conquer  sin 
ourselves.  And  there  is  nothing  that  will  give  us  the  victory  over  it  but  the  grace 
of  God.  This  is  the  real  agate,  the  Bible  jewel,  that  will  give  us  the  victory.  II. 
The  second  thing  over  which  this  jewel  will  make  us  conquerors  is  Satan.  This  is 
the  next  S.  Satan  is  the  great  tempter.  The  Bible  tells  us  that  he  "  goeth  about 
as  a  roaring  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour  "  or  destroy.  The  only  way  in 
which  Satan  can  destroy  us,  or  do  us  any  harm,  is  by  tempting  us  to  sin.  And  he 
cannot  hurt  us,  even  in  this  way,  unless  we  yield  to  the  temptation.  If  we  only 
have  this  Bible  jewel,  the  grace  of  God,  with  us,  it  will  make  us  conquerors  over 
Satan.  And  then,  although  he  is  so  powerful  and  so  wicked,  and  although 
he  tries  so  hard  to  injure  us  and  keep  us  from  getting  to  heaven,  he  won't 
be  able  to  do  us  any  harm.  (Ibid.)  The  conqueror^s  jeivel : — The  greatest 
enemy  with  which  we  have  to  fight  is  sin.  This  enemy  meets  us  in  many 
forms.  But  the  form  in  which  it  gives  us  more  ti-ouble  than  any  other  is 
perhaps  that  of  selfishness.  This  is  an  evil  that  is  very  hard  to  conquer. 
Suppose  we  are  walking  in  the  country,  and  meet  a  snake  in  the  path  ;  with 
the  cane  in  our  hand  we  strike  it  again  and  again,  till  it  lies  still  and  motionless. 
We  leave  it,  and  go  on  our  way,  feeling  sure  that  we  have  killed  the  snake.  But 
when  we  have  finished  our  walk,  and  come  back  to  the  place  where  we  left  the 
snake,  we  find  it  still  alive  and  active.  Then  we  say  to  ourselves,  "  Snakes  are  hard  to 
kill."  And  it  is  just  so  with  selfishness.  It  is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  conquer  it. 
If  we  wish  to  subdue  it,  and  get  the  victory  over  it,  we  must  be  sure  to  have  this 
conqueror's  jewel,  the  grace  of  God.  And  there  are  three  things  that  this  jewel  will 
lead  us  to  do  in  fighting  against  selfishness.  I.  In  the  first  place,  it  will  lead  us  to 
PRAY  AGAINST  IT.  Prayer  is  necessary  to  our  success  in  everything  we  do.  Jesus 
said  to  His  disciples,  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  And  this  is  as  true  now  as 
it  was  then.  It  is  as  true  of  us  as  it  was  of  the  disciples.  And  it  is  particularly 
true  of  the  thing  we  are  now  considering.  If  we  want  to  get  the  victory  over  the 
selfishness  of  our  own  hearts,  it  is  especially  necessary  for  us  to  pray  to  Jesus  to 
help  us.  II.  The  second  thing  that  this  conqueror's  jewel  will  lead  us  to  do  in 
getting  the  victory  over  selfishness  is  to  struggle  against  it.  We  must  not  think 
that  praying  is  to  take  the  place  of  striving.  God  only  helps  those  who  strive  to 
help  themselves.  Suppose  that  you  and  I  have  to  climb  up  a  high  mountain.  We 
kneel  down  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  and  pray  God  to  help  us  get  up  to  the  top 
of  it.  And  then  suppose  we  should  sit  down  and  wait  for  God  to  send  an  angel  to 
take  us  in  his  arms  and  carry  us  up  to  the  top  of  the  mountain.  Have  we  any 
right  to  expect  that  God  would  help  us  in  that  way  ?  Not  at  all.  We  might  wait 
all  our  lives,  but  we  never  should  get  any  help.  If  we  want  to  get  up  the  mountain, 
we  must  begin  to  chmb,  and  we  must  keep  on  climbing  till  we  get  to  the  top,  and 
while  we  are  doing  this  God  will  help  us.  No  soldier  ever  expects  to  gain  the 
victory  over  his  enemies  without  a  hard  struggle.  We  have  all  read  about  the  great 
victory  which  the  Duke  of  Wellington  obtained  over  the  Emperor  Napoleon  at  the 
battle  of  Waterloo.  But  he  had  to  fight  hard  all  day  before  he  gained  that  victory. 
And  so,  if  we  want  to  get  the  victory  over  our  selfishness,  we  must  struggle  hard 
against  it.  III.  The  third  thing  that  this  conqueror's  jewel  will  lead  us  to  do  in 
getting  the  victory  over  selfishness  is  xo  remember  the  example  of  Jesus.   Jesas 


510  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvra. 

came  down  from  heaven  to  do  three  things  for  ns.  The  first  was  to  fulfil  God's  law 
for  us.  The  second  was  to  die  for  our  sins.  The  third  was  to  show  us  how  to 
live.  The  Bible  tells  us  that  "  He  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His 
steps."  You  know,  when  we  are  learning  to  write,  our  teacher  sets  us  a  copy. 
Then  we  take  the  word  or  sentence  that  has  been  written  for  us,  letter  by  letter,  and 
try  to  make  others  like  them.  And  just  in  the  same  way  the  Ufe  of  Jesus  is  set 
before  us  as  our  copy.  We  are  to  keep  it  before  us,  and  try  to  make  our  own  lives 
hke  His.  Being  a  Christian  means  being  like  Jesus.  Now  it  is  said  of  Jesus  that 
"  He  pleased  not  Himself."      {Ibid.)  The   amethyst  : — The    amethyst  is  a 

very  precious  jewel  and  very  much  admired.  Its  colour  is  a  mixture  of  blue 
and  red.  It  is  a  rich  purple,  very  much  like  the  appearance  of  a  bunch  of  ripe, 
dark-coloured  grapes.  The  name  of  this  jewel  comes  from  the  Greek  language,  and 
it  means  not  to  intoxicate,  or  not  to  make  drunk.  The  amethyst  is  the  temperance 
jewel.  The  boys  and  girls,  and  men  and  women,  who  make  clear,  cold,  sparkling 
water  their  principal  drink,  should  take  the  amethyst  as  their  favourite  jewel.  In 
old  times  peopl  e  used  to  think  that  if  they  only  had  a  cup  made  out  of  an  amethyst  to 
drink  from,  they  never  would  get  intoxicated.  And  if  they  only  carried  one  of  these 
jewels  about  them  it  would  have  the  same  effect.  They  thought  the  amethyst  was 
a  charm  against  intemperance,  and  a  cure  for  it  when  men  fell  into  this  dreadful 
habit.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  would  be  if  this  were  so !  Then  this  jewel  would 
be  worth  its  weight  in  gold,  and  ten  times  more  than  that.  But  it  cannot  do  this. 
It  is  only  the  Bible  jewel,  which  the  amethyst  stands  for,  that  can  do  this.  And 
what  is  the  Bible  jewel  that  may  be  compared  to  the  amethyst  ?  It  is  the  fear  of 
God.  This  is  the  real  temperance  jewel.  I  wish  to  speak  of  three  ways  in  which 
this  Bible  jewel — the  true  amethyst — the  fear  of  God — will  be  a  temperance  jewel 
to  us.  I.  In  the  first  place  it  will  keep  us  from  learning  to  deink.  You  know 
what  a  dreadful  thing  it  is  to  be  plunged  over  the  Falls  of  Niagara.  Nobody  can 
go  over  there  without  being  killed.  And  if,  when  you  are  visiting  the  falls,  you 
should  see  a  person  sailing  in  a  boat  on  the  river  above  the  falls,  to  see  how  near 
he  could  go  without  being  drawn  over,  you  would  think  that  a  very  dangerous 
position  to  be  in.  And  so  it  would  be.  So  long  as  a  person  is  on  the  river  above 
Niagara  he  is  always  in  danger  of  being  drawn  over.  But  if  he  keep  out  of  the  river, 
he  is  free  from  danger.  Now,  to  fall  into  intemperance  is  worse  than  going  over 
Niagara.  And  learning  to  drink  intoxicating  liquor  is  like  sailing  on  the  river 
above  Niaj/ara.  You  are  in  danger  at  any  time  of  being  drawn  over.  This  Bible 
gem,  the  fear  of  God,  is  the  true  amethyst — the  temperance  jewel — in  the  first  place, 
because  it  will  keep  us  from  learning  to  drink.  II.  It  is  so,  in  the  second  place, 
because  it  will  keep  us  from  tempting  others  to  drink.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  how 
much  harm  is  done  in  this  way.  God  has  tried  to  stop  this  evil  by  speaking  about 
it  in  the  Bible.  He  says  in  one  place,  "  Woe  unto  him  that  giveth  his  neighbour 
drink,  that  putteth  the  bottle  to  him  "  (Hab.  ii.  15).  III.  And  then  there  is  another 
reason  why  this  Bible  jewel,  the  fear  of  God,  may  be  compared  to  the  amethyst — 
the  true  temperance  jewel — and  that  is,  it  will  lead  ds  to  stop  drinking  even 
when  we  have  got  into  the  habit  of  doing  so.  When  the  habit  of  drinking  is  once 
formed  it  becomes  very  strong.  Nothing  but  this  temperance  jewel  will  enable  any 
one  to  break  off  from  the  habit  of  drinking.  My  dear  young  friends,  you  know  that 
in  Switzerland  there  are  great  mountains,  very  high  and  very  steep.  Many  of  them 
have  there  tops  covered  with  ice  and  snow.  Sometimes  great  masses  of  this  ice  and 
snow  will  get  loose  and  fall.  In  their  fall  they  go  rushing  down  the  sides  of  the 
mountains  with  a  noise  like  thunder.  These  masses  of  falling  ice  and  snow  are 
called  avalanches.  If  travellers,  or  cottages,  or  even  villages  are  in  their  path,  they 
are  swept  away  into  instant  destruction.  When  an  avalanche  is  once  started,  it 
never  can  be  stopped  till  it  gets  to  the  bottom  of  the  mountain.  Sometimes  a  very 
httle  is  enough  to  start  an  avalanche.  The  stepping  of  your  foot  upon  it ;  the 
taking  away  of  a  loose  stone ;  or  even  the  jarring  of  the  air  may  do  it.  What  a 
dangerous  thing  it  is  to  loosen  an  avalanche  and  send  it  down  the  mountain  side, 
breaking  and  crushing  everything  before  it  1  But  drunkenness  is  worse  than  an 
avalanche.  And  when  any  one  gets  into  the  habit  of  drinking  he  is  loosening  an 
avalanche  over  his  head  which  may  at  any  time  rush  down  upon  him  and  kill  him. 
Be  very  careful  how  you  do  this.  Don')*;et  into  the  habit  of  drinking,  and  then  you 
will  be  sure  never  to  become  a  drunkard.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  29.  Aaron  shall  bear  the  names. — I.  The  person  ttpifibd  by  Aabon.    1. 
Christ  (Heb.  v.  i,  5).     2.  His  Divine  call  to  the  priesthood  (Heb.  v.  10).     3.  The 


CHAP,  xxvm.]  EXODUS.  511 

destrnction  of  His  enemies  (1  John  iii.  8).  4.  The  leader  of  His  people  (John  x.  3). 
5.  The  averter  of  God's  vengeance  (1  Tim.  ii.  5).  II.  The  persons  kepresented  by 
THE  TERM  "  IsRAEL."  Ancient  Israel,  as  an  elect  nation,  was  a  typical  people, 
representing  the  collective  body  of  Christ's  Church.  For  which  compare  Deut.  viL 
6-8  with  Rom.  viii.  28-30.  1.  All  true  believers  are  called  Israel  (Gal.  vi.  16).  2. 
They  are  circumcised,  as  was  Israel  (Rom.  ii.  28,  29).  3.  They  are  a  peculiar 
people,  as  was  Israel  (Tit.  ii.  14).  III.  What  is  meant  by  Aaron's  bearing 
THEM  ON  HIS  HEART.  1.  Christ's  affcction  for  us  (1  John  iii.  16).  2.  His 
great  pity  towards  us  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9).     3.  His   interest  in  us  (John  xvii.  9,  10,  24). 

IV.  What  we  are  to  dndeestand  by  Aaron's  going  into  the  holy  place.  Eternal 
exclusion  from  God's  glory  would  have  been  our  unchanging  portion,  had  not  the 
blessed  Saviour  opened  a  way  for  our  admission.  See  it  literally  explained  in  Lev. 
xvi.  1.  It  shows  Christ's  entrance  into  heaven  for  us  (Heb.  ix.  24).  2.  To  present 
His  perfect  offering  for  us  (Heb.  ix.  12).  3.  His  continual  intercession  (Heb.  vii.  25). 

V.  Here  I  shall  explain  this  "  continual  memorial,"  ever  before  the  Lord  :  It  may 
signify — 1.  The  constant  efficacy  of  His  blood.  2.  The  perfection  of  His  everlasting 
righteousness.  3.  The  daily  outpouring  of  His  Spirit.  4.  The  gracious  preservation  of 
His  people  in  holiness.  5.  It  represents  the  place  which  Christ's  Church  occupies  in 
His  heart,  in  glory.  6.  And  ensures  our  everlasting  enjoyment  after  this  time-state  is 
passed  away.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  The  connection  between  priest  and  people  : — That 
the  connection  between  the  priest  and  the  people  might  be  made  more  plain,  God 
not  only  placed  on  his  breast  the  memorials  of  the  twelve  tribes,  but  also  engraved 
their  names  on  his  shoulders.  Thus  the  people  would  understand  that  this  one 
man  was  not  separated  from  the  others  for  the  sake  of  private  advantage,  but  that 
in  his  one  person  they  were  all  a  kingdom  of  priests  (see  1  Pet.  ii.  5  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  21 ; 
Eev.  i.  6).  Hence  arises  our  confidence  of  ascending  to  heaven  because  Christ 
raises  us  up  with  Him;  we  "sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus"  ; 
however  weak  we  may  be  in  ourselves,  herein  is  all  our  strength  that  we  are  His 
burden.  {J.  Calvin.)  Shoulder  and  heart  ministry  : — History  shall  not  be 
forgotten,  deliverances  shall  be  held  in  perpetual  remembrance  ;  marvels  of  the 
Lord  wrought  yesterdaj  shall  be  as  the  marvels  wrought  in  the  present  hour.  Then 
there  shall  be  a  tenderer  representation — the  names  shall  be  upon  the  heart. 
There  shall  be  a  ministry  of  love,  a  pleading  of  sympathy,  an  identification  of 
the  spirit  of  the  man  with  all  the  difficulties  and  distresses  of  the  people.  Shoulder 
work :  representing  publicity,  courage,  strength,  leadership — shoulders  to  which 
men  may  look  as  to  strong  towers ;  and  then  the  delicate  heart-work  ;  the  sweet 
sympathy,  the  paternal  or  fraternal  interest  in  all  that  concerns  the  development, 
and  culture,  and  completion  of  poor,  shattered,  struggling  human  life.  It  is 
nothing  to  bear  upon  the  shoulder — that  is  a  kind  of  burden-carrying,  and  there  is 
a  kind  of  applause  immediately  following  the  completion  of  any  athletic  task — but 
who  can  tell  the  heart-work  of  the  true  mediator  or  minister  of  the  new  covenant  ? 
A  man  who  enters  into  this  work  with  his  whole  soul  must  live  a  life  of  singular 
tension  and  agony,  otherwise  he  is  but  a  shatterer  of  words ;  only  his  shoulder 
engaged  in  the  function ;  his  heart  is  at  liberty  to  run  after  any  vanity  and  court 
the  applause  of  any  foolish  idolatry.  We  must  look  at  ideals  ;  we  must  fasten  our 
attention  upon  the  thing  as  God  meant  it  to  be,  and  taking  the  Divine  meaning  of 
the  priesthood  in  the  olden  time  and  of  the  ministry  of  to-day,  we  have  amongst  us 
men  who  care  for  us,  men  with  strong  shoulders,  tower-like  men;  sturdy,  visible, 
valiant,  dauntless  men  ;  men  who  can  speak  in  the  darkness  and  make  their  voices 
heard  in  the  storm  ;  men  who  know  not  the  cloud  of  fear  and  who  heed  not  the 
tempest  of  opposition.  But  we  need  in  the  same  men  other  qualities,  tenderer 
elements,  more  gracious  and  insinuating  forces  that  find  their  way  into  our  inmost 
experience,  into  our  heart's  aching  and  sore  necessity— men  who  are  taught  of 
Heaven  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is  weary  ;  men  who  have  the  gift  of 
consolation,  who  can  lower  the  voice  into  a  tender  and  helpful  whisper,  and  who  can 
bring  all  God's  gospel  to  bear  in  gracious  and  healing  application  upon  the  wound 
which  makes  the  heart  sore.  This  is  the  ideal.  That  we  do  not  rise  to  it  may  be  a 
rebuke  to  ourselves,  but  it  is  no  just  criticism  upon  the  Divine  purpose.  It  is  an 
ideal  we  should  do  much  to  sustain.  We  cannot  tell  what  we  owe  to  the  men  who 
teach  us  great  doctrines,  who  pray  off  many  a  burden  that  strains  our  strength ; 
who  speak  to  us,  even  between  the  lines  of  their  eloquence,  things  that  help  us  to 
bear  life's  misery  with  a  more  cheerful  courage.  We  do  not  know  what  is  being 
done  by  ministry  of  a  truly  Christian  type,  whether  in  the  pulpit,  or  in  the  school, 
or  in  the  family,  or  in  the  market-place.    No  man  can  measure  the  full  issue  and 


512  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

outgoing  of  influence  connected  with  the  profound  agonistic  service  on  behalf  of 
truth  and  humanity.     [J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  30.  The  Urim  and  the  Thummlm. — The  Urim  and  Thnmmim : — A  very 
great  mystery  hangs  over  those  two  words — "  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  " — 
commonly  translated  "  light  and  perfection  " — in  the  Septuagint  version,  "  mani- 
festation and  truth," — and  in  the  Vulgate,  "  doctrine  and  truth."  But  until  there 
shall  stand  up  a  priest  with  Urim  and  Thummim,  we  are  told,  both  iu  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah,  it  will  remain  a  mystery.    And  as  a  mystery  we  must  view  it.     I.  The 

STONES  REPRESENTING  THE  ChURCH,  THAT  WERE  BORNE  UPON  THE  HIGH  PRIESX'S  BREAST 
AND  THE    HIGH    PBIEST's    SHOULDERS,  CONNECT   THEMSELVES    WITH    THE    UrIM    AND    THE 

Thummim.  In  some  way  or  other,  it  is  quite  clear  that  God  was  pleased  to  reveal 
His  will  in  connection  with  these  twelve  stones.  In  what  way  it  is  very  difficult  to 
determine.  There  are  these  possible  interpretations.  It  may  be  that  it  pleased  God 
at  certain  times  to  throw  a  miraculous  light  upon  these  twelve  different  coloured 
stones,  which  did  in  some  way  write  His  mind ;  either  by  the  initiatory  letters,  or  by 
some  signs  which  were  familiar  to  the  high  priest,  God  did,  by  the  means  of  these 
twelve  precious  stones,  representing  the  twelve  tribes,  convey  Ilis  will  to  the  high 
priest — that  he  might  again  convey  it  to  the  people.  But  the  closest  investigation 
that  has  been  given  to  the  subject  does  not  lead  to  that  conclusion — and  those  who 
are  the  most  competent  to  speak  do  not  adopt  that  intei-pretation.  It  has  been 
rather  supposed  that  these  stones  were  not  made  themselves  the  channels  or  the 
mediums  by  which  God  conveyed  His  will,  but  that  they  accredited,  as  it  were,  and 
empowered  the  high  priest,  when  he  was  before  God,  authenticated  the  high  priest, 
that  then  God  seeing  him  in  the  fulness  of  his  priesthood,  was  pleased  to  convey 
spiritually  and  not  materially  by  these  stones  to  his  mind  what  God  had  in  His  own 
mind  upon  the  subject  that  was  transferred  to  him  for  consultation.  II.  Consider 
now  practically  what  is  that  which  is  to  us  the  Urim  and  Thummto  ? — and  how 
SHOULD  WE  CONSULT  GoD,  AND  OBTAIN  ouB  ANSWERS  ?  1.  And  here  let  me  speak  to  you 
of  the  very  great  importance  of  going  to  God  very  often  consultingly.  In  prayer, 
pray  consultingly — in  reading,  read  consultingly.  Alwajji  consult  God  first,  before 
you  ask  any  man — if  possible,  before  you  ask  yourself.  Before  you  go  to  a  thought, 
if  possible,  ask  God  to  take  the  initiative — ask  God  first  to  speak  even  before  your 
own  heart  speaks.  2.  You  must  be  very  careful,  whenever  you  go  to  consult  God, 
that  there  are  two  conditions.  (1)  That  your  mind  is  not  preoccupied,  that  you  be 
free,  that  you  do  not  bring  pre-conceived  and  settled  ideas,  and  then  ask  God  to  fall 
in  with  your  view.  You  will  be  surprised,  if  you  examine  your  own  hearts,  how 
very  generally  you  do  that.  You  have  settled  what  you  wish,  and  then  you  go  to 
God  to  persuade  God,  as  it  were,  to  follow  your  design.  Try  to  go  to  God  as  the 
blank  sheet,  that  God  will  write  there,  upon  a  mind  quite  free,  His  own  entire  will. 
(2)  And  again,  it  is  quite  essential,  if  you  will  have  answers  to  your  consultings  of 
God,  that  you  should  have  thoroughly  and  honestly  made  up  your  mind  to  follow 
whatever  you  find  to  be,  believe  to  be  God's  guidance.  If  you  do  not  go  to  God 
with  that  true  determination,  you  will  consult  him  in  vain.  (3)  If  we  are  to  attain 
Urim  and  Thnmmim  in  our  consultations  with  God,  we  must  do  it  through  priest- 
hood— in  the  recognition  of  the  priesthood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     III.  There 

ARE  MANY  WAYS  IN  WHICH  GoD  MAT    GIVE  US    THE    UrIM    AND    ThUMMIM    TO    DIRECT  OUB 

STEPS.  1.  By  a  light  breaking  on  some  passage  of  the  Bible.  2.  By  the  Spirit  of 
God  illuminating  our  own  minds.  (/.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim : — We  lean  to  the  opinion  that  the  precious  stones  constituted  the  Urim  and 
Thummim,  but  not  by  reason  of  any  supernatural  illumination  of  the  letters,  and 
that  the  stones  rendered  the  breastplate  the  ornament  or  badge  which  qualified  the 
high  priest  for  making  inquiries  of  Jehovah  :  "  They  shall  be  upon  Aaron's  heart 
when  he  goeth  in  before  the  Lord."  The  precious  stones  may  have  received  the 
collective  name  of  Urim  and  Thnmmim  :  1.  On  their  own  account.  Of  all  earthly 
objects,  these  precious  stones  are  the  most  lustrous,  and  emit  light  of  themselves. 
Like  the  stars  they  shine  in  the  darkest  night,  and  for  that  reason  they  have  been 
called  the  "stars  of  earth."  Are  they  not,  then,  well  called  lights?  Thummim 
signifies  perfection.  The  stones,  from  their  brilliancy,  purity,  and  uncommon 
beauty,  are  perhaps  the  most  striking  emblems  which  earthly  objects  furnish  of 
truth  or  perfection,  and  are  therefore  not  inappropriately  named  "  Thummim."  2, 
On  account  of  their  being  the  badge  or  ornament  which  it  was  necessary  for  the 
high  priest  to  wear  when  he  consulted  Jehovah.  The  object  of  the  high  priest  was 
to  get  light  on  some  dark  subject,  or  to  arrive  at  the  truth  on  some  matter  he  coald 


CHAP,  xxvm.]  ^XODUS^  513 

not  discover  otherwise,  or  to  give  a  righteous  decision  in  cases  in  which  his 
knowledge  or  wisdom  was  deficient,  and  such  as  would  accord  with  innocence  and 
justice.  For  these  reasons  the  gems  seem  to  be  appropriately  called  "  Urim  and 
Thummim."  3.  On  account  of  their  representing  the  children  of  Israel.  The 
names  of  all  the  tribes  being  on  the  stones — one  name  on  each— the  Israelites 
might  see  in  these  stones  an  emblem  of  what  it  was  designed  they  should  become, 
before  they  were  meet  for  being  worshippers  in  the  heavenly  temple  ;  and  the  high 
priest  might  be  reminded  by  them  that  his  mission  was  to  bring  the  pious  Israelite 
into  that  state  of  perfection.  Like  these  gems,  man  by  nature  is  of  the  earth 
earthy.  Both  have  their  origin  in  mother  earth.  Yet  both,  when  polished,  may 
shine  like  the  stars   of  the  firmament.      (W.   Brown.)  The    Urim  and  the 

Thummim : — As  to  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim,  whether  they  were  precious 
stones  bearing  those  significant  names,  or  what  they  were,  no  one  is  able  at  present 
to  decide.  Urim  means  "  Lights  "  ;  Thummim,  "  Perfections."  These  mysterious 
contents  of  the  breastplate  seem  to  direct  our  thoughts  to  the  heart  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  containing  all  lights  and  perfections,  all  grace  and  truth,  all  mercies  and 
righteousness.  In  Him  was  light :  and  He  manifested  forth  that  light ;  He  declared 
the  Father.  He  is  the  light  of  the  glory  of  God :  all  fulness  of  light  dwells  in  Him. 
The  Septuagint  translation  "  Manifestation,"  is  not  an  inappropriate  expression, 
though  rather  a  paraphrase  than  a  translation.  We  are  told  in  Eph.  v.  13, 
"  Whatsoever  doth  make  manifest  is  light."  The  high  priest,  with  the  Urim  in  his 
breastplate,  became  the  channel  by  which  God  made  manifest  His  counsels.  The 
Lord  Jesus,  as  the  great  High  Priest,  makes  known  the  counsels  and  purposes  of 
God.  He  is  light ;  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all ;  so  that  the  mind  and 
will  of  God  can  be  perfectly  revealed  to  Him,  and  can  by  Him  be  communicated  to 
His  saints.  He  is  the  brightness  or  shining  forth  of  God's  glory,  the  irradiation 
of  God.  The  Thummim  also,  or  all  perfections  of  truth  and  holiness,  dwell  in  Him. 
Light  and  truth,  love  and  holiness,  grace  and  righteousness  are  inseparable. 
Sometimes  we  find  the  Urim  mentioned,  without  the  Thummim  (Num.  xxvii.  21 ; 
1  Sam.  xxviii.  6).  From  these  two  passages  it  is  clear  that  by  means  of  the  Urim, 
or  lights,  in  the  breastplate  of  the  high  priest,  the  counsel,  judgment,  and 
prophetic  guidance  of  Jehovah  were  revealed.  In  three  other  passages  (Deut; 
xxxiii.  8 ;  Ezra  ii.  63  ;  Neh.  vii.  65),  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  mentioned 
together.  "  Urim "  is  also  translated  "  fire "  and  fires  (Isa.  xxiv.  15,  xxxi.  9, 
xliv.  16,  xlvii.  14,  1.  11 ;  Ezek.  v.  2).  In  the  vision  of  the  Son  of  Man  (Kev.  i, 
12-16),  the  eyes  of  the  High  Priest,  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks, 
were  as  a  flame  of  fire.  The  ligbts  and  perfections  of  God  searched  into  the  ways 
of  the  seven  Churches  ;  and  the  Priest  of  the  Most  High  could  say,  as  He  addressed 
each  separately,  "  I  know  thy  works,"  and  could  give  a  word  of  encouragement  or 
of  rebuke,  according  as  it  was  needed.    (H.  W.  Soltau.) 

Vers.  31-35.  The  robe  of  the  ephod. — The  robe  of  the  ephod:— The  third 
peculiar  garment  of  the  high  priest  was  the  robe  of  the  ephod  (v,er3.  5,  31).  On 
the  skirts  of  which  were  fastened — 1.  The  pomegranates  of  blue  silk,  and  purple, 
and  scarlet  round  about.  This  fruit  hath  a  most  pleasant  smell,  sweet  in  itself, 
and  sweetening  other  things  round  about  it ;  and  is  full  of  precious  juice  and  liquor. 
2.  Bells  of  gold  between  them  round  about,  a  golden  bell  and  a  pomegranate ;  the 
use  of  which  was,  that  his  sound  might  be  heard  round  about  when  he  went  into 
the  sanctuary  and  holy  of  holies.  The  whole  garment  signified  the  righteousness 
of  Christ's  human  nature,  which  is — (1)  Most  sweet  itself,  having  a  most  pleasant 
savour  as  the  pomegranate.  (2)  Full  of  most  precious  juice  and  virtue,  to  qualify 
and  abate  the  raging  heat  of  God's  displeasure,  as  the  juice  of  pomegranates  doth 
allay  the  burning  heat  of  an  ague  that  would  shake  the  body  to  pieces.  (3)  Casts 
upon  us  a  sweet  savour  being  wrapped  in  it.  For  we,  by  nature,  stinking  in  our 
sins  and  rottenness,  are  loathsome  to  the  Lord  ;  but  once  covered  with  this  mantle, 
we  are  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  3.  This  garment  hath  a  sweet  sound,  as  of  golden 
bells,  which  to  hear  were  most  delectable,  because  the  garment  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness brings  grace  to  us  no  otherwise  than  by  the  sound  of  the  gospel.  For  faith,  by 
■which  we  put  on  Christ,  is  wrought  by  hearing  the  sweet  sound  and  golden  bell  of 
the  gospel.  Whence  some  have  thought,  that  by  this  part  of  the  priest's  attire,  is 
shadowed  the  prophetical  office  of  Christ.  Sweet  is  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel 
of  peace  !  4.  The  use.  That  by  these  bells  the  priests  must  be  heard  when  he  goeth 
into  the  sanctuary ;  signifying  the  power  of  Christ,  our  High  Priest's,  perpetual  inter- 
cession (being  entered  into  the  sanctuary  of  heaven)  for  His  elect  and  chosen.    (T. 

B3 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxvm. 


Taylor,  D.D.)  The  blue  robe  : — The  robe  was  of  one  piece,  and  was  all  of  blue. 
This  colour  sets  forth  that  which  was  pre-eminently  heavenly  in  the  character  of 
Christ,  and  it  reminds  us  of  that  perfect,  seamless  robe  of  Christ's  righteousness, 
which  is  "  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe  "  (Kom.  iii.  22).  The  bottom 
of  this  long  robe  was  ornamented  with  golden  bells  and  pomegranates.  Here  were 
Bound  and  fruit,  and  as  much  fruit  as  sound.  As  he  moved  about  in  the  court  or  in 
the  tabernacle,  every  step  sent  forth  a  sweet  golden  sound  from  each  of  the  many 
little  bells  hanging  about  his  feet,  and  Aaron  would  seem  to  say  by  this  sound,  "  I 
am  ready  to  serve  you,  and  to  bless  you."  The  pomegranates  would  often  remind 
him  that  a  priest  must  do  more  than  make  a  sound  ;  he  must  work  as  well  as  talk  ; 
he  must  produce  both  sound  and  fruit,  and  both  must  be  good.  These  bells  and 
pomegranates  were  about  the  feet — the  walk  of  the  high  priest ;  reminding  us  of 
the  loveliness  of  Christ's  walk,  and  of  the  sweetness  and  pleasantness  of  His  con- 
versation.  The  sound  of  these  bells  would  not  be  heard  in  the  camp,  and  but 
faintly,  if  they  could  be  heard  at  all,  outside  the  court.  To  hear  this  sweet  sound 
distinctly,  a  man  must  have  come  as  far  as  to  the  brazen  altar  ;  but  he  could  not 
come  there  without  an  offering.  And  as  the  first  offering  he  was  required  to  bring 
was  a  BJD-offering,  if  a  man  stood  at  the  altar  of  brass  and  listened  to  the  sweet  and 
joyful  sound  of  the  golden  bells  about  the  hem  of  the  priest's  blue  robe,  we  are 
quite  sure  that  he  had  come,  first  of  all,  as  a  sinner  to  be  pardoned  and  saved.  So 
now  a  man  must  feel  himself  a  sinner,  and  in  need  of  a  sin-offering :  he  must  come 
out  from  the  world  ;  must  draw  near  to  Him  who  is  both  the  altar  and  the  sacrifice ; 
must  lay  his  hand  by  faith  on  the  head  of  Christ.  (G.  Rodgers.)  The  robe  of  the 
ephod : — This  robe  embodied  the  colour  of  the  heavens  ;  it  was  all  of  blue.  It 
seems  to  have  typified  the  especial  glory  of  the  true  High  Priest,  whose  name  is 
"  Prince  of  Peace,"  the  "  Lord  of  Peace  "  ;  and  who  wears  His  princely  robes  as 
King  of  Righteousness,  and  King  of  Peace,  upon  the  ground  of  having  made  full, 
perfect,  and  eternal  peace  through  the  blood  of  His  cross.  Qod,  known  as  love,  ia 
the  God  of  peace  :  and  He  has  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  that 
Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  eternal  covenant.  That 
title,  "  the  Great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,"  seems  to  sum  up  in  one  name  the  whole 
of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  as  described  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  He  is  the 
Great  Shepherd ;  for  He  is  King  as  well  as  Priest.  He  has  royal  power  ;  a  royal 
heart ;  royal  glory ;  and  His  dominions  are  righteousness  and  peace  ;  and  He  is  the 
Shepherd,  having  proved  His  love  and  care  for  the  sheep,  in  laying  down  His  life 
for  them ;  and  all  His  priestly  service  on  their  behalf  is  conducted  with  the  heart 
of  a  good  Shepherd,  who  loves  His  own,  and  whose  own  the  sheep  are.  This  is, 
therefore,  a  princely,  priestly,  shepherd  robe.  It  displays  the  love  of  God  as  seen  in 
the  gift  of  His  Son  and  as  manifested  by  the  Son  Himself,  in  laying  down  His  life, 
and  so  making  peace.  It  was  a  robe  which  covered  the  high  priest  from  head  to 
foot,  and  showed  the  great  object  of  His  priesthood,  namely,  to  maintain,  on  the 
behalf  of  His  own,  that  peace  with  God  which  He  bad  procured  at  the  cost  of  His 
own  blood,  and  which  the  God  of  peace  had  sealed  and  established,  by  raising  Him 
from  the  dead  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  This  robe  was  all  of 
one  piece,  woven  from  the  top  throughout,  and  a  provision  was  made  by  means  of  a 
binding  of  woven  work  round  about  the  hole  in  the  top  of  it,  that  it  should  not  rend  or 
be  rent.  Is  not  this  very  significant  of  the  unchanging  love  of  Christ  ?  (H.  W. 
Soltau.)  A  golden  bell  and  a  pomegranate. — Golden  bells  : — I  am  glad  that  the 
first  use  of  bells  was  a  religious  use ;  and  hereafter  the  gospel  of  God  to  me  shall 
be  a  chime  of  bells  ;  and  whether  I  hear  them  in  the  garments  of  the  high  priest,  or 
in  the  cathedral  tower,  they  shall  suggest  to  me  the  gladness,  the  warning,  and  the 
triumph  of  the  gospel.  1.  These  gospel  bells,  like  those  that  adorned  the  high 
priest's  robe,  are  golden  bells.  Other  bells  are  made  of  coarser  materials — zinc, 
and  lead,  and  tin,  and  copper ;  but  these  gospel  bells  are  bells  of  gold.  There  is 
one  bell  in  Europe  that  cost  three  hundred  thousand  dollars.  It  was  at  vast 
expense  that  metallic  voices  were  given  to  the  towers  of  York,  and  Vienna,  and 
Oxford.  But  all  the  wealth  of  heaven  was  thrown  into  this  gospel  bell.  No  angel 
•can  coimt  its  value.  Eternity  cannot  demonstrate  its  cost.  When  the  bell  of  the 
Bussian  Kremlin  was  being  fused,  the  lords  came  and  threw  their  gold  into  the 
molten  mass  ;  but  when  this  Gospel  bell  was  to  be  constructed,  the  kings  of  heaven, 
the  hierarchs  of  eternity,  threw  into  it  their  crowns  and  their  sceptres.  It  is  a 
golden  bell.  Do  you  believe  it  ?  Hear  it  ring  !  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He 
gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish, 
Sat  have  everlasting  life."    "  Him  hath  God  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour, 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  EXODUS.  515 

to  give  repentance  unto  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins."     2.  I  remark,  further,  that 
these  gospel  bells,  like  those  around  the  high  priest's  garment,  are  bells  of  invita- 
tion.    When  the  Jews  heard  the  clash  of  those  bells  in  the  hem  of  the  priest's  robe 
they  knew  it  was  an  invitation  to  worship.     That  is  the  meaning  of  every  church 
tower  from  San  Francisco  to  New  York,  and  from  London  to  St.  Petersburgh.     It 
is,  "  Come— come."    3.  I  remark,  further,  that  the  gospel  bells,  like  those  on  the 
high  priest's  robe,  are  bells  of  warning.     When  the  Jews  heard  the  clash  and  ring 
of  these  bells,  it  was  a  warning  for  them  to  worship,  lest  their  God  be  offended. 
On  Bell  Rock,  in  the  German  Ocean,  there  is  a  lighthouse,  and  there  are  two  bells, 
that  every  half-minute  ring  out  through  the  fog,  through  the  darkness,  through  the 
storm,  and  over  the  sea.    Beware !  Beware !     The  helmsman  on  the  ship,  hearing 
the  warning,  turns  the  wheel  and  steers  off.     It  is  a  startUng  thing,  at  midnight,  to 
hear  the  heavy  clang  of  a  fire  bell,  if  you  live  in  the  third  ward,  and  the  tongue  of 
the  bell  strike  one,  two,  three !     If  a  city  is  besieged,  and  the  flash  of  the  musketry 
is  seen  on  the  hill-tops,  and  the  cavalry  horses  are  dashing  up  and  down,  and  the 
batteries  are  being  unlimbered,  all  the  bells  of  the  city  call,  to  arms  !  to  arms  !     So 
this  gospel  bell  is  a  bell  of  alarm.     4.  I  remark,  further,  that  the  bells  on  the  high 
priest's  robe  were  bells  of  joy.     When  the  Jews  heard  the  chiming  of  those  bells  on 
the  priest's  robe,  it  announced  to  them  the  possibility  of  pardon  for  their  sins,  and  of 
dehverance.     "  Behold  !  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  that  shall  be  to  all 
people."     There  have  been  bells  rung  on  days  of  victory.     The  bell  of  London  rang 
after  Waterloo.     The  bells  in  many  of  our  cities  rang  after  the  settlement  of  our 
national  strife.     The  great  bells  of  York,  and  Oxford,  and  Vienna,  at  some  time, 
have  sounded  the  victory.     5.  These  gospel  bells,  of  which  I  speak,  are  bells  of 
triumph.     Aye  !  they  are  ringing  now  :  "  All  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God." 
"  And  He  shall  reign  for  ever  and  for  ever  1  "     The  Bishop  of  Malta,  in  superstition, 
had  all  the  bells  of  the  city  rung,  in  the  hope  that  the  storm  that  was  raging  in  the 
city  might  be  quieted.    That  was  superstition  :  but  I  think  it  is  faith  in  God  that 
leads  us  to  believe  that  the  ringing  of  these  gospel  bells  will  yet  silence  all  the 
storms  of  this  world's  sin,  and  all  the  storms  of  this  world's  trouble.     Oh !  when 
Jesus,  our  Great  High  Priest,  in  full  robes  shall  enter  into  His  glory,  the  bells  on 
the  hem  of  His  garments  will  ring  with  the  music  of  an  eternal  merriment.     6.  But 
we  shall  have  no  share  in  that  joy  unless  now  we  listen  to  the  gospel    tiding. 
There  is  a  bell  on  the  other  side  of  the  waters,  weighing  two  hundred  and  eight 
thousand  pounds ;  and  it  takes  twenty-four  men  to  ring  it.     But  to  bring  out  all  the 
Bweetness  of  this  gospel  bell  would  take  all  the  consecrated  spirits  of  earth — sera- 
phim and  archangel.     Who  in  this  august  assembly  will  listen  ?     Who  will  listen 
now  ?    In  New  England  they  have  what  they  call  a  passing  bell ;  that  is,  when  some 
one  dies  in  a  village,  word  is  sent  to  the  sexton,  and  he  sounds  the  bell  just  as  often 
as  the  man  lived  years :  and  when  the  sound  is  in  the  tower,  the  people  are  solemn, 
and  they  say,  "  Some  one  is  dead — who  is  it?  "    For  us  the  passing  bell  will  soon 
sound.      Gone  from  the  family.      Gone  from  the  church.      Gone  from  the  last 
opportunity  of  salvation.     {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)        Lessons : — As  the  priests  must 
have  in  their  skirts  both  bells  and    pomegranates  :    so  must   every  evangelical 
minister.      1.  The  bells  allow  them  not  to  be  dumb  dogs  (Isa.  Ivi.  10),  but  the 
sound  of  the  law  and  gospel  must  clearly  sound  in  their  mouths,  to  be  heard  afar 
off.     2.  These  bells  must  be  of  gold,  to  put  ministers  in  mind  that  their  doctrine 
be  pure ;  not  corrupt,  not  savouring  of  popish  liberty,  or  self-respect.     3.  They 
must  never  come  into  the  congregation  without  these  bells ;  for  ministers  must  still  be 
furnished  with  some  sound  matter  of  instruction  and  edification.     How  is  it  then 
that  many  come  into  the  congregation  and  never  bring  bells  ?     Many  are  afraid 
lest  the  sound  of  their  bells  should  be  heard  too  much,  and  that  it  would  disgrace 
them  to  be  counted  diligent  preachers.     And  many  scorn  others  that  their  bella 
Bound  so   often.     4.  To  the  bells,  ministers  must  join  pomegranates:   with  the 
wholesome  word,  join  good  works  and  holy  life.    He  carries  the  bell,  a  minister 
whose  life  is  agreeable  with  the  holy  doctrine  (Matt.  v.  19).    He  that  keepeth  the 
commandments,  and  teacheth  others  so  to  do,  shall  be  great  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
John  Baptist  had  both  bells  (being  a  burning  light  in  himself),  and  pomegranates; 
being  a  shining  light  unto  others.     And  as  the  pomegranates  smelled  sweet ;  so 
must  ministers  labour  to  leave  a  sweet  smell  behind  them  everywhere.     (T.  Taylor, 
D.D.)        The  church-going  bells: — In  considering  the  usefulness  of  church  bells, 
it  may  be  proper  to  say :  First,  that  they  render  a  worthy  claim  for  their  existence 
in  promoting  the  temporal  welfare  of  communities  where  their  voice  is  heard. 
But,  secondly,  the  worth  of  a  bell  is  perhaps  still  more  evident  when  we  consider  its 


516  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 


use  for  religious  purposes.  The  ways  of  its  usefulness,  when  calling  the  people 
together  for  worship,  are  easily  seen.     I.  It  calls  attention  to  the  claims  of  God 

FOR  LOVE  AND  SERVICE.  NoTHINO  IS  MORE  MANIFEST  THAN  THAT  MEN  ARE  APT  TO 
BECOME  CARELESS  IN  RESPECT  TO  THESE  CLAIMS.  II.  It  IS  USEFUL  IN  PROMOTING  A 
LARGER  ATTENDANCE  UPON  THE  SERVICES  OF  THE  SANCTUARY,  THAN  WOULD  BE  SECURED 
BUT  FOR  ITS  INFLUENCE.  III.  AdDED  TO  AN  INCREASE  OF  ATTENDANTS,  THE  BELL  PRO- 
MOTES PUNCTUALITY.  IV.  ThE  BELL  IS  USEFUL  IN  THE  INFLUENCE  IT  HAS  IN  PREPAR- 
ING THE  MIND  OF  THOSE  WHO  OBEY  ITS  CALL  FOR  WORSHIP.  V.  ThE  BELL  IS  USEFUL 
BECAUSE  OF  THE  SACRED  ASSOCIATIONS  CONNECTED  WITH   ITS    SOUND,  AND    THE    HALLOWED 

MEMORIES  ITS  NOTES  INSPIRE.  (G.  L.  Fosttr.)  The  dumb  hell  .-—Mr.  Gatty,  in  his 
book  on  "  Bells,"  gives  the  following  anecdote,  on  the  credit  of  Cardinal  Baronius  : 
"  When  Charles  II.,  king  of  France,  a.d.  615,  was  at  Sens,  in  Burgundy,  he  heard  a 
bell  in  the  church  of  St.  Stephen,  the  sound  of  which  pleased  him  so  much  that  he 
ordered  it  to  be  transported  to  Paris.  The  Bishop  of  Sens,  however,  was  greatly 
displeased  at  this,  and  the  bell  so  sympathized  with  him  that  it  turned  dumb  on 
the  road  and  lost  all  its  sound.  When  the  king  heard  of  this  he  commanded  that 
the  bell  should  be  carried  back  to  its  old  quarters,  when,  strange  to  relate,  as  it 
approached  the  town,  it  recovered  its  original  tone,  and  began  to  ring  so  as  to  be 
heard  at  Sens,  whilst  yet  about  four  leagues  distant  from  it."  The  true  preacher 
grows  silent  if  forced  to  any  other  service  than  his  Lord's.  If  he  attempts  to  speak 
on  any  other  topic  than  that  which  concerns  his  Lord  and  the  gospel,  he  misses  his 
former  force ;  he  is  not  at  home,  he  is  glad  to  end  his  speech  and  sit  down.  Our 
bell  is  dumb  if  it  does  not  ring  out  for  Jesus.  The  world  would  soon  dismiss  us  if  it 
had  hired  us  to  be  its  orator,  for  our  heart  is  elsewhere,  and  only  upon  the  one  dear, 
familiar  theme  can  be  eloquent.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  36-38.  HollnesB to  the  Lord. — Holiness  to  the  Lord: — This  plate  of  pure 
gold  was  fastened  by  blue  lace  to  the  mitre,  or  turban,  or  tiara,  or  linen,  which  was 
upon  the  head  of  the  high  priest.  He  put  it  on  with  the  robe  of  the  ephod,  the  robe 
under  the  breastplate  and  the  ephod — the  robe  of  the  ephod,  which  had,  round  the 
bottom,  a  bell  and  a  pomegranate  alternately — fruitfulness  and  music— showing  the 
fruitfulness  of  the  priesthood  and  the  music  of  the  priesthood  before  God,  without 
which  emblems  the  high  priest  might  never  enter  into  the  holy  of  holies,  lest  he 
die.  To  teach  man  that  no  creature  can  ever  stand  before  God  but  through  priest- 
hood, lest  he  die.  Were  we  to  stand  before  God  but  in  the  fruitfulness  and  musio 
of  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  should  die.  The  plate  of  pure  gold  upon  his 
forehead,  he  went  in  before  God  to  present  the  inscription  graven  there  like  the 
engraving  of  a  signet,  "  HoUness  to  the  Lord,"  to  take  away  the  iniquity  of  the 
holy  things  of  Israel,  and  to  make  those  holy  things,  purged  from  their  iniquity, 
acceptable  to  God.  Consider  the  subject  of  holiness.  I.  The  word  is  used  in 
THREE  SENSES  IN  THE  BiBLE.  1.  Somctimes  the  word  "holy"  means  that  which 
is  set  apart,  consecrated.  In  that  sense  the  vessels  of  the  Temple  were  holy.  2. 
Sometimes  the  word  signifies  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  with  His  gradually  sanc- 
tifying processes.  In  this  sense  the  church  is  holy.  8.  There  is  a  still  higher 
sense  in  which  man  is  perfectly  holy.     Christ  perfects  them  that  are  sanctified. 

II.  The  true  definition  of  holiness  is  the  likeness  of  God.  But  we  cannot 
conceive  of  the  hkeness  of  God  but  through  a  medium,  and  that  medium  must  be 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Whatever  traits  we  find  characterizing  the  life  of  Jesus, 
these  make  up  holiness.  1.  The  life  of  Christ  was  a  separate  life.  2.  He  always 
carried  about  an  inner  sanctuary  in  His  own  soul.  3.  The  Ufe  of  Christ  had  a 
subdued  tone.    4.  It  was  a  life  consecrated  to  an  object.     5.  It  was  a  life  of  praise. 

III.  Look  upon  holiness  as  an  end  to  be  obtained.  Do  not  seek  holiness  as  a 
means  to  happiness,  but  happiness  as  a  means  to  holiness.  Be  more  careful  about 
the  holiness  of  little  things  than  of  great  things.  {J.Vnughan,  M.A.)  Christ 
our  High  Priest,  bearing  tiie  iniquity  of  our  holy  things  : — The  first  thing  that  strikes 
us  here  is,  that  it  is  the  head  of  the  high  priest  that  is  thus  adorned,  the  most 
honourable  member  of  the  body,  the  seat  of  the  indwelling  soul.  Then,  again,  it 
is  the  forehead  that  is  selected,  which  is  the  comeliness  and  glory  of  the  head — the 
place  on  which  the  eye  of  the  observer  rests,  and  on  which  the  eye  of  God  would 
rest  when  meeting  with  the  priest  or  the  worshipper.  On  the  forehead  of  the  high 
priest,  on  "  the  forefront  of  his  mitre,"  was  the  ornament  to  be  fastened.  It  con- 
sisted of  a  plate  of  pure  gold,  the  purest  and  costliest  of  metals,  to  signify  the 
purity  that  God  demanded.  On  it  there  was  to  be  engraved,  like  the  engravings  of 
a  signet,  distinct  and  deep,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord," — still  farther  foreshadowing  the 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  EXODVff.  517 

awful  holiness  of  God,  and  the  no  less  awful  holiness  which  He  required  in  the  sin- 
bearer.     Forming  thus  the  most  prominent  part  of  his  dress,  and  placed  upon  his 
forehead,  it  would  be  that  on  'which  the  eye  of  God  might  be  said  first  to  rest, 
whether  at  the  brazen  altar,  or  the  altar  of  incense,  or  the  mercy-seat,  in  all  parts 
of  his  holy  service.     When  standing  before  God,  it  was  this  peculiar  adorning  that 
presented  itself,  with  its  inscription,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."     Thus,  then,  there 
was  proclaimed  to  Israel  a  free  forgiveness  for  the  iniquities  of  their  holy  things. 
It  was  forgiveness  through  the  holiness  of  another,  aa  if  God  would  teach  them 
that  while  He  required  holiness  in  him  who  was  to  bear  any  sin,  yet  especial  holi- 
ness was  required  when  bearing  the  sins  of  our  holy  things.     And  then  there  was 
not  merely  the  bare  forgiveness,  but  there  was  the  acceptance  thus  provided,  both 
for  themselves  and  their  services,  before  the  Lord.    All  this  was  to  Israel  the 
shadow  of  "  good  things  to  come."    The  law,  indeed,  made  nothing  perfect,  but  it 
was  the  bringing  in  of  the  better  hope,  by  which  we  draw  nigh  to  God  (Heb.  vii. 
19).    This  better  hope  has  now  been  brought  in.     What  was  thus  foreshadowed 
afar  off  by  Aaron,  as  Israel's  high  priest,  has  been  fulfilled  to   us  in  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  God's  own  anointed  Priest.    I,  We  leabn  how  complete  is  the  provision 
MADE  BY  God  foe  a  sinner's  acceptance.     This  provision  is  entirely  in  Hun  who  is 
our  great  High  Priest.     It  is  not  in  ourselves  at  all,  but  in  Him  alone.     "  It  pleased 
the  Father  that  in  Him  should  aU  fulness  dwell."     He  is  the  Father's  infinite  trea- 
sure-house of  all  blessing,  secured  for,  and  set  open  to  sinners.    Nothing  that  a 
guilty  soul  can  require,  is  awanting  in  Him.     Out  of  Him,  there  is  nothing;  in 
Him,  there  is  everything.     "  He,  of  God,  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  sanctification,  and  redemption."     In  our  text,  however,  the  allusion  is 
not  to  His  fulness  in  general,  but  to  His  priesthood  alone,  as  making  i>rovision  for  a 
sinner's  pardon  and  acceptance :  and  this  in  reference  to  the  sins  of  our  holy 
things — the  i^ins  committed  in  our  more  direct  transactions  with  God.     For  every 
sin,  and  for  every  kind  of  sin,  there  is  provision  in  Him  on  whom  our  sins  were  laid. 
For  all  these  there  is  a  special  way  of  pardon  ordained  by  God,  and  certain  sins  are 
minutely  specified,  in  order  to  show  us  that  no  case  has  been  overlooked  or  left 
without  a  special  remedy.    II.  Let  cs  learn  how  perpetual  and  unchangeable 
THIS  provision  IS.     It  is  written  here,  concerning  the  high  priest  on  earth,  "  It 
shall  be  always  upon  his  forehead,  that  they  may  be  accepted  before  the  Lord,"   In 
this  we  have  a  vivid  type  of  Him,  who  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever";   who  hath  "an  unchangeable  priesthood";   who  "ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us."    He  who  bears  the  iniquity  of  our  holy  things,  is  one  who 
changes  not ;  who  is  ever  the  same  holy  High  Priest,  and  ever  glorious  in  the 
Father's  eyes.     We  vary,  but  He  varies  not.     Our  feelings  change.  His  alter  not. 
Our  soul  fluctuates,  ever   rising  and  falling,  ever  ebbing  and   flowing,  but    He 
remaineth  steadfast  and  true.     We  grow  cold  and  faithless,  He  abideth  faithful. 
He  cannot  deny  Himself.    His  is  a  priesthood  which  endureth  for  ever,  which  never 
loses  aught  of  its  efiicacy  and  value.    III.  Learn  how  glorious  and  certain  is  this 
PROVISION.    It  depends  upon  the  holiness  of  the  high  priest.    Not  upon  his  grace, 
or  mercy,  or  compassion,  but  upon  his  holiness.     It  is  because  there  is  such  holi- 
ness in  him  to  meet  and  satisfy  the  holiness  of  God  that  our  forgiveness  is  so 
secure,  and  the  way  of  our  obtaining  it  so  glorious.     What  an  ample  pardon,  what 
a  secure  acceptance,  must  that  be  which  is  secured  to  us  by  the  holiness  of  our 
great  High  Priest !  for  His  holiness  cannot  change,  neither  can  it  pass  away.    His 
mercy  might  be  worn  out  by  our  sins,  and  He  might  forget  to  be  gracious,  but  He 
cannot  cease  to  be  holy.     IV.  Learn  how  accessible  and  free  is  this  provision. 
It  is  set  open  to  all.     Its  benefits  are  wide  and  unrestricted  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be 
ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."     {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)        The  mitre : — 1.  Made 
of  blue  silk  and  fine  linen  (ver.  39),  like  (as  it  seems)  to  an  half-coronet.     2. 
Beautified  with  a  golden  plate,  on  which  was  written   "Holiness  to  the  Lord."    3. 
The  use.    Aaron  must  ever  have  it  on  his  forehead  while  he  bears  the  iniquity  of 
their  offerings,  to  make  the  people  acceptable  before  the  Lord  (ver.  38).     I.  The 
mitre   and  crown  on  the  priest's  head  signified — 1.  The  Deity  of  Christ  our 
head,  which  as  a  crown  or  circle  wants  beginning  and  end.     2.  The  kingly  office  of 
Christ,  with  all  that  honour  and  crown  of  glory  set  on  the  head  of  our  Eedeemer, 
to  whom  all  power  is  given  in  heaven  and  in  earth.     II,  The  golden  plate  in 
which  was  written  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  did  not  only  distinguish  it  from 
the  mitres  of  the  ordinary  priests,  which  wanted  such  a  plate  :  BUT  specially 
TYPiFED  Jesus  Christ  our  Head,  in  whom  was  most  conspicuous  (as  in  a  man's 
forehead),  a  most  Divine  and  perfect  holiuess  purer  than  the  gold  of  that  plate.    III. 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrmx. 

— »  

The  use  was  significant,  that  as  the  high  priest,  having  on  this  plate,  with  this 
inscription,  got  the  iniquities  of  the  people  pardoned,  which  he  bare  before  the 
Lord :  So  our  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  presenting  before  His  Father,  His  most 
absolute  holiness,  gets  a  pardon  for  all  our  sins,  which  He  bears  upon  Himself. 
And  as  their  sins  were  pardoned  in  respect  of  the  high  priest,  who  represented 
Christ :  So  both  theirs  and  ours  are  indeed  and  in  truth  pardoned,  for  the  true  and 
eternal  High  Priest,  who  is  Christ  Himself.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Holiness  to  the 
Lord  : — Holiness  to  the  Lord!  Where  is  that  inscription  to  be  stamped  now  ?  The 
Jewish  Tabernacle  has  expanded  into  that  world-wide  brotherhood,  where  whoso- 
ever doeth  righteousness  is  accepted.  Morning  has  risen  into  day.  The  ministry 
of  Aaron  is  ended.  All  the  outward  glory  and  beauty  of  that  Hebrew  worship  which 
the  Lord  commanded  Moses  has  vanished  into  the  eternal  splendour  of  the  gospel, 
and  been  fulfilled  in  Christ.  What  teaching  has  it  left  ?  What  other  than  this  ? — 
that  we  are  to  engrave  our  *'  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  first  on  the  heart,  and  then  on 
all  that  the  heart  goes  out  into,  through  the  brain  and  the  hand ;  on  the  plates  of 
gold  our  age  of  enterprise  is  drawing  up  from  mines  and  beating  into  currency ; 
on  bales  of  merchandise  and  books  of  account ;  on  the  tools  and  bench  of  every 
handicraft ;  on  your  weights  and  measures  ;  on  pen  and  plough  and  pulpit ;  on  the 
door-posts  of  your  houses,  and  the  utensils  of  your  tables,  and  the  walls  of  your 
chambers ;  on  cradle  and  playthings  and  schoolbooks ;  on  the  locomotives  of  enter- 
prise, and  the  bells  of  the  horses,  and  the  ships  of  navigation  ;  on  music-halls  and 
libraries ;  on  galleries  of  art,  and  the  lyceum  desk;  on  all  of  man's  inventing  and 
building,  all  of  his  using  and  enjoying,  for  all  these  are  trusts  in  a  stewardship,  for 
which  the  Lord  of  the  servants  reckoneth.  {Dp.  F.  D.  Huntington.)  Material 
and  shape  of  mitre: — Elsewhere  this  ornament  is  called  "  nezer,"  from  a  verb 
signifying  to  separate ;  and  hence  denoting  a  crown  as  a  mark  of  separation  or  dis- 
tinction. The  same  word  is  applied  to  the  diadem  of  kings.  Indeed,  such  turbans 
of  fine  linen,  with  an  encircUng  or  front  ornament  of  gold  or  precious  stones,  seem 
to  have  been  the  usual  diadems  of  ancient  kings.  Justin  says  that  Alexander  the 
Great  took  his  diadem  from  his  head  to  bind  up  the  wounds  of  Lysimachus.  This 
shows  clearly  that  it  was  of  linen.  Probably,  it  had  some  distinguishing  ornament 
like  that  of  the  hiph  priest  here.  1.  Jahn  sajs  curiously  enough  that,  in  the  time 
of  Josephus,  the  shape  of  the  mitre  had  become  somewhat  altered.  It  was  circular, 
was  covered  with  a  piece  of  fine  linen,  and  sat  so  closely  on  the  upper  part  of  the 
head  that  it  would  not  fall  off  when  the  body  was  bent  down :  apparently  it  did  not 
cover  the  whole  of  the  head.  It  may  be  that  there  is  mystical  reference  to  the 
crown  of  gold  worn  by  each  of  those  who  exulted  before  God  in  the  acknowledg- 
ment that  He  had  made  them  prince-priests  unto  Himself.  Each  cast  his  mitre- 
coronet  down  before  Him,  who  sat  upon  the  throne,  singing — 

*'  I  bless  Thee,  gracious  Father,  for  Thy  pleasant  gift  to  me, 
And  earnestly  I  ask  Thee,  that  it  may  always  be 
In  perfect  consecration  laid  at  Thy  glorious  feet. 
Touched  with  Thine  altar-fire,  and  made  an  offering  pure  and  sweet." 

On  the  cultivation  of  holiness : — Let  me  say  a  few  words  concerning  the  cultivation 
of  holiness.  Look  upon  holiness  as  an  end  to  be  obtained.  Do  not  seek  holiness 
as  a  means  to  happiness — but  happiness  as  a  means  to  holiness.  In  heaven  itself, 
the  bliss  of  that  world  of  glory  is  to  be  most  prized  because  the  happiness  of  that 
world  will  be  the  attainment  of  spotless  sanctity.  Be  sure  you  take  your  forgive- 
ness— accept  the  peace  which  God  freely  offers — believe  in  the  love  of  God  ;  receive 
gladly  and  gratefully  every  token  of  that  love  ;  if  it  be  only  for  this,  that  it  is  the 
means  to  holiness ;  it  will  make  you  holy.  And  you  may  argue  it  with  God  so ; 
"  Lord,  give  me  happiness  that  I  may  be  holy,  for  I  find  that  without  happiness  I 
cannot  glorify  Thee  by  holiness,  make  me  happy  that  I  may  be  holy."  Another 
suggestion  which  I  would  make  to  you  in  the  cultivation  of  holiness,  is  to  be  more 
careful  about  the  holiness  of  little  things  than  of  great  things.  It  is  so  easy  to  go 
to  church,  and  have  a  very  devout  manner,  and  even  at  the  time  to  feel  devoutly, 
and  then  to  go  away  into  Ufe,  and  to  have  so  very  little  holiness ;  rather,  such  un- 
holiness,  in  the  common  affairs  of  oux  common  life.  Now  that  which  characterizes 
the  dispensation  on  which  we  are  entered,  and  will  characterize  it  infinitely 
presently,  is  this — that  there  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord,  not  in  the  sanctuary, 
but  in  the  common-places  of  every-day  life,  out  of  doors  and  in  doors ;  out  of  doors 
on  that  most  familiar  thing  in  the  East,  "  the  bells  on  horses  " — the  very  harness  of 


•CHAP,  xxvin.]  EXODUS.  519 

tlie  horses  is  to  be  holiness ;  and  in  doors  (the  same  passa<^e  in  the  last  chapter  of 
Zechariah),  in  doors,  upon  the  most  ordinary  vessels  that  are  ustd  for  domestic 
uses,  the  commonest  thing  that  is  in  the  house  is  to  be  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  !  " — 
the  very  culinary  vessels  are  to  be  "Holiness  to  the  Lord."  (J.  Vaiinhan,  M.A.) 
The  mitre  : — The  white  linen  is  the  emblem  of  purity ;  the  head  is  the  seat  of 
■thought  and  of  intellect.  Christ  had  a  pure  mind  ;  all  His  thoughts  were  holy 
thoughts.  And  because  He  is  so  holy,  He  can  bear  His  people's  sins  (Isa.  liii.  4). 
He  who  is  our  Great  High  Priest  before  God  is  pure  without  a  slain.  God  sees 
Him  as  such,  and  He  stands  for  us  who  are  His  people,  and  we  are  accepted  in 
Him.  His  holiness  is  ours  by  imputation.  Standing  in  Him  we  are,  in  the 
sight  of  God,  holy  as  Christ  is  holy,  and  pure  as  Christ  is  pure.  (G.  Rodgers.) 
Holiness  to  the  Lord  in  common  thimjs  : — Li  an  old  book  I  was  reading  the  other 
day  the  writer  laughed  at  some  commoner  who  had  just  been  made  a  peer,  because 
he  had  his  coat  of  arms  burned  and  painted  even  upon  his  shovels  and  wheelbarrows. 
Now,  in  my  reckoning,  that  was  a  very  fine  action  and  full  of  significance.  If  a  man  is 
a  true  man  he  is  a  man  of  God,  a  prince  of  God  ;  and  he  ought  to  put  the  stamp  of 
his  nobility  on  the  commonest  things  with  which  he  has  to  do.  (Christian 
Journal.)        Holiness  unto  the  Lord: — 

Write  on  our  garnered  treasures, 
Write  on  our  choicest  pleasures. 
Upon  things  new  and  old. 
The  precious  stone  and  gold — 
Wife,  husband,  children,  friends — 
On  all  that  goodness  lends  ; 
Go  write  on  your  good  name — 
Upon  your  cherished  fame- 
On  every  pleasant  thing — 
On  stores  that  Heaven  doth  fling 
Into  your  basket — write  1 
Upon  the  smile  of  God, 
Upon  His  scourging  rod — 
Write  on  your  inmost  heart, 
Write  upon  every  part — 
To  Him  who  claims  the  whole. 
Time,  talent,  body,  soul — 
Holiness  unto  the  Lord  1 

That  Aaron  may  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  holy  things. —  The  iniquity  of  our  holy 
things  : — I.  A  sxd  subject.  "  The  iniquity  of  the  holy  things  which  the  children 
of  Israel  shall  hallow."  1.  They  were  "  holy  things."  Despite  the  iniquity,  their 
offerings  were  hallowed  and  holy.  This  is  a  precious  saving  clause.  Our  prayers,  our 
praises,  our  service  of  God,  these  are  holy  things,  albeit  that  iniquity  attaches  to 
them.  They  are  holy  as  to  God's  ordinance,  for  He  has  ordained  them  for  His 
glory.  "  Whoso  off ereth  praise  glorifieth  Me."  When  we  do  what  God  bids  us, 
the  act  is  holy,  because  done  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  ordinance.  Such  deeds  are 
holy  as  to  the  Divine  design  :  for  the  Facrifices  which  the  Israelites  brought  were 
meant  to  set  forth  Christ  and  His  glorious  work,  and  therefore  they  were  holy.  The 
great  Pather  teaches  us  much  precious  truth  by  every  institution  of  the  Tabernacle 
and  the  Temple,  and  the  gospel  Church,  and  therefore  obedience  to  each 
ordinance  is  holy.  These  deeds  were  often  holy  in  the  intent  of  the  vrorshipper. 
2.  But  although  "  holy  things,"  there  was  iniquity  upon  all  of  them ;  and 
did  we  ever  do  anything  yet  that  had  not  some  spot  of  iniquity  upon  it  ?  Is  not 
our  repentance,  after  all,  but  poor  stuff  compared  with  what  it  ought  to  be  ?  Is 
not  unbelief  mixed  with  our  faith  ?  Hath  not  our  love  a  measure  of  lukewarmness 
in  it  ?  No  act  of  consecration,  no  act  of  self-sacrifice,  no  rapture  of  fellowship,  no 
height  of  spirituality  has  been  without  its  imperfection.  3.  Furthermore,  some  of 
these  sins  are  apparent :  indeed,  many  of  them  are  painfully  before  our  own  eyes. 
If  the  Lord  sees  iniquity  in  our  holy  things,  what  iniquities  there  must  be  in  our 
unholy  things  I  I  have  to  complain  that  wandering  thoughts  will  intrude  in  my 
prayers,  my  study  of  the  Word,  my  sacred  song,  my  choice  meditation ;  indeed, 
even  in  ministering  the  Word  among  you,  I  find  my  mind  roaming.  I  have  to 
complain  also — and  I  fear  many  here  would  have  to  complain  even  more  than  I  do 
— of  want  of  faith  in  prayer.    4.  These  are  only  a  few  of  the  iniquities  of  our  holy 


520  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

things  which  we  can  see  ;  but  beside  these  there  are  many  imperfections  of  our  ser- 
vice which  we  do  not  notice  because  we  are  not  spiritual  enough  to  discern  them ; 
but  God  sees  them.  Bring  me  that  microscope !  I  have  just  now  put  the  wing  of  a 
butterfly  under  it.  That  is  God's  work,  and,  as  I  enlarge  it,  I  discover  no  imper- 
fection,  but  more  and  more  of  marvellous  beauty.  That  butterfly's  wing  under 
the  microscope  becomes  most  wonderful,  and  I  worship  God  as  I  gaze  upon  His 
handiwork.  Take  the  butterfly  away  now  and  put  your  needle  in  its  place.  What? 
Why  this  is  a  rough  bar  of  iron  which  has  never  been  smoothed  or  polished.  This 
is  wretched  workmanship.  It  does  not  seem  fitted  for  deUcate  work.  Such  is  man's 
manufacture,  the  best  of  it.  When  God  puts  your  prayers  and  my  sermons  under 
His  microscopic  eye,  they  are  not  at  all  what  we  thought  they  were,  but  quite  the 
reverse.  This  ought  to  humble  us  as  we  come  before  the  presence  of  the  All-seeing 
One.  5.  These  imperfections  in  our  holy  things  are  so  grievous  that  they  would 
prevent  any  one  of  our  works,  or  offerings,  or  prayers  being  accepted  before  the 
thrice-holy  God.  II.  A  glad  subject.  What  was  done  in  type  has  also  been  done 
in  reality.  1.  Consider,  then,  that  God  provided  the  high  priest.  It  was  ordained 
that  he  should  be  a  man  perfect  in  his  person.  In  our  Lord  Jesus  there  is  no  defect 
open  or  secret.  He  is  perfect,  and  so  He  can  be  high  priest  unto  God.  The  man 
had  to  be  chosen  of  God.  Aaron  was  so.  Christ  is  ordained  of  God,  and  by 
Divine  authority  lie  stands  as  high  priest  for  us.  This  man  had  to  be  anointed 
for  his  work.  Aaron  was  anointed  with  oil ;  but  our  Lord  was  anointed  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.  2.  This  high  priest  was  altogether  given  up  to  his  people.  He  has 
a  heart ;  his  people's  names  are  on  the  breast-plate  which  covers  it.  He  has 
shoulders  :  his  people's  names  are  written  on  his  shoulder-pieces,  and  thus  he  lends 
them  his  power.  Thus  Christ  has  given  up  His  thought,  His  judgment,  His  mind, 
His  every  faculty  to  His  people.  He  is  all  ours.  The  high  priest  reserved  nothing 
of  himself  ;  he  gave  all  of  himself  to  all  his  people.  3.  The  high  priest  bore  "the 
iniquity  of  the  holy  things."  All  the  iniquity  of  our  holy  things  our  Lord  Jesus 
has  borne,  and  it  is  no  longer  imputed  unto  us.  As  He  stood  before  God,  though 
He  bore  the  iniquity  of  the  people,  yet  He  exhibited  to  God  no  iniquity,  but 
on  His  forehead  was  written,  "  Holiness  to  Jehovah."  Notice  that  He  bore  before 
God  a  holiness  most  precious;  in  token  whereof,  in  type,  the  engraving  was  inscribed 
upon  a  plate  of  pure  gold.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  more  precious  to  God 
than  all  the  mines  of  gold  in  the  whole  world.  There  was  no  iniquity  in  His  holy 
things ;  His  holiness  was  conspicuous  and  undeniable,  it  shone  on  the  forefront  of 
His  mitre.  That  holiness  of  His  was  permanent.  One  thing  more  I  want  you  to 
notice,  and  that  is,  that  he  always  wore  it,  "  And  it  shall  always  be  upon  his  fore- 
head." Jesus  is  always  "  Holiness  to  God"  on  our  behalf.  Our  holy  work  is  now  viewed 
with  Divine  favour.  WiU  you  not  offer  more  and  more  of  these  holy  things,  since  they 
are  in  very  deed  accepted  in  Christ  ?  Now  I  have  taught  you  the  main  doctrine  of 
the  type,  I  desire  to  bring  forth  one  or  two  lessons.  1.  The  first  is,  see  here  a 
lesson  of  humiUty.  Our  good  works,  if  we  lay  them  up  in  store,  and  value  them  as 
jewels,  will,  like  the  manna  in  the  wilderness,  very  soon  breed  worms  and  stink. 
There  is  enough  rottenness  in  our  best  performances  to  make  them  offensive  to  an 
enlightened  conscience.  Oh,  that  this  fact,  that  even  our  holy  things  are  tainted,may 
be  the  death-warrant  of  our  pride  1  2.  In  the  next  place,  learn  the  awful  hazard 
of  going  unto  God  without  our  High  Priest.  3.  Learn  how  you  must  be  dressed 
as  a  royal  priesthood  unto  the  Lord.  4.  Lastly,  let  sinners  gain  a  store  of  comfort 
here.  If  God's  own  people  have  iniquity  in  their  holy  things,  and  yet  they  have 
Christ  to  Lear  it  for  them,  how  patient  must  He  be  who  is  our  High  Priest.  (G.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  39.  The  coat  of  fine  linen. — The  embroidered  coat : — The  portion  of  the  high 
priest's  dress  called  the  coat  was  more  properly  a  tunic.  It  was  the  innermost  gar- 
ment worn  by  the  high  priest,  being  placed  first  upon  him  after  he  was  washed  (Lev. 
viii.  7).  It  seems  to  be  derived  from  a  verb  meaning  "  to  cover,  or  hide."  It  seems  to 
have  been  interwoven,  like  net  or  chequer  work,  so  as  to  present  what  in  modem 
days  we  should  call  a  "  damask  "  appearance,  combining  weaving  with  a  species  of 
embroidery.  The  blue  robe,  and  gorgeous  ephod  with  its  cluster  of  brilliant 
precious  stones  on  the  shoulders  and  breastplate,  would  entirely  conceal  from  the 
eye  of  an  observer  this  fine  linen  coat.  Beneath,  therefore,  the  splendid  dress  of  the 
high  priest  there  was  a  more  humble  attire  of  pure  white,  though  it  was  still  a 
"garment  for  glory  and  beauty."  The  outer  garments  were  distinctly  of  a  repre- 
sentative character  ;  that  is,  they  bore  the  names  of  Israel  before  the  Lord.    But  in 


caAP.  XXVIII.]  EXODUS.  621 

this  under  tunic  there  was  no  apparent  connection  \dth  that  people.  It  was  rather 
the  personal  clothing  of  the  high  priest,  manifesting  hiro,  beneath  all  his  ofiScial 
glory,  as  one  who  could  minister  before  the  Lord  in  a  perfect  righteousness  of  his 
own.  A  glory  and  beauty  no  less  costly  and  precious  than  was  displayed  by  the 
other  garments,  though  to  the  eye  of  sense  not  so  striking  in  appearance.  In  fact, 
the  high  priest  could  not  have  worn  his  magnificent  apparel  unless  he  could  pre- 
viously exhibit  a  spotless  purity,  diversified  in  every  possible  way  like  the  embroi- 
dered fine  linen  coat.  The  Lord  Jesus,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  passed  through  an 
ordeal  of  temptation  and  suffering,  throughout  which  He  evinced  His  complete  fit- 
ness to  be  the  Great  High  Priest  in  resurrection,  showing  forth  a  righteous- 
ness and  holiness,  as  well  as  grace,  sympathy,  and  tenderness  which  proved 
Him  perfectly  suited  for  this  high  dignity  and  responsibility.  (H.  W.  Soltau.) 
The  embroidered  coat: — This  garment  was  most  proper  to  our  High  Priest 
of  the  New  Testament,  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  by  it  described  (Rev.  i.  13),  "  clothed 
in  a  garment  down  to  the  feet."  Noting — 1.  The  excellency  of  His  person, 
who  is  "Prince  of  Peace  "  (Isa.  ix.  6),  for  such  long  white  garments  ever  betoken 
peace,  both  within  the  church  and  without.  2.  That  He  excelled  in  wisdom  and 
counsel,  being  the  Great  Counsellor  and  the  "  Spirit  of  counsel  and  understanding 
resting  in  His  breast  "  (Isa.  xi.  2),  for  to  such  also  the  garments  belonged  (Dan.  v. 
7,  16).  3.  The  lovely  and  beautiful  connection  and  conjunction  of  His  prophetical, 
priestly,  and  princely  offices;  sincerely  and  perfectly  fulfilling  them  and  appearing 
before  God  in  them  as  in  a  most  costly  embroidered  garment  consisting  of  many 
pieces  and  many  colours  fitly  couched  and  laid  together.  And  this  garment  He 
wore,  not  only  on  earth  (as  the  priests  did),  but  now  after  His  ascension.  He  con- 
tinues to  perform  the  office  of  the  High  Priest  for  His  Church,  in  the  same  embroi- 
dered garment,  presenting  before  God  the  merit  of  His  only  sacrifice  and  making 
intercession  to  the  Father  for  it.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  girdle. — The  girdle : — 
This  was  worn  by  the  Hebrews  as  an  ornament  and  as  a  strengthener.  It  was  put 
on  Aaron,  but  our  Jesus  has  in  Himself  everything  that  was  symbolized  by  this, 
and  everything  else  that  was  put  on  Aaron.  I  like  to  look  at  the  girdle  as  the 
symbol  of  service,  and  at  Jesus  Christ  as  our  girded  High  Priest,  ever  ready  to  go  to 
God  on  His  people's  errands.  Jesus  is  ever  ready  for  any  service  His  people  may 
need.  He  will  present  their  prayers  to  God  and  obtain  answers  for  His  beloved  dis- 
ciples, or  He  will  stoop  to  wash  their  feet.  {G.  Eodgers.)  The  girdle: — This 
girdle  was  made  of  the  same  materials  as  the  vail ;  but  the  order  of  their  arrange- 
ment was  that  of  the  innermost  curtains  of  the  Tabernacle,  viz.,  "  fine  linen,  blue, 
purple,  scarlet."  The  fine  linen,  type  of  righteousness,  comes  first,  answering  to 
that  beautiful  passage  in  Isa.  xi.  5.  Eighteousness  and  faithfulness  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  made  perfectly  manifest  and  proved  to  the  utmost  in  His  death  upon  the 
Cross.  The  object  of  the  girdle  was  to  strengthen  the  loins  for  service.  And  the 
high  priest,  beneath  garments  of  majesty,  glory,  brilliancy,  and  power,  still  pre- 
served his  place,  as  the  girded  righteous  servant  of  the  Lord.  So  the  Lord  Jesus 
apon  the  throne  of  glory,  having  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  with  the 
name  above  every  name,  yet  delights  to  maintain  His  place  as  God's  servant, 
fulfilling  the  Father's  counsels  and  accomplishing  His  will  in  the  salvation  and 
ultimate  perfection  of  those  that  are  His.  We  have  in  John  xiii.  a  striking  illustra- 
tion of  our  blessed  Lord's  holy  service  ;  deeply  instructive  to  us  in  two  ways  :  first, 
as  teaching  us  what  His  present  occupations  are  in  our  behalf,  and  next,  as  giving 
us  an  example  which  we  have  to  follow  if  we  would  taste  of  His  happiness  and  joy. 
One  way  in  which  we  may  wash  one  another's  feet  is  by  prayer  and  intercession  for 
one  another ;  and  another  mode  is  by  seeking  to  deliver  any  of  the  Lord's  people 
that  may  be  ensnared,  from  the  entanglements  into  which  they  have  fallen.  (H. 
W.   Soltau.)  The   girdle: — The  sixth   garment   is   the   girdle    of    needlework 

(ver.  39).  Of  divers  matter,  linen,  blue  silk,  purple  and  scarlet,  and  of  divers 
colours  (chap,  xxxix.  29).  The  use  of  it  was  to  fasten  the  priest's  garment  unto 
him,  that  they  may  not  hang  loose  upon  him  in  his  ministration ;  and  specially 
points  out  unto  us  our  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  described  after  His  ascension  (Rev.  i. 
13),  "  And  girt  about  the  paps  with  a  golden  girdle."  Noting  in  Christ  four  things. 
1.  The  truth  and  constancy  in  accomplishing  all  the  gracious  promises  of  the  gospel, 
seeing  our  High  Priest  is  girt  about  with  a  girdle  of  verity.  2.  His  justice,  integrity, 
pure  and  uncorrupt  judgment,  as  gold  (Isa.  xi.  5),  "  Eighteousness  shall  be  the 
girdle  of  His  loins  and  faithfulness  the  girdle  of  His  reins."  3.  His  readiness  to 
do  the  office  of  a  Mediator.  4.  His  mindfulness  and  care  in  performing  His  office. 
For  as  not  girding  is  a  sign  of  carelessness  and  negligence,  so  girding  of  care  and 


523  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  xxiX. 

industry.  So  our  Lord  and  High  Priest  never  carelessly  cast  off  any  poor  and  peni- 
tent sinner ;  but  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  minded  their  misery ;  and  now  in  heaven  keeps 
on  His  girdle,  casts  not  off  the  care  of  His  Church,  but  perpetually  accomplisheth 
whatsoever  is  needful  for  her  salvation.    {T.  Taylor,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  1-37.  To  minister  unto  Me  In  the  priest's  ofQce. — The  consecration  of 
priests  : — I.  The  priests  were  washed  first.  1.  Regeneration.  2.  Remission  of 
sin.  II.  After  being  washed,  the  priests  were  clothed.  We  must  have  the  fine 
linen  of  an  inward  sanctification,  and  the  outer  garment  for  glory  and  for  beauty, 
of  the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ.  1.  These  garments  were  provided  for 
them.  2.  These  garments  formed  a  complete  apparel.  3.  These  garments  were 
very  comely  to  look  upon.  4.  The  dress  provided  was  absolutely  necessary  to  be 
worn.  III.  These  priests  were  anointed.  Be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  A  man  in 
Christ  is  fragrant  with  a  holy  perfume  before  the  Lord,  but  out  of  Christ  he  is  an 
unclean  thing,  and  cannot  approach  the  altar.  IV.  They  had  next  to  share  in  the 
sin-offering.  Lift  your  eyes  to  Jesus,  your  ransom  and  substitute.  V,  After  the 
sin-offering  the  consecrated  ones  went  on  to  take  their  shaije  in  the  burnt-offer- 
ing. The  sin-offering  indicated  Christ  as  bearing  our  sin,  but  the  burnt-offering 
sets  Him  forth  as  presenting  an  acceptable  offering  unto  the  Lord.  VI.  After  the 
priests  had  seen  for  themselves  the  sin-offering  and  the  burnt-offering,  it  was 
needful  that  they  should  partake  of  a  third  sacrifice,  which  was  a  peace-offering. 
This  was  shared  between  the  Lord  and  the  priest  or  offerer.  Thus  it  was  an  open 
declaration  of  the  communion  which  had  been  established  between  God  and  man, 
so  that  they  ate  together,  rejoicing  in  the  same  offering.  Conclusion :  1.  Do  yoa 
and  I  offer  sacrifice  continually?  Do  we  every  day  feel  that  our  whole  being  is 
"  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  ?  2.  What  have  you  to  offer  now  ?  Bring  continually 
of  your — (1)  Substance.     (2)  Talent.     (3)  Influence.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  10.  The  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation. — The  tent  of  meeting  : — The 
Tabernacle  of  the  congregation — or,  rather,  tent  of  meeting — was  the  place  where 
God's  presence  was  manifested.  This  was  granted  to  the  people  of  Israel,  first  in 
the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud,  then  in  the  Tabernacle  and  Temple.  And  now  for  us  in 
Jesus  Christ  there  is  "  God  manifested  in  the  flesh."  I.  In  and  through  Christ 
God  is  reveaied.  II.  Through  Him  and  by  Him  the  Lord  God  is  approached. 
1,  We  have  the  right  of  approach  through  Jesus  Christ.  His  life  embodied  a 
perfect  righteousness.  His  death  is  the  accepted  sacrifice.  2.  We  have  not  only 
the  right  of  approach,  but  also  the  power  to  approach,  sharing  the  Spirit  of  the 
Divine  Redeemer;  for  the  final  result  and  crowning  proof  of  our. Lord's  exaltation 
was  this — He  sent  the  Comforter.     {J.  Aldis.) 

Vers.  26-28.  Which  is  waved,  and  which  is  heaved  up. — The  wave-offerings  and 
heave-offerings  : — 1.  As  illustrating  the  state  of  the  heart  in  those  who  truly  offer 
themselves  up  to  God,  there  is  something  impressive  and  beautiful  in  the  ancient 
wave-offerings  and  heave-offerings.  Waving  is  one  of  nature's  universal  laws. 
The  whole  creation,  with  its  myriads  of  planets,  suns  and  heavens,  lives  because  it 
waves  to  and  fro  the  central  life.  The  life  of  God  waves  to  and  fro  between  our 
spirits  and  Him.  2.  In  prayer  our  souls  are  heaved  up  towards  the  eternal  Soul 
of  our  souls.  Nothing  heaves  up  the  soul  like  a  perfect  love.  Our  daily  heave- 
offering  is  a  labour  that  has  a  great  reward.  Our  aspirations,  our  inner  heavings 
and  upliftings,  are  the  works  which  will  follow  us  into  the  eternal  world.  They 
will  follow  us  by  being  actually  constituent  elements  of  our  future  body.  8.  Some 
persons  think  it  strange  that  we  should  be  exhorted  to  hasten  the  coming  of  the 
kingdom  of  God.  But  all  who  have  a  thrilling  expectation  of  it  may  be  sure  that 
the  vital  element  of  the  new  coming  is  waving  in  upon  them,  and  that  as  they  heave 
up  their  souls  and  expand  with  desire  to  draw  down  the  heavenly  fire  they  are  un- 
consciously hastening  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.  {J.  Fulsford,  D.D.)  The 
peace-offering : — This  was  the  most  important  sacrifice  of  all.    It  consisted  of  a  ram. 


CHAP.  XXX.]  EXODUS.  523 

called  "The  Earn  of  Consecration,"  or  more  literally,  the  "Ram  of  the  Fillings," 
because  the  hands  of  the  consecrated  persons  were  filled  by  portions  of  it  being 
placed  upon  them.  Of  this  ram  of  consecration,  after  Aaron  and  his  sons  had 
imposed  hands  upon  it,  and  it  had  been  slain,  some  of  the  blood  was  placed  upon 
the  tip  of  Aaron's  right  ear,  and  upon  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand,  and  upon  the 
great  toe  of  his  right  foot,  and  similarly  upon  the  same  three  members  of  his  sons, 
the  remainder  of  the  blood  being  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  round  about  (vers.  19, 
20;  Lev.  viii.  22-24).  This  represented  the  consecration  to  God  of  such  members 
of  the  body  as  would  be  more  especially  called  into  exercise  by  the  duties  of  the 
priestly  vocation.  The  ear  was  consecrated  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  the  hand 
to  do  His  will,  the  foot  to  walk  in  His  ways.  Secondly,  those  parts  of  the  peace- 
offering,  which  hereafter,  in  the  exercise  of  their  priestly  office,  it  would  be  their 
duty  to  receive  of  the  offerer  and  burn  upon  the  altar,  were  laid  upon  the  hands  of 
Aaron  and  his  sons,  together  with  a  meat-offering,  and  waved  as  a  wave-offering 
before  the  Lord  (vers.  22-24 ;  Lev.  viii.  25-27),  and  then  burnt  upon  the  altar 
(ver.  25 ;  Lev.  viii.  28).  This  ceremony  was  called  the  filling  of  the  hands, 
and  so  essential  a  part  of  the  consecration  ceremony  was  it,  that  the  expression 
to  "fill  the  hand"  became  equivalent  to  "consecrate  to  the  priesthood."  The 
sacrifice  itself  was  called  the  ram  of  consecration,  or  the  ram  of  fillings.  The 
intention  of  this  action  was  to  deliver  to  the  ordained  persons  the  sacrifices  which 
they  were  in  future  to  offer  to  God  ;  it  was  a  formal  initiation  into  the  sacrificial 
duties  of  their  office.  It  indicated  that  from  that  time  forward,  the  right  and  duty 
of  oflSciating  at  the  altar,  and  of  superintending  the  burning  of  the  sacrifices,  would 
be  theirs.  Similarly,  in  the  early  ordinals  of  the  Greek  Church,  a  portion  of  the 
"  sacrifice,"  i.e.,  of  the  consecrated  elements,  was  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  person 
who  was  ordained  priest :  a  tradition  still  observed  in  the  Eastern  Church,  and 
which,  in  a  remarkable  manner,  links  together  the  priesthoods  of  the  Jewish  and 
Christian  Churches.  The  next  part  of  the  ceremony  connected  with  the  ram  of 
consecration,  was  the  sprinkhng  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  and  their  vestments  with  its 
blood,  mingled  with  anointing  oil  (Lev.  viii.  30).  Hence  it  could  be  said  that  the 
sons  of  Aaron  were  anointed  as  their  father  was  anointed  (chap.  xl.  15) ;  they,  like 
him,  were  sprinkled  with  oil,  but  he  alone,  as  high  priest,  had  the  oil  poured  upon 
his  head,  and  could  thus  be  called,  in  contradistinction  to  the  other  priests,  pre- 
eminently "  the  anointed  priest."  In  this  secondary  anointing,  it  is  to  be  observed, 
that  the  clothes  were  sprinkled  and  consecrated  upon  and  with  the  persons.  The 
clothes  represented  the  office  filled  by  the  person.  The  person  and  the  clothes 
together  represented  the  priest ;  therefore  the  consecration  was  performed  on  both 
together.  Lastly  came  the  sacrificial  meal :  the  solemn  eating  of  the  body  of  the 
consecrating  peace-offering  by  Aaron  and  his  sons  within  the  precincts  of  the 
Tabernacle  (Lev.  viii.  31).  It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  apostles  were  con- 
secrated to  their  priestly  office  by  a  like  "filling  of  the  hands,"  and  by  a  like 
sacrificial  meal,  when  our  Lord  placed  in  their  hands  the  broken  bread  with  the 
words,  "  Take,  eat,  this  is  My  body."     (E.  F.  Willis,  M.A.) 

Vers.  38-46.  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel. — The  Divine  presence  in 
the  Church: — I.  The  condition  of  the  Divink  pbesence,  moral  and  spiritual 
condition :  everything  must  be  holy.  Entirely,  daily,  permanently,  must  we  yield 
ourselves  to  God.  II.  The  blessedness  of  the  Divine  presence.  1.  Enlightening 
(vers.  42).  2.  Glorifying  (vers.  43,  44).  3.  Redeeming  (ver.  46).  4.  Abiding. 
"  Dwell."    "  Pleasures  for  evermore."    (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Veb.  8.  Bum  incense  upon  it. — Incense: — All  religious  ceremony  and  ritual  is 
a  picture,  in  external  and  material  form,  and  upon  a  lower  platform,  of  something 
higher,  properly  religious.  Now  this  altar  of  incense  had  a  very  distinct  mean- 
ing.    I.  The  first  thing  that  I  want  to  point  out  is  what  a  lovely,  significant,  and 

tNSTECCTIVE    SYMBOL    OF    PEAYEB    THE    INCENSE    IS.      NoW  what    WCre    the   aSpCCtS    of 

prayer  suggested  by  the  symbolism  ?     1.  First  of  all,  I  suppose  that  the  essence  of 
it  is  the  ascent  of  a  man's  soul  to  God.    "  To  enter  into  thyself  is  to  ascend  to  God." 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

To  go  deep  down  into  thine  own  heart  is  to  go  straight  up  to  the  Father  in  heaven. 
Incense  is  prayer,  because  incense  surely  wreathes  itself  upwards  to  God.  2.  Let  us 
learn  another  lesson  from  the  incense,  and  that  is  that  the  prayer  which  ascends 
must  be  the  prayer  that  comes  from  a  fire.  The  incense  only  climbs  when  it  is  hot. 
3.  The  kmdled  incense  gave  forth  fragrant  odours.  When  we  present  our  prayers, 
they  rise  up  acceptable  to  God  in  curling  wreaths  of  fragrance  that  He  accepts.    II. 

Notice    THE    POSITION    OF    THE    ALTAB    OF    INCENSE    IN    RELATION    TO    THE    BEST    OF    THE 

SANCTUAEY.  It  stood  in  the  holy  place,  midway  between  the  outer  court,  where  the 
whole  assembly  of  worshippers  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting,  and  the  holiest  of  all. 
It  stood  in  a  right  line  betwixt  the  outer  court  and  the  mercy-seat,  where  the  sym- 
bolical  presence  of  God  was  visible  in  the  Shekinah :  and  whosoever  approached 
the  altar  of  incense  had  to  pass  by  the  altar  of  sacrifice  :  and  whosoever  was  on  his 
way  to  the  holiest  of  all  had  to  pass  by  the  altar  of  incense.  All  prayer  must  be 
preceded  by  the  perfect  sacrifice ;  and  my  prayer  must  be  offered  on  the  footing 
of  that  perfect  Sacrifice  which  Christ  Himself  has  offered.  And  so  you  and  I 
remember  the  Altar  of  Sacrifice  whenever  we  say,  "  For  Christ's  sake. — Amen." 
And  if  we  mean  anything  by  these  words  except  the  mere  empty  formula,  we  mean 
this: — "I  stand  here,  and  venture  to  put  my  grains  of  incense  upon  the  altar, 
because  He  died  yonder  upon  the  Cross,  that  I  might  pass  into  the  Holy  Place." 
The  prayer  that  goes  another  way  round,  and  does  not  pass  by  the  Altar  of  Sacrifice, 
is  not  the  prayer  that  God  desires  and  accepts.  And,  still  further,  let  me  remind 
you  that,  as  I  said,  whosoever  was  on  his  road  into  the  hoUestof  all  had  to  pass  by 
the  altar  of  incense.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  no  true  communion  of  spirit  with  God, 
except  on  condition  of  habitual  prayer,  and  they  that  are  strangers  to  the  one,  are 
strangers  to  the  other.  III.  The  perpetuity  of  this  offering.  Morning  and 
evening  the  incense  was  piled  up  and  blown  into  a  flame,  and  all  the  day  and  night 
it  smouldered  quietly  on  the  altar  ;  that  is  to  say,  special  seasons  and  continual 
devotion,  morning  and  evening  kindled,  heaped  up,  and  all  the  day  and  night  glow- 
ing. And  dim  lives  may  still,  like  the  priests  in  this  ritual,  pile  up  the  incense  on 
the  altar  at  fixed  seasons,  sure  that  if  we  do,  it  will  glow  there  all  the  day  long. 
But  only  remember,  there  is  not  much  chance  of  a  man's  devotion  being  continuous 
unless  he  has,  and  sticks  to,  his  fixed  seasons  for  formal  and  verbal  supplication. 
IV.  This  altar  that  bore  the  perpetual  incense,  once  a  year  Aaron  had  to  offer  a 
bacrifice  of  expiation  fob  it.  It  was  never  used  for  anything  except  the  laying 
upon  it  of  the  fragrant  incense,  and  yet  yearly  this  sacrifice  to  cleanse  it  from 
defilement  was  duly  presented.  Now  why  was  that  ?  Was  it  not  in  order  to  ex- 
press the  profound  feeling  that  the  purest  worship  is  stained,  and  that  howsoever 
clear  and  exclusive  may  be  the  occupation  and  the  use  of  this  altar  for  the  one 
solemn  purpose,  the  iniquities  of  the  offerers  had  defiled  it.  Let  us  be  thankful 
that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest  who  truly  cleanses  us  from  the  infirmities  of  our 
worship,  and  bears  the  iniquities  of  our  natures,  and  is  ever  ready  to  aid  our  prayers 
with  the  incense  of  His  own  sacrifice,  that  all  their  imperfections  may  be  washed 
away,  and  they  and  we  received  and  made  acceptable  in  His  sight.  (A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  The  altar  of  incense : — The  altar  of  incense  was  made  of  acacia  wood,  and 
stood  about  a  yard  high  and  eighteen  inches  square.  The  altar  and  incense  were 
symbolic— I.  Of  the  prayers  of  God's  people.  1.  In  prayer  we  speak  to  God  and 
tell  Him  the  thoughts  of  our  minds,  the  feelings  of  our  hearts,  the  desires  of  oar 
spirits.  The  incense  smoke  ascended,  arrow-like,  in  a  straight  and  most  direct 
column  to  heaven.  Our  prayers  ascend  immediately  and  in  the  directest  way  to  the 
heart  and  ear  of  God.  2.  In  prayer  we  stand  very  near  God.  The  altar  of  incense 
was  placed  "before  the  mercy-seat."  3.  The  pleasant  odour  of  the  incense  is 
symbolic  of  the  acceptableness  of  prayer.  U.  Of  intelligent,  unceasing,  and 
reverent  prayer.  1.  The  burning  of  incense  is  intelligent  prayer.  It  took  place 
in  the  light ;  and  our  prayers  should  be  presented  to  God  intelligently.  2.  Un- 
ceasing prayer.  It  was  a  perpetual  incense  before  the  Lord.  3.  Reverent  prayer 
(ver.  9.)  HI.  Of  prayer  offered  in  Christ's  name.  Aaron  sprinkled  the  golden 
horns  with  the  blood  of  atonement.  This  act  is  typical  of  the  offering  of  prayer  in 
the  name  of  Christ.  IV.  Of  the  power  of  prayer.  The  horns  of  the  altar  sym- 
bolize power.  "The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much, " 
(D.  JR.  Jenkins.)  The  altar  of  incense : — I.  We  gather  our  first  lesson  from  the 
bhape  and  position  of  this  altar.  The  altar  was  four-square.  The  same  measure 
and  estimate  were  thus  presented  every  way,  whether  towards  God,  or  towards  man. 
But  the  squareness  of  the  altar  also  denoted  the  stabihty  of  the  service  connected 
with  it.    Prayer  and  praise  are  not  temporary  things.    Prayer  indeed  will  be  con- 


CHAP.  XXX.]  EXODUS.  525 

fined  to  earth,  for  it  is  the  language  of  want.  But  "  praise  waiteth  for  God  "  in  the 
heavenly,  as  well  as  in  the  earthly  Zion.  II.  Our  second  lesson  from  the  golden 
altar  is  taught  us  by  the  condition  necessaby  to  the  offering  of  its  incense,  viz. , 
that  there  be  a  fire  burning  on  it.  1.  This  incense  on  the  altar  typified  the  inter- 
cession of  Christ.  But  the  fragrance  of  the  incense  could  not  be  brought  out,  nor 
its  efiScacy  put  forth  till  the  action  of  fire  was  employed.  And  these  burning  coals 
on  the  golden  altar,  to  what  do  they  point  us  in  this  view  of  our  subject  but  the 
sufferings  of  Christ?  "It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer."  2.  The  golden  censer  on 
this  altar,  with  the  incense  rising  from  it,  denotes,  we  know,  the  prayers  of  God's 
people  (see  Kev.  viii.  3,  4).  Here  again  we  see  that  the  incense  could  yield  no 
fragrance  without  fire.  The  priest  put  it  on  the  live  coals,  and  then  the  odorous 
clouds  went  fuming  up,  a  sweet  savour,  acceptable  to  God.  And  here  we  are  taught 
in  a  most  significant  way,  the  necessity  of  heartiness  in  our  worship  if  we  would 
have  it  well-pleasing  to  God.  III.  Our  third  lesson  from  this  altar  is  taught  us  by 
the  contindousness  of  the  incense  upon  it.  How  beautifully  this  points  us  to 
Jesus,  His  offering,  once  made  upon  the  brazen  altar,  was  never  repeated  ;  and  so 
the  incense  of  His  merits,  once  thrown  upon  the  fire  on  the  golden  altar,  never  needs 
to  be  repeated.  The  intercession  of  Christ  is  uninterrupted.  IV.  Our  fourth  lesson 
from  this  subject  is  furnished  by  observing  the  connection  of  the  altar  of  incensb 
with  both  the  outer  and  inner  sanctuary.  Niw  we  know  that  the  outer  part  of 
the  sanctuary,  or  the  holy  place,  represented  the  Church  on  earth  ;  while  the  inner 
part,  or  the  most  holy  place,  represented  the  Church  in  heaven.  The  lesson  taught 
us  by  the  part  of  the  subject  now  before  us  is,  that  the  golden  altar,  with  its  incense, 
belongs  alike  to  both  these  departments  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  All  the  service 
performed,  and  all  the  joy  experienced  by  the  redeemed  in  the  Church  on  earth  is 
based  upon  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  connected  with  the  incense  of  His  merits. 
And  the  same  will  be  true  of  the  redeemed  in  the  Church  in  heaven.  V.  Our  fifth 
and  last  lesson  from  this  subject  is  gathered  from  the  nature  and  composition  of 
THE  incense  offered  upon  the  golden  altar.  Now,  observe  this  incense  was  com- 
posed of  four  substances.  Three  of  these,  onycha,  stacte,  and  galbanum,  were 
substances  entirely  unknown  to  us.  These  may  point  to  the  divinity  of  Christ,  in 
the  mysteriousness  of  its  connection  with  His  death  and  sacrifice.  The  frank- 
incense was  a  substance  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  It  may  represent  the 
humanity  of  Christ.  This  we  know  and  understand,  for  it  was  like  our  own,  in  all 
respects,  save  that  it  was  free  from  sin.  The  elements  composing  this  incense  were 
mingled  together  in  equal  parts.  This  seems  to  point  significantly  to  the  entire  and 
perfect  harmony  of  character  which  distinguished  our  glorious  Saviour.  There  was 
nothing  out  of  place  in  Him.  Again,  the  materials  of  which  the  incense  was  com- 
posed had  to  be  beaten  into  small  particles,  or  reduced  to  powder  before  it  was  pre- 
pared to  give  out  its  rich  fragrance.  And  so  Jesus,  our  glorious  Saviour,  had  to  be 
brought  very  low,  and  stoop  to  the  most  wondrous  humiliation,  before  the  golden 
censer  of  His  merits  could  yield  those  sweet  odours  which  are  so  refreshing  to  the 
souls  of  His  people,  and  at  the  same  time  so  well  pleasing  to  God,  and  so  effica- 
cious to  secure  our  acceptance  before  Him.  (R.  Newton,  D.D.)  Incense  and 
light : — I  desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  conjunction  which  was  established  by 
the  Divine  law  between  the  burning  of  the  incense  and  the  lighting  of  the  lamps ; 
these  two  things,  being  both  of  daily  observance,  were  attended  to  at  the  same 
moment  for  reasons  worthy  of  our  study.    I.  And  first  I  call  your  attention  to  the 

WONDERFUL    CO-OPERATION    BETWEEN    THE    INTERCESSION    OF    ChRIST    FOR    US,  AND    THB 

WORK  OF  THE  HoLY  Spirit  IN  US.  1.  Notc,  that  wc  have  these  both  revealed  in  their 
fulness  at  the  same  time.  When  our  Lord  ascended  on  high  to  plead  before  the 
throne,  the  Spirit  descended  to  abide  in  the  Church.  After  the  Lord  was  taken  up 
the  disciples  received  the  promise  of  the  Father  and  were  illuminated  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  2.  Now,  as  they  were  connected  historically,  so  are  they  continually  con- 
nected as  a  matter  of  fact.  Herein  lies  our  hope  for  our  own  eternal  salvation,  in 
the  ceaseless  plea  and  the  quenchless  light.  3.  Furthermore,  this  conjunction,  es 
it  is  a  matter  of  history,  and  as  it  is  continuous,  will  always  be  seen  by  us  person- 
ally when  our  prayer  is  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  that  availeth 
much.  4.  That  in  God's  drawing  near  to  man  there  is  the  same  conjunction  of 
incense  and  light.  If  the  glory  of  God  were  to  come  forth  from  between  the 
cherubim,  if  it  should  come  past  the  veil  to  be  revealed  throughout  the  world,  that 
glory  would  pass  by  these  two,  the  golden  altar  of  incense  and  the  golden  lamp  of 
light.  I  mean  this :  God  can  have  no  dealing  with  men  at  all  except  through  the 
merit  of  Christ  and  the  light  of  the  Spirit.    II.  Secondly,  our  text  seems  to  teach 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rn. 


THE  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  PEAYEB  AND  KNOWLEDGE.  The  goldcn  altar  represents 
intercession  oifered  by  Christ,  and  also  the  prayers  of  all  the  saints,  which  are 
accepted  through  His  intercession  ;  and  as  the  candlestick  stood  side  by  side  with 
it,  and  represented  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  so  must  true  prayer  and  true 
knowledge  never  be  separated.  1.  So  I  gather,  first,  that  prayer  should  be  attended 
with  knowledge.  It  is  ill  when  men  worship  they  know  not  what.  God  is  light, 
and  He  will  not  have  His  people  worship  Him  in  the  dark.  When  they  burn  the 
incense  they  must  also  light  the  lamp.  2.  But  now  turn  the  thought  round  the 
other  way — knowledge  should  always  be  accompanied  by  prayer.  Revealed  truth 
is  as  a  church -bell  summoning  us  to  come  into  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  bow 
the  knee  before  Him.    III.  I  desire,  in  the  third  place,  to  show   some   special 

PRACTICAL  CONNECTION  BETWEEN  THE  INCENSE  AND  THE  LAMP.       "  And  Aaron  shall  bum 

thereon  sweet  incense  every  morning :  when  he  dresseth  the  lamps,  he  shall  bum 
incense  upon  it."  So,  then,  there  should  be  prayer  especially  at  the  dressing  of  the 
lamps  :  that  is  to  say,  when  preparing  our  minds  for  that  ministry  by  which  we 
enlighten  the  people  among  whom  we  dwell  we  should  be  specially  earnest  in  prayer. 
Dr.  Adam  Clarke  used  to  say  to  young  ministers,  "  Study  yourselves  dead,  and  then 
pray  yourselves  alive  again  "  ;  and  that  is  an  excellent  rule.  One  thing  more,  this 
burning  of  the  incense  was  not  only  at  the  dressing  of  the  lamps,  but  also  at  the 
kindling  of  the  lamps,  when  they  began  to  shine.  I  want  to  plead  very  heartily 
with  you  that  when  it  is  my  privilege  to  come  here  this  week  and  at  all  other  times 
to  light  the  lamps,  you  who  are  my  beloved  helpers  will  take  care  to  bum  the 
incense  at  the  same  time.  We  need  the  incense  of  prayer  more  than  ever  in  these 
latter  days.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  altar  of  incense  .-—This  altar  of  incense  may 
remind  us  of  many  things  concerning  prayer.  I.  Its  size  :  not  very  large,  the 
smallest  altar.  A  good  prayer  need  not  be  long.  God  knows  what  we  have  need 
of.  Like  the  Lord's  Prayer,  it  may  include  much.  II.  Its  design  :  symraetrical. 
Prayers  should  not  be  one-sided,  but  well-proportioned.  Not  all  about  one  thing, 
or  too  many  things.  There  was  a  simple  beauty  about  the  altar.  Four-square, 
crown  of  gold.  III.  Its  material  :  choice,  the  best  wood  and  metal.  In  prayer 
there  may  be  the  word  of  human  infirmity  and  need  ;  but  there  must  be  the  fine 
gold  of  truth,  Ac.  IV.  Its  place  :  in  the  holy  place,  in  front  of  the  vail  that  con- 
cealed the  most  holy.  There  should  be  prayer  before  entering  God's  house,  as  well 
as  inside  the  house.  V.  Its  xjse  :  to  bum  incense,  offering  to  God  of  holy  desire, 
thanksgiving,  praise.  Note — 1.  This  incense,  carefully  compounded  of  the  most 
precious  ingredients.  Not  to  be  used  for  ordinary  purposes.  Prayer  is  holy  to  the 
Lord.  2.  The  lamp  was  lighted  opposite  when  the  incense  was  kindled.  Prayer 
needs  Divine  illumination:  should  bear  the  hght  as  being  without  hypocrisy.  3. 
The  incense  was  burnt  morning  and  evening.  Our  days  should  begin  and  end  with 
prayer.       (Biblical  Museum).  The  altar  of  incense  :— Consider  this  as — I.  A 

TYPICAL  institution.  Notice  here — 1.  Its  daily  use.  2.  Its  annual  expiation.  II. 
An  emblematic  rite.  In  this  view  it  marks — 1.  The  privilege  of  Christians.  2. 
The  ground  of  their  acceptance.  Application:  (1)  How  highly  we  are  privileged 
under  the  Christian  dispensation.  (2)  What  a  holy  people  we  should  be  unto  the 
Lord.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  altar  of  incense: — At  the  west  end  of  the  outer 
apartment,  in  front  of  the  curtain  which  separated  it  from  the  holy  of  holies,  stood 
the  altar  of  incense,  three  feet  high,  with  four  equal  sides,  each  one  foot  and  six 
inches  in  horizontal  measure.  It  consisted  of  a  frame  of  acacia  wood,  with  horns 
of  the  same  material  at  the  four  upper  corners,  plated  over  all  the  external  surface 
with  gold.  It  was  not  left  open  at  the  top,  like  the  great  altar  of  burnt-offering, 
but  covered  with  a  board  of  acacia  wood,  overlaid  with  gold  like  the  four  vertical 
sides ;  and  this  cover  is  designated  by  the  word  which  signifies  the  roof  of  a  bouse. 
Like  the  ark  and  the  table,  it  had  rings  for  convenience  in  transporting  it,  and  a 
pair  of  gilded  staves,  which,  however,  did  not  remain  in  the  rings  when  the  altar 
was  in  place.  Just  above  the  rings  was  a  crown,  or  cincture,  of  the  kind  affixed  to 
the  ark  and  the  table.  The  incense  was  probably  burned  in  a  censer  placed  on  the 
top  of  the  altar  ;  the  ashes  remaining  in,  and  being  carried  away  with,  the  censer. 
(E.  E.  Atwater.) 

Ver.  12.  A  ransom  for  Ms  souL — The  ransom  for  the  life: — The  word  which  is 
here  rendered  "  ransom  "  is  afterwards  rendered  "  atonement."  The  atonement 
covered  or  removed  what  displeased  God,  and  thus  sanctified  for  His  service.  Our 
notion  of  sftonement  under  the  law  should  ordinarily  be  limited  to  the  removal  of 
the  temporal  consequences  of  moral  or  ceremonial  defilement.    The  sum  of  half  a 


CHAP.  XXX.]  EXODUS.  627 

shel^el  was  the  tax  that  every  man  had  to  pay  as  his  ransom,  and  as  this  is  the 
single  instance  in  the  Jewish  law  in  which  an  offering  of  money  is  commanded, 
it  seems  highly  probable  that  it  was  not  a  ransom  for  the  soul  so  much  as  a  ransom 
for  the  life  which  the  Israelite  made  when  he  paid  his  half-shekel.  On  all  occa- 
sions  in  which  the  soul,  the  immortal  principle,  is  undeniably  concerned,  the 
appointed  offerings  are  strictly  sacrificial.  Consider :  I.  The  kansom  for  the 
LIFE.  Our  human  lives  are  forfeited  to  God ;  we  have  not  accomplished  the 
great  end  of  our  being,  and  therefore  we  deserve  every  moment  to  die.  The 
Israelites  paid  their  tax  as  a  confession  that  life  had  been  forfeited,  and  as  an 
acknowledgment  that  its  continuance  depended  wholly  on  God.  We  cannot  give 
the  half -shekel  payment,  but  we  should  have  before  us  the  practical  remembrance 
that  in  God's  hand  is  the  soul  of  every  living  thing.  II.  The  kich  and  the  poor 
WERE  to  pay  jdst  THE  SAME  SUM.  This  was  a  clear  and  unqualified  declaration 
that  in  the  sight  of  God  the  distinctions  of  rank  and  estate  are  altogether  as 
nothing;  that,  whilst  He  gathers  the  whole  human  race  under  His  guardianship, 
there  is  no  difference  in  the  watchfulness  which  extends  itself  to  the  several 
individuals.  III.  If  we  understand  the  word  "soul"  in  the  ordinary  sense,  the 
text  is  a  clear  indication  that  God  values  at  the  same  rate  the  souls  of  all 
HUMAN  BEINGS.  Evcry  soul  has  been  redeemed  at  the  price  of  the  blood  of 
God's  Son.  Rich  and  poor  must  offer  the  same  atonement  for  the  soul.  (H. 
Melvill,  B.D.)  The  soul-ransom  : — I.  Divinely  appointed.  "  The  Lord  spake," 
&c.  Who  else  had  a  right  to  speak  on  this  matter  ?  How  would  it  have  been 
had  man  spoken?  God  mercifully  prevents  confusion  by  Himself  speaking. 
So,  in  our  case.  "I  have  found  a  ransom."  II.  Universally  enforced. 
"They  shall  give  every  man  a  ransom  for  his  soul."  No  moral  man  shall,  in 
the  pride  of  his  self-righteousness,  conclude  that  he  needs  no  ransom  ;  nor  shall 
any  vile  sinner,  in  utter  despair,  conclude  that  a  ransom  will  in  his  case  be 
useless.  "He  gave  Himself  a  Eansom  for  all."  How  if  we  "neglect  so  great 
ealvation  "  ?  III.  Equally  distributed.  "The  rich  shall  not  give  more,  and 
the  poor  shall  not  give  less."  There  should  be  no  excuse  for  misrepresenting 
their  circumstances.  They  were  taught  that  the  soul,  and  not  wealth,  was  the 
thing  considered.  Men  spiritually  on  one  level  (Lev.  xix.  15).  The  rich  and  the 
poor  might  be  sundered  by  circumstances  in  the  tent,  but  were  on  an  equality  in 
the  Tabernacle.  In  the  house  of  God  the  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together,  &c. 
Each  went  with  his  half-shekel  to  Him  who  respecteth  not  the  person  of  any 
man.  IV.  Mercifully  measured.  "  An  half-shekel  shall  be  the  offering  of 
the  Lord."  In  other  matters  there  was  a  difference  (see  Lev.  v.  7;  see  marg. ; 
Lev.  xii.  8;  xiv.  21,  22,  30,  31).  The  poor  were  always  treated  with  special 
consideration.  It  was  a  mercy  to  the  rich  to  humble  him,  and  to  the  poor 
to  inculcate  proper  self-respect.  A  mercy  to  all,  to  inculcate  the  habit  of  giving 
as  a  "  means  of  grace."  Learn — 1.  That  in  soul  matters  men  are  equal  before 
God.  2.  That  our  ransom  is  paid  for  us.  3.  That  we  are  not  redeemed  with 
corruptible  things,  &c.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  Silver  sockets  :  or,  redemption  the 
foundation : — 1.  Observe  that  this  redemption,  without  which  no  man  might 
rightly  be  numbered  among  the  children  of  Israel  lest  a  plague  should  break  out 
among  them,  must  be  personal  and  individual.  You  must  each  one  bring  Christ 
unto  the  Father,  taking  Him  into  your  hands  by  simple  faith.  No  other  price 
must  be  there ;  but  that  price  must  be  brought  by  every  individual,  or  else  there 
is  no  acceptable  coming  to  God.  2.  It  was  absolutely  essential  that  each  one 
should  bring  the  h<ilf-shekel  of  redemption  money ;  for  redemption  is  the  only 
way  in  which  you  and  I  can  be  accepted  of  God.  'There  were  many,  no  doubt,  in 
the  camp  of  Israel  who  were  men  of  station  and  substance  ;  but  they  must  bring 
the  ransom  money,  or  die  amid  their  wealth.  Others  were  ^vise-hearted  and  skilful 
in  the  arts,  yet  must  they  be  redeemed  or  die.  Rank  could  not  save  the  princes, 
nor  office  spare  the  elders :  every  man  of  Israel  must  be  redeemed ;  and  no  man 
could  pass  the  muster-roll  without  his  half-shekel,  whatever  he  might  say,  or  do, 
or  be.  3.  Note  well  that  every  Israelitish  man  must  be  alike  redeemed,  and 
redeemed  with  the  like,  nay,  with  the  same  redemption.  "  The  rich  shall  not 
give  more,  and  the  poor  shall  not  give  less  than  half  a  shekel."  4.  And  it  must 
be  a  redemption  that  meets  the  Divine  demand,  because,  you  see,  the  Lord  not 
only  says  that,  they  must  each  bring  half  a  shekel,  no  more,  no  less,  but  it  must 
be  "  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary  " — not  the  shekel  of  commerce,  which  might  be 
debased  in  quality  or  diminished  by  wear  and  tear,  but  the  coin  must  be  according 
to  the  standard  shekel  laid  up  in  the  holy  place.     I.  I  want  you  to  view  this  illus- 


528  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxx. 

tration  as  teaching  us  something  about  God  in  kelation  to  man.  The  tent  in 
the  wilderness  was  typical  of  God's  coming  down  to  man  to  hold  intercourse  with 
him.  The  Lord  seems  to  teach  us,  in  relation  to  His  dealing  with  men,  that  He 
will  meet  man  in  the  way  of  grace  only  on  the  footing  of  redemption.  He  treats 
with  man  concerning  love  and  grace  within  His  holy  shrine ;  but  the  basis  of  that 
shrine  must  be  atonement.  II.  I  think  we  may  apply  this  illustration  to  Christ 
IN  His  Divine  Person.  The  Tabernacle  was  the  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
for  God  dwells  among  men  in  Christ.  "  He  tabernacled  among  us,  and  we  beheld 
His  glory,"  "  In  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  Our  Lord 
is  thus  the  Tabernacle  which  the  Lord  hath  pitched  and  not  man  ;  and  our  first 
and  fundamental  idea  of  Him  must  be  in  His  character  as  Eedeemer.  Our  Lord 
does  come  to  us  in  other  characters,  and  in  them  all  He  is  right  glorious;  but 
unless  we  receive  Him  as  Eedeemer  we  have  missed  the  essence  of  His  character, 
the  foundation  idea  of  Him.  III.  The  Tabernacle  was  a  type  of  the  Chcrch  of 
God  as  the  place  of  Divine  indwelling.  What  and  where  is  the  Church  o£ 
God?  The  true  Church  is  founded  upon  redemption.  1.  Christ  is  a  sure  Found- 
ation. 2.  An  invariable  Foundation.  IV.  I  think  this  Tabernacle  in  the  wilder- 
ness may  be  viewed  as  a  type  of  the  gospel,  for  the  gospel  is  the  revelation  of  God 
to  man.  Now,  as  that  old  gospel  in  the  wilderness  was,  such  must  ours  be,  and  I 
want  to  say  just  two  or  three  things  very  plainly,  and  have  done.  Eedemption 
must  be  the  foundation  of  our  theology — doctrinal,  practical,  and  experimental. 
Ah,  and  not  only  our  theology  but  our  personal  hope.  The  only  gospel  that  I  have 
to  preach  is  that  which  I  have  to  rest  upon  myself — "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our 
sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  This  is  henceforth  the  burden  of  our  service,  and 
the  glory  of  our  life.  Those  silver  sockets  were  very  precious,  but  very  weighty. 
I  dare  say  the  men  who  had  to  move  them  sometimes  thought  so.  Four  tons  and 
more  of  silver  make  up  a  great  load.  0  blessed,  bUssful  draught,  to  have  to  put 
the  shoulder  to  the  collar  to  draw  the  burden  of  the  Lord — the  glorious  weight  of 
redemption.       (C.    H.    Spurgeoii.)  The  atonement  money : — The  atonement 

money  preached  a  very  clear  and  blessed  gospel.  It  told  out  the  gieat  truth,  that 
birth  in  the  flesh  availed  nothing.  Every  man  must  give  a  ransom  for  his  soul. 
The  price  was  fixed  by  God  Himself.  Each  man,  whether  poor  or  rich,  must  bring 
the  same.  One  could  not  pay  for  another.  Each  person  was  estimated  by  God 
at  the  same  price.  Salvation  must  be  an  individual,  personal  matter,  between  the 
soul  and  God.  Every  man  has  to  bring  his  own  half-shekel.  The  half-shekel  was 
to  be  of  silver ;  the  unalloyed,  unadulterated  metal.  Three  things  are  probably 
here  presented  in  type  :  the  Lord  Jesus  as  God — as  the  pure  and  spotless  One — 
and  as  giving  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.  The  silver,  being  a  solid,  imperishable, 
precious  metal,  may  have  this  first  aspect ;  its  chaste  whiteness  representing  the 
second ;  and  its  being  ordinarily  employed  as  money  or  price  may  point  out  its 
fitness  as  a  type  of  the  third.  (If.  W.  Soltau.)  Universal  equality  : — Why, 
under  these  circumstances,  the  ransom  of  half  a  shekel  ?  Everybody  when  he 
went  over  to  the  ofiScial  group  was  called  specifically  as  a  man  of  twenty  years  of 
age  and  upward.  Let  us  see.  Strip  away  wealth.  Strip  away  learning.  Strip 
away  rank.  Strip  away  fame.  Eeduce  us  to  our  natural  nakedness.  What  is 
left?  Nothing  but  a  sinful  man.  There  are  four  moments  in  our  ecclesiastical 
life  when  we  are  all  reduced  to  this  naked  simplicity,  to  this  fundamental 
similarity.  At  the  moment  of  our  baptism.  The  minister  receives  into  his  arms, 
literally  following  the  example  of  our  Lord — "  this  child,"  not  this  prince  or  this 
peasant.  Again,  at  the  moment  of  our  marriage.  I  remember  that  many  years  ago, 
when  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  married,  and  I  was  a  mere  boy,  I  was  struck  by  the 
fact  that  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  turned  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  said, 
"  Wilt  thou  have  this  woman  to  be  thy  wedded  wife  p "  not  "  this  Princess  of 
Dermiark."  And  then  to  the  woman  he  said  in  effect,  we  know  nothing  of  the  heir 
to  the  British  throne  in  the  house  of  God, — wilt  thou  have  "  this  man  "  to  be  thy 
wedded  husband  ?  I  was  struck  even  then  at  the  way  in  which  the  most  exalted 
were  reduced  to  their  simple  humanity.  Then,  again,  at  the  Holy  Communion, 
all  men  are  absolutely  equal.  One  table  for  rich  and  poor.  I  remember  a  beautiful 
incident  in  the  life  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  when  he  was  Lord  Warden  of  the 
Cinque  Ports,  a  position  held  by  the  late  Earl  Granville,  whose  death  we  all  so  much 
lament.  The  Iron  Duke  was  in  church,  and  was  going  to  receive  the  Lord's  Supper, 
when  a  peasant,  who  had  not  noticed  the  duke,  kneeled  bv  his  side.  Discovering 
who  he  was,  and  being  much  terrified,  he  was  getting  up,  when  the  duke  put  hia 
hand  on  his  shoulder,  aud  said,  "Don't  move,  we  are  all  equal  here."  Wisely  said. 


CHAP,  xxs.]  EXODVS.  529 

profoundly  true.  There  is  one  other  moment  when  we  are  all  equal — at  the  moment 
of  death.  If  any  mighty  monarch  is  fortunate  enough  to  be  a  Christian,  the  utmost 
the  Christian  minister  will  say  at  his  burial  is  this,  "  We  commit  the  body  of  our 
dear  brother  to  the  dust."  Our  brother,  nothing  more.  As  there  are  four  moments 
in  our  ecclesiastical  history  when  we  are  reduced  to  our  common  humanity  and  to 
our  absolute  similarity,  so  there  is  one  moment  in  our  civic  history,  and  that 
moment  is  to-night,  perhaps  the  only  time  in  your  life  when  you  will  be  absolutely 
on  an  equal  with  the  greatest  in  the  land.  This  is  why  in  that  old  theocracy  every 
man  who  was  numbered  in  the  census  had  to  pay  a  tribute  to  the  Tabernacle. 
When  nothing  is  left  except  our  common  humanity  surely  then  we  must  make  our 
common  confession,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ;  we  have  turned  every 
one  to  his  own  way  ;  and  the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  You 
may  be  a  duke.  You  may  be  an  Oxford  graduate.  You  may  be  a  millionaire.  But 
all  these  are  superficial  distinctions.  At  bottom  you  are  a  sinful  man  needing  the 
mercy  of  God  as  much  as  the  rest  of  us.  Therefore,  when  for  one  moment  all 
social,  artificial  distinctions  ceased,  each  man  paid  his  half-shekel  to  the  Taber- 
nacle as  an  acknowledgment  of  his  obligation  to  sue  for  the  mercy  of  heaven  and 
to  do  the  will  of  God.      (Hugh  Price  Hughes,  M.A.) 

Vers.  17-21.  A  laver  of  brass. — The  true  washing: — I.  Divine  (.John  xiii.  8). 

II.  Spiritual  (Jer.  iv.  14).      Kest  not  in  a  mere  social  or  ecclesiastical  purity. 

III.  Essential.      "That   they  die  not"  (Kev.  vii.  13-15).      {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.) 
The  laver: — 1.  This  laver  teaches  us,  among  other  things,  that  those  who  would 
come  to  God  must  approach  Him  with  clean  hands  (see  Psa.  xxvi.  6 ;  xxiv.  2-4 ; 
cxix.  9).     I  think  these  texts  show  that  those  who  profess  to  serve  God  must 
cultivate  holiness  of  heart  and  life,  and  that  whilst  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanses  us 
from  all  sin,  we  are  to  cleanse  ourselves  by  coming  constantly  under  the  power  of 
the  Word.     2.  None  but  priests  were  permitted  to  wash  in  this  laver,  and  none 
were  consecrated  to  the  office  of  priests  besides  those  who  were  born  into  the 
priestly  family.    All  the  Lord's  people  are  priests,  and  as  such  they  are  called  to 
offer  spiritual  sacrifices  to  God  (Eom.  xii.  1;  Heb.  xiii.  15,  16;  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  9). 
They  enter  the  priestly  family  when  bom  again,  and  none  but  those  who  are 
"twice  born"  can  offer  any  sacrifice  to  God  which  He  will  accept.    At  their  ordi- 
nation the  priests  were  washed  all  over :  this  they  did  not  do  for  themselves ;  it 
was  done  for  them  by  Moses,  and  answered  to  the  washing  of  regeneration,  which 
God  does  for  us  when  He  brings  us  into  His  house  and  makes  us  His  servants. 
Afterwards  there  was  the  daily  washing  of  the  hands  and  feet :  this  Moses  did  not 
do  for  them  ;  they  did  it  themselves,  did  it  every  day,  and  the  neglect  of  it  was 
punished  with  death  (Lev.  viii.  6  ;  Exod.  xxx.  18-21).     God  has  made  all  His 
people  clean.    As  He  sees  them,  there  is  no  sin  on  them  ;  but  as  to  their  daily 
walk,  they  need  to  be  constantly  judging  themselves  by  the  Word.     And  as  the 
action  of  water  will  remove  any  defilement  of  the  hands  or  feet,  so  the  action  of 
the  Word,  when  we  come  properly  under  its  power,  will  correct  our  wrong  habits, 
will  purify  our  thoughts,  and  make  us  clean.     (G.  Rodgers.)        The  laver : — There 
are  three  principal  points  with  which  the  lessons  taught  us  by  the  laver  may  be 
connected.     I.  In  the  first  place,  let  us  consider  what  we  are  taught  by  the  laveb 
WITH  ITS  SUPPLY  OF  CLEAiJsiNO  WATER.      The  lavcr,  with  its  abundant  supply  of 
pure  cleansing  water,  points  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the  truth  through  which 
that  Spirit  acts,  as  the  great  appointed  instruments  for  carrying  on  the  work  of 
sanctification  in  the  souls  of  believers.     II.  But,  secondly,  let  us  inquire  what 
lessons  we  are  taught  by  the  persons  who  used  the  laver.     It  was  only  the 
priests  who  had  access  to  the  laver.     We  see  here  the  true  character  of  God's 
people  ;  the  high  privilege  accorded  them  ;  and  the  nature  of  the  service  required 
of  them.     III.  But  there  is  a  third  and  last  point  of  view  from  which  to  contem- 
plate  this   laver,   and  gather  instruction  from  it,   and  that  is  the  position  it 
occupied.     This  is  very  significant.      The  direction  given  to  Moses,  on  this  point, 
was  most  explicit :  "  Thou  shalt  put  it  between  the  tent  of  the  congregation  and 
the  altar."     "  The  tent  of  the  congregation  "  means  the  Tabernacle.     Thus  the 
laver  stood,  by  Divine  direction,  midway  between  the  brazen  altar  and  the  Taber- 
nacle.    The  Jew  was  required  to  come  first  to  the  brazen  altar,  with  its  propitiatory 
sacrifice,  and  then  to  the  laver,  with  its  cleansing  water.     Not  the  washing  first, 
and  then  forgiveness,  but  forgiveness  first,  and  then  the  washing.    (R.  Newton,  D.D.) 

84 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xa. 

Vers.  22-33.  An  holy  anointing  oil. — The  anointing  oil: — I.  The  universal 
NEED  THERE  IS  OF  THE  HoLY  Spirit's  INFLUENCE.  1.  There  WES  nothing  under 
the  law  so  holy,  but  that  it  needed  this  Divine  unction.  2.  Nor  is  there  anything 
under  the  gospel  which  does  not  need  it.  II.  His  sufficiency  for  all  to  wnou 
THAT  influence  IS  APPLIED.  This  appears — 1.  From  the  preciousness  of  the 
ointment  which  was  used.  2.  From  the  virtue  infused  into  everything  anointed 
with  it.  Application — (1)  Seek  the  Holy  Spirit  for  your  own  souls.  (2)  Guard 
against  everything  that  may  reflect  dishonour  upon  Him.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.) 
The  use  of  oil  in  daily  life  and  in  the  symbolism  of  worship  : — I.  The  use  of  oil  in 
DAILY  LIFE  may  be  described  as  threefold.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  used  for  the 
anointing  of  the  body,  by  which  the  skin  was  rendered  soft  and  smooth ;  refreshed 
and  invigorated.  Orientals  ascribed  a  virtue  to  it  which  penetrated  even  to  the 
bones.  Coincident  with  this  was  the  use  of  oil  in  sickness,  as  a  means  of  lulling 
pain  and  restoring  health.  2.  The  second  use  of  oil  in  the  preparation  of  food  is 
to  be  looked  at  from  the  same  point  of  view.  Here  also  the  object  was,  so  to 
speak,  to  anoint  the  food,  so  as  to  make  it  soft  and  palatable.  3.  And  thirdly,  not 
less  frequent  and  important  was  the  use  of  oil  for  burning  and  giving  light,  surely 
also  an  anointing  for  the  purpose  of  enUvening  and  invigorating.  The  thing  to  be 
anointed  was  the  wick  of  the  lamp.  The  wick  would  bui'n  without  oil,  but  only 
with  a  weak  and  miserable  light,  and  very  speedily  it  would  become  extinguished. 
II.  All  these  modes  of  using  oil  are  transferred  to  the  syiibolish  of  worship.  1. 
The  first  we  see  at  once  is  the  anointing  of  the  Tabernacle,  its  vessels,  and  the 
priests  themselves.  2.  The  second  is  seen  in  the  minchah,  or  meat-offering,  not 
"  meat '"  at  all  in  our  modern  acceptation,  but  composed  of  wheat,  commingled 
with  oil  (Lev.  ii.  1-8).  3.  The  third  in  correspondence  is  obviously  the  ever- 
burning sacred  lamp  of  the  holy  place.  (cT^.  H.  Kurtz,  D.D.)  The  holy  anointing 
oil : — Moses  being  commanded  of  God  to  make  an  holy  anointing  oil  (ver.  23),  was 
to  take  a  certain  quantity  of  some  principal  spices,  such  as  myrrh,  cinnamon, 
calamus,  and  cassia,  then  to  compound  them  after  the  art  of  the  apothecary.  And 
thus  it  is,  that  the  oil  of  our  charity  must  be  rightly  ordered  ;  every  Christian 
alms-giver  must  be  a  kind  of  spiritual  apothecary.  First,  his  alms  must  be  like 
myrrh,  which  distils  from  the  tree  without  cutting  or  the  least  incision,  so  his 
charity  to  be  free  without  the  least  compulsion.  Secondly,  cinnamon,  hot  in 
taste  and  hot  in  operation,  so  his  alms,  neither  stone-cold  as  Nabal,  nor  lukewarm 
as  Laodicea,  but  hot ;  as  it  was  said  of  Dorcas,  that  she  was  full  of  good  works. 
Thirdly,  cassia,  as  sweet  as  the  former,  but  growing  low,  the  emblem  of  humility, 
so  giving,  but  not  vain-gloriously.  Lastly,  calamus,  an  odoriferous  powder,  but  of 
a  fragile  reed ;  so  giving,  but  acknowledging  his  weakness,  thinking  it  no  way 
meritorious  ;  for,  saith  St.  Bernard,  "  Dangerous  is  the  state  of  that  house  which 
thinks  to  win  heaven  by  keeping  house,"  &c.  (J.  SiJencer.)  The  holy  anointing 
oil : — This  is  to  be  composed  of  five  ingredients  :  500  shekels  of  pure  myrrh,  250 
of  sweet  cinnamon,  250  of  sweet  calamus,  and  500  of  cassia,  and  a  hin,  about  three 
quarts,  of  olive  oil.  It  is  said  to  be  compounded  after  the  art  of  the  perfumer.  It 
is  probable,  therefore,  as  the  Rabbins  suppose,  that  the  three  spices  were  soaked 
in  water,  and  boiled,  and  their  essence  extracted  and  mingled  with  the  myrrh 
and  oil  (vers.  26-30).  With  the  anointing  oil  are  to  be  anointed  the  tent  of 
meeting,  the  ark  of  the  testimony,  the  table,  the  candlestick,  and  the  altar  of 
incense,  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  the  laver,  and  all  their  appurtenances. 
Being  thus  anointed,  they  are  hallowed,  and  are  accounted  most  holy  (ver.  10). 
Aaron  and  his  sons  are  to  be  anointed  and  consecrated  to  their  priestly  office 
(vers.  31-33).  This  is  to  be  a  standing  oil  for  anointing,  not  to  be  used  for 
common  purposes,  not  to  be  imitated  in  ordinary  compounds,  on  pain  of  excom- 
munication (Gen.  xvii.  14).  The  anointing  oil  is  an  impressive  symbol  of  sancti- 
fying grace.  It  is  analogous  to  the  water  of  the  laver,  which  cleanses.  The  latter 
points  to  the  quality  required ;  the  former  to  the  end  contemplated.  That  which 
is  dedicated  to  God  must  be  cleansed  from  stain.    {J.  G.  Murphy,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  34-38.  Sweet  spices. — The  incense: — The  incense  employed  in  the  service 
of  the  Tabernacle  was  compounded  of  four  ingredients  :  stacte,  onycha,  galbanum, 
and  frankincense.  It  might  only  be  used  in  the  worship  of  God.  The  penalty  of 
death  was  affixed  to  the  making  or  using  of  it  for  profane  purposes  (vers.  37,  38). 
It  is  called  "  holy  of  holies"  (ver.  36),  or  "  most  holy."  This  incense  was  burnt 
morning  and  evening  upon  the  golden  altar  of  incense,  which  stood  in  the  holy 
place  (vers.  7,  8).     We  see,  here,  that  in  the  original  institution  the  burning  of 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  EXODUS.  531 

incense  was  the  special  work  of  the  high  priest ;  the  duty  is  assigned  to  Aaron 
himself,  not  to  his  sons.  Like  the  shewbread,  and  the  daily  sacrifice,  the  incense 
also  is  called  "  perpetual  "  (ver.  8).  Besides  the  daily  incense,  the  offering  of 
incense  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  by  the  high  priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  formed 
a  very  solemn  and  important  part  of  the  ceremonies  of  that  day.  But  for  the  cloud 
of  incense  covering  the  mercy-seat,  the  high  priest  would  have  died  on  entering  the 
holiest  place  (Lev.  xvi.  13).  Incense  was  a  symbol,  not  only  of  prayer  generally, 
but  more  especially  of  intercessory  prayer.  On  one  remarkable  occasion  we  find 
even  the  power  of  atoning  ascribed  to  the  offering  of  incense  (Numb.  xvi.  46-48). 
Here  the  rehearsal,  as  it  were,  of  the  incense-offering  of  the  day  of  atonement, 
exercised  a  similar  intercessory  and  atoning  power,  even  without  any  accompanying 
sacrifice  or  shedding  of  blood.  A  wonderful  foreshadowing  of  the  more  powerful 
incense-offering  of  a  greater  High  Priest  who  "  ever  liveth,"  &c.  (-E.  F.  Willis, 
M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Ver.  6.  In  the  beaxts  of  all  that  are  wise  hearted  I  have  put  wisdom. — The 
danger  of  accomplishments  : — There  are  persons  who  doubt  whether  what  are  called 
"  accomplishments,"  whether  in  literature  or  in  the  fine  arts,  can  be  consistent 
with  deep  and  practical  seriousness  of  mind.  I  am  not  speaking  of  human  learn- 
ing ;  this  also  many  men  think  inconsistent  with  simple  uncorrupted  faith.  They 
suppose  that  learning  must  make  a  man  pioud.  This  is  of  course  a  great  mistake  ; 
but  of  it  I  am  not  speaking,  but  of  an  over-jealousy  of  accomplishments,  the 
elegant  arts  and  studies,  such  as  poetry,  literary  composition,  painting,  music, 
and  the  like;  which  are  considered,  not  indeed  to  make  a  man  proud,  but  to  make 
him  trifling.  Of  this  opinion,  how  far  it  is  true  and  how  far  not  true,  I  am  going 
to  speak.  Now,  that  the  accomplishments  I  speak  of  have  a  tendency  to  make  ns 
trifling  and  unmanly,  and  therefore  are  to  be  viewed  by  each  of  us  with  suspicion 
as  far  as  regards  himself,  I  am  ready  to  admit,  and  shall  presently  make  clear.  I 
allow  that  in  matter  of  fact,  refinement  and  luxury,  elegance  and  effeminacy,  go 
together.  Antioch,  the  most  polished,  was  the  most  voluptuous  city  of  Asia.  But 
the  abuse  of  good  things  is  no  argument  against  the  things  themselves  ;  mental 
cultivation  may  be  a  Divine  gift,  though  it  is  abused.  An  acquaintance  with  the 
elegant  arts  may  be  a  gift  and  a  good,  and  intended  to  be  an  instrument  of  God's 
glory,  though  numbers  who  have  it  are  rendered  thereby  indolent,  luxurious,  and 
feeble-minded.  But  the  account  of  the  building  of  the  Tabernacle  in  the  wilder- 
ness, from  which  the  text  is  taken,  is  decisive  on  this  point.  How,  then,  is  it  that 
what  in  itself  is  of  so  excellent,  and,  I  may  say.  Divine  a  nature,  is  yet  so  commonly 
perverted  ?  Now  the  danger  of  an  elegant  and  poHte  education  is  that  it  separates 
feehng  and  acting  ;  it  teaches  us  to  think,  speak,  and  be  affected  aright,  without 
forcing  us  to  practise  what  is  right.  I  will  take  an  illustration  of  this  from  the 
effect  produced  upon  the  mind  by  reading  what  is  commonly  called  a  romance  or 
novel.  Such  works  contain  many  good  sentiments  (I  am  taking  the  better  sort  of 
them) ;  characters,  too,  are  introduced,  virtuous,  noble,  patient  under  suffering, 
and  triumphing  at  length  over  misfortune.  But  it  is  all' fiction  ;  it  does  not  exist 
out  of  a  book  which  contains  the  beginning  and  end  of  it.  We  have  nothing  to 
do ;  we  read,  are  affected,  softened,  or  roused,  and  that  is  all ;  we  cool  again — 
nothing  comes  of  it.  Now  observe  the  effect  of  this.  God  has  made  us  feel  in 
order  that  we  may  go  on  to  act  in  consequence  of  feeling ;  if,  then,  we  allow  our 
feelings  to  be  excited  without  acting  upon  them,  we  do  mischief  to  the  moral 
system  within  us,  just  as  we  might  spoil  a  watch,  or  other  piece  of  mechanism,  by 
playing  with  the  wheels  of  it.  We  weaken  its  springs,  and  they  cease  to  act  truly. 
For  instance,  wc  will  say  we  have  read  again  and  again  of  the  heroism  of  facing 
danger,  and  we  have  glowed  with  the  thought  of  its  nobleness.  Now,  suppose  lit 
length  we  actually  come  into  trial,  and,  let  us  say,  our  feelings  become  roused,  as 
often  before,  at  the  thought  of  boldly  resisting  temptations  to  cowardice,  shall  we 
therefore  do  our  duty,  quitting  ourselves  like  men?  rather,  we  are  likely  to  talk 
loudly,  and  then  run  from  the  danger.  And  what  is  here  instanced  of  fortitude  is 
true  in  all  cases  of  duty.  The  refinement  which  literature  gives  is  that  of  thinking, 
feeling,  knowing  and  speaking  right,  not  of  acting  right ;  and  thus,  while  it  makes 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xct. 

the  manners  amiable,  and  the  conversation  decorous  and  agreeable,  it  has  no 
tendency  to  make  the  conduct,  the  practice  of  the  man  virtuous.  The  case  is  the 
same  with  the  arts  last  alluded  to — poetry  and  music.  These  are  especially  likely 
to  make  us  unmanly,  if  we  are  not  on  our  guard,  as  exciting  emotions  without 
insuring  correspondent  practice,  and  so  destroying  the  connection  between  feeling 
and  acting ;  for  I  here  mean  by  unmanliness  the  inability  to  do  with  ourselves 
what  we  v.ish — the  saying  fine  things  and  yet  lying  slothfully  on  our  couch,  as  if 
we  could  not  get  up,  though  we  ever  so  much  wisbed  it.  And  here  I  must  notice 
something  besides  in  elegant  accomplishments,  which  goes  to  make  us  over, 
refined  and  fastidious,  and  falsely  delicate.  In  books  everything  is  made  beautiful 
in  its  way.  Pictures  are  drawn  of  complete  virtue ;  little  is  said  about  failures,  and 
little  or  nothing  of  the  drudgery  of  ordinary,  every-day  obedience,  which  is  neither 
poetical  nor  interesting.  True  faith  teaches  us  to  do  numberless  disagreeable  things 
for  Christ's  sake,  to  bear  petty  annoyances,  which  we  find  written  down  in  no  book. 
And  further  still,  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  art  of  composing,  which  is  a  chief 
accomplishment,  has  in  itself  a  tendency  to  make  us  artificial  and  insincere.  For 
to  be  ever  attending  to  the  fitness  and  propriety  of  our  words,  is  (or  at  least  there 
is  the  risk  of  its  being)  a  kind  of  acting ;  and  knowing  what  can  be  said  on  both 
sides  of  a  subject  is  a  main  step  towards  thinking  the  one  side  as  good  as  the 
other.  With  these  thoughts  before  us,  it  is  necessary  to  look  back  to  the  Scripture 
instances  which  I  began  by  adducing,  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  accomplish- 
ments  are  positively  dangerous  and  unworthy  a  Christian.  But  St.  Luke  and  St. 
Paul  show  us  that  we  may  be  sturdy  workers  in  the  Lord's  service,  and  bear  our 
cross  manfully,  though  we  be  adorned  with  all  the  learning  of  the  Egyptians  ;  or, 
rather,  that  the  resources  of  literature  and  the  graces  of  a  cultivated  mind  may  be 
made  both  a  lawful  source  of  enjoyment  to  the  possessor,  and  a  means  of  introduc- 
ing and  recommending  the  truth  to  others ;  while  the  history  of  the  Tabernacle 
shows  that  all  the  cunning  arts  and  precious  possessions  of  this  world  may  be 
consecrated  to  a  religious  service,  and  be  made  to  speak  of  the  world  to  come.  I 
conclude,  then,  with  the  following  cautions,  to  which  the  foregoing  remarks  lead. 
First,  we  must  avoid  giving  too  much  time  to  lighter  occupations  ;  and  next,  we 
must  never  allow  ourselves  to  read  works  of  fiction  or  poetry,  or  to  interfst  ourselves 
in  the  fine  arts  for  the  mere  sake  of  the  things  themselves  ;  but  keep  in  mind  all 
along  that  we  are  Christians  and  accountable  beings,  who  have  fixed  principles  of 
right  and  wrong,  by  which  all  things  must  be  tried,  and  have  religious  habits  to  be 
matured  within  them,  towards  which  all  things  are  to  be  made  subservient.  If  we 
are  in  earnest  we  shall  let  nothing  lightly  pass  by  which  may  do  us  good,  nor  shall 
we  dare  to  trifle  with  such  sacred  subjects  as  morality  and  religious  duty.  We 
shall  apply  all  we  read  to  ourselves  ;  and  this  almost  without  intending  to  do  so, 
from  the  mere  sincerity  and  honesty  of  our  desire  to  please  God.  We  shall  be 
suspicious  of  all  such  good  thoughts  and  wishes,  and  we  shall  shrink  from  all  such 
exhibitions  of  our  principles  as  fall  short  of  action.  Of  all  such  as  abuse  the 
decencies  and  elegancies  of  moral  truth  into  a  means  of  luxurious  enjoyment,  what 
would  a  prophet  of  God  say  ?  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  30-32  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  2-4  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  13). 
{J.  H.  Neu-man,  D.D.)  The  wise  hearted  ones  : — Who  are  the  wise  hearted  ones? 
1.  They  are  those  who  prove  themselves  as  having  ability  to  do  useful  work. 
Work  done,  and  well  done,  though  it  be  in  itself  of  trifling  value,  is  the  determina- 
tion of  wisdom.  2.  The  wise  hearted  are  they  who  reach  beyond  present  ability  to 
perform.  No  true  workman  is  satisfied  to  simply  repeat  his  last  job.  3.  The  wise 
hearted  are  they  who,  at  Christ's  call,  enter  His  kingdom,  there  to  labour  under 
the  influence  of  the  purest,  strongest  motives.  (C.  R.  Seymour.)  Grace  and 
genivs : — I.    Natueal  gifts  aee  often  discoveked  by  grace.     II.   Natural  gifts 

ARE    directed   BY   GRACE.        III.     NATURAL     GIFTS    ARE     HEIGHTENED   BY   GRACE.        IV. 

Natural  gifts  are  sanctified  by  grace.  {J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  method  of 
Providence  : — God  would  have  everything  built  beautifully.  What  an  image  of 
beauty  have  we  seen  this  Tabernacle  to  be  through  and  through,  flushed  with 
colours  we  have  never  seen,  and  bright  with  lights  that  could  not  show  themselves 
fully  in  the  murkiness  of  this  air  1  He  would  make  us  more  beautiful  than  our 
dwelhng-place.  He  would  not  have  the  house  more  valuable  than  the  tenant.  He 
did  not  mean  the  worshipper  to  be  less  than  the  Tabernacle  which  He  set  up  for 
worship.  Are  we  living  the  beautiful  Ufe — the  life  solemn  with  sweet  harmonies, 
broad  in  its  generous  purpose,  noble  in  the  sublimity  of  its  prayer,  like  God  in  the 
perpetual  sacrifice  of  its  life?  Not  only  will  God  build  everything  beautifully  ;  His 
purpose  is  to  have  everything  built  for  religious  uses.    His  meaning  is  that  the 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  EXODUS.  633 

form  shall  help  the  thought,  that  images  appealing  to  the  eye  shall  also  touch  the 
imagination  and  graciously  affect  the  whole  spirit,  and  subdue  into  tender  obedi- 
ence and  worship  the  soul  and  heart  of  man.  What  is  the  Tabernacle  for  ?  For 
worship.  What  is  the  meaning  of  it?  It  is  a  gate  opening  upon  heaven.  Why 
was  it  set  up  ?  To  lift  us  nearer  God.  If  we  fail  to  seize  these  purposes,  if  we 
fail  of  magnifying  and  glorifying  them  so  as  to  ennoble  our  own  life  in  the  process, 
we  have  never  seen  the  Tabernacle.  Herein  is  it  for  ever  true  that  we  may  have  a 
Bible  but  no  revelation;  a  sermon  but  no  Gospel;  we  may  be  in  the  church,  yet 
not  in  the  sanctuary  ;  we  may  admire  beauty,  and  yet  live  the  life  of  the  drunkard 
and  the  debauchee.  In  all  His  building — and  God  is  always  buikhng — He  qualifies 
every  man  for  a  particular  work  in  connection  with  the  edifice.  The  one  man 
wants  the  other  man.  The  work  stands  stiU  till  that  other  man  comes  in.  {J, 
Parker,  D.D.)  Various  kinds  of  inspiration: — Who  can  read  these  words  as 
they  ought  to  be  read  ?  How  it  makes  ministers  of  God  by  the  thousand !  We 
have  thought  that  Aaron  was  a  religious  man  because  of  his  clothing  and  because 
of  manj^  peculiarities  which  separated  him  from  other  men  ;  but  the  Lord  distinctly 
claims  the  artificer  as  another  kind  of  Aaron.  Who  divides  life  into  sacred  and 
profane  ?  Who  introduces  the  element  of  meanness  into  human  occupation  and 
service  ?  God  claims  all  things  for  Himself.  Who  will  say  that  the  preacher  is  a 
religious  man,  but  the  artificer  is  a  secular  worker?  But  let  us  claim  all  true 
workers  as  inspired  men.  We  know  that  there  is  an  inspired  art.  The  world 
knows  it ;  instinctively,  unconsciously,  the  world  uncovers  before  it.  There  is  an 
inspired  poetry,  make  it  of  what  measure  you  will.  The  great  common  heart 
knows  it,  says,  "  That  is  the  true  verse  ;  how  it  rises,  falls,  plashes  like  a  fountain, 
flows  like  a  stream,  breathes  like  a  summer  wind,  speaks  the  thoughts  we  have 
long  understood,  but  could  never  articulate  !  "  The  great  human  heart  says,  "  That 
is  the  voice  Divine  ;  that  is  the  appeal  of  heaven."  Why  should  we  say  that  in- 
spiration is  not  given  to  all  true  workers,  whether  in  gold  or  in  thought,  whether 
in  song  or  iu  prayer,  whether  in  the  type  or  in  the  magic  eloquence  of  the  burning 
tongue?  Let  us  enlarge  life,  and  enlarge  Providence,  rather  than  contract  it,  and 
not,  whilst  praying  to  a  God  in  the  heavens,  have  no  God  in  the  heart.  You  would 
work  better  if  you  realized  that  God  is  the  Teacher  of  the  fingers,  and  the  Guide  of 
the  hand.  Labour  is  churched  and  glorified.  Art  turns  its  chiselled  and  flushed 
features  towards  its  native  heaven.  (Ibid.)  Gifts  from  God  as  well  as  graces : — 
God  gave  the  plan  clearly,  graphically,  distinctly,  to  Moses ;  but  it  needed  men 
raised  up  specially  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  execute  the  plan,  and  to  give  it  practical 
development.  And  we  learn  from  this  fact  that  a  gifted  intellect  is  as  much  the 
creation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as  a  regenerate  heart.  Gifts  are  from  God  as  truly  as 
graces ;  it  needs  the  guidance  of  God's  good  Spirit  to  enable  a  man  "  to  work  in 
gold,  and  in  silver,  and  in  brass,  and  in  cutting  of  stones,  to  set  them ;  and  in 
carving  of  timber,  to  work  in  all  manner  of  workmanship  "  ;  just  as  it  does  to  do 
justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  God.  We  thus  see  that  God 
gives  light  to  the  intellect  as  well  as  grace  to  the  heart ;  and  we  may,  perhaps,  from 
this  learn  a  very  humbUng,  but  a  very  blessed  truth— that  the  man  with  a  gifted 
intellect  is  as  much  summoned  to  bow  the  knee,  and  to  thank  the  Fountain  and 
the  Author  of  it,  as  the  man  that  has  a  sanctified  heart  feels  it  his  privilege  to  bow 
his  knee,  and  to  bless  the  Holy  Spirit  that  gave  it,  for  this  his  distinguishing 
grace  and  mercy.  (J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  Spiritual  gifts  : — 1.  Prize  them  in- 
estimably. 2.  Covet  them  earnestly.  3.  Seek  for  them  dihgently.  4.  Ponder 
them  frequently.  5.  Wait  for  them  patiently.  6.  Expect  them  hopefully.  7.  Receive 
them  joyfully.  8.  Enjoy  them  thankfully.  9.  Improve  them  carefully.  10.  Eetain 
tbem  watchfully.  11.  Plead  for  them  manfuUy.  12.  Hold  them  dependently.  18. 
Grasp  them  eternally.  {BiblicalMuseum.)  Genius  and  industry : — A  friend  of  Charles 
Dickens,  a  man  who  had  given  promise  of  a  noble  career  as  an  author,  but  who, 
through  indolence,  had  failed  in  doing  any  permanent  work,  called  upon  him  one 
morning,  and,  after  bewailing  his  ill-success,  ended  by  sighing,  "  Ah,  if  I  only  were 
gifted  with  your  genius ! "  Dickens,  who  had  listened  patiently  to  the  complaint, 
exclaimed  at  once  in  answer,  "  Genius,  sir  I  I  do  not  know  what  you  mean.  I  had 
no  genius  save  the  genius  for  hard  work  ! "  However  his  enthusiastic  admirers 
may  dispute  this,  certain  it  is  that  Dickens  trusted  to  no  such  uncertain  light  as 
the  fire  of  genius.  Day  in  and  day  out,  by  hard  work,  he  elaborated  the  plot, 
characters,  and  dialogue  of  his  imperishable  stories.  Whole  days  he  would  spend 
to  discover  suitable  locahties,  and  then  be  able  to  give  vividness  to  his  description 
of  them,  while,  sentence  by  sentence,  his  work,  after  apparent  completion,  was 


534  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xsxa. 

retouched  and  revised.  The  great  law  of  labour  makes  no  exception  of  the  gifted 
or  ignorant.  Whatever  the  work  may  be,  there  can  be  no  success  in  it  without 
diligent,  unceasing,  persevering  labour. 

Ver.  18.  Written  with  the  finger  of  God. — God's  writing: — It  is  said  of  these 
tables  that  they  "  were  the  work  of  God,  and  the  writing  was  the  writing  of  God, 
graven  upon  the  tables."  Some  infidels  have  carped  at  this ;  and  I  must  say  it 
does  seem  to  me  as  if  it  were  not  human  finger,  or  human  stylus,  or  pen,  but 
God  Himself  that  engraved  it ;  but  why  should  it  be  thought  impossible  for 
God  to  engrave  upon  stone?  Have  we  not  discovered  that  the  lightning  can 
carry  our  messages — that  the  lightning  let  go  at  London  can  print  at  Dover, 
as  has  been  more  recently  shown — is  it  not  found  that  the  very  rays  of  light 
themselves  can  engrave  the  most  exquisite  and  intricate  imagery ;  and  should 
it  be  thought  strange,  then,  that  God  should  Himself  engrave  upon  stone  the 
Ten  Commandments  ?  The  fact  is,  the  higher  we  rise  in  scientific  knowledge, 
the  more  we  see  how  true  this  Book  is,  how  worthy  of  God  to  write  it,  how 
dutiful  in  man  to  beUeve,  and  bless  Him  and  rejoice  in  Him,  (J.  Gumming, 
D.D.) 


CHAPTER   XXXII. 


Vers.  1-6.  Up,  make  us  gods. — Idolatry  : — I.  The  vert  essence  oe  idolatet  is 

KOT    SPXRITUAL   IGNORANCE   AND    OBTTSENESS,    BUT   A   WILFUL    TURNING    AWAY   FROM   THE 

SPIRITUAL  KNOWLEDGE  AND  WORSHIP  OF  GoD.  1.  This  act  of  idolatry  was  in  the 
very  front  of  the  majesty  and  splendour  of  Jehovah  revealed  on  Sinai.  2.  With 
the  idol  before  him,  the  priest  proclaimed  a  feast  unto  the  Lord  ;  and  the  people 
pleased  themselves  with  the  thought  that  they  were  "  fearing  the  Lord,  while  they 
served  their  own  gods."  The  real  heart  of  idolatry  is  here  laid  bare.  It  is,  in 
plain  terms,  an  effort  to  bring  God  within  reach ;  to  escape  the  trouble,  pain,  and 
weariness  of  spiritual  effort,  and  substitute  the  effect  of  the  eye,  hand,  and  tongue 
for  the  labour  of  the  soul.  3.  In  God's  sight — i.e.,  in  reality — this  is  a  turning 
away  from  Him.  They  meant  this  bull  to  be  an  image  of  God  their  leader.  God 
saw  that  it  was  an  image  of  their  own  idolatrous  and  sensual  hearts.    H.  The 

CONTRAST  BETWEEN  THE  PROPHET  AND  THE  PRIEST.  IH.  ThE  CENTRAL  PKINCIFLE  OP 
IDOLATRY   IS   THE    SHRINKING    OF   THE    SPIRIT    FROM    THE     INVISIBLE     GoD.        It     is    the 

glory  of  the  Incarnation  that  it  presents  that  image  of  the  invisible  God  which  is 
not  an  idol,  that  it  gives  into  the  arms  of  the  yearning  spirit  a  Man,  a  Brother,  and 
declares  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  God  of  heaven.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B. A.)  Lessons 
from  the  worship  of  the  calf : — I.  The  difficulty  to  human  nature  of  faith  in  thb 
UNSEEN.  IX.  The  impatience  of  man  at  God's  method  of  working.  Moses  delayed 
in  the  mount.  The  people  would  not  wait  for  the  man  with  God's  Word.  III. 
That  man  will  have  a  god.  Up,  make  us  gods.  They  are  often  manufactured 
gods.  The  man  who  would  be  popular  must  make  gods  to  go  before  the  people.  It 
is  the  very  height  of  folly  when  men  of  science,  art,  or  manufactures,  say  of  their 
own  works,  "  These  be  thy  gods,  O  Israel."  IV.  The  effect  of  slavish  adherencb 
TO  old  ideas.  In  one  sense,  at  least,  they  were  not  out  of  Egypt — The  sacred  ox. 
See  the  importance  of  keeping  the  young  from  early  impressions  of  error.  Let 
none  expose  themselves  to  false  teaching,  it  may  bring  them  into  bondage.  V. 
Their  extravagant  expenditure  for  the  gratification  of  a  fancy  (ver.  2,  3). 
People  often  spend  more  in  superstition  than  Christians  for  the  truth.  Christians 
spend  far  more  for  luxury,  pleasure,  fancy,  than  for  Christ.  Who  amongst  us  is 
wiJhng  to  do  as  much  for  Jesus  as  these  people  did  to  procure  a  golden  calf  ?  VI. 
How  art  is  desecrated  to  sinful  purposes  (ver.  4).  So  in  building  at  Babel ;  in 
worship  at  Babylon,  and  Ephesus,  and  Athens.  Abundant  proof  in  our  picture 
galleries  and  museums,  and  also  in  our  modem  theatres,  gin  palaces,  &c.,  &c.  VIL 
That  if  God  is  dishonoured,  man  is  misled,  humiliated,  ruined.  (TF.  Whale.) 
The  golden  calf  of  Aaron  and  the  Lamb  of  God — an  infinite  contrast : — 1.  The  calf 
of  gold  was  made  of  earth's  choicest  valuables.  The  Lamb  of  God  was  heaven's 
greatest  treasure.  2.  The  calf  of  gold  was  made  to  make  God  visible.  Christ  was 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  8.  The  calf  of  gold  was  made  to  meet  a  seeming 
extremity.    Christ  came  when  maji  was  lost  beyond  hope.     4.  The  calf  of  gold  was 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  EXODUS.  535 

made  to  go  before  the  children  of  Israel  to  the  land  of  promipe.  Christ  is  the  way 
from  sin  and  bondage  to  a  land  glorious  beyond  the  imagination  of  men  to  con- 
ceive. {Homiletic  3Ionthly.)  The  golden  calf: — I.  The  first  fact  that  asserts 
itself  in  these  Unes  is  this — that  the  greatest  manifestations  of  God's  presence 
AND  power  do  not  NECESSARILY  KEEP  US  FROM  SIN.  We  must  rely  on  Christian 
principle  ;  or,  if  we  say  it  in  other  terms,  we  must  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight. 
II.  Another  lesson  which  comes  out  of  this  painful  history  is  the  uncertainty  of 
POPULAR  movements  IN  RELIGION.  They  are  very  deceptive,  and  never  more  so  than 
to-day,  when  the  democratic  idea  is  carried  over  into  the  realm  of  Christian  faith 
and  made  to  do  duty  where  it  has  no  place.  The  work  of  the  tempter  is  seen  not 
only  on  individuals,  but  on  whole  communities,  swaying  them  from  the  severe 
standard  of  purity  and  truth.  With  the  children  of  Israel  the  rule  was  the  Ten 
Commandments  which  they  had  just  accepted  from  Jehovah  and  which  left  them 
no  excuae  for  idolatry.  With  us  the  standard  is  the  whole  Word  of  God.  III. 
Perhaps  the  most  pitiable  figure  in  the  world  is  a  priest  like  Aaron  who  weakly 
succumbs  to  the  popular  will  and  attempts  to  lower  the  unchanging  and  the 
SPIRITUAL  LAWS  OF  GoD.  It  was  Convenient  for  the  turbulent  and  idolatrous  crowd 
at  the  foot  of  the  mountain  to  have  an  Aaron  to  do  their  wicked  work.  It  made  it 
look  better  and  soothed  the  outcries  of  conscience.  It  has  often  been  convenient 
for  godless  and  cruel  monarchs,  like  Henry  the  Eighth,  to  have  a  Wolsey  to 
sanction  their  wickedness.    IV.  Lastly,  we  see  that  the  covenant  was  broken,  but 

NOT  annihilated,  BECAUSE  THERE  IS  FORGIVENESS  WITH    GoD    OUR    F.\THEB.       The   tWO 

tables  were  shivered  to  atoms,  but  the  law  that  was  written  on  them  by  God'g 
finger  is  still  in  power.  (E.  N.  Packard. )  Makeshifts : — It  was  then  a  period  of 
ignorance  and  superstition  ;  but  even  now  the  greater  portion  of  humanity  worship 
tangible  gods.  The  cry  is  for  something  which  can  be  touched  ;  and  though  men 
believe  in  an  invisible  God,  yet  they  seek  to  gather  comfort  from  makeshift  idols. 
Men  see  that  gold  will  enable  them  to  obtain  the  comforts  of  life,  and  thinking  that 
such  comforts  will  give  joy  to  the  soul,  they  say,  "  Oh,  that  we  could  get  gold!  " 
They  work  and  slave,  and  bow  down,  and  sacrifice  themselves  for  gold,  as  if  it  were 
a  god.  The  fountain  of  pure  joy  and  rest  can  be  given  only  by  a  living  God  ;  gold 
is  a  dead  thing,  which  does  not  know  us  and  cannot  sympathize  with  us.  Men 
have  an  instinct  for  religious  worship  and  for  holy  conduct,  and  if  they  do  not 
exercise  this  sacred  instinct  in  its  true  channels,  they  must  have  a  makeshift  to 
satisfy  them  for  the  time  being.  Let  us  describe  some  of  the  makeshifts  on  which 
men  try  to  lean  for  comfort.  1.  Some  people  make  their  intention  to  serve  God 
to-morrow  a  makeshift  for  goodness  to-day.  You  use  this  intention  as  a  makeshift 
for  true  piety,  and  try  to  persuade  your  conscience  to  be  content  with  it  instead  of 
the  genuine  article.  2.  Many  people  seek  worldly  satisfactions  as  makeshifts  for 
spiritual  realities.  Men  say,  "  If  I  had  this  wealth,  or  that  friendship,  or  his  love, 
or  her  affection,  I  should  have  a  happy  soul."  They  think  that  earthly  satisfactions 
will  be  good  makeshifts  for  blessings  which  none  but  God  can  bestow.  3.  Others 
seek  in  the  approval  of  men  a  makeshift  for  the  approval  of  God.  4.  Is  it  not  true 
that  many  people  consider  the  pleasures  of  sin  a  makeshift  for  the  joys  of  holiness? 
Can  you  find  any  of  the  men  who  have  given  themselves  to  sin  and  profligacy  who 
can  truly  say  that  they  have  enjoyed  life  ?  5.  Perhaps  you  have  given  up  some 
sins,  and  make  that  fact  a  makeshift  for  perfect  cleansing.  As  a  child  is  content 
with  washing  a  part  of  her  face,  leavmg  the  crevices  of  the  eyes  and  ears  untouched, 
so  you  have  put  away  some  of  your  sins,  but  have  left  your  heart  as  it  was.  6. 
Some  people  make  attendance  at  church  a  makeshift  for  Divine  service.  (W. 
Birch.)  Aaron's  sin  : — Aaron,  formerly  eo  courageous  ;  fearlessly  speaking  to 
Pharaoh  ;  who  was  a  mouth  unto  Moses  his  brother ;  called  the  saint  of  the  Lord. 
Aaron,  so  prompt  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  listens  to  the  people,  and  actually 
leads  them  on  in  the  way  to  destruction!  In  all  probability  he  was  afraid  of 
offending  the  people,  who  were  assembled  in  numbers,  and  he  had  not  courage  to 
resist  their  sinful  desires.  We  have  other  instances  in  Scripture  in  which  the 
servants  of  God  failed  in  that  very  grace  for  which  they  were  most  remarkable. 
Simon  Peter  could  declare  his  determination  to  go  with  his  Master  to  prison  and 
to  death ;  yet  within  a  short  time  he  cursed  and  swore,  saying,  "  I  know  not  the 
man."  Elijah,  who  cut  off  four  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  prophets  of  Baal,  was 
intimidated  by  the  threats  of  Jezebal,  fled  from  his  post  of  duty  and  usefulness,  and 
wished  for  himself  that  he  might  die.  We  may  remark  from  this  that  no  sacred- 
ness  of  office  or  of  character  will  keep  man  from  sin.  It  is  only  grace  that  can 
effect  this  fur  us.     It  is  imagined  by  mauy  that  Aaron  did  not  intend  to  promote 


536  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iSxn. 

idolatry ;  that  he  merely  gave  the  advice  which  he  did  give  to  get  rid  of  the 
difficulty,  and  that  he  did  not  expect  the  people  would  make  the  sacrifice  which  he 
demanded,  knowing  their  love  for  their  ornaments  and  jewels.  But  how  unwise 
and  unholy  was  such  conduct :  he  was  at  any  rate  appearing  to  sanction  what  he 
knew  to  be  wrong ;  he  was  putting  the  most  important  interests  in  jeopardy,  and 
descending  from  the  only  ground  which  a  child  of  God  ought  to  occupy  in  moral 
questions.  But  Aaron's  manner  of  defending  himself  with  Moses  afterwards  proves 
that  he  had  given  way  in  opposition  to  his  conscience  (ver.  24).  What  need  have 
we  to  pray  that  ministers  especially  be  not  left  to  themselves!  we  are  men,  not 
angels  ;  we  are  compassed  with  infirmities, and  subject  to  like  passions  with  others; 
we  have  need  constantly  to  watch  and  pray,  that  your  desires  may  not  lead  us  to 
say  or  do  what  would  be  injurious  to  your  best  interests.  (George  Breaij,  B.A.) 
Aaron's  flexible  disposition : — Of  ready  and  eloquent  utterance,  he  seems,  like  many 
who  have  been  similarly  gifted,  to  have  been  of  a  pliant  and  flexible  disposition. 
He  bent,  like  the  sapling,  to  almost  every  breeze ;  his  nature  was  receptive  rather 
than  creative  ;  he  took  impressions  from  others,  but  made  little  or  no  impression 
on  them  in  return  ;  he  floated  on  the  current  which  others  formed,  but  he  rarely,  if 
ever,  made  a  torrent  which  swept  all  opposition  before  it.  He  had  little  of  that 
formative  power  which  is  always  the  indication  of  the  possession  of  the  highest 
greatness,  and  by  which  the  individual  moulds  and  fashions  all  who  come  within 
the  range  of  his  influence.  He  had  more  of  the  soft  impressiveness  of  the  melted 
wax  than  of  the  hardness  of  the  die  that  stamps  it.  Hence  he  was  well  enough  in 
time  of  peace,  and  when  everything  was  going  smoothly ;  but  when  a  sudden 
emergency  arose,  when  a  mutiny  was  to  be  quelled,  or,  as  in  the  present  instance, 
a  fit  of  idolatrous  madness  was  to  be  repressed,  he  proved  unequal  to  the  occasion, 
and  was  found  yielding,  against  his  better  judgment,  to  the  demand  of  the  multi- 
tude. From  a  timid  and  pusillanimous  regard  to  his  own  safety,  he  would  not 
oppose  the  wishes  of  the  people  ;  and  so  it  happened  that  the  spark,  w'hich  a 
moment's  firmness  might  have  trodden  out,  became  at  length  a  mighty  conflagra- 
tion, in  the  flames  of  which  some  thousands  were  consumed.  It  was  in  his  power, 
had  he  resisted  the  demand  at  the  first,  to  have  prevented  all  this  evil ;  and  even 
if  he  could  not  have  put  down  the  idolatrous  revolt,  it  was  still  his  duty  to  have 
offered  to  it  the  most  uncompromising  opposition.  Hence  his  conduct  was  not  only 
condemned  by  Moses,  but  also  in  the  highest  degi'ee  displeasing  to  God  (Deut.  ix. 
20).  1.  It  is  always  wrong  to  do  wrong.  Aaron  does  not  think  for  a  moment  of 
denying  that  idolatry  is  a  sin  ;  but  the  whole  drift  of  his  reply  to  Moses  is,  that 
his  making  of  the  golden  calf  was,  as  far  as  he  was  concerned,  a  thing  which  he 
could  not  get  rid  of.  The  man  who  came  home  intoxicated  last  night,  saying  that 
he  could  not  help  it,  because  he  met  some  friends  who  insisted  on  his  going  with 
them,  and  he  could  not  get  away  ;  the  family  who  are  ruined  by  reckless  extrava- 
gance, and  declare  that  they  were  under  the  necessity  of  keepmg  up  appearances  ; 
the  merchant  who,  on  the  eve  of  bankruptcy,  has  recourse  to  dishonourable 
expedients  ;  the  youth  who  helps  himself  to  his  employer's  money,  because  he  had 
to  do  something  to  pay  his  debts — all  are  in  the  same  category  with  Aaron.  (1) 
In  settling  what  is  your  duty  you  have  nothing  to  do  with  consequences.  The 
moment  you  begin  to  trouble  yourself  about  what  will  be  the  issue,  you  admit  the 
tempter  to  a  parley ;  and  it  will  be  well  if  in  the  end  he  do  not  briug  you  over  to 
his  views.  (2)  We  must  remember  that  no  one  can  compel  us  to  sin.  We  cannot 
do  wrong  until  we  choose  to  do  it,  and  the  choosing  is  a  free  act  of  our  own.  2. 
The  difliculty  of  doing  right  is  always  exaggerated  by  the  timid.  Tbe  world's  own 
maxim  is,  "  Grasp  the  nettle  firmly,  and  it  will  not  sting  "  ;  and  a  deep  knowledge 
of  your  own  heart,  or  a  large  experience  of  the  ways  of  men,  will  convince  >  ou  that, 
if  with  spirit  and  energy  you  do  the  right  thing  at  the  right  time,  opposition  will 
fall  away  frcm  before  you,  and  they  who  threatened  to  persecute  will  in  the  end 
approve.  Nor  ought  we  to  forget  that  God  has  promised  to  be  with  those  who 
stand  up  bravely  for  His  cause.  The  stern  eye  of  an  unflinching  man  will  hold — 
so  it  is  said — even  the  lion  spell-bound  ;  and  courage  in  the  service  of  God,  turning 
an  unjielding  eye  on  Satan,  will  send  him  away  from  us  for  a  season.  3.  The 
consequences  of  wrong-doing  are  always  more  serious  than  the  wrong-doer  at  first 
supposed.  I  can  imagine  Aaron  bitterly  upbraiding  himself  for  his  ^veakuess  when 
he  saw  the  fatal  fruits  of  it,  but  then  it  was  too  late  to  repair  the  wrong.  You  can- 
not stay  the  shell  midway  in  its  flight ;  after  it  has  left  the  mortar  it  goes  on  to  its 
mark,  and  there  explodes,  dealing  destruction  all  around.  Just  as  little  can  you 
arrest  the  consequences  of  a  sin  after  it  has  been  committed.    You  may  repent  of 


CHAP,  xxxu.]  EXODUS.  537 

it,  you  may  even  be  forgiven  for  it,  but  still  it  goes  on  its  deadly  and  desolating 
way.  ()F.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  That  most  men  have  their  weaknesses,  by  which 
they  may  be  taken: — I  have  never  read  of  any  island  so  impregnable  but  nature  has 
left  in  it  some  place  or  other  by  which  it  might  be  vanquishable ;  nor  have  I  ever 
met  with  any  person  so  well  armed,  at  all  points,  as  not  to  leave  some  way  whereby 
he  might  be  sometime  surprised :  this  passion,  that  affection,  this  friend  or  that 
kinsman,  this  or  that  delight  or  inclination.  He  is  the  strongest  who  has  the 
fewest  accesses.  As  those  places  are  the  weakest  which  lie  open  to  every  invader, 
so,  certainly,  he  is  the  most  subject  to  be  overcome  whose  easiness  exposes  him  to 
be  prevailed  upon  by  every  feeble  attempt.  And  however  fertile  he  may  be  by 
nature,  and  of  a  good  soil,  yet,  if  he  lies  unsurrounded,  he  shall  be  sure  to  be  always 
low.  At  least  he  ought  to  have  a  fence  and  a  gate,  and  not  let  every  beast  that  has 
but  craft  or  impudence  to  graze  or  dung  upon  him.  (Owen  Felltham.)  Lack  of 
decision  of  character  : — "  A  man  without  decision,"  writes  John  Foster,  "  can  never 
be  said  to  belong  to  himself ;  since,  if  he  dared  to  assert  that  he  did,  the  puny  force 
of  some  cause  about  as  powerful,  you  would  have  supposed,  as  a  spider,  may  make 
a  seizure  of  the  hapless  boaster  the  very  next  moment,  and  contemptuously  exhibit 
the  futility  of  the  determination  by  which  he  was  to  have  proved  the  independence 
of  his  understanding  and  his  will.  He  belongs  to  whatever  can  make  capture  of 
him ;  and  one  thing  after  another  vindicates  its  right  to  him  by  arresting  him  when 
he  is  trying  to  go  on,  as  twigs  and  chips  floating  near  the  edge  of  a  river  are  inter- 
cepted by  every  weed  and  whirled  in  every  little  eddy.  Having  concluded  on  a 
design,  he  may  pledge  himself  to  accomplish  it,  if  the  hundred  diversities  of  feeling 
which  may  come  within  the  week  may  let  him.  FI's  character  precluding  all  fore- 
sight of  his  conduct,  he  may  sit  and  wonder  what  form  and  direction  his  views  and 
actions  are  destined  to  take  to-morrow ;  as  a  farmer  has  often  to  acknowledge  that 
next  day's  proceedings  are  at  the  disposal  of  its  winds  and  clouds.  This  man's 
notions  and  determinations  always  depend  very  much  on  other  human  beings;  and 
what  chance  for  consistency  and  stability  while  the  persons  with  whom  he  may 
converse  or  transact  are  so  various  ?  A  succession  of  persons  whose  faculties  were 
stronger  than  his  own  might,  in  spite  of  his  irresolute  reaction,  take  him  and  dis- 
pose of  him  as  they  pleased.  Such  infirmity  of  spirit  practically  confesses  him 
made  for  subjection  ;  and  he  passes  like  a  slave  from  owner  to  owner."  A  dis- 
appointing development  of  character : — How  surprised  sometimes  is  the  naturalist 
who,  after  carefully  preserving  a  chrysalis,  and  awaiting  day  by  day  the  appearance 
of  the  beautiful  butterfly,  of  which  it  is  the  coarse  and  mysterious  envelope,  sees  a 
crowd  of  flies  emerge  in  place  of  it !  This  is  through  the  work  of  the  echinomyia, 
a  genus  of  insects  which  derive  their  nourishment  from  flowers.  They  deposit 
their  eggs  on  caterpillars,  and  the  young  larvae  on  hatching  penetrate  their  bodies 
and  feed  on  their  viscera.  How  surprised  sometimes  is  the  kind  father  of  a  family 
who,  after  carefully  watching  the  growth  of  a  child,  and  anticipating  the  develop- 
ment of  a  noble  character,  sees  to  his  dismay  an  exhibition  of  all  the  gross  and 
common  vices  instead  of  it.  This  is  the  work  of  various  bad  associates,  such  as 
servants,  tutors,  or  others  who,  whilst  deriving  their  liveUhood  from  tending 
children,  have  deposited  in  their  minds — perhaps  unintentionally,  but  nevertheless 
effectually — vicious  ideas  which  have  only  waited  the  opportunity  for  a  horrible 
unfolding.  The  victory  of  these  vicious  ideas  is  so  insidious  that  forethought  is 
disarmed.  The  embryo  is  placed  where  even  ingenuity  might  search  in  vain. 
When  those  ideas  develop  they  are  as  certain  to  destroy  a  beautiful  character  as 
the  echinomyia  are  to  destroy  the  most  lovely  butterfly.  (Scientific  Illustrations, 
(&c.)  We  must  not  be  persuaded  to  sin: — Then  there  was  John  Bunyan,  who, 
under  the  despotic  and  profligate  reign  of  Charles  II.,  was  sent  to  the  Bedford  gaol. 
True,  they  offered  to  release  him,  and  allow  him  to  go  back  to  his  wife  and  four 
children  (one  of  them  blind),  but  it  was  at  the  sacrifice  of  his  convictions,  and  he 
scorned  that.  He  was  a  man  every  inch  of  him,  and  in  reply  to  the  offer  he 
said,  "  Before  I  will  do  that,  I  will  stay  in  the  gaol  until  the  moss  has  grown 
around  my  eyebrows."  Brave  John  Bunyan  !  Sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink. — 
Epicurism  described  and  disgraced : — I.  Who  mn  this  ?  The  people  ;  who  had 
impiously  presumed  to  set  up  a  worship  against  God.  Whence  note  that  f eastings 
and  idleness  are  the  undivided  companions  of  idolatry.  The  counsel,  then,  of  the 
apostle,  upon  this  ground,  is  not  unseasonable  (1  Cor.  x.  7).  Be  not  idolaters, 
as  they  were.  But  we  are  the  people  of  God,  and  baptized  in  the  name  of  Christ ; 
there  is  no  fear  we  should  be  idolaters.  The  Jews  were  God's  people,  yet  set  up 
the  golden  calf.     II.  When  they  did  this.      Even   when   their  case  was  most 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

miserable,  then  were  they  most  insensible ;  for — 1.  They  had  robbed  themselvefi 
and  made  themselves  poor,  in  that  the  ear-rings  and  jewels  which  God  had  given 
them  from  the  Egyptians  they  bestowed  upon  an  idol.  2.  They  had  committed  an 
horrible  sin,  aggravated  sundry  ways.  They  had  turned  the  glory  of  an  incor- 
ruptible God  into  the  similitude  of  a  calf  that  eateth  hay.  3.  For  this  fearful 
sin  they  lie  under  a  heavy  punishment :  they  were  now  naked,  and  God  was 
coming  to  revenge  upon  them ;  and  after  He  was  entreated,  at  the  instance  of 
Moses,  to  spare  them,  yet,  for  example,  three  thousand  of  them  were  presently 
slain.  III.  But  is  it  not  lawful  to  eat  and  drink  ?  Yes,  it  is  not  lawful  only, 
but  necessary  to  nourish  our  life,  to  repair  strength  decayed,  and  enable  us  to  our 
duties  and  callings.  Nay,  more  :  we  may  use  the  creatures,  not  only  for  necessity, 
but  for  delight.  God  hath  given  us  leave  liberally  to  use  His  mercies,  aud  furnished 
QS  with  variety  far  beyond  necessity.  He  hath  not  given  bread  only  to  strengthen 
the  heart,  but  oil  to  make  the  face  shine.  What,  then,  did  this  people  other? 
They  failed  in  many  things.  1.  Whereas  the  chief  end  of  eating  and  drinking  is 
to  glorify  God  (1  Cor.  x.  31),  the  end  of  this  eating  and  drinking  was  to  dis- 
honour God  and  honour  the  calf.  2.  Whereas  eating  and  drinking  should  fit  us 
to  our  duties  and  callings,  both  general  and  special,  they  by  eating  and  drinking 
made  themselves  fit  for  nothing  but  play  and  wantonness.  3.  Whereas  men  ought 
to  eat  and  drink  according  to  the  call  of  nature,  in  sobriety  and  moderation,  the 
text  noteth  an  intemperate  waste  both  of  time  and  creatures,  addicting  themselves 
to  the  creature  and  nothing  else.  4.  Whereas  feastings  are  seasonable  in  times  of 
joy  and  gladness,  these  feast  in  a  time  when  God's  judgments  are  coming  on 
them  for  their  sin,  and  so  the  deepest  sorrow  would  better  beseem  them,  as 
also  did  they  in  Noah's  time.  They  ate  and  drank,  &c.  (and  Isa.  v.  12), 
not  considering  the  work  of  God.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Rose  up  to  play. — On 
recreation : — If  we  be  ruled  by  God  in  our  sports  and  rejoicings,  we  must  listen 
to  His  directions.  I.  First,  our  choice  must  be  of  sports  in  themselves  law- 
ful. We  may  not  play  with  holy  things,  suppose  Scripture  phrases;  we  must 
fear  the  holy  name  of  Jehovah,  not  play  with  it.  Neither  on  the  other  side 
may  we  play  with  sin,  or  things  evil  in  themselves,  viz.,  to  make  one  drunk  or 
swear,  or  to  laugh  at  such  persons.  It  is  a  matter  of  sorrow  to  see  God's  image  so 
defaced.  So  in  other  sinful  merriments.  Or  if  we  have  not  warrant  for  them,  by 
general  rules  of  the  Word,  if  the  laws  of  the  land  prohibit  them  as  unlawful. 
Here  pause  on  that  rule  (Phil.  iv.  8).  And  Christian  wisdom  will  also  guide  us  to 
the  choice  of  the  best  sports.  A  spiritual  mind  will  choose  spiritual  recreations,  as  a 
carnal  mind  will  use  carnal.  II.  Secondly,  when  we  have  chosen  warrantable  sports, 
we  must  beware  we  sin  not  in  the  use  of  them.  And  to  keep  us  from  sin  in  our 
recreations  we  must  look  to  our  neighbour,  to  ourselves.  1.  For  our  neighbour  two 
rules  must  be  observed  :  one  of  wisdom,  the  other  of  justice.  (1)  For  wisdom:  we 
must  wisely  sort  ourselves  in  our  sports  with  the  most  sober,  godly,  and  wise  of 
our  degree,  condition,  and  sort  of  life,  that  may  rather  watch  over  us  that  we 
ofifend  not  in  them  than  anyway  draw  and  provoke  us  so  to  do.  No  pestilential  air 
so  contagious  as  where  swearers  and  riotous  gamesters  are  met.  (2)  For  justice :  the 
rule  is  that  we  must  not  use  gaming  as  a  colour  to  purchase  our  neighbour's  money, 
or  to  help  ourselves  by  the  hindrance  of  his  estate.  2.  We  must  look  carefully  to 
ourselves.  First,  for  our  affection,  that  it  be  moderate.  We  may  use  lawful  sports, 
but  not  love  them.  Secondly,  for  our  ends.  Our  ends  must  not  be  to  pass  the 
time,  which  passeth  whether  we  will  or  no,  and  we  ought  to  redeem  our  time,  and 
not  let  it  pass  without  gaining  something  better  than  itself ;  nor  yet  to  maintain 
idleness  as  men  that  cannot  tell  what  to  do  with  themselves  else.  Again,  the  end  of 
sport  is  preservation  of  our  health,  both  of  soul  and  body,  and  not  to  impair  the 
health  of  either,  as  many  by  watching  at  play,  and  forgetting  or  foregoing  their 
diet  and  rest  for  play,  destroy  their  health  and  call  in  numbers  of  diseases  on  them- 
selves, and  oftentimes  untimely  death.  Lastly,  seeing  nothing  can  be  lawful 
wherein  some  glory  accrues  not  to  God,  therefore,  if  the  end  of  our  sports  be  not 
to  enable  us  with  cheerfulness  in  duties  of  religion  and  Christianity,  it  will  all  be 
returned  as  sin  in  this  reckoning.  {Ibid.)  The  right  use  of  amusements : — 
Bemember  our  amusements  and  recreations  are  merely  intended  to  fit  us  for  useful- 
ness. I  hope  that  none  of  you  have  fallen  into  the  delusion  that  your  mission  in 
life  is  to  enjoy  yourselves.  Pepper  and  salt  and  sugar  and  cinnamon  are  very 
important,  but  that  would  be  a  very  unhealthy  repast  that  had  nothing  else  on  the 
table.  Amusements  and  recreations  are  the  spice  and  the  condiment  of  the  great 
banquet.    But  some  of  you  over-pleasuring  people  are  feeding  the  body  and  soul 


CHAt.  xxxn.]  EXODUS.  539 

on  condiments.  We  are  to  make  these  recreations  of  life  preparations  for  practical 
nsefnlness.  We  must  make  our  amusements  a  reinforcement  of  our  capacity. 
Living  is  a  tremendous  affair,  and  alas !  for  the  man  who  makes  recreation  a 
depletion  instead  of  an  augmentation.  Once  when  the  city  of  Eome  was  besieged 
by  Hannibal's  army  there  was  a  great  shout  of  laughter  inside  the  walls,  and  it 
strangely  frightened  the  besieging  army,  and  they  fled  in  wild  precipitation.  That 
is  a  matter  of  history.  But  no  guffaw  of  laughter  will  ever  scatter  our  foes,  or  lift 
our  besiegement,  or  gain  our  victory.  It  must  be  face  to  face,  foot  to  foot,  battle- 
axe  to  battle-axe,  if  we  achieve  anything  worthy.  Can  you  imagine  any  predica- 
ment worse  than  that  which  I  now  sketch  ?  Time  has  passed,  and  we  come  up  to 
judgment  to  give  our  account  for  what  we  have  been  doing.  The  angel  of  the 
judgment  says  to  us  :  "  You  came  up  from  a  world  where  there  were  millions  in 
sin,  millions  in  poverty,  millions  in  wretchedness,  and  there  were  a  great  many 
people,  philanthropists  and  Christians,  who  toiled  themselves  into  the  grave  trying 
to  help  others.  What  did  you  do  ?  "  And  then  the  angel  of  the  resurrection,  the 
angel  of  the  judgment  will  say :  "  Those  are  the  women  who  consecrated  their 
needle  to  God  and  made  garments  for  the  poor."  The  angel  of  the  resurrection, 
the  angel  of  the  judgment  facing  the  group  of  pleasurists  :  "What  did  you  do?" 
*•  Well,"  says  one  of  them,  "  I  was  very  fond  of  the  drama,  and  spent  my  evenings 
looking  at  it."  May  the  Almighty  God  forbid  that  you  and  I  should  make  the 
terrific  mistake  of  substituting  merriment  for  duty  !  Pliny  says  that  the  mermaids 
danced  on  the  green  grass,  but  all  around  them  were  dead  men's  bones.  Neither 
bat  nor  ball,  nor  lawn  tennis  racquet,  nor  croquet  mallet,  nor  boat,  nor  skate — 
although  they  all  have  their  uses — can  make  death,  life,  and  eternity  happy.  (T. 
De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  A  sermon  on  play  : — Play  is  neither  idleness  nor  folly. 
It  is  one  of  the  many  good  things  which  have  come  into  your  life  from  heaven.  It 
is  a  gift  from  God.  It  is  a  part  of  your  life  as  truly  as  prayer  is,  as  truly  as  the 
soul  itself  is.  And  it  is  part  of  the  life  of  children  all  the  world  over.  1.  Now, 
the  first  thing  I  want  you  to  see  is  that  this  playing  of  you  boys  and  girls  is  a 
pleasure  to  God.  He  is  a  God  so  kind  and  loving  that  He  delights  in  everything 
innocent  that  is  a  delight  to  you.  Just  as  He  delights  in  the  songs  of  birds  and  in 
the  colour  and  fragrance  of  flowers,  He  delights  in  the  play  of  childhood.  2.  God 
has  made  play  a  part  of  your  Ufe,  because  He  wants  you  to  be  strong.  He  has 
work  waiting  in  the  years  to  come  for  every  boy  and  girl  on  the  earth.  And 
although  it  is  not  all  the  same  kind  of  work,  all  of  it  is  work  which  will  want 
strength  for  the  doing.  Therefore  He  will  not  have  you  always  at  tasks.  He 
has  divided  the  time  for  tasks  with  the  time  for  play.  He  will  have  you  out  in 
the  open  air.  By  your  games  He  will  have  your  body  in  endless  motion.  You 
shall  run  and  not  be  weary.  3.  For  another  thing  God  wants  you  to  have  a  happy 
gateway  into  life.  Nobody  can  tell  beforehand  whether  your  after-life  will  be  happy. 
In  games  you  are  joined  together,  just  as  we  who  are  old  are  in  our  toils.  The 
playground  is  a  little  world.  You  cannot  have  any  pleasure  in  any  of  its  games 
unless  you  try  to  have  the  others  playing  with  you  as  happy  as  yourself.  To  be 
unkind,  unjust,  unfair,  or  ungenerous  in  a  game  is  to  spoil  it  or  bring  it  to  an  end. 
Surely  this  is  a  new,  rich  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  God  when  we  discover  that 
the  same  kind  Father,  who  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  us,  that  He  might  deliver  us 
from  sin  and  death,  made  the  joy  and  play  of  boys  and  girls  in  the  streets  and  in 
the  house.  May  you  carry  something  of  the  joy  of  it  through  life  with  you,  and 
mny  you  remember  that  God  has  been  so  good  to  you  that  He  has  set  your  life 
between  two  worlds  of  joy — the  world  of  your  happy  childhood  and  the  world  that 
awaits  you  in  heaven !     {A.  Macleod,  DJD.) 

Vers.  11-14.  Moses  besought  the  Lord. — The  intercession: — We  find  him  in 
succession — 1.  Highly  privileged.  2.  Deeply  grieved.  3.  Eaised  to  a  holy  frame 
of  mind.  4.  Visibly  answered.  5.  Abundantly  strengthened.  I.  Many  events 
have  taken  place  since  Moses,  at  the  Lord's  command,  drove  back  the  waters  of  the 
Red  Sea,  and  the  song  of  deliverance  voiced  forth  from  heart  and  mouth  of  many 
myriads.  Amidst  the  sound  of  thunder  and  of  trumpets,  heaven  has  already 
spoken  to  the  earth,  and  Israel's  camp  has  now  for  weeks  been  gathered  round 
Mount  Sinai,  waiting  patiently  till  Moses  shall  return.  Return  !  Where  is  he, 
then,  you  ask,  and  where  can  Amram's  son  remain  with  more  advantage  than 
amidst  the  people,  who,  as  is  already  fully  evident,  cannot  remain  without  his  help 
and  guidance  for  another  single  day  ?  Where  ?  As  if  Moses  could  have  been 
himself  had  he  been  always  Uving  in  the  abject  sphere  in  which  this  Israel  moved ; 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxn. 

as  if  a  man  to  whom  the  Lord  Ahnighty  has  vouchsafed  a  look  into  celestial 
mysteries  should  hasten  back  to  earth  again  1  The  story  of  those  forty  days  is 
written  in  heaven's  register;  and  if  Moses  were  himself  still  here  to  give  his 
witness  as  to  what  occurred,  perhaps  he  would  repeat  the  words  of  Paul  regarding 
the  most  blessed  hour  of  his  experience,  "Whether  it  took  place  in  the  body,  or  out 
of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell — God  knoweth."  It  is  enough  for  us  that  he  receives  the 
law  there  through  the  medium  of  angels;  that  at  this  time  he  may  have  had  with- 
drawn from  him  the  cloud,  which  hitherto  had  quite  concealed  from  human  eyes 
God's  counsel  in  its  grand  development,  as  now  revealed  in  these  last  times  ;  that 
there  is  now  made  known  to  him,  not  merely  the  grand  principles  of  law  to  regulate 
the  Jewish  commonwealth,  but  God's  express  appointments  as  to  everything  relat- 
ing to  the  life,  both  civil  and  religious,  of  the  chosen  nation,  even  to  minute 
details ;  that  he  is  now  allowed  (and  this,  the  greatest  privilege  of  all,  I  mention 
last)  to  pray  in  such  a  way  that  he  most  truly  lives  in  close  communion  with  the 
Infinite.  Oh,  happy  Moses  1  who  shall  tell  in  what  a  stream  of  deep  enjoyment 
you  must  then  have  bathed ;  how  much  refreshment  your  soul  must  have  drawn 
from  the  full  cup  of  God's  delights;  and  how  oblivious  you  must  have  now  become 
of  all  the  troubles  which  so  often,  like  a  leaden  weight,  oppressed  your  soul  on 
earth  ?  How  high  stands  this  great  man  of  God  above  the  carnal  Israelites,  who 
long  for  nothing  so  incessantly  as  for  Egyptian  flesh  1  Among  those  born  of 
wim3n,  there  has  not  been  one,  belonging  to  the  days  of  the  Old  Covenant,  that 
stood  in  such  an  intimate  relation  to  Jehovah,  except,  it  may  be,  Abraham  alone : 
in  this  respect,  then,  we  look  upon  Moses  as  a  happy  man.  But  the  greatest 
privilege  which  Moses  had  at  Sinai — confidential  intercourse  with  God — is  granted 
to  each  one  of  us  who  know  Him  in  His  Son.  II.  Yet  do  not  think  that  such  a 
privilege  exempts  you  from  a  multitude  of  struggles  on  this  earth  ;  rather,  when 
you  but  look  at  Moses'  case,  and  find  how  deeply  grieved  he  was,  the  contrary 
seems  true.  He  is  still  standing  in  God's  holy  presence,  raised  above  the  dust  of 
earth,  when  suddenly  he  hears  the  words  addressed  to  him,  "  Go,  get  thee  down ; 
for  thy  people,  which  thou  broughtest  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  have  corrupted 
themselves."  "  Thy  people  "  :  these  are  bitter,  cutting  words.  Is  it  not  just  as  if 
Jehovah  meant  to  say,  "A  people  such  as  this  can  no  more  be  accounted  Mine"  ? 
What  has  occurred  to  rouse  the  Holy  One  to  wrath  ?  "  These  be  thy  gods,  0  Israel, 
which  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  Oh,  wretched  nation,  thus,  when 
not  much  more  than  called  to  liberty,  to  stretch  their  hands  out  for  the  fetters  of 
unrighteousness,  and,  as  it  were,  before  the  eyes  of  that  Jehovah  who  touched 
yonder  mountain-top  and  made  it  tremble,  thus  so  quickly  to  transgress  the  first 
requirement  of  His  holy  laws !  But  we  may  also  readily  imagine  what  unutterable 
grief  it  was  to  Moses  in  particular,  that  even  while  in  the  immediate  presence  of 
his  God,  a  dark  cloud  rises  on  His  face.  Is  this,  then,  the  reward  for  all  the  faith- 
fulness with  which  he  has  devoted  his  whole  energies  to  such  an  arduous  work  as 
Israel's  deliverance  ?  Is  this  the  seal  confirming  what  the  people,  scarcely  forty 
days  before,  declared,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do  "  ?  Where  are 
the  songs  of  thanksgiving  that  echoed  all  along  the  shores  of  the  Bed  Sea  ?  They 
now  are  changed  into  the  shouts  of  a  rebellious  mob.  Where  is  the  spoil  that  the 
dismayed  Egyptians  gave  up?  It  has  been  spent  on  the  adorning  of  an  idol. 
Where  is  the  prospect  now  of  national  prosperity  to  be  enjoyed  if  men  observed  the 
ordinances  of  the  Lord  ?  "I  have  seen  this  people,  and  behold  it  is  a  stifif-necked 
people  ;  now,  therefore,  let  Me  alone,  that  My  wrath  may  wax  hot  against  them, 
and  that  I  may  consume  them."  "Let  Me  alone  !  "  How  well  we  recognize  in  these 
few  words  the  living  God,  who  glories  in  omnipotence  combined  with  faithfulness, 
and  who  will  not  even  let  His  anger  burn  without  forewarning  this  His  faithful 
servant  of  the  dreadful  work  He  is  about  to  do.  But  ye  should  be  in  something 
like  a  proper  state  to  understand  the  depth  of  this  man's  sorrow — ye  who  had  saved 
your  dearest  child  from  certain  death,  and  who,  just  at  the  very  moment  when 
you  fancied  all  was  safe,  beheld  the  one  whom  you  had  rescued  rushing  wilfully  into 
the  jaws  of  death.  But  which  of  us,  my  fellow  Christians,  has  not  at  some  time 
had  experience  hke  Moses'  in  that  memorable  hour  ?  We  may  have  deemed  our? 
selves  blest  in  our  fellowship  with  God,  when  suddenly  the  harsh,  discordant  sound 
of  sin  was  heard — the  clash  of  weapons  in  the  striiggle  of  this  Ufe.  For  the  disciple 
always  finds  even  yet,  as  did  his  Lord  of  old,  that  the  desert  where  he  undergoes 
temptation  immediately  adjoins  the  Jordan  of  self-dedication  ;  yea,  just  in  propor- 
tion as,  like  Moses,  we  are  placed  in  higher  station,  and  more  privileged  than  other 
men,  we  often  find  our  trials  too  are  heavier.    Like  Moses,  too,  we  oftea  see  our 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  EXODUS.  541 

noblest  efforts  for  the  good  of  men  in  general  rewarded  with  most  base  ingratitude  ; 
or,  in  a  few  brief  hours,  what  we  have  raised  by  dint  of  sweat  and  toil,  continued 
through  successive  years  and  months,  is  broken  down  through  careless  weakness  ou 
another's  part.  In  utter  disappointment,  we  pour  out  our  grief  before  the  ruins  of 
the  edifice  we  reared  so  carefully  ;  and  when  we  would  continue  to  rejoice  in  hope 
that  God  will  yet  fulfil  His  promises,  it  seems  as  if  God  hid  His  face  from  us,  and 
we  are  terrified.  IH.  Would  that  we  all  were  but  of  such  a  holy  frame  of  mind  as 
was  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  whose  utter  disappointment  you  have  hitherto  been 
witnessing.  Does  not  the  simple  fact  that  Moses,  at  a  moment  such  as  this, 
betakes  himself  to  prayer  say  very  much  for  him  ?  J3ut  which  of  us  that  suddenly 
perceives  what  deeply  grieves  us  is  at  once  inclined  to  pray,  and  not,  instead,  dis- 
posed to  cry  out  in  despair,  but  most  of  all  disposed  to  silence  and  to  utter 
inactivity  ?  Now,  it  is  well  for  him  that  he  still  lingers  at  the  top,  not  at  the  foot, 
of  Sinai,  for  he  is  near  that  God  to  whom  he  never  called  in  vain.  Moses  pours 
out  his  supplications  in  the  quiet  solitude — for  whom  ?  Is  it  for  himself,  that  God 
may  give  him  strength  to  bear  the  burden  of  such  oft  rejection  by  the  people  ?  But 
wherefore  should  he  think  about  himself,  when  his  heart  is  filled  with  the  thought 
of  Israel's  salvation  ?  Why  should  he  think  of  men  in  their  rejection  of  himself, 
when  they  so  shamefully  provoked  the  Lord?  Nay,  here  the  lawgiver  becomes  a 
mediator,  interceding  for  his  people  in  their  sins,  with  but  his  prayers  for  an 
offering ;  words  fail  me  in  attempting  to  describe  his  true  nobility  of  soul,  which 
comes  out  in  his  prayers  and  pleadings  here.  Does  it  not  seem  as  if  love  were 
exhausting  all  its  energies  in  trying  to  find  out,  not  some  slight  palliations  of  tbe 
shameful  conduct  which  must  be  pronounced  quite  inexcusable,  but  some  good 
grounds  for  not  requiring,  in  this  case,  full  satisfaction  for  the  vast  amount  of  guilt 
incurred  ?  Now  he  reminds  Jehovah  of  the  great  deliverance  He  has  already 
wrought  for  Israel,  and  asks  Him  if  He  really  intends  to  bring  destruction  upon 
His  own  handiwork.  Then  He  points  out  to  Him  what  the  Egyptians  and  the 
other  nations  well  might  say  when  they  would  learn  that  the  object  of  their  hatred 
was  destroyed.  Again,  he  lays  before  Jehovah  His  own  promise  made  to  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob ;  and  he  asks  what  must  become  of  that,  if  He  do  not  turn  from 
His  wrath  in  time.  And,  finally,  he  earnestly  entreats  the  Lord,  if  it  must  even  be 
so,  to  take  away  his  life,  if  Israel's  life,  now  forfeited,  cannot  be  bought  at  any 
other  price.  In  the  full  strength  of  interceding  love  he  can  be  quite  oblivious  of 
everything  except  the  sinful  Israel ;  nor  does  he  leave  the  mountain-top  till  he 
brings  down  with  him  the  promise  that  the  sentence,  merited  even  though  it  is, 
shall  be  delayed  at  least,  if  not  repealed.  Does  not  a  holy  rapture  seize  you  when 
you  listen  to  a  prayer  like  this?  Here,  we  deliberately  say,  there  is  one  greater 
even  than  Abraham  when  pleading  in  behalf  of  the  guilty  Sodom  ;  for  those 
wicked  men  had  not  rejected  Abraham,  at  least  in  person,  and  tbe  patriarch  did 
not  express  his  readiness  to  give  his  own  life  as  an  offering  for  sin.  Who  does  not 
feel  that  prayer  like  this  truly  deserves  the  name ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  so 
much  of  what  bears  that  fair  name  is  little  more  than  a  mere  mumbling  over  «t 
some  fonns,  and  that,  too,  in  a  way  the  most  mechanical — if  it  be  not,  indeed,  but 
covert  sin?  Nay,  it  is  not  enough  that  you  should  cry  to  God  for  help  whenever 
your  own  want  and  misery  oppress  your  soul ;  Moses  calls  loudly,  "  Pray  for  others 
too  " — and  the  more  earnestly  for  them,  as  they  are  more  unfortunate,  more  sinful 
than  yourselves,  and  more  unthankful  and  unkind  to  you  !  Neither  is  it  enough 
that  you  present  to  Him  your  own  and  others'  miseries ;  for  Moses  says  again, 
"  God's  honour  must  be  made  the  one  great  object  in  your  prayer  " ;  woe  to  the  man 
whose  prayer  is  but  self-seeking,  who  does  not  endeavour  to  extol  God's  majesty ! 
Nor  yet,  again,  is  it  enough  that  you  should  raise  your  heart  at  special  times  in 
prayer,  but  soon  abate  your  zeal ;  Moses  cries  out  to  every  one  who  strives  on 
earth,  "  Continue,  persevere  in  prayer :  the  faithful  friends  of  God  are  the  best 
friends  of  men ! "  IV.  But  does  not  this  still  further  and  more  plainly  show  itself 
when  yon  perceive  how  Moses  was  heard  in  prayer  ?  There  is  (may  I  express  it 
so  ?)  something  beyond  description,  human  or  Divine,  in  these  words  found  in 
ver.  14 :  "  Then  the  Lord  repented  of  the  evil  which  He  thought  to  do  unto  His 
people."  Nay,  what  man  could  expect  by  prayer  to  make  God  alter  His  decree? 
what  godly  man  could  wish  to  have  such  power  ?  God  has  determined  at  all  times 
to  show  His  grace  to  sinful  men,  but  He  is  gracious  only  to  the  humble  prayer ; 
and  new,  when  Israel  themselves  neglect  to  pray  that  He  may  take  away  impend- 
ing judgments,  Moses  puts  himself  in  the  position  of  the  sinners ;  and  no  sooner 
does  he  venture  on  his  intercession  than  he  obtains  God's  pardon  ior  them  all. 


542  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 


Moses  has  prayed  for  grace,  but  grace  does  not  in  every  case  mean  quite  the  same 
thing  as  impunity;  and  Moses  himself  is  fully  conscious  that  the  nation  must  atone 
for  its  own  sins,  even  when  it  is  not  visited  according  to  its  sins.  "  Thou  wast  a 
God  that  forgavest  them,  though  Thou  tookest  vengeance  of  their  inventions." 
T'iBse  words,  penned  by  the  Psalmist,  form  the  motto  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel. 
When  God  exterminates  some  hundreds,  He  acts  like  the  surgeon,  sparing  not  the 
knife  though  it  inflicts  much  pain,  nor  hesitating  to  remove  most  precious,  yea, 
important,  members,  that  the  body  may  itself  be  saved  from  otherwise  inevitable 
death.  Yea,  what  is  it  that  prayer  cannot  do — humble,  beUeving,  fervent,  persever- 
ing prayer?  It  opens  up  the  treasures  hid  in  God's  paternal  heart,  and  shuts  the 
flood-gates  of  His  penal  judgments ;  it  brings  blessings  down  upon  the  head 
already  laden  with  the  curse  of  sin  ;  nor  has  it  lost  its  power,  although  the  mouth 
of  him  who  offered  it  is  long  since  silent  in  the  dust  of  death.  And  is  the  history  of 
the  Israel  of  the  New  Covenant  less  rich  in  illustrations  of  the  truth  that  God  desires 
to  have  entreaty  made  to  Him,  not  merely  by,  but  also  for.  His  people,  so  that  He 
may  pity  them  ?  iiun  over,  then,  yourselves  the  annals  of  Christ's  reign,  and  ponder 
specially  the  record  made  of  your  own  history.  What  keeps  the  sword  from  Peter's 
head  when  that  of  James  already  is  removed  ?  The  Church  sends  up  in  his  behalf 
a  constant  prayer  that  keeps  the  rock  from  falling  down.  What  has  the  Christian 
Church  to  thank  for  her  great  teacher,  Augustine  ?  The  prayer  of  Monica ;  because 
a  child  for  whom  so  many  tears  were  shed  could  not  by  any  possibility  be  lost. 
Christians !  if  you  most  truly  seek  your  brother's  and  your  own  salvation,  persevere 
in  prayer !  V.  "  Your  own  salvation  " — yes  ;  it  is  just  here  that  our  own  interest, 
which  we  so  fully  understand,  combines  most  beautifully  with  our  brother's  too. 
Come,  look  at  Moses,  in  the  last  place,  fully  strengthened  after  prayer.  Let  U3 
once  more  look  to  the  sequel  of  the  history.  When  you  behold  the  man  of  more 
than  eighty  years  descending  from  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  with  all  the  fire  of 
youth  still  full  in  him,  do  you  not  recognize  in  that  the  power  of  fellowship  with 
God  in  heaven  ?  What  calmness  in  his  eye,  what  firmness  in  his  gait,  what  firm 
decision  in  his  actions,  and  what  strength  combined  with  moderation,  as  this  very 
page  can  testify  !  Surely  you  do  not  disapprove  of  what  he  did,  when,  in  a  boiUng 
rage,  he  cast  away  the  tables  made  of  stone,  so  breaking  them,  and  strewed  the  dust 
obtained  by  pounding  down  the  golden  calf  upon  the  water  used  to  quench  the 
thirst  of  Israel?  "  See  my  zeal  for  the  Lord  !  "  So  Moses  might  have  said  with 
better  right  than  Jehu  did  in  later  times,  for  his  was  anger  without  sin.  And  we 
confess  that  we  would  scarce  have  looked  on  him  as  Moses — yea,  would  almost 
have  despised  him — had  he  not  on  this  occasion  cast  a  single  glance  of  deepest 
anger  upon  the  abomination  now  committed  by  the  Israelites.  What  would  have 
been  the  meaning  of  such  intercession  for  a  race  of  sinners  if  the  intercessor  had 
esteemed  the  sin  itself  as  trivial  ?  Then,  even  though  the  world  be  all  opposed  to 
us,  the  Lord,  in  His  eternal  faithfulness,  remains  upon  our  side ;  though  even  our 
dearest  friends  may  fall,  the  Friend  who  cannot  die  still  watches  us  ;  although  the 
head  may  bend  through  weariness,  the  heart  that  still  can  pray  renews  its  youth. 
Behold  in  this  the  explanation  of  the  mystery  why  two  men,  both  engaged  in  the 
selfsame  life-struggle,  may  yet  fight  in  ways  so  utterly  dissimilar,  that  while  the 
one  sinks  under  wounds  he  has  received,  the  other  issues  from  the  fight  victorious ; 
the  one  required  to  carry  on  the  war  at  his  own  charges,  while  the  other  bad 
Omnipotence  itself  upon  his  side.  On  Sinai  Moses  prays  for  a  rebelhous  nation ; 
on  Golgotha  you  hear  Jesus  pleading  for  His  executioners  when  He  was  being 
crucified.  Moses  invokes  God  for  His  grace  towards  Israel  only ;  Jesus  for  that 
same  grace  to  sinners  of  all  tribes  and  tongues,  peoples  and  nations — yea,  even 
towards  you  and  me,  in  all  our  guilt.  Moses  but  offers  to  make  his  own  Hfe  a  sacrifice 
for  sin,  while  Jesus  actually  gives  His  life  as  a  ransom  for  many.  Moses  obtains 
for  Israel  no  more  than  mitigation  of  the  penalty,  not  full  forgiveness ;  Jesus  can 
bestow  a  full  salvation  on  all  those  who  come  to  God  by  Him.  Moses  expires  when 
he  has  watched  and  prayed  for  forty  years,  seeking  the  good  of  Israel ;  but  Jesus 
ever  lives,  appearing  in  God's  presence  for  our  interest.  Nay,  Israel,  we  do  not 
envy  you  of  this  your  prayerful  mediator;  we  thank  God  that  we  look  unto  a  higher 
One.    {/.  J-  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  There  came  out  this  calf. — Aaron's  excme : — I.  There  never  was  a  speech 
more  true  to  one  disposition  of  our  human  nature  than  this  of  Aaron.  We  are  aui 
KEADY  10  LAY  THE  BLAME  ON  THE  FURNACES.  "  The  fire  did  it,"  wc  are  all  of  us  ready 
enough  to  say.    '*  In  better  times  we  might  have  been  better,  broader  men,  but  now, 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  EXODUS.  543 

behold,  God  puts  us  into  the  fire,  and  we  came  out  thus."  Our  age,  our  society,  is 
what,  with  this  figure  taken  out  of  the  old  story  of  Exodus,  we  have  been  calling  it. 
It  is  the  furnace.  Its  fire  can  set,  and  fix,  and  fasten  what  the  man  puts  into  it. 
But,  properly  speaking,  it  can  create  no  character.  It  can  make  no  truly  faithful 
soul  a  doubter.  It  never  did.  It  never  can.  II.  The  subtlety  and  attractiveness 
OF  this  excuse  extends  not  only  to  the  results  which  we  see  coming  forth  in 
ourselves  ;  it  covers  also  the  fortunes  of  those  for  whom  we  are  responsible. 
Everywhere  there  is  this  cowardly  casting  off  of  responsibilities  upon  the  dead 
circumstances  around  us.  It  is  a  very  hard  treatment  of  the  poor,  dumb,  helpless 
world  which  cannot  answer  to  defend  itself.  It  takes  us  as  we  give  ourselves  to.it. 
It  is  our  minister,  fulfilling  our  commissions  for  us  upon  our  own  souls.  III.  There 
IS  delusion  and  self-deception  in  this  excuse.  Very  rarely  indeed  does  a  man 
excuse  himself  to  other  men  and  yet  remain  absolutely  unexcused  in  his  own  eyes. 
Often  the  very  way  to  help  ourselves  most  to  a  result  which  we  have  set  before  our- 
selves is  just  to  put  ourselves  into  a  current  which  is  sweeping  on  that  way,  and 
then  lie  still,  and  let  the  current  do  the  rest,  and  in  all  such  cases  it  is  so  easy  to 
ignore  or  to  forget  the  first  step,  and  so  to  say  that  it  is  only  the  drift  of  the  current 
which  is  to  blame  for  the  dreary  shore  on  which  at  last  our  lives  are  cast  up  by  the 
stream.  IV.  If  the  world  is  thus  full  of  the  Aaron  spirit,  where  are  we  to  find 
ITS  CURE  ?  Its  source  is  a  vague  and  defective  sense  of  personality.  I  cannot  look 
for  its  cure  anywhere  short  of  that  great  assertion  of  the  human  personality  which 
is  made  when  a  man  personally  enters  into  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Bp. 
Phillips  Brooks.)  Shifting  responsibility  : — I.  Aaron  blajied  society.  Thus  is 
it  with  men  now.  Yielding  to  the  pressure  of  society,  we  do  not  live  out  our 
highest  convictions.  1.  We  defer  to  public  opinion.  Great  is  the  tyranny  of 
public  opinion,  and  many  dare  not  brave  it.  Aaron  dare  not  in  the  text,  and 
thousands  still  are  overawed  by  it.  We  like  to  be  talked  about,  but  not  against. 
We  stay  sbort  of  being  what  we  ought  to  be,  of  doing  what  we  ought  to  do,  for  fear 
of  the  adverse  criticism  of  our  neighbours,  work-fellows,  countrymen.  2.  We  defer 
to  public  custom.  The  Jewish  rabble  wanted  images,  such  as  were  in  Egypt,  and 
Aaron  had  not  courage  to  resist  the  demand.  So  we  often  bow  to  the  questionable 
customs  of  society.  Our  convictions  are  otherwise,  but  we  have  not  the  bravery  to 
be  singular — we  cast  a  grain  of  incense  on  the  world's  altar  when  we  ought  to  hurl 
a  stone  at  its  gods.  3.  We  defer  to  public  violence.  "  They  gathered  themselves 
together  unto"  (ver.  1) — rather  "against" — Aaron  in  a  tumultuous  manner,  to 
compel  him  to  do  whac  they  wished.  And  Aaron  was  coerced  by  them.  So  we 
often  fear  the  anger,  menace,  violence  of  those  around  us,  and  act  a  consciously 
unworthy  part.  Aaron  in  the  text  blaming  "  the  people  "  is  a  picture  of  thousands 
of  us  to-day  I  We  do  not  wish  to  act  thus  and  thus,  but  we  are  the  victims  of  our 
social  surroundings.  It  is  not  I,  but  the  people.  We,  none  of  us,  are  guilty  ;  it  is 
the  crowd  behind  which  pushes  us.  II.  He  blamed  nature.  "  I  cast  it  into  the  fire, 
and  there  came  out  this  calf."  As  if  it  were  not  his  fault,  but  nature's.  He  says 
nothing  about  the  mould  that  he  made ;  nothing  about  the  graving  tool  that  he 
used  (ver.  4)  ;  but  nature  has  done  it — it  has  done  itself.  So  do  we  reason  still.  1. 
W'e  blame  nature  for  our  sins.  We  ignore  the  fact  that  we  failed  to  interpose  our 
will ;  that  we  fed  the  fires  of  passion ;  that  in  making  preparation  for  the  flesh,  to 
fulfil  the  lusts  thereof,  we  constructed  the  mould.  2.  We  blame  nature  for  our 
miseries.  Lessons  :  1.  The  childishness  of  this  method  of  shifting  responsibility. 
2.  The  foolishness  of  it.  3.  The  uselessness  of  it.  (W.  L.  WcitJcinson.)  Aaro7i's 
apolopi) : — Aaron's  excuse  is  the  standing  excuse  of  at  least  one  laige  class  among 
us.  Servants  use  it  every  day.  Who  has  not  heard  them  plead  ?  "  Please,  ma'am, 
I  couldn't  help  it ;  it  broke  in  my  hands."  As  if  it  were  not  they,  but  the  wilful  jug 
or  dish  which  was  responsible  for  the  fracture,  or  some  malign  fate  which  mocks  at 
human  endeavour  and  care.  "  It  was  an  accident  "  has  been  their  sigh  ever  since 
domestic  service  became  an  institution  among  us.  But  is  the  plea  confined  to  them  ? 
Do  you  not  also  hear  it  from  the  lips  of  every  child ?  "I  didn't  do  it" — they  are 
all  quite  sure  of  that ;  though,  if  they  did  not  do  it,  it  would  be  hard  indeed  to  say 
who  did.  Here  are  two  large  classes,  then,  to  whom  Aaron's  excuse  is  familiar  ; 
and  to  one  of  these  classes  we  all  belonged  in  our  time.  But  are  there  no  more  ? 
Most  of  you  will  remember  that  inimitable  scene  in  "  Adam  Bede  "  in  which  Mrs. 
Poyser,  while  rating  the  clumsy  Molly  for  her  broken  jug  of  beer,  herself  drops  a 
still  more  precious  jug  from  her  angry  fingers,  and  exclaims  :  "  Did  anybody  ever 
Bee  the  like  ?  The  jugs  are  bewitched,  I  think."  You  will  remember  how  she  pro- 
ceeds to  argue  that  "  there's  times  when  the  crockery  seems  aUve,  an'  flies  oat  o' 


AT 


ov 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

your  hand  like  a  bird,"  and  concludes,  philosophically  enough,  that  "  what  is  to  be 
broke  will  be  broke."     Possibly  most  of  us  [have  known  mistresses  who,  while 
indignantly  repudiating  the  common  excuse  of  their  maids,  have  nevertheless  con- 
descended to  employ  it  in  their  own  behalf.     And  what  bankrujit  tradesman,  or 
broken  merchant,  or  fraudulent  banker  is  there  who  does  not  plead  the  same,  or  a 
similar,  excuse  ?    It  is  hardly  ever  their  fault  that  they  cannot  pay  twenty  shillings 
in  the  pound",  it  is  their  misfortune.  "  Things  have  gone  against  them."   "Circum- 
stances over  which  they  have  no  control  have  been  their  ruin  " — not  their  own 
rashness,  or  dishonest  discounts,  or  risky  speculations.    They  put  their  capital  into 
that  shop,  that  firm,  that  bank,  and,  lo,  there  came  out  this  ugly  calf  of  bank- 
ruptcy !    But  you  must  not  blame  them ;  it  is  the  furnace  that  was  in  fault.    And 
if  mistresses  no  less  than  their  maids,  and  men  of  business  no  less  than  their  wives, 
attribute  to  accident,  mischance,  or  a  malignant  and  mysterious  fate,  results  of 
which  the  cause  might  be  found  much  nearer  home,  scholars  no  less  than  men 
of  business,  men  of  science  no  less  than  scholars,  Christian  commentators  no  less 
than  men  of  science,  too  often  betake  themselves  to  the  same  egregrious  line  of 
argument  and  excuse.     There  are  illustrations  and  repetitions  and  modificationa 
of  Aaron's  apology  which  touch  us  closer  home.    The  man  who  is  a  sinner — as 
which  of  us  is  not  ? — has  it  perpetually  on  his  lips.     How  often,  when  arraigned  at 
the  bar  of  Conscience  or  taken  to  task  by  Authority,  have  we  urged  that  we  really 
could  not  help  ourselves ;  that,  to  use  Mrs.  Peyser's  word,  we  were  "  bewitched  " 
by  some  evil  and  malignant  power  ;  that  it  was  impossible  to  keep  the  law  we  had 
transgressed,  and  that  "  what  is  to  be  broken  "  will  and  must  be  broken  ?    "A  hot 
temper  leaps  o'er  a  cold  decree."    With  passions  so  fierce  and  strong  as  mine,  with 
a  natural  and  hereditary  bias  to  evil,  exposed  to  temptations  so  numerous  and  so 
nicely  adjusted  to  my  temperament,  why  should  I  be  blamed,  why  should  I  over- 
much blame  myself,  if  now  and  then  I  have  overleaped  the  cold  and  strict  require- 
ments of  the  law  ?     Such  as  I  am,  in  such  a  world  as  this,  with  a  passionate 
craving  for  immediate  enjoyment,  exposed  to  forces  so  powerful  and  so  constant  in 
their  operation,  hampered  by  conditions  so  inauspicious,  how  could  I  do  otherwise 
than  I  have  done  ?    Is  it  my  fault  that,  with  desire  and  opportunity  conspiring 
against  me,  I  have  sometimes  been  overmastered  or  betrayed  by  them,  and  broken 
a  commandment  which  no  man  has  always  kept?  .  .  .  Well,  Aaron's  excuse  for 
himself  has  reminded  us  of  a  good  many  excuses  as  irrational  and  absurd  as  his 
which  men  make  to  this  day.     And  we  have  seen  and  acknowledged  that  there  is 
some  element  of  truth  in  them  ;  that  what  we  call  accident  does  play  a  certain  part 
in  our  life  and  the  lives  of  our  fellows.   But  though,  in  the  abstract,  we  cannot  define 
this  mysterious  power,  or  determine  exactly  how  far  we  are  subject  to  it,  in  conduct 
and  practice  we  have  no  great  difficulty  in  dealing  with  it.    We  make  allowance  for 
our  servants ;  we  admit  that  even  the  most  careful  must  meet  with  an  accident 
sometimes,  and  that  there  are  times  even  when  a  small  series  of  such  accidents  are 
almost  certain  to  tread  on  each  other's  heels.     Nevertheless,  if,  after  due  trial,  we 
find  that  a  servant  has  contracted  a  constant  and  incorrigible  habit  of  breaking 
whatever  is  breakable,  we  promptly  dismiss  her  as  too  unfortunate  for  us,  or  as 
abnormally  clumsy,  or  as  wilfully  negligent.    We  make  allowance,  too,  for  the 
accidents  of  commerce  ;  we  confess  that  now  and  then  a  man  may  fail  honourably 
because  he  fails  through  no  fault  of  his  own.    But  if  we  meet  with  a  man  who  has 
failed  in  almost  everything  he  has  undertaken,  and  who  has  spent  half  his  time  in 
the  Court  of  Insolvency  and  its  purlieus,  we  are  in  no  hurry  to  associate  ourselves 
with  him  or  to  assist  him ;  nay,  unless  he  can  bring  surprisingly  good  evidence  to 
the  contrary,  we  set  him  down  as  a  lazy  vagabond  or  an  unscrupulous  rogue.    Just 
so  we  make,  or  ought  to  make,  allowance  for  a  man  who  is  "  overtaken  by  a  sin." 
And  for  ourselves,  my  brethren,  let  us  have  done  with  this  poor  subterfuge,  which 
we  know  to  be,  for  us  at  least,  a  mere  refuge  of  lies  even  as  we  run  into  it.   (S.  Cox, 
D.D.)        Excuses  for  sin  : — Here  is  a  man  all  gross  and  sensual,  a  man  still  young 
who  has  already  lost  the  freshness,  glory,  and  purity  of  youth.      Suppose  you 
•question  him  about  his  life.     You  expect  him  to  be  ashamed,  repentant.    There  is 
not  a  sign  of  anything  like  that  1    He  says  :  "  I  am  the  victim  of  circumstances. 
What  a  corrupt,  hcentious,  profane  age  this  is  in  which  we  live !    When  I  was 
in  college  I  got  into  a  bad  set.     When  I  went  into  business  I  was  surrounded  by 
bad  influences.    When  I  grew  rich,  men  flattered  me.    When  I  grew  poor,  men 
bullied  me.    The  world  has  made  me  what  I  am,  this  fiery,  passionate,  wicked 
world.    I  had  in  my  hands  the  gold  of  my  boyhood  which  God  gave  me.     Then  I 
oast  it  into  the  fire,  and  there  came  out  this  calf. "    Another  man  is  not  a  profligate, 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  EXODUS.  545 

but  is  a  miser,  or  a  mere  business  macLine.  "  What  can  you  ask  of  me  ?  "  he  says  ; 
"  this  is  a  mercantile  community.  The  business  man  who  does  not  attend  to 
his  business  goes  to  the  wall.  I  am  what  this  intense  commercial  life  has  made  me. 
I  put  my  life  in  there,  and  it  came  out  this."  And  then  he  gazes  fondly  at  his 
golden  calf,  and  his  knees  bend  under  him  with  the  old  long  habit  of  worshipping 
it,  and  he  loves  it  still,  even  while  he  abuses  and  disowns  it.  And  so  with  the 
woman  of  society.  "  The  fire  made  me  this,"  she  says  of  her  frivolity  and  pride. 
And  so  of  the  politician  and  his  selfishness  and  partisanship.  "  I  put  my  principles 
into  the  furnace,  and  this  came  out."  And  so  of  the  bigot  and  his  bigotry,  the  one- 
sided Conservative  with  his  stubborn  resistance  to  all  progress,  the  one-sided  Radical 
with  his  ruthless  iconoclasm.  So  of  all  partial  and  fanatical  men.  "  The  furnace 
made  us,"  they  are  ready  to  declare.  Bemember  that  the  subtlety  and  attractive- 
ness of  this  excuse,  this  plausible  attributing  of  power  to  inanimate  things  and 
exterior  conditions  to  create  what  only  man  can  make,  extends  not  only  to  the 
results  which  we  see  coming  forth  in  ourselves;  it  covers  also  the  fortunes  of  those 
for  whom  we  are  responsible.  The  father  says  of  his  profligate  son,  for  whom  he 
has  never  done  one  wise  or  vigorous  thing  to  make  a  noble  and  pure-minded  man  : 
*♦  I  cannot  tell  how  it  has  come.  It  has  not  been  my  fault.  I  put  him  into  the 
world,  and  this  came  out."  The  father  whose  faith  has  been  mean  and  selfish  says 
the  same  of  his  boy  who  is  a  sceptic.  Everywhere  there  is  this  cowardly  casting  off 
of  responsibilities  upon  the  dead  circumstances  around  us.  It  is  a  very  hard  treat- 
ment of  the  poor,  dumb,  helpless  world  which  cannot  answer  to  defend  itself.  It 
takes  us  as  we  give  ourselves  to  it.  It  is  our  minister  fulfilling  our  commissions  for 
ns  upon  our  own  souls.  If  we  say  to  it,  "  Make  us  noble,"  it  does  make  us  noble. 
If  we  say  to  it,  "  Make  us  mean,"  it  does  make  us  mean.  And  then  we  take  the 
nobility  and  say,  "Behold,  how  noble  I  have  made  myself."  And  we  take  the 
meanness  and  say,  "  See  how  mean  the  world  has  made  me."  .  .  .  The  only  hope 
for  any  of  us  is  in  a  perfectly  honest  manliness  to  claim  our  sins.  "  I  did  it,  I  did 
it,"  let  me  say  of  all  my  wickedness.  Let  me  refuse  to  listen  for  one  moment  to 
any  voice  which  would  make  my  sins  less  mine.  It  is  the  only  honest  and  the  only 
hopeful  way,  the  only  way  to  know  and  be  ourselves.  When  we  have  done  that, 
then  we  are  ready  for  the  gospel,  ready  for  all  that  Christ  wants  to  show  us  that  we 
may  become,  and  for  all  the  powerful  grace  by  which  He  wants  to  make  us  be  it 
perfectly.     (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.) 

Yer.  26.  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  7 — Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ? — I.  The  conflict, 
AND  WHICH  IS  THE  Lord's  SIDE.  The  commauds  of  God  versus  self-pleasing. 
Holiness  and  right,  against  sin  and  oppression.  II.  The  Lord's  friends,  and  what 
THEY  MUST  DO.  1.  They  must  own  their  allegiance  openly  (ver.  29).  2.  They 
should  come  out  and  rally  to  the  standard.  We  do  this  by  open  union  with  the 
Church,  by  boldly  rebuking  sin,  by  testifying  for  truth,  by  not  conforming  to  the 
world,  and  by  conforming  to  Christ  our  Lord  (2  Cor.  viii.  5).  3.  They  must  be 
willing  to  be  in  a  minority.  4.  They  must  become  aggressive  (ver.  27).  5.  Their 
zeal  must  overcome  nature's  ties  (Deut.  xxxiii.  9).  6.  They  must  do  what  they  are 
bidden  (ver.  28).  III.  The  Lord's  host  and  its  encouragements.  1.  Their  cause 
is  that  of  right  and  truth.  2.  It  is  God's  cause.  3.  Christ  Himself  is  our  Captain. 
4.  The  angels  are  with  us.  5.  Thousands  of  the  best  of  men  have  been  on  this 
side  (Heb.  xii.  1).  6.  It  is  the  side  of  conscience  and  of  a  clean  heart.  7.  It  is 
that  side  of  the  warfare  which  ends  in  heaven  and  victory.  IV.  The  question  op 
the  text,  and  proposals  foe  enlistment.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Who  is  on  the 
Lord's  sidA  7—1.  This  is  a  Divine  question.  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus," 
(fee.     II.  A  spiritual  question.     Are  we  ne^v  men  in  Christ  Jesus  by  the  new  birth? 

III.  A  crisis  question.     Truth  cannot  be  divided;  conduct  cannot  have  two  hearts. 

IV.  A  vital  question.  Treason  is  in  God's  government,  what  it  is  everywhere,  a 
capital  crime.  V.  A  determinate  question.  Ithuriel's  spear  disclosed  whatever  it 
touched.  This  inquiry  settles  fixedly  the  state  of  each  man  for  the  eternity  he  is 
to  enter.  VI.  An  experimental  question.  1.  There  are  only  two  sides  ever  to  be 
found.  2.  There  is  great  comfort  in  being  on  the  right  side.  3.  It  is  unsatis- 
factory, profitless,  and  perilous  to  be  upon  the  wrong  side.  The  soul  will  rest 
nowhere  there.  There  will  come  no  possible  advantage  from  rebellion  ;  danger  and 
destruction  are  directly  in  the  path  of  one  who  lifts  himself  against  God.  4.  Any 
one  can  know  which  side  he  is  on,  if  he  truly  desires  it.  (C.  S.  Robinson,,  D.D.) 
On  which  side  are  you  ? — I.  Decision.  1.  It  is  a  decision  upon  the  most  sublime 
And  important  theme  which  can  ever  come  under  a  man's  notice.    God  and  Satan. 

85 


546  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxif 

truth  and  falsehood,  hohness  and  sin.  2.  This  decision,  so  important  and  weighty, 
should  be  made  as  early  as  possible.  When  Agesilaus  came  to  the  borders  of 
Macedon  he  sent  the  laconic  message,  "  As  friends  or  as  enemies  ?  "  The  answer 
■was,  "  We  must  stop  awhile,  and  take  advice."  His  reply  was,  "  While  you  advise, 
we  march."  Wait  not.  Every  hour  renders  it  more  likely  that  you  will  make  a 
foolish  choice.  '6.  This  is  a  decision  of  the  greatest  importauce,  for  it  will  influence 
every  subsequent  decision  throughout  life.  True  religion  gives  a  tincture  to  every- 
thing with  which  the  man  comes  in  contact.  4.  As  to  this  decision  there  ought  to 
be  no  possible  difficulty.  A  man  should  decide  for  God,  since  He  is  his  Creator, 
Redeemer,  Preserver.  5.  This  decision  involves  but  one  alternative.  There  is  no  > 
synagogue  of  the  undecided  on  earth,  and  no  purgatory  of  middle  men  in  the 
umeen  world.     H.  The  avowal,     "  Let  him  come  unto  me."     "  For  God — to  me." 

1.  A  coming  out  from  amongst  the  idolaters.  Do  not  conceal  your  religion.  2. 
They  were  to  come  to  the  leader.  Follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  3<. 
Those  who  were  to  come  to  Moses  were,  of  course,  to  come  to  one  another.  Do 
not  birds  of  a  feather  flock  together?  If  God  has  made  you  birds  of  paradise, 
hasten  to  fly  like  doves  to  your  windows.     IH.  Consecration.     1.  Obey  God's  will. 

2.  Serve  God  actively  and  energetically.  3.  Do  this  at  all  hazards  and  costs.  ((7. 
H.  Spurqeon.)  Only  two  aides  ;— 1.  To  be  on  the  Lord's  side  is,  in  the  first  place, 
to  put  your  whole  weight  on  Christ  Jesus  as  your  personal  Saviour.  2.  To  be  on  the 
Lord's  side  is  publicly  to  profess  Him.  3.  To  be  on  the  Lords  side  you  must  con- 
secrate your  life  to  Him.  4.  Reasons  for  being  on  the  Lord's  side.  (1)  It  is  the 
happy  side.  (2)  It  is  the  safe  side.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmarje.)  lii'ligious  decision: — 
We  would  enforce  upon  you  the  importance  of  coming  to  a  determinate  and  decided 
judgment  on  the  great  business  of  religion.  Examine  its  claims  :  if  they  be 
spurious  or  unfounded,  then  reject  them ;  but  if  they  be  true,  if  they  agree  with 
certain  powers  and  feelings  of  your  mind,  then  give  to  religion  the  attention  its 
importance  demands.  Do  not  play  with  so  keen  a  weapon ;  do  not  trifle  on  the 
most  solemn  of  all  subjects.  Decision  of  character  is  a  highly  valuable  quality  of  , 
mind.  It  gives  to  its  possessor  great  advantages  over  others  in  the  ordinary  affairs 
of  life.  This  quality  of  mind  is  needed  in  proportion  to  tiie  difficulties  which 
obstruct  the  attainment  of  any  end.      I.  We  address  ourselves  to  those  WHe 

VACILLATE    BETWEEN  GoD  AND  THE  WORLD,  BETWEEN  BELIOION  AND  IBRELIGION.     There 

is  a  class,  and  a  numerous  class  of  men,  especially  in  our  own  enlightened  country, 
•who  may  be  considered  in  this  condition.  II.  To  those  who  entertain  a  scrip- 
tural  HOPE    OF    salvation,    BUT    HAVE    NOT    MADE    A    PUBLIC    AVOWAL    OF    THEIR     FAITH. 

This  backwardness  to  associate  with  the  professing  people  cf  God  results  from 
various  causes.  In  some  it  is  the  effect  of  mistaken  views  of  what  is  required  in 
order  to  the  fellowship  of  the  Church.  In  other  men,  this  backwardness  publicly 
to  acknowledge  the  Saviour  is  the  effect  of  a  very  lax  and  unscriptnral  view  of  what 
religion  requires.  They  suppose  that  if  their  hearts  are  right  with  God  it  is  not  at 
all  necessary  that  they  should  make  a  public  profession.  III.  The  language  op 
Moses  is  applicable  to  those  who  have  made  a  profession  of  religion.  That  many 
Christians  are  open  to  a  charge  of  compromising  their  principles  cannot  be  doubted 
by  any  who  are  conversant  with  the  transactions  of  daily  life.  (S.  Summers.) 
Duty  of  hciiifi  on  the  Lord^s  side  : — I.  What  is  liiPLtED  by  being  on  the  Lord's  side. 
1.  On  the  side  of  His  truth.  2.  On  the  side  of  His  character.  3.  On  the  side  of  His 
gospel.  4.  On  the  side  of  His  law.  5.  On  the  side  of  His  honour.  II.  Why  we  ought 
ALL  TO  be  on  the  Lord's  SIDE.  1.  The  first  reason  which  I  shall  offer  why  we  ought 
all  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side  is,  that  it  is  the  side  of  truth  and  righteousness.  2. 
As  another  reason  why  you  ought  to  be  on  the  Lord's  Bide,  let  me  beseech  you  to 
consider  seriously  on  what  side  you  are  if  you  are  not  on  His.  3.  Consider, 
further,  why  you  ought  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side,  how  much  the  Lord  has  done  for 
you.  4.  Another  reason  why  we  ought  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side  is,  that  it  is  the 
side  of  happiness.  5.  Further  :  let  me  entreat  those  who  are  not  yet  on  the  Lord's 
side  to  consider  that  they  have  not  one  reasonable  plea  for  being  on  the  side  of 
Satan.      {Preacher's  Treasury.)  Decision  of  character: — I.  The   text   clearly 

implies  a  solemn  fact,  that  there  is  a  side  in  antagonism  to  the  Lord's — that 
there  are  interests,  that  there  are  opinions,  that  there  are  principles,  that  there  are 
Uves  that  are  in  diametrical  opposition  to  the  side  of  God,  and  truth,  and  cf 
righteousness.  No  reflective  mind  can  survey  our  humanity  without  coming  to  this 
conviction  :  Surely  all  this  unrighteousness,  all  this  living  for  self,  all  this  oppres- 
sion, this  worldliness,  cannot  be  on  the  side  of  God's  moral  government.  There 
are  questions  of  science,  and  of  politics,  and  of  literature  on  which  a  man  may 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  EXODUS.  547 

» M 

assume  a  neutral  position  ;  but  in  the  great  matter  of  your  salvation,  God's  claim;.' 
to  your  love,  there  is  and  there  can  be  no  neutrality.  It  is  not  a  matter  optional 
with  you  whether  you  repent  or  not,  whether  you  believe  or  not,  whether  you  are 
the  follower  and  disciple  of  Christ  or  not.  It  is  not  a  matter  to  you  of  utter 
indifference  whether  or  not  you  are  known  in  this  world  to  be  a  child  of  God  and 
an  heir  of  glory.  II.  What  is  it  truly  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side?  1.  Let  me 
remark,  simply  and  emphatically,  that  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side  is  to  love  Him. 
Love  and  hate  to  one  and  the  selfsame  being  are  emotions  not  only  incongruous,  but 
impossible  in  the  human  breast.  There  are  no  two  properties  in  chemistry  more 
opposite  to  each  other  in  their  nature  and  in  their  operations  than  are  these  two 
emotions — love  and  hate.  2.  To  be  on  the  Lord's  side  is  to  be  on  the  side  of  His 
truth.  The  truth  of  God,  next  to  His  beloved  Son,  is  the  most  precious  thing  that 
He  possesses.  Declare  yourself  on  the  side  of  the  gospel  and  on  the  side  of  God's 
truth ;  let  there  be  no  compromise ;  let  there  be  no  doubt  whatever  as  to  the 
firmness  and  sincerity  with  which  you  hold  it.  3.  To  be  on  the  Lord's  side  is,  then, 
to  be  on  the  side  of  the  Lord's  people.  If  you  are  on  the  side  of  the  Lord,  you  will 
not  be  ashamed  of  the  Lord's  people.  You  may  find  many  of  them  in  lowly  life, 
you  may  find  many  of  them  battling  and  struggling  with  its  ditSculties,  you  may 
find  many  of  them  unlearned  and  ignorant  as  toufhing  the  lire  of  this  world.  4. 
But  to  be  on  the  side  of  holiness  it  is  essential  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  Lord.  The 
Lord's  side  is  holiness  in  conflict  with  ein,  righteousness  in  antagonism  with 
unholiness.  HI.  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "  There  are  many  considera- 
tions with  which  one  might  enforce  the  challenge,  and  press  it  upon  your  personal 
and  solemn  consideration.  Let  these  suffice — 1.  It  is  tbe  only  right  side.  2.  I 
remark,  in  addition  to  this,  that  it  is  the  only  winning  side.  (0.  IVinsloir.)  Who 
is  on  the  Lord's  side  ? — I.  The  text  implies  an  opposition.  II,  The  text  advo- 
cates A  DUTY.  It  is  the  duty  of  being  on  the  Lord's  sidf.  1.  To  be  on  the 
Lord's  side  is  to  acknowledge  Him  as  the  only  Lord.  2,  To  be  on  the  Lord's 
side  is  to  render  from  the  heart  aciurtlly  to  Him  emotions  of  reverence,  of  admi- 
ration, and  of  gratitude,  which  are  permanent  and  supreme.  3.  To  be  on  the 
Lord's  side  is  to  abandon  and  repudiate  all  refuges  which  are  false,  in  connection 
with  the  great  principle  of  acceptance  before  Him,  and  to  rest  entirely  and  imjjlicitly 
upon  the  one  method  which  He  has  been  pleasrcd  to  propound,  and  which  is  found 
in  the  expiation  and  in  the  imputed  righteousness  of  His  Son.  4.  To  be  on  the 
Lord's  side  is  to  become  practically  conformed  to  His  commandments.  5.  To  be  on 
the  Lord's  side  is  to  be  dihgent  in  the  advancement  of  His  glory.  Again  :  you  are 
to  observe  what  are  the  inducements  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side.  1.  You  should  be 
on  the  Lord's  side  because  He  possesses  an  unimpeachable  and  absolute  right  to 
you.  (1)  He  has  the  right  of  a  Creator.  (2)  The  rigtit  of  a  benefactor.  (3)  In  order 
to  save  you  from  that  wrath.  He  has  rendered  His  most  precious  and  incomparable 
gift :  He  gave  His  own  Son.  (4)  Because  you  will  be  made  partakers  of  vast  and 
incomparable  blessings.  (5)  Because  by  not  being  so  you  are  exposed  to  over- 
whelming punishment  and  sorrow.  III.  The  text  demands  a  declaration. 
"  Moses  stood  in  the  gate  of  the  camp,  and  said.  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ? 
let  him  come  unto  me."  God  will  not  have  His  servants  to  live  in  secret  and  in 
retirement ;  they  are  to  proclaim  and  publish  tbe  fact  that  they  are  for  Him.  1. 
This  declaration  should  be  made  by  verbal  announcement  in  the  intercourse  of 
social  liie :  "  With  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."  2.  This  declara- 
tion is  also  to  be  made  by  union  with  the  people  of  God  in  the  Church  of  His 
Son.  ^  3.  This  declaration  also  is  to  be  made  by  active  and  devoted  diligence  in 
promoting  the  cause  of  God  among  the  apostate  and  the  rebellious  of  your  race.  (J. 
Parsons.)  The  Lord's  side  : — I.  What  is  implied  in  being  "  on  the  Lord's 
SIDE."  It  implies — 1.  A  decided  renunciation  of  the  cause  of  sin.  2.  Believingly 
to  choose  God  as  our  portion.  3.  Cheerful  obedience  to  His  commands.  4.  An 
undaunted  profession  of  His  religion.  5.  A  consecration  of  all  we  possess 
to  His  honour  and  glory.  II.  The  advantages  arising  from  being  on  the 
Lord's  side.  1.  It  is  tbe  most  honourable  side.  2.  It  is  the  most  happy 
side.  3.  It  is  the  most  useful  side.  4.  It  is  the  most  safe  side.  Appli- 
cation :  1.  Congratulate  those  on  the  Lord's  side.  Exhort  them  to  steadfastness 
and  perseverance.  2.  Invite  poor  ruined  sinners  to  throw  down  their  weapons 
and  sue  for  mercy.  3.  Plead  with  the  miserable  backslider,  that  be  may 
return  to  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  his  soul.  "  I  will  heal  his  backslidings," 
&c.,  "saith  the  Lord."  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  On  decision  in  religion  : — I.  There 
ABE  TWO  GREAT  iNTEBESTS  IN  THE  WORLD — God  and  Satan,    No  neutrality.    II.  SojtE 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTHATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

— ■ — ' 0 

ABE  UNDECIDED  ABOUT  SERVING  GoD.  They  wlsh  to  become  Christians,  and  yet  will 
not  give  up  their  beloved  sins.  They  have  too  much  kuowledge  to  enjoy  the  world, 
and  too  great  a  love  of  the  world  to  enjoy  religion ;  and  thus  they  halt  between  two 
opinions.  III.  All  ought  to  decide  for  God.  IV.  The  sin  and  danger  of 
REMAINING  UNDECIDED.  It  is  base  ingratitude  and  the  most  prt-sumptuous  rebel- 
lion. V.  We  PRESS  IMMEDIATE  DECISION.  It  is  your  duty  to  God,  to  yourself,  and 
to  the  Church  of  Christ ;  it  is  your  privilege,  and  will  be  both  to  your  honour  and 
advaiita-'e.  VI.  The  way  to  snow  tocu  decision.  (Evangelical  Prcdclfr.)  The 
right  position  : — I.  Great  danger  of  delusion  here.  1.  Think  not  that  you  are 
on  the  Lord's  side  because  you  have  been  baptized  and  confirmed.  You  may  have 
broken  the  covenant  and  trampled  upon  its  mercies.  2.  Think  not  that  you  are 
on  the  Lord's  side  because  you  attend  the  Holy  Communion.  It  cannot  make  a 
saint  of  a  hypocrite.  3.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the  Lord's  side  because  you 
take  pleasure  in  religious  services.  Herod  heard  John  gladly,  but  would  not 
abandon  his  vicious  course  of  life.  4.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the  Lord's  side 
because  you  are  conscious  of  no  hostility  to  Him.  Few  men,  however  depraved 
and  guilty,  really  believe  themselves  the  enemies  of  Christ.  Nothing  special  has 
occurred  to  call  forth  their  opposition.  5.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the  Lord's 
side  because  you  meditate  with  delight  upon  His  character.  Such  is  the  consti- 
tution of  the  human  mind,  that  it  cannot  help  admirinp;  a  high  degree  of  virtue. 
No  doubt  the  conscience  of  hell  itself  is  with  God.  6.  Think  not  that  yon  are  on 
the  Lord's  side  because  you  faultles!^ly  perform  all  your  social  duties.  The  young 
ruler.  7.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the  Lord's  side  because  you  sometimes  experi- 
ence Flight  compunctions  for  sin.  Felix,  Agrippa.  8.  Think  not  that  you  are  on 
the  Lord's  side  because  you  cherish  in  your  heart  an  ardent  desire  of  salvation. 
Who  has  not  had  such  desires?  Who  would  not  die  the  death  of  the  righteous? 
9.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the  Lord's  side  because  you  show  a  comtuendable 
zeal  in  the  propagation  of  your  religious  opinions.  The  Jesuit  is  more  zealous  than 
yon.  So  are  the  Hindoo,  Mussulman,  Mormon.  10.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the 
Lord's  side  because  you  are  successful  in  your  efforts  to  promote  Christianity 
around  you.  Have  you  ever  equalled  the  success  of  the  Arabian  impostor  or  of  the 
profligate  saints  of  Utah?  11.  Think  not  that  you  are  on  the  Lord's  side  because 
your  fair  exterior  makes  others  regard  you  as  a  true  servant  of  God.  II.  What  is 
it,  then,  to  be  on  the  Lord's  side,  and  how  are  you  to  ascertain  your  true 
position  ?  What  is  implied  in  loyalty  to  God  and  an  alliance  with  Jesus  Christ  ? 
It  implies  baptism,  for  this  is  the  entrance  into  the  Christian  covenant.  It  implies 
confirmation,  for  this  is  the  public  recognition  and  ratification  of  that  sacred  com- 
pact with  the  Lord.  It  implies  Holy  Communion,  for  this  is  the  formal  and 
frequent  repetition  of  the  believer's  oath  of  allegiance  to  his  King,  the  Captain  of 
his  salvation.  But  it  implies  much  more,  which  is  involved  in  all  these,  and 
without  which  all  these  can  make  no  man  a  thorough  Christian.  If  you  are  on  the 
Lord's  side,  you  are  for  His  Church,  against  all  schism  ;  for  His  truth,  against  all 
heresy ;  for  the  faith  of  His  saints,  against  all  human  theories  and  speculations. 
(=7.  Cross,  D.D.)  The  Lord's  side  : — I.  In  outward  profession  they  are  on  the 
Lord's  side  who  have  become  partakers  of  the  peculiar  ordin.^nces  which  the 
Saviour  has  established  for  His  Church.  These  ordinances  He  has  made  impera- 
tive. H.  There  is  another  standard  which  looks  far  beyond  all  outward  professions 
in  a  determination  of  this  question.     There  is  a  character  which  the  power  of 

MAN  CANNOT  FEIGN,  AND  WHICH  ACCURATELY  MARKS  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  ENLISTED  THEM- 
SELVES UNDER  THE  BANNER  OF  THE  KiNG  OF  SAINTS.  Thcsc  evidences  are  to  be 
presented,  not  as  the  marks  by  which  we  may  form  an  opinion  of  others,  but  as 
the  testimony  by  which  we  may  examine  ourselves.  1.  They  who  are  on  the 
Lord's  side  have  been  converted  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  their  natural 
state  of  blindness  and  enmity  to  God.  2.  They  who  are  on  the  Lord's  side  in  this 
division  of  the  world  make  it  their  object  to  live  by  faith  in  His  promises  and 
power,  aiid  as  pilgrims  on  the  earth,  to  become  prepared  for  a  better  country — that 
is,  an  heavenly.  3.  They  who  are  on  the  Lord's  side  experience  a  daily  conflict 
with  the  principles  of  sin.  While  men  are  unconverted,  this  contest  is  unknown. 
4.  They  who  are  on  the  Lord's  side  are  going  on  from  grace  to  grace.  The  mind 
of  Christ  is  forming  within  them.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  The  clmllenge  of  Moses  : — 
I.  The  truths  which  the  text  teaches.  1.  That  there  are  two  great  interests  in 
the  world — a  good  one  and  a  bad  one — God,  the  great  eternal,  on  the  one  side,  and 
Satan,  the  prince  of  darkness,  on  the  other.  I  should  not  say  too  much,  I  presume, 
if  I  venture  to  affirm  all  belong  to  God  by  right.    But  Satan  has  usurped  a  dominion. 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  EXODUS.  549 

All  are  on  one  side  or  the  other.  2.  Some  are  undecided  about  serving  God.  Not  from 
the  want  of  conviction ;  their  consciences  speak  for  God,  but  their  wills  rebel.  II 
That  it  is  of  the  utmost  impoktance  for  ns  to  ascertain  to  which  class  we 
BELONG.  *  What  is  implied  in  being  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  1.  Enlightenment  of 
mind.  It  is  necessary  for  us  to  see  both  the  error  and  danger  there  is  in  being  on 
the  side  of  Satan  and  sin,  and  to  discover  the  excellency  and  superiority  of  Christ's 
cause  and  gospel.  2.  It  is  believingly  to  choose  Christ  for  our  portion.  3. 
It  incluiles  obedience  to  His  truth.  If  we  are  on  the  Lord's  side,  we  shall  delight 
in  His  law.  4.  It  includes  a  determination  of  mind  to  sacrifice  everything  for 
Him.  III.  Point  out  some  of  the  advantages  of  being  on  the  Lord's  side.  1. 
It  is  the  most  honourable  side.  It  is  not  the  side  of  the  despot  or  tyrant,  but  it  is 
the  cause  and  service  of  the  God  of  love.  It  is  not  the  service  of  sin,  but  of  purity. 
2.  It  is  the  strongest  side.  And  it  is  astonishing  to  see  how  fond  some  persons  are 
of  being  on  the  strongest  side.  3.  It  is  the  most  happy  side.  This  cannot  be  con- 
futed. For  while  there  is  no  peace  for  the  wicked,  the  Christian  hath  peace  with 
God — an  inward  tranquillity,  to  which  the  world  are  strangers  ;  the  retrospect,  and 
their  present  experience  as  well  as  their  future  prospects,  are  fraught  with  happi- 
ness and  joy.  4.  It  is  the  most  useful  side.  Sin  injures  others  as  well  as 
ourselves.  5.  It  is  the  most  safe  side.  In  fact,  no  other  state  is  safe.  Learn — 1. 
The  important  question,  "  WTio  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "  We  congratulate  those  who 
are,  and  would  say  to  them,  "  Be  steadfast,  unmovable  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  58).  2.  The  sin 
and  danger  of  remaining  undecided.  It  deprives  you  of  present  happiness,  and,  if 
grace  prevent  not,  it  will  shut  you  out  of  heaven  at  last.  3.  That  the  way  to  show 
your  decision  is  to  come  out  from  the  world  and  be  separate,  (ir.  Rose.)  Holding 
up  the  colours : — I  remember  a  story  of  the  Crimean  war,  of  that  terrible  day  at 
Inkerman  in  which  our  little  wasted  and  dispirited  army  was  suddenly  overwhelmed, 
in  the  mist  and  in  the  darkness  of  a  thick  November  morning,  by  vast  masses  of 
Russians.  The  men  had  to  fight  their  way  out  as  best  they  could.  There  was  one 
little  company  surrounded  and  hemmed  in  on  every  side  by  the  enemy,  but  there 
were  a  few  gallant  and  brave  men  in  their  midst  fighting  their  way  through  hosts 
of  foes  that  hedged  them  in  on  every  side.  There  was  a  voice  heard  by  a  spectator 
at  a  distance,  "  Hold  up  the  colours  "  ;  and  still  as  they  pressed  on,  and  still  as  one 
and  another  fell,  and  still  as  that  little  company  became  smaller,  still  the  cry  went 
up,  "  Hold  up  the  colours."  Holding  up  the  colours,  they  fought  their  way  through 
to  life  and  liberty  and  victory.  Oh,  it  is  a  lesson  to  us  ;  whatever  else  we  do,  hold 
up  the  colours.  Let  men  know  what  we  are ;  let  them  know  that  we  are  Christ's. 
On  our  colours  is  engraven,  "  Christ  and  His  salvation."  Hold  fast  the  colours — 
there  is  no  fear  of  the  victory.  (G.  Rogem.)  Are  toe  on  the  Lord's  side  ? — "  We 
trust  the  Lord  is  on  our  side,  Mr.  Lincoln,"  said  the  speaker  of  a  delegation  of 
Christian  people  to  that  good  man,  during  one  of  the  darkest  days  of  the  American 
Civil  War.  "  I  do  not  regard  that  as  so  essential  as  something  else,"  replied  Mr. 
Lincoln.  The  worthy  visitors  looked  horror-struck,  until  the  President  added  ;  "  I 
am  most  concerned  to  know  that  we  are  on  the  Lord's  side."  The  right  side  is  not 
my  side  or  your  side.  The  Lord's  side  is  the  place  to  which  every  one  of  us  should 
rally.  His  banner  has  right,  truth,  love,  and  holiness  written  on  it.  Be  sure  you 
stand  up  for  God's  banner,  even  if  j'ou  stand  alone.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
choice  to  he  made  : — Guizot,  in  his  life  of  St.  Louis  of  France,  says  that  the  latter 
had  many  vassals  who  were  also  vassals  of  the  King  of  England,  and  that  many 
subtle  and  difficult  questions  arose  as  to  the  extent  of  the  service  which  they  owed 
to  these  kings.  At  length  the  French  king  commanded  all  those  nobles  who  held 
lands  in  English  territory  to  appear  before  him,  and  then  he  said  to  them  :  "  As  it 
is  impossible  for  any  man  living  in  my  kingdom  and  having  possessions  in  England 
rightly  to  serve  two  masters,  you  must  either  attach  yourselves  altogether  to  me  or 
inseparably  to  the  King  of  England."  After  saying  this,  he  gave  them  a  certain 
day  by  which  to  make  their  choice.  Out  and  out  for  Christ: — An  Irish  gentle- 
man, pointing  to  a  young  man,  once  said :  "  Is  he  an  0.  0.  ?  "  "  What  do  you 
mean  by  0.  0.?"  "I  mean,"  was  the  reply,  "is  he  out  and  out  for  Christ  ?" 
This  is  what  all  ought  to  be  who  bear  Christ's  name.  "  When  all  who  belong  to 
the  Lord,"  one  says,  "  are  wilUng  to  speak  for  Him,  willing  to  work  for  Him, 
willing  to  die  for  Him,  then  Christianity  will  advance,  and  we  shall  see  the  work 
of  the  Lord  prosper." 

Ver.   27.  Slay  every  man  his   brother. — Idolatry  punished  : — The  actors   in 
THIS  idolatrous  SCENE.     1.  Their  historical  character.     2.  The  recent  experiences 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrm. 

— ^ ^ 

through  which  they  had  passed.  3.  In  view  of  these  facts  what  a  revelation  of 
human  nature  we  have  here  1  (1)  Of  its  fickleness.  (2)  Of  the  difficulty  ot  making 
deep  religious  impressions.  (3)  Of  the  imperiousness  of  the  religious  nature  (ver. 
1).  (4)  Of  the  depraved  tendency  of  man's  natural  religious  instincts  (ver.  6). 
(5)  Of  the  ingratitude  of  human  nature.  (6)  Of  the  weakness  of  their  present 
leader,  Aaron.  II.  The  punishment.  1.  The  opportunity  to  repent  before  the 
punishment  was  meted  out  (ver.  26).  2.  The  fidelity  of  the  sons  of  Levi.  8.  The 
terrible  slaughter  (vers.  27,  28).  4.  The  condition  of  forgiveness  (vers.  29,  30). 
5.  The  tender-hearted  intercessor  (vers.  31,  32).  6.  The  result  of  the  intercession 
(vers.  33-35).  Lessons  :  1.  The  plausible  grounds  on  which  men  justify  them- 
selves in  following  their  inclinations.  (1)  Doubtless  the  leaders  in  this  idolatry 
were  those  who  had  been  corrupted  in  Egypt,  and  were  longing  to  have  a  taste  of 
Egyptian  religion.  (2)  Their  excuse  was,  the  delay  of  Moses  in  coming  down  from 
the  mount.  2.  The  ease  with  which  some  leaders  will  fall  in  with  a  popular  cry, 
3.  False  leaders  will  lie  to  justify  themselves.  4.  What  a  power  for  good  or  evil  is 
a  great  popular  enthusiasm !  5.  The  contrast  between  the  religion  of  man  and  the 
religion  of  God.  6.  Sin  is  no  less  odious  in  God's  sight  because  it  is  committed  in 
the  name  of  religion.  God  is  ever  ready  to  forgive  the  truly  penitent.  (D.  C. 
Hughes,  M.A.)  Penalty  a  veiled  blessing  : — When  a  thunderstorm  is  in  progress, 
and  torrents  of  rain  are  falling,  one  might  wonder  why  God  allowed  such  a 
seemingly  evil  thing  to  happen.  But  the  farmer,  who  has  been  watching  for  weeks 
for  some  sign  of  rain,  knows  that  this  sudden  storm  and  downpour  is  a  blessing 
in  disguise.  So  the  penalties  by  which  God  preserved  the  Israelites  from  complete 
self-destruction  were  veiled  blessings.  Frowning  fortresses,  heavy  artillery,  and 
iron-clad  ships  are  sometimes  Grod's  best  instruments  in  His  sharp  surgpry  of  the 
nations.  It  is  hard  to  see  how  the  visitation  of  a  penalty  is  often  an  act  of  mercy  ; 
but  when  Moses  for  his  sin  was  denied  an  entrance  into  the  Holy  Land,  was  it,  after 
all,  a  great  hardship  that  he  was  taken  into  God's  Paradise  instead  ?  {S.  S.  Times.) 

Ver.  29.  Consecrate  yourselves  to-day  to  the  Lord. — Immediate  devotedness  to 
God: — I.  The  itature  of  this  consecration.  1.  We  must  recognize  the  claims 
of  Jehovah.  2.  We  must  concur  as  to  the  manner  of  our  consecration.  3.  We 
must  be  deeply  anxious  respecting  this  consecration.  4.  We  must  earnestly  and 
oelievingly  give  ourselves  up  to  the  Lord.  5.  This  act  of  consecration  must  be 
entire  and  for  ever.  6.  This  act  must  be  our  own  individual  act.  7.  This  act  must 
be  effected  and  sustained  by  Divine  grace.  8.  This  act  must  be  immediate. 
"  To-day  "  we  have  life,  means,  promises.  To-morrow  all  may  be  lost,  and  for  ever. 
Now,  let  us  urge  you  to  this  immediate  consecration — II.  By  several  important 
CONSIDERATIONS  AND  MOTIVES.  1.  It  is  rational.  2.  It  is  improving.  3.  It  is 
felicitous.  4.  It  is  consolatory.  5.  It  is  saving.  Application  :  1.  Let  me 
urge  the  text  on  all  classes — the  young  especially.  2.  Let  me  urge  all  now. 
3.  I  urge  by  a  countless  number  of  considerations.  By  the  majesty  and  glory 
of  the  God  who  seeks  your  salvation,  and  not  death.  By  the  Spirit  within  you. 
By  the  flight  of  time.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Consecrate  yourselves  to  the  Lord  : — If 
you  say  you  are  on  the  Lord's  side,  prove  it.  If  you  are  His  in  one  thing,  be  His 
in  all  things.  There  are  a  great  many  who  call  themselves  on  the  Lord's  side  when 
they  want  daily  bread  or  daily  protection,  who  hesitate  to  stand  out  against 
brother  and  neighbour  when  the  time  of  trying  division  for  conscience'  sake  comes. 
The  reason  why  so  many  of  us  accompUsh  so  Uttle  for  the  Lord  is,  that  we  are  only 
partially  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  We  are  His  for  Sunday  and  Wednesday 
evenings;  or  for  Him  in  one  line  or  another  of  thought  or  conduct;  or  for 
Him  in  all  lines  but  one.  Mr.  Moody  has  said  that  "  the  world  has  yet  to 
see  the  power  of  one  man  wholly  consecrated  to  God."  Uncle  Johnny  Vassar, 
or  David  Livingstone,  or  Martin  Luther,  or  some  such  man  as  that,  gives 
us  a  glimpse  of  the  possibilities  of  one  who  is  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  What  a 
pity  that  such  illustrations  are  so  exceptional !  "  Consecrate  yourselves  to-day  to 
the  Lord,  that  He  may  bestow  upon  you  a  blessing  I  "     (H.  C.  Trumbull.) 

Vers.  31,  32.  If  Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin. — Moses  interceding  for  the  people : — 
It  was  a  very  happy  thing  for  Israel  that  they  had  an  intercessor.  It  is  not  that 
God  needs  it.  God  does  not  need  the  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ — Christ  told  us 
so.  "  I  say  not  that  I  will  pray  the  Father  for  you,  for  the  Father  Himself  loveth 
you."  And  we  believe  that  as  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  availed  for  the  believers 
in  the  Old  Testament,  so  did  Hia  intercession — that  there  was  an  anticipation  of 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  EXODVS.  561 

the  intercession  of  Christ  when  Abraham  interceded,  or  Moses.  I.  An  J  first  let 
me  give  you  three  reasons  why  intercession  is  a  very  high  duty.  1.  It  is  a 
power  given  to  every  man  to  wield — a  power  of  love,  a  mighty  instrument  for 
which  we  are  responsible.  2.  St.  Paul  puts  it  very  prominently.  You  will 
remember  that,  writing  to  Timothy,  he  says,  "  I  exhort  that  first  of  all  supplications, 
prayers,  intercessions,  giving  of  thanks  be  made  for  all  men."  What  would  we 
give  for  love  that  does  not  speak  in  prayer  ?  3.  And  you  are  never  so  exactly  a  copy 
of  Christ  as  when  you  are  praying  for  a  fellow-creature.  II.  The  privilege  of  it  is 
EXCEEDING  GREAT.  Let  me  mention  one  or  two  of  the  privileges.  1.  It  is  such  a 
beautiful  way  of  giving  expression  to  love.  2.  It  revives  the  spirit  of  prayer  in 
ourselves.  III.  Let  me  give  you  one  or  two  words  of  practical  advice  respecting 
INTERCESSORY  PRAYER.  1.  Like  Other  prayer,  it  must  have  intensity.  2.  It  should 
be  accompanied  with  thanksgiving.  3.  Let  me  also  suggest  to  you  that  without 
•which  no  duty  is  ever  well  performed — your  method  with  your  intercessory  prayer. 
Of  course  it  must  be  left  to  every  one's  own  judgment  how  to  do  it.  Only,  have 
method,  and  have  a  period  of  the  day,  one  of  your  stated  prayers,  which  shall  be, 
if  not  entirely,  yet  to  a  great  extent,  given  to  intercession.  The  method  will  be 
helpful,  and  it  will  give  strength  to  the  action,  for  what  we  do  with  design  and 
plan  we  do  always  better  than  that  which  is  left  to  the  feelings  of  the  moment. 
And  amongst  the  arrangements  of  prayer  it  will  be  well  to  settle  with  your- 
Belves  when,  and  where,  and  how  much  shall  be  given  to  intercession.  {J. 
Vaughan,   M.A.)  The    forlorn  hope  : — Moses    was    one   of   those   who    had 

greatness  forced  upon  him,  not  being  capable  of  pursuing  it — the  meekest  and  most 
retiring  of  men  by  nature,  while  appointed  the  leader  of  a  rebellious  multitude. 
Immovable  as  a  rock,  courageous  as  David,  where  the  honour  of  God  was  con- 
cerned, his  own  honour,  in  the  ordinary  sense,  was  not  his  care,  and  for  it  he 
seemed  to  have  no  sensibility.  Happy  tbose  who  learn  to  forget  themselves,  and  to 
have  God  only  in  their  eye  !  And  shall  not  God  acknowledge  and  recompense  the 
grace  which,  flowing  from  Himself,  turns  its  streams  to  Him  again  ?  Is  it  not  fit 
that  He  should  distinguish  those  who  withhold  nothing  from  Him  ;  who  achieve  no 
honour  tbat  they  do  not  cast  forthwith  at  His  feet  ?  2.  Look  at  another  attribute 
of  a  heaven-formed  character.  Where  among  us  are  the  men  that  have  the  gift  of 
intercessory  prayer  in  any  measure  like  the  Lord's  servant  Moses '!  Who  are  they, 
in  a  day  of  general  defection  and  rebuke,  that,  like  Moses,  uncontamiuated  with  the 
sins,  unseduced  by  the  errors  of  their  generation,  find  it  their  piit  to  ascend  alone 
into  the  mount,  if  peradventure  they  may  make  an  atonement  ?  3.  It  has  been 
conjectured  by  some  that  Moses  here  uses  the  language  of  desperation,  and  invokes 
upon  himself  the  irremediable  sentence  of  final  perdition.  But  when  we  consider 
all  that  this  includes  in  it,  of  eternal  separation  from  the  Fountain  of  happiness,  of 
alienation  matured  into  enmity,  of  abandoned  association  with  the  cursed  and 
blaspheming  spirits  of  the  infernal  world,  it  is  impossible  that  so  revolting  a  wish 
entered  his  soul,  or  that  his  heavenly  spirit,  held  in  the  bonds  of  unchanging  love, 
was  violated  by  the  intrusion  of  so  cruel  and  abhorred  a  sentiment.  It  is  probable 
he  refers  to  the  declaration  made  above,  that  in  rejecting  Israel  God  would  make 
of  him  a  great  nation.  This  interpretation  is  quite  natural,  for  how  could 
his  heart  sustain  the  alternative  ?  Could  he,  so  true,  so  loyal  an  Israelite,  separate 
his  lot  from  that  of  Israel  ?  Could  he,  bereft  and  bespoiled  of  the  fruit  of  years  of 
anxious  toil,  and  of  faith  founded  on  inviolable  promise?,  acf^ept  of  this  as  an 
indemnification  for  his  loss,  or  consent  to  console  himself  with  new  projects  of 
happiness,  or  erect  his  name  and  found  his  greatness  on  the  ruins  of  forgotten 
Israel  ?  No ;  rather  let  the  grave  yield  him  a  refuge  from  such  parricidal  honours. 
Life  had  cost  him  already  too  many  pangs  to  leave  him  energy  to  commence  it 
anew.  It  was  enough  now  to  be  allowed  to  share  the  common  desolation,  and 
having  sustained  for  a  moment  the  dreaded  consummation  of  his  woes,  that  his 
life  and  hopes  should  be  extinguished  together.  Faithful  Moses  1  Thy  interests 
as  well  as  thy  wishes  were  safe,  left  for  decision  at  the  righteous  tribunal  of  the 
heart-searching  God.  {H.  Grey,  D.D.)  The  training  of  the  missionary  spirit : — 
L  The  Church  contemplative.  Consider  the  communion  of  Moses  on  the  mountain 
with  God.  No  wonder  that  Moses  should  delay  to  come  down.  When  the  sublime 
truths  of  the  Godhead  find  a  lodgment  and  settled  home  in  our  hearts,  so  that  we 
can  treat  them  as  the  familiar  things  of  our  faith,  and  not  as  passing  imaginations, 
we  have  great  confidence  towards  God.  Selfishness  is  purged  out  from  us,  and  with 
selfishness  goes  fear.  The  pure  in  heart  see  the  Holy  One ;  the  unselfish  see 
the  Eternal  Son.    II.  The  Church  militant.    The  spiritual  life  is  vast  and  varied ; 


552  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

quietism  alone  cannot  express  it,  even  though  it  be  the  fellowship  of  God's  own 
peace.     The  change  which  is  wrought  in  Moses  is  immediate  and  startling.     He 
who,  alone  with  God,  can  venture  on  remonstrances  with  God,  in  the  assurance 
that  his  pleadings  will  be  accepted  ;  when  he  sees  the  turbulent  levity  of  the  people, 
and  bears  their  licentious  singing,  is  transported  with  indignation.   The  degradation 
of  idolatry  is  illustrated  in  Israel's  transgression.     1.  It  is,  first,  a  revelation  of  the 
profound  unbeUef  of  the  people.     Moses  was  unto  them  instead  of  God.     "  Speak 
thou  \vith  us,  and  we  will  hear,"  they  had  said,  amid  the  lightnings  of  Sinai ;  "  but 
let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die."     Here  was  their  first  declining,  and  from 
this  point  the  descent  was  facile.     Moses  instead  of  God,  and  a  calf  instead  of 
Moses.     2.  Next,  the  fatuity  of  the  people  is  exposed.     Ignominious  as  is  their 
worship,  still  more  ignominious  is  Aaron's  stupid  account  of  it.    3.  And  then  there 
is  the  people's  peimanent  demoralization.    They  are  unconvicted  by  the  remon- 
strances of  Moses,  unmoved  by  his  earnestness;  fear  and  the  darkness  of  night 
alone  could  quiet  them.     "  Even  as  they  refused  to  have  God  in  their  knowledge, 
God  gave  them  up  unco  a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not  fitting." 
How  different  is  the  sight  of  sin  from  our  hearing  of  it :  sin  as  it  affects  God  seems 
so  easily  condoned  ;  sin,  when  it  affects  ourselves,  appears  so  heinous.     III.  The 
Chcrch  sacrificial.     The  next  day  displays  a  new  composure  in  Moses.    A  graver, 
wiser  man,  his  conflicting   emotions  steadied  under  the  constraint  of  a  solemn 
purpose.    He  goes  to  commune  with  the  Lord.     The  words  declare  his  sense  of  the 
wickedness  of  the  people,  his  feeling  that  nothing  can  be  said  to  abate  the  heinous- 
ness   of    their    transgressions.      Submission    is    the    only    off*  ring  which    their 
intercessor  can  present,  and  out  of  the  submission  comes  a  trembling  hope.     There 
is  here  the  utmost  tenderness  of  a  human  heart ;  there  is  also  an  absolute  resig- 
nation to   the  will  of   God.     They  are   truly  sacrificial  words,  sacrificial  in  the 
self-devotion  they  bespeak,  sacrificial  in  the  force  of  their  appeal  to  heaven.    Some 
sort  of  premonition  that  his  sacrificial  purpose  would  not  be  ratified  by  God  appears 
in  Moses'  language.     It  does  not  mar  the  sincerity  of  his  self-offering,  but  the  words 
halt  upon  his  lips  in  which  a  simple  faith  that  he  could  be  in  the  room  of  Israel 
would  have  been  expressed.     "If  Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sins — ;  and  if  not" — 
what  ?  Not,  blot  me,  instead,  out  of  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written ! — but,  "  blot 
rae — that  is  blot  me  with  my  people — let  me  share  their  forfeiture  ;  I  ask  no  destiny 
but  theirs."    It  seems  to  me  that  one  of  the  hardest  lessons  which  saintly  souls 
have  to  learn  to-day  is  that  they  cannot  sacrifice  themselves  for  the  sins  of  the 
world.     It  is  hard,  because  the  sympathy  which  impels  them  is  so  pure  and  deep  ; 
it  has  so  much  of  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  it.     To  the  sacrificial  Church  God  is  able 
to  reveal  the  true  atonement,  to  makes  us  preachers  of  Him.  in  whom,  "  according 
to  the  riches  of  His  grace,"  the  world  may  have  "  redemption  through  His  blood, 
the  forgiveness  of  fins."     IV.  The  mystery  of  the  Divine  sacrifice.     He  that  is 
willing,"   says   Christ,  "to  lose  his  life  for  My  sake  shall  find  it."     Moses  was 
accepted  for  the  people  in  a  deeper  sense  than  he  had  thought  of.     He  was  rein- 
stated  in  his  post  as  leader,  his  passion  of  self-devotedness  transfonncd  into  faith 
and  patience.  The  qualified  blessing  of  "  an  angel  to  go  before  him  "  was  changed — 
as  Moses,  in  his  pleading  for  theiJeople,  revealed  his  undaunted  confidence  in  God's 
fidelity,  and  his  quenchless  affection  for  the  people — into  a  larper  i^romise  :  "  My 
presence  shall  go  with  thee  ;  and  I  will  give  thee  rest."     And  when,  emboldened  by 
all  the  love  from  God,  he  goes  on  to  ask  for  more,  there  is  more  vouchsafed  him. 
The  Lord  declared  that  He  would  make  all  His  goodness  pass  before  His  servant ; 
and  intimated  to  him  that  beyond  even  this  was  a  deep,  unutteralde  secret,  which 
none  might  rend,  but  of  which,  if  we  could  but  rend  it,  we  should  see  the  burden  to 
be  grace.     To  such  surpassing  heights  of  human  efficiency  do  tho?e  attain  who 
are  willing  to  give  themselves  away.     The  reward  of  the  Church  sacrificial  will  be 
victory  over  the  powers  of  evil.     {A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)         Theprrnjer  of  Moses  ; — 
I.  We  are  to  inquire  to  what  book  Moses  refers  in  the  text.     He  says  to  God, 
"  Blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written."     I  would 
observe    that   M^ses  could  not  mean  the  book   of   God's  remembrance.      The 
prophet  Malachi  speaks  of  such  a  book.     Moses  must  have  known  tliat  there  was 
not  only  a  moral,  but  a  natural  impossibility  of  God's  blotting  Lis  name  out  of  the 
book  of  His  remembrance.    God  cannot  cease  to  remember  any  more  than  He  can 
cease  to  exist.     And  there  is  another  book  of  God,  often  mentioned  in  Scripture, 
which  is  called  the  book  of  life,  and  contains  the  names  of  all  whom  He  designs  to 
save  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  admit  to  heaven.     It  plainly  nppears  by  God's 
answer  to  Moses,  that  this  is  the  book  he  meant.    11.  What  was  the  ijipoet  os  hi3 


CHAP,  xxsii.]  EXODUS.  553 

BEQUEST,  WHEN  HE  SAID  TO  GoD,  "  Yet  HOW,  if  Thou  wilt,  forgive  their  sin  ;  and  if 
not,  blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written."  Here  are 
two  things  requested,  and  both  conditionally.  Moses  prays,  if  it  were  consistent 
with  the  will  of  God,  that  He  would  pardon  the  sin  of  His  people  in  making  the 
golden  calf.  "  Now  if  Thou  wilt,  forgive  their  sin."  He  prayed  for  the  exercise 
of  pardoning  mercy  towards  the  people  conditionally,  because  God  had  seemed  to 
intimate  that  He  intended  to  destroy  them,  by  saying,  "  Let  Me  alone,  that  My 
wrath  may  wax  hot  against  them."  Moses  had  reason  to  fear  that  God  would,  at 
all  events,  withhold  His  pardoning  mercy.  And  therefore  to  render  his  intercession 
more  prevalent,  and  to  express  his  most  ardent  desire  for  their  forgiveness,  he  prays 
again  conditionally:  "And  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  which 
Thou  hast  written."  This  was  implicitly  saying,  "  0  Lord,  since  Thou  hast 
proposed  to  spare  me  and  destroy  Thy  people,  I  pray  that  Thou  wouldest  rather 
blot  me  out  of  the  book  of  life,  and  spare  them.  If  Thy  glory  require  that  either 
they  or  I  must  be  destroyed,  I  pray  Thee  spare  them  and  destroy  me.  Their 
salvation  is  unspeakably  more  important  than  mine ;  and  I  am  willing  to  give  up 
my  salvation,  if  it  might  be  a  means,  or  occasion,  of  preventing  their  final  ruin." 
ni.  Whether  this  petition  of  Moses,  taken  in  the  sense  in  which  it  has  been 
EXPLAINED,  IS  A  PHOPER  ONE.  1.  It  appears  to  have  been  perfectly  acceptable  to 
God.  He  did  not  rebuke  him  for  a  rash  request,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  plainly 
intimated  that  He  was  highly  pleased  with  his  noble,  disinterested  desire.  And 
since  God  did  not  condemn  it,  we  may  safely  conclude  that  it  was  highly  acceptable 
in  His  sight.  2.  It  was  perfectly  agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  reason  and  conscience, 
that  Moses  should  have  been  willing  to  give  up  all  his  own  personal  interests,  to 
promote  the  glory  of  God  and  the  future  and  eternal  good  of  his  nation.  He 
supposed  that  the  glory  of  God  was  greatly  concerned  in  the  preservation  of  His 
people  from  deserved  destruction;  and  he  plead  this  as  the  most  powerful  argument 
to  move  God  to  forgive  and  spare  them.  3.  The  petition  of  Moses  was  agreeable 
to  the  very  law  of  love.  God  requires  all  men  to  love  Him  with  all  their  heart,  and 
their  neighbour  as  themselves.  4.  The  request  of  Moses  was  perfectly  agreeable  to 
the  spirit  which  Christ  uniformly  expressed  through  the  whole  course  of  His  life  on 
earth.  He  always  gave  up  a  less  good  of  His  own  for  a  greater  good  of  others.  5. 
That  the  prayer  of  Moses  was  proper,  because  it  was  agreeable  to  the  prayers  and 
practice  of  other  good  men.  Paul  said,  "  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for 
Israel  is  that  they  might  be  saved."  Yea,  he  did  solemnly  declare,  "  I  could  wish 
that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to 
the  flesh."  Improvement :  1.  If  the  prayer  of  Moses  in  the  text  was  proper  and 
acceptable  to  God,  then  true  love  to  God  and  man  is,  strictly  speaking,  disinterested 
love.  Moses  expressed  a  love  which  was  not  only  without  interest  but  contrary  to 
interest.  2.  If  the  conditional  prayer  of  Moses  was  proper,  then  it  is  impossible  to 
carry  the  duty  of  disinterested  benevolence  too  far.  3.  If  the  prayer  of  Moses  was 
proper,  then  none  ought  to  be  willing  to  be  lost,  only  conditionally.  4.  If  the 
prayer  of  IMoses  was  proper  and  sincere,  then  those  who  possess  his  spirit  are  the 
best  friends  of  sinners.  5.  If  the  prayer  of  Moses  was  proper  and  sincere,  then 
none  can  pray  sincerely  for  any  good  without  being  willing  to  do  whatever  is 
necessary  on  their  part  to  obtain  it,  6.  If  the  conditional  prayer  of  Moses  was 
proper  and  acceptable  to  God,  then  the  prayers  of  the  people  of  God  are  always 
heard  and  answered.  It  is  their  wisdom  as  well  as  their  duty  always  to  pray 
conditionally  and  submissively  ;  for  then  they  may  be  assured  that  their  prayers 
will  be  graciously  answered.  7.  If  the  conditional  prayer  of  Moses  was  acceptable 
to  God,  then  the  prayers  of  sinners  are  always  sinful  and  unacceptable  to  God. 
They  arc  not  willing  to  be  denied  on  account  of  God's  glory.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 
The  broken  sentence : — I.  The  problem  with  which  he  had  to  deal.  1.  Their 
idolatry.  The  great  lawgiver  and  leader,  acting  on  their  request,  thereupon  with- 
drew himself  into  the  Divine  pavilion,  and  was  absent  for  about  six  weeks.  At 
first,  without  doubt,  the  people  were  well  content.  Better  to  be  temporarily 
deprived  of  their  leader,  than  be  exposed  to  those  terrible  thunderings.  But,  after 
a  while,  they  became  uneasy  and  restless.  From  one  to  another  the  word  passed, 
"  Where  is  he?  He  did  not  take  food  enough  with  him  to  sustain  him  for  so  long." 
And  then  turning  to  Aaron,  the  man  of  words,  sure  that  fieither  he  nor  twenty  like 
him  could  fill  the  gap  which  the  loss  of  Moses  had  caused,  they  cried,  "  Up,  make 
us  gods,  which  shall  go  before  us."  We  may  notice,  as  we  pass,  the  essential 
nature  of  idolatry.  For  in  this  marvellous  chapter  we  have  its  entire  history,  from 
the  first  cry  of  the  soul,  which  betrays  a  mighty  yearning  for  an  idol,  to  the  drain- 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 


ing  of  the  last  bitter  dregs,  with  which,  when  ground  to  powder,  the  idolater  has 
to  drink  its  very  dust.     It  is  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  human  spirit  which 
Bhrinks  from  the  effort  of  communion  with  the  unseen  and  spiritual,  to  associate 
God  with  what  it  can  own  and  handle,  so  as  to  have  a  constant  and  evident  token 
of  the  presence  and  favour  of  God.     This  was  the  case  of  Israel.     It  was  only  three 
months  since  they  had  stood  by  the  Eed  Sea,  and  seen  its  waters  roll  in  pride  over 
the  hosts  of  Pharaoh.     Every  day  since  then  God's  love  had  followed  them.     But 
notwithstanding  all,  they  had  been  carried  away  before  that  imperious  craving  of 
the   human  heart  which  cries  out  for  a  sensible  image  of   its  worship.     Their 
idolatry,  then,  was  a  violation,  not  of  the  First,  but  of  the  Second,  Commandment. 
They  did  not  propose  to  renounce  Jehovah— that  was  left  for  the  days  of  Ahab  ; 
but  they  desired  to  worship  Jehovah  under  the  form  of  a  calf,  and  in  distinct 
violation  of  the  emphatic  prohibition  which  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee 
any  graven  image,  or  the  likeness  of  any  form  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  the  earth 
beneath  ;  thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them  nor  serve  them."     This  was 
the  sin  also  of  Jeroboam.     2.  Their  degradation.    There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
worship  of  the  calf  was  accompanied  with  the  licentious  orgies  which  were  a  recog- 
nized part  of  Egyptian  idolatry.     As  much  as  this  is  implied  in  the  narrative. 
"  The  people  sat  down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  rose  up  to  play."    It  is  an  awful 
thing  wben  a  single  man  throws  the  reins  on  the  neck  of  inordinate  desire,  but  how 
l^assing  terrible  it  must  have  been  when  a  whole  nation  did  it.     3.  The  claims  of 
God.     There  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  God  would  exact  the  full  amount  of 
penalty,  not   because  He  was  vindictive,  but   because  the   maintenance  of   His 
authority  seemed  to  demand  it.     How  could  God  maintain  His  character  with  His 
own  people  without  imperilling  it  with  the  Egyptians  ?     If  He  spared  the  people 
they  would  begin  to  think  that  neither  His  threats  nor  His  promises  were  worth 
their  heed.    And  if  He  destroyed  them,  His  glory  would  be  dimmed,  and  He  might 
Beem  to  have  become  unmindful  of  the  oath  which  He  swore  by  Himself  to  Hia 
servants,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Israel.     It  would  almost  seem  as  if  this  proposal 
was  hke  the  suggestion  made  to  Abraham  that  he  should  offer  up  his  only  son  Isaac. 
In  each  case  God  tried  or  tested  His  servant.    But  there  is  this  great  difference 
between  the  temptations  of  the  devil  and  of  God.     The  former  seeks  to  bring  out 
all  the  evil,  and  to  make  it  permanent,  as  the  streams  of  lava  poured  from  the  heart 
of  a  volcano ;  the  latter  seeks  to  bring  out  all  the  good,  and  to  make  it  ours ;  for 
moral  qualities  never  become  ours  till  we  have  put  them  into  practice.    H.  The 
EMOTIONS  WITH  WHICH  HIS  SOUL  WAS  STIRRED.     In  the  mouut  lic  acted  as  inter- 
cessor.    It  was  not  against  the  people,  but  against  their  sin,  that  his  anger  flamed 
out,     "  Moses'  anger  waxed  hot,  and  he  cast  the  tables  out  of  his  hands,  and  brake 
them  beneath  the  mount."    Those  splintered  bits  leaping  from  crag  to  crag  are  an 
apt  symbol  of  man's  inability  to  keep  intact  the  holy  law  of  God.    When  he 
reached  the  camp  he  seems  to  have  strode  into  the  astonished  throng  and  broke  up 
their  revelry,  overturned  their  calf,  ordering  it  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  fragments 
mingled  with  the  water  they  drank.     But  as  it  would  seem  that  this  did  not  avail 
to  stay  the  inveterate  evil,  he  was  compelled  to  use  more  drastic  measures,  and  by 
the  sword  of  Levi  to  extinguish  the  evil  with  the  life-blood  of  three  thousand  men. 
Then  when  the  next  day  came,  when  the  camp  was  filled  with  mourning  over  those 
new-made  graves,  when  the  awful  reaction  had  set  in  on  the  people  and  himself, 
the  tide  seems  to  have  turned.     His  indignation  was  succeeded  by  bitter  sorrow 
and  pity.    "Ye  have  sinned  a  great  sin,  and  now  I  will  go  up  unto  the  Lord, 
peradventure  I  shall  make  atonement  for  your  sin  "  ;  but  he  did  not  tell  them  the 
purpose  which  was  in  his  heart,  nor  the  price  wbich  he  was  purposing  to  pay.     IIL 
The  offer  that  he  made.    He  went  quietly  and  thoughtfully  back  to  the  presence- 
chamber  of  God,  as  the  people  stood  beholding.     "  Peradventure,"  he  had  said. 
He  was  not  sure.    He  felt  that  the  sin  was  very  great.     He  could  not  see  how  God 
could  go  back  from  His  solemn  threatenings.     He  was  convinced  that  if  the  merited 
judgments  were  averted,  it  must  be  in  consequence  of  an  atonement.     Yet,  what 
atonement  could  there  be  ?     Animals  could  not  avail,  though  they  were  offered  in 
hecatombs.     There  was  only  one  thing  he  could  suggest — he  could  offer  himself. 
And  it  was  this  which  made  him  say,  "  Peradventure."     He  could  not  be  sure  that 
the  ransom  price  would  be  large  enough.     It  may  be  asked  how  came  he  to  think 
of  atonement?     But  we  must  remember  that  probably   there  had  already  been 
much  talk  between  God  and  himself  about  the  sacrifices  which  the  people  were  to 
offer.     And   Moses  confessed  his  people's  sin  to  God,  and  added  :  "  Yet  now,  if 
Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin "    He  would  not  finish  that  sentence.    Ee  could 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  EXODUS.  566 

not  trust  himself  to  depict  the  blessed  consequences  that  would  ensue,  if  only  God 
would  forgive.  But  the  dark  fear  oppressed  him  that  free  pardon  was  too  much  to 
expect.  Ah !  how  little  did  he  realize  the  love  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Of  course,  the  offer  was  not  accepted.  No  one  can  atone  for  his  own  sin,  much  less 
for  the  sins  of  others.  Yet  the  people  were  spared.  The  passing  by  of  their 
transgression  was  rendered  possible  by  the  propitiation  which  was  to  be  offered 
in  the  course  of  the  ages  on  the  cross  (Kom.  iii.  25).  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Biases  intercedes  for  Israel : — Notice — I.  The  sin  of  Israel.  This  was  a  dreadful 
compound  of  ingratitude,  folly,  and  impiety.  Its  greatness  will  be  easily  imagined 
from  the  indignation  which  both  God  and  Moses  expressed  against  it.  II.  The 
INTERCESSION  OF  MosES.  1.  He  reminds  God  of  His  relation  to  them.  2.  He 
reminds  Him  also  of  His  promise  to  their  fathers.  3.  He  expresses  his  concern 
respecting  God's  honour  among  the  heathen.  4.  He  humbly  confesses  the 
greatness  of  their  sin.  5.  He  wishes  to  be  punished  in  their  stead.  HI.  The 
EEPL1  OF  God.  He  remits  their  punishment.  (C  Simeon,  31. A.)  The  godli- 
ness of  Hoses  : — The  indication  of  an  impetuous,  fiery  spirit  in  Moses,  only  reveals 
the  beauty  of  the  meek  patience  which  marked  his  life.  I.  In  the  story  op 
THE  golden  calf  WE  SEE — 1.  Man's  natural  tendency  to  worship.  2.  The  Israelites 
employing  the  very  tokens  of  their  deliverance  to  build  a  god  for  themselves.  The 
very  gifts  of  heaven — wealth,  intellect,  power — men  turn  into  idols.  2.  In  wor- 
shipping a  golden  calf  the  Israelites  utterly  degraded  themselves.  II.  The  godliness 
of  Moses  manifested  itself  in  self-sacrificing  sympathy.  Fronting  death  and  its 
mystery,  he  stood  sublimely  willing  even  to  be  cut  off  from  God  if  the  sin  of  the 
people  might  thereby  be  forgiven.  1.  His  revulsion  from  their  sin  mingled  with 
his  own  love  for  the  people.  The  holiest  men  ever  feel  most  deeply  the  sin  of  their 
fellows — they  see  its  seeds  in  themselves  ;  they  find  its  shadow  falling  across  their 
heaven.  2.  He  felt  the  promise  of  his  people's  future.  In  them  lay  the  germ  of  the 
world's  history  ;  through  them  might  be  unfolded  the  glory  of  Jehovah  before  the 
face  of  all  nations.  Gathering  these  feelings  together,  we  understand  his  prayers. 
(E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  "  Blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  Thy  book"  : — There  are  various 
ways  in  which  this  passage  maybe  understood.  You  may  take  it  quite  literally, 
and  say  that  Moses  really  would  sacrifice  himself  for  a  time,  or  fatally,  but  not 
sacrifice  himself  for  ever.  Christ  made  Himself  a  curse,  but  not  for  ever.  If  it 
would  be  possible  to  make  myself  a  curse  for  a  season  for  others,  I  should  be  within 
the  pattern  of  Christ — for  He  made  Himself  for  a  season  a  curse.  But  I  should 
transgress  the  boundary,  I  should  go  out  into  a  sinful  extravagance,  if  I  wished  to 
be  accursed  for  ever — for  after  all  I  am  not  to  love  another  soul  more  than  mine — 
that  is  never  commanded.  And  there  is  to  be  high  measure  of  right  self-love, 
because  the  love  of  a  fellow-creature  is  to  be  proportioned  to  the  self-love,  and  if  I 
have  no  great  self-love,  I  cannot  have  love  to  a  fellow-creature.  Therefore,  I  must 
love  myself  greatly — in  the  right  way.  How,  then,  are  we  to  understand  it? 
When  Moses  prayed  that  God  would  blot  his  name  out  of  the  book,  it  may  have 
been  out  of  the  register  of  those  who  were  to  inhabit  the  earthly  Canaan — that  he 
would  give  up  all  the  enjoyments  of  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  all  the 
promised  blessings  of  Palestine,  for  the  sake  of  the  forgiveness  of  the  guilty 
Israelites.  And  if  that  was  it — for  securing  their  eternal  happiness  he  was  willing 
to  give  up  all  happiness  here,  I  suppose  he  would  not  have  been  sinful.  And  I 
suppose  our  earnestness  should  go  to  that  point — that  I  would  give  up  all  earthly 
happiness  so  that  my  child,  my  friend,  my  enemy,  might  be  saved.  Or,  again,  it 
mav  simply  be  the  language  of  intensity — the  expression  of  exceeding  feeling.  But, 
whichever  it  be — if  you  would  intercede,  it  must  not  be  in  a  light  way,  it  must  not 
be  in  commonplaces,  it  must  not  be  superficial  and  cold.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Intercession  for  otheirs  : — Never  think  lightly  of  this  matter  of  intercession.  There 
is  a  very  light  way  in  which  people  say,  "Pray  for  me,"  and  a  very  light  way  in 
which  people  answer,  "Yes,  I  wiU."  Be  careful  as  to  asking  the  favour,  or 
promising  to  grant  it.  You  may  find  it  a  good  rule  to  promise,  indeed,  whenever 
you  are  asked  by  any  one  to  pray  for  them,  but  to  promise  with  this  limitation — "I 
will  do  it  once,  I  will  do  it  the  next  time  that  I  am  on  my  knees  before  God,  I 
will  remember  to  pray  for  you."  That  you  will  be  able  to  do.  But  to  undertake 
always  to  pray  for  all  who  ask  it  is  a  burden  of  the  conscience — a  thing  impossible. 
You  will  have  those  for  whom,  doubtless,  you  do  pray  continually,  and  many;  but  as 
respects  the  ordinary  request  that  you  will  pray,  I  would  suggest  to  you  not  to  with- 
hold the  promise,  but  with  the  limitation  that  yon  will  pray  once.  For  it  is  a 
blessed  thing  to  have  intercessors.     And  how  blessed  a  thing  it  is  God  seems  to 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxil. 

teach  us  in  that  He  has  revealed  to  us  that  we  have  the  Holy  Ghost  an  intercessor, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  an  intercessor.  We  have  an  intercessor  always  within 
us,  and  one  always  above  us.  "  The  Spirit  maketh  intercession  for  us  [and  in 
us]  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  And  here  is  the  comfort — that  "  He 
that  searcheth  the  heart,"  God  in  heaven,  "  knows  the  mind  of  the  Spirit"  in  the 
man.  The  Holy  Ghost  in  the  man  asks  everything  that  is  according  to  the  will  of 
God.  (Ibid.)  Effective  intercession  : — Amongst  the  many  touching  and  interesting 
incidents  that  occurred  in  Stanley's  last  journey,  there  are  but  few  to  equal  the 
following : — Stanley  had  much  trouble  with  his  men  on  account  of  their  current 
propensity  to  steal,  the  results  of  which  brought  upon  the  expedition  much  actual 
disaster.  At  last  he  doomed  the  next  man  caught  stealing  to  death.  His  grief  and 
distress  were  unbounded  when  the  next  thief  was  found  to  be  Uledi,  the  bravest, 
truest,  noblest  of  his  dusky  followers.  Uledi  had  saved  a  hundred  lives,  his  own 
among  the  number.  He  had  performed  acts  of  the  most  brilliant  daring,  always 
successful,  always  faithful,  always  kind.  Must  Uledi  die  ?  He  called  all  his  men 
around  him  in  a  council.  He  explained  to  them  the  gravity  of  Uledi's  crime.  He 
reminded  them  of  his  stern  decree,  but  said  he  was  not  hard  enough  to  enforce  it 
against  Uledi.  His  arm  was  not  strong  enough  to  kill  Uledi;  some  other  punish- 
ment, and  a  hard  one,  must  be  meted  out.  What  should  it  be?  The  council  must 
decide.  They  took  a  vote.  Uledi  must  be  flogged.  When  the  decision  was 
reached,  Stanley  standing,  Uledi  crouching  at  his  feet,  and  the  solemn  circle 
drawn  closely  around  them,  one  man  whose  life  Uledi  had  saved  under  circum- 
stances of  frightful  peril,  stood  forth  and  said  :  "  Give  me  half  the  blows,  master." 
Then  another  said,  in  the  faintest  accent,  while  tears  fell  from  his  eyes,  "  Will  the 
master  give  his  slave  leave  to  speak?"  "Yes,"  said  Stanley.  The  Arab  came 
forward  and  knelt  by  Uledi's  side.  His  words  came  slowly,  and  now  and  then  a 
sob  broke  them.  "The  master  is  wise,"  he  said.  "He  knows  all  that  has 
been,  for  he  writes  them  in  a  book.  Let  your  slave  fetch  the  book,  master,  and  turn 
its  leaves.  Maybe  there  is  something  that  tells  how  Uledi  saved  Zaidi  from  the 
white  waters  of  the  cataract ;  how  he  saved  many  men — how  many  I  forget 
— Bin  Ali,  Mabruki,  Koni  Kusi,  others  too  ;  how  he  is  worthier  than  any 
three  of  us ;  how  he  always  listens  when  the  master  speaks,  and  flies  forth 
at  his  word.  Look,  master,  at  the  book.  Then,  if  the  blows  must  be  struck, 
Shumari  will  take  half  and  I  the  other  half."  Saywa's  speech  deserves 
to  live  for  ever.  Stanley  threw  away  his  whip.  "  Uledi  is  free,"  he  said. 
"  Shumari   and  Saywa  are   pardoned."  Self-sacrificing  devotion  : — An    extra- 

ordinary act  of  devotion  is  described  in  the  "  Spirit  of  Missions,"  as  it  was 
related  by  Bishop  Boone,  while  on  a  visit  to  this  country.  He  said :  "  I  had  a 
very  valuable  Chinese  servant  in  my  employ,  upon  whom  I  leaned  with  implicit 
confidence,  and  one  day  he  came  to  me  and  said  :  '  I  shall  be  obliged  to  ask  you 
to  find  some  one  to  take  my  place,  as  in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  I  am  to  be 
executed  in  place  of  a  rich  gentleman,  who  is  to  pay  me  very  liberally  for  becoming 
his  substitute' — such  a  mode  of  exchange,  as  the  reader  may  know,  being  in 
accordance  with  the  law  of  the  empire.  I  then  inquired  what  possible  inducement 
there  could  be  for  him  to  forfeit  his  life  for  any  amount  of  money,  when  he  replied : 
•  I  have  an  aged  father  and  mother,  who  are  very  poor,  and  unable  to  work,  and 
the  money  that  I  am  to  receive  will  make  them  comfortable  as  long  as  they  livt. 
I  think,  therefore,  it  is  my  duty  to  give  up  my  life  for  the  sake  of  accomplishing 
this.'"  Pardoned,  yet  punished : — The  Lord  may  grant  pardon,  and  yet  there  is  a 
sense  in  which  He  will  still  "plague  the  people"  for  their  sin.  The  drunkard 
may  give  up  his  sin  and  become  a  Christian,  and  yet  come  to  a  premature  grave 
because  of  his  former  evil  course.  The  man  who  has  squandered  vast  estates  in 
evU-doing  may  repent,  but  his  repentance  will  not  bring  back  that  which  he  has 
lost.  The  boy  who  spends  foolishly  the  time  in  which  he  should  be  gaining  know- 
ledge and  virtue  will  feel  the  effects  of  that  misspent  time  all  his  life.  Some 
opportunities  which  we  have  carelessly  allowed  to  slip  by  unimproved  will  never 
come  again  to  us  to  all  eternity.  In  that  sense  each  of  us  must  bear  his  own 
iniquity.  (S.  S.  Times.)  An  example  of  intercession  : — Said  a  servant  to  President 
Bacchus,  "The  physician  said,  sir,  that  you  cannot  live  to  exceed  half  an  hour." 
"  Is  it  so  ?  Then  take  me  out  of  my  bed,  and  place  me  upon  my  knees  ;  let  me 
spend  that  time  in  calling  upon  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  world."  It  was  done. 
He  died  upon  his  knees,  praying  for  the  salvation  of  sinners. 


CHAP,  xxxni.]  EXODUS.  '  657 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Vees.  1-3.  Without  the  camp. — The  Tabernacle  without  the  camp : — I.  First,  then, 
they  that  seek  the  Lord  must  go  without  the  camp.  1.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  for  me 
to  say  that  no  man  can  be  a  true  seeker  of  God  who  has  anything  to  do  with  the  camp 
of  the  profane.  We  must  take  care  tliat  our  garments  are  entirely  clean  from  those 
lusts  of  tlie  flesh,  and  those  blasphemies  of  the  ungodly.  2.  Again,  we  must  as  much 
come  out  from  the  camp  of  the  careless  as  from  the  camp  of  tlie  profane.  The 
largest  company  in  the  world  is  not  that  of  the  profane,  but  of  the  thoughtless — not 
those  who  oppose,  but  who  neglect  the  great  salvation.  3.  But  we  must  go  further 
than  this  :  if  a  man  would  have  fellowship  with  God  he  must  go  even  out  of  the 
camp  of  the  merely  steady,  sedate,  and  thoughtful ;  for  there  be  multitudes  whose 
thoughts  are  not  God's  thoughts,  and  whose  ways  are  not  His  ways,  who  are  in 
every  respect  conformed  outwardly  to  the  laws  of  God,  and  who  rigidly  observe  the 
customs  of  upright  society — who  think,  and  therefore  abhor  the  trilies  of  the  world 
— but  who,  notwithstanding,  have  never  learned  to  set  their  affections  on  things 
above.  It  is  not  enough  to  leave  the  Amalekites ;  thou  must  leave  even  the  hosts 
of  Moab,  brother  though  Moab  may  seem  to  be  to  the  Israel  of  God.  4.  He  that 
would  know  anything  of  God  aright  must  even  come  out  of  the  camp  of  the  merely 
religious.  Oh,  it  is  one  thing  to  attend  to  religion,  but  another  thing  to  be  in 
Christ  Jesus ;  it  is  one  thing  to  have  the  name  upon  the  church  book,  but  quite 
another  thing  to  have  it  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  II.  This  going  out  of 
THE  CAMP  WILL  INVOLVE  MUCH  INCONVENIENCE.  1.  You  wiU  find  that  youf  diffidence 
and  your  modesty  will  sometimes  shrink  from  the  performance  of  duty's  stern  com- 
mands. If  Christ  be  worth  anything,  He  is  worth  avowing  before  the  world,  before 
men,  before  angels,  and  before  devils.  2.  Peradventure  when  you  go  without  the 
camp  you  will  lose  some  of  your  best  friends.  You  will  find  that  many  a  tie  has 
to  be  cut  when  your  soul  is  bound  with  cords  to  the  horns  of  the  altar.  Can  you 
do  it  ?  As  Christ  left  His  Father  for  you,  can  you  leave  all  for  Him  ?  3.  You  will 
find,  too,  when  you  go  without  the  camp,  you  will  have  some  even  professedly  godly 
people  against  you.  "  Ah  !  "  they  will  say,  when  you  are  filled  with  the  Spirit,  and 
are  anxious  to  serve  God  as  Caleb  did,  with  all  your  heart — "  Ah  1  young  man,  that 
is  fanaticism,  and  it  will  grow  cool  by  and  by."  4.  Another  inconvenience  to 
which  you  will  be  exposed  is  that  you  will  be  charged  falsely.  So  was  your  Master, 
remember.  Endure,  as  He  did.  5.  Again,  you  must  expect  to  be  watched.  If  you 
profess  to  go  without  the  camp,  others  will  look  for  something  extra  in  you — mind 
that  they  are  not  disappointed.  I  have  heard  some  say,  "  I  do  not  like  to  join  the 
Church  because  then  there  would  be  so  much  expected  of  me."  Just  so,  and  that 
is  the  very  reason  why  you  should,  because  their  expectation  will  be  a  sort  of 
sacred  clog  to  you  when  you  are  tempted,  and  may  help  to  give  impetus  to  your 
character  and  carefulness  to  your  walk,  when  you  know  that  you  are  looked  upon 
by  the  eyes  of  men.    III.  Now  I  come  to  use  certain  arguments,  by  which  I  desire 

EARNESTLY  TO  PERSUADE  EACH  CHRISTIAN  HERE  TO  GO  WITHOUT  THE  CAMP  ;  TO  BE  EXACT 
IN  HIS  OBEDIENCE  ;    AND    TO    BE    PRECISE    IN    HIS    FOLLOWING    THE   LaMB    >VITHERS0EVER 

He  goeth.  1.  I  use  first  a  selfish  argument,  it  is  to  do  it  for  your  own  comfort's 
sake.  If  a  Christian  can  be  saved  while  he  conforms  to  this  world,  at  any  rate  he 
will  be  saved  so  as  by  fire.  Would  you  like  to  go  to  heaven  in  the  dark,  and  enter 
there  as  a  shipwrecked  mariner  climbs  the  rocks  of  his  native  country  ?  2.  But  I 
have  a  better  reason  than  that,  and  it  is,  for  your  own  growth  in  grace  do  it.  If  you 
would  have  much  faith,  you  cannot  have  much  faith  while  you  are  mixed  with 
sinners.  If  you  would  have  much  love,  your  love  cannot  grow  while  you  mingle 
with  the  ungodly.  3.  I  beseech  you.  Christian  men  and  women,  come  right  out  and 
be  your  Master's  soldiers  wholly  for  the  Church's  sake.  It  is  the  few  men  in  the 
Church,  and  those  who  have  been  distinct  from  her,  who  have  saved  the  Church  in 
all  times.  4.  And  for  the  world's  sake,  let  me  beg  you  to  do  thus.  The  Church 
itself  can  never  be  the  salt  of  the  world,  unless  there  be  some  particular  men  who 
are  the  salt  of  the  Church.  5.  And  now  lastly,  for  your  Master's  sake.  What  have 
you  and  I  to  do  in  the  camp  when  He  was  driven  from  it  ?  What  have  we  to  do 
with  hosannas  when  He  was  followed  with  hootings,  "  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him  "? 
What  have  I  to  do  in  the  tent  while  my  Captain  lies  in  the  open  battle-field  ? 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  4-8.  Put  off  thy  ornaments  from  thee,  that  I  may  know  what  to  do  unto  thee. 


558  *         THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnan. 

— The  work  of  Lent : — Lent  is  a  season  with  a  likeness  to  Jewish  ordinances, 
because  man  in  his  nature  and  wants  is  ever  the  same ;  it  is  a  Christian  season, 
because  its  cue  object  is  to  make  us  know  more  of  the  nearness  of  God  to  man, 
which  is  the  great  fact  of  Christianity.     In  the  text  we  have  one  of  God's  most 
expHcit  statements  of  the  need  of  such  observance ;  and  we  ask  the  meaning  of  that 
reason  which  He  assigns  for  a  season  of  special  penitence  and  humiliation.     1. 
God  wishes  to  know  what  to  do  with  us.     If  the  putting  aside  of  ornaments,  no 
matter  how  valuable  or  brilliant,  is  the  condition  of  that  process,  it  ought  to  be 
done ;  for  God's  action  must  be  full  of  power  and  love  ;  and  to  be  told  that  His 
hand  is  to  be  felt  in  our  life,  must  imply  that  a  blessing  is  to  be  bestowed  upon  us 
far  beyond  anything  that  can  come  from  any  other  addition.     2.  Never  at  any 
stage  of  His  revelation  has  God  ceased,  in  one  form  or  other,  to  prescribe  temporary 
and  voluntary  relinquishments,  in  order  that  He  may  enter.     The  ornaments,  or 
God's  voice — that  is  the  simple  form  of  choice.     3.  The  object  of  God's  dealings 
with  men  is,  that  He  may  destroy  their  sin.     And  there  is  no  more  fruitful  source 
of  sin  than  those  ornaments  which  He  tells  us  to  put  away.     The  things  which 
gather  about  our  lives  are  causes  of  separation  from  our  brother.     The  innocence 
or  the  desirability  of  the  ornament  may  make  no  difference  in  the  result.    Learn- 
ing, applause,  and  culture  may  make  us  just  as  forgetful,  or  unsympathetic,  or  even 
cruel  towards  others,  as  the  more  material  possessions  of  life.    4.  We  can  see, 
therefore,  that  this  command  is  like  the  call  of  a  John  Baptist :  Make  the  way 
plain,  the  path  straight  and  level,  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord  ;  remove  the  stumbling- 
block  wbich  has  been  in  thy  own  or  thy  brother's  path.     Men  must  learn  to  see 
their  oneness  as  brothers,  before  sin  can  be  done  away ;  lives  very  different  from 
each  other  must  be  placed  side  by  side,  and  then  new  modes  of  thought  and  com- 
parison will  at  once  enter.    How  often  one  word,  which  gives  us  a  glimpse  into  the 
real  condition  of  another's  heart,  makes  us  ashamed  of  some  feeling  which  we  have 
been  cherishing  toward  him  I     5.  But  the  sins  against  our  brethren  are  not  the 
only  evil  that  our  ornaments  work,  and  do  not  constitute  the  only  reason  why  they 
must  be  abandoned  before  God  can  do  His  work  for  us.    Those  very  sins  spring 
from  a  deeper  injury  wbich  has  been  done  to  our  souls.     These  things  that  have 
attached  themselves  to  life  come  to  be  regarded  as  its  substance,  and  to  regulate  its 
whole  movement.     What  the  text  says  to  us,  then,  is  this :  Cease  to  depend  upon 
the  present  condition  and  surroundings  of  life.     Think  of  yourself  as  an  immortal 
soul.    Try  to  imagine  yourself  as  cut  off  from  all  these  pursuits  and  surroundings, 
for  so,  in  fact,  you  must  be  at  some  time  ;  then  count  over  the  treasures  of  your 
hfe,  and  see  whether  there  is  enough  to  support  an  immortal  soul.     6.  The  Lenten 
call  is  a  call  to  greater  moderation  in  the  use  of  the  things  of  this  life,  so  that  they 
shall  not  become  our  masters  ;  it  is  a  call  to  exalt  the  true  Master  of  our  life,  so 
that  every  ornament  of  our  being  shall  be  discarded  for  ever,  which  is  not  worthy 
to  minister  to  His  glory,  or  which  attempts  to  fight  against  His  supremacy,  so  that 
all  which  remains  shall  be  used  in  obedience  to  His  commands,  and  in  subservience 
to  His  purposes.     It  is  by  this  test  that  innocent  and  sinful  indulgence  in  the  things 
of  this  life  is  to  be  discriminated,  that  the  line  of  the  too  much  and  the  too  little 
is  to  be  drawn,  and  that  we  are  to  be  made  men  and  women  worthy  and  fit  to  use 
the  world  rightly.     7.  But  why  does  God  need  that  the  ornaments  of  men's  lives 
should  be  put  off  before  He  shall  know  what  to  do  unto  them  ?     Is  it  not  limiting 
His  power  to  say  that  He  cannot  deal  with  us  as  we  are,  with  all  our  ornaments 
upon  us  ?     The  work  which  God  is  to  do  for  us  has  for  its  greatest  mark  that  it  is 
dependent  upon  what  we  are.     It  is  the  work  of  overcoming  sin.     God,  when  He 
made  man,  gave  him  all  he  needed  for  full  development  and  growth.     His  course 
was  forward  and  upward,  ever  increasing  in  power  and  glory,  while  obedience  and 
dependence  upon  God  ruled  his  action.     No  redemption  would  be  necessary  for  such 
a  being.     Man's  sin,  his  desire  after  the  things  of  this  world,  his  willingness  to 
build  up  his  life  with  those,  created  the  great  necessity.     The  self-will  of  man  called 
upon  God  for  new  action — action  which  His  Divine  wisdom  could  alone  create,  and 
which  His  Divine  power  could  alone  execute.    That  He  may  know  what  it  shall  be, 
He  asks  some  indication  of  man's  desire.     There  is  nothing  to  do  but  to  punish,  to 
let  the  life  which  persistently  holds  to  what  has  been  its  destruction,  go  its  own  sad 
way  of  separation  from  God,  if  there  is  no  relaxing  of  the  nervous  grasp  on  earthly 
good  and  ornament.    But  at  the  very  first  sign  of  a  willingness  to  put  such  things 
away,  to  bridle  life's  passion,  and  to  restrain  life's  desire,  the  way  of  redeeming  love 
is  open.     Man  is  ready  ;  and  God  knows  what  to  do,  and  He  is  able  to  make  him 
Hi^  child  once  more.    8.  Let  as,  then,  rejoice  at  this  season  for  putting  awa,'  the 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  EXODUS.  669 

mere  ornaments  of  life,  and  in  it  open  oar  ear  anxiously,  constantly,  eagerly,  to 
hear  the  word  of  His  gracious  intention.  God's  treasury  is  full  of  the  true  ornaments 
of  life.  He  readily  offers  them  to  us.  Receive  them  as  readily,  and  the  world's 
ornaments  will  lose  their  false  glitter  ;  our  hearts  will  cease  to  desire  them  with 
that  eager  covetousness  which  conceals  all  the  better  impulses  of  the  soul,  and  God 
will  be  able  to  do  for  us  all  the  deep  purposes  of  His  wsdom  and  His  love. 
(Arthtir  Brook.t.)  Repentance  of  the  Israelites  : — I.  God  is  not  able  to  exercise 
MERCY  TOWARDS  AN  IMPENITENT  TRANSGRESSOR.  He  Cannot  do  this,  because  it  would 
— 1.  Be  inconsistent  with  His  own  perfections.  2.  Be  ineffectual  for  the  happiness 
of  the  persons  themselves.  3.  Introduce  disorder  into  the  whole  universe.  II. 
"Where  humiliation  is  manifested,  mercy  may  be  expected.     This  appears  from — 

I.  The  very  mode  in  which  repentance  is  here  enjoined.  2.  The  experience  of 
penitents  in  all  ages.  Apphcation  :  1.  Consider  what  obstructions  you  have  laid 
in  the  way  of  your  own  happiness.  2.  Endeavour  instantly  to  remove  them.  (C 
Simon,  M.A.)  A  fashionable  sin: — The  house  of  prayer  is  a  poor  place  to 
exhibit  beads,  ribbons,  ruffles,  gewgaws,  and  trinkets.  The  evils  of  such  ex- 
travagance are  many.  It  keeps  people  from  worship,  when  they  have  not  apparel 
as  gorgeous  as  their  neighbours.  It  loads  the  poor  with  burdens  too  heavy  to  be 
borne  to  procure  fas^hionable  clothing.  It  leads  many  into  temptations,  debt,  dis- 
honesty, and  sin.  It  causes  many  a  poor  shop  girl  to  work  nearly  all  Saturday 
night,  that  some  customer's  fine  clothes  may  be  ready  for  the  Sunday  show.  It 
keeps  people  at  home  in  cloudy  or  stormy  weather,  when,  if  they  wore  plain  cloth- 
ing, they  could  defy  clouds  and  storms.  It  consumes  the  hours  in  dressing,  crimp- 
ing, and  fussing,  keeping  people  from  church,  and  wasting  time,  hindering  the 
reading  of  the  Scripture,  and  making  Sunday  a  day  of  folly.  It  makes  the  poor 
emulous,  malicious,  and  envious,  and  plants  many  a  bitter  thought  in  the  minds  of 
children  and  others,  when  they  see  their  neighbours  decked  in  finery — often  unpaid 
for — and  feel  that  people  are  respected,  not  for  their  integrity  of  character,  but  for 
the  fashion  of  their  clothes.  It  is  forbidden  in  God's  Word.  And  yet  we  seldom 
find  a  minister  that  dare  open  his  mouth  against  this  fashionable  sin.  Christian 
people  should  dress  plainly  before  the  Lord,  for  example's  sake  at  home  and  abroad, 
for  decency's  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  Christ.     {Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  9-11.  The  Lord  talked  with  Moses. — Speaking  to  God: — In  the  minds  of 
many  prayer  seems  to  differ  widely  from  other  forms  of  communication.  Not  per- 
ceiving any  tangible  object  of  address,  they  feel  as  if  to  pray  were  to  talk  with 
nothing.  "  How  can  you  pray  with  vigour  into  the  empty  air  ?  "  asked  a  candid 
doubter.  Even  Christians  sometimes  lack  the  sense  of  communion,  and  then 
prayer  is  scarcely  more  than  soliloquy  in  the  form  of  petition.  And  yet  speaking  to 
God  is  really  very  much  like  speaking  to  men.  Since  God  is  a  person,  address  to 
Him  must  conform  to  the  general  principles  of  personal  address.  I.  In  speaking 
to  God,  as  in  speaking  to  men,  we  must  address  the  invisible.  Converse  is  mental, 
not  physical.  The  form  you  see  is  not  the  man  you  talk  with.  We  speak  not  to 
the  ears  which  catch  the  words,  but  to  the  mind  which  perceives  the  thought.  A 
mere  lump  of  organized  clay  cannot  be  a  party  to  conversation.  If,  then,  one  asks, 
How  can  jou  pray  i)ito  empty  air  ?  we  may  reply  by  asking  :  How  can  you  talk  to 
a  clod  of  clay  ?  In  every  case,  whatever  direction  be  given  to  words  or  other  signals 
of  communion,  the  real  address  is  to  mind.  One  using  an  acoustic  tube  apparently 
speaks  to  the  mouth-piece  in  the  wall.  But  he  really  addresses  a  person  in  another 
room.  W^ords  are  usually  directed  towards  eyes  and  ears  because  through  these 
mind  is  reached.  So  prayer  seems  to  the  prayerless  as  speech  thrown  into  void 
space.     It  is  really  a  direct  address  to  the  Infinite  Mind  which  pervades  all  space. 

II.  In  speaking  to  God,  as  in  speaking  to  men,  we  not  only  address  the  invisible, 

but  THE  presence  OF  A  VISIBLE  FORM,  OR  SYMBOL  OF  PERSONALITY,  IS  UNNECESSARY.      The 

blind  communicate  without  seeing  a  form,  and  the  deaf  without  hearing  a  voice. 
We  may  speak  to  a  person  behind  a  wall  or  screen  if  only  assured  that  he  is  within 
call.  By  letter  we  address  friends  hundreds  of  miles  distant.  Thus  it  is  evident 
that  prayer  to  God  is  only  one  of  many  forms  of  address  to  mind  with  no  visible 
form  present.  We  only  need  to  know  that  the  mind  addressed  is  within  reach  by 
any  means  of  communication.     IH.  In  speaking  to  God,  as  in  speaking  to  men,  the 

ENJOYMENT  OF  COMMUNION  IS  VARIABLE,  AND  INCREASES  WITH  CUSTOM  AND  ACQUAINTANCE, 

Many  people  have  heard  of  God,  but  are  not  acquainted  with  Him.  They  know 
Him  only  by  repu'&,tion.  They  are  not  on  speaking  terms  with  Him.  Hence  they 
have  not  leariie^  to  eni'^y  ^lis  company.     They  do  not  love  to  pray.    But  let  them 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxni. 

reverently  and  sincerely  cultivate  an  acquaintance  with  God,  so  as  really  to  know 
Him,  and  they  will  delight  in  holy  communion.  (The  Study.)  Friendship  with 
God : — Mr.  Toller,  of  Kettering,  invited  a  company  to  meet  Robert  Hall.  Among 
the  guests  was  Andrew  Fuller,  who,  with  Toller,  had  previously  aecompani-  d  Hall 
in  a  forenoon  walk  in  the  country.  They  returned  together  at  the  dinner-hour  ; 
and  Hall  immediately  went  up  alone  to  his  own  chamber.  The  company  waited 
for  some  time,  but  he  did  not  appear.  At  length  a  messenger  was  sent  to  say  that 
dinner  was  ready.  But  as  the  servant  approached  the  chamber,  she  paused  and 
listened,  for  Hall  was  on  his  knees  pleading  with  God  in  prayer.  When  this  wa-t 
repeated  to  the  company,  Fuller  exclaimed:  "Don't  disturb  him  ;  he  is  with  his 
best  Friend."  Friendship  with  God: — Augustine,  in  his  "  Confessions,"  te'ls  a 
story,  which  he  heard  from  his  friend  Pontitiaiius,  to  the  following  effect.  Two 
courtiers  in  attendance  on  the  emperor,  who  was  then  witnessing  the  public  games, 
strolled  into  some  gardens,  and  entering  a  neighbouring  house,  wiiich  happened  to 
belong  to  a  Christian,  were  attracted  by  a  manuscript  life  of  the  hermit  Anthony. 
As  pastime,  one  of  them  began  to  read  it,  but  his  curiosity  soon  grew  into  a  deep 
conviction,  which  made  him  cry  out  to  his  friend  :  "  What  attainment  do  we  propose 
to  ourselves  so  great  as  to  be  the  intimate  friends  of  the  emperor  ?  and  even  when 
arrived  at,  how  unstable  and  full  of  peril  is  the  position  ?  But  here,  if  I  wish  to 
be  the  friend  of  God,  He  will  receive  me  immediately!  "  Covimnnion  with  God: — 
There  was  each  morning  during  his  first  sojourn  in  the  Soudan  one  half-hour 
during  which  there  lay  outside  Charles  George  Gordon's  tent  a  handkerchief,  and 
the  whole  camp  knew  the  full  significance  of  that  small  token,  and  most  religiously 
was  it  respi^cted  by  all  there,  whatever  was  their  colour,  creed,  or  business.  No 
foot  dared  to  enter  the  tent  so  guarded.  No  message,  however  pressing,  was  carried 
in.  Whatever  it  was,  of  life  or  death,  it  had  to  wait  until  the  guardian  signiil  was 
removed.     Every  one  knew  that  God  and  Gordon  were  alone  in  there  together. 

Ver.  14.  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee,  and  I  will  give  thee  rest. — God'a 
prenence  giving  rest : — This  is  a  word  in  season  to  every  one  who  is  weary.     I.  In 

WHAT  SENSE  HAS  GoD  8.UD,  "  My  PRESENCE  SHALL  GO  WITH  THEE  "  ?       He  is  present  tO 

the  believer  as  a  Friend  whose  love  has  been  accepted,  and  whose  conversation 
is  understood  with  all  the  intelligence  of  a  kindred  nature.  II.  In  what  sense 
DOES  THE  PRESENCE  OF  God  GIVE  REST?  1.  It  teuds  to  give  rest  from  the  terror 
incident  to  a  state  of  condemnation.  2.  It  gives  rest  from  the  anguish  which 
springs  from  a  discordant  nature.  3.  It  gives  rest  from  the  cravings  of  an  un- 
satisfied spirit.  4.  It  gives  rest  from  the  distraction  felt  amidst  uncongenial  scenes 
and  associations.  5.  It  gives  rest  from  the  disquietude  which  results  from  want  of 
human  sympathy.  6.  It  gives  rest  from  apprehensions  regarding  the  future.  7. 
The  presence  of  God  with  us  now  is  the  pledge  of  perfect  rest  in  the  next  life. 
(C.  Stanford,  D.D.)         The  pilgrimage  of  a  true  life  : — I.  The  path  of  a  true  life, 

1.  From  captivity  to  freedom.  2.  From  scarcity  to  plenty.  II.  The  companion  of 
A  true  life.  God's  guiding,  succouring,  and  protecting  superintendence.  III. 
The  destiny  of  a  true  life.  "Rest."  Not  inactivity.  Harmonious  activity  is 
the  destiny  of  the  good ;  activity  in  harmony  with  all  our  powers,  with  the  order  of 
the  universe,  and  with  the  will  of  God.  (Homilist.)  A  gracious  promise : — I. 
"  My  presence  shall  go  with  th»e."  1.  By  the  presence  of  God,  we  are  sometimes 
to  understand  His  es'sential  presence  or  ubiquity,  which  pervades  all  matter  and 
space,  and  without  which  nothing  could  exist.  2.  There  is  also  the  providential 
presence  of  God,  by  which  He  sees  the  wants,  and  provides  for  the  necessities  of 
His  nutnerous  family.  3.  By  the  presence  of  God  here  is  meant  His  gracious 
presence  which  He  mercifully  condescends  to  manifest  in  His  house,  and  to  reveal 
to  His  people.  4.  The  gracious  presence  of  God  is  essentially  necessary  to  His 
people,  in  order  to  show  them  the  right  way  and  enable  them  to  walk  therein.  5. 
The  gracious  presence  of  God  is  indispensable  to  His  people  to  purify  them,  and 
make  them  ready  for  the  heavenly  Canaan.  If  ever  we  be  made  "meet  to  be 
partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  ligbt,"  it  must  be  "  through  sanctifica- 
tion  of  the  Spirit,  and  belief  of  the  truth."  II.  "I  will  give  thee  rest."  1. 
The  rest  here  mentioned  has,  undoubtedly,  a  primary  reference  to  the  land  of 
Canaan,  in  which  the  people  of  Israel  rested,  after  the  toils,  dangers,  and  fatigue  of 
the  wilderness.     But  then,  there  is  something  more  implied  in  the  word  than  this. 

2.  The  people  of  God  enjoy  a  comparative  rest  in  this  present  world,  inasmuch  as 
they  are  delivered  from  the  power  and  pollution  of  sin,  and  possess  thot  kingdom 
of  grace  which  consists  of  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.    3. 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  EXODUS.  6C1 

But  there  still  remaineth  a  rest  for  them  heyond  the  confines  of  the  grave,  in  the 
participation  of  that  felicity  which  is  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Most  High. 
{B.  Bailey.)  God's  presence  and  rest: — I.  The  journey.  The  people  were  ia  a 
journeying  condition.  1.  They  had  come  from  Egypt.  A  land  of  toil  and 
oppresion  and  misery.  2.  They  were  journeying  in  the  wilderness.  Aland  of 
drought,  sterility,  and  dangers.  They  had  many  trials  and  enemies.  A  true  picture 
of  the  world  through  which  believers  are  travelling.  3.  They  were  travelling  to 
Canaan.  A  land  promised  to  their  fathers ;  a  land  of  freedom  and  rest,  of  plenty 
and  happiness.  II.  The  presence.  "  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee."  This 
presence  was— 1.  Divine.  2.  Visible.  Pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  pillar  of  fire  by 
night.  3.  Efficient.  Not  merely  Divine  recognition  and  observation,  but  with 
them  to  do  all  for  them  they  required.  4.  Continued.  "  When  flesh  and  heart 
fail,"  &c.  "  This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever,"  &c.  III.  The  rest.  "  And 
I  will  give  thee  rest."  1.  The  rest  of  triumph  after  the  conflicts  of  life.  2.  A  rest 
from  the  toils  of  wilderness  journeyiogs.  3.  A  rest  from  the  fears  and  dangers  of 
the  way.  4.  A  rest  from  the  sufferings  and  afflictions  of  life.  5.  A  rest  of  eternal 
and  heavenly  glory.  {J.  Burns,  D.I).)  God's  gracioits  jrresence  with  His  people  : 
— I.  The  nature  of  the  presence.  God's  gracious  presence  with  His  people  is 
more  than  His  natural  attribute  of  omnipresence.  II.  While,  however,  God  is 
constantly  present  with  His  own  people,  there  are  certain  times  i\  which  His 
presence  is  specially  manifest.  III.  The  mental  states  which  precede  the  gift 
or  God's  presence.  1 .  Earnest  prayer.  2.  The  spirit  of  mourning  and  humilia- 
tion. (D.  Macaulay,  M.A.)  God's  presence  promised; — I.  The  need  of  refuge 
IN  God  from  the  lives  of  others.  Even  in  human  society  at  its  best  the  heart  has 
no  safe  refuge.  II.  The  prayer  of  Moses  suggests  the  need  of  one  worn  by  well- 
doing. That  well-doing  brings  exhaustion  and  despondency  and  so  specially  needs 
God's  aid  is  a  fact  which  we  sometimes  forget.  III.  The  prayer  of  Moses  expressed 
the  need  of  one  weiohted  by  the  sense  of  responsibility.  He  had  a  great  work 
to  do.  He  who  feels  little  need  of  God  has  a  low  sense  of  personal  responsibility. 
But  he  who  faces  all  responsibility  and  tries  to  see  his  life  as  he  will  see  it  when 
the  end  of  all  things  has  come,  has  great  need  of  God.  To  him  life  becomes  a 
serious  thing.  For  help  he  will  often  "lift  up  his  eyes  unto  the  hills,"  and  will 
take  help  from  no  lower  source.  IV.  This  prayer  of  Moses  RECEivED  a  gracious 
answer.  It  was  the  vision  of  God.  (WillardG.  Sperry.)  God's  special  presence 
distinguishes   His   own  people : — I.  The    promised    presence    of    God  with    His 

people  ^\7LL,  60  long  AS  THEY  ARE  FAVOURED  WITH  IT,  PRODUCE  A  WIDE  DIFFERENCE 
AND  SEPARATION  BETWEEN  THEM  AND  ALL  OTHER    MEN.       When  God    COmeS  tO  dwcU   lu 

the  soul.  He  imparts  to  it  a  portion,  not  only  of  His  own  views,  but  of  His  own 
feelings.  He  not  only  illuminates  the  understanding  with  His  own  light,  but,  as 
an  apostle  expresses  it,  sheds  abroad  His  love  in  the  heart.  II.  That  in  propor- 
tion AS  God  WITHDRAWS  THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  HiS  PRESENCE  FROM  HiS  PEOPLE, 
THIS   DIFFERENCE   AND   SEPARATION     BETWEEN     THEM    AND    OTHER    MEN    WILL    DIMINISH. 

God  is  the  Sun  of  the  soul.  When  He  favours  it  with  His  presence  and  exerts 
upon  it  His  influence,  it  is  enlivened  and  enlightened,  and  made  to  glow  with  love, 
and  hope,  and  joy,  and  gratitude.  But  when  He  withdraws  and  suspends  His 
influences,  spiritual  darkness  and  coldness  are  the  consequence.  Then  it  is  night, 
it  is  winter  with  the  soul.  In  proportion  as  He  thus  withdraws  from  His  people, 
they  cease  to  view  Him  as  a  preseut  reality ;  they  cease  to  have  those  views,  and  to 
exercise  those  affections,  which  constitute  the  grand  essential  difference  between 
them  and  other  men.  Nor  is  this  all.  As  holy  affections  decline,  sinful  affections 
revive.  It  remains  only  to  make  a  suitable  improvement  of  the  subject.  1.  W-ith 
this  view,  permit  me,  in  the  first  place,  to  sav  to  each  individual  in  this  assembly. 
Do  you  know  experimentally  the  difference  between  the  presence  and  the  absence 
of  God?  2.  Let  me  improve  this  subject,  by  inquiring  whether  this  Church  now 
enjoys  the  peculiar  presence  of  God,  as  it  once  appeared  to  do  ?  (-E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
God's  presence  realized : — Since  God  is  everywhere,  in  what  sacred  and  peculiar 
sense  is  He  present  to  the  believing  heart?  "Lord,  how  is  it  that  Thou  dost 
manifest  Thyself  to  us,  as  Thou  dost  not  unto  the  world  ?  "  The  principle  on  which 
He  does  so  is  illustrated  by  some  of  the  common  facts  of  life.  A  man  is  present 
to  his  friend,  as  he  is  not  to  a  stranger,  though  he  may  be  at  the  same  moment 
speaking  to  both.  The  light  which  floods  the  landscape  with  a  deluge  of  beauty  is 
present  to  him  who  sees  it,  as  it  is  not  to  the  blind  man  walking  at  his  side. 
Music,  though  it  may  ripple  round  the  deafened  ear,  is  only  present  to  him  who 
hears  it.     The  discourse  of  the  naturalist  on  his  experiments,  of  the  scholar  on  hi3 

36 


562  TITE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

books,  of  the  mathematician  who  is  talking  with  raptures  on  the  beauties  of  a 
theorem,  will  bring  things  into  the  presence  of  initiated  listeners,  which  are  still 
remote  from  the  minds  of  those  in  the  very  same  company  who  have  no  sj-mpathy 
with  the  theme.     So,  "  two  women  may  be  grinding  at  a  mill  "  ;  "  two  men  may  be 
in  the  field";  one  a  believer,  the  other  an  unbeliever;  and  although  the  Great 
Spirit  is  near  to  them  both,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  He  is  present  to  the  one  as 
He  is  not  to  the  other ;  for,  in  the  case  of  the  believer,  the  causes  of  estrangement 
have  been  taken  away,  a  new  relation  exists,  a  new  life  has  been  born,  and  God  is 
present  as  a  Friend,  whose  love  has  been  accr-pted,  and  whose  conversation  is 
understood  w.th  all  the  intelligence  of  a  kindred  nature.     Everything  we  need  to 
secure  that  peace  which  the  world  cannot  give  is  secured  by  the  promise,  "  My 
presence  shall  go  with  thee,"  for  that  tranquil  presence  does  not  merely  attend  us,  it 
enters  the  very  soul,  and  sheds  its  benediction  there.     Plato  seemed  to  have  a 
glimpse  of  this  glorious  truth  when  he  said,  "  God  is  moi-e  inward  to  us  than  we 
are  to  ourselves."     What  was  to  Him  a  beautiful  speculation  is  to  us  an  inspiring 
reality  ;  for  we  are  the  "temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost."     He  dwells  within  us  as  a 
pitying,  purifying  friend,  to  kindle  celestial  light  in  our  darkness,  and  by  removing 
the  cause  of  discord,  and  restoring  the  equilibrium  of  the  soul,  to  give  ns  peace  at 
the  very  seat  of  life.     Ignatius,  from  his  eminent  devotion,  was  called  by  his  com- 
panions "  The  Godbeai'er  "  ;  and  when  Trajan  said  to  him,  "  Dost  thou  then  bear 
the  Crucified  One  in  thy  heart?"  his  reply  was,  "Even  so;  for  it  is  wiiUen,  '  I 
will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them,  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be 
My  people.'"     This  honour  have  all  the  saints,  yet  all  do  not  seem  to  be  fully 
conscious  of  it.     Only  let  us  feel  it ;  only  let  us  own  that  inward  authority,  and 
listen  to  that  inward  voice  ;  only  let  us  act  in  ol)edience  to  the  suggestions  of  that 
"  Power  that  worketh  within  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure,"  and  we 
shall  find  that  in  proportion  as  we  are  actuated  by  the  life  of  God  within  ns,  shall 
we  feel  "His  peace."    {G.  Stanford,  D.D.)       Choice  food  for  pilgrims  to  Canaan: — 
I.  What  auk  the  benefits  of  the  Divine  pbesf.nce  which  is  hebe  promised  ?     1. 
The  acknowledgment  of  the  people  as  being  peculiarly  the  Lord's.     2.  Preservation 
and  protection.     3.  Direction  and  guidance.     4.  Keal  worship  in  the  wilderness. 
What  is  bread,  what  is  wine,  and  what  is  the  table,  if  the  King  Himself  be  not 
there  ?     5.  Ci>mmunion  with   God.     He  is  always  ready  for  fellowship  with  His 
people.     II.  What  are  the  demands  of  this  presence  ?     1.  That  we  rely  upon  it. 
Away  with  fear  and  melancholy.    Treat  it  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and  be  filled  with 
rest.     2.  That  we  use  it.     Exercise  faith  in  God.     3.  Do  not  lose  it.     Oh,  how 
reverently,  cautiously,  jealously,  and  holily  ought  we  to  behave  ourselves  in  the 
presence  of  God  1     4.  Glorify  Him  all  that  you  possibly  can.    Seek  out  those  who 
have  lost  His  company,  and  go- and  cheer  them.    III.  What  is  the  choice  blessing 
which  IS  APPENDED  to  this  PRESENCE.     "  Ecst  " — both  now  and  hereafter.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        Atone:  yet  not  alone: — I  cannot  see  that  this  choice  of  Moses,  to 
walk  in  God's  way,  if  but  assured  of  God's  presence,  differs  in  anywise  from  the 
choice  which  that  people  was  called  on  to  make  at  that  moment,  and  which  God  is 
ever  pressing  upon  us  all.     In  considering  it  in  its  broad  human  aspect,  I  observe 
— I.  Herb  are  two  wats  on  which  the  choice   is  to  be  exercised — two  paths, 
which  VERY  plainly  DIVERGE.     It  is  the  old,  old  choice — worldiiness,  godliness — 
duty,  pleasure — God's  will,  self-will — the  passions  and  appetites  of  the  flesh  or  of 
the  mind,  the  convictions  of  conscience  and  the  Word  of  God.     II.  The  cry  of  the 
human  spirit  for  rest.     The  longing  of  man's  spirit  amid  all  these  strifes,  discords, 
and  confusions,  is  for  rest.     Nothing  can  eradicate  man's  conviction  that  strife  and 
discord  have  no  right  in  the  universe ;  that  they  are  abnormal ;  that  the  normal 
condition  of  things  and  beings  is  harmony,  and  that  harmony  is  the  music  of  rest, 
God  must  rest — rest  even  in  working ;  and  all  that  is  of  God  aud  from  God  has 
the  longing  and  the  tending  to  rest.    III.  The  Divine  assorance  which  was  to 
Moses,  and  should  be  to  us,  an  all-sufficient  warrant  to  leave  the  world  and 
the    pleasures   of   sin   and    commit   ourselves   to   the   desert   under   God's 

GUIDANCE,    AS    THE  PATH  TO  THE  HEAVENL'Y  BEST.      (J.  B.  BrOWn,  B.A.)  TwO  kiuds 

of  rest : — There  are  two  kinds  of  rest,  or  rather  what  goes  by  the  name  of  rest, 
within  reach  of  man.  The  secret  of  the  one  is,  escape  from  trouble ;  the  secret  of 
the  other  is,  entering  into  life.  Life  is  the  harmonious  balance  of  conflicting  forces, 
the  calm  control  of  all  opposite  powers.  Escape  from  trouble  is  not  permitted  to 
man,  though  he  thinks  it  is.  It  is  a  wonderful  feature  in  man's  constitution  that 
he  can  find  rest  only  in  his  highest,  in  the  full  culture  and  activity  of  all  his  powers. 
He  tries  to  rest  in  a  luxurious  home,  in  a  feverish  orgy,  on  a  wanton's  breast.    But 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  EXODUS.  663 

who  shall  paint  the  anguish  of  the  rest  of  the  wicked  ?  How  many  a  man  has  gone 
out  from  a  scene  of  uproarious  merriment,  to  blow  out  his  brains,  in  blank  despair  I 
There  is  no  rest  but  in  God.  Man  rests  only  in  the  fulness  of  his  existence,  in  the 
completeness  of  his  life.  Moses  found  no  rest  in  communion  with  earthly  natures, 
but  there  was  rest  for  him — it  bathed  his  soul  like  the  dewy  moonlight  the  flowers 
— when  he  entered  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil,  and  talked  "  of  things 
unspeakable  "  with  God.  Having  faith  in  the  Saviour's  power  and  love,  the  spirit 
rests  amid  the  severities  of  discipline,  yea,  sleeps  sometimes,  as  Jesus  did  while  the 
storm  was  highest ;  for  ever  when  the  danger  is  imminent,  and  the  foaming  surges 
are  parting  to  engulf  their  prey,  the  Divine  presence  within  shines  forth  around, 
and  immediately  there  is  a  great  calm,  and  the  spirit  rests  still.  (Ibid.)  The 
Divine  presence  : — I.  Help  comes  when  most  needed.  The  idolatry  of  Israel 
discouraged  Moses.  So  the  trials  which  bring  us  to  God  in  dependence  and 
prayer,  bring  the  Divine  presence  and  blessing  to  our  aid.  II.  The  desikh  of  the 
SPiRiTDAL  MIND  IS  THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD.  "  If  Tby  presence  go  not  with  me,  carry 
us  not  up  hither."  "  Leave  me  not,  neither  forsake  me,  0  God  of  my  salvation." 
III.  God  sdpplies  this  want.  "  His  name  shall  be  called  'God  with  us.'  "  "Lo, 
I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  "  He  shall  give  you  another 
Comforter  that  He  may  abide  with  you  for  ever."  The  experience  of  this  presence 
is  a  joy  to  be  sought  and  found  only  in  fidelity  to  God.  It  restrains  from  evil  and 
inspires  to  good  works.  It  gives  rest  from  the  uncertainties  suggested  by  unbelief 
and  doubt.  It  supplies  the  happiness  of  assurance  and  the  culmness  of  jjeace. 
{E.  W.  Warren,  D.D.)  God's  presence  our  r.st : — Rest  must  be  sought  deeper 

down  than  in  circumstances.  It  must  begin  at  the  centre  of  our  being,  and  in  its 
accord  with  the  being  of  God.  His  presence  must  be  welcome  to  us  and  accompany 
us,  or  rest  is  a  vain  dream.  I.  The  crRcuMSXANCEs  by  which  this  assurance  was 
CALLED  FORTH.  1.  Moses  was  a  very  lonely  man.  Perhaps  more  lonely  in  the 
midst  of  the  two  millions  of  people  whom  he  was  leading  as  a  tlock  than  he  had 
been  amid  the  solitudes  of  the  desert  tending  the  flock  of  Jethro.  The  very  con- 
trast between  his  lofty  enjoyment  of  Divine  communion  and  the  people,  always  set 
on  sensual  pleasure,  must  have  lent  intensitv  to  the  isolation  of  his  spirit,  which 
reared  itself  amid  their  sensual  longings,  as  the  peak  of  Susafeh  above  the  lower 
ranges  of  Sinai.  In  this  his  loneliness  he  has  been  compared  to  Elijah  at  Cherith 
or  on  Carmel ;  to  Paul  standing  aged  and  friendless  before  the  tribunal  of  Nero ; 
to  Alfred  when,  in  the  words  of  the  old  chronicler,  he  "  lived  an  unquiet  life  in 
the  woodlands  of  Somerset";  to  Columbus  when,  wit'i  his  great  secret  locked  in 
his  heart,  he  still  prosecuted  his  quest  over  the  weaiy  waste  of  waters.  Jesus  was 
the  most  lonely  man  that  ever  lived.  He  drank  the  cup  of  loneliness  to  its  dregs. 
And  Moses  said  unto  the  Lord,  "  See,  Thou  sayest  unto  me.  Bring  up  this  people : 
and  Thou  has  not  let  me  know  whom  Thou  wilt  send  with  me."  Note  that  last 
clause,  "whom  Thou  wilt  send  with  me."  Do  tbey  not  contain  a  sigh  for  a  com- 
rade, a  companion,  a  friend  in  whose  sympathy  and  judgment  he  might  confide. 
In  the  phvsical  world  we  are  told  that  in  the  most  solid  bodies  the  atoms  do  not 
touch  ;  and  how  often,  though  the  crowd  throngs  us,  we  are  not  conscious  that  any 
one  has  touched  us.  It  is  to  that  state  of  mind  that  the  assurance  of  the  text  is 
given.  2.  In  addition  to  this,  the  hosts  were  soon  to  leave  the  mountain  region  of 
Sinai,  with  which  Moses  had  been  familiar  during  his  shepherd  life,  in  order  to 
take  the  onward  road  through  unknown  deserts,  infested  by  daring  and  experienced 
foes.  Such  a  summons  to  arise  and  depart  is  often  sounding  with  its  bugle-call  in 
our  ears.  We  are  not  like  those  who  travel  by  the  metal  track  of  the  railroad,  on 
which  they  have  been  to  and  fro  every  day  for  years,  and  are  able  to  tell  exactly 
the  names  and  order  of  the  stations  ;  but  like  an  exploring  expedition  in  an  abso- 
lutely unknown  district,  and  even  the  leader,  as  he  leaves  his  hammock  in  the 
morning,  does  not  know  where  it  will  be  slung  at  night.  3.  Srtill  further  difficulties 
had  lately  arisen  in  connection  with  the  people's  transgression.  From  a  careful 
study  of  the  passage  it  would  seem  that  a  change  was  proposed  by  their  Almighty 
Friend.  Hitherto  He  had  gone  in  the  midst  of  them.  Now  He  avowed  His 
intention  of  substituting  an  angel  for  Himself,  lest  He  should  suddenly  consume  the 
people  because  of  their  stiff-neckedness  (chap,  xxxiii.  3).  But  now  it  seemed  likely 
some  sensible  diminution  of  the  evidence  of  the  Divine  presence  and  favour  was 
about  to  take  place ;  and  the  fear  of  this  stirred  the  soul  of  the  great  leader  to  its 
depths.  Are  there  not  times  with  many  of  us  when  we  have  reason  to  fear  that, 
in  consequence  of  some  sad  failure  or  sin  on  our  part,  the  Lord  may  be  obliged  to 
mthdraw  the  conscious  enjoyment  of  His  love  ?    Supposing  He  should  be  cpm- 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

pelled  to  leave  me  to  myself,  to  withdraw  His  tender  mercies,  to  shut  up  His  com- 
passions. Supposing  that  I  should  be  like  a  sledge  abandoned  in  Arctic  snows,  or 
a  sbip  abandoned  by  its  crew  in  mid-ocean.  II.  The  place  where  this  assurance 
WAS  GIVEN.  The  earlier  intercourse  between  the  servant,  faithful  in  all  bis  house, 
and  Him  who  had  appointed  him  seems  to  have  been  on  the  mountain  summit. 
But  after  the  outburst  of  the  people's  sin  a  change  was  made  which  did  not 
necessitate  such  prolonged  or  distant  absences  from  the  camp.  Indeed,  he  was 
absent  for  only  one  other  period  of  forty  days  till  the  time  of  his  death,  some  thirty- 
eight  years  afterwards  (chap,  xxxiv.  28).  During  the  prolonged  interview  which 
he  had  been  permitted  to  enjoy,  God  had  spoken  to  him  much  of  the  Tabernacle 
which  was  shortly  to  be  reared.  He  at  once  saw  tbe  blessedness  of  this  proximity 
of  the  shrine  for  worship  and  fellowship,  and  his  ardent  soul  seems  to  have  been 
unable  to  brook  delay.  It  was  no  longer  necessary  for  him  to  climb  to  the  moun- 
tain summit,  entrusted  with  errands  on  behalf  of  the  people,  or  eager  for  advice  in 
difficult  problems.  He  was  able  to  transact  all  necessary  business  by  going  out  to 
the  tent.  Thus  the  Lord  spake  with  Moses  face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaketh  unto 
his  friend ;  and  Moses  spake  to  his  Father,  who  is  in  secret,  with  the  freedom  of  a 
child.  And  as  the  people  beheld  that  wondrous  sight  of  God  stooping  to  commune 
with  man,  they  rose  up  and  worshipped,  every  man  at  his  tent  door.  It  was  as  if 
he  said,  Wilt  Thou  Thyself  be  my  Comrade  and  Companion,  my  Referee  in  diffi- 
culty, my  Adviser  in  perplexity,  my  Friend  in  solitude  ?  Thine  angels  are  strong 
and  fair  and  good,  but  none  of  them  will  suffice  me,  nothing  short  of  Thyself. 
Without  Thee,  it  were  better  for  me  to  relinquish  my  task  and  die;  but  with  Thee, 
no  difficulty  can  battle,  no  fear  alarm,  no  obstacle  deter.  And  God's  answer  came 
back  on  his  spirit  with  music  and  balm,  "  My  presence  shall  go  with  tbee,  and  I 
will  give  thee  rest."  Nothing  was  said  as  to  the  people.  But  faith  gets  bolder  aa 
it  mounts.  Each  answer  to  its  claims  makes  it  claim  more.  We  may  seriously 
question  whether  our  faith  is  of  the  right  quality  if  it  is  unable  to  compass  more 
in  its  hand  to-day  than  it  did  a  year  ago.  And,  therefore,  Moses  not  only  took  the 
assurance  of  the  Divine  presence  for  himself,  but  asked  that  it  be  extended  to 
include  the  people.  "  Wherein  now  shall  it  be  known  that  I  have  found  grace  in 
Thy  sight,  I  and  Thy  people  ?  Is  it  not  that  Thou  goest  with  us,  so  that  we  be 
eeparated,  I  and  Thy  people,  from  all  the  people  that  are  upon  the  face  of  the 
earth."  In  this  respect  also  he  was  successful.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  I 
will  do  this  thing  also  that  thou  hast  spoken,  for  thou  hast  found  grace  in  My  sight. 
There  are  moments  of  holy  intercourse  Ms-ith  God,  rapturous,  golden  moments,  in 
the  lives  of  all  His  servants ;  when  next  they  visit  us,  and  we  would  make  the 
most  of  their  brief,  bright,  rapturous  glow,  let  us  plend.  not  only  for  ourselves,  but 
for  others,  asking  for  them  an  equal  blessedness.  III.  The  blessedness  which 
THIS  assurance  GUARANTEED.  There  was,  first,  the  Divine  presence ;  and  there 
wns,  secondly,  the  promised  rest ;  not  the  rest  of  Canaan,  for  this  Moses  never 
saw,  but  a  deeper  and  more  blessed  inheritance,  which  may  be  the  portion  of  all 
faithful  souls.  But  at  their  heart  these  two  are  one.  The  Divine  presence  is  rest. 
Of  course  the  conscious  presence  of  God  with  us  is  only  possible  on  three  conditions. 
Firstly,  we  must  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light,  for  He  will  have  no  fellow- 
ship with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  or  torn  aside  to  go  with  us  on  any 
crooked  path  of  our  own  choosing.  Secondly,  we  must  recognize  that  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  goes  on  cleansing  us  from  all  sin,  not  only  that  which  we 
judge  and  confess,  but  that  also  which  is  only  seen  by  His  prue  and  holy  eyes. 
Thirdly,  we  must  claim  the  gracious  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  real  that 
presence,  which  is  too  subtle  for  the  eye  of  man,  unless  it  be  specially  enlightened. 
And,  above  all,  we  must  remember  that  for  us,  at  least,  that  presence  is  localized 
in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  For  us  there  is  no  attenuated  mist  of  presence,  though  a 
mist  of  light,  but  a  Person  in  whom  that  presence  is  made  real  and  touches  us.  1. 
God's  presence  is  rest  from  the  conscience  of  sin.  "  I  will  remember  their  sins  no 
more."  2.  God's  presence  is  rest  from  anxiety.  The  future  is  dim.  and  we  are 
apt  to  strain  our  eyes  as  we  peer  into  its  depths.  Now  we  are  elate  with  b'uilding 
castles  of  light,  and  again  we  are  immured  in  dungeons  of  foreboding.  We  can- 
not rest  tossed  to  and  fro  like  this,  but  when  we  can  look  from  the  mist  to  the  face 
of  our  Guide,  who  goes  with  us,  such  wisdom  and  kindness  mingle  there  that  we 
are  at  rest.  3.  God's  presence  gives  rest  to  our  intellect.  The  mind  of  man  turns 
sick  before  the  trifles  and  frivolities  with  which  men,  for  the  most  part,  seek  to 
satisfy  its  insatiable  appetite,  and  craves  eternal  truth,  and  this  alone  can  be  found 
in  God.     4.  God's  presence  is  rest  to  our  judgment.     This  regal  faculty  is  con- 


CHAP,  xxxiil]  exodus.  666 

stantly  being  called  into  play  to  select  out  of  one  or  two  paths  which  offer  them- 
selves that  which  we  should  follow.  It  is  left  for  Him  to  choose,  and  to  make 
known  His  choice,  whilst  the  soul  waits,  exercising  careful  thought  indeed,  but 
concentrating  its  whole  power  in  seeking  to  know  the  Divine  will.  5.  God's  pre 
Bence  is  rest  to  our  will.  The  will  of  the  self-life,  which  chafes  like  an  unquiet 
sea,  can  only  come  to  rest  in  the  will  of  God,  compelled  by  the  powerful  attraction 
of  His  near  presence,  just  as  we  might  conceive  of  a  body  passing  from  the  earth  to 
the  sun,  increasingly  losing  the  attraction  of  the  planet  as  it  feels  the  pull  of  the 
mighty  orb  of  day.  6.  God's  presence  is  rest  from  weariness.  There  is  in  each  of 
us  a  fund  of  natural  energy,  determined  largely  by  health  or  temperament,  or 
favourable  circumstances.  But  at  times  this  is  crushed  by  disappointment  and 
failure,  and  the  sense  of  its  inadequacy  for  some  great  task.  But  when  God  is 
near  it  falls  back  on  Him  like  a  tired  child  on  a  father's  strength,  and  is  at  rest. 
7.  God's  presence  is  rest  to  our  heart.  Who  is  there  that  does  not  pine  for  love? 
But  to  know  God,  to  love  God,  to  be  loved  by  God,  to  delight  in  God's  perpetual 
presence — this  is  rest.  I  have  a  vision  of  a  woodland  glade.  A  group  of  tired, 
frightened  children  are  cowering  around  the  bole  of  an  old  tree,  dropping  the 
fragile,  withered  flowers  from  their  hands  and  pinafores,  as  the  lirst  great  drops  of 
the  thunder  shower,  which  had  been  darkening  the  sky,  begin  to  fall.  They  have 
lost  their  way,  they  sob  bitterly,  and  crowd  together.  Suddenly  through  the  wood 
there  comes  a  quick  step,  beneath  which  the  twigs  crackle  and  break — father  has 
come,  and  as  he  cariies  some  in  his  strong  arms  through  the  storm  on  the  nearest 
track  for  home,  and  the  others  run  at  his  side,  they  have  learnt  that  there  is  a 
presence  which  is  rest.     (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.  15-17.  If  Thy  presence  go  not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence.  — The  with- 
drawal of  God's  presence  deprecated: — What  was  the  special  grace  desired  by  Moses 
in  these  memorable  words  ?  What  withdrawal  of  honour  and  privilege  was  threat- 
ened ?  If  we  had  only  this  chapter^^we  might  infer  that  the  diiierence  in  God's  future 
dealings  with  Israel  would  be,  that  He  would  henceforth  commit  them  to  the  care  of 
an  angel — some  messenger  of  His  providence  less  holy  than  Himself^and  that  the 
honour  and  privilege  which  His  personal  presence  implied  would  be  withdrawn 
(vers.  1-3).  Apart,  however,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  any  real 
difierence  between  God's  personal  and  instrumental  superintendence,  we  no  sooner 
turn  our  attention  to  the  account  of  His  proposed  dealings  with  Israel  before  they 
fell  into  the  idolatry  of  the  golden  calf,  than  we  find  that  the  handing  over  of  the 
comniHud  of  their  hosts  to  an  angel  could  not  have  been  the  change  of  treatment 
that  filled  Moses  with  such  dismay.  There  is  no  warrant  for  the  supposition  that 
the  angel  of  this  chapter  is  an  inferior  being  to  the  angel  of  the  Divine  presence 
spoken  of  in  chap,  xxxiii.  Indeed,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  when  God 
says,  "  Must  My  presence  [literally.  My  face]  go  with  thee,  that  I  may  give  thee 
rest  ?  "  the  reference  is  to  the  angel  in  whom  God's  name  was,  and  whose  visible 
symbol  was  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire.  And  of  course  the  reference  will  be  the 
same  in  Moses'  reply  :  "  If  Thy  presence  go  not,"  &c.  What,  then,  was  the  grace 
which  God  proposed  to  withdraw  from  Israel  ?  By  their  shameful  apostasy  after 
the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  glory  at  Sinai,  they  had  shown  that  the  grandest 
and  most  awful  signs  of  the  Divine  Majesty  could  easily  be  forgotten  ;  and  it  really 
seemed  that  the  presence  of  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  tire  in  their  midst  would  not, 
when  once  it  should  become  familiar,  deter  them  from  rebellion.  It  would  be  better 
not  to  give  them  the  opportunity  of  openly  insulting  the  Divine  Majesty.  A  grace 
which  failed  to  inspire  awe  would  inevitably  harden.  God  intimated,  therefore,  that 
the  angel  of  His  face,  instead  of  having  His  holy  tent  in  the  midst  of  the  tents  of  the 
congregation,  should  simply  go  before  them  to  prepare  their  way.  If,  now,  we  look  at 
chap.  xxix.  42-45,  we  shall  see  of  what  they  would  be  deprived  by  the  threatened 
change  in  God's  dealings.  Evidently  they  would  lose  the  sanctuary  which  was  to 
be  their  peculiar  glory.  To  the  nations  they  would  appear  a  people  that  not  only 
had  no  visible  God,  but  no  public  religious  rites.  Moses,  their  leader,  instead  of 
being  able  to  commune  with  God  and  ask  counsel  of  Him,  would  be  left  to  the 
guidance  of  his  own  sagacity.  The  Children  of  Israel  could  not  come  to  inquire  of 
God ;  no  atonement  could  be  carried  into  the  presence  of  His  mercy-seat ;  and  no 
blessing  could  be  spoken  by  the  priests,  conveying  peace  to  the  hearts  of  the  thou- 
sands of  Israel.  They  were  to  be  left  to  follow  their  own  desires  and  the  counsels 
of  their  own  hearts.  God  would  fill  them  with  their  own  ways.  Only  His  provi- 
dence engaged  to  direct  their  path  and  prepare  their  way  to  enter  the  Promised 


566  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxnr.' 


Land.  The  effect  of  this  terrible  reservation  in  the  conditions  on  which  God  par- 
doned their  apostasy,  would  have  resembled  the  effect  of  a  papal  interdict  in  medie- 
val times,  when  nations  were  denied  the  public  oflices  of  religion  and  shut  up  to  a 
life  almost  without  God  in  the  world.  It  was  this  terrible  prospect  that  called  forth 
Moses'  passionate  entreaty,  "  If  Thy  presence  go  not  with  us,  carry  us  not  up 
hence."  Better  that  we  should  remain  in  the  wilderness,  better  that  we  should  die 
where  we  are,  than  live  under  such  perpetual  discouragement,  so  manifestly  for- 
saken of  God  !  The  lesson  God  desired  to  teach  was  conveyed  by  the  mere  threaten- 
ing, and,  in  answer  to  the  intercession  of  Moses,  He  consents  to  the  construction 
and  erection  of  the  Sanctuary.  When  completed.  He  solemnly  took  possession  of 
it,  and  Jehovah's  sacred  tent  became  the  visible  centre  of  the  camp  of  Israel 
(chap.  xl.  34-38).  The  application  of  this  incident  is  obvious,  though,  since  we 
live  under  a  new  and  better  covenant,  we  are  in  a  somewhat  different  case  from  the 
children  of  Israel.  The  Shekinah  has  been  set  up  in  the  family  of  man,  and  can 
never  be  removed.  Immanuel,  God  with  us,  is  the  imperishable  possession  of  the 
human  family.  Atonement  for  the  sins  of  mankind  has  been  made ;  Divine  forgive- 
ness has  been  pronounced;  God  and  man  are  reconciled.  Ihe  question  for  us  is. 
Are  we  content  to  live  without  a  personal  sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  without 
tasting  for  ourselves  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  without  seeking  counsel  and  guide- 
ance  from  the  oracles  of  God  and  obtaining  answers  of  peace  to  our  prayers?  Does 
a  Ufe  of  practical  atheism  seem  to  us  something  too  terrible  to  be  endured  ?  Would 
an  interdict  of  our  sanctuary  services,  a  prohibition  laid  upon  private  prayer,  a 
withdrawal  of  Divine  promises,  fiU  us  with  heart-felt  dismay  ?  (E.  W.  Slialders, 
B.A.) 

Ver.  18.  Show  me  Thy  Glory. — Moses'  aspiration : — It  was  a  fine  aspiration, 
worthy  of  the  man  who  uttered  it,  and  the  occasion  on  which  he  spoke  it — "  Show 
me  Thy  glory."  It  was  the  reaching  out  of  a  darker  dispensation  after  gospel  light 
— the  reflections  wishing  to  lose  themselves  in  the  great  original.  It  was  a  man 
who  had  had  great  things  given  him,  and  therefore  asked  more.  He  had  had  law  ; 
he  had  had  presonce.  And  now  from  presence  he  mounts  up  to  the  only  thing  above 
it glory,  which  is  above  presence.  That  is  always  a  right  field  of  aspiration — some- 
thing beyond  the  present  attainment,  taking  the  mercy  given  as  stepping-stones  up 
higher.  Do  not  be  afraid  of  high  spiritual  ambition.  Cultivate  aspirations — they  are 
little  different  from  prayer — they  are  very  elevating.  I.  Let  tis  see  to  what  Moses 
AsriKED.  What  are  we  to  understand  by  "glory"?  Evidently  it  was  more  than 
law.  There  are  three  kinds  of  glory.  1.  There  is  the  glory  of  circumstances  that 
addresses  itself  to  the  senses— the  glory,  to  the  Christian,  of  gold  and  of  pearl,  the 
glory  of  surrounding  angels,  the  glory  of  beautiful  ministiations,  the  gloiy  of 
hght.  2.  Then  there  is  moral  glory — such  as  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  upon 
earth  (John  i.  14).  3.  The  glory  of  the  sense  or  consciousness  that  everything 
goes  back  to  the  Creator,  encircling  Him  with  His  own  proper  perfections,  the 
living  of  God  in  the  adoration,  gratitude,  and  service  of  His  creatures.  Moses  saw 
all  three.  His  prayer  had  an  answer  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  IL  It  was 
A  VERY  kemarkable  ANSWER  THAT  GoD  MADE  TO  HIM.  "  I  will  make  My  kinducss  " — 
goodness,  kindness,  they  are  the  same— "  My  kindness  pass  before  thee."  Kindness 
is  glory.  For  example,  glory  is  a  covenanted  thing,  but  the  only  covenanted  thing 
is  love.  I  do  not  read  of  other  things  covenanted  ;  but  God's  glory  must  be  in  His 
covenant,  therefore  it  is  God's  kindness.  The  glory  of  God  was  in  Jesus  Christ. 
That  was  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  God— that  is  kindness.  The  glory  of 
God  is  Himself.  Now  God  is  love — He  has  many  attributes,  but  they  meet  to  make 
love.  And  take  this  lesson.  Kindness  is  greatness,  goodness  is  glory.  Eeally,  it 
is  no  greatness,  it  is  no  glory  to  see  faults.  It  is  so  easy,  and  it  is  so  poor,  and  it  is 
so  mean  to  see  faults,  and  talk  of  faults.  But  it  is  great,  really  great,  intellectually 
great,  morally  great,  to  see  excellencies.  Kindness  is  glory — it  is  a  heavenly  truth 
— the  kindness  of  God  is  His  glory.  And  every  one  among  us  is  really  glorious  in 
proportion  as  he  is  kind.  And  the  one  of  kindest  judgments  and  kindest  words  has 
the  most  glory  because  he  is  nearest  to  the  hkeness  of  God.  (J.  Vavghan,  M.A.) 
The  influence  on  the  hitvian  mind  of  the  manifestation  of  God's  glory  : — Correct 
views  of  the  Divine  character  lie  at  the  foundation  of  true  rehgion.  The  attributes 
with  which  the  Divine  character  is  invested  have  also  a  powerful  influence  on  the 
mind.  Carrying  forward  the  same  train  of  thought,  we  shall  find  that  even  under 
the  full  light  of  the  system  of  Christianity,  the  peculiar  aspect  in  which  the  Divine 
character  is  viewed  will  greatly  modify  Christian  conduct  and  enjoyment.    Thus, 


CHAP,  xxxni.]  EXODUS.  S67 

upon  one  may  rest  a  sense  of  the  terrible  majesty  of  God.  On  another  may  rest 
a  sense  of  awe  and  veneration,  and  the  still  small  voice  seem  ever  to  sound  in  his 
ears,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God."  To  a  third  is  presented  most  vividly  the 
idea  of  holiness;  and  to  a  fourth,  the  idea,  the  triumphant  thought,  is,  "God  is 
love."  These  various  views  must  greatly  modify  our  mode  of  approach  before  God. 
I.  First,  then,  let  cs  consider  the  desike  op  Moses.  1.  Did  he  desire  to  behold 
some  grand  and  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Deity  ;  some  outward  form  or  shape 
to  represent  the  great  Jehovah  ?  WTiy  should  such  be  his  desire  ?  In  the  first 
place,  he  must  have  had  correct  views  of  the  Deity — he  must  have  known  that 
"God  is  a  Spirit."  Our  tendency  to  attach  form  to  the  Deity  arises  from  the 
limited  nature  of  our  faculties.  We  are  principally  influenced  by  external  qualities ; 
we  judge  by  them  ;  and  though  we  know  a  spirit  has  not  the  ordinary  qualities  of 
matter,  yet  we  can  form  no  distinct  conception  without  associating  some  of  them. 
But,  in  the  second  place,  why  should  he  desire  to  behold  such  external  displays  of 
glory  and  pow^er  ?  He  had  worshipped  at  the  burning  bush.  The  sea  had  divided 
at  his  approach ;  the  Divine  presence,  as  a  pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  of  fire  by  night, 
had  been  his  guide  and  protection  ;  and,  lastly,  he  had  stood  amidst  the  terrific 
scenes  of  Sinai  until  he  exclaimed,  "  I  do  exceedingly  fear  and  quake."  2.  May  he 
have  used  the  expression  in  the  sense  of  the  Psalmist  where  he  says,  "  The  heavens 
declare  the  glory  of  God  "  ;  desiring  to  understand  more  of  creative  power  and 
skill?  There  can  be  doubt  that  he  earnestly  desired  to  know  all  that  could  be 
known  in  reference  to  the  great  work  of  creation.  3.  Is  it  probable  that  he  desired 
to  behold  the  glory  of  God  as  manifested  in  his  past  government  of  the  world  ?  In 
this  he  had  already  been  instructed.  4.  Since,  then,  his  prayer  could  not  refer  to 
external  exhibitions  of  the  glory  of  the  Deity,  or  to  His  creative  power,  or  past 
government  of  the  world,  it  only  remains  for  us  to  turn  toward  the  future.  And  if 
we  view  the  circumstances  surrounding  him,  we  shall  see  that  by  his  prayer,  "  I 
beseech  Thee,  show  me  Thy  glory,"  he  desired  to  understand  the  merciful  purposes 
of  God  toward  the  Israelites,  and  through  them  to  the  world.  That  the  Almighty 
had  great  designs  in  view  in  reference  to  the  Israelites,  he  had  a  right  to  infer,  from 
what  had  already  been  done  for  them.  As  when  an  architect  collects  in  one  place 
a  vast  quantity  of  materials,  we  have  a  right  to  expect  the  erection  of  some  magni- 
ficent edifice ;  so,  from  previous  and  vast  preparation  on  the  part  of  the  Deity, 
some  event  of  momentous  importance  might  be  inferred.  Abraham  had  been  called 
from  his  native  land  and  from  among  his  kindred  ;  his  Fons  had  been  trained  under 
peculiar  circumstances.  What  connection  this  had  with  the  hope  of  a  Messiah ! 
Again,  the  circumstance  through  which  he  had  just  passed  were  of  a  most  singular 
character.  He  had  been  upon  the  sacred  mount.  Israel  had  said,  "  Let  not  God 
speak  with  us  "  ;  and  Moses  had  stood  as  their  representative  for  forty  days.  But 
this  very  people  who  had  heard  the  voice  of  God  had  turned  to  idolatry  at  the  foot 
of  the  mount.  Wbat  can  be  the  measure  of  that  mercy  which  is  preceded  by  the 
preparatory  act  of  the  pardon  of  two  millions  and  a  half  of  people  ?  His  longing 
soul  desires  to  know  all  the  purposes  of  God.  The  act  of  mercy,  just  witnessed, 
kindled  within  him  a  greater  love  for  God,  a  more  earnest  wish  to  fathom  the  depths 
of  His  goodness  ;  and,  with  the  vehemence  of  intense  desire,  he  cries  out,  "  I  be- 
seech Thee,  show  me  Thy  glory  " — grant  me  a  full  exhibition  of  Thy  mercy  and  Thy 
love.  II.  Let  us  next  consider  how  fab  this  desire  was  satisfied.  In  answer  to 
this  earnest  prayer,  the  Deity  replies,  "  I  will  make  all  My  goodness  pass  before 
thee,"  &c.  (chap.  v.  19).  Again  in  verses  21-23,  "  Behold  there  is  a  place  by  Me,  and 
thou  shalt  stand  upon  a  rock,"  &c.  And  again  it  is  said  in  chap,  xxxiv.  5-7, 
"  And  the  Lord  descended  in  the  cloud,  and  stood  with  him  there,  and  proclaimed 
the  name  of  the  Lord."  In  this  manifestation  of  the  Divine  character  to  Moses, 
a  few  particulars  may  be  noticed.  1.  He  proclaimed  the  name  of  the  Lord  before 
him.  This  probably  refers  to  such  a  general  view  of  the  Divine  administration  as 
exhibits  the  benevolence,  holiness,  and  justice  of  God,  intimately  blended  in  the 
government  of  man.  2.  He  made  all  His  goodness  pass  before  him.  This  was  probably 
a  prophetic  view  of  His  mercy  to  the  Israehtes  as  a  nation.  3.  He  showed  him  His 
administration  as  a  sovereign :  "  I  will  be  gracious  to  whom  I  will  be  gracious,  and 
I  will  show  mercy  on  whom  I  will  show  mercy."  Here  was  explained  the  difference 
of  the  treatment  of  Israel  and  Canaan.  4.  He  gave  him  a  prophetic  view  of  the 
mission  of  Christ.  This  is  indicated  in  the  expression,  "  Thou  shalt  see  My  back 
parts."  The  Hebrew  word  in  this  place  translated  "  back  parts,"  refers  to  time  as 
as  well  as  to  position.  And  many  able  commentators  and  critics  have  referred  this 
passage  to  the  incarnation  of  Christ.    The  revelation  appears  to  have  been  given 


569  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxin. 

to  Moses  to  strengthen  his  own  faith,  and  to  fit  him  for  those  arduous  duties  re- 
quired of  the  leader  of  such  a  people.  He  is  placed  in  the  "  cleft  of  the  rock,"  and 
befoie  him  passes,  as  though  spread  out  on  au  immense  canvass,  the  representa- 
tions of  the  future.  III.  We  can  now  inquire  why  his  petition  was  kot  folly 
GRANTED.  1.  From  what  has  been  already  expressed,  we  are  prepared  to  assume 
that  it  was  not  because  in  any  manifestation  tbere  would  be  such  terrific  grandeur 
as  should  destroy  human  existence.  For,  first,  Mo-es,  we  think,  did  not  pray  for 
external  manifestations.  These  could  be  but  symbols  ;  and,  however  vast  and  mag- 
nificent the  symbols  might  be,  they  never  could  adequately  represent  the  Divine 
character.  But,  secondly,  there  is  no  intimation  made,  as  we  think,  that  if  an  ex- 
hibition were  given,  it  would  be  one  of  terrific  majesty.  2.  The  language  employed 
in  the  text,  "  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face  ;  for  there  shall  no  man  see  Me  and  live," 
docs  not  express  any  reason  why  man  is  unable  to  bear  a  view  of  the  Deity.  It 
bimply  declares  the  fact  that  man  cannot  see  the  face  of  God.  3.  The  reason  why 
man  could  not  behold  this  and  live,  would  not  be  because  of  its  terror  or  majesty  ; 
but  because  the  view  of  the  riches  of  His  grace.  His  compassion  and  benevolence 
would  excite  emotions  of  reverence,  of  admiration,  of  love,  and  of  joy,  too  over- 
whelming for  humanity  to  bear.  Each  manifestation  of  the  beuevolence  of  God 
called  forth  songs  of  joy  and  ascriptions  of  praise  from  those  who  beheld  them  in 
ancient  times.  "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to 
Thy  word ;  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation."  Now  if,  in  these  cases,  a 
single  view  had  such  an  effect,  what  would  be  the  result  if  all  the  mercy  and  com- 
passion of  God,  in  its  unbounded  immensity  and  inexhaustible  fulness,  could,  at 
one  moment,  be  revealed  to  the  human  mind?  Humanity  could  not  bear  the 
vision.  To  support  this  view  we  may  reflect,  that  things  exciting  emotions,  even  of 
a  pleasurable  character,  may  extend  so  far  as  to  become  destructive,  and  that 
emotions  of  joy  may  in  thems^elves  destroy  life.  Light  is  pheasant,  it  spreads  a 
halo  of  beauty  and  glory  around  the  face  of  nature.  The  eye  is  never  satisfied  with 
the  revelations  which  are  made  through  it,-!  medium.  Yet  let  that  light,  which 
thus  spreads  beauty  around,  fall  upon  theeye  in  the  concentrated  form  of  arayfrom 
the  meridian  sun,  and  the  power  of  vision  is  impaired,  if  not  totally  destroyed.  The 
same  is  true  of  mental  emotion.  How  the  miud  operates  upon  the  body  we  cannot 
tell.  But  that  the  emotions  of  the  mind  do  affect  the  body  is  universally  ad- 
mitted. Death  from  surprise,  from  fright,  from  terror,  from  all  the  depressing  pas- 
sions, has  been  by  no  means  uncommon.  In  the  every-day  walks  of  life,  who  has 
not  known  of  a  case  like  this  ?  A  beloved  son  has  left  the  home  of  fond  parents 
to  tnigage  in  commercial  pursuits,  or  visit  some  distant  place.  By  various  causes 
his  stay  is  prolonged,  until  at  last  the  tidings  reach  his  parents  that  he  was  wrecked 
off  some  rocky  coast ;  or,  that  he  perished  in  a  fatal  epidemic.  They  mourn  for 
him  as  one  that  is  lost;  and  they  think  of  him  only  as  in  the  spirit  world.  Years 
pass  away,  and  though  strangely  preserved,  his  parents  are  not  aware  of  his  exist- 
ence. He  starts  for  home.  Already  he  stands  upon  the  hill  that  overlooks  the 
scenes  of  bis  boyhood ;  the  house,  and  trees,  and  shrubs,  all  stand  as  when  he  left ; 
his  heart  exults  at  the  thought  of  embracing  his  parents,  and,  thoughtle.ss  as  to 
consequerces,  he  hastily  approaches.  He  opens  the  door.  His  mother  gazes  at  him 
but  a  moment,  cries,  "  My  son,  my  son,"  throws  her  arms  fondly  around  his  neck, 
and  swoons  away  in  his  arms.  And  instances  have  occurred,  in  which,  from  that 
swoon,  there  has  been  no  recovery.  History  informs  us  that,  in  the  time  of  the 
great  South  Sea  speculation  in  England,  many,  overjoyed  by  their  success,  became 
insane.  At  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.,  a  number  of  the  nobility  were  so  affected 
by  the  recovery  of  their  titles  and  estates,  that  they  became  diseased,  and  in  a  short 
time  died.  Leo  X.,  one  of  the  most  renowned  occupants  of  the  Papal  chair,  was 
60  rejoiced  by  a  victory  somewhat  unexpectedly  gained  over  his  enemies,  that  he 
Bunk  beneath  the  excitement.  The  heir  of  Leibnitz,  the  celebrated  mathematician, 
on  finding  that  a  chest,  filled  as  he  supposed  with  paper,  contained  a  la ige  quantity 
of  gold,  became  so  excited  by  the  discovery,  that  he  was  seized  with  a  fatal  disease 
of  the  heart.  If  such,  then,  be  the  influence  of  joyful  emotions,  when  arising  from 
temporal  subject-,  will  the  effect  be  diminished  by  adding  the  revelation  of  the  un- 
seen and  eternal?  Can  emotions  excited  by  the  view  of  the  majesty,  holiness, 
wisdom,  and  compassion  of  the  eternal  Jehovah  be  less  strong  than  those  excited 
by  considering  a  small  portion  of  the  work  of  His  hands  ?  As  a  general  inference 
from  this  subject,  we  may  notice  what  a  sublime  view  is  thus  presented  of  the  reve- 
lation contained  in  the  Word  of  God.  1.  It  is  a  system  of  truth,  in  which,  directly 
or  indirectly,  each  separate  truth  leads  to  the  great  commanding  truth  of  the  being 


CHAP,  xxsm.]  EXODUS.  569 

and  attributes  of  God.  This  is  the  substance  of  revelation ;  God  displayed  in 
creation,  in  government,  and  in  mercy  to  man.  All  other  statements  are  but  as 
secondaries  revolving  around  their  primary.  The  greatest  minds  may  here  be  for 
ever  en-.'aged ;  but,  hke  the  parallel  lines  of  the  mathematician,  there  may  be 
eternal  approximation  without  perfect  attainment.  2.  But  revelation  is  not  merely 
a  system  of  sublime  truth.  It  is  truth  so  presented  as  to  affect  our  sensitive  nature.  It 
is  not  abstract  speculation  alone  that  is  employed  ;  our  affections,  our  sympathies,  are 
all  enlisted.  It  is  a  system  intended  to  operate  upon  man.  (1)  It  operates  by  pre- 
senting the  grand,  the  lofty,  the  majestic  attributes  of  the  Divine  character.  (2)  It 
operates  by  inspiring  man  with  what  is  teimed,  technically,  the  sympathic  emotion 
of  virtue.  The  performance  of  a  brave,  a  noble,  a  patriotic,  or  a  virtuous  act,  makes 
us  desire  to  do  the  same.  And  when  God  reveals  Himself  as  a  God  of  mercy,  em- 
ploying His  omnipotence  in  acts  of  compassion,  there  is  a  voice  that  whispers  to 
the  heart  through  every  such  manifestation,  "Be  ye  merciful,  even  as  I  am  merci- 
ful." (3)  It  operates  by  exciting  gratitude  and  joy  for  personal  salvation — for 
pardon,  for  regeneration,  and  for  adoption  into  the  family  of  the  Most  High. 
The  grateful  soul  is  ready  to  exclaim,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all 
His  benetits  toward  me  !  "  "  What  am  I,  and  what  is  my  Father's  house,"  that  I 
should  thus  be  the  subject  of  Divine  love  1  (4)  A  fourth  effect  of  such  revelation 
is,  that  the  soul  desires  to  dwell  constantly  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  In  Him  is 
all  fulness — the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  for  the  intellect,  of  grace  and 
mercy  for  the  soul.  The  world  diminishes  in  value  ;  eternity,  with  all  its  si^iritual 
blessedness,  gradually  unfolds  before  the  moral  vision.  3.  That  such  are  the 
effects  of  the  manifestation  of  God's  mercy,  we  are  further  warranted  in  believing  from 
the  history  of  distinguished  individuals.  Moses,  when  the  name  of  the  Lord  was 
proclaimed  before  him,  and  His  goodness  passed  before  him,  "  made  haste  and 
bowed  his  head  toward  the  earth  and  worshipped."  He  adored  and  reverenced. 
And  such  was  the  influence  of  the  manifestations  he  received,  that  his  face  shone 
with  such  glory  that  the  people  could  not  look  upon  him  unveiled  ;  or,  in  other 
words,  the  manifestations  of  goodness  and  of  glory  were  carried  to  the  utmost  possible 
point  at  which  his  usefulness  to  the  people  of  Israel  could  remain.  When  Daniel  was 
showed  in  prophetic  vision  the  return  of  the  captive  Jews,  and  when  the  succession 
of  empire  was  revealed,  and  things  that  should  happen  in  the  latter  days,  he  says, 
"  There  remained  no  strength  in  me  "  ;  and  before  he  was  able  to  hear  the  whole 
prediction  the  angel  touched  him  to  strengthen  him.  On  the  mount  of  transfigura- 
tion the  disciples  were  so  overwhelmed  that  "  they  knew  not  what  they  said,"  or 
did  not  fully  see  the  impropriety  of  their  request,  and  yet  were  so  enchanted  that 
they  said,  "  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here."  4.  What  an  unfailing  source  of 
comfort  and  joy  is  opened  for  the  Christian  in  the  revelation  which  God  hath  given  ! 
His  joy  is  not  of  this  world,  it  is  in  God.  The  world  may  change,  but  God  changeth 
not.  God's  glory  never  faileth — the  Christian's  spring  of  happiness  never  runs 
dry.  It  is  a  river  of  mercy,  a  river  of  grace,  and  he  that  drinketh  of  its  water  needs 
never  thirst  again  for  the  turbid  streams  of  earthly  joy.  5.  If  then  the  effect  of 
the  manifestation  of  God's  meicy  and  love  be  to  elevate,  to  ennoble,  and  to  rejoice 
the  heart  of  man,  why  should  not  our  minds  dwell  upon  the  Divine  character? 
Christianity  alone  offers  man  knowledge  and  joy  which  can  perfectly  fill  his  expan- 
sive capacity,  and  for  that  knowledge  and  that  grace  unceasing  effort  should  be 
made,  and  ceaseless  prayer  offered  to  the  Most  High.  For  this  we  may  come 
boldly  to  the  throne  of  gi-ace.  6.  And  if  the  limit  of  manifestation  of  mercy  is 
found  in  the  circumstances  of  the  creature  and  not  in  God,  who  shall  attempt  to  say 
what  glorious  enjoyment  awaits  the  celestial  citizen  ?  7.  Does  it  seem  unreasonable 
that  when  life  is  about  to  be  over,  the  Deity  should  withdraw  His  hand,  and  let  such 
a  view  of  His  glory  upon  the  mind,  that  the  physical  frame  shall  fall,  and  the  un- 
fettered sijirit  rise  to  the  fuU  enjoyment  of  beatific  love?  {31.  Simpson,  D.D.) 
Closes'  sitjht  of' God : — I.  The  request  of  man.  1.  That  man,  as  man,  naturally 
looks  for  some  special  display  of  the  Divine  presence  and  attributes.  2.  That  man, 
as  a  sinner,  needs  an  expression  of  God's  readiness  to  forgive.  II.  The  besponse 
OF  God.  1.  That  there  are  Umitations  to  a  full  revelation  of  His  glory.  (1) 
Human  capacity  and  preparation,  (a)  The  bodily  senses,  (b)  The  mind.  (2)  The 
Divine  pleasure.  2.  That  within  these  limitations  there  is  given  an  abundant 
revelation.  3.  That  the  brightest  feature  of  the  revelation  is  Divine  love.  4.  That 
from  what  we  now  behold,  we  are  led  to  expect  a  still  more  glorious  revelation  here- 
after. (B.  Dale,  M.A.)  "  Showme  Thy  glory  ".• — 1.  That  God  raises  human  society 
by  the  ministry  of  individual  men.    2.  That  the  individiial  man  by  whom  He  f  aises 


570  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiii. 

society,  He  qualifies  by  a  close  fellowship  with  Himself.  I.  The  profodndkst 
CRAVINGS  OF  THE  soul.  "  Show  me  Thy  glory."  1.  This  craving  explains  the 
existence  of  polytheism.  2.  This  craving  implies  a  supreme  existence.  3.  This 
craving  renders  the  prevalence  of  atheism  impossible.  4.  This  craving  reveals  the 
grand  distinction  of  human  nature.  II.  The  gkandest  revelations  of  God.  "I 
will  proclaim  the  name  of  the  Lord  before  thee."  1.  The  revelation  of  moral 
character.  2.  The  revelation  of  the  sublimest  moral  character.  (1)  Absolute  love. 
(2)  Compassionate  love.  (3)  Sovereign  love.  III.  The  necessary  io.noeance  op 
MAN.  "  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face,"  &c.  {Homilist.)  The  sublime  j^rayer  of 
Moses : — I.  The  immediate  circdmstances  which  preceded  the  prayer.  II.  The 
PRAYER  ITSELF.  "  Show  me  Thy  glory."  It  is  clear  from  the  context  that  he  meant, 
Unveil  Thyself  to  my  vision ;  let  me  see  Thy  essential  majesty  and  splendour;  remove 
all  obscurity  from  my  vision.  We  have  to  observe  here — 1.  The  imperfection  of  the 
best  saints.  Impeifect  in  knowledge  and  judgment ;  fallible  in  our  desires  and  devo- 
tions. 2.  The  beneficence  and  care  of  God  for  His  people.  Not  only  in  g  ving,  but  in 
withholding.  How  important  to  ask  according  to  Hie  will.  To  refer  all  to  His  wisdom 
and  love,  and  in  everything  to  be  able  to  say,  "He  hath  done  all  things  well." 
III.  The  answer  returned.  1.  The  literal  request  was  mercifully  refused.  2.  The 
spirit  of  the  prayer  was  graciously  answered.  Application  :  1.  Learn  the  lofty 
eminence  to  which  true  piety  exalts  a  man.  Intercourse  with  heaven.  2.  The 
true  breathings  of  the  devout  soul.  "  Show  me  Thy  glory."  Everything  else  is 
tinsel.  3.  A  perfect  acquaintance  with  God's  goodness  is  offered  us  in  the  gospel. 
"  Oh,  taste  and  see,"  &c.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  desire  to  fee  God's 
glory: — I.  What  is  meant  by  God's  glory,  which  the  Christian  desires  to  see? 
1.  It  is  glory,  in  His  gracious  conduct  to  sinners,  in  and  through  His  Son.  2.  It  is 
His  glory,  as  manifested  to  the  soul  in  pardoning  mercy  and  love.  3.  It  is  His 
glory,  as  manifested  to  the  soul,  making  him  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature  (2  Pet. 
i.  4).  II.  Where  does  the  heal  Christun  wish  to  see  the  glory  of  God  ?  1.  In 
all  His  ordinances  in  this  world,  especially  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints.  2.  Much 
of  God's  glory  is  here  to  be  seen.  The  glory  of  His  wisdom,  in  devising  the  schema 
of  redemption,  &c.  3.  How  glorious  is  the  discovery  here  made  of  His  justice  and 
holiness,  in  the  satisfaction  made  for  sin  by  the  death  of  His  Son.  4.  Here  Divine 
grace  is  to  be  seen  in  its  brightest  lustre.  In  its  (1)  freeness,  (2)  condescension,  (3) 
sovereignty,  (4)  riches.  5.  Here  is  displayed  the  glory  of  God's  faithfulness  to  His 
promises.  6.  The  Christian  desires  to  see  the  glory  of  God  above  (Phil.  i.  23 ;  2 
Cor.  V.  1,2).  III.  Why  DOES  the  Christun  desire  to  see  His  glory?  1.  He 
desires  to  see  it  in  His  ordinances  here  because  (1)  The  glory  of  God  is  transform- 
ing. (2)  It  if;  reviving.  2.  He  wishes  to  see  this  glory  in  heaven,  because  it  will 
there  be  (1)  most  clear  and  full ;  (2)  most  satisfying  ;  (3)  permanent  and  everlasting. 
(Theological  Sketchbook.)  The  presence  of  Christ : — I.  That  the  desires  of 
religion  intensify  with  its  growth.  1.  The  more  grace  Moses  found,  the  more 
he  sought.  2.  To  surfeit,  not  to  satisfy,  is  the  nature  of  earthly  good.  3.  But  here 
is  satisfaction  without  surfeit.  II.  That  Christ  is  the  medium  of  Divine  manifes- 
tation. 1.  The  rock  was  an  emblem  of  Christ.  2.  Here  God  revealed  Himself  to 
Moses.  3.  Man  in  Christ  sees  God  and  lives.  III.  That  Divine  visions  abb 
attended  with  gracious  effects.  1.  Life  is  imparted  by  them.  2.  Devotion  is 
kindled  by  them.  3.  Spiritual  vigour  is  imparted  by  them.  4.  Moral  influence  is 
gained  in  them.  {J.  A.  Macdonald,  M.A.)  Moses'  request,  and  God's  gracious 
jnomise: — I.  And  what  did  Moses  ask  fob?  What  was  the  desire  of  his  heart? 
His  prayer  was,  "  I  beseech  Thee,  show  me  Thy  glory."  But,  it  may  be  said,  had 
not  Moses,  on  various  occasions,  seen  the  glory  of  God  ?  The  more  of  these 
heavenly  treasures  we  possess,  the  more  highly  do  we  prize  them,  and  the  more 
eagerly  do  we  seek  for  an  increase.  These  are  things  that  never  deceive,  never  dis- 
appoint, never  cloy.  Our  experience  of  them  convinces  us  that  they  are  solid,  sub- 
stantial, satisfactory.  The  capacity  of  the  soul  is  expanded,  and  we  are  prepared 
for  larger  communications  of  purity  and  love.  And  they  who  have  made  the 
highest  attainments  in  the  Christian  hfe,  and  have  experienced  most  largely  the 
efficacy  of  the  Redeemer's  all-purifying  blood,  will  be  found  to  be  most  anxious  to 
rise  still    higher    in    spiritual    blessings.      II.    God's    reply    to    the    request 

PBEFEBRED    BY     MoSES.         III.     BuT     WE     HAVE     TO     OBSERVE,      THAT     THE     DISPLAYS 

OF  THE  Divine  goodness  are  made  only  according  to  God's  own  will.  And 
•what  is  the  character  of  those  to  whom  the  mercy  of  Jehovah  will  be  ex- 
tended?   The  penitent,  the  humble,  the  meek,  the  lowly.     IV.  We  observe, 

IBAX    TEEBE    ABS    GEBTAIN    DISPLAYS    OF    THE    DiVINB    OLOBYj    WHICH    ABE    SBANIEO 


CHAP,  xxxni.]  EXODUS.  571 

TO  God's  believing  people  here  below,  on  eakth.  A  partial,  indistinct,  and 
necessarily  defective  view — a  glimpse  at  the  heavenly  glory — a  transient  exhibition 
of  the  Divine  excellence.  And  even  before  this  was  granted  to  Moses,  a  certain  pro- 
cess was  necessary  :  he  must  be  duly  prei^ared.     V.  Still  it  most  be  granted, 

THAT  the    most    EMINENT  AND  MOST    DELIGHTFUL   DISPLAYS   OF    THE    DiVINE    GLORY   ARE 

RESERVED  FOR  THE  HEAVENLY  WORLD.  The  eye  of  the  disembodied  spirit  will  be 
strengthened  and  fitted  to  gaze,  with  a  steady  and  direct  view,  on  the  uncreated 
Sun.     (W.   P.  Burgess,  D.D.)  The  object  of  a  Christian's   desire  in  religious 

worship: — I.  When  Christians,  then,  desire  to  see  the  glory  of  God,  it  seems 
CHIEFLY  TO  IMPLY  THE  FOLLOWING  THINGS.  1.  They  dcsirc  to  SCO  the  glory  of  an 
eternal  independent  God ;  they  desire  to  see  the  only  living  and  true  God  in  His 
own  inherent  excellence  and  infinite  perfection.  (1)  That  there  is  in  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  an  infinite  and  endless  variety  even  for  the  employment  of  our 
intellectual  powers.  (2)  That  the  real  and  proper  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  is 
by  inward  and  spiritual  illumination.  2.  That  the  believer  desires  to  see  the  glory 
of  a  gracious  and  reconciled  God,  not  only  infinitely  glorious  in  Himself,  but 
infinitely  merciful  to  him.  This  view  ought  never  to  be  separated  from  the  former. 
Take  away  the  Divine  mercy,  and  the  lustre  of  His  other  perfections  is  too  strong 
for  us  to  behold.  3.  The  believer  desires  to  see  the  glory  of  God  as  an  all-sufficient 
God.  (1)  When  the  believer  sees  the  fulness  of  God,  then  his  anxiety,  and  dis- 
tressing fears  of  every  kind,  are  at  an  end.  Does  he  want  provision?  "  The  earth 
is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  Does  he  want  friends  ?  God  is  able  to 
make  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  (2)  I  shall  only  add  that  the  Divine 
aU-sufficiency  is  to  be  considered  as  regarding  our  sanctification  as  well  as  comfort. 
And  what  courage  does  he  derive  from  the  fulness  of  Divine  protection,  the  great- 
ness of  Divine  power,  and  the  faithfulness  of  the  Divine  promise !     II.  I  proceed 

now  TO  MAKE  SOME  PRACTICAL  IMPROVEMENT  OF  WHAT  HATH  BEEN  SAID.     And — 1.  Let  US 

admire  the  Divine  condescension  in  admitting  His  saints  to  a  discovery  of  His 
glory.  2.  Let  me  beseech  you  to  try  yourselves  whether  this  ever  hath  been 
your  attainment,  and  whether  it  is  your  sincere  desire.  3.  I  exhort  you,  in 
the  most  earnest  manner,  to  diligence  in  seeking  after  real  communion  with 
God  in  His  instituted  worship.  How  highly  are  we  favoured  with  light  and 
liberty !  How  little  are  many  sensible  of  their  privileges !  III.  I  conclude 
by  offering  to  those  who  would  see  the  glory  of  God  a  few  directions  as  to 
THE  BEST  PREPARATION  FOR  SUCH  A  DISCOVERY.  1.  If  you  would  scc  the  glory  of  God 
in  His  sanctuary,  be  serious  in  self-examination  and  the  renunciation  of  all  known 
sin.  Holiness  is  an  essential  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature;  and,  therefore.  He 
must  be  worshipped  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  2.  In  order  to  see  the  glory  of  God 
you  must  be  clothed  with  humility  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  8.  In  the  last  place ;  if  you 
desire  to  see  the  glory  of  God,  be  fervent  in  preparatory  prayer :  if  there  is  any 
blessing  that  requires  importunity  and  wrestling  with  God,  surely  this  high  and 
happy  privilege  of  communion  with  Him  in  His  house  must  be  of  that  kind.  (J. 
Witherspoun.)         The  desire  to  sec  God's  glory  : — I.  What  a  child  of  God  may  have 

HIS  EYE  TO  WHEN  DESIRING  TO  SEE    God'S  GLORY.       II.    WhERE  WOULD  A  SAINT  SEE  THE 

glory  OF  God  or  have  it  shown  to  him?  1.  In  many  ordinances  here.  Where 
God  records  His  name  (chap.  xx.  24).  (1)  The  glory  of  His  wisdom  in  contriving 
a  way  how  heaven  and  earth  might  be  reconciled,  notwithstanding  the  wide  breach 
made  by  sin ;  and  how  the  seeming  contrary  pleas  of  God's  attributes  might  be 
adjusted.  (2)  Here  Divine  grace  is  to  be  seen  in  its  brightest  lustre  :  in  its  freeness, 
pitying  us  without  merit  or  motive,  and  against  the  highest  provocation :  in  its 
condescension,  pitching  upon  us,  and  resolving  to  save  us,  how  unworthy  soever  : 
in  its  sovereignty,  passing  by  angels,  and  providing  a  Saviour  for  men :  in  its 
riches.  (8)  Here  is  displayed  the  glory  of  God's  faithfulness  to  His  promises,  and 
willingness  to  promote  His  people's  comfort.  2.  A  saint  desires  to  see  the  glory  of 
God  in  the  state  above,  and  without  need  of  these  present  ordinances,  even  in 
heaven.  III.  Why  ihey  desire  this.  1.  In  ordinances  here  they  desire  this. 
(1)  Because  the  glory  of  God  is  transforming.  (2)  The  glory  of  God  thus  shown  to 
His  people  is  most  reviving.  2.  And  as  to  heaven,  the  people  of  God  desire.  He 
■would  there  show  them  His  glory,  and  eminently — (I)  Because  it  will  be  most  clear 
and  full.  (2)  The  glory  to  be  revealed  above  will  be  most  satisfying.  (3)  The 
manifestation  there  made  will  be  permanent  and  everlasting.  IV.  This  desire 
THEY  ARE  TO  OFFER  UP  IN  PRAYER  TO  GoD.  Desirc  is  the  life  of  prayer,  and  this 
is  to  be  made  known  by  way  of  request  to  God.  1.  To  testify  our  value  for  it.  They 
that  esteem  it  a  favour  to  see  God's  glory,  are  to  show  this  by  seeking  after  it.    2 


572  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [csap.  xxxni. 

'Tis  God  only  that  can  show  us  His  glory,  and  make  us  to  see  it ;  that  can  fit  us  for 
the  favour,  and  then  vouclisafe  it  to  ns.  Is  this  glory  wont  to  be  revealed  and  dis- 
played in  ordinances  ?  make  this  your  end  in  attending  upon  them  to  see  it.  (1) 
Get  into  a  state  of  peace  and  reconciliation  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ;  such 
only  as  are  so  are  capable  of  beholding  His  glory.  (2)  Desire  and  pray  for  some 
sight  of  this  glory.  (D.  Wilcox.)  The  glory  of  God:— I.  Consider,  first.  His 
NATURAL  attributes.  1.  God  is  self-existent.  All  other  beings  are  created,  and 
created  by  Him.  He  is  the  great  Parent  of  existence.  2.  Eeflect  next  upon  His 
omnipresence.  He  fills  heaven  and  earth.  3.  Survey  His  power.  He  is  almighty 
and  can  do  everything.  He  can  act  without  agents  or  instruments.  All  other 
beings,  animate  or  inanimate,  are  but  His  instruments  to  fulfil  His  will.  4.  View, 
lastly,  the  immeasurable  extent  of  His  bounty.  All  creatures  in  earth  and  heaven 
are  replenished  out  of  the  storehouse  of  His  beneficence.  II.  But  the  glory  of  God 
derived  from  what  may  be  termed,  by  way  of  distinction.  His  natural  attributes,  is 
NOT  THE  HIGHEST  DEscuiPTioN  OF  His  GLORY,  Or  cven  that  in  which  it  properly 
consists.  1.  His  goodness.  The  goodness  of  God  is  that  attribute  by  which  all 
His  other  perfections  are  directed  to  the  best  possible  end.  It  is  that  which  renders 
His  wisdom,  power,  and  presence,  not  only  not  dangerous,  but  in  a  supreme  degree 
beneficial,  to  the  whole  creation.  2.  But  the  holiness  of  God  forms  another 
principal  feature  in  His  glory.  He  "  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  3.  But 
is  justice  also  a  modification  of  goodness?  Justice  towards  some  is  the  security  of 
all.  Were  an  indiscriminate  mercy  to  be  shown  to  all,  sin  would  prevail,  and  soon 
prostrate  the  mercy  of  God,  and  efface  from  the  universe  every  trace  of  His  good- 
ness. (</.  Venn,  M.A.)  The  glory  of  God  illustrated : — I.  Let  us  consider  what 
WE  ARE  TO  UNDERSTAND  DY  THE  GLORY  OF  GoD .  The  glory  of  any  moral  agent  is  that 
intrinsic  moral  excellence  which  renders  him  worthy  of  approbation  and  esteem. 
This  is  never  seated  in  the  understanding,  but  in  the  heart.  As  a  man  thinketh  in 
his  heart,  so  is  he  ;  and  as  God  thinketh  in  His  heart,  so  is  He.  God  is  love.  And 
in  this  consists  His  real,  intrinsic,  supreme,  moral  excellence  and  glory.  II.  To 
consider  what  is  to  be  understood  by  God's  displaying  all  His  goodness.  His 
promise  to  Moses  is  very  singular  and  very  significant.  "  I  will  make  all  My  good- 
ness pass  before  thee."  That  God  may  display  all  His  goodness,  He  must  do  two 
things.  1.  He  must  display  His  goodness  to  as  high  a  degree  as  possible.  2.  God's 
displaying  all  His  goodness  farther  implies  His  displaying  it  in  all  its  branches, 
and  agieeably  to  the  various  natures  and  characters  of  His  dependent  creatures. 
In  particular — (1)  It  implies  displaying  His  benevolence  towards  all  sensitive  natures. 
(2)  In  order  to  display  all  His  goodness,  God  must  display  His  complacency 
towards  all  holy  beings.  The  goodness  of  the  Deity  naturally  and  necessarily 
inclines  Him  to  love  goodness,  wherever  He  sees  it.  (3)  Another  branch  of  Divine 
goodness  is  grace  towards  the  guilty  and  ill-deserving.  Such  a  display  of  Divine 
grace  is  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  give  a  full  display  of  Divine  goodness.  It 
must  be  observed — (4)  That  another  branch  of  God's  goodness  is  distributive  justice, 
or  a  disposition  to  punish  impenitent  sinners  according  to  their  deeds.  III.  That 
God,  by  thus  displaying  all  His  goodness,  necessarily  displays  all  His  glory. 
But  the  truth  of  this  will  more  fully  appear  if  we  consider — 1.  That  when  God  dis- 
plays  all  His  goodness,  He  displays  all  His  moral  character.  The  Supreme  Being 
has  no  moral  excellence  but  what  is  included  in  His  goodness.  God  is  love  ;  all  His 
goodness  consists  in  love ;  all  His  love  lies  in  His  heart ;  and  His  heart  is  the  seat 
of  all  His  moral  excellence.  2.  When  God  displays  all  His  goodness,  He  necessarily 
displays  all  His  natural  as  well  as  moral  excellence.  But  all  these  natural  attributes 
derive  their  real  glory  from  His  goodness,  without  which  they  would  be  a  blemish 
rather  than  a  beauty  in  His  character.  Inferences:  1.  If  God  be  a  being  who 
possesses  and  displays  perfect  goodness,  then  the  religion  which  He  has  required  of 
mankind  is  a  reasonable  service.  2.  If  God  must  display  His  goodness  in  order  to 
display  His  glory,  then  by  seeking  His  own  glory  He  must  necessarily  seek  the  good 
of  His  creatures.  3.  If  God  cannot  display  all  His  glory  without  displaying  all  His 
goodness,  then  the  glory  of  God  required  the  existence  of  natural  and  moral  evil. 
All  the  goodness  of  God  in  all  its  branches  could  not  have  been  displayed  if  natural 
and  moral  evil  had  not  existed.  4.  If  the  supreme  glory  of  God  consists  in  His 
goodness,  then  those  who  love  any  part  of  His  character  must  necessarily  love  the 
whole.  5.  If  the  supreme  glory  of  God  consists  in  His  goodness,  then  those  who 
dislike  any  part  of  the  Divine  character  must  necessarily  disUke  the  whole.  6.  If 
the  goodness  of  God  forms  His  whole  moral  character,  then  those  who  do  not 
love  Him  supremely  must  necessarily  hate  Him  supremely.    7.  Does  the  glory  ol 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  EXODUS.  673 

God  consist  in  His  goodness,  or  in  His  feeling  properly  towards  all  His  creatures  of 
every  character  ?  8.  If  the  glory  of  God  consists  in  His  goodness,  then  a  clear  view 
of  His  goodness  would  destroy  all  the  false  hopes  of  sinners  respecting  their  good 
estate.  9.  If  the  glory  of  God  consists  in  His  goodness,  then  we  learn  why  sinners 
are  represented  as  blind  to  His  glory.  They  must  feel  as  He  does,  in  order  to  have 
a  moral  view  of  His  moral  excellence.  10.  If  God's  glory  essentially  consists  in  His 
goodness,  then  those  who  have  seen  His  real  glory  in  the  least  degree  will  desire  to 
see  more  and  more  of  it.  Tliis  appears  from  the  nature  of  spiritual  discoveries, 
which  afford  peculiar  satisfaction  to  those  to  whom  they  are  made.  {N.  Emmons, 
D.D.)         The  glory  not  to  be  revealed  : — I.  That  there  is  in  the  Divine  nature 

AN  interior   and    HIDDEN    GLORY    WHICH   CANNOT   BE    REVEAIiED.       Tbc  WOrd    glory  iS    a 

large  and  comprehensive  term,  including  all  that  is  ineffably  great  and  lovely  in  the 
Divine  essence.  This  glory  is  everywhere  revealed.  The  glory  of  God  is  not  to  be 
looked  upon  as  something  separate  and  distinct  from  His  nature;  but  rather  that 
nature  in  the  sum  and  fulness  of  its  perfection.  And  as  His  being  is  past  finding 
out,  so  is  His  glory  ahove  the  heavens.  II.  That  the  sublimest  manifestation 
WHICH  God  has  made  of  His  glory  is  in  connection  with  the  great  remediaxi 
scheme  of  man's  redemption.  It  matters  little  whether  we  conceive  of  God  as  light, 
or  life,  or  love.  It  is  the  light  which  reveals  the  life,  and  it  is  the  life  which 
expresses  itself  in  the  love.  If  God  be  love,  then  the  highest  manifestation  of  this 
love  must  be  regarded  as  the  highest  revelation  of  His  glory.  It  is  the  infinite 
and  ineiiable  benignity  of  the  Divine  nature  which  renders  its  glory  so  engaging 
and  attractive.  Light  is  blended  with  love — greatness  is  inseparable  from  good- 
ness— majesty  is  mellowed  and  modified  by  mercy.  The  Cross  exhibits  the  only 
ground  on  which  God  and  man  can  ever  meet.  If  the  Divinity  has  never  inhabited 
humanity,  man  can  never  rise  into  communion  with  God.  If  the  necessary  and 
all-effective  means  do  not  exist  for  impressing  His  image  upon  us  while  we  are 
on  the  earth,  we  can  never  see  His  face  in  heaven.  To  behold  His  glory  we  must 
partake  His  purity,  III.  That  notwithstanding  this  revelation  which  God  has 
made  of  Himself,  they  are  the  purer  and  the  loftier  spirits  amongst  us 
which  are  favoured  with  the  more  special  manifestations  of  Divine  globt. 
We  assert  it  without  fear  of  contradiction,  that  even  Nature  herself  will  withhold  all 
her  higher  and  more  glorious  revelations  unless  there  be  a  correspondence  or  like- 
ness between  her  own  spirit  and  the  spirit  of  those  who  would  commune  with  her. 
So  in  the  intercourse  between  mind  and  mind.  In  like  manner  God  never  reveals 
Himself  in  the  depth  of  His  g'.ory  to  any  man,  till  the  man  has  first  yielded  his 
whole  nature  to  the  purifying  and  transforming  power  of  the  Spirit,  and  has  thus 
taken  on  higher  degrees  of  moral  purity  and  perfection.  It  is  only  the  pure  in 
heart  that  can  see  God.  As  the  Jew  had  his  outward  ceremonial  ablutions,  the 
Christian  should  have  his  inward  spiritual  purifications.  An  external  reformation 
does  not  necessarily  imply  an  internal  renovation  ;  but  if  the  inner  man  is  renewed 
and  sanctified,  the  outer  man  must  exhibit  the  effects  of  the  change.  We  must  be 
cleansed  both  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  spirit.  IV.  That  these  deeper  manifesta- 
tions OF  Divine  glory  are   not   given  as  mere   fruitless  exhibitions,  but  to 

QUICKEN     the    love    AND   TO     INCREASE    THE     DEVOTEDNESS    OF    THOSE     TO    WHOM   THEY 

ARE  IMPARTED.  The  heart-throbs  of  piety  have  their  expression  in  a  life  of  en- 
lightened and  cheerful  activity.  We  have  each  a  work  to  do  in  the  world,  and  for 
God ;  and  to  do  it  as  the  work  of  God  ought  to  be  done,  we  need  not  only  the 
symbols  of  His  presence  and  love,  but  the  baptism  of  His  Spirit— the  plenitude  of 
light  and  the  fulness  of  grace.  V.  That  the  revelation  of  this  glory  in  the  world 

TO  COME  WILL  FOR  EVER  FIX  THE  ATTENTION,  AND  HEIGHTEN  THE  RAPTURE,  AND  ENERGIZE 

THE  ACTIVITY  OF  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  THAT  BLESSED  STATE.  The  brighter  and  the  fuller 
the  revelation,  the  more  profound  and  fixed  will  be  our  attention.  Every  thought 
will  be  captivated,  every  emotion  will  be  stirred,  and  the  jov  of  the  soul  will  rise 
into  rapture,  heightened  and  perpetuated  for  ever.  (R.  Ferguson,  LL.D.) 
The  festive  time  : — Come,  and  behold  in  this  communication,  asked  for  and  obtained 
by  Moses — 1.  The  crown  of  the  Old  Covenant.  2.  The  mirror  of  the  New.  3.  The 
promise  and  prediction  that  God's  glory,  in  its  fulness,  would  in  future  be  revealed. 
1.  The  festive  shouts  that  Israel  raised  in  honour  of  the  idol  they  first  made  are 
silent  now,  and  the  avenging  sword,  at  Moses'  prayer,  is  now  averted  from  the 
nation's  head.  Only  three  thousand  sinners  have  endured  the  righteous  punishment 
deserved  by  many  more — by  nearly  all.  Moses  feels  himself,  at  last,  no  longer 
able  to  restrain  his  wish  for  further  light :  he  prays  the  Lord  to  show  whom  He 
will  send,  and  what  He  means  to  do  with  a  nation  that  is  still  His  own.     Moses 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

further  states,  most  positively,  that  he  would  prefer  to  go  no  farther,  than  remain 
without  the  guidance  of  the  Lord  Himself  ;  then,  filled  with  joy  and  with  astonish- 
ment, the  man  of  God  essays  to  take  one  further  step,  and  gives  expression  to  his 
heart's  wish  in  the  prayer,  "  Show  me  now  Tliy  glory."    Who  shall  determine  what 
it  was  that  Moses  understood,  and  felt,  and  wished,  when  he  employed  these  words? 
We  know,  of  course,  that  ere  this  time  he  had  seen  much  more  of  God's  glory  than 
all  other  men.     The  bush  that  burned,  and  yet  was  not  consumed ;  the  Red  Sea 
moved  out  from  its  bed ;    the  manna  rained  down  from  above ;    the   arid  rock 
changed  to  a  source  of  living  streams !     Alone,  upon  the  top  of  Sinai,  and  amidst 
most  dreadful  signs,  he  had  received  the  law  of  God  ;  moreover,  with  the  elders  of 
the  Israelites,  he  had  beheld  the  pavement  which  the  King  of  Israel  laid  for  the 
palace  wliere  He  sits  enthroned — what  seemed  transparent  sapphire-stone  (chap, 
xxiv.  9,   10).      What  more  is  it  that  this  insatiable,   this   high-minded   servant 
of  the  Lord  desires?     The  Lord  Himself  gives  answer  to  the  question,  when  He 
(ver.  20)   in  so  many  words  declares,  "My   face  cannot  be  seen."    That   is  to 
say,   Moses  has    hitherto  but  heard  the  voice  of    Him  that   spake   out  of  the 
cloud  ;  now  he  beseeches  that  the  veil  of  mystery  shall  be  removed,  and  that  he 
may  be  shown  the  face  of  God,  beaming  with  heavenly  light.     Say  not  that  this 
request  comes  from  a  narrow  mind ;  above  all,  do  not  say  that  it  is  unbecoming  and 
irreverent.     It  was  the  very  multitude  of  promises  which  he  had  just  received 
that  gave  him  all  the  greater  boldness  to  ask  more,  and  to  express  a  bold  desire 
that  long  had  slumbered  in  his  pious  soul.     Up  till  this  time  the  angels  had  been 
called  to  mediate  between  him  and  the  Lord ;     but  now  he  would  approach  the 
Lord  directly  and  immediately.     One  aspect  of  that  nature  Moses  has  already 
looked  upon,  when  he  received  the  law ;  but  he  thinks  there  are  still  other  aspects, 
hitherto  concealed  from  him,  and  his  spirit  cannot  rest  till  he  has  also  looked  on 
these.     It  certainly  may  be  impossible  to  gratify  the  wish  of   Moses   to  the  full. 
What  mortal  would  be  able  to  behold  the  face  of  God,  and  yet  not  be  immediately 
consumed  by  the  intensity  of  glory  there  revealed?   Nevertheless,  as  far  as  possible, 
at  least  the  spirit  of  this  pious  prayer  shall  be  observed,  though  Moses  shall  not 
find  it  literally  fulfilled.     Not  God's  face  in  itself,  but  only  the  last  fold  seen  in  His 
royal  mantle — such  is  the  most,  the  only  thing  that  He  can  show  to  any  creature 
upon  whom  He  will  confer  the  highest  privilege !     Thus  there  is  pointed  out  once 
more,  not  merely  the  unlawfulness,  but  also  the  absurdity  of  the  idolatry  of  which 
the  Israelites  had  just  been  guilty.     The  Lord  Himself,  by  His  free  grace,  seeks  to 
restore  the  broken  covenant,  and  to  reveal  Himself  towards  the  mediator  of  the  Old 
Covenant  not  merely  as  the  Great  Invisible,  but  as  a  God  in  whom  compassion 
flows.     Imagine  the  emotion  of  the  man  of  God,  and  how  he  must  have  watched 
tLroughout  the  sleepless  night  for  the  expected  hour !     On  Sinai,  at  the  bush, 
Moses  was  taught  to  view  Jehovah  as  the  Infinite  ;  at  the  giving  of  the  Law,  as  the 
God  of  spotlcj-s  holiness  ;  but  here,  moreover,  as  the  God  of  everlasting  mercy. 
This  revelation  forms  the  bond  by  which  God  joins  Himself  once  more  to  Israel; 
and  unto  Moses,  as  a  compensation  for  the  fact  that  his  most  earnest  prayer  has  not 
been  answered  to  the  letter,  there  is  promised  the  fulfilment  of  his  earlier  request — 
that  the  Lord  Himself  will  go  with  the  nation.     Moses  desires  to  see;  but  God 
desires,  above  all  things,  to  make  him  hear  and  follow  Him.     But  what  he  now 
hears  is  the  grandest  revelation  ever  made  by  God  under  the  Old  Economy.    Truly, 
there  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  Moses  tarries  other  forty  days  upon  the  mountain- 
top  in  heavenly  ecstasy;  and  that  his  countenance  beams  forth  with  heavenly 
glory,  when,  bearing  in  his  hands  two  tables  made  of  stone,  the  pledge  of  the 
renewal    of    God's  promises,  he  leaves  the   consecrated  ground.     Happy  Moses, 
unto  whom,  at  least  on  one  occasion,  it  was  granted,  even  on  this  side  of  the  grave, 
to  contemplate  to  such  a  large  extent  the  glory  of  the  Lord!      2.  Happy  Moses: 
are  these  words  found  on   your  lips   too?     Then  surely  you  will  joy  when  you 
remember  that  the  privilege,  accorded  in  those  days  to  him,  is  equally  attainable  by 
every  Christian  now.     Come,  give  us  youv  attention  still,  while,  in  the  revelation, 
viewed  already  as  the  crown  and  glory  of  the  Old  Economy,  we  also  let  you  see  the 
mirror  of  the  blessings  of  the  New.    The  glory  of  the  Lord  is  shown  us  in  another 
way,  but  with  no  less  of  clearness  than  before.     Is  this  too  strong  a  statement? 
Only  look  to  the  person  of  the  Eedeemer,  the  work  of  redemption,  the  guidance  of 
the  redeemed ;  and  then  see  whether  you  have  any  ground  for  feeling  envy  towards 
Moses  in  his  privilege.   "  Show  me  Thy  glory  !  "   It  was  more  than  a  mere  personal 
want  to  which  Moses  gave  expression  in  this  prayer.    It  was  the  wish  that  lived, 
consciously  or  unconsoioasly,  within  the  heart  of  multitudes,  in  whose  eyes  this 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  EXODUS.  676 

whole  earth,  with  all  its  glory,  was  too  poor  and  small  to  satisfy  the  deepest  wish 
felt  by  the  lonj^ing  heart.  Men  felt  that  God — yes,  God  Himself — must  needs 
appear  on  earth,  if  earth  were  to  become  a  gate  of  heaven.  "  Oh  that  Thou 
wouldst  rend  the  heavens,  that  Thou  wouldst  come  down,  that  the  mountains 
might  flow  at  Thy  presence  I  " — such  was  the  strong  expression  of  the  feeling  in  the 
prophet's  heart  (Isa.  Ixiv.  1).  And  lo!  the  heavens  did  open  when  the  fulness  of 
the  time  had  come :  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt  among  us ;  and  we 
beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father"  (John  i.  14).  He 
who  is  very  God  was  manifested  in  our  human  flesh :  but  what  is  here  shown  to 
Moses,  viz.,  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  God  is  Light,  God  is  Love — how  plainly  may  we 
read  this  in  the  Gospel,  as  if  written  there  in  heavenly  characters,  when  we  look  to 
the  revelation  of  God's  glory  in  the  Son  of  His  love  !  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at 
any  time :  the  only-begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath 
declared  Him  "  (John  i.  18).  How  God's  unspotted  holiness  beams  towards  you,  in 
Him  who  well  can  ask  a  friend  and  foe,  "Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of  sin?" 
(John  viii.  46)  who  always  sees  the  Father,  just  because  He  ever  does  what  is  well- 
pleasing  in  His  eyes;  who  prays  without  ceasing,  but  in  no  case  for  the  forgiveness 
of  His  own  sins;  and  who  awaits  His  being  glorified,  not  as  a  favour,  but  an 
undisputed  right !  And  the  love  of  God  : — but  where  shall  I  find  words  with  which 
I  may  describe  the  love  of  Christ,  Divine  in  origin  and  splendour,  but  a  splendour 
which  is  tempered  by  its  covering— a  lowly,  human  form?  But  that  glory  does 
not  shine  forth  from  His  works  alone,  nor  does  it  merely  manifest  itself  in  what  He 
says ;  it  beams  upon  us  from  the  splendour  seen  in  His  whole  mien.  And  that 
appearance,  too,  exhibits  as  calm  majesty  as  God  does  when  He  shows  Himself  to 
Moses  here :  He  does  not  cry,  nor  raise  His  voice,  nor  cause  it  to  be  heard  in  the 
streets ;  but  when  we  look  on  Him,  we  feel  like  Moses  when  the  cloud  passed  by 
before  his  eyes ;  surely  we  see  in  Him  more  than  the  hinder  portion  of  the  royal 
train — we  see  God's  greatness  in  the  face  of  Him  who  was  God  of  God  and  Light  of 
Light,  whereunto  no  man  can  approach,  but  who  has  yet  come  near  and  lived  in 
humble  sorvant-guise.  If  here  the  revelation  given  by  God  is  made  to  Moses  only, 
it  is  now,  in  Christ,  bestowed  upon  the  poorest  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  taught  to 
see  the  Father  in  the  Son.  If  here,  through  Moses,  God  reveals  His  nature  to  one 
single  people,  now  the  light  arises  over  all  the  nations  that  but  sat  in  the  darkness 
heretofore  ;  for  here,  "  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  uncircum- 
cision,  barbarian  nor  Scythian,  bond  nor  free,  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  all"  (Col.  iii. 
11).  And  how  much  more  impressively  that  voice  sounds  when  we  venture  on  a 
second  step,  and  meditate  on  God's  redeeming  work  !  What  is  the  sin  which,  in 
God's  eyes,  polluted  Israel,  compared  with  the  abominable  sins  which  stand  against 
a  whole  lost  world — against  you  and  me — before  the  God  of  unspotted  holiness? 
We  all  deserved  that  God  should  turn  away  His  friendly  countenance  from  us,  as 
from  that  people  ;  and  that  He  should  not  guide  us  by  an  angel,  but,  instead,  give 
us  the  portion  of  the  fallen  ones.  And  yet,  what  is  even  the  assurance  of  God's 
pity  and  His  grace  that  Moses  learned,  when  we  compare  it  with  the  matchless  fact 
that  the  Beloved  of  the  Father  dies  for  His  worst  enemies,  and  that  God  in  Him  not 
merely  shows  us  heaven  opened,  but  unlocks  to  us  the  Leaven  we  forfeited  ?  It  is 
just  here  especially  that  we,  no  less  than  Moses,  fail  in  finding  words  with  which 
we  can  express  our  thoughts;  but  this  we  feel,  ttiat,  louder  far  than  anywhere 
besides  on  earth,  the  voice  out  of  the  cloud  is  found  re-echoed  from  the  cross.  Now 
let  us  take  one  other  look  at  the  guidance  of  the  redeemed,  who,  like  Moses,  found 
favour  in  t))e  sight  of  God.  Does  it  need  much  to  show  that,  in  this  too,  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  is  seen  almost  at  every  step  ?  But  ye  who  are  the  Lord's  redeemed 
have  an  experience  that  speaks  more  strongly  still ;  for  not  merely  do  ye  live  by  His 
long  suffering,  but  ye  continue  in  His  favour  and  in  fellowship  with  Him ;  and  ye 
learn  by  experience,  like  Moses,  that  He  never  puis  to  shame  or  pours  contempt 
upon  the  humble  prayer  of  faith.  And  surely  you,  too,  know  full  many  a  spot,  as 
Moses  did  the  crevice  in  the  rock,  where  you  sit  gladly  down,  there  to  review  the 
way  by  which  the  Lord,  in  His  eternal  faithfulness,  has  thus  far  been  conducting 
you?  I  hear  you  sav  already  that  the  sum  of  your  inquiries  is  conaprised  in  this  : 
the  voice  out  of  the  cloud  has  been  the  voice  addressed  to  me  through  all  my  life  on 
earth !  3.  The  festive  time  of  Moses'  life  becomes,  lastly,  to  us  a  prophecy  of  the 
future  revelation  of  God's  eternal  glory.  When  you,  like  Moses,  must  depart,  you 
should  not  fail  in  making  the  acknowledgment  that  you  have  seen,  at  least  in  some 
degree,  the  glory  of  the  L.ord.  But  that  something,  though  we  had  the  power  to 
multiply  it  even  n  f  c'v-nrd-fold,  what  is  it  when  compared  with  the  far  greater,  tho 


576  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLTJSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxin. 

entire  amount  of  what  believing  hearts  desire?  Our  deepest  need,  our  highest 
blessedness  is,  not  to  hear  the  voice  of  God,  but  to  behold  the  Lord  Himself ;  but 
that  IS  just  the  very  wish  denied  us  here  on  earth,  even  as  in  Moses'  case.  Nay, 
more ;  we  do  not  even  stand,  like  Moses,  on  the  top ;  we  dwell,  like  Israel,  scattered 
in  tents  at  the  foot  of  the  mount  of  God's  glory.  "  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight  " : 
such  is  the  motto  of  the  New  as  well  as  of  the  Old  Economy  ;  and  it  is  well  for  ns 
that  this  grand  principle  is  never  modified.  How  should  we  ever  be  prepared  for 
heaven  if,  in  this  life,  the  school  of  faith  were  now  already  closed?  And  what 
surprise  of  pleasure  could  tbe  future  bring  ns,  if  this  day  or  yesterday  belield  each 
enigma  sufhciently  explained  ?  "  How  very  little  after  all  is  it  that  I  have  seen  ! " 
must  Moses  frequently  have  said  when  he  looked  back  upon  that  morning.  We 
hope  for  the  Falvation  of  the  Lord,  but  how  wide  the  difference  between  the  living 
hope  and  the  desired  enjoyment  1  We  have  moments  of  presentiment,  of  spiritual 
intercourse,  of  (I  might  almost  say)  immediate  contact  between  the  Eternhl  Spiiit 
and  our  own  ;  and  at  such  times  a  voice  comes  whispering,  "  Thus  shalt  thou  see 
hereafter."  Yet  something  always  intervenes  between  this  heart  of  ours  and  God  ; 
He  lays  a  covering  hand  upon  the  eyes  of  His  most  faithful  worshippers,  that  they 
may  not  yet  fully  see  the  truth  ;  nevertheless,  they  make  their  own  conjectures  with 
regard  to  it,  they  constantly  draw  nearer  it,  and  almost  seem  to  grasp  it  with  Iheir 
hands  while  they  engage  in  prayer.  So  i^  it  here  ;  so  must  it  be  on  euth  ;  but  so 
it  will  not  always  be.  With  God's  hand  laid  upon  our  eyes,  we  grope  along  for 
days  or  years  in  deepest  gloom  until  we  reach  death's  vale,  .  .  .  then  the  Ijord 
passes  by  before  us,  while  tbe  chilly  breath  of  him  who  is  the  King  of  Terrors  blows 
upon  our  face.  "  Show  me  now  Tby  glory  "  :  thus  faith  entreats  with  almost 
faltering  lips ;  and  never,  God  be  thanked,  did  Heaven  continue  silent  at  the  Inst 
prayer  breathed  on  earth.  The  Lord,  as  it  were,  makes  all  His  goodness  pass  once 
more  before  His  dying  friends,  since  "  He  is  truly  gracious  towards  those  to  whom 
He  is  gracious."  More  closely  ihan  at  any  time  before  does  He  approach,  while  He 
proclaims  His  name  before  us,  .  .  .  then  He  lifts  His  covering  hand  from  oB  our 
eyes,  and  lo,  we  see  1  Come,  follow  me  a  little  longer,  while,  in  closing,  we 
address  three  questions  to  your  heart  and  conscience.  1.  Have  you,  too,  ever 
yet  desired  what  Moses  sought  so  eagerly?  Ah  !  if  each  one  of  you  were  plainly 
asked.  What  is  your  chief  desire?  how  many,  nay,  how  few.  Lord,  could  lay 
their  hand  upon  their  heart  and  say,  I  desire  nothing  more  earnestly  than  living, 
personal  communion  with  God !  Perhaps,  indeed,  an  evanescent  wish  for  something 
higher,  better,  may  not  be  unknown  to  many  here,  especially  when  earthly  things 
bring  disappointment,  and  the  future  is  concealed  from  sight.  And  when  some- 
times— although,  of  course,  we  are  unwilling  to  beUeve  this  true  of  every  one  of 
you — the  soul's  necessities  assert  themselves,  and  that  soul  has  begun  to  cry  for 
God,  oh,  what  a  constant  tendency  there  is  to  seek  peace  where  it  cannot  possibly 
be  found ;  how  every  kind  of  artifice  is  tried  to  smother  heart  and  conscience  whea 
they  cry ;  how  frequently,  Uke  Israel  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  we  sit  down  smitten, 
chastised,  and  stripped  of  all  that  formerly  adorned  us,  but  without  true 
penitence,  without  true  longing  after  God  1  2.  Have  you,  too,  already  seen 
what  Moses  saw?  There  is  no  doubt  of  that,  if  you  have  really,  by  faith, 
beheld  the  Christ  of  God;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  how  many  are  there  here 
at  whom  the  Lord  can  ask,  as  once  at  Philip,  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  with 
you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  Me?  "  Or  are  there  not  those  who  are  carried 
off  by  a  most  fatal  spirit  of  the  times,  and  who  will  not  believe  what  they  do  not 
first  understand  ?  If  you  indeed  desire  that  such  a  witness  shall  apply  at  least  to 
you,  do  not  forget  that  you,  like  Moses,  must  especially  concern  yourself  with  these 
three  things — a  clear  eye,  a  pure  heart,  and  constant  prayer.  The  eye  of  faith  is 
the  organ  of  the  soul,  by  which  we  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  Christ ;  and  He 
Himself  must  open  that  for  us.  One  little  speck  of  dust  may  cause  such  floods  of 
tears  as  to  conceal  the  sun  from  you ;  the  dust  of  earth  but  hurts  the  eye  that  would 
behold  the  glory  of  the  Lord  !  Oh,  how  much  of  the  carnal  still  remains  in  us  to 
be  destroyed,  in  order  that  the  spirit  may  be  ti  uly  fit  for  even  the  least  amount  of 
living  fellowship  with  God  1  Like  Moses,  keep  that  festive  season  of  your  inner  life 
in  constant  memory;  and  if  Heaven  hears  your  thanksgiving,  let  earth  enjoy  its 
fruits!  3.  Have  you  already  done  what  Moses  did?  The  sequel  of  the  histojy 
informs  you  of  the  earlier,  but  also  of  the  later  influence  of  what  was  now  revealed. 
Bowing  in  deepest  reverence,  and  well  assured  that  he  has  found  grace  in  the  sight 
of  God,  the  mediator  of  the  Old  Covenant  repeats  the  prayer,  "Let  the  Lord,  I 
beseech  thee,  go  among  us,  for  this  is  a  stiff-necked  people ;  and  pardon  eur  iniquity 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  EXODUS.  S^ 

and  our  sin,  and  take  us  for  Thine  inheritance  "  (chap,  xxxiv.  9).  Oh,  What  a 
glorious,  but  also  blessed,  calling  to  be  like  the  man  of  God  in  this  point  too  !  Does 
it  not  strike  you  how,  in  pleading  here  for  Israel,  he  does  not  speak  of  their  sins,  but 
of  ours,  and  puts  himself  upon  a  level  with  those  rebels  ?  Now,  it  is  true,  we  mast, 
like  him,  descend  the  mount  and  enter  the  dark  vale ;  but  what  is  it  that  we  can 
need,  if  but  we  have  the  Lord  with  us,  and  our  whole  nature,  like  His  shining  face, 
gives  evidence  of  our  close,  friendly  intercourse  with  God  ?  Even  as  He  veiled  that 
strange,  mysterious  lustre  from  the  eyes  of  Israel,  we  too  must  often  hide,  from 
an  unholy  world,  the  blessed  mystery  of  our  own  inner  life  ;  but  wben  we  go  into 
the  solitude,  and  tbere  approach  God's  throne  of  grace,  how  priceless  is  this 
privilege,  that  we  believers  may,  like  Moses,  cast  off  every  covering,  and  then  find 
our  refreshing  in  His  kindly  light.  (/.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  A  daring 
prayer : — It  was  a  daring  prayer  offered  by  Augustine  when  he  said,  "  Lord,  hast 
Thou  declared  that  no  man  shall  see  Thy  face  and  live  ? — then  let  me  die,  that  I 
may  see  Thee  1  " 

Ver.  19.  I  will  be  gracious. — Election  no  discouragement  to  seeking  sonis  : — 
Because  God  is  the  Maker,  and  Creator,  and  Sustainer  of  all  thmgs,  He  has  a  right 
to  do  as  He  wills  with  all  His  works.  I.  Let  us  begin  with  this  assertion,  which  we 
are  absolutely  sure  is  correct :  this  doctkine  does  not  oppose  any  comfort  derived 
FROM  OTHER  ScRiPTtJKAii  TRUTHS.  There  is  Dot  the  slightest  shadow  of  a  conflict 
between  God's  sovereignty  and  God's  goodness.  He  may  be  a  sovereign,  and  yet  it 
may  be  absolutely  certain  that  He  will  always  act  in  the  way  of  goodness  and  love. 
It  is  true  tbat  He  will  do  as  He  wills  ;  and  yet  it  is  quite  certain  that  He  always  wills 
to  do  that  which,  in  the  widest  view  of  it,  is  good  and  gracious.  II.  That  this 
DOCTRINE  HAS  A  MOST  SALOTARY  EFFECT  DPON  SINNERS.  To^  the  awakened  siuucr, 
next  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  the  doctrine  of  distinguishing  grace  is  perhaps  the 
most  fraught  with  blessings  and  comfort.  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  doctrine  of  elec- 
tion, applied  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  strikes  dead  for  ever  all  the  efforts  of  the  flesh. 
2.  Again,  this  doctrine  gives  the  greatest  hope  to  the  really  awakened  sinner. 
3  Moreover,  do  not  you  see  how  the  doctrine  of  election  comforts  the  sinner  in  the 
matter  of  power.  His  complaint  is,  "I  find  I  have  no  power  to  believe  ;  I  have  no 
spiritual  power  of  any  kind."  Election  stoops  down  and  whispers  in  his  ear — 
"  But  if  God  wills  to  save  you.  He  gives  the  power,  gives  the  life,  and  gives  the 
grace  ;  and  therefore  since  He  has  given  that  power  and  might  to  others  as  weak  as 
you,  why  not  to  you  ?  Have  courage,  look  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  and  live."  And 
oh  !  what  emotions  of  gratitude,  what  throbbings  of  love  does  this  doctrine  cause  in 
human  hearts.  I  wanted  to  have  said  a  word  as  to  the  effect  of  this  gospel  upon 
incorrigible  sinners.  If  you  are  ever  to  be  pardoned,  God  must  do  it.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  Moral  glory  : — How  precious  is  the  thought  suggested  by  this — that 
when  God  is  seen  to  be  most  good  to  His  creatures.  He  is  then  seen  to  be  most 
glorious  in  the  universe  ;  that  the  glory  and  the  goodness  of  God  are  so  connected 
together  that  where  the  one  is  most  revealed,  the  other  shines  in  its  richest 
splendour.  Not  power  in  creating,  not  justice  in  punishing,  but  goodness  in 
saving,  sets  forth  most  the  glory  of  God.  Creation  is  the  mirror  of  His  power ; 
Sinai  is  the  pedestal  of  His  justice  ;  but  Calvary  is  the  scene  of  His  goodness,  and 
therefore  of  His  great  glory.  And  we  all  know  that  great  genius  may  make  us 
wonder,  great  riches  may  make  us  envy,  great  strength  may  startle  us ;  but  great 
goodness  rises  upon  the  soul  with  an  influence  like  the  sun  in  his  shining  light, 
making  us  love  as  well  as  admire,  and  reverence,  and  esteem.  Lost  as  man  is, 
goodness  is  still  most  impressive  on  the  heart  of  the  very  worst.  Even  with  all  our 
depravity,  who  does  not  admire  Howard,  the  philanthropist,  vastly  more  than 
Byron,  the  poet  ?  There  may  have  been  little  genius  in  Howard,  as  the  world  calls 
genius,  but  there  was  a  beneficence  that  went  into  the  retreats  of  fever,  into  the 
lairs  of  vice,  shut  its  eyes  to  monumental  remains  of  ancient  days,  and  opened  his 
heart  only  to  the  cry  of  them  that  were  appointed  to  die.  And  when  one  hears 
what  he  did,  and  what  he  dared  under  the  inspiration  of  goodness,  one  is  not  awed, 
but  charmed  and  delighted,  with  the  character  of  Howard.  But  when  we  see,  on 
the  other  hand,  great  genius — and  one  cannot  but  admire  such  a  genius  as  that 
gifted  nobleman  had — we  wonder  at  the  greatness  and  the  versatihty  of  intellect ; 
but  when  that  intellect  was  used  only  to  scathe,  and  to  wither,  and  to  blast,  we 
look  upon  it  in  the  same  way  as  upon  the  sirocco  in  the  desert,  we  are  rather 
terrified  at  it,  or  retreat  from  it,  or  would  rather  wish  we  should  not  see  it  at  all. 
But  how  complete  is  the  contrast  between  goodness  in  a  Howard,  and  mere  power 

37 


SIS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap,  xxmii 

in  a  Byron !  And  is  there  one  in  this  assembly  that  would  not  infinitely  rather  take 
the  example  of  Howard  as  his  model,  than  wish  the  power  of  Byion  to  be  hia 
possession  ?  But  this  is  in  the  human,  and  I  quote  it  in  the  human  only  to  show 
you  more  clearly  the  truth  I  am  trying  to  teach  ;  that  not  the  manifestation  of 
power,  not  the  manifestation  of  justice,  but  the  manifestation  of  goodness,  is  the 
most  impressive  on  the  heart.     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 

Vers.  20-23.  My  face  shall  not  be  seen. — God's  glory  must  he  veiled  from  human 
sight : — If  God  had  revealed  all  His  glory — if  He  had  not  put  the  shadow  of  His 
hand  upon  Moses,  if  He  had  not  revealed  merely  His  skirts,  as  it  were,  as  He  passed 
by — Moses  would  have  been  overwhelmed.  And  this  explains  to  you  what  is  often 
said  in  Scripture,  "  No  man  can  see  God  and  live," — not  because  God  would 
destroy  the  man,  but  because  the  glory  would  be  so  intense  that  it  would  overwhelmi 
him.  Moral  grandeur  may  be  overpowering,  and  we  learn  in  history  that  there  have 
been  cases  where  mental  emotion  has  struck  dead  the  physical  economy.  A  celebrated. 
American  astronomer  was  watching  the  transit  of  Venus  over  the  sun's  disk ;  he  believed 
that  that  transit  would  take  place  at  a  specified  moment ;  and  when  he  saw  the 
shadow  of  the  planet  appear  on  the  disk  of  the  sun,  such  was  bis  excitement  or  grati- 
fication, that  he  fainted  away  from  excess  of  joy.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  so  overcome 
by  the  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  his  discoveries,  or  of  the  extent  of  what  he  saw  in 
consequence  of  the  great  principle  he  had  laid  down,  that  from  excess  of  feeling  he 
was  unable  to  carry  out  his  own  grand  calculations,  and  others  had  to  do  it  for  him. 
Now,  if  excess  of  knowledge,  of  joy,  or  prosperity,  have  these  powerful  effects  upon 
the  human  frame,  we  can  conceive  that  too  grand  an  apocalypse  of  God  would  be 
nnbearable  now  ;  just  as  the  eyeball  would  be  blinded  by  excess  of  light.  But  you 
can  conceive  what  a  splendour  and  majesty  we  shall  behold  when  we  see  God,  not 
through  a  glass  darkly — the  smoked  glass  or  lens  through  which  we  look  at  great 
brightness — but  we  shall  see  Him  face  to  face.  And  what  a  change  will  have 
passed  upon  us  when  we  can  bear  to  look  upon  Deity  and  not  shrink !  (J.  Cum- 
ming,  D.D.)  There  is  a  place  by  Me,  and  thou  shalt  stand  upon  a  rock. — The 
believer's  standing  idace : — To  those  who  like  typical  texts,  there  is  a  peculiar 
charm  in  such  as  this:  "a  place  by  Me,"  and  "a  rock"  for  a  standing  place. 
What  suggestions — 1.  Of  the  believer's  firm  foundation — the  "  Rock."  2.  Of  the 
believer's  fellowship  with  God — •'  a  place  by  Me."  3.  Of  the  believer's  favour  with 
God — a  vision  of  His  glory.  (A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.)  The  place  by  God,  or  the 
right  standjyoint: — The  guide-books  name  the  time  when  rainbows  may  be  seen  on> 
some  of  the  many  waterfalls  which  abound  in  Switzerland.  One  day,  when  I  was 
at  Lauterbrunnon,  I  went  to  the  famous  Staulbach  Fall  (980  feetl,  and  sat  down  by 
the  flagstaff,  and  waited  and  watched.  Others  did  the  same,  and  we  all  went  away 
disappointed.  Next  day  one  of  my  friends  said  he  would  show  us  how  to  find  the 
rainbow.  So  I  went  again,  and  saw  a  most  lovely  one,  and  stood  almost  in  the 
centre  of  it.  Then  I  found  that  not  only  were  sunshine  and  spray  necessary  to 
produce  a  rainbow,  but  also  that  those  who  would  see  it  must  stand  between  it  and 
the  sun,  i.e.,  it  could  be  seen  only  at  a  given  point.  Then  I  perceived  that  those  who 
would  see  the  glory  of  God  could  see  it  only  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that 
the  reason  why  so  many  fail  in  this  respect  is  because  they  do  not  take  the  right, 
standpoint.  (Gavin  Kirkham.)  The  standpoint  of  the  Cross  : — I  was  talking  about 
Christ  to  an  impenitent  neighbour  the  other  day.  He  said:  "Why  can't  I  feel 
about  Him  as  you  do  ?  I  have  read  the  Bible  a  good  deal.  I  have  heard  a  good 
deal  of  preaching.  Yet  I  can't  get  up  any  enthusiasm  in  regard  to  this  Saviour  that 
you  talk  so  much  about."  I  said  to  him  :  "  You  make  me  think  of  my  visit  to  the 
White  Mountains  some  years  ago.  We  were  told  that  there  was  a  wonderful  piece 
of  natural  statuary  there — a  man's  face,  chiselled,  as  it  were,  out  of  a  granite  cliff. 
We  went  to  see  it.  We  found  what  we  supposed  was  the  cliff,  but  there  was  no 
appearance  of  human  features — no  form  or  comeliness  such  as  we  had  been  told 
of.  We  were  about  to  turn  away  disappointed,  when  a  guide  came  along,  and  said, 
•You  are  not  looking  from  the  right  point.'  He  led  us  up  the  road  a  few  rods,  and 
then  said,  '  Now  turn,  and  look.'  We  did  so,  and  there  was  the  face  as  distinct  a3 
any  of  ours,  though  of  gigantic  size.  Until  we  reached  the  right  spot  we  could  see 
only  a  jagged  rock,  and  not  a  symmetrical  face.  The  vision  of  the  form  and 
comeliness  depended  upon  the  angle  of  observation.  And  it  is  so  with  you,  my 
friend.  Come  with  me  under  the  shadow  of  the  Cross.  Come  there  as  a  penitent 
sinner.  Look  there  upon  that  '  visage  so  marred  more  than  any  man.'  Realize 
that  the  mangled,  thorn-crowned  Sufferer  is  dying  for  you,  and  you  will  see  in  Him 
a  beauty  that  will  ravish  your  souL"    (T.  L.  Cuyler.) 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  EXODUS.  579 


CHAPTER  XXXrV. 

Ver.  1.    Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone. — The  renewal  of  the  two  tables : — I.  That 
THE  MORAL  LAW  IS  PERPETUALLY  BINDING.     Having  been  broken,  it  must  be  renewed. 
II.  That  the  renewal  of  the  moral  law  when  broken  entails  duties  unknown 
BEFORE.     "  Hew  thee  two  tables  of  stone  " ;  "  and  he  hewed  two  tables  of  stone." 
This  fact  is  very  typical  and  suggestive.     1.  In  the  first  inscription  of  the  moral 
law  upon  man's  heart,  the  preparation  and  the  writing  were  exclusively  the  work  of 
God.     When  our  first  parents  awoke  to  consciousness,  the  "  fleshy  tables  "  were 
found  covered  with  the  "  oracles  of  God."    2.  When  those  tables  were  defaced  and 
those  oracles  transgressed,  the  work  of  preparation  fell  largely  upon  man.     Ever 
afterwards  man  had  to   prepare  himself    by  acts  of   penitence  and  faith — not 
excluding  Divine  help,  of  course — but  nevertheless  those  acts  are  acts  of  man.     3. 
But  this  renewal  of  the  Divine  law  is  accomi^lished  in  such  a  way  as  to  deprive  man 
of  all  ground  of  glorying,  and  so  as  to  ascribe  all  the  glory  to  God.     The  tables 
were  of  plain  stone,  all  their  embellishments  were  by  the  Divine  hand.     III.  That 
when  the  moral  law  is  broken,  God  graciously  offers  to  renew  it  upon  man's 
compliance  with  the  revealed  condition.     So  when  man  by  repentance  and  faith 
"  puts  oif  the  old  man  and  puts  on  the  new,"  he  is  renewed  in  the  image  of  Him 
that  created  him,  on  which  the  moral  law  is  inscribed  (Col.  iii.  9-lfi).     IV.  That 
these  conditions  should  be  complied  with — 1.  Sjjeedily.     "Early  in  the  morning." 
2.  Personally.     This  great  work  is  a  transsction  between  God  and  the  individual 
particularly  concerned.     3.  Patiently.     Mo.ses  waited  again  forty  days  and  forty 
nights.     (1)  Do  not  hurry  the  work  over.     What  is  being  done  is  being  done  for 
eternity.     (2)  Don't  despond  if  the  work  is  not  progressing  as  japidly  as  you  might 
wish.     If  God  is  writing  on  your  heart,  let  that  be  your  conifoit,  and  let  God  use 
His  own  time.     Learn — 1.  The  value  of  the  moral  law.     2.   Tlie  importance  of 
having  that  law  not  only  on  stone  or  paper,  but  in  the  heart.    3.  The  necessity  of  a 
public  and  practical  exhibition  and  interpretation  of  that  law  in  the  life.     (J.  W. 
Burn.)         God  re-writing  the  law : — Can  jou  think  of  a  course  more  merciful  than 
this  ?     "  Bring  two  tables  of  stone  just  like  the  first,  and  I  will  write  it  over  again ; 
I,  God,  will  write  over  again  the  very  words  that  were  on  the  first  tables  that  thou 
brakest  in  pieces."     There  is  no  mercy  hke  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  ;  I  never  find  any 
tenderness  like  His  tenderness.     You  remember  some  years  ago  George  Peabody 
gave  half  a  million  of  money  to  the  London  poor ;    and  I  think  some  eighteen 
thousand  people  are  sheltered  in  the  houses  that  have  sprung  out  of  that  splendid 
charity.     I  remember  that  when  Peabody's  charity  had  awakened  England  to  a 
sense  of  his  goodness,  the  Queen  of  England  rose  equal  to  the  occasion,  and  she 
offered  this  plain  American  citizen  some  title,  and  he  declined  the  honour.    And  then 
she,  with  a  woman's  delicacy  of  insight,  and  with  more  than  queenly  dignity, 
inquired  if  there  was  anything  that  Peabody  would  accept ;  and  he  said.  Yes,  there 
was,  if  the  Queen  would  only  write  him  a  letter  with  her  own  hand  ;  he  was  going 
to  pay  a  last  visit  to  his  native  land  across  the  Atlantic,  and  he  should  like  to  take 
it  to  his  birthplace,  so  that  at  any  time,  if  bitterness  should  arise  between  these 
two  nations,  his   countrymen  could  come  and  see  that  letter,  and  they  would 
remember  that  England's  Queen  had  written  it  to  a  plain  American  citizen.     The 
Queen  of  England  said  she  would  write  him  a  letter,  and  she  would  do  more  than 
that — she  would  sit  for  her  portrait  to  be  painted,  and  he  should  take  that  with  the 
letter ;  and  she  put  on  the  Marie  Stuart  cap  which,  I  think,  she  had  only  worn, 
perhaps,  twice  since  the  death  of  the  Prince  Consort,  and  she  sat  day  afier  day  in 
her  robes  of  state,  and  the  painter  painted  one  of  the  finest  portraits  of  the  Queen 
that  has  ever  been  executed.   When  it  was  finished  she  presented  it  to  Mr.  Peabody, 
and  he  took  it,  with  the  Queen's  letter,  away  to  his  birthplace  yonder.   Now,  suppose 
George  Peabody,  in  some  fit  of  forgetfulness,  had  torn  the  Queen's  letter  up,  and 
flung  it  into  the  fire,  and  dashed  the  portrait  down  and  broken  it  to  fragments  ;  and 
suppose  that,  after  that,  somebody  had  told  her  Majesty  that  George  Peabody  was 
penitent,  do  you  think  she  would  have  written  him  the  letter  over  again  ?  do  you 
think  she  would  have  sat  again  for  another  portrait  to  be  painted,  just  like  the  first 
one  ?     Who  can  tell  ?    Yet  our  Father  in  heaven,  if  you  have  broken  the  tables  of 
your  covenant  with  Him,  bring  your  broken  heart  back  again  to  His  feet,  and  He 
will  renew  the  covenant.    (T.  Guttery.) 

Vers.  2,  3.     Come  up  in  the  morning. — Be  ready  in  the  morning :  an  address  for 


580  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xmot. 

New  Year''8  eve : — I.  Be  ready  for  a  conscious  contact  with  God  in  the  future.  1. 
As  a  duty.  2.  As  a  privilege.  "  In  Thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy."  3.  As  a 
calamity.  The  hell  of  the  guilty.  II.  Be  ready  for  a  conscious  isolation  of  youb 
BEING  in  the  future.  "  No  man  shall  come  up  with  thee."  1.  There  are  events 
which  will  give  us  a  profound  consciousness  of  isolation.  (1)  Bereavements.  (2) 
Personal  aftiiction.  (3)  Death.  2.  There  are  mental  operations  that  will  give  us 
a  profound  consciousness  of  isolation.  Remembrance  of  past  sins,  &c.  {Ilomilist.) 
Morning  on  Vie  mount: — I.  God  wishes  me  to  be  alone  with  Him.  How  Si  Icmn 
will  the  meeting  be !  Father  and  child ;  Sovereign  and  subject ;  Creator  and 
creature !  The  distance  between  us  will  be  infinite,  unless  He  shorten  it  by  His 
mercy!  Oh,  my  poor  broken  and  weary  heart,  th  nk  of  it  and  be  glad.  He  will 
shed  His  light  upon  thy  tears,  and  make  them  shine  like  jewels ;  He  will  make 
thee  young  again.  II.  How  shall  I  oo  before  God?  In  what  rohe  shnll  I  dress 
myself?  "All  the  fitness  He  requires  is  to  feel  my  need  of  Him."  But  when  I 
think  of  Him  the  thought  of  my  great  sin  comes  at  the  same  time,  and  it  is  like  a 
hlack  cloud  spread  between  me  and  the  sun.  When  I  think  of  anything  else,  I  am 
happy  for  the  moment;  but  when  I  think  of  God,  I  burn  with  shame  and  tremble 
with  fear.  This  morning  I  must  meet  Him  on  the  mount — meet  Him  alone  I  Alone  1 
Surely  He  need  not  have  said  expressly  so ;  for  to  be  with  God  is  to  be  in  solitude, 
though  the  mountain  be  alive  with  countless  travellers.  III.  God  asks  me  to  meet 
Him  in  the  top  of  the  mount.  I  am  called  to  climb  as  far  away  from  the  world  as 
I  can.  For  many  a  day  I  have  not  seen  the  top  of  the  mount.  I  have  stood  on 
the  plain,  or  I  have  gone  to  the  first  cleft,  or  have  tried  a  short  way  up  the  steep. 
I  have  not  risen  above  the  smoke  of  my  o^vn  house,  or  the  noise  of  my  daily  busi- 
ness. Oh,  that  I  might  urge  my  way  to  the  very  top  of  the  hill  chosen  of  God  I 
"  What  must  it  be  to  be  there  ?  "  The  wind  will  be  music.  Earth  and  time  will 
be  seen  as  they  are,  in  their  littleness  and  their  meanness.  IV.  The  morning  is  the 
time  fixed  for  my  meeting  the  Lord.  What  meaning  there  is  in  the  time  as  well  as 
in  the  place  I  This  very  word  morning  is  as  a  cluster  of  rich  grapes.  Let  me 
crush  them,  and  drink  tlie  sacred  wine.  In  the  morning — then  God  means  me  to 
be  at  my  best  in  strength  and  hope  ;  I  have  not  to  chrab  in  my  weakness  ;  in  the 
night  I  have  buried  yesterday's  fatigue,  and  in  the  morning  I  take  a  new  lease  of 
energy.  Give  God  ihy  strength — all  thy  strength  ;  He  asks  only  what  He  first  gave. 
In  the  morning — then  He  may  mean  to  keep  me  long  that  He  may  make  me  rich  ! 
Blessed  is  the  day  whose  morning  is  sanctified.  Successful  is  the  day  whose  first 
victory  was  won  in  prayer.  Health  is  established  in  the  morning.  Wealth  is  won 
in  the  morning.  (J.  rarher,D.D.)  Rising  early  for  prayer  : — We  have  a  saying 
among  us,  that  "  the  morning  is  a  friend  to  the  muses  "  ;  that  is,  the  morning  is  a 
good  studying  time.  I  am  sure  it  is  as  true  that  the  morning  is  a  great  friend  to 
the  graces  ;  the  morning  is  the  best  praying  time.  (/.  Caryl.)  Rising  /arly  for 
devotional  exercises : — It  is  told  in  Sir  Henry  Havelock's  "  Life,"  how  he  always 
secured  two  hours  for  devotion  before  the  business  of  the  day  began,  even  in  his 
busiest  time,  by  rising  at  five  or  four,  as  required.  .  .  .  Colonel  Gardiner  had  the 
same  habit.  Early  rising  for  the  objects  of  this  world  is  usual  enough,  and  much 
to  be  commended  ;  but  the  same  industry  that  will  advance  a  man's  temporal 
interests  will  make  him  spiritually  rich,  and  give  him  great  treasure  in  heaven,  if  it 
be  used  towards  God.  .  .  .  On  the  contrary,  late  rising  in  the  morning,  rapid  dress- 
ing, curtailing  even  the  few  moments  allotted  to  thanksgiving  and  prayer,  before 
the  plunge  into  the  world's  affairs,  deafens  our  ears  and  hearts  to  things  spiritual ; 
we  exchange  an  interview  with  our  God,  who  can  give  us  all  good,  for  the  miserable 
gratification  of  our  indolence.  Morning  prayer : — Let  the  day  have  a  blessed 
baptism  by  giving  your  first  waking  thoughts  into  the  bosom  of  God,  The  first 
hour  X)f  the  morning  is  the  rudder  of  the  day.     (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Verse  6,  7.  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  g^racious. — The  name  of  the 
Lord  :-^l.  "The  Lord."  There  we  lay  our  basis.  Unless  you  are  prepared 
to  admit,  the  perfect  sovereignty  of  God,  you  can  go  no  further — you  will  see 
no  more.  II.  Then  we  put  it  in  combination — "the  Lord  God."  And  oh!  what 
a  combination !  We  put  all  sovereignty  with  all  the  mystery  of  the  Godhead 
— God,  that  unfathomable  word.  But  amongst  all  those  wondrous  attributes 
which  go  to  make  the  word  God,  there  is  one  stands  out — that  name  leads  us  to  it. 
The  root  of  the  word  is  kindness — God,  the  good.  The  Lord  the  good ;  the  Lord- 
love  ;  God.  "  We  put  the  infinitude  of  His  sovereignty  in  combination  with  the 
boundlessness  of  His  affection,  and  we  say,  "  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God."    III.  But 


CHAP,  xxxrv.]  EXODUS.  SI 

now  we  come  to  the  goings  forth  of  that  wonderful  mystery  of  Godhead  to  man — 
MERCY.  You  know  that  the  strict  meaning  of  the  word  mercy  is — a  heart  for 
misery.  Therefore  the  lirst  thoupht  is — the  great  Lord  God  stooping  to  the  wretched, 
going  forth  to  the  miserable.  IV.  And  why  merciful?  Because  okacious.  Grace 
is  the  free  flowing  of  undeserved  favour.  V.  "  Long-suffering  !  "  It  is  the  most 
marvellous  part  of  the  character  of  God — His  patience — it  is  so  contrasting  with 
the  impetuosity,  the  haste,  the  impulsiveness  of  man.  He  is  provoked  every  day, 
but  He  continues  patient.  VI.  Now  it  rises — "  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth." 
Abundant  is  enough  and  something  over — a  cup  so  full  that  it  mantles — abundant, 
"abundant  in" — VII.  "  Goodness,"  and — VIII.  "Truth."  IX.  "Keeping  mercy 
FOR  thousands."  There  are  thousands  who  do  not  yet  see  or  feel  their  mercy,  for 
whom  God  is  now  keeping  it  in  reserve — say,  persons  not  yet  converted.  X.  For- 
giving iniquity  and  transgression  and  six."  We  are  getting  all  the  more  now 
into  the  work  of  Christ.  And  what  distinction  shall  we  make  between  "  iniquity, 
transgression,  and  sin  ?  "  Is  "  iniquity  "  acts  of  injustice  to  a  fellow-creature — and 
"transgression  "  acts  of  injustice  towards  God — and  "  sin,"  the  deep  root  of  all  in 
the  human  heart  ?  Or  is  it  thus  ?  Is  "  iniquity  "  that  principle  of  all  wrongness, 
the  want  of  uprightness,  the  acting  unfairly  by  God  or  man ; — and  then  "  trans- 
gression "  the  act,  whether  it  be  to  God  or  man,  to  God  through  man,  "  transgres- 
sion,"— and  then  "sin"  again  the  inner  nature  from  which  that  transgression, 
which  makes  that  iniquity,  springs.  I  think  that  is  the  true  intention — iniquity, 
transgression,  sin.  But  He  pardons  all.  XL  "  By  no  means  clear  the  guilty." 
The  word  "guilty"  is  not  in  the  original — "by  no  means  clear."  Whom?  He 
will  not  clear  any  one  whom  He  has  not  pardoned.  "  Guilty "  means  a  man 
still  subject  to  wrath.  If  a  man  does  not  accept  Christ,  he  is  still  subject  to 
wrath — that  man  God  will  never  clear.  XII.  And  then  comes  that  very  ditHcult 
part — that  He  "visits  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  and  upon 

THE    children's    CHILDREN,    UNTO   THE    THIRD   AND    TO    THE    FOURTH    GENERATION."      It 

seems  to  me  to  be  an  ever-standing  visible  proof  and  monument  of  God's  holiness 
and  justice.  He  visits  sin  from  generation  to  generation.  There  are  inherited  dis- 
pensations, inherited  calamities.  Is  it  unjust?  It  is  the  principle  of  the  greatest 
justice  that  we  read  of  in  the  history  of  this  world.  For  the  atonement  all  depends 
upon  that  principle.  If  God  does  visit  the  sin  of  one  in  the  sufferings  of  another, 
has  not  He  also  laid  it  down  that  He  visits  the  righteousness  of  one  in  the  happiness 
and  the  eternal  salvation  of  another  ?  And  did  we  do  away  with  that  principle, 
where  would  be  our  hope?  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  God's  mercy  : — I.  What  the 
MERCY  OF  God  is.  1.  That  perfection  whereby  He  assists  His  creatures  in  misery 
(Lam.  iii.  22).  2.  His  mercy  is  infinitely  great  (Psa.  cxlv.  8).  3.  He  is  the  Foun- 
tain and  Father  of  mercy  (2  Cor.  i.  3).  II.  To  whom  God  is  generally  and 
ESPECIALLY  merciful.  1.  To  mankind  in  general  (Psa.  cxlv.  9).  2.  He  continues 
life  notwithstanding  our  sins  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  13).  3.  In  delivering  out  of  troubles 
(Psa.  cvii.  13).  4.  In  granting  all  the  necessaries  of  life  (Matt.  v.  45).  5. 
Especially  is  He  merciful  to  His  people  (Deut.  xxxii.  43).  6.  In  pardoning  all  their 
sins  (Heb.  viii.  12).  7.  In  quickening  them  to  newness  of  life  (Eph.  ii.  4,  5).  8.  In 
assisting  us  to  exercise  all  true  grace  (1  Cor.  vii.  25).  9.  Support  under  spiritual 
troubles  (Psa.  xciv.  17-19).  10.  Blessing  troubles  for  our  good  (Heb.  xii.  10).  11. 
Bringing  to  heaven  at  last  (Titus  iii.  8).  III.  The  uses  that  are  to  be  made  op 
God's  mercy  1.  Not  to  abuse  it  to  licentiousness  (Rom.  vi.  1,  2).  2.  We  should 
be  merciful  to  others  (Luke  vi.  36).  3.  Pardoning  their  injuries,  pitying  their 
miseries,  and  relieving  tl.eir  necessities  (Gal.  vi.  10).  4.  We  must  attribute  all  our 
blessings  to  the  mercy  of  God  towards  us  (Psa.  cxv.  1).  5.  This  should  teach  us  to 
love  Him  (Psa.  cvi.  1).  6.  Cause  us  to  fear  Him  (Pta.  ciii.  11).  7.  And  induce  us 
to  praise  Him  (Psa.  ciii.  2,  3,  4).  8.  God's  mercies  are  greater  than  our  miseries 
(1  John  iv.  4).  9.  They  are  sealed  to  us  by  Christ's  blood  (Heb.  xii.  24).  10.  His 
mercy  is  only  known  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Eph.  i.  13,  14).  (T.  B. 
Baker.)  The  unveiled  mystery  of  God: — There  is  in  man  a  yearning  after  the 
unseen.  Every  one  feels,  even  if  he  will  not  confess  it,  that  another  world  lies, 
after  all,  behind  this  one.  But  the  world  of  spirits  is  twofold — the  kingdom  of  the 
powers  of  darkness  below,  and  the  kingdom  of  light  in  heaven.  In  man  there  is 
by  nature  a  secret  drawing  to  that  which  is  below.  There  is  the  dark  point  of  sin 
in  us  which  draws  us  downward.  Whoever  follows  this  drawing  goes  to  destruction. 
But  there  is  in  man  another  drawing — a  drawing  to  light,  a  drawing  to  God.  For 
we  were  made  for  Him.  But  although  we  have  separated  ourselves  from  Him,  He 
has  not  altogether  given  up  His  connection  with  us.     He  who  would  paint  God, 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxrv. 

must  paint  love — a  fire  of  love  which  fills  heaven  and  earth.  But  who  can  com- 
prehend  and  describe  this  boundless  and  endless  love  ?  It  has  collected  itself,  and 
given  itself  a  bodily  form,  in  order  to  reveal  itself  to  as.  The  heart  of  God  has 
opened  itself  up  to  us — eternal  love  has  revealed  itself  to  us  in  Christ  Jesns.  But 
it  is  not  in  the  New  Testament  that  this  is  revealed  for  the  first  time.  It  is  as  old 
as  the  revelation  of  God's  eternal  counsel  of  love.  Even  in  the  Old  Testament 
Christ  is  contained,  although  in  type  and  prophecy.  There  is  darkness  round  about 
God,  He  is  veiled  in  mystery,  no  mortal  man  beholds  His  countenance  and  lives  ; 
the  eyes  of  Moses  are  holden  by  Jehovah,  whilst  He  papses  by  him.  But  a  word 
falls  upon  liis  ear  :  in  this  word  God  pronounces  His  nature,  and  this  word  runs 
thus — "  God  is  love."  That  is  the  unveiled  mystery  of  God.  Let  us  then  consider 
this  unveiled  mystery  in  the  threefold  way  in  which  our  text  sets  it  before  our  eyes. 
L  In  the  direction  of  life.  God  orders  the  vast  and  disposes  of  the  most  isolated 
object.  That  is  just  His  gieatness — attention  in  what  is  little.  But  how  often  are 
our  ways  and  God's  direction  of  our  life  a  mystery  to  us  I  That  He  leads  us  happily 
and  blessedly,  we  believe,  although  what  we  see  often  appears  to  us  to  be  strange. 
Tet  we  shall  one  day  stand  upon  the  heights  of  light  and  look  back  upon  our  dark 
paths  in  the  valley,  and  they  will  be  light,  and  our  understanding  will  give  its 
judgment  in  the  praise  of  love.  That  is  the  unveiled  mystery  of  God  in  the 
direction  of  life.  II.  We  will  consider  this  unveiled  mystery  in  the  forgiveness  of 
SIN.  For  our  life  is  full  of  sins  and  guilt.  The  termination  of  our  life  is  the  seal 
of  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  We  bear  the  law  of  God  written  on  our  hearts.  But 
our  sin  has  broken  it.  We  are  sorry  ;  we  should  like  to  be  pious  and  holy.  Hence 
we  come  and  present  ourselves  before  God  with  new  resolutions  :  from  henceforth 
it  shall  be  otherwise  with  us.  But  how  long  does  it  continue  till  it  is  as  before  ? 
It  will  not  come  to  a  really  new  life.  We  amend  there  and  then  ;  but  our  moral 
life  remains  at  all  times  a  wearying  work,  and  never  becomes  a  free,  joyful  matter, 
which  is  understood  of  itself — which  gushes  and  streams  fresh  and  gladly  out  of 
the  heart.  Whence  is  this  ?  The  failing  is  in  the  foundation.  God  must  make 
such  an  impression  upon  us  as  to  win  our  hearts,  and  to  make  it  impossible  for  us 
to  do  other  than  love  Ilira.  By  what  means  does  God  make  such  an  impression 
upon  us  ?  Not  by  His  infinite  greatness  and  majesty,  but  by  His  gracious  love. 
"  We  love  Him  because  He  has  first  loved  us  "  (1  John  iv.  19).  And  what  love  is 
that?  It  is  God's  pardoning  love  :  not  the  love  manifested  in  the  displays  of  His 
goodness,  in  His  anxiety  for  our  earthly  life.  This  humbles  us,  but  it  does  not  yet 
touch  our  innermost  being.  The  innermost  point  in  us,  where  we  are  connected  with 
God,  is  the  conscience.  And  just  here  we  feel  ourselves  separated  from  God.  Here 
we  must  experience  the  love  of  God  :  that  is  His  forgiving  love.  But  this  is  the 
right  foundation  of  all  moral  work.  III.  We  will  consider  this  unveiled  mystery 
IN  COVENANT  FELLOWSHIP.  The  Covenant  of  Grod  with  Israel  rests  on  the  forgiveness 
of  sins.  God  dwells  in  the  midst  of  them.  He  is  their  God  and  they  are  His  people, 
and  He  leads  them  on  their  way,  and  He  brings  them  to  the  goal.  He  thus  reveals 
Himself  to  them  as  a  covenant  God.  But  all  this  is  only  a  prophecy  of  the  covenant 
of  God  with  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  rests  on  the  true,  real  forgiveness  of  sins. 
But  all  this  is  but  the  commencement  of  the  completion.  We  wait  for  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise.  In  hope,  the  abode  yonder  is  already  here.  But  we  are  not  yet 
yonder.  We  are  still  on  our  pilgrimage  to  the  hall  of  blessedness.  There  for  the 
first  time  will  there  be  the  right  celebration  of  the  covenant.  {J.  C.  Lvthardt,  D.D.) 
The  moral  nature  of  God : — I.  The  form  in  which  the  revelation  is  made.  1.  In  the 
first  place,  it  is  given,  not  in  the  cold  and  formal  terms  of  a  merely  ethical  and 
philosophical  system,  but  in  its  warm  and  sympathetic  application  to  the  needs  of 
man's  life.  The  profoundest  truth  is  here  implied.  But  the  form  of  the  declaration 
is  simple,  couched  in  the  every-day  speech  of  men,  such  as  all  men,  in  any  and 
every  condition,  could  easily  and  readily  apprehend.  2.  It  is  not  only  addressed  to 
man  upon  the  simplest  side  of  his  nature,  but  it  sets  in  the  very  foreground  of  the 
Divine  qualities  those  which  have  regard  to  man's  sinfulness,  and  the  need  in  which 
he  stands,  of  tenderness,  pity,  and  grace.  What  a  recognition  is  this  of  the  true 
state  of  the  human  heart !  God's  revelation  is  no  philosophy  of  the  "  might  have 
been,"  of  the  "ought  to  be" — dreamy,  vague,  hypothetic,  and  useless.  But  it  is  a 
practical  dealing  with  what  is.  It  takes  man  just  as  it  finds  him.  II.  Now,  let  us 
inquire.  What  is  the  revelation  which  is  thus  made  in  so  human  and  so  gracious 
s  form?  God  declares  Himself  to  be  "merciful  and  gracious."  By  the  first 
quality  we  understand  pitifulness,  a  tenderness  towards  the  weak  and  helpless,  with 
an  added  sense  of  gentleness  and  forgiveness  towards  those  that  are  not  only  weak 


CHAP.  XXXI7.]  EXODUS.  B83 

but  wicked,  sinful  as  well  as  sad.  And  while  God  is  this,  it  is  all  of  favour,  free 
and  unmerited.  He  is  gracious  as  well  as  merciful.  But  there  are  added  qualities 
of  mercy  and  grace  beyond  the  mere  broad  and  general  fact  of  their  possession. 
These  might  be  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  yet  their  exercise  might  be  restrained 
within  narrow  and  brief  limits  of  occasion  and  duration.  But  God  is  "  longsuffer- 
ing  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth."  We  must  not  forget  that  these  qualities 
of  God's  moral  being  are  related,  as  we  have  said,  tc  human  conditions,  especially 
that  of  sin,  and  in  respect  of  that  He  is  "  longsufifering."  For  man  is  not  merely 
«,  sinner,  but  he  perpetuates  the  sin,  he  continues  sinning;  he  is  alienated  from 
God,  and  remains  an  alien,  with  hard  and  ever  harder  heart,  going  farther  away, 
being  less  accessible,  increasing  his  rebellion  ever.  And  yet  God's  mercy  does  not 
cease.  He  loses  no  patience.  He  waits  and  watches.  And  of  this  mercy  and 
clemency  no  one  need  doubt  the  power  or  the  sufficiency.  God  is  declared  further 
to  be  "  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth."  Goodness  is  perhaps  an  attribute  of 
wider  reach  than  mercy,  embracing  mercy  for  the  sinner  and  the  wretched  in  the 
beneficent  relation  towards  all  whose  welfare  and  happiness  God  ever  seeks.  Truth 
is  that  harmony  of  being  upon  which  we  may  ever  depend.  It  is  order  and  peace, 
it  is  fidelity  and  changelessness — everything  that  renders  trust  in  the  truthful  God 
a  certain  thing,  not  liable  to  disappointment,  change,  and  decay.  The  emphasis, 
perhaps,  is  to  be  placed  upon  the  word  "abundant."  God  has  enough  and  to  spare. 
Then,  these  are  by  no  means  quiescent,  inoperative  attributes  of  the  Divine  nature. 
Men  often  lose  themselves  and  the  clearness  of  their  thoughts  in  mere  abstract  state- 
ments of  the  qualities  of  God,  but  in  this  declaration  of  Himself,  Jehovah  shows  how 
practical  is  the  revelation  which  He  gives.  "  Keeping  mercy  for  thousands  forgiving 
iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin."  The  phrase  "  keeping  mercy  for  thousands  "  is 
a  striking  one.  The  term  thousands  is  indefinite,  signifying  a  vei-y  large  number.  It 
may  be  used  in  contrast  with  the  "  third  and  fourth  generation  "  of  the  following  clause, 
and  if  so,  it  indicates  that  the  mercy  of  God  is  preserved  through  all  the  ages  of  man- 
kind, and  remains  pei-petual  and  ceaseless,  for  the  universal  race  for  ever.  'The  forgive- 
ness, too,  bow  full  is  this !  It  is  not  merely  the  single  sin  that  is  pardoned.  The 
continued  habit  of  sin,  the  formed  and  indurated  character  of  evil,  the  strong  and 
defiant  wickedness,  even  these  may  find  mercy  and  have  experience  of  God's  par- 
doning grace.  It  is  His  prerogative.  It  is  His  nature.  All  this  is  based  upon  the 
most  absolute  justice  and  integrity  of  righteousness.  "  He  will  by  no  means  clear 
the  guilty."  i'he  eternal  claim  of  moral  order  must  be  recognized,  and  until  guilt 
is  purged  and  sin  is  destroyed,  the  sinner  cannot  be  cleared.  Let  us,  now,  gather 
up  the  great  truths  of  this  sublime  passage,  and  lay  their  meaning  and  their  power 
to  our  hearts.  1.  The  revelation  which  God  grants  of  Himself  is  in  the  sphere  of 
moral  being.  2.  This  moral  aspect  of  Deity  is  in  complete  harmony  with  every 
other  side  of  the  Divine  nature.  3.  The  moral  being  of  God,  as  it  is  revealed, 
necessarily  provides  a  satisfaction  of  its  claims  of  justice  and  rectitude.  4.  In  this 
completeness  of  revelation  there  is  an  abundance  of  grace  and  mercy  which  is  offered 
to  all  men.  This,  then,  is  the  final  truth  which  appears  iu  the  revelation  of  God. 
Let  no  man  despair.  (L.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  God's  great  goodness  : — I.  The  globy 
OP  God  is  His  goodness.  When  Moses  said,  "  I  beseech  Thee,  shi)w  me  Thy  glory," 
the  Lord  answered,  "  I  will  make  all  My  goodness  pass  before  thee"  (chap,  xxxiii. 
18,  19,  xxxiv.  6).  1.  We  see  it  in  nature  (Psa^  xxxiii.  5,  cxlv.  9,  Ixv.  11).  2.  We 
see  it  iu  providence  (1  Kings  viii.  66:  Psa.  xxxi.  19  ;  Zech.  ix.  16,  17).  3.  We  see 
it  in  grace  (Eph.  i.  7  ;  Psa.  xxiii.  6;  Jer.  xxxi.  14).  II.  The  effect  of  God's  good- 
ness UPOK  THE  HE.iRT  OF  MAN  IS  MEANT  TO  BE — 1.  Sorrow  at  having  offeudcd  God 
(Rom.  ii.  4  ;  Job  xlii.  5,  6;  Hosea  iii.  5),  2.  Delight  in  praising  God  (Psa.  cvii.  8; 
Isa.  IxiiL  7).  3.  Desire  to  receive  God's  blessings  (Numb.  vi.  24,  26;  Mic.  vii.  18, 
19).  4.  A  disposition  to  imitate  God's  character  (Luke  vi.  36  ;  Eph.  v.  2 ;  1  John 
vi.  11).  {Clergyman's  M'igazhie.)  God's  goodness  : — The  late  Dr.  Samuel  Martin, 
in  a  letter  to  a  friend  after  Dr.  Davidson's  death,  thus  speaks  of  that  pious  and 
devoted  man,  whose  memory  is  hallowed  in  the  minds  of  all  who  knew  him  : — "  He 
studied  divinity  at  Glasgow  College.  Thomas  and  I  lived  together,  companions  and 
fellow-students  ;  and  I,  being  some  years  older,  was  considered  as  a  kind  of  guardian. 
On  looking  back  to  that  period,  in  reviewing  fully  sixty  years'  intercourse  and  friend- 
ship, I  ever  found  in  him,  from  first  to  last,  genuine  and  unaffected  piety,  affection, 
benevolence,  regular,  exemplary,  amiable  deportment.  I  recollect,  with  pleasure, 
the  family  devotions  of  our  little  society.  I  well  remember  an  exclamation,  on  one 
occasion,  to  me,  after  risins  from  prayer — a  striking  proof  of  his  characteristio 
humility,  gratitude,  and  tenderness  of  conscience,  '  Oh,  Martin,  it  is  the  Divine 


584  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

goodness,  of  all  things,  that  humbles  me  most ! '  "        God^s  forgiving  mercy  : — I 
once  visited  the  ruius  of  a  noble  city  that  had  been  built  on  a  desert  oas^is.    Mighty 
columns  of  roofless  temples  still  stood  in  unbroken  file.     Halls  in  which  kings  and 
satraps  had  feasted  two  thousand  years  ago  were  represented  by  solitary  walls. 
Gateways  of  richly  carven  stone  led  to  a  paradii-e  of  bats  and  owls.    All  was  ruin  I 
But  past  the  dismantled  city,  brooks,  which  had  once  flowed  through  gorgeous 
flower-gardens,  and  at  the  foot  of  marble  halls,  still  swept  on  in  undying  music  and 
unwasted  freshness.     The  waters  were  just  as  sweet  as  when  queens  quaffed  them 
two  thousand  years  ago.     A  few  hours  before  they  had  been  melted  from  the  snows 
of  the  distant  mountains.     And  so  God's  forgiving  love  flows  in  ever-renewed  form 
through  the  wreck  of  the  past.     Past  vows  and  past  covenants  and  noble  purposes 
may  be  represented  by  solitary  columns  and  broken  arches  and  scattered  foundations 
that  are  crumbling  into  dust,  yet  through  the  scene  of  ruin  fresh  grace  is  ever 
flowing  from  His  great  heart  on  high.     (T.  G.  Selhy.)        That  will  by  no  means 
clear  the  guilty. —  God  justified  in  man's  salvation  : — I.  Man  thinks  of  God  as  if 
God  weuk  somethinq  like  himself  :  and  hence  he  would  make  God  a  changeable 
and  capricious  Being ;  he  would  make  Him  connive  at  sin  and  make  light  of  trans- 
gression, accepting  a  few  tears,  or  a  few  resolutions,  or  a  few  alms,  as  satisfaction 
enough  for  him  to  receive  pardon.    All  such  ideas  of  God  are  base  and  unwarrant- 
able, and  will  cover  those  who  entertain  them  with  everlasting  confusion.     The 
nature  of  God  makes  it  impossible  for  Him  to  clear  the  guilty.     If  the  positive  be 
true,  that  God  loves  holinpss,  the  negative  must  be  true,  that  He  hates  iniquity.    II. 
And  now  some  will  probably  fay,  "  Why,  this  is  coxtravenino  the  very  gospel  ;  it 
IB  surely  favouring  the  notion  that  none  can  be  saved  ;  for  who  can  be  saved,  when 
there  is  no  guiltless  man?     And  if  God  will  not  clear  guilty  men,  how  is  any  one 
to  meet  his  Maker  in  peace  ?  "     The  view  I  have  of  it  is  this — tbat  God  does  not 
clear  the  guilty ;  no,  but  I  will  tell  you  what  He  does,  which  is  infinitelv  more  to 
His  glory,  and  of  necessity  more  for  our  peace — He  makes  the  guilty  guiltless,  and 
He  makes  the  unrighteous  perfect  in  righteousness.     He  does  this  in  virtue  of  the 
life  laid  down  for  the  guilty,  for  all  who  in  Him  have  believed;  in  Him  all  have  paid 
the  penalty,  all  have  satisfied  Gods  justice,  and  all  have  perfect  righteousness.    (H. 
Stowell,  M.A.)       The  guilty  "  by  no  means  cleared  " ; — I.  What  is  to  be  understood 
BY  the  Lord  "  not  clearing  the  gthlty  "'  ?    When  He  pronounces  the  sentence  of 
acquittal,  it  will  be  m  full  accordance  with  justice.   And  yet  the  basis  of  this  world's 
religion  is  nothing  more  than  a  belief  that  God  will  "  clear  the  guilty."     What  are 
all  the  delusions  of  self-righteous  workings?  what  are  all  the  endeavours  to  put  off 
till  a  more  convenient  season  comes?  what  is  all  the  resting  in  ordinances,  forms, 
and  external  things?     Just  a  forgetfulness  that  God  is  a  heart-searching  God.     II. 
But  now  observe,  why  is  it  true  that  God  "  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty  "  ? 
Everything  in  God  forbids  it.     His  very  faithfulness  renders  it  impossible.     Now, 
faithfulness  is  part  of  the  Divine  goodness.     What  forms  the  real  substance  of  our 
hope ?  that  through  God's  grace  we  shall  be  at  last  in  heaven?     God  tells  me,  that 
"  he  tbat  believeth  shall  be  saved  "  ;  He  tells  me,  that  the  "  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
cleanses  from  all  sin."     What  gives  us  confidence  ?     Simply,  God's  faithfulness — 
I  believe  it,  because  God  says  it.     Take  that  away,  and  where  is  His  goodness  ?     It 
is  no  more.     Now  bear  this  in  mind,  that  what  gives  stability  to  the  promise  gives 
stability  to  the  threatening.     The  love  of  God  is  a  holy  love.     Now  the  great  cause 
of  all  misery  is  sin  ;  and  that  which  forbids  sin  is  a  holy  love.     Yes,  and  one  may 
even  say  that  the  penalty,  awful  and  fearful  as  it  is,  is  one  of  the  great  unfoldings 
of  His  love.     Conclusion  :  1.  The  subject  has  a  very  awful  look,  as  it  regards  the 
sinner  hardened  in  his  trespasses.     "  He  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty  ones." 
2.  The  words  are  full  of  encouragement  to  the  poor  penitent  spirit — *'  He  will  by  no 
means  clear  the  guilty."     "  Ah  !  "  you  are  ready  to  say,  ''  how  can  He  clear  me  ? 
I  am  all  guilt."     Thou  never  hadst  any  due  conception  of  thine  own  guiltiness,  and 
of  what  thy  guiltiness  is  before  God.    Yet  none  at  all  hast  thou.  Why  ?   Because  it 
has  all  been  transferred  to  Jesus.     Because  He  has  taken  it  and  borne  it  away.     He 
has  endured  it.   He  was  "  not  cleared,"  He  endured  the  penalty.     3.  How  this  truth 
fhould  lead  to — (1)    Confession  of   sin;   (2)  holy  service.      (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 
Union  of  jvstice  and  grace  in  God: — "Behold  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God," 
Bays  the  Apostle  Paul     In  most  cases  the  goodness  is  illustrated  by  one  kind  of 
events  and  the  severity  by  another,  but  in  Christ's  work  the  same  event  of  His  death 
displayed  the  two  sides  of  God's  character  alike  and  at  once,  and  thus  pardon  was 
never  offered  to  the  guilty  without  a  loud  protest  against  sin.     Now  the  pains  taken 
to  inculcate  both  these  qualities  through  the  entire  Scriptures  seem  to  p*int  at 


CHAP,  xxxiv.]  EXODUS.  bfi$ 

something  in  man,  some  conception  of  character  which  he  needs  to  have  impressed 
upon  him  and  which  he  ought  to  realize  in  his  own  life.  I.  And  in  pursuing  this 
subject  we  remark,  first,  that  among  men  he  who  is  capable  of  exercising  only  hard, 

UNRELENTING  JUSTICE  IS  HELD  TO  BE  FAR  FROM  PERFECTION,  AND  CANNOT  BE  LOVED  ; 
WHILE,  ON  THE  OTHER  HAND,  A  CHARACTER  IN  WHICH  BARE  KINDNESS  OR  GOODNESS  IS  THE 

ONLY  NOTICEABLE  TRAIT  SECURES  NO  RESPECT.  Only  where  wc  sce  the  two  qualities 
united  can  we  feel  decided  confidence  and  attachment.  They  do  not  check  each 
other,  as  might  be  supposed,  but  add  to  each  other's  power.  The  indiscriminately 
kind  man  is  felt  to  be  weak :  the  harsh  rigorous  nature  may  have  intellect  in 
abundance,  but  fails  to  warm  the  souls  of  men.  When  united  they  form  character, 
a  character  in  which  there  is  depth,  the  depth  of  intellect  resting  below  temper  and 
impulse  on  a  foundation  of  wisdom  and  true  excellence  of  heart.  There  can  be  no 
moral  government  among  men  without  wisdom,  for  he  who  makes  men  good  must 
look  not  at  immediate  impressions,  but  at  results  :  he  must  take  long  stretches  of 
time  into  view,  and  long  series  and  interactions  of  causes  shaping  character.  When 
did  instinctive  benevolence  ever  fail  to  thwart  its  own  wishes  and  to  corrupt  its 
beneficiaries  ?  The  union  of  these  opposites,  where  alone  wisdom  can  be  found, 
ensures  the  best  government,  and  as  every  one  must  be  in  some  way  a  governor,  of 
a  family,  or  a  workshop,  if  not  of  a  town  or  state,  the  whole  of  the  vast  interests 
of  mankind  depend  on  this  union.  II.  If  God  is  to  be  honoured  and  loved  by  human 
BEINGS,  He  must  present  Himself  to  our  minds  under  the  same  twofold  aspect.  He 
must  be  seen  in  the  light  of  those  qualities  which  we  may  call  by  the  name  of  justice, 
and  of  those  to  which  we  give  the  names  of  goodness,  kindness,  tenderness,  or  mercy. 
Sinners  are  recovered  and  reclaimed  first  by  a  sense  of  sin,  and  then  by  a  percep- 
tion of  Divine  love,  and  without  the  latter  they  would  not  think  of  their  sins,  or 
grow  into  that  fihal  fear,  that  holy  worship  which  the  Psalmist  intends.  Only 
under  this  twofold  aspect  of  God  is  true  religion,  the  religion  of  the  soul,  possible. 
III.  We  add  thirdly,  that  it  involves  a  very  high  degree  of  wisdom  to  know 

WHEN  to  be  JOST    OR    SEVERE,  AND    WHEN    TO    EXERCISE    GOODNESS    OR    GRACE.      It    is    a 

great  problem  to  govern  a  nation ;  it  is  a  greater  to  govern  a  virtuous  universe ; 
but  a  greater  still  is  presented  when  the  element  of  evil  is  thrown  into  the  question, 
&nd  the  interests  of  the  many  come  into  conflict  with  the  happiness  of  the  sinful 
few.  Especially  when  we  look  on  God  as  training  His  creatures  up  for  a  higher 
condition  ;  enlarging  their  powers,  helping  the  strong  to  grow  stronger,  pitying  the 
weak  and  revealing  Himself  as  their  forgiving  God  ;  then  above  all  does  it  appear 
that  the  balances  of  the  moral  universe  are  exceedingly  delicate,  and  that  there  is 
need  of  a  hand,  firm  and  wise  beyond  our  tb ought,  to  hold  them.  No  solution  of 
the  intricacies  of  things  has  been  offered  to  man  deserving  of  notice  but  that  which 
Christ  has  made.  The  reconciliation  of  holiness  and  love  in  His  work,  its  just, 
well-balanced  training  of  the  whole  moral  nature  challenge  our  respect,  our  admira- 
tion, even  if  we  will  stand  aloof  from  Christ.  He  is  made  of  God  unto  us  wisdom 
and  righteousness  and  sanctifieation  and  redemption.  IV.  And  now,  having 
brought  your  minds  to  Christ,  I  close  with  the  remark  that  He  united  the  two 

BIDES  of  character  WHICH  WE  HAVE    SPOKEN    OF,  IN    THEIR   DUE    MIXTURE,  IN    HiS   ONE 

PERSON.  And  it  is  well  worthy  of  being  remarked  that  their  union  proves  their 
genuineness  and  their  depth.  He  who  could  love  so  and  forgive  so, 
notwithstanding  His  deep  sense  of  the  sin,  what  strength  of  character 
must  He  have  had,  what  a  depth  and  truth  of  love,  what  a  power  of  loving, 
what  an  inexhaustible  richness  of  soul !  And  He  who  could  rebuke  so  and 
show  such  strong  displeasure  against  evil  doing,  how  hard,  humanly  speaking, 
must  it  have  been  for  Him  to  love  objects  so  far  from  loveliness  ;  and  if  He  loved 
them  as  He  did,  must  not  His  love  have  been  of  another  kind  than  ours,  one 
superior  to  personal  slights  and  injuries,  wholly  unlike  instinctive  kindness  of 
temper,  partaking  of  a  quality  of  lofty  wisdom  1  (T.  D.  Woohey.)  Universal 
redemption  subversive  of  the  ass^trance  of  salvation : — Draw  near  and  contemplate 
this  Christian  paradox  ;  come,  behold  with  us,  for  a  time,  this  Christian  mystery, 
the  certainty  that  the  puilty  cannot  be  cleared — that  God  cannot  do  it- — is  the  safe- 
guard of  redemption,  the  guarantee  of  the  offered  atonenipnt.  I.  It  is  true  that 
this  declaration  of  God's  character — of  the  impossibility  of  His  clearing  the  guilty — 
SHUTS  MANY  LARGE  AND  WIDE  DOORS  OF  HOPE.  The  hearts  of  sinncrs  are  full  of 
devices  for  salvation.  They  have  many  entrance- ways  to  pardon  and  favour.  1, 
There  is  the  placability  and  compassion  of  God  upon  which  they  largely  draw. 
The  Divine  anger  is  thus,  in  their  imagination,  a  bugbear,  well  got  up  to  scare 
transgressors,  to  keep  them  in  check,  but,  as  to  any  ultimate  and  eternal  condem- 


586  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crn^.  ixxir. 

nation  resulting  from  it,  all  is  set  aside  by  their  convenient  doctrine  of  His  easy  and 
overwhelming  compassion.  2.  Again,  there  is  the  tempter's  suggesuon  of  the 
cbangeableness  of  God,  "  ye  shall  not  surely  die,"  opening  to  many  a  wide  door. 
It  is  not  that  the  veracity  of  God  is  actually  questioned.  But  then  He  may  take 
back  or  change  His  word.  These  deceitful  hopes  are  met,  and  the  door  tbey  open 
for  ever  shut,  by  the  one  decisive  passage — "  and  I  will  by  no  means  clear  the 
guilty."  II.  Whilst  this  passage  shuts  with  so  decisive  a  hand  every  false  door  of 
hope,  and  announces  in  characters  of  light,  that  guilt  cannot  go  unpunished,  it 
YET  OPENS  A  DOOR  OF  HOPE  THAT  NEVER  CAN  BE  SHOT,  and  is  an  immovable  anchor 
to  every  soul  that  has  fled  for  refuge  to  the  great  propitiation.  He  can  by  no 
means  clear  the  guilty,  therefore  am  I  assured  He  can  by  no  means  punish  the 
innocent.  In  Christ  I  am  innocent ;  guilt  is  no  longer  attachable  to  me  ;  my  soul 
is  justified;  justice,  with  its  sword,  has  no  claim  upon  me — it  is  satisfied  ;  the  law, 
with  its  penalties,  has  no  demand  against  me  ;  every  jot  and  tittle  of  it  is  fulfilled. 
"  Who  is  he  that  conderaneth  ?  it  is  Christ  that  died."  III.  We  observe  that  the 
strong  consolation  drawn  from  this  passage  is  warranted  only  on  the  supposition 

THAT,  IN  DYING,  ChRIST  DIED  AS  A  TRUE  AND  REAL  SUBSTITUTE  IN  THE  ROOM   AND    STEAD 

OF  His  people,  and  fob  them  alone.  (J.  Leicis.)  Justice  and  mercy  not  an- 
tagonistic : — Now,  there  is  no  greater  mistake  than  to  suppose  that  the  Divine 
Being,  as  a  God  of  justice,  and  a  God  of  mercy,  stands  in  antagonism  to  Himself. 
Observe,  I  pray  you,  that  it  is  not  mercy,  but  injustice,  which  is  irreconcilable  with 
justice,  and  that  it  is  cruelty,  not  justice,  that  stands  opposed  to  mercy.  These 
attributes  of  Jehovah  are  not  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  as  are  light  and  dark- 
ness, fire  and  water,  truth  and  falsehood,  right  and  wrong.  No.  Like  two  separate 
streams  which  unite  their  waters  to  form  a  common  river,  justice  and  mercy  are 
combined  in  the  covenant  of  redemption.  Like  the  two  cherubims  whose  out- 
stretched wings  met  above  the  ark,  or  like  the  two  devout  and  holy  men  who  drew 
the  nails  from  Christ's  body,  and  bore  the  sacred  burden  to  the  grave,  or  like  the 
•two  angels  who  received  it  in  charge,  and,  seated  like  mourners  within  the 
sepulchre,  the  one  at  the  head,  the  other  at  the  feet,  kept  silent  watch  over  the 
precious  treasure,  justice  and  mercy  are  associated  in  the  work  of  Christ.  They 
are  the  supporters  of  the  shield  on  which  the  cross  is  emblazoned.  They  sustain 
the  arms  of  our  heavenly  Advocate.  They  form  the  two  solid,  immovable,  and 
eternal  pillars  of  the  Mediator's  throne.  On  Calvai-y,  mercy  and  truth  meet 
together,  righteousness  and  peace  kiss  each  other.  {T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Visiting 
tJxe  iniquity  of  the  fathers. — The  law  of  heredity  : — We  are  born  into  a  life  where 
we  cannot  determine  the  nature  of  the  influences  which  we  exert.  We  can  repress 
some,  modify  others,  and  develop  stiU  others ;  but  we  cannot  determine  the  effect, 
nor  change  it.  A  certain  influence  we  must  exert  one  upon  another.  I.  First,  we 
will  mention  voluntary  influence,  or  the  capacity  which  we  have  gained  of 
influencing  our  fellow-men  by  bringing  power,  or  the  causes  of  power,  to  bear  upon 
them  on  purpose.  This  is  the  more  familiar  form  of  influence.  It  is  the  founda- 
tion of  all  instruction.  The  parent  influences  the  child  on  purpose.  The  teacher 
purposely  influences  all  the  minds  that  are  brought  nnder  his  care.  Friends 
influence  friends.  We  draw  men  to  our  way  of  thinking,  and  to  our  way  of  acting. 
We  persuade ;  we  dissuade ;  we  urge ;  we  enforce  our  agency ;  and  in  a  thousand 
ways  we  voluntarily  draw  men  to  and  fro.  II.  Then,  besides  all  this,  besides  what 
we  do  on  purpose,  there  is  the  other  element  of  unconscious  influence  which  men 
exert— that  which  our  nature  throws  out  without  our  volition.  For  I  hold  that  it  is 
with  us  as  it  is  with  the  sun.  I  do  not  suppose  that  the  sun  ever  thinks  of  raising 
the  thermometer ;  but  it  does  raise  it.  Wherever  the  sun  shines  warmly,  the 
mercury  goes  up,  although  the  sun  and  the  instrument  are  both  unconscious.  And 
we  are  incessantly  emitting  influences  good,  bad,  or  negative.  We  are  perpetually, 
by  the  force  of  life,  throwing  out  from  ourselves  imperceptible  influences.  And  yet 
the  sum  of  these  influences  is  of  the  utmost  weight  and  importance  in  life.  A 
single  word  spoken,  you  know  not  what  it  falls  upon.  You  know  not  on  what  soul 
it  rests.  In  some  moods,  words  fall  off  from  us,  and  are  of  no  account.  But  there 
are  other  moods  in  which  a  word  of  hope,  a  word  of  cheer,  a  word  of  sympathy,  is 
as  balm.  It  changes  the  sequence  of  thought,  and  the  whole  order  and  direction  of 
the  mind.  Single  words  have  often  switched  men  off  from  bad  courses,  or  off  from 
good  ones,  as  the  case  may  be.  A  simple  example,  silent,  unspeaking  by  vocaliza- 
tion, but  characterized  by  purity,  bv  simplicity,  crystalline  and  heavenly,  has 
sweetened  whole  neighbourhoods.  Fidelity,  disinterestedness  in  love,  pure  peace- 
fulness,  love  of  God,  and  faith  in  invisible  things,  cannot  exist  in  a  man  without 


CHAP,  xxxnr,]  EXODUS.  537 

having  their  effect  upon  his  fellow-men.  It  is  impossible  that  one  should  stand  up 
in  the  midst  of  a  community  and  simply  be  good,  and  not  diffuse  the  influence  of 
that  goodness  on  every  side.  That  which  is  true  of  goodness  is  true  also  of  evil. 
Men  who  are  under  the  influence  of  the  malign  passions  are  sowing  the  seeds  of 
these  passions.  Sparks  fly  out  from  them  as  from  the  chimney  of  a  forge.  It  is 
the  inherent  necessity  of  wickedness  to  breed  wickedness  and  distribute  it.  A  man 
is  responsible,  not  only  for  what  he  does  on  purpose,  but  what  he  unconsciously 
does.  And  the  load  of  responsibility  grows  as  you  take  in  these  widening  circles. 
More  than  this,  the  greater  the  nature,  and  the  more  ample  the  endowment,  the 
more  influence  does  a  man  exert  both  for  good  and  for  evil.  The  moral  tone  of  our 
literature  in  this  respect  is  exceedingly  bad.  There  is  almost  a  maxim  that  genius 
has  a  right  to  be  lawless  as  to  its  method  of  doing  right  things.  Every  man  is 
responsible  for  duty ;  and  duty,  and  responsibility  for  it,  augment  in  the  proportion 
of  being.  III.  Our  influence  is  not  merely  voluntary,  or  involuntary  and  unconscious, 

BOT    IT    BECOMES    COMPLEX,    BECAUSE     IT     IS     COMPOUNDED    WITH    THE    LIVES    AND    THE 

ADDED  INFLUENCE  OF  OTHERS.  We  are  social.  We  come  into  relations  with  men. 
Our  freedom  touches  theirs.  We  inspire  them.  But  we  do  not  change  their 
nature.  We,  as  it  were,  sow  germs  in  their  soil.  These  germs  go  on  and  become 
forces  in  their  hands.  So  that  that  which  we  do  to  single  ones,  they  propagate. 
But  men's  influence  is  not  limited  to  their  voluntary  action,  nor  to  the  complex 
social  relations  which  they  sustain,  and  by  which  their  influence  is  propagated 
inliirectly.  IV.  In  some  respects  men  hold  in  their  hands  the  history  of  the 
FUTURE.  The  very  solemn  declaration  of  our  text — "  Visiting  the  iniquities  of  the 
fathers  upon  the  children,  and  upon  the  children's  children,  unto  the  third  and  to  the 
fourth  generation  " — this  is  the  mystery  of  ages.  If  it  were  but  on  the  one  side  ;  if 
men,  having  the  power  of  beneficence,  had  the  power  to  perpetuate  it,  we  should 
admire  that ;  but  if  it  is  a  fact  that  men  have  the  power  of  transmitting  corruption, 
and  so  of  influencing  after  times,  who  can  fail  to  marvel  at  that?  If  that  is  a  law, 
men  may  well  stand  appalled  in  the  presence  of  such  results  as  must  fall  out  under 
it.  And  it  is  a  law,  it  is  a  fact.  We  must  learn  this  great  hereditary  law,  and  we 
must  include  in  our  purposes  of  benevolence  the  wise  selection,  the  perpetuity  and 
the  improvement  of  the  race,  by  the  observance  of  this  great  law  of  hereditary 
transmission.  The  malignity  of  sin  is  a  terrible  malignity,  as  it  is  revealed  by  this 
great  law  of  the  transmission  of  influence  to  posterity,  either  directly  and  volun- 
tarily, or  indirectly  and  unconsciously.  There  are  multitudes  of  men  that  are  careless 
of  themselves.  They  are  said  to  be  their  own  worst  enemies.  They  are  men  that 
are  free  and  easy  ;  that  squander  their  money;  that  pervert  their  disposition.  And 
because  they  are  good-natured  and  genial,  people  say  of  them,  "  They  are  clever 
fellows ;  they  are  kind  men ;  they  do  no  harm ;  at  any  rate  they  are  their  own 
worst  enemies."  Now,  a  man  that  is  spending  his  whole  life  to  destroy  himself, 
cannot  stop  with  himself.  And  the  better  fellow  he  is,  the  more  likely  is  he  to 
exert  an  influence.  More  than  that,  it  is  not  himself  alone  that  is  destroyed.  The 
babe  in  the  cradle  is  cursed.  The  daughter  unborn  is  cursed.  The  heir  and 
sequent  children  are  cursed.     V.  I  will  add  but  a  single  consideration  more :  and 

THAT  IS  A  CAUTION   AND  A  WARNING    TO    ALL    THOSE    WHO    ARE    CONSCIOUSLY    BEARING    IN 

THEMSELVES  THE  SEED  OF  TRANSMISSIBLE  DISEASE.  I  think  there  is  HO  Crime  and  no 
misdemeanour,  to  those  that  are  instructed,  greater  than  that  of  forming  marriage 
connections  under  such  circumstances,  (ff.  W.  Beecher.)  The  organic  unity  of 
the  race  : — I.  Let  us,  in  the  first  place,  observe  the  natural  fact  we  may  almost  call 
it,  of  THE  UNITY  AND  SOLIDARITY  OF  THE  RACE.  The  method  of  the  preservation  and 
reproduction  of  the  species,  which  God  has  appointed,  is  that  of  parentage  and  off- 
spring. The  relations  of  the  different  parts  of  this  prolonged  species  are  such,  as 
to  involve  a  certain  unity.  Birth  and  nurture,  the  family  relation,  the  law  of  simi- 
larity, the  limits  of  variation,  by  which  the  children  cannot  diverge  from  the 
parental  type  beyond  a  certain  mark  of '  liberty,  all  these  are  what  we  may  call 
physical  and  bodily  elements  of  unity  in  the  race.  This  unity  is  found,  as  we  rise 
to  the  human  race,  to  involve  the  descendant  in  the  conditions  of  the  parent,  to  a 
degree  that  is  much  more  striking  than  in  lower  species.  The  human  infant 
remains  longer  in  dependence  upon  the  parent ;  the  years  of  education  extend 
farther ;  the  conditions  of  life  for  the  offspring,  in  proportion  as  civilization  and 
culture  make  life  more  complicated,  and  more  deeply  affected  by  the  parent.  That 
this  unity  of  the  race  is  taught  by  Scripture,  no  one  can  doubt.  It  is  further  illus- 
trated by  the  Divine  treatment  of  individual  cases,  and  by  the  development  of  the 
Divine  purpose  throughout  the  sacred  history.  ...  If  there  be  lessons  in  history, 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

this  lesson  at  least  is  clear.  God  has  bound  men  into  the  nnity  of  their  descent, 
and  deals  with  man  along  the  lines  of  his  generation.  II.  Our  text  does  more  than 
merely  reveal  the  truth  which  we  have  stated  and  illustrated ;  it  further  shows  us 
that  this  organic  unity  of  the  race  is  of  a  moral  quality  and  involves  moral  dis- 
cipline. God  declares  that  He  visits  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children, 
and  upon  the  children's  children,  unto  the  third  and  unto  the  fourth  generation. 
We  are  not  bound  by  the  mere  number  of  the  descents  to  which  the  visitation  will 
be  applied.  The  very  form  of  the  phrase  suggests  indefiniteness.  It  may  be  that, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  only  one  generation  shall  suffer,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  dread 
judgment  may  descend  beyond  the  third  and  fourth  line  of  the  posterity.  The  law 
is  one  of  the  generalities  of  human  life,  not  to  be  measured  by  the  accuracies  of 
arithmetic.  Man  needs  not  to  be  exalted  to  presumption,  nor  cast  down  to  hope- 
lessness, by  the  words  of  this  revelation.  And,  as  we  interpret  the  duration  of  the 
penalty  in  the  general  sense,  so  we  may  find,  in  the  words  of  judgment,  something 
more  than  the  mere  formula  of  doom.  If  there  be  a  visitation  of  the  father's  sin, 
there  surely  must  be  also  a  benediction  from  the  father's  virtue.  The.se  words 
therefore  reveal  to  us  the  moral  quality  of  the  race's  organic  unity.  That  which  is 
involved  in  the  descent  of  child  from  parent  is  not  by  way  of  mere  natural  cause 
and  effect.  It  is  indeed  part  of  the  material  conditioning  of  the  universe.  But  it 
is  superintended  by  the  God  who  governs,  and  governs  not  only  by  physical  law, 
but  also  with  moral  and  spiritual  ends.  He  reveals  Himself  as  administering  jt, 
and  we  know  therefore  that  if  it  be  a  Divine  visitation,  it  is  done  with  wisdom  and 
regulative  grace,  it  is  done  for  the  higher  purposes  of  character,  for  the  evolution 
of  good,  and  for  the  final  extinction  of  evil,  and  therefore,  it  must  hold,  blended 
with  it,  not  only  the  designs  of  moral  law  and  the  vindication  of  justice,  but  also 
the  sublime  issues  of  grace  and  salvation,  inasmuch  as  God  is  a  Father  as  well  as  a 
Euler,  a  Saviour  as  well  as  a  Judge.  It  is,  then,  not  a  doom,  but  a  discipline.  It 
is  not  to  work  itself  out  like  some  physical  mechanical  law,  catching  you  as  a 
machine  catches  the  unwary  or  the  blundering  operative,  and  then  never  letting 
him  go,  until  it  has  dragged  him  through  all  its  terrible  course  of  wheels  and 
rollers,  cogs  and  crushing  pistons,  to  throw  him  out,  at  length,  a  torn  and  mangled' 
dismembered,  slaughtered  travesty  of  life  and  power.  This  is  your  philo- 
sophic view  of  human  descent,  but  this  is  not  the  Divine.  God  "  visits  the  sins  of 
the  fathers  on  the  children."  We  know  then  that  He  does  it  to  discipline  the  race* 
"  My  Father  is  a  husbandman,"  said  Jesus,  teaching  us  the  same  blessed  lesson 
under  a  beautiful  figure.  What,  may  we  now  ask,  is  the  practical  outcome  of  all 
this  truth,  man's  organic  relation,  this  relation  divinely  regulated  and  applied  to 
the  discipline  of  the  race  ?  1.  In  the  first  place,  will  it  not  give  us  a  fresh  sense  of 
the  responsibility  of  life ?  We  are  links  in  the  chain  of  human  life.  We  receive 
the  influences  of  our  fathers,  we  hand  these  on  to  our  children.  2.  Shall  we  then 
not  deeply  consider  the  tremendous  responsibility  with  which  we  are  freighted  ? 
W^e  may  involve  a  long  line  of  descendants'  in  the  result  of  our  living.  3.  The 
import  of  this  lesson  becomes  all  the  greater  when  we  consider  it  as  it  bears  upon 
family  life,  and  the  relations  which  subsist  between  the  parent  and  the  child.  What 
a  sanctity  has  not  God  given  to  the  family !  Nothing  must  break  the  bond  which 
binds  society  into  its  essential  and  formative  elements — the  circles  of  home.  4.  Let 
ns,  then,  seek  to  render  this  Divine  law  of  great  potency  in  the  building  of  our 
Church  and  the  furtherance  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  as  it  is  given  to  us.  "  To 
you  and  to  your  children  "  is  the  promise.  5.  And  finally,  let  me  ask  you  to  reflect 
upon  your  relation  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  light  of  this  organic  unity  of  the  race. 
(L.  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  The  iniquitxj  of  the  fathers  visited  upon  their  children: — 1. 
That  this  passage  has  no  reference  whatsoever  to  God's  treatment  of  mankind  in 
a  future  state.  It  does  not  mean  that  God  will  punish  children  in  a  future  state 
for  the  sins  of  their  parents ;  but  the  visitation  which  it  threatens  is  exclusively 
temporal  (see  Ezek.  xviii.  20).  2.  That  God  never  visits  children  even  with 
temporal  judgments  for  the  sins  of  their  parents,  unless  they  imitate,  and  thus 
justify  their  parents'  offences.  Hezekiah,  Josiah,  and  many  other  pious  men  were 
the  children  of  exceedingly  wicked  parents  ;  but  as  they  shunned  the  sins  of  their 
fathers,  and  were  supremely  devoted  to  God,  they  enjoyed  His  favour  in  a  very  high 
degree,  and  were  visited  with  no  marks  of  displeasure  on  account  of  their  progeni- 
tors. There  is,  however,  one  apparent  exception  to  these  remarks,  which  must  be 
noticed.  It  is  evident  from  facts,  that  even  pious  children  often  suffer  in  conse- 
quence of  the  wicked  conduct  of  their  parents.  If  a  father  be  idle,  or  extravagant, 
his  children,  and  perhaps  his  children's  children,  may  suffer  in  consequence ;  nor 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  EXODUS.  589 

will  any  degree  of  piety  always  shield  them  from  such  sufferings.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  added,  that  the  sinful  example  and  conduct  of  wicked  patents  has  a  most 
powerful  teudency  to  prevent  their  children  from  becoming  pious,  to  induce  them 
to  pursue  vicious  courses,  and  thus  to  bring  upon  them  Divine  judgments.  3.  That 
our  text  describes  God's  method  of  proceeding  with  nations,  and  civil  or  ecclesi- 
astical communities,  rather  than  with  individuals.  I  do  not  say  that  it  has  no 
reference  to  individuals,  but  that  it  refers  principally  to  nations,  states,  and 
churches.  That  v>-e  may  perceive  the  justice,  wisdom,  and  proiDiiety  of  this  method 
of  proceeding,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  following  things.  It  is  indispensably 
necessary  to  the  perfection  of  God's  moral  government  that  it  should  extend  to 
nations  and  communities  as  well  as  to  individuals.  This,  I  conceive,  is  too  evident 
to  require  proof ;  for  how  could  God  be  considered  as  the  moral  governor  of  the 
world  if  nations  and  communities  were  exempt  from  His  government  ?  Again,  if 
God  is  to  exercise  a  moral  government  over  nations  and  communities  by  reward- 
ing or  punishing  them  according  to  their  works,  the  rewards  and  punishments 
must  evidently  be  dispensed  in  this  world;  for  nations  and  communities  will  not 
exist,  as  such,  in  the  world  to  come.  In  that  world  God  must  deal  with  men, 
considered  simply  as  individuals.  Further,  it  seems  evidently  proper  that  com- 
munities as  well  as  individuals  should  have  a  time  of  trial  and  probation  allowed 
them  ;  that  if  the  first  generation  prove  sinful,  the  community  should  not  be 
immediately  destroyed,  but  that  the  punishment  should  be  suspended,  till  it  be  seen 
whether  the  nation  will  prove  incorrigible,  or  whether  some  succeeding  generation 
will  not  repent  of  the  national  sins,  and  thus  avert  national  judgments.  Now  it  is 
evident  that  if  God  thus  waits  upon  nations,  as  He  does  upon  individuals,  and 
allows  them  a  season  of  probation,  a  space  for  repentance,  He  cannot  destroy  them 
until  many  generations  of  sinners  are  laid  in  their  graves.  Besides,  by  thus  sus- 
pending the  rod  or  the  sword  over  a  nation.  He  presents  to  it  powerful  inducements 
to  reform.  He  appeals  to  parental  feelings,  to  men's  affection  for  their  posterity, 
and  endeavours  to  deter  them  from  sin  by  the  assurance  that  their  posterity  will 
Buffer  for  it.     (E.  Paijson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  21-26.  Thou  shalt  rest. — Sabbath  rest  in  harvest: — '* Six  days  thou  shalt 
work,  but  on  the  seventh  day  thou  shalt  rest:  in  earing  time  and  in  harvest  thou  shalt 
rest  "  ;  that  is,  you  shall  not  violate  the  Sabbath-day  because  it  is  harvest.  I  have 
heard  persons  fay.  It  has  been  six  days  very  wet ;  the  corn  is  standing,  and  Sunday 
happens  to  be  a  bright  sunny  day  ;  and  tbey  say.  We  ought  to  go  and  cut  down  the 
corn  on  the  Sabbath-day.  Here  is  a  provision  for  this  very  possibility.  God  says, 
Even  in  harvest  and  earing  time  you  shall  still  keep  the  Sabbath  sacred  to  God. 
And  I  have  noticed,  although  I  admit  my  obsei-vation  has  been  very  limited,  that 
that  man  who  has  cut  down  his  corn  on  the  Sunday  in  order  to  get  it  in  well,  did 
not  succeed  one  whit  better  in  the  long  run  than  he  that  observed  the  Sabbath  as 
holy,  and  waited  for  sunny  week-days  in  order  to  do  his  week-day  work.  I 
admit  that  there  are  works  of  necessity  and  mercy  that  are  proper  to  be  done  on 
the  Sabbath-day ;  and  I  can  conceive  the  possibility  that  a  time  may  come — an 
autumn  may  come — when,  even  upon  the  Sabbath-day,  you  should  be  obliged  to 
cut  down  the  corn  in  consequence  of  unfavourable  weather  on  the  week-days ;  but 
you  should  first  be  well  satisfied  that  there  is  no  prospect  of  sunshine  during  the 
six  days  that  are  to  follow.  Do  not  forget  that  God  said — not  as  ceremony  but 
morality — that  in  earing  time,  and  in  harvest  even,  thou  shalt  rest,  or  sabbatize, 
or  keep  the  Lord's  day.  (/.  Cumming,  D.D.)  Exemplary  Sabbath-keepmg  : — 
I  remember  one  time,  many  years  ago,  I  was  standing  out  for  Sunday,  but  the 
owners  could  not  bear  the  thought  of  the  smacks  laying  to  for  the  Sabbath. 
Well,  the  owner  I  sailed  for  wanted  me  to  work  on  Sunday.  I  felt  I  could  not,  so  I 
had  to  leave  my  berth.  I  walked  about  eight  weeks  after  that  in  search  of  employ- 
ment. Several  owners  asked  me  whether  I  wanted  a  situation.  I  asked  them 
whether  they  wished  me  to  fish  on  the  Lord's  day.  They  said,  yes.  I  had  to 
decline.  Well,  the  money  was  getting  short,  and  I  used  to  go  iu  the  dark  places 
on  the  sands  to  lift  up  my  heart  to  God  to  lielp  me  to  stand  against  this  fierce 
temptation.  I  had  no  help  at  home.  My  wife,  not  loving  my  Saviour,  could  not 
understand  my  objection,  and  I  have  often  seen  her  crying  to  think  that  she  and 
the  two  little  children  would  have  no  bread  to  eat.  My  faith  told  me  that  my 
Father  in  heaven  would  not  let  them  be  without  bread  ai.d  watei — that  would  lie 
sure.  At  length  the  time  came  when  I  had  to  take  my  wat^h  to  pledge  to  get 
tread.     I  started  with  a  heavy  1  eart  and  when  I  got  to  the  sliop  I  could  not  gain 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

courage  to  go  in  for  a  long  time.  I  walked  up  and  down  praying  to  God  to  keep  me 
strong  and  faithful  and  able  to  part  with  everything  rather  than  to  betray  my  trust. 
At  last  I  went  in,  and  there  stood  one  of  our  Church  helpers  behind  the  counter. 
'  Hullo,'  says  he,  '  Wilkinson,  has  it  come  to  this  ?  '  He  was  a  dear  young  Chris- 
tian, and  has  been  a  minister  of  the  gospel  for  many  years  now.  He  asked  me  what 
I  wanted  there.  Then  I  told  him  I  had  come  to  pledge  my  watch  to  get  bread  for 
•wife  and  children.  The  tears  stood  in  both  our  eyes.  At  last  he  asked,  '  How 
much  do  you  waut  on  it  ? '  I  said,  '  I  don't  know ;  give  me  enough  to  get  some- 
thing to  eat  to-day ;  and  to-morrow,  perhaps,  God  may  see  fit  to  give  me  some- 
thing to  do  where  I  can  still  serve  Him.'  Well,  he  gave  me  some  money,  and  he 
shook  hands  with  me,  and  said,  '  Have  faith  and  courage ;  keep  trusting  in  the 
Lord,  and  He  will  bring  you  through.'  And  so  He  did.  The  next  week  three 
smacks  had  to  be  sold,  and  a  Christian  man  bought  one.  He  asked  me  to  go  as 
skipper  of  her.  He  told  me,  before  I  went  to  sea,  not  to  do  anything  on  Sundays 
if  I  could  help  it.  That  is  twenty-six  years  ago,  and  that  is  how  the  Lord  brought 
me  through.  (Captain  Wilkinson,  Mission  Smack  "Ed.  Birkbeck.")  Observe  the 
feast. — God's  j)  revision  for  His  people's  enjoyment: — I.  That  seasons  for  rejoicing 
WERE  COMMANDED.  Letthoscwho  think  that  the  OldDispcnsatiou  wasgloomy  remember 
that  there  was  Divine  injunction  for  joy  and  feasting  three  times  a  year.  II.  That 
these  seasons  for  rejoicing  were  convenientlt  appointed.  Not  in  winter,  but — 1.  In 
spring,  Passover.  2.  Summer,  First-fruits.  3.  Autumn,  Ingathering.  III.  That 
these  seasons  for  rejoicing  had  a  religious  basis.  1.  The  feasts  were  "  unto 
God."  2.  Were  in  remembrance  of  Divine  services  which  made  rejoicing  possible. 
IV.  That  these  seasons  for  rejoicing  were  connected  with  religious  acts  (vers. 
17-19).  1.  Personal  dedication.  2.  Sacrifices.  V.  That  seasons  of  rejoicing 
must  not  engender  slovenliness  and  uncleanness  (ver.  18).  VI.  That  seasons  of 
rejoicing  must  not  be  desecrated  by  unnatural  ob  superstitious  ceremonies. 
"  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his  mother's  milk  " ;  an  outrage  on  nature  and 
connected  with  witchcraft.  In  conclusion,  if  Judaism  was  a  religion  of  joy, 
much  more  so  is  Christianity.  The  latter — 1.  Was  inaugurated  as  "  glad  tidings 
of  great  joy."    2.  Its  leading  fact  and  doctrines  are  grounds  of  joy  (1  John  i.  1-4). 

3.  Its  great  central  and  fundamental  principle  is  an  occasion  of  joy  (Rom.  v.  11). 

4.  The  "fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  joy."  5.  It  provides  an  eternity  of  joy.  6.  But 
remember  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength,  and  it  is  only  "in  the  Lord  "  that 
we  can  rejoice  evermore  (Phil.  iv.  4).  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Thrice  In  the  year. — The 
three  yearly  feasts  at  Jerusalem: — We  will — I.  Draw  your  attention  to  the  institu- 
tion RECORDED  IN  THE  TEXT.  Consider — 1.  Of  what  nature  this  appointment  was  : 
partly  political,  and  partly  religious.  2.  What  care  God  took  to  guard  against  the 
objections  to  which  it  was  liable.  II.  Suggest  some  observations  founded  upon 
IT.  1.  The  service  of  God  is  of  paramount  obligation.  2.  They  who  serve  the 
Lord  shall  be  saved  by  Him.     (C.  Simeon,  M.A.) 

Vers.  27,  28.  He  wrote  upon  the  tables. — The  second  tables : — The  Ten  Com- 
mandments were  twice  written  by  the  finger  of  God  Himself  (see  Deut.  x.  1-3), 
and  upon  enduring  tables  of  stone,  to  fchow  how  deeply  and  permanently  they  were 
to  be  engraved  upon  the  heart  of  man.  Twice  written,  once  upon  a  broken  and 
once  upon  an  unbroken  tablet,  symbolically  setting  forth  the  truth  that  they  were 
once  written  upon  the  nature  before  the  Fall,  and  are  to  be  inscribed  a  second  time 
upon  that  nature,  which  inscription  is  made  at  his  regeneration.  Also,  as  they 
were  once  written  upon  stone,  they  were  to  be  engraved  a  second  time  upon  the 
heart,  as  the  prophet  Jeremiah  predicted  would  be,  and  as  the  apostle  asserted  had 
been  done  (Heb.  viii.  10).  Then  by  special  command  they  were  afterwards 
deposited  for  safe  keeping  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  upon  which  rested  the 
Shekinah  of  the  Lord,  the  most  inviolably  sacred  place  outside  the  courts  of 
heaven,  and  by  special  designation  were  ever  afterward  known  as  the  "  Tables  of 
the  Testimony."     (Jas.  Stacy,  D.D.) 

Vers.  29-35.  The  skin  of  his  face  shone. — Moses  transfigured: — This  was  the 
transfiguration  of  Moses.  Let  us  consider  the  narrative  as  a  spiritual  parable,  and 
'•  try  to  read  iu  it  some  of  the  conditions  and  privileges  of  exalted  communion  with 
God.  Communion  with  God  is  the  highest  prerogative  of  spiritual  beings.  It  is 
the  instinctive  craving  of  human  souls  ;  it  is  the  supreme  privilege  and  joy  of  the 
religious  life  ;  it  is  the  inspiration  and  strength  of  all  great  service.  God  redeems 
us  and  saves  us  By  drawing  us  to  Himself.    By  mysterious  voices  He  solicits  us ; 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  EXODUS.  691 

by  irrepressible  instincts  He  impels  us ;  by  subtle  affinities  He  holds  us ;  by  in- 
effable satisfactions  He  makes  us  feel  His  nearness  and  fills  us  with  rest  and  joy. 

1.  We  ABE    ADMITTED    TO   FELLOWSHIP    WITH    GoD    ONLY   THROUGH   PROPITIATORY    SACRI- 

,  FICE.     Moses  builds  an  altar  under  the  hill,  offers  sacrifices  upon  it,  and  sprinkles 
^  the  blood  thereof  before  he  ascends  the  holy  mount  to  commune  with  God.     We 
must   seek  fellowship  with  God  through  the  one  propitiatory  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ.     Not  only  is  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  the  medium  through  which  the  for- 
giving love  of  God  becomes  possible ;  it  is  the  supreme  expression  of  it.     II.  We 

ARE    (JUALIFIED    FOR    OUR   HIGHEST   INTERCOURSE    WITH    GOD    BY   THE     SPIRITUAL    GRACE 

OF  OUR  OWN  SOULS ;  Moscs  was  quaUfied  for  this  revelation  of  the  supreme  glory  of 
God  by  his  peculiar  magnanimity  and  self-sacrifice.  When  God  admits  us  to 
intercourse  with  Himself,  what  we  see  will  depend  upon  our  capability  of  seeing. 
Only  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  God.     III.  We  are  admitted  to  visions  of  the 

HIGHER    GLORY   OF    GoD    ONLY   WHEN     WE     SEEK     THEM     FOR    THE     USES    OF     PRACTICAL 

RELIGIOUS  DUTY.  If  selfishuess  be  a  disqualification,  so  is  mere  sentiment.  A 
man  who  seeks  God  for  his  own  reUgious  gratification  merely  may  see  God,  but 
he  will  not  see  God's  supreme  glory.  Our  chief  reason  for  desiring  to  know  God 
must  be  that  we  may  glorify  Him  in  serving  others.  IV.  The  most  spiritual 
visions  of  God,  the  closest  communion  with  God,  are  to  be  realized  only 
WHEN  WE  seek  Him  ALONE.  In  our  greatest  emotions  we  seek  solitude  instinc- 
tively. Human  presence  is  intolerable  to  the  intensest  moods  of  the  soul.  No  man 
can  be  eminent  either  in  holiness  or  service  who  does  not  often  ascend  to  the 
mountain-top,  that  he  may  be  alone  with  God  and  behold  His  glory.     V.  The 

SUPREME      REVELATION     OF     GoD   TO     WHICH    WE    ATTAIN     THROUGH     SUCH     FELLOWSHIP 

WITH  Him  is  the  revelation  of  His  grace  and  love.  When  a  man  sees  this, 
the  glory  of  God  has  passed  before  him.     VI.  The  revelation  of  god's  glorious 

GOODNESS     transfigures   THE    MAN    WHO   BEHOLDS    IT.       {H.     Allon,    D.D.)  UnCOH- 

scious  beauty: — "  He  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone."  Few  and  simple 
as  these  words  are,  there  could  be  none  grander  written  to  the  memory  of  a  hero. 
The  noblest  and  loftiest  character  is  assuredly  that  of  the  man  who  is  so  absorbed 
in  the  Divine  nature  of  his  calling,  and  so  conscious  of  the  need  of  those  for 
whom  he  labours,  that  he  becomes  forgetful  of  the  beauty  in  his  character  which 
others  recognize,  and  almost  unconscious  that  he  is  himself  the  worker.    I.  There 

ARE     many     unconscious     BELIEVERS   AND    WORKERS     IN     THE     WORLD     STILL,    WHO    MAY 

gather  helpful  thoughts  FROM  THIS  FACT  CONCERNING  MosES.  Mucli  time  and 
abiUty  has  been  devoted  to  discussing  the  question  of  "  Christian  assurance."  To 
say  that  if  we  do  not  feel  that  we  are  saved,  we  are  not  saved,  is  to  lose  sight  of 
what  salvation  really  means.  It  is  nowhere  stated  in  Scripture  that  an  assurance 
of  that  salvation  which  is  a  gradual  matter,  a  day-by-day  struggle  and  deliverance, 
is  either  universal  or  necessary.  God  may  think  it  best  that  some  of  us  should 
not  have  assurance,  as  on  that  great  day  He  kept  Moses  unconscious  that  the  skin 
of  his  face  shone.     II.  Perhaps  some  of  us  may  feel  that  there  were  moments  of 

BUCH    BRIGHT    AND    HOPEFUL   EXPERIENCE     ONCE,    BUT     THEY   ARE    PAST    NOW,    and     that 

seems  to  us  the  saddest  thought  of  all.  Still  we  need  not  despair.  We  should  go 
back  as  Moses  did  to  the  mount  wbere  God  had  spoken  to  him,  to  the  source  of  the 
old  enthusiasm  and  the  former  faith.  If  we  go  back  and  stand  face  to  face  with 
the  crucified  Christ,  our  life  will  glow  anew  with  the  radiance  of  His  love,  even 
though  we  ourselves  are  unconscious  of  it.  III.  This  holds  good  also  regarding 
OUR  WORK  FOB  GoD.  Many  a  splendid  silent  work  is  done  on  earth,  and  the  doer  is 
perhaps  unconscious  of  it,  and  may  remain  unconscious  till  the  great  day  of  the 
Lord  shall  reveal  it.  (T,  T.  Shore,  M.A.)  Moses'  face  shining  :  a  picture  of  true 
glory : — 1.  Man  has  an  instinct  for  glory.  2.  Man  has  sadly  perverted  this  in- 
stinct. 3.  The  Bible  rightly  directs  it.  I.  The  true  glory  of  man  involves 
fellowship  with  THE  Eternal.  The  human  character  is  formed  on  the  principle 
of  imitation.  To  get  a  perfect  character  implies — 1.  The  existence  of  a  perfect 
model.  2.  The  love  of  a  perfect  model.  3.  The  knowledge  of  a  perfect  model. 
II.  The  true  glory  of  man  has  an  external  manifestation.  1.  True  glory  will 
show  itself  in  the  "face"  of  our  person.  2.  Language.  3.  Life.  III.  True  glory 
IS  never  self-conscious.  "  Moses  wist  not."  There  are  several  things  that 
necessitate  self  obliviousness  in  a  truly  great  soul.     1.  His  standard  of  judgment. 

2,  His  circle  of  life.  He  who  stands  before  God  feels  his  notbingness.  8.  His 
spirit  of  life.  Love  is  a  passion  that  drowns  the  lover  in  the  loved.  "  I  live,  yet 
not  I."  IV.  True  glory  will  command  the  reverence  of  society.  1.  The  law  of 
conscience  will  ensure  universal  respect  for  it.    2.  The  law  of  guilt  will  ensure 


592  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

trembling  homage  for  it.  {EomiHst.)  The  shining  face : — I.  The  shining  face 
THE  RESULT  OF  HIS  LONG  AND  CLOSE  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD.  The  heavenly  light  witliin 
will  shine  out.  II.  The  shining  face  was  beheld  by  the  people.  The  good 
man's  walk  and  conversation  are  known  of  all.  III.  The  shining  face  awed  all 
WHO  beheld  it.  The  consciousness  of  sin  makes  the  wicked  fear  pious  friends, 
whose  presence  rebukes  them.  IV.  Moses  knew  not  that  his  face  shone.  The 
more  grace  we  have  the  less  self-consciousness.  The  more  good  others  see  in  us, 
tbe  less  do  we  see  ourselves.  Application:  1.  If  you  cannot  do  anything  e'se  for 
God,  you  can  exhibit  a  shining  face.  2.  Do  not  be  discouraged  because  you  are  not 
conscious  of  any  good  influence  you  exert.  {J.  L.  Elderdice.)  Communion  with 
Uod : — I.  The  distinguishing  chak.^ctekistics  op  communion  with  God.  1.  It  is 
mediatory.  2.  It  is  individual.  3.  It  is  protracted.  4.  It  is  self-denying.  II. 
The  irradiating  power  of  communion  with  God.  1.  Its  manifestation.  2. 
Its  unconsciousness.  3.  Its  effect.  (1)  Awe-inspiring.  (2)  Heart-attract in^jj. 
(T.  Baron.)  The  Divine  glory  and  its  effects: — We  learn  here  three  things 
with  regard  to  the  beauty  of  a  sanctified  character.  I.  The  nature  of  this 
beauty, — it  is  that  which  shines.  1.  Its  self-manifestation  may  be  often  a  passive 
tbing.  It  was  Moses'  face  that  was  the  index  of  his  mood  at  the  time,— nut  his 
tongue  nor  his  hands.  So  with  the  child  of  God  ;  the  beauty  that  bathes  him  is  a 
matter  that  exists  independent  of  any  definite  words  spoken,  or  any  outward  deeds 
done.  The  beauty  of  the  believer  is  the  beauty  of  joy  ;  and  joy  does  not  always 
need  speech  to  express  itself,  or  the  word  to  others,  "  I  am  glad."  2.  Then,  too, 
•we  learn  that  spiritual  beauty  is  often  an  unwitnessed  thing.  It  is  by  no  ojeans 
conditioned  by  the  position  a  man  occupies,  or  the  numbers  that  are  there  to  see. 
For  the  glory  on  Moses'  face  was  not  brought  there  just  that  others  might  watch  and 
admire.  His  features  would  have  glowed  all  the  same,  had  there  been  no  one  to 
watch  and  to  marvel  in  all  the  plain ;  and  heaven's  own  light  would  have  glanced 
and  flickered  from  his  face  among  the  bare  dead  sands  and  unconscious  stones 
where  he  trod,  making  the  solitude  around  him  luminous.  So  again  with  the  child 
of  God.  His  ghining  does  not  need  the  stimulus  of  spectators.  II.  The  secret  of 
THIS  beauty.  Communion  with  God, — that  is  the  source  it  must  spring  from,  lend- 
ing sanctity  to  the  character,  and  beauty  to  the  very  face.  To  see  God's  face  is  to 
shine ;  to  keep  seeing  it  is  to  ki'ep  shining.  It  is  thus  that  the  marvel  of  the  story  is 
repeated,  and  God's  praying  saints  come  forth  from  this  privacy  with  their  faces 
aglow;  and  the  dying  grow  luminous  on  their  beds,  till  the  watchers  wonder.  Why, 
where  is  there  brightness  like  the  brightness  of  heaven  ?  They  are  all  lustrous  therel 
Uncover  yourselves  therefore  to  the  light ;  keep  yourselves  up  where  the  light  is 
shining.  The  struggle  will  be  to  do  that,  and  will  be  over  when  you  have  done  it. 
So  and  so  only  will  you  shine  yourselves.  The  manner  of  this  shining  is  reflection, 
and  the  secret  of  it  is  communion  with  God.  III.  The  characteristic  by  which  it  la 
MARKED.  That  characteristic  is  unconsciousness.  "  Moses,"  we  are  told,  "  wist  not 
<that  his  face  shone."  It  is  always  most  real  when  it  radiates  unawares.  Is  it  not 
the  case  that  many  an  act  which  would  otherwise  have  afiected  us  favourably, 
attracted  our  admiration,  won  our  esteem,  is  shorn  of  its  grace  and  becomes 
worthless  or  worse  for  us,  just  because  vitiated  by  self-consciousness?  For 
instance,  I  may  be  glad  to  receive  a  kindness ;  but  if  the  man  who  professes  to 
show  it  me  betrays  so  plainly  that  he  thinks  it  a  kindness,  and  imposes  a  debt  on 
myself  while  he  does  it,  then  I  refuse  to  have  the  favour  at  his  hands,  or  I  grudge 
the  necessity  that  compels  me.  Or  I  may  feel  that  I  stand  in  need  of  forgiveness ; 
but  it  the  brother  at  whose  door  I  am  suing  for  it  makes  it  clear,  while  he  gives  me 
his  hand,  that  he  counts  his  act  a  magnanimous  one,  his  forgiveness  is  emptied 
of  its  giaee.  Why,  there  are  books  one  could  point  to,  as  well  as  people,  in  whose 
case  the  principle  holds  true.  In  language  and  in  sentiment  they  are  otherwise 
unexceptional.  They  treat  of  moral  and  religious  truth  with  a  freshness  of  view 
and  a  beauty  of  utterance  which  in  themselves  would  arrest  and  stimulate.  But 
you  cannot  help  feeling  throughout  them  the  presence  of  an  evil  underflavour  the 
while — the  taint  of  the  writer's  self-consciousness  in  it  all,  that  maims  and  defiles 
his  message — the  traces  of  a  spiritual  ostentation  through  the  whole,  that  makes 
yuu  recognize  while  you  read  that  the  question  is  being  asked  you — not,  "  What 
think  ye  of  the  truth  merely  ?  "  but,  "  What  think  ye  of  me  who  am  saying  it  ?  " 
Nor  is  this  unconsciousness  without  its  directer  proots.  Two  atleact  will  invariably 
be  found  with  it — appreciation  of  others,  depreciation  of  self.  Nor  is  the  reason 
of  all  this  far  to  seek.  This  unconsciousness  of  grace  that  we  speak  of,  issuing 
not  only  in  apprec.aion  of  others,  but  in  dejjreciuti  n  of  self,  may  be  xuc^uuted 


CHAP.xxsiv.]  EXODUS,  593 

for  by  converse  with  a  high  ideal.  For  the  greater  an  artist's  success,  the  greater 
his  sense  of  imperfection.  The  more  that  he  strives  to  attain,  the  further  will  his 
standard  recede  from  him,  the  more  unsatisfactory  will  his  attainments  appear  in 
the  light  of  it.  What,  then,  must  the  case  be  when  the  standard  is  an  infinite  one, 
and  the  mark  we  reach  forth  to  is  tlie  perfection  of  a  God  1  (W.  A.  Gray.)  The 
element  of  unconsciousness  in  character : — See  also  Judges  xvi.  20.  I.  Let  ns 
note,  in  "the  first  place,  that  this  qdalitt  of  unconsciocsness  is  rNVARiABi.Y 
CONNECTED  WITH  A  PECULIAR  ANTECEDENT  HISTORY.  The  facts  Stated  regarding 
Moses  and  Samson  do  not  stand  out  in  isolation  in  their  biographies.  They  are 
in  immediate  relation  to  the  preceding  incidents  in  their  careers.  The  new  man 
can  form  good  habits,  just  as  the  old  man  formed  evil  ones,  and  in  propm-tion  as 
these  habits  gain  strength,  the  consciousness  of  effort  after  the  things  which  they 
lead  us  to  do  begins  to  <liminish  in  us.  Hence  in  the  details  of  daily  life  the 
character  of  the  believer,  as  he  grows  in  holiness,  shines  with  a  radiance  of  which 
he  is  largely  unaware.  Now  this  truth  has  another  side,  for  it  comes  in  also  with 
fearfully  dangerous  influence  in  the  continued  commission  of  sin.  The  more  one 
practises  iniquity,  the  greater  facility  he  acquires  in  committing  it,  the  stronger 
becomes  the  tendency  to  indulge  in  it,  and  the  weaker  ever  is  his  sense  of  its 
enormity.  In  a  manufacturing  town  in  England,  some  years  ago,  it  became 
necessary  to  do  some  repairs  at  the  top  of  one  of  the  tallest  smoke-stacks  in  the 
principal  factory,  and  an  expert  was  engaged  for  the  purpose.  He  flew  his  kite 
over  it,  and  fixed  his  tackle  so  that  he  could  hoist  himself  up.  But  when  he 
reached  the  summit,  through  some  accident,  the  whole  tackling  fell,  and  there  he 
stood  without  any  means  of  coming  down  again.  Every  plan  was  tried  to  get  a 
rope  to  him  without  success.  A  great  crowd  collected  at  the  base  of  the  chimney, 
and  among  these  was  the  wife  of  the  unfortunate  man.  A  happy  thought  struck 
her,  in  her  earnestness  for  her  husband's  safety.  She  knew  that  he  wore  at  the 
moment  stockings  which  her  own  hands  had  just  knitted.  So,  at  her  suggestion, 
they  called  him  to  undo  the  yarn  of  which  they  were  composed,  and  by  and  by  a 
tiny  thread  came  fluttering  down  on  the  breeze.  When  it  reached  the  earth,  they 
tied  it  to  a  piece  of  twine,  which  he  drew  up  with  the  yarn.  To  the  twine  again 
they  tied  a  thicker  string,  and  then  to  that  a  cord,  and  to  that  again  a  cable,  and 
so  he  was  saved.  That  was  a  work  of  deliverance.  But  there  is  a  similar 
gradation  in  the  cord  of  evil  habit  by  which  a  sinner  is  bound.  It  is  first  a 
brittle  yarn,  then  a  tiny  twine,  with  which  a  child  might  play.  II.  But  I  advance 
another  step  in  the  prosecution  of  my  theme,  and  remark,  in  the  second  place,  that 

THIS  QUALITY    OF  UNCONSCIOUSNESS    MARKS  THE    CULMINATION    OF    CHARACTER  EITHER   IN 

GOOD  OR  EVIL.  The  highest  greatness  is  that  which  is  unconscious  of  itself.  The  very 
forthputting  of  an  effort  to  be  great  in  any  direction  indicates  that  we  lack  that 
greatness.  So  long  as  we  are  conscious  of  an  effort  to  be  something,  we  are  not 
fully  that  something,  therefore  we  ought  to  redouble  our  exertions.  When  a 
venerable  minister  was  called  upon  once  unexpectedly  to  preach,  he  delivered 
extempore  a  sermon  of  great  power.  It  seemed  to  come  perfectly  natural  to  him. 
There  was  no  appearance  of  effort ;  and  one  hearer,  amazed  at  the  character  of  the 
discourse,  asked,  "  How  long  did  it  take  you  to  make  that  sermon  ?  "  "  Forty  years," 
was  the  reply.  And  there  was  deep  philosophy  in  the  answer,  for  had  "  the  old 
man  eloquent  "  not  given  these  forty  years  to  diligent  study  and  laborious  effort, 
he  could  not  then  have  preached  so  easily.  Now,  in  the  same  way,  our  conscious 
endeavours  after  the  Christian  life  will,  if  faithfully  prosecuted,  lead  up  to  a  time 
when,  in  some  emergency,  we  shall  meet  it  with  the  most  perfect  ease,  and  be 
hardly  aware  of  any  exertion.  Let  this  thought  stimulate  us  to  perseverance  in  our 
great  Christian  life-work  of  building  char  icter.  The  longer  we  labour  the  less 
arduous  will  our  labour  become,  until  by  and  by  we  shall  lose  the  sense  of  labour  in  the 
joy  and  liberty  of  our  happy  experience.  L'ut  note  again  at  the  other  end  of  the 
scale  that  the  deepest  degradation  is  that  which  is  unconscious  of  its  dishonour. 
Hence,  however  degraded  a  man  may  be  there  is  hope  of  his  recovery  if  he  only 
knows  bis  condition.  That  is  the  handle  by  which  yet,  through  the  grace  of  God, 
you  may  raise  him,  and  you  will  succeed  in  lifting  the  fallen  from  their  defilement 
only  by  awakening  in  them  that  consciousness.  Their  fall  has  stunned  them  into 
insensibility,  and  the  first  thing  you  have  to  do  with  them  is  to  restore  them  to 
consciousness.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)         Communion  with  God,  and  its  results: — 

I.    First,    THE  CONVERSE  WHICH  MoSES  HAD  WITH  GoD    ON    THE    TOP    OF    THE    MOUNTAIH 
WAS  THE  CAUSE  OF  THAT  GLORY  WHICH  RESTED  ON  HIS  COUNTENANCE.     There  is,  DO  doubt, 

a  great  deal  of  what  is  miraculous  in  connection  with  this  transaction  ;  but  thougli 

38 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxiV. 

we  are  not  to  look  in  our  own  particular  case  for  anything  analogous  to  it,  yet  we 
are  to  expect  something  spiritually  correspondent  with  it.  1.  The  first  remark  that 
I  offer  to  your  attention  is,  that  on  ascending  the  mountain  to  hold  intercourse 
with  God,  Moses  observed  the  rites  of  the  religious  dispenpation  under  which  he 
lived.  A  devotional  spirit  must  be  cherished  and  cultivated  ;  and  it  is  promised, 
on  the  part  of  the  Saviour,  that  what  we  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  that  we  shall 
receive.  But  in  addition  to  this,  God  must  lift  the  veil  from  His  own  throne.  He 
must  give  utterance  to  the  voice  of  mercy  and  love.  He  must  display  reasons  to 
the  humble  waiting  spirit,  and  must  manifest  Himself  in  some  clear  manner, 
before  we  can  be  made  conscious  of  communion  with  Him.  2.  Moses  ascended 
the  mountain  alone.  This  opens  to  us  another  principle  of  religion.  It  is  this — 
that  in  all  respects  it  is  personal.  Our  devotional  exercises  are  of  this  nature.  It 
is  true,  indeed,  that  we  meet  in  public  fellowship ;  but  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
the  soul  sits  solitary  and  alone  in  the  midst  of  a  mighty  multitude.  Here  I  standi 
and  there  you  sit ;  but  one  character,  one  faith,  one  love,  one  hope,  one  joy.  And 
our  several  emotions  are  all  personal,  and  belong  to  ourselves.  You  know  not 
my  feelings ;  I  know  not  yours.  3.  As  Moses  drew  a  pattern  from  God  on  the 
mountain,  so  must  we  derive  grace  to  fill  it  up  from  tbe  same  source.  Now  as  far 
as  we  are  employed  in  building  the  internal  temple  of  Christianity,  we  must  derive 
grace  and  strength  from  intercourse  with  God  for  the  discharge  of  this  great  duty  ; 
and  as  Moses  recei%'ed  the  law  from  God,  so  we  must  receive  grace  and  power  to 
obey  it  from  the  same  source.  This  remark  is  applicable  both  to  our  personal  and 
public  duties.      II.  The  second  general  observation  to  be  made  relates  to  the 

NATURE    OF   THAT   LIGHT,    AND    BEAUTY,    AND   GLORY,     WHICH     RESTED    ON    THE     FACE     OF 

Moses.  I  should  here  remark,  that  there  is  a  great  mystery  in  this,  but  that  it 
was  intended  to  be  symbolical  of  a  better  glory.  That  intercourse  with  God  will 
Make  or  cause  His  beauty  to  rest  upon  the  soul.  There  may  be  no  external  glory, 
Buch  as  beamed  on  the  face  of  Moses,  but  a  spiritual  glory  beaming  forth,  instead, 
upon  the  mind.  1.  There  must  be,  for  instance,  rapturous  joy.  How  can  it  be 
otherwise?  The  impulses  of  religion,  when  they  exitt  in  the  mind,  as  they  should 
do,  by  constant  fellowship  with  the  eternal  Trinity,  must  be  transporting  and 
animating  in  the  highest  degree.  2.  Intercourse  with  God  must  have  the  effect 
of  expanding  the  capacity  and  enlarging  the  soul.  3.  I  may  also  add,  that  ^ 
intercourse  with  God  will  produce,  if  not  external  or  physical  beauty,  yet  a  beauty 
of  character.  Internal  purity  will  be  corroborated  by  outward  conduct.  III.  The 
final  remark  which  I  offer  for  your  attention,  relates  to  the  vail  which  Moses  put 
ON  his  face  when  he  descended  from  the  mountain  to  hold  fellowship  with  the 
PEoriJi:.  There  is  a  mystery  in  this;  but  the  mystery  we  shall  not  attempt  to 
unravel.  Allow  me  here  to  say  generally,  that  religion  in  its  beauty  and  glory  is 
often  in  the  present  life  veiled  beneath  circumstances  which  obscure  its  grandeur. 
(J.  Dixon.)  A  transfigured  soul : — You  have  heard  of  the  marks  on  the  bodies 
of  Roman  Catholic  devotees  which  go  by  the  name  of  stigmatization.  There 
appear  on  the  hands  and  feet  of  the  rapt  saint  wounds  similar  to  those  inflicted  on 
the  crucified  Saviour.  It  is  alleged  that  the  intense  brooding  of  their  sympathetic 
and  ravished  souls  on  the  Eedeemer's  agonies  have  led  to  their  bearing  about,  in  a 
literal  sense,  on  their  bodies  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  We  shall  leave 
physiologists  to  explain  the  alleged  phenomena,  or  to  expose  the  possible 
importure,  and  go  on  to  say  that  this  physical  stigmatization  has  a  moral 
joountcrpart ;  that  though  the  wounds  inflicted  on  the  Saviour's  flesh  may  not  be 
'reproduced  on  the  bodies  of  His  saints,  the  moral  glory  of  His  nature  may  be 
republished  in  their  souls,  and  through  their  faces  may  be  radiated  into  the 
world,  as  His  own  glory,  usually  veiled,  once  was  allowed  to  burst  through  the 
environing  flesh  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration.  In  meditating  on  this 
incident  in  the  history  of  Moses  I  suggest  to  you — 1.  That  the  effulgence  of 
bis  face  was  the  result  of  his  eighty  days'  fellowship  with  God.  I  have  read 
Bomewhere  that  people  who  live  together  through  long-wedded  years  at  last  grow 
like  each  other,  not  only  in  their  ways  of  thinking,  of  looking  at  things — in  their 
moods  and  habitudes  of  mind — but  even  in  their  cast  of  face  and  feature.  Such 
power,  it  is  said,  has  long  and  constant  fellowship  to  make  people  variously 
constituted  of  like  temper,  and  even  appearance.  I  can  understand  it  in  the  case 
of  the  moral  and  mental  dispositions.  The  stronger  nature  makes  the  weaker 
surrender  its  own  personality  and  qualities,  and  borrow  from  that  by  which  it  is 
swayed.  It  is,  indefd,  by  the  working  of  this  mysterious  law  of  spirit  that  the 
Christian  believer  is  renewed  into  Christ.    If,  therefore,  the  face  of  the  sage  and 


CHAP,  xxsiv.]  EXODUS.  596 

seer  phone  with  unwonted  lustre,  it  must  have  been  because  of  a  corresponding 
purification  of  his  moral  nature.  It  is  to  this  condition  alone  that  a  glimpse  of 
the  beatific  vision  and  an  insight  into  Divine  things  are  given.  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God,"  and  discern  truth.  2.  Did  the  translucency 
fade  away,  as  the  golden  glory  fades  from  the  hill-tops  when  the  sun  has  set ;  or 
did  it  last  till  the  day  of  his  death  T  Had  he  ever  after  kept  his  spirit  up  to  the 
moral  elevation  to  which  it  rose  on  Sinai's  height,  the  splendour  of  his  visage 
would  have  been  subject  to  no  eclipse  or  wane  ;  it  would  have  shone  not  only  with 
an  undiminishing,  but  with  an  ever-increasing  light.  3.  Though  the  face  of  Moses 
shone,  he  was  quite  unconscious  that  there  was  anything  unusual  about  him  ;  "  he 
wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone  when  he  talked  "  ;  he  had  no  knowledge 
of  the  marvellous  external  results  which  his  eighty  days'  companionship  with  God 
had  wrought  in  his  appearance.  There  is  a  beautiful  unconsciousness  about  the 
Christian.  All  the  world  is  applauding  and  reverencing  him  ;  blessing  him  for  the 
vision  of  excellence  with  which  he  refreshes  it ;  acknowledging  that  his  very 
existence  fertilizes  the  field  of  life ;  but  were  you  to  overhear  his  own  estimate  of 
himself,  you  would  find  it  other  and  different.  Did  you  listen  to  his  prayers,  you 
would  find  them  full  of  heart-breaking  confessions  of  unworthiness.  (J.  Forfar.) 
The  law  a  light: — 1.  First,  it  was  signified  that  the  law  proceeded  from  a  higher 
world  of  light,  of  knowledge,  and  of  holiness,  since  its  very  gleams  were  to  be  seen 
outwardly  on  the  minister  of  the  law.  2.  Since  the  p^'ople  could  not  bear  the 
shining  of  the  light,  it  represented  how  fearful,  condemnatory,  and  fatal  the  law 
was  for  a  sinful  people.  {Otto  von  Gerlnch,  D.D.)  The  highest  excelh'nce  is 
that  ichich  is  least  consciotis  of  itself : — The  greatest  achievements  made  by  the 
sculptor  or  the  painter  have  been  those  in  the  production  of  which  he  has  been 
fullest  of  his  conception,  and  had  least  thought  of  himself.  I  do  not  mean  to  say 
that  the  noblest  artists  have  not  been  indefatigable  workers  ;  on  the  contrary,  they 
have  laboured  with  such  persevering  effort  that  at  last  they  can  produce,  almost 
without  the  consciousness  of  exertion,  something  that  will  never  be  foi'gotten  ;  and 
their  supreme  work  is  that  which  seems  almost  to  have  come  to  them  of  itself,  so 
that  they  were  more  passive  than  active  in  its  transmission  to  their  fellows.  The 
best  sermons  write  themselves,  and  are  given  to  the  preacher  before  they  are 
given  by  him,  so  that  he  cannot  think  of  them  as  wholly  his  own.  But  it  is  the  same 
in  spiritual  things.  If  I  am  conscious  of  an  effort  to  be  humble,  very  clearly  I 
have  riot  yet  attained  to  humility;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  very  moment  I 
become  conscious  that  I  am  humble,  I  have  become  proud.  And  so  with  every 
other  grace.  What  a  discount  you  take  from  a  man's  character  when,  after  you 
have  said  of  him,  he  is  this,  or  that,  or  the  other  thing  that  is  good,  you  add,  "  but 
he  knows  it."  You  might  almost  as  well  have  taken  a  sponge  and  wiped  out  all 
that  went  before.  So  if  you  know  your  excellence,  you  have  not  reached  the  highest 
excellence  ;  there  remaineth  yet  the  loftiest  and  the  hardest  peak  of  the  mountain  to 
be  climbed  by  vou,  and  that  is  humility.  (W.  31.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Light  through 
converse  irith  spiritual  things : — There  is  one  kind  of  diamond  which,  after  it  has 
been  exposed  for  some  minutes  to  the  light  of  the  sun,  when  taken  into  a  dark 
room  will  emit  light  for  some  time.  The  marvellous  property  of  retaining  light, 
and  theieby  becoming  the  source  of  light  on  a  small  scale,  shows  how  analogou=! 
to  light  its  very  nature  must  be.  Those  who  touched  the  Saviour  became  sources  of 
virtue  to  others.  As  Moses'  face  shone  when  he  came  from  the  mount,  so  converse 
with  spiritual  things  makes  Christians  the  light  which  shines  in  the  dark  places  of 
the  earth.  "Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men."  (Weekly  Pulpit.)  Moral 
illumination: — The  spaces  between  the  windows  of  one  of  the  rooms  of  a  famous 
palace  are  hung  with  mirrors,  and  by  this  device  the  walla  are  made  just  as 
luminous  as  the  windows,  through  which  the  sunshine  streams.  Every  square 
inch  of  surface  seems  to  reflect  the  light.  Let  your  natures  be  like  that — no  point 
of  darkness  anywhere,  the  whole  realm  of  the  inward  life  an  unchequered  blaze  of 
moral  illumination.  (T.  G.  Selby.)  The  outshining  of  a  joyful  heart: — Moses 
came  down  from  the  mount,  when,  like  the  bush  of  Horeb,  he  had  been  in  the 
midst  of  the  fire  and  was  not  consumed,  and  as  he  came,  the  light  of  his  soul 
transfigured  his  face,  "the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  was  upon  him,"  and  the 
ninetieth  Psalm  seemed  to  be  shining  through  it.  As  the  brightly-coloured  soil  of 
volcanic  8icily  makes  flowers  of  the  brightest  tints,  so  there  was  a  garden  in  the 
prophet's  face,  glorified  by  the  outshining  of  his  joyful  heart.  (Christian  Age.) 
The  after-glow  of  devotion  : — One  of  the  most  solemn  and  delightful  privileges  of 
the  traveller  is  to  watch  the  after-glow   upon  the  mountains  when  the  sun  has 


696  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxit. 

disappeared.     This  was  accorded  to  us  on  several  occasions,  but  was  never  more 
imptessive  than  in  the  valley  of  Chamounix.     To  see  the  hoary  hi  ad  of  Mont 
Blanc,  and  even  the  pointed  aguiles  of  the  locality,  too  steep  to  allow  the  snow  to 
settle  on  them,  all  aglow  with  rosy  tints,  made  us  feel  as  though  by  some  trans- 
formation scene  we  were  inhabitants  of  another  world,  or  as  though  heaven  had 
come  down  to  earth,  and  the  tabernacle  of  God  had  been  pitched  among  men, 
(G.  Kirkham.)        Light  reflected  from  the  cross  : — With  much  pathos  Mr.  Varley 
once  tuld  the  story  of  Sybil,  a  negress  sluve,  whose  mistress  said  to  her  :  "  When 
I  heard  you  singing  on  the  house-top  I  thought  you  fanatical,  but  when  I  saw  your 
beaming   face   I  could  not  help  feeling  how  different  you  were  to  me."     Sybil 
answered,  "  Ah,  missus,  the  ligLt  you  saw  in  my  face  was  not  from  me,  it  all  camo 
'fleeted  from  de  cross,  and  there  is  heaps  more  for  every  poor  sinner  who  will  come 
near  enough  to  cotch  de  rays."         Exhortation  to  huviility  : — I  charge  you,  be 
clothed  with  humility,  or  you  will  yet  be  a  wandering  star,  for  whom  is  reserved 
the   blackness   of   darkness  for  ever.      Let    Christ  increase,   let  man   decrease. 
Remember,  "  Moses  wist  not  that  the  skin  of  his  face  shone."     Looking  at  our 
own  shining  face  is  the  bane  of  the  spiritual  life,  and  of  the  ministiy.     Oh  1  for 
closest  communion  with  God,  till  soul    and    body,  head  and  heart,  shine  with 
Divine  brilliancy !   But  oh  1  for  a  holy  ignorance  of  their  shining  !   (R.  McCheyne.) 
The  absence  of  self-consciousness : — Near  the  close  of  the  summer  season,    in   a 
pleasant  summer  retreat,  a  new-comer  found  the  entire  company  of  ths  little  hotel 
preparing  to  give  a  fete  in  honour  of  a  young  lady  who  was  about  to  leave  them. 
The  young  men  had  hired  a  band,  marquees  were  erected  on  the  lawn,  the  house 
was  wreathed  with  flowers  ;  everjbody  had  some  little  farewell  gift  ready  for  "  Miss 
Betty."  The  stranger  was  curious.    "  This  Miss  Betty  is  very  beautiful  ?  "  he  asked. 
"  No,  I  think  not ;  it  never  occurred  to  me  before,  but  I  believe  she  is  homely."   "  A 
great  heiress,  then  ?  "  "  On  the  contrary,  a  poor  artist."  "Brilliant?  Witty  ?  Highly 
intellectual  ?  "    "  No,  indeed  ;  she  never  said  a  fine  thing  in  her  life.     But  she  is 
the  best  listener  I  ever  knew.    Neither  is  she  learned  or  clever  or  fascinating;  but  she 
is  the  most  lovable  girl  in  the  world."   "  What  is  the  charm,  then  ?  "   Betty's  friend 
looked  perplexed.  "  I  do  not  know,"  he  hesitated,"  unless  it  is  that  she  never  thinks 
of  herself."    The  charm  of  this  woman  was  an  absolute  absence  of  all  self -conscious- 
ness.    She  was  neither  vain  nor  modest.     She  simply  forgot  that  there  was  such  a 
person  as  Betty  Gordon,  and  with  her  warm  heart  and  quick  sj^mpathies  threw 
herself  into  the  lives  of  others.     It  was  a  peculiar,  powerful  attraction,  and  brought 
the  little  world  about  her  to  her  feet.        He  put  a  vail  on  Ma  face. — T'he  vailed 
face : — It  appears  to  be  a  law  of  our  being,  and  the  being  of  all  material  thinge, 
that  everything  grows  like  to  that  with  which  it  is  conversant  and  familiar.     It  is 
a  law  ruling  all  creation.     We  find  it  in  the  Arctic  regions  and  we  find  it  in  the 
tropics — namely,  life  assimilates  itself  to  the  nature  which  is  around  it.     Friend- 
ship, the  intercourse  of  common  friendship,  will  affect  the  countenance.     When  we 
go  to  moral  life,  there  is  its  evil  and  its  blessed  application.     Those  who  frequent 
the  good  gather  the  image  of  their  goodness;  and  those  who  deal  much  with  God, 
they  grow  God-like.     I.  What  was  the  glory  on  Moses'  face  ?     St.  Paul  gives  us  a 
remarKable  answer  to  this  question.     He  says,  "  They  could  not  look  steadfastly  to 
the  end  of  that  which  is  abolished."     "  That  which  is  abolisbed"  is  the  law,  and 
the  end  of  the  law  is  Christ ;  therefore  the  glory  upon  Moses'  face  was  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     II.  It  was  not  in  compassion  for  the  weakness  of  the  Israelites 
that  Moses  put  a  vail  upon  his  face.     The  Jews  had  lost  the  power  to  see  the  end 
of  that  which  is  abolished,  to  see  the  glory  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  reflected  in  the 
law,     The  vail  was  judicial,  the  consequence  of  sin  ;  it  was  interposed  between 
them  and  the  beauty,  the  lustre,  of  the  mighty  glory  of  God  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.     III.  There  are  vailed  hearts  among  ds  n(5w  ;  and  the  reason  of  the  vail  is 
SIN.     Do  you  think  that  like  those  Israelites  you  have  committed  some  sins  under 
the  mount  ?     It  will  quite  account  for  the  vail,  and  the  vail  will  be  proportioned 
to  that  state  of  life.     Every  wilful  disobedience  of  conscience,  every  going  against 
a   conviction,   will  thicken   your  vail.     It  will  be  God's  retribution  to  you — the 
intellect  dulled,  the  mind  warped,  the  heart  hardened,  the  Spirit  hindered,  by  the 
sin.     What  is  the  remedy  ?     "  When  it  shall  turn  to  the  Lord,  the  vail  shall  be 
taken  away."    Then  Christ  is  the  remedy.    (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)        Moses'  vail : — 
The  vail  which  Moses  put  on  his  face,  when  he  perceived  that  it  shone — 1.  Teaches 
us  a  lesson  of  modesty  and  humility  :  we  must  be  content  to  have  our  excellences 
obscured.     2.  It  teaches  ministers  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  capacities  of 
the  people,  and  to  preach  to  them  as  they  are  able  to  bear  it.    3.  The  vail 


CHAP.  XXXV,]  EXODUS.  597 

signified  the  darkness  of  that  dispensation  in  which  there  were  only  "  shadows  of 
good  things  to  come."  (A.  Nevin,  D.D.)  The  vail  on  Hoses'  face  : — St.  Paul,  in 
the  New  Testament,  makes  large  use  of  this  narrative  of  the  glory  that  shone  on 
Moses'  face  as  he  came  down  with  the  renewed  covenant.  Thus  he  employs  it  as 
in  a  typical  sense  an  emblem  of  the  relative  glories  of  the  old  legal  and  the  new 
evangelical  dispensation  (2  Cor.  iii.  10-18).  Even  as  a  rhetorical  figure,  how  beautiful 
is  this  application  of  the  narrative  of  Moses  to  the  purpose  of  setting  before  Jewish 
Christians  the  relation  of  the  new  to  the  old  dispensation.  Moses,  with  his  vail, 
stands  as  a  symbol  of  his  own  dispensation,  which  was,  in  fact,  the  gospel  under  a 
vail.  .  And  the  symbol  is  represented  as  having  a  threefold  significancy,  when 
contemplated  in  its  different  parts.  First,  the  symbol  points  out  the  intrinsic 
excellence  and  glory  of  the  old  dispensation,  even  though  far  less  glorious  than  the 
new.  But  as  tbe  glory  of  Moses'  face  was  absorbed  and  lost  when  he  entered  "  the 
tent  of  meeting,"  to  commune  with  God,  so  the  brightness  of  the  old  dispensation 
of  Moses  is  eclipsed  in  the  transcendent  brightness  of  the  gospel.  Again,  the 
narration  of  the  veiled  Moses,  in  the  apostle's  view,  symbolizes  the  comparative 
obscurity  of  the  old  exhibition  of  the  way  of  salvation.  The  vail  represents  the 
indistinct  view  which  the  Israelites  had  through  the  ritual  teachings  of  the  law ; 
the  brightness  of  the  gospel  light  was  covered  up  by  rites  that  their  minds  did  not 
penetrate.  Nor  will  many  of  them  now  lift  the  vail,  as  the  new  dispensation  invites 
them  to  do.  Hence,  again,  this  vail  typified  the  blindness  and  ignorance  under 
which  the  Jewish  mind  laboured,  even  in  the  time  of  the  apostle.  They  had  so 
long  looked  at  Moses  vailed  that  they  now  seemed  to  think  the  very  vail  an 
essential  part  of  the  system  of  salvation.     (S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Ver.  3.  Ye  shall  kindle  no  fire. — The  unkindled  fire  : — In  the  old  time  it  was  a 
law  that  each  night,  at  a  prescribed  hour,  a  bell  should  be  rung,  on  hearing  which 
the  people  were  to  put  out  their  fires.  This  a  law  not  about  putting  fires  out  each 
day,  but  against  lighting  a  fire  on  one  particular  day.  Why  this  law?  I.  To  show 
THAT  on  the  Sabbath,  espectally,  men  should  attend  to  the  interests  of  the 
soul,  eather  than  to  the  comforts   of   the   body.      II.    To  remove    frivolous 

EXCUSES    for   non-attendance    on    RELIGIODS    worship.       III.    To    GUARD    THE    TIME  OF 

FEMALES  OR  SERVANTS  FROM  UNRIGHTEOUS   INVASION;   and  teach  men  that  women 
had  religious  rights  and  duties  equally  with  themselves.     IV.  To  inculcate  in  all 

THE  DUTY  OF  SELF-SACRIFICE  IN  MATTERS  RELATING    TO    THE    SOUL   AND    GoD.       {Biblical 

Museum.)  Tlie  rest  of  plants : — All  creation  seems  to  possess  the  instinct  of  rest. 
We  well  know  how  eagerly  the  human  heart  sighs  for  rest.  But  it  is  not  so  well 
known  that  even  plants  sleep.  Their  strange  sleep,  says  Figuier,  vaguely  recalls  to 
us  the  sleep  of  animals.  In  its  sleep  the  leaf  seems  by  its  disposition  to  approach 
the  age  of  iufancy.  It  folds  itself  up,  nearly  as  it  lay  folded  in  the  bud  before  it 
opened,  when  it  slept  the  lethargic  sleep  of  winter,  sheltered  under  the  robust  and 
hardy  scales,  or  shut  up  in  its  warm  down.  We  may  say  that  the  plant  seeks  every 
night  to  resume  the  position  which  it  occupied  in  its  early  days,  just  as  the  animal 
rolls  itself  up,  lying  as  if  it  lay  in  its  mother's  bosom.  All  the  world  seems  to 
express  the  sentiment  contained  in  the  words  uttered  by  one  of  old,  who  desired  the 
wings  of  a  dove  in  order  to  seek  and  obtain  rest.  (Scientific  Illustrations.)  Sabbath 
breaking  condemned: — Dr.  Beecher  was  seen  one  Monday  morning  leaving  his 
house  with  a  basket  in  his  band  which  he  was  carrying  to  the  fish-market,  and  in 
which  he  intended  to  carry  home  a  fish  for  the  family  table.  Unknown  to  him,  a 
young  man  of  undecided  religious  principles  was  following  and  watching  him.  The 
minister  soon  came  to  the  fish-market.  Here  Dr.  Beecher  picked  up  a  fine-looking 
fish,  and  asked  the  fisherman  if  it  was  fresh  and  sweet.  "  Certaiuly,"  replied  the 
man,  "  for  I  caught  it  myself  yesterday,"  which  was  the  Sabbath.  Dr.  Beecher 
at  once  dropped  the  fish,  saying,  "Then  I  don't  want  it,"  and  went  on  without 
another  word.  We  are  not  informed  whether  the  preacher  obtained  his  fisb,  but 
when  the  young  man  who  was  following  him  that  morning  related  his  experience 
some  time  afterwards  on  his  admission  to  the  Christian  Church,  he  stated  that  Dr. 
Beecher's  consistency  evinced  in  the  fish-market  had  been  the  turning-point  in  hia 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxt. 

career.    It  convinced  him  of  the  power  of  religion  in  life,  liad  induced  him  to 
attend  the  ministry  of  the  man  who  had  won  his  respect,  and  he  was  converted. 

Ver.  29.  A  willing  offering. — The  willing  offering : — Eemember  that  at  this  time 
th<;re  was  no  legislation  to  Israel  about  giving.     A  little  while  after  there  were 
strict  laws  how  much  they  were  to  give — and  every  Israelite  was  by  law  presently 
compelled  to  give  no  less  than  two-tenths — first  one-tenth  and  then  another  tenth 
— one-fifth  of  all  his  property  to  God ;  but  now  that  legislation  had  not  taken 
place,  and  tbey  gave  in  the  freeness  of  their  own  willing  hearts.     But  God  has 
withdrawn  legislation  again  with  respect  to  His  Church's  gifts  to  Him.     Only  He 
has  laid  down  broad  principles — and  we  act  upon  those  broad  principles  in  the  free- 
dom of  the  gospel.     And  Lere  is  our  opportunity  of  testing  our  great  love  to  God — 
that  we  are  ourselves  to  be  a  law  to  ourselves,  that  we  should  give  as  the  Spirit  of 
God  moves  us.     Now  let  us  see,  a  little  more  carefully,  some  rules  for  giving.    We 
cannot  give  before  we  have  received.    We  can  only  give  Him  of  His  own ;  and, 
therefore,  he  who  would  be  a  good  giver  must  be  careful  first  to  be  a  good  receiver.    I. 
Having  received  largely  and  freely,  then,  to  give  is  first  to  give  one's  selp.    And 
I  would  advise  you,  before  you  make  any  gift  whatsoever,  to  go  through  an  express 
act  of  surrender  of  yourself  to  God.     That  done,  then  make  your  gift,  whatever  it 
be,  that  you  have  in  your  heart  to  give — make  it  a  solemn,  consecrated  gift.     By 
some  special  acts  of  prayer,  dedicate  it  to  God.     Then  make  your  act  of  charity, 
to  the  Church  or  to  your  fellow-men.     II.  And  now  the  practical  question  comes — 
How  MUCH  ouoHT  WE  TO  GIVE  ?     A  questiou  wliich,  in  the  freeness  of  the  gospel, 
it  is  impossible  to  answer.    The  answer  would  vary  according  to  many  circum- 
stances, so  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  lay  down  one  abstract  law.     The  line  has 
too  often,  perhaps,  been  drawn,  that  it  becomes  a  Christian  to  give  one-tenth  of  his 
income  to  God.    But  if  a  man  with  small  means  ought  to  give  one-tenth,  then  a 
man  with  double  the  means  ought  to  give  a  fifth  ;  because  the  rate  of  giving  ought 
to  rise  in  proportion  to  the  income.    And,  again,  the  rate  of  the  giving  must  be  accord- 
ing to  the  demands  and  the  claims  which  are  upon  the  Christian.     So  that  those 
who  have  families — wives  and  children — depending  upon  them,  ought  not  to  give 
in  the  same  proportion  to  their  income  as  those  who  have  none.     So  that  .should  it 
be  that  any  person,  either  of  his  own  fault  or  other's  fault,  is  involved  in  debt,  then 
that  person  should  consider  first  the  justice  of  paying  the  debt,  and  then  go  on  to 
the  luxury  of  giving  to  God  or  to  the  Church.     I  do  not  say  that  a  person  who  is  in 
debt  should  be  deprived  altogether  of  the  privilege  of  giving  to  God.     Because,  if 
he  make  his  gift  to  God  a  thing  taken  out  of  that  which  he  would  certainly  other- 
wise have  spent  upon  himself,  then  he  is  not  injuring  his  creditors,  though  he  gives 
part  of  his  income,  and  though  he  be  in  debt,  to  God.    But  then  he  must  be  careful 
that  by  that  gift  he  does  not  defraud  his  creditors,  because  there  must  be  perfect 
justice  before  charity.     (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  blessings  of  giving : — There  is 

nothing  so  like  God — because  the  essence  of  God  is  He  is  always  emitting.  "He 
opens  His  hand,  and  fiUs  all  things  living  with  plenteousness  " :  and  all  things  are 
His.  And  the  more  expansive  our  minds,  the  more  open  our  hearts,  the  more  we 
give,  the  more  we  grow  into  the  likeness  of  the  great  giving  God.  And  it  is  such  a 
sweet  feeling  one  almost  fears  that  we  may  be  led  to  do  it  for  the  very  sweetness 
there  is  in  the  act.  But  it  is  the  happiness  of  giving  when  it  is  done  to  express  our 
own  feelings  of  love  to  Jesus.  And  though  there  is  no  merit  in  any  gift  that  any 
man  can  ever  give,  yet  there  is  "  a  good  foundation  for  the  timo  to  come."  And 
this  is  the  way  it  is  a  foundation.  It  is  an  evidence.  In  the  great  day  of  judg- 
ment, the  thing  examined  will  be,  "Did  you  love  Christ  ?  "  For  witness  there  will 
stand  out  your  acts,  to  prove  whether  you  did  or  did  not  love  Christ — that  is, 
whether  you  had  accepted  His  salvation,  and  had  loved  Him  in  return.  And  your 
acts  will  stand  out  in  testimony,  to  prove  or  disprove  your  love  to  Christ.  And 
not  onlv  so.  This  world  is  a  failing  world,  and  everything  around  us  will  be  bank- 
rupt. Therefore,  do  you  so  use  "  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,"  the  spoils  of 
Egypt — money — do  you  so  use  "  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness  "  that  it  will  be 
a  "  friend  "  to  you — not  an  enemy,  to  rise  up  against  you  as  a  witness  to  your 
selfishness,  and  your  pride,  and  your  worldliness,  but  a  friend  to  speak  for  you. 
(Ibid.)  Free  giving: — I.  The  Lord's  opfebing   should  be    utmediate.      The 

people  in  this  instance  were  sufiiciently  informed  of  the  need.  They  had  time  to 
learn  how  far  they  eonid  individually  meet  it,  and  then  they  returned  with  their 
presents.  A  simple,  practical  reply  this,  to  the  Divine  call.  "  He  give*  twice  that 
gives  quickly."    Emergencies  are  not  continuous.    IL  The  Lobd's  oFFEaiNG  must 


CHAP.  XXXV.,]  EXODUS.  699 

BE    VOLUNTABY.       III.    ThE   LoRD's   OFFERING   IS   TO   BE    OF   SUCH   AS   WE    HAVE.       Good 

wishes  and  approving  words  bring  down  no  scales  which  turn  with  deeds.  "  Most 
men,"  said  Sydney  Smith,  "are  ready  to  act  the  good  Samaritan  ivithoiit  the  oil 
and  the  two  pence."  IV.  The  Lord's  offering  may  be  complete  (chap,  xxxvi. 
5,  6).     (De  With  S.  Clarke.)  A  great  demand,  and  the  firacious  response: — I.  A 

great  demand.  1.  God  sometimes  makes  demands  upon  His  people.  Sometimes 
liy  providential  calls  for  help.  Our  brother  dies  suddenly  and  leaves  his  orphan 
children  dependent  on  our  care.  In  these  children  God  comes  to  us  and  says — Give! 
2.  The  demands  which  God  makes  upon  His  people  are  sometimes  apparently 
harsh  and  unreasonable.  Here,  from  these  newly-escaped  slaves,  He  demands  a 
Taboinacle  which  cost,  it  is  computed,  at  least  £250,000.  3.  God  sometimes  makeg 
demands  upon  His  people  which  cannot  be  met  without  real  self-sacrifice.  4.  He 
demands  that  these  sacrifices  shall  be  made  with  good  will  (chap.  xxv.  2,  xxxv.  5  ; 
1  Cor.  viii.  12,  ix.  7).  God  makes  such  demands  upon  His  people — (1)  Not  because 
He  needs  anything  at  their  hand  (Psa.  1.  9-12).  (2)  But  solely  for  their  welfare, 
(a)  They  need  to  be  saved  from  covetousness,  which  is  idolatry,  (b)  They  need  to 
have  their  character  ennobled,  and  this  can  be  accomplished  only  by  the  exercise 
of  self-denial,  (c)  Tbey  need  channels  for  the  expression  of  gratitude  and  joy. 
By  those  who  truly  love  God,  opportunities  by  which  they  may  honour  Him  are 
welcomed  with  eager  joy.  II.  A  glorious  response.  The  demand  for  contribu- 
tions for  the  erection  of  the  Tabernacle  was  more  than  met  (chap,  xxxvi.  5-7).  How 
did  this  come  to  pass?  1.  A  spirit  of  holy  enthusiasm  possessed  the  people.  2. 
This  sijirit  of  holy  enthusiasm  possessed  not  a  few  wealthy  men  only,  but  the 
whole  people  (vers.  21,  29).  3.  This  spirit  of  holy  enthusiasm  moved  them  to  give 
not  only  of  their  superfluity,  but  also  things  needful  to  them  in  daily  life  (vers. 
22-24) ;  and  not  only  to  give,  but  also  to  labour  (ver.  25).  4.  This  spirit  of  holy 
enthusiasm  transformed  every  sacrifice  that  was  made  for  God  into  an  occasion  and 
cause  of  great  joy.  So,  again,  was  it  at  the  erection  of  the  Temple  (1  Chron.  xxix. 
9).  Finally,  this  glorious  response  on  the  part  of  the  people  was  gloriously  acknow- 
ledged by  the  Most  High  (chap.  xl.  34,  35).  {The  Preacher's  Monthly.)  An  old 
subscription  list: — There  was  plenty  of  compulsory  work,  of  statutory  contribution, 
in  the  Old  Testament  system  of  worship.  Sacrifices  and  tithes  and  other  things 
were  imperative,  but  the  Tabernacle  was  constructed  by  means  of  undemanded 
offerings,  and  there  were  parts  of  the  standing  ritual  which  were  left  to  the  prompt- 
ings of  the  worshipper's  own  spirit.  There  was  always  a  door  through  which  the 
impulses  of  devout  hearts  could  come  in,  to  animate  what  else  would  have  become 
dead,  mechanical  compliance  with  prescribed  obligations.  I.  We  have  set  forth 
here  the  trce  motive  of  acceptable  service.  "  Tbey  came,  everv  one  whose  heart 
stirred  him  up,  and  every  one  whom  his  spirit  made  willing."  There  is  a  striking 
metaphor  in  that  last  word.  Wherever  the  spirit  is  touched  with  the  sweet 
influences  of  God's  love,  and  loves  and  gives  back  again,  tbat  spirit  is  buoyant, 
lifted,  raised  above  the  low,  flat  levels  where  selfishness  feeds  fat  aud  then  rots. 
The  spirit  is  raised  by  any  great  and  unselfish  emotion.  Continual  contact  with 
Jesus  Christ,  and  realization  of  what  Hia  has  done  for  us,  is  sure  to  open  the  deep 
fountains  of  the  heart,  and  to  secure  abundant  streams.  If  we  can  tap  these 
perennial  reservoirs,  they  will  yield  like  artesian  wells,  and  need  no  creaking 
machinery  to  pump  a  scanty  and  intermittent  supply.  We  cannot  trust  this  deepest 
motive  too  much,  nor  appeal  to  it  too  exclusively.  Let  me  remind  you,  too,  that 
Christ's  appeal  to  this  motive  leaves  no  loophole  for  selfishness  or  laziness. 
Responsibility  is  all  the  greater  because  we  are  left  to  assess  ourselves.  The  blank 
form  is  sent  to  us,  and  He  leaves  it  to  our  honour  to  fill  it  up.  Do  not  tamper  with 
the  paper,  for  remember  there  is  a  Returning  Ofiicer  that  will  examine  your  schedule 
who  knows  all  about  your  possessions.  II.  We  get  here  the  measure  of  accept- 
able work.  We  have  a  long  catalogue,  very  interesting  in  many  respects,  of  the 
various  things  that  the  people  brought.  Such  sentences  as  these  occur  over  and 
over  again — "  And  every  man  with  whom  was  found  "  so-and-so  "  brought  it  " ; 
•'  And  all  the  women  did  spin  with  their  hands,  and  brought  that  which  they  had 
spun  "  ;  "  And  the  rulers  brought  "  so-and-so.  Such  statements  embody  the  very 
plain  truism  that  what  we  have  settles  what  we  are  bound  to  give.  Or,  to  put  it 
into  grander  words,  the  capacity  is  the  measure  of  duty.  Our  work  is  cut  out  for 
us  by  the  faculties  and  opportunities  that  Go.l  has  given  us.  The  form  as  well  as  the 
measure  of  our  service  is  determined  thereby.  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could," 
said  Jesus  Christ  about  Mary.  We  often  read  that,  as  if  it  were  a  kind  of  apology 
for  a  sentimental  and  useless  gift,  because  it  was  the  best  that  she  could  bestow.    I 


GOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xrxv. 

do  not  hear  that  tone  in  the  words  at  all.  I  hear,  rather,  this :  that  duty  is  settled 
by  faculty,  and  that  nobody  else  has  any  business  to  interfere  with  that  which  a 
Christian  soul,  all  aflame  with  the  love  of  God,  finds  to  be  the  spontaneous  and 
natural  expre>  sion  of  its  devotion  to  the  Master.  The  words  are  the  vindication  of 
the  form  of  loving  service  ;  but  let  us  not  forget  that  they  are  also  a  very  stringent 
requirement  as  to  its  measure,  if  it  is  to  please  Christ.  "What  she  could."  The 
engine  must  be  worked  up  to  the  last  ounce  of  pressure  that  it  will  stand.  All 
must  be  got  out  of  it  that  can  be  got  out  of  it.  III.  Notice,  again,  how  in  this  list 
of  offerings  there  comes  out  the  great  thought  of  the  infinite  variety  of  forms 

OF  SERVICE  AND  OFFERING,  WHICH  ARE  ALL  EQ0ALLY  NEEDFUL  AND  EQUALLY  ACCEPT- 
ABLE. The  list  begins  with  "  bracelets,  and  ear-rings,  and  rings,  and  tablets,  all 
jewels  of  gold."  And  then  it  goes  on  to  "  blue,  and  purple,  and  scarkt,  and  fine 
linen,  and  red  skins  of  rams,  and  badgers'  skins,  and  shittim  wood."  And  then 
we  read  that  the  women  did  spin  with  their  hands,  and  brought  that  which  they 
had  spun — namely,  the  same  things  as  have  been  alrea^ly  catalogued,  the  blue,  and 
purple,  and  scarlet,  and  fine  linen.  That  looks  as  if  the  richer  gave  the  raw 
material,  and  the  women  gave  the  labour.  Poor  women,  they  could  not  give,  but 
they  could  spin.  They  had  no  stores,  but  they  had  ten  fingers  and  a  distaff;  and/ 
if  some  neighbour  found  the  stuff,  the  ten  fingers  joyfully  set  the  distaff  twirling, 
and  spun  the  yarn  fur  the  weavers.  Then  there  were  others  who  willingly  undertook 
the  rougher  work  of  spinning,  not  dainty  thread  for  the  rich  soft  stuffs  whose 
colours  were  to  glow  in  the  sanctuary,  but  the  coarse  black  goats'  hair  which  was 
to  be  made  into  the  heavy  covering  of  the  roof  of  the  Tabernacle.  No  doubt  it  was 
less  pleasant  labour  than  the  other,  but  it  got  done  by  willing  hands.  And  then, 
at  the  end  of  the  whole  enumeration,  there  comes — "  And  the  rulers  brought  pre- 
cious stones,  and  spices,  and  oil,"  and  all  the  expensive  things  that  were  needed. 
The  big  subscriptions  are  at  the  bottom  of  the  list,  and  the  smaller  ones  are  in  the 
place  of  honour.  All  this  just  teaches  us  this — what  a  host  of  things  of  all  degrees 
of  preciousness  in  men's  eyes  go  to  make  God's  great  building!  All  the  things  that 
are  given,  and  the  works  that  are  done  from  the  same  motive,  because  of  the  will- 
ing heart,  stand  upon  the  same  level  of  acceptance  and  preciousness  in  His  eyes, 
whatever  may  be  their  value  in  the  market-pluce.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Free 

giving : — I.  Co-operation  in  free  giving.  1.  The  men  brought  their  gifts  (vers. 
23,  24).  2.  The  women  brought  their  gifts  (vers.  25.  26).  3.  The  rulers  brought 
their  gifts  (vers.  27,  28).  II.  Giving  based  on  an  acceptable  principle.  1.  Its 
motive  was  right  (ver.  2'.t).  2.  Its  judgment  was  correct.  (1)  The  givers  did  what 
they  could  in  their  respective  lines.  (2)  The  character  and  variety  in  the  gifts 
noticeable.  III.  Free  giving,  in  its  influence  upon  God  (vers.  30-35).  1.  If  the 
gifts  had  not  been  forthcoming,  the  special  skill  would  not  have  been  brought  into 
requisition.  2.  The  gifts,  without  the  skill  to  use  them,  would  have  been  of  no 
account.  3.  A  Divine  law  is  here  discovered — God  ever  imparts  to  a  willing  people 
every  needed  grace  for  complete  success.  Lessons :  1.  The  contrast  between  the  child- 
ren of  Israel  bowing  before  the  calves  of  gold  and  bearing  cheerful  offerings  for  God's 
sanctuary,  is  marked  and  suggestive.  (1)  It  suggests  the  power  of  a  sentiment  for 
good  or  evil.  (2)  It  suggests  the  responsibility  of  leaders  of  the  people.  The  few 
create  the  sentiment,  the  many  adopt  it.  2.  The  contrast  between  the  feelings  of 
their  covenant  God  towai^d  them  in  these  opposite  attitudes.  (1)  Toward  His 
sinning  people  He  is  angry.  (2)  Toward  His  obedient  people  He  is  full  of  grace 
and  blessing.  3.  Suggestive  also  is  the  contrast  between  the  joy  and  peace  of  a 
disobedient  and  an  obedient  people.  4.  We  have  here  an  instructive  example  of  how 
much  can  be  accomplished  by  a  willing  and  united  people  in  a  short  time.  (1) 
Consider  the  costliness  of  the  Tabernacle.  (2)  Consider  the  skill  required.  (D.  C. 
Hughes,  M.A.)  Free  gifts  for  the  Tabernacle  : — I.  Art  should  be  consecrated 
TO  THE  SERVICE  AND  WORSHIP  OF  GoD.  Emptiness  and  gloom  do  not  honour  Him 
whose  aie  the  silver  and  the  gold,  and  whose  handiwork  is  manifest  in  star  and 
crystal,  flower  and  feather.  We  cannot  go  far  wrong  when  the  Word  of  God 
encourages  us  in  chaste  use  of  symbols,  making  art  the  handmaid  of  religion,  and 
every  avenue  to  the  soul  a  highway  to  God.  11.  The  artizan's  calling  is  honoured 
OF  God  and  his  lawgiver.  He  who  is  dihgent  in  business  and  fervent  in  spirit 
serves  the  Lord,  and  even  in  our  manual  occupations  we  may  be  fellow-workers 
with  God.  He  who  works  rightly  is  so  far  God-like.  III.  Giving,  when  rightly 
DONE,  IS  AN  ACT  OF  WORSHIP.  To  hear  the  Word  without  an  offering  is  to  be  a 
hearer  of  it  and  not  a  doer.  Stinginess  in  a  Christian  contradicts  the  cross  and 
its  letson.    We  are  to  give  promptly  and  regularly.    Zeal  cools  by  delay.    Ideas 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EXODUS.  60i 

shrink  "and  vision  shortens  when  the  heart  is  not  roused.  Like  the  willing  people 
before  Moses,  let  us  give  now  and  see  the  good  of  our  gifts  while  we  live.  Better 
be  our  own  executors,  writing  our  wills  on  living  hutuan  hearts  rather  than  on  the 
skins  of  dead  sheep  or  lawyers'  foolscap.  IV.  Impulsive  generosity  is  not  to  be 
CONTEMNED.  Sentiment  is  more  powerful  than  logic,  and  every  minister  of  Christ 
and  leader  of  men  should  imitate  Moses,  who  proved  himself,  under  God,  a  heart- 
rou^<ing,  pocket-compelling  preacher.  To  thrill  the  money-nerve  unto  good  ends  is 
a  noble  achievement.  Then  the  maid  forgets  her  ornaments.  The  lady's  jewels 
are  cast  into  the  molten  mass  that  is  to  make  a  church  bell,  supply  the  needs  of 
tbe  battle-field,  the  hospital,  or  the  famine-stricken  land.  V.  The  path  of  sac- 
KiFicE  LEADS  US  TO  Christ  AND  His  CROSS.  The  heart  that  prompts  the  ofifer  of 
the  cup  of  cold  water,  when  cultivated  by  Divine  grace  to  highest  possibilities,  rests 
only  under  the  cross  of  Calvary.  (Williain  E.  Griffis.)  Materials  and  offerings  : 
— I.  The  materl\xs  of  which  the  Tabernacle  was  made.  1.  Various.  Nothing  is 
too  good  for  God's  service.  Common  things  are  useful,  and  not  to  be  despised. 
Tbe  meanest  things  may  be  sanctified  to  God's  service.  In  the  Church  of  Christ 
we  find  persons  of  all  nations  and  stations.  Sinners  of  every  degree,  colour, 
character,  and  size ;  redeemed,  called,  sanctified,  and  blessed,  are  the  materials 
with  which  God  builds  His  spiritual  house.  2.  Suitable.  We  cannot  improve  on 
God's  choice,  nor  conceive  of  a  better  plan.  So  in  the  Church  of  God  perfect 
wisdom  is  seen.  His  glory  is  great  in  our  salvation.  Christ  will  have  a  revenue 
of  praise  from  every  soul  He  rescues  from  hell.  Great  sinners  are  just  suitable  for 
a  great  Saviour.  3.  Very  costly.  Who  can  tell  the  value  of  one  soul  ?  4.  Mostly 
from  Egypt.  God  gathers  all  the  materials  for  His  sanctuary  out  of  the  house  of 
bondage.  5.  Beautiful.  6.  Durable.  II.  The  willing  people  who  brought  the 
materlals.  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  fruit  and  effect  of  God's  forgiving  love. 
Having  willing  hearts,  the  people  brought  willing  offerings.  All  classes  had  a 
share  in  the  giving — poor  as  well  as  rich — and  all  their  gifts  were  accepted.   III.  The 

SKILFUL  workmen  WHO  BROUGHT  THE    MATERIALS  INTO  BEAUTEOUS  FORM.     (R.E.  SearS.) 

Voluntary  contributions  for  Church  work : — I.  Let  us  compare  their  design  in 
ERECTING  THE  Tabkrnacle  WITH  ouES.  It  was  to  establish  a  religion  which,  when 
we  consider,  we  cannot  but  rejoice  that  we  live  in  brighter  days.  Not  that  we 
would  speak  dii=resp»^ctfuUy  of  a  system  which  God  Himself  instituted  ;  but  we 
may  safely  say  that  it  was  inferior  to  ours.  When  the  Jews  laboured  to  build  the 
Tabernacle  they  laboured  to  establish  a  religion  that  was — 1.  Obscure.  There  was 
some  light,  but  it  was  mingled  with  much  darkness.  The  truths  taught  were 
enveloped  in  obscurity.  2.  Their  system  was  contracted.  When  they  sought  to 
build  a  Tabernacle,  it  was  only  for  the  use  of  a  million  or  a  million  and  a  half  of 
people.  Theirs  was  a  spirit  of  sectarianism.  It  was  wisely  appointed,  indeed,  to 
keep  them  from  mingling  with  the  heathen  around  them.  But  we  cannot  help 
rejcicing  that  we  are  not  thus  shut  up.  The  gospel  is  designed  for  all  nations, 
tongues,  and  people.  3.  Their  system  was  burdensome.  Their  observances  were 
pompous,  their  rites  were  numerous  and  costly.  But  our  yoke,  in  this  respect,  is 
easy,  our  burden  is  light.  Here  are  but  few  institutions,  and  rtiose  are  simple  and 
efficient.  4.  Their  system  was  temporary.  It  was  only  suited  to  the  Jewish 
meridian,  it  was  only  adapted  to  the  service  of  the  Tabernacle.  Whereas  the 
Christian  system  is  adapted  to  every  government,  for  it  interferes  with  none  ;  to 
every  climate,  for  it  is  not  regulated  by  the  usages  of  country  ;  to  all  people,  for  it 
is  alike  friendly  to  all.  II.  Let  us  compare  the  exertions  of  the  Jews  with  ours, 
IN  REFERENCE  TO  THESE  RESPECTIVE  SYSTEMS.  1.  Their  cxcrtions  wcre  prompt. 
2.  General.  3.  Proportionate.  All  seemed  to  ask,  "  What  talent  have  I  by  which ^^ 
I  may  promote  this  cause?  "  If  our  Churches  were  possessed  of  this  spirit,  how 
much  more  would  be  done  :  ministers  can  prfach  and  speak,  but  there  must  be 
collectors  also,  distributors  of  repoits,  &c.  Those  who  have  not  a  ready  tongue, 
may  have  a  flowing  pen.  III.  Let  us  consider  the  obligations  under  which 
THEY  WERE  LAID,  AND  UNDER  WHICH  WE  ALSO  ARE  LAID.  1.  They  had  received  a 
revelation  from  heaven.  If  they  who  received  a  revelation  under  the  influence  of 
terror  did  so  much,  we  ought  surely  to  do  more  !  If  they  did  so  much  under  the 
smoke  of  Sinai,  ought  not  the  droppings  of  the  cross  to  influence  us  ?  Oh,  let  us  feel 
ashamed  that  we  have  made  so  few  exertions.  2.  They  had  experienced  merciful 
deliverances  from  heaven.  3.  They  had  enjoyed  merciful  supplies  from  heaven. 
(J.  Blackburn.)  The  j^opular  response  : — 1.  The  answer  of  the  people  was  marked 
by  the  spirit  of  willinghood.  Some  form  of  the  word  willing  occurs  again  and 
again  :  "  Every  one  whom  his  spirit  made  willing  "  ;   "  As  many  as  were  willing- 


602  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

hearted."     God  will  have  nothing  out  of  the  reluctant  hand.     We  may  throw  an 
offering  down,  but  it  is  not  taken  up  by  heaven.     It  evaporates  downwards  ;  it  is 
not  received  by  the  condescending  and  sympathetic  sun.     2.  The  answer  was  the 
deepest  and  truest  cure  of  all  murmuring.     The  people  had  been  murmuring  again 
and  again,  but  the  moment  they  began  to  work  they  ceased  to  complain.     You 
would  murmur  less  if  you  worked  more.    An  evil  thing  is  idleness.   It  must  always 
sit  with  coldness,  and  the  two  must  keep  one  another  in  evil  countenance.  The  one 
thing  to  be  feared  is  stagnation.      Hear  heaven's  sweet  appeal  for   service,  for 
sacrifice,  and  know  that  the  appeal  is  not  the  demand  of  exaggeration,  but  that  it 
is  inspired  by  the  very  spirit  of  consideration  for  human  feeling,  and  expresses  the 
very  philosophy  of  human  spiritual  education,     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Gifts  to  the 
Lord : — I.  The  spirit  of  the  people  was  thoroughly  devotional.     It  will  result  in 
no   success  whatsoever  to  attempt  to  manage  the  Lord's  interests  in  a  merely 
mercenary  and  marketable  way.    Any  Church  enterprise  will  fail  if  it  only  seeks  to  ^-^ 
please  a  crowd,  to  fire  the  ambition  of  a  denomination,  or  become  a  monument  of 
personal  pride.    For  this  is  not  its  end ;  its  purpose  is  salvation  of  lost  souls,  and 
anything  short  of  that  is  simply  waste  of  money  and  zeal.    We  have  heard  it  said  l^ 
that  once  the  venerable  keeper  of  the  Eddystone    lighthouse   was    completely 
prostrated  by  the  wild  conflict  of  the  ocean  during  a  violent  storm  which  threatened 
to  destroy  the  slender  shaft  of  stone  out  in  the  midst  of  the  waves.     He  joined  the 
small  company  of  his  helpers  in  guarding  the  windows,  defending  the  doois,  saving 
the  boats,  fastening  the  broken  chains,  till  he  used  up  his  inlirm  strength  com- 
pletely.    They  laid  him  down  in  one  of  the  little  chambers  to  die,  for  no  one  could 
be  spared  to  watch.     After  a  while  they  came  to  tell  him  the  stomi  was  abating  ; 
but,  left  for  a  moment,  he  had  crept  up  the  stairs  to  the  lantern,  and  was  there 
feebly  trimming  the  lamps.     "  I  was  afraid  some  vessel  might  miss  tlie  light,"  he 
said  in  explanation.     They  told  him,  a  little  petulantly,  that  he  might  have  spared 
his   strength  to  help  preserve  the  building.     "  No,  no,"  he  answered,  with  an 
anxious  look  out  over  the  ofling ;  '*  I  was  not  put  out  here  to  save  lighthouses,  but 
to   save  ships  I "      II.  The   spirit  of    the    people  was  universally  industrious. 
Personal  labour  is  more  valuable  often  than  money  in  the  Lord's  service,  for  it  more 
surely  carries  the  heart  with  it.     There  is  an  exquisite  little  story  told  us  in  the 
classics,  of  one  Cressinus,  whom  the  Romans  arrested  for  witchcraft  because  he 
grew  opulent  on  so  small  a  farm.      But  he  came  to  the  judgment  producing  hia 
tools,  and  displaying  his  hardened  hands  :  "  These  are  my  sorceries,"  he  exclaimed; 
"  these  implements  of  honest  toil  are  all  the  witcheries  I  know  of  ! "    And  tbey 
freed  him  on  the  plea.     The  eight  fingers  and  two  thumbs  of  Christians  are  the 
best  ten  friends  that  any  congregation  in  difficulties  ever  has  found  under  God. 
III.  The  spirit  of  the  people  was  self-sacrificingly  leberai,.     There  was  once  a  man 
who  was  prospered  in  business  and  grew  wealthy.     Then  he  lavished  his  fortune 
in  house  and  equipage,  and  in  all   personal  indulgence  of  self.    He  suddenly 
failed,  and  in  shame  and  sorrow  stood  by  while  his  furniture  and  pictures,  his  horses 
and  plate,  were  scattered  among  strangers  by  the  glib  auctioneer.      Some  days 
afterwards  he  happened  to  be  present  at  the  dedication  of  a  mission  chapel  for  the 
poor,  which  a  Christian  friend  had  just  erected.     "  Ah,  how  I  wish,"  said  he,  as  his 
memory  told  him  of  his  improvident  excesses  in  former  times — "  how  I  wish  now 
that  some  of  the  wealth  I  wasted  was  invested  here  with  yours  in  this  building, 
which  will  be  doing  God  o  service  long  after  I  am  forgotten  1  "    IV.  The  spirit  of 
the  people  was   prayerfully  ingenious.     The  principle  of  division  of  labour  was 
carried  into  use  among  the  people  so  that  every  sort  of  fitness  should  be  put  into 
service.     Eeally,  the  rule  appears  to  have  been  that  every  one  should  do  the  exact 
thing  he  could  do  the  best,  and  give  all  he  was  able  to  offer  in  the  line  of  unobtrusive 
contribution.     There  was  certainly  something  for  each  man  and  each  woman  to 
do  ;  and  they  all  became  alert  to  find  out  their  vocation.     It  is  remarkable  to  see 
how  unconscious  they  are  of  any  claim  to  special  praise.     There  is  no  clapping  of 
hands  for  each  other ;  there  is  no  plaudit  from  the  skies.     The  famous  statue  of 
Phidias,  called  the  Olympian  Jove,  was  reckoned  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world ; 
and  the  Grecian  orators  used  to  declare  that  on  its  completion  Jove  himself  struck 
the  pavement  in  front  of  it  with  glorious  lightning  in  token  of  his  approbation. 
This  will  do  very  well  as  a  tale  for  a  superstitious  and  self-seeking  multitude.    But 
our  God  never  compliments  human  industry,  nor  flatters  his  creatures  for  simply 
doing  their  duty.     They  must  be  content  to  wait  with  the  approval  of  their  own 
consciences,  and  watch  the  rising  of  each  fair  enterprise  like  a  tabernacle  for  God's 
dwelling.    V.  The  spirit  of  the  people  was  enthusiastically  ajtectiunate.     Over 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EXODUS.  603 

and  over  again  we  are  reminded  that  their  hearts  were  in  every  case  "  stirred  up," 

and  their  spirits  were  made  "  willing-hearted."    It  is  not  even  worth  while  to  delay 

in  illustrating  this  point ;  for  the  whole  after  history  shows  that  their  success  in 

such  a  vast  undertaking  came  from  the  same  temper  as  that  which  actuated  the 

nation  in  after  times  when  building  the  Temple  :  "  The  people  had  a  mind  to 

work."     Therein  is  our  very  best  lesson  for  modern  endeavour.     {C.  S.  Robinson, 

D.D.)  Willinghood : — I.   Descbibe   the   willing   offeeeb.      He  is   one   who 

gives — 1.  As   much  as  he  can.    2.  Of  the  best  he  has.   3.  Cheerfully,  as  to  the 

Lord.     II.  Offeb  some  seasons  fob  willingness  in  the  seewce  of  God.     1.  The 

Lord  loves  a  cheerful  giver.     2.  The  value  of  what  is  given  in  enhanced  by  the 

manner  of  the  bestowment.    3.  The  wilUngness  of  one  stirs  the  liberality  of  others. 

4.  Good  works  are  often  delayed,  fatally,  by  the  slowness  of  giving.    5.  We  are  not 

our  own,  and  all  we  have  is  God's.    6.  God  gave  "  this  unspeakable  gift  "  wiUingly. 

{Biblical  Museum.)        Strange  offerings: — About  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  the 

people  gathered  together  in  the  church.    Fully  five  hundred  natives  were  present, 

and  the  building  seemed  to  be  well  fiUed.     It  is  hard  to  say  how  many  the  Port 

Moresby  church  wiU  hold.     The  people  sit  on  the  floor.      They  have  a  way  of 

folding  up  their  legs  and  then  sitting  on  them,  and  this  saves  space  by  doing  away 

with  all  need  for  chairs.     They  can  stay  seated  in  this  cramped  position  for  au 

hour  or  two.     Upon  this  occasion  the  floor  was  almost  entirely  covered  with  people 

who  listened  well  to  what  was  said.  I  have  never  faced  such  a  congregation  before. 

Towards  the  front  the  people  were  simply  but  decently  dressed.     Many  of  them 

were  young  men   and  women* who  are  being  trained  for  native  teachers  in  the 

Mission  School.     You  had  only  to  look  a  few  yards  behind  them  to  see  the  naked 

savage  sitting  almost  motionless,  and  looking  jast  a  little  hideous  in  his  grotesque 

ornamentation.     To  look  from  one  man  to  another  was  to  see  what  has  been  done, 

and  what  can  be  done  for  these  people  by  the  gospel  of  Christ.    The  collection  was 

a  very  strange  one.     Very  few  of  the  people  have  any  money,  so,  instead  of  silver 

and  gold,   they  brought  such  as  they  have — viz.,  325  spears,  65  shell  armlets, 

92  bows,  180  arrows,  besides  shields,  drums,  shell  necklaces,  feather  and  other 

ornaments.     Altogether,  counting  money  given  by  the  missionaries  and  the  native 

teachers,  the  collection  was  worth  £30  Is.  6d.    (Lewis,  Missionary  in  New  Guinea.) 

Self-denying  offerings  of  icomen: — General  Longstreet,  speaking  of  the  struggle  at 

Centreville,  says :  "  The  Federals  had  been  using  balloons  in  examining  our  positions, 

and  we  watched  with  envious  eyes  their  beautiful  observations,  as  they  floated  high 

np  in  the  air,  and  well  out  of  the  range  of  our  guns.     We  longed  for  the  balloon 

that  poverty  denied  us.    A  genius  arose  for  the  occasion  and  suggested  that  we 

send  out  and  gather  together  all  the  silk  dresses  in  the  Confederacy  and  make  a 

balloon.     It  was  done,  and  soon  we  had  a  great  patchwork  ship  of  many  and  varied 

hues."     {H.  O.  Machey.)  Consecrated  jewels  : — A  few  months  before  the  death 

of  Miss  Frances  Ridley  Havergal,  the  sweet  and  accomplished  missionary  poetess, 

she  sent  to  the  Church  Missionr.ry  Society  her  jewels,  value  £50.    Had  she  been 

strong  enough,  she  herself  would  have  gone  to  India.     Consecrated  plate : — Lord 

Shaftesbury,  on  one  occasion,  said  to  me,  "  I  am  going  to  build  a  schoolroom  in 

your  parish."  I  knew  that  he  had  a  good  many  claims  on  him,  and  I  said  "Let  me 

help  you  to  collect  the  funds."    But  he  would  not,  and  he  built  schoolrooms  in  two 

of  the  parishes  on  the  estate.     Afterwards  he  said  to  me,  "  You  asked  me  to  allow 

you  to  help  me  in  collecting  funds,  but  I  thought  it  was  not  my  duty  to  do  so.     Do 

you  know  how  I  got  the  money  ?  "     I  said,  "  No,  of  course  I  do  not."     "  Well,"  he 

said,  "  I  found  I  had  so  much  more  plate  left  me  by  my  father  than  I  wanted,  that 

I  thought  I  would  sell  enough  to  build  these  two  schoolrooms."     (Bp.  Bicker steth.) 

The  motive  to  liberality  : — Diodorus  Siculus  relates  that  the  forest  of  the  Pyrenean 

Mountains  being  set  on  fire,  and  the  heat  penetrating  to  the  soil,  a  pure  stream  of 

silver  gushed  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  earth  and  revealed  for  the  first  time  the 

existence  of  those  rich  lodes  afterwards  so  celebrated.     Let  the  melting  influence  of 

the  cross  be  felt,  let  the  fire  of  the  gospel  be  kindled  in  the  Church,  and  its  ample 

stores  shall  be  seen  flowing  from  their  hidden  recesses  and  becoming  "  the  fine 

gold  of  the  sanctuary.  {J.  Harris.)     Offerings  of  devotion  : — The  Kev.  Dr.  D.  Fraser 

tells  the  following  : — After  a  sermon  preached  by  him  at  the  opening  of  a  church 

elsewhere,  a  lady  of  fashionable  position  in  society  came  to  him.     "  Why  should 

I  have  two  watches  while  the  house  of  God  remains  unpaid  for  ?  "     He  replied, 

"Eeally,  I  cannot  tell  why."     She  then  said,  "  Well,  I  will  give  the  better  watch 

of  the  two  toward  the  cost  of  the  church."     She  did  so,  and  a  jeweller  paid  £25  for 

it,  which  was  a  sensible  addition  to  the  fund.    Dr.  Fraser  added  that  at  another 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

collection,  on  the  previous  Sunday,  a  lady  who  had  not  a  piece  of  gold,  and  who 
did  not  care  to  give  silver,  took  the  chain  off  her  neck  and  put  it  on  the  plate.  She 
would  lose  nothing  by  that.  They  might  say  that  these  were  impulsive  women. 
Well,  impulsive  women  might  rise  up  to  condemn  illiberal  men  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord.  Variety  of  offerings  in  God's  treasury  : — I  remember  once  being  in  the 
treasury  of  a  royal  palace.  There  was  a  long  gallery  in  which  the  Crown  valuables 
were  stored.  In  one  compartment  there  was  a  great  display  of  emeralds,  and 
diamonds,  and  rubies,  and  I  know  not  what,  that  had  been  looted  from  some 
Indian  rajah  or  other.  And  in  the  next  case  there  lay  a  common  quill  pen,  and 
beside  it  a  Uttle  bit  of  discoloured  coarse  serge.  The  pen  had  signed  some 
important  treaty,  and  the  serge  was  a  fragment  of  a  flag  that  had  been  borne 
triumphant  from  a  field  where  a  nation's  destinies  had  been  sealed.  The  two 
together  were  worth  a  farthing  at  the  outside,  but  they  held  their  own  among  the 
jewels,  because  they  spoke  of  brain-work  and  bloodshed  in  the  service  of  the  king. 
Many  strangely  conjoined  things  lie  side  by  side  in  God's  jewel-cases.  Things 
which  people  vulgarly  call  large  and  valuable,  and  what  people  still  more  vulgarly 
call  small  and  worthless,  have  a  way  of  getting  together  there.  For  in  that 
place  the  arrangement  U  not  in  order  of  what  the  thing  will  fetch  if  it  is 
sold,  but  what  was  the  thought  in  the  mind  and  the  emotion  in  the  heart 
which  gave  it.  Jewels  and  camel's  hair,  yarn  and  gold  and  silver,  are  all 
massed  together.  Wood  is  wanted  for  the  temple  quite  as  much  as  gold  and 
silver  and  precious  stones.  So,  whatever  we  have,  let  us  bring  that ;  and 
whatever  we  are,  let  us  bring  that.  If  we  be  poor  and  our  work  small,  and  our 
natures  limited,  and  our  faculties  confined,  it  does  not  matter.  A  man  is  accepted 
"  according  to  that  he  hath,  and  not  according  to  that  he  hath  not."  He  gives 
much  who  gives  all,  though  his  all  be  little  ;  he  gives  little  who  gives  a  part,  though 
the  part  be  much.  The  motive  sanctifies  the  act,  and  the  completeness  of  the 
consecration  magnifies  it.  Great  and  small  are  not  words  for  God's  kingdom,  in 
which  the  standard  is  not  quantity  but  quality,  and  quality  is  settled  by  the  purity 
of  the  love  which  prompts  the  deed,  and  the  consequent  thoroughness  of  self- 
surrender  which  it  expresses.  Whoever  serves  God  with  a  whole  heart  will  render 
to  Him  a  whole  strength,  and  will  thus  bring  Him  the  gifts  which  He  most  desires. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Willivg  offerings  acceptable  to  God  : — There  was  once  a 
missionary  meeting  held  in  the  West  Indies  among  the  negroes,  at  which  these 
three  resolutions  were  agreed  upon — 1.  We  will  all  give  something.  2.  We  will 
give  as  God  has  prospered  us.  3.  We  will  all  give  willingly.  As  soon  as  the 
meeting  was  over,  a  leading  negro  took  his  seat  at  the  table,  with  pen  and  ink,  to 
put  down  what  each  came  to  give.  Many  came  forward  to  give,  some  more  and 
some  less.  Amongst  those  that  came  was  a  rich  old  negro,  almost  as  rich  as  all 
the  others  put  together,  and  threw  down  upon  the  table  a  small  silver  coin. 
"Take  dat  back  again,"  said  the  negro  that  received  the  money  ;  "  dat  may  be 
according  to  de  first  resolution,  but  it  not  according  to  de  second."  The  rich  man 
accordingly  took  it  up,  and  hobbled  back  to  his  seat  in  a  great  rage.  One  after 
another  came  forward,  and  as  almost  all  gave  more  than  himself,  he  was  fairly 
ashamed  of  himself,  and  again  threw  down  a  piece  of  money  on  tbe  table,  saying, 
"  Dare  !  take  that  1  "  It  was  a  valuable  piece  of  money  :  but  it  was  given  so  ill- 
temperedly,  that  the  negro  answered  again,  "No!  dat  won't  do  yet!  It  maybe 
according  to  de  first  and  second  resolutions,  but  it  is  not  according  to  de  last  "  ;  and 
he  was  obliged  to  take  up  his  coin  again.  Still  angry  at  himself  and  all  the  rest, 
he  sat  a  long  time,  till  nearly  all  were  gone,  and  then  came  up  to  the  table,  and 
with  a  smile  on  his  face,  and  very  willingly,  gave  a  large  sum  to  the  treasurer. 
"Very  well,"  said  the  negro,  "dat  will  do;  dat  according  to  all  de  resolutions." 
Whatever  we  do  for  the  worship  and  service  of  God,  we  should  do  it  freely,  cheer- 
fully, and  cordially.  "  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  If  cheerful  giving  to  God's 
cause  was  required  under  the  old  dispeasalion,  how  much  more  is  it  required  under 
the  new  1  I  mmt  give  before  I  can  pray  : — The  venerable  Dr.  Sewall,  of  Alaine,  once 
entered  a  meetingin  behalf  of  foreign  missions,  ju-t  as  the  collectors  of  the  contribn- 
tiiins  were  re-uming  their  seats.  Tue  chairman  of  the  meeting  requested  him  to  lead 
in  prayer.  The  old  gentleman  stood  hesitatingly,  as  if  he  had  not  heard  the  request. 
It  was  repeated  in  a  louder  voice,  but  there  was  no  response.  It  was  observed, 
however,  that  Dr.  Sewall  was  fumbling  in  his  pockets,  and  presently  he  produced  a 
piece  of  money,  which  he  deposited  in  the  contribution  box.  The  chairman,  think- 
ing he  had  not  been  understood,  said  loudly,  "  I  didn't  ask  you  to  give.  Dr.  Sewall, 
I  asked  you  to  pray."     "  Oh,  yes,"  he  replied,  "  I  heard  you,  but  I  can't  pray  tiU  I 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EXODUS.  605 

have  given  something."  The  worth  of  youthful  giving  : — The  Eev.  Dr.  Dickson,  of 
Baltimore,  in  an  address  at  the  Maryland  State  Sabbath-school  Convention,  spoke 
of  the  need  of  cultivating  "  the  grace  of  giving"  in  early  life.  Twenty  years  ago, 
he  said,  he  proposed  to  his  Sabbath-school  superintendent  to  take  up  a  collection 
every  Sabbath  morning  from  the  children.  "Why,  my  dear  pastor,"  exclaimed 
the  superintendent,  "you  shear  the  sheep  pretty  often,  and  this  looks  really  like 
wantina;  to  shear  the  tender  lambs ! "  The  thought  startled  the  speaker.  A  few 
days  after,  however,  he  was  in  the  store  of  one  of  his  parishioners,  purchasing 
stockings.  He  had  selected  a  good  article,  as  he  thought,  when  the  merchant 
inquired,  "  Why  do  you  not  select  the  lambs'  wool?  "  "  Lambs'  wool  I  why,  are 
they  better  ?  "  "  Yes,  they  are  a  world  softer,  far  more  pliable,  and  I  believe  wear 
longer  than  those  made  from  old  sheep's  wool."  He  did  not  remember,  and  needed 
not  to  inform  the  hearers,  whether  he  took  the  stockings ;  but  he  knew  that  he 
took  the  fact  to  his  superintendent,  telling  him  that  "  lambs'  wool  was  the  best 
wool,  and  he  meant  to  try  it ! "  The  many  early  traits  of  selfishness,  avarice, 
covetousness,  subdued  by  the  earlier  formed  habits  of  giving  in  children  who  could 
tell! 

Vers.  30-34.  To  devise  curious  works. — Bezaleel ;  or,  invention,  art,  and 
religion : — Keligion  may  not  despise  art  and  inventive  power.  It  should  absorb 
everything  that  can  give  pure  joy  and  assist  devotion.  The  best  art  generally  has 
a  Godward  look.  I.  Akt  and  Christianity  both  imply  work.  Indolence  ia 
disgrace.  Work  is  honourable,  whether  it  be  the  work  of  the  horny  hand,  the 
skilful  touch,  or  the  busy  brain.  There  is  no  curse  upon  work,  unless  when  poorly 
paid.     Indeed,  the  world  would  be  accursed  if  there  were  no  work,  no  art,  no  skill. 

II.  Art  and  science,  like  religion,  stimulate  thought.  Man,  weak  in  bodily 
frame,  is  to  be  strong  by  the  exercise  of  mind.  Thought  is  to  overcome  force,  and 
ingenuity  inertness.  We  believe  that  Christianity  will  flourish  best  where  there  ia 
truest  art  culture  and  deepest  reverence  arising  from  contemplation  of  God's  works. 

III.  Art,  science,  and  Christianity  alike  teach  us  that  we  are  mutually 
dependent.  The  comforts  and  joys,  as  well  as  the  necessaries  of  life,  are  the  result 
of  much  thought  and  care  on  the  part  of  others.  IV.  Art  and  science,  like 
Christianity,  are  useful  in  fostering  purer  and  higher  tastes.  God  intended 
that  we  should  be  educated  in  this  way  to  appreciate  something  higher  in  the 
better  world.  (F.  Hastings.)  The  true  design  of  work  : — W'e  are  accustomed  to 
hmit  the  inspiration  of  God's  Spirit  to  thoughts  and  words.  For  this,  however,  we 
have  no  warrant  in  Scripture.  The  sevenfold  Spirit  has  differences  of  administra- 
tion and  operation.  The  body  as  well  as  the  soul  experiences  His  sanctifying 
influence.  He  enters  the  sphere  of  man's  labour  as  well  as  of  his  thought,  and 
inspires  the  work  of  his  hands  as  well  as  the  meditations  of  his  mind.  The  pame 
Spirit  that  inspired  the  eloquence  of  Isaiah,  and  the  melodies  of  the  chief  musician 
Asaph,  also  imparted  to  Samson  that  marvellous  bodily  strength  which  he  displayed 
in  Herculean  labours,  and  tremendous  feats  against  the  Philistines ;  and  to  Beza- 
leel and  Aholiab  that  fine  aesthetic  taste  and  mechanical  skill,  by  which  they  were 
enabled  to  construct  the  Tabernacle  after  the  pattern  shown  on  the  mount.  What 
is  the  lesson  conveyed  to  us  by  the  Theocratic  government  of  Israel,  whose  affair?, 
secular  and  religious,  national  and  individual,  were  regulated  directly  by  God  Himself? 
Is  it  not  that  the  whole  of  life  is  one  ;  that  true  religion  is  the  proper  use  of  man'3 
whole  being,  and  of  the  universe  around  him  ?  What  does  the  ascension  of  our 
Lord  teach  us  ?  Is  it  not  the  unity  of  life;  the  oneness  of  the  natural  and  the 
religious  life  ?  Godliness  is  now  profitable  unto  all  things.  It  is  not  the  setting 
up  of  an  estrangement  between  man  and  the  outer  world,  but  the  working  out  of  a 
true  harmony  between  them  ;  not  the  elimination  of  any  of  the  elements  of  man's 
life,  but  the  proper  blending  of  the  whole — the  sanctification  of  body,  soul,  and 
spirit ;  the  doing  all,  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  we  do,  to  the  glory  of 
God.  Bearing  in  mind  this  solemn  truth  of  the  unity  of  all  life,  let  me  proceed  to 
consider  the  significance  of  the  inspiration  of  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab.  This  fact  is 
not  of  individual  but  of  general  application.  It  is  not  unique,  but  representative.  The 
Tabernacle  of  the  wilderness  was  a  miniature  model  of  the  whole  earth,  just  as  the 
people  of  Israel  were  the  miniature  pattern  of  all  nations.  Every  man  has  a  part  as- 
signed to  him  in  the  erection  and  adorning  of  this  wonderful  Tabernacle,  whose  floor 
is  the  green  fields,  whose  walls  are  the  rocks  and  mountains,  and  whose  roof  is  the 
ever-changing  sky.  Every  man  who  does  a  day's  work  is  a  fellow-worker  with  God, 
in  carrying  out  His  great  des'gn  in  creation,  in  improving  the  face  of  nature, 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

changing  the  wilderness  into  a  garden,  in  making  the  world  fairer  and  richer,  and 
better  fitted  to  be  the  home  of  redeemed  man,  and  the  shrine  of  the  Most  High  God. 
Toil  is  the  first  stage  of  the  process  of  redemption — "  the  condition  of  man's  eleva- 
tion out  of  the  state  of  a  sinful,  suffering,  degraded  creature,  to  the  friendship, 
fellowship,  and  likeness  of  God."  In  the  Pacific  Ocean  there  are  lovely  islands 
built  entirely  by  coral  zoophytes,  out  of  the  profound  depths  of  the  ocean.  Raised 
above  the  waves,  floating  germs  of  vegetation  alight  on  them,  and  speedily  cover 
them  with  a  fair  clothing  of  verdure.  Man  comes  and  takes  up  his  abode  on  these 
Edens,  and  makes  their  resources  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  human  life.  By 
and  by  the  missionary  appears,  and  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  changes  the 
moral  wilderness  into  a  garden  of  the  Lord.  The  last  great  result  is  thus  but  the 
completion  of  a  process  begun  by  the  mere  natural  instinct  of  a  creature  in  the 
depths  of  the  ocean.  The  work  of  the  missionary  rests  upon,  and  is  closely  con- 
nected with,  the  work  of  the  polyp.  So  is  it  with  human  toil.  It  may  be  a  mere 
instinctive  process  carried  on  in  the  depths  of  spiritual  ignorance ;  a  blind,  aimless 
motion,  having  no  higher  object  than  the  mere  satisfying  of  natural  wants.  Man 
may  be  induced  to  work  purely  by  physical  necessity,  because  he  cannot  otherwise 
get  his  bread  ;  and  yet  toil  is  absolutely  necessary  as  the  foundation  upon  which 
the  spiritual  structure  of  our  soul's  salvation  is  laid.  The  effects  of  the  fall  began 
indeed  in  the  soul ;  and  it  is  in  the  soul  that  they  must  first  be  counteracted.  The 
work  of  grace  is  radical.  It  begins  in  the  heart,  and  spreads  outwardly  through 
the  life.  But  work  is  the  fulcrum  by  which  its  blessed  leverage  is  exerted,  the  dis- 
cipline through  which  it  is  carried  out.  Toil,  first  of  all,  teaches  man  his  utter 
poverty.  He  forfeited  life  and  all  the  means  of  life  by  his  sin.  As  an  outlaw 
under  sentence  of  outlawry,  he  can  hold  no  possessions  whatever ;  he  has  no  right 
even  to  his  daily  bread.  But  further,  toil  makes  man  subject  to  the  law  which  he 
has  broken.  He  sought  to  escape  from  law  by  his  transgression.  Striving  to  escape 
from  the  beneficent  law  of  God,  he  fell  under  the  cruel  law  of  poverty,  hunger,  and 
death.  He  must  become,  as  Mr.  Brown  says,  the  servant  of  the  laws  by  which  God 
maintains  the  order  and  life  of  the  world,  if  he  would  earn  the  smallest  blessing 
from  their  co-operation.  Only  by  falling  in  with  the  Divine  rule  in  every  work  can 
any  man  hope  to  succeed  in  it.  Those  who  conquer  nature  are  those  who  compre- 
hend and  obey  her.  But  further  still,  toil  opens  the  door  into  the  sphere  of  duty, 
and  is  tlie  hinge  on  which  the  deepest  relationships  and  richest  experiences  of  life 
turn.  Not  for  himself  does  any  man  toil.  Wife  and  children  have  to  be  provided  for. 
But  the  highest  ministry  which  our  toil  performs  is  to  bring  us  into  communion 
and  fellowship  with  God  our  Redeemer,  to  make  us  fellow-workers  with  God.  We 
enter  into  His  purposes,  comprehend  His  plans,  and  sympathize  with  His  feelings. 
The  patience  which  the  husbandman  exercises  in  waiting  through  the  long  summer 
months  for  the  fruit  of  what  he  sows,  and  which  the  artist  and  mechanic  display 
in  slowly  developing  their  s-pecial  work,  enables  us  in  some  measure  to  understand 
the  patience  of  God  in  His  work  of  providence  and  redemption.  The  disappoint- 
ments and  failures  to  which  all  kinds  of  work  are  exposed,  prepare  us  for  sympa- 
thizing with  God's  grief  over  the  ruins  of  the  world  which  He  had  made  all  very 
good,  and  over  the  disappointments  which  He  meets  in  His  redemption  work.  The 
courage, the  faith,  the  devotion,  the  perseverance,  the  self-denial  which  our  daily  work 
calls  forth,  are  closely  related  to  our  higher  moral  and  spiritual  discipline,  and  have 
the  most  important  effect  in  redeeming  us  from  the  consequences  of  the  fall.  We  need 
the  inspiration  of  God's  Spirit — the  inspiration  which  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  had — 
to  respiie  our  work  from  the  degradation  into  which  it  so  easily  slides,  and  make  it 
what  God  meant  it  to  be.  The  very  labour  of  our  hands  sinks  down  into  depraved 
methods,  unless  kept  up  by  the  ennobling  influence  of  God's  Spirit.  The  inspira- 
tion of  the  Spirit  does  not  indeed  impart  gifts — does  not  stand  in  place  of  natural 
abilities  and  attainments.  Men  have  different  talents  naturally ;  and  a  Christian 
may  have  only  one  talent,  while  a  thoroughly  worldly  man  may  have  ten.  And 
yet  it  is  marvellous  what  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  can  do,  even  in  the  absence 
or  deficiency  of  natural  attainments.  The  entrance  of  God's  Word  gives  light, 
and  makes  the  simple  wise.  Conversion  is  itself  an  education.  Religion  exalts 
and  ennobles  the  whole  man.  It  quickens  and  elevates  all  his  powers,  and  makes 
itself  ft  It  in  every  thing  with  which  he  has  to  do.  We  see  the  marvellous  influence 
of  the  Christian  religion,  even  although  mixed  with  much  superstition,  in  the  art 
of  the  Middle  Arcs — in  those  paintings  of  sacred  subjects,  and  those  abbeys  and 
cathedrals  which  are  the  admiration  of  our  age.  There  is  nothing  in  Christianity 
that  forbids,  but,  on  the  contrary,  everything  that  favours  the  widest  expansioD, 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  EXODUS.  6(ft 

the  loftiest  achievement  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  most  skilful  profln  '  '^n  of  the 
human  hand.  It  belioves  all  who  are  Christians,  then,  to  show  what  Christianity 
can  do  in  the  way  of  purifying  and  ennobling  common  every-day  work.  Let  us  seek  to 
make  our  work  an  essential  part  of  our  religion.  The  labour  of  Bezaleel,  from  a 
worldly  point  of  view,  was  evanescent.  The  Tabernacle  which  he  constructed  with 
such  rare  skill,  passed  away ;  all  its  precious  materials  and  workmanship  dis- 
appeared like  a  beautiful  dream  of  the  morning,  and  not  a  trace  of  them  now  remains 
on  the  face  of  the  earth.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  this,  the  work  of  Bezaleel  was 
abiding  in  its  spiritual  results.  Israel  reaped  the  benefit  of  it  through  all  their 
generations.  We  ourselves  are  the  better  for  it  today.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
Inspiration  for  handicraft : — No  nobler  thought  of  God,  no  more  welcome  gospel, 
after  an  assurance  of  purifying  grace,  has  been  uttered  than  this  which  these  verses 
hold.  Fallacious  and  fatal  is  the  thought  that  a  man  can  live  a  divided  life.  Hope- 
less is  his  struggle  to  "  serve  two  masters."  And  surely  few  heresies  have  done  so 
much  damage  to  religion  as  that  which  would  lead  a  man  to  think  that  the  things 
•which  necessarily  occupy  a  large  proportion  of  his  time  and  energy  are  matters  of 
no  concern  to  the  God  who  claims  his  worship,  and  that  to  Him  the  toil  of  the 
industrious,  the  genius  of  the  skilful,  the  patience  of  the  earnest,  with  all  the  pro- 
ducts of  such  life's  endeavour,  are  things  of  no  moment,  lying  outside  the  region 
of  His  care  and  cognizance.  Honour  to  the  soul  that  rises  in  revolt  against  an 
injustice  to  God  and  man  !  I  meet  with  men  who  are  troubled  by  this  miscon- 
ception ;  men  who  need,  as  we  all  need,  help  from  God  day  by  day,  and  all  daylong ; 
men  who,  if  their  industry  cannot  be  brought  within  the  sphere  of  their  religion, 
feel  that  they  must  be  irreligious,  or  at  all  events  unreligious  for  the  greater  part 
of  their  life.  Let  me  try  to  win  such  men  from  their  mistake  by  setting  before 
them  this  truth  of  God.  Do  you  not  feel  how  full-charged  this  truth  is  with  the 
power  of  quickening  and  redeeming  grace  ?  Do  you  not  feel  how  all-inclusive  this 
truth  is,  how  it  touches  every  man,  and  makes  hjs  whole  self  worthy,  how  it  touches 
the  whole  of  the  man,  and  leaves  nothing  of  him  outside  of  Divine  help,  nothing 
of  him  undignified  by  Divine  overruling?  Let  us  put  the  truth  into  plain  words, 
and  look  it  straight  in  the  face — power  of  hand  and  brain  is  of  God  and  for 
God.  It  has  a  comely  aspect,  significant  of  hope,  voiceful  with  strenuous  incen- 
tive, calm  with  conscious  triumph.  We  are  brought  just  back  to  this  simple, 
ancient  way  of  putting  the  fact,  after  all  the  revelations  and  imaginations  concern- 
ing species  and  development,  which  have  been  given  to  the  world.  Genius  maybe 
largely  hereditary,  special  capacities  may  be  cultured  and  developed.  But  who 
planned  the  conditions  and  the  laws?  It  is  interesting  to  discover  method;  but 
method  is  not  cause.  Knowledge  of  the  means  through  which  anything  is  done  is  not 
the  same  as  a  knowledge  of  that  fc(/ which  the  thing  is  done.  I  don't  know,  I  don't  be- 
lieve that  any  one  wants  to  try  to  prove  atheism.  But  we  might  almost  as  well  doubt 
the  very  existence  of  our  God  as  fail  to  reap  the  great  harvest  of  privilege  which 
springs  from  this  great  seed-truth,  "  in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being." 
Oh,  if  all  the  thinkers  and  workers  in  the  world,  our  fellows  and  associates  in  the  ollice 
and  the  warehouse,  in  the  factory  and  in  the  foundry,  could  be  bi-ouglitto  feel  this, 
what  a  power  for  good  would  grow  I  If  men  and  women  went  into  each  day's  toil 
with  not  a  vague,  phadowy  idea,  but  a  great  and  vivid  conviction  that  tlie  strength, 
the  skill,  the  ingenuity,  power  of  adroit  and  delicate  touch,  power  of  fanciful  and 
beautiful  designing,  strength  to  sling  the  hammer  and  make  the  anvil  ring,  delicacy, 
deftness,  knack,  that  indescribable  way  of  doing  just  the  right  thing  at  the  right 
time,  which  is  so  marv(='llous  to  watch — that  all  this  is  a  Divine  gift  bearing  the 
seal  of  the  Mo>t  High  God,  the  pledge  of  His  thought  and  care  and  love,  a  holy 
trust  to  be  used  for  Him — would  not  such  a  conviction  be  as  good  as  it  was  great, 
as  redemptive  as  it  was  real?  It  makes  all  the  difference  between  drudgery  and 
duty,  between  toil  and  work.  It  changes  hard  labour,  recompensed  by  coin  of  the 
realm  by  which  a  man's  debts  are  paid  and  his  needs  met,  into  an  exultant  exercise 
of  power,  recompensed  by  the  approval  of  a  conscience  void  of  offence,  recompensed 
more  gloriously  by  the  approval  of  the  Master  who  was  once  Himself  a  workman 
and  is  eternally  a  worker :  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant :  enter  thou  into 
the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  I  appeal  to  those  who  listen  to  me  to  pet  rid  of  the  fallacy 
and  to  get  hold  of  the  fact.  The  call  to  labour  is  a  summons  to  high  privilegp.  The 
inspiration  to  true  labour  has  its  origin  in  God.  Take  the  truth  with  you  to- 
morrow, friend,  and  it  will  lift  your  life  out  of  its  monotony  and  rid  it  of  any  aspect 
of  dreariness.  It  will  put  a  soul  into  what  has,  perhaps,  been  a  lifeless  thing.  It 
will  send  a  glow  to  you  through  what,  perhaps,  hitherto  has  chilled  your  very  heart. 


609  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

It  was  the  Lord  God  who  put  wisdom  and  understanding  into  every  wise-hearted 
man  "  to  know  how  to  work  all  manner  of  work  for  the  service  of  the  sanctuary," 
and  He,  the  Lord,  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  This  brings 
me  naturally  to  the  emphasizing  of  another  poiot  illustrated  here  :  that  the  power, 
the  disposition  to  use  the  skill  is  also  a  Divine  gift.  I  say  use,  for  misuse  and 
abuse  are  of  a  man's  own  selfishness.  Often  do  we  hear  the  question,  "  What  will 
he  do  with  it  ?  "  Now  I  imagine  that  a  man  who  has  felt  the  pressure  of  the  solemn 
fact  of  which  I  have  spoken,  namely,  that  power  of  hand  and  brain  is  of  and  for 
God,  will  be  found  looking  for  this  second  fact — that  power  to  use  the  skill  is  also 
a  gift  from  Him.  If  I  discover  that  I  am  in  possession  of  some  precious  thing 
which  has  come  to  me  from  God,  the  natural  and  immediate  impulse  will  be  to  look 
to  Him  for  guidance  and  power  in  the  use  of  it.  I  am  anxious  not  to  misus-e  it.  I 
fear  to  make  a  mistake.  A  man  makes  a  sorry  bargain  who  sells  himself  for 
money  or  for  the  passing  gratification  of  his  senses.  Yet  men  have  been  tempted 
to  abuse  their  skill,  intelligence,  strength,  by  the  doing  of  a  deed,  one  result  of 
which  was  the  enabling  them  to  say,  "  That  pile  of  gold  is  mine,"  a  saying  which 
could  only  be  true  for  a  time,  and  another  result  of  which  was  the  withering  and 
maiming  of  their  very  soul.  I  believe  in  the  possibility  of  consecrating  all  endeavour. 
I  believe  that  daily  labour  in  any  man's  lawful  calling  may  be  ennobled  with  the 
grandeur  of  Divine  service.  If,  then,  you  and  I  feel  giacious  influences  and  powers 
leading  and  qualifying  us  to  use  our  force  and  skill  in  this  highest  way,  "  not  with 
eye-service  as  men-pleasers,"  but  with  "  singleness  of  heart "  as  reverencing  God, 
thankfully  may  we  recognize  the  influence  as  His  influence,  the  power  as  His 
power,  the  grace  as  His  grace.  Mental  endowment  and  power  of  speech,  phy.-ical 
endowment  and  power  of  handicraft,  are  high  gifts,  and  the  generosity  is  meant  for 
good.  (D.  Jones  Ilamer.)  Consecrated  ability  : — There  was,  of  course,  a  special 
Divine  influence  on  these  two  artists  ;  but  in  a  very  real  sense,  it  is  true  of  every 
man  of  genius  that  his  excellence  has  been  given  him  by  God,  and  he  should  seek 
to  consecrate  it  to  God's  service.  Let  us  be  just,  also,  and  add  that,  in  a  large  pro- 
portion of  instances,  they  have  done  so.  Take  the  noblest  things  in  poetry,  music, 
architecture,  and  painting,  and  you  will  find  that  they  have  been  done  in  the 
service  of  God,  and  have  a  religious  significance.  The  grandest  epic  in  our  lan- 
guage is  on  a  religious  theme ;  and  some  of  our  grandest  lyrics  have  come  from 
the  harp  of  a  pious  heart,  swept  by  the  breeze  of  a  holy  influence.  What  are  the 
oratorios  of  Handel  but  the  consecration  of  his  genius  to  Jehovah?  and  the  finest 
specimens  of  architecture  which  Europe  has  to  show  are  its  venerable  cathedrals, 
every  one  of  which,  in  the  ideal  of  its  designer,  was  a  sermon  in  stone.  The  greate.st 
triumphs  of  the  painter  have  been  in  the  dehneations  of  sacred  subjects ;  and 
many  among  them  who  have  become  famous  have,  like  the  Fra  Angelico,  done  their 
work  upon  their  knees.  .  .  .  Every  true  product  of  art,  no  matter  in  what  depart- 
ment, is  a  poem  ;  and  if  we  can  adopt  the  lyrics  of  the  singer  into  our  hymnology, 
why  should  we  not  encourage  our  artists  to  preach  on  the  canvas  and  in  the  marble? 
Never  minister  gave  a  more  eloquent  sermon  than  that  painted  by  Holman  Hunt 
in  "  The  Light  of  the  W^orld."  And  the  advantage  is  on  the  painter's  side  in  more 
ways  than  one,  for,  while  the  sermon  dies  out  of  recollection,  the  picture  lives.  So 
let  us  encourage  men  of  genius  to  consecrate  their  abilities  to  God's  service  ;  and 
then,  perhaps,  the  time  will  come  when,  in  the  highest  of  all  senses,  "  the  day  of 
the  Lord  shall  be  upon  all  pleasant  pictures."  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Art 
inspiration: — Few  minds  are  sunlike,  sources  of  light  to  themselves  and  to  others. 
Most  are  moons,  which  shine  with  a  derivative  and  reflected  light.  Bezaleel  and 
Aholiab  drew  their  skill  from  Divine  inspiration.  Indeed,  it  has  been  said  by 
Cicero  that  all  great  men  are  in  some  degree  inspired.  They  are  Divinely  qoalified 
for  their  respective  missions.  Was  not  Gutenburg  inspired  to  invent  printing,  with 
the  view  to  a  world-wide  diffusion  of  the  Word  of  God  ?  The  history  of  nations 
and  of  the  Church  afford  numerous  illustrations  of  this  species  of  inspiration  in  the 
raising  up  of  special  men  to  certain  works  when  such  needed  to  be  done.  Artistic 
education  of  Israelites  in  Egypt  : — Under  Jehovah's  merciful  providence  even  the 
captivity  of  Israel  had  a  sunny  side.  Egypt,  then  at  the  noon  of  her  civilization, 
was  pre-eminently  the  home  of  science,  art,  and  culture.  For  both  rede-craft  sjid 
hand-craft  her  children  were  world-famed.  The  Israelites  were  educated  in  a  school 
of  fine  arts  as  well  as  in  brickyards.  Not  all  their  eons  and  daughters  toiled  in 
clay,  or  ate  only  cheapest  bread  and  onions.  Many  were  house  and  body  servants 
to  Egyptian  ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  brighter  and  more  dexterous  learned 
trades ;  and  though  slaves,  served  their  masters  as  skilled  mechanics  or  workers  ia 


CHAP.  xxxYi.]  EXODUS.  609 

art  products.  Not  a  few  secured  first-class  knowledge  in  stamping,  chasing,  and 
various  branches  of  metal-work,  in  the  lapidary  and  glyptic  art,  as  well  as  in 
weaving,  dyeing,  carpentry,  and  leather-dressing.  In  addition  to  their  theoretical 
knowledge  and  practical  handicraft,  they  had  pretty  full  sets  of  models  and  master- 
pieces of  mechanism.  The  keepsakes  and  souvenirs  borrowed  from  the  Egyptians 
were  easily  copied  and  manufactured,  when  raw  material  from  mine  and  flock,  sea 
and  soil,  in  the  Sinaitic  peninsula  were  put  to  account.  It  was  not  entirely  a 
"  horde  of  slaves  "  that  went  up  out  of  Egypt.  Between  the  mob  of  ignorant 
freedmen  and  the  princes,  statesmen,  and  leaders  inspired  of  God,  stood  another  class 
of  men  :  these  were  metallurgists,  jewellers,  engravers,  architects,  and  weavers  pos- 
sessing that  skill,  born  of  hand  and  brain  working  in  harmony,  without  which  a  high 
civilization  and  the  order  of  cities  are  impossible.  {W.  E.  Griffis.)  Prayer  for 
artistic  skill  ansicered  : — A  young  painter  was  directed  by  his  master  to  complete 
a  picture  on  which  the  master  had  been  obliged  to  suspend  his  labours  on  account 
of  his  growing  infirmities.  "I  commission  thee,  my  son,"  said  the  aged  artist, 
"  to  do  thy  best  upon  this  work.  Do  thy  best."  The  young  man  had  such  rever- 
ence for  his  master's  skill,  that  he  felt  incompetent  to  touch  canvas  that  bore  the 
mark  of  that  renowned  hand.  But  "  Do  thy  best  "  was  the  old  man's  calm  reply; 
and  again,  to  repeated  solicitations,  he  answered,  "  Do  thy  best."  The  youth 
tremblingly  seized  the  brush,  and  kneeling  before  his  appointed  work,  he  prayed :  "  It 
is  for  the  sake  of  my  beloved  master  that  I  implore  skill  and  power  to  do  this  deed." 
His  hand  grew  steady  as  he  painted.  Slumbering  genius  awoke  in  his  eye. 
Enthusiasm  took  the  place  of  fear.  Forgetfulness  of  himself  supplanted  his  self- 
distrust,  and  with  a  calm  joy  he  finished  his  labour.  The  "beloved  master"  was 
borne  on  his  couch  into  the  studio,  to  pass  judgment  on  the  result.  As  his  eye  fell 
upon  the  triumph  of  art  before  him,  he  burst  into  tears,  and  throwing  his  enfeebled 
arms  around  the  young  artist,  he  exclaimed,  "My  son,  I  paint  no  more!"  That  youth, 
Leonardo  da  Vinci,  became  the  painter  of  "  The  Last  Supper,"  the  ruins  of  which, 
after  the  lapse  of  three  hundred  years,  still  attract  large  numbers  annually  to  the 
refectory  of  an  obscure  convent  in  Milan.  (Christian  Journal.)  Wisdom  a  Divine 
gift : — A  touching  story  is  related  of  Thomas  Telford,  the  Scottish  mason  who  became 
one  of  the  greatest  of  British  engineers.  His  great  scheme  of  a  suspension  bridge 
over  the  Menai  Strait,  connecting  Carnarvonshire  with  the  Isle  of  Anglesea,  had 
passed  through  many  stages  of  difficulty  and  doubt.  Will  and  genius  had  battled 
with,  and  overcome  the  obstacles,  and  the  bridge  was  a  fact.  An  experiment  had 
been  made,  and  all  went  well.  Enthusiastic  friends  missed  the  designer.  They 
went  to  seek  him,  and  to  tell  him  how  thoroughly  his  plans  appeared  to  be  justified, 
and  how  reward  had  come  for  labour  and  anxiety.  Telford  was  found  on  his  knees, 
lifting  up  his  heart  to  God  in  adoration  and  prayer.  He  recognized  that  all  wisdom 
and  all  power  was  a  Divine  trust,  and  that  God  was  the  Giver  of  all  his  good.  This 
is  the  right  way  to  take  success.  Such  men  do  not  lose  in  soul-stature  through  their 
prosperity. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Vers.  1-38.  Every  wise-hearted  man  in  whom  the  Lord  put  wisdom  and  under- 
standing to  know  how  to  work. — Consecrated  art : — Dannecker,  the  German 
sculptor,  occupied  eight  years  upon  a  marble  statue  of  Christ.  He  beheved  then, 
and  ever  afterward,  that  he  had  been  inspired  of  God  to  do  that  thing.  He  thought 
that  he  had  seen  a  vision  of  Christ  in  his  sohtary  vigils.  He  had  but  transferred 
to  the  marble  the  image  that  the  Lord  had  shown  to  him.  His  rising  fame 
attracted  the  attention  of  Napoleon,  and  he  was  requested  to  make  a  statue  of 
Venus  similar  to  Ariadne,  for  the  gallery  of  the  Louvre.  He  refused,  saying,  "  A 
man  who  has  seen  Christ  would  commit  sacrilege  if  he  should  employ  his  art  in  the 
carving  of  a  pagan  goddess.  My  art  is  therefore  a  consecrated  thing."  Is  there 
not  an  experience  of  communion  with  God  in  Christ,  not  uncommon  with  mature 
believers,  which  is  equivalent  to  a  vision  of  the  Lord,  and  which  renders  life  and 
life  work,  even  its  humblest  occupations,  sacred  ?  The  lowliest  not  less  than  the 
loftiest  life  may  have  this  element  of  an  infinite  dignity.  Indolence  in  the 
Church: — A  North  American  Indian  convert,  being  catechised  upon  "  original  sin," 
stated  that  he  rather  thought  that  in  his  case  it  was  laziness.    Original  sin  certainly 

39 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxrrai, 

seems  to  take  this  form  in  the  case  of  many  members  of  our  Churches.  What  is 
the  proportion  of  Christian  workers  in  any  Church  ?  Are  they  not  invariably  a 
small  minority  ?  Why  so  ?  What  exemption  can  the  majority  plead  ?  It  is  said 
the  working  bees  cast  out  the  drones  from  the  hive.  Were  we  to  proceed  upon  this 
principle,  what  terrible  depletion  would  our  Churches  suffer  I  (J.  Ilaheij.)  False 
estimates  of  Church-workers  :  —We  sometimes  form  a  too  favourable  estimate  of 
the  number  of  workers  in  our  Churches,  erroneously  judging  from  the  number  of 
departments  of  service,  and  imagining  that  each  department  has  its  own  distinct 
staff  ;  whereas,  as  a  rule,  it  is  the  individuals  who  are  active  in  one  sphere  who 
display  the  same  activity  in  another.  I  believe  that  in  dramatic  exhibitions  the 
impression  of  a  large  army  is  sometimes  produced  upon  the  spectators  by  the 
device  of  marching  the  same  band  of  persons  over  and  over  again  across  the  stage. 
We  get  our  impressions  of  the  noble  army  of  Christian  workers  very  much  in  the 
same  way.    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXXVn. 
See  ch.  xxv.  10-40 ;  ch.  xxx.  1-6,  23-38, 


CHAPTER  XXXVm. 


Ver.  8.  The  looking-glasses  of  the  women. — The  looking- glass  and  thelaveri — 
Unlike  our  looking-glasses  made  of  silvered  glass,  which  did  not  come  into  use  till 
the  thirteenth  century,  these  primitive  looking-glasses  were  made  chiefly  of  an  alloy 
of  copper,  tin,  and  lead,  wrought  with  such  admirable  skill  that  it  was  capable  of 
receiving  the  highest  and  most  enduring  polish.  The  mirror  itself  was  a  round  or 
pear-shaped  plate,  often  encircled  with  a  wreath  of  leaves,  or  adorned  with  figures 
engraved  upon  the  rim  ;  and  it  was  attached  to  a  handle  often  carved  with  some 
elegant  form  of  life.  Numerous  sjiecchi  of  this  kind  have  been  found  in  Etruscan 
tombs,  retaining  their  polish  so  brightly  as  sometimes  to  fit  them  for  their  original 
purpose  ;  and  having  on  their  disks  scenes  of  Etruscan  life  and  manners,  and  repre- 
sentations or  symbols  of  the  national  faith,  illustrated  by  inscriptions  in  the 
native  character,  they  have  been  well  called  by  Bunsen  "a  figurative  dictionary," 
eminently  useful  to  the  archaologist  for  the  light  they  throw  upon  the  creed  ajid 
history  of  this  ancient  and  most  mysterious  race.  In  Japan  certain  metal  mirrors 
have  acquired  a  magic  fame,  and  are  brought  to  this  country  as  curiosities,  on 
account  of  the  figures  which  shine  through  them  when  seen  in  a  certain  light,  while 
directly  viewed  they  reflect  only  on  their  polished  surface  the  face  that  looks  into 
them.  The  specula  of  the  Hebrew  women  were  brought  with  them  from  Egypt,  and 
doubtless  formed  part  of  the  spoil  which  the  Israehtes  took  from  the  Egyptians  at 
the  time  of  the  Exodus.  In  that  country  they  were  used  not  only  in  domestic 
economy,  but  also  in  the  idolatrous  worship  of  the  temples  ;  and  probably  the 
Hebrew  women  who  assembled  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  had 
adopted  this  custom,  and  worshipped  the  God  of  Israel  as  the  Egyptian  women 
worshipped  Isis  or  Anubis,  dressed  in  linen  garments,  holding  a  sistrum  in  their 
right  hand  and  a  mirror  in  their  left.  It  is  not  without  deep  significance  that 
this  holy  vessel,  typical  of  spiritual  cleansing,  should  have  been  formed  of  such 
materials.  The  whole  transaction  is  a  most  beautiful  and  expressive  symbol  of  the  vast 
difference  between  the  beauty  which  man  sees  in  himself,  and  the  beauty  which  God 
induces  in  him  by  the  means  of  grace.  In  fact,  the  whole  gospel  scheme  might  be 
represented  to  the  eye  pictorially  by  these  two  emblematical  objects — the  looking-glass 
and  the  laver ;  for  it  shows  us  to  ourselves,  and  it  cleanses  us  from  our  impurity. 
1.  Let  us  look,  in  the  first  place,  at  the  gospel  as  a  mirror  showing  us  to  ourselves. 
Contemplating  the  features  of  our  character  in  our  own  natural  looking-glass,  we  are 
satisfied  with  the  image  that  is  reflected  there.  Comparing  ourselves  with  ourselves 
we  have  no  sense  of  contrast ;  we  come  up  to  our  own  ideal ;  we  realize  oar  own 
standard  of  goodness.    Comparing  ourselves  with  others  we  are  raised  in  our  own 


CHAP,  xxsvra.]  EXODUS.  811 

estimation  ;  we  see  many  guilty  of  meannesses  and  follies  which  we  should  scorn. 
We  feel  like  the  self-righteous  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  and  thank  God  that  we  are 
not  as  other  men,  or  as  the  publican  beside  us.  But  the  gospel  is  the  true  mirror 
in  which  we  see  our  true  image  reflected.  The  holiness  of  God,  as  it  is  revealed  to 
us  in  the  face  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  best  mirror  in  which  to  see  reflected 
our  own  sinful  image.  Thathohness  is  the  part  of  the  Divine  image  which  we  have 
completely  lost  in  our  fallen  state.  When  the  pure  searching  light  of  His  law 
shines  into  our  hearts,  how  defiled  and  unworthy  do  many  things  appear  which 
before  were  regarded  as  clean  and  good !  What  secret  unsuspected  sins  are  made 
manifest  Uke  the  myriad  motes  which  float  in  the  sunbeams  that  enter  a  dark  room ! 
How  true  it  is,  that  those  who  are  ignorant  of  God  are  ignorant  of  themselves  I  The 
mirror  must  lead  to  the  laver.  Having  learned  what  our  true  condition  is,  we  must 
cease  to  look  at  ourselves,  and  have  recourse  to  the  cleansing  bath  which  God  has 
provided  in  the  gospel  for  the  sinner  conscious  of  his  sin.  The  fact  that  the  laver 
was  made  of  the  looking-glasses  teaches  this  practical  lesson  to  us.  We  see  our 
impurity  in  order  that  we  may  apply  for  cleansing.  Our  uncomeliness  is  revealed 
to  us  for  the  very  purpose  of  causing  us  to  seek  for  the  beauty  of  holiness.  2.  The 
laver  made  of  the  looking-glasses  of  the  women  stood  in  the  court  of  the  Tabernacle 
between  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  and  the  door  of  the  holy  place.  As  the  altar 
removed  the  legal  obstacle  that  lay  in  the  way  of  a  sinner's  access  to  God,  so  the 
laver  removed  the  moral.  The  one  by  the  atont-ment  which  it  presented  opened  up 
the  way  to  God  ;  the  other  by  the  purification  which  it  effected  qualified  the  believer 
for  coming  into  God's  presence.  And  viewed  in  this  liuht,  what  an  expressive 
Bymbol  is  it  of  the  spiritual  fountain  opened  in  the  house  of  David  for  sin  and  un- 
cleanness!  The  laver  in  which  we  are  washed  becomes  the  mirror  in  which  we  see 
our  own  reflection ;  and  the  mirror  of  sclf-coinplacericy,  in  which  hitherto  we  sought 
to  see  visions  of  our  own  comeliness  whereof  to  glory  in  the  flesh,  is  converted  into 
the  fountain  of  life  in  which  the  discovery  of  our  own  vileness  is  overborne  by  the 
discovery  of  the  surpassing,  all-compensating  loveliness  of  Him  in  whom  God  sees 
no  iniquity  in  Jacob,  and  no  perverseness  in  Israel.  (//.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The 
laver  and  looking-glasses  : — I  shall  take  that  laver  of  looking-glasses,  spoken  of 
in  the  text,  as  all-suggestive  of  the  gospel,  which  first  shows  us  our  sins  as  in  a 
mirror,  and  then  washes  them  away  by  Divine  ablution.  1.  Now,  I  have  to  say  that 
this  is  the  only  looking-glass  in  which  a  man  can  see  himself  as  he  is.  There  are 
some  mirrors  that  flatter  the  features,  and  make  you  look  better  than  you  are. 
Then  there  are  other  mirrors  that  distort  your  features,  and  make  you  look  worse 
than  you  are  ;  but  I  want  to  tell  you  that  this  looking-glass  of  the  gospel  shows  a 
man  just  as  he  is.  When  the  priests  entered  the  ancient  Tabernacle,  one  glance  at 
the  burnished  side  of  this  laver  showed  them  their  need  of  cleansing.  So  this 
gospel  shows  the  soul  its  need  of  Divine  washing.  "  All  have  sinned,  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God."  That  is  one  showing.  "  All  we,  like  sheep,  have  gone 
astray."  That  is  another  showing.  In  Hampton  Court  I  saw  a  room  where  the 
four  walls  were  covered  with  looking-glasses,  and  it  made  no  difference  which  way 
you  looked,  you  saw  yourself.  And  so  it  is  in  this  gospel  of  Christ.  If  you  once 
step  within  its  full  precincts  you  will  find  your  whole  character  reflected — every 
feature  of  moral  deformity — every  spot  of  moral  taint.  2.  I  want  you  to  notice  that 
this  laver  in  which  the  priests  washed  was  filled  with  fresh  water  every  morning. 
So  it  is  with  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;  it  has  a  fresh  salvation  every  day.  Come 
this  morning  and  take  the  glittering  robe  of  Christ's  righteousness  from  the  Saviour's 
hand.  You  were  plunged  in  the  fountain  of  the  Saviour's  mercy  a  quaiter  of  a 
century  ago.  That  is  nothing  to  me  ;  I  tell  you  to  wash  now  in  this  laver  of  looking- 
glasses,  and  have  your  soul  made  clean.  3.  I  notice,  also,  in  regard  to  this  laver  of 
looking-glasses  spoken  of  in  the  text,  that  the  priests  always  washed  both  hands  and 
feet.  The  water  came  down  in  spouts,  so  that  without  leaving  any  filth  in  the  basin, 
the  priests  washed  both  hands  and  feet.  So  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  must  touch 
the  very  extremities  of  our  moral  nature.  4.  I  remark,  further,  that  the  laver  of 
looking-glasses  spoken  of  in  the  text,  was  a  very  large  laver.  I  always  thought  from 
the  fact  that  so  many  washed  there,  and  also  from  the  fact  that  Solomon  afterwards,  > 
when  he  copied  that  laver  in  the  temple,  built  it  on  a  very  large  scale,  that  it  was 
large,  and  so  suggestive  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  and  salvation  by  Him — vast  in 
its  provisions.  The  whole  world  may  come  and  wash  in  this  laver  and  be  clean.  5. 
But  I  notice,  also,  in  regard  to  this  laver  of  looking-glasses  spoken  of  in  the  text, 
that  the  washing  in  it  was  imperative  and  not  optional.  When  the  priests  came 
into  the  Tabernacle  (you  will  find  this  in  the  30th  chapter  of  Exodus),  God  tells  them 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxix. 

they  must  wash  in  that  laver  or  die.  The  priests  might  have  said  :  "  Can't  I  wash 
elsewhere?  I  washed  in  the  laver  at  home,  and  now  you  want  me  to  wash  here." 
God  says,  "  No  matter  whether  you  have  washed  before.  Wash  in  this  hxver  or 
die."  "  But,"  says  the  priest,  "  there  is  water  just  as  clean  as  this,  why  won't  that 
do?  "  "  Wash  here,"  says  God,  "  or  die."  So  it  is  with  the  gospel  of  Chiist — it  is 
imperative.  There  is  only  this  alternative  :  keep  our  sins  and  perish,  or  wash  them 
away  and  live.  (Dr.  Talmarje.)  Old  tilings  turned  to  new  vscs : — In  many  ancient 
religions  women  took  a  leading  part  in  some  of  the  ceremonies.  This  was  so  in 
Egypt.  Each  woman  had  a  looking-glass  made  of  polished  brass,  and  that  mirror 
was  used  in  some  way  in  connection  with  idolatrous  practices.  When  the  Taber- 
nacle was  being  built  the  women  gave  up  their  mirrors  and  so  contributed  to  the 
formation  of  the  laver,  which  was  made  of  brass,  and  the  foot  of  it  of  brass. 
Thus  we  liave  old  things  turned  to  new  uses,  and  it  is  for  us  to  say  whether  we 
shall  regard  this  incident  as  a  piece  of  ancient  history,  or  whether  we  shall  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  it  and  realize  the  action  in  our  own  day  and  on  a  broa'ler  scale. 
How  came  the  women  to  give  up  their  looking-glasses  to  assist  in  constructing  the 
laver  ?  Because  a  superior  spirit  had  taken  possession  of  them.  That  is  the  philo- 
sophy and  that  the  explanation  of  the  case.  What  then  is  the  spirit  that  is  to  enter 
into  us  ?  None  other  than  the  spirit  of  Christ.  We  might  use  many  words  in 
describing  the  spirit,  but  all  the  words  would  focalize  themselves  at  last  in  this 
sublime  expression — "  For  Christ's  sake."  The  highest  personality  is  Christ.  We 
follow  Him,  and  in  proportion  as  we  follow  Him  all  things  we  possess  are  His. 
There  is  room  in  the  sanctuary  for  everything.  This  is  the  point  wc  have  so  often 
missed  in  our  Christian  teaching.  No  punishment  is  burning  enough  for  the  men 
who  would  belittle  God's  house.  What  have  you  ?  You  have  nothing  that  cannot 
be  used  in  the  buildiug  of  God's  house  and  kingdom.  Have  you  nothing  but  the 
little  looking-glass  ?  It  can  be  used.  Is  yours,  on  the  other  hand,  but  one  small 
flower  which  a  child  could  pluck  ?  It  was  God's  flower  before  it  was  yours,  and  He 
will  never  consent  to  lose  a  flower  ;  it  cost  Him  thought  and  care  and  love ;  He 
dressed  the  flower  as  Solomon  never  could  dress  himself.  Blessed  will  be  the  day 
when  the  breweries  of  the  country  are  turned  into  mechanics'  institutes,  great 
sanitary  establishments  for  the  washing  and  cleansing  of  the  people.  Blessed  will 
be  the  day  when  the  rich  man's  ealoons  shall  be  thrown  open  to  the  poorest  neigh- 
bours he  has  who  will  come  to  look  at  his  articles  of  vcrtu, — who  will  turn  over  his 
curiosities  and  examine  them  with  honest  fingers,  and  so  admire  them  as  to  be 
touched  into  desire  for  broader  life.  Blessed — bright  will  be  the  day  when  in  that 
sense  we  shall  have  all  things  common  ;  when  the  strong  man's  strength  shall  be 
the  weak  man's  refuge;  when  the  homeless  shall  have  a  large  home  in  the  charity 
and  love  of  his  richer  brother ;  when  the  one  object  of  every  heart  will  be  to  extend 
the  happiness  of  mankind — the  one  question  in  the  morning  being,  What  good 
can  be  done  to-day?  and  the  one  question  at  eventide.  What  good  has  been 
accomplished  ?  My  persuasion  is  that  if  ever  that  time  is  to  be  brought  about,  it 
can  only  be  by  the  extension  of  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  Taking  the  Christian 
view,  all  becomes  larger  still  and  brighter,  and  the  hope  is  given  that  one  day 
everybody  will  be  in  the  kingdom,  and  every  man,  woman,  and  child,  will  be  doing 
their  very  best  to  make  that  kingdom  what  God  meaus  it  to  be.  The  great  men, 
by  heroic  strength,  by  dauntless  valour,  will  carry  on  their  sublime  occupation ;  the 
patient  women — gentle  souls,  having  the  genius  of  sympathy  and  the  faculty  of 
interpreting  by  suffering — will  contribute  their  important,  their  ineffably  valuable 
share ;  and  little  children  will  make  up  the  sum  total  of  the  consecration.  (cT". 
Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Vees.  32-43.  They  brought  the  Tabernacle  imto  Moses. — The  delivery  of  the 
icork  to  3Ioses: — I.  The  pkesentation  of  the  work:  "  They  brought  the  Tabernacle 
unto  Moses."  So,  whatever  work  or  service  is  done  in  connection  with  the 
Christian  Church  should  be  solemnly  presented  to  Christ,  who  is  the  Chief  Builder 
of  the  Christian  Temple.  II.  The  inspection  of  the  work  :  "  Moses  did  look  upon 
all  the  work  "  ;  and  so  does  Christ  inspect  every  offering  that  is  brought  to  Him. 
Paul  tells  us  in  1  Cor.  iii.  13,  that  a  day  is  coming  in  which  every  man's  work  will 


CHAP.  XXXIX.]  EXODUS.  618 

be  tried  of  what  sort  it  is — tried  by  fire — tried  with  the  most  terrible  exactness. 
III.  The  approbation  of  the  work  :  "  Behold,  they  had  done  it  as  the  Lord  had 
commanded."'  So  in  Christian  service  nothing  can  be  accepted  that  is  not  minutely 
in  accordance  with  the  Divine  specification.  IV.  The  remuneration  of  the  work  : 
"And  Moses  blessed  them."  So  is  all  faithful  service  done  to  Christ  rewarded 
even  here  with  spiritual  blessing.  So  will  it  be  in  the  end  (1  Cor.  iii.  14). 
Lessons :  1.  The  dignity  of  Christian  work  as  presented  to  Christ.  2.  The  duty 
of  fidelity  in  Christian  work,  considering  it  must  be  inspected  by  Christ.  3.  The 
grand  aim  in  Christian  work,  to  be  accepted  by  Christ.  Cf.  2  Cor.  v.  9.  4.  The 
high  stimulus  in  Christian  work,  the  certainty  of  being  rewarded  by  Christ.  (/.  S. 
Exell,  m.A.)  The  Tabernacle  itself : — The  Tabernacle  held  an  important  position 
in  the  divinely-appointed  worship  of  the  Jewish  Church.  No  less  than  thirteen 
chapters  in  the  Book  of  Exodus  (xxv.-xxxi. ;  xxxv.-xl.)  are  devoted  to  the  account 
of  it ;  an  account  twice  repeated,  extending  to  the  minutest  details  of  shape,  size, 
material,  colour,  and  workmanship.  Special  stress  is  laid  upon  the  fact  that  it 
was  made  after  a  heavenly  design  exhibited  to  Moses  during  the  forty  days  of  his 
mysterious  communing  with  Jehovah  on  Ilount  Sinai  (xxix.  9,  40;  xxvi.  30).  The 
smallest  details  are  included  in  this  heavenly  pattern  (xxvii.  8  ;  Numb.  viii.  4). 
This  heavenly  pattern  of  the  Tabernacle  is  twice  referred  to  in  the  New  Testament 
(Acts  vii.  44;  Heb.  viii.  5).  Not  only  was  the  Tabernacle  made  after  a  heavenly 
pattern,  but  divinely-inspired  artificers  carried  the  design  into  execution  (xxxi.  1-6; 
XXXV.  30-35  ;  xxxvi.  1).  We  see  from  these  passages  that,  in  matters  which 
concern  the  worship  of  God,  the  minutest  details  as  to  the  colour,  shape,  material, 
and  make  of  the  ornaments  of  Divine  service,  and  of  the  ministers  of  it,  are  not 
thought  unworthy  of  a  special  Divine  revelation  as  to  their  design,  and  of  a  special 
Divine  inspiration  for  the  carrying  of  that  design  into  effect.  At  the  close  of  the 
work  we  are  told,  in  words  that  carry  our  thoughts  back  to  the  blessing  bestowed 
upon  the  first  creation  (Gen.  i.  30),  that  Moses  recognized  its  exact  accordance  with 
the  heavenly  pattern  which  he  had  seen  (xxxix.  43).  {E.  F.  Willis,  M.A.) 
Names  of  the  Tabernacle : — It  is  called  the  House  of  Jehovah  (Exod.  xxiii.  19 ; 
Josh.  vi.  24  ;  1  Sam.  iii.  15) ;  the  Temple  of  Jehovah  (1  Sam.  iii.  3) ;  the  Sanctuary 
(Exod.  XXV.  8  ;  Lev.  xii.  4  ;  xvi.  33  ;  xix.  30  ;  xx.  3 ;  xxi.  12  ;  Numb.  iii.  38,  Ac.) ; 
or  simply,  the  Tabernacle  (Exod.  xxv.  9 ;  xxvi.  16  ;  xxvii.  9,  19,  &c.);  or  Dwelling, 
i.e.,  of  God.  The  two  most  characteristic  names,  however,  are,  the  Tent  or 
Tabernacle  of  the  Testimony  (Numb.  ix.  15 ;  xvii.  22,  Ac),  and  the  Tent  or  Taber- 
nacle of  Meeting  (Exod.  xxvii.  21 ;  xxxix.  32,  40;  xl.  7,  34,  35,  &c.).  The  name 
Tent  or  Tabernacle  of  the  Testimony  had  reference  to  that  which  was  one  of  the 
two  chief  objects  of  the  Tabernacle,  viz.,  to  serve  as  a  shrine  for  "  the  Testimony  " 
— the  two  tables  of  stone  on  which  were  engraved  the  ten  words  of  the  Divine 
Law.  The  other  characteristic  name,  that  of  Tabernacle  or  Tent  of  Meeting, 
speaks  of  the  other  chief  end  for  which  the  Tabernacle  existed,  viz.,  to  be  a  place 
of  meeting  between  God  and  His  people  (Exod.  xxv.  8,  22;  xxix.  42-45  ;  xxx.  6, 
36).  (ibid.)  Completed  labour  : — I.  The  work  was  completed  according  to  pI;AN. 
II.  It  was  completed  in  a  short  tisie.  III.  It  was  completed  with  great  joy.  The 
joy  of — 1.  Knowing  tbat  each  had  done  something,  and  that  something  his  best. 
2.  Anticipation.  IV.  The  comjjleted  work  may  remind  us  of  the  words  of  Him  who 
BATD,  "  I  have  finished  the  work  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do."  V.  As  the  house  in  the 
■wilderness  was  finished  down  to  the  last  pin,  so  the  Church  in  the  world,  of 
which  it  was  a  type,  shall  be  perfected  down  to  the  last  and  meanest  member. 
The  Jewish  Tabernacle  : — 1.  It  was  a  school  of  object-lessons,  designed  to  teach  the 
ignorant  and  sensual  Israelites  the  truths  of  the  invisible  and  eternal  kingdom  of 
God.  It  was  a  small  model  of  heavenly  realities — a  pattern  of  sight  in  the  heavens 
(Heb.  ix.  23).  It  was,  in  the  realm  of  religious  truth,  somethi'ig  like  the  plane- 
tarium used  in  a  recitation  room  in  teaching  astronomy.  2.  The  principal  lessons 
it  taught  were — (1)  The  holiness  of  God.  (2)  The  sinfulness  of  man.  (3)  The 
distance  between  God  and  man.  (4)  The  fact  that  God  will  abide  with  man. 
(5)  The  Divine  plan  for  bringing  Goa  and  man  into  union. 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

VpRS.  1-38.  Set  up  the  Tabernacle. — The  primary  and  universal  obligation  to  the 
warship  of  Jehovah;  the  proper  vieans  to  its  right  performance,  with  their  evidences 
and  fruita  : — I.  What  is  implied  in  the  injunction  in  the  text  ?  1.  The  wor- 
ship of  Jehovah,  at  whose  command  the  Tabernacle  was  erected.  2.  The  setting 
up  of  the  Tabernacle,  at  God's  command,  implied  that  He  required  a  specific  wor- 
ship ;  and  the  doing  this  at  the  seasons  expressed  in  the  text,  that  He  called  for 
espi'cial  homage  at  particular  times,  and  in  an  express  manner ;  and  a  compliance 
\nth.  the  direction  was  an  evidence  of  obedience  to  the  will  of  Jehovah.  3.  But 
further,  this  setting  up  of  the  Tabernacle  at  God's  command  implied  His  povereign 
rule  and  authority  among  the  Jews.  4.  Again,  as  the  setting  up  of  the  Tabernacle 
at  God's  command  implied  His  sovereignty,  so  a  compliance  with  the  injunction 
or  direction  implied  a  disposition  to  serve  Him.  II.  How  it  may  be  carried  into 
EFFECT  BY  VS.  1.  It  may  be  donc  by  our  punctual  and  devout  attendance  on  Divine 
worship.  2.  If  we  would  carry  the  injunction  in  the  text  into  effect  suitably,  we 
must  duly  observe  and  keep  all  the  ordinances  of  God's  house.  3.  I  observe  that 
the  spirit  of  the  commandment  before  us  will  be  carried  into  effect  in  a  more 
especial  manner  by  us  if  we  make  Christ  the  Alpha  and  Omega— the  beginning  and 
the  ending  of  all  our  religious  worship — the  great  object  of  faith  and  adoration  in 
all  our  ceremonial  observances.  4.  Lastly,  that  your  services  may  be  suitable, 
acceptiible,  and  efficient,  seek  the  teaching  and  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  III. 
The  EVIDENCES  WHICH  will  prove  THAT  IT  HAS  BEEN  DONE.  1.  In  the  first  place, 
if  you  have  set  up  your  Tabernacle ;  if  you  are  resolved  that,  whatever  others  do,  as 
for  you  and  your  household  ye  will  serve  the  Lord ;  and  if  you  are  enabled  to 
approach  Him  in  a  suitable  disposition,  and  by  a  right  faitli  ;  then  aou  will  enjoy 
in  your  own  souls  all  the  blessings  of  His  house,  and  the  blessednr  ss  of  those 
whom  He  causes  to  come  near  unto  Him.  2.  If  you  have  set  up  your  Tabernacle, 
and  are  led  by  the  Spirit  to  serve  God  with  your  spirit,  then  you  will  bring  forth 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Ephes.  v.  9 ;  Gal.  v.  22,  23 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  11).  3.  If  we  have 
set  up  our  Tabernacle,  and  serve  God  in  His  Son,  are  led  by  His  Spirit,  and  bring 
forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  then  we  shall  be  prepared  for  the  rewards  of  the 
righteous,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  man  "  at  His  appearing  and  His  king- 
dom." Lessons  :  1.  As  the  command  for  the  erection  of  the  Tabernacle  is  given  us  by 
God,  and  every  direction  respecting  it  comes  from  Him,  what  presumption  is  it  in 
any  man  to  go  about  the  formation  of  a  different  Tabernacle  after  his  own  fancy  1 
2.  As  the  setting  up  of  the  Tabernacle  was  to  be  done  forthwith  at  God's  command- 
ment, and  for  the  whole  congregation,  what  madness  for  any  to  think  of  postponing 
the  duty  to  a  more  convenient  season  I  3.  As  the  Tabernacle  is  erected  for  God's 
service,'  was  to  be  resorted  to  at  stated  times,  and  attendance  upon  it  is  designed 
for  our  greatest  good — as  a  Bethel,  a  house  of  mercy,  a  Bethesda,  from  which  we 
may  derive  healing,  how  should  we  prize  seasons,  and  means,  and  opportunities,  of 
attending  it!  (J.  Allport.)  The  setting  up  of  the  Tabernacle  on  Neio  Year's 
Day : — Out  of  materials  specially  provided  by  Him  who  holds  in  His  hands  the 
springs  of  action  in  men,  and  by  artizaus  inspired  by  an  extraordinary  skill,  and 
according  to  the  pattern  given  to  Moses,  the  Tabernacle  was  prepared,  every  part 
made  ready  and  stored  up  for  the  day  of  erection.  But  God  named  that  day  Him- 
self, and  Moses  waited  for  it.  I.  And  now  I  would  have  you  notice  the  speciaIi 
DAY  WHICH  God  selected.  It  was  the  first  day  of  the  first  month — that  is.  New 
Year's  Day  ;  and  the  reason  of  this  choice  is  of  course  to  be  looked  for  in  a  benevo- 
lent regard  to  the  religous  good  of  the  Jewish  people.  It  would  fix  a  suitable 
season  for  a  commemorative  festival  of  the  great  blessing  vouchsafed  to  Israel  by  a 
Tabernacle  for  the  Divine  presence  among  them — a  festival,  be  it  remarked,  that 
was  not  forgotten  by  them  in  after  times,  for  we  read  that,  in  the  revival  of  religion 
under  Hezekiah,  it  was  on  the  fii-st  day  of  the  first  month  that  the  House  of  Go4 
was  sanctified  for  the  pious  and  pure  worship  of  the  Lord.  Moreover,  this 
selection  would,  I  suppose,  make  New  Year's  Day,  in  the  Jewish  calendar,  a  day 
of  religious  observance.  Consider,  first,  that  the  Christian's  body  and  the 
Christian's  spirit  are  together  the  Tabernacle  of  God.  He  is  "  an  habitation  of 
God  through  the  Spirit."  "Know  ye  not,"  saith  the  apostle  to  the  Corinthian 
Christians,  "  that  ye  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  "  "  He  that  dwelleth  in 
love,"  writes  John,  "  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him."  And  wherever  tlds  in- 
dwelling of  God  is,  there  and  there  only  is  there  a  Christian  man  or  a  Christian 


CHAP.  XL.]  EXODUS.  615 

woman  ;  wherever  there  is  this  indwelling  of  God,  there  and  there  only  is  the  true 
antitype  of  the  beautiful  Tabernacle  which  was  set  up  on  the  first  day  of  the 
first  month  in  the  Jewish  calendar.  This  is  the  true  Tabernacle,  too,  in  which 
God  rests  for  ever,  because  He  delights  therein.  Now  mark:  such  a  wonderful 
tabernacle  like  that  which  was  put  up  by  Moses  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month 
can  only  be  made  of  materials  which  God  has  selected,  and  which  God  has  gathered 
together  for  that  work  ;  for  the  light  and  the  elements  and  the  features  and  graces 
of  the  Christian  character  are  His  gift,  such  as  holy  trust,  humble  desire,  love, 
meekness,  gratefulness,  praise,  prayer,  and  joy  in  Christ.  And  again,  those  materials 
must  be  wrought  up  and  combined  according  to  the  pattern  which  has  been  shown 
to  us  in  the  mount.  Marvellous  pattern  !  the  hving  model  of  the  character  of 
Jesus,  the  true  Tabernacle  of  the  Father.  II.  Israel's  obediexce  is  exemplary  to 
THOSE  WHO  ARE  ALREADY  Christlvn  MEN.  There  is  soiuc  ncw  work  now  for  God 
to  be  done,  or  some  old  work  for  God  to  be  done  in  a  new  spirit.  For  instance, 
responsibility  of  time  to  be  more  felt,  and  its  management  and  use  arranged  with 
an  increased  Christian  conscientiousness.  The  dedication  of  self  to  the  Saviour 
has  to  be  renewed,  and  everywhere  and  always  remembered.  Does  not  our  work 
for  Him  who  died  for  us  want  to  be  done  secretly  in  the  heart,  openly  in  the  family, 
and  in  the  church,  and  in  the  world,  with  a  new  love,  a  new  spirit,  a  new  resolute- 
ness, and  a  new  will  ?  Ah  !  a  new  year  summons  a  Christian  in  a  new  manner  of 
spirit  unto  obedience  to  his  Divine  Master.  Let  us,  on  such  an  occasion,  listen 
to  our  Father's  voice,  and  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month  set  up  our  Tabernacle  f 
and  then  be  assured  that  through  aU  the  journeyings  of  the  year,  as  upon  the 
Tabernacle  of  Israel,  shall  the  tokens  of  the  Divine  presence  rest  upon  us.  III. 
For  notice,  in  the  next  place,  that  on  the  first  day  of  the  fh^st  month,  imme- 
diately the  Tarerxacle  was  set,  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  was  upon  it  by  day, 
and  the  fire  of  the  lord  was  upon  it  by  night,  and  both  continued  to  rest 
there  THROUGH  THE  JOURNEYINGS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Oh !  it  must  have  been  a 
marvellous  phenomenon,  that  under  which  the  Almighty  God  thus  certified  His 
protection  and  guidance  to  the  people.  And  it  was  a  necessary  phenomenon,  too, 
under  their  novel  circumstances.  The  desert  was  pathless,  and  they  had  no  guide, 
and  so  by  this  tbey  were  conducted  in  their  journeyings.  It  was  adapted,  too,  to 
meet  their  wants:  it  was  "the  pillar  of  cloud  by  day"  to  screen  them  from  the 
fierce  sun,  and  it  was  "  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night "  to  light  up  the  encampment 
and  warm  the  chill  air.  And  is  not  Christian  life  a  pilgrimage?  Are  we  not 
strangers  upon  earth,  seeking  a  better,  a  heavenly  Temi^le  ?  Could  we  reach  it 
without  a  Divine  Guide  ?  And  though  we  have  not  the  same  sensible  proofs  of 
God's  presence  which  were  granted  to  Israel,  is  it  not  most  assuredly  with  us  just 
as  it  was  with  them?  (C  P.  Eyre,  31. A.)  Tabernacle  foresliadowings : — The 
Tabernacle,  as  a  whole,  is  a  finger-post  directing  me  to  that  mystic  Person  in  whom 
"  God  in  verj'  deed  dwelt  with  man  upon  the  earth."  Its  white-robed  priest  is  the 
shadow  of  Him  who  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  and  whom  I  recognize  as 
my  true  High  Priest.  Its  bleeding  lamb  laid  upon  the  altar  is  the  likeness  of  that 
Lamb  of  God  by  whose  precious  blood  I  have  been  redeemed  from  all  iniquity ; 
its  innermost  sanctuary  is  the  type  of  that  heaven  into  which  He  has  entered  to 
make  atonement  for  my  sin;  and  its  outer  apartment  is  the  analogue  of  the  pre- 
sent world,  in  which  we  are  to  serve  Him  with  the  incense  of  our  devotions,  the 
light  of  our  characters,  and  the  fruit  of  our  lives.  The  incarnation  in  the  person 
of  Christ,  the  mediation  and  expiation  of  His  priestly  work,  and  the  consequent 
obligation  under  which  His  redeemed  people  lie  to  honour  Him  with  unceasing 
service  and  shining  hohness — or,  putting  it  all  into  four  words,  incarnation, 
mediation,  expiation,  consecration — these  are  the  things  of  which  the  Tabernacle, 
with  its  furniture,  services,  and  attendants,  were  the  special  types ;  and  as  thus 
we  condense  its  teachings  into  their  essence,  we  come  to  a  larger  and  more  com- 
prehensive view  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  itself,  and  discover  that  we  have 
been  studying  the  same  truths,  only  under  a  different  form.    (W.  M.  Taylor^  DJ).) 


Date  Due 


.iT****'*'**^' 


•■ey)3W»»*BW»"W' 


M'»wnw^iy:c  D  Q  m  ■ 


HMd44^ 


4^-4^  iii^ 


V- '■ T 


^M^^^^MMMm  i^*° 


T'^aaiMsF 


0UK«  :"^ 


^fiiiiMiiMMl^K 


K«i(ii**_ 


MAP.  "i»ii«ii  Mrtiif/ 


.Allf.j 


