FROM-THE- LIBRARY-OP 
TR1NITYCOLLEGETORDNTO 


From  the  Library  of 

Samuel  L.  Pollard 
Given  by  his  family 


THE 

BAMPTON    LECTURES 

FOR    M.DCCCLXIV. 


THE 


PROGRESS    OF    DOCTRINE 

IN    THE 

NEW    TESTAMENT, 

CONSIDERED    IN    EIGHT    LECTURES    PREACHED    BEFORE 
THE    UNIVERSITY    OF    OXFORD, 

1864, 

ON     THE     FOUNDATION     OF     THE     LATE     REV.     JOHN     BAMPTON, '  M.  A. 
CANON    OF    SALISBURY. 


BY 

THOMAS    DEHANY    BERNARD,    M.A. 

Of  Exeter  College, 
RECTOR      OF      WALCOT      AND      CANON      OF      WELLS. 


THIRD      EDITION. 

Hontron: 

MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 

1873- 

[  All  rights  reserved} 


tie;  r 

AU6  1 


EXTRACT 

FROM   THE   LAST   WILL   AND   TESTAMENT 

OF    THE    LATE 

REV.   JOHN   BAMPTON, 

CANON   OF   SALISBURY. 

— "  I  give  and  bequeath  my  Lands  and  Estates  to  the 
"  Chancellor,  Masters,  and  Scholars  of  the  University  of  Oxford 
"  for  ever,  to  have  and  to  hold  all  and  singular  the  said  Lands 
"  or  Estates  upon  trust,  and  to  the  intents  and  purposes  herein- 
"  after  mentioned ;  that  is  to  say,  I  will  and  appoint  that  the 
"  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of  Oxford  for  the  time 
"  being  shall  take  and  receive  all  the  rents,  issues,  and  profits 
"  thereof,  and  (after  all  taxes,  reparations,  and  necessary  deduc- 
"  tions  made)  that  he  pay  all  the  remainder  to  the  endowment 
"  of  eight  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons,  to  be  established  for  ever 
"  in  the  said  University,  and  to  be  performed  in  the  manner 
"  following : 

"  I  direct  and  appoint,  that,  upon  the  first  Tuesday  in  Easter 
"  Term,  a  Lecturer  be  yearly  chosen  by  the  Heads  of  Colleges 
"  only,  and  by  no  others,  in  the  room  adjoining  to  the  Printing- 
"  House,  between  the  hours  of  ten  in  the  morning  and  two  in 
"  the  afternoon,  to  preach  eight  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons,  the 


vi  EXTRACT  FROM  CANON  BAMPTON'S   WILL. 

"year  following,  at  St.  Mary's  in  Oxford,  between  the  com- 
"  mencement  of  the  last  month  in  Lent  Term,  and  the  end 
"  of  the  third  week  in  Act  Term. 

"  Also  I  direct  and  appoint,  that  the  eight  Divinity  Lecture 
"  Sermons  shall  be  preached  upon  either  of  the  following  Sub- 
"  jects — to  confirm  and  establish  the  Christian  Faith,  and  to 
"  confute  all  heretics  and  schismatics — upon  the  divine  au- 
"  thority  of  the  holy  Scriptures — upon  the  authority  of  the 
"  writings  of  the  primitive  Fathers,  as  to  the  faith  and  practice 
"  of  the  primitive  Church — upon  the  Divinity  of  our  Lord  and 
"  Saviour  Jesus  Christ — upon  the  Divinity  of  the  Holy  Ghost — 
"  upon  the  Articles  of  the  Christian  Faith,  as  comprehended  in 
"  the  Apostles'  and  Nicene  Creeds. 

"  Also  I  direct,  that  thirty  copies  of  the  eight  Divinity  Lecture 
"  Sermons  shall  be  always  printed,  within  two  months  after  they 
"  are  preached  ;  and  one  copy  shall  be  given  to  the  Chancellor 
"  of  the  University,  and  one  copy  to  the  Head  of  every  College, 
"  and  one  copy  to  the  Mayor  of  the  city  of  Oxford,  and  one 
"  copy  to  be  put  into  the  Bodleian  Library ;  and  the  expense  of 
"  printing  them  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  revenue  of  the  Land  or 
"  Estates  given  for  establishing  the  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons ; 
"  and  the  Preacher  shall  not  be  paid,  nor  be  entitled  to  the 
"  revenue,  before  they  are  printed. 

"  Also  I  direct  and  appoint,  that  no  person  shall  be  qualified 
"  to  preach  the  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons,  unless  he  hath 
"  taken  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  at  least,  in  one  of  the  two 
"  Universities  of  Oxford  or  Cambridge ;  and  that  the  same 
"  person  shall  never  preach  the  Divinity  Lecture  Sermons 
"  twice." 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION. 


1  HE  title  given  to  these  Lectures  may  perhaps  sug 
gest  different  expectations  as  to  their  scope.  It  may 
appear  to  some  to  announce  an  intention  of  drawing 
from  the  New  Testament  materials  for  a  historical  en 
quiry  into  the  growth  of  Christian  doctrine,  as  it  took 
place  in  the  minds  and  under  the  hands  of  the  Apostles. 
To  others  it  may  indicate  a  purpose  of  shewing  that  the 
New  Testament  itself  exhibits  a  scheme  of  progressive 
doctrine,  fashioned  for  permanent  and  universal  use. 
The  Lectures  will  be  found  to  address  themselves  not 
to  the  first,  but  to  the  second  of  these  attempts ;  not 
examining  the  New  Testament  collection,  in  order  to 
ascertain  the  chronological  sequence  of  fact,  but  con 
templating  it,  as  it  is,  for  the  purpose  of  observing  the 
acttial  sequence  of  thought.  In  so  doing,  we  are  con 
cerned,  not  only  with  the  component  parts  of  the  New 
Testament,  but  with  the  order  in  which  they  are  placed. 
On  this  subject  some  prefatory  words  are  needed,  lest 
it  should  seem  that  the  order  here  followed  has  been 
adopted,  merely  because  it  comes  naturally  to  us,  as  that 
with  which  we  are  familiar  in  our  own  Bibles. 


viii  PREFACE. 

When  this  particular  arrangement  of  books,  which 
may  be,  and  often  have  been,  otherwise  arranged,  is 
treated  as  involving  a  course  of  progressive  teaching,  it 
may  seem  that  an  unwarrantable  stress  is  laid  on  an 
accidental  order,  which  some  may  regard  as  little  more 
than  a  habit  of  the  printer  and  the  binder.  The  Lec 
tures  themselves  ought  to  give  the  answer  to  this  idea ; 
for  if  the  familiar  order  does  exhibit  a  sequence  of 
thought  and  a  sustained  advance  of  doctrine,  then  the 
several  documents  are  in  their  right  places,  according  to 
the  highest  kind  of  relation  which  they  can  bear  to  each 
other ;  and  if  they  had  come  into  our  hands  variously 
and  promiscuously  arranged,  it  would  yet  be  incumbent 
on  one  who  would  study  them  as  a  whole,  to  place  them 
before  him  in  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  order  as 
that  which  they  have  actually  assumed. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  importance  here  ascribed  to 
the  order  of  the  books  is  ascribed  strongly  to  its  chief 
divisions,  and  more  faintly  to  its  details.  The  four  Gos 
pels,  the  Book  of  Acts,  the  collection  of  Epistles,  and 
the  Apocalypse,  are  regarded  as  severally  exhibiting 
definite  stages  in  the  course  of  divine  teaching,  which 
have  a  natural  fitness  to  succeed  each  other.  Within 
these  several  divisions,  the  order  of  the  four  Gcipels  is 
treated  as  having  an  evident  doctrinal  significance  (Lec 
ture  II.),  and  a  certain  measure  of  propriety  and  fitness 
is  attributed  to  the  relative  positions  of  the  Pauline  and 
the  Catholic  Epistles,  and  again  in  a  less  degree  to  .that 
of  the  several  Pauline  Epistles  themselves  (Lecture  VI.) 

But  while  it  belongs  to  the  scope  of  the  Lectures 
to  point  out  reasons  of  internal  fitness  for  a  certain 
arrangement  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  it 
does  not  enter  into  their  design  to  discuss  the  subject 


PREFACE.  ix 

on  its  other  side,  and  to  treat  of  the  custom  of  the 
Church  in  regard  to  the  order  of  the  canon.  Yet  this 
is  a  point  on  which,  in  some  minds,  enquiry  will  natu 
rally  arise,  and  to  them  some  short  account  of  the  state 
of  the  case  is  due. 

In  speaking  of  the  custom  of  the  Church,  it  must  first 
be  remembered,  that  the  New  Testament  was  not  given 
and  received  as  one  volume,  but  that  it  grew  together 
by  recognition  and  use.  As  the  several  books  gradually 
coalesced  into  unity,  it  might  be  expected  that  there 
would  be  many  varieties  of  arrangement,  but  that  they 
would  on  the  whole  tend  to  assume  their  relative  places, 
according  to  the  law  of  internal  fitness,  rather  than  on 
any  other  principle  which  might  exercise  a  transient  in 
fluence,  as  for  instance  that  of  the  relative  dignity  of  the 
names  of  their  authors,  or  that  of  their  chronological 
production  or  recognition.  In  fact,  this  tendency  shews 
itself  at  once,  in  the  earliest  period  to  which  our  en 
quiries  are  carried  back  by  extant  manuscripts,  by  cata 
logues  of  the  sacred  books  given  by  ancient  writers,  and 
by  the  habitual  arrangement  of  the  oldest  versions.  A 
short  summary  of  the  testimony  derived  from  these 
sources  is  given  in  the  first  Note  in  the  Appendix,  by 
reference  to  two  writers  whose  works  have  laid  the 
Church  under  no  common  obligations'1.  From  that 
review  of  the  case,  it  will  be  apparent  that  the  order  in 
which  we  now  read  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  is 
that  which,  on  the  whole,  they  have  tended  to  assume ; 
and  that  the  general  internal  arrangement,  by  which  the 
entire  collection  forms  for  us  a  consecutive  course  of 
teaching,  has  been  sufficiently  recognised  by  the  instinct, 
and  fixed  by  the  habit  of  the  Church- 

"  See  Note  1. 


X  PREFACE. 

It  remains  to  add  a  word  of  explanation  as  to  the 
method  in  which  the  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the  New 
Testament  has  been  here  treated.  Two  ways  of  handling 
the  subject  may  suggest  themselves :  one,  that  of  exhi 
biting  the  gradual  development  of  particular  doctrines, 
through  successive  stages  of  the  divine  course  of  in 
struction  ;  the  other,  that  of  marking  the  characteristics 
and  functions  of  those  stages  themselves  as  parts  of  a 
progressive  scheme.  The  first  method  would  be  suited 
to  the  purpose  of  proving  the  fact  of  the  progress  of 
doctrine :  the  second  to  the  purpose  of  shewing  that  that 
fact  involves  the  tmity  of  a  divine  plan,  and  therefore  the 
continuity  of  a  divine  authority.  The  latter  purpose 
appeared  the  more  likely  to  be  practically  useful,  at 
least  in  the  present  day.  The  advanced  character  of 
the  doctrine  in  some  books,  as  compared  with  others, 
is  indeed  sufficiently  obvious,  and  is  not  only  admitted, 
but  sometimes  exaggerated  into  a  supposed  incongruity, 
or  even  inconsistency,  in  the  views  of  the  sacred  writers. 
It  was,  then,  not  the  reality  of  the  progress  of  doctrine, 
but  the  true  character  of  it,  which  seemed  especially  to 
solicit  attention ;  and  in  this  point  of  view  the  subject 
is  here  considered. 

It  was  in  fact  originally  suggested  by  the  strong  dis 
position,  evinced  by  some  eminent  writers  and  preachers, 
to  make  a  broad  separation  between  the  words  of  the 
Lord  and  the  teaching  of  his  Apostles,  and  to  treat  the 
definite  statements  of  doctrine  in  the  Epistles,  rather  as 
individual  varieties  of  opinion  on  the  revelation  recorded 
in  the  Gospels,  than  as  the  form  in  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  perfected  for  us  the  one  revelation  of  himself. 

Such  a  habit  of  thought  must  frustrate  the  provision 
which  our  great  Teacher  has  made,  for  enduing  those 


PREFACE.  xi 

that  believe  on  his  name  with  the  vigour  of  a  distinct, 
and  the  repose  of  a  settled  faith.  One  of  the  most 
effectual  safeguards  against  that  danger  will  be  found 
in  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  progressive  plan  on 
which  God  has  taught  us  in  his  written  Word  :  and  if 
the  view  which  is  taken  in  these  Lectures  of  the  range 
of  New  Testament  teaching  should,  in  any  quarter  and 
in  any  measure,  contribute  to  that  end,  the  prayer  which 
has  been  associated  with  their  preparation  will  have  re 
ceived  its  answer.  In  all  our  works  the  first  and  the 
last  resort  is  the  thought  of  that  mercy  which  answers 
prayer.  I  have  need  to  revert  to  it  now.  One  who  has 
taken  up  a  subject  connected  with  the  Holy  Word, 
under  a  strong  sense  of  the  usefulness  which  may  belong 
to  a  due  exposition  of  it,  must  feel  a  proportionate 
sorrow  in  the  review  of  an  inadequate  treatment.  But 
it  is  enough.  The  desires  and  the  regrets  which  attend 
our  ministrations  in  the  Lord's  household  are  better 
uttered  to  God  than  to  man. 

For  one  defect  only  it  seems  right  to  offer  an  excuse. 
I  think  that  many  of  the  points,  which  in  the  Lectures 
are  necessarily  touched  in  a  cursory  manner,  ought  to 
have  been  more  fully  worked  out  and  illustrated  in  Notes 
and  References  :  and  it  would  certainly  have  been  a 
satisfaction,  in  rapidly  skirting  the  confines  of  so  many 
fields  of  recent  and  laborious  study,  to  borrow  contri 
butions  from  writers  by  whom  they  have  been  tho 
roughly  explored.  Only  a  few  such  additions  have  been 
made,  as  they  occurred  at  the  moment.  I  may  be 
allowed  to  plead  that  the  circumstances,  in  which  I  was 
placed  during  the  preparation  of  these  Lectures,  have 
made  it  impossible  for  me  to  do  more.  Scarcely  had 
this  office  been  confided  to  me,  before  I.  was  called  to 


xii  PREFACE. 

enter  on  the  care  of  a  parish  of  fifteen  thousand  souls, 
the  affairs  of  which  required  immediate,  and  have  com 
pelled  almost  incessant  attention.  Of  the  effect  of  this 
pressure  of  duties  it  will  not  be  proper  for  me  to  say 
more,  than  that  it  has  caused  the  omission  which  is  here 
acknowledged. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION. 


I  HE  republication  of  these  Lectures  in  an  altered 
form  implies  the  hope  that  they  may  yet  be  of  service 
to  a  larger  class  of  readers.  The  hope  may  prove  falla 
cious,  but  it  has  not  been  readily  admitted.  After  the 
second  edition  was  out  of  print  I  had  no  thought  of 
issuing  another.  But  during  the  intervening  time,  the 
suggestions  of  men  to  whose  judgment  I  have  reason  to 
defer,  have  received  support  from  applications,  which 
still  continue  to  reach  me,  from  quarters  in  which  I  have 
no  personal  acquaintance,  and  the  favourable  reception 
which  I  find  to  have  been  given  in  America  to  an  edition 
published  at  Boston,  has  afforded  more  distinct  encou 
ragement. 

If  these  Lectures  prove  of  any  service,  it  will  be  to 
readers  of  the  Bible,  and  in  one  particular  respect. 

The  interest  in  any  subject  must  always  be  sensibly 
increased  in  proportion  as  it  is  seen  to  arrange  itself  on 
an  orderly  plan,  which  evinces  the  reality  of  design,  and 
conducts  to  a  definite  result,  by  the  distinct  stages  of  a 
continuous  advance.  This  kind  of  interest  attaches  in 
an  eminent  degree  to  the  Bible ;  consisting  as  it  does  of 
numerous  and  various  writings,  which,  taken  separately, 
are  visibly  occasional,  but  taken  collectively,  are  funda 
mentally  systematic.  I  believe  that  this  comprehensive 
view  of  the  written  revelation  of  God,  is  now  both  more 


xiv  PREFACE. 

congenial  to  the  mind  of  the  day  and  more  necessary  to 
faith  than  it  ever  was  before. 

The  uneducated  mind  derives  its  impressions  from 
single  sayings  and  rests  in  separate  and  detached  ideas, 
and  is  rather  embarrassed  than  assisted  by  the  sequence, 
and  internal  relations  of  a  continuous  line  of  thought. 
But  in  proportion  as  the  mind  is  educated,  some  sense 
of  this  continuity  becomes  more  and  more  a  necessity. 
There  will  always  be  many  humble  and  devout  persons 
who  find  all  that  their  minds  can  grasp  and  their  souls 
require  in  familiar  texts  and  separate  passages  of  the 
Word  of  God.  But  there  is  an  ever  increasing  number 
who  are  not  only  readers  of  texts,  and  chapters,  and 
books,  but  in  a  more  entire  sense  readers  of  the  Bible. 
They  read  it,  and  they  want  to  be  assisted  to  read  it,  as 
a  course  of  progressive  revelation  and  a  scheme  and  con 
stitution  of  truth  t>. 

To  such  students  a  just  view  of  the  proper  functions 
and  mutual  relations  of  the  several  parts  of  Scripture, 
has  an  ever  increasing  importance ;  and,  that  not  only 
as  a  subject  of  intelligent  interest,  but  as  a  positive 
security  to  their  faith.  To  them  will  occur  those  diffi 
culties  and  objections  which  are  suggested  by  the  vary- 


b  The  words  are  used  in  the  sense  in  which  Bishop  Butler  has  explained 
them : — 

"Whoever  thinks  it  worth  while  to  consider  this  matter  thoroughly, 
should  begin  with  stating  to  himself  exactly  the  idea  of  a  system,  economy, 
or  constitution  of  any  particular  nature,  or  particular  thing ;  and  he  will,  I 
suppose,  find  that  it  is  an  one  or  a  whole,  made  up  of  several  parts ;  but 
yet  that  the  several  parts,  even  considered  as  a  whole,  do  not  complete  the 
idea,  unless,  in  the  notion  of  a  whole,  you  include  the  relations  and  re 
spects  which  those  parts  have  to  each  other.  Every  work,  both  of  nature 
and  art  is  a  system.  And  as  every  particular  thing,  both  natural  and  arti 
ficial  is  for  some  use  or  purpose  out  of  and  beyond  itself,  one  may  add,  to 
what  has  been  already  brought  into  the  idea  of  a  system,  its  conduciveness 
to  one  or  more  ends." — Preface  to  the  Sermons  on  Human  Nature. 


PREFACE.  XV 

ing  aspects  of  truth,  in  its  different  stages  of  development, 
and  these  can  be  satisfactorily  disposed  of,  only  when 
the  succession  of  those  stages  is  understood.  But  more 
than  this  is  involved.  For  them  the  sufficient  evidence 
of  doctrine  lies  less  in  single  texts  than  in  the  combina 
tion  and  convergence  of  scriptures.  For  particular  doc 
trines  we  are  accustomed  to  adduce  our  "  Scripture 
proofs,"  as  we  call  them,  citing  selected  texts  which 
seem  most  decisive  on  the  point  in  question.  The  young 
catechumen  learns  them,  and  is  satisfied  ;  though  his 
satisfaction  may  perhaps  become  more  dubious,  when 
he  comes  to  know  the  possibility  of  alternative  interpre 
tations,  and  to  hear  the  arguments  which  have  been  in 
vented  for  plausible  evasions.  But  a  far  deeper  and  more 
rooted  conviction  is  wrought  into  the  mind  which  has 
attended  the  course  of  a  doctrine  along  the  whole  line  of 
its  disclosure,  and  has  felt  itself  borne  onward  by  the 
strong  and  steady  drift  of  Revelation,  to  the  point  at 
which  the  teaching  is  fully  manifested  and  the  firm 
ground  of  certainty  is  reached. 

He  who  is  to  read  his  Bible  in  this  way,  and  with 
these  results  must  learn  to  appreciate  the  scheme  and 
constitution  of  Revelation,  and  to  discriminate  the  stages 
of  its  advance.  To  give  some  assistance  to  this  end  in 
the  reading  of  the  New  Testament  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  aim  with  which  these  Lec 
tures  were  written,  and  the  hope  in  which  they  are  now 
reprinted. 

BATH, 
A  scension  Day,  1873. 


ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES. 


LECTURE  I. 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

ST.  JOHN  xvii.  8. 

SUBJECT    proposed.      Its  connexion  with   the  ministry  of  the 
word,  and  with  the  present  tendencies  of  thought. 

I.  Preliminary  positions. 

1.  There  is  divine  teaching  in  the  New  Testament — doctrine 

given  by  the  Father  to  the  Son — by  the  Son  to  men. 

2 .  The  divine  teaching  coincides  in  extent  with  the  New  Testa 

ment.  Not  to  be  restricted  to  words  of  the  Lord  in  the 
flesh.  Effect  of  such  restriction.  Forbidden  by  the 
Lord's  words.  Not  to  be  extended  through  the  whole 
Christian  age.  Progress  of  doctrine  through  all  Church 
history — is  a  progress  of  apprehension  by  man,  not  of 
communication  by  God.  No  advance  in  divine  teaching 
after  the  apostolic  age  ever  admitted  by  the  Church. 

3.  The  plan  of  the  divine  teaching  is  represented  in  the  New 

Testament.  In  what  sense  it  can  be  said  that  it  exhibits 
a  scheme  of  doctrine  progressively  developed. 

II.  Outlines  of  the  subject, 

i.  Reality  of  the  progress  of  doctrine.     Visible  in  the  Old 
Testament — in  the  New  Testament, 
b 


xviii  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.  [LECT. 

2.  Stages  in  the  progress  of  doctrine  in  the  New  Testament — 

marked  by  Gospels,  Acts,  Epistles,  Apocalypse. 

3.  Principles  of  the  progress  of  doctrine  in  the  New  Testa 

ment — constituted  by  the  relations  of  the  doctrine  (a)  to 
its  Author,  (/3)  to  the  facts  on  which  it  is  founded,  (y)  to 
the  human  mind,  (§)  of  the  several  parts  of  the  doctrine 
to  each  other. 

Survey  of  the  New  Testament  as  a  progressive  scheme,  (pp.  1-30.) 


LECTURE  II. 

THE     GOSPELS. 

ST.  MARK  i.  i. 

The  beginning  of  the  Gospel.  The  whole  life  and  ministry  of 
Christ  on  earth  may  be  thus  described — represented  in  the  New 
Testament  by  the  four  Gospels. 

I.  The   Gospel  Collection  in  its    relation  to  the  whole   New    Testament 

forms  the  initiatory  stage  of  a  progressive  plan.  Fitted  to 
this  place  and  function,  as  presenting  the  person  of  Christ. 
Effect  of  the  transparent  style — of  the  fourfold  repetition — of 
the  fourfold  variation.  Communication  of  personal  knowledge 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel. 

II.  The  Gospel  Collection  in  itself  exhibits  a  progressive  plan— (i)  in 

the  division  into  two  distinct  stages;  (2)  in  the  character  of 
the  synoptic  Gospels  relatively  to  each  other ;  (3)  in  the 
character  of  St.  John's  Gospel  relatively  to  the  others.  Unity 
of  the  whole  representation — one  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Unity 
and  progress  in  the  parts  imply  design  in  the  whole — the  Holy 
Ghost  the  designer. 

The  Gospel  Collection,  in  its  general  effect,  prepares  us  for 
further  teaching,  by  creating  the  want,  giving  the  pledge,  depositing 
the  material,  and  providing  the  safeguard,  (pp.  30-54.) 


II-IV.]  ANALYSIS  OF   THE  LECTURES.  xix 

LECTURE  III. 

THE    GOSPELS. 
HEB.  ii.  3. 

The  Lord  himself  the  first  Teacher.  His  personal  teaching  in 
the  Gospels  is  initiatory. 

I.  i.  Includes  the  substance  of  all  Christian  doctrine.      Its  occasional 

character — but   the    occasions   pre-ordained.      Instances   of 
pregnant  sayings. 

2.  Tet  does  not  bear  the  character  of  finality, — a.  in  its  form — /3. 
in  its  method — y.  in  its  substance — as  moral  teaching, 
full  and  open,  as  revelation  of  a  mystery,  reserved  and 
anticipatory.  The  mystery  being  fundamental  to  the 
ethic,  this  reserve  creates  the  need  of  further  teaching. 
Instances  in  the  doctrines  of  Forgiveness  of  sin  and 
Acceptance  in  prayer. 

II.  i.  Is  a  'visibly  progressive  system.     Comparison  of  the  first  and 

last  discourses,  Matt,  v-vii.  and  John  xiv-xvii. 

2.  Tet  declares  itself  incomplete,  and  refers  us  to  a  subsequent 
stage  of  teaching.  Transitional  character  of  the  last 
discourse.  Plain  assertions  of  incompleteness.  Promises 
of  things  to  be  spoken  after.  The  personal  teaching  of 
Christ  to  be  completed  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit. 

Saving  purpose  of  the  whole  testimony,  which  only  attains  its  end 
in  those  who  '  have  life  through  his  name.'  (pp.  55-79.) 

LECTURE  IV. 

THE   ACTS    OF    THE   APOSTLES. 
ACTS  i.  1-4. 

The  Gospels  and  the  Acts  linked  together  as  parts  of  one  scheme 
— the  one  commencing,  the  other  continuing,  the  teaching  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Two  points  to  be  observed  in  the  second  stage  of  divine 
teaching  in  the  New  Testament. 


XX  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.  [LECT. 

I.  The  Teacher  is  the  same.  Evidence  of  this.  The  Book  of  Acts  is 
a  record  of  the  personal  action  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  per 
fecting  of  his  word  and  the  formation  of  his  Church.  The 
method  of  this  action  : — 

1.  Special  interventions.     Survey  of  these.     Given  at   critical 

moments,  and  at  the  steps  of  progress — particularly  in 
the  history  of  St.  Paul.  Relations  of  the  course  of  action 
to  the  course  of  doctrine, — as  the  pledge  of  its  authority 
— as  the  means  of  its  completion.  Testimony  of  the 
Epistles  to  this  personal  action  of  the  Lord  in  the  pro 
gress  of  doctrine.  St.  Paul's  statements  as  to  the  sources 
of  his  doctrine. 

2.  Habitual  guidance   of  the  Apostles   by  the    Holy    Ghost. 

Nature  of  the  gift  at  Pentecost  —  shewn,  from  the 
promise,  from  the  facts,  and  from  the  testimony  of  the 
Apostles,  to  have  involved  the  Gospel  itself.  Hence  a 
divine  authority  attaches  to  the  whole  Apostolic  teaching, 
in  its  interpretations  and  inferences  as  well  as  in  its 
witness  of  facts. 

II.  The  method  is  changed.  Reason  for  the  change.  The  change  is 
a  sign  and  means  of  progress.  The  history  of  Salvation  being 
finished,  must  be  followed  by  the  interpretation  of  it,  and  by 
the  exhibition  of  its  effects  in  human  consciousness.  This 
is  achieved  by  the  change  in  the  method  of  divine  teaching, 
signified  by  the  words,  'He  dwelleth  with  you  and  shall  be 
in  you.'  Action  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  to  be  distinguished 
according  to  its  purpose — in  the  founders  of  the  Church  to 
communicate  truth — in  the  members  of  the  Church  to  receive 
it.  (pp.  80-105.) 

LECTURE  V. 

THE  ACTS   OF   THE   APOSTLES. 
ACTS  v.  42. 

Further  questions  to  be  answered  by  the  Book  of  Acts.  Its 
purpose  to  answer  them.  Character  and  scheme  of  the  Book.  Its 
place  and  function  in  the  evolution  of  doctrine. 

I.  It  gives  the  general  character  of  the  Christian  doctrine  in  its  second 
stage. 


v,  vi.]  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.  xxi 

1.  A  preaching  of  Christ.      Comparison   of    the  preaching 

recorded  in  the  Gospels  and  that  recorded  in  the  Acts — 
the  one  of  the  kingdom,  the  other  of  the  person.  The 
difference  in  the  preaching  accounts  for  the  difference  in 
the  effect. 

2.  A  preaching  of  the  work  of  Christ,  in  its  main  features  and 

their  results — of  his  death  as  the  source  of  forgiveness, 
of  his  resurrection  as  the  source  of  life.  Progress  of 
doctrine  in  the  summing  up  and  exposition  of  the  past. 

II.  It  gives  the  course  of  events  through  which  the  doctrine  was 
matured.  Outlines  of  the  history  in  this  point  of  view.  The 
doctrine  cleared  and  formed  in  the  course  of  this  history, 
chiefly  in  respect  of  two  principles :  a.  The  Gospel  is  the 
substitute  for  the  Law — Jewish  theory  of  the  Law — Judaising 
attempts -negatived  and  superseded;  £.  The  Gospel  is  the  heir 
of  the  Law — inheriting  its  ideas  and  its  Scriptures.  St.  Paul's 
conflict  for  these  positions.  Largeness  of  the  results  de 
duced  from  them  in  the  Epistles. 

Value  of  a  divine  summing  up  of  the  meaning  and  effects  of  the 
manifestation  of  Christ,  (pp.  106-129.) 

LECTURE  VI. 

THE     EPISTLES. 

ROM.  i.  17. 

Marks  of  the  continuity  of  doctrine,  in  passing  from  the  Acts 
to  the  Epistles.  The  point  at  which  the  Book  of  Acts  leaves  us — 
it  has  presented  the  Gospel  as  a  system,  but  i.  in  its  external  aspect 
— all  the  discourses  in  the  Book  are  addressed  to  those  who  are 
not  yet  Christians ;  2.  as  a  doctrine  in  outline — coextensive  with  the 
Apostles'  Creed. 

Need  of  further  divine  teaching.  The  Epistles  are  the  voice  of 
the  Spirit  within  the  Church  to  those  who  are  within  it — presenting 
the  internal  aspect  of  the  Gospel,  and  filling  up  its  outlines  by 
perfecting  the  Christian  faith  and  educating  the  Christian  life. 

The  Epistles  are  fitted  for  this  work  by  their 

I.  Form.  The  Epistolary  form  peculiar  to  the  New  Testament 
—indicates  fellowship— addresses  itself  to  actual  life,  and 
various  conditions  of  mind. 


xxii  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.  [LECT. 

II.  Method.    One  of  reasoning,  interpretation  of  Old  Testament 

Scriptures,  utterance  of  personal  feelings  and  convictions 
— is  a  method  of  association  rather  than  of  authority,  of 
education  rather  than  of  information,  yet  pervaded  by 
authority,  and  blended  with  direct  revelation. 

III.  Authorship.      Chiefly  that  of  St.  Paul,  who  had  not  been 

with  Jesus  and  was  born  out  of  due  time.  Inference, 
that  these  writings  form  a  stage  of  doctrine  in  advance 
of  that  in  the  Gospels,  as  shewing  the  results  of  the 
manifestation  of  Christ.  The  same  kind  of  teaching  in 
the  Catholic  Epistles,  by  four  other  authors,  chosen  re 
presentatives  of  the  Twelve. 

IV.  Relative  characters,      (i)  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  grouped  and 

characterised,  form  a  body  of  doctrine.  (2)  Need  and 
effect  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  (3)  The  Catholic 
Epistles  confirmatory  and  supplementary. 

The  Epistles  a  provision  for  the  exigencies  of  the  Christian  life. 
The  exigencies  must  be  known — the  provision  must  be  used, 
(pp.  130-156.) 


LECTURE  VII. 

THE     EPISTLES, 
i  COR.  i.  30. 

The  doctrine  in  the  Epistles,  as  a  stage  in  advance  of  the  doctrine 
in  the  preceding  books,  is  distinguished  by 

I.  Its  general  character — a  doctrine  of  the  life  in  Christ — shews  the 

fulfilment,  and  gives  the  interpretation,  of  the  promise,  '  At 
that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  ye  in  me, 
and  I  in  you.'  Discrimination  of  the  points  in  the  promise. 
In  the  Epistles  all  things  are  '  in  Christ  Jesus.'  Need  of  a 
correspondence  with  this  character  in  our  own  habit  of  mind. 

II.  Particular  doctrines  as  affected  by  this  general  character.    Examples. 

(i)  Doctrine  of  salvation — in  the  Gospels — in  the  Epistles. 
Increased  definiteness,  especially  as  to  the  consciousness  of 
atonement  and  redemption.  (2)  Doctrine  of  adoption— in  the 


vir,  vili.]  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.  xxiii 

Gospels — in  the  Epistles.  The  form  of  it  fuller — the  ground 
of  it  clearer.  A  new  sense  of  it  from  the  gift  of  the  Spirit. 
(3)  Doctrine  of  worship — in  the  Gospels — in  the  Epistles. 
Plainer  revelation  of  access  by  sacrifice — by  mediation — in 
the  Holy  Ghost.  (4)  Ethical  doctrine — in  the  Gospels — in 
the  Epistles.  Advanced  to  a  higher  point  by  the  knowledge 
of  higher  relations,  motives,  and  powers  found  '  in  Christ 
Jesus.' 

Retrospect  of  the  course  of  doctrine — its  unity,  and  progress. 
Our  personal  duty  in  regard  to  it.  (pp.  157-179.) 

LECTURE   VIII. 

THE    APOCALYPSE. 

REV.  xxi.  2. 

The  Apocalypse  fulfils  the  promise,  '  He  shall  shew  you  things  to 
come ' — and  completes  the  line  of  history  and  prophecy.  Is  related 
to  the  last  discourse  in  St.  Matthew,  as  the  Epistles  are  to  that  in 
St.  John.  The  Lord  himself  is  still  the  revealer. 

Connection  between  the  progress  of  prophecy  and  the  progress  of 
doctrine. 

Doctrinal  bearing  of  the  book  in 

I.  The  want  which  it  supposes — concerned  with  the  destinies  of  the 

body,  the  Church.  The  corporate  life  distinguished  from  the 
individual  life  in  the  Epistles.  Contrast  between  the  ideal 
character  of  the  Church  and  the  indications  of  its  actual 
history.  In  the  later  Epistles  the  tokens  and  revelations  of 
the  future  grow  darker.  Thus  a  want  has  been  created  which 
demands  a  further  word  of  God.  State  of  mind  to  which  the 
Book  is  addressed. 

II.  The  satisfaction  which  it pro-vides — as  being  a  doctrine  of  consum 

mation. 

i.  A  doctrine  of  the  Cause  of  the  consummation.  The 
personal  salvation  of  the  individual  and  the  general 
salvation  of  the  Church  have  the  same  ground,  namely, 
the  Atoning  Sacrifice, —  implied  by  'the  Lamb,'  as  the 
apocalyptic  name  of  Christ. 


xxiv  ANAL  YSIS  OF  THE  LECTURES.      [LECT.  VIII.] 

2.  A  doctrine  of  the  History  of  the  consummation — shewing 

the  inner  nature  of  events— by  connecting  things  seen 
with  things  not  seen — by  presenting  the  earth  as  the 
battlefield  of  spiritual  powers. 

3.  A  doctrine  of  the  Coming  of  the  Lord — the  announcement 

of  this  is  the  key-note  of  the  Book — all  else  a  part  of 
this.  In  the  Epistles  the  coming  is  connected  chiefly 
with  the  personal  life — here  with  the  corporate  life — as 
'  the  close  of  the  world's  history. 

4.  A   doctrine   of  Victory — completes   the   teaching   of  the 

Epistles  on  the  victory  of  the  Lord — and  of  his  people. 

5.  A  doctrine  of  Judgment.      '  The  Prince  of  this  world  is 

judged.'  Judgment  of  the  usurping  Power — of  the 
world — of  nations — of  persons. 

6.  A.  doctrine  of  Restoration.     There   is   to  be   a  perfect 

humanity.  Humanity  only  perfect  in  society.  The  city 
a  type  of  society  in  its  maturity.  Failure  of  earthly 
societies  to  realise  the  ideal.  Realisation  promised  in  the 
Bible.  Need  of  the  final  vision  to  complete  the  teaching 
of  God.  The  Bible  an  account  of  the  preparation  of 
the  City  of  God — by  expectation,  prophecy,  and  type — 
by  the  reconstitution  of  men's  relations  to  God,  and  to 
each  other — both  effected  by  the  Gospel.  Other  systems 
have  despaired  of  human  society.  Completeness  of  the 
Bible  in  providing  for  the  perfection  of  man,  in  a  corpo 
rate  as  well  as  a  personal  life. 

Final  survey  of  the  progressive  teaching  of  the  New  Testament 
in  its  several  stages,  represented  by  the — Gospels — Acts — Epistles 
— Apocalypse.  Fitness  of  this  survey  to  increase  the  sense  that  the 
doctrine  is  not  of  the  world — and  the  confidence  that  it  is  of  God. 
(pp.  180-207.) 


LECTURE    I 


THE   NEW  TESTAMENT. 


ST.  JOHN  xvii.  8. 
/  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  ga*vest  me. 


the  truth  of  this  saying  stands  the  whole  fabric  of 
creeds  and  doctrines.  It  is  the  ground  of  authority  to 
the  preacher,  of  assurance  to  the  believer,  of  existence 
to  the  Church.  It  is  the  source  from  which  the  per 
petual  stream  of  Christian  teaching  flows.  All  our 
testimonies,  instructions,  exhortations  derive  their  first 
origin  and  continuous  power  from  the  fact  that  the 
Father  has  given  to  the  Son,  the  Son  has  given  to  his 
servants,  the  words  of  truth  and  life. 

I  am  now  called,  not  so  much  to  preach  the  words 
thus  given  to  us,  as  to  enquire  concerning  them.  It  is 
a  secondary  and  subsidiary  ministry. 

Our  first  charge  is,  '  Go  stand  and  speak  in  the 
temple  to  the  people  all  the  words  of  this  life.'  We 
go  ;  and  our  words  not  only  meet  the  wants  of  con 
science,  but  stir  the  activities  of  thought  ;  and  a  cloud 
of  questions  rises  round  us,  which  must  be  dissipated 

B 


2  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

while  it  is  gathering,  but  which  will  still  gather  while 
it  is  being  dissipated.  Thus  the  preaching  of  the  words 
of  life  to  the  people  is  evermore  attended  by  an  inci 
dental  necessity  for  extensive  and  various  discussion. 

The  .institution  of  these  Lectures  is  a  testimony  to 
that  necessity,  and  a  testimony  also  to  the  relation 
which  such  discussion  bears  to  the  main  object  for 
which  the  Word  was  given.  For  if  this  pulpit  is  de 
voted  on  these  occasions  to  the  deliberate  treatment  of 
some  particular  question,  that  is  only  on  account  of  the 
bearing  which  such  questions  may  have  on  the  work 
which  the  Church  fulfils  in  testifying  the  Gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God.  More  especially  is  it  fitting  that  one, 
who  is  habitually  engaged  in  the  work  of  preaching  and 
teaching,  should  keep  as  near  as  he  can  to  this  ultimate 
practical  aim.  Therefore,  invoking  the  guidance  of  God, 
I  shall  submit  to  you  some  considerations  on  the  pro 
gress  of  doctrine  in  the  New  Testament,  a  subject  which 
on  the  one  side  touches  the  living  ministry  of  the 
Church  at  its  very  heart,  and  on  the  other  is  specially 
affected  by  the  present  tendencies  of  sacred  criticism. 

Into  all  our  parishes  and  all  our  missions  the  thou 
sands  of  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers  are  sent  forth 
with  the  Bible  placed  in  their  hands,  and  with  solemn 
charges  to  draw  from  its  pages  the  gospel  which  they 
preach.  But  when  those  pages  are  opened,  they  pre 
sent,  not  the  exposition  of  a  revelation  completed,  but 
the  records  of  a  revelation  in  progress.  Its  parts  and 
features  are  seen,  not  as  arranged  after  their  develop 
ment,  but  as  arranging  themselves  in  the  course  of 
their  development,  and  growing,  through  stages  which 
can  be  marked  and  by  accessions  which  can  be  mea 
sured,  into  the  perfect  form  which  they  attain  at  last. 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  3 

Thus  the  Bible  includes  within  itself  a  world  of  anti 
cipation  and  retrospection,  of  preparation  and  comple 
tion,  whereby  various  and  vital  relations  are  constituted 
between  its  several  parts.  These  relations  enter  as 
really  into  the  scheme  of  Scripture  as  do  the  several 
parts  themselves  ;  and  must  be  rightly  understood  and 
duly  appreciated,  if  the  doctrine,  which  the  Book  yields 
upon  the  whole,  is  to  be  firmly  grasped  by  the  student 
or  fairly  presented  by  the  preacher. 

In  this  way  the  subject  of  progressive  teaching  in 
Scripture  is  implicated  with  the  living  ministry  of  the 
Church.  How  it  is  affected  by  the  present  tendencies 
of  sacred  criticism  there  is  no  need  to  explain,  for  it  is 
known  to  all  that  the  studies  of  our  day  are  directed  to 
a  minute  and  laborious  examination  of  the  internal 
characteristics  of  the  books  of  Scripture,  and  more  par 
ticularly  of  their  mutual  relations,  and  of  the  differences 
of  doctrine  both  in  amount  and  form  which  they  exhibit 
on  comparison  with  each  other.  Notwithstanding  all 
reasons  for  anxiety,  sometimes  even  for  grief  and  indig 
nation,  which  we  may  find  in  the  actual  handling  of  the 
subject,  we  have  cause  to  be  thankful  that  the  pro 
gressive  character  of  revelation  is  thus  coming  more 
distinctly  before  the  mind  of  the  Church.  In  regard 
to  any  subject  the  observation  of  successive  stages  of 
design  must  be  expected  ultimately  to  conduce  to  a 
more  thorough  comprehension  of  the  thing  designed, 
and  will  also  naturally  tend  to  place  the  observer  in 
closer  contact  with  the  mind  of  the  designer.  So  will 
it  be  with  the  written  word. 

Only  a  part  of  the  general  subject  is  before  us  now. 
We  shall  be  occupied  with  the  last  stage  through  which 
the  revelation  of  God  was  perfected,  as  exhibited  in  the 

B  2 


4  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

canonical  books  of  the  New  Testament.  But  though 
only  a  part  of  a  larger  subject,  this  is  itself  one  of  great 
extent  and  various  aspect,  and  on  this  account  some 
preliminary  words  are  necessary,  in  order  to  fix  the 
point  of  view  from  which  it  will  be  regarded.  I  shall 
therefore  devote  the  chief  part  of  this  introductory  lec 
ture  to  secure  for  myself  the  following  positions. 

1.  That  by  doctrine  shall  be  here  meant  divine  teach 
ing,  or  truth  as  communicated  by  God. 

2.  That  the  course  of  divine  teaching  under  the  Chris 
tian  dispensation  shall  be  considered  to  coincide  in  extent 
with  the  New  Testament  Scriptures. 

3.  That  the  relative  character  and  actual  order  of  the 
parts  of  the  New  Testament  shall  be  taken,  as   ade 
quately  representing  the  progressive  plan  on  which  this 
course  of  divine  teaching  was  perfected. 

When  I  have  strengthened  these  positions  by  such 
explanations  as  time  will  allow,  I  will  close  this  intro 
duction  of  the  subject,  by  pointing  out  that  the  pro 
gressive  system  of  teaching  in  the  New  Testament  is  an 
obvious  fact,  that  it  is  marked  by  distinct  stages,  and 
that  it  is  determined  by  natural  principles. 

I.  i.  First,  then,  I  assume  that  the  doctrine  here 
spoken  of  is  divine  teaching,  and  that  by  its  progress  is 
meant  a  systematic  advance  in  its  communication  from 
God. 

That  some  doctrine  contained  in  the  New  Testament 
must  be  thus  characterised,  we  are  assured  by  the  asser 
tion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  text:  'I  have  given  unto 
them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me.'  Words  then 
have  been  given  to  men,  which,  not  only  in  their  ori 
ginal  source,  but  in  their  intermediate  channel,  are  abso 
lutely  and  incontestably  divine.  Over  and  above  those 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  5 

discoveries  of  the  mind  of  God  which  are  contained  in 
the  natural  order  of  things,  and  which  we  may  discern 
by  an  intuitive  faculty  or  infer  by  a  reasoning  process, 
we  have  that  which,  in  the  clearest,  fullest,  strongest 
sense,  must  be  called  the  '  word  of  God'  Nay,  he  has 
not  only  given  us  a  word ;  he  has  done  more,  he  has 
given  us  words  (pi/^ara),  separate,  articulate,  definite 
communications,  each  as  truly  divine  as  is  the  whole 
word  which  they  compose.  Such  words  of  God  were 
spoken  of  in  old  time  as  'coming  to'  particular  persons, 
who  were  to  be  the  messengers  of  those  words  to  others. 
The  Prophets  testified,  when  they  spoke,  that  '  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  them;'  and  the  testimony  was 
authenticated  of  God  and  accepted  of  men.  But  the 
communications  made  through  them  were  only  intro 
ductory.  '  In  sundry  parts  and  in  divers  ways  God 
having  spoken  of  old  to  the  Fathers  in  the  Prophets, 
at  the  end  of  these  days  spake  to  us  in  his  Son.'  Those 
to  whom  the  word  of  God  came  were  succeeded  by  him 
who  is  himself  the  'Word  of  God.'  He  became  man, 
and  stood  forth  as  the  one  real  and  eternal  Prophet,  the 
medium  of  communication  between  the  mind  of  God 
and  the  mind  of  man.  Then  he  was  in  the  world,  but 
he  '  was  in  heaven,'  in  the  concourse  of  men  but  '  in  the 
bosom  of  his  Father.'  His  flesh  was  as  a  veil  between 
the  two  worlds,  and  he  who  dwelt  in  it  read  on  the  one 
side  the  secrets  of  the  Most  Holy,  and  on  the  other 
presented  them  to  the  apprehensions  of  mankind.  On 
the  one  side  he  received^  on  the  other  he  gave.  He 
shewed  to  the  world  the  works  which  he  had  seen  with 
his  Father ;  he  spoke  to  the  world  the  words  which  he 
had  heard  with  his  Father ;  and  in  closing  his  personal 
teaching  in  the  flesh,  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  heaven, 


6  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

and  said,  '  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou 
gavest  me.'  Imagination  itself  can  go  no  further.  If  we 
asked  for  assurance  that  men  had  really  received  the 
words  of  God,  it  would  be  impossible  to  conceive  a 
higher  authority,  a  more  plain  assertion,  or  a  more  un 
qualified  statement.  On  this  point  I  need  say  no  more. 
My  only  purpose  in  touching  it  has  been  to  refresh  in 
your  minds  the  remembrance,  that  the  doctrine  about 
which  we  enquire  is,  in  some  part  of  it  at  least,  truly 
and  incontestably  divine. 

2.  More  perhaps  needs  to  be  said  in  order  to  justify 
the  next  step  which  I  would  take,  in  the  assumption 
that  the  course  of  this  divine  teaching  coincides  in  extent 
with  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament.  Have  I  the 
right  to  extend  the  course  of  divine  teaching  so  far?  If 
so,  have  I  the  right  to  refuse  to  extend  it  farther  ?  At 
first  sight  the  text  might  suggest  that  the  character  of 
doctrine,  which  has  been  just  asserted,  should  be  limited 
to  the  words  spoken  by  the  lips  of  the  Lord  Jesus  when 
on  earth.  If  we  pass  beyond  this,  and  include  words 
spoken  by  the  lips  of  men,  we  may  seem  compelled  to 
extend  our  thoughts  to  a  progress  of  doctrine  carried 
on  to  the  end  of  time.  In  neither  of  these  cases  will 
the  course  of  the  divine  communication  of  Christian 
truth  coincide  with  the  extent  of  the  New  Testament. 
In  the  one  case  it  will  be  comprised  in  the  Gospels 
alone,  which  leave  us  some  of  their  most  peculiar  doc 
trines  only  in  short  summaries  or  pregnant  germs  ;  in 
the  other  case  it  may  be  prolonged  through  an  indefinite 
series  of  accessions,  which  will  always  leave  the  Church 
in  doubt,  as  to  what  the  faith  delivered  to  it  is,  and  still 
more  in  doubt  as  to  what  it  may  hereafter  turn  out 
to  be. 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  7 

What  then  are  the  words  to  which  the  description  in 
the  text  applies  ?  or  rather,  within  what  limits  shall  we 
seek  them  ? 

Undoubtedly  the  Lord  speaks  of  all  the  words  which 
he  had  already  uttered  to  those  disciples  as  their  teacher 
in  the  days  of  his  flesh.  But  is  the  saying  true  only  of 
those  words  ?  Is  it  to  be  restricted  to  that  stage  of 
teaching  which  had  then  reached  its  conclusion,  and  of 
which  at  the  time  the  assertion  might  seem  to  be  made  ? 
Or  is  it  also  true  of  other  words?  words  for  instance 
which  he  gave  after  he  was  risen  ?  or,  again,  words 
which  he  gave  after  he  was  glorified  ? 

To  those  who  would  study  the  evolution  of  doctrine 
in  the  New  Testament  this  question  is  of  vital  import 
ance,  for  if,  after  we  have  passed  the  first  stage  of  teach 
ing,  the  authority  which  we  recognised  there  is  with 
drawn,  our  treatment  of  the  subsequent  teaching  must  be 
conducted  in  an  altered  spirit  and  on  other  principles. 
Having  bowed  in  silence  before  the  Divine  Teacher,  we 
shall  recover  our  freedom  of  opinion  when  we  are  left 
with  his  followers.  Only  at  first  shall  we  tread  securely 
on  the  rock :  we  must  then  look  well  to  our  steps,  and 
be  free  to  choose  our  path  among  the  irregularities  and 
uncertainties  of  a  more  shifting  soil ;  for  we  shall  pass 
from  words  which  the  Son  of  God  gave  to  men,  to  the 
expansions  of  those  words  and  the  deductions  from 
them  which  the  men  who  first  received  them  have  given 
to  us.  Our  study  of  the  progress  of  doctrine  within  the 
limits  of  the  New  Testament  would  thus  be  entirely 
changed  in  its  character,  as  we  passed  from  the  Gospels 
to  the  subsequent  books.  Only  in  the  first  stage  would 
the  progress  of  doctrine  bear  the  meaning  of  the  pro 
gress  of  its  communication  by  God.  In  the  second 


8  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

stage,  it  could  but  signify  the  progress  of  its  appre 
hension  by  men.  The  Acts  and  Epistles  would  thus 
form  only  the  first  chapter  of  the  history  of  the  Church, 
separated  from  its  subsequent  chapters  by  a  much  nar 
rower  interval  than  that  which  marks  them  off  from  the 
Gospels  which  precede  them.  They  would  in  fact  be 
simply  specimens  of  human  apprehensions  of  divine  truth  ; 
specimens  of  singular  value,  because  produced  under 
peculiar  advantages ;  but  yet,  like  any  other  individual 
apprehensions,  modified  by  the  personal  character  and 
historical  position  of  those  who  formed  them.  They 
would  therefore  be  liable  to  such  deductions  on  these 
accounts  as  historical  criticism  might  suggest,  and  would 
remain  rather  as  warrants  for  various  explications  by 
other  minds  and  in  other  ages,  than  as  fixed  canons  of 
the  truth  for  ever. 

I  ask  then  whether  the  giving  of  the  words  of  God 
was  completed  when  the  text  was  uttered,  or  whether 
there  was  a  distinct  part  of  the  process  yet  to 
come? 

The  discourse  in  which  the  saying  occurs  has  supplied 
the  answer.  Its  distinctive  character  is  that  of  tran 
sition,  closing  the  past  but  opening  the  future,  repre 
senting  a  later  stage  of  teaching  as  the  predestined  com 
pletion  of  the  earlier,  and  cementing  both  into  one,  by 
asserting  for  both  the  same  source,  and  diffusing  over 
both  the  same  authority.  This  function  in  the  progress 
of  divine  teaching,  which  belongs  to  the  discourse  in  the 
I4th,  1 5th,  and  i6th  chapters  of  St.  John,  must  come 
more  distinctly  into  view  at  a  later  stage  of  our  enquiry. 
It  is  now  sufficient  to  refer  to  it  in  passing,  as  an  evi 
dence  that  the  very  words,  of  which  the  text  specifically 
and  indubitably  speaks,  include  the  assertion  of  the 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  -9 

same  divine  gift  and  authority  for  other  teaching  which 
was  yet  to  come. 

Thus  we  stand  on  the  declaration  of  the  giver  of  the 
word  himself,  when  we  consider  the  progress  of  Christian 
doctrine  in  its  communication  from  God  as  extending, 
not  only  over  one  stage  in  which  it  was  delivered  by 
the  Lord  in  the  flesh,  but  through  a  second  stage  in 
which  it  was  delivered  by  the  same  Lord  through  the 
Spirit.  It  might  indeed  have  seemed  .natural,  at  the 
point  where  the  voice  of  Jesus  ceases,  to  draw  the  line 
which  should  terminate  the  words  which  were  given  by 
the  Father  to  the  Son,  and  by  the  Son  were  given  to 
men,  a  line  of  broad  demarcation,  separating  those 
words  from  all  others  whatever.  But  that  very  voice 
forbad  the  act,  and  admonished  us  that,  when  it  should 
seem  to  have  ceased,  it  must  yet  be  recognised  as  carry 
ing  on  the  course  of  communications  which  were  not 
then  complete.  I  now  say  no  more  on  this  important 
point,  because  a  clear  understanding  upon  it  ought  to 
be  one  of  the  chief  results  of  the  enquiry  which  lies 
before  me. 

But  a  second  question  is  waiting  for  me  now.  If  I  see 
that  the  proposal  to  restrict  the  divine  authority  to  the 
communications  of  the  Lord's  own  lips  has  been  nega 
tived  by  himself,  I  am  left  to  extend  that  authority  to 
communications  from  the  lips  of  men.  Then  where  am 
I  to  stop?  Am  I  any  longer  within  the  limits  of  the 
New  Testament?  I  have  looked  forth  on  the  ocean. 
Am  I,  or  am  I  not,  actually  launched  upon  it  ?  I  am 
compelled  to  turn  towards  the  vast  and  confusing  pros 
pect,  in  order  to  mark  the  limits  within  which  I  claim 
the  right  to  remain. 

Now  if  the  second  part  of  the  New  Testament  simply 


io  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

rehearsed  to  us  certain  definite  revelations,  which  the 
writers  alleged  that  they  had  received,  no  difficulty  would 
exist.  Their  testimony  to  these  would  be  on  the  same 
footing  (or  nearly  so)  with  the  testimony  of  the  Evan 
gelists  as  to  the  discourses  of  our  Lord.  But  this  is 
not  their  method.  We  have  the  revealed  truth  pre 
sented  to  us  in  the  Epistles,  not  only  as  a  communica 
tion  from  God,  but  also  as  an  apprehension  by  man. 
The  great  transition  from  the  one  stage  to  the  other  is 
exhibited  before  our  eyes  as  already  effected.  We  have 
the  gospel,  as  it  existed  in  the  mind  of  Peter  and  of 
Paul,  of  James  and  of  John.  It  is  thus  presented  to  us 
in  combination  with  the  processes  of  human  thought  and 
the  variations  of  human  feelings,  in  association  with 
peculiarities  of  individual  character,  and  in  the  course 
of  its  more  perfect  elaboration  through  the  exigencies 
of  events  and  controversies. 

But  is  not  this  account  of  the  second  part  of  the  New 
Testament  also  the  account  of  the  whole  subsequent 
history  of  doctrine  in  the  world,  that  is,  of  Church  his 
tory  in  its  essential  and  inward  character  ?  Certainly  it 
is  so ;  and  therefore  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles  stand  to 
the  ecclesiastical  historian  as  the  first  chapters  of  his 
work,  for  there  he  already  finds  the  aspects  which  the 
revealed  truth  bears  to  human  minds  and  assumes  in 
human  hands,  and  the  manner  in  which  its  parts  and 
proportions  come  to  be  distinctly  exhibited  through  the 
agency  of  men  and  the  instrumentality  of  facts.  And 
this  is  a  process  which  goes  on  through  descending  ages, 
and  in  which  every  generation  bears  its  part.  It  has 
gained  accessions  from  all  those  varieties  of  the  human 
mind  which  have  been  placed  in  contact  with  revealed 
truth,  from  the  idiosyncrasies  of  persons,  of  nations,  of 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  II 

ages,  from  Fathers  and  Councils,  from  controversies  and 
heresies,  from  Hellenist,  Alexandrian,  and  Roman  forms 
of  thought,  from  the  mind  of  the  East  and  the  mind  of 
the  West,  from  corruptions  and  reformations  of  religion, 
from  Italy  and  England,  from  Germany  and  Geneva, 
from  authority  and  enquiiy,  from  Church  and  Dissent. 
These  words  and  others  like  them  represent  the  varying 
measures  of  apprehension,  and  the  varying  kinds  of  ex 
pression,  which  the  gospel  revelation  has  found  among 
men.  The  '  developments  of  doctrine,'  (if  I  may  use 
in  this  sense  a  word  once  familiar  to  our  ears) — the 
developments  of  doctrine  thus  originated  were  the 
joint  product  of  the  revealed  truth  and  the  condition  of 
the  mind  which  received  it.  The  revealed  truth  was 
one,  but  the  conditions  of  the  human  mind  are  infinitely 
various,  and  hence  an  endless  variety  in  the  develop 
ments  themselves, — -a  variety  which  sometimes  melts 
into  a  higher  harmony,  but  more  often  jars  on  our  ears 
in  irreconcilable  discord. 

I  am  not  here  concerned  with  the  degrees  in  which  dif 
ferent  developments  have  represented  or  perverted  their 
fundamental  idea,  in  the  one  case  more  conspicuously  ex 
hibiting  the  element  of  the  divine  truth,  in  the  other  that 
of  the  human  infirmity.  I  would  only  observe  that  through 
all  this  confusion  there  is  in  some  sense  a  progress  of 
doctrine.  Even  by  misapprehensions  and  perversions 
the  relations  of  the  Word  to  the  human  mind  are  more 
perfectly  disclosed.  In  partial  systems  of  religion  those 
parts  of  the  entire  scheme  which  they  have  more  par 
ticularly  adopted  often  come  to  be  seen  under  a  stronger 
light.  But  especially  it  is  evident  that  certain  great 
features  of  truth  emerge  from  periods  of  conflict  and 
the  driving  mists  of  controversy,  and  swell  upon  the 


12  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

sight  with  outlines  more  defined  and  a  power  more  re 
cognised  than  had  seemed  to  belong  to  them  before. 
The  names  of  Athanasius,  Augustine,  and  Luther  recall 
in  a  moment  some  of  the  most  obvious  examples  of  this 
fact  in  regard  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Nature  of  Christ,  of 
Original  Sin,  and  of  Justification  by  Faith. 

There  were  periods  then  at  which  these  doctrines 
stood  forth  with  a  vividness,  precision,  and  force,  which 
gave  them  as  it  were  a  new  place  in  the  apprehensions 
of  men,  affecting  of  course  by  their  increased  definiteness 
and  expansion  the  proportions  of  the  whole  body  of 
truth.  These  however  are  only  prominent  instances  of 
a  general  and  continuous  fact.  Every  age,  every  Church, 
every  sect,  every  controversy,  in  some  way  or  other 
contributes  something  to  the  working  out,  the  testing, 
or  the  illustrating  of  some  part  of  the  revelation  of  God. 
Our  English  mind  has  borne  its  part,  and  the  religious 
movements  of  our  own  day  will  deposit  some  residuum 
of  materials  for  future  thought  and  knowledge.  Our 
missionary  efforts  will,  in  this  respect  also,  have  results 
of  their  own,  and  Christianity  in  India  or  in  China,  when 
it  has  in  some  degree  lost  its  English  type,  and  entered 
into  full  relations  with  the  peculiar  minds  of  those  pecu 
liar  races,  will  perhaps  make  as  distinct  additions  to  the 
history  of  doctrine,  as  we  recognise  in  passing  from  the 
theology  of  the  Eastern  to  that  of  the  Western  Church. 
The  history  upon  the  whole  both  has  been  and  will  be 
a  long  disclosure  of  the  perverse  tendencies  and  infirm 
capacities  of  man.  Yet  a  special  providence  over  the 
Church  and  the  living  Spirit  in  it  has  been  proved  as 
well  as  promised  :  and  he  who  looks  back  upon  the 
tortuous  and  agitated  course  of  thought,  perceives  that 
the  truth  is  not  only  preserved,  but  explored  and  worked 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  13 

out,  the  definitions  of  it  becoming  more  exact,  the 
construction  of  it  more  systematic,  and  the  deductions 
from  it  more  numerous. 

Thus  the  history  of  the  apprehension  of  Christian 
truth  by  man,  which  commences  within  the  New  Tes 
tament,  is  continued  in  the  history  of  the  Church  to  the 
end  of  time ;  and  still,  while  it  is  continued,  it  is  in  some 
sort  a  history  of  progress,  and  one  in  which  the  Spirit  of 
God  mingles,  and  which  the  providence  of  God  moulds. 

What  then  is  it  which  draws  the  line  of  separation 
between  the  apostolic  period  and  all  the  subsequent 
periods  of  this  history?  It  is  this — That  the  apostolic 
period  is  not  only  a  part  of  the  history  of  the  appre 
hension  of  truth  by  man :  it  is  also  a  part  of  the  history 
of  the  communication  of  truth  by  God.  It  is  the  first 
stage  of  the  one,  and  the  last  stage  of  the  other.  The 
aspect  which  the  Gospel  bears  in  the  writings  of  the 
Apostles  is  a  communication  from  God  of  what  it  really 
is,  a  revelation  of  what  he  intended  that  it  should  be 
in  the  minds  of  men  for  ever.  This  character  of  the 
apostolic  writings  has,  without  variation  of  testimony, 
been  acknowledged  by  the  Church  from  the  beginning ; 
but  this  acknowledgment  has  been  confined  to  these 
writings,  and  has  never  been  extended  to  subsequent 
expositions  or  decrees.  Councils  and  doctors  have 
claimed  a  right  to  be  heard,  only  as  assertors  and  wit 
nesses  of  apostolic  teaching.  No  later  communications 
from  heaven  are  supposed  or  alleged.  What  has  been 
handed  down, — what  is  collected  out  of  the  writings  of 
the  Apostles, — is  the  professed  authority  for  all  defi 
nitions  and  decrees  ;  and  all  reference  to  (what  may 
appear  to  be)  other  authority  is  based  upon  the  fact, 
asserted  or  implied,  that  in  the  quarters  appealed  to 


14  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

there  was  reason  to  recognise  some  special  connection 
with  the  apostolic  teaching.  This  fact,  moreover,  comes 
out  most  clearly  at  those  moments  in  which  (what  might 
be  called)  an  advance  of  doctrine  is  seen  most  evidently 
to  take  place.  If  the  doctrine  of  the  Nature  of  Christ 
shews  a  new  distinctness  and  firmness  of  outline  after 
Nice  and  Constantinople,  yet  that  form  of  the  doctrine 
professes  to  be,  and  when  examined  proves  to  be,  only 
a  formal  definition  of  the  original  truth.  Nothing  new 
has  been  imported  into  it ;  only  fresh  verbal  barriers 
have  excluded  importations  which  were  really  new.  If 
the  doctrine  of  Justification  by  Faith  seems,  at  the  era 
of  the  Reformation,  like  a  new  apparition  on  the  scene, 
yet  it  is  advanced,  and  is  received,  only  as  the  old 
Pauline  doctrine  reasserting  its  forgotten  claims. 

Even  palpable  innovations  have  supported  their  pre 
tensions  by  the  plea  of  an  imaginary  tradition,  descend 
ing  from  the  days  when  it  was  confessed  that  the  com 
munications  of  God  had  been  completed.  Our  own  days 
have  seen  fresh  evidence  of  the  tenacity  with  which  the 
Romish  Church  holds  to  this  theory,  while  making  that 
last  addition  to  the  articles  of  the  faith  which  seemed  to 
imply  that  it  was  abandoned.  Then,  when  the  pretence 
of  a  tradition  appeared  to  have  finally  given  way  under 
the  ever  accumulating  mass  of  novelties,  minds  accus 
tomed  to  the  logic  of  facts  began  to  cast  about  for  some 
other  theory,  which  should  admit  of  being  reconciled 
with  them.  The  exposition  of  such  a  theory  began  in 
this  pulpit,  and  was  completed  in  the  communion  into 
which  its  author  speedily  passed.  It  was  a  theory  which 
virtually  claimed  for  the  Church  the  power  to  create 
new  doctrine,  instead  of  a  mere  authority  to  determine 
what  was  old.  But  the  claim  could  not  secure  adoption, 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  15 

though  it  had  been  boldly  acted  upon,  and  seemed 
necessary  to  the  controversial  position  of  Rome.  The 
settled  sense  of  Christendom  as  to  the  revelation  of  the 
truth  was  not  to  be  violated.  Newly-'  defined'  doctrines 
were  still  to  be  pronounced  true  and  necessary  on  the 
ground  that  they  had  been  held  by  the  Apostles,  though 
no  evidence  of  that  fact  survived,  and  that  they  had 
been  handed  down  by  tradition,  though  no  trace  of  the 
tradition  could  be  found.  The  gift  thus  ascribed  to  the 
'Infallible  Authority' was  not  an  inspiration  to  know 
the  truth  of  new  doctrines,  but  a  revelation  of  the  fact 
that  they  were  old.  The  new  position  has  been  in  fact 
abandoned  by  those  who  offered,  but  have  not  been 
suffered  to  hold  it a ;  and  we  are  still  able  to  say,  that 
only  in  transient  moments  of  enthusiasm,  and  by  some 
insignificant  and  eccentric  sects,  has  there  been  any 
definite  allegation,  that  doctrinal  communications  from 
God  have  been  received  since  the  last  Apostle  died. 

The  sum  of  what  has  been  said  is  this.  (First),  There 
are  words  (definite  doctrinal  communications)  of  which 
it  is  said  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  'The  words  which  thou 
gavest  me  I  have  given  them.'  (Secondly),  These  words 
are  not  only  those  which  he  spake  with  his  lips  in  the 
days  of  his  flesh ;  they  include  other  words,  afterwards 
given  through  men  in  the  Spirit,  during  a  period  of  time 
which  is  represented  to  us  by  the  books  of  the  New  Tes 
tament.  (Thirdly),  Those  words  were  finished  in  that 
period,  and  have  received  no  subsequent  additions.  The 
description  in  the  text  not  only  cannot  be  shown  to 
belong,  but  has  never  been  supposed  to  belong,  to  any 
words  which  have  been  spoken  since. 

a  See  Note  II. 


1 6  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

On  these  three  points  the  judgment  of  the  Church 
has  been  all  but  universal  and  unchanging.  In  speak 
ing  therefore  of  progress  of  doctrine  in  the  New  Tes 
tament,  I  speak  of  course  of  communication  from  God 
which  reaches  its  completion  within  those  limits,  con 
stituting  a  perfected  scheme  of  divine  teaching,  open  to 
new  elucidations  and  deductions,  but  not  to  the  addition 
of  new  materials. 

3.  The  books  of  the  New  Testament  are  the  form  into 
which  this  divine  teaching  has  been  thrown  for  perma 
nent  and  universal  purposes,  and  by  the  will  of  God  they 
constitute  the  only  representation  of  it  for  all  men  and 
for  ever.  I  have  now  to  add  that  they  give  the  repre 
sentation,  not  only  of  its  substance,  but  also  of  the  plan 
on  which  it  was  progressively  matured. 

It  must  here  be  remarked  that  there  are  two  ways  in 
which  we  may  exhibit  the  progressive  development  of 
any  system  of  things,  whether  it  be  a  scheme  of  religious 
doctrine,  a  science,  a  political  constitution,  or  anything 
else  which  has  completed  itself  by  degrees — one  may 
be  characterized  as  the  historical,  the  other  as  the  con 
structive  method.  In  the  one  case  we  enquire  after  the 
exact  succession  of  events  through  which  the  result  was 
reached ;  in  the  other  we  discriminate  the  stages  of  ad 
vance  in  the  result  itself.  The  representation  of  pro 
gress  made  in  the  one  case  would  be  regulated  simply 
by  the  order  of  fact,  while  that  which  would  be  pro 
duced  in  the  other  would  be  rather  governed  by  the 
order  of  thought.  Now  if  we  consider  the  New  Tes 
tament  as  representing  a  progressive  development  of 
doctrine,  it  is  so  in  the  latter  sense  more  than  in  the 
former.  It  is  rather  a  constructive  than  a  simply  his 
torical  representation.  For  instance,  in  the  development 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  17 

of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh,  the  words 
and  deeds  recorded  by  St.  John  must  be  restored,  on 
the  historic  principle,  to  their  proper  places  in  the  actual 
order  of  events ;  on  the  constructive  principle,  they  pro 
perly  coalesce  into  a  separate  whole,  as  bringing  out  a 
view  of  that  manifestation  which  is  an  advance  in  the 
order  of  thought  upon  the  view  which  the  synoptic  Gos 
pels  present.  So  in  a  historic  representation  of  the 
formation  of  apostolical  doctrine  we  should  have  to  trace 
the  successive  steps  and  occasions  of  its  advance,  to 
secure  the  exact  chronological  arrangement  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles,  and  to  insert  them  in  their  several  places  in  the 
narrative  of  his  labours.  On  the  other  hand,  the  pur 
poses  of  a  constructive  representation  may  be  better 
served  by  keeping  the  records  of  the  external  activity  of 
the  Church  separate  from  its  directly  doctrinal  writings, 
or  by  placing  those  doctrinal  writings  in  a  different 
order  from  that  of  their  chronological  production.  Thus 
the  New  Testament,  as  a  whole,  presents  to  us  a  course 
of  teaching  on  the  constructive  rather  than  on  the  his 
toric  principle ;  and  it  is  in  this  sense  that  I  propose  to 
take  the  book  as  an  adequate  representation,  not  only 
of  the  substance  of  the  divine  teaching,  but  of  the  plan 
and  order  of  its  progress. 

It  may  be  said,  that  there  is  a  difference  between  the 
progress  of  doctrine  as  it  actually  was  during  the  time 
which  the  New  Testament  covers,  and  the  representation 
of  it  which  we  have  in  those  particular  writings.  Yes ! 
and  there  would  be  a  difference  between  the  actual 
course  of  some  important  enterprise, — say,  of  a  military 
campaign  for  instance, — and  the  abbreviated  narrative, 
the  selected  documents,  and  the  well-considered  arrange 
ment,  by  which  its  conductor  might  make  the  plan  and 

C 


1 8  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

execution  of  it  clear  to  others.  In  such  a  case,  the  man 
who  read  would  have  a  more  perfect  understanding  of 
the  mind  of  the  actor  and  the  author  than  the  man  who 
saw ;  he  would  have  the  whole  course  of  things  mapped 
out  for  him  on  the  true  principles  of  order.  Such  is 
the  position  of  every  reader  of  the  New  Testament, 
who  accounts  that  the  Lord,  by  whom  the  historical 
development  of  truth  was  guided,  is  also  the  virtual 
author  of  that  representation  of  it  which  lies  before 
him. 

We  have  not  then  to  make  out  a  chart  from  materials 
given  to  us,  but  to  study  one  which  is  already  made. 
Tracing  the  course  of  doctrine  as  it  is  seen  to  advance 
through  those  pages,  we  shall  have  no  need  to  recon 
struct  for  ourselves  the  actual  order  in  which  the  truth 
was  historically  developed.  Whatever  were  the  measures 
and  gradations  by  which  it  was  opened  out  to  the  Church 
at  first,  here  are  the  measures  and  gradations  by  which 
it  is  opened  out  to  the  Church  for  ever.  Indeed,  the 
plan  on  which  the  Lord  perfected  his  promised  teaching 
was  one  which  could  only  be  seen  in  retrospect.  Con 
ducted  through  the  medium  of  persons  and  events,  and 
by  the  use  of  local  occasions,  the  method  of  procedure 
must  at  the  time  have  very  imperfectly  disclosed  its 
real  system  and  coherence.  Parts  of  the  truth  for  in 
stance  were  being  cleared  and  settled  in  some  Churches, 
which  perhaps  were  scarcely  enquired  for  in  others,  yet 
the  decision  was  of  the  Lord,  and  destined  for  the  whole 
body.  A  transient  occasion  demanded  the  interference 
of  a  particular  Apostle,  and  through  his  sentence  was 
given  some  fundamental  and  eternal  principle.  Among 
all  that  was  done  and  written  and  said,  in  that  scene  of 
intense  activity  and  incessant  movement  which  the 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  19 

apostolic  writings  open  to  us,  it  would  have  been  hard 
indeed  at  the  time  to  follow  with  steady  eye  the  great 
lines  of  advancing  doctrine,  and  to  single  out  the  acts 
and  documents  which  would  adequately  represent  the 
results  secured.  Only  when  these  results  had  been  firmly 
deposited  in  the  Church,  could  the  successive  contribu 
tions  of  the  divine  teaching  be  recognised,  and  their  rela 
tive  order  discerned.  To  exhibit  this  plan  of  things 
there  was  need,  not  of  a  mass  of  accidental  records,  but 
of  a  body  of  records  selected  and  arranged.  It  might 
seem  that  we  had  no  right  to  attribute  such  a  character 
as  this  to  a  collection  of  writings  which  are  upon  the 
face  of  them  independent  and  occasional.  Yet  it  is  cer 
tain  that,  when  taken  as  a  whole,  this  is  its  effect,  and 
that  it  makes  upon  the  mind  the  impression  of  unity 
and  design.  He  who  reads  through  the  Koran  (albeit 
the  work  of  a  single  author),  finds  himself  oppressed,  as 
by  a  shapeless  mass  of  accidental  accretions.  He  who 
reads  through  the  New  Testament  finds  himself  educated 
as  by  an  orderly  scheme  of  advancing  doctrine.  The 
several  books  seem  to  have  grown  into  their  places  as 
component  parts  of  an  organic  whole ;  and  '  the  New 
Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ'  lies 
before  us  as  an  account  of  a  perfected  revelation,  and  a 
course  of  divine  teaching  designed  and  prepared  by  one 
presiding  mind. 

II.  Having  now  accomplished  the  preliminary  steps, 
I  will  close  this  introductory  Lecture  by  pointing  out 
the  reality  of  the  progress  of  which  I  speak,  the  stages 
through  which  it  is  perfected,  and  the  principles  by  which 
it  is  regulated. 

i.  The  reality  of  this  progress  is  very  visible;  and 
more  especially  so  when  we  regard  the  New  Testament 

C  2 


20  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

as  the  last  stage  of  that  progressive  teaching  which  is 
carried  on  through  the  Scriptures  as  a  whole.  Glance 
from  the  first  words  to  the  last,  '  In  the  beginning  God 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth' — 'Even  so,  come, 
Lord  Jesus.'  How  much  lies  between  these  two !  The 
one  the  first  rudiment  of  revelation  addressed  to  the 
earliest  and  simplest  consciousness  of  man,  that,  namely, 
which  comes  to  him  through  his  senses,  the  consciousness 
of  the  material  world  which  lies  in  its  grandeur  round 
him :  the  other  the  last  cry  from  within,  the  voice  of  the 
heart  of  man,  such  as  the  intervening  teaching  has  made 
it ;  the  expression  of  the  definite  faith  which  has  been 
found,  and  of  the  certain  hope  which  has  been  left,  by 
the  whole  revelation  of  God.  The  course  of  teaching 
which  carries  us  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  progressive 
throughout,  but  with  different  rates  of  progress  in  the 
two  great  stages  which  divide  it.  In  the  Old  Testament 
the  progress  is  protracted,  interrupted,  often  languid, 
sometimes  so  dubious  as  to  seem  like  retrogression. 
Accessions  take  place  in  sundry  parts,  in  divers  man 
ners,  at  times  under  disguises  of  earthly  forms,  seeming 
to  suggest  mistakes,  which  have  to  be  themselves  cor 
rected.  Yet  through  it  all  the  doctrine  grows,  and  the 
revelation  draws  nearer  to  the  great  disclosure.  Then 
there  is  entire  suspension.  We  turn  the  vacant  page 
which  represents  the  silence  of  400  years, — and  we  are 
in  the  New  Testament. 

Now  again  there  is  progress,  but  rapid  and  unbroken. 
Our  steps  before  were  centuries  ;  now  they  are  but 
years.  From  the  manger  of  Bethlehem  on  earth  to  the 
city  of  God  coming  down  from  heaven  the  great  scheme 
of  things  unrolls  before  us,  without  a  check,  without  a 
break.  It  is  in  harmony  with  processes  of  nature  and 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  21 

with  human  feelings,  that  preparations  should  be  slowly 
matured,  but  that  final  results  should  rapidly  unfold. 
When  life  becomes  intense  it  can  no  more  endure  delays, 
or  develop  itself  by  languid  progression.  The  root  was 
long  before  it  shewed  the  token  of  its  presence,  the  stem 
and  leaves  grew  slowly,  but  yesterday  the  bud  emerged 
from  its  sheath,  and  to-day  it  is  expanded  in  the  flower. 
A  swift  course  of  events,  the  period  of  one  human  life, 
a  few  contemporary  writers  have  given  us  all  the 
gospel  that  we  need  to  know  under  our  present  dis 
pensation,  all  that  we  shall  ever  know  till  Jesus  comes 
again. 

But  there  is,  as  has  been  observed,  a  plan  of  progress 
though  its  course  is  swift,  and  I  would  take  note  first  of 
its  stages  and  then  of  its  principles. 

2.  Its  stages  I  do  not  now  examine;  but  just  mark 
them  off  as  they  catch  the  eye.  First  we  are  conducted 
through  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh :  we  see 
and  hear  and  learn  to  know  the  living  person,  who  is  at 
once  the  source  and  the  subject  of  all  the  doctrine  of 
which  we  speak.  He  is  presented  as  the  source  of  doc 
trine,  delivering  with  his  own  lips  the  first  Christian  in 
structions,  the  first  preaching  of  a  present  gospel  and 
the  pregnant  principles  of  truth.  He  is  presented  as  the 
subject  of  doctrine,  for  it  is  himself  that  he  offers  to  us 
by  word  and  deed  as  the  object  of  our  faith,  and  the 
events  which  we  see  accomplished  in  his  earthly  history 
are  the  predestined  substance  of  all  subsequent  instruc 
tion.  But  within  this  stage  of  learning  there  is  not  only 
continuous  development  by  the  course  of  events  and 
accumulation  of  facts,  but  at  a  certain  point  a  great 
change  occurs,  which  is  visible  to  every  eye.  It  is  the 
point  where  we  pass  from  the  synoptic  Gospels  and  come 


22  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

under  the  teaching  of  St.  John.  Now  we  rise  to  heaven, 
and  go  back  to  '  the  beginning,'  and  set  forth  from  '  the 
bosom  of  the  Father.'  Now  we  are  taught  to  recognise 
the  glory  of  the  person  of  Christ,  with  a  consciousness 
not  changed  but  more  distinct,  with  acknowledgments 
not  new  but  more  articulate.  In  the  former  Gospels  we 
have  walked  with  him  in  the  common  paths  of  life ;  in 
this  we  seem  to  have  joined  him  on  'the  holy  mount.' 
It  is  almost  like  the  change  which  was  witnessed  by 
the  three  disciples,  who  had  walked  conversing  by  his 
side,  and  then  suddenly  saw  his  countenance  altered 
and  his  raiment  white  and  glistering.  Such  is  the 
effect  upon  our  minds,  not  merely  of  the  last  Evan 
gelist's  own  expressions,  but  of  that  selection  of  words 
and  acts  which  it  was  his  commission  to  make  and  to 
leave. 

We  close  the  Gospels  and  open  the  books  which 
follow.  We  have  passed  a  great  landmark  and  are 
farther  on  our  way ;  yet  the  line  of  doctrine  which  we 
pursue  seems  to  have  sunk  to  a  lower  level,  for  we  cease 
to  be  taught  by  the  lips  of  the  Incarnate  Word,  and  are 
remitted  to  the  discourses  and  writings  of  men.  Is  this 
progress  ?  He  assured  us  that  it  would  be  ;  and  we  find 
that  it  is. 

We  are  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit ;  and 
in  the  book  of  Acts  are  borne,  by  seeming  accident 
but  by  invisible  guidance,  straight  along  that  line 
of  fact  and  of  thought  in  which  we  are  to  find  the 
full  developments  of  the  truth  which  was  given  in  the 
Gospels. 

In  matter  of  doctrine  the  book  of  Acts  is  our  intro 
duction  to  the  Epistles.  Here  if  the  .authority  of  the 
teacher  seems  lowered  from  what  it  was  in  the  Gospels, 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  23 

the  fulness  of  the  doctrine  is  visibly  increased.  Its  more 
mysterious  parts  are  seen  expanded  and  defined.  State 
ments  which  might  seem  of  doubtful  meaning  in  the 
former  stage  have  found  a  fixed  interpretation  in  the 
latter.  Suggestions  of  thought  in  the  one  have  become 
habits  of  thought  in  the  other.  What  were  only  facts 
there  have  become  doctrines  here  ;  and  truths,  which 
just  gleamed  from  a  parable  or  startled  us  in  some 
sudden  saying,  are  now  deliberately  expanded  into 
manifold  and  recognised  relations  with  the  feelings  and 
necessities  of  man.  The  nature  and  consequences  of  the 
work  of  Christ  on  earth,  the  offices  for  men  which  he 
now  fulfils  in  heaven,  the  living  relations  which  he  bears 
to  his  people  in  the  Spirit,  the  discoveries  of  his  majesty 
and  communications  of  his  glory  which  are  ready  to 
be  revealed  in  the  last  time,  all  these  are  seen  in  the 
apostolic  writings,  sometimes  asserted  as  perspicuous 
doctrine,  more  often  blending  and  kindling  together  in 
the  inward  life  of  the  spirit,  giving  the  form  to  the 
character  and  the  motives  to  the  life. 

Yet  a  further  change  takes  place  as  we  reach  the  close 
of  the  Scriptures.  This  inward  and  personal  life  in  the 
Spirit  is  not  all.  There  is  a  kingdom  of  Christ,  which 
has  its  form,  its  history,  its  destinies.  In  the  later  Epi 
stles  we  see  a  constituted  society,  and  hear  the  sounds 
of  a  coming  conflict :  the  Church  appears  on  the  defen 
sive,  and  the  steps  of  invisible  powers  are  moving  round 
her.  The  prophetic  book  which  follows  transports  us 
into  the  unseen  world,  and  opens  the  temple  of  God  in 
heaven,  and  shews  us  the  connection  of  the  history  of 
the  Church  with  things  above  and  things  below ;  and 
guides  through  the  dim  confusion  of  the  conflict  to  the 
last  victory  of  the  Lamb,  leaving  us  at  last  among  the 


24  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

full  effects  of  redemption,  in  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth,  and  in  a  holy  society  and  city  of  God. 

3.  Having  cast  our  eye  along  the  stages  of  advance,  we 
next  enquire  after  the  principles  by  which  it  is  governed  ; 
and  we  find  them  in  the  relations  which  the  doctrine 
bears  to  its  author,  which  it  bears  to  the  facts  on  which 
it  is  founded,  which  it  bears  to  the  human  mind  to  which 
it  is  addressed,  and  which  its  component  parts  bear  to 
each  other. 

a.  The  relation  of  the  doctrine  to  its  author  is  the 
ground  of  its  continuous  unity,  and  unless  there  be 
unity  we  have  no  right  to  speak  of  progress :  for  suc 
cession  is  of  many,  but  progress  is  of  one.  The  unity 
of  the  New  Testament  doctrine  lies  in  this,  that  it  is  the 
teaching  of  one  mind,  the  mind  of  Christ.  The  security 
for  this  is  given  to  us  in  two  ways  :  first  by  the  fact  that 
there  is  no  part  of  the  later  and  larger  doctrine  which 
has  not  its  germs  and  principles  in  the  words  which  he 
spake  with  his  own  lips  in  the  days  of  his  flesh.  It  is 
provided  that  all  which  is  to  be  spoken  after  shall  find 
support  and  proof  from  his  own  pregnant  and  fore 
casting  sayings.  Secondly,  it  is  made  clear  by  his  own 
promises  beforehand,  by  facts  which  evidence  his  per 
sonal  administration,  and  by  the  distinct  assertions  of 
the  men  whom  he  employs,  that,  when  his  own  voice 
has  ceased  on  earth,  it  is  nevertheless  he  who  teaches 
still.  The  testimonies  of  this  are  scattered  along  our 
whole  path,  till  we  come  to  the  last  vision  itself,  in  which 
he  personally  reappears,  'to  shew  unto  his  servants  the 
Revelation  which  God  gave  unto  him,'  renewing  thereby 
for  the  last  time  the  assertion  of  our  text,  '  I  have  given 
unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me.' 

/3.  The  relation  of  the  doctrine  to  the  facts  on  which 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  25 

it  is  founded  is  a  principle  by  which  a  certain  measure 
of  progress  is  necessarily  constituted.  Christian  doc 
trine  does  not  ground  itself  on  speculation.  It  begins 
from  the  region  and  the  testimony  of  the  senses.  Its 
materials  are  facts,  and  it  is  itself  the  interpretation  and 
application  of  them.  It  is  therefore  reasonable  that  the 
facts  should  be  completed,  before  they  are  clearly  inter 
preted  and  fully  applied.  Jesus  must  have  died  and 
risen  again  before  the  doctrine  concerning  his  death  and 
resurrection  can  be  brought  to  light.  Not  till  the  Son  of 
Man  is  glorified  can  we  expect  to  arrive  at  a  stage  of 
doctrine  which  shall  give  all  the  meaning  and  the  virtue 
of  facts  which  till  then  were  not  completed.  Up  to  that 
time  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  history  of  which  his  own 
saying  is  true,  'What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but 
thou  shalt  know  hereafter.' 

y.  The  relation  of  the  doctrine  to  the  human  mind 
does  also  plainly  necessitate  a  particular  kind  of  pro 
gress  in  the  method  of  its  communication.  The  doc 
trine  was  not  meant  to  be  an  opinion  but  a  power  : 
'  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you  they  are  spirit  and 
they  are  life.'  It  therefore  had  to  pass  from  the  form 
of  a  divine  announcement  into  the  form  of  a  human  ex 
perience.  It  had  to  establish  its  own  connection  with 
the  world  of  human  thoughts  and  feelings.  Once  spoken 
by  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,  it  might  perhaps  have  been 
left  to  make  this  transition  according  to  the  natural  laws 
of  the  human  mind.  But  the  transition  in  itself  was  too 
great,  the  consequences  of  error  in  the  first  stage  of  it 
would  be  too  momentous,  for  the  Author  and  Finisher 
of  our  faith  to  leave  the  Church  to  her  ordinary  resources 
at  so  critical  a  moment.  He  would  give  a  divine  cer 
tainty  and  authority  to  the  first  human  apprehensions  of 


26  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

his  truth.  He  would  make  it  sure  that  he  had  himself 
conducted  those  first  experiences  and  applications  of 
the  word,  by  which  future  experiences  and  applications 
might  be  guided  and  tried  for  ever.  Therefore  the  word 
spoken  to  men  by  the  voice  of  Jesus  changed  into  a  word 
spoken  in  men  by  his  Spirit,  creating  thus  a  kind  of 
teaching  which  carried  his  word  into  more  intimate  con 
nection  with  human  thought  and  more  varied  application 
to  human  life. 

8.  Lastly,  the  relation  of  the  several  parts  of  doctrine 
to  each  other  would  call  for  a  certain  orderly  course  of 
development.  There  is  a  natural  fitness  that  the  know 
ledge  of  the  Lord  himself  should  precede  the  knowledge 
of  his  work,  and  that  we  should  wait  on  his  ministry  on 
earth  before  we  apprehend  his  ministry  in  heaven,  and 
that  we  should  see  that  we  are  reconciled  by  his  death 
before  we  understand  how  we  are  saved  by  his  life  ;  em 
bracing  the  meritorious  means  before  we  expatiate  among 
the  glorious  issues.  It  is  reasonable  that  an  acquaintance 
with  Christ  himself,  and  a  knowledge  of  his  work  and 
grace,  should  be  given  first,  and  that,  from  the  source 
thus  provided,  the  rules  and  motives  of  conduct  should 
afterwards  be  elicited.  It  is  right  that  we  should  be 
fully  and  clearly  instructed  in  the  things  of  our  present 
dispensation,  and  in  the  life  of  faith  through  which  we 
are  passing  now,  and  in  the  kingdom  of  an  inward 
and  spiritual  grace,  and  then  that  we  should  be  subse 
quently  informed,  and  more  dimly  and  briefly  too,  of  the 
great  history  of  the  unseen  conflict  with  which  we  are 
more  remotely  concerned,  and  of  its  final  issues  when 
the  former  things  will  have  passed  away  and  God  shall 
make  all  things  new.  These  various  parts  of  the  doctrine, 
though  in  some  degree  commingling  and  interfused,  do 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  27 

yet  on  the  whole  sort  themselves  out  in  Gospels,  Epistles, 
and  Apocalypse. 

Lift  up  now  your  eyes  on  this  monument  of  a  distant 
age  which  you  call  the  New  Testament.  Behold  these 
remains  of  the  original  literature  of  a  busy  Jewish  sect ; 
these  occasional  writings  of  its  leaders,  emanating  from 
different  hands  and  gathered  from  different  localities. 
They  are  delivered  to  you  collected  and  arranged,  though 
by  means  which  you  cannot  ascertain.  They  are  before 
you  now,  not  as  accidentally  collected  writings,  but  as 
one  book ;  a  design  completed,  a  body  organised,  and 
pervaded  by  one  inward  life.  The  several  parts  grow 
out  of  and  into  each  other  with  mutual  support,  cor 
relative  functions,  and  an  orderly,  development.  It  is  a 
'whole  body  fitly  joined  together  and  compacted  by  that 
which  every  joint  supplies,  according  to  the  effectual 
working  in  the  measure  of  every  part,  making  increase 
of  the  body  to  the  building  itself  up'  in  truth. 

It  begins  with  the  person  of  Christ,  and  the  facts  of 
his  manifestation  in  the  flesh,  and  the  words  which  he 
gave  from  his  Father ;  and  accustoms  us  by  degrees  to 
behold  his  glory,  and  to  discern  the  drift  of  his  teaching 
and  to  expect  the  consequences  of  his  work.  It  passes 
on  to  his  body  the  Church,  and  opens  the  dispensation 
of  his  Spirit,  and  carries  us  into  the  life  of  his  people, 
yea  down  into  the  secret  places  of  their  hearts  ;  and 
there  translates  the  announcements  of  God  into  the  ex 
periences  of  man,  and  discovers  a  conversation  in  heaven 
and  a  life  which  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  It  works 
out  practical  applications,  and  is  careful  in  the  details 
of  duty,  and  provides  for  difficulties  and  perplexities, 
and  suggests  the  order  of  Churches,  and  throws  up  bar 
riers  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  It  shews  us  things 


28  THE  NEW   TESTAMENT.  [LECT. 

to  come,  the  course  of  the  spiritual  conflict,  and  the 
close  of  this  transient  scene,  and  the  coming  of  the  Lord, 
and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the  eternal  judg 
ment,  and  the  new  creation,  and  the  life  everlasting. 

Thus  it  is  furnished  for  all  emergencies  and  prepared 
for  perpetual  use.  It  dominates  the  restless  course  of 
thought,  and  is  ever  being  interpreted  by  experience 
and  events.  It  is  an  authority  which  survives  when 
others  perish,  and  a  light  which  waxes  when  others  wane. 
By  it,  as  the  instrument  of  God  for  the  education  of  men, 
nations  are  humanised  and  churches  sanctified.  And 
yet  more  real  and  lasting  than  these  are  the  results  which 
it  secures.  An  elect  nation  is  being  gathered  from 
among  us,  and  an  eternal  Church  prepared,  which  shall 
supplant  all  transient  and  provisional  societies  in  that 
day  for  which  the  whole  creation  waits.  Here  is  the 
final  scope  of  the  Book  of  our  covenant,  in  its  combi 
nation  with  that  older  volume  which  it  continues  and 
completes. 

Then  is  it  not  to  each  of  us  a  matter  of  the  deepest 
personal  concern,  that  the  truth  which  it  teaches  and  the 
spirit  which  it  breathes  should  have  entered  into  his  own 
soul ;  and  that  he  should  thus  become  a  partaker  in  the 
life  which  it  reveals,  an  example  of  the  character  which 
it  demands,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  portion  which  it  pro 
mises  ?  But  this  cannot  be,  unless  he  yield  to  the 
Written  Word  the  confidence  which  it  claims.  Oh,  deal 
worthily,  deal  trustfully  with  such  a  guide  as  this !  Ven 
ture  your  souls  on  the  words  of  which  the  Lord  has  said, 
'  I  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest 
me.'  Receive  the  message,  receive  the  form  in  which  it 
is  left  to  you,  '  not  as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  it  is  in 
truth,  the  word  of  God/  and  then  you  will  find  that  it 


I.]  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  29 

'effectually  worketh  also  in  them  that  believe,'  for  he 
who  '  obeys  from  the  heart  that  form  of  doctrine  into 
which  he  is  delivered,'  finds  that  a  course  of  progressive 
teaching  is  opened  in  his  own  soul,  to  which  the  Holy 
Scripture  will  never  cease  to  minister,  and  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  will  never  cease  to  guide. 


THE   GOSPELS. 


ST.  MARK  i.  i. 
The  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. 

W ITH  reverential  and  affectionate  interest  we  look 
back  to  the  beginnings  of  those  things  which  possess 
our  allegiance  as  established  powers,  or  are  daily  en 
joyed  as  familiar  blessings.  The  thought  that  they  had 
a  beginning,  that  there  was  once  a  time  when  they  were 
not,  gives  a  freshness  to  the  feelings  with  which  we 
regard  them  ;  while  the  comparison  of  the  state  of  com 
mencement  with  the  state  of  perfection  brings  with  it  a 
natural  pleasure,  in  marking  the  tendencies  and  the 
tokens  of  all  that  has  happened  since.  No  words  can 
open  the  heart  to  these  impressions  so  powerfully  as 
those  which  have  just  been  uttered.  The  beginning  of 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  places  us  at 
the  opening  of  the  mystery  of  godliness,  of  the  salvation 
of  the  world,  of  the  glory  which  fills  the  heavens,  and  of 
the  kingdom  which  endures  for  ever. 

The  expression  with  which  St.  Mark  opens  his  narra- 


THE   GOSPELS.  31 


tive  implies  that  the  Gospel  is  then  an  established  fact 
and  a  completed  scheme,  and  that  he  here  returns  to 
the  moment  when  the  fact  began  to  assert  itself  before 
the  world  as  already  present,  and  the  scheme  to  shew 
itself  as  in  actual  progress.  The  beginning  of  the  Gospel 
(according  to  this  Evangelist)  is  not  found  at  the  birth 
of  Jesus,  when  the  communications  of  Heaven  were 
made  but  to  few,  and  died  suddenly  into  silence  ;  but 
from  the  time  when  John  did  baptize  in  the  wilderness, 
and  when  Jesus  began  to  show  himself,  and  '  the  word 
of  the  beginning  of  Christ'  was  publicly  proclaimed, 
never  to  be  again  suspended  till  it  should  have  become 
the  word  of  a  completed  Gospel.  It  is  indeed  the  habit 
of  the  Apostles  to  represent  the  publication  of  the  Gospel 
as  historically  commencing  at  the  same  point  of  time. 
'  The  word,'  says  St.  Peter,  '  which  God  sent  unto  the 
children  of  Israel,  preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ, — 
that  word  began  from  Galilee,  after  the  baptism  which 
John  preached  a  ;'  and  St.  Paul,  in  presenting  to  the  Jews 
'  the  word  of  this  salvation,'  dates  its  proclamation  from 
the  time  'when  John  had  first  preached  before  his 
coming  the  baptism  of  repentance  to  all  the  people 
of  Israel  V 

But  the  expression  which  is  used  in  the  text  of  the 
opening  of  the  public  life  of  Jesus  may  also  be  truly 
applied  to  the  whole  period  of  that  life.  The  Gospel, 
considered  as  fact,  began  from  the  Incarnation,  and  was 
completed  at  the  Resurrection  ;  but  the  Gospel,  consi 
dered  as  doctrine,  began  from  the  first  preaching  of  Jesus, 
and  was  completed  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit. 
When  the  Lord  quitted  the  world,  he  left  the  material 

a  Acts  x.  36,  37.  b  Ibid.  xii.  24. 


32  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

of  the  Gospel  already  perfect,  but  the  exposition  of  the 
Gospel  only  begun  ;  and  in  the  subsequent  consciousness 
of  his  disciples,  the  period  of  the  commencement  of  the 
word  and  the  period  of  its  perfection  must  have  been 
strongly  discriminated  from  each  other. 

When  living  in  the  perfect  dispensation  of  the  Spirit, 
and  going  to  others  in  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ,  they  would  remember  how  that  Gospel 
dawned  gradually  on  their  minds  during  the  few  years 
in  which  its  facts  had  been  passing  before  their  eyes, 
how  imperfectly  they  had  understood  those  facts,  how 
inadequately  they  had  apprehended  the  teaching  by 
which  the  facts  were  accompanied,  how  true  it  was  that 
what  their  Lord  did  they  knew  not  then,  but  that  they 
were  to  know  it  afterwards.  To  them  that  whole  period 
of  time  must  have  seemed  but  an  initiatory  stage,  a 
'  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of 
God.' 

And  so  it  was.  The  Gospel  which  Jesus  preached 
was  a  Gospel  which  in  its  main  particulars  had  yet  to 
be  fulfilled,  and  which  could  not  be  fully  opened  till  it 
had  been  fulfilled.  While  the  facts  were  still  incom 
plete,  the  doctrine  was  yet  in  its  commencement ;  and 
we  have  on  this  account  the  right  to  describe  by  the 
words  of  the  text,  not  only  the  first  steps  but  the  whole 
of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh.  The  be 
ginning  of  the  Gospel  is  a  name  which  in  one  sense 
comprehends  'all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  teach 
until  the  day  when  he  was  taken  up.' 

To  us  this  stage  of  the  divine  teaching  is  represented 
by  the  writings  of  the  four  Evangelists  ;  and  I  would 
now  consider  this  collection,  first  relatively,  as  the  be 
ginning  of  the  orderly  development  of  the  Christian  doc- 


II.]  THE   GOSPELS.  33 

trine  in  the  whole  New  Testament,  and  then  separately, 
as  a  course  of  teaching  which  bears  within  its  own  limits 
a  certain  character  of  systematic  advance." 

Two  such  topics,  included  in  a  single  Lecture,  can 
receive  little  more  than  a  suggestive  treatment ;  but  I 
pray  that  this  may  not  occasion  any  defect  of  that  care 
ful  reverence,  with  which  the  fourfold  Gospel  must  be 
ever  touched  by  those  who  see  in  it  the  very  ark  of  the 
covenant,  where  the  cherubim  of  glory  overshadow  the 
mercy-seat. 

I.  First,  then,  we  have  to  observe  how  the  Gospel 
collection  is  fitted  to  its  place  and  fulfils  its  function,  as 
the  commencement  of  tJie  Christian  doctrine  in  t/ie  New 
Testament. 

Now  the  Christian  doctrine  is  a  doctrine  concerning 
facts  which  have  occurred  and  a  person  who  has  been 
manifested  within  the  sphere  of  human  observation. 
The  foundations  of  all  that  is  to  be  known  of  the  word 
of  life  are  laid  in  'that  which  was  seen  with  the  eyes, 
and  heard  with  the  ears,  and  handled  with  the  hands'  of 
men.  Then  it  is  necessary  for  every  learner  that,  before 
all  inferences  or  applications,  the  facts  themselves  as  mere 
phenomena  should  first  be  rendered  in  the  clearest  light. 
Hence  our  elementary  lessons  are  narratives  of  the  sim 
plest  form.  A  plain  report  of  words  and  deeds,  easy  and 
inartificial  in  the  extreme,  in  which  the  most  stupendous 
events  elicit  no  articulate  expression  of  feeling,  without 
appearance  of  plan  or  system,  with  scarcely  a  comment 
or  reflection,  and  in  which  a  word  of  explanation  almost 
startles  us — such  is  the  character  of  the  three  first  of 
those  writings  which  form  the  ground  and  contain  the 
material  of  all  subsequent  Christian  doctrine.  No  literary 
fact  is  more  remarkable  than  that  men,  knowing  what 

D 


34  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

these  writers  knew,  and  feeling  what  they  felt,  should 
have  given  us  chronicles  so  plain  and  calm.  They  have 
nothing  to  say  as  from  themselves.  Their  narratives 
place  us  without  preface,  and  keep  us  without  comment, 
among  external  scenes,  in  full  view  of  facts,  and  in  con 
tact  with  the  living  person  whom  they  teach  us  to  know. 
The  style  of  simple  recital,  unclouded  and  scarcely 
coloured  by  any  perceptible  contribution  from  the  mind 
of  the  writers,  gives  us  the  scenes,  the  facts,  and  the 
person,  as  seen  in  the  clearest  light  and  through  the 
most  transparent  atmosphere.  Who  can  fail  to  recog 
nise  a  divine  provision,  for  placing  the  disciples  of  all 
future  ages  as  nearly  as  possible  in  the  position  of  those 
who  had  been  personally  present  at  'the  beginning  of 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God  ?' 

The  importance,  in  the  whole  course  of  instruction, 
of  first  fixing  on  the  mind  both  the  objective  reality  of 
the  facts  and  the  living  portrait  of  the  person,  is  further 
intimated  by  the  fourfold  repetition  of  the  history. 
Four  times  does  the  Lord  walk  before  us  in  the  glory 
of  grace  and  truth,  and,  whatever  correspondences  or 
variations  the  Gospels  may  exhibit  in  other  parts  of 
their  narratives,  four  times  are  the  great  facts  of  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  rehearsed  to  us  in  the 
minuteness  of  circumstantial  detail.  We  do  not  go  for 
ward  to  further  disclosures,  till  the  historical  facts  have 
been  ensured  to  us  by  testimony  upon  testimony,  and 
the  portrait  has  grown  familiar  to  us  by  line  upon  line. 

Far  on  in  the  holy  books,  when  the  scriptural  struc 
ture  is  nearly  perfected,  our  eyes  are  turned  back  to  the 
ground  of  visible,  audible,  tangible  realities  from  which 
we  started. 

'  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,  which  we  have 


n.]  THE   GOSPELS.  35 

heard,  which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes,  which  we  have 
looked  upon,  and  our  hands  have  handled  of  the  Word 
of  life,  (for  the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  it, 
and  bear  witness,  and  shew  unto  you  that  eternal  life, 
which  was  with  the  Father  and  was  manifested  to  us,) 
that  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we  unto  you, 
that  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us  c.' 

Yes,  it  is  true.  We  have  fellowship  with  those  that 
speak,  not  only  in  their  spiritual  relations  with  their 
Lord  (which  they  fully  understood  only  after  he  was 
gone),  but  in  their  remembrances  of  him  in  that  earlier 
time  when  he  was  yet  with  them.  Their  witness  is 
effectual  for  this  end.  For  us  also  it  is  all  real.  He 
dwelt  among  us.  We  beheld  his  glory.  We  caught 
the  gracious  words  that  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth. 
So  things  went  with  him.  So  he  looked  and  moved 
and  spoke.  So  he  wrought  and  suffered  and  died.  We 
have  stood  by  the  cross  of  Jesus.  We  have  entered  the 
empty  sepulchre.  We  have  seen  him  alive  after  his 
passion.  He  has  shewn  us  his  hands  and  his  feet.  We 
have  been  led  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany,  have  seen  the 
hands  lifted  up  to  bless,  and  watched  the  ascending 
form. 

Open  these  pages  where  we  will,  the  sense  of  reality 
revives  within  us.  We  feel  afresh  that  we  have  not 
followed  cunningly  devised  fables,  have  not  loved  an 
idea,  or  trusted  in  an  abstraction.  We  know  -in  whom 
we  have  believed,  and  feel  that  our  Redeemer  is  our 
friend.  We  are  solemnised  as  in  a  holy  sanctuary,  and 
secure  as  in  a  familiar  home.  We  have  escaped  from 
doubt  and  debate,  and  no  longer  criticise  or  reason.  We 

c  i  John  i.  1-3. 
D  2 


•36  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

have  recovered  the  mind  of  little  children.  We  sit  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus :  and  the  faith  which  came  into  his 
presence  languid  and  disconcerted,  departs  invigorated 
and  refreshed. 

Brethren,  let  me  urge  upon  you  the  habitual  study  of 
the  holy  Gospels  for  this  revival  of  the  reality  and  sim 
plicity  of  faith.  Let  me  urge  it  more  especially  upon 
those  who  converse  in  the  region  of  abstract  ideas, 
whether  they  frequent  the  ordered  paths  of  systematic 
divinity,  or  wander  in  the  free  excursions  of  speculative 
thought.  Dear  as  the  Gospel  stories  are  to  the  simple 
peasant,  they  are  yet  more  necessary  to  the  student  and 
the  divine ;  for  there  are  influences  in  abstract  thought 
and  in  dogmatic  discussion  which  will  drain  the  soul  of 
life  unless  fitting  antidotes  be  used :  and  there  is  no 
antidote  so  effectual,  as  is  found  in  a  continual  return  to 
those  scenes  of  historic  fact  in  which  the  word  of  God 
has  given  us  our  first  lessons  in  Christ. 

This  necessity  for  habitual  converse  with  the  evan 
gelical  narratives  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  wisdom 
which  assigned  them  the  place  and  the  space  which  they 
actually  fill,  and  especially  which  ordained  that  the  pic 
ture  of  our  Lord's  earthly  life  should  be  given  to  us  not 
in  one  gospel,  but  in  four. 

I  suppose  we  all  feel  how  different  would  have  been 
the  effect  of  possessing  one  '  Life  of  Christ,'  however  full 
and  systematic.  We  spend  more  time  and  (if  I  may 
use  the  expression)  feel  more  at  home  in  the  four  suc 
cessive  chambers  than  we  should  have  done  in  one  long 
gallery ;  and  the  impression  of  all  that  is  there  shewn 
to  us  sinks  deeper  into  the  heart,  from  the  repetition  of 
many  passages  of  the  story  under  slightly  varying  lights 
and  in  different  relative  connections.  Lively  attention, 


II.]  THE   GOSPELS.  37 

minute  observation,  careful  comparison,  and  enquiry 
which  is  never  fully  satisfied,  are  awakened  at  every 
step  by  that  singular  combination  of  resemblances  and 
differences ;  and  the  mind  is  thus  engaged  to  dwell 
longer  on  the  scenes,  conversing  among  them  in  a  more 
animated  spirit,  and  with  an  interest  which  is  perpetually 
refreshed.  We  know  the  immense  expenditure  of  labour 
in  our  own  day  on  the  comparative  characteristics  of  the 
Gospels,  and  the  manifold  attempts  to  harmonise  or  to 
reconstruct  them,  to  ascertain  the  point  of  view  of  the 
writers,  and  to  account  for  the  variations  in  their  selec 
tion  and  position  of  incidents  and  in  the  turn  which  they 
give  to  discourses.  Whatever  be  the  spirit  in  which 
such  attempts  are  made,  they  at  least  afford  an  inci 
dental  witness  to  the  care  which  divine  wisdom  has 
taken  to  detain  and  occupy  our  minds  at  the  outset  in 
those  scenes  in  which  alone  we  can  learn  to  know  Jesus 
Christ  himself, 

It  is  plain  that  the  four  histories  are  modified  by  their 
own  instinctive  principles  of  selection  and  arrangement, 
which  do  not  indeed  announce  themselves,  and  almost 
elude  our  attempts  to  ascertain  them,  but  yet  result  in 
giving  four  discriminated  aspects  of  their  common  sub 
ject,  as  the  Royal  Lawgiver,  the  Mighty  Worker,  the 
Friend  of  Man,  and  the  Son  of  God— four  aspects,  but 
one  portrait ;  for  if  the  attitude  and  the  accessories  vary, 
the  features  and  the  expression  are  the  same'1. 

Who  does  not  perceive  the  immense  assistance  hereby 
given  to  us  for  receiving  the  knowledge  of  Christ  ?  One 
representation,  however  full,  would  still  have  suggested 
the  thought,  '  This  is  the  impression  made  upon  a  single 
mind.  Who  can  say  what  part  of  it  is  due  to  the 
d  Note  III. 


38  THE    GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

idiosyncrasies  of  the  witness  ?  If  we  had  the  impressions  of 
another  mind,  perhaps  we  should  have  a  different  image.' 
As  it  is,  we  derive  the  impression  from  four  different 
quarters,  and  the  image  is  still  the  same.  It  is  repre 
sented  from  four  different  points  of  view  ;  but,  however 
represented,  it  is  the  same  Jesus.  The  conception  is  one, 
and  its  unity  attests  its  truth.  We  feel  that  we  see  him 
as  he  was.  No  human  being  that  ever  trod  the  earth 
has  left  behind  a  representation  of  himself  more  clear 
and  living,  and  more  certain  in  its  truthfulness,  than 
is  that  which  we  possess  of  Him  who  was  known  at 
first  as  '  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  in  Galilee.' 

From  time  to  time  some  fresh  portrait  may  appear. 
Some  adventurous  imagination,  charmed  and  yet  per 
plexed  by  the  Gospel  story,  may  attempt  to  reconstruct 
it  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  world.  Unable  to 
receive  as  real  the  sole  example  of  sinless  humanity,  it 
may  introduce  into  the  picture  touches  of  the  error  and 
infirmity  which  are  not  there :  and  may  mistake  the 
awful  gleams  of  the  indwelling  Godhead  for  the  glimmer 
of  an  enthusiasm  which  deludes  and  is  deluded.  The 
world  may  read  the  bold  romance,  and  half  commend 
the  creation  of  fancy.  But  the  creations  of  fancy  perish 
as  they  rise,  and  the  Jesus  of  the  Gospels  remains ;  not 
only  as  a  perfect  ideal,  but  as  a  vivid  reality,  a  repre 
sentation  which  appears  after  every  fresh  attempt  to 
change  it,  more  glorious  in  majesty  and  beauty,  and 
more  conspicuous  also  for  truthfulness  and  life. 

In  placing  the  statement  of  the  person  of  Christ  as 
the  first  work  of  the  Gospel  histories,  and  as  the  be 
ginning  of  the  Gospel  itself,  I  speak  in  accordance 
with  the  spirit  of  those  books  and  of  the  whole  ensuing 
system  of  doctrine.  Jesus  Christ  created  the  Gospel  by 


II.]  THE    GOSPELS.  39 

his  work  ;  he  preaches  the  Gospel  by  his  words  ;  but  he 
is  the  Gospel  in  himself.  The  expression  is  but  the 
condensation  of  a  hundred  passages  of  scripture  which 
declare  him  to  be  that,  which,  in  more  timid  but  less 
adequate  language,  we  might  say  that  he  ivrought,  or 
that  he  tauglit,  or  that  he  gave.  '  I  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life6.'  He  'is  our  peacef,'  he  'is  our  life?,'  he 
'  is  the  hope  of  gloryh.'  '  He  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  re 
demption  ; :'  and  they  who  are  saved  '  are  made  partakers 
of  Christk,'  not  merely  of  his  gifts,  whether  they  be  gifts 
of  grace  or  glory.  Is  it  not  indeed  the  distinguishing 
feature  of  the  Christian  system,  that  it  places  the  founda 
tion  of  salvation  in  living  relations  with  a  living  person, 
rather  than  in  the  adoption  of  opinions  or  of  habits? 
that  under  it  the  believer  is,  not  the  man  who  maintains 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  or  holds  'justification  by 
faith,'  but  the  man  who  has  'come  to'  Christ,  and 
'  abides  in '  him  ? 

These  are  the  Lord's  own  words :  they  are  funda 
mental  words  in  relation  to  all  that  is  added  afterwards  : 
they  are,  in  matter  of  doctrine,  the  beginning  of  the 
Gospel.  The  writings  of  the  Evangelists  do  not  present 
to  us  a  scheme  of  doctrine  as  to  the  nature  of  Christ  or 
as  to  the  work  which  he  does.  They  present  to  us  the 
Lord  Jesus  himself,  as  he  shewed  himself  to  men  in 
order  to  win  their  confidence  and  fix  their  trust.  Men 
learned  to  know  him  and  to  trust  him  before  they  fully 
understood  who  he  was  and  what  he  did. 

The  faith  which,  in  the  Gospel  stories,  we  see  asked 
for  and  given,  secured  and  educated,  is  a  faith  that 

6  John  xi.  25.  f  Eph.  ii.  14.  e  Col.  iii.  4. 

h  Col.  i.  27.  'i  Cor.  i.  30.  k  Heb.  iii.  14. 


40  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

fastens  itself  on  a  living  Saviour,  though  it  can  yet  but 
little  comprehend  the  method  or  even  the  nature  of  the 
salvation.  Thus  the  New  Testament,  in  giving  us  these 
narratives  for  our  first  lessons  in  Christian  faith,  teaches 
us  that  the  essential  and  original  nature  of  that  faith 
lies,  not  in  acceptance  of  truths  which  are  revealed,  but 
in  confidence  in  a  person  who  is  manifested.  '  He  that 
cometh  to  me,'  c  He  that  believeth  on  me,'  is  the  Lord's 
own  account  of  the  child  of  the  new  covenant  who  is  the 
fit  recipient  of  advancing  doctrine.  Faith,  as  seen  in  the 
Gospels,  results  not  in  the  first  place  from  the  miracles 
which  justify  and  sustain  it,  but  from  the  personal  im 
pression  which  appeals  to  the  conscience  and  the  spirit 
in  man.  The  first  disciples  believed  before  a  miracle 
had  been  shewn.  It  was  imputed  as  a  fault,  '  Except 
ye  see  signs  and  wonders  ye  will  not  believe1:'  and  it 
was  a  condescension  to  inferior  spiritual  sensibilities 
when  the  simple  word  '  Believe  me m '  was  changed  to 
'  Or  else  believe  me  for  the  very  work's  sake.'  As  it 
was  with  those  disciples,  so  also  is  it  with  ourselves. 
The  evidential  works  have  their  own  most  important, 
most  necessary  office  :  but  the  Lord  himself  is  his  own 
evidence,  and  secures  our  confidence,  love,  and  adoration 
by  what  he  is  more  than  by  what  he  does. 

We  pass  on  from  the  Gospel  histories  into  a  dis 
pensation  of  invisible  offices  and  spiritual  relations,  and 
we  carry  with  us  the  personal  knowledge  of  him  by 
whom  these  offices  and  relations  are  sustained.  It  is 
this  which  secures  that  they  should  not  be  to  us  a  system 
of  ideas  and  abstractions,  of  words  and  names.  The 
Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  High  Priest  in  the 
spiritual  temple,  the  King  on  the  unseen  throne,  is  this 

1  John  iv.  48.  m  Ibid.  xiv.  n. 


II.]  THE    GOSPELS.  41 

same  Jesus  who  went  in  and  out  among  us,  whom  we 
have  seen  sitting  in  the  house  at  Bethany,  or  by  the  well 
at  Sychem,  receiving  sinners,  preaching  to  the  poor,  com 
forting  his  friends,  and  suffering  little  children  to  come 
to  him.  With  an  acquaintance  already  formed,  a  con 
fidence  already  secured,  and  a  love  already  awakened, 
we  can  pass  with  a  prepared  heart  to  more  abstruse  reve 
lations  of  the  same  Lord,  when  he  is  presented  as  the 
righteousness  of  the  sinful  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
as  the  predestined  source  of  life  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Ephesians,  as  the  sacrifice  and  priest  of  the  new  covenant 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  Having  first  known 
himself,  we  are  ready  for  the  Spirit  to  take  of  the  things 
which  are  Ms  and  shew  them  to  us. 

II.  Our  reflections  hitherto  have  turned  upon  the 
relation  which  the  Gospel  collection  bears  to  the  whole 
New  Testament,  and  we  have  looked  at  it  as  the  begin 
ning  of  a  course  of  doctrine  extending  through  the  books 
which  follow.  It  is  now  further  to  be  noted,  that  its  own 
separate  work  is  itself  fulfilled  on  an  apparent  plan  of 
progressive  development,  which  is  constituted  by  the  rela 
tive  characters  of  the  Gospels  viewed  in  the  order  which 
they  have  habitually  assumed. 

(i)  The  collection  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  line 
of  demarcation  perceptible  to  every  eye  and  recognised 
in  every  age  ;  the  first  three  Gospels  forming  the  one  part 
and  the  fourth  Gospel  the  other.  The  former  naturally 
precedes,  and  in  its  effect  prepares  us  for  the  latter.  We 
are  to  learn  the  great  lesson  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ : 
and  here,  as  in  most  other  subjects,  the  order  of  fact  is 
not  the  order  of  knowledge.  In  the  order  of  fact  the 
glory  of  the  divine  nature  precedes  the  circumstances  of 
the  earthly  manifestations  ;  but  in  the  order  of  knowledge 


42  THE    GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

the  reverse  is  true.  Events  occurring  in  time,  a  place  in 
human  history,  and  the  external  aspect  of  a  life,  must 
supply  the  antecedent  conditions  for  the  higher  dis 
closures.  Thus  the  triple  Gospel,  which  educates  us 
among  scenes  of  earth,  prepares  us  for  that  which  fol 
lows.  Our  minds  are  led  along  that  very  course  of 
thought  over  which  they  would  have  moved  if  we  had 
been  eye-witnesses  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  in  that 
we  are  familiarised  with  its  ordinary  aspect  and  most 
frequent  characteristics,  before  our  thoughts  are  riveted 
on  those  peculiar  passages  in  which  the  revelation  of 
glory  is  most  concentrated,  and  which  serve  to  interpret 
all  that  we  had  before  felt  to  be  implied. 

(2)  Again,  if  the  synoptic  Gospels  are  taken  by  them 
selves,  we  observe,  even  within  the  limits  of  this  division, 
certain  orderly  steps  of  advance.  Each  of  these  narra 
tives  has  its  own  prevailing  character,  whereby  it  makes 
its  proper  contribution  to  the  complete  portrait  of  the 
Lord  :  each  also  has  its  own  historical  associations, 
whereby  it  represents  a  separate  stage  in  the  presenta 
tion  of  Christ  to  the  world.  Both  the  internal  characters 
and  the  historical  associations  of  the  several  Gospels 
have  been  fully  wrought  out  by  recent  writers,  and  are 
now  generally  understood.  Yet  they  must  be  shortly 
noticed  here,  for  the  due  elucidation  of  the  statement 
that  the  books  in  combination  constitute  a  progressive 
course. 

The  record  of  St.  Matthew,  ever  recognised  as  the 
Hebrew  Gospel,  is  the  true  commencement  of  the  New 
Testament,  shewing  how  it  grows  out  of  the  Old,  and 
presenting  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  not  as 
a  detached  phenomenon,  but  as  the  predestined  com 
pletion  of  the  long  course  of  historic  dispensations.  It 


II.]  THE    GOSPELS.  43 

is  the  Book  of  the  Generation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son 
of  David,  the  son  of  Abraham.  It  founds  itself  on  the 
ideas  of  the  old  covenant.  It  refers  at  every  step,  espe 
cially  in  its  earlier  chapters,  to  the  former  Scriptures, 
noting  how  that  was  fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  the 
prophets.  It  is  a  history  of  fulfilment^  presenting  the 
Lord  as  the  fulfiller  of  all  righteousness,  the  fulfiller  of 
the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to 
fulfil.  It  sets  him  forth  as  a  King  and  Lawgiver  in  that 
kingdom  of  heaven  for  which  a  birthplace  and  a  home 
had  been  prepared  in  Israel :  and  thus  corresponds  to 
that  period  in  the  historical  course  of  events  when  the 
word  was  preached  to  none  but  to  the  Jews  only11. 

The  Gospel  of  St.  Mark  is  traditionally  connected 
with  St.  Peter,  who  first  opened  the  door  of  faith  to 
Gentiles,  and  has  the  appearance  of  being  addressed  to 
such  a  class  of  converts  as  it  was  given  to  that  Apostle 
to  gather,  men,  like  the  devout  soldiers  of  Caesarea,  in 
whom  the  Roman  habit  of  mind  was  coloured  by  contact 
with  Judaism.  It  is  the  Gospel  of  action,  rapid,  vigorous, 
vivid.  Entering  at  once  on  the  Lord's  official  and  public 
career,  it  bears  us  on  from  one  mighty  deed  to  another 
with  a  peculiar  swiftness  of  movement,  and  yet  with  the 
life  of  picturesque  detail.  Power  over  the  visible  and 
invisible  worlds,  especially  as  shewn  in  the  casting  out 
of  devils,  is  the  prominent  characteristic  of  the  picture. 
St.  Peter's  saying  to  Cornelius  has  been  well  noticed  as 
a  fit  motto  for  this  Gospel,  'God  anointed  Jesus  of  Naza 
reth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power,  who  went 
about  doing  good  and  healing  all  those  who  were  op 
pressed  of  the  devil.'  In  relation  to  the  expansion  of 
the  word  from  its  first  home  in  Jewry  to  its  ultimate 
n  See  Note  IV. 


44  THE    GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

prevalence  in  the  whole  earth,  this  Gospel  occupies  an 
intermediate  position  between  those  of  St.  Matthew  and 
St.  Luke.  Its  representation  of  the  Lord  is  disengaged 
from  those  close  connections  with  Jewish  life  and  thought 
which  the  first  Gospel  is  studious  to  exhibit,  while  it  is 
wanting  in  that  breadth  of  human  sympathy  and  special 
fitness  for  the  Gentile  mind  at  large,  which  we  recognise 
in  the  treatise  of  St.  Luke. 

This  latter  Gospel  intimates  its  character  in  this  re 
spect  by  a  genealogy  which  presents  to  us  not  the  son 
of  Abraham,  but  the  son  of  Adam ;  and  it  carries  out 
the  intimation  by  special  notice  of  our  Lord's  familiar 
intercourse  with  human  life,  his  tender  sympathies  with 
human  feelings,  his  large  compassion  for  human  woes. 
The  preface,  addressed  to  a  Gentile  convert,  indicating 
the  position  of  the  writer  in  regard  to  the  facts  which 
he  will  relate,  and  speaking  in  the  language  of  classical 
composition,  shews  us  at  the  outset  that  we  have  passed 
from  Jewish  associations  to  a  stage  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  when  its  purpose  of  expansion  has  been  proved, 
and  its  character  of  universality  established.  The  whole 
tone  of  this  Gospel  constitutes  it  pre-eminently  a  Gospel 
for  the  Gentiles,  specially  adapted  to  the  Greek  mind, 
then,  in  some  sense,  the  mind  of  the  world.  Its  internal 
character  thus  accords  with  its  historical  position,  as  the 
Gospel  of  St.  Paul,  written  by  his  close  companion,  and 
circulated,  we  cannot  doubt,  in  the  Churches  which  he 
founded. 

As  the  book  of  Acts  shews  us  three  stages  in  the 
outward  progress  of  the  Gospel,  first  within  the  bounds 
of  Judaism,  then  in  the  work  of  St.  Peter,  spreading 
beyond  those  limits  in  the  Roman  direction,  and  finally 
in  the  ministry  of  St.  Paul,  delivered  freely  and  fully  to 


II.]  THE    GOSPELS.  45 

the  world  ;  so  do  the  synoptic  Gospels,  as  they  stand  in 
the  canon,  correspond  with  a  singular  fitness  to  those 
three  periods.  We  are  going  forward  as  we  pass  through 
them,  and  are  completing  the  representation  of  Christ, 
not  by  mere  repetition  or  fortuitous  variation  in  our 
point  of  view,  but  in  a  certain  orderly  sequence,  corre 
sponding  to  that  in  which  the  knowledge  of  him  was 
historically  opened  to  the  world.  The  evangelical  narra 
tives  are  the  proper  monuments  of  a  Gospel,  which  first 
asserted  itself  as  the  true  form  of  Judaism  and  the 
legitimate  consummation  of  the  old  covenant,  and  then 
unfolded  its  relations  with  the  whole  race  of  mankind, 
and  passed  into  the  keeping  of  a  Catholic  Church. 

(3)  If  in  traversing  the  synoptic  Gospels  we  march 
in  the  line  of  a  historical  advance,  it  is  still  more  plain 
that  we  do  so  when  we  pass  to  the  teaching  of  St.  John. 

The  Gospel  of  Christ  had  no  sooner  completed  the 
conflicts,  through  which  it  established  its  relations  to 
Judaism  and  to  the  world,  than  it  entered  on  those 
profound  and  subtle,  those  various  and  protracted  con 
troversies,  which  turned  on  the  person  of  Christ.  This 
was  the  natural  course  of  events,  whether  we  regard 
the  tendencies  of  human  thought,  the  wiles  of  the  devil, 
or  the  government  of  God.  If  the  revelation  of  Christ 
himself  (as  distinguished  from  what  he  taught  and  what 
he  wrought)  is  the  foundation  of  the  whole  Gospel,  it 
would  be  first  to  explore  this  mystery  that  the  activities 
and  subtleties  of  thought  would  address  themselves ;  it 
would  be  first  to  destroy  this  mystery  that  the  assaults 
of  the  enemy  would  be  directed  ;  it  would  be  first  in 
securing  this  mystery  that  the  divine  guidance  of  the 
Church  would  be  made  manifest.  One  Apostle,  the  first 
and  the  last  of  the  'glorious  company,'  was  chosen  as 


46  THE    GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

the  chief  instrument  for  settling  human  thought,  defeat 
ing  the  wiles  of  the  devil,  and  certifying  the  witness  of 
God.  There  was  but  one  moment  in  which  the  condi 
tions  for  such  a  production  could  co-exist.  It  must  be 
after  a  speculative  theosophy  had  begun  to  form  its 
language  and  manifest  its  aberrations.  Yet  it  must  be 
while  the  voice  of  an  eye-witness  could  still  be  lifted  up, 
to  tell  what  eyes  had  seen,  and  ears  had  heard,  and 
hands  had  handled  of  the  Word  of  Life  ;  so  that  the 
clearest  intuitions  of  the  divinity  of  Jesus  might  be  for 
ever  blended  with  the  plainest  testimony  of  the  senses 
concerning  him.  Such  a  moment  was  secured  by  the 
providence  which  ordained  that  John  should  live  till  the 
first  heresies  had  shaped  themselves.  The  disciple  who 
first  came  to  Jesus,  who  followed  him  most  closely,  who 
lay  in  his  bosom,  who  stood  by  his  cross,  who  believed 
when  others  were  confounded,  who  saw  with  more  pene 
trating  eye  the  glory  which  they  all  beheld,  was  reserved 
to  complete  the  written  statement  of  the  person  of  Christ, 
in  a  record  which  has  been  designated  from  ancient  days 
as  '  the  Gospel  according  to  the  Spirit.' 

As  the  other  Gospels  respectively  make  prominent 
the  ideas  of  law,  of  power,  and  of  grace,  so  does  this 
present  the  glory  of  Christ.  '  We  beheld  his  glory,  the 
glory  as  of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father0.'  All  the 
disciples  beheld  it,  but  there  was  one  whose  pure,  lofty, 
and  contemplative  spirit  fitted  him  to  be  the  best  re 
cipient,  and  therefore  the  best  exponent,  of  the  sublime 
disclosure.  To  him,  therefore,  the  office  was  assigned, 
and  his  Gospel  is  its  fulfilment.  He  begins,  not  like 
his  predecessors  from  an  earthly  starting-point,  from  the 
birth  of  the  son  of  Adam,  or  the  son  of  Abraham,  or 

0  John  i.  14. 


II.]  THE    GOSPELS.  47 

the  opening  of  the  human  ministry,  but  in  the  depths  of 
unmeasured  eternity  and  the  recesses  of  the  nature  of 
God  ;  and  then  bringing  the  First-begotten  into  the 
world,  traces  with  adoring  eye  the  course  of  word  and 
deed  by  which  he  manifested  forth  his  glory,  and  at 
last  delivers  his  record  to  others,  'that  they  may  be 
lieve  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  believing 
they  may  have  life  through  his  name  P.' 

We  have  now  seen  that  in  the  three  synoptic  Gospels 
the  representation  of  Christ,  as  he  lived  and  conversed 
amongst  men,  is  carried  on  by  three  successive  stages, 
from  its  first  Jewish  aspect  and  fundamental  connection 
with  the  old  covenant  to  its  most  catholic  character  and 
adaptation  to  the  Gentile  mind ;  and  that  these  steps 
correspond  to  and  are  connected  with  the  historical 
stages  of  advance,  by  which  the  word  of  God  passed 
from  its  first  home  to  its  destined  sphere  of  influence. 
We  have  seen  that  in  the  fourth  Gospel  we  rise  to  a 
more  distinct  apprehension  of  the  spiritual  mystery  in 
volved  in  the  picture  which  has  been  presented ;  and 
further,  that  this  advance  also  is  connected  with  histori 
cal  conditions,  subsequent  in  time  to  those  under  which 
the  preceding  books  originated.  The  course  of  teaching 
thus  produced  is  according  to  that  principle  which  places 
the  earthly  things  as  the  introduction  to  the  heavenly, 
and  keeps  everything  in  '  its  own  order,  first  that  which 
is  natural,  and  afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual.' 

And  yet  these  stages  of  progress  are  constituted  only 
by  differences  of  degree.  There  is  nothing  expanded  in 
one  book  which  has  not  been  asserted  in  another.  Take 
whatever  may  seem  to  you  the  distinguishing  idea  of 
any  one  of  them,  and  you  find  a  strong  expression  of  it 

P  John  xx.  31. 


THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 


in  all  the  others.  The  Judaism  of  St.  Matthew  reaches 
out  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  the  catholic  spirit 
of  St.  Luke  falls  back  upon  its  Jewish  origin.  St.  John, 
in  exhibiting  the  divine  nature  of  Christ,  exhibits  only 
what  the  others  have  everywhere  implied  and  frequently 
affirmed.  'The  Johannean  conception  of  Christ,'  as  it 
has  been  termed  by  some,  who  would  place  it  in  oppo 
sition  to  preceding  representations,  is  in  fact  their  expli 
cation  and  confirmation.  In  the  former  Gospels  we 
behold  the  Son  of  God,  proclaimed  by  angels,  confessed 
by  devils,  acknowledged  by  the  voice  of  the  Father ; 
with  authority  and  power  commanding  the  visible  and 
invisible  worlds,  and  at  the  central  moment  of  the  his 
tory  transfigured  on  the  holy  mount  before  the  eye 
witnesses  of  his  majesty.  The  first  word  in  the  Temple 
declares  to  his  earthly  parent  his  conscious  relation  to 
his  Father ;  the  last  charge  to  the  Apostles  founds  the 
Church  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  ;  while,  in  the  intervening  period,  some 
voice  of  self-revelation  more  deep  than  usual  is  from 
time  to  time  suffered  to  fall  upon  our  ears ;  like  that 
which  so  many  commentators  have  noticed  as  a  kind  of 
anticipation  of  the  language  of  St.  John,  '  All  things  are 
delivered  to  me  of  my  Father ;  and  no  man  knoweth 
who  the  Son  is  but  the  Father,  neither  knoweth  any 
man  the  Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever 
the  Son  will  reveal  him  q.' 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  in  the  record  of  St.  John 
that  we  read  words  which,  if  found  in  another  Gospel, 
would  have  been  eagerly  urged  as  antagonistic  to  'the 
Johannean  conception.'  We  can  imagine  what  use  would 

<i  Matt.  xi.  27,  and  Luke  x.  22. 


II. J  THE   GOSPELS.  49 

then  have  been  made  of  the  argument  (John  x.  34-36) 
founded  on  the  text  '  I  have  said  ye  are  gods,'  or  of  the 
assertions,  '  The  words  which  ye  hear  are  not  mine,'  and 
'  The  Father  is  greater  than  I.'  Now,  standing  in  con 
nection  with  the  claim  to  the  incommunicable  Name, 
and  with  the  statements,  'All  things  that  the  Father 
hath  are  mine,'  and  '  I  and  the  Father  are  one,'  that 
argument  and  those  assertions  cannot  be  mistaken ;  but 
they  serve  to  confirm  the  unity  of  that  revelation  of  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh  of  which  one  aspect  is  more  fully 
exhibited  in  one  part,  and  the  other  aspect  in  the  other 
part  of  the  evangelical  record  r. 

Asserting  then  the  peculiar  development  which  the 
last  Gospel  gives  to  the  doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ, 
we  also  assert  that  there  is  no  variation  from  the  original 
conception.  The  exposition  is  continuous ;  the  picture 
is  one.  From  the  beginning  of  St.  Matthew  to  the  end 
of  St.  John  it  is  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  really  the  Son 
of  Man  in  the  last  Gospel  as  in  the  first,  as  really  the 
Son  of  God  in  the  first  Gospel  as  in  the  last.  Only  we 
find,  in  passing  under  the  teaching  of  St.  John,  that  here 
the  great  mystery  shews  more  vivid  and  mature ;  that 
the  intuitions  of  it  have  become  more  conscious  and 
clear,  and  the  assertions  of  it  more  definite  and  in 
disputable  ;  that  we  have  advanced  from  the  simple 
observation  of  facts  to  the  state  of  retrospection  and 
reflection,  and  that  we  have  attained  to  the  formation 
of  a  language  fitted  to  the  highest  conceptions  of  him, 
who  is  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father,  the  Life,  and  the 
Light,  and  the  Truth,  and  the  Word  Eternal. 

Such  is  the  character  of  the  Gospel  collection,  regarded 

r  Note  V. 
E 


50  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

as  an  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ. 
As  a  scheme  characterised  by  unity  and  progress  it  has 
obviously  the  appearance  of  design  :  and  where  design 
appears  there  is  reason  to  conclude  that  it  existed. 

But  w//#.5^  design  is  this,  which  appears  not  in  the 
separate  books,  but  in  the  collection  taken  as  a  whole  ? 
The  agents  were  severed  from  each  other,  and  wrote  as 
their  respective  turns  of  mind  and  historical  circum 
stances  determined.  Where  then  was  the  presiding 
mind  which  planned  the  whole,  and,  in  qualifying  and 
employing  the  chosen  agents,  divided  to  every  man 
severally  as  he  would  ?  By  the  voice  of  the  Church  as 
a  body,  by  the  ever  accumulating  consent  of  her  several 
members,  an  unchanging  answer  comes  down  from  age 
to  age.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  here. 

Yes !  the  Spirit  was  to  testify  of  Jesus,  and  the  four 
fold  Gospel  is  his  permanent  testimony.  In  it  he  has 
provided  that  the  foundations  of  our  faith  should  be  laid 
in  the  region  where  the  foundations  of  all  human  know 
ledge  lie,  namely,  in  the  evidence  of  the  senses,  in  that 
which  '  eyes  have  seen,  ears  have  heard,  and  hands  have 
handled  of  the  Word  of  Life.'  He  has  provided  that  the 
object  of  our  faith  should  be  known  to  us  as  he  was 
known  to  those  who  saw  him,  that  he  should  be  clearly 
known  by  the  simplicity,  fully  known  by  the  variety, 
and  certainly  known  by  the  unity,  of  the  narratives 
which  give  to  the  world  the  perpetual  and  only  repre 
sentation  of  its  Redeemer.  Finally,  he  has  provided 
that  the  representation  should  be  completed  by  a  pro 
gressive  course  of  teaching,  which  first  familiarises  us 
with  the  conversation  of  our  Lord  among  men  in  its 
general  and  ordinary  aspect,  and  then  admits  us  to  the 
more  concentrated  study  of  the  glory  and  the  mystery, 


II.]  THE   GOSPELS.  51 

which    had    already    made    themselves    felt    at    every 
step. 

I  have  only  to  add,  that  the  divine  teaching  thus 
given,  even  when  viewed  separately,  has  the  appearance 
of  being  not  a  whole  scheme  ending  in  itself,  but  a  part 
of  a  larger  scheme.  I  mean  that  the  general  effect  of  the 
manifestation  which  is  made  in  the  Gospels  is  such  as 
almost  necessitates  farther  disclosures. 

One  shining  with  the  glory  of  the  Only-begotten  of 
the  Father,  but  clothed  in  the  poverties  and  infirmities 
of  man,  has  walked  before  us  in  power  and  weakness,  in 
majesty  and  woe.  He  has  come  close  to  us,  and  drawn 
us  close  to  him  ;  has  touched  every  chord  of  our  hearts  ; 
has  secured  our  implicit  trust,  and  become  the  object  of 
adoration  and  love :  then  he  has  hung  upon  a  cross,  has 
sunk  into  a  grave,  has  risen,  has  ascended,  and  is  gone. 
It  was  a  brief  dispensation,  and  is  finished  once  for  all. 
What  did  it  mean  ?  What  has  it  done  ?  What  are  our 
relations  with  him  now  ?  and  in  what  way  has  this  brief 
appearance  affected  our  position  before  God  and  the 
state  and  destiny  of  the  soul  ?  What  is  the  nature  of 
the  redemption  which  he  has  wrought,  of  the  salvation 
which  he  has  brought,  of  the  kingdom  of  God  which  he 
has  opened  to  all  believers  ? 

These  were  questions  left  for  the  Disciples  when  Jesus 
was  gone  ;  and,  when  the  reader  of  the  Gospel  story 
reaches  its  close,  these  questions  remain  for  him.  The 
Disciples  would  recall  what  their  Master  had  spoken,  in 
order  to  gather  the  whole  result  of  the  words  of  his  lips. 
The  reader  also  will  review  that  personal  teaching  of 
Christ  which  is  interwoven  with  his  visible  manifestation, 
and  will  ask  whether  it  gives  an  answer  to  the  questions 
which  the  manifestation  suggests ;  whether  it  does  so 

E  2 


52  THE  GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

fully  or  partially,  as  affinal  communication,  or  as  the 
commencement  of  information  to  be  completed  after 
wards.  This  is  the  subject  which  will  next  claim  our 
attention,  as  the  first  step  in  the  enquiry,  how  the  Chris 
tian  doctrine  was  added  to  the  Christian  facts — the 
divine  interpretation  to  the  divine  intervention. 

The  relations  between  these  two  parts  of  the  Gospel 
have  now  in  some  measure  come  into  view.  We  have 
seen  that  the  evangelical  narrative  creates  the  want  and 
gives  the  pledge  of  an  evangelical  doctrine ;  that  it  also 
deposits  its  material  and  provides  its  safeguard. 

a.  The  narrative  creates  the  want.,  in  that  it  leaves 
the  mind  of  the  reader  in  a  state  of  desire  and  expec 
tation,  since  the  stupendous  facts  which  it  recites  can 
not  but  suggest  anxious  enquiries  which  wait  for  clear 
replies,  and  vast  speculations  which  demand  a  firm 
direction. 

/3.  And  this  want  seems  to  carry  with  it  the  pledge 
that  it  is  raised  in  order  to  be  satisfied.  We  feel  sure 
that  God  has  not  given  us  the  external  manifestation  of 
his  Son,  and  then  left  the  questions  which  arise  out  of  it 
unanswered  and  the  hopes  which  it  suggests  undefined. 
In  the  fulness  and  vividness  of  the  record  of  the  facts  we 
find  an  implied  assurance,  that  their  purposes  and  results 
shall  also  be  made  clear,  and  receive  in  their  proper 
place  their  own  proper  exposition. 

y.  Again,  the  history  deposits  the  material  of  the  doc 
trine  ;  for  that  material  is  nothing  else  than  Christ 
manifest  in  the  flesh — his  incarnation,  his  obedience,  his 
holiness,  love,  grace  and  truth,  his  death  and  passion, 
his  resurrection  and  ascension,  and  then,  beyond  these, 
his  glorified  life,  and  his  coming  and  his  kingdom,  in 
which  the  past  history  finds  its  necessary  and  predicted 


II.]  THE   GOSPELS.  53 

issues.  These,  brethren,  are  the  topics  of  the  evangelical 
teaching,  and  the  constituent  elements  of  the  truth, 
seeing  that  in  this  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  all 
that  men  had  known  before  has  received  its  full  illus 
tration  and  its  final  seal,  and  that  which  they  had  not 
known  has  been  once  for  all  revealed.  All  that  is  to  be 
learned  is  comprised  within  this  circle.  The  deep  mine 
of  truth  lies  beneath  this  spot.  '  In  him  (as  the  mystery 
of  God)  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know 
ledge  s.' 

8.  Lastly,  the  narrative  provides  the  safeguard  of  the 
doctrine.  Before  we  arrive  at  the  latter  form  of  teaching, 
we  have  been  secured  against  its  possible  dangers,  hav 
ing  been  already  taught  in  the  most  effective  way  to  feel 
that  our  trust  is  not  in  a  name  which  we  learn,  but  in  a 
person  whom  we  know ;  not  in  a  scheme  of  salvation, 
but  in  a  living  Saviour.  I  cannot  say  how  strongly  I 
feel  the  value  of  the  Gospel  narrative  in  this  last  point 
of  view ;  and  I  feel  it  most  when  I  observe  the  effect  of 
other  methods,  which  have  trained  the  minds  of  disciples 
mainly  by  schemes  of  doctrine  without  the  admixture 
in  its  due  proportion  of  the  ever  fresh  and  healthful 
element  of  history.  Blessed  be  the  wisdom  of  God, 
which  has  ordered  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament 
upon  its  actual  plan,  laying  first  the  living  knowledge 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  broadest  and  safest  basis  for 
doctrine  and  instruction  in  righteousness.  The  order 
thus  observed  in  the  written  word  teaches  how  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  will  best  be  opened  out  to  every 
single  soul.  He  only  is  duly  prepared  for  more  ab 
stract  revelations  of  the  nature  of  the  redeeming  work 

8  Col.  ii.  3. 


54  THE    GOSPELS. 


and  of  its  present  and  future  issues,  in  whose  heart 
the  past  manifestation  in  the  flesh  is  clearly  reflected, 
and  who  thus  has  worthily  received  into  his  own  soul 
'the  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Son 
of  God.' 


LECTURE    III. 


THE    GOSPELS. 


HEB.  ii.  3. 

How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation,  which  at 
the  first  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord  ? 

r  ROM  age  to  age  this  question  has  fulfilled  its  office. 
Men,  trusting  in  their  immunity  from  criminal  acts,  have 
found  themselves  confronted  by  an  accusation  which 
they  could  not  answer,  and  convicted  of  guilt  of  which 
they  had  never  thought.  Still  may  this  question  reach 
one  heart  after  another  amongst  ourselves,  and  flash  the 
sense  of  sin  and  ruin  on  those  who  even  now,  and  even 
here,  are  practically  neglecting  so  great  salvation ! 

Not,  however,  on  this  question,  but  on  the  following 
words,  have  I  now  to  fix  your  attention  ;  words  which 
are  added  to  aggravate  the  sin  of  that  neglect,  and  to 
illustrate  the  certainty  of  a  corresponding  retribution  ; 
but  which  do  so  by  the  mention  of  a  fact  which  falls 
into  our  present  line  of  thought  at  the  point  which  we 
have  now  reached.  This  'so  great  salvation  began  to 
be  spoken  by  the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed  unto  us  by 
them  that  heard  him  ;  God  also  bearing  them  witness 
by  signs  and  wonders,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
according  to  his  own  will.' 


56  THE    GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

It  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord.  The  word  of  the 
old  covenant  is  repeatedly  declared  to  have  been  '  re 
ceived  by  the  disposition  of  angels a' — '  ordained  by 
angelsb> — 'spoken  by  angels0.'  The  ministering  spirits, 
the  messengers  and  servants  of  the  Lord,  were  employed 
to  introduce  the  preparatory  system.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  salvation  of  the  new  covenant  is  introduced,  not  by 
the  servants,  but  by  the  Lord  in  person.  His  introduc 
tion  of  it  was  not  confined  to  providing  its  conditions 
and  foundations,  by  the  manifestation  of  himself,  and 
by  the  redemption  which  he  wrought.  He  was  the 
messenger  and  teacher  of  this  salvation,  as  well  as  its 
author  and  giver.  It  was  fully  wrought  by  the  Lord  ; 
but,  besides  that,  it  began  to  be  'spoken''  by  the  Lord, 
its  announcement  coming  first  from  his  own  lips.  Yet 
this  personal  speaking  was  only  a  certain  stage  in  the 
course  of  its  publication.  It  began  to  be  spoken  by  the 
Lord,  (apx^v  kafiovcra  XaXflcrOa  8ta  TOV  Kvpiov,)  and  when 
he  ceased  to  speak  the  word  was  not  yet  completed.  It 
was  to  be  cleared  and  assured  to  the  world  by  those 
that  heard  him  ;  who,  having  been  educated  and  com 
missioned  by  him  for  the  purpose,  proceeded  to  preach 
the  Gospel  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven, 
and  with  adequate  proofs  of  the  co-attestation  of  God. 

This  account  of  the  personal  ministry  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  an  initiatory  stage  of  the  word  of  salvation, 
gives  me  the  subject  of  which  I  have  now  to  treat. 
Evidently  it  is  one  of  the  very  highest  importance  in 
its  bearings  on  the  subsequent  stages  of  doctrine ;  on 
which  we  shall  enter  in  a  very  different  spirit,  if  we 
consider  the  word  spoken  by  the  Lord  in  person  as  a 
finished  word,  or  if  we  regard  it  as  a  word  begun. 

a  Acts  vii.  53.  b  Gal.  iii.  19.  c  Heb.  ii.  2. 


III.]  THE    GOSPELS.  57 

As  steps  which  may  be  of  use  towards  attaining  a 
true  view  of  the  case,  I  would  lay  down  the  following 
propositions. 

First,  The  teaching  of  the  Lord  in  the  Gospels  includes 
the  substance  of  all  Christian  doctrine,  but  does  not  bear 
the  character  of  finality.  Secondly,  The  teaching  of  the 
Lord  in  the  Gospels  is  a  visibly  progressive  course,  but  on 
reaching  its  highest  point  announces  its  own  incomplete 
ness,  and  opens  another  stage  of  instruction. 

I.  i .  The  teaching  of  the  Lord  in  the  Gospels  includes 
the  substance  of  all  Christian  doctrine.  Never  was  teach 
ing  more  natural  than  his.  It  was  drawn  forth  by  occa 
sions  as  they  arose.  It  shaped  itself  to  the  character, 
the  words,  and  the  acts  of  those  whom  he  met  in  the 
highway  of  the  world.  It  borrowed  its  imagery  from  the 
circumstances  and  scenery  of  the  moment.  Such  teach 
ing  as  this  would  not  seem  likely  to  embrace  the  whole 
circle  of  truth.  We  should  expect  to  find  it  partial  and 
fragmentary  ;  full  in  some  points,  deficient  in  others, 
according  as  the  occasions  for  evoking  it  had  or  had  not 
arisen. 

Yet  surely  the  whole  course  of  the  manifestation  of 
the  Son  of  God  would  be  governed  not  by  accident, 
but  by  a  special  divine  predestination  :  and  there  must 
have  been  a  providential  appointment  of  the  fittest  oc 
casions  and  the  most  perfect  conditions,  in  order  that 
he  'who  came  from  God  to  speak  the  words  of  God 
might  adequately  accomplish  his  mission.  In  that  case 
the  general  state  of  the  religious  atmosphere  at  the  time 
of  his  appearing,  the  strongly  discriminated  develop 
ments  of  opinion  in  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  the  con 
dition  of  individuals  who  came  across  his  path,  the 
scenes  and  circumstances  in  which  he  met  them,  were 


58  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

all  prepared  by  divine  governance,  to  further  the  effec 
tual  fulfilment  of  his  mission  as  the  teacher  of  men. 
Thus  it  came  to  pass,  that  not  only  in  set  discourses 
(which  seldom  occur),  but  in  transient  conversations  and 
sudden  replies,  in  words  drawn  forth  by  the  appeals  of 
the  wretched,  by  the  temptations  of  enemies  or  by  the 
errors  of  disciples,  in  strong  denunciations  of  the  wicked 
or  in  tender  consolations  of  the  weak,  the  mind  of  Christ 
has  been  expressed  on  all  points,  and  the  store  of  divine 
sentences  is  full. 

Shall  I  enter  into  detail,  and  begin  to  shew  how  the 
whole  argument  on  justification  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Romans  is  involved  in  the  assertion,  that  '  the  Son  of 
Man  was  lifted  up,  that  he  that  believeth  on  him  should 
not  perish  but  have  everlasting  lifed'  ? — how  the  expo 
sition  of  the  Christian  standing  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  is  comprehended  in  the  words,  '  The  servant 
abideth  not  in  the  house  for  ever,  but  the  son  abideth 
ever.  If  the  son  make  you  free  ye  shall  be  free  in 
deed6'? — how  the  sacrificial  doctrine  of  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  is  implied  in  all  its  parts  by  the  words, 
'  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  covenant  which  is  shed 
for  you  and  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sinsf'? 
Though  such  proof  in  detail  is  here  impossible,  it 
would  yet  be  easy  to  shew  that  every  doctrine  ex 
panded  in  the  Epistles  roots  itself  in  some  pregnant 
saying  in  the  Gospels ;  and  that  the  first  intimation 
of  every  truth,  revealed  to  the  holy  Apostles  by  the 
Spirit,  came  first  from  the  lips  of  the  Son  of  Man.  In 
each  case  the  later  revelation  may  enlarge  the  earlier, 
may  shew  its  meaning  and  define  its  application,  but 

(1  John  iii.  14.  15.  °  Ibid.  viii.  35,  36.  f  Matt.  xxvi.  28. 


III.]  THE    GOSPELS.  59 

the  earlier  revelation  stands  behind  it  still,  and  we  owe 
our  first  knowledge  of  every  part  of  the  new  covenant 
to  those  personal  communications  in  which  the  salva 
tion  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord. 

In  all  things  he  was  to  have  the  pre-eminence  (kv  -nan-iv 
avTosTTptoTfv&v),  in  speaking  as  well  as  in  acting,  not  only 
as  the  Life,  but  also  as  the  Light  of  men.  The  more  we 
study  the  records  of  that  short  ministry  in  the  flesh,  the 
more  we  are  impressed  with  the  fact  that  all  the  past 
and  all  the  future  are  gathered  up  in  it.  Past  inspired 
teaching  here  finds  its  meaning  interpreted  and  its  au 
thority  sealed,  whilst  (so  to  speak)  the  several  chapters 
of  future  inspired  teaching  are  opened  by  pregnant  sum 
maries  and  certified  by  anticipatory  sanctions.  That  is 
indeed  a  time  'of  large  discourse,  looking  before  and 
after,'  and  the  words  of  Prophets  on  the  one  side,  and  of 
Apostles  on  the  other,  are  for  ever  justified  and  main 
tained  by  the  words  of  him  who  came  between  them. 

There  was  nothing  then  on  the  lips  of  the  preachers 
of  the  Gospel,  but  what  had  been  'begun  to  be  spoken' 
by  its  first  preacher ;  and  in  following  to  their  utmost 
the  words  of  the  Apostles,  we  are  still  within  the  com 
pass  of  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

2.  Yet  those  words  do  not  bear  the  character  of  finality. 
The  doctrine  delivered  in  the  Gospels  appears  to  need, 
and  to  promise,  further  explanations,  combinations,  and 
developments.  The  character  of  that  ministry  on  the 
whole  is  introductory.  It  is  so  in  \tsform,  in  its  met/tod, 
and  in  its  substance. 

a.  Our  Lord's  general  teaching,  in  regard  to  its  form, 
is  cast  in  the  mould  of  parable  or  proverb.  So  it  appears 
more  especially  in  the  first  three  Gospels  as  compared 
with  the  fourth  :  and  it  is  agreed  on  all  hands  that  the 


60  THE  GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

former  represent  the  ordinary  course  of  the  teaching  of 
Jesus ;  and  that  the  latter  purposely  collects  into  one 
view  those  stronger  assertions  of  divine  mysteries,  which 
were  made  on  particular  occasions,  and  which,  when  thus 
combined,  form  for  us  a  more  advanced  stage  of  reve 
lation.  Yet  in  St.  John  also  the  characteristic  form  of 
parable  continues,  though  its  visible  diminution  corre 
sponds  with  the  increased  intensity  of  revealing  light. 

There  can  be  no  need  to  exhibit  the  fact  of  this  pre 
vailing  character  of  our  Lord's  discourse.  It  is  to  be 
noticed,  not  only  in  the  large  amount  of  professed 
parables,  but  in  the  general  habit  of  proverbial  sayings, 
that  is,  sayings  which  glance  by  us,  as  condensed  and 
momentary  parables,  suggesting  much  that  it  would  take 
long  to  tell,  or,  at  least,  sayings  which  have  more  or  less 
the  shape  and  air  of  proverbs,  complete  in  themselves, 
terse  and  pointed,  fashioned  for  common  memory  and 
common  use,  meaning  more  than  they  say,  and,  by 
strong  antithesis  or  seeming  paradox,  fitted  to  arouse 
reflection,  and  to  fix  on  the  mind  some  principle  of 
thought  or  conduct.  This  characteristic  of  our  Lord's 
teaching  does  not  exist  in  that  of  his  servants.  It  is 
peculiar  and  distinctive :  and  not  without  reason,  for  it 
falls  in  with  that  character  of  germinating  fulness  which 
has  been  already  ascribed  to  the  personal  ministry  of 
Christ ;  and  not  less  plainly  with  that  character  of 
initiation  which  is  now  to  be  asserted. 

It  is  of  the  essence  of  proverbial  speech  that  it 
detaches  itself  from  particular  occasions,  that  it  has  a 
capacity  for  various  applications,  and  a  fitness  for  per 
manent  use,  and  embraces  large  meaning  within  narrow . 
limits.  It  therefore  fitted  well  the  lips  which  were  to 
utter  the  great  principles  of  Christian  thought,  and  to 


III.]  THE   GOSPELS.  6 1 

leave  them  amongst  men  for  all  times  and  occasions. 
Yet  this  form  of  teaching  belongs  to  the  introduction  of 
knowledge.  It  seems  intended  to  set  the  mind  working, 
and  to  rouse  the  spirit  of  enquiry  by  partial  or  disguised 
discoveries  of  truth.  '  To  them  that  are  without,'  said 
our  Lord,  '  all  these  things  are  done  in  parables  =  ;'  inti 
mating  that  the  use  of  that  form  of  instruction  is 
appropriate  to  the  preliminary  and  probationary  stage. 
In  its  fullest  degree  it  belongs  originally  to  those  that 
are  without,  though,  by  means  of  light  afterwards 
afforded,  it  continues  to  minister  large  instruction  to 
those  that  are  within.  To  the  multitude  our  Lord's 
teaching  was  mainly  of  this  character  :  to  his  Disciples 
it  was  obviously  less  so.  To  them  '  it  was  given  to  know 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  to  others  in 
parables h.'  Yet  to  them  also,  through  all  their  time  of 
training,  we  see  that  this  mode  of  speech  is  largely  used, 
and  when  the  personal  intercourse  is  about  to  close,  they 
receive  the  assurance  that  the  teaching  of  the  future  will 
herein  differ  from  that  of  the  past :  '  These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you  in  proverbs,  but  the  time  cometh  when 
I  shall  no  more  speak  unto  you  in  proverbs,  but  I  shall 
shew  you  plainly  of  the  Father1.'  The  words  remain  as 
a  sufficient  testimony  that  the  peculiar  character  of 
language,  in  which  the  salvation  began  to  be  spoken  by 
the  Lord,  is  a  mark  of  an  introductory  stage,  and,  so  far 
as  it  prevails,  is  both  a  sign  that  the  time  for  shewing 
plainly  is  not  yet  come,  and  a  pledge  that  it  is  to  follow. 
/3.  As  the  form  of  the  teaching  leads  to  this  conclusion, 
so  also  does  its  metJiod.  It  is  seemingly  to  a  great  degree 

8  Mark  iv.  n.  \Ktivois  rots  «£<u — yet  certainly  not  to  keep  them  without, 
but  as  the  appropriate  means  to  draw  them  within. 

b  Luke  viii.  10.  '  John  xvi.  25. 


62  THE    GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

a  method  of  chances  and  occasions  ;  carried  on  by  words 
suited  to  the  moment,  by  separate  addresses,  or  replies 
to  particular  persons,  and  by  explanations  added  to 
particular  acts.  It  is  moreover  in  these  communications, 
rather  than  in  the  deliberate  discourses,  that  the  higher 
revelations  of  his  Gospel  are  for  the  most  part  contained. 
When  'he  opened  his  mouth  and  taught'  in  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  he  delivered  to  those  who  were  entering 
his  kingdom  the  great  principles  of  moral  righteousness. 
But  it  is  from  words  dropped  as  it  were  in  a  private 
conversation  by  night,  or  in  collision  with  the  provoca 
tions  of  unbelievers,  and  amid  sighs  or  sorrows  by  the 
grave  of  a  friend,  that  we  derive  our  plainest  assurances 
of  the  mysteries  of  his  salvation.  While  we  gather  up  the 
precious  things  of  his  ordinary  discourses,  we  are  made 
sensible  that  other  truths  are  implied,  deeper  than  those 
which  are  announced,  and  from  time  to  time  the  words 
which  assert  those  deeper  truths  break  with  a  kind  of 
suddenness  on  our  ears.  It  would  hardly  appear  likely 
that  such  a  mode  of  teaching  was  intended  to  be  final, 
rather  we  should  expect  it  to  prove  (as  in  fact  it  did)  the 
prefatory  announcement  of  a  coming  system  of  truth,  in 
which  the  several  sayings  would  discover  their  cohesion 
and  the  condensed  assertions  would  expand  into  their 
fulness. 

y.  If  the  form  and  method  of  the  personal  teaching  of 
Jesus  suggest  the  conclusion,  that  it  was  meant  to  be, 
not  the  whole  of  his  teaching  to  men,  but  only  the  initia 
tory  stage  of  it,  that  conclusion  becomes  more  sure  when 
we  come  to  consider  the  substance  of  the  doctrine  itself. 

The  doctrine  bears  a  double  character.  It  is,  first,  the 
clearing,  restoring,  and  perfecting  of  truth  already  known ; 
and  it  is,  secondly,  the  revealing  of  a  mysterious  economy 


III.]  THE  GOSPELS.  63 

which  had  not  yet  been  divulged.  It  is,  I  suppose, 
obvious  to  every  reader  of  the  Gospels,  that  the  doctrine 
contained  in  them  is  much  more  full  and  explicit  in  the 
first  of  these  characters  than  it  is  in  the  second  ;  that  all 
which  belongs  to  human  duty  and  character  comes  out 
habitually  to  view  in  the  clearest  light,  while  the  dis 
coveries  of  that  secret  scheme  of  things,  by  which  the 
divine  purposes  are  worked  out,  are  either  made  by 
implication,  or  are  marked  by  a  certain  brevity  and  re 
serve.  This  fact  is  generally  recognised,  and  especially 
by  those  minds  which  shrink  from  the  more  mysterious 
parts  of  revelation.  These  fall  back  upon  the  Lord's  own 
teaching  in  the  Gospels,  as  containing  more  to  which 
they  can  cordially  assent,  or  at  least  less  which  troubles 
and  perplexes  them,  than  they  find  in  the  writings  of  his 
followers.  All  that  troubles  and  perplexes  them  is 
indeed  there  ;  but  the  restricted  measure  of  its  exposi 
tion  allows  them  more  easily  to  ignore  its  presence. 
Such  men  fly  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  linger 
over  parables  and  discourses,  which  instruct  us  in  the 
great  original  truths  of  the  fatherhood  of  God,  of  heart 
felt  prayer,  of  love  and  forgiveness,  of  lowliness  and 
truth,  of  obedience  and  self-sacrifice,  of  confidence  in 
pardoning  mercy,  and  of  faith  (yet  only  general  and 
preliminary)  in  him  whom  God  hath  sent. 

It  is  indeed  true  that  in  passing  through  the  synoptic 
Gospels  we  meet  with  few  express  and  definite  assertions 
of  the  real  nature  and  effects  of  the  mediatorial  work  of 
Christ ;  and  if  we  drop  out  of  notice  those  few  strong 
sayings,  and  are  content  to  take  the  lowest  meaning  of 
every  expression  that  sounds  ambiguous,  and  are  reso 
lutely  insensible  to  the  suggestion  of  typical  miracles  and 
to  the  implications  contained  in  the  whole  history,  we 


64  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

may  perhaps .  arrive  at  the  Gospel  of  St.  John  with  no 
higher  convictions  than  were  expressed  by  the  enquirer, 
whom  we  there  find  uttering  the  dubious  acknowledg 
ment,  '  Master,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come 
from  God,'  (on  airb  0eoS  eA.?/Ai;#a?  8t8a(T/caAos). 

But  having  acknowledged  this  much,  we  must  from 
this  point  acknowledge  much  more.  We  find  that  the 
Gospel  on  which  we  have  entered  has  collected  for  us 
the  scattered  sayings,  in  which,  from  time  to  time,  our 
Lord  asserted  his  highest  offices,  and  opened  the  mystery 
of  his  work.  One  after  another  the  great  testimonies 
concerning  himself  fall  on  our  ears  :  yet,  in  regard  to 
every  one  of  them,  we  are  made  to  feel  that  the  intima 
tions  given  are  at  the  time  beyond  the  apprehensions  of 
the  hearers,  and  this  not  only  on  account  of  the  dulness 
of  the  particular  persons,  but  because  the  testimonies 
imply  events  which  have  not  yet  happened,  and  are 
fragments  of  a  revelation  for  which  the  hour  is  not  yet 
come.  Glance  through  a  few  of  these  sayings : — The 
heavens  open,  and  the  angels  ascending  and  descending 
on  the  Son  of  Man  k ;  the  Temple  destroyed  and  raised 
up  again  in  three  days1 ;  the  birth  of  water  and  the 
Spirit™ ;  the  Son  of  Man  who  came  from  heaven,  who 
goes  to  heaven,  and  who  is  in  heavenn ;  the  lifting  up 
like  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  that  men  may  not 
perish0 ;  the  water  which  he  will  give,  springing  up  into 
everlasting  life p ;  the  eating  the  flesh  and  drinking  the 
blood  as  the  means  of  everlasting  life  and  of  being  raised 
up  at  the  last  dayq.  These  sayings,  and  many  others 
like  them,  are  uttered  to  hearers  whose  perplexity  is 
made  apparent,  and  are  at  the  time  left  unexplained,  to 

k  John  i.  51.  !  Ibid.  ii.  19.  m  Ibid.  iii.  5.  n  Ibid.  13. 

0  Ibid.  14.  P  Ibid.  iv.  14.  M  Ibid.  vi.  54. 


III.]  THE   GOSPELS.  65 

await  the  light  which  they  are  to  receive  from  future 
events  and  later  discoveries.  This  (if  I  may  so  call  it) 
anticipatory  character  of  our  Lord's  teaching,  with  regard 
to  the  work  which  he  came  to  fulfil,  strikes  us  most 
forcibly,  when  we  compare  his  mode  of  speaking  on  the 
subject  with  the  full  and  explicit  language  which  becomes 
familiar  to  us  in  the  writings  of  his  Apostles. 

And  if  this  account  of  one  part  of  his  teaching  be 
true,  an  evident  consequence  follows  in  regard  to  the 
other  part.  Grant  that  the  discoveries  of  the  redeeming 
work  of  Christ  are  in  any  measure  restricted  and  de 
ferred,  and  it  follows  that  a  large  part  of  the  teaching 
on  human  duty  must  be  restricted  and  deferred  in  pro 
portion.  Instructions  in  faith  in  himself  must  wait  for 
their  perfecting,  until  the  things  to  be  believed  concern 
ing  him  have  grown  clear.  Instructions  in  our  relations 
to  God  (whether  bearing  on  the  hope  of  a  penitent  or 
on  the  confidence  of  a  child)  have  not  attained  their 
completion,  while  the  grounds  of  forgiveness  and  ac 
ceptance  are  in  any  manner  obscure.  Finally,  instruc 
tions  on  duty  and  character  must  be  deficient  in  some 
of  their  most  important  elements,  while  the  motives 
which  flow  from  redemption  cannot  be  assumed  as 
recognised,  because  Jesus  has  not  yet  died  ;  while  the 
life  in  the  Spirit,  and  the  power  of  the  resurrection,  and 
the  citizenship  in  heaven,  cannot  be  realised,  because 
Jesus  has  not  yet  revived,  risen,  and  ascended. 

In  illustration  of  these  assertions  I  will  instance  the 
treatment  of  the  two  doctrines  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
and  the  success  of  prayer.  We  know  how  intimately  in 
the  evangelical  system  these  two  doctrines  are  associated 
with  the  personal  agency  of  our  Redeemer,  the  one  with 
his  atoning  sacrifice,  the  other  with  his  priestly  mediation. 

F 


66  THE  GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

But  it  is  certain  that  in  his  own  teaching  on  earth  they 
are  not  so  treated.  Other  truths  concerning  them  are 
brought  forward  when  these  are  absent. 

Take  the  first  example.  '  Forgive  and  ye  shall  be 
forgiven11;'  'Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven,  for 
she  loved  muck*;'  'I  forgave  thee  all  that  debt  because 
thou  desircdst  me1 ;'  '  He  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying, 
God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner^l  and  then  '  went  down 
to  his  house  justified  rather  than  the  other.'  Lastly,  in 
the  great  parable  of  forgiveness  the  erring  son  simply 
returns,  and  the  father  falls  on  his  neck  and  kisses  him. 
'  Father,'  says  he,  '  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and 
before  thee/  and  straightway  he  is  clothed  with  the  best 
robe,  and  has  the  ring  on  his  hand,  and  the  shoes  on  his 
feet.  '  He  was  dead  and  is  alive  again  :  he  was  lost,  and 
is  found.'  There  is  no  mention  of  any  intercessor,  no 
typical  hint  of  sacrifice  or  other  atonement,  no  condition 
anywhere  supposed,  but  what  is  included  in  'because 
thou  desiredst  me,'  or  in  the  presence  of  penitence  and 
tenderness  of  heart,  and  the  absence  of  an  unforgiving 
spirit  towards  others.  Yet  at  other  times  there  fall  from 
the  Lord's  own  lips  some  few  words  at  least,  which 
reveal  himself  as  the  channel,  and  his  blood  as  the  pur 
chase,  of  the  forgiveness  which  he  preaches  so  freely. 
'The  Son  of  Man  has  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sinsx;' 
'My  blood  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sinsx.' 
These  sayings  give  a  momentary  insight  into  the  depths 
of  the  subject,  and  disclose  something  of  the  mysterious 
means  by  which  forgiveness  has  been  procured,  and 
through  which,  when  once  revealed,  it  must  be  sought. 
It  is  evident  that  such  a  revelation  cannot  remain  as  a 

1  Luke  vi.  37.  "  Ibid.  vii.  47.  *  Matt,  xviii.  32. 

u  Luke  xviii.  13.  *  Matt.  ix.  6.  y  Ibid.  xxvi.  28. 


III.]  THE   GOSPELS.  6^ 

mere  associated  idea,  that  it  must  become  fundamental, 
and  give  a  peculiar  and  distinctive  character  to  the 
Christian  doctrine  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  But  we  see 
that  it  is  not  wrought  out  in  the  Gospels.  Must  we  not 
then  expect  that  this  will  yet  be  done?  and  that,  in 
some  future  stage  of  divine  teaching,  we  shall  find  the 
word  'Forgive  and  ye  shall  be  forgiven'  elevated  and 
opened  into  '  Forgiving  one  another  as  God  for  Christ's 
sake  hath  forgiven  you2,'  and  the  hope  of  forgiveness 
placed  for  ever  on  its  true  basis  of  faith  in  him,  '  in 
whom  we  have  redemption  tJirongh  Ids  blood^  even  the 
forgiveness  of  sinsa'? 

Again,  take  the  doctrine  of  acceptance  and  success  in 
prayer.  How  earnest  and  how  strong  are  our  Lord's  de 
clarations  on  this  subject !  It  is  needless  to  rehearse  them, 
but  these  precious  assurances  are  here  connected  only 
with  the  earnestness,  importunity,  and  simplicity  of  the 
worshippers,  and  with  a  general  faith  in  the  Father's  will 
to  give  good  things  to  those  that  ask  him.  We  might  be 
ready  to  say,  '  The  whole  instruction  amounts  to  this, — 
Dismiss  all  heathen  and  all  Pharisaic  notions  on  this 
subject.  Go  simply  to  God  as  your  Father.  Ask,  and 
ye  shall  receive.'  Yet  he  who  has  taught  us,  before  he 
ceases  to  speak,  adds  something  more.  At  the  highest 
point  of  his  teaching  we  hear  him  say,  '  No  man  cometh 
unto  the  Father  btit  by  meb  /'  'If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in 
my  name  I  will  do  itc.'  Here  is  an  immense  accession 
of  revelation,  which,  when  fully  comprehended,  must  give 
its  character  to  the  whole  Christian  doctrine  and  to  the 
whole  Christian  habit  of  prayer.  But  if  we  are  ever  to 
see  this  consequence  wrought  out  by  divine  teaching, 

z  Eph.  iv.  32.  »  Ibid.  i.  7- 

b  John  xiv.  6.  c  Ibid.  xvi.  23. 


68  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

we  must  find  it  in  some  future  stage  of  instruction,  in 
which  the  access  to  the  Father  by  the  Son,  and  the  new 
and  living  way  which  he  has  consecrated  for  us,  and  the 
offices  of  the  High  Priest  over  the  house  of  God,  shall 
be  recognised  as  the  true  grounds  of  the  full  assurance  of 
faith,  for  him  who  draws  near  to  God  in  prayer. 

The  argument  then  stands  thus.  The  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel  includes  special  revelations  which  must  from  their 
nature  become  the  foundations  of  moral  and  spiritual  life. 
But  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospels  they  are  not  so  treated, 
nor  indeed  could  they  be,  since  the  revelations  them 
selves  are  chiefly  anticipatory  allusions  to  facts  which 
have  not  yet  taken  place.  In  these  revelations  the  teach 
ing  culminates  rather  than  commences.  They  are  the 
point  at  which  it  arrives,  not  that  from  which  it  starts. 
The  doctrine  does  not  therefore  bear  the  character  of 
finality.  We  expect  another  stage,  in  which  these 
special  revelations  shall  be,  not  only  cleared  and  com 
bined,  but  shall  hold  tinak  fundamental  place  in  the  whole 
system  of  instruction  which  they  tend  inevitably  to 
assume.  And  thus,  from  the  consideration  of  the  sub 
stance  and  proportions  of  the  doctrine  in  the  Gospels, 
as  well  from  the  observation  of  its  form  and  method,  I 
conclude  that  I  am  here  only  in  an  initiatory  stage  of 
divine  teaching,  and  that  another  part  of  the  course 
must  lie  before  me. 

II.  But  I  am  not  left  to  draw  this  conclusion.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Gospels  not  only  looks  as  if  it  were  to  be 
followed  by  another  stage  of  teaching,  but  declares  that 
such  is  the  fact.  I  come  to  my  second  proposition,  that 
the  personal  teaching  of  the  Lord  is  a  visibly  progressive 
system,  which,  on  reaching  its  liigliest  point,  declares  its  oivn 
incompleteness,  and  refers  us  to  anotJier  stage  of  instruction. 


III.]  THE   GOSPELS.  69 

i.  Place  side  by  side  the  first  discourse  in  St.  Matthew 
and  the  last  in  St.  John,  and  the  truth  of  the  first  part 
of  this  proposition  is  at  once  apparent,  namely,  that  the 
personal  teaching  of  the  Lord  is  a  visibly  progressive 
system.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  at  the  opening  of 
the  ministry,  and  the  Discourse  in  the  Upper  Room  deli 
vered  at  its  close,  are  separated  from  each  other,  not  only 
by  difference  of  circumstance  and  feeling,  but  as  implying 
on  the  part  of  the  hearers  wholly  different  stages  in  the 
knowledge  of  truth.  There  is  a  greater  interval  between 
these  two  discourses  than  thei^  is  between  the  teaching 
of  the  Gospels  as  a  whole  and  that  of  the  Epistles. 

The  first  discourse  is  the  voice  of  a  minister  of  the 
circumcision  clearing  and  confirming  the  divine  teaching 
given  to  the  fathers.  Blessings,  laws,  and  promises  are 
alike  founded  on  the  Old  Testament  language,  which 
the  speaker  at  the  same  time  adopts  and  interprets. 
He  keeps  in  a  line  with  the  past,  while  he  makes  a  clear 
step  in  advance.  He  gives,  not  so  much  a  new  code,  as 
a  new  edition  of  the  old  one.  The  word  of  authority, 
'  /  say  unto  you,'  is  directed  not  to  destroy  but  to  fulfil. 
It  is  the  authority  of  the  original  law-giver,  clearing  up 
his  own  intentions,  and  disallowing  the  perversions  of 
men.  As  plainly  as  the  first  discourse  links  itself  to  the 
past,  so  plainly  does  the  last  discourse  reach  on  to  the 
future.  If  the  one  reverts  to  what  was  said  in  old  time, 
the  other  casts  the  mind  forward  on  a  day  of  knowledge 
which  is  dawning  and  a  new  teacher  who  is  coming.  In 
passing  from  the  one  point  to  the  other,  we  have  left 
behind  us  the  language  and  associations  of  the  Old 
Testament :  we  have  entered  a  new  world  of  thought, 
and  hear  a  new  language  which  is  being  created  for  its 
exigencies.  What  makes  the  thought  and  the  language 


70  THE  GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

new  ?  One  single  fact ;  namely,  that  the  true  relation  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  to  the  spiritual  life  of  his  people  is  now 
in  a  measure  revealed.  '  Ye  believe  in  God,  believe  also 
in  me :' — this  is  the  keynote  of  the  whole  address.  And 
in  the  same  strain  it  continues,  '  No  man  cometh  unto 
the  Father  but  by  me  ;'  '  Abide  in  me  and  I  in  you  ;' 
'  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing.'  How  foreign  would 
such  words  have  been  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount ! 
We  are  not  unprepared  for  them  here,  though  even  here 
they  mean  more  than  can  be  yet  understood.  I  do  not 
speak  of  single  expressions,  but  of  the  whole  doctrine  on 
faith  and  prayer,  and  love,  and  service,  and  hope,  and 
life.  All  subjects  have  here  assumed  their  distinctively 
Christian  character :  they  are  ' in  Clirist  Jesus'  The 
faith  fixes  itself  on  him,  and  on  the  Father  through  him. 
The  prayer  is  '  in  his  name."1  The  love  is  a  response  to 
his  love.  The  service  is  the  fruit  of  union  with  him. 
The  hope  is  that  of  being  with  him  where  he  is ;  to  abide 
in  him  is  the  secret  of  life,  safety,  fruitfulness,  and  joy  ; 
and  the  guiding  power  of  this  new  state  is  not  the  ex 
planation  of  a  law,  but  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the 
Comforter.  Compare  these  ideas  with  those  which  cha 
racterise  the  earliest  Gospel  teaching,  and  you  see  how 
far  you  have  been  carried  from  the  point  at  which  you 
started.  You  see  how  much  must  have  intervened  in 
the  gradual  revelation  of  Christ,  and  in  the  gradual 
advance  of  his  teaching,  before  such  a  stage  of  doctrine 
could  be  reached. 

And  much  had  intervened.  To  shew  how  much,  it 
would  be  necessary  to  trace  through  all  the  Gospel 
record  the  unfolding  of  the  salvation,  as  it  began  to  be 
spoken  by  the  Lord,  and  the  steps  by  which  it  was 
brought  about,  that  the  Master  and  the  disciples  should 


in.]  THE   GOSPELS.  71 

become  the  Saviour  and  the  believers,  and  that  the  ex 
ternal  hearing  and  following  should  pass  into  the  mys 
terious  relations  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  union.  It  is 
enough  to  recall  the  fact  that,  through  all  the  works  of 
mercy,  the  corrections  of  error,  and  the  instructions  in 
righteousness,  a  deeper  lesson  yet  is  sinking  into  the 
minds  of  his  hearers,  in  the  growing  sense  of  a  profound 
and  ineffable  relation  borne  by  him  to  the  human  race 
and  to  every  human  soul.  He  makes  it  felt,  that  he 
stands  before  men  as  the  one  object  on  which  faith  must 
fasten,  as  the  one  who  has  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins, 
who  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost,  who 
gives  rest  to  the  heavy  laden,  as  the  giver  of  eternal  life, 
as  the  quickener  of  whom  he  will,  as  the  bread  which 
came  down  from  heaven  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof  and 
not  die,  as  giving  his  flesh  for  the  life  of  the  world,  his 
life  a  ransom  for  many,  his  blood  as  the  blood  of  the  new 
covenant  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.  Testi 
monies  like  these  gather  as  we  advance  ;  and  while  the 
Lord  in  his  ordinary  teaching  fulfils  his  mission  as  the 
expounder  of  the  laws,  and  the  example  of  the  character, 
and  the  prophet  of  the  destinies  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
he  discloses  at  the  same  time  by  these  scattered  sayings 
a  far  deeper  and  more  fundamental  relation  than  these 
to  that  kingdom  as  a  whole  and  to  all  its  individual 
members. 

But  while  these  disclosures  are  yet  in  progress  they 
are  suddenly  cut  off.  The  ministry  must  end  :  the  hour 
is  come.  We  enter  the  upper  room,  and  attend  the  last 
discourse,  which  is  the  close  and  the  consummation  of 
the  teaching  of  the  Lord  on  earth. 

2.  We  turn  then  to  that  portion  of  the  word  of  God 
which  extends  from  the  beginning  of  the  Hth  to  the  end 


72  THE  GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

of  the  i /th  chapter  of  St.  John.  There,  in  words  most 
simple  but  unfathomably  deep,  addressed  first  to  men 
and  then  to  God,  there  flow  forth  the  thoughts  which 
belong  to  that  hour.  Oh  tender  solemn  words  !  oh  words 
of  majesty  and  love,  of  divine  sorrow  and  joy  !  words  for 
the  saddest  moments,  the  sublimest  moments,  the  last 
moments  of  life !  Not  in  the  cold  spirit  of  one  who 
would  prove  a  point  do  I  turn  to  them  now,  though  it 
be  indeed  to  decide  a  question.  But  what  a  question ! 
Not  one  affecting  some  single  doctrine  which  some  text 
in  the  discourse  may  touch,  but  one  affecting  all  the 
doctrine  before  and  after,  all  that  began  to  be  spoken  by 
the  Lord  and  was  confirmed  to  us  by  them  that  heard 
him.  It  is  the  question  whether  the  point  which  we 
have  reached  is  final  or  central :  whether  the  true  teach 
ing  of  God  here  reaches  a  close  or  effects  a  transition. 
There  is  no  uncertainty  in  the  answer,  for  to  give  that 
answer  is  one  main  purpose  of  the  discourse.  The  Lord 
speaks  to  the  occasion.  He  would  have  it  understood 
to  what  point  in  the  progress  of  his  teaching  we  are 
come,  and  what  is  the  relation  between  that  which  is 
now  ending  and  that  which  is  about  to  begin. 

At  the  first  glance  it  is  plain  that  the  character  of  the 
discourse  is  distinctly  transitional,  that  it  announces  not 
an  end,  but  a  change ;  and  that,  in  closing  one  course  of 
teaching,  it  at  the  same  time  opens  another.  As  the 
first  discourse  linked  the  personal  teaching  of  Christ  to 
the  Law  and  the  Prophets  which  went  before  it,  so  the 
last  discourse  links  that  teaching  to  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit  which  is  to  come  after  it.  The  fact  on  which 
the  first  is  founded  is  that  the  Law  of  God  has  been 
given  to  men  as  the  guide  to  righteousness :  the  fact  on 
which  the  last  is  founded  is  that  Jesus  himself  has  now 


III.]  THE   GOSPELS.  73 

been  presented  to  men  as  the  object  of  faith.  And 
as  it  was  intimated  in  the  one  case  that  the  lesson  of 
righteousness  was  yet  incomplete,  and  was  to  be  per 
fected  by  Jesus  himself,  so  it  is  intimated  in  the  other 
that  the  lesson  of  faith  is  yet  incomplete,  and  is  to  be 
perfected  by  the  Holy  Ghost  whom  he  will  send. 

First,  the  narrative  is  careful  to  shew  us  that  this 
lesson  of  faith  had  been  imperfectly  learned.  The  au 
ditors  are  the  men  whom  the  Lord  had  chosen  and 
trained,  and  who  had  watched  most  closely  the  whole 
course  of  his  manifestation.  Yet,  as  he  proceeds,  what 
do  we  hear  ?  '  Lord,  we  know  not  whither  thou  goest, 
and  how  can  we  know  the  way?'  '  Shew  us  the  Father 
and  it  sufficeth  us.'  '  How  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest 
thyself  unto  us  and  not  unto  the  world  ?'  'What  is  this 
that  he  saith  ?  we  cannot  tell  what  he  saith.'  By  such 
voices  of  faint  and  partial  apprehension  or  of  sore  per 
plexity  we  learn  how  far  the  teaching  of  the  past  had 
gone  with  them,  in  regard  to  those  truths  which  were 
being  then  set  forth. 

But  it  might  be,  notwithstanding,  that  the  course  of 
divine  instruction  ivas  complete,  and  that  events  yet  to 
come  and  reflection  on  the  past  would  be  sufficient  to  open 
to  them  its  meaning.  Not  thus  does  the  Lord  reply. 
Mingled  with  sad  reflections,  that  he  has  been  so  long 
time  with  them  and  that  yet  they  have  not  known  him, 
he  gives  the  consoling  assurance  that  their  instruction  in 
the  truth  is  not  yet  ended.  A  part  of  it  is  over,  but  only 
a  part ;  and  a  part  which  had  its  hindrances  as  well  as 
its  helps.  The  presence  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  had  been 
a  help  to  what  they  had  already  learned  ;  it  was  a 
hindrance  to  what  they  had  now  to  learn  d.  While  he 
i  See  Note  VI. 


74  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

sat  there  before  them  in  the  body,  it  was  hard  to  under 
stand  the  mystery  of  a  spiritual  union.  That  hindrance 
is  to  be  removed  ;  '  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
away.' 

Then  the  teaching  which  he  had  given  them  must 
close.  Yes,  but  another  teaching  shall  be  substituted  ; 
which  shall  be  also  /as,  though  suited  to  the  new  relations 
which  he  shall  bear  to  them  in  his  glorified  state.  '  It  is 
expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away,  for  if  I  go  not  away 
the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you,  but  if  I  depart,  I 
will  send  him  unto  you.'  Then  follow  those  precious 
promises  of  the  coming  and  office  and  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  expand  their  fulfilment  over  the  whole 
Church  and  throughout  all  ages.  But  while  it  is  clear 
that,  in  the  way  of  extension  and  of  inference,  many  of 
the  words  allow  and  invite  this  wider  application,  it  is  far 
more  evident  that  in  their  first  intention  they  are  directly 
addressed  to  those  who  heard  them,  and  meant  to  meet 
the  question  of  the  particular  crisis  which  had  then 
arrived  e. 

c  '  I  will  pray  the  Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter,  that 
he  may  abide  with  you  for  ever ;  even  the  Spirit  of  truth  ;  whom  the  world 
cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not,  neither  knoweth  him :  but  ye 
know  him,  for  he  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.  I  will  not  leave 
you  comfortless,  I  will  come  unto  you.'  John  xiv.  16-18.  'At  that  day 
ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I  in  you.'  ver. 
20.  'These  things  have  I  spoken  to  you,  while  abiding  with  you;  but  the 
Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my 
name,  he  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remem 
brance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you.'  ver.  25,  26.  'When  the  Com 
forter  is  come,  he  shall  testify  of  me.'  xv.  26.  '  He  shall  reprove  the  world 
of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment :  of  sin,  because  they  believe 
not  on  me ;  of  righteousness,  because  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see  me  no 
more  :  of  judgment,  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged.  I  have  yet 
many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now.  Howbeit, 
when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  shall  guide  you  into  all  truth ;  for 
he  shall  not  speak  of  himself,  but  whatsoever  he  shall  hear  that  shall  he 
speak ;  and  he  shall  shew  you  things  to  come.  He  shall  glorify  me,  for  he 
shall  receive  of  mine,  and  shall  shew  it  unto  you.'  xvi.  8-14. 


III.]  THE   GOSPELS. 


No  more  distinct  assurance  could  have  been  given  that 
those  future  teachers  of  the  world  were  not  then  at  the 
end,  but  only  at  a  certain  point  in  the  progress  of  their 
education,  and  that  a  teaching  remained  for  them,  which 
should  both  continue  and  surpass  that  which  they  had 
already  received. 

But  had  they  not  heard  the  truth  from  their  Lord  ? 
Yes  ;  and  it  was  to  be  the  office  of  the  Spirit  to  recall  to 
their  minds  the  truth  which  they  had  heard,  as  the  text 
and  substance  of  their  future  knowledge.  '  He  shall  bring 
all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said 
unto  you.'  But  though  in  the  teaching  of  Jesus  all  the 
truth  might  be  implied,  it  was  not  all  opened ;  therefore 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  add  that  which  had  not  been 
delivered,  as  well  as  to  recall  that  which  had  been 
already  spoken.  There  is  an  evident  contrast  intended, 
with  regard  to  extent  of  knowledge,  between  '  these 
things  which  I  have  spoken  while  yet  present  with  you,' 
and  '  all  things  which  he  shall  teach  you.'  Nay,  there  is 
the  plainest  assertion  which  could  be  made,  that  things 
were  to  be  said  afterwards  which  had  not  been  said  then ; 
and  those  not  few  but  many — ('  I  have  yet  many  things 
to  say  unto  you ') — not  of  secondary  importance  but  of 
the  highest  moment  ('  Ye  cannot  bear  them  now ' — ov 
bvvaade  pavTdfciv).  They  are  things  of  such  a  kind  as 
would  now  weigh  down  and  oppress  your  minds,  seeing 
that  they  surpass  your  present  powers  of  spiritual  appre 
hension.  But  these  many  and  weighty  things  shall  not 
be  left  untold  :  '  When  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he 
shall  guide  you  into  all  the  truth.'  He  shall  guide  you 
(6briyrj(T€i),  as  by  successive  steps  and  continuous  direc 
tion  (eis  Travav  ri]v  dA?/0etcu'),  into  the  whole  of  that  truth 
of  which  the  commencements  have  now  been  given  ;  and 


76  THE  GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

especially  into  the  highest  and  central  part  of  it.  For  it 
is  also  made  plain  on  what  subject  this  light  shall  be 
poured,  and  into  what  mysteries  this  guidance  shall  lead. 
'  He  shall  testify  of  me  ;'  '  he  shall  glorify  me  ?  '  he  shall 
take  of  mine  and  shew  it  unto  you ;'  '  at  that  day  ye 
shall  know  that  /  am  in  the  Father,  and  ye  in  me,  and  I 
in  yon?  Not  then  for  some  secondary  matters  (details 
of  Church  order  or  relations  of  Jews  and  Gentiles)  was 
this  light  and  witness  of  the  Holy  Ghost  reserved  (though 
to  these  questions  also  the  divine  guidance  extended), 
but  rather  for  the  great  and  central  mystery  of  godliness, 
embracing  the  nature,  work,  and  offices  of  Jesus  Christ, 
his  mediatorial  relations  to  the  Father  and  to  the  Church, 
the  redemption  of  men  by  his  blood,  and  the  salvation 
of  men  by  his  life.  But  instead  of  attempting  to  enume 
rate  these  great  ideas,  it  were  better  to  comprehend 
them  all  in  his  own  vast  and  unexplained  expression, 
'  He  shall  take  of  mine  (e/c  TOV  e/xow  Aileron),  and  shall 
shew  it  unto  you.' 

We  have  now  reviewed  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  in 
the  flesh,  in  order  to  draw  from  it  an  answer  to  this 
question,  '  Is  the  revelation  of  the  great  salvation  given 
to  us  in  that  teaching  to  be  considered  as  final  and 
complete?'  The  answer  has  been,  'No!  //  lias  not  the 
appearance  of  being  final,  and  it  explicitly  declares  that  it 
is  not  complete.  When  it  was  ended,  it  was  to  be  fol 
lowed  by  a  new  testimony  from  God,  in  order  that  many 
things  might  be  spoken  which  had  not  been  spoken 
then.' 

The  testimony  came  ;  the  things  were  spoken  ;  and  in 
the  apostolic  writings  we  have  their  enduring  record. 
In  those  writings  we  find  the  fulfilment  of  an  expectation 
which  the  Gospels  raised,  and  recognise  the  performance 


ill.]  THE   GOSPELS.  77 

of  a  promise  which  the  Gospels  gave.  If  we  do  not,  the 
word  of  salvation,  which  began  to  be  spoken  by  the 
Lord,  has  never  been  finished  for  us.  Then,  not  only 
would  the  end  be  wanting,  but  the  beginning  would 
become  obscure.  The  lessons  of  holiness  would  still 
shine  in  their  own  pure  light,  and  the  rebukes  of  human 
error  would  shew  in  their  severe  outlines  ;  but  the  words 
which  open  by  anticipation  the  mystery  of  the  great 
salvation,  flashing  sometimes  on  its  deep  foundations, 
sometimes  on  its  lofty  summits,  would  but  dazzle  and 
confuse  our  sight ;  and  we  should  be  tempted  to  turn 
from  their  discoveries,  as  from  visions  which  had  no 
substance,  or  from  enigmas  which  we  could  not  in 
terpret. 

And  so  in  fact  they  treat  the  personal  teaching  of 
Christ  who  give  not  its  due  honour  to  the  subsequent 
witness  of  his  Spirit,  regarding  the  apostolic  writings  as 
only  Petrine,  Pauline,  or  Alexandrian  versions  of  the 
Christian  doctrine,  interesting  records  of  the  views  of 
individuals  or  schools  of  opinion  concerning  the  salva 
tion  which  Jesus  began  to  speak.  No  !  the  words  of  our 
Lord  are  not  honoured  (as  these  men  seem  to  think)  by 
being  thus  isolated  ;  for  it  is  an  isolation  which  separates 
them  from  other  words  which  also  are  his  own,  words 
given  by  him  in  that  day  when  he  no  longer  spake  in 
proverbs,  but  shewed  his  servants  plainly  of  the  Father. 
The  brief  communications  in  which  the  salvation  '  began 
to  be  spoken '  by  the  Lord  must  lose  half  their  glory,  if  a 
mist  and  darkness  be  cast  over  that  later  teaching  which 
was  ordained  to  throw  its  reflex  light  upon  them. 

Our  thoughts  have  now  arrived  at  the  point  where 
the  day  of  'speaking  in  proverbs'  changes  into  the  day  of 
'  shewing  plainly.'  It  is  a  critical  moment ;  for,  whatever 


78  THE   GOSPELS.  [LECT. 

progress  of  doctrine  the  change  may  involve,  all  our 
satisfaction  in  its  increased  distinctness  of  outline  and 
accumulated  fulness  of  detail  must  depend  on  our  assur 
ance  that  the  teacher  is  still  the  same.  My  next  duty 
will  therefore  be  that  of  noting  the  care  which  he  him 
self  has  taken  to  fix  that  assurance  on  our  minds.  His 
care  is  never  wanting  where  it  is  needed,  and  we  have 
cause  to  praise  his  holy  name  that  in  this,  as  well  as  in 
so  many  other  ways,  he  has  knit  together  the  one  body 
of  his  written  word  by  living  and  indissoluble  bands, 
so  that  its  interdependent  parts  fulfil  effectually  their 
several  functions,  in  commencing  or  completing  the  one 
testimony  of  the  great  salvation. 

It  is  of  the  testimony  that  I  now  speak.  More  happy 
is  that  common  ministry  in  which  we  present  the  salva 
tion  itself.  Only  for  the  sake  of  the  salvation  does  the 
testimony  exist.  There  is  a  deep  interest  for  every  con 
siderate  mind  in  the  form,  the  plan,  the  character,  of  the 
sacred  writings  ;  but  it  is  not  a  merely  literary  or  intel 
lectual  interest :  it  is  one  created  by  the  object  for  which 
the  writings  are  given.  The  reader  of  the  Gospels  is 
not  suffered  to  close  the  volume  without  a  solemn  admo 
nition  of  the  purpose  for  which  it  has  been  placed  in  his 
hands.  '  These  things  are  written  that  ye  may  believe 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  be 
lieving  ye  may  have  life  through  his  name.'  Does  it 
wound  our  hearts  to  see  this  wondrous  record  misappre 
hended,  its  unity  denied,  its  glory  darkened  ?  Perhaps  it' 
is  a  sadder  sight  in  the  eye  of  heaven  when  its  inspira 
tion  is  vindicated,  its  perfection  appreciated,  its  majesty 
asserted,  by  one  who  at  the  same  time  for  himself  neg 
lects  the  great  salvation.  Such  a  case  is  not  impossible 
— perhaps  is  not  uncommon.  The  Day  will  declare  it. 


in.]  THE   GOSPELS.  79 

At  least  let  it  be  remembered,  that  the  study  of  the 
testimony  is  one  thing,  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  salva 
tion  is  another,  and  that  the  record  of  the  things  which 
Jesus  did  and  said  has  attained  its  end  with  those  only, 
who,  '  believing,  have  life  through  his  name.' 


LECTURE    IV. 


THE   ACTS   OF   THE   APOSTLES. 


ACTS  i.  1-4. 

The  former  treatise  have  I  made,  O  Theophilus,  of  all  that  Jesus  began 
both  to  do  and  teach, 

Until  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  up,  after  that  he  through  the 
Holy  Ghost  had  given  commandments  unto  the  Apostles  'whom  he  had 
chosen : 

To  whom  also  he  shewed  himself  alive  after  his  passion  by  many  in 
fallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them  forty  days,  and  speaking  of  the  things 
pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God  : 

And,  being  assembled  together  with  them,  commanded  them  that  they 
should  not  depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father, 
which,  saith  he,  ye  have  heard  of  me. 

WlTH  these  words  we  enter  on  a  new  stage  of  history 
and  of  doctrine,  and  they  are  words  which  connect  it 
with  the  past.  The  links  of  Scripture  (if  I  may  so  call 
them)  uniting  one  part  to  another,  and  assisting  our 
sense  of  the  continuity  of  the  whole,  are  worthy  of 
especial  notice.  Thus  the  Gospels  have  been  brought 
to  a  fit  and  (as  it  seems  from  the  final  words)  an  in 
tended  conclusion,  at  the  end  of  the  twentieth  chapter 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  81 

of  St.  John ;  but  yet  another  chapter  is  added,  as  if  dic 
tated  by  some  after-thought,  which  in  its  effect  links  the 
whole  Gospel  record  to  the  book  which  succeeds  it.  The 
miracle  which  had  already  foreshadowed  the  work  of 
the  fishers  of  men  is  repeated,  but  with  altered  circum 
stances,  typical  of  the  change  which  was  at  hand.  For 
now  the  Lord  is  no  longer  with  them  in  the  ship,  but 
stands  dimly  seen  upon  the  shore  ;  yet  from  thence 
issues  his  directions,  and  shews  the  presence  of  his  power 
working  with  them  in  their  seemingly  lonely  toil.  Then 
the  charge  is  left  to  'feed  his  sheep,'  and  lastly,  the 
future  destinies  of  the  two  chief  Apostles  are  suffered  to 
be  faintly  seen. 

In  like  manner  does  the  book  of  Acts  at  its  opening 
attach  itself  to  the  preceding  record ;  throwing  back 
our  thoughts  on  'the  former  treatise  of  all  that  Jesus 
began  both  to  do  and  teach,'  and  then  passing  rapidly 
in  review  the  last  circumstances  which  connect  the 
Apostles  with  their  Lord,  as  the  instruments  which  he 
had  chosen  and  prepared  for  the  work  which  he  had  yet 
to  do.  Thus  the  history  which  follows  is  linked  to,  or 
(may  I  not  rather  say)  welded  with,  the  past ;  and  the 
founding  of  the  Church  in  the  .earth  is  presented  as  one 
continuous  work,  begun  by  the  Lord  in  person,  and 
perfected  by  the  same  Lord  through  the  ministry  of 
men.  This  is  the  point  on  which  I  have  now  to  insist. 
'The  former  treatise'  delivered  to  us,  not  all  that  Jesus 
did  and  taught,  but  '  all  that  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and 
teach,  until  the  day  when  he  was  taken  up.'  The 
following  writings  appear  intended  to  give  us,  and  do 
in  fact  profess  to  give  us,  that  which  Jesus  continued  to 
do  and  teach  after  the  day  in  which  he  was  taken  upa. 
«  Note  VII. 
G 


82  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

There  are  then  two  points  which  claim  our  attention 
when  we  pass  beyond  that  day,  and  enter  on  the  second 
stage  of  New  Testament  doctrine.  One  is  that  the 
authority  is  continued ;  the  other  is  that  the  method  is 
changed.  Our  enquiries  will  naturally  be  directed,  (i)  to 
the  evidence  for  the  first  fact,  and  (2)  to  the  reasons  for 
the  second. 

I.  First,  then,  I  turn  to  the  books  which  lie  before  us, 
to  ask  what  evidence  they  give,  that  the  divine  authority, 
which  was  self-evident  in  the  first  stage  of  teaching,  is 
continued  also  in  the  second,  or,  in  other  words,  that  this 
is  as  really  as  the  other  a  part  of  revelation,  and  a 
period  of  divine  communication  of  truth  to  man.  The 
fundamental  part  of  this  evidence  consists  in  the  words, 
which  were  cited  in  the  last  lecture,  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord  himself :  for  in  the  words  of  his  lips  is  centred 
the  evidence  for  all  teaching  which  he  has  given  us 
through  the  lips  of  men.  But  we  are  now  to  see 
how  these  intimations  are  supported  in  the  books  which 
follow. 

I.  We  find,  then,  that  the  doctrinal  writings  of  the 
Apostles  are  prefaced  by  the  book  of  Acts,  some  account 
of  that  which  was  done  being  given  as  an  introduction 
to  the  record  of  that  which  was  taught.  The  function 
of  this  book  in  the  scheme  of  Scripture  is  of  very  high 
importance,  in  other  respects,  to  which  we  must  advert 
hereafter,  and  especially  in  that  which  concerns  us  now. 
It  is  a  record  of  the  personal  action  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  the  first  evolution  of  his  gospel  and  formation  of 
his  Church. 

With  him  and  with  his  last  words  on  earth  the  book 
begins,  reminding  us  of  his  commission  and  commands 
to  the  Apostles  whom  he  had  chosen.  Then  we  see  him 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  83 

depart,  and  they  are  left  to  their  work.  Yet  they  do 
not  begin  it  till  the  promised  Spirit  is  come  ;  they  wait 
for  the  promise  of  the  Father,  which  they  have  heard  of 
him.  One  transaction  in  the  interval  shews  their  own 
assurance  that  he  who  directed  them  so  lately  intends 
to  direct  them  still :  '  Thou,  Lord,  which  knowest  the 
hearts  of  all  men,  shew  whether  of  these  two  thou  hast 
chosen,  that  he  may  take  part  in  this  ministry  and 
apostleshipV  Such  language  intimates  the  relation  in 
which  they  still  felt  themselves  to  their  now  unseen 
Master.  But  soon  the  promised  gift  is  bestowed,  and 
the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  has  begun.  And  what  in 
their  view  is  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  ?  It  is  the 
agency  and  gift  of  Jesus.  '  Being  by  the  right  hand  of 
God  exalted,  and  having  received  of  the  Father  the 
promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed  forth  this, 
which  ye  now  see  and  hearc.' 

This  view  of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  medium 
through  which  the  Lord  Jesus  wrought  and  taught,  is  car 
ried  through  the  whole  course  of  the  history  which  follows. 
As  in  the  promise,  so  in  the  history,  '•The  Comforter 
will  come  unto  you' — '/  will  come  unto  you,' — are  but 
two  sides  of  one  and  the  same  fact.  On  critical  occasions 
and  at  each  onward  step  the  hand  of  the  Master  is  made 
distinctly  visible.  The  first  martyr  dies  for  a  testimony, 
which  is  felt  to  be  an  advance  on  what  had  been  given 
before,  being  understood  to  imply  that  'this  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  shall  destroy  this  place,  and  change  the  customs 
which  Moses  delivered  us ;'  and  his  words  are  sealed  by 
the  vision  of  his  Lord  in  glory.  The  consignment  of  the 
Gospel  to  the  Ethiopian  proselyte  was  another  step  in 
advance,  and  for  this  '  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  unto 

b  Acts  i.  24.  c  Ibid.  ii.  33. 

G  2 


84  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

Philip.'  The  preaching  of  the  word  to  Gentiles,  and 
their  admission  into  the  Church,  was  a  greater  step ; 
and  for  this  the  Lord  intervenes  by  the  mission  of  an 
angel  to  Cornelius,  by  a  vision  and  a  voice  of  the  Spirit 
to  Peter,  and  by  a  kind  of  second  Pentecost  to  the  con 
verts  themselves.  But,  when  the  greatest  step  of  all  is 
to  be  taken  in  the  outward  course  of  the  Gospel,  then 
most  visibly  does  the  great  Head  of  the  Church  make 
manifest  his  personal  administration.  A  new  Apostle 
appears ;  not  like  him  who  was  added  before  Pentecost, 
completing  the  number  of  the  original  college,  and  losing 
his  individuality  in  its  ranks  ;  but  one  standing  apart 
and  in  advance,  under  whose  hand  both  the  doctrines 
and  the  destinies  of  the  Gospel  receive  a  development  so 
extensive  and  so  distinct,  that  it  seemed  almost  another 
Gospel  to  many  who  witnessed  it,  and  to  some  who  study 
it  seems  so  still.  How  striking  is  the  special  authentica 
tion  appropriated  to  this  stage  of  teaching !  This  man's 
conversion,  education,  commission,  direction,  the  Lord 
Jesus  undertakes  himself.  Suddenly  he  meets  him  in 
the  way,  shines  forth  upon  him  in  a  light  above  the 
brightness  of  the  sun,  speaks  to  him  by  a  voice  from 
heaven,  calls  him  by  name,  convinces,  adopts,  directs 
him,  commands  Ananias  concerning  him,  and  (apparently 
on  repeated  occasions)  announces  the  use  which  he  has 
decreed  to  make  of  '  the  chosen  vessel.'  The  subsequent 
history  is  marked  by  continual  testimonies  of  the  same 
divine  intervention,  given  at  every  step  which  might 
involve  the  doubt  whether  it  were  of  Paul  or  of  Christ. 
When  his  soul  clave  to  the  ministry  among  his  own 
people,  he  was  forced  from  it  by  immediate  command  : 
'  It  came  to  pass  that,  while  I  prayed  in  the  Temple, 
I  was  in  a  trance,  and  saw  him  saying  unto  me,  Make 


iv.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  85 

haste  and  get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jerusalem,  for  they 
will  not  receive  thy  testimony  concerning  me :  depart, 
for  I  will  send  thee  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles d.'  When 
he  had  fixed  himself  as  a  settled  teacher  in  Antioch, 
'  the  Spirit  said,  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the 
work  whereunto  I  have  called  them.'  When  he  would 
have  confined  himself  to  the  eastern  continent,  and 
turned,  in  his  contemplated  circuit,  first  to  Asia  and 
then  to  Bithynia,  'the  Spirit  suffered  h'im  not,'  and  a 
divine  message  enabled  him  to  'gather  assuredly  that 
the  Lord  had  called  him'  to  carry  his  Gospel  into 
Europe.  Again,  in  Corinth  the  Lord's  own  voice  directed 
him  to  remain,  as  in  the  head-quarters  of  the  Grecian 
world.  In  Jerusalem,  when  disheartened  and  perhaps 
doubtful  of  the  course  he  had  taken,  his  Master  came  to 
assure  him  of  the  acceptance  of  his  past  testimony,  and 
announce  the  purpose  that  he  should  bear  witness  also 
at  Rome ;  and  finally,  in  the  shipwreck  itself,  when  all 
hope  of  being  saved  was  taken  away,  the  declaration  of 
the  divine  purpose  was  made  yet  more  distinct :  '  Fear 
not,  Paul,  thou  must  be  brought  before  Caesar.' 

Thus  does  he,  who  at  the  commencement  of  the  history 
was  seen  to  pass  into  the  heavens,  continue  to  appear  in 
person  on  the  scene.  His  Apostles  act,  not  only  on  his 
past  commission,  but  under  his  present  direction.  He  is 
not  wholly  concealed  by  the  cloud  which  had  received 
him  out  of  their  sight.  Now  his  voice  is  heard ;  now 
his  hand  put  forth  ;  and  now  through  a  sudden  rift  the 
brightness  of  his  presence  shines.  And  these  appearances, 
voices,  and  visions  are  not  mere  incidental  favours ;  they 
are,  as  we  have  seen,  apportioned  to  the  moments  when 
they  are  wanted,  moments  which  determine  the  course 

d  Acts  xxii.  17,  1 8,  21. 


86  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

which  the  Gospel  takes,  and  in  which  a  manifestation  of 
divine  guidance  proves  the  divine  guidance  of  the  whole. 
The  ship  rushes  on  its  way,  shunning  the  breakers, 
dashing  through  the  billows,  certain  of  its  track.  The 
crew  work  it,  but  do  not  guide  it.  We  can  see  the 
strong  movements  of  the  helm,  and  from  time  to  time 
discern  a  firm  hand  which  holds  it.  No  chances,  no 
winds  or  currents,  bear  it  along  at  their  will,  but  he  who 
has  launched  it  guides  it,  for  he  knows  the  course  which 
it  must  take. 

The  divine  direction,  which  is  thus  exhibited  in  the 
book  of  the  Acts,  is  indeed  the  direction  of  a  course  of 
action  rather  than  a  course  of  teaching.  It  seems  to  be 
the  guidance  of  the  movements  of  the  Gospel,  rather  than 
of  \heformation  of  the  Gospel ;  and  our  present  enquiry 
is  concerned  with  the  progress  of  its  formation,  not  with 
the  progress  of  its  extension.  Yet  in  the  apostolic  period 
these  two  kinds  of  progress  co-exist,  and  (as  it  were) 
cohere  ;  and  the  outward  divine  direction  of  the  one  is 
offered  as  surety  for  the  inward  divine  direction  of  the 
other.  In  the  earlier  period,  the  things  which  Jesus 
began  to  do  were  the  proof  and  support  of  the  things 
which  he  began  to  teach  ;  and  in  the  later  period,  that 
which  he  continued  to  do,  in  the  acts  of  his  Apostles,  is 
the  pledge  that  in  their  doctrine  also  it  was  he  who 
continued  to  teach.  The  inference  is  natural  and  is 
plainly  intended, — If  the  introductory  historical  book 
manifests  tJie  direction  of  the  Lord  in  the  acts  of  these 
men,  then  in  the  subsequent  doctrinal  books  we  must  own 
his  direction  in  their  teaching.  Such  an  inference  would 
be  reasonable,  if  we  regarded  the  teaching  as  simply  an 
accompaniment  of  the  acting  ;  such  an  inference  is  in 
evitable,  when  we  see  that  the  delivery  of  the  truth 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  87 

to  the  world  is  the  one  end  and  object  of  what  is 
done. 

I  must  further  observe,  that  the  facts  recorded  in  the 
book  of  Acts  are  not  only  a  pledge  of  the  divine  au 
thority  of  the  doctrine  in  the  Epistles,  but  are  also  the 
means  through  which  that  doctrine  was  perfected.  As 
the  Gospel  was  guided  through  its  conflict  with  the  con 
temporaneous  Judaism  ;  as  it  spread  from  the  Hebrews 
to  the  Grecians,  to  the  Dispersion,  to  the  Devout  Persons, 
to  the  Heathen  beyond  ;  as  it  passed  from  Jerusalem  to 
Antioch,  to  Corinth,  to  Rome  ;  as  it  was  presented  to 
men  first  through  Peter,  and  then  through  Paul, — its 
doctrines  were  gaining  at  every  step  in  definiteness  and 
fulness.  Questions  arose  which  compelled  decision  ; 
new  states  of  mind  in  receivers  of  truth  called  out,  not 
new  principles  of  truth,  but  new  applications  of  it ;  and 
the  growth  of  Churches  and  the  advance  of  Christian  life 
led  to  the  settlement  of  points,  which  could  not  have 
been  raised  till  such  a  state  of  things  had  arisen.  Under 
these  circumstances,  a  divine  guidance  of  events  was 
only  a  means  for  the  divine  guidance  of  doctrine.  If  the 
Lord  himself  sensibly  interfere,  to  send  Peter  to  Caesarea, 
and  to  call  Paul  to  bear  his  name  before  Gentiles  and 
kings,  then  not  only  those  steps,  but  the  doctrinal  results 
of  them,  are  visibly  included  in  the  purpose  of  God  and 
marked  with  the  seal  of  heaven. 

More  than  this  we  can  hardly  ask  for  from  the  book 
of  Acts,  seeing  that  its  province  is  in  the  outward  scene, 
and  its  office  is  to  record  the  march  of  events.  We  pass 
from  it  to  the  Epistles  with  the  fullest  assurance  which 
such  evidence  can  afford,  that  the  doctrine  which  they 
contain  is  given  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  that,  if  it  appear 
an  advance  upon  that  which  he  spake  with  his  lips  in  the 


88  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

days  of  his  flesh,  that  advance  has  been  matured  by 
himself. 

In  the  Epistles  which  have  for  their  province,  not  his 
tory  but  doctrine,  some  direct  statements  on  this  subject 
might  perhaps  be  expected.  Whether  expected  or  not, 
they  are  certainly  found.  The  great  body  of  the  Epi 
stles  are  the  writings  of  St.  Paul.  The  change  in  the 
aspect  of  their  doctrine  as  compared  with  the  Gospel 
type  bears  chiefly  the  impress  of  his  mind.  It  has  been 
called,  and  may  be  properly  called,  the  Pauline  doctrine. 
Is  it  also  absolutely  the  doctrine  of  Christ  ?  or  is  it  an 
individual  variety  of  that  doctrine,  to  be  regarded  (so  far 
as  it  seems  peculiar)  as  one  allowable  form  of  the  original 
truth?  a  token  that  there  shall  be,  a  warrant  that 
there  may  be,  various  systems  of  opinion  in  the  Church  ? 
The  question  in  fact  is  this,  Is  the  -voice  of  Paul  speaking 
in  the  Scriptures  to  be  taken  by  the  Church  as  the  voice 
of  Jesus?  This  question  has  been  answered  by  the 
history  in  the  Acts.  We  h  ave  already  recalled  to  our 
minds  the  special  choice,  and  call,  and  commission,  and 
direction,  which  were  assigned  to  the  Apostle  born  out 
of  due  time  ;  the  confirmation  of  his  proceedings  when 
they  were  most  questioned,  the  divine  fellowship  in  his 
course  when  it  seemed  most  lonely.  But  there  is  yet  a 
more  direct  answer  than  this  ;  one  which  his  own  words 
supply. 

In  his  writings  in  general  he  is  careful  to  assert  the 
reality  of  his  apostleship,  as  conferred  by  immediate  ap 
pointment  and  bearing  the  seal  of  God  ;  and  it  is  ob 
servable,  that  the  strength  of  these  expressions  is  pro 
portioned  to  the  occasions  when  the  authority  of  the 
office  involves  the  authority  of  the  doctrine.  In  the 
Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  when  he  has  to  maintain  his 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  89 

gospel  as  being  the  Gospel,  we  find  the  precision  which 
marks  the  language  of  one  who  knows  what  insinuations 
he  has  to  negative:  '  Paul,  an  Apostle,  not  of  men  (air' 
drfyxtfTTou'),  neither  by  men  (di  ai'0pu>-nov),  but  by  (8ia)  Jesus 
Christ,  and  God  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the 
dead.'  He  declares  himself  to  have  been  placed,  not 
originally  from  men,  nor  mediately  by  any  man's 
ministry,  but  by  the  very  hand  of  Christ,  in  the  chair 
from  which  his  instructions  are  delivered,  and  thus  he 
attaches  the  authority  of  the  commission  to  the  instruc 
tions  which  are  given  under  it.  But  he  goes  farther,  and 
affirms  that  those  instructions  themselves  were  no  less 
immediately  received  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  than  was  the 
commission  under  which  they  were  delivered. 

Let  me  ask  your  attention  to  the  language  which  this 
Apostle  uses,  when  speaking  of  the  sources  whence  the 
matter  of  his  preaching  w7as  derived.  Take  first  two 
passages  from  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  He 
says  (ch.  xi.  23-25),  '/  have  received  of  the  Lord  that 
which  also  I  delivered  unto  you,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
the  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed  took  bread  ;  and 
having  given  thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said,  Take,  eat : 
this  is  my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you  :  this  do  in 
remembrance  of  me.  Likewise  also  he  took  the  cup, 
when  he  had  supped,  saying,  This  cup  is  the  New  Testa 
ment  in  my  blood  :  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it, 
in  remembrance  of  me.'  Again  (ch.  xv.  1-7),  the  same 
expression,  though  less  full,  is  used  in  reference  to 
another  class  of  facts  :  '  Brethren,  I  declare  unto  you  the 
gospel  which  I  preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye  have 
received  ....  For  I  delivered  unto  you  first  of  all  that 
which  I  also  received,  how  that  Christ  died  for  our  sins 
according  to  the  Scriptures  ;  and  that  he  was  buried, 


90  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

and  that  he  rose  again  the  third  day  according  to  the 
Scriptures  :  and  that  he  was  seen  of  Cephas,  and  then  of 
the  twelve  ;  after  that,  he  was  seen  of  above  five  hundred 
brethren  at  once  ;  .  .  .  .  after  that,  he  was  seen  of  James  ; 
then  of  all  the  Apostles.'  Now  place  by  the  side  of 
these  statements  two  others,  taken  from  the  Epistles 
which  follow.  To  the  Galatians  he  says  (ch.  i.  11,  12), 
'  I  certify  you,  brethren,  that  the  gospel  which  was 
preached  of  me  is  not  after  man  ;  for  /  neither  received  it 
of  man  (-napa  avOpuvov  -nap^ajSou],  neither  was  I  taught  it, 
but  by  revelation  (01'  cnroKaA^ecos)  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  to 
the  Ephesians  (iii.  2,  3)  he  speaks  in  the  same  strain, 
though  with  less  emphatic  precision :  '  Ye  have  heard 
of  the  dispensation  of  the  grace  of  God,  given  to  me  to 
you-ward  :  how  that  by  revelation  he  made  known  unto  me 
the  mystery,'  (Kara  aTro/caAuv^ti'  eywopifre  juot  TO  ^vcrrr^pLov) . 

Between  the  first  and  the  second  of  these  pa^rs  of  texts 
a  very  remarkable  difference  appears.  In  the  first,  St. 
Paul  seems  to  represent  his  own  preaching  as  a  link  in 
the  chain  of  tradition,  'I  received,'  'I  delivered,'  (7rape'Aa/3or, 
•7rape7)a>/ca) :  nor  yet  as  the  first  link,  for  even  the  fuller 
expression,  rendered  '  I  received  of  the  Lord,'  (aTio  -ov 
Kvpiov\  does  not  so  fitly  import  an  immediate  communi 
cation,  as  a  reception  of  that  which  had  originated  from 
the  Lord,  and  was  handed  down  by  his  commandment e. 
St.  Paul,  therefore,  here  appears  to  stand,  in  respect  to 
the  sources  of  his  information,  on  the  same  footing  as 
the  Evangelist  who  was  associated  with  him, .  and  to 
speak  of  the  facts  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  '  even 
as  they  delivered  them  unto  us  (KO^CUS  -naptboa-av  r^uv], 
who  from  the  beginning  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers 
of  the  word.'  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  second  pair  of 
o  See  Note  VIII. 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  91 

statements,  the  contrary  assertion  is  made,  namely,  that 
his  gospel  was  not  received  from  man,  nor  taught  by 
man,  but  communicated  immediately  by  revelation  of 
the  Lord  Jesus. 

The  state  of  the  case  thus  brought  to  light  is  in  exact 
accordance  with  the  view  which  is  here  taken  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  Lord  perfected  his  word.  The 
Gospel  which  the  Apostles  preached  was  a  combination 
of  historic  facts  with  their  spiritual  interpretations  ;  and 
the  expression,  '  Gospel  which  I  preached,'  is  used  by 
St.  Paul  in  different  places  with  more  immediate  refer 
ence  to  the  one  or  the  other  of  these  elements.  In  the 
passages  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  he  speaks 
of  the  first  and  fundamental  part  of  his  preaching,  re 
ferring  expressly  to  the  publication  of  historic  facts  : — 
Christ  died — he  was  buried — he  rose  again — he  was  seen 
of  Cephas,  &c.  On  the  same  night  that  he  was  betrayed 
he  took  bread — he  gave  thanks,  and  brake  it — he  said, 
Take,  eat,  &c. ;  and  we  learn  that  the  Gospel,  as  a  body  of 
Jiistoric  fact,  was  received  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  as  by  all 
others  who  had  not  seen  the  Lord  in  the  flesh,  from 
those  who  were  the  appointed  witnesses  of  his  visible 
manifestation.  In  the  two  latter  passages  it  is  otherwise. 
Not  the  historic  facts,  but  '  the  mystery '  connected  with 
them,  is  spoken  of  (in  the  address  to  the  Ephesians)  as 
the  subject  of  the  revelation  received.  And  '  the  Gospel ' 
of  which  he  writes  to  the  Galatians  is  plainly  not  thought 
of  on  its  historical,  but  on  its  doctrinal  side.  The  '  other 
Gospel'  into  which  the  converts  were  'being  removed' 
was  not  another  account  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  but  another 
set  of  inferences  connected  with  it.  When  he  went  up 
to  Jerusalem  by  revelation,  and  privately  communicated 
to  those  of  reputation  'the  Gospel  which  he  preached 


9 2  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

among  the  Gentiles,'  we-  are  sure  that  he  laid  before 
them,  not  the  substance  of  the  history  which  we  read  in 
St.  Luke's  narrative,  but  the  substance  of  the  doctrine 
which  is  embodied  in  his  own  Epistles.  The  whole 
argument  to  the  Galatians  turns  upon  the  doctrinal 
element  of  the  Gospel.  It  is  of  this,  therefore,  that  he 
so  solemnly  affirms  that  he  was  not  taught  it  by  agency 
of  man,  but  received  it  as  direct  revelation  from  the 
Lord;  and  this  affirmation  is  made,  not  merely  in  respect 
of  the  general  doctrine,  but  specifically  of  those  parts  of  it 
which  it  was  given  to  him  to  develope  and  defend  :  '  the 
Gospel  which  was  preached  by  me,'—'  my  Gospel]  as  he 
elsewhere  calls  it,  the  Gospel  under  that  particular 
aspect  which  he  admits  to  be  the  subject  of  extensive 
doubt  and  complaint.  The  part  in  the  progress  of 
doctrine  committed  to  St.  Paul  was  to  define,  to  settle, 
and  to  carry  out  to  its  practical  consequences  the 
principle  of  free  justification  in  Christ,  which  (as  a 
principle)  was  acknowledged  and  held  before  his  voice 
was  heard  ;  and  we  learn  from  his  own  statements,  that, 
for  this  special  work,  not  only  a  special  commission,  but 
a  special  revelation  was  given  him  by  the  Lord  Jesus, 
so  as  to  clear  and  settle  his  own  mind,  on  those  points 
on  which  he  was  sent  to  clear  and  settle  the  minds  of 
others.  In  this  way  he  was  a  minister  and  a  witness, 
not  of  those  things  which  he  had  heard  from  others,  nor 
of  those  things  which  he  had  only  thought  out  for 
himself,  but  of  those  things  which  his  Lord  had  showed 
him  in  personal  visits  and  distinct  communications, 
according  to  the  announcement  made  at  the  first  com 
mencement  of  this  peculiar  intercourse,  '  I  have  appeared 
unto  thee  for  this  purpose,  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a 
witness,  both  of  those  things  which  thou  hast  seen,  and 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  93 

of  those  things  in  the  which  /  will  appear  unto  thee,'  (wv 
re  elSes1  &v  re  6<p0i](rop,ai.  aoi f).  No  !  he  was  not  only  an 
inspired  teacher  adorned  with  the  title  of  Apostle  ;  he 
was  an  Apostle  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  a  com 
missioned  witness  to  others  of  direct  communications  of 
Jesus  Christ  to  himself;  one  appointed  to  confirm  to 
others  the  salvation  which,  in  his  own  hearing,  had  begun 
to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord. 

The  appearances  and  revelations  vouchsafed  to  the 
Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  are  thus  conspicuously  seen  to 
connect  themselves  with  the  agency  assigned  to  him  in 
the  progress  of  doctrine  ;  and  the  more  carefully  we 
examine  his  history  and  weigh  his  language,  the  more 
sensibly  do  we  feel  ourselves  in  the  presence  of  that 
great  fact,  on  the  reality  of  which  the  faith  of  succeed 
ing  ages  has  reposed,  namely,  the  continued  personal 
administration  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  founding  his  Church 
and  perfecting  his  word. 

This  administration  was  manifested,  as  we  have  seen, 
by  selection  of  agents,  direction  of  events,  angelic  mes 
sages,  visits  in  visions,  special  instructions,  and  distinct 
revelations ;  yet  these  numerous  interventions  do  not 
constitute  the  entire  system  of  divine  guidance,  or  even 
the  chief  part  of  it,  but  are  rather  to  be  regarded  as 
additions  to  the  normal  method  of  administration  which 
they  serve  both  to  assist  and  authenticate. 

2.  The  real  guidance  of  the  Apostles  by  their  Lord 
was  not  occasional,  but  habitual,  not  through  separate 
interventions,  but  through  the  Holy  Ghost  divclling  in 
them.  So  the  promise  ran  that  it  should  be ;  and  so  in 
fact  it  was. 

The  Day  of  Pentecost  is  the  opening  of  the  second 

f  Acts  xxvi.  1 6. 


94  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

period  of  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  It  stands 
alone,  as  does  the  day  which  now  we  call  Christmas  : 
the  one  the  birthday  of  the  Lord,  the  other  the  birthday 
of  his  Church  ;  the  one  proclaimed  by  praises  sung  by 
hosts  in  heaven,  the  other  by  praises  uttered  in  the 
various  tongues  of  earth. 

The  change  is  meet,  because  the  Spirit  now  conveys 
the  true  knowledge  of  the  wonderful  works  of  God  into 
the  recesses  of  the  human  heart.  A  dispensation  is 
begun,  in  which  the  mind  of  God  has  entered  into  mys 
terious  combination  with  the  mind  of  man,  and  hence 
forth  the  revealing  light  shines,  not  from  without,  but 
from  within. 

'  O  God,  who  at  this  time  didst  teach  the  hearts  of  thy 
faithful  people  by  the  sending  to  them  the  light  of  thy 
Holy  Spirit!'  So  speaks  the  Collect  for  Whitsunday ; 
and,  in  so  speaking,  seizes  at  once  the  central  idea  of 
the  event.  That  idea  is  often  imperfectly  apprehended  ; 
for  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  there  is  so  much 
that  is  visible  on  its  surface,  that  our  thoughts  are  apt 
to  be  arrested  before  they  penetrate  to  its  centre. 
Tongues  and  prophecies,  and  signs  and  wonders,  gifts  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  dispensed  according  to  his  will,  are 
visible  results  of  the  event,  and  they  witness  to  the 
Gospel  and  clear  its  way.  Below  these  superadded 
faculties,  we  are  conscious  of  a  mighty  influence  in  the 
region  of  the  emotions.  We  feel  the  presence  of  that 
comfort  and  strength,  of  that  glow  and  fervour  and  joy, 
by  which  we  see  the  men  animated  in  the  exercise  of 
their  new  powers,  and  hear  them  speak  with  tongues 
and  magnify  God.  But  we  must  go  further.  The  new 
powers  seem  as  it  were  born  from  the  new  impulses,  but 
whence  do  the  new  impulses  proceed  ?  Is  there  not  a 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  95 

cause  for  these?  Does  the  Holy  Spirit  limit  his  en 
trance  into  man  to  the  region  of  emotion,  which  is  but 
the  surface  of  our  nature,  without  reaching  those  inner 
springs  from  which,  according  to  the  laws  of  that  nature, 
the  emotions  should  themselves  be  quickened  ?  No  !  be 
sure  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  occupied  the  heart  and 
centre  of  our  being,  and  that,  as  the  tongues  are  given 
as  a  vent  for  the  fervour  of  emotion,  so  the  fervour  of 
emotion  has  its  own  origin  in  a  sudden  access  of  intel 
lectual  light.  New  apprehensions  of  truth,  new  views  of 
things,  which  those  thus  visited  had  seen  but  had  not 
understood,  now  burst  in  a  moment  on  their  minds,  and 
from  that  moment  continued  to  grow  more  distinct  and 
more  extended  before  their  now  enlightened  eye.  God 
at  that  time  not  only  stirred,  but  taught,  the  hearts  of 
his  faithful  people,  and  sent  to  them  not  only  the  warmth 
but  'the  light'  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 

If  this  had  not  been  so,  what  fulfilment  would  there 
have  been  of  those  promises  of  the  Lord  which  we  lately 
recalled  to  mind,  respecting  the  nature  and  effect  of  the 
gift  which  was  to  follow  his  departure?  He  told  his 
Apostles  that  they  should  '  receive  power,'  and  he  told 
them  that  they  should  receive  '  comfort,'  but  we  have 
seen  that  that  on  which  he  chiefly  dwelt  was  the  light 
of  knowledge  which  should  rise  upon  their  minds.  '  In 
that  day  ye  shall  know ;'  '  he  shall  bring  all  things  to 
your  remembrance  ;'  '  he  shall  teach  you  all  things  ;'  '  he 
shall  guide  you  into  all  truth  ;'  '  he  shall  receive  of  mine 
and  shall  shew  it  unto  you.'  These  are  plain  assertions.  It 
is  enough  that  they  were  made  by  him  who  gave  the  gift, 
and  certainly  knew  how  to  describe  it.  The  rehearsal  of 
these  assertions  belonged  to  the  last  stage  of  our  enquiry ; 
the  evidence  of  their  fulfilment  is  the  thing  before  us  now. 


g6  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

Those  to  whom  these  promises  are  'given  exhibit  at 
the  time  a  dimness  of  apprehension,  a  perplexity  and 
disorder  of  thought,  an  incapacity  to  understand  the 
things  which  they  hear  and  see,  which  we,  enlightened 
from  the  light  which  they  afterwards  obtained,  most  un 
reasonably,  count  to  be  wonderful.  It  could  not  have 
been  otherwise  with  the  strongest  and  most  penetrating 
intellects.  But  the  fact  of  their  condition  of  mind  is 
undoubted,  whether  we  ascribe  it  to  personal  deficiency 
or  to  the  necessity  of  the  case. 

They  were  dealt  with  accordingly.  From  the  moment 
when  they  saw  their  Lord  ascend,  they  were  in  full 
possession  of  all  the  external  facts  of  which  they  were 
appointed  to  bear  witness.  But  they  were  not  in  pos 
session  of  the  spiritual  meaning,  relations,  and  conse 
quences  of  those  facts,  and  therefore  the  hour  of  their 
testimony  was  not  come,  and  the  interval  was  passed 
not  in  preaching  but  in  prayer.  As  soon  as  the  promise 
is  fulfilled  they  lift  up  their  voice  and  speak.  Never 
were  men  so  changed.  Who  does  not  note  the  accession 
of  boldness,  faithfulness,  and  fervour!  But  these  are 
not  separated  and  unsupported  gifts.  They  manifestly 
have  their  origin  in  the  certainty  of  assurance  and  in 
tensity  of  conviction.  The  irappr^crLa  proceeds  from  TT\^- 
po(popla ;  according  as  it  is  written, '  I  believed  and  there 
fore  have  I  spoken,  these  also  believe  and  therefore 
speak.'  Their  clear  firm  testimony  rises  in  a  moment 
before  the  world,  never  hesitating  or  wavering,  never  to 
sink  or  change  again,  only  manifesting  more  fully,  as 
time  advances,  the  largeness  of  its  compass  and  the 
definiteness  of  its  announcements.  Ever  after  they  speak 
as  men  would  do,  who  were  conscious  of  a  ground  of 
certainty  which  could  not  be  questioned,  who  could  say 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  97 

that  things  'seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to 
them s ;'  that  their  word  was  '  not  the  word  of  man  but 
the  word  of  God h ;'  that  it  was  '  the  Spirit  that  bore 
witness1 ;'  that  they  'preached  the  Gospel  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven j ;'  that  '  things  which  eye 
had  not  seen  nor  ear  heard,  and  which  had  not  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man,  had  been  revealed  to  them  by  the 
Spirit,  which  searcheth  the  deep  things  of  God  ;'  that 
they  '  had  received,  not  the  spirit  which  is  of  the  world, 
but  the  Spirit  which  is  of  God,  that  they  might  know 
the  things  which  are  freely  given  of  God  ; '  that  they 
'  spoke  these  things,  not  in  words  which  man's  wisdom 
taught,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  taught ;'  and  that  they 
'could  be  judged  of  no  man,'  because  'none  knew  the 
mind  of  the  Lord  so  as  to  instruct  him,  and  they  had 
the  mind  of  Christ k.'  It  is  enough.  The  three  testi 
monies  concur — the  testimony  of  him  who  gave  the 
Spirit,  the  testimony  of  those  who  received  it,  and  the 
testimony  of  the  facts  which  ensued  on  its  reception. 

Are  we  then  at  a  loss  to  know  what  was  the  nature 
of  the  gift  which  the  Holy  Spirit  brought  for  the  pur 
poses  of  the  apostolic  work  ?  Certainly  it  was  vast  and 
various — 'a  sevenfold  gift;'  but  its  most  essential  part 
lay  not  in  tongues  and  powers  which  witnessed  to  the 
Gospel,  not  in  the  fervour  and  boldness  which  preached 
it,  rather  it  was  the  Gospel  itself. 

The  Gospel  which  the  Apostles  preached  consisted  of 
two  elements,  a  testimony  of  external  facts  which  fell 
within  the  region  of  the  senses,  and  a  testimony  of  the 
virtue  of  those  facts  in  the  predestined  government  of 
God,  and  of  the  consequences  of  them  in  the  spiritual 

s  Acts  xv.  28.  h  i  Thess.  ii.  13.  '  i  John  v.  6. 

J  i  Peter  i.  12.  k  I  Cor.  ii.  9-16. 

H 


98  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

history  of  men,  neither  of  which  was  it  possible  for  the 
senses  to  certify.  For  the  first  testimony  they  needed 
but  a  clear  and  faithful  memory.  For  the  second  also 
the  same  faculty  would  suffice,  but  only  up  to  a  certain 
point ;  namely,  as  far  as  they  had  received  and  under 
stood  the  exposition  of  transcendental  truth  from  the 
lips  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  we  have  seen  that  the  salva 
tion  only  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord,  and  that 
he  himself  asserted  that  it  would  not  be  fully  revealed 
by  him,  or  understood  by  them,  until  the  Spirit  came. 
If  the  Spirit  on  his  coming  did  not  complete  that  reve 
lation,  then  the  Gospel  which  the  Apostles  preached 
must  have  been,  in  some  of  its  most  important  features, 
partly  a  word  of  God  and  partly  a  word  of  man.  Their 
witness  of  the  death,  and  resurrection,  and  ascension  of 
Jesus  would  demand  an  unqualified  acceptance,  but  their 
representation  of  the  sacrificial  character  and  atoning 
merits  of  the  death,  of  the  life-giving  power  of  the  resur 
rection,  and  of  the  mediatorial  office  in  heaven,  would  be 
the  result  of  their  own  inferences  from  the  words  which 
they  had  gleaned  from  their  Lord  ;  and,  instead  of  being 
judged  of  no  man,  they  would  be  judged  of  every  man 
who  could  take  a  different  view  of  the  words  which  they 
repeated  from  that  which  they  had  taken  themselves1. 
Thus  the  whole  system  of  their  doctrine  would  stand 
(like  the  image  in  the  dream)  on  feet  part  of  iron  and 
part  of  clay,  and  would  not  wait  long  for  the  hour  of 
its  overthrow.  But  he  who,  in  the  face  of  all  which  has 
been  now  recalled  to  mind,  should  still  treat  their  doc 
trine  in  this  light,  would  plainly  accuse  of  falsehood,  not 
only  the  men,  but  their  Lord  himself;  who,  if  he  spoke 
true  when  he  gave  them  the  Spirit,  led  them  thereby 
1  See  Note  IX. 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  99 

'  into  all  the  truth.'  The  guarantees  for  this  fact  could 
hardly  have  been  plainer  or  stronger  than  they  are.  We 
thank  God  that  he  has  provided  them,  and  we  pass  into 
the  second  stage  of  New  Testament  teaching  with  ade 
quate  assurances  that  he  who  before  taught  us  on  earth 
now  teaches  us  from  heaven,  and  that  we  still  '  hear  him 
and  are  taught  in  him' 

II.  We  have  not  then  changed  our  teacher,  but  he  has 
changed  his  method:  and  I  have  now  to  point  out  the 
reasons  of  the  change,  by  showing  that  it  was  fitted  to 
conduct  the  advance  of  doctrine  from  the  point  at  which 
it  had  then  arrived. 

It  may  be  said  that  the  change  was  simply  a  matter 
of  necessity,  because  he  who  had  spoken  with  his  lips 
was  now  to  be  received  up  into  glory,  and  could  no 
longer  talk  with  his  servants  on  earth.  But  though  the 
change  might  be  necessary,  it  was  also  'expedient' — 
expedient  for  them.  So  he  represents  it  to  his  mourning 
and  perplexed  disciples,  and  adds  the  support  of  a 
strong  asseveration.  '  Nevertheless  I  tell  you  the  truth, 
it  is  good  for  you  that  I  go  away ;  for  if  I  go  not  away 
the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you™.'  The  change 
then  takes  place  as  an  advantage  to  those  who  are  sub 
jected  to  it.  For  them  a  stage  of  revelation  has  come 
which  demands  a  method  of  teaching  more  penetrating 
and  internal  than  that  which  they  had  till  then  enjoyed. 

It  is  in  this  character  that  the  superiority  of  the  later 
method  consists,  as  is  pointed  out  by  the  plain  distinc 
tion,  '  He  dwelleth  with  you,  and  shall  be  in  you.'  Here 
are  two  methods  appropriated  to  the  two  stages  of  New 
Testament  teaching :  and  it  is  clear  as  day  that  the 
second  is  an  advance  upon  the  first.  In  the  one,  the 

m  John  xvi.  7. 
H  2 


100  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

teaching  power  is  separated  from,  and  external  to,  the 
mind  which  is  being  taught ;  in  the  other,  it  is  interfused 
and  commingled  with  it.  The  words,  in  the  one,  are 
divine  announcements  fitted  to  form  the  apprehensions 
of  man  :  the  words,  in  the  other,  are  expressions  of 
human  apprehensions  already  formed  under  the  divine 
agency.  The  teaching  power  has  thus  changed  its 
method,  in  order  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  a  more  dim- 
cult  stage  of  instruction. 

The  facts  are  finished  when  Jesus  is  glorified ;  the 
manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  is  perfect,  the  redemp 
tion  is  accomplished,  and  the  conditions  of  human  salva 
tion  are  complete. 

The  history  must  now  be  treated  as  a  whole,  of  which 
the  plan  and  purpose  have  become  apparent.  The  time 
is  come  for  the  full  interpretation  of  the  facts,  of  their 
effects  in  the  world  of  spirit,  and  of  their  results  in 
human  consciousness. 

A  doctrine  then  is  needed,  which  shall  sum  up  the 
whole  bearing  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  which  shall 
throw  a  full  light  on  its  spiritual  effects,  and  which  shall 
guide  the  minds  of  men  in  their  application  of  it  to 
themselves.  Such  a  doctrine  might  be  given  from  God 
in  one  of  two  ways :  by  voices  from  heaven,  declaring 
what  view  men  ougJit  to  take  of  the  history  which  had 
passed  before  them,  and  what  their  faith  and  feelings 
ought  to  be  concerning  it ;  or  by  voices  from  men  them 
selves,  expressing  the  view  which  they  did  take,  and  the 
faith  and  feelings  which  were  actually  in  their  hearts. 
In  the  one  case,  we  should  have  Apostles,  who  would 
be  to  us  the  messengers  of  God,  only  while  they  testified 
that  they  had  received  such  and  such  revelations,  and 
while  they  recited  those  revelations  to  us  word  for  word  : 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  101 

but  all  their  other  words  would  come  to  us  on  their  own 
merits,  as  simply  the  words  of  holy  and  enlightened 
men.  In  the  other  case,  we  should  have  Apostles,  whose 
representations  of  their  own  view  of  all  which  they  had 
heard  and  seen,  whose  expositions  of  their  own  convic 
tions  and  feelings,  and  of  the  processes  of  their  own 
thoughts  concerning  the  things  of  Christ,  would  be  to 
us  so  many  revelations  from  God  of  what  he  intended 
to  be  the  result  of  the  manifestation  of  his  Son  in  human 
hearts. 

Who  does  not  see  that  this  kind  of  teaching  would 
exceed  the  other  in  completeness  and  effectiveness  ?  It 
would  be  more  complete  ;  for  we  should  thus  have  the 
word  presented  to  us  in  the  final  form  which  it  was 
meant  to  take,  that,  namely,  of  a  word  dwelling  in  us — 
a  divine  announcement  changed  already  into  a  human 
experience.  It  would  be  more  effective ;  inasmuch  as 
example  is  more  so  than  precept,  and  the  same  voice, 
being  to  us  both  the  voice  of  God  and  the  voice  of  man, 
would  affect  our  hearts  with  the  double  power  of  cer 
tainty  and  sympathy.  Such  a  method  of  teaching  could 
only  be  possible,  under  some  system  of  divine  action 
which  should  fuse  into  one  the  thoughts  of  God  and  the 
thoughts  of  man  ;  and  this  was  effected  by  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  Apostles  for  the  work  whereto 
they  were  called. 

I  say  for  the  work  whereto  they  were  called,  for  the 
same  Spirit  is  diverse  in  operation,  and  divides  to  every 
man  severally  as  he  will.  When  the  Church  was  anointed 
from  above,  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  pervaded  her 
whole  frame,  'like  the  precious  ointment  on  the  head, 
which  ran  down  upon  the  beard,  even  upon  Aaron's 
beard,  and  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his  garments.' 


102  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

Even  'on  the  servants  and  on  the  handmaids'  did  the 
Lord  pour  out  of  his  Spirit,  and  the  supernatural  pre 
sence  was  disclosed  in  a  vast  scale  of  various  gifts,  rang 
ing  from  that  which  was  intense  and  supreme  to  that 
which  was  superficial  and  ancillary.  But  we  speak  now 
of  that  which  was  supreme.  '  First  Apostles?  The  oint 
ment  is  poured  first  upon  the  head  ;  and  from  thence 
the  glittering  drops  descend  upon  the  raiment.  All  the 
members  have  not  the  same  office  : — Are  all  Apostles  ? 
No !  the  authorities,  standards,  and  types  of  truth  are  so 
by  direct  commission,  and  the  gift  which  they  receive 
is  one  which  makes  them  so  indeed.  As  the  office,  so  is 
the  gift. 

An  incommunicable  office  has  an  incommunicable  gift. 
An  office  which  is  to  be  solitary  and  supreme  in  the 
Church  for  ever  has  a  gift  adequate  to  secure  the  implicit 
confidence  of  long-descending  ages. 

Voices  may  be  heard  among  us  now  which  tend  to 
impair  that  confidence  ;  complaints  of  the  distinctive  use 
of  the  word  'inspiration,'  as  applied  to  the  Scripture 
writers  ;  assertions  that  '  the  Scriptures  are  before  and 
above  all  things,  the  voice  of  the  congregation? 

On  what  do  these  complaints  and  assertions  rest  ? 
On  the  true  conviction,  that,  in  all  the  Church,  and  in 
all  ages,  there  is  the  presence  of  the  same  Spirit.  Yes  ! 
and  on  the  false  assumption,  that  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit 
are  to  all  the  same  gifts.  There  is  no  principle  in  the 
Bible  more  clear,  than  that  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit  are 
diverse,  and  are,  in  character  and  proportion,  adapted  to 
the  works  which  God  assigns,  and  appropriated  to  the 
offices  which  he  creates.  Now  it  is  certainly  one  thing 
to  be  a  member,  and  another  thing  to  be  a  founder,  of  the 
Church.  It  is  one  thing  to  receive  or  to  propagate  the 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  103 

truth,  and  another  to  deliver  it  with  the  authority  of 
God,  and  to  certify  it  to  the  world  for  ever. 

The  same  clear  view  of  the  way  of  salvation,  and  of 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  which  gladdened  the 
soul  of  St.  Paul,  might  gladden  the  soul  of  one  who  heard 
his  words,  and  may  now  gladden  the  soul  of  one  who 
reads  them.  For  both  there  is  the  same  Spirit  and  the 
same  testimony ;  but  the  Spirit  is  given  to  the  one,  that 
he  may  originate  that  testimony,  to  the  other,  that  he 
may  receive  it.  There  is  a  difference  between  being 
builded  into  the  holy  temple,  which  is  the  habitation  of 
God  through  the  Spirit,  and  being  constituted  a  founda 
tion,  on  which  the  future  building  is  to  rise  at  first  and 
to  rest  for  ever.  Such  was  the  separate  function  of  the 
Apostles  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour,  a  function  which 
they  shared  with  the  special  messengers  of  God  who 
went  before  them,  and  even  with  their  Lord  himself. 
'  Ye  are  built,'  said  they  to  their  brethren, — '  Ye  are  built 
on  the  foundations  of  the  Apostles  and  Prophets,  Jesus 
Christ  himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone  ».'  The  corner 
stone  is  but  part  of  the  foundation,  though  it  be  the  first 
and  the  chief  part ;  and  this  consolidation  of  the  corner 
stone  with  the  adjacent  foundations,  as  one  basement  to 
sustain  the  building,  exhibits  in  the  plainest  manner  the 
fact,  that  the  Church,  in  respect  of  its  faith,  rests  upon  a 
testimony  which  was  delivered,  partly  by  Jesus  Christ 
in  person,  and  partly  by  the  agents  whom  for  that  pur 
pose  he  ordained.  Their  inspiration  as  believers  asso 
ciates  them  with  the  whole  Church  ;  their  inspiration  as 
teachers  unites  them  only  with  their  Lord. 

The   consciousness   of.   this   position   appears    in   the 


104  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

records  of  their  preaching,  and  breathes  through  all  their 
writings  a  lofty  and  unyielding  authority.  They  speak 
as  men  having  the  Spirit  to  those  to  whom  it  is  also 
given,  yet  as  men  empowered  to  deliver  the  truth  which 
the  others  were  only  enabled  to  receive.  St.  Paul 
addresses  himself  to  '  those  that  are  spiritual,'  but  he 
shews  them  that  it  is  he,  and  not  they,  who  is  '  put  in 
trust  with  the  Gospel,'  and  that  the  word  which  he  utters 
is  one  to  which  they  can  add  nothing,  and  in  which  they 
can  change  nothing.  St.  John  exhorts  those  '  who  have 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,'  but  as  having  himself  a 
kind  of  anointing  in  which  they  do  not  share,  whereby 
he  delivers  the  '  message,'  and  the  '  witness,'  and  the 
'  commandment,'  which  they  on  their  part  recognise  and 
accept.  No !  the  voice  that  sounds  from  these  pages  is 
not  the  voice  of  the  congregation,  but  the  voice  of  those 
who  founded  it  by  the  will  of  God ;  and  that  character 
the  congregation  itself  has  asserted  for  the  word  in  all 
ages.  The  written  word  has  been  the  canon  of  the 
Church,  because  it  was  a  voice  which  came  to  it,  not 
because  it  was  a  voice  which  proceeded  from  it0. 

To  us  at  this  day  this  word  has  come  ;  and  to  us 
at  this  day  the  anointing  from  the  Holy  One  flows 
down.  For  you,  for  me,  (thank  God !)  the  teaching  of 
the  Spirit  remains.  It  remains  for  the  servants  and  the 
handmaids  :  and  many  an  obscure  and  lowly  brother  in 
the  streets  around  us  can  say  for  himself,  as  truly  as  St. 
Paul  could  say,  '  I  have  received  the  Spirit  that  is  of 
God,  that  I  may  know  the  things  which  are  freely  given 
to  me  of  God.'  But  one  who  thus  speaks  can  know 
that  his  convictions  are  really  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit 

0  See  Note  X. 


IV.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  105 

of  God  only  in  so  far  as  they  correspond  with  the  eternal 
types  of  truth,  which  ascertain  to  us  what  the  teaching 
of  the  Spirit  is.  Now,  as  in  those  apostolic  days,  he 
which  is  spiritual  can  shew  that  he  is  so,  only  '  by  ac 
knowledging  that  the  things  which '  those  appointed 
teachers  '  wrote  to  us  are  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord  ; '  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  others  is  not  a 
gift  whereby  they  originate  the  knowledge  of  new  truths, 
but  a  gift  whereby  they  recognise  and  apprehend  the  old 
unchanging  mystery,  still  receiving  afresh  the  one  reve 
lation  of  Christ,  ever  approaching,  never  overpassing  the 
comprehensive  but  immovable  boundaries  of  the  faith 
once  delivered  to  the  saints.  This  is  the  gift,  the  only 
gift,  which  we  desire  for  our  Church  and  for  ourselves  ; 
for  it  is  one  which  makes  the  written  word  a  living  word, 
which  fills  a  Church  with  joy,  and  seals  a  soul  for  glory. 


LECTURE   V. 


THE   ACTS   OF   THE   APOSTLES. 


ACTS  v.  42. 
They  ceased  not  to  teach  and  to  preach  Jesus  Christ. 

JESUS  CHRIST  is  gone  up  into  glory,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  come  down  into  men  :  and  we  have  seen  that 
these  events  are  represented  to  us,  not  as  closing  the 
course  of  revelation,  but  as  opening  a  new  stage  of  it. 
The  questions  which  met  us  on  the  threshold  have  been 
answered,  and  we  go  forward  with  the  full  assurance  that 
our  first  teacher  is  our  teacher  still,  and  that  his  second 
method  of  instruction  is  an  advance  upon  the  first. 

We  have  now  to  ask,  first,  What  change  appears  in  the 
aspect  of  the  doctrine  ?  and  then,  What  is  the  plan  on 
which  it  continues  to  advance  ? 

For  a  reply  to  these  questions  I  address  myself  to 
that  introductory  book  which  gives  us  the  external  his 
tory  of  this  part  of  the  dispensation  of  truth.  It  is  not 
the  function  of  a  historical  record  to  work  out  exposi 
tions  of  doctrine,  but  such  a  book  may  be  expected  to 
present  the  general  character  which  the  doctrine  bore,  and 
to  clear  to  our  view  the  agencies  and  the  stages  by  which 


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  I  Of 

it  was  matured.  This  is  precisely  what  is  done  in  the 
book  of  Acts.  It  is  the  purpose  of  the  book  to  do  it ;  a 
purpose  which  ought  to  be  more  fully  recognised  than 
it  is. 

There  are  works  which  are  done  with  so  natural  and 
graceful  a  facility,  that  it  seems  to  the  superficial  ob 
server  as  if  any  one  could  have  done  them,  or  as  if  he 
who  did  them  was  only  guided  by  casual  impulse,  while 
a  more  careful  student  will  perceive  that  singular  gifts 
were  necessary  to  produce  the  results  which  seem  so 
easy,  and  that  a  comprehensive  design  and  an  accurate 
judgment  presided  over  arrangements  which  appear  for 
tuitous.  Such  a  work  is  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  In 
a  narrative  all  alive  with  graphic  details,  and  written  in 
a  style  of  animated  simplicity  and  natural  ease,  it  carries 
us  through  a  period  of  human  history  of  incalculable 
interest  and  importance :  one  in  which  the  effects  of  the 
manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God  were  developed  and 
tested  ;  in  which  the  life  which  he  had  introduced  among 
men  disclosed  its  nature  and  power,  and  the  truth  which 
he  had  left  commenced  its  struggles  and  conquests ;  in 
which  the  Christian  Church  was  constituted,  gradually 
detached  from  its  Jewish  integuments,  and  brought  to 
the  consciousness  of  its  freedom  and  catholicity  ;  in 
which  it  verified  its  credentials,  proved  its  arms,  recog 
nised  its  destinies,  and  commenced  its  victories ;  in  which 
impulses  were  given  which  would  never  cease  to  vibrate, 
and  precedents  were  established  to  which  distant  ages 
would  refer ;  in  which  solemn  and  exciting  scenes,  mar 
vels  and  miracles,  saintly  and  heroic  characters,  their 
labours,  their  conflicts,  their  sufferings,  their  journeyings, 
their  collisions  with  all  classes  of  men,  seem  to  force 
upon  the  historian  a  confusing  multiplicity  of  materials. 


io8  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

Yet  through  all  this  he  makes  his  way  straight  in  one 
direction,  as  a  man  guided  by  that  instinct  of  selection 
which  belongs  to  the  ruling  presence  of  a  definite  pur 
pose.  It  is  just  this  definiteness  of  purpose  which  is  apt 
to  pass  unobserved.  It  is  nowhere  announced,  and  the 
unconstrained  freedom  of  manner  and  easy  inartificial 
style  suggest  no  thought  of  it.  We  seem  sometimes  .to 
be  reading  a  collection  of  anecdotes  or  personal  memoirs 
of  certain  Apostles,  and  some  critics  have  dealt  with 
the  book,  as  if  indeed  it  were  but  a  chance  collection  of 
stories  with  which  the  author  had  happened  to  become 
acquainted,  or  as  if  a  fragment  of  the  acts  of  St.  Peter 
had  been  prefixed  to  a  journal  of  the  travels  of  St.  Paul. 
But  we  know  St.  Luke's  intelligent,  enquiring  mind, 
his  opportunities  of  information,  his  '  perfect  understand 
ing  of  all  things  from  the  very  first,'  his  personal  inter 
course  with  those  'who  from  the  beginning  had  been 
eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word.'  We  cannot 
for  a  moment  suppose  that  his  acquaintance  with  the 
'acts  of  the  Apostles'  was  limited  to  the  facts  recorded 
in  the  book ;  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  proceedings 
of  John  or  James,  or  of  the  manifold  movements  and 
events  which  were  going  on  by  the  side  of  those  which 
he  has  related.  In  fact,  there  is  not  a  book  upon  earth 
in  which  the  principle  of  intentional  selection  is  more 
evident  to  a  careful  observer.  There  is  indeed  no  reason 
given,  why  one  speech  is  reported  and  one  event  related 
at  length,  in  preference  to  others  which  are  passed  over 
or  slightly  touched  ;  yet  when  we  reach  the  conclusion 
we  see  the  reasons  in  the  result.  We  find  that  by  an 
undeviating  course  we  have  followed  the  development  of 
the  true  idea  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  in  its  relations 
first  to  the  Jewish  system,  out  of  which  it  emerges,  and 


v.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  109 

then  to  the  great  world,  to  which  it  opens  itself.  When 
the  words  and  deeds  of  Philip  or  Stephen,  of  Peter  or 
Paul,  are  implicated  with  this  progress  of  things,  we 
find  ourselves  in  their  company,  but  when  we  part  from 
St.  Peter  without  notice  of  his  after-course,  when  we 
leave  St.  Paul  abruptly  at  the  commencement  of  his 
two  years  in  Rome,  we  are  given  to  understand  that  we 
have  been  reading,  not  their  personal  memoirs,  but  a 
higher  history,  which  certain  portions  of  their  careers 
serve  to  embody  or  to  illustrate.  Even  when  the  book 
is  considered  by  itself,  the  unity  and  completeness  of 
the  result  is  plain  ;  but  when  we  look  at  it  in  its  place 
in  Scripture,  observe  its  function  there,  and  its  relation 
to  the  books  which  follow,  we  see  most  clearly  the  defi 
nite  purpose  with  which  it  places  us  and  keeps  us  in 
that  particular  line  of  historical  fact  which  involves  the 
progress  of  doctrine. 

It  may  be  said  that  this  is  claiming  too  much  ;  for 
that,  whatever  amount  of  design  may  be  attributed  to 
the  author  of  the  '  Acts,'  we  cannot  ascribe  to  him  the 
prophetic  purpose  of  fitting  his  book  to  its  present  place 
in  Scripture.  No,  certainly  not  to  him  ;  but  the  Church 
has  ever  held  that  another  Mind  presided  over  what  was 
written  in  these  pages,  a  Mind  which  purposed  that  we 
should  have  a  Bible,  and  which,  guiding  the  production 
of  its  component  parts,  has  made  it  what  it  is. 

I  speak  in  accordance  with  this  view  of  Scripture  when 
I  ask,  What  is  the  office  which  the  book  of  Acts  fulfils 
in  the  evolution  of  doctrine  in  the  New  Testament  ? 

For  a  reply  to  this  question  I  would  point  to  three 
results  which  the  book  unquestionably  yields. 

i.  It  places  in  the  clearest  light  tJie  divine  authority 
of  the  doctrine  given  during  the  period  which  it  covers, 


no  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

as  a  doctrine  delivered  by  those  who,  for  that  particular 
purpose,  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  were 
agents  of  the  personal  administration  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  This,  the  first  and  most  important  part  of  the 
office  of  the  book,  has  been  considered  in  the  last 
Lecture. 

2.  It  represents  the  general  character  of  the  doctrine 
delivered  by  the  Apostles  to  the  world. 

3.  It  traces  the  steps  of  external  history  through  which 
the  doctrine  was  matured. 

These  are  the  parts  of  its  office  on  which  I  have  now 
to  dwell. 

I.  The  general  character  of  the  doctrine  as  it  appears 
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  is  presented  in  the  words  of 
the  text,  'They  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus 
the  Christ,'  (OVK  fTravovro  8t8dcncofTes  /cat  eiiayyeAi^o'/xerot 
'\r](Tovv  TOV  X/noroV).  Similar  expressions  continually  re 
cur :  'he  preached  Christ  unto  thema ;'  'he  preached 
unto  him  Jesusb;'  'he  preached  Christ  in  the  syna 
gogues0;'  they  'spake  unto  the  Grecians  preaching  the 
Lord  Jesus d ;'  'he  preached  unto  them  Jesus  and  the 
resurrection6.'  No  such  announcements  as  these  are 
heard  in  the  Gospels.  The  preaching  spoken  of  there 
is  not  of  the  person  but  of  the  kingdom.  Jesus  comes 
'preaching  the  kingdom  of  Godf;'  ' preaching  the  Gos 
pel  of  the  kingdom  s ;'  and  his  parables  and  common 
teaching  are  not  prominently  about  himself,  but  about 
'  the  kingdom  of  heaven.'  So  also  his  disciples  are  sent 
out '  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God,'  and  are  even  charged 
to  '  tell  no  man  that  he  was  Jesus  the  Christ h,'  and  are 

a  Acts  viii.  5.  b  Ibid.  35.  c  Ibid.  ix.  20. 

d  Acts  xi.  20.  e  Ibid.  xvii.  18.  f  Luke  ix.  2. 

e  Matt.  iv.  23,  and  Mark  i.  14.  h  Matt.  xvi.  20. 


v.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  in 

forbidden  to  publish  the  manifestations  of  the  fact  '  until 
the  Son  of  Man  be  risen  again  from  the  dead5.'  And 
because  of  the  absence  of  this  personal  proclamation  by 
himself  or  his  servants,  we  find  John  the  Baptist  troubled 
and  perplexed,  and  sending  a  deputation  of  his  followers 
in  the  hope  of  extracting  such  a  public  declaration  ;  and 
the  multitude  at  a  later  time  complain,  '  How  long  dost 
thou  make  us  to  doubt  ?  If  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us 
plainly  k  ;'  and  the  High  Priest,  at  the  very  last,  unable 
to  obtain  testimony  to  such  a  public  claim,  is  compelled 
to  resort  to  adjuration — 'Art  thou  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
the  Blessed  i?' 

The  change  in  the  key-note  of  the  preaching  is  very 
significant.  Things  had  been  tending  towards  it.  The 
presentation  of  Christ  to  men  had  been  going  forward, 
and  the  scheme  on  which  it  is  set  before  us  in  the  Gospel 
collection  marks  the  gradual  manner  in  which  the  eye, 
looking  for  the  kingdom,  had  come  to  be  fixed  upon  the 
person.  In  the  teaching  of  the  first  Gospel  the  idea  of 
the  kingdom,  in  that  of  the  last  the  idea  of  the  person, 
is  predominant.  In  the  Acts  the  two  expressions  are 
sometimes  united,  as  when  the  Samaritans  '  believed 
Philip  preaching  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  m :'  and  yet  again, 
with  more  evident  purpose,  in  the  end  of  the  book,  where 
Paul's  exposition  to  the  Jews  at  Rome  stands  as  the  last 
appeal  to  that  people — 'To  whom  he  expounded,  testi 
fying  the  kingdom  of  God  and  persuading  them  concern 
ing  Jesus  :'  and  yet  again  in  the  closing  verse,  which 
describes  the  two  years'  continuous  ministry  by  the 
words  'preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teaching 

'  Matt.  xvii.  9.  k  John  x.  24. 

1  Mark  xiv.  61.  m  Acts  viii.  12. 


112  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

those  things  which  concern  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ n.' 
Evidently  on  purpose  are  the  two  expressions  combined 
in  this  final  summary,  in  order  to  shew  that  the  preach 
ing  of  the  kingdom  and  the  preaching  of  Christ  are  one  : 
that  the  original  proclamation  has  not  ceased,  but  that 
in  Christ  Jesus  the  thing  proclaimed  is  no  longer  a  vague 
and  future  hope,  but  a  distinct  and  present  fact.  In  the 
conjunction  of  these  words  the  progress  of  doctrine 
appears.  All  is  founded  upon  the  old  Jewish  expecta 
tion  of  a  kingdom  of  God  ;  but  it  is  now  explained  how 
that  expectation  is  fulfilled  in  the  person  of  Jesus ;  and 
the  account  of  its  realization  consists  in  the  unfolding  of 
the  truth  concerning  him  (ra  -nepl  TOV  'I^aou).  The  mani 
festation  of  Christ  being  finished,  the  kingdom  is  already 
begun.  Those  who  receive  him  enter  into  it.  Having 
overcome  the  sharpness  of  death,  he  has  opened  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers.  Those,  therefore, 
who  were  once  to  '  tell  no  man  that  he  was  Christ,'  are 
now  to  make  '  all  the  house  of  Israel  know  assuredly 
that  God  has  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  they  had 
crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ ; '  yea,  they  are  to  pro 
claim  that  fact  to  every  nation  under  heaven. 

It  is,  I  apprehend,  by  this  change  in  the  character  of 
the  preaching,  that  we  are  to  explain  the  surprising 
difference  in  the  effect  of  the  preaching,  as  seen  in  the 
Gospels  and  in  the  Acts.  For  some  three  years,  prob 
ably,  did  Jesus  preach  in  the  Temple,  in  synagogues, 

n  Acts  xxviii.  23,  31.  ^iafj.aprvp6fi€vos  TTJV  BaaiKtiav  TOV  Qtov,  itti&wv  Tf 
avrovs  TcL  TTtpl  TOV  'lijaov.  ^ver.  23.)  Kqpvaauv  TTJV  Pao~i\(iav  TOV  Qtov, 
KOI  Si&dvKoov  TO.  irepl  TOV  Kvpiov  'Irjaov.  (\ei.  31.)  Compare  this  sum 
mary  of  the  apostolic  teaching  at  the  end  of  the  book  with  the  summary  of 
the  last  teaching  of  Jesus  at  its  beginning: — Si'  fiptpSiv  reaaapaicovTa  o-mavo- 
Hd'os  avrois  KOI  \eycav  TO.  irtpl  Trjs  paai\fias  TOV  Qtov.  (i.  3.) 


V.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  113 

in  houses,  on  the  seashore,  and  by  the  wayside  ;  yet  it  is 
obviously  but  a  scanty  band  of  professed  believers  whom, 
he  leaves  upon  the  earth,  and  these  too  appear  possessed 
but  with  a  dubious  and  uncertain  faith.     On  occasion  of 
an  important  gathering  in  Jerusalem,  'the    number   of 
names  together  were  about  an  hundred    and  twenty".' 
The    largest    number    we    ever   hear  of    is    that    men 
tioned   by   St.  Paul — '  above    five    hundred   brethren    at 
once  p  ;'  probably  the  collected  body  of  professed  followers 
of  Jesus.     But  a  few  days  later  Peter  lifts  up  his  voice, 
and  'the  same  day  there  were  added  unto  them  about 
three  thousand  souls  1.'     And  so  the  word  grows   and 
multiplies,  till   we  hear  of  '  a  great  company  of  priests 
obedient  to  the  faith r,'  and  '  many  ten-thousands  of  Jews 
which  believe s ;'    besides    the    suddenly-rising,    rapidly- 
growing   Churches  in    all    parts  of  the    Gentile   world. 
Men  have  sometimes    expressed    their  wonder   at    this 
difference  in  the  effect  of  the  Lord's  own  preaching  and 
of  that  of  his  disciples  ;    and   they  have  been    fain   to 
ascribe  it  to  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  which  wrought 
a  sudden  change  in  the  hearts  of  the  hearers.     But  we 
have  no  encouragement  to  suppose  that  the  three  thou 
sand  who  believed  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  received  any 
special  gift  of  the  Spirit  (such  as  originated  on  that  day) 
until  after  they  believed.     This  wras   promised  by  the 
Apostle  as  a  gift,  not  preceding,  but  ensuing  on  their 
baptism.     '  Repent,'  said  he,  '  and  be  baptized  every  one 
of   you  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ye  shall  receive 
the  gift   of  the   Holy  Ghost'      No!    It  is  not  on   the 
hearers,  but  on  the  preachers,  that  the  mighty  influence 
is  said  to  have  come.     The  true  reason  for  the  change  in 

0  Acts  i.  15.  P  i  Cor.  xv.  6.  i  Acts  ii.  41. 

r  Ibid.  vi.  7.  s  Ibid.  xxi.  20. 


ii4  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

the  effect  of  the  doctrine  is  found  in  the  change  which 
had  passed  upon  the  doctrine  itself,  when  '  the  Spirit  of 
truth  was  come'  to  fulfil  the  prediction  'He  shall  glorify 
me.'  Christ  was  not  preached  before  he  suffered;  after  he 
was  glorified  he  was.  In  the  former  period,  he  and  his 
followers  '  preached  the  kingdom  of  God  ;'  in  the  latter, 
'  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ.' 
Thus  the  great  change  in  the  effect  of  the  preaching, 
which  might  seem  at  first  sight  to  derogate  from  his 
glory,  is,  on  further  consideration,  seen  to  enhance  it. 
Only  when  it  is  possible  freely  and  fully  to  publish  the 
one  '  name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby 
they  must  be  saved,'  are  their  consciences  thoroughly 
roused  and  their  trust  decisively  secured.  So  has  it 
been,  and  so  shall  it  be  in  the  Church  for  ever.  Oh, 
that  the  apostolic  lesson  may  still  have  its  fruit  amongst 
ourselves !  that  our  evangelists  may  still  know  where 
their  power  lies !  and  especially  that  it  may  be  said  of 
all  who  go  forth  to  the  work  from  this  place,  '  They 
ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ !' 

2.  But  now  comes  the  question,  What  was  this  preach 
ing  of  Christ  ?  Some  have  paraphrased  it  as  the  preach 
ing  of  his  doctrine,  of  the  holy  lessons  which  he  taught. 
Some,  again,  as  the  setting  forth  of  his  holy  character, 
the  beauty  of  his  life,  and  the  attraction  of  his  love. 
But  if  this  were  the  main  idea  of  preaching  Christ,  then 
certainly  the  relative  effect  of  his  own  teaching  and  of 
that  of  his  disciples  ought  to  have  been  just  the  reverse 
of  what  it  was  ;  for  the  actual  hearing  of  the  gracious 
words  which  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth,  and  the  actual 
sight  of  his  holiness  and  love,  must  be  supposed  more 
effectual  than  the  mere  account  of  them  by  others. 
Then  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  have  gathered  the  thousands 


v.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  115 

and  his  disciples  the  hundreds  ;  and  the  faith  inspired 
in  the  first  period  ought  to  have  been  more  decided  and 
intense  than  that  awakened  in  the  second.  But  the 
contrary  was  the  case.  There  was  then  something  in 
the  later  preaching  which  was  not  present  in  the  earlier. 
Was  it  that  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  was  then  openly 
proclaimed,  which  men  had  before  been  left  to  infer  from 
the  things  which  they  heard  and  saw  ?  It  was  this — but 
more  than  this.  Not  only  was  the  fact  of  the  Messiah- 
ship  proclaimed,  but  the  nature  of  it  was  explained. 
The  Christ  who  was  now  proclaimed  was  one  who  had 
died  and  risen  again,  and  whom  the  heavens  had  re 
ceived  till  the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all  things.  In 
these  three  facts  the  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  God 
had  culminated,  and  in  them  the  true  character  of  his 
mission  had  appeared.  The  old  carnal  thoughts  of  it 
had  been  left  in  his  grave,  and  could  never  rise  from 
it  again.  It  was  the  '  Prince  of  life '  who  had  risen  from 
the  dead;  it  was  the  'King  of  glory'  who  had  passed 
into  the  heavens.  And  no  less  did  these  facts  declare 
the  spiritual  consequences  of  his  manifestation  ;  since  they 
carried  with  them  the  implication  of  those  three  corre 
sponding  gifts,  which  we  celebrate  for  evermore,  saying 
with  solemn  joy,  '  I  believe  .  .  .  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the  life  everlasting.' 

Towards  these  topics  the  preaching  of  Christ  in  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  continually  turns.  Observe  how 
the  first  and  present  blessing  (the  forgiveness  of  sins) 
is  ever  adduced,  as  the  result  of  the  wondrous  history 
which  the  chosen  witnesses  rehearse.  When  they  have 
told  of  the  cross  and  passion,  it  is  in  this  consequence 
flowing  from  it  unto  men  that  their  sermons  culminate 
and  close.  '  Him  hath  God  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and 

I  2 


n6  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness 
of  sins* ;'  '  Repent  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the  remission  of  sins11 ;' 
'  Repent  ye  therefore  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins 
may  be  blotted  outx;'  'Be  it  known  unto  you  therefore, 
men  and  brethren,  that  through  this  man  is  preached 
unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins  ;  and  by  him  all  that 
believe  are  justified  from  all  things  from  which'  ye  could 
not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Mosesy ;'  '  To  him  give  all 
the  prophets  witness  that,  through  his  name,  whosoever 
believeth  on  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins7-.' 

Such  is  the  burden  of  the  apostolical  preaching,  as 
exhibited  in  the  rapid  sketches  and  brief  summaries 
given  in  this  book.  It  is  a  doctrine  of  '  redemption 
by  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,'  conveying, 
through  the  simple  act  of  faith,  a  present  cleansing  to 
the  conscience,  as  the  necessary  qualification  for  the 
glory  which  is  to  follow. 

Then,  in  the  next  place,  that  glory  is  shewn  to  arise 
from  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  as  the  preparation  for  it 
does  from  his  sufferings.  I  need  not  remind  you  of  the 
'  great  power'  with  which,  from  one  end  of  the  book  to  the 
other,  'the  Apostles  give  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.'  Everywhere  they  preach  a  '  Christ  that  died, 
yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again.'  This  event  is  presented 
by  them  not  simply  as  the  seal  of  his  teaching,  or  more 
generally  (to  use  the  poor  and  shrunken  phrase  of  later 
times)  as  the  proof  of  his  divine  mission,  but  as  itself  the 
cause  and  the  commencement  of  that  new  world  and 
eternal  life  which  was  consciously  'the  hope  of  Israel,' 
and  unconsciously  the  hope  of  man.  Turn  especially  to 

*  Acts  v.  31.  u  Ibid.  ii.  38.  x  Ibid.  iii.  19. 

y  Ibid.  xiii.  38,  39.  z  Ibid.  x.  43. 


v.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  117 

the  latter  part  of  the  book,  and  study  the  position  taken 
by  St.  Paul  in  the  last  crisis  of  his  controversy  with  the 
Jews.  See  how  he  falls  back  upon  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  as  involving  the  realisation  of  the  hopes  of  his 
people  and  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  promises  of  God. 
Some  have  treated  as  a  mere  expedient  for  his  own 
deliverance  at  the  moment  that  one  voice  which  he 
cried  in  .the  Council,  '  Men  and  brethren,  I  am  a 
Pharisee,  the  son  of  a  Pharisee ;  of  the  hope  and  resur 
rection  of  the  dead  I  am  called  in  question?  But  he 
needed  no  expedient,  for  he  was  then  in  Roman  hands 
and  under  Roman  protection.  It  was  no  pretence  to 
serve  a  turn  ;  it  was  the  genuine  language  of  his  heart. 
In  all  his  other  speeches  at  this  crisis  the  same  idea 
reigns  predominant. 

'  I  stand  and  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promise 
made  of  God  unto  our  fathers  :  unto  which  promise  our 
twelve  tribes,  instantly  serving  God  day  and  night,  hope 
to  come :  for  which  hope's  sake,  King  Agrippa,  I  am 
accused  of  the  Jews.  Why  is  it  judged  by  you  a  thing 
incredible  if  God  raises  the  dead?'  It  is  the  self-same 
sound  which  we  heard  in  the  first  discourse  given  us 
from  his  lips,  when  he  cried  to  the  Jews  of  the  Pisidian 
Antioch,  '  Now  we  declare  unto  you  glad  tidings,  how 
that  the  promise  which  was  made  unto  the  fathers,  God 
hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us  their  children,  in  that  he 
hath  raised  tip  Jesus  again' 

And  when  we  read  his  mind  upon  this  subject  more 
fully  in  I  Cor.  xv.,  and  indeed  in  the  whole  of  his 
writings,  we  see  how  truly  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
did,  in  his  view,  include  the  realisation  of  all  the  hopes 
with  which  the  old  covenant  was  pregnant ;  how  entirely 
it  was  to  him  the  cause  and  actual  commencement,  as  well 


n8  TffE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

as  the  pledge  and  promise,  of  the  resurrection  and  the 
life  to  man. 

But  I  must  not  go  further  into  this  subject.  I  had 
only  to  indicate  that  the  general  character  of  the  doc 
trine  which  appears  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  is  an 
advance  upon  that  delivered  in  the  Gospels.  I  say  that 
it  is  so,  inasmuch  as  it  does  more  than  merely  testify  to 
the  facts  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  as  (to  use  an 
imperfect  illustration)  the  summing  up  of  a  judge  is  an 
advance  upon  the  evidence  on  which  it  is  founded,  since 
it  adds  to  the  rehearsal  of  that  evidence  the  selection  of 
its  critical  points,  the  representation  of  their  force  and 
bearing,  and  the  intimation  of  the  conclusions  to  which 
they  lead.  Thus  does  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles 
sum  up  the  result  of  all  that  the  Gospels  have  disclosed, 
by  the  direct  preaching  of  Jesus  to  men's  souls,  and  by 
preaching  him  especially  as  the  Christ  who  has  been 
perfected  by  death  and  resurrection ;  by  death  which 
provides  for  the  present  necessities  of  conscience  in  the 
forgiveness  of  sins,  and  by  resurrection  which  provides 
for  the  longings  and  hopes  of  the  soul  in  the  life  ever 
lasting.  The  messengers  of  God  in  this  book  cease  not 
to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  the  Christ,  as  a  Saviour  by 
these  means  and  in  this  sense. 

II.  It  is,  however,  the  book  not  of  the  words,  but  of 
the  acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  we  accordingly  find  in  it 
the  intimations  rather  than  the  expositions  of  doctrine. 
It  assists  our  present  enquiry  in  a  manner  more  appro 
priate  to  its  historical  character,  by  laying  down  for  us 
the  course  of  external  events  through  which  the  doctrine 
was  matured. 

I  have  already  adverted  to  the  systematic  plan  of  the 
book,  as  following  out  this  course  of  events  with  the 


V.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  119 

instinct  of  an  undeviating  purpose.  It  carries  us  straight 
from  the  Gospels  to  the  Epistles,  as  the  span  of  some 
great  bridge  continues  the  road  between  dissevered  re 
gions.  Take  it  away  and  what  a  chasm  appears !  '  Paul, 
an  Apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  saints  that  are  in  Rome, 
in  Corinth,  Thessalonica,  Philippi,  Galatia,  Ephesus,  Co- 
lossse.'  Who  is  this  Paul,  and  in  what  sense  is  he  an 
Apostle?  We  knew  him  not  when  the  twelve  were 
ordaiied.  We  saw  him  not  among  the  witnesses  of  the 
resuriection.  How  came  the  Gospel  to  these  places  ? 
and  is  it  the  same  Gospel  for  these  Gentiles  as  it  was 
for  the  Jews  ?  As  for  James,  and  Peter,  and  John,  and 
Jude,  \ve  know  and  revere  their  commission  :  but  we  saw 
them  ast  in  partial  ignorance  and  error,  and  we  hardly 
know  what  the  value  of  their  words  may  be. 

We  have  noted  on  a  former  occasion  the  answers  to 
these  questions  which  the  book  of  Acts  supplies — the 
anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  qualifying  the  men  to  fulfil 
the  commission  which  they  had  received,  the  guidance 
of  Christ  given  to  their  steps  and  his  attestations  to 
ther  words  and  works,  the  call  and  commission  of  St.  Paul 
and  his  special  appointment  to  a  special  work,  and  the 
spread  of  the  Gospel  in  the  world,  and  the  rise  of  the 
Gertile  Churches.  By  means  of  this  information  we  are 
broight  to  the  point  at  which  we  can  open  the  apostolic 
writngs,  first  with  a  due  sense  of  their  divine  authority, 
and  then  with  a  sufficient  acquaintance  with  the  persons, 
scenes,  and  facts  with  which  they  are  connected,  and  (I 
ma>  further  add)  with  effective  supports  to  our  convic- 
tionof  their  genuineness  and  authenticity.  But  neither 
of  tlese  functions  of  the  book  is  precisely  that  for  which 
we  low  enquire.  Between  Gospels  and  Epistles  there  is 
neec  for  a  connection  of  a  more  internal  kind.  During 


120  THE  ACTS  OF    THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

the  intervening  time  the  doctrine  was  not  only  spread 
ing,  it  was  clearing  and  forming  itself,  or  rather  was 
being  cleared  and  formed  by  the  hand  of  its  Divine 
Author.  This  was  effected  through  a  certain  line  of 
events  and  through  the  agency  of  particular  persons. 
With  these  events  and  persons  the  book  of  Acts  is 
occupied. 

It  begins  at  Jerusalem,  it  ends  at  Rome.  Between 
these  two  points  questions  have  been  settled,  principles 
carried  out,  and  divinely  implanted  tendencies  disclosed. 
Especially  have  the  relations  of  the  Gospel  to  Jev  and 
Gentile  been  fixed  for  ever.  We  see  how  all  the  story 
progressively  ministers  to  this  result. 

First  Peter  presents  the  Gospel  as  the  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  and  completion  of  the  covenant  made  wi:h  the 
fathers.  Then  the  Hellenist  element  seems  to  ellipse 
the  Hebrew,  and  Stephen  rises  to  reason  and  to  die. 
A  large  space  is  therefore  given  to  the  speech,  kvhich 
sets  forth  the  progressive  nature  of  the  dealings  oi^  God 
with  Israel,  and  shews  the  drift  of  that  current  of  thought 
on  which  we  are  launched.  The  death  of  Stepher  is 
not  only  an  individual  martyrdom,  like  that  of  Jameg  so 
briefly  mentioned  afterwards  ;  it  is  a  great  crisis,  ind 
stands  as  such  in  the  narrative,  with  a  clear  intimaiion 
of  the  position  which  was  assumed  on  the  one  side  ind 
rejected  on  the  other.  Straightway  the  Gospel  sprads. 
First  Hebrew,  then  Hellenist,  by  the  ministry  of  Plilip 
it  soon  becomes  Samaritan,  and  at  the  next  step  by  :hat 
of  Peter  goes  in  to  men  uncircumcised.  In  the  stor^  of 
Cornelius,  we  have  a  detailed  statement  of  the  mean,  by 
which  the  Lord  manifested  his  will,  that  the  Geniles 
should  hear  the  word  and  believe.  Then  we  pass  f-om 
the  side  of  Peter  to  that  of  the  new  Apostle,  to  wlom 


V.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  121 

the  carrying  out  of  this  principle  is  committed.  Antioch 
becomes  our  starting-point,  where  the  disciples  are  first 
called  Christians.  We  follow  the  steps  of  the  traveller, 
and  see  far  and  wide  that  God  hath  also  to  the  Gentiles 
granted  repentance  unto  life.  Then  an  opposing  power 
is  felt  within  the  Church,  and  Christian  Judaism  asserts 
that  there  is  departure  from  the  original  scheme.  The 
Council  meets,  and  by  testimonies  of  Scripture  and  of 
fact  infers  the  verdict  of  God,  and  issues  the  high  de 
cision,  '  It  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to  us.' 
Then,  and  not  till  then,  Europe  is  entered,  and  the  great 
centres  of  Greek  life  are  occupied  ;  but  still  in  every 
place  does  the  Apostle  address  himself  first  to  the  Jews, 
and  everywhere  they  reject  and  persecute  him.  Finally, 
he  returns  to  the  head-quarters  of  the  nation,  and  pre 
sents  himself  there  with  every  circumstance  of  concilia 
tion,  but  claiming  his  place  in  the  covenant  and  as  a 
preacher  of  the  hope  of  Israel.  The  scenes  and  speeches 
of  that  crisis  are  given  with  fulness,  because  they  define 
the  position  of  the  Christianity  which  St.  Paul  represents 
towards  the  Jewish  system,  and  its  final  and  furious  re 
jection  by  the  Jewish  peopled  'Believing  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  Law  and  in  the  Prophets,  and 
having  committed  nothing  against  the  people  or  customs 
of  his  fathers ll,'  he  and  his  creed  are  forced  from  their 
proper  home.  On  it  as  well  as  him  the  Temple  doors 
are  shut.  Lastly,  before  the  Jews  at  Rome  he  closes  the 
long  struggle  with  the  peroration  furnished  him  by  pro 
phecy : — 'Well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by  Esaias  the 
prophet  unto  our  fathers,  saying,  Go  unto  this  people 

»  Not,  as  some  have  put  it,  because  Luke  happened  to  be  present.   Rather, 
Luke  was  present  because  the  scenes  and  speeches  were  to  be  reported. 
b  Acts  xxiv.  14;  xxviii.  17. 


122  THE  ACTS  OF   THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 


and  say,  Hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not  under 
stand  ;  and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  not  perceive.  For 
the  heart  of  this  people  is  waxed  gross,  and  their  ears 
are  dull  of  hearing,  and  their  eyes  have  they  closed  ; 
lest  they  should  see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their 
ears,  and  understand  with  their  heart,  and  should  be 
converted,  and  I  should  heal  them.  Be  it  known  there 
fore  unto  you,  that  the  salvation  of  God  is  sent  unto  the 
Gentiles,  and  that  they  will  hear  itc.' 

Now  let  no  man  think  that  the  rejection  of  Jews  and 
admission  of  Gentiles  were  the  only  result  of  this  long 
history.  Another  result  has  been  involved  in  it :  Chris 
tianity  itself  has  been  finally  drawn  out  of  Judaism,  the 
delicate  and  intricate  relations  of  the  two  systems  being 
dealt  with  in  such  a  way,  that  (so  to  speak)  the  texture 
of  living  fibre  has  been  lifted  unimpaired  out  of  its 
former  covering,  leaving  behind  only  a  residuum  of  what 
was  temporary,  preparatory,  and  carnal.  In  fact,  the 
doctrine  of  the  Gospel  has  been  cleared  and  formed  ; 
cleared  of  the  false  element  which  the  existing  Judaism 
would  have  infused  into  it,  and  formed  of  the  true  ele 
ments  which  the  old  covenant  had  been  intended  to  pre 
pare  for  its  use. 

Two  great  principles,  it  seems  to  me,  were  fought  for 
and  secured,  which  may  be  expressed  (though  not  with 
strict  accuracy)  by  saying  that  the  Gospel  is  the  sub 
stitute  for  the  Law,  and  that  the  Gospel  is  the  heir  of  the 
Law. 

a.  In  saying  that  the  Gospel  is  the  substitute  for  the 
Law,  I  do  not  mean  that  it  is  so,  as  doing  what  the  Law 
had  done  before  it  came,  nor  yet  as  doing  what  the  Law 

c  Acts  xxviii.  25-28. 


V.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  123 

had  been  meant,  but  had  failed,  to  do  ;  but  only  as  doing 
that  which  the  Law  had  been  supposed  to  do.  The 
Gospel  provides  for  individual  souls  the  means  of  justifi 
cation  and  the  title  to  eternal  life.  This  the  Law  had 
not  done,  had  not  been  meant  to  do,  and  by  Prophets 
and  Psalmists  had  been  asserted  not  to  do.  Yet  it  had 
sunk  deep  into  the  mind  of  those  who  were  under  it, 
that  this  was  the  very  thing  which  it  did.  Scribes 
taught  distinctly,  and  the  people  wrere  possessed  with 
the  idea,  that  there  had  been  a  Law  given  which  could 
give  life,  and  that  righteousness  was  by  that  Law.  Here 
was  the  conviction  which  had  entwined  itself  with  their 
patriotism  and  their  religion.  Here  was  their  pride  and 
boast,  and  the  prerogative  which  severed  them  from  all 
mankind.  Then,  as  now,  they  looked  for  a  Messiah, 
who  was  to  perfect  the  keeping  of  the  Law,  and  (in 
some  sense)  to  save  other  nations  by  reducing  them  to 
its  obedience,  and  (as  appeared  in  the  sequel)  many 
received  Jesus  himself  as  the  Messiah,  without  any  ma 
terial  change  in  that  idea.  But  when  the  death  of  Jesus 
was  preached  as  procuring,  and  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
as  originating  eternal  life,  and  when  the  simple  act  of 
faith  in  him  was  proclaimed  as  the  means  of  sharing  it, 
the  antagonism  of  the  two  doctrines  appeared. 

It  was  first  in  the  arguments  of  Stephen,  and  after 
wards  in  the  preaching  of  Paul,  that  this  particular 
feature  of  the  Christian  system  made  itself  felt  in  its 
bearing  on  the  great  Jewish  error.  Hence  the  passion, 
the  virulence,  and  the  rancour  with  which  the  two  men 
were  pursued.  '  This  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blas 
phemous  words  against  this  holy  place  and  the  lawd ' — • 

d  Acts  vi.  13. 


124  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

so  ran  the  accusation  against  the  first  martyr :  and  years 
afterwards  the  superintendent  of  his  execution  heard 
the  same  words  shrieked  out  against  himself,  '  Men  of 
Israel,  help !  This  is  the  man  who  teacheth  all  men 
everywhere  against  the  people,  and  the  law,  and  this 
place e.'  False  and  odious  allegations  !  Yet  the  doctrine 
of  which  the  two  men  were  the  great  exponents  did 
really  involve  a  flat  contradiction  of  the  prevailing 
Jewish  theory  about  the  people,  and  the  law,  and  that 
place.  Within  the  Christian  Church  the  same  theory 
held  its  ground,  and  in  that  quarter  cost  the  Apostle  a 
still  closer  and  keener  conflict,  in  order  to  vindicate  and 
establish  for  Jew  as  well  as  Gentile  the  great  principle, 
'  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faithV  or,  as  St.  Peter 
expressed  the  same  truth,  'Through  the  grace  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  shall  be  saved,  even  as  they?.' 

Still  the  anxious  pastor  in  his  parish,  still  the  self- 
observant  Christian  in  his  own  heart,  learns  how  deep- 
seated  and  how  stubborn  is  that  principle  in  human 
nature,  which  seeks  the  starting-point  of  salvation  in 
self  rather  than  in  God,  in  doing  rather  than  in  receiving, 
in  work  rather  than  in  grace.  By  the  common  Jewish 
theory  of  the  Law,  that  principle  had  fortified  itself 
strongly,  and  clothed  itself  gloriously,  with  the  usurped 
sanctions  of  God.  The  Judaising  doctrine  would  have 
perpetuated  that  usurpation  in  the  Christian  Church, 
and  in  so  doing,  would  have  neutralised  the  Gospel  itself. 
The  keen  eye  of  the  selected  champion  saw  in  a  moment 
the  fatal  consequences  of  customs  turned  into  doctrines, 
which  others,  who  believed  as  he  did,  were  perhaps 
inclined  to  regard  with  indulgence,  as  signs  of  an 
affectionate  veneration  for  ancient  ordinances. 

e  Acts  xxi.  28.  ''  Eph.  ii.  8.  «  Acts  xv.  n. 


v.]  THE  ACTS  OF   THE  APOSTLES.  12$ 

In  his  writings  we  see  how  his  penetrating  eye  dis 
cerned  the  danger,  and  how  his  unsparing  hand  averted 
it :  we  see  also  that  the  intuitive  discernment  and  the 
impulsive  vigour  were  the  result  of  a  deep  personal  ex 
perience,  both  of  the  error  which  he  resisted,  and  of  the 
truth  which  he  defended.  In  the  Acts  we  are  carried 
through  the  period  of  this  contest  in  the  outward  course 
of  events,  and  when  the  history  ceases  in  the  hired  house 
at  Rome,  the  Gospel  has  fought  itself  free,  and  severed 
itself  from  Judaism,  not  merely  in  its  form,  but  in  its 
essence,  proclaiming  salvation  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  Law. 

(3.  The  other  principle  which  is  contended  for  and 
secured  is,  that  the  Gospel  is  the  heir  of  the  Law ;  that 
it  inherits  what  the  Law  had  prepared.  The  Law,  on 
its  national  and  ceremonial  side,  had  created  a  vast 
and  closely-woven  system  of  ideas.  These  were  wrought 
out  and  exhibited  by  it  in  forms  according  to  the  flesh — 
an  elect  nation,  a  miraculous  history,  a  special  covenant, 
a  worldly  sanctuary,  a  perpetual  service,  an  anointed 
priesthood,  a  ceremonial  sanctity,  a  scheme  of  sacrifice 
and  atonement,  a  purchased  possession,  a  holy  city,  a 
throne  of  David,  a  destiny  of  dominion.  Were  these 
ideas  to  be  lost,  and  the  language  which  expressed  them 
to  be  dropped,  when  the  Gospel  came  ?  No  !  It  was  the 
heir  of  the  Law.  The  Law  had  prepared  these  riches, 
and  now  bequeathed  them  to  a  successor  able  to  unlock 
and  to  diffuse  them.  The  Gospel  claimed  them  all,  and 
developed  in  them  a  value  unknown  before.  It  asserted 
itself  as  the  proper  and  predestined  continuation  of  the 
covenant  made  of  God  with  the  fathers,  the  real  and  only 
fulfilment  of  all  which  was  typified  and  prophesied  ;  pre 
senting  the  same  ideas,  which  had  been  before  embodied 


126  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

in  the  narrow  but  distinct  limits  of  carnal  forms,  in  their 
spiritual,  universal,  and  eternal  character.  The  body  of 
types  according  to  the  flesh  died  with  Christ,  and  with 
Christ  it  arose  again  a  body  of  antitypes  according  to 
the  Spirit.  Those  who  were  after  the  flesh  could  not 
recognise  its  identity  :  those  who  were  after  the  Spirit 
felt  and  proclaimed  it.  The  change  was  as  great,  the 
identity  was  as  real,  as  in  that  mystery  of  the  resur 
rection  of  the  body  which  the  same  preachers  shewed  : 
in  which  the  earthly  frame  must  lay  aside  the  flesh  and 
blood  which  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
must  re-appear,  dead  and  raised  again,  another  and  yet 
the  same,  '  sown  in  weakness  and  raised  in  power,  sown 
in  dishonour  and  raised  in  glory,  sown  a  natural  body 
and  raised  a  spiritual  body.' 

But  I  should  speak  amiss,  if  I  left  it  to  appear  that 
the  Gospel  inherited  the  ideas  only  of  the  preceding  dis 
pensation,  and  not,  in  one  sense,  their  form  also.  Their 
written  form  it  did  inherit,  unchanged  and  unchangeable. 
The  Law  and  the  Prophets,  as  scriptures,  as  a  book,  were 
still  under  the  new  dispensation  what  they  had  been 
under  the  old — the  voice  of  the  Spirit  and  the  word  of 
God.  Nay !  this  written  word  belonged  to  the  new 
dispensation  more  truly  than  to  the  old,  for  these  scrip 
tures  also  were  now  raised  to  newness  of  life,  and  were 
recognised  as  prepared  for  the  uses  to  which  they  were 
now  applied,  and  written  less  for  the  immediate  than  for 
the  ulterior  purposes ;  as  St.  Peter  has  expressed  it, 
'  Not  unto  themselves,  but  unto  us  they  did  minister  the 
things  which  are  now  reported  unto  you  by  them  that 
have  preached  the  Gospel  unto  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost 
sent  down  from  heaven  h.'  This  is  ever  the  position  of 

h  l  Peter  i.  12. 


v.]  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  127 

St.  Paul,  for,  as  one  has  truly  said,  '  None  of  the  Apostles 
has  laid  such  stress  upon  the  Holy  Scripture,  as  the 
Apostle  of  the  Spirit  and  liberty'.'  And  as  this  ap 
pears  in  his  writings,  so  does  it  also  in  the  history.  From 
his  first  reported  speech  at  the  Pisidian  Antioch  k,  which 
bases  all  upon  the  Scriptures,  still  he  goes  on  with  the 
Scriptures  in  his  hand,  till  he  stands  and  is  judged, 
'  believing  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  Law  and  in 
the  Prophets ] ; '  and  finally  parts  from  the  Roman  Jews 
after  '  persuading  them  concerning  Jesus,  both  out  of 
the  Law  of  Moses  and  out  of  the  Prophets,  from  morning 
till  evening™.'  This  then  is  the  position  taken  at  the 
beginning  and  fought  for  to  the  end  ;  and  it  is  a  striking 
sight  to  see  how  resolutely  St.  Paul  insists  that  he  and 
his  doctrine  are  the  true  representatives  of  the  Law  and 
the  Prophets,  while  he  is  being  persecuted  and  cast  out, 
as  having  betrayed  and  blasphemed  them. 

These  two  principles — what  the  Gospel  does  without 
the  Law,  and  what  the  Gospel  derives  from  the  Law — 
do  in  fact  contain  the  main  substance  of  apostolic  teach 
ing.  On  the  one  side,  the  principle  that  men  are  'justified 
freely  by  God's  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Christsjesus11'  is  laid  as  the  deep  foundation  of  all  the 
various  forms  and  applications  of  evangelical  truth.  On 
the  other,  the  principle  that  the  same  things  which  were 
done  under  the  old  covenant  in  the  region  of  the  flesh 
are  done  under  the  new  covenant  in  the  region  of  the 
spirit,  opens  out  into  the  doctrine  of  the  mediatorial 
work  of  Christ  in  the  true  tabernacle,  the  sacrificial 
character  of  his  death,  the  atoning  virtue  of  his  blood, 

'  Baumgarten  on  the  Acts,  vol.  iii.  78  (Clarke's  Tr.). 

k  Acts  xv.  13-41.  l  Ibid.  xxiv.  14. 

m  Ibid,  xxviii.  23.  n  Rom.  iii.  24. 


128  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  [LECT. 

the  sanctification  of  believers  as  a  kingdom  of  priests 
and  an  holy  nation,  and  their  destined  inheritance  in  a 
promised  land  and  a  holy  city  of  their  God.  The  ex 
pansion  of  these  doctrines  fills  and  forms  all  the  Epistles, 
and  each  is  distinctly  wrought  ovit  by  itself,  the  one  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  at  the  beginning,  the  other 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  at  the  end,  of  the  course 
of  the  Pauline  writings. 

It  is  in  the  Epistles  themselves  that  we  behold  this 
expansion  and  formation  of  doctrine.  In  the  Book  of 
Acts  we  are  conversant  rather  with  the  providential  cir 
cumstances  through  which  the  result  was  obtained.  Great 
principles  are  wrought  out  and  settled  in  men's  minds  only 
through  some  such  process  as  is  here  disclosed  ;  namely, 
by  persons  raised  up  to  represent  them,  by  consultations, 
reasonings,  debates  concerning  them,  by  events  which 
compel  their  more  distinct  assertion  and  test  their 
hidden  strength,  and  by  the  action  of  opposing  principles, 
firmly  resisted  in  their  fierce  assaults,  or  instinctively 
rejected  in  their  subtle  approaches.  This,  the  common 
course  of  the  development  and  establishment  of  all 
principles,  is  here  presented  to  us  as  carried  on  under 
the  manifested  guidance  of  the  Lord  himself;  who,  by 
special  interventions,  raises  up  the  persons,  guides  the 
events,  and  certifies  the  issues  with  his  own  signature 
and  seal. 

Blessing  and  praise  be  unto  his  holy  name,  because  he 
has  done  this !  For  he  has  thus  added  to  the  manifes 
tation  of  himself  his  own  direction  as  to  the  way  in 
which  it  is  to  be  used.  On  what  a  sea  of  uncertainties 
we  should  else  have  been  launched !  Observe  the  vague 
and  wavering  doctrine  which  ensues,  whenever  the  divine 
attestation  of  the  apostolical  teaching  meets  with  dis- 


V.]  THE  ACTS  OF   THE  APOSTLES.  129 

credit  or  mistrust.  Now  the  Gospel  is  nothing  but  a 
republication,  pure  and  perfect,  of  the  Law  of  God  ;  now 
it  is  a  proclamation  of  his  universal  fatherhood  ;  now  an 
exhibition  of  the  beauty  of  holiness  and  the  attraction  of 
love ;  now  the  revelation  of  a  righteous  King  and  Head 
of  the  human  race ;  now  it  seems  little  else  than  a  ne 
gation,  a  sweeping  away  of  all  the  ideas  which  a  teaching 
supposed  to  be  divine  had  fashioned  through  preceding 
ages.  So  it  is  when  men  proceed,  as  if  the  summing  up 
of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  had  not  been  done  for 
them,  but  was  left  for  them  to  do.  From  all  partial  or 
perverted  representations  our  refuge  is  with  those  who 
were  actually  commissioned  to  do  it,  and  who,  under  a 
divine  guidance  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  that  com 
mission,  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ. 
Through  the  blessed  ordinance  of  a  written  word  they 
have  not  ceased  to  do  so  now.  To  us.  even  to  us  who 
are  here  alive  this  day,  they  preach  him  still ;  a  Christ 
'  who  died  for  our  sins  and  rose  again  for  our  justifica 
tion  ;'  a  Christ  who  saves  without  the  Law,  yet  one  who 
is  witnessed  by  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.  So  they 
preach,  and  so  we  believe.  This  was  the  beginning  of 
the  confidence  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  to  the 
Church  at  its  birth,  and  this  beginning  it  will  hold  firm 
unto  the  end.  It  is  for  us  to  see  that  we  bear  our  part  in 
the  long  history  of  the  faith,  finding  its  reality  in  the  joy 
of  our  own  salvation,  and  transmitting  its  testimony  to 
the  generation  to  come. 


K 


LECTURE  VI. 


THE   EPISTLES. 


ROM.  i.  1-7. 

Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  called  to  be  <?»  Apostle,  separated 
unto  the  gospel  of  God  ...  To  all  that  be  in  Rome,  beloved  of  God,  called 
to  be  saints :  grace  to  you  and  peace  from  God  our  Father,  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ, 

I  HESE  words  are  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  long 
superscription  which  opens  the  series  of  Apostolic  Epi 
stles.  That  superscription  forms  a  close  and  living  union 
with  the  preceding  book,  in  which  we  have  known  Paul 
the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  his  calling  to  be  an  Apostle, 
his  separation  to  the  gospel  of  God,  and  have  left  him  at 
its  close  testifying  to  that  gospel  in  Rome  itself.  A  still 
more  intimate  union  will  disclose  itself  to  any  one  who 
studies  the  position  which  he  takes  up  for  his  gospel  and 
himself  in  the  Book  of  Acts,  and  then  considers  the  suc 
cinct  and  explicit  assertion  of  the  same  position  in  the 
intervening  verses  of  this  superscription,  where  he  charac 
terises  the  gospel  to  which  he  was  separated  as  that 
'  which  God  had  promised  afore  by  his  prophets  in  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  concerning  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 


THE  EPISTLES.  131 


Lord,  who  was  made  of  the  seed  of  David  according  to 
the  flesh ;  and  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with 
power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resur 
rection  from  the  dead  :  by  whom,'  he  adds,  '  we  have 
received  grace  and  apostleship  for  obedience  to  the  faith 
among  all  nations,  for  his  name  :  among  whom  are  ye 
also  the  called  of  Jesus  Christ.'  Here  the  Apostle  seems 
to  stand  before  us  as  he  did  in  the  previous  history, 
firmly  holding  his  ground  in  the  prophetic  and  historic 
line  of  the  old  covenant,  and  from  that  standing  point 
opening  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  which  has  its 
source  and  its  pledge  in  the  resurrection,  and  claiming 
'  all  nations '  for  the  '  obedience  otfaitk? 

This  witness  of  continuity  is  especially  important  in 
passing  from  the  apostolic  history  to  the  apostolic 
writings,  since  the  history  gains  significance  from  the 
doctrine,  and  the  doctrine  derives  authority  from  the 
history.  The  persons  and  events  in  the  Book  of  Acts 
are  important  because  they  were  ordained  for  the  work 
ing  out  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.  But  what  is  that 
truth  which  they  worked  out  ? 

Summaries  of  its  general  character  occur  in  that  book 
continually,  and  the  points  which  are  being  cleared  and 
established  are  strongly  indicated  :  but  we  have  only 
summaries  and  indications,  and  the  sketches  of  doctrines 
presented  to  us  are  taken  rather  from  without  than 
from  within.  If  we  except  the  debate  in  the  council  of 
Jerusalem  and  the  charge  to  the  elders  of  Miletus, 
all  the  discourses  reported  in  this  book  are  addressed 
to  those  who  are  not  yet  Christians.  So  Christ  was 
preached  to  the  world — but  how  was  he  taught  to  the 
Church  ? 

This  element  is  wanting  in  the  history :  yet  it  is  one 

K  2 


132  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

which  we  should  have  naturally  looked  to  find  ;  and,  as 
we  are  brought  into  contact  with  so  many  Churches,  on 
whose  incipient  and  unsettled  Christianity  the  labour  of 
St.  Paul  was  spent,  its  absence  is  really  remarkable.  We 
are  told  how  he  passed  two  years  at  Ephesus,  and  a  year 
and  a  half  at  Corinth,  '  teaching  the  word  of  God  among 
them,'  how,  revisiting  his  Churches,  '  he  gave  them  much 
exhortation,'  and  how  he  '  was  long  preaching '  in  one 
assembly  or  another  of  the  brethren  :  but  no  particulars 
of  these  preachings,  teachings,  and  exhortations  are 
given  :  and,  considering  that  we  have  specimens  of  every 
kind  of  address  to  those  that  are  without,  we  might  well 
ask,  why  there  is  no  example  to  shew  how  men  were 
taught  after  they  had  believed.  But  they  who  hold  that 
the  scheme  of  Scripture  as  a  whole  is  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
will  not  ask  that  question ;  for  they  see  that  this  omis 
sion  is  part  of  a  plan,  which  provides  this  information  for 
us  in  a  more  worthy  and  perfect  way ;  namely,  by 
placing  in  our  hands  the  collection  of  Apostolic  Epi 
stles. 

These  writings  are  addressed  to  those  who  are  already 
Christians;  as  our  text  describes  them,  'called  of  Christ 
Jesus — beloved  of  God — called  saints.'  Such  high  titles, 
repeated  in  the  successive  superscriptions,  warn  us  that 
we  are  here  in  the  esoteric  circle  of  doctrine.  Whatever 
progress  of  doctrine  these  writings  exhibit,  that  fact  is 
the  key  to  it.  It  must  be  a  distinctly  subjective  progress, 
working  out  the  results  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in 
the  consciousness  of  men. 

Observe  the  point  at  which  we  have  arrived,  by  the 
time  that  we  finish  the  Book  of  Acts,  and  open  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans.  The  facts  of  the  manifestation 
of  CJirist  have  been  completed,  and  have  been  testified 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  133 

in  all  fulness  and  certainty  by  the  witnesses  chosen  of 
God.  They  have  not  only  testified  of  the  facts,  they 
have  summed  them  up ;  have  announced  their  scope 
and  purpose  in  the  counsels  of  God,  as  effecting  the 
redemption  of  the  world,  and  have  called  men  to  par 
take  in  the  fruits  of  that  redemption  by  believing  and 
being  baptized.  They  have  given  this  testimony,  not  as 
of  themselves,  but  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
heaven,  whose  witness  is  united  with  their  own,  and 
whose  indwelling  presence  is  given  also  to  those  who 
receive  the  testimony,  in  order  to  open  its  meaning  and 
to  seal  its  truth.  Thus  a  holy  Church  is  formed,  which 
gradually  proves  itself  catholic,  and  shews  at  once  its 
power  of  expansion  and  its  spirit  of  unity ;  and  within 
its  protecting  frame-work  there  exists  a  communion  of 
saints,  a  common  participation  in  the  same  spiritual 
possessions  by  all  whom  a  union  with  Christ  has  sepa 
rated  and  sanctified  to  God  ;  and  thus  men  are  joined 
to  the  Lord  and  united  with  each  other,  and  rest  in 
the  consciousness  that  '  they  have  found  the  forgive 
ness  of  sins,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the  life 
everlasting.  In  its  fundamental  articles  the  Creed  is  now 
complete. 

To  this  point  the  Book  of  Acts  conducts  us,  and  at 
this  point  it  leaves  us. 

It  may  be  said,  what  more  should  follow  ?  Christians 
exist.  Christian  communities  are  formed.  Let  them 
now  be  left  to  their  ordinary  and  permanent  resources. 

So  it  might  have  been. — So  in  God's  mercy  it  was  not. 

A  new  life  had  begun,  intellectual,  moral,  and  social, 
teeming  with  elements  which  could  not  but  work  and 
expand.  It  would  have  been  hard  to  say  with  what 
force  they  would  do  so,  or  in  what  direction.  Now  the 


THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 


great  ideas  of  the  Gospel  are  old  and  familiar ;  and  the 
very  words  which  represent  them  have  been  sorely  bat 
tered  by  controversy,  and  worn  thin  by  use.  But  then 
the  revelation  of  Christ  had  just  broken,  like  an  unex 
pected  morning,  on  a  weary  and  hopeless  world.  The 
stupendous  events  which  had  so  lately  passed  on  earth, 
the  present  actual  relations  with  heaven  which  were 
witnessed  to  men  by  proofs  within  and  around  them, 
the  prospect  of  things  awful  and  glorious  hastening  on, 
and  perhaps  already  near  at  hand,  must  have  given  a 
stimulus  to  thought  and  feeling,  the  first  sensations  of 
which  it  is  not  easy  for  us  now  to  estimate.  The  Father 
revealed,  the  Son  incarnate,  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down 
from  heaven — redemption  wrought,  salvation  given,  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  the  eternal  judgment,  the  se 
cond  death,  the  life  eternal — new  principles  of  thought, 
new  standards  of  character,  new  grounds  of  duty,  new 
motives,  new  powers,  new  bonds  between  man  and  man, 
new  forms  of  human  society,  new  language  for  human 
lips — all  coming  at  once  upon  men's  minds,  placed  them, 
as  it  were,  in  a  different  world  from  that  in  which  they 
had  lived  before.  At  the  same  time  they  carried  into 
that  world  of  thought  all  the  tendencies,  infirmities,  and 
perversities  of  our  nature,  and  revealed  truth  had  to 
settle  itself  into  lasting  forms,  to  find  its  adequate  ex 
pression,  and  to  have  its  moral  and  social  consequences 
deduced,  under  a  variety  of  inferences  uncongenial  to 
itself.  So  critical  a  period,  on  which  the  whole  future 
of  the  Gospel  hung,  would  seem  to  cry  aloud  for  a 
continued  action  of  the  living  word  of  God ;  such  as 
might,  with  supreme  authority,  both  judge  and  guide  the 
thoughts  of  men,  and  translate  the  principles  which  they 
had  received  into  life  and  practice. 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  135 

The  Lord  recognised  this  necessity.  He  met  it  by 
the  living  voice  of  his  Apostles ;  and  their  Epistles  re 
main  as  the  permanent  record  of  this  part  of  their  work. 
They  are  the  voice  of  the  Spirit,  speaking  within  the 
Church  to  those  who  are  themselves  within  it,  certifying 
to  them  the  true  interpretations  and  applications  of  the 
principles  of  thought  and  life  which  as  believers  in  Jesus 
they  have  received.  This  is  the  function  in  the  scheme 
of  divine  instruction  which  belongs  to  these  writings ; 
and  I  propose  now  to  note  some  particular  aspects  in 
which  their  designation  and  adaptation  to  it  will  appear. 
Without  entering  yet  into  the  examination  of  their 
actual  doctrine,  we  shall  see  that  the  Epistles  are  fitted 
to  form  a  course  of  teaching  of  the  kind  described,  by 
their  form,  their  method,  their  authorship,  and  their 
relative  character. 

I.  The  form  in  which  this  teaching  is  given  to  us  is 
very  significant.  '  The  epistolary  form,'  says  Bengel,  '  is 
a  pre-eminence  of  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament 
as  compared  with  those  of  the  Old  a.'  It  is  a  suggestive 
remark,  reminding  us  of  that  open  communication  and 
equal  participation  of  revealed  truth,  which  is  the  pre 
rogative  of  the  later  above  the  former  dispensation  ; 
indicating  too  that  the  teacher  and  the  taught  are 
placed  on  one  common  level  in  the  fellowship  of  truth. 
The  Prophets  delivered  oracles  to  the  people,  but  the 
Apostles  wrote  letters  to  the  brethren,  letters  characterised 
by  all  that  fulness  of  unreserved  explanation,  and  that 
play  of  various  feeling,  which  are  proper  to  that  form 
of  intercourse.  It  is  in  its  nature  a  more  familiar  com 
munication,  as  between  those  who  are,  or  should  be, 

»  See  Note  XI. 


136  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

equals.  That  character  may  less  obviously  force  upon 
us  the  sense,  that  the  light  which  is  thrown  on  all  sub 
jects  is  that  of  a  divine  inspiration  ;  but  this  is  only  the 
natural  effect  of  the  greater  fulness  of  that  light ;  for  so 
the  moonbeams  fix  the  eye  upon  themselves,  as  they 
burst  through  the  rifts  of  rolling  clouds,  catching  the 
edges  of  objects  and  falling  on  patches  of  the  landscape  ; 
while,  under  the  settled  brightness  of  the  universal  and- 
genial  day,  it  is  not  so  much  the  light  that  we  think  of, 
as  the  varied  scene  which  it  shews. 

But  the  fact  that  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles  is  repre 
sented  by  their  letters,  is  a  peculiarity,  not  only  in  com 
parison  with  the  teaching  of  the  Prophets,  but  with 
ancient  teaching  in  general,  which  is  perpetuated  either 
in  regular  treatises  or  in  discourses  or  conversations  pre 
served  in  writing.  The  form  adopted  in  the  New  Tes 
tament  combines  the  advantages  of  the  treatise  and  the 
conversation.  The  letter  may  treat  important  subjects 
with  accuracy  and  fulness,  but  it  will  do  so  in  immediate 
connection  with  actual  life.  It  is  written  to  meet  an 
occasion.  It  is  addressed  to  particular  states  of  mind. 
It  breathes  of  the  heart  of  the  writer.  It  takes  its  aim 
from  the  exigencies,  and  its  tone  from  the  feelings  of 
the  moment.  In  these  respects  it  suits  well  with  a  period 
of  instruction,  in  which  the  word  of  God  is  to  be  given 
to  men,  not  so  much  in  the  way  of  information,  as  in  the 
way  of  education ;  or  in  other  words,  in  which  the  truth 
is  to  be  delivered,  not  abstractedly,  but  with  a  close  rela 
tion  to  the  condition  of  mind  of  its  recipients. 

Thus  it  is  delivered  in  the  Epistles.  Christ  has  been 
received  ;  Christian  life  has  commenced  ;  Christian  com 
munities  have  been  formed  ;  and  men's  minds  have  been 
at  work  on  the  great  principles  which  they  have  em- 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  137 

braced.  Some  of  these  principles  in  one  place,  and 
others  of  them  in  another,  have  been  imperfectly  grasped, 
or  positively  perverted,  or  practically  misapplied,  so  as 
to  call  for  explanation  or  correction  ;  or  else  they  have 
been  both  apprehended  and  applied  so  worthily,  that 
the  teacher,  filled  with  joy  and  praise,  feels  able  to  open 
out  the  mysteries  of  God,  as  one  speaking  wisdom  among 
them  that  are  perfect.  These  conditions  of  mind  were 
not  individual  accidents.  Rome,  Corinth,  Galatia,  Ephe- 
sus,  supplied  examples  of  different  tendencies  of  the 
human  mind  in  connection  with  the  principles  of  the 
Gospel — tendencies  which  would  ever  recur,  and  on 
which  it  was  requisite  for  the  future  guidance  of  the 
Church  that  the  word  of  God  should  pronounce.  It  did 
pronounce  in  the  most  effectual  way,  by  those  letters 
which  are  addressed  by  the  commissioners  of  Christ,  not 
to  possible  but  to  actual  cases,  with  that  largeness  of 
view  which  belongs  to  spectators  at  a  certain  distance 
from  the  scene,  and  with  that  closeness  of  application 
which  personal  acquaintance  dictates  and  personal  affec 
tion  inspires. 

Thus  the  fuller  expositions  of  truth  contained  in  the 
Epistles  are  based  on  what  the  first  principles  of  the 
Gospel  had  already  wrought  in  human  hearts  ;  and  its 
doctrines  are  cleared  and  settled,  developed  and  com 
bined,  in  correspondence  with  the  ascertained  capacities 
and  necessities  of  believers. 

II.  From  the  adaptation  of  the  form  I  pass  to  that  of 
the  method  which  the  apostolic  writings  employ  in  the 
completion  of  evangelical  doctrine.  The  one  is  in  per 
fect  harmony  with  the  other.  It  is  a  method  of  com 
panionship  rather  than  of  dictation.  The  writer  does 
not  announce  a  succession  of  revelations,  or  arrest  the 


138  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

enquiries  which  he  encounters  in  men's  hearts  by  the 
unanswerable  formula,  'Thus  saith  the  Lord.'  He 
rouses,  he  animates,  he  goes  along  with  the  working  of 
men's  minds,  by  shewing  them  the  workings  of  his  own. 
He  utters  his  own  convictions,  he  pours  forth  his  own 
experience,  he  appeals  to  others  to  'judge  what  he  says,' 
and  commends  his  words  'to  their  conscience  in  the 
sight  of  God.'  He  confutes  by  argument  rather  than 
by  authority,  deduces  his  conclusions  by  processes  of 
reasoning,  and  establishes  his  points  by  interpretations 
and  applications  of  the  former  Scriptures.  Such  a  me 
thod  necessarily  creates  a  multitude  of  occasions  for 
hesitation  or  objection,  and  it  has  been  proposed  to 
meet  these  difficulties  by  the  principle,  that  we  are 
bound  to  accept  the  conclusions  as  matter  of  revelation, 
but  not  to  assent  to  the  validity  of  the  arguments  or 
the  applicability  of  the  quotations.  The  more  we  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  the  particular  passages  which  have 
been  thought  to  require  that  qualification,  the  more  we 
feel  that  it  can  only  have  seemed  necessary,  from  a 
want  of  real  and  deep  harmony  with  the  mind  of  Scrip 
ture.  But  I  have  no  call  to  enter  on  that  subject ;  my 
purpose  is  simply  to  draw  attention  to  the  fact,  that  not 
only  in  the  conclusions  given,  but  in  the  methods  em 
ployed  in  reaching  them,  there  is  an  outward  guidance 
of  the  Christian  mind  and  a  visible  purpose  to  provide 
such  guidance. 

Consider,  for  instance,  the  argument  on  justification 
in  the  early  part  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  which 
accomplishes  every  step  by  the  aid  of  the  former  Scrip 
tures.  Why  all  this  labour  in  proving  what  might  have 
been  decided  by  a  simple  announcement  from  one  en 
trusted  with  the  word  of  God  ?  Would  not  the  apostolic 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  139 

declaration  that  such  a  statement  was  error,  and  that 
such  another  was  truth,  have  sufficed  for  the  settlement 
of  that  particular  question  ?  Doubtless  !  but  it  would 
not  have  sufficed  to  train  men's  minds  to  that  thought- 
fulness  whereby  truth  becomes  their  own,  or  to  educate 
them  to  the  living  use  of  the  Scriptures  as  the  consti 
tuted  guide  of  enquiry. 

It  is  the  same  with  those  records  of  personal  experi 
ence,  and  those  effusions  of  personal  feeling,  which  teach 
us  how  the  revelation  of  Christ  tells  upon  the  believer's 
heart.  We  see,  for  instance,  in  the  7th  and  8th  chapters 
of  the  same  Epistle,  the  writer's  own  heart  thrown  open  ; 
first  in  its  passage  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death  to  the 
law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  then  in  the 
assured  consciousness  of  the  vast  and  various  blessings, 
present  and  future,  which  belong  to  the  children  of  God, 
and  the  heirs  together  with  Christ,  whom  nothing  shall 
be  able  to  separate  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  their  Lord.  This  is  not  only  definite  infor 
mation,  it  is  also  effective  education,  shewing  the  revela 
tion  of  God  as  wrought  into  its  ultimate  and  subjective 
form ;  and  assisting  by  sympathy,  and  ratifying  by 
example,  the  same  processes  in  other  hearts. 

Yet  we  should  speak  amiss,  if  we  represented  the 
education  of  Christian  thought  as  carried  on  in  the 
Epistles  only  by  methods  which  seem  to  place  the 
Apostle  on  the  same  level  with  his  readers.  No  !  there 
is  everywhere  present,  in  the  lofty  and  unwavering  testi 
mony,  the  sense  of  an  authority  which  makes  all  things 
sure ;  and  whenever  occasion  arises,  as  from  Galatian 
perverseness  or  Corinthian  disorder,  it  assests  its  un 
hesitating  and  uncompromising  claims.  Again,  when 
need  so  requires,  there  is  a  change  in  the  common 


140  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

method  ;  and  the  progress  of  doctrine  is  effected  in  the 
prophetic  manner,  by  definite  additions  to  former  revela 
tions  :  as  when  St.  Paul  informs  the  Thessalonians,  '  in 
the  word  of  the  Lord  V  of  some  particulars  not  before 
made  known,  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the  dead  and 
the  living  will  meet  the  Lord  at  his  appearing.  Thus 
apostolical  authority  and  direct  revelation  diffuse  over 
the  Epistles  their  certainty  and  their  majesty  ;  but  yet 
the  presence  of  these  more  commanding  elements  is  not 
suffered  to  overpower  that  general  character  of  doctrine, 
which  is  proper  for  those  who  are  of  full  age,  and  who 
have  themselves  'an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  that 
they  may  know  all  things c.'  The  mind  of  the  teacher 
still  enters  into  a  free  companionship  with  the  mind  that 
is  taught,  so  as  to  exercise  and  educate  the  spiritual 
faculties,  at  the  same  time  conducting  them  with  decisive 
authority  to  conclusions  which  they  might  else  have  failed 
to  reach. 

III.  Turn  now  to  the  authorship  of  these  writings.  If 
the  form  and  method  of  this  scheme  of  Christian  educa 
tion  are  important  features  of  it,  so  also  is  the  selection 
of  its  agents  ;  for  here,  as  in  other  departments  of  educa 
tion,  we  may  say  that  '  the  master  is  the  school.' 

Who  are  the  appointed  teachers  of  the  Church  ?  Peter 
and  John,  the  two  chief  Apostles  ;  James  and  Jude,  the 
brethren  of  the  Lord.  We  take  knowledge  of  them  that 
they  have  been  with  Jesus,  and  own  the  highest  authority 
which  association  with  him  can  give.  But  the  chief 
place  in  this  system  of  teaching  does  not  belong  to  any 
one  of  them,  nor  to  all  of  them  together.  Their  united 
writings  form  but  a  second  volume,  and  that  a  very  thin 
one,  just  one-fifth  of  the  bulk  of  the  first,  to  which  more- 

b  i  Thess.  iv.  13-17.  c  i  John  ii.  20. 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  141 

over  it  bears  in  some  degree  a  kind  of  supplementary 
relation.  The  office  of  working  out  the  principles  of 
Christian  faith  into  full  proportions  and  clearly  defined 
forms  was  assigned  to  another,  to  '  Paul,  the  servant  of 
Jesus  Christ,  called  to  be  an  Apostle,  separated  unto  the 
Gospel  of  God,  which  he  had  promised  afore  by  his 
Prophets  in  his  holy  Scriptures.' 

Now  is  it  not  a  remarkable,  and  almost  a  startling 
fact,  that  this  great  office  should  have  been  assigned  to 
one,  who  had  not  been  a  witness  of  the  Lord's  life  on 
earth,  and  had  nothing  to  tell  of  things  which  he  had 
seen  with  his  eyes,  and  heard  with  his  ears,  and  his 
hands  had  handled  of  the  word  of  life  ?  We  remember 
the  indispensable  importance  of  this  qualification  for  the 
original  apostleship,  as  expressed  on  the  appointment  of 
Matthias.  '  Of  these  men  which  have  companied  with  us 
all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  among 
us,  beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John  unto  that  same 
day  in  which  he  was  taken  up  from  us,  must  one  be 
ordained  to  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resurrection.' 
Yet  on  him  who  had  never  companied  with  him,  or  even 
with  them,  for  one  single  day,  the  most  important,  or,  at 
least,  the  most  extensive  and  enduring  part  of  the  apo 
stolic  work  devolved.  The  peculiar  qualifications,  which 
in  other  respects  fitted  St.  Paul  for  the  work  whereto  he 
was  called,  have  ever  received  a  just  appreciation  and 
ample  treatment.  We  can  all  perceive  the  active  habit, 
the  fervent  spirit,  the  strong  will,  the  warm  affections, 
the  tender  sensibility,  the  exercised  intellect,  the  sub 
jective  tendencies  of  thought,  the  vivid  consciousness  of 
his  own  inward  history,  the  combination  of  Greek  and 
Hebrew  training,  the  thorough  grounding  of  the  mind  in 
the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  the  profound  experience  of 


142  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

the  false  theory  of  Judaism,  in  its  effects  on  his  own 
heart,  and  in  the  practical  consequences  to  which  it  once 
carried  him ;  finally,  the  suddenness  with  which  the 
Gospel  came  upon  him,  making  him  to  know  with  a 
singular  distinctness  .what  is  the  contrast  between  sal 
vation  sought  by  law  through  works,  and  salvation  found 
by  grace  through  faith,  and  what  is  the  change  in  the 
whole  world  within,  when  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in 
Christ  Jesus  makes  a  man  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and 
death. 

Perhaps  it  is  commonly  felt  that  these  qualifications 
outweighed  the  disadvantage  at  which  he  stood  in  com 
parison  with  the  other  Apostles  who  had  been  with 
Jesus,  and  that  this  accounts  for  the  addition  to  their 
number  of  one  in  other  respects  specially  fitted  for  the 
work,  although  born  out  of  due  time.  But  it  will  better 
consist  with  the  principles  on  which  his  whole  history 
must  be  judged,  if  we  say,  that  his  being  born  out  of  due 
time  was  itself  one  of  his  qualifications. 

Now  we  must  remember  that  it  is  the  Lord,  fore 
seeing  and  fore-ordaining  all,  who  directs  the  course  of 
these  events.  If,  after  choosing  and  training  the  Twelve, 
he  calls  another  man,  who  has  had  no  share  in  that 
training,  and  specially  commits  to  him  a  department  of 
the  apostolic  work,  we  cannot  speak  of  such  a  step  as  an 
afterthought  and  supplement,  as  we  might  do  if  it  oc 
curred  in  some  human  undertaking,  in  which  the  original 
arrangements  had  proved  inadequate.  We  may  be  sure 
that  the  call  of  St.  Paul  after  the  manifestation  of  Christ 
was  finished,  was  as  much  a  part  of  the  divine  plan,  as 
was  the  call  of  the  Twelve  when  that  manifestation  was 
beginning,  and  that  the  later  call  must  have  corres 
ponded  as  truly  with  his  appointed  work,  as  the  earlier 
call  did  with  theirs. 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  143 

We  are  here  led  to  the  more  distinct  observation  of  a  fact 
already  noted,  that  the  apostolic  testimony  was  twofold, — 
first  to  the  facts  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ,  secondly  to 
its  intended  consequences  in  the  spiritual  state  of  man. 

It  was  necessary  that  those  who  were  to  represent 
the  Lord  to  the  world,  in  his  words  and  deeds,  his  mind 
and  life,  should  be  men  on  whose  hearts  the  holy  image 
had  been  stamped  by  closest  intercourse,  and  who  could 
testify  to  others  of  what  their  eyes  had  seen.  They 
who  were  so  qualified  did  their  work,  and  gave  the 
knowledge  of  Jesus  to  mankind.  Modern  study  traces 
the  distinct  outlines,  and  finds  the  solid  fragments  of 
their  oral  narratives  deposited  in  the  written  Gospels. 
Still,  further,  St.  Luke's  preface  shews  that  these  narra 
tives  were  the  regular  instruments  of  Christian  education, 
'the  things  wherein'  catechumens  'were  instructed d.' 
This  kind  of  instruction  has  found  its  permanent  form 
in  the  fourfold  Gospel. 

But  believers  were  also  to  be  trained  to  the  full 
apprehension  of  the  effects  of  the  manifestation  in  their 
own  spiritual  life.  The  apostolic  teaching  on  this  sub 
ject  is  represented  for  ever  by  the  Epistles,  and  those 
documents  are  in  a  remarkable  degree  restricted  to  that 
particular  office.  We  should  naturally  have  expected  in 
apostolic  teaching  an  abundant  reference  to  the  words 
and  acts  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  prolific  sources  of  in 
struction.  But  we  do  not  find  such  reference,  nor  any 
thing  like  it,  till  we  come  to  the  Epistles  of  James,  Peter, 
and  John,  and  catch  again  the  sound  of  words  which  we 
had  heard  from  their  Master  and  ours.  The  great  doctor 
of  the  Church  had  no  such  remembrances.  His  relations 

d  Ao'-yot  irf pi  Siv  Ka.ri]xn6T]S-     Luke  i.  4. 


144  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

with  the  Lord  only  commenced  after  Jesus  was  glorified 
and  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  had  begun.  If  the 
others  were  the  Apostles  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ, 
he  was  the  Apostle  of  its  results ;  and,  in  the  fact  of 
passing  under  his  teaching,  we  have  sufficient  warning 
that  we  are  advancing  from  the  lessons  which  the  life, 
and  the  character,  and  the  words  of  Jesus  gave,  into  the 
distinct  ex-position  of  the  redemption,  the  reconciliation, 
the  salvation  which  result  from  his  appearing.  In  this 
way  it  was  provided  that  the  two  correlative  kinds  of 
teaching,  which  the  Church  received  at  the  first,  should 
be  left  to  the  Church  for  ever  in  the  distinctness  of  their 
respective  developments  ;  for  this  distinctness  of  develop 
ment  in  the  second  kind  of  teaching  is  both  announced 
and  secured  by  its  being  confided  to  St.  Paul. 

Yet  a  danger  might  arise  ;  a  danger  which  did  attend 
his  living  ministry,  and  which  recent  theories  have  been 
eager  to  revive.  It  might  appear,  that  the  Gospel  which 
he  preached  was  not  so  much  a  stage  of  progress  as  an 
individual  variety,  and  that  in  following  it  out  we  had 
diverged  from  the  track  of  the  original  doctrine,  and 
were  no  longer  sustained  by  the  authority  of  the 
Twelve. 

The  Twelve,  therefore,  are  joined  with  St.  Paul,  as 
authors  together  with  him  of  the  doctrinal  canon  of  the 
Church,  fulfilling  this  office  through  Peter  and  John, 
their  natural  leaders  and  original  representatives,  and  in 
a  more  restricted  measure  through  James  and  Jude,  the 
brethren  of  the  Lord,  to  the  former  of  whom,  in  the 
second  stage  of  the  Church's  history,  so  eminent  and 
peculiar  a  position  is  assigned.  Had  we  been  permitted 
to  choose  our  instructors  from  among  '  the  glorious  com 
pany,'  three  of  these  names  at  least  would  have  been 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  I4o 

uttered  by  every  tongue ;  and  besides  our  desire  to  be 
taught  by  their  lips,  we  should,  as  disciples  of  St.  Paul, 
have  felt  a  natural  anxiety  to  know  whether  'James, 
Cephas,  and  John,  who  seemed  to  be  pillars,'  'added 
nothing  toe,'  and  took  nothing  from,  the  substance  of 
the  doctrine  which  we  had  received  through  him.  It 
was  the  will  of  God  that  this  anxiety  should  be  met. 
We  have  not  been  left  to  conjectures  and  surmises.  We 
have  words  from  these  very  Apostles,  expressing  the 
mind  of  their  later  life,  words  in  which  we  recognise  the 
mellow  tone  of  age,  the  settled  manner  of  an  old  expe 
rience,  and  the  long  habit  of  Christian  thought.  We  not 
only  meet  the  men  whom  we  should  wish  to  hear,  but 
we  meet  them  at  the  point  where  we  should  wish  to  hear 
them,  now  the  venerated  authorities  in  the  Church  which 
they  had  long  since  founded,  and  fully  cognizant  of  its 
intervening  history. 

Thus,  if  the  collection  of  Epistles  be  intended  to  ex 
hibit  the  fulness  and  maturity  of  Christian  doctrine,  the 
selection  of  its  authors  corresponds  to  the  end  in  view; 
the  man  who  is  best  fitted  to  conduct,  being  associated 
with  the  men  who  are  best  fitted  to  confirm,  the  expo 
sition  and  development  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ 

IV.  In  the  last  place  I  must  advert,  though  it  is  only 
possible  to  do  so  very  slightly,  to  the  relative  characters 
of  the  several  Epistles,  as  complementary  one  to  another, 
and  constituent  parts  of  one  body  of  teaching. 

i.  The  Pauline  Epistles  appear,  with  very  small  vari 
ation,  to  have  been  habitually  ranged  in  that  order  in 
which  we  read  them  now ;  and  it  is  one  which  on  the 
whole,  and  in  a  certain  measure,  produces  the  effect  of 

e  Galatians  ii.  9. 
L 


146  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

a  course  of  doctrine.  They  fall  naturally  into  groups, 
which  stand,  relatively  to  each  other,  in  the  places  which 
they  ought  to  occupy  for  purposes  of  progressive  in 
struction.  The  Epistles  to  the  Romans,  Corinthians, 
and  Galatians  have  a  corrective  and  decisive  character. 
They  are  the  voice  of  the  doctor  of  the  Church,  ex 
pounding  with  blended  argument  and  authority  the 
meaning  and  the  bearing  of  the  principles  of  the  Gospel, 
which  his  hearers  had  already  received  ;  so  as  to  decide 
the  uncertainties,  and  correct  the  divergencies,  which 
will  always  characterise  every  second  stage  in  the  his 
tory  of  truth.  When  the  enjoyment  of  a  new  discovery 
passes  into  reflection  upon  it,  and  impressions  begin  to 
define  themselves  in  words,  and  'good  tidings'  are 
shaping  themselves  into  doctrines  and  laws  of  life,  a 
time  of  danger  and  necessity  has  come.  Then  the 
vagueness  and  the  incorrectness  of  many  first  impres 
sions  come  to  light ;  then  old  habits  of  thought  are 
found  still  to  survive,  and  old  principles  return  to  enter 
into  damaging  or  destructive  combination  with  those  by 
which  they  had  seemingly  been  expelled.  Then,  through 
treacherous  arts,  through  perverse  moral  tendencies,  and 
even  through  logical  weakness,  the  tender  system  of 
truth  may  suffer,  in  the  period  of  its  formation,  injuries 
which  will  be  for  ever  fatal.  The  reader  of  the  first 
three  Epistles  finds  himself  in  the  presence  of  such  a 
state  of  things,  and  feels  that  the  necessities,  which  are 
there  met  by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  would,  if  not  thus 
provided  for,  have  left  the  first  inevitable  questions  unde 
cided,  and  the  foundations  of  future  thought  insecure. 

Especially  in  this  point  of  view  does  the  Epistle  to 
the  Romans  claim  the  place  which  it  has  habitually  held 
as  the  first  step  in  the  epistolary  course.  The  subject  on 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  147 

which  it  gives  a  full  and  decisive  exposition  is  not  only 
vital  but  fundamental ;  namely,  the  need,  the  nature,  and 
the  effects  of  the  justification  for  individual  souls  which 
the  Gospel  preaches,  and  if  it  did  not  preach  would  be  no 
Gospel.  As  there  can  be  no  repose  for  a  soul  while  that 
first  point  of  personal  anxiety,  '  How  can  man  be  just 
with  God?'  is  left  unsettled  ;  so  there  can  be  no  solidity 
for  a  system  of  doctrine  till  the  true  answer  to  that 
question  has  been  distinctly  shaped  and  firmly  depo 
sited.  Moreover,  if  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  fitly 
opens  the  whole  evangelical  record  by  connecting  it  with 
the  former  Scriptures,  so  also  for  the  same  reason  does 
this  great  Epistle  fitly  open  the  doctrinal  series :  for 
what  the  one  does  in  respect  of  fact,  the  other  does  in 
respect  of  doctrine,  justifying  throughout  the  intimation 
with  which  it  opens  that  the  Gospel  will  here  be  treated 
as  that  '  which  God  had  promised  before  by  his  prophets 
in  the  Holy  Scriptures.'  In  the  constant  references,  and 
in  the  whole  line  of  argument,  we  see  the  illustrious 
genealogy  and  lineal  descent  of  the  Christian  doctrine  of 
justification  by  faith,  traced,  like  that  of  Jesus  himself, 
from  Abraham  and  David,  and  vindicated  by  the  witness 
of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets ;  so  that  we  enter  on  the 
final  exposition  of  the  truth  with  a  settled  sense,  that  in 
all  the  successive  stages  of  its  revelation  the  truth  has 
still  been  one. 

In  the  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians  we  have  passed 
into  another  region  of  thought,  conversing  now  among 
the  Greeks  who  seek  after  wisdom.  In  the  presence  of 
a  spirit  of  self-confident  freedom,  both  in  thought  and 
conduct,  or  in  other  words,  in  presence  of  the  essential 
spirit  of  the  world,  rising  again  like  a  returning  tide,  the 
Gospel  develops  its  divine  and  indefeasible  authority, 

L  2 


148  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

claims  the  subjection  of  the  mind,  and  regulates  the  life 
of  the  Church. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  it  encounters,  not  the 
spirit  of  a  presumptuous  freedom,  but  the  spirit  of  a 
wilful  bondage,  which  returns  after  its  own  stubborn 
and  insensate  fashion  to  the  elements  of  the  world  and 
of  the  flesh.  In  repelling  this  tendency,  the  apostolic 
doctrine  asserts  more  strongly  than  ever  its  character  as 
a  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  shines  out  more  clearly 
as  a  dispensation  of  spirit  and  of  liberty. 

Thus  in  the  first  three  Epistles  the  first  questions 
have  been  answered  and  the  first  dangers  averted ;  and 
the  Apostolic  or  Pauline  doctrine  has  established  its 
divine  character f  and  developed  its  essential  features. 

The  following  Epistles  differ  from  this  first  group  in 
the  comparative  absence  of  the  controversial  attitude 
and  of  the  judicial  tone.  As  those  whose  minds  are  now 
cleared,  settled,  and  secured,  we  readily  follow  the 
Apostle  to  that  more  calm  and  lofty  stage  of  thought  on 
which  he  stands  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians  and 
Colossians ;  when,  no  longer  in  collision  with  human 
error,  he  expatiates  in  the  view  of  the  eternal  purposes  of 
God,  and  of  the  ideal  perfections  of  the  Church  in  Christ. 
If  inspiration  was  asserted  in  the  other  Epistles,  here  it 
is  felt.  We  hear,  not  as  before,  the  doctor  of  the  Church 
expounding,  confuting,  and  deciding,  but  rather  a  prophet 
of  truth  speaking  as  one  borne  along  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
V77o  Trvtvfj.ci.Tos  ayiov  c^epo/xeyos.  Who  can  read  Eph.  i.  and 
ii.  without  being  reminded  of  this  expression  of  St.  Peter, 
by  the  sustained  swell  and  unbroken  flow  of  the  thoughts 

f  In  the  Romans,  by  connecting  itself  with  the  inspiration  of  the  Old 
Testament ;  in  the  Corinthians  and  Galatians,  by  asserting  its  own.  (See 
especially  i  Cor.  ii.  and  Gal.  i.) 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  149 

and  language  ?  Yet  in  both  Epistles  this  high  strain 
passes  by  the  most  natural  transition  into  the  plainest 
counsels,  and  in  the  intervening  Epistle  to  the  Philippians 
the  voice  is  not  that  of  a  prophet  but  of  a  friend. 

Finally,  the  Thessalonian  Epistles  complete  St.  Paul's 
addresses  to  seven  Churches,  and,  though  first  in  the 
date  of  production,  may  fitly  be  read  last  in  the  per 
manent  order,  as  being  specially  distinguished  by  the 
eschatological  element,  and  sustaining  the  conflict  of 
faith  by  the  preaching  of  '  that  blessed  hope '  and  '  the 
glorious  appearing  and  the  coming  of  the  day  of  Gods.' 

To  this  body  of  doctrine  the  Pastoral  Epistles  add 
their  suggestive  words,  on  the  principles  and  spirit  of 
that  office,  which  is  at  once  a  government  to  order  the 
Church  and  a  ministry  to  serve  it ;  so  that,  in  the  ac 
knowledged  writings  of  St.  Paul,  we  advance  from  the 
first  momentous  question  of  justification  for  individual 
souls,  through  a  thousand  various  exigencies  and  un- 
foldings  of  the  life  of  faith,  till  we  reach  the  outer  circle 
of  ministerial  provision  for  the  care  of  the  Church  and 
the  stewardship  of  the  truth. 

2.  But,  in  passing  through  this  course  of  teaching,  we 
have  been  in  continual  contact  with  the  reminiscences, 
the  ideas,  the  imagery,  and  the  'language  which  are 
natural  to  one  who  was  by  origin  and  training  a  Hebrew 
of  the  Hebrews.  With  all  his  evangelical  expansiveness 
of  spirit,  and  all  his  antagonism  to  the  false  theory  of 
the  Jewish  system,  he  yet  has  taught  the  things  of 
Christ,  and  presented  the  universal  salvation,  under 
forms  of  speech  and  in  a  cast  of  thought  which  are 
derived  from  the  school  of  the  Law.  Every  moment  it 

B  A  characteristic  made  very  noticeable  in  the  present  division  by  chapters, 
each  chapter  in  the  first  Epistle  closing  with  the  mention  of  this  subject. 


150  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

becomes  a  more  serious  question,  whether  this  language 
is  to  be  allowed  for,  as  inaccurate  in  itself  but  under  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  inevitable,  or  whether  it  is  to 
be  insisted  on,  as  the  method  prepared  in  the  purpose  of 
God  for  the  most  adequate  expression  of  spiritual  truth. 
The  question  was  indeed  decided  by  the  two  facts,  that 
the  old  covenant  itself  was  a  divine  ordinance,  and  that 
its  historical  relations  with  the  new  covenant  were  a 
divine  provision.  Still  it  was  of  high  importance  to  the 
clearness  and  fixedness  of  the  doctrine,  that  this  con 
nection  between  the  two  covenants  should  be  deliberately 
shewn  to  consist,  not  in  rhetorical  illustration,  but  in  a 
divinely-intended  system  of  analogies.  This  is  the  per 
manent  office  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which,  if 
not  St.  Paul's,  is  confessedly  Pauline,  and,  apparently  on 
account  of  its  uncertified  authorship,  has  usually  taken 
its  place  in  succession  to  his  acknowledged  writings.  In 
its  origin  it  evidently  belongs  to  the  last  hour  of  transi 
tion  and  decision,  when  a  large  number  of  men,  who 
were  at  once  Jews  and  Christians,  stood  perplexed,  agi 
tated,  and  almost  distracted,  as  they  seemed  to  feel  the 
ground  parting  beneath  their  feet,  and  hardly  knew 
whether  to  throw  themselves  back  on  that  which  was 
receding,  or  forward  on  that  to  which  they  were  called  to 
cling.  In  an  intense  sympathy  with  this  perplexity,  and 
even  anguish,  prevailing  in  the  Hebrew- Christian  mind, 
and  in  an  intense  anxiety  as  to  its  issue,  the  Epistle  was 
written  ;  a  living  voice  of  power  in  a  time  of  change  and 
fear,  yet  a  comprehensive  exposition  of  the  advancing 
course  of  revelation,  and  of  the  relations  between  its  two 
great  stages.  But  more  particularly  is  it  to  be  noticed 
here,  that  this  Epistle  throws  a  stronger  light  than  other 
writings  had  done  upon  \\\&  progress  of  doctrine  during 


THE  EPISTLES.  151 


the  Christian  period  itself.  For,  first,  it  expressly  recog 
nises  the  fact  that  '  the  word  of  the  beginning  of  Christ  »  ' 
(o  TTJS  o.p\fjs  TOV  XpLcrrov  Ao'yos)  had  been  enlarged  by 
intervening  teaching  into  a  '  perfection,'  which  many  of 
those  who  are  here  addressed  had  sinfully  and  shame 
fully  failed  to  receive  ;  the  teachers  sent  from  God  having 
wrought  out  for  them  full  expositions  of  truth,  to  which 
their  old  prepossessions  had  closed  their  hearts.  And, 
secondly,  it  exhibits  the  further  fact,  that  this  perfecting 
of  the  truth,  by  the  full  and  definite  interpretation  of 
the  principles  of  the  Gospel,  had  been  accomplished  by 
means  of  the  true  reading  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the 
light  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ's 

3.  From  the  Pauline  writings  we  pass  to  the  collection 
of  the  Catholic  Epistles.  For  all  internal  reasons  they 
are  better  read  in  the  place  which  they  occupy  in  our 
Bibles,  than  in  that  which  the  older  manuscripts  gene 
rally  assign  them,  preceding  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  ;  for 
they  are  in  effect  the  confirmation  and  the  supplement 
of  his  doctrine1. 

This  character  cannot  here  be  proved,  and  it  scarcely 
needs  to  be,  for  it  is  now  in  the  main  acknowledged. 
The  personal  characteristics  of  these  writers  are  unlike 
those  of  St.  Paul  ;  the  aspects  of  the  truth  are  different, 
but  the  substance  and  the  features  are  the  same.  Each. 
writer,  by  the  strongly-distinguished  lines  of  his  own 
individuality,  makes  still  more  conspicuous  the  unity  of 
the  common  faith. 

The  Epistle  of  St.  James  alone  makes  at  first  sight  an 
opposite  impression,  and  instead  of  harmonising  with  the 
full  development  of  evangelical  doctrine,  may  appear  to 

1  Heb.  vi.  i.  k  See  Note  XI. 

1  See  the  latter  part  of  Note  I.  in  reference  to  this  arrangement. 


152  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

belong  to  an  earlier,  or  rather  a  retrograde  stage ;  and  if 
taken  as  an  intended  exposition  of  the  essential  features 
of  Christian  truth,  it  might  be  thought  to  imply  an 
Ebionite  view  of  the  Gospel,  and  even  to  betray  an 
Ebionite  origin.  But  the  careful  and  candid  student 
sees  that  the  language  employed  distinctly  pre-supposes 
the  evangelical  doctrine,  and  by  supplementing  other 
expositions  of  it  does  in  fact  acknowledge  and  confirm 
them  m. 

The  harmony  of  the  Epistles  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  John 
with  the  Pauline  doctrine  is  sufficiently  obvious,  and  the 
former  Apostle  not  only  practically  (as  is  the  case  in  an 
eminent  degree),  but  pointedly  and  professedly  sets  his 
seal  to  the  development  which  the  Gospel  had  received 
in  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  assuring 
those  who  had  accepted  the  doctrine  that  '  this  is  the 
true  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  stand  a ; '  and  again,  in 
structing  those  to  whom  the  '  beloved  brother  Paul ' 
had  written  '  according  to  the  wisdom  given  unto  him,' 
that  they  are  to  regard  those  writings  as  on  a  level  with 
'  the  other  Scriptures0.' 

On  the  Gospel  doctrine  itself,  which  is  thus  confirmed, 
a  fresh  light  seems  to  be  thrown  by  the  spirit  of  these 
precious  Epistles,  the  faith  expounded  by  St.  Paul 
kindling  into  fervent  hope  in  the  words  of  St.  Peter,  and 
expanding  into  sublime  love  in  those  of  St.  John.  At 
the  same  time  the  reader  cannot  fail  to  note  how  these 
writings  of  the  original  Apostles,  by  express  reference,  by 
borrowed  language,  and  by  their  whole  spirit,  seem  to 
bind  the  doctrine  which  the  Epistles  have  developed  to 
the  Gospels  in  which  it  first  began  to  be  opened.  Finally, 

m  See  Note  XII.  n  i  Peter  v.  12. 

0  2  Peter  iii.  16. 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  153 

he  may  observe  with  admiration  the  singular  fitness  of 
the  few  words  of  St.  Jude  to  close  the  series  of  writings, 
through  which  the  faith  has  been  wrought  out  and  con 
signed  to  the  Church  for  ever.  It  only  remains  for  our 
last  instructor  to  exhort  us  '  earnestly  to  contend  for  the 
faith  once  for  all  delivered  to  the  saints; '  to  warn  us  of 
the  dangers  of  relapse  ;  to  entreat  us  '  to  build  ourselves 
up  on  our  holy  faith,  and  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  looking  for  the  mercy 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life  ; '  and,  finally, 
to  commend  us  '  to  him  who  is  able  to  keep  us  from 
falling,  and  to  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of 
his  glory  with  exceeding  joy.' 

With  such  charges,  warnings,  and  commendatory 
prayers  is  the  didactic  portion  of  the  New  Testament 
left  in  our  hands.  We  have  now  observed  its  function 
in  the  whole  scheme  of  instruction,  as  addressed  to  those 
who  have  believed  the  Gospel,  for  the  furtherance  and 
perfecting  of  their  education  in  Christ.  We  have  seen 
that  it  is  adapted  to  this  work  by  the  epistolary  form, 
which  contemplates  those  who  are  addressed  as  par 
takers  in  the  same  life  with  those  who  address  them,  and 
as  brethren  in  the  family  of  God.  Secondly,  by  the 
method  adopted,  in  which  the  teacher,  putting  forth  all 
the  varieties  of  his  own  mental  energies,  exercises  and 
trains  the  spiritual  faculties  of  those  who  are  taught, 
while  conducting  them  to  definite  and  ascertained  con 
clusions.  Thirdly,  by  the  appointment  of  the  chief 
author,  whose  proper  work  only  commences  at  the  point 
where  the  testimony  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in 
the  flesh  is  finished,  and  passes  into  the  testimony  of 
his  present  relations  with  men  in  the  spirit.  Lastly,  by 
the  relative  characters  of  the  collected  writings,  whereby 


154  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

the  exigencies  of  the  spiritual  life  are  met  at  every  point 
and  provided  for  in  natural  though  in  formal  succes 
sion. 

In  concluding  this  survey  I  would  suggest  two  ques 
tions  which  it  may  well  leave  upon  our  minds.  First, 
What  is  our  own  experience  of  the  exigencies  thus  pro 
vided  for  ?  The  Gospel  history  accepted  as  true,  some 
general  statements  concerning  its  consequences  adopted, 
and  a  position  in  the  Christian  community  assumed — 
these  things  seem  to  satisfy  the  minds  of  many  among 
us.  We  see  that  the  word  of  God  does  not  contemplate 
so  sudden  and  easy  a  satisfaction.  It  supposes  that  the 
believer  in  Jesus  has  entered  on  a  vast  world  of  life  and 
thought.  It  supposes  the  existence  of  inquiries,  anxie 
ties,  aspirations.  It  supposes  a  mind  thoroughly  aroused 
by  the  importance,  the  grandeur,  and  the  glory  of  the 
truth  which  has  come  before  it — a  mind  which  purposes 
with  itself  '  to  apprehend  the  things  for  which  also  it  is 
apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.'  It  supposes  the  existence 
of  hindrances,  difficulties,  oppositions  —  things  to  be 
struggled  through,  as  .well  as  things  to  be  striven  after. 
What  do  you  know  of  all  this  ?  Till  you  do  know  some 
thing  of  it,  the  Epistles  are  not  for  you.  They  are  not 
written  to  suit  a  cool  indifference,  or  to  gratify  a  taste 
for  discussion.  The  real  condition  for  their  use  is  the 
existence  of  that  inward  life  for  the  necessities  of  which 
they  provide.  A  man  must  turn  the  pages  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  with  a  sense  of  perplexity  and 
distaste,  if  his  own  heart  own  no  serious  inquiry  after 
the  righteousness  of  God.  The  discovery  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  of  all  that  is  transacted  within  the  veil, 
by  the  effectual  ministry  of  the  eternal  Priest,  can  have 
for  him  but  the  slight  interest  which  may  attach  to 


VI.]  THE  EPISTLES.  155 


ingenious  typology,  if  he  feel  no  daily  necessity  to  come 
himself  to  the  throne  of  grace  to  obtain  mercy  and  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  ;  and  the  glorious  standard 
of  Christian  character  which  every  Epistle  offers  can  but 
repel  him,  as  something  overstrained  and  inapplicable 
to  actual  life,  if  he  have  not  recognised  himself  as  bought 
with  the  precious  blood  and  as  dead  and  risen  with  Christ. 
The  whole  scheme  and  course  of  teaching,  meant  for 
those  who  are  '  called  to  be  saints,'  loses  not  only  its 
force  but  its  meaning,  for  those  who  have  no  such  project 
as  those  words  imply. 

The  second  question  is  this :  If  the  exigencies  which 
are  thus  supposed  are  really  felt  by  us,  what  use  do  we 
make  of  the  word  which  is  given  to  meet  them?  We 
have  seen  that  that  word  does  not  lead  us  to  the  entrance 
of  the  Christian  life  and  then  leave  us  at  the  threshold. 
It  recognises  fully,  it  warmly  enters  into,  all  those 
anxious  questions  which  arise  in  your  hearts,  as  to  the 
real  nature  of  the  work  of  Christ  in  which  you  are  taught 
to  trust,  of  that  salvation  which  you  desire  to  receive,  of 
that  life  which  you  are  called  to  lead,  of  those  relations 
to  God  in  which  you  are  placed,  of  those  great  prospects 
which  lie  before  you.  And  shall  negligence  or  distrust 
deprive  you  of  the  assistance  thus  prepared,  and  leave 
you  to  encounter  the  thoughts  which  crowd  upon  the 
awakened  soul,  as  if  you  had  to  deal  with  them  only  by 
means  of  your  own  resources  ?  You  are  not  so  left. 
For  those  within  the  Church,  those  who  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  those  who  own  the  holy  calling, 
all  this  teaching  is  made  ready.  To  them  it  is  expressly 
addressed,  and  for  their  various  necessities  it  is  adapted. 
But  it  does  not  yield  its  true  uses  to  a  critical  reference 
or  an  occasional  consultation ;  only  through  a  constant 


i,56  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT.  vi. 

companionship  and  familiar  intercourse  does  it  tell  effec 
tually  for  its  destined  ends,  and  accomplish  the  blessed 
transformation  of  the  poverty  and  vanity  of  this  poor 
human  life  into  the  glory  and  reality  of  a  life  that  is 
in  Christ. 


LECTURE  VII. 


THE    EPISTLES. 

i  COR.  i.  30. 

Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus. 

I  TAKE  this  text,  because  it  appears  to  me  to  contain 
the  fundamental  idea,  which  underlies  the  whole  range 
of  the  Epistles,  and  gives  the  specific  character  to  their 
doctrine.  The  specific  character  of  their  doctrine,  as 
compared  with  the  preceding  parts  of  the  New  Testa 
ment,  is  the  question  which  lies  before  me  now. 

Some  kind  of  doctrinal  progress  must  necessarily  be 
attributed  to  these  writings,  if  their  words  are  taken  as 
words  of  God  ;  for  everything  in  them  which  is  not 
simple  repetition  must  be  in  some  sense  addition,  either 
giving  information  wholly  new,  or  explaining,  enlarging 
and  arranging  that  which  former  teachings  had  im 
parted. 

It  would  therefore  be  fit,  at  the  point  which  these 
Lectures  have  reached,  to  make  some  collection  of  these 
additions,  or  rather  some  selection  of  the  chief  instances 
of  them ;  unless  it  should  appear  that  this  stage  of  the 


158  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 


progress  of  doctrine  is  marked  by  such  distinctive  fea 
tures,  as  suffice  by  themselves  to  describe  the  nature  of 
the  advance  which  has  been  made,  and  to  supersede 
the  accumulation  of  particulars  by  the  peculiarity  of  a 
general  character. 

I.  In  what  has  been  already  advanced  the  existence 
of  such  a  general  character  has  been  implied,  and  its 
nature  has  been  in  some  degree  defined. 

We  have  looked  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospels  as 
the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  men,  giving  the  conditions 
and  the  materials  of  a  spiritual  life  which  was  to  follow. 
We  have  looked  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  as  the  preaching  of  Christ  to  men,  summing  up 
the  results  of  his  appearing,  proclaiming  him  with  the 
witness  of  the  Spirit,  and  gathering  those  who  receive 
him  into  the  form  and  the  life  of  a  Church.  We  have 
observed  that  the  Epistles  take  up  the  line  of  teaching 
at  this  point,  being  a  voice  within  that  Church  to  those 
who  are  themselves  within  it ;  that  they  are  appropriated 
by  their  superscriptions  to  those  who  are  already  called, 
separated,  and  sanctified  in  Christ ;  that  they  are  marked 
by  their  form  and  method  as  instruments  of  education  to 
the  spiritual  life  after  it  has  begun  ;  and  that  the  ap 
pointment  of  their  chief  author  implies  the  purpose  of 
teaching  things  which  followed  the  completion  of  the 
work  of  Christ  on  earth,  in  his  offices  and  ministrations 
in  heaven,  and  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  amongst 
men.  If  the  actual  contents  of  the  Epistles  correspond 
with  these  intimations,  their  doctrine  must  necessarily 
bear  a  specific  character  as  compared  with  that  of  the 
Gospels  and  the  Acts.  As  the  manifestation  of  Christ 
when  it  was  finished  made  way  for  the  preaching  of 
Christ,  so  the  preaching  of  Christ  when  it  has  been 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  159 

received  opens  into  the  life  in  CJirist.  The  Epistles  pre 
suppose  the  existence  of  this  life,  both  in  the  community 
and  in  the  individual,  and  their  doctrine  is  directed  to 
educate  and  develop  it.  The  fundamental  thought  in 
every  page  is  that  expressed  in  my  text,  '  Of  him  are  ye 
in  Christ  Jesus.' 

They  are  little  words,  but  they  make  an  announce 
ment  of  vast  significance  and  boundless  consequences. 
Writer  and  readers  regard  themselves  and  each  other  as 
having  now  entered  on  an  existence,  which  for  spiritual 
beings  seems  the  only  real  one.  '  Ye  are]  says  the 
Apostle.  After  speaking  of  'things  that  are  not'  and  of 
'things  that  are,'  he  turns  to  his  fellow-believers,  and 
says,  ' but  ye  are'  And  whence  is  this  existence  found  ? 
From  him  (e'£  avrov},  from  God  himself,  as  its  immediate 
origin  and  still  continuous  author.  And  where  is  it 
found  ?  '  In  Christ  Jesus.' 

In  Christ  Jesus !  As  the  simple  voice  of  faith  this 
word  is  ever  uttered  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory.  But  preacher  or  commentator,  who  may  attempt 
to  sound  the  depths  or  open  the  treasures  of  its  meaning, 
must  feel  his  tongue  falter  under  the  sense  of  the  in 
adequacy  of  every  explaining  word.  Let  us,  however, 
at  least  assert  the  reality  of  the  fact  which  it  expresses, 
for  it  is  no  symbolical  form  of  speech,  but  the  state 
ment  of  a  fact,  as  real  in  regard  to  the  spirit,  as  the 
fact  of  pur  being  in  the  world  is  real  in  regard  to  the 
body. 

How  does  the  vivid  consciousness  of  this  reality  glow 
in  the  pages  which  are  before  us  now !  Christ  has  been 
manifested,  preached,  received  ;  and  what  is  the  state 
which  has  ensued,  as  exhibited  in  the  consciousness  of 
those  who  have  received  him  ?  They  are  not  merely 


160  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 


professors  of  his  name,  learners  of  his  doctrine,  followers 
of  his  example,  sharers  in  his  gifts.  I  may  go  further. 
They  are  not  merely  men  ransomed  by  his  death,  or 
destined  for  his  glory.  These  are  all  external  kinds  of 
connection,  in  which  our  separate  life  is  related  to  his  life 
only  as  one  man's  life  may  be  related  to  another's,  by 
the  effect  of  what  he  teaches,  of  what  he  gives,  and  of 
what  he  does.  But  it  is  assumed  in  the  Epistles,  that 
believers  in  Jesus  are  no  longer  living  a  life  that  is  only 
external,  and,  as  it  were,  parallel  to  his  life.  They  are 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  he  also  is  in  them. 

At  the  close  of  his  manifestation  he  foretold  a  state  of 
consciousness,  which  his  disciples  had  not  attained  while 
he  was  with  them  in  the  flesh,  but  which  would  be 
enjoyed  by  them  under  the  succeeding  dispensation. 
'At  that  day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  my  Father, 
and  ye  in  me,  and  I  in  you3.'  The  language  of  the 
Epistles  is  the  echo  of  this  promise.  It  is  the  voice 
of  those  who  have  entered  on  the  predicted  knowledge, 
and  who  view  all  subjects  in  the  light  of  it. 

They  know  that  Christ  is  in  the  Father  and  the  Father 
in  hini°.  Their  living  words  of  argument  or  exhortation 
or  high  prophetic  testimony  express  the  same  knowledge 
of  this  divine  mystery,  which  an  after  age  (the  better  to 
secure  it  to  the  Church  for  ever)  embodied  in  abstract 
statements  and  careful  definitions  of  doctrine.  They  see 
in  this  mystery  the  life  of  all  other  truths.  '  The  Father 
in  the  Son '  constitutes  the  virtue  of  the  work  of  Christ 
on  earth.  '  The  Son  in  the  Father '  constitutes  the 
power  of  the  mediation  of  Christ  in  heaven.  '  God 
was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  to  himself.'  '  With 
Christ  in  God'  the  Christian's  present  life  is  hid. 

a  John  xiv.  20.  b  Ibid.  x.  38;  xiv.  10;  and  xvii.  21. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  161 

All  that  Christ  does  and  is  in  relation  to  man  derives  its 
virtue  from  the  ineffable  union  of  the  Father  with  the 
Son  c  and  the  Son  with  the  Father  d. 

Furthermore,  these  writers  know  that  believers  are  in 
CJirist  and  Clirist  in  them,  and  shew  that  knowledge, 
not  only  by  frequent  assertions  and  a  universal  sup 
position  of  a  close  and  vital  union  between  the  members 
and  the  head,  but  by  a  full  development  of  both  the 
aspects  of  this  union  which  the  words  of  the  Lord 
present. 

Believers  are  in  Christ,  so  as  to  be  partakers  in  all 
that  he  does,  and  has,  and  is.  They  died  with  him, 
and  rose  with  him,  and  live  with  him,  and  in  him  are 
seated  in  heavenly  places.  When  the  eye  of  God  looks 
on  them  they  are  found  in  Christ,  and  there  is  no  con 
demnation  to  those  that  are  in  him,  and  they  are 
righteous  in  his  righteousness,  and  loved  with  the  love 
which  rests  on  him,  and  are  sons  of  God  in  his  son- 
ship,  and  heirs  with  him  of  his  inheritance,  and  are 
soon  to  be  glorified  with  him  in  his  glory.  And  this 
standing  which  they  have  in  Christ,  and  the  present 
and  future  portion  which  it  secures,  are  contemplated 
in  eternal  counsels,  and  predestined  before  the  founda 
tion  of  the  world. 

As  the  sense  of  this  fact  breathes  in  every  page,  so 
also  does  the  sense  of  the  correlative  fact,  that  Christ 
is  in  those  who  believe:  associating  his  own  presence 
with  their  whole  inward  and  outward  life.  They  know 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  them,  except  they  be  reprobates6 
(rejected  ones).  They  live,  yet  not  they,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  themf,  and  the  kv^vva^v  Xpforos  is  their 


c  2  Cor.  v.  19.  d  Col.  iii.  3. 

6  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  f  Gal.  ii.  20. 

M 


1 62  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

strength  and  their  songs.  This  indwelling  of  Christ  is 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  the  same  passages  speak 
interchangeably  of  the  Spirit  being  in  us,  and  of  Christ 
being  in  ush ;  or  of  the  Holy  Ghost  being  in  us,  and 
our  members  being  the  members  of  Christ1:  and  so 
this  word,  '/  in  you]  includes  the  whole  life  of  the 
Spirit  in  man,  with  all  its  discoveries,  impulses,  and 
achievements,  its  victory  over  the  world,  its  conversa 
tion  in  heaven,  and  earnest  of  the  final  inheritance. 

Thus,  through  the  different  but  intertwined  relations 
represented  by  the  words,  '  Ye  in  me,  and  I  in  you,' 
human  life  is  constituted  a  life  in  Christ ;  and,  through 
the  still  higher  mystery  of  the  union  of  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  is  thereby  revealed  as  a  life  in  God.  '  At  that 
day  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  ye 
in  me,  and  I  in  you.'  Yes !  as  we  pass  through  the 
Epistles,  we  see  that  that  day  is  come,  and  that  the 
consciousness  thus  predicted  has  been  attained.  It  is 
no  flight  of  mysterious  rhetoric,  but  the  brief  expression 
of  the  settled,  habitual,  fundamental  view  of  the  state 
of  those  who  are  here  addressed,  '  Of  him  are  ye  in 
Christ  Jesus.' 

This  idea  underlies  all  that  is  said,  gives  the  point 
of  view  from  which  every  subject  is  regarded,  and  sup 
plies  the  standard  of  character  and  the  rules  of  conduct. 
We  move  in  a  new  world  of  thought,  and  are  raised  to 
a  level  of  doctrine  which  we  had  not  reached  before, 
though  the  Gospels  had  prepared  us  for  it,  and  the 
Acts  had  led  us  towards  it.  In  the  Gospels  we  have 
stood  like  men  who  watch  the  rising  of  some  great 
edifice,  and  who  grow  familiar  with  the  outlines  and 
the  details  of  its  exterior  aspect.  In  the  preaching  of 

s  Phil.  iv.  13.  h  Rom.  viii.  9,  10.  '  i  Cor.  vi   15,  19. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  163 

the  Acts  we  have  seen  the  doors  thrown  open,  and 
joined  the  men  who  flock  into  it  as  their  refuge  and 
their  home.  In  the  Epistles  we  are  actually  within  it, 
sheltered  by  its  roof,  encompassed  by  its  walls ;  we 
pass,  as  it  were,  from  chamber  to  chamber,  beholding 
the  extent  of  its  internal  arrangements  and  the  abund 
ance  of  all  things  provided  for  our  use.  We  are  here 
'  in  Christ  Jesus.'  That  is  the  account  of  the  difference 
which  we  feel,  and  which  lies  in  the  opening  out  of 
the  whole  effect  of  the  Gospel,  rather  than  in  additions 
made  to  its  particular  doctrines.  The  presence  which 
was  lately  before  our  eyes,  and  drew  us  towards  itself, 
now  absorbs  and  wraps  us  round,  and  has  become  the 
ground  on  which  we  stand,  the  air  which  we  breathe, 
the  element  in  which  we  live  and  move  and  have  our 
being. 

The  Churches  are  'in  Christ;'  the  persons  are  'in 
Christ.'  They  are  'found  in  Christ'  and  'preserved  in 
Christ.'  They  are  'saved'  and  'sanctified  in  Christ;' 
are  'rooted,  built  up,'  and  'made  perfect  in  Christ.' 
Their  ways  are  '  ways  that  be  in  Christ ;'  their  con 
versation  is  'a  good  conversation'  in  Christ;  their  faith, 
hope,  love,  joy,  their  whole  life  is  '  in  Christ.'  They 
think,  they  speak,  they  walk  '  in  Christ.'  They  la 
bour  and  suffer,  they  sorrow  and  rejoice,  they  conquer 
and  triumph  'in  the  Lord.'  They  receive  each  other 
and  love  each  other ' '  in  the  Lord.'  The  fundamental 
relations,  the  primal  duties  of  life,  have  been  drawn 
within  the  same  circle.  '  The  man  is  not  without  the 
woman,  nor  the  woman  without  the  man  in  the  Lordk.' 
Wives  submit  themselves  to  their  husbands  'in  the 
Lord ;'  children  obey  their  parents  '  in  the  Lord.'  The 

k  I  Cor.  xi.  ii. 
M    2 


164  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

broadest  distinctions  vanish  in  the  common  bond  of 
this  all-embracing  relation.  'As  many  as  have  been 
baptized  into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ ;  there  is  neither 
Greek  nor  Jew,  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is 
neither  male  nor  female ;  they  are  all  one  in  Christ 
Jesus1.'  The  influence  of  it  extends  over  the  whole  field 
of  action,  and  men  'do  all  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  giving  thanks  to  God  and  the  Father  by  him.' 
The  truth  which  they  hold  is  '  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus ;'  the  will  by  which  they  guide  themselves  is  'the 
will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  them.'  Finally, 
this  character  of  existence  is  not  changed  by  that  which 
changes  all  besides.  Those  who  have  entered  on  it 
depart,  but  they  '  die  in  the  Lord,'  they  '  sleep  in  Jesus,' 
they  are  '  the  dead  in  Christ ;'  and  '  when  he  shall  ap 
pear,'  they  will  appear ;  and  when  he  comes,  '  God  shall 
bring  them  with  him,'  and  they  shall  '  reign  in  life  by 
one — Jesus  Christ.' 

Pardon,  my  brethren,  the  necessarily  slight  and  rapid 
manner  in  which  you  have  now  been  reminded  of  this 
pervading  characteristic  of  the  Apostolic  writings.  Yet, 
swiftly  as  I  am  compelled  to  proceed,  I  must  delay  a 
moment ;  for  there  is  a  question  which  one  who  rehearses 
such  words  ought  not  to  leave  unspoken.  What  corre 
spondence  is  there  between  our  own  habit  of  thought 
and  the  Christian  consciousness  which  speaks  in  these 
pages  ?  I  mean,  not  in  regard  to  particular  doctrines  or 
precepts,  but  in  regard  to  that  one  fact  which  embraces 
them  all — that  which  the  text  expresses,  '  Of  him  are 
ye  in  Christ  Jesus.'  That  is  not  the  statement  of  a 
doctrine,  but  the  summary  of  a  life.  Surely  I  must  ask 
—Is  it  a  life  which  I  am  living  now?  I  glance  over 
i  Gal.  iii.  28. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  165 

these  pages,  and  see  the  holy  and  beloved  name  shining 
in  every  part  of  them,  and  mingling  its  presence  with 
every  thought  and  feeling,  every  purpose  and  hope.  I 
see  an  ever-present  consciousness  of  being  in  Christ, 
and  a  habit  of  viewing  all  things  in  him.  Must  I  not 
look  down  into  my  heart,  and  ask  whether  my  own  in 
ward  life  bears  this  character?  Let  me  accept  nothing 
in  exchange  for  this.  Men  bid  me  live  in  duty  and 
truth,  in  purity  and  love.  They  do  well.  But  the  Gospel 
does  better ;  calling  me  to  live  in  Christ,  and  to  find 
in  him  the  enjoyment  of  all  that  I  would  possess  and 
the  realisation  of  all  that  I  would  become.  In  suggest 
ing  these  personal  inquiries,  I  have  scarcely  taken  a 
step  out  of  my  way,  for  the  very  point  before  us  is  this, 
that  the  progress  of  doctrine  in  the  Epistles  is  consti 
tuted,  not  in  the  first  place  by  the  communication  of 
new  information,  but  by  the  recognition  of  a  spiritual 
state  which  has  been  attained,  and  by  the  education  of 
the  spiritual  life  pertaining  to  it. 

II.  It  now  remains  for  me  to  point  out  that  this  fun 
damental  character  does  of  itself  constitute  a  visible 
advance  in  the  several  parts  of  doctrine,  both  changing 
their  aspect,  and  enlarging  their  bounds  ;  and  for  this 
purpose  it  is  necessary  to  select  some  particular  subjects 
in  which  this  change  may  be  studied. 

i.  We  turn  first  to  the  primary  doctrine  of  salvation 
of  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  Gospels  this  doctrine  appears 
in  its  most  general  form.  To  a  great  degree  it  is  typi 
cally  represented,  through  the  bodily  healing  or  saving 
which  points  to  the  like  work  in  the  world  of  spirit.  On 
some  occasions  that  faith,  by  which  men  are  '  made 
whole'  or  'saved'  (as  the  one  word  is  variously  rendered) 
in  the  lower  sense,  is  declared  to  be  the  means  of  the 


1 66  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

higher  blessing,  and  to  have  secured  for  the  applicant 
'forgiveness  of  sins.'  To  these  intimations,  definite  in 
vitations  and  assertions  are  added.  He  who  speaks  is 
'  come  to  save  the  world ;'  '  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  is  lost ;'  men  are  called  to  '  come  to  him  that  they 
may  have  life ;'  '  he  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  con 
demned  ;'  '  he  shall  never  perish,  but  have  everlasting 
life :'  and  from  time  to  time  some  words  are  spoken, 
which  suggest'  the  method  in  which  the  salvation  is 
wrought — words  which  tell  of  'the  Lamb  of  God  who 
taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world ;'  of  being  '  lifted  up 
like  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,'  that  those  who  look 
may  live ;  of '  life  given  as  a  ransom  for  many ;'  and  of 
'  the  blood  of  the  new  covenant  shed  for  the  remission  of 
sins.'  But,  in  reaching  the  Epistles,  who  is  not  struck 
with  the  definiteness  and  development  which  the  whole 
doctrine,  especially  this  last  part  of  it,  has  obtained. 
Here  men  have  already  received  the  great  truth  in  its 
first  aspect,  and  have  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus  for 
the  remission  of  sins.  Their  minds,  however,  must  work  ; 
and  they  search  into  the  real  depth  and  extent  of  the 
general  assurances,  in  which  their  souls  at  first  found 
rest  and  joy.  The  word  of  God  guides  them  through 
its  commissioned  interpreters.  Thus  the  grounds  of  this 
salvation  in  the  work  of  Christ,  and  the  means  of  it  in 
their  own  faith,  are  brought  clearly  and  vividly  into 
view,  and  the  attention  is  fixed  upon  the  way  in  which 
men,  being  sinful,  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God. 
In  every  variety  of  expression  the  reality  of  the  atoning 
work  of  Christ  is  made  sure ;  in  every  connection  of 
thought  it  is  made  present.  God  '  has  set  him  forth  to 
be  a  propitiation  for  sins  through  faith  in  his  blood  m ;' 

m  Rom.  iii.  25. 


vil.]  THE  EPISTLES.  167 

'  We  are  reconciled  unto  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son  »  ;' 
'We  are  justified  in  his  blood0;'  'We  have  redemption 
through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins v ;'  we, 
'  who  were  far  off,  are  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ*1;' 
'  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who  knew  no  sin, 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
him  r ;'  '  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the 
law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us s ;'  '  By  his  own  blood  he 
entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us  * ;'  '  He  was  once  offered  to 
bear  the  sins  of  manyu  ;'  '  He  put  away  sin  by  the  sacri 
fice  of  himself v  ;'  '  He  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on 
the  tree x ;'  '  Ye  are  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ,  as  of  a  Lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spoty;' 
'  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin z ;'  '  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  not  for 
ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  a.' 

Such  is  the  constant  voice  of  the  Apostolic  teaching, 
and  such  also  is  the  constant  voice  of  that  Christian 
consciousness  which  the  Apostolic  teaching  forms  and 
certifies.  Those  who  are  in  Christ  are  already  inmates 
of  that  holy  '  temple,'  which  we  see  reared  in  the  Gos 
pels  and  opened  in  the  Acts ;  and  for  them  the  altar  of 
the  cross  is  the  one  central  object,  visible  from  the  re 
motest  precincts,  and  sanctifying  all  around  it,  while 
the  one  sacrifice  thereon  completed  is  the  ever-present 
condition  of  all  which  is  celebrated  or  enjoyed  within. 
No  mist  invests  the  object  to  which  all  eyes  are  turned, 
such  as  may  suggest  or  excuse  the  doubt  whether  that 

n  Rom.  v.  10.                          °  Ibid.  v.  9.  P  Eph.  i.  7. 

i  Ibid.  ii.  13.                            r  2  Cor.  v.  21.  s  Gal.  iii.  13. 

*  Heb.  ix.  i  2.                           n  Ibid.  ix.  28.  T  Ibid.  ix.  26. 

1  i  Pet.  ii.  24.                         y  Ibid.  i.  19.  z  i  John  i.  7. 
a  Ibid.  ii.  2. 


1 68  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

object  be  truly  an  altar,  and  the  act  accomplished  on  it 
a  sacrifice  indeed.  Not  here  do  we  see  believers  '  cling 
ing  (as  it  has  been  expressed)  to  the  ground  of  fact' 
under  the  feeling  that  '  mystery  is  the  nearest  approach 
that  we  can  make  to  the  truth  ;  that  only  by  indefinite- 
ness  can  we  avoid  putting  words  in  the  place  of  things  ; 
that  we  know  nothing  of  the  objective  act  on  God's  part 
by  which  he  reconciled  the  world  to  himself,  the  very 
description  of  it  as  an  act  being  only  a  figure  of  speech  ; 
and  that  we  seem  to  know  that  we  never  can  know  any 
thing13.'  Instead  of  this  we  find  a  firm  unsparing  use 
of  various  but  kindred  forms  of  speech,  each  supple 
menting  and  confirming  the  other,  and  having  in  the 
minds  of  those  who  use  them  a  recognised  and  settled 
force,  derived  from  ordinances  which  they  have  always 
held  to  be  divine,  and  which  they  now  understand  to 
have  been  pre-ordained  for  the  very  purpose  of  pre 
paring  the  ideas  and  the  language,  in  which  they  are 
here  expressing  the  things  of  Christ. 

Mysteries  of  course  remain ;  and  the  truths  delivered, 
however  distinct  and  clear  in  their  central  parts,  have 
their  circumference  in  regions  which  the  eye  cannot 
reach.  I  only  observe  that  these  central  parts  of  the 
truth  of  our  salvation  do  grow  more  distinct  and  clear 
as  we  advance  beyond  the  threshold  of  the  Gospel :  and 
that  in  the  Epistles,  as  standing  amongst  those  who  are 
in  Christ,  we  receive  a  fuller  interpretation  of  the  things 
which  he  spake  with  his  lips,  concerning  the  salvation 
which  we  were  to  find  in  him. 

2.  Proceed  now  to  another  doctrine  respecting  the 
Christian  state — namely,  that  those  who  are  saved  are 
also  sons. 

b  Jowett  on  the  Epistles,  vol.  ii.  p.  482. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  169 

One  chief  feature  of  the  teaching  in  the  Gospels  is 
found  in  the  word  '  Father.'  Jesus  appears  amongst 
men  in  the  character  of  the  Son.  His  first  spoken  word 
utters  the  consciousness  of  that  relation,  'Wist  ye  not 
that  I  must  be  among  the  things  of  my  Father0'?  His 
first  introduction  to  men  ratifies  it :  '  This  is  my  be 
loved  Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  d :'  and  so  he  goes 
forth  into  the  world  as  the  Son  of  the  Father.  In  right 
of  this  relation  he  straightway  associates  in  it  those  who 
receive  him  :  and  when,  in  his  first  instructions,  he  lifts 
up  his  eyes  on  his  disciples  to  teach  them  the  principles 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  he  bases  everything  upon  this 
relation  between  them  and  their  God.  'Pray  to  thy 
Father e  ;'  '  Thy  Father  will  reward  f ;'  '  Your  Father 
knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need  of?;'  'That  ye  may 
glorify  your  Father11;'  'That  ye  may  be  the  children  of 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven ' ;'  'Be  ye  perfect,  as 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect11.'  So  the 
whole  course  of  his  teaching  tends  to  that  intertwining 
of  his  own  relation  to  God  with  theirs,  which  is  finally 
expressed  on  the  eve  of  his  departure : — '  My  Father 
and  your  Father,  my  God  and  your  God  V  And  this 
language  is  not  a  mere  general  declaration  of  the  uni 
versal  fatherhood  of  God  ;  for  it  is  always  addressed  to 
his  disciples  as  such,  to  the  little  flock,  whom  the  world 
will  persecute,  and  to  whom  'it  is  their  Father's  good 
pleasure  to  give  the  kingdom m  :'  and  it  is  further  de 
clared  that  the  consciousness  of  it  is  only  awakened  in 
those  who  hear  his  word,  for  '  no  man  knoweth  the  Father 


c  Luke  ii.  49.  d  Matt.  iii.  17.  e  Ibid.  vi.  6. 

f  Ibid.  vi.  4.  e  Ibid.  8.  h  Ibid.  v.  16. 

1  Ibid.  v.  45.  k  Ibid.  48.  1  John  xx.  17. 

ra  Luke  xii.  32. 


170  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal 
him n  ;'  and  the  right  to  enjoy  and  feel  this  relation  is 
represented  by  St.  John  as  a  gift  to  those  who  receive 
him,  and  believe  in  him :  '  To  as  many  as  received  him, 
to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even 
to  them  that  believe  on  his  name :  which  were  born,  not 
of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  God  °.' 

What  advance  is  made  in  the  Epistles  upon  the  doc 
trine  thus  announced  ?  It  appears  there  in  a  fuller  form, 
and  with  plainer  statements  of  its  ground  in  the  work  of 
Christ,  who  is  the  Son  sent  forth,  '  made  under  the  law 
to  redeem  (buy  out,  e^ayopacny)  those  who  were  under  the 
law,  in  order  that  (iVa)  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of 
sonsP:'  and  with  stronger  assertions  also  of  the  means, 
on  our  part,  through  which  the  sonship  is  enjoyed. 
'  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  born  of 
God  i ; '  'Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus r.'  But  the  substantive  addition  made  to 
the  doctrine  lies  in  the  region  of  consciousness,  and  in 
the  experience  of  the  inward  life.  Believers  are  in 
Christ,  and  so  are  sons  of  God,  but,  having  become  so, 
they  find  that  Christ  also  is  in  them,  giving  them  the 
mind  of  sons  and  the  sense  of  their  sonship.  '  Because 
ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son 
into  your  hearts,  crying,  Abba,  Father s.'  The  Spirit 
itself  witnesseth  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children 
of  God  :  and  if  children,  then  heirs  ;  heirs  of  God,  and 
joint-heirs  with  Christ*.'  'This  revelation  is  not  only 
seen  in  the  particular  passages  which  assert  it,  but  its 

n  Matt.  xi.  27.  °  John  i.  12.  P  Gal.  iv.  3. 

i  I  John  v.  I.  r  Gal.  iii.  26.  8  Ibid.  iv.  6. 

4  Rom.  viii.  16,  17. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  171 

presence  is  felt  in  all  parts  of  the  Apostolic  writings,  and, 
as  we  read,  we  become  more  and  more  sensible  that 
Christ  in  the  Spirit  has  perfected  his  teaching  in  the 
flesh,  and  that  those  who  are  in  him  have  now  learned 
all  that  was  meant  by  his  word  '  Your  Father.' 

3.  Turning  now  to  the  department  of  duties,  let  us 
take  the  first  of  them — the  personal  approach  to  God  in 
worship,  prayer,  and  praise. 

Speaking  often  on  this  subject,  our  Lord  instructs  us 
to  come  to  God  as  a  Father,  and  as  one  who  seeth  in 
secret u ;  to  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth v ;  to  pray 
always,  and  not  to  faint w ;  to  pray  as  sinners  who  need 
mercy x,  as  children  who  are  sure  to  be  heard  y  ;  and 
whatsoever  things  we  ask  to  believe  that  we  receive 
them z.  In  his  last  discourse  words  are  dropped,  which 
seem  to  place  the  whole  subject  on  a  fresh  basis :  '  No 
man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me; '  '  If  ye  shall 
ask  anything  in  my  name,  I  will  do  it.  Hitherto  ye 
have  asked  nothing  in  my  name :  ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  fulla.' 

In  the  Epistles  these  (at  the  time)  anticipatory  words 
have  found  their  explanation ;  and  thereby  all  the  pre 
vious  instruction  is  fully  realised.  Men  are  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  tJicrefore  they  come  to  God  by  him.  The 
whole  character  of  worship  and  prayer  is  now  derived 
from  the  consciousness,  that  '  through  him  we  have 
access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father  V  God  is  ap 
proached  as  a  Father  indeed,  because  he  is  the  Father  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  whom  the  worshipper  is  found  : 
and  therefore  the  two  names  are  united  in  every  voice 

"  Matt.  vi.  8.  v  John  iv.  24.  w  Luke  xviii.  i. 

x  Ibid,  xviii.  13.  y  Ibid.  xi.  11-13.  *  Mark  xi.  24. 

»  John  xiv.  6,  14,  and  xvi.  23,  24.  b  Eph.  ii.  18. 


172  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

and  almost  every  mention  of  prayer.  Through  him 
also  we  have  the  access  (TTJV  Trpoo-aywyrp),  or  (as  it  is  soon 
afterwards  expressed)  '  access  with  confidence  by  the 
faith  of  him c.'  The  right  of  entrance  is  secured,  and 
the  means  by  which  it  was  secured  are  present  to  the 
mind.  We  have  '  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by 
the  blood  of  Jesus ''.'  Sacrifice  has  been  offered,  the 
barriers  are  gone,  a  new  and  living  way  is  opened.  And 
yet,  further,  there  is  (as  the  word  implies)  a  present 
introduction  by  the  living  intervention  of  an  Eternal 
Priest,  ministering  in  the  true  sanctuary,  with  active 
mediation  and  a  perpetual  intercession  for  all  who  come 
to  God  by  him.  Furthermore,  this  access,  which  is 
through  the  Son,  is  also  '  by  one  Spirit.'  To  those  who 
are  in  Christ  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given,  as  the  conse 
quence  of  their  union  with  him,  and  thus  there  is  the 
divine  presence  in  the  soul  of  the  worshipper ;  and  so, 
in  the  highest  and  most  perfect  sense,  he  worships  the 
Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  prays  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
'  the  Spirit  itself  helping  his  infirmities,  when  he  knows 
not  what  he  should  pray  for  as  he  ought,  and  making 
intercession  for  him  with  groanings  that  cannot  be 
uttered  e.'  Passing  into  the  midst  of  such  discoveries  as 
these,  we  feel  that  the  doctrine  of  prayer  has  attained 
its  perfect  form,  by  combination  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity,  and  that  the  highest  fulfilment  of  all  which  had 
been  enjoined  upon  those  who  were  with  Jesus  has  be 
come  possible  for  those  who  now  are  in  him. 

4.  The  ethical  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  shall 
be  my  last  example.  There  also  the  like  kind  of  ad 
vance  appears.  I  need  not  recall  by  any  special  re- 

c  Eph.  iii.  ii.  d  Heb.  x.  19.  e  Rom.  viii.  26. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  173 

ferences  the  characteristic  features  of  our  Lord's  moral 
teaching  in  the  Gospels.  They  are  present  to  all  our 
minds.  That  standard  of  character  and  rule  of  conduct 
have  secured  the  reverential  recognition  of  the  common 
conscience  of  mankind,  and  the  genuine  admiration  of 
unbelief  itself.  It  has  been  felt,  even  in  unlikely 
quarters,  that  in  these  holy  discourses  and  that  perfect 
example,  human  character  appears  in  a  state  of  purity 
and  elevation  which  is  nowhere  else  to  be  seen :  and 
especially  that  this  moral  system  shines  most  brightly  in 
those  points  where  other  systems  fail,  namely,  the  truth 
fulness  of  inward  cleansing,  the  majesty  of  lowliness,  and 
the  glory  of  love.  Can  there  be  advance  on  such  a  code 
as  this,  given  by  the  Lord  himself,  when,  as  a  man 
among  men,  he  shewed  and  taught  what  human  per 
fection  is  ? 

Yet  when  we  pass  to  the  Epistles  we  are  sensible  of  a 
momentous  change.  The  standard  is  the  same  in  its 
general  elevation  and  in  the  proportions  of  its  several 
parts.  Where  then  is  the  change?  I  answer,  in  the 
position  of  those  who  are  to  use  it,  in  the  relations  of 
which  they  are  now  conscious,  and  therefore  in  the 
motives  by  which  they  are  to  be  influenced,  and  in  the 
powers  which  they  are  supposed  to  possess.  "  Our  duties," 
as  Bishop  Butler  observes,  "arise  out  of  our  relations f.' 
Therefore  every  revelation  of  hitherto  unknown  re 
lations  must  affect  in  some  way  the  character  of  our 
duties.  This  truth  comes  strikingly  into  view,  as  we 
follow  the  unfolding  of  the  spiritual  relations  of  believers 
to  their  Lord. 

Observe  first  the  position  which  the  Lord  Jesus  attri- 

f  Analogy,  Part  II.  ch  i.  sect.  2. 


174  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

butes  to  those  whom  he  teaches,  and  the  consequent 
motives  to  which  he  appeals,  in  those  instructions  in 
righteousness  which  he  gave  in  the  days  of  his  flesh. 
He  urges  the  special  relations  in  which  those  who  have 
joined  him  stand.  They  are  under  peculiar  obligations, 
and  a  peculiar  government.  They  are  his  disciples e,  and 
the  children  of  their  Father  f;  they  must  '  do  more  than 
others  s.'  He  charges  them  as  being  their  master,  and 
counsels  them  as  being  their  friend ;  and,  as  time  goes 
on,  uses  the  power  of  his  example,  and  at  last  appeals  to 
the  claims  of  his  love :  '  I  have  given  you  an  example, 
that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you  h  ; '  '  As  I  have 
loved  you,  that  ye  love  one  another  * : '  then  finally  opens 
that  deeper  relation,  from  which  their  future  fruitfulness 
must  be  derived  :  '  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the 
branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself  except  it  abide  in  the 
vine,  no  more  can  ye  except  ye  abide  in  me  V 

That  last  saying,  which  was  at  the  time  a  parable, 
they  soon  knew  as  a  fact.  When  the  redemption  was 
completed,  and  he  was  gone  from  their  side,  they  found 
themselves  in  a  closer  and  deeper  union  with  him  than 
they  had  understood  before.  Henceforth  it  was  in  the 
relations  with  him,  on  which  they  had  entered  in  the 
Spirit,  that  they  found  both  the  motives  of  duty  and  the 
power  for  its  fulfilment. 

The  Epistles  first  unfold  the  fulness  of  the  grace  in 
Christ,  and  then  beseech  us  'by  the  mercies  of  God' 
that  we  present  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy, 
acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  our  reasonable  service1.' 


e  Luke  xiv.  26,  27,  43.  l  Matt.  v.  45.  e  Ibid.  17. 

h  John  xiii.  15.    .  >  Ibid.  xv.  12.  k  Ibid.  4. 

1  Rom.  xii.  i. 


YII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  175 

They  base  their  practical  instructions  on  the  conscious 
ness  of  being  redeemed  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ »',  of  being  risen  with  Christ n,  of  having  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  dwelling  in  us0.  All  goodness,  righteousness, 
and  truth  are  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  dwelling  in  us.  We 
live  in  the  Spirit,  therefore  we  are  to  walk  in  the  Spirit1' : 
we  have  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  therefore  we  are 
to  walk  in  him  1 ;  we  are  to  flee  fornication,  because  it 
would  defile  the  members  of  Christ r ;  we  are  to  put 
away  corrupt  communications,  because  they  will  grieve 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  we  are  sealed  to  the 
day  of  redemption s ;  we  are  to  forgive  one  another, 
because  God  for  Christ's  sake  has  forgiven  us i ;  to 
receive  one  another,  because  Christ  received  us  to  the. 
glory  of  God  u  ;  and  to  give  to  others,  because  we  know 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  when  he  was 
rich,  for  our  sakes  became  poor,  that  we  through  his 
poverty  might  be  made  richx ;  our  conversation  is  to  be 
worthy  of  God,  who  has  called  us  to  his  kingdom  and 
glory  >T ;  we  are  to  mortify  our  members  upon  the  earth, 
because,  when  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  we 
also  shall  appear  with  him  in  glory  z. 

This  character  of  ethical  teaching  is  nowhere  more 
conspicuous  than  in  the  calm  depths  of  the  Epistle  of  St. 
John,  where  the  sense  of  fellowship  with  God  is  the 
ground  of  walking  in  the  light a  ;  and  '  he  that  saith  he 
abideth  in  Christ  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as 
he  walked b ;  and  every  man  that  hath  the  hope  in 
Christ  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  purec;  and  the 
love  which  laid  down  his  life  for  us  is  the  reason  for  a 

m   I  Pet.  i.  1 8.  n  Col.  iii.  I.  °  Rom.  viii.  9,  13. 

v  Gal.  v.  22-25.  li  Col.  ii.  6.  r  i  Cor.  vi.  19.  s  Eph.  iv.  29,  30. 

1  Ibid.  32.  u  Rom.  xv.  7.  x  2  Cor.  viii.  9.  >    I  Thess.  ii.  12. 

z  Col.  iii.  4,  5.  a  i  John  i.  0.          b  Ibid.  ii.  6.  °  Ibid.  iii.  2,  3. 


176  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

willingness  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren  (1 ;  and 
the  whole  spirit  of  love  one  to  another  is  the  reflection 
of  that  love  of  God,  wherewith  he  first  loved  us,  and 
sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins e. 

We  recognise  then  the  advance  of  ethical  doctrine, 
not  only  or  chiefly  in  its  more  various  and  detailed 
practical  development,  but  in  the  fact  that  the  principles, 
motives,  and  conduct  of  life  are  habitually  drawn  from 
the  ever-present  consciousness  of  the  great  salvation.  It 
is  a  habit  of  thought,  up  to  which,  but  not  into  which, 
the  moral  teaching  of  Jesus  had  led  us  ;  a  habit  of 
thought,  which  corresponds  with  those  relations  towards 
himself,  into  which  men  fully  entered  only  when  his 
voice  on  earth  had  ceased.  If  there  is  this  visible  pro 
gress  of  doctrine  in  the  department  of  Christian  ethics ; 
if,  in  respect  of  distinct  exhibition  of  principles  and 
motives,  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles  surpasses  that  of 
their  Lord  ;  it  is  plain  that  this  fact  is  a  necessity  from 
the  nature  of  the  case.  Till  Jesus  was  glorified,  his 
spiritual  relations  with  believers  could  not  be  fully  un 
folded  ;  and  till  those  relations  were  apprehended,  the 
motives  arising  out  of  them  could  not  be  called  into 
action,  nor  the  life  resulting  from  them  be  clearly 
brought  to  light, 

I  have  now  adverted  to  some  principal  subjects  on 
which  we  have  received  the  teaching  of  God  in  the  New 
Testament,  as  illustrations  of  the  change  which  that 
teaching  exhibits  in  the  latter  part  of  the  volume.  If 
we  multiplied  these  examples  to  the  utmost,  our  com 
parison  of  the  aspect  which  every  separate  doctrine 
bears  in  the  Gospels  with  that  which  it  presents  in  the 

d  I  John  1 6.  e  Ibid.  iv.  7-10. 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  177 

Epistles  would  still  have  the  same  result.  We  should 
still  see  that  the  later  doctrine  differs  from  the  earlier, 
only  as  being  its  TrXTjpcoo-i?,  its  completion  and  fulfilment. 
The  Lord  himself  was  perfected  and  glorified,  not  in  the 
days  of  his  flesh,  but  after  they  were  ended.  So  also 
was  his  doctrine  ;  but  as  in  the  later  stage  he  is  still  the 
same  Lord,  so  it  is  still  the  same  doctrine.  Its  meaning 
is  defined,  its  extent  is  disclosed,  its  consequences  are 
deduced.  Parable  and  proverb  are  changed  into  great 
plainness  of  speech.  What  seemed  a  figure  is  shewn  as 
a  fact.  What  was  intimation  of  something  future  is 
become  assertion  of  something  present.  Motives  are 
supplied,  powers  are  assured,  by  which  that  which  was 
enjoined  is  realised,  and  a  life  which  had  seemed  im 
possible  is  now  become  simply  natural.  Revelation  has 
only  enlarged  itself  to  meet  necessities  and  fill  capacities 
which  its  former  words  had  purposely  created.  The 
earlier  teaching  contemplated  the  coming  of  a  day  for 
its  disciples,  in  which  many  things  should  be  said  to 
them  which  they  could  not  bear  then.  In  the  later 
teaching  that  day  is  come.  At  first  they  are  taught  as 
those  who  are  with  Jesus,  afterwards  as  those  who  are 
in  Christ.  They  know  now  that  he  is  in  the  Father, 
and  they  in  him,  and  he  in  them.  When  that  con 
sciousness  is  given,  a  standing-point  is  reached  from 
which  new  worlds  of  thought  may  be  surveyed.  They 
are  surveyed  in  the  Epistles,  and  there  the  chosen 
teachers  spread  before  us  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ.  They  say  to  us,  '  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ 
Jesus ; '  and  they  shew  us  what  that  state  implies,  of 
capacities,  possessions,  responsibilities,  duties,  and  des 
tinies  ;  of  relations  to  God  and  man,  of  connection  with 
things  in  earth  and  things  in  heaven.  They  shew  that 

N 


178  THE  EPISTLES.  [LECT. 

to  produce  and  to  perfect  this  state  are  the  ends  of  the 
preaching  of  the  word,  of  the  institution  of  the  sacra 
ments,  of  the  ordinance  of  the  ministry,  of  the  life  and 
order  of  the  Church  ;  yea,  of  the  divine  government  of 
the  world,  and  of  all  that  bears  on  human  history.  '  All 
things  are  for  your  sakesf;'  'All  are  yours,  whether 
Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or 
death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come ;  all  are 
yours  ;  and  ye  are  Christ's  ;  and  Christ  is  God's  K.' 

And  so  the  great  course  of  divine  teaching  has 
reached  its  highest  stage.  After  slowly  moving  on, 
through  the  simple  thoughts  of  patriarchal  piety,  through 
the  system  and  covenant  of  the  Law,  and  through  the 
higher  spirituality  of  the  Prophets,  it  rose  suddenly  to  a 
lofty  elevation  when  God  spake  to  us  in  his  Son ;  and, 
even  higher  yet,  when  the  Son  ascended  back  into  glory, 
and  sent  down  the  Holy  Ghost  to  take  up  his  unfinished 
word,  and  open  the  mysteries  which  had  been  hid  from 
ages  and  generations.  Each  stage  of  progress  based 
itself  on  the  facts  and  instructions  of  that  which  went 
before.  The  Law  was  given  to  the  children  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob  ;  the  Prophets  spake  to  those  who  were 
under  the  Law  ;  Jesus  Christ  came  to  those  who  had 
been  taught  by  the  Prophets ;  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
structed  those  who  had  received  Christ. 

Beyond,  and  outside  this  course  of  teaching,  lay,  and 
still  lies,  the  great  world  of  human  beings.  Lord,  and 
what  shall  these  men  do  ?  What  is  that  to  thee  ? 
Follow  thou  me. 

Oh !  let  us  follow.  It  is  not  the  object  of  revelation 
to  answer  those  enquiries,  natural  as  they  are.  It  is 
its  object  to  lead  those  to  whom  it  comes  into  that  fulness 

f  2  Cor.  iv.  15.  si  Cor.  ii.  21-23 


VII.]  THE  EPISTLES.  179 

of  knowledge,  and  up  to  those  heights  of  blessing, 
towards  which,  in  its  own  historical  progress,  it  so 
steadily  advanced,  and  which  its  final  stage  attained. 

Let  not  searchings  of  heart  as  to  what  others  shall  do, 
or  the  sense  of  the  thousand  questions  which  mtist 
wait  for  their  solution  a  few  years  longer,  divert  us  from 
now  pressing  into  that  inner  circle  of  experience  to 
which  the  Word  of  God  conducts  us. 

There  we  shall  find  it  true  that  '  he  that  believeth  on 
the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself^?  There  we 
shall  repeat  within  ourselves  the  words  with  which  the 
last  Apostle  closes  his  Epistle  :  '  We  know  that  the  Son 
of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  understanding,  that 
we.  may  know  him  that  is  true,  and  we  are  in  him  that 
is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true 
God,  and  eternal  life1.'  There  we  shall  feel  that  we 
have  reached  results  for  our  own  inward  life  answerable 
to  all  the  preparations  which  went  before — answerable 
even  to  the  great  facts  in  which  those  preparations 
culminated,  when  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father  came 
down  to  earth  to  take  us  into  himself,  and  returned  into 
glory  to  unite  us  to  God. 

h  i  John  v.  6.  >  Ibid.  20. 


N   2 


LECTURE     VIII. 


THE   APOCALYPSE. 


REV.  xxi.  2. 

/  John  saw  the  holy  city,  ne<w  Jerusalem,  coming  do<wn  from  God 
out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband. 

I  HESE  words  open  the  last  vision  of  prophecy  and 
the  last  teaching  of  Scripture. 

It  had  been  the  promise  of  the  Lord  to  his  disciples 
that  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  he  would  send  to  them  from 
the  Father,  should  not  only  lead  them  into  all  the  truth, 
but  should  also  shew  them  things  to  come :  and  we  find 
the  promise  fulfilled  in  both  its  parts.  The  predictions 
of  the  great  transitional  discourse,  concerning  the  coming 
dispensation  of  the  Spirit,  have  their  permanent  justi 
fication  in  the  canonical  books  which  follow ;  and  as  the 
Epistles  respond  to  the  assurance,  '  He  shall  lead  you 
into  all  the  truth,'  so  does  the  word,  '  He  shall  shew  you 
things  to  come,'  find  its  distinct  fulfilment  in  the  Apo 
calypse.  That  book  continues  the  line  of  predictive 
history  running  through  the  New  Testament,  and  is  the 


THE  APOCALYPSE.  181 


consummation  of  the  sure  word  of  prophecy  which  per 
vades  the  Bible  as  a  whole. 

I  have  already  had  occasion  to  observe  that  the  words 
spoken  by  our  Lord  in  the  flesh  give  the  substance  of 
all  the  later  doctrine,  and  prove  to  be,  as  it  were,  the 
heads  and  summaries  of  chapters  which  were  to  be 
written  afterwards.  As  all  the  great  doctrinal  features 
of  the  Epistles  are  found  in  germ  in  separate  sayings  of 
the  Lord,  so  also  the  main  outlines  of  the  Apocalypse 
are  given  us  in  parables  and  sayings,  which  trace  the 
future  history  of  his  kingdom.  And  more  particularly 
it  is  to  be  noticed,  that  this  book  bears  the  same  rela 
tion  to  the  last  discourse  in  St.  Matthew,  which  the 
Epistles  bear  to  the  last  discourse  in  St.  John.  In  the 
upper  room  where  the  last  Passover  and  the  first  Eucha 
rist  had  been  celebrated,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  little 
company  which  then  represented  the  Christian  Church,  the 
Lord  spoke  the  words  which  opened  the  mystery  of  the 
spiritual  life,  a  mystery  afterwards  to  be  fully  unfolded 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  day  when  they  would  know 
that  he  was  .in  the  Father,  and  they  in  him,  and  he  in 
them.  Sitting  on  the  Mount  of  Olives  with  Jerusalem 
spread  before  him,  and  questioned  as  to  the  sign  of  his 
coming  and  of  the  winding  up  of  the  age,  he  gave  the 
outlines  of  a  prophetic  history,  which  contained  the  sub 
stance,  bore  the  character,  and  must  rule  the  inter 
pretation,  of  the  later  and  larger  revelation. 

Again,  as  in  the  case  of  the  doctrinal  teaching,  so  in 
the  case  of  the  prophetical,  its  unity  is  assured  to  us  by 
the  testimonies  that  the  teacher  is  the  same  in  the  later 
as  in  the  earlier  stage.  Not  only  do  we  find  in  the 
spoken  words  of  the  Lord  the  condensed  substance  of 
that  which  follows ;  not  only  do  we  hear  from  him,  that 


1 82  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

this  part  of  his  teaching  is  to  be  continued  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  whom  he  will  send  to  shew  us  things  to  come ; 
but  a  peculiar  care  is  taken,  in  opening  the  last  communi 
cation  from  heaven,  to  bring  fully  before  the  mind  of  the 
Church  the  reality  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord  himself 
in  his  revealing  word.  'The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ 
which  God  gave  unto  him,  to  shew  unto  his  servants  the 
things  which  must  come  to  pass,'  is  a  repetition,  and  a 
particular  application,  of  that  assurance  on  which  all  the 
Gospel  rests,  '  /  have  given  unto  them  the  words  which 
thou  gavest  me'.  Even  the  visible  discovery  of  this  fact 
is  not  withheld.  If  Paul,  as  the  great  expositor  of  the 
present  spiritual  life,  had  seen  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and 
received  immediately  from  the  Lord  that  which  he  de 
livered  unto  men  ;  so  John,  as  the  chief  prophet  of  the 
things  to  come,  saw  the  well-remembered  form  again, 
surrounded  with  the  symbols  of  majesty  and  judgment, 
and  looked  upon  his  countenance,  now  like  the  sun 
shining  in  his  strength,  and  heard  his  voice  as  the  sound 
of  many  waters. 

Thus  the  continuity  of  the  line  of  prophecy  within 
the  canonical  books  is  made  as  clear  as  that  of  the  line 
of  doctrine ;  both  commencing  in  the  words  of  Jesus  in 
the  flesh,  both  perfected  by  the  word  of  Jesus  in  the 
Spirit. 

But  it  may  be  asked,  If  the  line  of  prophecy  is  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  line  of  doctrine,  what  place  can  the 
former  subject  claim  in  Lectures  which  are  appropriated 
to  the  latter? 

Taking  prophecy  as  predicted  fact  (however  partially 
discovered  or  symbolically  disguised),  it  will  stand  in 
the  same  relation  to  doctrine  as  is  held  by  history  or 
recorded  fact.  In  the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  that  rela- 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  183 

tion  is  the  very  closest ;  for  it  is  a  doctrine  which  rests 
upon  events.  Its  foundation  is  in  facts  which  have  come 
to  pass,  and  will  yet  come  to  pass.  Jesus  died — he 
ascended — he  will  come  again — he  will  reign  in  glory. 
These  are  external  facts.  They  enter  the  region  of  doc 
trine  (as  we  commonly  use  the  term)  through  their  con 
sequences  to  ourselves,  through  their  effect  on  our  own 
inward  consciousness,  through  the  uses  and  applications 
which  may  be  made  of  them.  If  Jesus  died — to  bear 
our  sins,  if  he  ascended — to  be  manifested  in  the  pre 
sence  of  God  for  us,  if  he  will  come  again — to  judge  our 
state,  if  he  will  reign  in  glory — to  perfect  our  salvation, 
then  these  facts,  in  themselves  external  to  us,  are  ex 
ternal  no  longer.  They  are  among  the  grounds  of  a 
whole  system  of  thought  and  habit  of  feeling,  and,  when 
taught  as  such,  they  grow  into  a  scheme  of  doctrine. 
But  as  in  history  (I  mean  that  which  is  commonly  de 
scribed  as  inspired  history)  all  the  events  have  not  the 
same  connection  with  doctrine,  but  some  only  an  indi 
rect  and  remote  one,  so  also  is  it  in  prophecy ;  and  par 
ticular  facts,  or  a  whole  series  of  events,  may  be  inti 
mated  in  the  way  of  prediction  for  other  reasons,  but 
not  for  any  immediate  bearing  which  they  have  upon 
doctrine.  t 

It  results  from  these  observations  that  the  progress 
of  prophecy,  taken  as  a  whole,  is  so  bound  up  with  the 
progress  of  doctrine,  that  the  enlargement  of  the  one 
must  in  some  degree  involve  the  enlargement  of  the 
other.  It  also  results  that  the  one  is  still  to  be  distin 
guished  from  the  other,  and  therefore  that  it  does  not 
belong  to  such  an  enquiry  as  I  now  pursue  to  trace  the 
details  of  a  predicted  course  of  events. 

I  am  free  then  from  all  necessities  of  detailed  apo- 


1 84  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

calyptic  interpretation  ;  having  only  to  render  some 
account  of  the  general  doctrinal  bearing  of  this  revela 
tion  of  things  to  come,  and  to  point  out  what  additions 
of  that  kind  are  made  in  the  last  book,  to  the  treasures 
which  the  preceding  documents  have  accumulated  for 
our  use.  The  separate  accessions  of  information  it  would 
take  long  to  gather,  but  their  general  character  is  visible 
at  once. 

I.  The  former  Scriptures  have  revealed  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  Saviour,  not  only  of  individual  souls, 
but  also  of  '  the  body,  the  Church.'  The  final  result  of 
his  appearing  is  shewn  not  only  in  the  peace,  the  holi 
ness,  the  participation,  and  inherence  in  him  of  each 
separate  person,  but  in  the  formation  of  a  corporate 
existence,  a  society  in  which  man  is  perfected,  a  king 
dom  in  which  God  is  glorified.  The  parables  and  say 
ings  of  the  Gospels  present  this  kingdom  of  God  as 
having  its  own  life  and  end,  its  own  history  and  destiny, 
in  which  those  of  its  individual  members  are  involved. 
Soon  its  visible  shape  appears.  A  society  is  formed, 
and,  if  glorious  things  were  spoken  of  the  city  of  God 
under  the  old  covenant,  still  more  glorious  things  are 
spoken  of  this,  which  is  '  the  house  of  God,'  '  the  Church 
of  the  living  God  a,'  '  the  habitation  of  God  through  the 
Spirit h,'  It  is  not  a  mere  aggregate  of  separate  parts, 
but  possesses  an  organic  life,  as  'the  body  of  Christ' 
'  fitly  joined  together  and  compacted  by  that  which 
every  joint  supplieth,  according  to  the  effectual  working 
in  the  measure  of  every  part,  making  increase  of  the 
body  unto  the  edifying  of  itself  in  love  c.'  It  is  endued 
with  a  corporate  personality,  in  which  the  full  results  of 

a  I  Tim.  iii.  15.  b  Eph.  ii.  22.  i       c  Ibid.  iv.  16. 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  185 

redemption  will  appear :  for  it  is  the  spouse  of  Christ, 
which  he  loved,  and  for  which  he  gave  himself,  and 
which  he  will  present  unto  himself  a  glorious  Church, 
'not  having  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing d.'  In 
this  view,  the  Church  is  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  the 
individual,  as  the  individual  for  the  sake  of  the  Church. 
Its  perfection  and  glory,  its  full  response  to  the  work  of 
Christ,  its  realisation  of  the  purposes  of  God,  constitute 
the  end  to  which  the  existence  of  each  member  min 
isters.  This  line  of  thought  runs  through  the  Epistles, 
and  forms  a  distinct  advance  upon  that  which  works  out 
the  development  of  personal  salvation.  I  have  now  to 
point  out  that  it  is  not  perfected  in  the  Epistles,  but 
demands  such  a  continuance  and  such  a  close  as  it  re 
ceives  in  the  Apocalypse. 

The  sense  of  sharing  in  a  corporate  existence,  and  in 
a  history  and  destinies  larger  than  those  which  belong 
to  us  as  individuals,  tends  to  throw  the  mind  forward 
upon  a  course  of  things  to  come,  through  which  this 
various  history  is  to  run,  and  these  glorious  destinies 
are  to  be  reached.  More  especially  is  this  the  case, 
where  there  is  a  strong  contrast  between  the  ideal  ex 
pectations  which  we  have  formed  and  the  actual  realisa 
tion  which  at  any  particular  time  we  behold.  When 
present  things  in  a  measure  disappoint  us,  we  turn  more 
eagerly  to  the  brighter  future,  and  look  beyond  the 
darkened  foreground  to  the  light  which  glows  on  the 
horizon.  Who  does  not  feel,  in  reading  the  Epistles, 
that  some  such  sense  of  present  disappointment  grows 
upon  him,  and  that  such  dark  shadows  are  gathering  on 
the  scene  ? 

d  Eph.  v.  27. 


l86  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

How  fair  was  the  morning  of  the  Church !  how  swift 
its  progress!  what  expectations  it  would  have  been 
natural  to  form  of  the  future  history  which  had  begun 
so  well !  Doubtless  they  were  formed  in  many  a  san 
guine  heart :  but  they  were  clouded  soon.  It  became 
evident  that,  when  the  first  conflicts  were  passed,  others 
would  succeed  ;  and  that  the  long  and  weary  war  with 
the  powers  of  darkness  had  only  just  begun.  The 
wrestlings  'against  principalities  and  powers  and  the 
spiritual  forces  of  wickedness  in  heavenly  places e '  were 
yet  to  be  more  painfully  felt,  and  believers  were  pre 
pared  to  be  'partakers  of  Christ's  sufferings,'  and  not  to 
'  think  it  strange  concerning  the  fiery  trial  which  was  to 
try  them,  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened  to 
them  f. ' 

But  worse  for  the  Church  than  the  fightings  without 
were  the  fears  within.  Men  who  had  long  professed  the 
Gospel  '  had  need  to  be  taught  again  what  were  the  first 
principles  of  the  oracles  of  Gods.'  They  were  'falling 
from  grace,'  and  '  turning  back  to  weak  and  beggarly 
elements,  whereto  they  desired  again  to  be  in  bondage  V 
'  Some  had  already  turned  aside  after  Satan  V  and, 
where  there  was  no  special  prevalence  of  error,  a  cold 
ness  and  a  worldliness  of  spirit  drew  forth  the  sad 
reflection.  '  All  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  which  are 
Jesus  Christ's"".'  Contentions  were  rife,  and  schisms 
were  spreading ;  and  men,  in  the  name  of  Christ  and  of 
truth,  were  '  provoking  one  another,  envying  one  another.' 
New  forms  of  error  began  to  arise,  from  the  combination 
of  Christian  ideas  with  the  rudiments  of  the  world  and 
the  vagaries  of  oriental  philosophy.  Here  were  men, 

e  Eph.  vi.  12.  f  i  Pet.  iv.  12,  13.  «  Heb.  v.  12. 

h  Gal.  iv.  9;  v.  4.'         *  i  Tim.  v.  15,  k  Phil.  ii.  21. 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  187 

like  Jannes  and  Jambres  who  withstood  Moses,  '  resist 
ing  the  truth,  reprobate  concerning  the  faith1.'  Here 
were  '  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus,  who  concerning  the 
truth  had  erred,  saying  that  the  resurrection  was  past 
already111.'  Here  was  the  \l/evba>wp.os  yvuxns11,  teeming 
with  a  thousand  protean  forms  of  falsehood.  While  the 
Apostles  wrote,  the  actual  state  and  the  visible  ten 
dencies  of  things  shewed  too  plainly  what  Church  history 
would  be  ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  prophetic  intimations 
made  the  prospect  still  more  dark  :  for  '  the  Spirit  spake 
expressly,  that  in  the  latter  times  men  would  depart 
from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doc 
trines  of  devils0,' — that  'in  the  last  days  grievous  times 
should  come,'  marked  by  a  darkness  of  moral  condition 
which  it  might  have  been  expected  that  Gospel  influences 
would  have  dispelled  P, — that  '  there  would  be  scoffers  in 
the  last  days,  walking  after  their  own  lusts  and  saying, 
where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming'1?' — that  the  day  of 
the  Lord  would  not  be,  '  till  the  apostacy  had  come  first, 
and  the  man  of  sin  had  been  revealed,  the  son  of  per 
dition,  the  adversary  who  exalts  himself  above  all  that 
is  called  God  or  an  object  of  worship ;  so  that  he  sits  in 
the  Temple  of  God,  shewing  himself  that  he  is  God  r.' 
'  The  mystery  of  lawlessness  was  already  working,  and, 
as  antichrist  should  come,  even  then  were  there  many 
antichrists3,'  men  'denying  the  Father  and  the  Son,' 
'  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  them  V  '  turning  the 
grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness ",'  and  '  bringing  on 
themselves  swift  destruction.' 


1  2  Tim.  iii.  8.  m  Ibid.  ii.  17.  u  i  Tim.  vi.  20. 

0  Ibid.  iv.  i.  P  2  Tim.  iii.  1-5.  4  2  Pet.  iii.  3. 

T  2  Thess.  ii.  4-7.  "  i  John  ii.  18-22.  *  2  Pet.  ii.  i. 

u  Jude  4. 


1 88  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

I  know  not  how  any  man,  in  closing  the  Epistles, 
could  expect  to  find  the  subsequent  history  of  the 
Church  essentially  different  from  what  it  is.  In  those 
writings  we  seem,  as  it  were,  not  to  witness  some  pass 
ing  storms  which  clear  the  air,  but  to  feel  the  whole 
atmosphere  charged  with  the  elements  of  future  tempest 
and  death.  Every  moment  the  forces  of  evil  shew  them 
selves  more  plainly.  They  are  encountered,  but  not 
dissipated.  Or,  to  change  the  figure,  we  see  battles 
fought  by  the  leaders  of  our  band,  but  no  security  is 
promised  by  their  victories.  New  assaults  are  being 
prepared  ;  new  tactics  will  be  tried  ;  new  enemies  pour 
on  ;  the  distant  hills  are  black  with  gathering  multitudes, 
and  the  last  exhortations  of  those  who  fall  at  their  posts 
call  on  their  successors  to  '  endure  hardness  as  good 
soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ x,'  and  '  earnestly  to  contend  for 
the  faith  which  was  once  delivered  to  the  saints  y.' 

The  fact  which  I  observe  is  not  merely  that  these 
indications  of  the  future  are  in  the  Epistles,  but  that 
they  increase  as  we  approach  the  close,  and  after  the 
doctrines  of  the  Gospel  have  been  fully  wrought  out,  and 
the  fulness  of  personal  salvation  and  the  ideal  character 
of  the  Church  have  been  placed  in  the  clearest  light,  the 
shadows  gather  and  deepen  on  the  external  history. 
The  last  words  of  St.  Paul  in  the  second  Epistle  to 
Timothy,  and  those  of  St.  Peter  in  his  second  Epistle, 
with  the  Epistles  of  St.  John  and  St.  Jude,  breathe  the 
language  of  a  time  in  which  the  tendencies  of  that 
history  had  distinctly  shewn  themselves ;  and  in  this 
respect  these  writings  form  a  prelude  and  a  passage  to 
the  Apocalypse. 

x  2  Tim.  ii.  3.  >'  Jude  3. 


vm.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  189 

Thus  we  arrive  at  this  book  with  wants  which  it  is 
meant  to  supply  ;  we  come  to  it  as  men,  who  not  only 
personally  are  in  Christ,  and  who  know  what  as  indi 
viduals  they  have  in  him ;  but  who  also,  as  members  of 
his  body,  share  in  a  corporate  life,  in  the  perfection  of 
which  they  are  to  be  made  perfect,  and  in  the  glory  of 
which  their  Lord  is  to  be  glorified.  For  this  perfection 
and  glory  we  wait  in  vain,  among  the  confusions  of  the 
world  and  the  ever-active,  ever-changing  forms  of  evil. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  this  wild  scene  ?  what  is  to  be  its 
issue  ?  and  what  prospect  is  there  of  the  realisation  of 
that  which  we  desire  ?  To  such  a  state  of  mind  as  this, 
and  to  the  wants  which  it  involves,  this  last  part  of  the 
teaching  of  God  is  addressed,  in  accordance  with  that 
system  of  progressive  doctrine  which  I  have  endeavoured 
to  illustrate,  wherein  each  stage  of  advance  ensues  in  the 
way  of  natural  sequence  from  the  effect  of  that  which 
preceded  it. 

Brethren,  I  would  that  this  state  of  mind,  these  desires 
and  wants,  which  the  last  revealing  word  supposes  in 
those  to  whom  it  comes,  did  exist  more  extensively 
and  distinctly  among  us.  I  think  we  must  all  feel  that 
the  piety  of  our  day  encloses  itself  too  much  within  the 
limits  of  individual  life. 

That  /  should  be  pardoned,  saved,  and  sanctified — 
that  /  should  serve  before  God,  and  be  accepted  in  my 
service — that  /  should  die  in  peace  and  rest  in  Christ — 
that  /  should  have  confidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  be 
fore  him  at  his  coming — these  are  worthy  desires  for  an 
immortal  being,  and  for  these  the  Gospel  provides.  But 
it  provides  for  more  than  these ;  making  me  the  member 
of  a  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  the  citizen  of  a  city  of  God. 
There  ought  surely  to  be  a  consciousness  within  me  cor- 


1 90  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

responding  to  that  position  ;  there  ought  to  be  affections, 
which  will  associate  me  in  spirit  with  that  larger  history, 
in  which  my  own  is  included  ;  and  which  will  make  me 
long  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  should  come,  and  the 
city  of  God  be  manifested.  The  blessedness,  ascribed  to 
him  that  reads,  and  those  who  hear,  the  words  of  this 
prophecy,  can  belong  only  to  those  who  read  it  and  hear 
it  thus. 

II.  Such  being  the  state  of  mind  which  the  book  pre 
supposes,  and  such  the  wants  to  which  it  is  addressed,  I 
have  now  to  point  out  some  leading  characteristics  of  its 
doctrine,  in  order  to  show  what  are  the  satisfactions 
which  it  provides.  These  characteristics,  though  dis 
tinguished  from  each  other,  will  yet  all  be  found  to 
combine  into  one.  The  doctrine  of  the  book  is  a  doc 
trine  of  consummation. 

i.  It  is  a  doctrine  of  the  cause  of  the  consummation. 
It  educes  the  result  from  one  source — the  atoning  death 
of  Jesus.  Is  this  an  advance  in  doctrine  ?  Has  not  the 
nature  and  efficacy  of  the  great  sacrifice  been  already 
sufficiently  disclosed?  Yes,  certainly,  in  its  bearing  on 
personal  salvation  ;  but  this  book  exhibits  the  connection 
between  the  personal  and  the  general  salvation,  in  the 
identity  of  their  common  cause.  The  personal  salvation 
for  each  several  soul  has  been  expounded  in  the  Epistles 
as  found  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  more  particularly  in  our 
redemption  to  God  by  his  blood.  In  those  writings  the 
sacrifice  and  propitiation  of  his  death  are  ever  before  our 
eyes,  as  the  cause  of  our  restoration  and  the  source  of 
all  our  other  blessings.  When,  in  this  book,  we  pass  on 
from  the  personal  to  the  general  life,  and  are  to  see  the 
victory  secured,  and  the  kingdom  brought  in,  we  may 
perhaps  expect  that  the  Lord  will  now  appear  only  with 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  191 

ensigns  and  titles  of  majesty,  as  the  conqueror  and  the 
king.  It  is  not  so.  The  opening  doxology,  '  To  him 
that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood'  strikes  the  note  of  all  which  is  to  follow.  When  the 
historic  vision  begins,  one  is  sought  who  may  open  the 
sealed  purposes  of  God,  and  conduct  them  to  their  end. 
'  Then  I  beheld,  and  lo  !  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and 
the  beasts,  and  the  elders,  stood  .  .  .  .  a  Lamb  as  it  had 
been  slain*?  and  his  appearance  wakens  the  song,  'Thou 
art  worthy  to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals 
thereof:  for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to 
God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
people,  and  nation  ;  and  hast  made  us  unto  our  God 
kings  and  priests  :  and  we  shall  reign  on  the  earth.'  So 
the  vision  proceeds,  and  from  the  beginning  to  the  end, 
through  the  long  conflict,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  glorious 
issue,  there  is  still  one  title  for  him  who  conquers,  and 
judges,  and  reigns.  It  is  the  Lamb  who  makes  war  and 
overcomes  ;  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb,  kings  and 
nations  flee.  It  is  the  Lamb  in  whose  blood  his  servants 
also  overcome ;  in  whose  blood  they  have  washed  their 
robes ;  before  whom  they  stand  in  white  raiment ;  and 
to  whom  they  ascribe  salvation.  In  the  Lamb's  Book  of 
Life  the  names  of  the  saved  are  written.  The  Holy  City 
is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  The  Lord  God  Almighty 
and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  it,  and  the  light  of  it  : 
and  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  flows  for  ever  from  the 
throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  In  the  peculiar  title,  thus 
studiously  employed,  and  illustrated  by  the  repeated 
mention  of  the  slaying  and  the  blood,  we  read  the  doc- 

a  v.  6-10.  This  passage  is  fundamental,  as  shewing  the  ground  of  the 
power  and  the  means  of  the  victory,  by  the  intentional  contrast  of  images. 
u  Ktcav  lviier)(T(v.  .  .  ISov  apviov  ws  fa<paj/j.fvov. 


192  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

trine,  that  the  ground  of  the  personal  is  the  ground  of 
the  general  salvation,  that  the  place,  which  the  sacrifice 
of  the  death  of  Christ  holds  in  the  consciousness  of  the 
believer,  is  the  same  which  it  also  occupies  in  the  history 
of  the  Church,  and  that  he  conquers  for  us,  and  reigns 
among  us,  and  achieves  the  restoration  of  all  things, 
because  he  has  first  offered  himself  for  us,  and  is  the 
Lamb  of  God  who  takes  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 

No  view  of  the  death  of  Jesus  which  fuses  it  with  the 
rest  of  his  example  could  have  suggested  the  title,  by 
which  this  prophecy  so  persistently  designates  the  con 
queror  and  the  king. 

2.  We  have  here,  in  the  next  place,  a  doctrine  of  the 
Jiistory  of  the  consummation  ;  I  mean  that  besides  a  pro 
phetic  record  of  the  facts  of  the  history,  we  have  (what  is 
of  much  higher  value)  an  exposition  of  the  nature  of  the 
history.  The  book  is  a  revelation  of  the  connection 
between  things  that  are  seen  and  things  that  are  not 
seen,  between  things  on  earth  and  things  in  heaven  ;  a 
revelation  which  fuses  both  into  one  mighty  drama,  so 
that  the  movements  of  human  action  and  the  course  of 
visible  fact  are  half  shrouded,  half  disclosed,  amid  the 
glory  and  the  terror  of  the  spiritual  agencies  at  work 
around  us,  and  of  the  eternal  interests  which  we  see  in 
volved.  We  are  borne  to  the  courts  above,  and  the 
temple  of  God  is  opened  in  heaven,  and  we  behold  the 
events  on  earth  as  originating  in  what  passes  there. 
There  seals  are  broken,  trumpets  are  sounded,  and  vials 
are  poured  out,  which  rule  the  changes  of  the  Church 
and  of  the  nations.  While  we  are  looking  down  through 
the  rolling  mists  on  things  that  pass  below,  we  are  all 
the  time  before  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,  and 
among  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  the  four  living  beings, 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  193 

and  the  innumerable  company  of  angels  ;  and  we  hear 
voices  proceeding  out  of  the  throne,  the  cries  of  disem 
bodied  spirits,  and  hallelujahs  that  roll  through  the 
universe.  We  see  further,  that  there  is  cause  for  this 
participation  of  the  world  above  in  the  events  of  the 
world  below,  for  it  becomes  every  moment  more  plain, 
that  the  earth  is  the  battlefield  of  the  kingdom  of  light 
and  darkness.  There  is  a  far  bolder  revelation  than  we 
have  had  before  of  the  presence  and  action  of  the  powers 
of  evil.  The  old  Serpent  is  on  one  side  as  the  Lamb  is 
on  the  other,  and  the  same  light,  which  shews  the  move 
ments  of  the  Head  and  Redeemer  of  our  race,  falls  also 
upon  those  of  the  enemy  and  destroyer.  In  the  sense  of 
this  connection  between  things  seen  and  things  not  seen, 
lies  the  secret  of  that  awe  and  elevation  of  mind,  which 
we  felt  as  children  when  we  first  turned  these  pages ; 
and  the  assurance  of  it  has  an  ever-increasing  value  to 
him,  who  has  painfully  sought  to  test  the  mingled  forms 
of  good  and  ill,  and  to  discern  some  plan  and  purpose  in 
the  confused  scene  around  him. 

After  noting  the  instruction  given  on  the  cause  and 
the  history  of  the  great  consummation,  I  come  now  to 
that  which  is  given  on  its  constituent  parts,  namely,  the 
coming  of  the  Lord,  and  the  attendant  facts  of  victory, 
judgment,  and  restoration. 

3.  The  book  is  a  doctrine  of  the  power  and  coming  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  '  Behold  he  cometh  with  clouds, 
and  every  eye  shall  see  himV  That  is  the  first  voice, 
and  the  keynote  of  the  whole.  The  Epistles  to  the 
seven  Churches  (symbolical  representatives  of  the  whole 
Church  in  its  various  conditions)  all  take  their  tone  from 

b  Rev.  i.  7. 
O 


194  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

this  thought,  and  are  the  voice  of  a  Lord  who  will  '  come 
quickly.'     The  visions  which  follow  draw  to  the  same 
end,  and  the  last  voices  of  the  book  respond  to  the  first, 
and  attest  its  subject  and  its  purpose.     '  He  which  tes- 
tifieth  these  things  saith,  Surely  I  come  quickly.    Amen. 
Even  so  come,  Lord  Jesus c.'     Whatever  else  the  Chris 
tian  desires  is  bound  up  in  this  prospect.     The  deliver 
ance  of  the  creation  from  its  present  groans  and  travail, 
the  redemption  of  our  body,  the  perfection  of  man  in  a 
holy  community,  and  the  realisation  in  outward  things  of 
the  tendencies  of  the  renewed  nature,  all   these  hopes 
wait  on  the  one  hope  of  '  his  appearing.'     Towards  that 
hope  our  eyes  have  been  steadily  directed  in  the  former 
apostolic  writings  ;  but  it  is  here  presented,  not  so  much 
in  relation  to  our  personal  life,  as  to  the  kingdom  of  God 
and  to  the  world  itself  upon  the  whole.     It  appears  here 
as  the  (rvvTf\€La  TOV  ai&vos,  towards  which  all  things  tend, 
and  which  the  fuller  manifestation  of  evil  and  the  seem 
ing  victories  of  the  enemy  are  themselves  ordained  to 
prepare.     Differences  and  uncertainties  of  interpretation 
as  to  the  details  of  this  progressive  history  still  leave  us 
under  the  sense,  that  it  is  a  history  of  the  power  and 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     This  assurance,  en 
joyed  at  all  times,  grows  clearer  in  the  days  of  trouble, 
rebuke,  and  blasphemy,  and  the  darkest  times  which  the 
prophecy  forbodes  will  be  those  in  which  its  fullest  uses 
will  be  found. 

4.  The  doctrine  of  the  coming  is  in  itself  a  doctrine  of 
victory  ;  and  that  character  pre-eminently  belongs  to  the 
apocalyptic  teaching.  '  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribu 
lation,  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world.' 

c  Rev.  xxii.  20. 


Vlii.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  195 

These  were  the  last  words  of  the  Lord's  last  discourse  ; 
and  ever  after  we  feel  their  power  in  the  actions,  the 
bearing,  and  the  words  of  his  servants.  They  wrestle 
against  the  world,  and  principalities,  and  powers,  but  as 
men  who  are  upon  the  conquering  side,  and  who  know 
that  their  Lord  has  already  overcome  these  enemies,  and 
triumphed  over  them  in  his  cross.  Therefore  they  also 
'  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved 
them d,'  and  they  record  their  conviction,  that  '  whoso 
ever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the  world  ;  and  that  this 
is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith6.' 
In  the  Apocalypse  this  spirit  is  still  more  distinctly  felt ; 
for  there  the  virtual  victory  becomes  a  visible  victory, 
both  for  the  Lord  and  for  his  people.  Every  promise  in 
the  seven  Epistles  is  addressed  '  to  him  that  overcometh;' 
and  the  last  Epistle  unites  the  victory  of  the  servant 
with  the  victory  of  the  Lord  :  '  To  him  that  overcometh 
will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  on  my  throne ;  even  as  I  also 
overcame,  and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  on  his 
throne f.'  When  the  prophetic  visions  are  to  commence, 
the  opening  of  the  book  is  represented  as  the  result  of 
victory  g.  The  first  vision  presents  '  one  who  goes  forth 
conquering  and  to  conquer ; '  and  then,  through  all  the 
changes  of  the  conflict,  we  have  the  anticipations  and 
presages  of  final  victory.  We  are  told  of  those  who 
'  overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  h  ; '  we  hear  their 
shout  of  triumph,  and  see  the  palms  in  their  hands  ;  until 
in  the  last  crisis  the  conquering  armies  of  heaven  sweep 

d  Rom.  viii.  37.  e  i  John  v.  4.  f  Rev.  iii.  21. 

s  Rev.  v.  5.  ISojv  (vi/trjaev  6  \toiv  6  wv  I*  rfjs  <pv\rjs  'lovSa  dvoi£ai  T^ 
/3t/3Atov.  The  variety  of  the  words  employed  in  the  Authorized  Version 
(overcome,  prevail,  conquer,  victory)  to  represent  the  one  word  in  the 
Greek,  has  the  effect  of  diminishing  the  impression  which  this  feature  in. 
the  language  would  otherwise  make  on  the  reader. 

h  Rev.  xii.  1 1 . 

O   2 


1 96  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

into  sight,  following  the  victor  who  has  '  on  his  vesture 
and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written,  King  of  Kings,  and 
Lord  of  Lords  V 

5.  But  victory  for  one  side  is  overthrow  and  condem 
nation  for  the  other  ;  so  that  we  have  here  also  a  doctrine 
tot  judgment.  '  The  prince  of  this  world  is  judged.'  That 
saying  might  stand  as  the  summary  of  a  large  part  of 
the  book.  He  is  judged — judged  as  the  prince  of  this 
world — and  this  world  is  involved  in  his  judgment.  The 
reality  of  some  possession  of  this  world  by  the  Power 
of  evil,  and  the  certainty  of  its  judicial  consequences  to 
him  and  to  it,  had  been  revealed  with  increasing  distinct 
ness  through  the  former  writings ;  till  in  two  of  the 
last  Epistles,  in  the  words  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude, 
the  'terrible  voice  of  most  just  judgment'  had  swelled 
into  the  full  tones,  to  which  our  ears  had  been  ac 
customed  in  Old  Testament  prophecy.  I  need  not 
recall  by  particular  citations  the  manner  in  which  this 
line  of  teaching  is  carried  out  in  the  Apocalypse,  the 
various  forms  of  strong  development  in  which  the  Power 
of  evil  is  represented  as  appearing,  or  the  plagues,  and 
punishment,  and  final  overthrow,  which  are  its  portion 
from  the  Lord.  The  opening  proclamation  of  the 
coming  notifies  also  its  effect  on  the  world  :  '  Every  eye 
shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  him,  and  all 
kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him  k.'  And 
these  sounds  continue.  Things  do  not  melt  quietly  into 
the  peace  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  There  is  a  crash  of 
ruin,  and  a  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God,  and 
a  lake  that  burns  with  fire  and  brimstone.  And  this 
judgment  falls,  not  only  on  principles  and  powers  of  evil 
but  on  nations  of  men  ;  and  not  only  on  nations,  but  on 
1  Rev.  xix.  11-16.  k  Ibid.  i.  7. 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  197 

separate  persons,  even  on  '  every  one  who  is  not  found 
written  in  the  book  of  life.'  He  who  does  not  accept  the 
reality  of  the  world's  rebellion  and  ruin,  and  of  the 
wrath  and  judgment  which  it  brings,  must  certainly 
reject  this  whole  book  from  the  canon  ;  and,  with  it, 
must  tear  away  large  and  living  portions  of  every  pre 
ceding  book  of  Scripture. 

6.  The  features  of  apocalyptic  teaching,  which  have 
now  been  noticed,  may  serve  as  instances  of  the  whole 
character  of  the  doctrine,  which  is  combined  with  its 
predictions  ;  and  which,  as  a  doctrine  of  consummation, 
is  an  evident  advance,  in  that  particular  direction,  on  the 
doctrine  of  the  Epistles.  But  it  is  when  the  prophecy 
carries  us  beyond  the  great  crisis,  that  this  advance  is 
most  clearly  seen.  The  coming  of  the  Lord  is  not  the 
last  thing  which  we  know.  After  that  event  has  closed 
the  present  age,  after  the  victory  has  been  won,  and  the 
judgment  has  dealt  with  things  that  are  past,  the  final 
results  appear,  and  the  true  life  of  man  begins.  The 
doctrine  of  the  book  is  ultimately  and  pre-eminently 
one  of  restoration. 

'  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  for  the  first 
heaven  and  the  first  earth  were  passed  away,  and  there 
was  no  more  sea.  And  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new 
Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  pre 
pared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband.'  In  taking 
these  words  for  my  text  I  placed  myself  at  the  point 
where  the  whole  teaching  of  Scripture  culminates.  Here, 
at  the  last  step,  we  have  a  definite  and  satisfactory  com 
pletion  of  the  former  doctrine  of  the  future.  There  is 
to  be  a  perfect  humanity ;  not  only  perfect  individually, 
but  perfect  in  society.  There  is  to  be  a  city  of  God. 
'The  Holy  City!' — there  is  the  realisation  of  the  true 


198  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

tendencies  of  man.  'New  Jerusalem!' — there  is  the 
fulfilment  of  the  ancient  promises  of  God. 

Dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  word  '  city,'  under  the  re 
membrance  of  what  it  was  to  those  in  whose  language 
the  book  is  written.  The  city  (the  Greek  iro'Ats)  is  a  consti 
tution  of  society  complete  in  its  own  local  habitation  ; 
the  visible  collection  of  buildings  being  a  symbol  of  the 
organised  life  within.  It  is  the  most  perfect  realisation, 
and  the  most  convenient  representation,  of  society  in  its 
maturity ;  in  which  the  various  relations  of  men  are  so 
combined,  as  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the  several  mem 
bers,  and  secure  the  unity  of  a  common  life  to  the  whole. 
'It  is'  (as  has  been  said)  'the  perfecting  of  the  self-pro 
visions  of  Nature,  and  the  condition  of  the  highest  well- 
being  of  man.' 

There  is  no  need  to  tell  how  poorly  this  idea  has 
been  realized  in  fact,  nor  are  the  causes  of  the  failure 
remote  from  view.  In  this  fallen  world  all  communities 
have  grown  up  under  hard  external  conditions,  and  with 
a  deep  internal  disease,  sustaining  all  sorts  of  shocks  and 
wounds,  and  often  developing  what  vigour  they  possess 
in  forms  of  violence  and  oppression.  History  is  the 
record  of  human  society.  There  we  see 

'  The  giant  forms  of  empires  on  their  way 
To  ruin :  one  by  one 
They  tower,  and  they  are  gone :' 

leaving  materials  to  be  combined  again,  that  they  may 
be  again  dissolved,  and  forces  which  renew  their  eternal 
struggle  at  the  same  time  to  construct  and  to  destroy. 
Ever  since  Cain  went  forth  and  builded  the  first  city, 
the  long  experiment  has  continued  ;  and  he  who  surveys 
the  results,  in  the  communities  which  have  filled,  and 
now  fill,  the  habitable  world,  will  return  from  his  inspec- 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  199 

tion  wearied  and  disheartened,  and  little  able  to  antici 
pate  the  perfection  of  man  from  the  progress  of  society 
and  the  education  of  the  world. 

And  yet  human  nature  is  to  find  the  realisation  of  its 
tendencies  and  the  fulfilment  of  its  hopes.  The  Bible 
opens  the  prospect  of  which  history  had  led  us  to  de 
spair.  It  is  one  long  account  of  the  preparation  of  the 
city  of  God.  That  is  one  distinct  point  of  view  from 
which  the  Bible  ought  to  be  regarded,  and  one  from 
which  its  contents  will  appear  in  clearer  light.  We  are 
accustomed  in  the  present  day  to  read  it  too  exclusively 
from  the  individual  point  of  view,  as  the  record  for  each 
man  of  that  will  of  God  and  that  way  of  salvation  with 
which  he  is  personally  concerned.  This  it  is,  but  it  is 
more  than  this.  It  places  before  us  the  restoration,  not 
only  of  the  personal,  but  of  the  social  life  ;  the  creation, 
not  only  of  the  man  of  God,  but  of  the  city  of  God  ;  and 
it  presents  the  society  or  city,  not  as  a  mere  name  for 
the  congregation  of  individuals,  but  as  having  a  being 
and  life  of  its  own,  in  which  the  Lord  finds  his  satisfac 
tion  and  man  his  perfection.  The  'Jerusalem  which  is 
above'  is,  in  relation  to  the  Lord,  cthe  Bride,  the  Lamb's 
Wife1,'  and,  in  relation  to  man,  it  is  'the  Mother  of  us 
allm.'  In  its  appearance  the  revealed  course  of  redemp 
tion  culminates,  and  the  history  of  man  is  closed  :  and 
thus  the  last  chapters  of  the  Bible  declare  the  unity  of 
the  whole  book,  by  completing  the  design  which  has 
been  developed  in  its  pages,  and  disclosing  the  result  to 
which  all  preceding  steps  have  tended11.  Take  from  the 


1  Rev.  xxi.  9.  m  Gal.  iv.  26. 

n  nSero  ir6\ts  <f>vffet  ka-rlv,  (itrep  KOI  at  irpuirat  KOtvuvitU'  re\os  yap  avrrj 
oov  r)  St  (pvffts  re'Xos  (ffriv  oiov  -yap  ttcaaTuv  fart  rrjs  yevtaeajs  Te\ea- 
s,  ravrrfv  <pap.tv  rfjv  (pvffiv  tlvai  knaorov  .  .  .  Kal  irp6repov  Srj  TT}  (pvatt 


ttcfiv 


200  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

Bible  the  final  vision  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and 
what  will  have  been  lost  ?  Not  merely  a  single  passage, 
a  sublime  description,  an  important  revelation ;  but  a 
conclusion  by  which  all  that  went  before  is  interpreted 
and  justified.  We  shall  have  an  unfinished  plan,  in 
which  human  capacities  have  not  found  their  full  reali 
sation,  or  divine  preparations  their  adequate  result.  To 
the  mind  that  looks  beyond  individual  life,  or  that  under 
stands  what  is  necessary  to  the  perfection  of  individual 
life,  a  Bible  that  did  not  end  by  building  for  us  a  city  of 
God  would  appear  to  leave  much  in  man  unprovided  for, 
and  much  in  itself  unaccounted  for.  But  as  it  is,  neither 
of  these  deficiences  exists.  The  great  consummation 
is  there,  and  we  are  instructed  to  observe,  that,  from 
the  first,  the  desires  of  men  and  the  preparations  of 
God  have  been  alike  directed  towards  it. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  sacred  story,  the  Father  of 
the  faithful  comes  forth  into  view,  followed  by  those  who 
are  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  promise  ;  and  they  sepa 
rate  themselves  to  the  life  of  strangers,  because  they  are 
'looking  for  the  city  which  hath  the  foundations,  whose 
builder  and  maker  is  God0.'  In  due  time  solid  pledges 
of  the  divine  purpose  follow.  We  behold  a  peculiar 
people,  a  divinely-framed  polity,  a  holy  city,  a  house  of 
God.  It  is  a  wonderful  spectacle — this  system  of  earthly 
types,  thus  consecrated  and  glorified  by  miraculous  in 
terventions  and  inspired  panegyrics.  Do  we  look  on  the 
fulfilment  of  patriarchial  hopes,  or  on  the  types  of  their 
fulfilment  ?  on  the  final  form  of  human  society,  or  on  the 
figures  of  the  true  ?  The  answer  was  given  by  Prophets 

iro\is  fj  fnaffros  fmSiv  ecrrj,  TO  yap  o\ov  irporfpov  dvaffcatov  tivai  rov 
/itpovs. — Aristot.  Polit.  lib.  i.  ch.  i.  Most  true  principles  of  the  true  history 
of  man ! 

0  Heb.  xi.  10.     rr)v  TOVS  Be^(\iovs  (\ovaav  ii6\iv. 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE. 


201 


and  Psalmists,  and  then  by  the  word  of  the  Gospel, 
finally  by  the  hand  of  God,  which  swept  the  whole 
system  from  the  earth.  It  was  gone  when  the  words  of 
the  text  were  written,  and  when  the  closing  scene  of 
the  Bible  presented  the  new  Jerusalem,  not  as  the  resto 
ration,  but  as  the  antitype  of  the  old. 

This  vision  teaches  us,  that  the  drama  of  the  world 
must  be  finished,  and  its  dispensation  closed,  that  the 
Lord  must  have  come,  the  dead  have  been  raised,  the 
judgment  have  sat,  the  heavens  and  the  earth  which 
are  now  have  passed  away,  and  the  new  creation  have 
appeared,  before  the  chosen  people  shall  see  the  city 
of  their  habitation. 

Meantime  it  is  the  day  of  preparation.  The  builder 
of  the  eternal  city  first  '  prepares  his  work  without,  and 
makes  it  fit  for  himself  in  the  field,  and  afterwards 
builds  his  house11.'  There  was  much  to  be  done,  and 
it  takes  long  to  do  it.  The  members  of  the  intended 
society  must  be  sorted  and  collected  out  of  the  mass 
of  mankind.  They  must  also  be  tested  and  trained. 
The  very  grounds  on  which  the  future  work  is  to  rest 
must  themselves  be  laid.  The  perfect  society  is  to  be 
founded  on  men's  relations  to  God,  and  is  to  be  com 
pacted  by  their  relations  to  each  other.  The  true  rela 
tions  were  destroyed  by  sin,  and  it  was  necessary  that 
they  should  be  constituted  afresh.  This  is  done  in  Jesus 
Christ. 

Propitiation  and  atonement,  reconciliation  and  re 
demption,  are  words  which  express  the  restoration  of 
the  broken  relations  with  God,  as  accomplished  by  the 
work  of  the  Mediator.  Those  who  receive  Christ  Jesus 

P  Prov.  xxiv.  27. 


202  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

the  Lord  are  thereby  in  a  state  of  grace.  Sin  no  longer 
divides  and  estranges  them  from  God.  He  has  returned 
to  them,  and  they  to  him.  They  have  fellowship  with 
the  Father  and  with  the  Son  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  God 
dwells  in  them,  and  they  in  him.  Thus  in  each  separate 
soul  are  beforehand  established  those  relations  with  God 
in  Christ,  which  shall  hereafter  glorify  the  community 
of  the  saints,  in  the  day  when  '  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it,'  and  '  God  himself  shall  be 
with  them  and  be  their  God.' 

To  the  reconstitution  of  men's  relations  to  God  must 
also  be  added  that  of  their  relations  to  each  other.  To 
what  an  extent  these  have  suffered  from  the  fall  of  man 
a  glance  at  the  history  of  the  world  or  at  any  section 
of  society  is  sufficient  to  convince  us.  Not  only  the 
violations  but  the  very  institutions  of  law  and  justice 
testify  to  the  fact.  It  is  well  said,  'Law  is  not  made  for  a 
righteous  man.'  The  inherent  vice  of  human  society 
lies  in  the  depravity  of  human  nature.  If  that  were 
healed,  and  transmuted  into  universal  righteousness  and 
love,  the  internal  happiness  and  perfection  would  be 
secured.  And  they  are  to  be  secured  in  that  city,  where 
'  the  people  shall  be  all  righteous  q,'  and  where  love  shall 
never  fail.  To  the  formation  of  those  habits  of  mind 
the  teaching  of  God  is  now  visibly  directed,  and  men 
are  trained,  on  the  grounds  and  motives  of  the  Gospel, 
to  love  one  another.  Love  is  ever  represented  as  'the 
end  of  the  commandment,'  the  highest  attainment  of 
man,  the  completion  of  his  education  by  God.  And  no 
wonder  it  is  so  represented,  since  the  present  prepares 
the  future,  and  that  future  is  to  be  a  state  of  society— 

•i  Isa.  Ix.  21. 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  203 

'a  city  which  is  compact  together r.'  The  Gospel  then, 
which  lays  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  receive  it  the 
deepest  grounds  of  fellowship,  and  educates  them  to 
the  habit  of  love,  is  visibly  preparing  the  conditions  of 
the  things  to  come.  As  if  to  signalise  this  connection 
of  the  present  work  and  the  future  promise  of  the 
Gospel,  it  is  committed  to  the  last  Apostle,  who  closes 
the  Holy  Scripture,  both  to  be  our  chief  teacher  in  the 
love  of  the  brethren,  and  to  open  to  our  eyes  the  scene 
in  which  it  shall  be  perfected. 

Thus  does  the  present  world  give  scope  for  the  pre 
paration  of  the  city  of  God.  Its  fundamental  principles 
are  being  established,  its  members  gathered,  trained,  and 
made  ready.  At  the  same  time  all  moral  tendencies  are 
being  wrought  out  by  conflict  and  experience  ;  and  the 
vanity  of  what  is  vain  and  the  evil  of  what  is  evil  have 
space  to  shew  themselves,  before  the  final  fires  and  the 
eternal  judgment  remove  them  for  ever  from  the  scene. 
Then,  when  Babylon  has  fallen,  the  city  of  God  will 
appear. 

Its  fabric  and  scenery  are  described  in  symbolic  lan 
guage  glowing  with  all  precious  and  glorious  things  ; 
nor  do  we  desire  an  interpreter  who  will  tell  us  what 
the  symbols  severally  represent,  in  the  future  details  of 
the  glorified  society.  Perhaps  such  an  attempt  would 
impair,  rather  than  enhance,  the  effect  of  the  vision, 
which  now  kindles  the  imagination  of  expectant  faith 
by  the  entire  assemblage  of  its  glories.  I  only  dwell 
upon  the  fact  that  it  is  a  city  which  stands  before  us,  as 
the  final  home  of  mankind.  If  we  think  only  of  our 
individual  portion,  we  miss  the  completeness  of  Scrip- 

r  Ps.  cxxii.  3. 


204  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

ture  in  its  provision  for  the  completeness  of  man.  If 
individual  blessedness  were  the  highest  thought  of  hu 
manity,  it  might  have  been  sufficient  to  have  restored 
the  lost  garden  of  Eden,  and  to  have  left  the  inhabitants 
of  the  new  earth  to  dwell  safely  in  its  wilderness  and 
sleep  in  its  woods s.  Such  dreams  of  human  happiness 
have  haunted  the  minds  of  men,  who  have  been  wearied 
with  the  disorders,  corruptions,  and  miseries  of  society, 
till  society  in  itself  has  seemed  to  them  a  standing  hin 
drance  to  perfection,  and  almost  necessarily  an  organism 
of  evil.  Thus  the  habit  of  mind  which  flies  from  man 
to  nature,  and  desires  unconstrained  freedom,  and  would 
simplify  to  the  utmost  all  social  relations,  has  ever  loved 
to  depict  a  heaven  of  fields  and  bowers,  and  to  ask  for 
the  life  of  the  first  Paradise  again.  It  is  worthy  of  re 
mark  that  the  religions  of  the  world  have,  for  the  most 
part,  confessed  in  this  way  their  despair  of  human 
society,  and  unconsciously  acknowledged  that  in  their 
scheme  of  things  the  true  foundations  of  it  were  wanting. 
Not  so  does  the  revelation  of  God  inform  the  expec 
tations  of  those  who  receive  it.  Other  systems  evade 
the  demands  of  the  highest  tendencies  of  man  :  this 
provides  that  they  shall  be  realised.  It  decrees  not  only 
the  individual  happiness,  but  the  corporate  perfection  of 
man  ;  and  closes  the  book  of  its  prophecy  by  assuring 
the  children  of  the  living  God,  that  '  he  liath  prepared 
for  them  a  city' 

The  survey  which  has  been  made  in  these  Lectures 
has  now  carried  us  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
New  Testament,  from  the  cradle  of  Bethlehem  to  the 

s  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25. 


vill.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  205 

city  of  God.  We  have  seen  that  this  collection  of 
various  and  occasional  writings  presents  to  us  a  gradually 
progressive  scheme,  fully  wrought  out  in  its  several 
stages,  and  advancing  in  a  natural  order  of  succession. 

First  a  person  is  manifested  and  facts  are  set  forth, 
in  the  simplest  external  aspect,  under  the  clearest  light, 
and  with  the  concurrence  of  a  fourfold  witness.  This 
witness  also  is  itself  progressive,  and  in  the  last  gospel 
the  glory  of  the  person  has  grown  more  bright,  and  the 
meaning  of  the  facts  more  clear. 

Then,  in  the  Book  of  Acts,  Christ  is  preached  as  per 
fected,  and  as  the  refuge  and  life  of  the  world.  The 
results  of  his  appearing  are  summed  up  and  settled  ; 
and  men  are  called  to  believe  and  be  saved.  Those 
who  do  so  find  themselves  in  new  relations  to  each 
other ;  they  become  one  body,  and  grow  into  the  form 
and  life  of  a  Catholic  Church. 

The  state  which  has  thus  been  entered  needs  to  be 
expounded,  and  the  life  which  has  been  begun  needs  to 
be  educated.  The  Apostolic  letters  perform  the  work. 
The  questions  which  universally  follow  the  first  sub 
missions  of  the  mind  receive  their  answers,  and  so  the 
faith  which  was  general  grows  definite.  The  rising  exi 
gencies  of  the  new  life  are  met,  both  for  the  man  and 
for  the  Church :  and  we  learn  what  is  the  happy  con 
sciousness,  and  what  the  holy  conversation,  which  belong 
to  those  who  are  '  in  Christ  Jesus.' 

Lastly,  as  members  of  the  body  of  Christ,  we  find 
ourselves  partakers  in  a  corporate  life  and  a  history 
larger  than  our  own.  We  feel  that  vve  are  taken  up  into 
a  scheme  of  things,  which  is  in  conflict  with  the  present, 
and  which  cannot  realise  itself  here.  Therefore  our  final 
teaching  is  by  prophecy,  which  shews  us,  not  how  we 


206  THE  APOCALYPSE.  [LECT. 

are  personally  saved  and  victorious,  but  how  the  battle 
goes  upon  the  whole ;  and  which  issues  in  the  appear 
ance  of  a  holy  city,  in  which  redemption  reaches  its  end, 
and  the  Redeemer  finds  his  joy ;  in  which  human  ten 
dencies  are  realised,  and  divine  promises  fulfilled  :  in 
which  the  ideal  has  become  the  actual,  and  man  is  per 
fected  in  the  presence  and  glory  of  God. 

If  this  doctrine  is  not  of  the  world,  every  step  that 
it  takes  in  advance  must  make  that  fact  more  plain. 
The  world  feels  that  it  is  so.  The  manifestation  of 
Christ  it  will  admire  and  interpret  for  itself.  The  preach 
ing  of  Christ  it  can  hear  and  accept  in  its  generality. 
The  life  in  Christ  through  the  Spirit  it  cannot  receive. 
The  kingdom  of  Christ  in  its  antagonism  to  itself  it 
cannot  suffer.  Yes,  the  world  is  right.  In  following  the 
advancing  line  of  doctrine  in  the  Scriptures,  we  diverge 
further  and  further  from  its  paths  and  habits  of  thought. 
But  is  that  a  subject  of  regret?  What  has  been  the 
progress  of  doctrine  achieved  by  the  spirit  which  is  of 
the  world  ?  Into  what  can  it  ever  lead  our  souls  ?  Into 
vague  desires  to  which  nothing  corresponds,  into  great 
ideas  which  remain  ideas  still,  into  uncertainty  and  per 
plexity,  into  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  Only  the 
written  word  of  God,  confidingly  followed  in  the  pro 
gressive  steps  of  its  advance,  can  lead  the  weakest  or 
the  wisest  into  the  deep  blessedness  of  the  life  that  is  in 
Christ,  and  into  the  final  glory  of  the  city  of  God. 

Perhaps  in  some  minds  this  needful  confidence  may 
be  strengthened,  by  a  review  of  the  books  of  the  New 
Testament  in  the  light  in  which  they  have  now  been 
placed.  When  it  is  felt  that  these  narratives,  letters, 
and  visions  do  in  fact  fulfil  the  several  functions,  and 
sustain  the  mutual  relations,  which  would  belong  to  the 


VIII.]  THE  APOCALYPSE.  207 

parts  of  one  design,  coalescing  into  a  doctrinal  scheme, 
which  is  orderly,  progressive,  and  complete,  then  is  the 
mind  of  the  reader  in  conscious  contact  with  the  mind 
of  God  ;  then  the  superficial  diversity  of  the  parts  is 
lost  in  the  essential  unity  of  the  whole  :  the  many 
writings  have  become  one  Book  ;  the  many  writers  have 
become  one  Author.  From  the  position  of  students, 
who  address  themselves  with  critical  interest  to  the 
works  of  Matthew,  of  Paul,  or  of  John,  we  have  risen 
to  the  higher  level  of  believers,  who  open  with  holy  joy 
'the  New  Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,'  and,  while  we  receive  from  his  own  hand  the 
book  of  life  eternal,  we  hear  him  saying  still,  '  I  have 
given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me.' 


NOTES. 


NOTES. 


NOTE  I.    PREFACE. 

FOR  the  customary  order  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  in 
ancient  times  we  may  refer  to  Manuscripts,  Catalogues,  and  Old 
Versions. 

The  testimony  of  Manuscripts  will  be  at  once  exhibited  and  cer 
tified  by  the  following  extract  from  Mr.  Scrivener's  Introduction  to 
the  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament. 

'  It  is  right  to  bear  in  mind  that  comparatively  few  copies  of  the 
whole  [Greek]  New  Testament  remain ;  the  usual  practice  being  to 
write  the  four  Gospels  in  one  volume,  the  Acts  and  Epistles  in 
another:  manuscripts  of  the  Apocalypse,  which  was  little  used  for 
public  worship,  being  much  rarer  than  those  of  the  other  books. 
Occasionally  the  Gospels,  Acts,  and  Epistles  form  a  single  volume ; 

sometimes  the  Apocalypse  is  added  to  other  books The 

Codex  Sinaiticus  of  Tischendorf  is  the  more  precious,  that  it  hap 
pily  exhibits  the  whole  New  Testament  complete:  so  would  the 
Codices  Alexandrinus  and  Ephraemi,  but  that  they  are  sadly  muti 
lated.  No  other  uncial  copies  have  this  advantage,  and  very  few 

cursives.  In  England,  only  four  such  are  known Besides 

these  Scholz  enumerates  only  nineteen  foreign  copies  of  the  whole 
New  Testament ;  but  twenty-seven  in  all  out  of  the  whole  mass  of 
extant  documents. 

'  Whether  copies  contain  the  whole  or  a  part  of  the  sacred  volume, 
the  general  order  of  the  books  is  the  following :  Gospels,  Acts,  Catholic 
Epistles,  Pauline  Epistles,  Apocalypse.  A  solitary  manuscript  of  the 

P  2 


2i2  NOTE  I.  [PREFACE. 

fifteenth  century  (Venet.  10.  Evan.  209)  places  the  Gospels  between 
the  Pauline  Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse :  in  the  Codices  Sinaiticus, 
Leicestrensis,  Fabri  (Evan.  90),  and  Montfortianus,  as  in  the  Bodleian 
Canonici  34,  the  Pauline  Epistles  precede  the  Acts;  the  Codex  Basi- 
liensis  (No.  4  of  the  Epistles),  and  Lambeth  1182,  1183,  have  the 
Pauline  Epistles  immediately  after  the  Acts  and  before  the  Catholic 
Epistles,  as  in  our  present  Bibles ;  Scholz's  Evan.  368  stands  thus, 
St.  John's  Gospel,  Apocalypse,  then  all  the  Epistles ;  in  Havniens.  I. 
No.  234  of  the  Gospels  (A.D.  1278),  the  order  appears  to  be,  Acts, 
Pauline  Epistles,  Catholic  Epistles,  Gospels;  in  Basil.  B.  vi.  27  or 
Cod.  i,  the  Gospels  now  follow  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles;  while  in 
Evan.  5 1  the  binder  has  set  the  Gospels  last ;  these  however  are  mere 
accidental  exceptions  to  the  prevailing  rule.  The  four  Gospels  are 
almost  invariably  found  in  their  familiar  order,  although  in  the  Codex 
Bezae  they  stand,  Matthew,  John,  Luke,  Mark ;  in  the  Codex  Mona- 
censis  (X),  John,  Luke,  Matthew,  Mark;  in  the  Curetonian  Syriac 
version,  Matthew,  Mark,  John,  Luke.  In  the  Pauline  Epistles,  that 
to  the  Hebrews  precedes  the  four  Pastoral  Epistles,  and  immediately 
follows  the  second  to  the  Thessalonians  in  the  four  great  Codices, 
Sinaiticus,  Alexandrinus,  Vaticanus,  and  Ephraem :  in  the  copy  from 
which  the  Cod.  Vatican,  was  taken,  the  Hebrews  followed  the  Gala- 
tians.  The  Codex  Claromontanus,  the  document  next  in  importance 
to  these  four,  sets  the  Colossians  appropriately  enough  next  to  its 
kindred  and  contemporaneous  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  but  post 
pones  that  to  the  Hebrews  to  Philemon,  as  in  our  present  Bibles ; 
an  arrangement  which  at  first,  no  doubt,  originated  in  the  early 
scruples  prevailing  in  the  Western  Church  with  respect  to  the  author 
ship  and  canonical  authority  of  that  divine  epistle  a.' 

From  extant  Manuscripts  I  turn  to  the  earliest  Catalogues  of  the 
sacred  books  which  occur  in  the  writings  of  Christian  antiquity,  and 
these,  perhaps,  are  more  real  indications  of  habit  in  the  Church 
than  particular  manuscripts  can  be.  It  will  only  be  necessary  to 
advert  to  a  few  of  the  most  important  of  these  Catalogues,  and  in  so 
doing  I  refer  the  reader  to  the  Rev.  B.  F.  Westcott's  History  of  the 
Canon  of  the  New  Testament,  or  his  shorter  and  more  popular  volume, 
The  Bible  in  the  Church,  books  which  deal  with  a  subject  lying  close 
to  the  foundations  of  our  faith,  in  a  spirit  not  less  reverential  than 

a  Introduction  to  the  Criticism  of  the  New  Testament,  pp.  60-62. 


PREFACE.]  NOTE  /.  213 

critical,  and  which  place  within  the  reach  of  ordinary  readers,  an 
exact,  lucid,  and  succinct  account  of  a  history  which  was  before  the 
property  of  the  learned. 

The  Muratorian  Fragment,  '  of  which  the  date  may  be  fixed  with 
tolerable  certainty,  A.D.  160-170,'  and  which  'may  be  regarded  on 
the  whole  as  a  summary  of  the  opinion  of  the  Western  Church  on 
the  canon  shortly  after  the  middle  of  the  second .  century,  com 
mences  with  the  last  words  of  a  sentence  which  evidently  referred 
to  the  Gospel  of  St.  Mark :'  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  is  then  expressly 
mentioned  as  'the  third,'  and  the  Gospel  of  St.  John  as  'the  fourth.' 
The  Book  of  Acts  is  mentioned  next,  and  then  thirteen  Epistles 
of  St.  Paul,  enumerated  in  the  following  order: — Corinthians  I,  II, 
Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  Galatians,  Thessalonians  I,  II, 
Romans,  epistles  (it  is  observed)  written  (like  those  in  the  Apoca 
lypse)  to  seven  churches;  then  Philemon,  Titus,  Timothy  I,  II. 
After  observations  on  these  books,  the  Fragment  diverges  to  spu 
rious  or  disputed  books,  and  the  assertion  that  the  Epistle  of  Jude 
and  two  Epistles  of  John  are  reckoned  among  the  Catholic  (Epistles) 
is  the  only  notice  of  the  remaining  books  which  its  corrupt  and 
apparently  mutilated  state  has  left. 

The  Catalogue  given  by  Eusebius  (H.  E.  iii.  25),  c.  A.D.  340,  claims 
a  special  importance  on  account  of  his  having  been  employed  by 
Constantine  to  prepare  the  first  edition  of  the  Bible  which  had  the 
seal  of  a  central  or  sovereign  authority.  The  order  is  the  same  as 
our  own,  except  in  as  far  as  it  appears  disarranged  by  the  principle 
on  which  the  catalogue  is  formed,  namely,  that  of  distinguishing  the 
acknowledged  from  the  controverted  books. 

'  First,  then,  we  place  the  holy  quaternion  of  the  Gospels,  which 
are  followed  by  the  account  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  After  this 
we  must  reckon  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul ;  and  next  to  them  we  must 
maintain  as  genuine  the  Epistle  circulated  as  the  former  of  John, 
and  in  like  manner  that  of  Peter.  In  addition  to  these  books,  if 
possibly  such  a  view  seem  correct,  we  must  place  the  Revelation  of 
John,  the  judgments  on  which  we  shall  set  forth  in  due  course,  and 
these  are  regarded  as  generally  received.  Among  the  controverted 
books,  which  are  nevertheless  well  known  and  recognised  by  most, 
we  class  the  Epistle  circulated  under  the  name  of  James,  and  that 
of  Jude,  as  well  as  the  Second  of  Peter,  and  the  so-called  Second 


214  NOTE  I.  [PREFACE. 

and  Third  of  John,  whether  they  really  belong  to  that  Evangelist 
or  possibly  to  another  of  the  same  name  V 

The  Catalogue  of  Athanasius  (Ep.  Alex.  326),  A.D.  373,  given  in 
a  style  of  authoritative  decision,  is  as  follows : — '  The  Books  of  the 
New  Testament  are  these, — Four  Gospels,  according  to  Matthew, 
Mark,  Luke,  John.  Then  after  these,  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and 
the  so-called  Catholic  Epistles  of  Apostles,  seven  in  number ;  thus, 
of  James,  one ;  of  Peter,  two ;  of  John,  three ;  and  after  these,  of 
Jude,  one.  In  addition  to  these  there  are  fourteen  Epistles  of  the 
Apostle  Paul,  in  their  order  written  thus ;  Romans,  Corinthians  I,  II, 
Galatians,  Ephesians,  Philippians,  Colossians,  Thessalonians  I,  II,  and 
that  to  the  Hebrews;  and  in  succession,  Timothy  I,  II,  Titus,  Phi 
lemon  ;  and  again  the  Apocalypse  of  John c.' 

The  testimonies  of  Eusebius  and  Athanasius  are  in  effect  those  of 
the  Greek  and  Alexandrine  Churches.  One  other  list  promulgated 
a  few  years  later  (A.D.  397)  by  the  voice  of  a  whole  province,  is  on 
that  account  worthy  to  be  specified,  since  it  is  the  first  (certain) 
synodical  decision  on  the  canon  of  Scripture.  It  is  found  in  the 
proceedings  of  the  third  Council  of  Carthage,  at  which  Augustine 
was  present.  The  order  is  as  follows : — '  Four  books  of  the  Gospels, 
one  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  thirteen  Epistles  of  the  Apo 
stle  Paul,  one  Epistle  of  the  same  to  the  Hebrews,  two  Epistles  of 
the  Apostle  Peter,  three  of  John,  one  of  James,  one  of  Jude,  one 
book  of  the  Apocalypse  of  John  d ;'  precisely  corresponding  to  our 
own  order,  except  in  the  place  given  to  the  Epistle  of  James. 
Lastly,  as  the  best  witness  of  Italian  custom  we  may  take  the  Cata 
logue  of  Ruffinus  (c.  A.D.  410),  in  which  the  order  is  identical  with 
that  of  the  decree  of  Carthage,  and  therefore  with  our  own,  save 
that  the  Catholic  Epistles  stand  as  follows : — '  Two  of  the  Apostle 
Peter ;  one  of  James,  the  Lord's  brother  and  apostle ;  one  of  Jude ; 
three  of  John.' 

But  perhaps  the  most  important  evidence  to  the  custom  of  the 
Church  is  not  that  of  manuscripts  or  catalogues,  but  rather  that  of 
the  two  venerable  versions  of  Syria  and  North  Africa,  which  are 
almost  coeval  with  the  first  general  recognition  of  a  collected  New 
Testament.  The  Peshito  was  popularly  and  practically  the  Bible  of 
the  Syrian  Church.  The  Old  Latin  was,  as  it  were,  the  parent  of 

b  History  of  Canon,  481-2.  c  Ibid.  574.  d  Ibid.  509. 


PREFACE.]  NOTE    I.  215 

the  Vulgate,  which  became  the  common  Bible  of  the  West.  The 
order  of  the  Peshito  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  best  Greek  manu 
scripts,  the  four  Gospels,  the  Acts,  the  Catholic  Epistles  (i.  e.  those 
which  it  admitted),  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  (the  Apocalypse  being 
absent).  The  order  of  the  Vulgate  is  that  which  our  modern  Bibles 
exhibit ;  the  Old  Latin  order  of  the  Gospels,  Matthew,  John,  Mark, 
and  Luke  (which  was  ruled  no  doubt  by  the  apostolic  rank  of  the 
authors),  being  changed  by  Jerome  in  accordance  with  the  Greek 
order,  which  was  derived  not  merely  from  chronological  consider 
ations,  but  from  a  finer  doctrinal  instinct. 

This  glance  at  the  various  testimonies  which  survive,  of  the  an 
cient  custom  of  the  Church,  is  sufficient  to  shew  that  the  order  with 
which  we  are  familiar  has  substantially  prevailed  from  the  first  re 
cognition  of  the  separate  books  as  forming  one  collection  or  instru 
ment.  The  great  divisions,  the  Gospels,  the  Acts,  the  Epistles,  and 
the  Apocalypse,  occur  habitually  in  their  natural  order,  and  though 
there  are  many  variations  (most  frequently  in  regard  to  the  position 
of  the  Acts),  yet  they  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule.  The  books 
which  compose  these  several  divisions  likewise  assume  habitually  the 
same  arrangement  as  at  present.  It  is  so  with  the  four  Gospels,  and 
with  the  Pauline  Epistles,  the  order  of  which  is  seldom  varied  except 
in  respect  of  the  place  given  to  the  Hebrews.  The  only  important 
variation,  which  obtains  extensively,  is  in  the  relative  positions  of 
the  Pauline  and  Catholic  Epistles.  The  manuscripts  for  the  most 
part  place  the  Catholic  Epistles  next  to  the  Acts,  and  before  the 
Pauline  Epistles.  In  the  Catalogues  the  opposite  order  is  more  fre 
quent,  and  becomes  increasingly  so  the  farther  we  advance.  Of 
five-and-twenty  Catalogues  which  are  collected  in  the  Appendix  to 
Mr.  Westcott's  History  of  the  Canon,  ranging  from  c.  A.D.  170  to 
A.D.  636,  I  find  that  seven  give  the  first  place  to  the  Catholic,  and 
eighteen  to  the  Pauline  Epistles. 

This  last  point  is  one  of  minor  importance,  yet  as  connected  with 
the  conformation  of  the  New  Testament  it  has  its  interest ;  and  as 
some  little  stress  is  laid  upon  it  in  one  of  these  Lectures  (the  Vlth), 
it  may  be  well  to  point  out  the  following  reasons  for  the  greater 
fitness  of  the  arrangement  which  has  upon  the  whole  prevailed. 

i.  There  is  the  closest  possible  relation  between  the  Book  of  Acts 
and  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  the  latter  part  of  the  Book  forming  as  it 
were  the  historical  introduction  to  his  writings,  so  that  we  pass  from 


216  NOTE  II.  [LECT. 

one  to  the  other  by  a  natural — it  might  almost  seem  a  necessary — 
transition. 

2.  The  unity  and  mass  of  St.  Paul's  writings  properly  claim  for 
them  precedence  over  the  fewer,  shorter,  and  less  connected  writings. 

3 .  The  course  of  doctrinal  instruction  pleads  for  the  same  arrange 
ment,  in  order  that  the  more  thorough  and  systematic  treatment  of 
fundamental  subjects  may  precede  that  which  is  more  supplementary. 

4.  In  the  heart  of  the  Catholic  Epistles  there  is  a  note  which 
seems  to  appoint  their  position,  namely,  in  the  reference  (2  Pet.  iii. 
15,  1 6)  to  St.  Paul's  writings  as  previously  known,  and  in  the  express 
intimation  of  an  intention  to  confirm  their  doctrine. 

These  considerations  obviously  outweigh  the  one  reason  for  the 
opposite  order,  which  is  found  in  the  relative  historical  positions  of 
the  authors,  and  which,  taken  by  itself,  would  certainly  postpone  the 
productions  of  the  later  Apostle,  born  out  of  due  time,  to  those 
which  bear  the  names  of  chief  members  of  the  original  college. 


NOTE  II.    LECTURE  I.  p.  15. 

IN  his  recently  published  Apologia,  Dr.  Newman  has  shewn  into 
what  form  he  has  found  it  necessary  to  recast  his  doctrine  of  De 
velopment,  though  the  subject  is  touched  in  a  shy  and  uneasy 
manner. 

'  It  (i.  e.  the  Infallible  Power  which  imposes  doctrine)  must  ever 
profess  to  be  guided  by  Scripture  and  tradition.  It  must  refer  to 
the  particular  Apostolic  truth  which  it  is  enforcing  or  (what  is  called) 
defining.  Nothing,  then,  can  be  presented  to  me  in  time  to  come  as 
part  of  the  faith,  but  what  I  ought  already  to  have  received,  and 
have  not  actually  received,  (if  not)  merely  because  it  had  not  been 
told  me.  ...  It  must  be  what  I  may  even  have  guessed  or 
wished  to  be  included  in  the  Apostolic  revelation.  .  .  .  Perhaps 
I  and  others  actually  have  always  believed  it,  and  the  only  question 
which  is  now  decided  in  my  behalf  is  that  I  am  henceforth  to  be 
lieve  that  I  am  only  holding  what  the  Apostles  held  before  me  e.' 

These  statements  are  then  expressly  applied  to  'the  doctrine 
which  Protestants  consider  our  greatest  difficulty,  that  of  the  Imma 
culate  Conception ; '  and,  after  assuring  us  that  the  imposition  of 

«  Part  vii.  p.  393. 


I.]  NOTE  IL  217 

this  doctrine  is  no  burden  to  himself  or  others,  and  that  he  '  sin 
cerely  thinks  that  St.  Bernard  and  St.  Thomas,  who  scrupled  at  it 
in  their  day,  had  they  lived  into  this  would  have  rejoiced  to  accept 
it  for  its  own  sake,'  he  adds  the  remark  that  'the  number  of  those 
(so-called)  new  doctrines  will  not  oppress  us,  if  it  takes  eight  cen 
turies  to  promulgate  even  one  of  them.  Such  is  about  the  length 
of  time  through  which  the  preparation  has  been  carried  on  for  the 
definition  of  the  Immaculate  Conception1.' 

These  expressions  occur  incidentally  while  the  author  is  shewing 
that  'the  (so-called)  new  doctrines'  are  'no  burden'  to  priests 
under  the  Roman  obedience,  which  of  course  is  true,  if  the  doc 
trines  be  such  as  they  'have  guessed  and  'wished  to  be  included  in 
the  Apostolic  revelation.'  But  the  expressions  themselves  are  re 
markable  as  shewing  how  awkwardly  Dr.  Newman's  own  doctrine 
of  Development  has  assumed  the  garb  and  style  of  his  Church's 
doctrine  of  Tradition;  his  true  account  of  a  development  which 
historically  took  place  veiling  himself,  as  by  command,  under  its 
fiction  of  a  tradition  which  did  not  really  exist. 

A  doctrine  is  for  the  first  time  promulgated  by  the  Infallible 
Authority,  and  imposed  as  an  article  of  the  faith.  '  The  preparation 
for  it  has  been  carried  on  for  eight  hundred  years.'  Eight  hundred 
years  ago  is  the  most  distant  point  at  which  any  'preparation '  for  it 
can  be  discerned,  that  '  preparation '  being  found  in  the  first  sug 
gestion  of  the  opinion,  and  in  the  rejection  of  it  by  the  leading 
authorities  of  the  time  as  new  and  false ;  but  as  time  goes  on  it  gains 
influence  and  acceptance.  It  is  acknowledged,  then,  that  in  the 
thousand  years  preceding  it  ivas  not  even  in  preparation,  that  there  is 
no  trace  of  it  whatever  until  its  mediaeval  dawn.  According  to  the 
doctrine  of  Development,  the  infallible  authority  would  decree  its 
truth  as  having  been  gradually  wrought  out  during  those  eight  hun 
dred  years,  and  at  last  adequately  recognised  by  the  instinct  of  the 
Church.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  Tradition,  it  must  decree 
the  truth  of  the  opinion  on  the  ground  of  its  having  been  a  part  of 
the  original  revelation  handed  down  from  the  beginning.  In  the 
one  case  it  would  affirm  that  the  doctrine  -would  have  been  held  by 
the  Apostles  if  they  had  known  of  it.  In  the  other  case  it  must 
affirm  that  the  doctrine  was  made  known  to  the  Apostles  and  that 

f  Part  vii.  p.  395. 


2i8  NOTE  II.  [LECT.  i. 

they  did  hold  it.  To  this  latter  theory  Dr.  Newman  has  now  seen 
it  necessary  to  conform  his  language.  '  The  only  question  now  decided 
is  that  he  is  holding  what  the  Apostles  held  before  him.'  The  Infal 
lible  Authority  is  thus  recognised,  not  as  deciding  on  the  truth  of  an 
opinion,  but  as  certifying  a  fact,  i.  e.  that  the  Apostles  held  such  and 
such  an  opinion  as  part  of  the  revelation  given  to  them.  If  no  evi 
dence  of  this  fact  survives,  if  no  tradition  has  handed  it  down,  if  the 
doctrine  is  one  which  only  began  to  be  prepared  eight  hundred  years 
ago,  it  is  evident  that  the  Infallible  Authority  can  only  have  known 
the  fact  which  it  certifies  by  a  direct  revelation. 

To  one  who  considers  the  exigencies  of  the  Romish  position  so 
glaringly  exemplified  in  connection  with  the  doctrine  here  alluded 
to,  it  must  appear  that  this  issue  of  an  attempt  to  provide  for  those 
exigencies,  by  a  theory  in  some  measure  accordant  with  facts,  is  the 
strongest  testimony  to  the  ineradicable  sense  of  Christendom,  that 
the  divine  communication  of  truth  was  limited  to  the  Apostolic  age. 

The  method  of  the  perpetuation  and  transmission  of  the  truths 
then  communicated  is  of  course  an  entirely  separate  question.  But 
whether  that  question  be  determined  as  it  is  by  Rome,  or  as  it  is 
by  us,  the  kind  of  development  of  doctrine  which  legitimately  be 
longs  to  the  Church  must  be,  on  either  hypothesis,  theoretically  the 
same.  It  must  consist  in  a  fuller  and  more  systematic  apprehension 
of  the  truths  which  were  communicated  at  first,  not  in  the  addition 
of  truths  communicated  afterwards.  Practically,  the  Church  of 
Rome  has  acted  (as  Dr.  Newman  so  distinctly  felt)  on  the  latter,  and 
not  on  the  former,  of  these  principles :  first  adding  new  doctrines  on 
the  most  flimsy  pretences  of  a  tradition,  and  then  superadding  one 
for  which  not  the  slenderest  thread  of  a  tradition  could  be  shewn. 


LECT.  II.] 


NOTE    III. 


NOTE  III.    LECTURE  II.  p.  37. 

.  No  more  interesting  and  suggestive  summary  of  the  comparative 
character  and  scope  of  the  several  Gospels  could  be  given,  than  that 
which  is  produced  by  simply  placing  their  respective  conclusions 
side  by  side. 

MARK  xvi. 
15-20. 

And  he  said 
unto  them,  Go  ye 
into  all  the  world, 
and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every 
creature. 

He  that  believ- 
eth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved ; 
but  he  that  be- 
lieveth  not  shall 
be  damned. 

And  these  signs 
shall  follow  them 
that  believe ;  In 
my  name  shall 
they  cast  out  de 
vils  ;  they  shall 
speak  with  new 
tongues. 

They  shall  take 
up  serpents ;  and 
if  they  drink  any 
deadly  thing,  it 
shall  not  hurt 
them ;  they  shall 
lay  hands  on  the 
sick,  and  they 
shall  recover. 

So  then  after 
the  Lord  had 
spoken  unto  them, 
he  was  received  up 
into  heaven,  and 
sat  on  the  right 
hand  of  God. 

And  they  went 
forth,  and  preach 
ed  every  where, 
the  Lord  working 
with  them,  and 
confirming  the 
word  with  signs 
following.  Amen. 


MATT,  xxviii. 
18-20. 

Jesus  came  and 
spake  unto  them, 
saying,  All  power 
is  given  unto  me 
in  heaven  and  in 
earth. 

Go  ye  there 
fore,  and  teach  all 
nations,  baptizing 
them  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost : 

Teaching  them 
to  observe  all 
things  whatsoever 
I  have  command 
ed  you :  and,  lo, 
I  am  with  you 
alway,  even  unto 
the  end  of  the 
world.  Amen. 


LUKE  xxiv. 

JOHN  xx. 

5°-53- 

28-31. 

And  he  led  them 

And     Thomas 

out    as   far   as   to 

answered  and  said 

Bethany,    and    he 

unto      him,      My 

lifted  up  his  hands, 

Lord      and       my 

and  blessed  them. 

God. 

And  it  came  to 

Jesus  saith  unto 

pass,      while      he 

him,  Thomas,  be 

blessed    them,   he 

cause    thou     hast 

was    parted    from 

seen  me,  thou  hast 

them,  and  carried 

believed  :     blessed 

up  into  heaven. 

are  they  that  have 

And  they  wor 

not  seen,  and  yet 

shipped  him,   and 

have  believed. 

returned   to   Jeru 

And  many  other 

salem    with    great 

signs      truly      did 

joy: 

Jesus   in  the   pre 

And  were   con 

sence  of  his  disci 

tinually      in      the 

ples,  which  are  not 

templr,       praising 

written      in      this 

and  blessing  God. 

book  : 

Amen. 

But    these    are 

written,    that    ye 

might  believe  that 

Jesus  is  the  Christ, 

the    son   of  God  ; 

and  that  believing 

ye  might  have  life 

through  his  name. 

220  NOTE  III.  [LECT. 

Here  we  see,  i.  In  St.  Matthew,  the  Royal  Lawgiver,  or  King 
and  Teacher  of  men,  endued  with  all  authority  (e'^ouo-i'a),  founding 
a  kingdom  for  all  nations,  with  its  ordinance  of  admission  (baptism), 
and  its  permanent  laws  ('  Whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you ') : 
and  still  the  kingdom  is  (as  it  were)  a  school,  in  which  his  commis 
sioners  are  charged  to  continue  the  work  of  teaching  which  he  had 
begun  (fjLa6rjTeva-aT€ — 8i8d(TKoVT€s). 

2.  In  St.  Mark,  the  Mighty  Worker,  who  leaves  the  energy  of  his 
action  in  his  Church.     Not  here  is  represented  the  slower  process 
of  forming  and  training  communities,  but  the  bold  and  world-wide 
proclamation,  with  the  sure  execution  of  its  sanction.     (Compare 
the  p,adr)T£v<raT(  travra  ret  edvrj  with  the  Krjpv^are  nacrrj  rfj  Kricrei.)   Then 
the  signs  of  living  power  are  to  follow  those  that  believe,  beginning 
with  the  casting  out  of  devils  in  his  name.     Finally,  the  scene  is 
changed  in  a  moment,  and  the  command  and  promise  are  seen  in 
their  fulfilment — the  Lord  in  heaven,  the  disciples  on  earth — they 
going  forth  and  preaching  everywhere,  and  the  Lord  still  working 
with  them  and  confirming  the  word  by  the  signs  of  power. 

3.  In  St.  Luke,  the  Friend  of  Man,  sending  to  all  nations  the 
message  of  repentance  and  remission  of  sins,  and  ensuring  to  his 
messengers  the  promise  of  his  Father;  while  the  reality  of  kind 
companionship  is  preserved  to  the  end,  in  the  mention  of  localities, 
movements,  and  gestures  ('  He  led  them  out  as  far  as  to  Bethany,' 
'  He  lifted  up  His  hands  and  blessed  them,'  '  He  was  parted  from 
them'),  the  parting  itself  being  one  of  love  (while  He  blessed  them), 
and  one  which  leaves  behind  it  a  state  of  worship  and  joy. 

4.  In  St.  John,  the  Son  of  God,  receiving  from  the  lately  doubt 
ing  disciple  the  highest  acknowledgment  which  had  yet  come  from 
human  lips  (6  Kvpios  pov  KOI  6  Qeos  /*ou),  and  then,  as  it  were,  lifting 
up  his  eyes  beyond  the  little  company  who  had  seen  him,  and  pro 
nouncing  for  all  ages  and   nations  a  blessing  on  those  who,  not 
having  seen,  should  yet  have  believed.     Yet  farther,  the  Evangelist 
speaks  from  himself,  thus  characteristically  closing  the  only  gospel 
in  which  the  thoughts  of  the  writer  have  been  mingled  with  his 
narrative.     He  tells  us  that  he  has  given  us  incidents  intentionally 
selected  for  a  certain  definite  purpose,  namely,  to  present  the  great 
object  of  faith  in  his  highest  character  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  so  to 
secure  the  result  of  faith  in  its  deepest  essence,  'life  through  his 
name.' 


II.]  NOTE  IV.  221 


NOTE  IV.    LECTURE  II.  p.  43. 

THIS  effect  of  the  opening  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  and  so  of  the 
whole  Gospel  record,  is  well  described  by  Lange : — 

'  The  genealogy,  &c.,  with  which  the  Gospel  according  to  Mat 
thew  opens,  is  of  the  greatest  importance.  The  first  Gospel  con 
nects  the  New  Testament  with  the  Old,  not  by  giving  an  index  of 
the  writings  of  the  Old  Testament,  but  by  delineating  the  Old  Tes 
tament  genealogy  of  Jesus.  This  serves  not  merely  as  evidence  of  the 
indissoluble  connection  between  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament, 
which  continued  in  the  secret  recesses  of  Jewish  life  even  during 
the  age  of  the  Apocrypha,  but  expresses  the  important  truth  that 
God  revealed  himself  and  carried  on  his  covenant  purposes,  not 
only  by  the  spoken  and  written  word,  but  also  and  chiefly  in  and  by 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  until  he  came  in  whom  both  impersonation 
and  revelation  had  reached  their  climax. 

'  In  the  Gospel  by  Matthew  the  life  of  Jesus  is  presented  as  form 
ing  part  of  the  history  and  life  of  the  Jewish  nation ;  and  hence  as 
the  historical  fulfilment  of  the  blessing  promised  to  Abraham  and  to 
his  seed.  Jesus  is  here  set  before  us  as  the  new-born  King  of  the 
Jews,  as  the  promised  Messiah,  and  the  aim  and  goal  of  every  pro 
gressive  stage  of  the  theocracy.  He  is  the  great  Antitype  of  Old 
Testament  history,  in  whom  every  thing  has  been  fulfilled — the 
types  in  the  law,  in  worship,  in  historical  events,  and  in  gracious 
interpositions — in  short,  the  fulfilment  of  the  theocracy.  In  and 
with  him  the  old  covenant  passes  into  the  new,  the  theocracy  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  the  demands  of  the  law  into  the  beatitudes, 
Sinai  into  the  Mount  of  Beatitudes,  the  prophetic  into  the  teaching 
office,  the  priesthood  into  redemption  by  suffering,  and  the  kingship 
into  the  triumph  of  almighty  grace,  restoring,  helping,  and  delivering 
a  fallen  world  ».' 

Again,  in  his  other  work,  the  same  thoughts  occur : — 

'  He  (St.  Matthew)  exhibits  the  Gospel  in  its  historical  relation  as 

the  completion,  the  spiritual  fruit  of  the  cShristological  growth  in 

the  Old  Testament.     It  was  his  task  to  prove  to  his  own  nation  that 

Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  the  son  of  Abraham. 

8  Lange,  Commentary  on  St.  Matthew,  pp.  49,  50. 


222  NOTE  V.  •    [LECT.  n. 

(Chap.  i.  i.)  But  just  because  Christ  was,  in  his  eyes,  the  true  and 
spiritual  King  of  the  Jews,  and  His  kingdom  the  true  theocratic 
kingdom  of  God,  did  Matthew  from  the  very  first  give  prominence 
to  the  great  contrast  between  the  spiritual  Israel  and  the  worldly 
and  hardened  Israel.  Thence  it  was  that  from  the  beginning  new 
conflicts  were  ever  arising,  thence  that  we  continually  meet  with 
fresh  sufferings  of  the  holy  Heir  of  the  ancient  theocracy  till  His 
death  upon  the  cross,  new  triumphs  till  the  manifestation  of  His 
glory.  The  series  of  the  Messiah's  sufferings  runs  through  the  whole 
of  this  gospel  as  its  prevailing  thought h.' 

NOTE  V.    LECTURE  II.  p.  49. 

THE  essential  identity  of  the  synoptist  view  of  the  person  of 
Christ  with  that  given  by  St.  John  is  ably  asserted  by  Dorner.  It 
may  be  well  to  cite  a  part  of  his  argument : — 

'  Taking  the  notices  of  the  Synoptists  together,  it  thus  appears 
that  for  all  eternity,  also  for  the  far)  al&vios  in  heaven,  the  Person 
of  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Son  of  Man,  forms  the  centre 
point  of  the  Christian  religion,  in  the  trials  and  in  the  triumphs  of 
individuals  and  of  the  Church.  He  is  the  perfect  Lawgiver.  He 
not  merely  reveals,  but  he  realizes  as  well,  the  holy  and  just  as  the 
gracious  will  of  God ;  hence  is  He  also  the  Judge  of  the  world.  He 
has  and  exercises  power  over  the  whole  world,  even  as  he  does  over 
the  spiritual ;  He  communicates  here  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  there  eternal  felicity ;  and  the  summit  of  the  latter  is 
ever  formed  by  perfect  fellowship  with  His  Person 

'  It  may  be  boldly  affirmed  that  the  entire  representation  of  Christ 
given  by  the  Synoptists  may  be  placed  by  the  side  of  the  Johannine 
as  perfectly  identical,  inasmuch  as  faith,  moulded  by  means  of  the 
synoptic  tradition,  must  have  essentially  the  same  features  in  its 
conception  of  Christ  as  the  Christ  of  John  has. 

'  The  passages  in  John  which  speak  the  most  loftily  of  Christ  are 
those  to  which  the  Synoptists  supply  exactly  the  closest  parallels, 
whilst  some  of  the  strongest  traits  in  the  latter  find  no  parallel  in 
John;  comp.  Matt.  ix.  2-6  with  John  v.  41  (viii.  n),  Matt,  xxviii. 
18-20  with  John  iii.  35.  But  as  these  latter  synoptic  traits  are 

h  Life  of  Christ,  vol.  i.  249. 


LECT.  Ill,  IV.]  NOTES  VI,    VII.  223 

assuredly  capable  of  being  without  difficulty  incorporated  with 
John's  representation  of  Christ,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  may  what 
John,  with  Paul  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  advances,  that 
goes  beyond  the  Synoptists — that,  namely,  which  has  relation  to  the 
element  of  pre-existence — be  brought  into  relation  to  them.  The 
Christ  of  the  Synoptists  stands  already  so  high  above  the  Ebionitic 
Christ ;  He  is  especially  through  His  eschatological  aspect  so  linked 
with  the  world-idea,  that  to  the  synoptic  faith  there  needs  to  be 
added  not  so  much  a  new  object  as  simply  a  stronger  interest  of 
gnosis;  and  so  also  it  is  that  this  faith  can  find  satisfaction  in  no 
narrower  utterance  concerning  Christ  than  in  such  a  one  as  the 
dogma  of  His  pre-existence  will  enunciate. 

'  In  point  of  fact,  there  are  not  wanting  in  the  Synoptists  them 
selves  the  beginning  of  such :  comp.  Luke  vii.  37,  Matt.  xi.  19,  where 
Christ  calls  himself  the  Wisdom,  with  Prov.  viii.,  Matt.  xi.  27;  espe 
cially,  however,  Luke  xi.  49  with  Matt,  xxiii.  34;  Matt.  xiii.  17, 
Luke  x.  23,  24,  with  John  viii.  56  if'.' 

NOTE  VI.    LECTURE  III.  p.  73. 

THIS  hindrance  is  strongly  put  in  some  words  of  Draseke  quoted 
by  Stier : — 

'  The  old  Messiah  in  the  flesh  is  with  them ;  therefore  the  new 
Comforter,  the  Spirit,  is  far  from  them.  What  hindered  their  being 
comforted  ?  Jesus  himself,  who,  comforting,  stood  before  them,  was 
the  hindrance !  As  long  as  he,  this  Messiah,  bearing  all  the  prophetic 
marks  upon  him,  stood  before  them  in  person,  this  his  person  con 
tinued  to  be  a  foundation  and  prop  to  that  system  of  vanities 
which  bewitched  their  heads  and  hearts.  The  Form  must  pass 
away  from  their  eyes  before  the  Spirit  could  enter  their  souls.  It 
was  good  for  them  that  Jesus  should  go  away.  Before  he,  the  Christ 
after  the  flesh,  went  away,  the  Christ  after  the  Spirit  could  not 
come.  When  the  former  vanished,  the  latter  appeared  V 

NOTE  VII.    LECTURE  IV.  p.  81. 

BAUMGARTEN'S  Apostolic  History  starts  .it  once  from  the  right 
point  of  view;  and  the  effect  of  this  is  felt  through  the  whole  work. 

1  Dorner,  On  the  Person  of  Christ,  Introduction,  pp.  60,  61. 
k  Words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  vol.  vi.  p.  337. 


224  NOTE  VII.  [LECT. 

I  subjoin  a  part  of  his  criticism  on  the  cardinal  expression,  which 
indicates  the  relation  between  the  two  histories  treated  by  St.  Luke, 
in  support  of  that  view  of  it  which  is  briefly  given  in  the  text  of  the 
lecture : — 

'  From  the  words,  a>v  fjpf-a.ro  6  'irjcrovs  Troielv  re  KOL  8i8acrKfiv,  we 
perceive  that,  through  the  Gospel,  St.  Luke  intends  Jesus  to  be  re 
garded  as  the  acting  subject  of  this  history.  Consequently,  what 
ever  else  the  Gospel  narrates,  whether  the  actions  of  other  persons 
or  the  sufferings  of  the  Saviour  himself,  his  labours,  either  in  doing 
or  in  teaching,  are  to  be  considered  as  the  central  point  from  which 
the  whole  is  determined.  But  now  it  is  of  especial  significance  that 
in  this  passage  there  occurs  a  word  which,  corresponding  to  the  term 
TrpuTov,  refers  us  with  equal  precision,  as  well  to  what  follows,  as 
to  what  precedes.  It  is  the  word  fjpgaTo.  With  good  reason  has 
Meyer  maintained  that  this  word  has  a  peculiar  emphasis,  and  has 
therefore  rightly  rejected  all  such  expositions  of  it  as  would  explain 
away  its  force.  But  the  explanation  which  he  himself  proposes  is 
equally  fatal  to  the  emphatic  character  which  he  claims  for  it.  He 
sees  in  it,  for  instance,  an  antithesis  of  this  kind,  'Jesus  began — the 
Apostles  carried  on.'  But  the  peculiar  force,  which  Meyer  has  just 
claimed  for  fjpgaTo,  depends,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  on  its  position,  stand 
ing  as  it  does  before  the  name,  which,  In  itself,  comprises  the  whole 
subject-matter  of  the  Gospel 

'  The  impressive  force  of  the  word  fjp^aro  will,  therefore,  be  duly 
appreciated  as  soon  as,  with  Olshausen  (in  loc.)  and  Schneckenburger, 
we  regard  it  as  characterising  and  referring  to  the  whole  of  Jesus' 
labours  during  his  existence  on  earth — in  other  words,  as  describing 
the  whole  course  of  his  labours  up  to  the  time  of  his  ascension  as 
initiatory  and  preparatory. 

'  If,  therefore,  at  the  commencement  of  a  second  book,  all  that 
had  been  narrated  in  the  first  is  characterised  as  the  work  of  the 
initiatory  labours  of  Jesus,  is  not  this  a  plain  intimation  that  in  the 
second  book  we  are  to  look  for  an  account  of  the  further  conti 
nuance  of  those  labours1?' 

1  Baumgarten's  Apostolic  History  (Clarke's  Tr.),  sect  i.  pp.  10,  n. 


IV.]  NOTE  VIII.  225 


NOTE  VIII.    LECTURE  IV.  p.  90. 

THE  view,  which  is  given  in  the  text,  of  St.  Paul's  testimonies, 
concerning  the  sources  from  which  he  had  derived  his  gospel,  and 
particularly  of  his  assertion,  i  Cor.  xi.  23,  was  not  reached  without 
some  hesitation.  It  had  once  seemed  to  me  (as  probably  it  does  to 
most  readers)  that  the  interpretation  of  the  words  eyw  napeXaftov 
d?ro  TOV  Kvpiov,  was  decided  by  the  more  definite  language  of  Gal. 
1.12:  and  also  that  the  express  mention  both  of  the  e-yw  and  the 
Kvpios  was  more  natural,  on  the  supposition  that  the  Apostle  meant 
to  intimate  an  immediate  personal  communication  from  the  Lord 
to  himself.  The  first  of  these  reasons  is  removed,  if  the  expressions 
in  the  Corinthians  on  the  one  hand,  and  those  in  the  Galatians  and 
Ephesians  on  the  other,  contemplate  the  gospel  (as  they  obviously 
do)  from  the  two  different  sides  of  history  and  doctrine.  The 
second  reason  was  merely  a  confirmation  of  an  interpretation  ac 
cepted  upon  other  grounds,  and  has  no  great  force  by  itself.  It  is 
an  argument  of  the  same  kind,  but  perhaps  of  scarcely  as  much 
weight,  as  that  which  is  adduced  on  the  other  side  from  the  use  of 
OTTO  instead  of  jrapd.  Dean  Alford's  decision  (the  opposite  of  that 
which  is  adopted  in  the  lecture)  seems  to  me  too  hastily  given  in 
regard  to  a  point  of  so  much  interest ;  and  he  treats  the  question  of 
the  preposition  too  slightingly : — 

'  FOR  I  (no  emphasis  on  eyo>  as  Meyer,  al.,  see  ch.  vii.  28  com 
pared  with  32 ;  Gal.  vi.  17;  Phil.  iv.  n)  RECEIVED  FROM  THE  LORD 
(by  special  revelation,  see  Gal.  i.  12).  Meyer  attempts  to  deny  that 
this  revelation  was  made  to  Paul  himself,  on  the  strength  of  diro 
meaning  indirect,  napd  direct  reception  from  any  one :  but  this  dis 
tinction  is  fallacious :  e.  g.  i  John  i.  5,  avrrj  ea-rlv  fj  faayyeXia  fjv  UK^- 
KoafjLfv  an  avrov.  He  supposes  that  it  was  made  to  Ananias  or  some 
other,  and  communicated  to  Paul.  But  the  sole  reason  for  this 
somewhat  clumsy  hypothesis  is  the  supposed  force  of  the  prepo 
sition,  which  has  no  existence.  If  the  Apostle  had  referred  only 
to  the  Evangelical  tradition  or  writings  (?)  he  would  not  have  used 
the  first  person  singular,  but  7rapeXa/3o/iej/ m.' 

'The  supposed  force  of  the  preposition,  which  has  no  existence,' 
is  an  over-confident  expression.  Against  this  decision  must  be 

m  Alford  in  loc. 
Q 


226  NOTE  VIII.  [LECT. 

weighed  the  opinion  given  by  others,  e.  g.  by  Winer,  '  After  verbs 
of  receiving,  &c.,  ano  has  merely  the  general  meaning  of  whence: 
Matt.  xvii.  25,  OTTO  rivu>v  \a/j.^dvovo-i  re'Xr; ;  it  is  kings  who  are  the 
Aap./3ai/oi>Tes ;  irapd  would  have  indicated  the  immediate  gathering  of 
the  taxes,  and  would  have  been  employed  in  this  passage  had  the  tax- 
gatherers  been  spoken  of  as  the  Xa/^jSaz/oi/rey.  In  the  expression 
XappdvovTes  TTapd  TWOS,  the  TIS  denotes  the  person  actually  delivering 
or  tendering:  in  \a/j.f3dvovTfs  dno  TWOS  it  denotes  merely  the  pro 
prietor.  ....  Paul,  in  i  Cor.  xi.  23,  writes  Trape\aftov  atro  TOV 
Kvpiov,  "  I  received  of  the  Lord,"  not,  the  Lord  himself  has  directly, 
personally,  in  an  dnoK.a\v>\fis,  communicated  it  to  me  V 

Winer's  judgment  is  adopted  by  Bishop  Ellicott.  On  Gal.  i.  12, 
ov8e  yap  eyco  Trapa  dv6pa>Trov  TrapeAajSoi',  he  says,  '  rrapa  dvdpunrov 
"from  man,"  not  synonymous  with  dnb  dvdpanrov,  the  distinction 
between  these  prepositions  after  verbs  of  receiving,  &c.  (Trapa  more 
immediate,  dno  more  remote  source)  being  apparently  regularly  main 
tained  in  St.  Paul's  Epistles.  Compare  i  Cor.  xi.  23,  7rap<fXa/3oi>  OTTO 
TOV  Kvpiov,  on  which  Winer  (De  Verb.  Comp.  Fasc.  ii.  p.  7)  rightly 
observes,  "non  Trapa  TOU  Kvpiov,  propterea  quod  non  ipse  Christus 
prsesentem  docuit."' 

The  example  given  by  Alford  on  the  other  side  appears  of  little 
value,  as  the  eVa-yyeXt'a  fjv  aV^Koa/nej'  aV'  OVTOV  is  not  a  saying  cited  by 
St.  John  as  uttered  to  him  personally  by  the  mouth  of  Christ,  but 
a  general  summary  of  the  message  with  which  the  teachers  of  the 
Church  were  entrusted  by  their  Lord.  On  the  whole,  the  force  of 
the  preposition  may  be  stated  thus :  it  does  not  compel  us  to  adopt 
either  interpretation,  but  it  is  more  accurate,  more  natural,  and 
more  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  Scripture,  when  interpreted 
not  in  the  sense  of  an  immediate,  but  of  a  more  remote  reception. 
If  we  should  probably  conclude  that  the  general  facts  of  the  Gospel 
history  (e,  g.  those  mentioned  i  Cor.  xv.  3-7)  were  not  communi 
cated  to  St.  Paul  by  direct  revelation,  we  should  have  no  reason  to 
suppose  an  exception  in  regard  to  the  facts  of  the  institution  of  the 
Lord's  Supper;  unless  the  language  employed  in  regard  to  that 
subject  obliged  us  to  do  so.  Apparently  that  is  not  the  case,  the 
preposition  used  agreeing  rather  with  the  opposite  opinion,  and  cer 
tainly  not  being  that  which  would  seem  likely  to  have  been  chosen, 

n  Grammar  of  N.  T.  Diction,  p.  388. 


IV.]  NOTE  IX.  227 

if  it  had  been  the  purpose  of  the  writer  to  assert  the  exceptional 
nature  of  this  particular  communication.  Thus  the  addition  of  OTTO 
'TOV  Kvplov  to  irape\a3ov  will  only  indicate  the  importance  of  the  acts 
and  words  of  the  institution,  as  handed  down  by  the  known  will, 
and  (probably)  by  the  express  charge,  of  the  Lord. 

In  regard  to  the  whole  question  of  the  sources  of  St.  Paul's  doc 
trine,  it  seems  to  me  that  his  own  expressions  lead  us  to  class  them 
as  follows:  (i)  the  report  of  others,  conveying  to  him  the  historical 
facts  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ;  (2)  direct  and  definite  reve 
lations  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  ascertaining  to  him  the  main  features  of 
the  doctrine  which  it  was  his  special  work  to  deliver;  (3)  a  general 
inspiration  or  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  present  in  his  experience, 
in  the  workings  of  his  own  mind,  and  more  particularly  in  his  study 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 

The  last  mentioned  method  of  illumination  is  evidently  of  a  pro 
gressive  character.  In  reference  to  this  subject  Ellicott's  observa 
tion,  in  his  comment  on  Gal.  i.  12,  is  fair  and  reasonable : — 

'  It  is  a  subject  of  continual  discussion,  whether  the  teaching  of 
St.  Paul  was  the  result  of  one  single  illumination,  or  of  progressive 
development.  The  most  natural  opinion  would  certainly  seem  to 
be  this :  that  as,  on  the  one  hand,  we  may  reverently  presume  that 
all  the  fundamental  truths  of  the  Gospel  would  be  fully  revealed  to 
St.  Paul,  before  he  commenced  preaching ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
might  have  been  ordained,  that,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  our 
spiritual  nature,  its  deepest  mysteries  and  profoundest  harmonies 
should  be  seen  and  felt  through  the  practical  experiences  of  his 
apostolical  labours.' 

I  would  only  wish  to  add  to  this  statement  of  the  case  a  distinct 
mention  of  that  continuous  ministration  of  the  Old  Testament  Scrip 
tures  to  his  mind,  which  is  perceptible  in  all  his  writings,  and  to 
which  attention  is  called  in  Note  XI. 


NOTE  IX.    LECTURE  IV.  p.  98. 

EVERY  day  we  become  more  familiar  with  that  view  of  the  Apos 
tolic  writings,  which  distinguishes  between  the  narrator  and  the 
commentator,  assigning  a  commanding  authority  to  the  bare  witness 
of  facts,  of  sayings  of  the  Lord,  and  of  revelations  distinctly  asserted, 

Q  2 


228  NOTE  IX.  [LECT. 

and  denying  such  authority  to  the  expositions  of  the  doctrine  in 
volved  in  those  facts,  sayings,  and  revelations.  In  the  one  depart 
ment  of  their  work  they  are  true  witnesses,  delivering  to  us  the 
words  of  God.  In  the  other  they  are  fallible  men,  theorising  or 
theologising  under  the  mingled  advantages  and  disadvantages  which 
might  result  from  their  historical  position.  This  bisection  (if  I  may 
use  the  word)  of  the  testimony  of  our  appointed  teachers,  leaves 
us  the  divine  foundations  of  a  theology,  but  sweeps  away  the  divine 
theology  itself,  which  they  were  laid  to  support.  We  are  at  full 
liberty  to  raise  other  edifices  in  its  stead,  or,  which  will  be  better 
still,  we  may  leave  the  materials  unused  and  the  ground  unoccupied. 
The  intimations  of  this  view  of  the  inspired  writings  are  often  hurt 
ful,  only  because  they  are  disguised ;  the  theory  not  being  avowed, 
while  the  language  appropriate  to  it  is  used.  It  will  be  well  to  keep 
the  theory  itself  distinctly  in  sight,  as  it  will  explain  the  meaning 
and  expose  the  tendency  of  many  arguments  and  insinuations  which 
might  else  make  injurious  impressions  on  unestablished  faith.  Per 
haps  this  theory  cannot  be  better  exhibited  than  in  the  following 
words  of  one  of  its  leading  advocates : — 

'  As  to  what  especially  concerns  the  religious  doctrines  contained 
in  the  Bible,  it  is  clear  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  that  we 
are  only  bound  to  notice  those  doctrines  which  can  be  directly  re 
ferred  to  inspiration.  We  therefore  need  pay  no  regard  to  those 
doctrines,  which  lay  no  claim  to  be  considered  as  inspired,  and  do 
not  come  before  us  as  forming  part  of  a  Divine  revelation.  Such, 
for  instance,  are  the  doctrines  of  the  Mosaic  cosmogony,  the  simple 
historical  narratives  in  both  the  Testaments,  &c.  Above  all,  those 
parts  of  the  Bible  which  cannot  be  directly  derived  from  inspiration, 
consequently  everything  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets  (and,  taking 
the  word  in  a  wide  sense,  of  the  apostles  also)  which  is  in  any  degree 
of  a  scientific  character,  the  result  of  reflexion,  and  in  any  sense 
whatever  the  work  of  science,  true  and  important  as  it  may  be, 
these,  one  and  all,  have  not  a  binding  authority  upon  us.  But  fur 
ther,  all  developments  of  doctrine,  which  were  in  point  of  fact  the 
commencement  of  a  theology,  have  a  large  margin  belonging  to 
them.  Take,  for  instance,  the  theological  theories  and  peculiar  views 
of  Paul  and  John,  although  in  another  regard  they  have  an  especial 
value  for  us,  yet  per  se  they  are  not  revelation.  Their  authors  worked 
them  out  with  much  painful  thought,  and  their  thought  we  also  truly 


IV.]  NOTE  X.  229 

regard,  when  striving  like  them  to  master  the  subject ;  yet  they 
never  claim  for  their  theological  deductions  a  binding  authority  upon 
others.  On  the  other  hand,  all  the  direct  declarations  in  Holy  Scrip 
ture  about  our  salvation,  all  the  great  historical  facts  of  the  great 
drama  of  revelation,  especially  the  contents  of  the  Gospels,  these 
have  all  a  binding  authority  upon  us.  These  are  the  points  on  which 
Paul  and  John  theologise. 

'  It  is  this  assertion  of  the  comparative  authority  of  the  Holy  Scrip 
tures  which  is  the  only  means  of  securing  them  from  forced  and 
violent  interpretations0.'  It  would  be  more  true  to  say — of  exposing 
them  to  such  interpretations. 

NOTE  X.     LECTURE  IV.  p.  104. 

'  IF  such  a  Spirit  did  not  dwell  in  the  Church,  the  Bible  would  not 
be  inspired ;  for  the  Bible  is,  before  all  things,  the  (written  voice  of  the 
congregation.  Bold  as  such  a  theory  of  inspiration  may  sound,  it  was 
the  earliest  creed  of  the  Church,  and  it  is  the  only  one  to  which  the 
facts  of  Scripture  answer.  The  Sacred  Writers  acknowledge  them 
selves  men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves,  and  we  are  promised 
illumination  from  the  Spirit  which  dwelt  in  them  p.' 

These  words  of  Dr.  Williams  give  a  distinct  statement  of  a  view 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  is  often  presented  in  more  ambiguous 
language.  The  Bible  is  the  voice  of  the  congregation,  in  the  sense 
of  being  a  voice  adopted  by  the  congregation,  as  the  expression  of 
its  mind  for  ever;  and  assertions  may  be  made  concerning  the 
Scriptures,  which  are  true  in  this  sense,  while  they  are  false  in  the 
sense  which  they  are  meant  to  bear:  but  this  sense  is  here  dis 
claimed  by  the  words  '  before  all  things,'  which  deny  that  the  Scrip 
tures  have  any  character  antecedent  to  this.  This  denial  flatly  contra 
dicts  the  real  voice  of  the  congregation,  which  has  always  acknow 
ledged  and  adopted  the  Scriptures,  in  the  character  of  a  voice  which 
carne  to  it,  not  in  that  of  a  voice  which  proceeded  from  it.  Nothing 
is  more  certain  than  that  the  Church  has  always  considered  and 
avowed,  that  she  was  called  into  existence  by  the  Apostolic  agency  : 
and  that  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles  was  the  cause  and  not  the  pro 
duct  of  her  faith.  It  is  no  less  certain,  that  she  has  from  the  first 

0  R.  Rothe,  in  an  article  in  Studien  und  Kritiken,  1860. 
P  Essays  and  Reviews,  p.  78. 


230  NOTE  X.  [LECT. 

acknowledged  and  received  the  canonical  books,  as  being  themselves 
a  part,  the  written  part,  of  that  Apostolic  teaching,  that  is  to  say, 
as  being  the  permanent  form  of  the  word  by  which  her  faith  was 
first  created. 

This  acknowledgment  of  the  Catholic  Church,  concerning  her 
own  origin  and  the  relation  of  the  Scriptures  to  it,  does  in  fact  dis 
pose  of  the  questions  which  we  often  hear  debated — whether  the 
Church  is  before  the  Bible,  or  the  Bible  before  the  Church — whether 
the  New  Testament  Scriptures  stand  upon  Christianity,  or  Chris 
tianity  upon  the  New  Testament  Scriptures.  It  is. certain  that  the 
Church  existed  before  the  Bible,  and  Christianity  before  the  New 
Testament  Scriptures ;  but  it  is  also  certain  that  the  Church  and 
Christianity  derived  their  own  existence  from  the  word  which  those 
Scriptures  contain.  The  word  was  antecedent  to  the  existence  of  the 
Church,  as  the  cause  is  to  the  effect ;  the  writing  of  that  word,  and 
its  reception  when  written,  were  subsequent  to  the  formation  of  the 
Church,  but  the  writing  only  made  permanent  for  future  time  the 
word  by  which  the  Church  had  been  created ;  and  the  reception  of 
the  writings  only  recognised  them  as  the  same  word  in  its  form  of 
permanence.  Thus  while  the  Church  is  chronologically  before  the 
Bible,  the  Bible  is  potentially  before  the  Church;  since  the  written 
word,  which  is  the  ground  of  faith  to  later  generations  of  Christians, 
is  one  in  origin,  authority,  and  substance  with  the  oral  word,  which 
was  the  ground  of  faith  to  the  first  generation  of  Christians.  Any 
one  who  pleases  may  deny  this  unity  of  the  written  and  the  oral 
word.  I  only  observe,  that,  if  he  does  so,  he  contradicts  '  the  voice 
of  the  congregation.' 

It  may  further  be  said,  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  some  of  the 
New  Testament  Scriptures  are,  as  (writings,  anterior  to  Christianity, 
not  only  potentially  but  chronologically.  If  the  ministry  of  St.  Paul 
was  divinely  ordained,  and  used,  to  develop  the  Christian  doctrine, 
then  that  ministry  was  anterior  to  the  full  development  of  Chris 
tianity.  But  his  Epistles  were  part  of  his  ministry,  as  much  a  part 
of  it  as  his  spoken  word  :  may  we  not  say  a  more  important  part,  as 
being,  by  their  character  of  writing,  more  deliberate  and  thorough. 
It  follows  that  his  Epistles  are,  as  really  as  his  oral  teaching,  chrono 
logically  anterior  to  Christianity  as  a  perfected  system.  Christianity 
therefore  stands  upon  the  New  Testament  Scriptures ;  not  the  New 
Testament  Scriptures  upon  Christianity. 


NOTE  XI.  231 


NOTE  XI.    LECTURE  VI.  p.  135. 

'  EPISTOLICAM  formam  pree  libris  V.  T.  habent  Scripta  N.  T.  et  in 
his  non  solum  Pauli,  Petri,  Jacobi,  Judas,  sed  etiam  uterque  Lucse, 
et  omnes  Johannis  libri.  Plus  etiam  est,  quod  ipse  Dominus  Jesus 
Christus  suo  nomine  septem  epistolas  dedit,  Johannis  manu,  Apoc. 
ii.  3,  ac  tota  Apocalypsis  instar  est  epistolae  ab  Ipso  datae.  Non  ad 
servos,  sed  ad  liberos,  eosque  emancipates  potissimum,  epistote 
mitti  sunt  solitse :  epistolicumque  scribendi  genus  prse  quovis  alio 
accommodatum  est  ad  regnum  Dei  quam  latissime  propagandum, 
et  ad  animas  quam  locupletissime  sedificandas.  Plus  in  hoc  quoque 
genere  unus  laboravit  Paulus  quam  ceteri  omnes  1.' 

NOTE  XII.    LECTURE  VI.  p.  151. 

THE  principle  intimated  in  the  text  is  that  the  ' perfection'  (reXei- 
07-779)  of  Christian  doctrine  was  attained  by  the  reading  of  the  Old 
Testament  in  the  light  of  the  (elementary)  knowledge  of  Christ ;  in 
other  words,  that  the  complete  exposition  of  the  Gospel  was  the  result 
of  a  combination  of  the  facts  and  the  words  of  the  old  dispensation 
with  the  facts  and  the  words  of  the  new,  a  combination  effected  in 
the  minds  of  the  Apostles  under  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
who  thus  brought  to  light  the  meaning  and  the  scope  of  his  own 
earlier  inspirations,  preserved  in  the  Law  and  the  Prophets.  This 
method  of  divine  teaching  is  exhibited  in  action,  and  exemplified  at 
length,  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  to  the  Hebrews.  It  does 
in  fact  constitute  and  create  those  two  precious  writings ;  which, 
while  they  are  arguments  addressed  to  others,  appear  to  be  also 
records  of  the  course  of  thought  and  formation  of  opinion  in  the 
minds  of  the  writers  themselves.  They  use  for  the  education  of 
other  minds  the  same  means  and  materials  which  the  Holy  Ghost 
had  first  prepared,  and  then  used,  for  the  education  of  their  own. 

E.  g.  The  mind  of  St.  Paul  having  received  the  fundamental  prin 
ciple  of  justification  by  grace  through  faith  in  Christ,  seems  to  have 
defined  and  systematised  his  doctrine  on  th:,t  subject,  by  reflexion 
on  his  own  experience  of  what  the  Law  could  do  and  of  what  it 
could  not  do,  on  the  principle  enunciated  by  Hababkuk,  that  '  the 

i  Bengelii,  Gnomon,  in  Rom.  i.  I . . 


232  NOTE  XII.  [LECT. 

just  shall  live  by  his  faith,'  on  the  fact  that  Abraham,  'being  yet  un- 
circumcised,  believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  right 
eousness,'  on  David's  description  of  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord, 
imputeth  righteousness  without  works,'  &c.,  &c.  The  writer  to  the 
Hebrews,  again,  in  his  penetrating  and  profound  treatment  of  a 
multitude  of  Old  Testament  texts  and  of  the  whole  system  of  the 
first  covenant,  not  only  instructs  the  disciples  whom  he  addresses, 
but  also  incidentally  shews  in  what  way  their  teachers  had  them 
selves  been  taught,  namely,  by  means  of  the  former  Scriptures,  read 
in  connexion  with  the  Gospel  facts,  and  under  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

I  do  not  mean  that  precisely  the  same  passages  which  they  think 
fittest  for  instructing  others  had  been  effectual  to  their  own  enlight 
enment,  but  that  they  had  gained  their  own  perfect  light  from  these 
and  others  like  them,  and  that  they  had  themselves  been  taught 
through  the  same  medium  which  they  employ.  St.  Paul's  manner 
of  using  the  Old  Testament  seems  continually  to  imply  his  own  per 
sonal  obligations  to  it. 

Some  may  think  that  this  view  of  the  manner  in  which  the  truth 
was  cleared  to  the  minds  of  its  first  teachers  is  inconsistent  with,  or 
at  least  derogatory  to,  their  inspiration ;  since  it  implies  the  pro 
cesses  of  study,  reflexion,  comparison,  deduction,  a  gradual  increase 
in  the  fulness  and  proportions  of  their  knowledge,  and  a  progress  of 
doctrine  in  their  own  minds.  Certainly  it  implies  all  this,  and  that 
as  a  reason  not  against,  but  for  its  truth ;  for  the  Apostolic  writings 
appear  to  bear  witness  to  such  processes  and  such  progress  in  the 
minds  of  their  authors.  Had  it  been  the  purpose  of  these  Lectures 
to  consider  the  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  this  sense,  the  view  taken  of 
it  would  have  been  in  accordance  with  the  observation  of  Bengel, 
that  when  the  Pauline  discourses  and  writings  are  placed  in  chrono 
logical  order,  '  incrementum  Apostoli  spirituale  cognoscitur  r.'  Such  a 
view  has  no  kindred  with  that  which  has  been  hazarded  by  Professor 
Jowett  and  others,  and  which  treats  the  later  teaching,  not  as  an 
expansion,  but  as  a  reversal  of  the  earlier ;  not  as  a  more  full  and 
definite,  but  as  an  absolutely  different  doctrine.  The  doctrine  was 
always  one,  its  full  development  being  implied  in  its  first  elements, 
but,  like  any  other  large  system  of  thought,  taking  time  to  unfold 

r  Gnomon,  Rom.  i.  i. 


vi.]  NOTE  XII.  233 

itself,  first  in  the  minds  of  the  teachers,  and  then  in  the  Church 
which  they  taught.  The  instrument  used  for  this  purpose  was  the 
Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  was  so  from  the  very  first. 
When  their  Lord  taught  them  personally  after  his  resurrection  it 
was  through  this  medium.  '  He  expounded  unto  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures  the  things  concerning  himself;'  'Then  opened  he  their 
understandings,  that  they  might  understand  the  Scriptures,  and  said 
unto  them,  Thus  it  is  written,  and  thus  it  behoved  Christ  to  suffer, 
and  to  rise  from  the  dead  the  third  day,  and  that  repentance  and 
remission  of  sins  should  be  preached  in  his  name  among  all  nations.' 
(Luke  xxiv.  27,  45-47.)  It  is  scarcely  less  evident  that  the  same 
method  was  pursued  in  their  subsequent  illumination  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  that  the  light  which  they  enjoyed  was  a  light  which  was 
cast  upon  the  Scriptures  and  so  reflected  from  thence.  That  which 
the  Lord,  before  his  departure,  did  by  word  of  mouth,  is  precisely 
that  which,  after  his  departure,  he  did  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  '  Then 
opened  he  their  understandings  that  they  might  understand  the 
Scriptures.' 

There  is  nothing  in  this  view  of  the  case  derogatory  to  the  fulness 
of  their  inspiration,  for  the  inspiration  in  which  we  believe  is  not 
one  which  in  its  general  action  supersedes  the  natural  processes 
of  the  mind,  but  one  which  mingles  itself  with  them,  and  insures 
the  truth  of  their  results.  In  making  the  former  Scriptures  the 
means  of  enlightening  the  authors  of  the  later  Scriptures,  the  Holy 
Spirit  established  the  continuity  of  his  own  teaching,  and  built  the 
Church  '  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Apostles  and  Prophets,'  amal 
gamating  the  two  foundations  into  one.  It  is  from  his  own  expe 
rience  that  St.  Paul  says  to  Timothy  (albeit  not  impowered  by  the 
Apostolic  inspiration),  '  The  Holy  Scriptures  (of  the  Old  Testa 
ment)  are  able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation  (crc  o-o<j)i<rai  €is  oxo- 
T>jpt'ai>)  through  faith  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ.'  (2  Tim.  iii.  15.)  The 
force  of  the  expression  lies  in  the  aoipio-ai.  The  Gospel  Timothy 
has  already  received ;  the  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  he  already  has ;  and 
therefore  he  is  actually  in  possession  of  tine  salvation :  but  the 
ivisdom  (cro$ia)  appertaining  to  this  salvation  he  is  to  seek  by  means 
of  the  Scriptures  (TO.  dwdptva  ao^tVai).  This  o-o'$ia  corresponds 
to  the  Tf\(ioTr)s  (of  doctrine)  spoken  of  in  Heb.  vi.  i,  which  is  there 
illustrated  by  the  exquisite  example  of  spiritual  exegesis,  on  the 
passage,  '  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.' 

R 


234  NOTE  XIIL  [LECT. 

Elsewhere,  again,  the  Apostle  adverts  to  this  character  of  his  doc 
trine,  '  Howbeit  we  speak  wisdom  among  them  that  are  perfect' 
(<ro$iW  ev  Tois  TfXfiois,  i  Cor.  ii.  6);  and  there  the  method  of  its 
exposition  is  described  by  the  remarkable  expression  (of  somewhat 
doubtful  meaning),  ev  8i8aKTo'is  Twev^aros  dyiov,  TrvevpaTiKols  Trvevfj.a- 
TIK.O.  a-vjKpivovres  (ver.  13).  It  seems  to  me  that  the  interpretation 
of  these  words  is  best  derived  from  the  fact,  everywhere  apparent  in 
the  Apostle's  writings,  namely  his  habit  of  working  out  all  the  more 
recondite  and  (if  I  may  use  the  word)  scientific  parts  of  the  Evan 
gelical  doctrine  by  the  aid  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  types,  images, 
and  sentences  of  which  were,  we  know,  in  his  sight  Trvevp-ariKa.  Dean 
Alford's  objection  to  this  interpretation,  as  given  by  Chrysostom, 
is  founded  upon  his  treatment  of  the  word  vvyKpiveiv,  as  if  it  meant 
barely  to  prove  or  interpret.  I  think  that  Chrysostom's  illustra 
tions,  in  the  passage  referred  to,  suggest  a  larger  meaning  than  this ; 
but  even  the  latter  of  these  words,  taken  in  its  full  sense,  would  be 
a  more  adequate  and  exact  rendering  than  that  which  is  adopted  in 
its  place,  '  putting  together  spirituals  with  spirituals,'  i.  e.  attaching 
spiritual  words  to  spiritual  things.  The  avyKpiveiv  will  more  properly 
represent  a  process  of  thought  and  judgment  than  a  mere  method  of 
expression:  it  does  in  fact  most  aptly  represent  that  process  which 
we  actually  see  in  the  Epistles,  in  which  the  Tcvtv^ariKa  of  the  old 
covenant  are  combined  with  those  of  the  new  in  order  to  establish 
and  elucidate  the  doctrine  which  is  delivered.  The  appropriation 
of  the  Old  Testament  words  to  express  the  New  Testament  doc 
trines  is  a  part  of  this  elucidation :  e.  g.  the  application  of  the  old 
terms  of  sacrifice  and  lustration,  to  describe  the  nature  of  the  death 
and  the  effect  of  the  blood  of  Christ. 


NOTE  XIII.    LECTURE  VI.  p.  152. 

'  As  Luther  complained  of  the  Epistle  of  James,  that  it  was  not 
occupied  with  Christ,  so  in  more  recent  times  an  inclination  has 
been  exhibited  to  regard  James,  as  he  appears  to  us  in  his  Epistle, 
as  the  representative  of  the  faith  of  the  earliest  Christians;  and 
hence  it  has  been  deduced  that  the  Ebionitic  doctrine  was  the 
primitive ;  a  conclusion  in  every  respect  over-precipitate  !  For, 
first,  the  design  of  James  is  such,  that  it  does  not  fall  to  him  to  set 
forth  in  order  the  faith  and  its  contents,  but  to  maintain  the  TTLO-TIS 


vi.]  NOTE  XIII.  235 

rather  according  to  its  ethical  significancy,  and  to  contend  against 
all  antinomianism.     The  nia-rts  he  presupposes ;  he  does  not  seek  to 
plant  it  for  the  first  time ;  and  hence  it  is  incompetent,  nay,  unjust 
to  him,  to  treat  his  Epistle  as  if  he  began  with  the  beginning,  and 
meant  to  set  forth  the  fundamental  principles  of  Christianity,  which 
as  yet  were  not  in  dispute.     But,  secondly,  it  would  be  still  more 
hazardous  from  this  short  Epistle — which,  according  to  its  avowed 
design,  aims  to  unfold  the  ethical  and  not  the  dogmatical  aspect  of 
Christian  truth — to  form  an  estimate  of  James  universally ;  of  whom 
we  have  no  right,  since  in  other  respects  he  is  at  one  with  the 
synoptic  tradition,  to  assume  that  in  respect  to  Christological  ideas 
he  stands  opposed  to  it.     Thirdly,  utterly  untrue  is  the  assumption 
that  James  is  to  be  viewed  as  the  representative  of  the  faith  of  the 
earliest  Christianity.     Rather  is  his  letter,  with  its  polemic  against 
a  one-sided  faith,  an  evidence  that  there  was  another  tendency  in 
the  Church,  which  laid  chief  stress  on  faith,  not  in  its  ethical  purify 
ing  power,  but  viewed  principally  as  an  object  of  knowledge,  cro^ia ; 
consequently,  more  in  respect  of  its  dogmatic  import,  and  that  in 
a  fruitless  way,  and  which  held  participation  in  Christianity  in  this 
sense  for  justifying,     Over  against  this  theoretical  faith  he  places 
that  which  is  practical.    Still  more  weighty  is  what  we  would  adduce 
fourthly,  viz.,  that  it  cannot  be  denied  that  to  the  individuality  of 
James  the  ethical  was  the  most  congenial,  and  hence  drew  him  to 
give  especial  effect  to  the  refutation  of  this  false  tendency s.' 

Dorner  goes  on  to  shew  that  the  ethic  of  St.  James  is  a  Christian 
ethic,  and  then  to  point  out  the  actual  Christological  features  of  the 
Epistle.  The  result  is,  '  that  James  bad  before  him  the  Christian  pre 
supposition  in  anthropological  and  soteriological  form'' — a  sufficiently 
alarming  sentence,  which,  however,  I  print  in  italics,  because  it 
gives  the  precise  point  to  which  I  have  wished  to  speak  in  the  text, 
namely,  that  a  considerate  examination  of  the  Epistle  shews,  that 
the  whole  doctrine  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh,  and 
of  the  mystery  of  redemption  and  salvation,  is  presupposed  as  already 
known  and  accepted  both  by  the  writer  and  by  those  to  whom  he 
writes.  It  is  this  presupposition  which  justifies  the  place  which  is 
assigned  to  the  Epistle  in  the  course  of  divine  instruction. 

9  Dorner,  On  the  Person  of  Christ,  Introchiction,  pp.  62,  63. 


June  1872. 

A  CATALOG UE  of  THE OL o GICAL  B o OKS, 
-with  a  Sliort  Account  of  their 
Character  and  Aim, 

Published  by 

MACMiLLAN"  A:NT>  co. 

Bedford  Street,   Covent   Garden,  London. 


Abbott  (Rev.  E.  A.)— BIBLE  LESSONS.  By  the  Rev. 
E.  A.  AKBOTT,  M.A.,  Head  Master  of  the  City  of  London 
School.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  4_r.  6d. 

Among  the  subjects  treated  in  this  volume  are: — "  The  Times  of 
•  Christ"  "77ie  Life  of  Christ,"  '•'Christ's  Miracles,'"  "Christ's 
Sacrifice"  "Lore,"  "Forgiveness,"  "Faith"  and  "Prayer."  The 
book  is  written  in  the  form  of  dialogiies  carried  on  between  teacher 
and  pupil,  and  its  main  object  is  to  make  the  scholar  think  for 
himself.  "Wise,  suggestive,  and  really  profound  initiation  into 
religious  thought. " — Guardian.  The  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  in 
his  speech  at  the  Education  Conference  at  Abergivilly,  says  he 
thinks  "nobody  could  read  them  without  being  the  better  for  them 
himself,  and  being  also  able  to  see  hcnv  this  difficult  duty  of  im 
parting  a  sound  religious  education  may  be  effected." 

I 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Ainger  (Rev.  Alfred).— SERMONS  PREACHED  IN 
THE  TEMPLE  CHURCH.  By  the  Rev.  ALFRED  AINGER, 
M.A.  of  Trinity  Hall,  Cambridge,  Reader  at  the  Temple  Church. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6s. 

This  volume  contains  twenty-four  Sermons  preached  at  various  times 
during  the  last  few  years  in  the  Temple  Church,  and  are  charac 
terised  by  such  qualities  as  are  likely  to  make  them  acceptable  to 
cultivated  and  thoughtful  readers.  The  following  are  a  feiv 
of  the  topics  treated  of: — "Boldness;"  "Murder,  Ancient  and 
Modern;"  "The  Atonement;"  "  The  Resurrection;"  "The  Fear 
of  Death;"  "  The  Forgiveness  of  Sins,  the  Remission  of  a  Debt'1'1 
(2  Sermons);  "Anger,  Noble  and  Ignoble;"  "  Culture  and 
Temptation;''''  "The  Religious  Aspect  of  Wit  and  Humour;" 
"The  Life  of  the  Ascended  Christ."  "It  is,"  the  British  Quar 
terly  says,  "  the  fresh  unconventional  talk  of  a  clear  independent 
thinker,  addressed  to  a  congregation  of  thinkers  .  .  .  .  Thoughtful 
men  will  be  greatly  charmed  by  this  little  volume." 

Alexander.— THE  LEADING  IDEAS  of  the  GOSPELS. 
Five  Sermons  preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford  in  1870 — 
71.  By  WILLIAM  ALEXANDER,  D.D.,  Brasenose  College  ;  Lord 
Bishop  of  Derry  and  Raphao  ;  Select  Preacher.  Cr.  8vo.  4?.  6d. 

Each  of  these  Sermons  is  on  a  characteristic  text  taken  successively 
from  each  of  the  four  Gospels,  there  being  two  on  that  from  St. 
John  ;  ziz.—St.  Matt.  i.  I  ;  St.  Mark  i.  I ;  St.  Luke  i.  3  ;  St.  John 
i.  I,  14.  "  Dr.  Alexander  is  eminently  fitted  for  the  task  he  has 
undertaken.  He  has  a  singular  felicity  of  style,  which  lights  up 
the  discourse  and  clothes  it  with  great  beauty  and  impressiven»ss. " 
—Nonconformist. 

Arnold.— A  BIBLE  READING  BOOK  FOR  SCHOOLS. 
THE  GREAT  PROPHECY  OF  ISRAEL'S  RESTORATION  (Isaiah, 
Chapters  40 — 66).  Arranged  and  Edited  for  Young  Learners.  By 
MATTHEW  ARNOLD,  D.C.L.,  formerly  Professor  of  Poetry  in  the 
University  of  Oxford,  and  Fellow  of  Oriel.  iSmo.  cloth,  is. 
Mr.  Arnold  has  undertaken  this  really  important  task,  on  account 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


of  his  conviction  "  of  the  immense  importance  in  education  of  what 
is  called  letters  ;  of  the  side  which  engages  our  feelings  and  imagina 
tion."  Mr.  Arnold  in  this  little  volume,  attempts  to  do  for  the 
Bible  -what  has  been  so  abundantly  done  for  Greek  and  Roman, 
as  well  as  English  authors  ;  viz.  — to  take  ' '  some  -whole,  of  ad 
mirable  literary  beauty  in  style  and  treatment,  of  manageable 
length,  within  defined  limits  ;  and  present  this  to  the  learner  in  an 
intelligible  shape,  adding  such  explanations  and  helps  as  may  enable 
him  to  grasp  it  as  a  connected  and  complete  work."  Mr.  Arnold 
thinks  it  clear  that  nothing  could  more  exactly  suit  the  purpose 
than  the  last  twenty-seven  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  beginning 
"  Comfort  ye"  &*c.  He  has  endeavoured  to  present  a  perfectly  cor 
rect  text,  maintaining  at  the  same  time  the  unparalleled  balance 
and  rhythm  of  the  Authorized  Version.  In  the  copious  notes  every 
assistance  is  given  to  the  complete  understanding  of  the  text.  There 
is  nothing  in  the  book  to  hinder  the  adherent  of  any  school  of  in 
terpretation  or  of  religious  belief  from  using  it.  The  Preface 
contains  much  that  is  interesting  and  valuable  on  the  relation  of 
"letters"  to  education,  of  the  principles  that  ought  to  guide  the 
makers  of  a  new  version  of  the  Bible,  and  other  important  matters. 
Altogether,  it  is  believed,  the  volume  will  be  found  to  form  a  text 
book  of  the  greatest  vahce  to  schools  of  all  classes. 

Baring-Gould.— LEGENDS  OF  OLD  TESTAMENT 
CHARACTERS,  from  the  Talmud  and  other  sources.  By  the 
Rev.  S.  BARING-GOULD,  M.A.,  Author  of  "Curious  Myths  of 
the  Middle  Ages,"  "The  Origin  and  Development  of  Religious 
Belief,"  "In  Exitu  Israel,"  etc.  In  two  vols.  crown  8vo.  i6s. 
Vol.  I.  Adam  to  Abraham.  Vol.  II.  Melchizidek  to  Zechariah. 

Mr.  Baring- Gould's  previous  contributions  to  the  History  of  Mytho 
logy,  and  the  formation  of  a  science  of  comparative  religion  are 
admitted  to  be  of  the  highest  importance;  the  present  work,  it  is 
believed,  will  be  found  of  equal  value.  Pie  has  collected  from  the 
Talmud  and  other  sources,  Jeivish  and  Mahommedan,  a  large 
number  of  curious  and  interesting  legends  concerning  the  principal 
characters  of  the  Old  Testament,  comparing  these  frequently  with 
similar  legends  current  among  many  of  the  peoples,  savage  and 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


civilised,  all  over  the  world.  ' '  These  volumes  contain  much  that 
is  strange,  and  to  the  ordinary  English  reader,  very  novel." — 
Daily  News. 

Barry,  Alfred,  D.D.— The  ATONEMENT  of  CHRIST. 

Six  Lectures  delivered  in  Hereford  Cathedral  during  Holy  Week, 
1871.  By  ALFRED  BARRY,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  Canon  of  Worcester, 
Principal  of  King's  College,  London.  Fcap.  8vo.  zs.  6d. 

In  writing  these  Sermons,  it  has  been  the  object  of  Canon  Barry  to 
set  forth  the  deep  practical  importance  of  the  doctrinal  truths 
of  the  Atonement.  ''''The  one  truth,"  says  the  Preface,  "which, 
beyond  all  others,  I  desire  that  these  may  suggest,  is  the  inseparable 
unity  which  must  exist  between  Christian  doctrine,  even  in  its  more 
mysterious  forms,  and  Christian  morality  or  devotion.  They  are 
a  slight  contribution  to  the  plea  of  that  connection  of  Religion  and 
Theology,  which  in  our  own  time  is  so  frequently  and,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  so  unreasonably  denied.'1''  The  Guardian  calls  them  "strik 
ing  and  eloquent  lectures. " 

Binney.— SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  THE  KING'S 
WEIGH  HOUSE  CHAPEL,  1829—69.  By  THOMAS  BINNEY, 
D.  D.  New  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  45-.  6d. 

In  the  earnestness  and  vigour  which  characterize  the  sermons  in  this 
volume  the  reader  will  find  a  clue  to  the  vast  influence  exerted  by 
Mr.  Binney  for  forty  years  over  a  wide  circle,  particularly  young 
men.  In  the  concluding  sermon,  preached  after  the  publication  of 
the  first  edition,  he  reviews  the  period  of  his  ministry  as  a  whole, 
dwelling  especially  an  its  religious  aspects.  "Full  of  robust  in 
telligence,  of  reverent  but  independent  thinking  on  the  most  profound 
and  holy  themes,  and  of  earnest  practical  purpose." — London 
Quarterly  Review. 

Burgon.— A   TREATISE  on  the  PASTORAL   OFFICE. 

Addressed  chiefly  to  Candidates  for  Holy  Orders,  or  to  those  who 
have  recently  undertaken  the  cure  of  souls.     By  the  Rev.  JOHN 
W.  BURGON,  M.A.,  Oxford.     8vo.     \2s. 
The  object  of  this  work  is  to  expound  the  great  ends  to  be  accomplished 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


by  the  Pastoral  office,  and  to  investigate  the  various  means  by  which 
these  ends  may  best  be  gained.  Full  directions  are  given  as  to 
preaching  and  sermon-writing,  pastoral  visitation,  village  educa 
tion  and  catechising,  and  confirmation.  Under  the  heading  of 
"  Pastoral  Method"  the  author  shows  how  each  of  the  occasional 
offices  of  the  Church  may  be  most  properly  conducted,  as  well  as  how 
a  clergyman's  ordinary  public  ministrations  may  be  performed 
with  the  greatest  success.  The  best  methods  of  parochial  manage 
ment  are  examined,  and  an  effort  is  made  to  exhibit  the  various 
elements  of  the  true  pastoral  spirit.  "  The  spirit  in  which  it 
approaches  and  solves  practical  questions  is  at  once  full  of  common 
sense  and  at  the  same  time  marked  by  a  deep  reverential  piety  and 
a  largeness  of  charity  which  are  truly  admirable."- — Spectator. 

Butler    (G.) — Works  by  the  Rev.  GEORGE  BUTLER,  M.A., 

Principal  of  Liverpool  College  : 
FAMILY  PRAYERS.     Crown  8vo.     $s. 

The  prayers  in  this  volume  are  all  based  on  passages  of  Scripture — the 
morning  prayers  on  Select  Psalms,  those  for  the  evening  on  portions 
of  the  ATezv  Testament. 

SERMONS  PREACHED  in  CHELTENHAM  COLLEGE 

CHAPEL.     Crown  8vo.     7^.  6d. 

These  Sermons,  twenty-nine  in  number,  were  delivered  at  intervals 
from  the  opening  of  Cheltenham  College  Chapel  in  1 858,  to  the  last 
Sunday  of  the  year  1 86 1,  and  contain  references  to  the  important 
events  which  occurred  during  that  pei-iod — the  Indian  mutiny,  the 
French  campaign  in  Italy,  the  liberation  of  Sicily  and  Naples,  the 
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  the  American  Civil  War, 
and  the  deaths  of  many  eminent  men.  "  These  sermons  are  plain, 

practical,  and  well  adapted  to  the  auditors We  cordially 

recommend  the  volume  as  a  model  of  pulpit  style,  and  for  individual 
and  family  reading." — Weekly  Review. 

Butler  (Rev.  H.  M.)— SERMONS  PREACHED  in  the 
CHAPEL    OF    HARROW     SCHOOL.       By    H.    MONTAGU 
BUTLER,   Head  Master.     Crown  8vo.     7$.  6d. 
Whilst  these  Sermons  were  prepared  to  meet  the  -;<ants  of  a  special  class, 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Butler  (Rev.  H.  M.) — continued. 

there  is  a  constant  reference  in  them  to  the  great  principles  which 
underlie  all  Christian  thought  and  action.  They  deal  -with  such 
subjects  as  "Temptation"  "Courage"  "  Duty  without  regard  to 
consequences"  "Success,"  "  Devout  Impulses,"  and  "  The  SouPs 
need  of  God."  "  These  sermons  are  adapted  for  every  household. 
There  is  nothing  more  striking  than  the  excellent  good  sense  -with 
which  they  are  imbued." — Spectator. 

A  SECOND  SERIES.     Crown  8 vo.     js.6d. 

" 'Excellent  specimens  of  what  sermons  should  be, — plain,  direct, 
practical,  pervaded  by  the  true  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  and  holding  up 
lofty  aims  before  the  minds  of  the  young." — Athenaeum. 

Butler  (Rev.  W.  Archer). — Works  by  the  Rev.  WILLIAM 
ARCHER  BUTLER,  M.A.,  late  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in 
the  University  of  Dublin  : — 

SERMONS,  DOCTRINAL  AND  PRACTICAL.  Edited, 
with  a  Memoir  of  the  Author's  Life,  by  THOMAS  WOODWARD, 
Dean  of  Down.  With  Portrait.  Eighth  and  Cheaper  Edition, 
8vo.  Ss. 

This  -volume  contains  twenty-six  Sermons  by  one  of  the  most  earnest, 
thoughtful,  and  eloquent  preachers  of  his  time,  treating  of  almost 
every  point  of  evangelical  doctrine  and  Christian  practice.  The 
following  selections  from  the  titles  of  the  sermons  will  give  a  fair 
idea  of  the  contents  of  the  volume: — "The  Mystery  of  the  Holy 
Incarnation;"  "  The  Daily  Self-Denial  of  Christ;"  "  The  Power 
of  the  Resurrection;"  "  Self- Delusion  as  to  our  Real  State  before 
God;"  "  The  Faith  of  Man  and  the  Faithfulness  of  God;"  "  The 
Wedding-  Garment ;"  ' '  Human  Affections  Raised,  not  Destroyed  by 
the  Gospel;"  "The  Rest  of  the  People  of  God;"  ' '  The  Divinity  of 
our  Priest,  Prophet,  and  King;"  "  Church  Education  in  Ireland" 
(two  Sermons).  The  Introductory  Memoir  narrates  in  consider 
able  detail  and  with  much  interest,  the  events  of  'Butler's  brief  'life ; 
and  contains  a  few  specimens  of  his  sweet  and  tender  poetry,  and 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Butler  (Rev.  W.  Archer.) — continued. 

a  few  extracts  from  his  thoughtful  addresses  and  essays,  including 
a  long  and  eloquent  passage  on  the  Province  and  Duty  of  the 
Preacher. 

A  SECOND  SERIES  OF   SERMONS.      Edited  by  J.  A. 

JEREMIE,  D.  D.,  Dean  of  Lincoln.     Sixth  and  Cheaper  Edition. 

8vo.     is. 

In  this  volume  are  contained  other  twenty-six  of  the  late  Professor 
Butler's  Sermons,  embracing  a  wide  range  of  Christian  topics,  as 
will  be  seen  by  the  following  selection  from  the  titles: — "  Christ  the 
Source  of  all  Blessings ;"  "  The  Hope  of  Glory  and  the  Charities  of 
Life;'1''  "The  Holy  Trinity;"  "The  Sorrow  that  Exalts  and 
Sanctifies;"  "  The  Growth  of  the  Divine  Life;"  "The  Folly  of 
Moral  Cowardice;"  "Strength  and  Mission  of  the  Church;" 
"  The  Blessedness  of  Submission ;"  "  Etei-nal  Punishment. "  The 
North  British  Review  says,  "  Few  sermons  in  our  language  exhibit 
the  same  rare  combination  of  excellencies ;  imagery  almost  as  rich 
as  Taylor's;  oratory  as  vigorous  often  as  Souths;  judgment  as 
sound  as  Barrow's;  a  style  as  attractive  but  more  copious, 
original,  and  forcible  than  Atterbury's  ;  piety  as  elevated  as  Howe's, 
and  a  fervour  as  intense  at  times  as  Baxter's.  Mr.  Butler's  are 
the  sermons  of  a  true  poet. " 

LETTERS    ON    ROMANISM,  in  reply  to    Dr.  Newman's 

Essay  on  Development.     Edited  by  the  Dean  of  Down.     Second 

Edition,  revised  by  Archdeacon  HARDWICK.     8vo.      los.  6d. 

These  Letters  contain  an  exhaustive  criticism,  written  in  the  authors 

most  vigorous  and  polished  style,  of  Dr.  Newman' s  famous  "Essay 

on  the  Development  of  Christian  Doctrine."     An  attempt  is  made 

to  shew  that  the  theory  is  opposed  to  the  received  doctrine  of  the 

Romish  Church  ;  that  it  is  based  on  purely  imaginary  grounds, 

and  necessarily  carries  with  it  consequences  in  the  highest  degree 

dangerous  both  to  Christianity  and  to  general  truth.      Whilst  the 

work  is  mainly  polemical  in  its  character,  it  contains  the  exposition 

of  many  principles  of  far  more  than  mere  temporary   interest. 

"A  work  which  ought  to  be  in  the  Library  of  every  student  of 

Divinity." — BP.  ST.  DAVID'S. 

LECTURES  ON  ANCIENT  PHILOSOPHY.     See  SCIEN 
TIFIC  CATALOGUE, 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Cambridge  Lent  Sermons.  — SERMONS  preached 
during  Lent,  1864,  in  Great  St.  Mary's  Church,  Cambridge.  By 
the  BISHOP  OF  OXFORD,  Revs.  H.  P.  LIDDON,  T.  L.  CLAUGHTON, 

J.    R.   WOODFORD,         Dr.   GOULBURN,        J.   W.   BlTRGON,        T.   T. 

CARTER,  Dr.  PUSEY,  Dean  HOOK,  W.  J.  BUTLER,  Dean  GOOD 
WIN.     Crown  8vo.     Js.  6d. 

The  names  of  the  preachers  of  these  Sermons  are  a  guarantee  that  they 
are  •worth  reading.  They  were  preached  on  the  Wednesdays  and 
Fridays  during  Lent  1864,  and  treat  of  the  follmuing  among  other 
subjects: — "God  in  His  Perfections  the  Measure  of  the  Sinfulness 
of  Sin  in  the  Creature"  by  the  Bishop  of  Oxford;  ''''Adam  hiding 
himself  from  the  Presence  of  the  Lord,"  by  the  Rev.  H.  P.  Liddon; 
"God  the  Hope  and  Joy  of  the  Penitent,"  by  the  Rev.  T.  T.  Carter; 
"  Daznd  in  his  Sin  and  his  Penitence,"  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Pusey ; 
"God  the  Consolation  of  the  Afflicted, "  by  the  Very  Rev.  Dean  H'ook : 
"God  the  Reward  of  the  Faithful,"  by  the  Rev.  W.  J.  Butler. 

Campbell.— Works  by  JOHN  M'LEOD  CAMPBELL  : — 

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT  AND  ITS 
RELATION  TO  REMISSION  OF  SINS  AND  ETERNAL 
LIFE.  Third  Edition,  with  an  Introduction  and  Notes.  8vo. 
\QS.  6d. 

Three  chapters  of  this  work  are  devoted  to  the  teaching  of  Luther  on 
the  subject  of  the  Atonement,  and  to  Calvinism,  as  taught  by  Dr. 
Owen  and  President  Ed-wards,  and  as  recently  modified.  The 
remainder  is  occupied  with  the  different  aspects  of  the  Atonement  as 
conceived  by  the  author  himself,  the  object  being  partly  to  meet  the 
objections  of  honest  inquirers,  but  mainly  so  to  reveal  the  subject  in 
its  (nun  light  as  to  render  self-ruident  its  adaptation  to  the  spiritual 
wants  of  man.  The  book  has  been  found  richly  suggestive  by  many 
of  the  profoundest  minds  in  the  Church.  Professor  Rolleston,  in 
quoting  from  this  book  in  his  address  to  the  Biological  Section  of 
the  British  Association  (Liverpool,  September,  iSjo),  speaks  of  it 
as  ' '  the  great  work  of  one  of  the  first  of  living  theologians. " 
"Among  the  first  theological  treatises  of  this  generation."  - 
Guardian. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Campbell  (J.  M'Leod.) — continued. 

CHRIST  THE  BREAD  OF  LIFE.      An  Attempt  to  give 
a  profitable  direction  to  the  present  occupation  of  Thought  with 
Romanism.    Second  Edition,  greatly  enlarged.    Crown  8vo.    45.  6rf. 
In  this  volume  the  Doctrines  of  the  Infallibility  of  the  Church  and 
Transubstantiation  are  regarded  as  addressed  to  real  imvard  needs 
of  humanity,  and  an  effort  is  made  to  disengage  them  from  the 
truths  whose  place  they  usurp,    and  to   exhibit  these  truths   as 
adequate  to  meet  human  cravings.      The  aim  is,  first,  to  offer  help 
to  those  -who  feel  the  attractions  to  Romanism  too  strong  to  be  over 
come  by  direct  arguments  addressed  to  sense  and  reason ;   and, 
second,  to  quicken  interest  in  the  Truth  itself.      "  Deserves  the  most 
attentive  study  by  all  who  interest  themselves  in  the  predominant 
religious  controversy  of  the  day." — Spectator. 

Cheyne. — Works  by  T.  K.  CHEYNE,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Balliol 

College,  Oxford  : — 

THE  BOOK  OF  ISAIAH  CHRONOLOGICALLY  AR 
RANGED.  An  Amended  Version,  with  Historical  and  Critical 
Introductions  and  Explanatory  Notes.  Crown  8vo.  "js.  6d. 

The  object  of  this  edition  is  to  restore  the  probable  meaning  of  Isaiah , 
so  far  as  can  be  expressed  in  appropriate  English.  The  basis  of 
the  version  is  the  revised  translation  of  1611,  but  alterations  have 
been  introduced  whej-ever  the  true  sense  of  the  prophecies  appeared  to 
require  it.  The  Westminster  Review  speaks  of  it  as  "  a  piece  of 
scholarly  work,  very  carefully  and  considerately  done."  The 
Academy  calls  it  "a  successful  attempt  to  extend  a  right  under 
standing  of  this  important  Old  Testament  writing." 

NOTES  AND  CRITICISMS  on  the  HEBREW  TEXT 
OF  ISAIAH.  Crown  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

This  work  is  offered  as  a  slight  contribution  to  a  more  scientific  study 
of  the  Old  Testame>it  Scriptures.  The  autJior  aims  at  completeness, 
independence,  and  originality,  and  constantly  endeavours  to  keep 
philology  distinct  from  exegesis,  to  explain  the  form  without  pro 
nouncing  on  the  matter.  Saad  YaKs  Arabic  Version  in  the  Bod- 


io  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

leian  has  been  referred  to,  while  Walton  and  Buxtorf  have  been 
carefully  consulted.  The  philological  -works  of  German  critics, 
especially  Ewald  and  Delitsch,  have  been  anxiously  and  repeatedly 
studied.  The  Academy  calls  the  "work  ' '  a  valuable  contribution 
to  the  more  scientific  study  of  the  Old  Testament." 

Choice    Notes   on   the    Four  Gospels,   drawn  from 

Old  and  New  Sources.      Crown  Svo.      4*.  6d.  each  Vol.      (St. 

Matthew  and  St.  Mark  in  one  Vol.  price  9^. ). 

These  Notes  are  selected  from  the  Rev.  Prebendary  Ford's  Illustrations 
of  the  Four  Gospels,  the  choice  being  chiefly  confined  to  those  of 
a  more  simple  and  practical  cJiaracter.  The  plan  follcnued  is  to  go 
over  the  Gospels  verse  by  verse,  and  introduce  the  remarks,  mostly 
meditative  and  practical,  of  one  or  more  noted  divines,  on  the  verses 
selected  for  illustration.  The  names  of  the  -writers  from  -whom  the 
remarks  are  taken  are  invariably  appended  to  the  extracts,  and 
amongst  others  to  be  met  -with,  aj-e  the  following : — J.  Ford,  Bona- 
ventura,  William  Law,  Pascal,  Austin,  Dr.  Donne,  Bonne/I, 
Flavel,  Bishop  Hall,  Dr.  John  Scott,  Thomas  Scott,  R.  Cecil, 
St.  Ambrose,  Bengel,  Bishop  Reynolds,  J.  H.  Newman,  George 
Herbert,  Bishop  Jewel,  Jeremy  Taylor,  Cardinal  Bellarmine, 
Quarles,  St.  Augustine,  Archbishop  Trench,  Archbishop  Leighton, 
Lord  Bacon,  Dr.  Pusey,  St.  Chrysostom,  Dr.  Arnold,  Thomas 
Fuller.  Thus  the  selection  is  made  in  a  catliolic  spirit,  and  the 
reader  will  find  it  a  safe  and  useful  companion  in  his  meditations. 

Church.— SERMONS  PREACHED  BEFORE  the  UNI 
VERSITY  OF  OXFORD.  By  the  very  Rev.  R.  W.  CHURCH, 
M.A.,  Dean  of  St.  Paul's.  Second  Edition.  Crown  Svo.  4_r.  6d. 

Sermons  on  the  relations  between  Christianity  and  the  ideas  and  facts 
of  modern  civilized  society.  The  sttbjects  of  the  various  discourses 
are : — ' '  The  Gifts  of  Civilization, "  ' '  Christ's  Words  and  Christian 
Society,"  "  Christ's  Example,"  and  "  Civilization  and  Religion." 
"Thoughtful  and  masterly.  .  .  We  regard  these  sermons  as  a 
landmark  in  religious  thought.  They  help  us  to  understand  the 
latent  strength  of  a  Christianity  that  is  assailed  on  all  sides." — 
Spectator. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  11 

Clay.— THE  POWER  OF  THE  KEYS.     Sermons  preached 

in  Coventry.     By  the  Rev.  W.  L.  CLAY,  M.  A.     Fcap.  8vo.   y.  6d. 

In  this  work  an  attempt  is  made  to  shew  in  -what  sense,  and  to  what 

extent,  the  power  of  the  Keys  can  be  exercised  by  the  layman,  the 

Church,  and  the  priest  respectively.      The  Church  Review  says  the 

sermons  are  "in  many  respects  of  unusual  merit." 

Clergyman's     Self-Examination    concerning    the 

APOSTLES'  CREED.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.      is.  6J. 

"  These  Confessions  have  been  written  by  a  clergyman  for  his  own  use. 
They  speak  of  his  own  unbelief.  Possibly  they  may  help  some  of 
his  brethren,  who  wish  to  judge  themselves  that  they  may  not  be 
ashamed  before  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth."  He  takes  each  clause 
of  the  Creed  and  examines  it  in  the  light  of  common  sense,  in  order 
to  obtain  its  real  meaning ;  searching  at  the  same  time  his  own 
heart  to  discover  to  what  extent  he  really  believes  the  statements  so 
frequently  uttered  by  him.  Not  only  is  it  calculated  to  afford 
material  aid  to  a  proper  understanding  of  the  Creed,  but  will  aha 
be  found  extremely  useful  as  a  manual  of  devotion. 

Collects  of  the  Church  of  England.  With  a  beauti 
fully  Coloured  Floral  Design  to  each  Collect,  and  Illuminated 
Cover.  Crown  8vo.  I2s.  Also  kept  in  various  styles  of  morocco. 
In  this  edition  of  the  Church  Collects,  the  paper  is  thick  and  hand 
some,  and  the  type  large  and  beautiful,  each  Collect,  with  a  few 
exceptions,  being  printed  on  a  separate  page.  The  distinctive  cha 
racteristic  of  this  edition  is  the  coloured  floral  design  which  ac 
companies  each  Collect,  and  which  is  generally  emblematical  of  the 
character  of  the  day  or  saint  to  which  it  is  assigned ;  the  flcnvers 
which  have  been  selected  are  such  as  are  likely  to  be  in  bloom  on  the 
day  to  which  the  Collect  belongs.  From  the  variety  of  plants 
elected  and  the  faithfulness  of  the  illustrations  to  nature,  the 
volume  should  form  an  instructive  and  interesting  companion  to 
all  devout  Christians,  who  are  likely  to  find  their  devotions  assisted 
and  guided  by  having  thus  brought  before  them  theflrwers  in  their 
seasons,  God's  beautiful  and  never-failing  gifts  to  men.  The 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Preface  explains  the  allusions  and  the  table  of  contents  gives  both 
the  popular  and  scientific  name  of  each  plant.  There  are  at  least 
one  hundred  separate  plants  figured.  "Carefully,  indeed  livingly 
drawn  and  daintily  coloured,"  says  the  Pall  Mall  Gazette.  The 
Guardian  thinks  it  "a  successful  attempt  to  associate  in  a  natural 
and  unforced  manner  the  flowers  of  our  fields  and  gardens  -with 
the  course  of  the  Christian  year." 


Cotton. — Works    by    the    late    GEORGE    EDWARD    LYNCH 

COTTON,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Calcutta  : — 

SERMONS  PREACHED  TO  ENGLISH  CONGREGA 
TIONS  IN  INDIA.  Crown  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

These  Sermons  are  selected  from  those  •which  were  preached  between 
the  years  1863  and  1 866  to  English  congregations  under  the  varied 
circumstances  of  place  and,  season  which  an  Indian  Bishop  en 
counters.  ''''The  sermons  are  models  of -what  sermons  should  be, 
not  only  on  account  of  their  practical  teachings,  but  also  with 
regard  to  the  singular  felicity  with  which  they  are  adapted  to  times, 
places,  and  circumstances." — Spectator. 

EXPOSITORY  SERMONS  ON  THE  EPISTLES  FOR 
THE  SUNDAYS  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.  Two 
Vols.  Crown  8vo.  15^. 

These  two  volumes  contain  in  all  fifty-seven  Sermons.  They  were 
all  preached  at  various  stations  throughout  India,  and  from  the 
nature  of  the  circumstances  which  called  them  forth,  the  varied 
subjects  of  which  they  treat  are  dealt  with  in  such  a  manner  as  is 
likely  to  prove  acceptable  to  Christians  in  general.  Each  sermon, 
furnishes  some  account  of  the  context  and  general  scope  of  the  epistle 
for  the  day,  with  a  careful  paraphrase  of  it,  and  with  an  explana 
tion  of  any  important  difficulties  occurring  in  it;  and  in  con 
clusion,  draws  out  the  main  truths  or  precepts  of  the  epistle.  The 
Preface  contains  some  sensible  remarks  on  "Complaints  against 
Modern  Sermons,"  "Expository  Preaching,"  "Plan  of  the  Ser 
mon,  "  and  other  topics. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  13 

Cure.— THE    SEVEN   WORDS    OF    CHRIST    ON   THE 
CROSS.      Sermons  preached  at  St.  George's,   Bloomsbury.     By 
the  Rev.  E.  CAPEL  CURE,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo.     y.  6d. 
These  seven  Sermons  were  preached  at  St.  Georges,    Bloomsbury, 
during  the  season  of  Lent,  each  having  for  its  text  one  of  the  seven 
last  sayings  of  Christ  while  He  hung  on  the  Cross,  as  they  are  re 
corded  in   the  following  places : — (i)  Luke  xxiii.  34;      (2)  Luke 
xxiii.  43  ;    (3)  John  xix.  26  ;    (4)  Matthew  xxvii.  46  ;    (5)  John 
xix.  28;  (6)  John  xix.  30;  (7)  Luke  xxiii.  46.      Of  these  Sermons 
the  John  Bull  says,  "They  are  earnest  and  practical ;"  the  Non 
conformist,  "  The  Sermons  are  beautiful,  tender,  and  instructive ;" 
and  the  Spectator  calls  them  "A  set  of  really  good  Sermons." 

Curteis.— DISSENT  in  its  RELATION  to  the  CHURCH 
OF  ENGLAND.     Eight  Lectures  preached  before  the  University 
of  Oxford,   in  the  year  1871,  on  the  foundation  of  the  late  Rev. 
John  Bampton,  M.  A.,  Canon  of  Salisbury.     By  GEORGE  HERBERT 
CURTEIS,   M.  A.,  late  Fellow  and  Sub-Rector  of  Exeter  College  ; 
Principal  of  the  Lichfield  Theological  College,  and  Prebendary  of 
Lichfield  Cathedral ;  Rector  of  Turweston,  Bucks.     8vo.     14^. 
In  these  Bampton  Lecttires  the  Author  has  endeavottred  to  accomplish 
three  things : — /.    To  shew  those  who  are  in  despair  at  the  present 
divided  aspect  of  Christendom,  that  from  the  Apostles'  time  down 
wards  there  has  never  been  an  age  of  the  Church  without  similar 
internal  conflicts  ;  that  if  well  managed,  these  dissensions  may  be 
kept  within  bounds,  and  made  to  minister  to  the  life  and  movement 
of  the  whole  polity ;  but  if  ill-managed,  they  are  always  liable  to 
become  a  wasting  fever  instead  of  a  healthy  warmth.      II.    To 
present  materials  by  which  CJmrchmen  might  be  aided  informing 
an  intelligent  and  candid  judgment  as  to  zvhat  precisely  these  dis 
senting  denominations  really  are ;  what  it  is  they  do,  and  what 
they  claim  to  teach;  and  why  it  is  they  are  now  combining  to  bring 
the  Church  of  England,  if  possible,  to  the  ground.     III.   To  point 
out  some  few  indications  of  the  wonderful  and  every  way  deplorable 
misapprehensions  which  have  clothed  the  Church  of  England  to 
their  eyes  in  colours  absolutely  foreign  to  her  true  character  ;  have 
ascrsbed  to  her  doctrines  absolutely  contrary  to  her  meaning ;  and 
have  interpreted  her  customs  in  a  way  repdlant  to  the  Christian 
Common-sense  of  her  own  people. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Davies.—  Works  by  the  Rev.  J.  LLEWELYN  DAVIES,  M.A., 
Rector  of  Christ  Church,   St.  Marylebone,  etc.  :  — 

THE  WORK  OF  CHRIST;  or,  the  World  Reconciled  to 
God.  With  a  Preface  on  the  Atonement  Controversy.  Fcap. 
8vo.  6s. 

The  reader  will  here  find,  amongst  others,  sermons  on  "  The  forgive 
ness  of  sins,"  "  Christ  dying  for  men,"  "Sacrifice"  "  The  Ex 
ample  of  Christ"  "  The  Baptism  of  Christ"  "  The  Temptation 
of  Christ,"  "Love,  Divine  and  Human,"  "  Creation  by  the  Word," 
''Holy  Seasons,"  and  "  The  Coming  of  the  Son  of  Man."  The 
Preface  is  devoted  to  shelving  that  certain  popular  theories  of  the 
Atonement  are  opposed  to  the  moral  sense  of  mankind,  and  are  not 
imposed  on  Christians  by  statements  either  in  the  Old  or  New 
Testaments. 


SERMONS  on  the  MANIFESTATION  OF  THE  SON 
OF  GOD.  With  a  Preface  addressed  to  Laymen  on  the  present 
Position  of  the  Clergy  of  the  Church  of  England ;  and  an  Ap 
pendix  on  the  Testimony  of  Scripture  and  the  Church  as  to  the 
possibility  of  Pardon  in  the  Future  State.  Fcap.  8vo.  6.?.  6d. 

The  Preface  to  this  work  is  mainly  occupied  with  the  distinction 
between  the  essential  and  non-essential  elements  of  the  Christian 
faith,  proving  that  the  central  religious  controversy  of  the  day  relates, 
not,  as  many  suppose,  to  such  questions  as  the  Inspiration  of 
Scripture,  but  to  the  profounder  question,  whether  the  Son  of  God 
actually  has  been  manifested  in  the  person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
The  grounds  on  which  the  Christian  bases  his  faith  are  also 
examined.  In  the  Appendix  the  testimony  of  the  Bible  and  the 
Anglican  formularies  as  to  the  possibility  of  pardon  in  the  future 
state  is  investigated.  The  sermons,  of  which  the  body  of  the  work 
is  composed,  treat  of  the  great  principles  revealed  in  the  words  and 
acts  of  Jesus.  "This  volume,  both  in  its  substance,  prefix,  and 
suffix,  represents  the  noblest  type  of  theology  now  preached  in  the 
English  Church. " — Spectator. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  15 

Davies  (Rev.  J.  Llewelyn) — continued. 

BAPTISM,  CONFIRMATION,  AND  THE  LORD'S 
SUPPER,  as  Interpreted  by  their  Outward  Signs.  Three  Ex 
pository  Addresses  for  Parochial  use.  Fcap.  8vo.,  limp  cloth. 
is.  6d. 

The  method  adapted  in  these  addresses  is  to  set  forth  the  natural  and 
historical  meaning  of  the  signs  of  the  tivo  Sacraments  and  of  Con 
firmation,  and  thus  to  arrive  at  the  spiritual  realities  -which  they 
symbolize.  The  -work  touches  on  all  the  principal  elements  of  a 
Christian  man's  faith. 

THE  EPISTLES  of  ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  EPHESIANS, 
THE  COLOSSIANS,  and  PHILEMON.  With  Introductions 
and  Notes,  and  an  Essay  on  the  Traces  of  Foreign  Elements  in 
the  Theology  of  these  Epistles.  8vo.  Js.  6d. 

The  Author  believes  the  Epistles  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians  to 
be  specially  adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  present  age.  The  chief  aim, 
therefore,  of  the  translations  and  notes  in  the  present  -volume  is 
simply  to  bring  out  as  accurately  as  possible  the  apostle's  meaning. 
The  General  Introduction,  treats  mainly  of  the  time  and  circum 
stances  in  which  Paul  is  believed  to  have  written  these  Epistles. 
To  each  Epistle  there  is  a  special  critical  introduction.  The 
Essay  "  On  the  Traces  of  Foreign  elements  in  the  Doctrine  of 
these  Epistles"  discusses  the  question  how  far  the  ideas  in  the 
Epistles  -which  resemble  gnostical  systems  are  to  be  found  in  books 
and  traditions  to  which  St.  Paul  and  his  contemporaries  had 
access.  '  'A  valuable  contribution  to  the  literature  of  the  Pattline 
Epistles." — Freeman. 

MORALITY  ACCORDING  TO  THE  SACRAMENT 
OF  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  Crown  Svo.  3.5-.  6d. 

These  discourses  were  preached  before  the  University  of  Cambridge. 
They  form  a  continuous  exposition,  and  are  directed  mainly  against 
the  two-fold  danger  which  at  present  threatens  the  CJmrch — the 
tendency,  on  the  one  hand,  to  regard  Morality  as  independent  of 
Religion,  and,  on  the  other,  to  ignore  the  fact  that  Religion  finds 
its  proper  sphere  and  criterion  in  the  moral  life. 


16  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Davies  (Rev.  J.  Llewelyn) — continued. 

THE  GOSPEL  and  MODERN  LIFE.  Sermons  on  some 
of  the  Difficulties  of  the  Present  Day,  with  a  Preface  on  a  Recent 
Phase  of  Deism.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  6s. 

The  "  recent  phase  of  Deism"  examined  in  the  preface  to  this  volume 
is  that  professed  by  the  '•''Pall  Mall  Gazette" — that  in  the  sphere  of 
Religion  there  are  one  or  two  " probable  suppositions,"  but  nothing 
more.  The  writer  starts  -with  an  assumption  that  mankind  are 
under  a  Divine  discipline,  and  in  the  light  of  this  conviction  passes 
under  review  the  leading  religious  problems  which  perplex  thought 
ful  minds  of  the  present  day.  Amongst  other  subjects  examined 
are — '•''Christ  and  Modern  Knowledge"  '•''Humanity  and  the 
Trinity,"  "  Nature,"  "Religion,"  ''''Conscience,"  "Human 
Corruption,"  and  "Human  Holiness."  "There  is  probably  no 
writer  in  the  Church  fairer  or  more  thoroughly  worth  listening  to 
than  Mr.  Llewellyn  Davies,  and  this  book  will  do  more  than  sustain 
his  already  high  reputation." — Globe. 

De  Teissier. — Works  by  G.  F.  DE  TEISSIER,  B.D.:— 
VILLAGE  SERMONS,  FIRST  SERIES.     Crown  8vo.    gs. 

This  volume  contains  fifty-four  short  Sermons,  embracing  many  sub 
jects  of  practical  importance  to  all  Christians.  The  Guardian  says 
they  are  ' '  a  little  too  scholarlike  in  style  for  a  country  village, 
but  sound  and  practical. "  The  folloi.ving  are  a  few  of  the  titles 
of  the  Sermons: — "Death  of  the  Prince  Consort;"  "Particular 
Providence ;"  "  The  Suffering  Christ ;"  "Charity  the  Crown  of 
Christianity;"  "On  Self- Deceit ;"  "On  Hypocrisy;"  "Christ 
Risen;"  "The  Comfort  of  Religion;"  " Good  Neighbourhood ;" 
"  The  Return  of  Spring;"  "A  Harvest  Sermon;"  "Heart- 
Religion.  " 

VILLAGE  SERMONS,  SECOND  SERIES.  Crown  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

"This  second  volume  of  Parochial  Sermons  is  given  to  the  public 
in  the  humble  hope  that  it  may  afford  many  seasonable  thoughts 
for  such  as  are  Mourners  in  Zion."  There  are  in  all  fifty -two 
Sermons  embracing  a  wide  variety  of  subjects  connected  with 
Christian  faith  and  practice. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  17 


De  Teissier  (G.  F.) — continued. 

THE  HOUSE  OF  PRAYER;  or,  a  Practical  Exposition 
of  the  Order  for  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  in  the  Church  of 
England.  iSmo.  extra  cloth.  4^.  6d. 

"  There  is  in  these  addresses  to  the  Christian  reader,'1''  says  the  Intro 
duction,  an  attempt  to  set  forth  the  devotional  spirit  of  our  Church 
in  her  daily  forms  of  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer,  by  shelving 
how  all  the  parts  of  them  may  have  a  just  bearing  upon  Christian 
practice,  and  so  may  have  a  deep  influence  zipon  the  conduct  of  all 
our  honest  worshippers,  under  every  possible  relation  and  circum 
stance  of  life."  liFor  a  certain  devout  tenderness  of  feeling  and 
religious  earnestness  of  purpose,  this  little  book  of  Mr.  De  Teissier's 
is  really  noteworthy;  and  it  is  a  book  which  grows  upon  you 
very  much  wlten you  read  it." — Literary  Churchman. 

Ecce  Homo.      A  SURVEY  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  WORK  OF 
JESUS  CHRIST.     23rd  Thousand.     Crown  Svo.     6j. 

//  is  needless  to  say  anything  in  recommendation  of  a  book  so  ividely 
known,  and  whose  striking  merit  has  been  recognised  by  men  and 
periodicals  of  all  varieties  of  opinion.  The  following  are  a  few 
selections  from  the  very  favourable  notices  with  which  the  press  has 
received  it.  '  'A  very  original  and  remarkable  book,  full  of  striking 
thought  and  delicate  perception;  a  book  which  has  realised  with 
•wonderful  vigour  and  freshness  the  historical  magnitude  of  Christ's 
work,  and  which  here  and  there  gives  us  readings  of  the  finest  kind 
of  the  probable  motive  of  His  individual  ivords  and  actions.'" — - 
Spectator.  Ife  bates  not  a  jot  of  Christ's  pretensions.  Miracles 
he  insists  upon  as  an  integral  part  of  the  history.  With  a 
generous-minded  sceptic  this  book  may  lead  him  on  to  give  earnest  and 
persistent  attention  to  Christianity.  The  best  and  most  established 
believer  will  find  it  adding  some  fresh  buttresses  to  his  faith. 
Finally  it  traces  the  working  of  the  great  principles  of  Christian 
charity  through  all  the  ramifications  of  character  and  action.  "- 
Literary  Churchman.  If  we  have  not  misunderstood  him,  we 
have  before  us  a  writer  who  has  a  right  to  claim  deference  from 
those  who  think  deepest  and  know  west." — Guardian. 


1 8  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Farrar. — Works  by  the  Rev.  F.  W.  FARRAR,  M.A.,  F.R.S., 
Head  Master  of  Marlborougb  College,  and  Hon.  Chaplain  to  the 
Queen : — 

THE    FALL     OF    MAN,    AND    OTHER    SERMONS. 
Second  and  Cheaper  Edition.      Extra  fcap.  8vo.     4^.  dd. 

This  volume  contains  twenty  Sermons.  No  attempt  is  made  in 
these  sermons  to  develope  a  system  of  doctrine.  In  each  discourse 
some  one  aspect  of  truth  is  taken  up,  the  chief  object  being  to  point 
out  its  bearings  on  practical  religious  life.  The  Nonconformist 
says  of  these  Sermons, — "Mr.  Farrar' s  Sermons  are  almost  perfect 
specimens  of  one  type  of  Sermons,  which  we  may  concisely  call 
beautiful.  7"he  style  of  expression  is  beautiful— there  is  beauty  in 
the  thoughts,  the  illustrations,  the  allusions — they  are  expressive  of 
genuinely  beautiful  perceptions  and  feelings.'1''  The  British  Quar 
terly  says, — "Ability,  eloquence,  scholarship,  and  practical  useful 
ness,  are  in  these  Sermons  combined  in  a  very  unusual  degree. " 

THE   WITNESS   OF    HISTORY  TO   CHRIST.      Being 
the  Hulsean  Lectures  for  1870.     New  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     5^. 

In  these  Lectures,  Mr.  Farrar  endeavours  to  grapple  with  the  most 
recent  manifestations  of  infidelity,  and  endeavours  to  proi'e  the 
divinity  of  Christ  and  the  supernatural  origin  of  Christianity  on 
rational  grounds,  and  by  an  appeal  to  the  origin  and  progress  oj 
the  Christian  Religion  itself.  The  copious  notes  contain  many 
references  which  will  be  found  of  great  use  to  the  enquiring  student. 
The  following  are  the  subjects  of  the  Five  Lectures : — /.  "  The 
Antecedent  Credibility  of  the  Miraculous"  II.  "The  Adeqttacy 
of  the  Gospel  Records."  III.  "The  Victories  of  Christianity." 
IV.  "Christianity  and  the  Individual."  V.  "Christianity  and 
the  Race."  The  subjects  of  the  four  Appendices  are:— A,  "  The 
Diversity  of  Christian  Evidences."  B.  "Confucius."  C.  "Bud 
dha."  D.  " Comte."  "Here"  the  Standard  says,  "we  have 
eloquence  combined  with  abundant  information  on  all  points  of 
importance,  both  as  regards  theology  and  classical  accuracy.  This 
renders  the  book  one  of  lasting  value." 

SEEKERS  AFTER  GOD.     The  Lives  of  Seneca,  Epictetus, 

and  Marcus  Aurelius.     See  SUNDAY  LIBRARY  at  end  of  Catalogue. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  19 

Fellowship :     LETTERS     ADDRESSED     TO     MY     SISTER 
MOURNERS.     Fcap.  8vo.  cloth  gilt.     y.  6d. 

The  Seven  Letters  contained  in  this  little  volume  are  written  by  one 
•who  has  herself  been  shrouded  in  the  darkest  shadow  of  affliction 
consequent  on  being  bereaved  of  one  in  whom  her  whole  life  was 
built  up.  In  these  Letters  she  tells  her  man  sorrowful  tale  in  un 
affected,  tender,  touching  words,  which  cannot  but  appeal  to  all 
•who  are  placed  in  a  similar  comfortless  position.  She  does  not 
attempt  to  preach  or  to  aggravate  the  sorrmu  and  sense  of  loss  of 
•mourners  by  administering  advice  which  they  cannot  take,  or 
quoting  texts  and  sentiments  calculated  only  to  irritate.  She 
speaks  of  her  loss  and  consequent  gnef  in  such  a  way  as  only  a 
genuine  mourner  can  ;  of  the  well-meant  but  aggravating  comfort 
and  useless  advice  admininistered  her  by  her  many  comforters,  and 
shews  her  fellow-mourners  by  what  means,  in  course  of  soothing 
time,  she  got  consolation  and  arrived  at  calmness  and  resignation. 
1  'A  beautiful  little  volume,  written  with  genuine  feeling,  good  taste, 
and  a  right  appreciation  of  the  teaching  of  Scripture  relative  to 
sorrmu  and  suffering." — Nonconformist.  "A  very  touching,  and 
at  the  same  time  a  very  sensible  book.  It  breathes  throughout  the 
truest  Christian  spirit." — Contemporary  Review. 

Forbes.— THE  VOICE  OF  GOD  IN  THE  PSALMS. 
By  GRANVILLE  FORBES,  Rector  of  Broughton.  Cr.  8vo.  6s.  6d. 
This  volume  contains  a  connected  series  of  twenty  Sermons,  divided 
into  three  parts,  the  two  first  parts  being  Introductory.  Part  I. 
treats  of  the  "Ground  of  Faith,"  and  consists  of  four  Sermons  on 
"Faith  in  God,"  "God's  Voice  within  us"  "Faith  in  God  the 
Ground  of  Faith  in  the  Bible"  and  "God's  Voice  in  the  Bible." 
Part  II.  treats  of"  The  VoiceofGodin  the  Law  and  the  Prophets," 
on  which  there  are  four  Sermons;  and  Part  III.,  occupying  the 
greater  part  of  the  volume,  deals  with  "The  Voice  of  God  in  the 
Psalms,"  and  consists  of  twelve  Sermons.  The  last  Sermon  is 
on  "The  Voice  of  God  in  History."  Tlie  Literary  Churchman 
says  these  Sermons  are  "characterized  throughout  by  a  strong 
realisation  of  the  Providence  and  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  by  their 
•vivid  apprehension  of  the  Voice  of  God  within  man  as  ansii.'ering 
to  and  accepting  the  Revelation  of  God  to  Man." 


20  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Gifford.— THE   GLORY  OF  GOD  IN  MAN.      By  E.  H. 
GIFFORD,  D.  D.     Fcap.  8vo.,  cloth.     T,S.  6d. 

This  is  a  connected  sequence  of  four  Sermons  which  treat  of  "  77ie 
Unrighteousness  of  Man,"  "  The  Righteousness  of  God"  ''''Life  in 
Christ"  and  "  The  Love  of  the  Spirit."  Notes  are  appended  in 
which  tJte  sentiments  of  various  authors  on  the  statements  made 
are  quoted  or  referred  to.  "  The  sermons  are  short,  thoughtful,  and 
earnest  discussions  of  the  -weighty  matter  involved  in  the  subjects  of 
them." — Journal  of  Sacred  Literature. 

Golden  Treasury  Psalter.     See  p.  50. 

Hardwick. — Works  by  the  Ven.  ARCHDEACON  HARDWICK  : 
CHRIST  AND  OTHER  MASTERS.     A  Historical  Inquiry 
into  some  of  the  Chief  Parallelisms  and  Contrasts  between  Christ 
ianity  and  the  Religious  Systems  of  the  Ancient  World.     New 
Edition,   revised,  and  a  Prefatory  Memoir  by  the  Rev.  FRANCIS 
PROCTER,  M.A.     Two  vols.  crown  Svo.     i$s. 
After  several  introductory  chapters  dealing  -with  the  religious  tendencies 
of  the  present  age,  the  unity  of  the  human  race,  and  the  character 
istics  of  Religion  under  the  Old  Testament,  the  Author  proceeds  to 
consider  the  Religions  of  India,  China,  America,  Oceanica,  Egypt, 
and  Medo-Persia.      The  history  and  characteristics  of  these  Religions 
are  examined,  and  an  effort  is  made  to  bring  out  the  points  of 
difference  and  affinity  beirween  them  and  Christianity.      The  object 
is  to  establish  the  perfect  adaptation  of  the  latter  faith  to  human 
nature  in  all  its  phases  and  at  all  times.      "  The  plan  of  the  work 
is  boldly  and  almost  nobly  conceived.  .  .     We  commend  tlie  luark  to 
the  perusal  of  all  those  who  take  interest  in  the  study  of  ancient 
mythology,  without  losing  their  reverence  for  the  supreme  authority 
of  the  oracles  of  the  living  God." — Christian  Observer. 

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.  Middle 
Age.  From  Gregory  the  Great  to  the  Excommunication  of  Luther, 
Edited  by  WILLIAM  STUBBS,  M.A.,  Regius  Professor  of  Modern 
History  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  With  Four  Maps  constructed 
for  this  work  by  A.  KEITH  JOHNSTON.  Third  Edition.  Crown 
Svo.  IO.T.  6d. 
Although  the  ground-plan  of  this  treatise  coincides  in  many  points 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Hardwick  (Archd.) — continued. 

with  that  of  the  colossal  work  of  Schrockh,  yet  in  arranging  the 
materials  a  very  different  course  has  frequently  been  pursued. 
With  regard  to  his  opinions  the  late  author  avowed  distinctly  that 
he  construed  history  with  the  specific  prepossessions  of  an  English 
man  and  a  member  of  the  English  Church.  The  reader  is  con 
stantly  referred  to  the  authorities,  both  original  and  critical,  on 
which  the  statements  are  founded.  For  this  edition  Professor 
Stubbs  has  carefully  revised  both  text  and  notes,  making  such  cor 
rections  of  facts,  dates,  and  the  like  as  the  results  of  recent  research 
warrant.  The  doctrinal,  historical,  and  generally  speculative 
vieT.vs  of  the  late  author  have  been  preserved  intact.  ilAs  a  Manual 
for  the  student  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the  Middle  Ages,  we  know 
no  English  work  which  can  be  compared  to  Kir.  HardiaicKs  book. " 
— Guardian. 

A  HISTORY  of  the  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  DURING 
THE  REFORMATION.  New  Edition,  revised  by  Professor 
STUBBS.  [In  the  Press. 

This  volume  is  intended  as  a  sequel  and  companion  to  the  "History 
of  the  Christian  Church  during  the  Middle  Age."  The  author's 
earnest  wish  has  been  to  give  the  reader  a  trustworthy  version  of 
those  stirring  incidents  which  mark  the  Reformation  period,  with 
out  relinquishing  his  former  claim  to  characterise  peculiar  systems, 
persons,  and  events  according  to  the  shades  and  colours  they  as 
sume,  when  contemplated  from  an  English  point  of  view,  and  by  a 
member  of  the  Church  of  England. 

Hervey.— THE  GENEALOGIES  OF  OUR  LORD  AND 

SAVIOUR  JESUS   CHRIST,   as  contained  in  the  Gospels  of 

St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke,  reconciled  with  each  other,  and  shown 

to  be  in  harmony  with  the  true  Chronology  of  the  Times.     By  Lord 

ARTHUR  HERVEY,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells.     8vo.     los.  6d. 

The  difficulties  and  importance  of  the  subject  are  first  stated,  the  three 

main  points  of  inquiry  being  clearly  brought  out.      The  Author 

then  proceeds  to  shew  that  the  genealogies  of  St.  Matthew's  and 

St.  Luke's  Gospels  are  both  genealogies  oj  Joseph,  and  examines 

the  principle  on  which  they  are  framed.      In  the  following  chapters 

the  remaining  aspects  of  the  subject  are  exhaustively  investigated. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Hymni  Ecclesiae. — Fcap.  8vo.    7.5-.  6d. 

A  selection  of  Latin  Hymns  of  the  Mediaeval  Church,  containing 
selections  from  the  Paris  Breviary,  and  the  Breviaries  of  Rome, 
Salisbury,  and  York.  The  selection  is  confined  to  such  holy  days 
and  seasons  as  are  recognised  by  the  Church  of  England,  and  to 
special  er'ents  or  things  recorded  in  Scripture.  This  collection  -was 
edited  by  Dr.  Newman  while  he  lived  at  Oxford. 

Kempis,  Thos.  A.  —  DE  IMITATIONS  CHRISTI. 
LIBRI  IV.  Borders  in  the  Ancient  Style,  after  Holbein,  Durer, 
and  other  Old  Masters,  containing  Dances  of  Death,  Acts  of 
Mercy,  Emblems,  and  a  variety  of  curious  ornamentations.  In 
white  cloth,  extra  gilt.  "js.  6d. 

The  original  Latin  text  has  been  here  faithfully  reprodttced.  The 
Spectator  says  of  this  edition,  it  "  has  many  solid  merits,  and  is 
perfect  in  its  way.'"  While  the  Athenaeum  says,  "  The  whole  work 
is  admirable;  some  of  the  figure  compositions  have  extraordinary 
merit." 

Kingsley. — Works  by  the  Rev.  CHARLES  KINGSLEY,  M.A., 
Rector  of  Eversley,  and  Canon  of  Chester.  (For  other  Works 
by  the  same  author,  see  HISTORICAL  and  BELLES  LETTRES 
CATALOGUES). 

The  high  merits  of  Mr.  Kingsley's  Sermons  are  acknowledged. 
Whether  preached  to  the  rustic  audience  of  a  village  Church  or  to 
the  princely  congregation  of  the  Chapel  Royal,  these  Sermons  are 
invariably  characterized  by  intense  earnestness  and  magnanimity, 
combined  with  genuine  charity  and  winning  tenderness ;  the  style 
is  always  clear,  simple,  and  tmaffectedly  natural,  abounding  in 
beautiful  illustration,  the  fruit  of  a  rich  fancy  and  a  cultivated 
taste.  They  are  emphatically  practical. 

THE   WATER    OF    LIFE,   AND    OTHER  SERMONS. 
Second  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     35.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  twenty-one  Sermons  preached  at  various  places 
—  Westminster  Abbey,  Chapel  Royal,  before  the  Queen  at  Windsor, 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  23 

Kingsley  (Rev.  C.) — continued. 

etc.  The  following  are  a  few  of  the  titles: — '•''The  Water  of  Life;''1 
"  The  Wages  of  Sin  ;"  "  The  Battle  of  Life;"  "Ruth;"  "Friend 
ship,  or  David  and  Jonathan;"  "Progress;"  "Faith;"  "The 
Meteor  Shower"  (1866);  "Cholera"  (1866);  "The  God  of 
Nature. " 

VILLAGE  SERMONS.    Seventh  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  y.6</. 

The  following  are  a  few  of  the  titles  of  these  Sermons: — "God's 
World;"  "Religion  not  Godliness;"  " Self- Destruction ;"  "Hell 
on  Earth  ;"  ii Noa)C s  Justice ;"  "Our  Father  in  Heaven  ;"  "The 
Transfiguration;"  "The  Crucifixion;"  " The  Resurrection;" 
"Improvement ;"  "On  Books  ;"  "  The  Courage  of  the  Saviour. " 

THE    GOSPEL    OF    THE     PENTATEUCH.        Second 
Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     3.?.  6d. 

This  volume  consists  of  eighteen  Sermons  on  passages  taken  from  the 
Pentateuch.  They  are  dedicated  to  Dean  Stanley  out  of  gratitude 
for  his  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,  under  the  influence  and  in 
the  spirit  of  which  they  were  written.  ' '  With  your  book  in  my 
hand,"  Mr.  Kingsley  says  in  his  Preface,  "I  have  tried  to  write 
a  few  plain  Sermons,  telling  plain  people  what  they  will  find  in  the 
Pentateuch.  I  have  told  them  that  they  will  find  in  the  Bible,  and 
in  no  other  ancient  book,  that  living  working  God,  whom  their 
reason  and  conscience  demand ;  and  that  they  will  find  that  He  is 
none  other  than  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 

GOOD    NEWS    OF    GOD.     Fourth  Edition.      Fcap.  8vo. 
3J-.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  thirty-nine  short  Sermons,  preached  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  the  author 's  parochial  ministrations.  A  fe?v  of 
the  titles  are — "  The  Beatific  Vision;"  "  The  Life  of  God ;"  "The 
Song  of  the  Three  Children;"  "Worship;"  "De  Profundis  ;" 
"  The  Race  of  Life;"  "Heroes  and  Heroines ;"  "Music ;" 
"Christ's  Boyhood;"  "Human  Nature;"  "True  Prudence;" 
"The  Temper  of  Christ;"  "Our  Deserts;"  "The  Loftiness  of 
God." 


24  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Kingsley  (Rev.  C.) — continued. 

SERMONS    FOR    THE    TIMES.     Third  Edition.     Fcap. 
8vo.     y.  6d. 

Here  are  twenty-two  Sermons,  all  bearing  more  or  less  on  the  every 
day  life  of  the  present  day,  including  such  subjects  as  these : — 
''Fathers  and  Children;"  "A  Good  Conscience;"  "Names;" 
11  Sponsorship  ;"  "Dtity  and  Superstition  ;"  " 'England's  Strength  :" 
"  The  Lord's  Prayer ;"  "Shame;"  " Forgiveness''' ;"  The  Trite 
Gentleman:"  "Public  Spirit." 


TOWN  AND  COUNTRY  SERMONS.  Second  Edition. 
Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3-r.  6d. 

Some  of  these  Sermons  were  preached  before  the  Queen,  and  some  in 
the  performance  of  the  writer's  ordinary  parochial  ditty.  There  are 
thirty -nine  in  all,  under  such  titles  as  the  following : — '  'Hcnu  to  keep 
Pas  si  on- Week;"  ''A  Soldier's  Training;"  "Turning-points;" 
"Work;"  "  The  Rock  of 'Ages ;"  "  The  Loftiness  of  Humility  ;" 
"  The  Central  Sun ;"  "  Ev  TOUTW  NiKct  ;"  "  The  Eternal  Man 
hood ';"  "Hypocrisy;"  "The  Wrath  of  Love."  Of  these  Sermons 
the  Nonconformist  says,  "  They  are  warm  with  the  fervour  of  the 
preacher's  own  heart,  and  strong  front  the  force  of  his  cnun  con 
victions.  There  is  nowhere  an  attempt  at  display,  and  the  clear 
ness  and  simplicity  of  the  style  make  them  suitable  for  the  youngest 
or  most  unintelligent  of  his  hearers." 

SERMONS  on  NATIONAL  SUBJECTS.  Second  Edition. 
Fcap.  8vo.  3.5-.  6d. 

THE  KING  OF  THE  EARTH,  and  other  Sermons. 
a  Second  Series  of  Sermons  on  National  Subjects.  Second 
Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  3-r.  6d. 

The  following  extract  from  the  Preface  to  the  2nd  Series  will  explain 
the  preacher 's  aim  in  these  Sermons: — "  /  have  tried to  pro 
claim  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Scriptures,  both  in  their 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  25 

Kingsley  (Rev.  C.) — continued. 

strictest  letter  and  in  their  general  method,  from  Genesis  to  Rez'e- 
lation,  seem  to  me  to  proclaim  Him ;  not  merely  as  the  Savioitr  of 
a  few  elect  souls,  but  as  the  light  and  life  of  every  hitman  being 
who  enters  into  the  world;  as  the  source  of  all  reason,  strength, 
and  virtue  in  heathen  or  in  Christian  ;  as  the  King  and  Ruler  of 
the  whole  universe,  and  of  every  nation,  family,  and  man  o>n 
earth ;  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  whole  earth  and  the  whole  human 

race His  death,    as  a  full,  perfect,   and  sufficient  sacrifice, 

oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  ivhole  world,  by  which 
God  is  reconciled  to  the  whole  Jnunan  race. 


DISCIPLINE,  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.  Fcp.  8vo.  is.6d. 

Herein  are  twenty-four  Sermons  pi-cached  on  various  occasions,  some 
of  them  of  a  public  nature — at  the  Volunteer  Camp,  Wimbledon, 
before  the  Prince  of  Wales  at  Sandringham,  at  Wellington  College, 
etc.  A  few  of  the  titles  are — "Discipline"  (to  Volunteers); 
'•''Prayer  and  Science;"  "False  Ciinlization ;"  "The  End  of 
Religion;"  "  The  Humanity  of  God;"  "God's  World ';"  "Self- 
Help;"  "  Toleration;"  "  The  Likeness  of  God."  77iis  volume 
the  Nonconformist  calls, — "  Eminently  practical  and  appropriate 

Earnest  stirring  words."     The  Guardian  says, — "There  is 

much  thought,  tenderness,  and  devoutness  of  spirit  in  these  Sermons, 
and  some  of  them  are  models  both  in  matter  and  expression." 


DAVID.      FOUR    SERMONS  :     David's   Weakness — David's 
Strength — David's  Anger — David's  Deserts.     Fcap.  8vo.     2s.  6d. 

These  four  Sermons  were  preached  before  the  University  of  Cam 
bridge,  and  are  specially  addressed  to  young  men.  Their  titles  are, 
— "David's  Weakness;"  "David's  Strength  ;"  "David's  Anger ;" 
"David's  Deserts."  The  Freeman  says — "Every  paragraph 
glows  with  manly  energy,  delivers  straightforward  practical  truths, 
in  a  vigorous,  sometimes  even  passionate  way,  and  exhibits  an 
.intense  sympathy  with  everything  honest,  pure,  and  noble. " 


26  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Lightfoot. — Works  by  J.  B.  LiGHTFOOT,  D.D.,  Hulsean 
Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  University  of  Cambridge ;  Canon  of 
St.  Paul's. 

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  A  Re 
vised  Text,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Dissertations.  Third 
Edition,  revised.  8vo.  cloth.  I2s. 

The  subjects  treated  in  the  Introduction  are — the  Galatian  people,  the 
Churches  of  Galatia,  the  date  and  genuineness  of  the  Epistle,  and 
its  character  and  contents.  The  dissertations  discuss  the  question 
whether  the  Galatians  -were  Celts  or  Tartars,  and  the  -whole  subject 
of  "  The  Brethren  of  the  Lord,"  and  "St.  Paul  and  the  Three." 
While  the  Author's  object  has  been  to  make  this  commentary 
generally  complete,  he  has  paid  special  attention  to  everything  re 
lating  to  St.  PauFs  personal  history  and  hh  intercourse  with  the 
Apostles  and  Church  of  the  Circumcision,  as  it  is  this  feature  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  which  has  given  it  an  overwhelming 
interest  in  recent  theological  controversy.  The  Spectator  says 
"there  is  no  commentator  at  once  of  sounder  judgment  and  more 
liberal  than  Dr.  Lightfoot.'' 


ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  A 
Revised  Text,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Dissertations.  Second 
Edition.  8vo.  1 2s. 

The  plan  of  this  Z'olume  is  the  same  as  that  of  "  The  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians. "  The  Introduction  deals  with  the  follmuing  subjects  : 
— "  Sf.  Paul  in  Rome,"  "  Order  of  the  Epistles  of  the  Captivity," 
"  The  Church  ofPhilippi,"  "Character  and  Contents  of  the  Epistle," 
and  its  genuineness.  The  Dissertations  are  on  "  The  Christian 
Ministry"  "St.  Paul  and  Seneca,"  and  "  The  Letters  of  Paul 
and  Seneca. "  f  lNo  commentary  in  the  English  language  can  be 
compared  -with  it  in  regard  to  fulness  of  information,  exact 
scholarship,  and  laboured  attempts  to  settle  everything  about  the 
epistle  on  a  solid  foundation." — Athenaeum.  "Its  author  blends 
large  and  varied  learning  with  a  style  as  bright  and  easy,  as  telling 
and  artistic,  as  that  of  our  most  accomplished  essayists. " — Nan* 
conformist. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  27 

Lightfoot  (Dr.  J.  B.) — continued. 

ST.  CLEMENT  OF  ROME,  THE  TWO  EPISTLES  TO 
THE  CORINTHIANS.  A  Revised  Text,  with  Introduction 
and  Notes.  8vo.  &s.  6</. 

This  volume  is  the  first  part  of  a  complete  edition  of  the  Apostolic 
Fat  furs.  The  Introductions  deal  with  the  questions  of  the  genuine 
ness  and  authenticity  of  the  Epistles,  discuss  their  date  and  character, 
and  analyse  their  contents.  An  account  is  also  given  of  all  the 
different  epistles  which  bear  the  name  of  Clement  of  Rome.  "By 
far  the  most  copiously  annotated  edition  of  St.  Clement  which  -we 
yet  possess,  and  the  most  convenient  in  every  ^i'ay  for  the  English 
reader. " — Guardian. 

ON  A  FRESH  REVISION  OF  THE  ENGLISH  NEW 
TESTAMENT.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  6.?. 
The  Author  begins  with  a  few  words  on  S.  Jerome's  revision  of  the 
Latin  Bible,  and  then  goes  on  to  s/iezv  in  detail  the  necessity  for 
afresh  revision  of  the  authorized  version  on  the  following  grounds : 
— I.  False  Readings.  2.  Artificial  distinctions  created.  3.  Real 
distinctions  obliterated.  4.  Faults  of  Grammar.  5-  Faults  of 
Lexicography.  6.  Treatment  of  Proper  Names,  official  titles,  etc. 
7.  Archaisms,  defects  in  the  English,  errors  of  the  pi-ess,  etc. 
The  volume  is  completed  by  ( I )  an  elaborate  appendix  on  the  words 
tirtovffios  and  irfpiovmos,  (2)  a  table  of  passages  of  Scripture 
quoted,  and  (3)  a  general  index.  "  The  book  is  marked  by  careful 
scholarship,  familiarity  with  the  subject,  sobriety,  and  circumspec 
tion." — -Athenaeum.  "  It  abounds  with  evidence  of  the  most  ex 
tensive  learning,  and  of  a  masterly  familiarity  with  the  best  results 
of  modern  Greek  scholarship." — Standard. 


Luckock.— THE    TABLES    OF    STONE.      A    Course   of 
Sermons  preached  in  All  Saints'  Church,  Cambridge,  by  H.  M. 
LUCKOCK,  M.A.,  Vicar.     Fcap.  8vo.     3-f.  6d. 
Sermons  illustrative  of  the  great  principles  of  morality,  mostly  based 
on  texts  from  the  New  Testament  Scriptures. 


28  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Maclaren — SERMONS  PREACHED  at  MANCHESTER. 
By  ALEXANDER  MACLAREN.     Third  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.  45.  6d. 

These  Sermons,  twenty-four  in  number,  are  well  known  for  the 
freshness  and  vigour  of  their  thought,  and  the  wealth  of  imagination 
they  display.  They  represent  no  special  school,  but  deal  with  the 
broad  principles  of  Christian  truth,  especially  in  their  bearing  on 
practical,  every  day  life.  A  few  of  the  titles  are: — "  The  Stone  of 
Stumbling"  " Love  and  Forgiveness,"  "The  Living  Dead," 
" Memory  in  Another  World,"  "Faith  in  Christ"  "Love  and 
Fear,"  "  The  Choice  of  Wisdom"  "  The  Food  of  the  World." 

A  SECOND  SERIES  OF  SERMONS.      Second    Edition. 

Fcap.  8vo.     4-r.  6d. 

This  2nd  Series,  consisting  of  nineteen  Sermons,  are  marked  by  the 
same  characteristics  as  the  1st.  77te  Spectator  characterises  them 
as  " 'vigorous  in  style,  full  of  thought,  rich  in  illustration,  and  in 
an  tinusual  degree  interesting." 

Maclear. — Works  by  G.  F.  MACLEAR,  D.D.,  Head  Master  of 

King's  College  School,  and  Preacher  at  the  Temple  Church  : — 
A    CLASS-BOOK    OF    OLD    TESTAMENT    HISTORY. 
With  P'our  Maps.     Sixth  Edition.      i8mo.     4^.  6d. 

"The  present  volume,"  says  the  Preface,  "forms  a  Class-Book  of  Old 
Testament  History  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  those  of  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah.  In  its  preparation  the  most  recent  authorities  have 
been  consulted,  and  wherever  it  has  appeared  ttseful,  Notes  have 
been  subjoined  illustrative  of  the  Text,  and,  for  the  sake  of  more 
advanced  students,  references  added  to  larger  works.  The  Index 
has  been  so  arranged  as  to  form  a  concise  Dictionary  of  the  Persons 
and  Places  mentioned  in  the  course  of  the  Narrative."  The  Maps, 
prepared  by  Stanford,  materially  add  to  the  value  and  usefulness 
of  the  book:  they  are — I.  A  Map  illustrating  the  Dispersion  of 
AToah's  Descendants.  2.  A  Map  of  Canaan,  Egypt,  and  Sinai, 
to  illustrate  the  Patriarchal  History  and  the  Exodus ;  with  Mt. 
Sinai  enlarged.  3.  77/6'  Holy  Land  divided  among  the  Twelve 
Tribes.  4.  Solomon's  Dominions,  the  Kingdoms  of  Judah  and 
Israel,  and  the  Lands  of  the  Captivities.  In  the  Appendix  are 


THEOLOGICAL   BOOKS.  29 


Maclear  (G.  F.) — continued. 

given  a  -variety  of  Tables  of  great  interest  and  utility.  The 
British  Quarterly  Review  calls  it  "A  careful  and  elaborate, 
though  brief  compendium  of  all  that  modern  research  has  done  for 
the  illustration  of  the  Old  Testament,  We  know  of  no  work  which 
contains  so  much  important  information  in  so  small  a  compass." 

A  CLASS-BOOK  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT  HISTORY. 
Including  the  Connexion  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  Fourth 
Edition.  i8mo.  5-r.  6</. 

The  present  volume  forms  a  sequel  to  the  Author's  Class-Book  of 
Old  Testament  History,  and  continues  the  narrative  to  the  close  of 
St.  Paul's  second  imprisonment  at  Rome.  It  is  marked  by  the 
same  characteristics  as  the  former  work,  and  it  is  hoped  that  it  may 
prove  at  once  a  useful  Class-Book  and  a  convenient  companion  to 
the  study  of  the  Greek  Testament.  The  -work  is  divided  into  three 
Books — /.  Tlie  Connection  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 

II.  The  Gospel  Histoiy.     III.    The  Apostolic  History.     In  the 
Appendix  are  given  Chronological  Tables,  I.    Of  the  Jeivs  under 
tJie   Empire.       II.     The   Era   of  the   Ptolemies  and  Seleucida. 

III.  Rise  of  t fie  Herodian  Family.       IV.     The  Gospel  History. 
V.     The  Apostolic  History.       Appendix    VI.    is   a    Table  of  the 
Herodian  Family.      TJiere  are  five  Maps,  viz. — I.   A  Map  of  the 
Holy  Land  to  illustrate  the  Asmonean  Period.      2.    A   Map  of 
the  Holy  Land  to  illustrate  the  New  Testament.       3.    The  Shores 
of  t/ie  Sea  of  Galilee.      4.   Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  our  Lord. 
5.    A    Map  to   illustrate  the  Apostolic   History.       The  Clerical 
Journal  says,    ' '  It  is  not  often  that  such  an  amount  of  useful 
and  interesting  matter  on  biblical  subjects,  is  found  in  so  convenient 
and  small  a  compass,  as  in  this  well-arranged  volume. " 

A  CLASS-BOOK  OF  THE  CATECHISM  OF  THE 
CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  Second  Edition.  iSmo.  cloth. 
2s.  6d. 

The  present  work  is  intended  as  a  sequel  to  the  two  preceding  books. 
' '  Like  them,  it  is  furnished  with  notes  and  references  to  larger 
•works,  and  it  is  hoped  that  it  may  be  found,  especially  in  the  higher 


30  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Maclear  (G.  F.) — continued. 

forms  of  our  Public  Schools,  to  supply  a  suitable  manual  of  in 
struction  in  the  chief  doctrines  of  our  Church,  and  a  usefifi  help 
in  the  preparation  of  Candidates  for  Confirmation."  The  Author 
goes  over  the  Church  Catechism  clause  by  clause,  and  gives  all 
needful  explanation  and  illustration,  doctrinal,  practical,  and 
historical ;  the  Notes  make  the  work  especially  valuable  to  the  student 
and  clergyman.  After  a  brief  Introduction  on  the  Derivation, 
Division,  and  History  of  the  Catechism,  the  book  is  divided  into 
five  Parts : — /.  The  Christian  Covenant.  II.  The  Creed. 
III.  The  Ten  Commandments.  IV.  The  Lord's  Prayer. 
V.  The  Sacraments.  Appended  are  a  General  Index,  an  Index 
of  Greek  and  Latin  Words,  and  an  Index  of  the  Words  ex 
plained  throughout  the  book.  The  Literary  Churchman  says, 
"It  is  indeed  the  work  of  a  scholar  and  divine,  and  as  such,  though 
extremely  simple,  it  is  also  extremely  instructive.  There  are  fe?v 
clergy  who  would  not  find  it  useful  in  preparing  candidates  for 
Confirmation  •  and  there  are  not  a  few  who  would  find  it  useful  to 
themselves  as  well." 

A  FIRST  CLASS-BOOK  OF  THE  CATECHISM  OF 
THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND,  with  Scripture  Proofs  for 
Junior  Classes  and  Schools.  Second  Edition.  i8mo.  6d. 

77iis  is  an  epitome  of  the  larger  Class-book,  meant  for  junior  students 
and  elementary  classes.  The  book  has  been  carefully  condensed,  so 
as  to  contain  clearly  and  fully,  the  most  important  part  of  the 
contents  of  the  larger  book.  Like  it  the  present  Manual  is  sub 
divided  into  five  parts,  each  part  into  a  number  of  short  chapters, 
one  or  more  of  which  might  form  a  suitable  lesson,  and  each 
chapter  is  subdivided  in  a  number  of  sections,  each  with  a  pro 
minent  title  indicative  of  its  contents.  It  will  be  found  a  valuable 
Manual  to  all  who  are  concerned  with  the  religious  training  of 
children. 

A  SHILLING-BOOK  of  OLD  TESTAMENT  HISTORY. 
i8mo.  cloth  limp.  is. 

This  Manual  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  larger  Old  Testament 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  31 

Maclear  (G.  F.) — continued. 

History,  that  the  book  just  mentioned  docs  to  the  larger  -work  on  the 
Catechism.  As  in  it,  the  small-type  notes  have  been  omitted,  and 

a  dear  and  full  epitome  given  of  the  larger  work.  It  consists  of 
Ten  Books,  divided  into  short  chapters,  and  subdivided  into  sections, 

each  section  treating  of  a  single  episode  in  the  history,  the  title  of 

which  is  given  in  bold  type.      The  Map  is  clearly  printed,  and  not 

overcrowded  with  names. 


A  SHILLING-BOOK  of  NEW  TESTAMENT  HISTORY. 
181110.  cloth  limp.     u. 

This  bears  the  same  relation  to  the  larger  Neiv  Testament  Historv 
that  the  work  just  mentioned  has  to  the  large  Old  Testament 
History,  and  is  marked  by  similar  characteristics. 


THE  ORDER  OF  CONFIRMATION.  A  Sequel  to  the 
Class-Book  of  the  Church  Catechism,  with  Prayers  and  Collects. 
1 8mo.  3</. 

The  Order  of  Confirmation  is  given  in  full,  after  which  the  Manual 
is  divided  into  seven  brief  chapters : — /.  "  Tlie  Meaning  of  Con 
firmation."  II.  "  The  Origin  of  Confirmation."  III.,  IV., 
V.  "The  Order  of  Confirmation,"  treating,  (i)  of  "  The  In 
terrogation  and  Answer"  (2)  "  T/ie  Laying  on  of  Hands" 
(3)  "  The  Prayers  and  Benediction,"  VI.  "  77ie  Holy  Com 
munion."  Chapter  VII.  consists  of  a  few  suitable  Prayers  and 
Collects  intended  to  be  used  by  the  candidate  during  the  days  of 
preparation  for  Confirmation.  Valuable  references  and  notes  are 
added.  The  Manual  will  be  found  valuable  both  by  candidates 
and  by  clergymen.  The  Literary  Churchman  calls  it  "An  ad 
mirable  Manual.  Thoroughly  sound,  clear,  and  complete  in  its 
teaching,  with  some  good,  clear,  personal  advice  as  to  Holy  Com 
munion,  and  a  good  selection  of  prayers  and  collects  for  those 
preparing  for  Confirmation. " 


32  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Macmillan. — Works  by  the  Rev.  HUGH  MACMILLAN.  (For 
other  Works  by  the  same  Author,  see  CATALOGUE  OF  TRAVELS 
and  SCIENTIFIC  CATALOGUE). 

THE     TRUE    VINE;     or,    the   Analogies    of  our   Lord's 
Allegory.     Second  Edition.     Globe  8vo.     6.r. 

This  work  is  not  merely  an  exposition  of  the  fifteenth  chapter  of 
St.  Johrfs  Gospel,  but  also  a  general  parable  of  spiritual  truth 
from  the  world  of  plants.  It  describes  a  few  of  the  points  in 
•which  the  -varied  realm  of  vegetable  life  comes  into  contact  with  the 
higher  spiritual  realm,  and  shews  how  rich  a  field  of  promise  lies 
before  the  analogical  mind  in  this  direction.  The  majority  of  the 
analogies  are  derived  from  the  grape-fine;  but  the  whole  range 
of  the  -vegetable  kingdom  is  laid  under  contribution  for  appropriate 
illustration.  Indeed,  Mr.  Macmillan  has  brought  into  his  service 
many  of  the  results  of  recent  scientific  and  historic  research  and 
biblical  criticism ;  as  lodl  as  the  discoveries  of  travellers  ancient 
and  modern.  The  work  will  thus  be  found  not  only  admirably 
suited  for  devotional  reading,  but  also  full  of  valuable  and  -varied 
instruction.  T)ie  Nonconformist  says,  "  It  abounds  in  exquisite 
bits  of  description,  and  in  striking  facts  clearly  stated."  The 
British  Quarterly  says,  "  Readers  and  preachers  who  are  un 
scientific  will  find  many  of  his  illustrations  as  valuable  as  they 
are  beautiful. " 

BIBLE     TEACHINGS     IN     NATURE.      Sixth    Edition. 

Globe  8vo.     6.?. 

In  this  vohime  the  author  has  endeavoured  to  shew  that  the  teaching 
of  nature  and  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  are  directed  to  the  same 
great  end;  that  the  Bible  contains  the  spiritual  t>  nths  which  are 
necessary  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,  and  the  objects  and  scenes 
of  nature  are  the  pictures  by  which  these  truths  are  illustrated. 
J^he  first  eight  chapters  describe,  as  it  were,  the  exterior  appearance 
of  natures  temple — the  gorgeous,  many-coloured  curtain  hanging 
before  the  shrine.  The  last  seven  chapters  bring  us  into  the 
interior — the  holy  place,  where  is  seen  the  very  core  of  symbolical 
ordinances.  "He  has  made  the  world  more  beautiful  to  us,  and 
unsealed  our  ears  to  voices  of  praise  and  messages  of  love  that  might 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  33 

Macmillan  (H.) — continued. 

otherwise  have  been  unheard" — British  Quarterly  Review.  "Mr. 
Macmillan  has  produced  a  book  which  may  be  fitly  described  as  one 
of  the  happiest  efforts  for  enlisting  physical  science  in  the  direct 
service  of  religion. " — Guardian. 

THE  MINISTRY  OF  NATURE.     Second  Edition.    Globe 
8vo.     6s. 

Mr.  Macmillan  believes  that  nature  has  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a 
material  side, — that  she  exists  not  only  for  the  natural  uses  of  the 
body,  but  also  for  the  sustenance  of  the  life  of  the  soul.  This  higher 
ministry,  the  author  believes,  explains  all  the  beauty  and  wonder  of 
the  world,  which  would  often  be  superfluotts  or  extravagant.  In 
this  volume  of  fourteen  chapters  the  Author  attempts  to  interpret 
Nature  on  her  religious  side  in  accordance  with  the  most  recent 
discweries  of  physical  science,  and  to  shew  how  much  greater 
significance  is  imparted  to  many  passages  of  Scripture  and  many 
doctrines  of  Christianity  when  looked  at  in  the  light  of  these  dis- 
ccveries.  Instead  of  regarding  Physical  Science  as  antagonistic  to 
Christianity,  the  Author  believes  and  seeks  to  shew  that  every  new 
discovery  tends  more  strongly  to  prove  that  Nature  and  the  Bible 
have  One  Author.  "  Whether  the  reader  agree  or  not  with  his 
conclusions,  he  will  acknowledge  he  is  in  the  presence  of  an  original 
and  thoughtful  writer" — Pall  Mall  Gazette.  "  There  is  no  class 
of  educated  men  and  women  that  will  not  profit  by  these  essays."— 
Standard. 

M'Cosh.— For  Works  by  JAMES  McCosn,  LL.D.,  President 
of  Princeton  College,  New  Jersey,  U.S.,  see  PHILOSOPHICAL 
CATALOGUE. 

Maurice. — Works  by  the  late  Rev.  F.  DENISON  MAURICE, 

M.A.,   Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Cam 
bridge. 

Professor  Maurice 's  Works  are  recognized  as  having  made  a  deep 
impression  on  modern  theology.  With  whatever  subject  he  dealt 
he  tried  to  look  at  it  in  its  bearing  on  living  men  and  their  every 
day  surroundings,  and  faced  unshrinkingly  the  difficulties  which 

3 


34  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

occur  to  ordinary  earnest  thinkers  in  a  manner  that  showed  he  had 
intense  sympathy  -with  all  that  concerns  humanity.  By  all  who 
ivish  to  understand  the  various  drifts  of  thought  during  the  present 
century,  Air.  Maurices  works  must  be  studied.  An  intimate 
friend  of  Mr.  Maurice's,  one  who  has  carefully  studied  all  his 
works,  and  had  besides  many  opportunities  of  knowing  the  Author' s 
opinions,  in  speaking  of  his  so-called  "obscurity,"  ascribes  it  to 
'•''the  never-failing  assumption  that  God  is  really  moving,  teaching 
and  acting ;  and  that  the  writer 's  business  is  not  so  much  to  state 
something  for  the  reader's  benefit,  as  to  apprehend  -what  God  is 
saying  or  doing. "  The  Spectator  says — "few  of  those  of  our  own 
generation  whose  names  will  live  in  English  history  or  literature 
have  exerted  so  profound  and  so  permanent  an  influence  as  Mr. 
Maurice. " 


THE  PATRIARCHS  AND  LAWGIVERS  OF  THE 
OLD  TESTAMENT.  Third  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown 
8vo.  $s. 

The  Nineteen  Discourses  contained  in  this  volume  were  preached  in  the 
chapel  of  Lincoln's  Inn  during  the  year  1851.  The  texts  are 
taken  from  the  books  of  Genesis,  Exodus,  Numbers,  Deuteronomy, 
Joshua,  Judges,  and  Samuel,  and  involve  some  of  the  most  in 
teresting  biblical  topics  discussed  in  recent  times.  In  his  Preface 
to  the  First  Edition,  Mr.  Maurice  endeavours  to  explain  the 
mission  and  justify  the  position  of  the  Church  of  England  against 
the  attacks  of  Dissenters  and  others  ;  in  his  Preface  to  the  Second 
Edition  he  comments  upon  some  remarks  made  by  Mr.  Mansel 
on  the  meaning  given  by  Mr.  Maurice  to  the  word  ' Eternal.'  In 
the  latter  Preface  the  writer  says,- — "My  chief  object  in  preaching 
and  writing  upon  the  Old  Testament  has  been  to  shew  that  God 
has  created  man  in  His  image ;  that  being  so  created  he  is  capable 
of  receiving  a  revelation  from  God, — of  knowing  what  God  is  ;  that 
without  such  a  revelation  he  cannot  be  truly  a  man  ;  that  without 
such  knowledge  he  cannot  become  what  he  is  always  feeling  that  he 
ought  to  become. " 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  35 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

THE  PROPHETS  AND  KINGS  OF  THE  OLD  TES 
TAMENT.  Third  Edition,  with  new  Preface.  Crown  8vo. 
loj.  6d. 

The  previous  work  brings  down  Old  Testament  history  to  the  time  of 
Samuel.  The  Sermons  contained  in  the  present  volume — twenty- 
seven  in  number,  coming  down  to  the  time  of  Ezekiel — though  they 
commence  at  that  point  are  distinct  in  their  subject  and  treatment. 
Mr.  Maurice,  in  the  spirit  which  animated  the  compilers  of  the 
Church  Lessons,  has  in  these  Sermons  regarded  the  Prophets  more 
as  preachers  of  righteousness  than  as  mere  predictors — an  aspect 
of  their  lives  w/iic/i,  he  thinks,  has  been  greatly  overlooked  in  our 
day,  and  than  •which,  there  is  none  we  have  more  need  to  con 
template.  He  has  found  that  the  Old  Testament  Prophets,  taken 
in  their  simple  natural  sense,  clear  up  many  of  the  difficulties 
which  beset  tis  in  the  daily  work  of  life  ;  make  the  past  intelligible, 
the  present  endurable,  and  the  future  real  and  hopeful.  In  the 
Preface  to  this  Third  Edition,  Mr.  Mattrice  propounds  his  views 
with  regard  to  the  connection  of  Church  and  State,  with  special 
reference  to  the  recent  disestablishment  of  the  Irish  Church,  and 
the  wish  in  certain  quarters  to  treat  the  Church  of  England  in  the 
same  way. 

THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN. 
A  Series  of  Lectures  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke.  Crown  8vo.  9.?. 

Mr.  Maurice,  in  his  Preface  to  these  Twenty-eight  Lectures,  says, 
— "/«  these  Lectures  I  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain  ivhat  is  told 
its  respecting  the  life  of  Jesus  by  one  of  those  Evangelists  who  pro 
claim  Him  to  be  the  Christ,  who  says  that  He  did  come  from  a 
Father,  that  He  did  baptize  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  He  did  rise 
from  the  dead.  I  have  chosen  the  one  who  is  most  directly  con 
nected  with  the  later  history  of  the  Church,  who  was  not  an  Apostle, 
who  professedly  wrote  for  the  use  of  a  man  already  instructed  in 
the  faith  of  the  Apostles.  I  havefollmved  the  course  of  the  writer's 
narrative,  not  changing  it  under  any  pretext.  I  have  adhered  to 
his  phraseology,  striving  to  avoid  the  substitution  of  any  other  for 
his."  This  is  necessary  on  account  of  the  conventional  notions 


36  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

which  most  people  are  apt  to  attach  to  the  words  of  the  Gospels : 
and  in  the  remainder  of  his  Preface,  Mr.  Maurice  points  out  some 
of  these  conventional  notions,  I.  In  relation  to  Miracles.  2.  On 
the  question,  Are  the  Gospels  the  announcement  of  a  religion  ? 
3.  Concerning  Eternal  Punishment.  4.  The  Authenticity  and 
Inspiration  of  the  Gospels. 

THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.  A  Series  of  Discourses. 
Third  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  6s. 
These  Discourses,  twenty-eight  in  number,  are  of  a  nature  similar 
to  those  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke,  and  will  be  found  to  render 
valuable  assistance  to  any  one  anxious  to  understand  the  Gospel  of 
the  beloved  disciple,  so  different  in  many  respects  from  those  of  the 
other  three  Evangelists.  Appended  are  eleven  notes  illustrating 
various  points  -which  occur  throughout  the  discourses,  such  as, 
"  Baur's  Theory  of  the  Gospels ;"  "On  the  objections  to  a  Revision 
of  the  Scriptures;"  "On  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body  and  the 
Judgment-day ;"  "On  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement — Scotch  and 
English  Divinity ;"  "On  Corporate  Holiness"  etc.  The  Literary 
Churchman  thus  speaks  of  this  volume: — "Thorough  honesty, 
rez'erence,  and  deep  thought  pervade  the  -work,  -which  is  every  way 
solid  and  philosophical,  as  well  as  theological,  and  abounding  with 
suggestions  which  the  patient  student  may  draw  out  more  at  length 
for  himself." 

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.  A  Series  of  Lectures 
on  Christian  Ethics.  Second  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Cr.  8vo.  6s. 
These  Lectures  on  Christian  Ethics  were  delivered  to  the  students  of 
the  Working  Men's  College,  Great  Ormond  Street,  London,  on 
a  series  of  Sunday  mornings.  There  are  twenty  Lectures  in  all, 
founded  on  various  texts  taken  from  the  Epistles  of  St.  John,  which 
abound  in  passages  bearing  directly  on  the  conduct  of  life,  the  duty 
of  men  to  God  and  to  each  other.  It  will  be  found  that  a  very 
complete  system  of  practical  morality  is  developed  in  this  volume, 
in  which  the  most  important  points  in  Ethics  are  set  forth  in  an 
unconventional  and  interesting  manner.  Mr.  Maurice  believes 
that  the  question  in  -which  we  are  most  interested,  the  question  which 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  37 


Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

most  affects  our  studies  and  our  daily  lives,  is  the  question,  whether 
there  is  a  foundation  for  human  morality,  or  whether  it  is  de 
pendent  tipon  the  opinions  and  fashions  of  different  ages  and 
countries.  This  important  question  will  be  found  amply  and  fairly 
discussed  in  this  volume,  which  the  National  Review  calls  "Mr. 
Maurice's  most  effective  and  instructive  work.  He  is  peculiarly 
fitted  by  the  constitution  of  his  mind,  to  throw  light  on  St.  John 's 
writings."  Appended  is  a  note  on  " Positivism  and  itsTeacher." 

EXPOSITORY  SERMONS  ON  THE  PRAYER-BOOK. 

The  Prayer-book  considered  especially  in  reference  to  the  Romish 
System.     Second  Edition.     Fcap.  8vo.     $s.  6d. 

"There  are  certain  popular  notions  which,"  says  the  Preface,  "as 
sume  that  the  Church  of  England  is  the  result  of  a  compromise; 
that  the  Articles  embody  the  opinions  of  one  party  to  the  bargain, 
the  Liturgy  those  of  the  other ;  that  every  time  I  put  my  hand  to 
the  former  document  I  proclaim  myself  in  the  strictest  sense  a 
Protestant,  that  every  time  I  use  the  latter  I  act  as  a  Papist ; 
that  in  fact,  I  am  neither ....  In  delivering  these  Sermons  \in 
Lincoln's  Inn  Chapel  in  1848-9],  /  endeavoured  to  tell  laymen 
•why  I  coidd  with  a  clear  heart  and  conscience  ask  them  to  take  part 
with  me  in  this  Common  Prayer.  In  publishing  them  I  would 
address  myself  with  equal  earnestness  and  affection  to  another  class, 
to  the  younger  part  of  the  clergy,  and  to  those  who  are  preparing 
for  Orders. "  After  an  Introductory  Sermon,  Mr.  Maurice  goes 
over  the  various  parts  of  the  Church  Service,  expounds  in  eighteen 
Sermons,  their  intention  and  significance,  and  shews  hcnv  ap 
propriate  they  are  as  expressions  of  the  deepest  longings  and  wants 
of  all  classes  of  men. 

LECTURES    ON   THE   APOCALYPSE,  or  Book  of  the 

Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine.     Crown  8vo.      los.  6d. 

These  Twenty-three  Lectures  on  what  is  generally  regarded  as  the  most 

mysterious  Book  in  the  Bible,  do  not  demand  that  extensive  know- 

ledge  of  ancient  or  modern  history  which  it  is  necessary  to  possess 

to  be  able  to  judge  of  most  modern  commentaries  on  Prophecy. 

Mr.  Maurice,  instead  of  trying  to  find  far-fetched  allusions  to  great 

historical  events  in  the  distant  future,  endeavours  to  discover  the 


38  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

plain,  literal,  oh'tous  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  writer,  and 
shews  that  as  a  rule  these  refer  to  events  contemporaneous  with  or 
immediately  succeeding  the  time  when  the  book  was  written.  At 
the  same  time  he  shews  the  applicability  of  the  contents  of  the 
book  to  the  circumstances  of  the  present  day  and  of  all  times. 
Here,  as  in  his  other  expositions  of  Scripture,  Mr.  Maurice  at 
tempts  to  shew  that  the  Bible  authorises  us  to  believe  that  the 
Kingdom  of  Heaven,  instead  of  being  some  dull  Utopia  in  the 
far-distant  future,  is  not  "far  off  from  any  one  of  us,"  is  indeed 
in  our  very  midst.  ''''Never,"  says  the  Nonconformist,  "has 
Mr.  Maurice  been  more  reverent,  more  careful  for  the  letter  of  the 
Scripture,  more  discerning  of  the  purpose  of  the  Spirit,  or  more 
sober  and  practical  in  his  teaching,  than  in  this  volume  on  the 
Apocalypse. " 

WHAT  IS  REVELATION?  A  Series  of  Sermons  on  the 
Epiphany ;  to  which  are  added,  Letters  to  a  Theological  Student 
on  the  Bampton  Lectures  of  Mr.  Mansel.  Crown  8vo.  los.  6d. 
Both  Sermons  and  Letters  were  called  forth  by  the  doctrine  main 
tained  by  Mr.  Mansel  in  his  Bampton  Lectures,  that  Revelation 
cannot  be  a  direct  Manifestation  of  the  Infinite  Nature  of  God. 
Mr.  Maurice  maintains  the  opposite  doctrine,  and  in  his  Sermons 
explains  why,  in  spite  of  the  high  authorities  on  the  other  side, 
he  must  still  assert  the  principle  which  he  discovers  in  the  Services 
of  the  Church  and  throughout  the  Bible.  In  the  Letters  to  a 
Student  of  Theology,  he  has  follmved  out  all  Mr.  ManseFs 
Statements  and  Arguments  step  by  step.  The  subjects  of  the  Ser 
mons  are: — /.  The  Magians.  II.  Christ  among  the  Doctors. 
III.  St.  Paul  at  Athens.  IV.  The  Miracles.  V.  Casting  out 
the  Evil  Spirit.  VI.  Christ's  Parables.  VII.  Practice  and 
Speculation.  Among  the  matters  discussed  in  the  Letters  are: — 
Sir  William  Hamilton;  Butler  ;  the  Atonement  and  Incarnation  ; 
the  Criterion  of  Truth  ;  Philosophy  of  Consciousness;  the  Scotch; 
Prayer;  Knmving  and  Being;  the  Trinity ;  Miracles ;  Kant ; 
Contents  and  Evidences  of  the  Bible.  The  Nonconformist  says, 
"  There  will  be  found  ample  materials  to  stimulate  Christian  faith 
and  earnestness,  to  quicken  and  give  tenderness  to  charity,  and  to 
vivify  conceptions  of  the  ' things  not  seen  which  are  eternal.*" 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  39 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

SEQUEL  TO  THE  INQUIRY,  "WHAT  IS  REVELA 
TION  ?"  Letters  in  Reply  to  Mr.  Mansel's  Examination  of 
"Strictures  on  the  Bampton  Lectures."  Crown  8vo.  6s. 

This,  as  the  title  indicates,  was  called  forth  by  Mi:  Manse? s  Ex 
amination  of  Mr.  Maurice's  Strictures  on  his  doctrine  of  the 
Infinite. 

THEOLOGICAL  ESSAYS.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo. 
los.  6d. 

"The  book,''''  says  Mr.  Maurice,  "expresses  thoughts  which  have 
been  working  in  my  mind  for  years ;  the  method  of  it  has  not  been 
adopted  carelessly ;  even  the  composition  has  undergone  frequent 
revision."  There  are  seventeen  Essays  in  all,  and  although  meant 
primarily  for  Unitarians,  to  quote  the  words  of  the  Clerical 
Journal,  "  /'/  leaves  untouched  scarcely  any  topic  ^vhich  is  in  agita 
tion  in  the  religious  world ;  scarcely  a  moot  point  between  our 
various  sects  ;  scarcely  a  plot  of  debateable  ground  between  Christ 
ians  and  Infidels,  between  Romanists  and  Protestants,  between 
Socinians  and  other  Christians,  between  English  Churchmen  and 
Dissenters  on  both  sides.  Scarce  is  there  a  misgiving,  a  dif 
ficulty,  an  aspiration  stirring  amongst  us  now, — now,  when  men 
seem  in  earnest  as  hardly  ever  before  about  religion,  and  ask  and 
demand  satisfaction  with  a  fearlessness  which  seems  almost  awful 
when  one  thinks  what  is  at  stake — which  is  not  recognised  and 
grappled  with  by  Mr.  Maurice." 

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRIFICE  DEDUCED  FROM 

THE  SCRIPTURES.     Crown  8vo.      "js.  6d. 

Throughout  the  Nineteen  Sermons  contained  in  this  volume,   Mr. 

Maurice  expounds  t/ie  ideas  which  he  has  formed  of  the  Doctrine 

of  Sacrifice,  as  it  is  set  forth  in  various  parts  of  the  Bible.      The 

first  five  Sermons  consider  various  sacrifices  referred  to  in  the  Old 

7^estament,  while  in  the  remainder  the  death  and  resurrection  of 

Christ  are  looked  at  from  different  points  of 'view.     He  has  "tried 

to  speak  of  Sacrifice  under  every  aspect  in  which  the  Bible  presents 

it. "      In   the  Dedicatory  Letter  (occupying  fifty  pages)  to  the 


40  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

Members  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association,  Mr.  Maurice 
animadverts  on  an  attack  made  on  his  opinions  and  character,  by 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Candlisk  of  Edinburgh,  in  an  address  to  that  Society 
in  Exeter  Hall.  "  The  habitual  tone,"  says  the  Christian  Spec 
tator,  "  is  that  of  great  seriousness  and  calm, — a  seriousness  which 
makes  an  impression  of  its  own,  and  a  serenity  -which  is  only  broken 
by  some  overpowering  feeling  forcing  itself  into  expression,  and 
making  itself  heard  in  most  meaning  and  stirring  words." 

THE  RELIGIONS  OF  THE  WORLD,  AND  THEIR 
RELATIONS  TO  CHRISTIANITY.  Fourth  Edition.  Fcap. 
8vo.  5J-. 

These  Eight  Boyle  Lectures  are  divided  into  two  parts,  of  four 
Lectures  each.  In  the  first  part  Mr.  Maurice  examines  the  great 
Religious  systems  -which  present  themselves  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  with  the  purpose  of  inqttiring  what  is  their  main  cha 
racteristic  principle.  The  second  four  Lectures  are  occupied  with 
a  discussion  of  the  questions,  "  In  what  relation  does  Christianity 
stand  to  these  different  faiths  ?  If  there  be  a  faith  which  is 
meant  for  mankind,  is  this  the  one,  or  must  we  look  for  another1?" 
In  the  Preface,  the  most  important  atithorities  on  the  various 
subjects  discussed  in  the  Lectures  are  referred  to,  so  that  the  reader 
may  pursue  the  subject  further. 

ON  THE  LORD'S  PRAYER.  Fourth  Edition.  Fcap. 
8vo.  2s.  6d. 

In  these  Nine  Sermons  the  successive  petitions  of  the  Lord's  Prayer 
are  taken  up  by  Mr.  Maurice,  their  significance  expounded,  and, 
as  was  usual  with  him,  connected  with  the  every-day  lives,  feelings, 
and  aspirations  of  the  men  of  the  present  time.  They  were  de 
livered  in  the  momentous  year  1848,  and  frequent  allusions  are 
made  and  lessons  drawn  from  the  events  of  that  year. 

ON  THE  SABBATH  DAY  ;  the  Character  of  the  Warrior, 

and  on  the  Interpretation  of  History.      Fcap.  8vo.      2s.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  Three  Sermons  on  the  Sabbath-day,   one  of 

them  being  in  reference  to  the  proposed  opening  of  the   Crystal 

Palace  on   Sunday — one  on   the   "Character  of  the   Warrior," 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  41 


Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

suggested  by  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington;  the  fifth  being 
on  ' '  The  Divine  Interpretation  of  History, "  delivered  during  the 
Great  Exhibition  of  1 85 1 .  In  this  last  Mr.  Maurice  points  out 
afeiv  difficulties  which,  judging  from  his  oiun  experience,  he  thinks 
likely  to  perplex  students  of  history,  explaining  liaiv  the  Bible  has 
anticipated  and  resolved  them. 

THE  GROUND  AND  OBJECT  OF  HOPE  FOR 
MANKIND.  Four  Sermons  preached  before  the  University  of 
Cambridge.  Crown  8vo.  3-v.  6d. 

In  these  Four  Sermons  Mr.  Maurice  views  the  subject  in  four 
aspects : — /.  The  Hope  of  the  Missionary.  II.  77ie  Hope  of  the 
Patriot.  III.  The  Hope  of  the  Churchman.  IV.  The  Hope  of 
Man.  The  Spectator  says,  " //  is  impossible  to  find  anywhere 
deeper  teaching  than  this;"  and  the  Nonconformist,  "We  thank 
him  for  the  manly,  noble,  stirring  words  in  these  Sermons — words 
fitted  to  quicken  thoughts,  to  awaken  high  aspiration,  to  stimulate 
to  lives  of  goodness." 

THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  THE  CREED,  AND  THE 

COMMANDMENTS.     A  Manual  for  Parents  and  Schoolmasters. 

To  which  is  added  the  Order  of  the  Scriptures.      iSmo.   cloth 

limp.      is. 

This  book  is  not  written  for  clergymen,  as  such,  but  for  parents  and 
teachers,  who  are  often  either  prejudiced  against  the  contents  of  the 
Catechism,  or  regard  it  peculiarly  as  the  clergyman's  book,  but, 
at  the  same  time,  have  a  general  notion  that  a  habit  of  prayer 
ought  to  be  cultivated,  that  there  are  some  things  which  ought  to 
be  believed,  and  some  things  which  ought  to  be  done.  It  will  be 
found  to  be  peculiarly  valuable  at  the  present  time,  when  the 
question  of  religious  education  is  occupying  so  much  attention.  The 
book  consists  of  four  parts : — /.  The  Lord's  Prayer.  II.  The 
Belief  (Creed).  III.  The  Commandments.  IV.  The  Scriptures. 
Each  part  is  divided  into  days,  for  each  day  a  petition  of  the 
Prayer,  a  clause  of  the  Creed,  a  Commandment,  or  a  book  or  con 
nected  group  of  books  of  the  Bible  is  taken,  and  a  few  words  of 
exhortation,  explanation,  or  reflection  given  on  the  sentiment  sug 
gested. 


42  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

THE  CLAIMS  OF  THE  BIBLE  AND  OF  SCIENCE. 
A  Correspondence  on  some  Questions  respecting  the  Pentateuch. 
Crown  8vo.  4^.  6c/. 

This  volume  consists  of  a  series  of  Fifteen  Letters,  the  first  and  last 
addressed  by  a  '  Layman  '  to  Mr.  Maurice,  the  intervening  thirteen 
written  by  Mr.  Maurice  himself.  In  the  Layman 's  first  letter  to 
Mr.  Maurice,  immediately  called  forth  by  the  appearance  of  Bishop 
Colenso's  work  on  the  Pentateuch,  the  writer  sets  forth  some  of  the 
difficulties  likely  to  be  suggested  to  an  ordinary  thinker  and  bdicvei- 
in  Christianity,  by  recent  criticisms  on  the  Bible  of  the  class  to 
which  the  works  of  Colenso  belong.  Three  questions  especially  he 
propounds,  to  which,  he  thinks,  a  layman  may  naturally  at  the 
present  time  ask  for  an  answer : — I.  Do  not  our  faith  in  Christ, 
and  our  belief  in  the  four  Gospels  as  a  real  history,  rest  on  grounds 
independent  of  the  results  of  any  critical  inquiry  into  the  authorship 
of  tlie  Pentateuch  ?  2.  May  we  not  continue  to  read  the  Pentateuch 
as  the  Word  of  God,  speaking  of  man  and  to  man,  without  putting 
a  forced  construction  on  the  plain  meaning  of  the  words,  and  with 
out  imposing  fetters  on  the  freedom  of  scientific  or  critical  investiga 
tion  in  any  matters  which  God  has  given  us  the  power  to  inquire 
into?  3.  Is  faith  in  Christ  contingent  on  the  proof  or  disproof  of 
the  existence  of  certain  natural  phe>io mena,  which  seem  not  to  accord 
with  the  language  of  the  Bible?  Mr.  Maurice,  in  his  Thirteen 
Letters,  takes  up  these  and  the  other  points  suggested  by  the  Lay 
man,  and  endeavours  to  clear  them  up  and  to  throw  light  on  the 
all-important  Biblical  controversy  generally. 

DIALOGUES  ON  FAMILY  WORSHIP.    Crown  8vo.    dr. 

"  The  parties  in  these  Dialogues,"  says  the  Preface,  "are  a  Clergy 
man  who  accepts  the  doctrines  of  the  Church,  and  a  Layman 
whose  faith  in  them  is  nearly  gone.  The  object  of  the  Dialogues 
is  not  confutation,  but  the  discovery  of  a  ground  on  which  two 
Englishmen  and  two  fathers  may  stand,  and  on  which  their 
country  arid  their  children  may  stand  when  their  places  know 
them  no  more."  Some  of  the  most  important  doctrines  of  the 
Church  are  discussed,  the  whole  series  of  dialogues  tending  to  shew 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  43 


Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

that  men  of  all  shades  of  belief  may  look  up  to  and  worship  God 
as  their  common  and  loving  Father.  The  key-words  of  the  Dia 
logues  are  as  folhmt : — /.  A  Layman's  Perplexities.  II.  A 
Mother's  Faith.  III.  Male  Calvinism.  IV.  The  Regenerate 
and  the  Unregenerate.  V.  The  Natural  and  the  Supernatural. 
VI.  The  Rez'elation  and  the  Family  of  Abraham.  VII.  The 
Father  and  the  Son.  VIII.  Repentance  and  Conversion.  IX. 
Fathers  in  God.  X.  Heathen  and  Christian  Devotion.  XI.  The 
Method  of  Prayer.  XII.  The  Soul  and  the  Spirit. 

THE  COMMANDMENTS  CONSIDERED  AS  IN 
STRUMENTS  OF  NATIONAL  REFORMATION.  Crown 
8vo.  4.5.  6J. 

This  is  a  book  of  practical  morality  and  divinity.  It  was  to  some 
extent  occasioned  by  Dr.  Norman  Macleod's  Speech  on  the  Sabbath, 
and  his  views  of  the  Commandments.  The  author  endeavours  to 
shew  that  the  Commandments  are  now,  and  ever  have  been,  the 
great  protesters  against  Presbyteral  and  Prelatical  assumptions, 
and  that  if  we  do  not  receive  them  as  Commandments  of  the  Lord 
God  spoken  to  Israel,  and  spoken  to  every  people  under  heaven 
no~ii>,  we  lose  the  greatest  witnesses  we  possess  for  national  morality 
and  civil  freedom. 

MORAL  AND  METAPHYSICAL  PHILOSOPHY.  Vol. 
I.  Ancient  Philosophy  from  the  First  to  the  Thirteenth  Centuries. 
Vol.  II.  Fourteenth  Century  and  the  French  Revolution,  with  a 
Glimpse  into  the  Nineteenth  Century.  Two  Vols.  8vo.  2§s. 

This  is  an  edition  in  two  volumes  of  Professor  Maurice's  History  of 
Philosophy  from  the  earliest  period  to  the  present  time.  It  was 
formerly  issued  in  a  number  of  separate  volumes,  and  it  is  believed 
that  all  admirers  of  the  author  and  all  students  of  philosophy  will 
welcome  this  compact  edition.  In  a  long  introduction  to  this  edition, 
in  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  Professor  Maurice  justifies  his  own 
views,  and  touches  upon  some  of  the  most  important  topics  of  the 
time. 


44  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

SOCIAL  MORALITY.  Twenty-one  Lectures  delivered  in 
the  University  of  Cambridge.  Cheaper  Edition.  [/«  the  Press. 

In  this  series  of  Lectures,  Professor  Maurice  considers,  historically  and 
critically,  Social  Morality  in  its  three  main  aspects: — /.  "  The 
Relations  which  spring  from  the  Family — Domestic  Morality." 
II.  ' '  Relations  which  subsist  among  the  various  constituents  of  a 
Nation — National  Morality."  III.  "As  it  concerns  Universal 
Humanity — Universal  Morality."  Appended  to  each  series  is  a 
chapter  on  "'Worship:"  first,  ''''Family  Worship-"  second, 
" National  Worship-"  third,  "Universal  Worship."  "Whilst 
reading  it  we  are  charmed  by  the  freedom  from  exclusiveness  and 
prejudice,  the  large  charity,  the  loftiness  of  thought,  the  eagerness 
to  recognise  and  appreciate  whatever  there  is  of  real  worth  extant 
in  the  world,  which  animates  it  from  one  end  to  the  other.  We 
gain  new  thoughts  and  new  ways  of  vieiving  things,  even  more, 
perhaps,  from  being  brought  for  a  time  under  the  influence  of  so 
noble  and  spiritual  a  mind." — Athenaeum. 

THE  CONSCIENCE:  Lectures  on  Casuistry,  delivered  in 
the  University  of  Cambridge.  Second  and  Cheaper  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.  5.?. 

In  this  series  of  nine  Lectures,  Professor  Maurice,  endeavours  to 
settle  what  is  meant  by  the  word  "  Conscience,"  and  discusses  the 
most  important  questions  immediately  connected  with  the  subject. 
Taking  "Casuistry"  in  its  old  sense  as  being  the  "study  of  cases 
of  Conscience,"  he  endeavours  to  show  in  what  way  it  may  be 
brought  to  bear  at  the  present  day  upon  the  acts  and  thoughts  of 
our  ordinary  existence.  He  shows  that  Conscience  asks  for  laws, 
not  rules  ;  for  freedom,  not  chains  ;  for  education,  not  suppres 
sion.  He  has  abstained  from  the  use  of  philosophical  terms,  and 
has  touched  on  philosophical  systems  only  when  he  fancied  "they 
were  interfering  with  the  rights  and  duties  of  wayfarers. "  The 
Saturday  Review  says:  "  We  rise  from  the  perusal  of  these  lectures 
with  a  detestation  of  all  that  is  selfish  and  mean,  and  with  a  living 
impression  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  goodness  after  all." 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  45 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

LECTURES   ON  THE    ECCLESIASTICAL   HISTORY 
OF  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND  CENTURIES.  8vo.   los.  6d. 

The  work  contains  a  series  of  graphic  sketches  and  vivid  portraits, 
bringing  forcibly  before  the  reader  the  life  of  the  early  Church  in  all 
its  main  aspects.  In  the  first  chapter  on  ' '  Thejewish  Calling"  besides 
expounding  his  idea  of  the  true  nature  of  a  "  Church"  the  author 
gives  a  brief  sketch  of  the  position  and  economy  of  the  Jnvs  ;  while 
in  the  second  he  points  out  their  relation  to  "  the  other  Nations." 
Chapter  Third  contains  a  succint  account  of  the  various  Jewish 
Sects,  while  in  Chapter  Fourth  are  briefly  set  forth  Mr.  Maurice's 
ideas  of  the  character  of  Christ  and  the  nature  of  His  mission,  and 
a  sketch  of  events  is  given  up  to  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  The  re 
maining  Chapters,  extending  from  the  Apostles'  personal  Ministry 
to  the  end  of  the  Second  Century,  contain  sketches  of  the  character 
and  work  of  all  the  prominent  men  in  any  way  connected  with  the 
Early  Church,  accounts  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  various 
doctrines  orthordox  and  heretical  which  had  their  birth  during  the 
feriod,  as  well  as  of  the  planting  and  early  history  of  the  Chief 
Churches  in  Asia,  Africa  and  Europe.  Besides  the  Apostles,  the 
work  contains  characteristic  sketches  of  the  lives,  position,  and 
influence  of  Justin  Martyr,  St.  Ignatius,  Melito,  Polycarp,  Mar- 
cion,  Dionysius  of  Corinth,  Clement  of  Alexandria,  Clement  of 
Rome,  Irettaeus,  Tertullian,  and  many  others.  The  three  con 
cluding  chapters  treat  of  the  relations  of  the  Church  to  the  Emperors, 
the  Philosophers,  and  the  Sects. 

LEARNING  AND  WORKING.  Six  Lectures  delivered 
in  Willis's  Rooms,  London,  in  June  and  July,  1854. — THE 
RELIGION  OF  ROME,  and  its  Influence  on  Modern  Civilisa 
tion.  Four  Lectures  delivered  in  the  Philosophical  Institution  of 
Edinburgh,  in  December,  1854.  Crown  Svo.  $s. 

In  the  Dedication  and  Preface  to  this  volume,  Professor  Maurice 
shmus  that  these  two  sets  of  Lectures  have  many  points  of  connec 
tion.  In  the  first  series  of  Lectures  the  author  endeavours  to  ex 
plain  to  such  an  audience  as  was  likely  to  meet  in  Willis's  Rooms, 


46  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Maurice  (F.  D.) — continued. 

the  scope  and  aims  of  the  course  of  education  established  at  the 
then  recently  founded  Working  Men's  College,  and  at  the  same 
time  expounds  his  notions  of  education  in  general,  the  pivot  of  his 
system  being  the  truth  that  Learning  and  Working  are  not  incom 
patible.  The  title  to  the  second  series  is  a  sufficient  index  to  their 
nature. 


Moorhouse. — Works  by  JAMES  MOORHOUSE,  M.A.,  Vicar 

of  Paddington  : — 

SOME  MODERN  DIFFICULTIES  RESPECTING  the 
FACTS  OF  NATURE  AND  REVELATION.  Fcap.  8vo. 
2s.  6d. 

The  first  of  these  Four  Discourses  is  a  systematic  reply  to  the  Essay 
of  the  Rev.  Baden  Pmvell  on  Christian  Evidences  in  "Essays  and 
Revieivs."  The  fourth  Sermon,  on  "  The  Resurrection,"  is  in 
some  measure  complementary  to  this,  and  the  two  together  are 
intended  to  furnish  a  tolerably  complete  vinu  of  modern  objections 
to  Revelation.  In  the  second  and  third  Sermons,  on  the  "  Tempta 
tion''1  and  "Passion,"  the  author  has  endeavoured  "to  exhibit  the 
polver  and  TOO  nder  of  those  great  facts  wit/tin  the  spiritual  sphere, 
Which  modern  theorists  have  especially  sought  to  discredit."  The 
British  Quarterly  says  of  them,  —  "The  tone  of  the  discussion  is 
able,  and  throughout  conservative  of  Scriptural  truth." 

JACOB.  Three  Sermons  preached  before  the  University  of 
Cambridge  in  Lent  1870.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

In  these  Three  Sermons  the  author  endeavours  to  indicate  the  course 
of  that  Divine  training  by  which  the  patriarch  Jacob  was  converted 
from  a  deceitful  and  unscrupulous  into  a  pious  and  self-denying 
man.  In  the  first  Sermon  is  considered  "  The  Human  Subject," 
or  the  nature  to  be  trained ;  in  the  second  "  The  Divine  fower," 
the  power  by  which  that  training  was  effected ;  and  in  the  third 
"  The  Great  Change,"  or  the  course  and  form  of  the  training. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  47 


Moorhouse  (J.) — continued. 
THE  HULSEAN  LECTURES  FOR  1865.    Cr.  8vo.     $s. 

The  following  are  the  subjects  of  the  Four  Hulsean  Lectures  in  this 
volume: — I.  "Bearing  of  Present  Controversies  on  the  Doctrine  of 
the  Incarnation."  II.  ii How  far  the  Hypothesis  of  a  real  Limit 
ation  in  our  Saviour's  Human  Knowledge  is  consistent  -with  the 
Doctrine  of  His  Divinity. "  III.  ' '  The  Scriptural  Evidence  of 
our  Saviour's  Sinlessness.'"  IV.  "What  Kind  and  Degree  of 
Human  Ignorance  -were  left  possible  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by 
tlie  fact  of  His  Human  Sinlessncss. "  The  three  Sermons  which 
follmv  elucidate  many  difficulties  which  in  the  Lectures  could  not  be 
investigated  with  that  degree  of  care  and  fulness  which  was  desirable. 
"Si~2v  more  valuable  works  have  come  into  our  hands  for  many 
years  .  .  .  a  mo st  fruitful  atid  welcome  volume. " — Church  Review. 

O'Brien.— AN  ATTEMPT  TO  EXPLAIN  and  ESTAB 
LISH  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  JUSTIFICATION  by  FAITH 
ONLY.  By  JAMES  THOMAS  O'BRIEN,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Ossory. 
Third  Edition.  8vo.  12.?. 

This  work  consists  of  Ten  Sermons.  The  first  four  treat  of  the  nature 
and  mutual  relations  of  Faith  and  Justification  ;  the  fifth  and 
sixth  examine  the  corruptions  of  the  doctrine  of  Justification  by  Faith 
only,  and  the  objections  which  have  been  urged  against  it.  The  four 
concluding  sermons  deal  with  the  moral  effects  of  Faith.  Various 
Notes  are  added  explanatory  of  the  Author's  reasoning. 

Palgrave. — HYMNS.  By  FRANCIS  TURNER  PALGRAVE. 
Third  Edition,  enlarged.  iSmo.  is.  6tf. 

This  is  a  collection  of  twenty  original  Hymns,  which  the  Literary 
Churchman  speaks  of  as  "so  choice,  so  perfect,  and  so  refined, — 
so  tender  in  feeling,  and  so  scholarly  in  expression." 

Palmer.— THE     BOOK     OF    PRAISE  :     From   the    Best 

English  Hymn  Writers.     Selected  and  arranged  by  Sir  ROUNDELL 

PALMER.     With  Vignette  by  WOOLNER.     iSmo.     4^-.  6d. 

The  present  is  an  attempt  to  present,  under  a  convenient  arrangement, 

a  collection  of  such  examples  of  a  copious  and  interesting  branch  of 


48  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

popular  literature,  as,  after  several  years'  study  of  the  subject,  have 
seemed  to  the  Editor  most  -worthy  of  being  separated  from  the  mass 
to  which  they  belong.  It  has  been  the  Editor's  desire  and  aim  to 
adhere  strictly,  in  all  cases  in  which  it  could  be  ascertained,  to  the 
genuine  uncorrupted  text  of  the  authors  themselves.  The  names  of 
the  authors  and  date  of  composition  of  the  hymns,  when  known, 
are  affixed,  while  notes  are  added  to  the  volume,  giving  further 
details.  The  Hymns  are  arranged  according  to  subjects.  "  There 
is  not  room  for  two  opinions  as  to  the  value  of  the  ''Book  of  Praise. ' " 
— Guardian.  '''Approaches  as  nearly  as  one  can  conceive  to  per 
fection.  " — Nonconformist. 

BOOK  OF  PRAISE  HYMNAL.     See  end  of  this  Catalogue. 

Paul  of  Tarsus.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Times  and  the 
Gospel  of  the  Apostles  of  the  Gentiles.  By  a  GRADUATE.  8vo. 
los.  6d. 

The  Author  of  this  work  has  attempted,  out  of  the  materials  which 
were  at  his  disposal,  to  construct  for  himself  a  sketch  of  the  time  in 
which  St.  Paul  lived,  of  the  religious  systems  with  which  he  was 
brought  in  contact,  of  the  doctrine  which  he  taught,  and  of  the 
work  which  he  ultimately  achieved.  The  Author's  researclies  have 
been  pursued  with  independence,  candour,  and  ability,  and  it  is 
confidently  expected  that  the  work  will  afford  considerable  assistance 
towards  the  solution  of  the  important  question,- — By  what  means, 
and  under  what  pressure,  have  the  dogmas  of  later  Christianity 
been  developed  from  the  Pauline  original?  "  Turn  where  we  will 
throughout  the  volume,  we  find  the  best  fruit  of  patient  inquiry, 
sound  scholarship,  logical  argument,  and  fairness  of  conclusion. 
No  thoughtful  reader  will  rise  from  its  pemsal  without  a  real  and 
lasting  profit  to  himself,  and  a  sense  of  permanent  addition  to  the 
cause  of  truth.'" — Standard. 

Prescott — THE  THREEFOLD  CORD.  Sermons  preached 
before  the  University  of  Cambridge.  By  J.  E.  PRESCOTT,  B.D. 
Fcap.  8vo.  3-r.  6d. 

The  title  of  this  volume  is  derived  from  the  subjects  of  the  first  three 
of  these  Sermons — Love,  Hope,  Faith.  Their  full  titles  are : — 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  49 


/.  " 'Christ  the  Bringer  of  Peace — J^cve."  //.  "Christ  the  Reno 
vator— Hope."  III.  "Christ  the  Light— Faith.''1  The  fourth, 
an  Assize  Sermon,  is  on  "  The  Divinity  of  Justice. "  The  Sermons 
are  an  attempt  to  shevj  that  Christian  theology  is  sufficient  for  the 
wants  of  the  present  day.  The  Notes  throughout  the  volume  direct 
the  reader  to  valuable  sources  of  information.  77ie  Churchman 
says  the  volume  "  is  evidently  the  production  of  a  scholar.  Eloquent 
and  striking  passages  abound  throughout. " 

Procter.— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON 
PRAYER :  With  a  Rationale  of  its  Offices.  By  FRANCIS 
PROCTER,  M.A.  Tenth  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Crown 
8vo.  lew.  6d. 

The  fact  that  in  fifteen  years  nine  editions  of  this  volume  have  been 
called  for,  shews  that  such  a  work  was  -wanted,  and  that  to  a  large 
extent  JMr.  Procter's  book  has  supplied  the  want.  ' '/«  the  cotirse 
of  the  last  thirty  years,"  the  author  says,  '•''the  whole  subject  has 
been  investigated  by  divines  of  great  learning,  and  it  was  mainly  with 
a  vieT.o  of  epitomizing  their  extensive  publications,  and  correcting 
by  their  help  sundry  traditional  errors  or  misconceptions,  that  the 
present  volume  was  put  together."  The  Second  Part  is  occupied 
with  an  account  of  "The  Sources  and  Rationale  of  the  Offices." 
The  Athenaeum  says: — "TJie  origin  of  every  part  of  the  Prayer- 
book  has  been  diligently  investigated, — and  there  arefetv  questions 
or  facts  connected  with  it  which  are  not  either  sujficietitly  explained, 
or  so  referred  to,  that  persons  interested  may  work  out  the  truth  for 
themselves." 

Procter  and  Maclean—  AN  ELEMENTARY  INTRO 
DUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER. 
Fourth  Edition,  Re-arranged  and  Supplemented  by  an  Explanation 
of  the  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer  and  the  Litany.  By  F. 
PROCTER,  M.A.  and  G.  F.  MACLEAR,  D.D.  i8mo.  2s.  6d. 

This  book  has  the  same  object  and  follmvs  the  same  plan  as  the 
Manuals  already  noticed  under  Mr.  Macleans  name.  Each  book 
is  subdivided  into  chapters  and  sections.  In  Book  I.  is  given  a 
detailed  History  of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer  down  to  the 

4 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Attempted  Revision  in  the  Reign  of  William  III.  Book  II.,  con 
sisting  of  four  Parts,  treats  in  order  the  various  parts  of  the 
Prayer  Book.  Valuable  Notes,  etymological,  historical,  and  critical, 
are  given  throughout  the  book,  while  the  Appendix  contains  sei'eml 
articles  of  much  interest  and  importance.  Appended  is  a  General 
Index  and  an  Index  of  Words  explained  in  the  Notes.  The 
Literary  Churchman  characterizes  it  as  "  by  far  the  completest 
and  most  satisfactory  booh  of  its  kind  -we  know.  We  wish  it 
were  in  the  hands  of  every  schoolboy  and  every  schoolmaster  in  the 
kingdom." 

Psalms  of  David  CHRONOLOGICALLY  ARRANGED. 
An  Amended  Version,  with  Historical  Introductions  and  Ex 
planatory  Notes.  By  FOUR  FRIENDS.  Second  and  Cheaper 
Edition,  much  enlarged.  Crown  8vo.  8s.  6d. 

One  of  (Tie  chief  designs  of  the  Editors,  in  preparing  this  volume, 
was  to  restore  the  Psalter  as  far  as  possible  to  the  order  in  -which 
the  Psalms  were  written.  They  give  the  division  of  each  Psalm 
into  strophes,  and  of  each  strophe  into  the  lines  which  composed  it, 
and  amend  the  errors  of  translation.  In  accomplishing  this  work 
they  have  mainly  followed  the  guidance  of  Professor  Henry  Ewald. 
A  Supplement  contains  the  chief  specimens  of  Hebrew  Lyric  poetry 
not  included  in  the  Book  of  Psalms.  The  Spectator  calls  it  "One 
of  the  most  instructive  and  valuable  books  that  have  been  published 
for  many  years. " 

Golden  Treasury  Psalter. — THE  STUDENT'S  EDITION. 

Being  an  Edition  with  briefer  Notes  of  the  above.     i8mo.    3j.  6d. 

This  volume  will  be  found  to  meet  the  requirements  of  those  who  wish 
for  a  smaller  edition  of  the  larger  work,  at  a  lower  price  for  family 
use,  and  for  the  use  «f  younger  pupils  in  Public  Schools.  The 
short  notes  which  are  appended  to  the  volume  will,  it  is  hoped, 
suffice  to  make  the  meaning  intelligible  throughout.  The  aim  of 
this  edition  is  simply  to  put  the  reader  as  far  as  possible  in  pos 
session  of  the  plain  meaning  of  the  writer.  "It  is  a  gem,"  the 
Nonconformist  says. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Ramsay.— THE  CATECHISER'S  MANUAL;  or,  the 
Church  Catechism  Illustrated  and  Explained,  for  the  Use  of 
Clergymen,  Schoolmasters,  and  Teachers.  By  ARTHUR  RAMSAY, 
M.A.  Second  Edition.  i8mo.  is.  6d. 

This  Manual,  which  is  in  the  form  of  question  and  answer,  is  in 
tended  to  afford  full  assistance  both  to  learners  and  teachers,  to 
candidates  for  Confirmation  as  well  as  to  clergymen,  in  the 
understanding  of  the  Church  Catechism,  and  of  all  the  matters 
referred  to  therein.  It  is  divided  into  seven  chapters : — •/.  ' '  The 
Church  Catechism,"  in  which  the  meaning  and  object  of  the 
Catechism  is  explained,  as  well  as  the  significance  and  object  of 
Confirmation.  If.  The  various  parts  of  the  Catechism  are 
analysed  and  explained.  III.  The  Creeds — the  Apostles',  the 
Nicene,  and  the  Athanasian.  IV.  The  Apostles'1  Creed.  V.  The 
Commandments.  VI.  The  Lord's  Prayer.  VII.  The  Sacra 
ments.  77ie  English  Journal  of  Education  says, — "  This  is  by 
far  the  best  Manual  on  the  Catechism  we  have  met  with,  adapted 
not  only  for  the  use  of  the  national  schoolmaster,  but  also  for  the 
clergyman  and  the  tutor. 

Rays  of  Sunlight  for  Dark  Days.    A  Book  of  Selec 
tions  for  the  Suffering.     With  a  Preface  by  C.  J.  VAUGHAN,  D.D. 
iSmo.     Fifth  Edition.     3^.  6d.     Also  in  morocco,  old  style. 
Dr.  Vaughan  says  in  the  Preface,  after  speaking  of  the  general  run 
of  Books  of  Comfort  for  Mourners,    "It  is  because  I  think  that 
the  little  volume  now  offered  to   the   Christian  sufferer  is  one  of 
greater  wisdom  and  of  deeper  experience,  that  I  have  readily  con 
sented  to  the  request  that  I  would  introduce  it  by  a  few  words  of 
Preface."     The  book  consists  of  a  series  of  very  brief  extracts  frotn 
a  great  variety  of  authors,  in  prose  and  poetry,  suited  to  the  many 
moods  of  a  mourning  or  suffering  mind.      "Mostly  gems  of  the  first 
water. " — Clerical  Journal. 

Reynolds.— NOTES  OF  THE   CHRISTIAN    LIFE.      A 
Selection   of  Sermons   by   HENRY   ROBERT    REYNOLDS,    B.A., 
President  of  Cheshunt  College,  and  Fellow  of  University  College, 
London.     Crown  Svo.     "js.  6</. 
Tliis  work  may  be  taken  as  representative  of  the  mode  of  thought  and 


52  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


feeling  which  is  most  popular  amongst  the  freer  and  more  cultivated 
Nonconformists.  "  The  reader  throughout,"  says  the  Patriot, 
'  'feels  himself  in  the  grasp  of  an  earnest  and  careful  thinker. " 
"ft  is  long,"  says  the  Nonconformist,  "since  we  have  met  with 
any  published  sermons  better  calculated  than  these  to  stimulate 
devout  thought,  and  to  bring  home  to  the  soul  the  reality  of  a 
spiritual  life." 

Roberts.— DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  GOSPELS.  By  the^ 
Rev.  ALEXANDER  ROBERTS,  D.D.  Second  Edition,  revised  and 
enlarged.  8vo.  i6s. 

This  volume  is  divided  into  two  parts.  Part  /.  "(9w  the  Language 
employed  by  our  Lord  and  His  Disciples,"  in  which  the  author 
endeavours  to  prove  that  Greek  was  the  language  usually  employed 
by  Christ  Himself,  in  opposition  to  the  common  belief  that  Our 
Lord  spoke  Aramaan.  Part  II.  is  occupied  with  a  discussion 
"On  the  Original  Language  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel"  and  on 
"  The  Origin  and  Authenticity  of  the  Gospels."  The  author  pro 
pounds  some  novel  views  on  the  points  discussed,  the  result  of 
long  and  deep  study  and  research.  The  volume  abounds  in  valu 
able  Notes,  and  in  the  Second  Part  is  a  chapter  bearing  chiefly 
on  the  proper  authenticity  of  the  Gospels  as  recently  challenged 
by  M.  Renan.  "  The  author  brings  the  valuable  qualifications  of 
learning,  temper,  and  an  independent  judgment.  .  .  .  It  is  btit  bare 
justice  to  affirm  that  his  arguments  render  it  \Jiis  proposition] 
extremely  probable." — Daily  News.  "This  volume  is  of  intense 
interest  to  every  Biblical  student.  It  enters  a  field  of  inquiry 
hitherto  untrodden. " — British  Standard. 

Robertson.— PASTORAL  COUNSELS.      Being  Chapters 
on  Practical  and  Devotional  Subjects.    By  the  late  JOHN  ROBERT 
SON,    D.D.      Third  Edition,    with   a   Preface  by  the  Author  of 
"  The  Recreations  of  a  Country  Parson."     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     6s. 
These  Sermons  are  the  free  utterances  of  a  strong  and  independent 
thinker.      He  does  not  depart  from  the  essential  doctrines  of  his 
Church,  but  he  expounds  them  in  a  spirit  of  the  widest  charity,  and 
always  having  most  prominently  in  view  the  requirements  of  prac 
tical  life.      "  The  sermons  are  admirable  specimens  of  a  practical, 
earnest,  and  instructive  style  of  pulpit  teaching. " — Nonconformist. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  53 

Rowsell.— MAN'S    LABOUR   AND    GOD'S    HARVEST. 

Sermons  preached  before  the   University  of  Cambridge  in  Lent, 

1 86 1.     Fcap.  8vo.     3.?. 

This  volume  contains  Five  Sermons,  the  general  drift  of  which  is 
indicated  by  the  title.  "  We  strongly  recommend  this  little  volume 
to  young  men,  and  especially  to  those  who  are  contemplating  work 
ing  for  Christ  in  Holy  Orders." — Literary  Churchman.  "Jlfr. 
Kowselfs  Sermons  j/nist,  we  feel  sure,  have  touched  the  heart  of 
many  a  Cambridge  Undergraduate,  and  are  desennng  of  a  wide 
general  circulation." — The  Ecclesiastic. 

Sanday.— THE  AUTHORSHIP  AND  HISTORICAL 
CHARACTER  OF  THE  FOURTH  GOSPEL,  considered  in 
reference  to  the  Contents  of  the  Gospel  itself.  A  Critical  Essay. 
By  WILLIAM  SANDAY,  M.  A. ,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford. 
Crown  8vo.  85.  6d. 

The  object  of  this  Essay  is  critical  and  nothing  more.  The  Author 
attempts  to  apply  faithfully  and  persistently  to  the  contents  of  the 
much  disputed  fourth  Gospel  that  scientific  method  which  has  been 
so  successful  in  other  directions.  "  The  facts  of  religion"  the 
Author  believes,  "(i.  e.  the  documents,  the  history  of  religious 
bodies,  &*c. )  are  as  much  facts  as  the  lie  of  a  coal-bed  or  the  forma 
tion  of  a  coral-reef."  It  is  believed  that  the  work  will  prove  of 
value  to  theologians,  as  well  as  to  all  who  take  an  interest  in  the 
subject  of  which  it  treats. 

Sergeant. — SERMONS.  By  the  Rev.  E.  W.  SERGEANT, 
M.A.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford;  Assistant  Master  at  Westminster 
College.  Fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  Nine  Sermons  on  a  variety  of  topics,  preached 
by  the  author  at  various  times  and  to  various  classes  of  hearers. 
The  First  Sermon  is  on  Free  Inquiry. 

Smith.— PROPHECY  A  PREPARATION  FOR  CHRIST. 
Eight  Lectures  preached  before  the  University  of  Oxford,  being  the 
Bampton  Lectures  for  1869.     By  R.  PAYNE  SMITH,  D.D.,   Dean 
of  Canterbury.     Second  and  Cheaper  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6.?. 
The  author's  object  in  these  Lectures  is  to  sheiv  that  there  exists  in  the 


54  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Old  Testament  an  element,  which  no  criticism  on  naturalistic 
principles  can  either  account  for  or  explain  away:  that  element  is 
Prophecy.  The  author  endeavours  to  prove  that  its  force  does  not 
consist  merely  in  its  predictions.  The  Bible  describes  man's  first 
estate  of  innocency,  his  fall,  and  the  promise  given  by  God  of  his 
restoration.  Virttially  the  promise  meant  that  God  would  give 
man  a  true  religion;  and  the  author  asserts  that  Christianity  is 
the  sole  religion  on  earth  that  fulfils  the  conditions  necessary  to 
constitute  a  true  religion.  God  has  pledged  His  own  attributes 
in  its  behalf;  this  pledge  He  has  given  in  miracle  and  prophecy. 
The  author  endeavours  to  shew  the  reality  of  that  portion  of  the 
proof  founded  on  prophecy.  ' '  These  Lectures  overflow  with  solid 
learning. " — Record. 

Smith. — CHRISTIAN   FAITH.     Sermons  preached  before 
the  University  of  Cambridge.      By  W.  SAUMAREZ  SMITH,  JV1.A., 
Principal  of  St.  Aidan's  College,  Birkenhead.      Fcap.  8vo.    &.  6d. 
The  first  two  sermons  in  this  volume  have  special  reference  to  the 
Person  of  Christ ;   the  next  two  are  concerned  with  the  inner  life 
of  Christians  ;  and  the  last  speaks  of  the  outward  development  of 
Christian  faith.      " 'Appropriate  and  earnest  sermons,  suited  to  the 
practical  exhortation  of  an  educated  congregation. " — Guardian. 

Stanley. — Works  by  the  Very    Rev.  A.  P.  STANLEY,  D.D., 
Dean  of  Westminster. 

THE  ATHANASIAN  CREED,  with  a  Preface  on  the 
General  Recommendations  of  the  RITUAL  COMMISSION.  Cr. 
8vo.  2s. 

•  The  object  of  the  work  is  not  so  much  to  iirge  the  omission  or  change 
of  the  Athanasian  Creed,  as  to  shew  that  such  a  relaxation  ought 
to  give  offence  to  no  reasonable  or  religious  mind.  With  this 
•view,  the  Dean  of  Westminster  discusses  in  succession — (i)  the 
Authorship  of  the  Creed,  (2)  its  Internal  Characteristics,  (3)  the 
Peculiarities  of  its  Use  in  the  Church  of  England,  (4)  its  Ad 
vantages  and  Disadvantages,  (5)  its  various  Interpretations,  and 
(6)  the  Judgment  passed  upon  it  by  the  Ritual  Commission.  In 
conclusion,  Dr.  Stanley  maintains  that  the  use  of  the  Athanasian 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  55 


Stanley  (Dean) — continued. 

Creed  should  no  longer  be  made  compulsory.      "£>>:  Stanley  puts 
•with  admirable  force  the  abjections  which  may  be  made  to  the  Creed ; 
equally  admirable,  we  think,  in  his  statement  of  its  advantages."— 
Spectator. 

THE  NATIONAL  THANKSGIVING.  Sermons  preached 
in  Westminster  Abbey.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  zs.  6d. 
These  Sermons  are  (l)  "  Death  and  Life"  preached  December  IO, 
1871  ;  (2)  "  The  Trumpet  of  Patmos,"  December  17,  1871  ; 
(3)  "  The  Day  of  Thanksgiving"  March  3,  1872.  It  is  hoped 
that  these  Sermons  may  recall,  in  some  degree,  the  serious  reflections 
connected  with  the  Prince  of  Wales' s  illness,  which,  if  the  nation  is 
true  to  itself,  ought  not  to  perish  with  the  moment.  The  proceeds  of 
the  publication  will  be  devoted  to  the  Fund  for  the  Restoration  of 
St.  Paul's  Cathedral.  "  In  point  of  fervour  and  polish  by  far  the 
best  specimens  in  print  of  Dean  Stanley's  eloquent  style. " — Standard. 

Sunday  Library.     See  end  of  this  Catalogue. 

Swainson. — Works  by   C.  A.  SWAINSON,  D.D.,    Canon   of 
Chichester : — • 

THE  CREEDS  OF  THE  CHURCH  IN  THEIR  RE 
LATIONS  TO  HOLY  SCRIPTURE  and  the  CONSCIENCE 
OF  THE  CHRISTIAN.  Svo.  cloth,  gs. 

The  Lectures  which  compose  this  volume  discuss,  amongst  others,  the 
following  subjects :  ll  Faith  in  God,"  "  Exercise  of  our  Reason," 
11  Origin  and  Authority  of  Creeds,"  and  "Private  Judgment,  its 
use  and  exercise."  "  Treating  of  abstruse  points  of  Scripture,  he 
applies  them  so  forcibly  to  Christian  duty  and  practice  as  to  prove 
eminently  serviceable  to  the  Church." — John  Bull. 

THE  AUTHORITY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT, 
and  other  LECTURES,  delivered  before  the  University  of  Cam 
bridge.  Svo.  cloth.  12s. 

The  first  series  of  Lectures  in  this  work  is  on  "  The  Words  spoken  by 
the  Apostles  of  Jesus"  "  The  Inspiration  of  God's  Servants," 


56  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


"  The  Human  Character  of  the  Inspired  Writers"  and  "  The 
Divine  Character  of  the  Word  written. "  The  second  embraces 
Lectures  on  "  Sin  as  Imperfection,"  "•  Sin  as  Self-will,"  ii  What 
soever  is  not  of  Faith  is  Sin,"  "  Christ  the  Saviour,"  and  "  The 
Blood  of  the  New  Covenant."  The  third  is  on  " 'Christians  One 
Boiy  in  Christ"  "  The  One  Body  the  Spouse  of  Christ,"  "  Christ's 
Prayer  for  Unity,"  "  Our  Reconciliation  should  be  manifested  in 
common  Worship"  and  lt  Ambassadors  for  Christ."  " All  the 
grave  and  awful  questions  associated  with  human  sinfulness  and 
the  Divine  plan  of  redemption  are  discussed  with  minute  and 
painstaking  care,  and  in  the  Appendix  all  the  passages  of  Scripture 
referring  to  them  are  marshalled  and  critically  reviewed."— 
Wesleyan  Times. 

Taylor.— THE  RESTORATION  OF  BELIEF.  New  and 
Revised  Edition.  By  ISAAC  TAYLOR,  Esq.  Crown  8vo.  8s.  6d. 
The  earlier  chapters  are  occupied  ivith  an  examination  of  the  primitive 
history  of  the  Christian  Religion,  and  its  relation  to  the  Roman 
government ;  and  here,  as  well  as  in  the  remainder  of  the  work,  the 
author  sheivs  the  bearing  of  that  history  on  some  of  the  difficult  and 
interesting  questions  which  have  recently  been  claiming  the  attention 
of  all  earnest  men.  The  book  will  be  found  to  contain  a  clear  and 
full  statement  of  the  case  as  it  at  present  stands  in  behalf  of  Christ 
ianity.  The  last  chapter  of  this  New  Edition  treats  of  "  7^he 
Present  Position  of  the  Argument  concerning  Christianity,"  with 
special  reference  to  M.  Kenan's  Vie  de  Jesus.  TJie  Journal  of 
Sacred  Literature  says, — "  The  current  of  thought  which  runs 
through  this  book  is  calm  and  clear,  its  tone  is  earnest,  its  manner 
courteous.  The  author  has  carefully  studied  the  successive  pi-oblems 
which  he  so  ably  handles. " 

Temple.— SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  THE  CHAPEL 
of  RUGBY  SCHOOL.  ByF.  TEMPLE,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Exeter. 
New  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4^.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  Thirty-five  Sermons  on  topics  more  or  less  inti 
mately  connected  with  every -day  life.  The  following  are  a  few  of 
the  subjects  discoursed  upon: — "'Love  and  Duty;"  "Coming  to 
Christ;"  "Great  Men;"  "Faith;"  "Doubts;"  "Scruples;" 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  57 


Temple  (F.,  D.D.)— continued. 

"  Original  Sin  ;"  "Friendship;"  lt Helping  Others ;"  "  The  Dis 
cipline  of  Temptation;"  ^'Strength  a  Duty;"  " 'Worldliness ;" 
"///  Temper;"  "  The  Burial  of  the  Past."  The  Critic  speaks  of 
them  thus : — ' '  We  trust  that  the  tender  affectionate  spirit  of  practical 
Christianity  which  runs  through  every  page  of  the  -volume  will  have 
its  due  effect.  .  .  .  desiring  to  rouse  the  youthful  hearers  to  a  sense  of 
duty,  and  to  arm  them  against  the  perils  and  dangers  of  the  world 
against  which  they  are  so  soon  to  battle. " 


A  SECOND  SERIES  OF  SERMONS  PREACHED  IN 
THE  CHAPEL  OF  RUGBY  SCHOOL.  Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
6s. 

This  Second  Scries  of  Forty-two  brief,  pointed,  practical  Sermons,  on 
topics  intimately  connected  ivith  the  every-day  life  of  young  and  old, 
ivill  be  acceptable  to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  the  First  Series. 
The  following  are  a  few  of 'the  subjects  treated  of : — "Disobedience," 
11  Almsgiving,"  "  The  Unknoiun  Guidance  of  God,"  ll  Apathy  one 
of  our  Trials,"  "High  Aims  in  Leaders,"  "Doing  our  Best," 
"  The  Use  of  Kncnvledge,"  "  Use  of  Observances,"  " 'Martha  and 
Mary,"  "John  the  Baptist,"  " 'Severity  before  Mercy,"  "Even 
Mistakes  Punished"  " Morality  and  Religion,"  "Children," 
"Action  the  Test  of  Spiritual  Life,"  "Self-Respect"  "Too  Late," 
"The  Tercentenary." 


A  THIRD  SERIES  OF  SERMONS  PREACHED  IN 
RUGBY  SCHOOL  CHAPEL  IN  1867—1869.  Extra  fcap. 
8vo.  6s. 

This  third  series  of  Bishop  Temple's  Rugby  Sermons,  contains  thirty- 
six  brief  discourses,  characterized  by  "a  penetrating  and  direct 
practicalness,  informed  by  a  rare  intuitive  sympathy  ivith  boy- 
nature  ;  its  keen  perception  of  reality  and  earnestness,  its  equally 
keen  sympathy  ivith  what  is  noblest  in  sentiment  and  feelings." 
The  volume  includes  the  "  Good-bye"  sermon  preached  on  his 
leaving  Rugby  to  enter  on  the  office  he  now  holds. 


58  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Thring. — Works  by  Rev.  EDWARD  THRING,  M.A. 

SERMONS  DELIVERED  AT  UPPINGHAM  SCHOOL. 

Crown  8vo.     $s. 

In  this  -volume  are  contained  Forty-seven  brief  Sermons,  all  on 
subjects  more  or  less  intimately  connected  -with  Public-school  life. 
"  These  Sermons,"  the  author  says,  " are  sent  into  the  -world  as 
parts  of  a  system,  and  as  exponents,  in  some  degree,  of  the  ex 
perience  of  working  men,  that  it  is  possible  to  have  a  free  and 
manly  school-life,  complete  in  all  its  parts,  neither  lost  in  a  crowd, 
nor  shut  up  in  a  prison,  nor  reared  in  a  hot-bed" — ''We  desire 
-very  highly  to  commend  these  capital  Sermons  which  treat  of  a  boy's 
life  and  trials  in  a  thoroughly  practical  way  and  with  great 
simplicity  and  impressiveness.  They  deserve  to  be  classed  with  the 
best  of  their  kind." — Literary  Churchman. 

THOUGHTS    ON    LIFE-SCIENCE.      New   Edition,   en 
larged  and  revised.     Crown  8vo.     "js.  6</. 

In  this  volume  are  discussed  in  a  familiar  manner  some  of  the  most 
interesting  problems  between  Science  and  Religion,  Reason  and 
Feeling.  '•''Learning and  Science,"  says  the  Author,  "are  claiming 
the  right  of  building  up  and  pulling  down  everything,  especially 
the  latter.  It  has  seemed  to  me  no  useless  task  to  look  steadily  at 
•what  has  happened,  to  take  stock  as  it  were  of  man's  gains,  and  to 
endeavour  amidst  new  circumstances  to  arrive  at  some  rational 
estimate  of  the  bearings  of  things,  so  that  the  limits  of  what  is  pos 
sible  at  all  events  may  be  clearly  marked  out  for  ordinary  readers. 
....  This  book  is  an  endeavour  to  bring  out  some  of  the  main 
faffs  of  the  world." 

Tracts    for    Priests    and    People.         By   VARIOUS 

WRITERS. 

THE  FIRST  SERIES.     Crown  8vo.     8s. 
THE  SECOND  SERIES.     Crown  8vo.     Ss. 
The  whole  Series  of  Fifteen  Tracts  may  be  had  separately,  price 

One  Shilling  each. 

A  series  of  papers  written  after  the  excitement  aroused  by  tJie  publica 
tion  of '"  Essays  and  Rei'iews"  had  somewhat  abated,  and  designed, 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  59 

by  the  exposition  of  positive  truth,  to  meet  the  religious  difficulties  of 
honest  inquirers.  Amongst  the  writers  are  Mr.  Thomas  Hughes, 
Professor  Maurice,  the  Rev.  J.  Llewellyn  Davies,  and  Mr.  J.  M. 
Ludlow. 

Trench. — Works  by  R.  CHENEVIX  TRENCH,  D.D.,  Arch 
bishop  of  Dublin.  (For  other  Works  by  the  same  author,  see 
BIOGRAPHICAL,  BELLES  LETTRES,  and  LINGUISTIC  CATA 
LOGUES). 

Archbishop  Trench  is  well  known  as  a  writer  who  has  the  happy 
faculty  of  being  able  to  take  with  discrimination  the  results  of  the 
highest  criticism  and  scholarship,  and  present  them  in  such  a  shape 
as  will  be  not  only  valuable  to  scholars,  but  interesting,  intelligible, 
and  of  the  greatest  use  even  to  the  ordinary  reader.  It  is  generally 
acknowledged  that  few  men  have  been  more  successful  in  bringing 
out  the  less  obvious  meanings  of  the  Neiv  Testament,  or  done  more 
for  the  popular  yet  scholarly  exposition  of  the  Bible  generally. 

NOTES     ON     THE     PARABLES     OF     OUR     LORD. 

Eleventh  Edition.     Svo.     12s. 

This  work  has  taken  its  place  as  a  standard  exposition  and  interpret 
ation  of  Christ's  Parables.  The  book  is  prefaced  by  an  Intro 
ductory  Essay  in  four  chapters : — /.  On  the  definition  of  the 
Parable.  If.  On  Teaching  by  Parables.  III.  On  the  Interpret 
ation  of  the  Parables.  IV.  On  other  Parables  besides  those  in  the 
Scriptures.  The  author  then  proceeds  to  take  up  the  Parables  one 
by  one,  and  by  the  aid  of  philology,  history,  antiquities,  and  the 
researches  of  travellers,  sJmv  forth  the  significance,  beauty,  and 
applicability  of  each,  concluding  with  what  he  deems  its  true  moral 
interpretation.  In  the  numerous  Notes  are  many  valuable  references, 
illustrative  quotations,  critical  and  philological  annotations,,  etc., 
and  appended  to  the  volume  is  a  classified  list  of  fifty-six  works  on 
the  Parables. 

NOTES     ON     THE     MIRACLES     OF     OUR     LORD. 
Ninth  Edition.     Svo.      12s. 

In  the  'Preliminary  Essay'  to  this  work,  all  the  momentous  and 
interesting  questions  that  have  been  raised  in  connection  with 


60  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Tre  n  ch — continued. 

Miracles,  are  discussed  with  considerable  fulness,  and  the  author's 
usual  candour  and  learning.  The  Essay  consists  of  six  chapters  : 
— /.  On  the  Names  of  Miracles,  i.  e.  the  Greek  words  by  which 
they  are  designated  in  the  New  Testament.  II.  The  Miracles 
and  Nature — What  is  the  difference  between  a  Miracle  and 
any  ezvut  in  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature?  III.  The 
Authority  of  Miracles — Is  the  Miracle  to  command  absolute  obe- 
dieitce?  IV.  The  Evangelical,  compared  with  the  other  cycles  of 
Miracles.  V.  The  Assaults  on  the  Miracles — I.  The  Jewish. 
2.  The  Heathen  (Celsus  etc.).  3.  The  Pantheistic  (Spinosa  etc.). 
4.  The  Sceptical  (Hume).  5.  The  Miracles  only  relatively  mi 
raculous  ( Schleiermacher).  6.  The  Rationalistic  (Paulus).  7. 
77ie  Historico-  Critical  (  Woolston,  Strauss).  VI.  The  Apologetic 
Worth  of  the  Miracles.  The  author  then  treats  the  separate 
Miracles  as  he  does  the  Parables. 

SYNONYMS     OF     THE     NEW     TESTAMENT.     New 
Edition,  enlarged.     8vo.  cloth.      125. 

The  study  of  synonyms  in  any  language  is  valuable  as  a  discipline 
for  training  the  mind  to  close  and  accurate  habits  of  thought ; 
more  especially  is  this  the  case  in  Greek — "a  language  spoken  by 
a  people  of  the  finest  and  stibtlest  intellect ;  who  sa^v  distinctions 
where  others  saw  none ;  who  divided  out  to  different  words  what 
others  often  were  content  to  huddle  confusedly  under  a  common 
term.  .  .  .  Where  is  it  so  desirable  that  -we  should  miss  nothing, 
that  we  should  lose  no  finer  intention  of  the  writer,  as  in  those 
words  which  are  the  vehicles  of  the  very  mind  of  God  Himself "?" 
This  work  is  recognised  as  a  valuable  companion  to  every  student 
of  the  New  Testament  in  the  original.  This,  the  Seventh  Edition, 
has  been  carefully  revised,  and  a  considerable  number  of  new 
synonyms  added.  Appended  is  an  Index  to  the  Synonyms,  and 
an  Index  to  many  other  words  alluded  to  or  explained  throughout 
the  work.  "He  is,"  the  Athenaeum  says,  "a  guide  in  this  depart 
ment  ofknovjledge  to  whom  his  readers  may  intrust  themselves  with 
confidence.  His  sober  judgment  and  sound  sense  are  barriers  against 
the  misleading  influence  of  arbitrary  hypotheses." 


THEOLOGICAL  BO^OKS.  6r 

Tre  n  ch — continued. 

ON   THE  AUTHORIZED   VERSION    OF  THE    NEW 
TESTAMENT.     Second  Edition.     8vo.     -]s. 

Archbishop  Trench's  familiarity  with  the  New  Testament  makes 
him  peculiarly  fitted  to  estimate  the  value  of  the  present  translation, 
and  to  give  directions  as  to  how  a  new  one  should  be  proceeded 
with.  After  some  Introductory  Remarks,  in  which  the  propriety 
of  a  revision  is  briefly  discussed,  the  whole  question  of  the  merits 
of  the  present  version  is  gone  into  in  detail,  in  eleven  chapters. 
Appended  is  a  chronological  list  of  vuorks  bearing  on  the  subject, 
an  Index  of  the  principal  Texts  considered,  an  Index  of  Greek 
Words,  and  an  Index  of  other  Words  referred  to  throughout  the 
book. 

STUDIES  IN  THE  GOSPELS.      Second  Edition.      Svo. 
IQS.  6d. 

This  book  is  published  under  the  conviction  that  the  assertion  often 
made  is  untrue, — viz.  that  the  Gospels  are  in  the  main  plain  and 
easy,  and  that  all  the  chief  difficulties  of  the  Neiu  Testament  are 
to  be  found  in  the  Epistles.  77iese  "Studies,"  sixteen  in  number, 
are  the  fruit  of  a  much  larger  scheme,  and  each  Study  deals 
with  some  important  episode  mentioned  in  the  Gospels,  in  a  critical, 
philosophical,  and  practical  manner.  Many  learned  references 
and  quotations  are  added  to  the  Notes.  Among  the  subjects  treated 
are: — The  Temptation ;  Christ  and  the  Samaritan  Woman;  The 
Three  Aspirants;  The  Transfiguration;  Zacchaus;  The  True 
Vine;  The  Penitent  Malefactor ;  Christ  and  the  Two  Disciples  on 
the  way  to  Emmaus. 

COMMENTARY    ON   THE  EPISTLES    to  the  SEVEN 
CHURCHES  IX  ASIA.     Third  Edition,  revised.     Svo.     8s.  6d. 

Bengel  was  wont  above  all  things  to  recommend  the  study  of  these 
Epistles  to  youthful  ministers  of  Chrisfs  Word  and  Sacraments ; 
and,  as  the  author  says  in  his  Preface,  the  number  of  aspects 
in  which  they  present  themselves  to  us  as  full  of  interest,  is  extra 
ordinary.  They  are  full  of  interest  to  the  student  of  ecclesiastical 
history ;  possess  a  strong  attraction  for  those  who  occupy  them- 


62  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Tre  n  ch — continued. 

selves  with  questions  of  pure  exegesis,  from  the  fact  of  their  con 
taining  so  many  unsolved  problems  of  interpretation  ;  their  purely 
theological  interest  is  great;  their  practical  interest  in  their 
bearing  on  the  whole  pastoral  and  ministerial  -work  is  extreme; 
and  finally,  there  is  about  these  Epistles  a  striking  originality, 
an  entire  unlikeness,  in  some  points  at  least,  to  anything  else  in 
Scripture.  The  present  work  consists  of  an  Introduction,  being 
a  commentary  on  Rev.  i.  4 — 2O,  a  detailed  examination  of  each  of 
the  Seven  Epistles,  in  all  its  bearings,  and  an  Excursus  on  the 
If istorico- Prophetical  Interpretation  of  the  Epistles. 

THE  SERMON  ON  THE  MOUNT.  An  Exposition 
drawn  from  the  writings  of  St.  Augustine,  with  an  Essay  on  his 
merits  as  an  Interpreter  of  Holy  Scripture.  Third  Edition,  en 
larged.  8vo.  \QS.  6d. 

The  first  half  of  the  present  work  consists  of  a  dissertation  in  eigJit 
chapters  on  "Augitstine  as  an  Interpreter  of  Scripture,'1''  the  titles 
of  the  several  chapters  being  as  follow : — /.  Augustine's  General 
Views  of  Scripture  and  its  Interpretation.  II.  The  External 
Helps  for  the  Interpretation  of  Scripture  possessed  by  Augustine. 
III.  Augustine's  Principles  and  Canons  of  Interpretation.  IV. 
Augustine's  Allegorical  Interpretation  of  Scripture.  V.  Illustra 
tions  of  Augustine's  Skill  as  an  Interpreter  of  Scripture.  VI. 
Augustine  on  John  the  Baptist  and  on  St.  Stephen.  VII.  Au 
gustine  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  VIII.  Miscellaneous  Ex 
amples  of  Augustine's  Interpretation  of  Scripture.  The  latter  half 
of  the  work  consists  of  Augustine's  Exposition  of  the  Sermon  on 
the  Mount,  not  however  a  mere  series  of  quotations  from  Augustine, 
but  a  connected  account  of  his  sentiments  on  the  various  passages  of 
that  Sermon,  interspersed  with  criticisms  by  Archbishop  Trench. 

SERMONS  PREACHED   in  WESTMINSTER  ABBEY. 
Second  Edition.     8vo.      IQJ.  6d. 

These  Sermons  embrace  a  wide  variety  of  topics,  and  are  thoroughly 
practical,    earnest,    and  evangelical,    and  simple  in  style.      The  • 
following  are  a  few  of  the  subjects: — "  Tercentenary  Celebration 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  63 

Trench — continued. 

of  Queen  Elizabeth's  Accession;'1''  "Conviction  and  Conversion;" 
"  77ie  Incredulity  of  Thomas;'1''  "  The  Angels'1  Hymn;'1''  "Count 
ing  the  Cost;"  ''''The  Holy  Trinity  in  Relation  to  our  Prayers ;" 
"On  the  Death  of  General  Havelock;"  "Christ  Weeping  over 
Jerusalem;"  "Walking  with  Christ  in  White." 

SHIPWRECKS    OF    FAITH.      Three    Sermons   preached 
before  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  May,   1867.     Fcap.  8vo. 

2s.  6d. 

These  Sermons  are  especially  addressed  to  young  men.  The  subjects 
are  "Balaam"  "Saul"  and  "Judas  Iscariot,"  three  of  the 
mournfullest  lives  recorded  in  Scripture,  "for  the  greatness  of 
their  vocation,  and  their  disastrous  falling  short  of  the  same, 
for  the  utter  defeat  of  their  lives,  for  the  shipwreck  of  everything 
which  they  made. "  These  lives  are  set  forth  as  beacon-lights, 
' '  to  warn  us  off  from  perilous  reefs  and  quicksands,  which  have 
been  the  destruction  of  many,  and  which  might  only  too  easily  be 
ours. ' '  The  Job  n  Bull  says,  ' '  they  are,  like  all  he  writes,  affectionate 
and  earnest  discourses." 

Tudor.— The  DECALOGUE  VIEWED  as  the  CHRIST 
IAN'S  LAW.  With  Special  Reference  to  the  Questions  and 
Wants  of  the  Times.  By  the  Rev.  RICH.  TUDOR,  B.A.  Crown 
8vo.  IDS.  6d. 

The  author's  aim  is  to  bring  out  the  Christian  sense  of  the  Decalogue 
in  its  application  to  existing  needs  and  questions.  The  work  will 
be  found  to  occupy  ground  which  no  other  single  work  has  hitherto 
filled.  It  is  divided  into  Two  Parts,  the  First  Part  consisting  of 
three  lectures  on  "Duty"  and  the  Second  Part  of  twelve  lectures 
on  the  Ten  Commandments.  TheG\\3.r<\\zaisaysofit,  "His  volume 
throughout  is  an  outspoken  and  sound  exposition  of  Christian 
morality,  based  deeply  ttpon  true  foundations,  set  forth  system 
atically,  and  forcibly  and  plainly  expressed — as  good  a  specimen  of 
what  pulpit  lectures  ought  to  be  as  is  often  to  be  found. "  The 
Westminster  Review  says,  "  There  is  an  earnestness  in  his 
purpose  and  evidently  a  sincere  endeavour  to  apply  the  words  of 
Scripture  to  present  needs." 


64  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Tulloch.— THE  CHRIST  OF  THE  GOSPELS  AND 
THE  CHRIST  OF  MODERN  CRITICISM.  Lectures  on 
M.  RENAN'S  "Vie  de  Jesus."  By  JOHN  TULLOCH,  D.D., 
Principal  of  the  College  of  St.  Mary,  in  the  University  of  St. 
Andrew's.  Extra  fcap.  8vo.  4^.  €>d. 

While  Dr.  Tulloch  does  not  hesitate  to  grapple  boldly  with  the 
statements  and  theories  of  Renan,  he  does  so  in  a  spirit  of  perfect 
fairness  and  courtesy,  eschewing  all  personalities  and  sinister  in 
sinuations  as  to  motives  and  sincerity.  The  -work  will  be  found 
to  be  a  fair  and  full  statement,  in  Dr.  Tulloctts  eloquent  style, 
of  the  case  as  it  stands  against  Kenan's  theory.  "Amongst  direct 
answers,"  says  the  Reader,  "fa  M.  Renan,  this  -volume  will  not 
be  easily  surpassed.  .  .  The  style  is  animated,  pointed,  and  scholarly ; 
the  tone  fair  and  appreciative;  the  philosophy  intelligent  and 
cautious;  the  Christianity  liberal,  reverent,  and  hearty." 

Vaughan. — Works  by  CHARLES  J.  VAUGHAN,  D.D.,  Master 

of  the  Temple  : — 

Dr.  Vaugharfs  genuine  sympathy  with  the  difficulties,  sorrows  and 
struggles  of  all  classes  of  his  fellow-men,  his  thorough  disinterested 
ness,  and  his  high  views  of  life  have  been  acknowledged  by  critics  of 
all  creeds.  No  sermons  can  be  more  applicable  to  the  ever- 
recurring  ills,  bodily,  mental,  and  spiritual,  that  flesh  is  heir  to. 
His  commentaries  and  expository  lectures  are  those  of  a  faithful 
evangelical,  btit  at  the  same  time  liberal-minded  interpreter  of 
what  he  believes  to  be  the  Word  of  God. 

CHRIST  SATISFYING  THE  INSTINCTS  OF  HU 
MANITY.  Eight  Lectures  delivered  in  the  Temple  Church. 
Extra  fcp.  8vo.  3-r.  6d. 

The  object  of  these  Sermons  is  to  exhibit  the  spiritual  wants  of  human 
nature,  and  to  prove  that  all  of  them  receive  full  satisfaction  in 
Christ.  77/e  various  instincts  which  He  is  shewn  to  meet  are  those 
of  Truth,  Reverence,  Perfection,  Liberty,  Courage,  Sympathy, 
Sacrifice,  and  Unity.  "We  are  convinced  that  there  are  congrega 
tions,  in  number  unmistakeably  increasing,  to  whom  such  Essays 
as  these,  full  of  thought  and  learning,  are  infinitely  more  beneficial, 
for  they  are  more  acceptable,  than  the  recognised  type  of  sermons. " 
—John  Bull. 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  65 

Vaughan  (Dr.  C.  J.)— continued. 

MEMORIALS  OF  HARROW  SUNDAYS.  A  Selection 
of  Sermons  preached  in  Harrow  School  Chapel.  With  a  View 
of  the  Chapel.  Fourth  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  icw.  6d. 

While  these  Sermons  deal  with  subjects  that  in  a  peculiar  way  concern 
the  young,  and  in  a  manner  that  cannot  fail  to  attract  their  atten 
tion  and  influence  their  conduct,  they  are  in  every  respect  applicable 
to  people  of  all  ages.  ' ' Discussing, "  says  the  John  Bull,  ' '  those 
forms  of  evil  and  impediments  to  duty  which  peculiarly  beset  the 
young,  Dr.  Vaughan  has,  with  singular  tact,  blended  deep  thought 
and  analytical  investigation  of  principles  with  interesting  earnest 
ness  and  eloquent  simplicity."  The  Nonconformist  says  "the 
volume  is  a  precious  one  for  family  reading,  and  for  the  hand 
of  the  thoughtful  boy  or  young  man  entering  life." 

THE  BOOK  AND  THE  LIFE,  and  other  Sermons, 
preached  before  the  University  of  Cambridge.  New  Edition. 
Fcap.  8vo.  4s.  6d. 

These  Sermons  are  all  of  a  thoroughly  practical  nature,  and  some  of 
them  are  especially  adapted  to  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  anxious 
doubt.  "  They  meet,"  the  Freeman  says,  "in  what  appears  to  us 
to  be  the  one  true  method,  the  scepticism  and  indifference  to  religious 
truth  which  are  almost  sure  to  trouble  young  men  who  read  and 
think.  In  short,  we  know  no  book  more  likely  to  do  the  young  and 
inquiring  good,  or  to  help  them  to  gain  that  tone  of  mind  wanting 
•which  they  may  doubt  and  ask  for  ever,  because  always  doubting 
and  asking  in  vain. " 


TWELVE  DISCOURSES  on  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED 
WITH  THE  LITURGY  and  WORSHIP  of  the  CHURCH 
OF  ENGLAND.  Fcap.  8vo.  65-. 

Four  of  these  discourses  were  published  in  1860,  in  a  work  entitled 
Revision  of  the  Liturgy ;  four  others  have  appeared  in  the  form 
of  separate  sermons,  delivered  on  various  occasions,  and  published 
at  the  time  by  request ;  and  four  are  new.  All  will  be  found  to 

5 


66  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 


Vaughan  (Dr.  C.  J.) — continued. 

fall  strictly  under  the  present  title,  reviewing  the  chief  matters 
suggested  by  the  Church  Liturgy.  The  Appendix  contains  two 
articles, — one  on  "Subscription  and  Scruples"  the  other  on  the 
'''•Rubric  and  the  Burial  Service."  The  Press  characterises  the 
volume  as  ' '  eminently  -wise  and  temperate. " 


LESSONS  OF  LIFE  AND  GODLINESS.  A  Selection 
of  Sermons  preached  in  the  Parish  Church  of  Doncaster.  Fourth 
and  Cheaper  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  3^.  6d. 

This  volume  consists  of  Nineteen  Sermons,  mostly  on  subjects  con 
nected  with  the  every-day  vvalk  and  conversation  of  Christians. 
They  bear  such  titles  as  "  The  Talebearer,"  "Features  of  Charity," 
"  The  Danger  of  Relapse"  "  The  Secret  Life  and  the  Outward" 
"Family  Prayer"  "Zeal  without  Consistency"  "  The  Gospel  an 
Incentive  to  Industry  in  Business"  "Use  and  Abuse  of  the 
World."  The  Spectator  styles  them  "earnest  and  human.  They 
are  adapted  to  every  class  and  order  in  the  social  system,  and  will 
be  read  with  wakeful  interest  by  all  who  seek  to  amend  whatever 
may  be  amiss  in  their  natural  disposition  or  in  their  acquired 
habits. " 


WORDS  FROM  THE  GOSPELS.  A  Second  Selection 
of  Sermons  preached  in  the  Parish  Church  of  Doncaster.  Second 
Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  45-.  6d. 

In  this  volume  are  Twenty-two  Sermons  on  subjects  taken  from  one 
or  other  of  the  four  Gospels.  The  Nonconformist  characterises 
these  Sermons  as  "  of  practical  earnestness,  of  a  thoughtfulness  that 
penetrates  the  common  conditions  and  experiences  of  life,  and  brings 
the  truths  and  examples  of  Scripture  to  bear  on  them  with  singular 
force,  and  of  a  style  that  owes  its  real  elegance  to  the  simplicity  and 
directness  which  have  fine  culture  for  their  roots.  ...  A  book  than 
which  few  could  give  more  holy  pleasantness  and  solemn  purpose  to 
their  Sabbath  evenings  at  home." 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  67 

Vaughan  (Dr.  C.  J.) — continued. 

LESSONS  OF  THE  CROSS  AND  PASSION.  Six 
Lectures  delivered  in  Hereford  Cathedral  during  the  Week  before 
Easter,  1869.  Fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  Six  Sermons  on  subjects  mainly  connected  with 
the  death  and  passion  of  Christ.  The  titles  of  the  Sermons  are : — 
/.  "  Too  Late"  (Matt.  xxvi.  45^.  //.  "  The  Divine  Sacrifice  and 
the  Human  Priesthood."  III.  "Love  not  the  World."  IV. 
' '  The  Moral  Glory  of  Christ. "  V.  "  Chi  ist  made  perfect  through 
Suffering."  VI.  "Death  the  Remedy  of  Christ's  Loneliness." 
"  This  little  volume"  the  Nonconformist  says,  ''''exhibits  all  his 
best  characteristics.  Elmated,  calm,  and  clear,  the  Sermons  owe 
much  to  their  force,  and  yet  they  seem  literally  to  owe  nothing  to  it. 
They  are  studied,  but  their  grace  is  the  grace  of  perfect  simplicity. " 

LIFE'S  WORK  AND  GOD'S  DISCIPLINE.  Three 
Sermons.  Fcap.  8vo.  cloth.  2s.  6d. 

The  Three  Sermons  contained  in  this  volume  have  a  oneness  of  aim 
indicated  bv  the  title,  and  are  on  the follcnving  subjects : — /.  ' '  77?^ 
Work  burned  and  the  Workmen  saved."  II.  '•'•The  Individual 
Hiring. "  III.  ' '  The  Remedial  Discipline  of  Disease  and  Death. " 

THE  WHOLESOME  WORDS  OF  JESUS  CHRIST. 
Four  Sermons  preached  before  the  University  of  Cambridge  in 
November  1866.  Second  Edition.  Fcap.  8vo.  cloth.  35.  6d. 

Dr.  Vaughan  uses  the  word  "Wholesome"  here  in  its  literal  and 
original  sense,  the  sense  in  which  St.  Paul  uses  it,  as  meaning 
healthy,  sound,  conducing  to  right  living ;  and  in  these  Sermons 
he  points  out  and  illustrates  several  of  the  "ivholesome"  character 
istics  of  the  Gospel, — the  Words  of  Christ.  The  subjects  of  these 
Sermons  are  as  follow: — /.  "Naturalness  and  Spirituality  of 
Revelation — Grandeur  and  Self-Control — Truthfulness  and  Ten 
derness.  "  II.  "  Universality  and  Individuality  of  Chris fs  Gospel. " 
III.  ''''Oblivions  and  Ambitions  of  the  Life  of  Grace."  IV. 
"Regrets  and  Preparations  of  Human  Life.''''  The  John  Bull 
says  this  volume  is  "replete  with  all  the  author's  well-known 
vigour  of  thought  and  richness  of  expression." 


68  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Vaughan  (Dr.  C.  ].)— continued. 

FOES    OF    FAITH.     Sermons   preached   before   the    Uni 
versity  of  Cambridge  in  November  1868.     Fcap.  8vo.     3^.  6d. 

The  "Foes  of  Faith"  preached  against  in  these  Foiir  Sermons  are: — 
/.  "Unreality.''''  II.  "Indolence."  III.  "Irreverence."  IV. 
"Inconsistency," — "Foes,"  says  the  author,  "which  must  be  man 
fully  fought-  against  by  all  who  would  be  finally  admitted  into  that 
holy  communion  and  fellowship  which  is,  for  time  and  eternity, 
the  blessed  company  of  all  faithful  people."  "  They  are  written" 
the  London  Review  says,  "with  culture  and  elegance,  and  exhibit 
the  thoughtful  earnestness,  piety,  and  good  sense  of  their  author." 


LECTURES  ON  THE  EPISTLE  to  the  PHILIPPIANS. 

Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     7-r-  6</. 

Each  Lecture  is  prefaced  by  a  literal  translation  from  the  Greek 
of  the  paragraph  which  forms  its  subject,  contains  first  a  minute 
explanation  of  the  passage  on  which  it  is  based,  and  then  a 
practical  application  of  the  verse  or  clause  selected  as  its  text. 
The  Press  speaks  of  these  Lectures  thus: — "Replete  with  good 
sense  and  practical  religious  advice.  .  .  The  language  of  the 
Apostle  assumes  a  practical  significance,  which  it  seldom  wears 
in  the  eyes  of  any  ordinary  reader,  and  Dr.  Vaughan's  listeners 
would  feel  themselves  placed  in  the  position  of  men  receiving 
inspired  instruction  on  the  ordinary  business  of  life.  We  can 
scarcely  praise  this  plan  too  highly. " 

LECTURES   ON  THE   REVELATION   OF   ST.  JOHN. 
Third  and  Cheaper  Edition.     Two  Vols.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    9^. 

In  this  the  Third  Edition  of  these  Lectures,  the  literal  translations  of 
the  passages  expounded  will  be  found  interwoven  in  the  body  of 
the  Lctures  themselves.  In  attempting  to  expound  this  most- 
•  hard-to-understand  Book,  Dr.  Vaughan,  while  taking  from  others 
what  assistance  he  required,  has  not  adhered  to  any  particular 
school  of  interpretation,  but  has  endeavoured  to  shew  forth  the 
significance  of  this  Revelation  by  the  help  of  his  strong  common 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  69 

Vaughan  (Dr.  C.  J.) — continued. 

sense,  critical  acumen,  scholarship,  and  reverent  spirit.  "Dr. 
Vang/tan's  Sermons,"  the  Spectator  says,  "are  the  most  practical 
discourses  on  the  Apocalypse  with  which  we  are  acquainted."  Pre 
fixed  is  a  Synopsis  of  the  Book-of  Revelation,  and  appended  is  an 
Index  of  passages  illustrating  the  language  of  the  Book. 

EPIPHANY,  LENT,  AND  EASTER.  A  Selection  of 
Expository  Sermons.  Third  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  icw.  6d. 

The  first  eighteen  of  these  Sermons  were  preached  during  the  seasons 
of  1 860,  indicated  in  the  title,  and  are  practical  expositions  of  pas 
sages  taken  from  the  lessons  of  the  days  on  which  they  were  delivered. 
The  last  eight  Sermons  were  added  to  the  Second  Edition.  As  in 
the  case  of  the  Lectures  on  Philippians,  each  Lecture  is  prefaced 
with  a  careful  and  literal  rendering  of  the  original  of  the  passage 
of  which  the  Lecture  is  an  exposition.  The  Nonconformist  says 
that  ' '  in  simplicity,  dignity,  close  adherence  to  the  words  of  Scrip 
ture,  insight  into  '  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,'  and  practical  thought- 
fulness,  they  are  models  of  that  species  of  pulpit  instruction  to  which 
they  belong." 

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  PAUL.  For  English  Readers. 
PART  I.,  containing  the  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS. 
Second  Edition.  8vo.  is.  6d.  Each  Epistle  will  be  published 
separately  in  its  chronological  order. 

It  is  the  object  of  this  work  to  enable  English  readers,  unacquainted 
with  Greek,  to  enter  with  intelligence  into  the  meaning,  connection, 
and  phraseology  of  the  writings  of  the  great  Apostle,  (i)  Each 
Epistle  will  be  prefaced  by  an  Introduction  containing  information 
as  to  the  circumstances,  design,  and  order  of  its  composition.  (2) 
The  Authorized  English  Version  occupies  the  foremost  place  in 
each  page.  (3)  Beside  it,  in  smaller  type,  is  a  literal  English 
Version,  made  from  the  original  Greek.  (4)  A  free  paraphrase 
stands  belmv,  in  which  it  is  attempted  to  express  the  sense  and 
connection  of  the  Epistle.  (5)  The  Notes  include  both  doctrinal 
explanation  and  verbal  illustration;  occasionally  a  brief  word  of 
application  has  been  introduced. 


70  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Vaughan   (Dr.  C.  J.) — continued. 

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.     The  Greek 

Text,    with   English   Notes.       Third    Edition,    greatly   enlarged. 

Crown  8vo.     *]s.  6d. 

This  volume  contains  the  Greek  Text  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  as 
settled  by  the  Rev.  B.  F.  Westcott,  D.D.,  for  his  complete  recension 
of  the  Text  of  the  New  Testament.  Appended  to  the  text  are  copious 
critical  and  exegetical  Notes,  the  result,  of  almost  eighteen  years' 
study  on  the  part  of  the  author.  The  "Index  of  Words  illustrated 
or  explained  in  the  Notes"  will  be  found,  in  some  considerable 
degree,  an  Index  to  the  Epistles  as  a  whole.  " /  have  desired," 
the  author  says,  ' '  to  catch  and  to  represent  the  meaning  of  each 
passage  and  of  tJie  whole,  without  deriving  it  from  anv  secondary 
source.  One  of  my  principal  endeavours  has  been,  to  trace  through 
the  New  Testament  the  uses  of  the  more  remarkable  words  or  phrases 
which  occur  in  the  Epistle,  arranging  them,  where  the  case  required 
it,  under  their  various  modifications  of  sense."  Prefixed  to  the 
•volume  is  a  discourse  on  "St.  Paul's  Conversion  and  Doctrine," 
suggested  by  some  recent  publications  on  St.  Paul's  theological 
standing.  In  the  Preface  to  the  Third  Edition,  -winch  has 
been  almost  entirely  rewritten,  among  other  things,  is  a  Synopsis  of 
the  contents  of  the  Epistle.  The  Guardian  says  of  the  work, — 
"For  educated  young  men  his  commentary  seems  to  fill  a  gap 
hitherto  unfilled.  .  .  As  a  -whole,  Dr.  Vaughan  appears  to  us  to 
have  given  to  the  world  a  valuable  book  of  original  and  careful  and 
earnest  thought  bestowed  on  the  accomplishment  of  a  work  which 
will  be  of  much  set-vice  and  which  is  much  needed." 

THE  CHURCH  OF  THE  FIRST  DAYS. 
Series  I.     The  Church  of  Jerusalem.     Second  Edition. 

"    II.     The  Church  of  the  Gentiles.     Second  Edition. 

"  III.     The  Church  of  the  World.      Second  Edition. 
Fcap.  8vo.  cloth.     A,S.  6d.  each. 
The  work  is  in  three  volumes : — /.    ' '  The  Church  of  Jerusalem, " 

extending  from  the  1st  to  the  %th  chapter  (inclusive)  of  the  Acts. 

//.  "  The  Church  of  the  Gentiles,"  from  the  gtA  to  the  i6//t  chapter. 

III.    "The  Church  of  the   World"  from    the  i"jth   to   the   zWi 

chapter.      Where   necessary,    the  Authorized    Version    has    been 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  71 

Vaughan  (Dr.  C.  J.) — continued. 

departed  from,  and  a  nezv  literal  translation  taken  as  the  basis  of 
exposition.  All  possible  topographical  and  historical  light  has  been 
brought  to  bear  on  the  subject ;  and  while  thoroughly  practical  in 
their  aim,  these  Lectures  will  be  found  to  afford  a  fair  notion  of  the 
history  and  condition  of  the  Primitive  Church.  The  British 
Quarterly  says, — "These  Sermons  are  worthy  of  all  praise,  and 
are  models  of  pulpit  teaching." 

COUNSELS  for  YOUNG  STUDENTS.  Three  Sermons 
preached  before  the  University  of  Cambridge  at  the  Opening  of 
the  Academical  Year  1870-71.  Fcap.  8vo.  2s.  6d. 

The  titles  of  the  Three  Sermons  contained  in  this  volume  are : — /. 
"  The  Great  Decision. "  II.  ' '  The  House  and  the  Builder. "  III. 
"  The  Prayer  and  the  Counter- Prayer. "  They  all  bear  pointedly, 
earnestly,  and  sympathisingly  upon  the  conduct  and  pursuits  of 
young  students  and  young  men  generally,  to  counsel  whom,  Dr. 
Vaughan' s  qualifications  and  aptitude  are  -well  known. 

NOTES     FOR     LECTURES     ON     CONFIRMATION, 

with  suitable  Prayers.     Eighth  Edition.     Fcap.  Svo.      is.  6d. 

In  preparation  for  the  Confirmation  held  in  Harrow  School  Chapel, 
Dr.  Vaughan  was  in  the  habit  of  printing  week  by  week,  and  dis- 
tribtiting  among  the  Candidates,  somewhat  full  notes  of  the  Lecture 
he  purposed  to  deliver  to  them,  together  with  a  form  of  Prayer 
adapted  to  the  particular  subject.  He  has  collected  these  weekly 
Notes  and  Prayers  into  this  little  volume,  in  the  hope  that  it  may 
assist  the  labours  of  those  who  are  engaged  in  preparing  Candidates 
for  Confirmation,  and  who  find  it  difficult  to  lay  their  hand  upon 
any  one  book  of  suitable  instruction.  The  Press  says  the  -work 
"  commends  itself  at  once  by  its  simplicity  and  by  its  logical 
arrangement.  .  .  .  While  points  of  doctrine,  as  they  arise,  are  not 
lost  sight  of,  the  principal  stress  is  laid  on  the  preparation  of  the 
heart  rather  than  the  head." 

THE  TWO  GREAT  TEMPTATIONS.  The  Tempta 
tion  of  Man,  and  the  Temptation  of  Christ.  Lectures  delivered  in 
the  Temple  Church,  Lent  1872.  Extra  fcap.  Svo.  3.?.  6d. 


72  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Vaughan.— Works  by  DAVID  J.  VAUGHAN,  M.A.,  Vicar  of 

St.  Martin's,  Leicester  : — 

SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  ST.  JOHN'S  CHURCH, 
LEICESTER,  during  the  Years  1855  and  1856.  Crown  8vo. 
$s.  6d. 

These  Twetzfy-five  Sermons  embrace  a  great  -variety  of  topics,  all 
of  the  highest  interest,  are  thoroughly  practical  in  their  nature, 
and  calculated  to  give  a  hopeful  view  of  life  as  seen  in  the  light 
shed  upon  it  ly  Christianity. 

SERMONS  on  the  RESURRECTION.  With  a  Preface. 
Fcap.  8vo.  3.?. 

In  the  Preface  to  this  work,  the  author  expounds  and  endeavours  to 
justify  his  vinv  of  the  Atonement,  shewing  it  to  be  more  reasonable 
and  scriptural  than  the  ordinary  doctrine.  There  are  Seven 
Sermons  in  all,  bearing  the  following  titles : — /.  "  The  fellowship 
of  Christ's  Sufferings."  II.  "Christ  the  Resurrection  and  the 
Life."  III.  "Christ  our  Passover."  IV.  "Christ  the  Shepherd." 
V.  "The  True  Light  -which  lighteth  every  man."  VI.  ''''The 
City  of  God,  and  the  Light  thereof ."  VII.  "Christ  going  to  the 
Father,  and  the  Way  to  the  Father." 

CHRISTIAN  EVIDENCES  AND  THE  BIBLE.  New 
Edition,  revised  and  enlarged.  Fcap.  8vo.  cloth.  $s.  £>d. 

The  ?nain  object  of  this  series  of  Twelve  Sermons  is  to  shew,  that, 
quite  irrespective  of  any  theory  as  to  the  nature  of  the  Bible  and  the 
special  inspiration  of  its  authors,  there  is  good  and  sufficient  reason 
for  believing  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  reveals  and 
reconciles  men  to  the  Father.  The  author  thinks  that  the  true 
and  solid  rock,  upon  which  the  Church  really  stands  and  ought 
consciously  to  stand,  is  simply  the  confession  that  "Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  The  Preface  to  this,  the 
Second  Edition,  consists  of  an  "Analysis  of  the  Nature  of  Scien 
tific  Truth," — the  nature  of  the  evidence  which  is  universally  held 
to  be  sound  and  conclusive.  In  the  Sermons  themselves  the  Internal 
and  External  'Evidences  of  Christianity  and  cognate  subjects  are 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  73 

Vaughan  (D.  J.) — continued. 

discussed,  and  throughout  the  volume  are  several  long  notes  on  points 
occurring  in  the  text.  Appended  is  a  short  Essay  on  "  The  Nature 
and  Sphere  of  Law," — "  This  little  volume,"  the  Spectator  says, 
"is  a  model  of  that  honest  and  reverent  criticism  of  the  Bible  -which 
is  not  only  right,  but  the  duty  of  English  clergymen  in  such  times 
as  these  to  put  forth  from  the  pulpit." 

Venn.— ON  SOME  OF  THE  CHARACTERISTICS  OF 
BELIEF,  Scientific  and  Religious.  Being  the  Hulsean  Lectures 
for  1869.  By  the  Rev.  J.  VENN,  M.  A.  8vo.  6s.  6d. 

These  discourses  are  intended  to  illustrate,  explain,  and  work  out  into 
someof  their  consequences,  certain  characteristics  by  which  the  attain 
ment  of  religious  belief  is  prominently  distinguished  from  the  attain 
ment  of  belief  upon  most  other  subjects.  The  first  Lecture  is  an 
attempt  to  explain  what  is  the  nature  of  the  logical  foothold  for 
differences  of  opinion  among  men  ;  to  s/ieiv  -what  there  is  in  the 
constitution  of  the  evidence  which  makes  it  possible  for  these  differences 
to  commence  and  persist.  The  second  meets  the  question,  What  is 
the  criterion  of  truth  ?  HOT.V  are  we  to  decide  which  of  the  varying 
but  honest  judgments  on  the  same  sttbject  is  right  and  which  wrong? 
The  third  and  fourth  Lectures  are  devoted  to  working  out  into 
several  of  their  consequences  the  characteristics  of  evidence  on  re 
ligious  subjects  which  were  explained  and  illustrated  in  the  first. 

Warington.— THE  WEEK  OF  CREATION  ;  OR,  THE 
COSMOGONY  OF  GENESIS  CONSIDERED  IN  ITS 
RELATION  TO  MODERN  SCIENCE.  By  GEORGE  WAR 
INGTON,  Author  of  "The  Historic  Character  of  the  Pentateuch 
Vindicated."  Crown  8vo.  4?.  6d. 

The  greater  part  of  this  work  is  taken  ^tp  with  the  teaching  of  tlie 
Cosmogony.  Its  purpose  is  also  investigated,  and  a  chapter  is 
devoted  to  the  consideration  of  the  passage  in  which  the  difficulties 
occur.  "A  very  able  vindication  of  the  Mosaic  Cosmogony  by  a 
writer  who  unites  the  advantages  of  a  critical  knowledge  of  the 
Ilebrewtext  and  of  distinguished  scientific  attainments." — Spectator. 


74  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

WestCOtt. — Works  by  BROOKE  FOSS  WESTCOTT,  D.D., 
Regius  Professor  of  Divinity  in  the  University  of  Cambridge ; 
Canon  of  Peterborough  : — 

The  London  Quarterly,  speaking  of  Mr.  Westcott,  says, — "To  a 
learning  and  accuracy  •which  command  respect  and  confidence,  he 
unites  what  are  not  always  to  be  found  in  union  with  these  qualities, 
the  no  less  vahtable  faculties  of  lucid  arrangement  and  graceful  and 
facile  expression. " 

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE 
GOSPELS.  Fourth  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  los.  6d. 

The  author's  chief  object  in  this  work  has  been  to  shew  that  there  is 
a  true  mean  between  the  idea  of  a  formal  harmonization  of  the 
Gospels  and  the  abandonment  of  tlteir  absolute  truth.  After  an 
Introduction  on  the  General  Effects  of  tJie  course  of  Modern  Philo 
sophy  on  the  popular  views  of  Christianity,  he  proceeds  to 
determine  in  what  way  the  principles  therein  indicated  may  be 
applied  to  tJie  study  of  tlie  Gospels.  The  treatise  is  divided  into 
eight  Chapters: — /.  The  Preparation  for  the  Gospel.  II.  The 
Jewish  Doctrine  of  t lie  Messiah.  III.  The  Origin  of  the  Gospels. 
IV.  The  Characteristics  of  the  Gospels.  V.  The  Gospel  of  St. 
John.  VI.  and  VII.  TJie  Differences  in  detail  and  of  arrange 
ment  in  the  Synoptic  Evangelists.  VIII.  The  Diffictdties  of 
the  Gospels.  The  Appendices  contain  much  valuable  subsidiary 
matter. 

A  GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE 
CANON  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  DURING  THE 
FIRST  FOUR  CENTURIES.  Third  Edition,  revised.  Crown 
8vo.  icw.  6d. 

TJie  object  of  this  treatise  is  to  deal  with  the  New  Testament  as  a 
whole,  and  that  on  purely  historical  grounds.  The  separate  books 
of  which  it  is  composed  are  considered  not  individually,  but  as 
claiming  to  be  parts  of  the  apostolic  heritage  of  Christians.  The 
Author  has  thus  endeavoured  to  connect  the  history  of  the  New 
Testament  Canon  with  the  growth  and  consolidation  of  the  Catfwlic 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  75 

Westcott  (Dr.  B.  F.)— continued. 

Church,  and  to  point  out  the  relation  existing  between  the  amount  of 
evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  its  component  parts  and  the  vvhole 
mass  of  Christian  literature.  "  The  treatise"  says  the  British 
Quarterly,  "is  a  scholarly  performance,  learned,  dispassionate, 
discriminating,  worthy  of  his  subject  and  of  the  present  state  of 
Christian  literature  in  relation  to  it." 


THE  BIBLE  IN  THE  CHURCH.  A  Popular  Account 
of  the  Collection  and  Reception  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  the 
Christian  Churches.  Third  Edition.  i8mo.  45.  6d. 

The  present  volume  has  been  -written  under  the  impression  that 
a  History  of  the  whole  Bible,  and  not  of  the  New  Testament 
only,  -would  be  required,  if  those  unfamiliar  with  the  subject  were 
to  be  enabled  to  learn  in  what  manner  and  with  what  consent 
the  collection  of  Holy  Scriptures  was  first  made  and  then  enl 
arged  and  finally  closed  by  the  Church.  Though  the  work  is 
intended  to  be  simple  and  popular  in  its  method,  the  author,  for 
this  "very  reason,  has  aimed  at  the  strictest  accuracy.  The 
History  of  the  Bible  is  brought  down  to  the  \6th  century,  and 
the  Appendix  contains  two  articles, — /.  "On  the  History  of  the 
Canon  of  the  Old  Testament  before  the  Christian  Era. "  II. 
"On  the  Contents  of  the  most  ancient  MSS.  of  the  Christian 
Bible."  The  Literary  Churchman  says,  "Mr.  Wcstcotf  s  account 
of  the  'Canon'  is  true  history  in  the  very  highest  sense." 

A  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE 
ENGLISH  BIBLE.  Crown  8vo.  IQJ.  dd. 

In  the  Introduction  the  author  notices  briefly  the  earliest  vernacular 
versions  of  the  Bible,  especially  those  in  Anglo-Saxon.  Chapter  I. 
is  occupied  with  an  account  of  the  Manuscript  English  Bible  from 
the  \^th  century  down-wards ;  and  in  Chapter  II.  is  narrated, 
with  many  interesting  personal  and  other  details,  the  External 
History  of  the  Printed  Bible.  In  Chapter  III.  is  set  forth  the 
Internal  History  of  the  English  Bible,  shelving  to  what  extent 
the  various  English  Translations  were  independent,  and  to  what 


76  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Westcott  (Dr.  B.  F.)—  continued. 

extent  the  translators  -were  indebted  to  earlier  English  and  foreign 
versions.  In  the  Appendices,  among  other  interesting  and  valu 
able  matter,  -will  be  found  "Specimens  of  the  Earlier  and  Later 
Wycliffite  Versions-"  " Chronological  List  of  Bibles  ;"  "/4«  Ex 
amination  of  Mr.  Fronde's  History  of  the  English  Bible."  The 
Pall  Mall  Gazette  calls  the  work  "A  brief,  scholarly,  and,  to  a 
great  extent,  an  original  contribution  to  theological  literature. " 

THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE,  MANIFOLD  AND  ONE. 
Six  Sermons  preached  in  Peterborough  Cathedral.  Crown  8vo. 
2s.  6d. 

The  Six  Sermons  contained  in  this  volume  are  the  first  preached  by 
the  author  as  a  Canon  of  Peterborough  Cathedral.  The  subjects 
are: — /.  '''•Life  consecrated  by  the  Ascension."  II.  li Many  Gifts, 
One  Spirit."  III.  " The  Gospel  of  the  Resurrection."  IV. 
"Sufficiency  of  God."  V.  "Action  the  Test  of  Faith."  VI. 
"Progress  from  the  Confession  of  God."  The  Nonconformist 
calls  them  " 'Beautiful  discourses,  singularly  dez'out  and  tender." 

THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  RESURRECTION.  Thoughts 
on  its  Relation  to  Reason  and  History.  New  Edition.  Fcap. 
8vo.  4s.  6d. 

The  present  Essay  is  an  endeavour  to  consider  some  of  the  elementary 
truths  of  Christianity,  as  a  miraculous  Revelation,  from  the  side  of 
History  and  Reason.  The  author  endeavours  to  shew  that  a 
devout  belief  in  the  Life  of  Christ  is  quite  compatible  "with  a  broad 
view  of  the  course  of  human  progress  and  a  frank  trust  in  the  laws 
of  our  own  minds.  After  a  "Statement  of  the  Question,"  and 
an  Introduction  on  "Ideas  of  God,  Nature,  Miracles,"  Chapter 
I.  treats  of  "  The  Resurrection  and  History;"  Chapter  II.  "  The 
Resurrection  and  Man  ;"  Chapter  III.  "  The  Resurrection  and 
the  Church." — "  We  owe"  the  Patriot  says,  "Mr.  Westcott  a  very 
great  debt  of  gratitude  for  his  very  able  little  treatise,  so  faithful 
to  the  great  truths  which  are  so  precious  to  us,  so  catholic  and 
spiritual  in  its  conceptions  of  tJiese  truths,  and,  moreover,  so 
philosophical  in  analysis,  organism,  and  presentation." 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  77 

Wilkins.— THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD.  An  Essay, 
by  A,S.  WILKINS,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin  in  Owens  College, 
Manchester.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  y.  6d. 
This  is  the  Hid  sea  n  Prize  Essay  for  1869.  The  subject  proposed  by 
the  Trustees  -was,  ' '  The  Distinctive  Features  of  Christian  as 
compared  with  Pagan  Ethics."  This  the  author  treats  in  six 
chapters: — /.  "The  Object  and  Scope  of  the  Discussion.'"  II. 
and  III.  ''''Pagan  Ethics — their  Historical  Development"  and 
their  Greatest  Perfection."  IV.  V.  and  VI.  '•''Christian  Ethics 
— their  Method, "  their  Perfection"  and  their  Power."  The  author 
has  tried  to  shmv  that  the  Christian  ethics  so  far  transcend  the 
ethics  of  any  or  all  of  the  Pagan  systems  in  method,  in  purity  and 
in  power,  as  to  compel  us  to  assume  for  them  an  origin,  differing  in 
kind  from  the  origin  of  any  purely  human  system.  "  It  would  be 
difficult  to  praise  too  highly  the  spirit,  the  burden,  the  conclusions,  or 
the  scholarly  finish  of  this  beautiful  Essay." — British  Quarterly 
Review. 

Wilson.— RELIGIO  CHEMICI.  With  a  Vignette  beauti 
fully  engraved  after  a  Design  by  Sir  NOEL  PATON.  By  GEORGE 
WILSON,  M.D.  Crown  8vo.  8.r.  6d. 

"George  Wilson,"  says  the  Preface  to  this  volume,  "  had  it  in  his 
heart  for  many  years  to  -write  a  book  corresponding  to  the  Religio 
Medici  of  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  with  the  title  Religio  Chemici. 
Several  of  the  Essays  in  this  volume  were  intended  to  form  chapters 
of  it,  but  the  health  and  leisure  necessary  to  carry  out  his  plans 
were  never  attainable,  and  thus  fragments  only  of  the  designed 
work  exist.  These  fragments,  however,  being  in  most  cases  like 
finished  gems  waiting  to  be  set,  some  of  them  are  now  given  in 
a  collected  form  to  his  friends  and  the  public."  The  Contents 
of  the  volume  are : — "Chemistry  and  Natural  Theology."  "  The 
Chemistry  of  the  Stars ;  an  Argument  touching  the  Stars  and 
their  Inhabitants."  "Chemical  final  Causes;  as  illustrated  by 
the  presence  of  Phosphorus,  Nitrogen,  and  Iron  in  the  Higher 
Sentient  Organisms."  " 'Robert  Boyle."  "Wollaston."  "Life 
and  Discoveries  of  Dalton."  "  Thoughts  on  tlte  Resurrection;  an 
Address  to  Medical  Students." — "A  more  fascinating  volume" 
the  Spectator  says,  "has  seldom  fallen  into  our  hands." 


78  THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS. 

Wilson.— THE  BIBLE  STUDENT'S  GUIDE  TO  THE 
MORE  CORRECT  UNDERSTANDING  of  the  ENGLISH 
TRANSLATION  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT,  BY  RE 
FERENCE  TO  THE  ORIGINAL  HEBREW.  By  WILLIAM 
WILSON,  D.  D.,  Canon  of  Winchester.  Second  Edition,  carefully 
revised.  410.  25.?. 

' '  The  author  believes  that  the  present  work  is  the  nearest  approach 
to  a  complete  Concordance  of  every  -word  in  the  original  that  has 
yet  been  made:  and  as  a  Concordance,  it  may  be  found  of  great 
use  to  the  Bible  student,  while  at  the  same  time  it  serves  the 
important  object  of  furnishing  the  means  of  comparing  synonymous 
•words,  and  of  eliciting  their  precise  and  distinctive  meaning. 
The  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew  language  is  not  absolutely  necessary 
to  the  profitable  use  of  the  work ;  and  it  is  believed  that  many 
devout  and  accurate  students  of  the  Bible,  entirely  unacquainted 
with  it,  will  derive  great  advantage  from  frequent  reference  to 
these  pages. "  Introductory  to  the  body  of  the  work,  the  azithor 
gives  a  sketch  of  the  Construction  of  Hebrew.  The  plan  of  the 
work  is  simple:  every  word  occurring  in  the  English  Version  is 
arranged  alphabetically,  and  under  it  is  given  the  Hebrew  word  or 
words,  with  a  full  explanation  of  their  meaning,  of  which  it  is 
meant  to  be  a  translation,  and  a  complete  list  of  the  passages  where 
it  occurs.  Following  the  general  work  is  a  complete  Hebrew  and 
English  Index,  which  is,  in  effect,  a  Hebrnv-English  Dictionary. 
Appended  are  copious  examples  of  the  Figure  Paronomasia,  which 
occurs  so  frequently  in  the  Bible. 

Worship  (The)  of  God   and   Fellowship   among 

Men.     Sermons  on  Public  Worship.     By  Professor  MAURICE, 
and  others.     Fcap.  8vo.     3-r.  6d. 

This  volume  consists  of  Six  Sermons  preached  by  various  clergymen, 
and  although  not  addressed  specially  to  any  class,  were  suggested  by 
recent  efforts  to  bring  the  members  of  the  Working  Class  to  our 
Churches.  The  preachers  were — Professor  Maurice,  I.  " 'Preach 
ing,  a  Call  to  Worship."  II.  '•''The  Bible,  a  Revelation  of 
the  Beginning  and  End  of  Worship."  Re^'.  T.J.Rowsdl, 
"Common  Prayer,  the  Method  of  Worship."  Rev.  J.  LI.  Davies, 


THEOLOGICAL  BOOKS.  79 

I.  "Baptism,  an  Admission  to  the  Privilege  of  Worship."  II. 
"  The  Sabbath  Day,  the  Refreshment  of  Worship."  Rev.  D.  J. 
Vaughan,  ' '  The  Lord's  Supper,  the  most  Sacred  Bond  of  Worship. ' ' 
' '  They  are  very  suggestive  to  those  who  may  have  to  prepare  sermons, 
and  well  calculated  to  be  lent  amongst  the  more  thoughtful  pat  ish- 
ioners." — Literary  Churchman. 

Yonge  (Charlotte  M.)— SCRIPTURE  READINGS  for 
SCHOOLS  AND  FAMILIES.  By  CHARLOTTE  M.  YONGE, 
Author  of  "The  Heir  of  Redclyffe. "  Globe  8vo.  is.  6d.  With 
Comments.  3^.  6d. 

A  SECOND  SERIES.     From  Joshua  to  Solomon.     Extra  fcap.  8vo. 
is.  6d.     With  Comments.     3^".  £>d. 

Actual  need  has  led  the  author  to  endeavour  to  prepare  a  reading  book 
convenient  for  study  with  children,  containing'  the  very  words  of 
the  Bible,  with  only  a  fe~<.v  expedient  omissions,  and  arranged  in 
Lessons  of  such  length  as  by  experience  she  has  found  to  suit  with 
children's  ordinary  power  of  accurate  attentive  interest.  The  verse 
form  has  been  retained  because  of  its  convenience  for  children  reading 
in  class,  and  as  more  resembling  their  Bibles ;  but  the  poetical 
pm-tions  have  been  given  in  their  lines.  When  Psalms  or  portions 
from  the  Prophets  illustrate  or  fall  in  with  the  narrative,  they  are 
given  in  their  chronological  sequence.  The  Scripture  portion,  with 
a  very  few  notes  explanatory  of  mere  words,  is  bound  up  apart  to 
be  used  by  children,  while  the  same  is  also  supplied  with  a  brief 
comment,  the  purpose  of  which  is  either  to  assist  the  teacher  in 
explaining  the  lesson,  or  to  be  used  by  more  advanced  young  people 
to  whom  it  may  not  be  possible  to  give  access  to  the  authorities  whence 
it  has  been  taken.  Professor  Huxley  at  a  meeting  of  the  London 
School-board,  particularly  mentioned  the  Selection  made  by  Miss 
Yonge,  as  an  example  of  how  selections  might  be  made  for  School 
reading.  "Her  Comments  are  models  of  their  kind." — Literary 
Churchman. 


8o  M ACHILLAS  S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY. 


In  crown  8vo.  cloth  extra,  Illustrated,  price  4^.  6d.  each  Volume ;  also 

kept  in  morocco  and  calf  bindings  at  moderate  prices,  and  in 

Ornamental  Boxes  containing  Four  Vols.,  2is.  each. 

MACMILLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY. 

A  SERIES  OF  ORIGINAL  WORKS  BY  EMINENT  AUTHORS. 

The  projectors  of  the  SUNDAY  LIBRARY  feel  that  there  is  a  "want  of 
books  of  a  kind  that  will  be  -welcome  in  many  Households  for  reading 
on  Sundays,  and  will  be  in  accordance  with  earnest  convictions  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  "Sabbath  Day." 

Sunday  should  contain  the  theory,  the  collective  view,  of  our  work-day 
lives;  and  these  work-days  should  be  the  Sunday  in  action.  Our 
Simday  Books,  therefore,  ought  to  do  more  than  afford  abstract  sub 
jects  of  meditation ;  they  should  exercise  a  living  power,  by  bringing 
us  into  direct  contact  with  all  that  is  true  and  noble  in  human  nature 
and  human  life,  and  by  shewing  us  the  life  of  Christ  as  the  central 
truth  of  humanity. 

For  Sunday  reading,  therefore,  we  need  not  only  history,  but  history  in 
its  relation  to  Christianity ;  not  only  biography,  but  the  lives  of  men 
•who  have  consciously  promoted  the  Christian  religion — Christian 
heroes  in  art,  in  science,  in  divinity,  and  in  social  action.  The 
history  of  Christianity,  permanent  and  progressive,  is  also  the  history 
of  civilization,  and  from  the  growth  of  the  latter  we  may  be  strengthened 
in  the  faith  that  the  former  will  ultimately  prevail  throughout  the 
whole  world. 

The  Publishers  have  secured  the  co-operation  of  very  eminent  writers, 
a  list  of  whom,  with  the  works  they  undertake,  is  herewith  given. 


MACMiLLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY.  81 


THE  FOLLOWING    VOLUMES  ARE  NOW  READY:— 

The  Pupils  of  St.  John  the  Divine. — By  CHARLOTTE 
M.  YONGE,  Author  of  "The  Heir  of  Redclyffe." 

The  author  first  gives  a  full  sketch  of  the  life  and  -work  of  the 
Apostle  himself,  drawing  the  material  from  all  the  most  trustworthy 
authorities,  sacred and profane ;  then  follow  thelivesofhis  immediate 
disciples,  Ignatius,  Quadratus,  Poly  carp,  and  others;  which  are  suc 
ceeded  by  the  lives  of  many  of  their  pupils.  The  author  then  proceeds 
to  sketch  from  their  foundation  the  history  of  the  many  churches 
planted  or  superintended  by  St.  John  and  his  pupils,  both  in  the 
East  and  West.  In  the  last  chapter  is  given  an  account  of  the 
present  aspect  of  the  Churches  of  St.  John, — the  Seven  Churches  of 
Asia  mentioned  in  Revelations  ;  also  those  of  Athens,  of  Nimes,  of 
Lyons,  and  others  in  the  West.  Throughout  the  volume,  much  of 
early  Church  History  is  necessarily  introduced,  and  details  are 
given  of  the  many  persecutions  to  -which  Christianity  was  subjected 
during  its  struggling  infancy.  "  Young  and  old  will  be  equally 
refreshed  and  taught  by  these  pages,  in  which  nothing  is  dull,  and 
nothing  is  far-fetched. " — Churchman. 


The  Hermits. — By  CANON  KINGSLEY. 

In  the  Introduction  to  this  volume,  Mr.  Kingsley  shews  that  early 
hermit-life  was  a  natural  outcome  of  the  corrupt  condition  of 
Roman  society,  "which,  was  no  place  for  honest  men," —  "where 
but  to  think  was  to  be  full  of  sorrow  and  leaden-eyed  despair." 
The  hermits  ' '  were  a  school  of  philosophers  who  altered  the  whole 
current  of  human  thought ;  their  influence  is  being  felt  around  us  in 
many  a  puzzle- — educational,  social,  and political ;"  these  lives  afford 
a  "key  to  many  a  lock,  which  just  now  refuses  to  be  tampered  with 
or  burst  open."  The  volume  contains  the  lives  of  some  of  the  most 
remarkable  early  Eg)<ptian,  Syrian,  Persian,  and  Western  hermits. 
The  lives  are  mostly  translations  from  the  original  biographies ; 
' '  the  reader  will  thus  be  able  to  see  the  men  as  wholes,  to  judge  of 
their  merits  and  defects." — "It  is  from  first  to  last  a  production 
full  of  interest,  written  with  a  liberal  appreciation  of  what  is 

6 


82  MACMILLAWS  SUNDAY  LIBRARY. 

memorable  for  good  in  the  lives  of  the  Hermits,  and  with  a  wise 
forbearance  towards  legends  which  may  be  due  to  the  ignorance, 
and,  no  doubt,  also  to  the  strong  faith  of  the  early  chroniclers." — 
London  Review. 


Seekers  after  God. — By  the  Rev.  F.  W.  FARRAR,  M.A., 
F.R.S.,  Head  Master  of  Marlborough  College. 

In  this  volume  the  author  seeks  to  record  the  lives,  and  gives  copious 
samples  of  the  almost  Christ-like  utterances  of,  with  perhaps  the 
exception  of  Socrates,  ' '  the  best  and  holiest  characters  presented 
to  us  in  the  records  of  antiquity."  They  are  Seneca,  Epictetus, 
and  Marcus  Aurelius,  most  appropriately  called  ''''Seekers  after 
God,"  seeing  that  "amid  infinite  difficulties  and  surrounded  by 
a  corrupt  society,  they  devoted  themselves  to  the  earnest  search  after 
those  truths  -which  might  best  make  their  lives  '  beautiful  before 
God. ' "  The  reader  will  learn  from  this  volume  in  what  kind  of 
atmosphere  the  influences  of  Christianity  were  forced  to  work. 
Many  details  are  also  given  which  afford  an  insight  into  Roman 
life  and  manners,  the  kind  of  education  bestowed  on  Roman  youth, 
and  the  characteristics  of  the  chief  systems  of  ancient  philosophy. 
The  volume  contains  portraits  of  Aurelius,  Seneca,  and  Antoninus 
Pius.  "We  can  heartily  recommend  it  as  healthy  in  tone,  in 
structive,  interesting,  mentally  and  spiritually  stimulating  and 
nutritious. " — Nonconformist. 


England's  Antiphon. — By  GEORGE  MACDONALD. 

This  volume  deals  chiefly  with  the  lyric  or  song-form  of  English 
religious  poetry,  other  kinds,  however,  being  not  infrequently  in 
troduced.  The  author  has  sought  to  trace  the  course  of  our 
religious  poetry  from  the  i^th  to  the  ityh  centuries,  from  before 
Chaucer  to  Tennyson.  He  endeavours  to  accomplish  his  object  by 
selecting  the  men  who  have  produced  the  finest  religious  poetry, 
setting  forth  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were  placed,  charac 
terising  the  men  themselves,  critically  estimating  their  productions, 
and  giving  ample  specimens  of  their  best  religious  lyrics,  and 


MACMILLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY.  83 

quotations  from  larger  poems,  illustrating  the  religious  feeling 
of  the  poets  or  their  times.  Thus  the  volume,  besides  providing 
a  concert  of  the  sweetest  and  purest  music,  -will  be  found  to  exhibit 
the  beliefs  held  and  aspirations  cherished  by  many  of  the  noblest, 
purest,  and  most  richly  endowed  minds  during  the  last  600  years. 
—  "Dr.  Macdonald  has  very  successfully  endeavoured  to  bring 
together  in  his  little  book  a  whole  series  of  the  sweet  singers  oj 
England,  and  makes  them  raise,  one  after  the  other,  their  voices  in 
praise  of  God. " — Guardian. 


Great  Christians  of  France  :    ST.  Louis  and  CALVIN. 

By  M.  GUIZOT. 

From  among  French  Catholics,  M.  Guizot  has,  in  this  volume,  selected 
Louis,  King  of  France  in  the  \yh  century,  and  among  Pro 
testants,  Calvin  the  Reformer  in  the  \6th  century,  "as  two 
earnest  and  ilhistrious  representatives  of  the  Christian  faith  and 
life,  as  well  as  of  the  loftiest  thought  and  purest  morality  of  their 
country  and  generation."  In  setting  forth  with  considerable  fulness 
the  lives  of  these  prominent  and  representative  Christian  men, 
M.  Guizot  necessarily  introduces  much  of  the  political  and  religious 
history  of  the  periods  during  which  they  lived.  "A  very  interesting 
book, "  says  the  Guardian. 


Christian    Singers    of    Germany.  —  By    CATHERINE 

WlNKWORTH. 

In  this  volume  the  authoress  gives  an  account  of  tht  principal 
hymn-writers  of  Germany  from  the  qth  to  the  i<)th  century, 
introducing  ample  (altogether  about  120  translations)  specimens 
fivm  their  best  productions.  In  the  translations,  while  the 
English  is  perfectly  idiomatic  and  harmonious,  the  characteristic 
differences  of  the  poems  have  been  carefully  imitated,  and  the  general 
style  and  metre  retained.  The  book  is  divided  into  chapters,  the 
writers  noticed  and  the  hymns  quoted  in  each  chapter,  being  re 
presentative  of  an  epoch  in  the  religious  life  of  Germany.  In  thus 
tracing  the  course  of  German  hymnology,  the  authoress  is  necessarily 


84  MACMILLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY. 

''brought  into  contact  -with  those  great  movements  which  have 
stirred  the  life  of  the  people." — "Miss  Winkwortli  s  volume  of  this 
series  is,  according  to  our  view,  the  choicest  production  of  her  pen." 
— British  Quarterly  Review. 

Apostles    of  Mediaeval    Europe. — By  the  Rev.  G.  F. 
MACLEAR,  D.D.,   Head  Master  of  King's  College  School,  London. 

In  two  Introductory  Chapters  the  author  notices  some  of  the  chief 
characteristics  of  the  mediceval  period  itself;  gives  a  graphic 
sketch  of  the  devastated  state  of  Europe  at  the  beginning  of 
that  period,  and  an  interesting  account  of  the  religions  of  the 
three  great  groups  of  vigorous  barbarians — the  Celts,  the  Teutons, 
and  the  Sclaves — who  had,  wave  after  wave,  overflowed  its  surface. 
He  then  proceeds  to  sketch  the  lives  and  work  of  the  chief  of  the 
courageous  men  who  devoted  themselves  to  the  stupendous  task  of 
their  conversion  and  civilization,  during  a  period  extending  from 
the  fyh  to  the  i^th  century ;  such  as  St.  Patrick,  St.  Columba,  St. 
Columbanus,  St.  Augustine  of  Canterbury,  St.  Boniface,  St.  Olaf, 
St.  Cyril,  Raymond  Sull,  and  others.  In  narrating  the  lives  of 
these  men,  many  glimpses  are  given  into  the  political,  social,  and 
religious  life  of  Europe  during  the  Middle  Ages,  and  many  interest 
ing  and  instructive  incidents  are  introduced.  "Afr.  Maclear  will 
have  done  a  great  work  if  his  admirable  little  volume  shall  help  to 
break  up  the  dense  ignorance  which  is  still  prevailing  among  people 
at  large. " — Literary  Churchman. 

Alfred  the  Great. — By  THOMAS  HUGHES,  M.P.,  Author 

of  "Tom  Brown's  School  Days." 

"  The  time  is  come  when  we  English  can  no  longer  stand  by  as 
interested  spectators  only,  but  in  which  every  one  of  our  institutions 
will  be  sifted  with  rigour,  and  will  have  to  shew  cause  for  its 
existence.  .  .  .  As  a  help  in  this  search,  this  life  of  the  typical 
English  King  is  here  offered."  After  two  Introductory  Chapters, 
one  on  Kings  and  Kingship,  and  another  depicting  the  condition 
of  Wessex  when  Alfred  became  its  ruler,  the  author  proceeds  to  set 
forth  the  life  and  work  of  this  great  prince,  shewing  hmo  he 


MACMILLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY.  85 

conducted  himself  in  all  the  relations  of  life.  In  the  last 
chapter  the  author  shews  the  bearing  which  Christianity  has  on  the 
kingship  and  government  of  the  nations  and  people  of  the  -world  in 
which  we  live.  Besides  other  illustrations  in  the  volume,  a  Map  of 
England  is  prefixed,  shelving  its  divisions  about  1000  A.D.,  as  well 
as  at  the  present  time.  ' '  Mr.  Hughes  has  indeed  written  a  good 
book,  bright  and  readable  we  need  hardly  say,  and  of  a  very  con 
siderable  historical  value." — Spectator. 


Nations  Around. — By  Miss  A.  KEARY. 

This  volume  contains  many  details  concerning  the  social  and  political 
life,  the  religion,  the  superstitions,  the  literature,  the  architecture, 
the  commerce,  the  industry,  of  the  Nations  around  Palestine,  an 
acquaintance  with  which  is  necessary  in  order  to  a  clear  and  full 
understanding  of  the  history  of  the  Hebrew  people.  The  authoress 
has  brought  to  her  aid  all  the  most  recent  investigations  into  the 
early  history  of  these  nations,  referring  frequently  to  the  fruitful 
excavations  which  have  brought  to  light  the  ruins  and  hieroglyphic 
writings  of  many  of  their  buried  cities.  "Miss  Keary  has  skil 
fully  availed  herself  of  the  opportunity  to  write  a  pleasing  and  in 
structive  book. " — Guardian.  '  'A  valuable  and  interesting  volume. " 
— Illustrated  Times. 


St.  Anselm.— By  the  Very  Rev.  R.  W.  CHURCH,  M.A.,  Dean 
of  St.  Paul's. 

In  this  biography  of  St.  Anselm,  while  the  story  of  his  life  as  a 
man,  a  Christian,  a  clergyman,  and  a  politician,  is  told  im 
partially  and  fully,  much  light  is  shed  on  the  ecclesiastical  and 
political  history  of  the  time  during  wJiich  he  lived,  and  on  the 
internal  economy  of  the  monastic  establishments  of  the  period. 
Of  the  worthiness  of  St.  Anselm  to  have  his  life  recorded,  Mr. 
Church  says,  "It  would  not  be  easy  to  find  one  who  so  joined  the 
largeness  and  daring  of  a  powerful  and  inquiring  intellect,  with 
the  graces  and  sweetness  and  unselfishness  of  the  most  loveable  of 
friends,  and  with  the  fortitude,  clear-sightedness,  and  dauntless 


86  MACMILLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY. 

firmness  of  a  hero,  forced  into  a  hero's  career  in  spite  of  himself  ." 
The  author  has  drawn  his  materials  from  contemporary  biographers 
and  chroniclers,  white  at  the  same  time  he  has  consulted  the  best 
recent  authors  who  have  treated  of  the  man  and  his  time.  "It  is 
a  sketch  by  the  hand  of  a  master,  with  every  line  marked  by  taste, 
learning,  and  real  apprehension  of  the  subject."  —  Pall  Mall 
Gazette. 


Francis  of  Assisi.— By  Mrs.  OLIPHANT. 

The  life  of  this  saint,  the  founder  of  the  Franciscan  order,  and  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  men  of  his  time,  illustrates  some  of  the  chief 
characteristics  of  the  religious  life  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Mrs. 
Oliphant,  in  an  Introduction,  gives  a  slight  sketch  of  the  political 
and  religious  condition  of  Europe  in  the  13^/2  century,  in  order  to 
shew  that  the  kind  of  life  adopted  by  St.  Francis  was  a  natural 
result  of  the  influences  by  which  he  was  surrounded.  In  the  sub 
sequent  biography  much  information  is  given  concerning  the  mis 
sionary  labours  of  the  saint  and  his  companions,  as  well  as  con 
cerning  the  religious  and  monastic  life  of  the  time.  Many  graphic 
details  are  introduced  from  the  saint's  contemporary  biographers, 
which  shew  forth  the  prevalent  beliefs  of  the  period  ;  and  abundant 
samples  are  given  of  St.  Francis's  own  sayings,  as  well  as  a  few 
specimens  of  his  simple  tender  hymns.  ' '  We  are  grateful  to  Mrs. 
Oliphant  for  a  book  of  much  interest  and  pathetic  beauty,  a  book 
which  none  can  read  without  being  the  better  for  it." — John  Bull. 


Pioneers  and  Founders ;  or,  Recent  Workers  in  the 
Mission  Field.  By  CHARLOTTE  M.  YONGE,  Author  of  "The 
Heir  of  Redclyffe."  With  Frontispiece,  and  Vignette  Portrait  of 
BISHOP  HEBER. 

The  author  has  endeavoured  in  these  narratives  to  bring  together  such 
of  the  more  distinguished  Missionaries  of  the  English  and  American 
Nations  as  might  best  illustrate  the  character  and  growth  of 
Mission-work  in  the  last  two  centuries.  The  object  has  been  to 
throw  together  such  biographies  as  are  most  complete,  most  illus- 


MACMILLAN'S  SUNDAY  LIBRARY.  87 

trative,  and  have  been  found  most  inciting  to  stir  up  others — 
representative  lives,  as  far  as  possible.  The  missionaries  whose 
biographies  are  here  given,  are — John  Eliot,  the  Apostle  of  the  Red 
Indians;  David  Brainerd,  the  Enthusiast ;  Christian  F.  Schwartz, 
the  Councillor  of  Tanjore ;  Henry  Marty n,  the  Scholar- Missionary  ; 
William  Carey  and  Joshua  Marshman,  the  Serampore  Missionaries  ; 
thejudson  Family ;  the  Bishops  of  Calcutta, — Thomas  Middlcton, 
Reginald  Heber,  Daniel  Wilson ;  Samuel  Marsden,  the  Australian 
Chaplain  and  Friend  of  the  Maori;  John  Williams,  the  Martyr 
of  Erromango  ;  Allen  Gardener,  the  Sailor  Martyr ;  Charles 
Frederick  Mackenzie,  the  Martyr  of  Zambesi.  "Likely  to  be  one 
of  the  most  popular  of  the  '  Sunday  Library'  volumes." — Literary 
Churchman. 


COMPILED  AND  ARRANGED   BY 

SIR    ROUNDELL    PALMER, 

In  the  following  four  forms : — 

A.  Beautifully  printed  in  Royal  32mo.,  limp  cloth,  price  6d. 

B.  ,,  ,,      Small  18mo.,  larger  type,  cloth,  limp,  Is. 

C.  Same  edition  on  fine  paper,  cloth,  Is.  6d. 

Also  an  edition  with  Music,  selected,  harmonized,  and  composed 
by  JOHN  HULL  AH,  in  square  18mo.,  cloth,  3s.  6d. 

The  large  acceptance  which  has  been  given  to  "  The  Book  of  Praise" 
by  all  classes  of  Christian  people  encourages  the  Publishers  in  entertaining 
the  hope  that  this  Hymnal,  -which  is  mainly  selected  from  it,  may  be  ex 
tensively  used  in  Congregations,  and  in  some  degree  at  least  meet  the 
desires  of  those  who  seek  uniformity  in  common  worship  as  a  means 
towards  that  unity  which  pious  souls  yearn  after,  and  which  our  Lord 
prayed  for  in  behalf  of  his  Church.  "The  office  of  a  hymn  is  not  to 
teach  controversial  Theology,  but  to  give  the  voice  of  song  to  practical 
religion.  No  doubt,  to  do  this,  it  must  embody  sound  doctrine ;  but  it 
oiight  to  do  so,  not  after  the  manner  of  the  schools,  but  with  the  breadth, 
freedom,  and  simplicity  of  the  Fountain-head. "  On  this  principle  has 
Sir  R.  Palmer  proceeded  in  the  preparation  of  this  book. 

The  arrangement  adopted  is  the  following  : — 

PART  I.  consists  of  Hymns  arranged. according  to  the  subjects  of  the 
Creed — "God  the  Creator,"  "Christ  Incarnate"  "Christ  Crucified" 
"Christ  Risen,"  "Christ  Ascended"  "Christ's  Kingdom  and  Judg 
ment,"  etc. 

PART  II.  comprises  Hymns  arranged  according  to  the  subjects  of  the 
Lord's  Prayer. 

PART  III.  Hymns  for  natural  and  sacred  seasons. 

There  are  320  Hymns  in  all. 


CAMBRIDGE: — PRINTED  BY  j.  PALMER. 


BR  BERNARD 
45     THE  PROGRESS  OF 

,B52  DOCTRINE  IN  THE  NEW 

1873  TESTAMENT     116742 


5" 


ISSMFD  TO 


