THE    LlDllARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  U:  IVZRSITY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


THE  PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY 


ON     THE 


BOOK  OF  PSALMS. 


THE 


Jr^acher's  Complete  ^otniUttcal 

COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


OLD    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN), 

Mith  Critical  anb  @xpknat0re  ^ote^,  inbias,  &€.,  Set 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1892 


THE 


PREACHEE'S    COMMENTARY 


0:^r  THE  BOOK  OF 


PSALMS. 


VOL.  I. 


ON  PSALMS  I.— XXV. 

By  W.  L.  WATKINSON; 

ON  PSALMS  XXVL—XXXV. 
By  W.  FORSYTH,  A.M.  ; 

ON  PSALMS  XXXVL— XXXVIII. 

Y  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL  ; 

ON  PSALMS  XXXIX.— LXXXVIL 

By  WILLIAM  JONES. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


1.  V      X 


-GHAM  YCL.        V     IVZRSITY 
PROVO,  UTAH 

http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet11newy 


HOMILETIO    OOMMEJ^TARY 


ONTHB 


PSALMS. 


BY  REV.  W.  L.  WATKINSON. 


PSALM  L 
Introduction. 

••  This  psalm  seems  to  have  been  placed  first  in  the  collection,  because,  from  its  general 
character  and  subject,  it  formed  a  suitable  introduction  to  the  rest.  It  treats  of  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  righteous,  and  the  misery  of  the  wicked — topics  which  constantly  recur  in  the 
psalms,  but  it  treats  of  them  as  if  all  experience  pointed  only  in  one  direction.  The  moral 
problem  which  in  other  psalms  troubles  the  ancient  poets  of  Israel,  when  they  see  the 
ftvil  prospering  and  the  good  oppressed,  has  here  no  place.  The  poet  rests  calmly  in  the 
truth  that  it  is  well  with  the  righteous.  He  is  not  vexed  with  those  passionate  questionings  of 
heart  which  meet  us  in  such  psalms  as  the  37th  and  73d.  Hence  we  may  probably  conclude 
that  his  lot  was  cast  in  happier  and  more  peaceful  times." — Perovme, 

The  Blessed  Life. 


{Verses 

Consider : 

I.  The  secret  of  the  blessed  life. 

*'  Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not 
in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,"  &c. 
(ver.  1.) 

Wherever  blessedness  is  to  be  found, 
it  is  not  in  these  directions.  What  a 
direct  contradiction  is  this  first  verse  to 
the  world's  philosophy  !  To  keep  the 
law  may  be  safe,  but  it  is  to  walk  in 
the  common  light  of  day ;  to  follow 
one's  own  counsels  is  to  dwell  in  the 
purple  light  of  pleasure.  So  argues  the 
natural  man ;  and  here  the  Psalmist  gives 
a  flat  denial  to  his  argument.  The  world 
is  wrong  ;  the  Psalmist  is  right.  Blessed 
is  the  man  who  abstains  from  ungodly 
policy,  iniquitous  action,  scornful  use  of 
things  divine  and  holy.  According  to 
a  custom  which  is  generally  recognised 
in  Central  Africa,  whenever  a  caravan 
mistakes  its  way,  and  is  obliged  to  re- 
trace its  steps  and  return  to  a  road  from 


1-3.) 

which  it  has  deviated,  a  bough  is  thrown 
across  the  wrong  path,  and  a  furrow  is 
scratched  in  the  ground  by  means  of  the 
feet,  so  that  no  succeeding  caravan  may 
fall  into  the  same  error.  Thus  the  gene- 
rations which  have  gone  astray  have  de- 
clared that  the  ways  of  ungodliness  and 
sin  are  ways  of  bitterness  and  disappoint- 
ment, and  they  have  left  their  emphatic 
and  sorrowful  testimonies  as  boughs  and 
furrows  across  these  false  ways,  to  ad- 
monish us  to  seek  another  and  a  truer 
path. 

But  a  merely  negative  goodness  will 
not  ensure  us  true  blessedness,  therefore 
the  Psalmist  proceeds  to  lay  down  the 
grand  secret  of  blessedness  in  profound 
spiritual  words.  "  But  his  delight  is  in 
the  law  of  the  Lord"  How  truly  pro- 
found !  How  superior  to  the  superficial 
theories  of  happiness  which  human 
moralists  have  from  time  to  time  put 
forth  1      Whichcote  truly  Bays:    ''Dutj 


FBALM  I. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


/and  happiness  are  vital  acts,  and  must 
be  put  forth  from  vital  principles/'  The 
vital  principle  is  here  declared.  *'  The 
philosophers'  discourses  of  this  subject 
are  but  learned  dotages.  David  saith 
more  to  the  point  in  this  short  psahn 
than  any  or  all  of  them  put  together ; 
they  did  but  beat  the  bush.  God  hath 
put  the  bird  into  our  haiwis." — Trapp. 

The  secret  of  bliss  is  the  right  attitude 
of  the  soul  to  the  truth  of  God. 

1.  A  right  relation  of  the  ivill  to  the 
law  of  God.  "But  his  will  is  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord." — Luther.  The  bias  of 
the  will  is  toward  Divine  truth.  The 
*'  ungodly"  are  self-willed,  and  walk  after 
their  own  "counsel;"  the  "blessed" 
man  consults  the  Divine  will,  and  is 
ever  longing  for  the  path  of  God's  com- 
mandments. "  The  *  will '  which  is  here 
signified  is  that  delight  of  heart,  and 
that  certain  pleasure,  in  the  law,  which 
does  not  look  at  what  the  law  promises, 
nor  at  what  it  threatens,  but  at  this 
only,  that  *the  law  is  holy,  and  just, 
and  good.*  Hence  it  is  not  only  a  love 
of  the  law,  but  that  loving  delight  'in 
the  law  which  no  prosperity,  nor  adver- 
sity, nor  the  world,  nor  the  prince  of  it, 
can  either  take  away  or  destroy ;  for  it 
victoriously  bursts  its  way  through 
poverty,  evil  report,  the  cross,  death, 
and  hell,  and  in  the  midst  of  adver- 
sities shines  the  brightest."  —  Luther, 
quoted  by  Spurgeon. 

2.  A  right  relation  of  the  affections 
to  the  law  of  God.  ^^ His  delight'^ 
"  The  law  is  more  than  a  mere  rule, 
after  which  the  man  is  to  frame  his  out- 
ward life." — Peroivne,  It  fills  with  ad- 
miration and  delight.  But  can  the  law 
of  God  thus  excite  the  affections  and 
rejoice  the  heart  ?     Yes ;  for,  as  Festus 


Bings — 


**  Law  is  love  defined. " 


The  godly  man  beholds  in  the  spiritual 
law  the  declaration  of  the  Divine  nature, 
which  is  essential  love,  and  he  delights 
in  that  law  after  the  inner  man. 

3.  A  right  relation  of  the  intelligence 
to  the  law  of  God.  "  He  meditates  on 
the  law  day  and  night.'"  We  must  know 
the  law  if  we  are  to  perceive  its  beauty 
and  appreciate  its  worth,  and  the  more 


we  know  of  it,  the  greater  shall  be  our 
joy  in  it.  Many  skim  the  Bible  as  a 
novel,  when  they  should  ponder  it,  and 
master  it,  line  by  line,  like  a  grammar; 
He  who  is  ignorant  of  the  Divine  law, 
or  misconceives  it,  cannot  know  true 
freedom  and  blessedness ;  but  he  whose 
eyes  are  opened  to  the  deep  things  of 
the  law,  walks  at  liberty,  and  knows 
peace  unspeakable. 

Let  us  not  seek  bliss  in  things  of 
time  and  sense,  but  let  us  labour  to 
know  the  will  of  God,  and  to  have  our 
hearts  harmonised  with  that  will,  and 
we  shall  find  rest  to  our  souls. 

Consider  : 

II.  The  picture  of  the  blessed  life. 

"  He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted," 
(kc.  (ver.  3.) 

L  The  security  Q>i  this  blessedness. 
"  Planted  by  the  rivers  of  water." 
"  Planted"  means  firmly  planted. 
"  Bivers,"  indicate  unfailing  refreshment 
of  spirit;  the  streams  of  Divine  truth 
and  influence.  Carnal  joys  flourish  and 
wither  with  changing  circumstances,  but 
his  joy  abides  whose  life  is  rooted  in 
God.  "  His  soul,  watered  by  the 
streams  of  Paradise,  knows  not  the 
parched  season  of  the  sunburnt  heath." 
— Sutcliffe.  "  By  the  side  of  the  streams 
in  the  East  may  be  seen  trees,  at  all 
seasons  covered  with  luxurious  verdure, 
blossoms,  or  fruit ;  whilst  at  a  distance, 
where  no  water  is,  may  be  seen  dwarfish 
and  unhealthy  trees,  with  scarcely  a 
leaf  to  shake  in  the  winds  of  heaven." — 
Roberts.  Thus,  drinking  supplies  from 
the  living  streams  of  God's  truth,  our  life 
is  ever  strong  and  blessed,  whilst  we  faint 
and  fade  where  no  such  water  is. 

2.  The  manifestation  of  this  blessed- 
ness. The  godly  man  is  known  by  the 
beneficence  of  his  life.  "  Brin-eth  forth 
his  fruit  in  his  season."  The  truly 
blessed  life  is  a  life  of  beneficence ;  and 
if  we  delight  in  God's  law,  it  shall  per- 
fect our  individual  character,  fit  us  for 
the  sphere  and  season  in  which  we  live, 
and  make  us  a  blessing  to  our  genera- 
tion. "  As  with  a  palm-tree,  all  that  is 
in  it  is  profitable — leaves,  wood,  and 
fruit — so  also  with  the  Christian,  all  that 
he  does  is  to  redound  to  the  honour  of 
the  Divine  name  and  the  benefit  of  his 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  L 


neighbour." — Starke,  The  godly  man 
is  known  by  the  beauty  of  his  character. 
"His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither. ''  As 
the  foliage  of  the  tree  is  its  beauty  and 
glory,  so  shall  delight  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord  give  grace  and  majesty  to  the 
character.  In  inner  rectitude  is  the 
secret  of  all  true  and  higb  visible  excel- 
lence ;  out  of  a  heart  right  with  God 
spring  all  the  poetry  ?.nd  utilities  of 
life. 

3.  The  perpetuity/  of  this  blessedness. 
The  tree  by  the  watercourses  abides  in 
bloom  and  fruition,  and  the  joy  and 
glory  which  spring  in  the  heart  and  life 
of  the  lover  of  God's  Word  are  perennial 
and  permanent.  Our  scientific  garden- 
ers enthusiastically  anticipate  the  day 
when,  through  special  culture,  all  our 
roses  will  have  evero^reen  foliaire,  bril- 
liant  and  fragrant  flowers,  and  the  habit 
of  blooming  for  a  greater  part  of  the 
ye;>r.  He  whose  life  is  grounded  in  the 
Divine  truth  and  goodness,  who  draws 
daily  vitality  from  the  river  of  God's 
I)]easure,  is  an  evergreen,  and  blooms  all 
the  year  long,  all  life  long,  and  death 
itself  cannot  blight  his  glory,  or  destroy 
hi.s  joy. 

4.  The  universality  of  this  blessed- 
ness.    "And  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall 


prosper."  "  He  shall  prosper  in  whatso- 
ever hedoeth." —  Wordsworth.  Deference 
to  the  law  of  God  secures  universal  pros- 
perity. God's  blessing  is  on  all  the 
handiwork  of  the  godly,  and  directs  it 
to  blessed  and  prosperous  issues. 

"  Oh  !  the  blessednesses"  of  the  man 
who  delights  in  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
As  we  long  for  the  beatitudes,  let  us 
put  ourselves  in  God's  hands.  "  Planted 
by  the  river."  "  This  is  properly  used 
of  a  transplanted,  tree.  He  is  not  left 
to  the  efibrts  of  nature,  but  taken  be- 
neath the  gardener's  care,  and  placed  in 
a  favourable  soil." — Kay.  "  Man  is 
ri<jhteous,  not  by  birth  or  nature,  or 
through  his  own  power,  skill,  or  activity, 
but  by  the  Divine  agency^  through  the 
means  of  grace  which  Divine  mercy  has 
established  for  us,  as  a  tree  planted  by 
an  abundant  and  flowing  brook,  if  he, 
like  the  tree,  take  up  into  his  own  life^ 
from  the  means  afforded  him  hy  God^ 
that  which  is  necessary  to  his  life  and 
growth." — Moll. 

May  God  take  us  from  the  wilds  of 
nature,  graft  us  into  Christ,  nourish  us 
by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  thus  shall  we  bear  our  fruit  unto 
holiness,  and  in  the  end  everlasting 
life. 


The  Programme  of  Evil, 

Psalm  i.  1. 

••A  climax  is  to  be  noted  here  in  the  choice  of  expressions.  Thui  w«  have,  first,  threo 
degrees  of  habit,  in  the  verbs  'walked,'  'stood,*  'sat;*  next,  three  degrees  of  evil  in  the 
character,  the  *  wicked, '  the  '  sin  ners, '  and  the  *  mockers  ; '  lastly,  three  degrees  of  openness 
in  the  evil-doing,  *  counsel,*  'way,*  'seat.'  " — Perowne. 


We  see  here : 

I.  The  evil  life  in  its  inception. 

'*Walketh  in  the  counsel  of  the  un- 
godly." 

The  word  used*  in  the  original  for 
"  ungodly "  signifies  the  "  loose  man, 
the  man  loose  from  God." — Delitzsch. 
We  see  here  that  ungodliness  is  the 
source  of  all  evil ;  "  becoming  loose  to 
God,"  is  the  point  of  departure  to  posi- 
tive and  universal  unrighteousness.  Thia 
great  truth  is  often  forgotten ;  and 
where  actual  sin  would  be  denounced. 
ungodliness  is  often  regarded  with  in 
dulgence.  Indeed,  that  temper  of  mind 
which   is  loose  from  God  is  by  many 


considered  the  most  philosophic  and 
desirable  condition  of  the  mind ;  the 
morality  loose  from  God,  the  truest 
morality;  the  science  loose  from  God, 
the  wisest  science  :  the  character  loose 
from  God,  the  most  sound  and  noble 
character.  The  Psalmist  in  this  place 
indicates  the  profound  error  of  such 
reasoning.  Looseness  from  God,  un- 
godliness, is  the  original  and  fertile 
source  of  all  transgression.  Enmity 
with  God  is  enmity  with  righteousness. 
The  Psalmist  teaches  this  same  doctrine 
of  the  connection  of  atheism  with  trans- 
gression in  Psalm  xiv.  1 :  "  The  fool 
hath   said   in   his   heart,    There   is  no 


PSALM  L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


God.  They  are  corrupt,  they  have  done 
abominable  works,  there  is  none  that 
doeth  good."  Beware  of  ungodly 
thoughts !  Beware  of  a  morality  not 
built  upon  theology !  Beware  of  an 
evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  departing  from 
the  living  God ! 

And  this  ungodliness  seeks  to  justify 
Itself.     "  The  counsel  of  the  ungodly." 
Men  are  anxious  that  their  opinions  and 
conduct    should    have    the    sanction    of 
reason,  and  so  they  seek  to  justify  their 
ungodliness     to     their     understanding. 
"No    one    sins    without    making   some 
excuse  to  himself  for  sinning.      He   is 
obliged  to  do  so ;  man  is  not  like  the 
brute    beasts ;    he    has    a    Divine    gift 
within  him  which  we  call  reason,  and 
whicb  constrains  him  to  give  an  account 
to  it  for  what  he  does.     He  cannot  act 
at  random  ;  however  he  acts,  he  must 
act  by  some  kind  of  rule  or  some  sort 
of  principle,  else  he  is  vexed  and  dis- 
satistied  with  himself.     Not  that  he  is 
very  particular  whether  he  finds  a  good 
reason  or  a  bad,  when  he  is  very  much 
straitened  for  a  reason,  but  a  reason  of 
some    sort    he    must    have." — Newman. 
Reason  is  never  used  in  a  more  unna- 
tural, ignoble,  hopeless  task,  than  when 
it  is  pressed  into  the  service  of  atheism 
and   irreligion:  but  it  is   pressed  into 
Buch    service,    tortured    and    perverted, 
until    the    godless    theory    of    life    is 
"sicklied  o'er  with   the    pale    cast    of 
thought,"  and  looks  a  very  clever  and 
plausible    thing.      The   maxims    which 
are  used  to  justify  a  godless  science  and 
a  godless  life  are  essentially  stupid  and 
false,  yet  how  frequently  they  wear  a 
most  philosophic   air!     Here,   then,   is 
the    beginning  of   evil— an  irreligious, 
ungodly  way  of  thinking. 

II.  The  evil  life  in  its  development. 

1.  ^'  Standeth  in  the  way  of  sinne7^s." 
By  "  sinners  "  are  intended  those  "  who 
pass  their  lives  in  sin,  especially  coarse  and 
manifest  ain." —Delitzsch.  *'Open  and 
avowed  offenders,  habitual  transgressors." 
— Kay.  Here  sinful  thought  has  passed 
into  conduct,  action,  life.  We  cannot 
hold  unbelieving  theories  with  impunity. 
Ideas  rule  men,  ideas  rule  the  world,  and 
ideas  fundnmentally  false,  as  are  those  of 
atheism,  must  soon  work  disaster,  both 


in  individual  and  national  life.    He  who 
in   thought    lingers    on    the   forbidden 
ground  of  scepticism,  next  takes  his  place 
with   actual   offenders  against  the  law. 
Nothing  is  more  evident  than  that  loose 
thinking  and  loose  living  go  together. 
2.   "  Sitteth  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.'* 
"  The  scornful  are  the  men  who  deride 
the  thought  of  religious  obligation." — 
Kay.     They  delight  in  the  company  of 
those  who  scoff  at  religion.     This  state, 
and  it  is  soon  reached,  argues  the  most 
desperate  wickedness.     There  is   some- 
thing so  exalted  in  reverence,  that  some 
commentators   have   expressed   a   senti- 
ment of  respect  for  Jacob,  who  buried 
his  false  gods  with  tenderness;  but  how 
utterly  dead   to  every  noble  quality  is 
the   man  who   can   blaspheme  the  true 
God  and  His  Word  !     Here  the  poison- 
seed   of  unbelief  has   opened   into  the 
full-blown  flower  of  wickedness.     "  The 
beginnings  of  sin  are  mod^fet,  the  issues 
of  it  are  impudent." — Whichcote. 

III.  The  evil  life  in  its  consumma- 
tion. 

The  man  is  blessed  who  walketh  not 
in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly ;  it  follows 
that  he  is  cursed  who  does  follow  un- 
godly counsels  and  conduct.  "Cursed 
in  his  counsels,  cursed  in  his  actions, 
cursed  in  his  ewdi." —Clarke.  The  fur- 
ther he  goes,  the  further  he  is  from 
blessedness. 

We  are  reminded  in  this  verse : 

1.  Of  the  insinuating  nature  of  sin. 
It  glides  stealthily  into  the  heart — 
stealthily  into  the  life. 

2.  Of  the  prolific  nature  of  sin.  One 
sin  leads  to  another  sin ;  one  sin  leads 
to  a  darker  sin ;  one  sin  leads  to  many 
sins.  It  is  a  traveller's  tale  which  tells 
that  the  Indian  spiders  weave  webs  so 
strong  that  men  are  sometimes  impri- 
soned by  them ;  but  it  is  no  fable  that 
from  the  gossamer  threads  of  ungodly 
thoughts,  and  slender  transgressions, 
come  at  length  dark  convictions  and 
habits  which  hold  men  in  most  cruel 
bondage. 

3.  Of  tlie  accursed  nature  of  sin.  It 
fills  with  misery;  it  ends  in  death.  What 
God  curses  withers  away.  Let  us  pray, 
then,  that  we  enter  not  into  the  path  of 
the  wicked. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  II. 


Results. 
{Verses  4-6.) 


I.  The  destinies  of  men  are  various. 

The  godly  flourish  evermore  :  "  The 
ungodly  are  not  so"  The  pious  and  the 
wicked  .are  together  in  this  world,  but 
the  text  indicates  that  a  separation  will 
be  effected.  *'  They  are  like  the  chafif 
which  the  wind  driveth  away."  "  This 
allusion  describes  the  instability  of  the 
principles  of  the  ungodly,  rather  than  of 
their  fortunes.  Their  want  of  principle 
is  opposed  to  the  good  man's  steady 
meditation  of  Jehovah's  law,  which  is 
the  foundation  of  his  prosperity.  On 
the  other  hand,  because  the  ungodly 
want  this  principle,  therefore  they  shall 
not  stand  in  the  judgment." — Horsley. 
The  ungodly  have  instability  of  prin- 
ciple, and  therefore  instability  of  fortune. 
"  Their  glory  shall  not  descend  after 
them." 

II.  The  destinies  of  men  are  decided 
by  their  moral  character  and  conduct. 

"  Therefore  the  ungodly  shall  not 
stand  in  the  judgment."  "Because  they 
are  like  chaff,  without  root  below,  with- 
out fruit  above,  without  spiritual  vital- 
ity ;  therefore,  on  account  of  their  inner 
worthlessness  and  instability,  they  do 
not  stand." — Delitzsch.  "Although  the 
ungodly  are  in  similar  circumstances  with 
the  righteous,  yet  they  derive  no  profit 
from  this  favourable  circumstance.  They 
aie  spiritually  dead  and  withered.  That 
which  has  matured  in  them  has  faded 
prematurely ;  for  they  have  not  appro- 
priated to  themselves  the  nourishment 


of  life,  and  they  have  not  formed  in 

themselves  the  faculty  for  this  appro- 
priation. Without  root  and  without 
sap,  they  have  not  attained  aiiy  vigour, 
nor  brought  forth  any  fruit  (Matt.  xxi. 
19).  Thus  they  have  ripened  only  for 
destructio7i ;  unsubstantial  and  worthless 
as  chaff,  the  sport  of  the  wind  until 
scattered  by  the  storm,  they  go  to  de- 
struction, and  leave  no  trace  behind." — 
Moll.  And  the  righteous  stand  because 
they  are  righteous.  Not  chance,  not 
social  rank,  not  birth,  not  intellectual 
culture,  not  religious  profession,  not 
Divine  decrees,  shall  determine  our  des- 
tiny, but  our  spirit  and  course  of  life. 

III.  The  destinies  of  men  are  as 
widely  contrasted  as  their  character. 

The  righteous  bloom  for  ever  in  the 
paradise  of  God ;  the  wicked  are  driven 
away  as  chaff  in  the  whirlwind  of  the 
Divine  anger.  "Whose  fan  is  in  His 
hand,  and  He  will  throughly  purge  His 
floor,  and  gather  His  wheat  into  the  gar- 
ner; but  He  will  burn  up  the  chaff  with 
unquenchable  fire"  (Matt.  iii.  12).  And 
this  teaching  of  the  Scriptures  commends 
itself  to  reason.  "  Nothing  is  more  cre- 
dible than  that  men's  states  shall  differ 
as  much  as  their  spirits  and  tempers  do 
differ." —  Whichcote. 

Blessed  is  the  man  whose  will  and  life 
are  thoroughly  identified  with  the  Divine 
law ;  for  the  law  shall  stand  for  ever, 
and  none  shall  suffer  loss  who  enjoy  its 
shelter  1 


PSALM  IL 
Introduction, 

**  It  is  quite  impossible  now  to  say  what  the  event  was  which  occasioned  this  poem.  The 
older  interpreters  referred  it  to  David,  and  the  attacks  made  upon  him  hy  the  Philistines 
(2  Sam.  V.)  But  though  the  poem  was  occasioned  by  some  national  event,  we  must  not  confine 
its  application  to  that  event,  nor  need  we  even  suppose  that  the  singer  himself  did  not  feel  that 
his  words  went  beyond  their  first  occasion.  He  begins  to  speak  of  an  earthly  king,  and  his 
wars  with  the  nations  of  the  earth,  but  his  words  are  too  great  to  have  all  their  meaning 
exhausted  in  David,  or  Solomon,  or  Ahaz,  or  any  Jewish  monarch.  Or  ever  he  is  aware,  the 
local  and  the  temporal  are  swallowed  up  in  the  universal  and  tlie  eternal.  The  king  who  sits 
on  David's  throne  has  become  glorified  and  transfigured  in  the  light  of  the  promise.  The  picture 
is  half  ideal,  half  actual.  It  concerns  itself  with  the  present,  but  with  that  only  so  far  as  it  la 
typical  of  greater  things  to  come.    The  true  King,  who  to  the  Prophet's  mind  is  to  fulfil  all  his 

5 


PSALM  n. 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS 


largest  hopes,  has  taken  the  place  of  the  visible  and  earthly  king.  The  nations  are  not  merely 
those  who  are  now  mustering  for  the  battle,  but  whatsoever  opposeth  and  exalteth  itself  against 
Jehovah  and  His  Anointed." — Perovme. 

The  Holy  War. 


Whilst  we  ought  to  be  careful,  and 
not  fall  into  the  mistake  of  the  mystical 
interpreters,  who  see  the  prefiguration  of 
the  Messiah  in  almost  every  psalm,  we 
must  not  fall  into  the  far  greater  error 
of  the  rationalistic  critics,  who  cannot 
find  predictions  of  the  Messiah  in  any. 
In  nature,  types  are  always  thrown  off 
before  the  archetype  appears;  outline 
sketches  are  given  long  before  the  ideal 
is  realised.  And  we  are  perfectly  justi- 
fied in  finding  in  the  character  and  his- 
tory of  David  the  rough  outline  and 
prefiguration  of  the  glorious  ideal  King, 
whose  reign  is  a  reign  of  righteousness, 
and  whose  kingdom  caTinot  be  moved. 
In  this  psalm  we  have  a  vivid  picture  of 
The  revolt  against  Messiak 

Consider : 

I.  Tiie  extent  of  the  revolt. 

"  Nations."  "  Peoples."  «  Kings." 
**  Rulers  "(ver.  1,  2). 

The  reign  and  kingdom  of  Christ  has 
always  encountered  violent  opposition. 
The  decree  is,  "  Rule  Thou  in  the  midst 
of  Thine  enemies ;  "  and  Christ  has  ever 
had  to  contend  with  opposition  to  His 
generous  aims.  He  has  encountered  this 
opposition — (1.)  In  all  nations — Jew, 
Roman,  Greek.  (2.)  In  all  ranks. 
*'  Kings,"  "  peoples  ;  "  monarchs,  and 
mobs  have  resisted  the  Christian  faith, 
and  joined  to  crush  it.  (3.)  In  all  gene- 
rations. Christ  was  rejected  by  His  own 
age  (Acts  iv.  27) ;  and  the  pages  of 
Church  history  are  crowded  with  the 
records  of  a  warfare  that  has  never  slept 
since  the  Church  was  founded;  and, 
unless  we  misread  the  Apocalypse,  fierce 
and  bloody  days  are  yet  before  the 
Church  of  Christ. 

II.  The  determination  by  which  this 
revolt  is  characterised. 

It  is  (1.)  Deliberate.  "They  take 
counsel."  They  "imagine,"  t.6.,  devise. 
They  ponder  in  their  heart,  and  bring 
forth  their  strongest  reasons  and  most 
subtle  schemes.  (2.)  Combined.  "They 
take  counsel  together."  Strange  com- 
binations have  been,  and  still  are  beinc. 
6  ^ 


formed  against  Christ.  (3.)  Resolute* 
"  Set  themselves."  *'  Stand  up  against." 
— Prayer- Booh.  "  The  word  used  here  is 
the  word  used  of  Goliath  taking  up  his 
station  to  defy  Israel." — Kay.  A  most 
resolute  and  defiant  attitude.  "  One 
would  have  expected  that  so  great  a 
blessing  to  this  world  should  have  been 
universally  welcomed  and  embraced, 
and  that  every  sheaf  should  immediately 
have  bowed  to  that  of  the  Messiah,  and  all 
the  crowns  and  sceptres  on  earth  should 
have  been  laid  at  His  feet ;  but  it  proves 
quite  contrary.  Never  were  the  notions 
of  any  sect  of  philosophers,  though 
never  so  absurd,  nor  the  power  of  any 
prince  or  state,  though  never  so  tyran 
nical,  opposed  with  so  much  violence  as 
the  doctrine  and  government  of  Christ." 
— M.  Henry.  '•  We  will  not  have  this 
man  to  reign  over  us"  (Luke  xix.  14). 

III.  The  secret  cause  of  this  revolt. 

"Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder, 
and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us" 
(ver.  3). 

They  rebel  against  the  law  of  God  in 
Christ.  The  law  of  God,  as  declared  in 
Christ,  is  a  law  requiring  great  denials 
and  sacrifices  to  men,  the  foundations 
of  whose  nature  are  out  of  course ;  and 
for  this  reason  it  is  distasteful  to  us,  and 
we  reject  it.  "Doctrines  would  be 
readily  believed  if  they  involved  in 
them  no  precepts ;  and  the  Church  may 
be  tolerated  by  the  world  if  she  will 
only  give  up  her  discipline." — Rome. 
The  yoke  of  Christ  is  easy,  and  His 
burden  light  to  the  penitent  and  en- 
lightened heart ;  but  to  the  blind  and 
self-willed  the  law  of  Christ  is  as  the 
"  bands"  and  "  cords"  which  the  yoked 
oxen  are  eager  to  cast  off.  Men  may 
give  a  score  reasons  for  their  hostility 
to  Christ,  such  as  the  incredibility  of 
miracles,  the  faults  of  Christians,  <fec., 
but  the  final  reason  for  His  rejection  is 
to  be  found  in  those  laws  of  truth  and 
love  and  purity  which  regulate  His 
kingdom,  and  which  are  bright  as  gold 
and  soft  as  silk  to  the  righteous,  but 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  IL 


wLicli  are  to  the  disobedient  and  lawless 
hateful  as  the  hangman's  noose. 

IV.  The  vanity  of  this  opposition  to 
Christ. 

1.  The  unreasonableness  of  it.  It  is 
vain  in  the  sense  of  being  unreasonable. 
*'  Why  do  the  heathen  rage  li "  This  is 
a  question  to  which  no  satisfactory 
answer  can  be  given.  Christ  is  the  most 
blessed  King,  and  wherever  He  reigns 
blessings  abound.  Why  reject  Him? 
It  is  a  vain,  foolish  act.  To  all  His 
enemies  we  ask,  '*What  evil  hath  He 
done?"  Statesmen  are  against  Him, 
and  yet  they  cannot  shut  their  eyes  to 
the  fact  that  His  religion  makes  grand 
nations;  philosophers  are  against  Him, 
and  yet  they  cannot  deny  but  that  He 
has  lit  up  the  intellectual  sphere  with  a 
most  precious  and  benign  light ;  moral- 
ists are  against  Him,  and  yet  they  con- 
fess His  character  to  be  unique  and  un- 
ap})roachable  in  its  sublime  beauty  and 
goodness.  All  sinners  are  against  Him  ; 
and  yet  in  their  deepest  heart  they 
know  Him  to  be  love.  His  law  to  be 
right.  His  kingdom  to  be  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  To  oppose  Christ  is  madness, 
blind  passion,  suicidal  folly,  for  He  is  the 
sinner's  friend,  the  Desire  of  the  nations. 

2.  The  vselessness  of  it.  It  is  *'  vain  " 
in  the  sense  of  being  useless.  The 
physical  man  might  sooner  hope  to  free 
himself  from  the  law  of  gravitation,  than 
the  man  moral  expect  to  shake  himself 
loose  from  the  law  and  dominion  of 
Christ.  It  is  God's  declared  will  that 
Christ  shall  reign,  and  that  all  things 
shall  be  put  under  His  feet  (ver.  7,  8). 
*'  The  day  of  Christ's  coronation  was  the 
day  of  His  resurrection." — Perowne.  (Yer. 
7.)  By  virtue  of  His  atoning  work  He 
has  become  the  King  of  kings,  and  He 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever  (Dan.  vii. 
9-14).  God  holds  in  contempt  the 
enemies  of  His  Son  (ver.  4).  *'  With 
the  rage  and  exertion  of  His  enemies 
the  poet  sets  in  beautiful  contrast  the 
laughing  quiet  of  his  God,  who  can  with 
one  word  bring  these  proceedings  to 
naught." — De  Wette.  And  all  the  rage 
of  the  unbelieving  fails  to  destroy  Mes- 
siah's kingdom.  *'The  ungodly  storm 
and  rage  against  the  pious,  excite  all 
their  counsels  against  them.      But  all 


this  is  as  the  stormy,  swollen  waves  of 
the  sea,  which  rush  along  as  if  they 
would  break  down  the  shore,  but  before 
they  reach  the  shore  they  quiet  down 
again,  vanish  in  themselves,  or  break  up 
with  a  little  foam  upon  the  shore." — 
Luther.  "  The  Church  is  oppressed  but 
not  suppressed." — Mali.  And  God  shall 
at  length  cover  all  Christ's  enemies  with 
confusion  and  ruin  (ver.  9).  "  He  shall 
break  them,"  &c.  Is  not  the  Jewish 
nation  a  signal  illustration  of  this? 
Nations  and  men  who  set  themselves 
against  Christ  perish.  We  see  here 
then  the  utter  vanity  of  all  attempts  to 
injure  the  throne  of  God's  Anointed 
King, — Messiah. 

The  Psalmist  concludes : 

1.  With  an  admonition.  "  Be  wise 
now,"  &c.  (ver.  10.)  ^' Be  wise."  Let 
the  princes  exalt  Christ  in  their  king- 
doms, in  their  hearts;  let  all  know 
the  folly  and  fruitlessness  of  resisting 
Him.  One  of  the  Roman  philosopheis 
remarked  to  the  Emperor  Adrian,  "  I 
never  dispute  with  a  prince  who  has 
twenty-four  legions  in  his  service.'* 
"  All  power  is  given  unto  Christ,"  and 
this  power  is  based  on  love  and  right- 
eousness, and  woe  unto  those  who  resist 
the  Saviour-King.  When  His  wrath 
blazes  forth  they  "  perish  from  the  way  " 
(ver.  12).  *' Whosoever  shall  fall  on 
this  stone  shall  be  broken ;  but  on 
whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  grind 
him  to  powder  "  (Matt.  xxi.  44).  "  It 
shall  grind  him  to  powder,"  nitant  a 
destruction  utter,  and  hopeless,  and  ever- 
lasting, and  without  remedy.  Ground 
— ground  to  powder !  Any  life  left  in 
that?  any  gathering  up  of  that,  and 
making  a  man  of  it  again  1  All  the 
humanity  battered  out  of  it,  and  the 
life  clean  gone  from  it  1  Does  not  that 
sound  very  much  like  everlasting  de- 
struction "  from  the  presence  of  God 
and  from  the  glory  of  His  power " ! 
Christ,  silent  now,  will  begin  to  speak ; 
passive  now,  will  begin  to  act.  The 
stone  comes  down,  and  the  fall  of  it 
will  be  awful !  *'  I  remember,  away  up 
in  a  lonely  Highland  valley,  where, 
beneath  a  tall  black  cliff,  all  weather- 
worn, and  cracked,  and  seamed,  there 
lies  at  the  foot,  resting  on  the  green- 


rsALMn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Bward  that  creeps  round  its  base,  a  huge 
rock  that  has  fallen  from  the  face  of 
the  precipice.  A  shepherd  was  passing 
beneath  it ;  and  suddenly,  when  the 
finger  of  God's  will  touched  it,  and  rent 
it  from  its  ancient  bed  in  the  everlast- 
ing rock,  it  came  down,  leaping  and 
bounding  from  pinnacle  to  pinnacle — and 
it  fell ;  and  the  man  that  was  beneath 
it  is  there  now  !  '  Ground  to  powder.' 
Ah,  my  brethren !  that  is  not  my  illus- 
tration—  that  is  Christ's.  Therefore  I 
say  to  you,  since  all  that  stand  against 
Him  shall  become  as  *  the  chaff  of  the 
Bummer  threshing-floor,'  and  be  swept 
utterly  away,  make  Him  the  foundation 
on  which  j'ou  build  j  and  when  the 
storm  sweeps  away  every  *  refuge  of 
lies,'  you  will  be  safe  and  serene, 
builded  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages." — 
Madaren.  "  Be  wise  now."  Fools  do 
that  at  last  which  wise  men  do  at  first. 


2.  With  a  direction,  "Serve  the 
Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trem- 
bling" (ver.  11).  With /car,  because  of 
His  greatness  and  holiness ;  with  joy^ 
because  His  law  is  love,  and  His  service 
freedom. 

3.  With  a  persuasion.  "  Kiss  the 
Son,"  (kc.  (ver.  12.)  "Do  Him  hom- 
age." His  wrath  may  kindle  suddenly, 
and  if  it  does,  we  "  perish  from  the 
right  way." — Prayer- Book.  "The  power 
of  Christ  will  be  manifested  in  all,  by 
the  destruction  either  of  sin  or  the 
sinner."  —  Home.  "Blessed  are  all 
they,"  (fcc.  "  Only  those  who  reject  the 
breath  of  love,  feel  the  iron  of  justice." 
—Moll 

Let  Him  break  the  law  of  sin  with  a 
rod  of  iron,  let  Him  dash  to  pieces  our 
bad  heart  as  a  potter's  vessel,  but  let 
us  put  our  trust  in  Him,  and  He  shall 
save  our  souls  alive. 


The  Reign  of  Christ. 

{Verses  6-12.) 


We  have  here  a  description  of  Christ's 
mediatorial  reign. 
Observe  : 

I.  Its  sovereignty. 

Ver.  6.  Christ  is  here  exalted  above 
all  kings  and  nations.  His  throne  is 
set  above  all  earthly  thrones ;  on  His 
head  are  many  crowns.  The  supreme 
power  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Messiah. 

II.  Its  authority. 

Ver.  7.  "  I  will  declare  what  God 
has  decreed." — Horsley.  "  The  kings  of 
Israel  derived  their  authority  from  God; 
they  were  appointed  to  execute  His  laws; 
and  being  God's  vicegerents,  they  were 
in  their  official  capacity  styled  gods,  or 
sons  of  God." — Phillips.  So  is  Christ's 
administration  of  Divine  authority,  but 
in  a  peculiar  and  pre-eminent  sense.  He 
is  not  a  son  of  God,  but  tlte  Son  of  God. 
And  Christ  was  not  made  the  Son  of 
God  in  the  incarnation  or  in  the  resur- 
rection, but  He  was  in  those  great  events 


manifested  as  such.  "  He  was  made  of 
the  seed  of  David  according  to  the  flesh; 
and  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with 
power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holi- 
ness, by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead" 
(Rom  i.  3,  4). 

Christ  is  of  Divine  nature;  His  re- 
deeming work  was  Divin»  work;  and 
His  mediatorial  reign  is  of  Divine  author- 
ity and  force. 

III.  Its  universality. 

Ver.  8.  "His  kingdom  ruleth  over 
all,"  and  aims  to  restore  all, 

IV.  Its  irresistibility. 

Ver.  9.  "  The  enemies  of  Christ  sup- 
pose that  His  sceptre  is  still  a  reed,  as  in 
the  time  of  His  sufferings ;  but  they 
will  be  obliged  to  experience,  some  day, 
to  their  greatest  shame,  the  iron  sceptre 
in  His  hand." — Moll. 

V.  Its  graciousness. 

Ver.  10,  &c.  Its  grand  design  is  to 
save  and  bless. 


8 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  II. 


Antagonistio  F0BOX8. 
(Vme  11.) 


"Serve  the  Lord  witli  fear,  and  re- 
joice with  trembling." 

The  scientist  tells  us  that  the  laws  of 
nature  are  arranged  on  the  principle  of 
antagonistic  forces  ;  and  it  is  somewhat 
thus  with  the  laws  of  the  Christian  life, 

I.  We  describe  the  two  states  of 
feeling  to  which  the  text  refers. 

I.  "  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear^ 
There  are  two  kinds  of  fear — servile  and 
filial.  The  latter  is  indicated  here.  A 
noble  sensitiveness,  an  anxious  conscien- 
tiousness, a  salutary  apprehensiveness. 
"With  trembling."  "With  diffidence. 
The  thing  meant  is  that  sort  of  fear 
which  arises  from  a  man's  diffidence  of 
his  own  strength  and  power." — Horsley, 
2.  "And  rejoice."  Be  glad  in  the  Lord, 
and  in  His  service.  "  Take  satisfaction, 
joy,  and  glory  to  yourselves  in  becoming 
His  servants.  But  let  it  be  a  holy, 
temperate  joy,  fearful  of  offence,  not 
heedless  and  presumptuous,  verging  on 
the  licentious  kind." — Horsley.  We 
observe : 

II.  These  two  states  of  feeling  are 
not  incompatible. 

Fear  and  joy  are  only  apparently  con- 
tradictory. We  often  see  in  nature  how 
apparently  contradictory  materials  and 
forces  blend.  Oxygen  and  nitrogen 
may  be  spoken  of  as  contradictory 
gases,  but  they  are  really  comple- 
mentary, and,  combined  in  due  pro- 
portions, make  the  sweet  and  vital 
atmosphere.  Attraction  and  repulsion 
seem  to  be  contradictory  forces,  but 
are  really  complementary,  and  their 
combined  action  preserves  the  universe 
in  harmonic  movement.  Forces,  laws, 
phenomena,  which  appear  contradictory 
are  really  complementary,  and  from 
their  combined  action  spring  the  glories 
and  melodies  of  creation.  Thus  is  it  in 
Christian  experience.  States  of  feeling 
which  are  apparently  contradictory  are 
really  correlative.  Joy  and  sorrow, 
weakness  and  strength,  fear  and  com- 
fort ;  these  different  states  of  feeling  are 
often  co-existent  in  the  Christian  heart. 


m.  These  two  states  of  feeling  are 
essential  to  the  security  and  develop- 
ment of  the  Christian  life. 

They  not  only  may,  but  they  ought 
to  exist  together. 

We  ought  to  fear.  Some  Christians 
are  distressed  because  they  feel  this 
emotion.  They  need  not.  "  Work  out 
your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling." 
The  brighter  the  star  the  more  it 
trembles.  As  the  needle  trembles  to 
the  pole,  so  should  our  soul  tremble  to 
its  God. 

We  ought  to  rejoice,  Pliny  tells  us 
of  some  strange  tribes  who  dwelt  in 
caves  because  they  were  afraid  of  the 
sunshine ;  we  have  known  Christians 
similarly  afraid  of  sunshine.  Be  not 
afraid  of  joy.  Let  Him  lead  you  into 
green  pastures.  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord 
always ;  and  again  I  say  rejoice." 
"  There  must  ever  be  a  holy  fear  mixed 
with  the  Christian's  joy.  This  is  a 
sacred  compound,  yielding  a  sweet  smell; 
and  we  must  see  to  it  that  we  burn  no 
other  upon  the  altar.  Fear  without  joy 
is  torment  j  and  joy  without  holy  fear 
would  be  presumption." — Spurge(m. 

There  must  be  the  two  states  of  feel- 
ing, and  they  must  be  duly  balanced. 
If  we  give  too  much  place  to  fear,  it 
destroys  the  freedom,  nobility,  and 
joyfulness  of  the  soul;  if  we  give  too 
much  place  to  joy,  it  renders  the  soul 
relaxed  and  light. 

And  these  two  states  of  feeling,  com- 
pleting and  balancing  each  other,  secure 
the  true  development  and  perfection  of  the 
soul.  The  laws  of  nature  are  arranged 
on  the  principle  of  antagonistic  forces, 
and  the  constant  struggle  to  maintain 
the  equilibrium  fills  creation  with  motion, 
life,  music,  beauty,  and  fruitfulness.  So 
weakness  and  strength,  joy  and  sor- 
row, solicitude  and  comfort,  hope  and 
fear,  are  the  antagonistic  forces  of 
the  soul,  and  in  the  constant  struggle 
to  secure  the  equilibrium,  the  moral 
nature  is  being  exercised,  enlarged,  and 
perfected. 

9 


PBATM  in. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  m. 
Minorities  and  Majorities, 

Introduction, 

**  The  preceding  psalm  had  set  before  us  the  utter  vanity  of  all  attempti  to  injure  the 
throne  of  God's  anointed  King — MeBsiah.  The  present  psalm  relates  to  that  incident  in  David'i 
life  which  stands  as  the  typical  instance  of  rebellion  against  God's  kingdom ; — as  the  type,  there- 
fore, of  the  working  of  Antichrist." — Kay. 


I.  The  majority  without  God. 

1.  The  greatness  of  the  majority. 
"  How  are  they  increased."  "  Many  are 
they"  (ver.  1).  "Many  there  be" 
(ver.  2).  *'  Ten  thousands  of  people, 
that  have  set  themselves"  (ver.  6). 
Nearly  all  Israel  had  deserted  the  king 
(2  Sam.  XV.  12).  How  often  has  good- 
ness to  find  itself  outvoted  !  How  often 
has  the  man  of  God  to  feel  a  sense  of 
solitude  and  desolation !  Thus  Christ. 
Thus  the  Church  has  often  been  out- 
numbered by  its  enemies,  again  and 
again.  A  few  holy  men  have  had  to 
struggle  against  the  weight  of  govern- 
ments, the  influence  of  the  press,  the 
omnipotence  of  wealth,  the  organisation 
of  parties,  the  fury  of  mobs,  and  some- 
times the  power  of  the  pulpit.  And  the 
believer  feels  the  air  is  full  of  foes  :  his 
adversaries  are  "  legion."  He  feels  that 
he  is  alone  contending  with  dark  hosts 
of  sins,  doubts,  fears,  and  sorrows. 
"They  set  themselves  round  about." 
They  swarm  on  every  hand,  and  fix  them- 
selves in  battle  array.  The  odds  were 
overwhelmingly  against  the  Psalmist ; 
so  are  the  odds  overwlielmingly  against 
the  Church  of  Christ,  and  against  the 
Bonis  which  trust  in  Christ. 

2.  The  bitterness  of  the  majority. 
**  Many  there  be  which  say  of  my  soul, 
There  is  no  help  for  him  in  God  "  (ver. 
2).  "He  has  offended  God  :  and  God, 
who  was  his  strength,  has  forsaken  him. 
God  will  no  longer  save  him.  He  is  a 
reprobate." — Kay.  "  God  as  well  as 
man  is  against  him  ;  his  destruction  is 
certain ;  prayer  itself  will  be  of  no  avail." 
— Perowne  (2  Sam.  xvi.  8).  His  ene- 
mies breathe  out  cruelty.  *'  The  words 
of  the  adversaries  pronounce  a  judgment 
upon  his  inmost  life,  or  upon  his  per- 
sonal relationship  to  God." — Delitzsch. 
*  God,'  they  cried,  *  has  deserted  him.* 

10 


And  the  Psalmist  knew  that  their  re- 
proach was  not  without  seeming  justifi- 
cation. He  knew  that  his  own  sin  lay 
at  the  bottom  of  this  insurrection. 
"  David  had  plunged  himself  into  the 
deepest  abyss  of  wretchedness  by  his 
adultery  with  Bathsheba.  The  rebellion 
of  Absalom  belonged  to  the  series  of 
dire  calamities  which  began  to  come 
upon  him  from  that  time.  Plausible 
reasons  were  not  wanting  for  such  words 
as  these  which  gave  up  his  cause  as 
lost." — Delitzsch.  Thus  his  enemies,  as 
well  as  his  disconcerted  friends,  rem  ember 
his  sin,  and  regard  him  as  one  cast  away. 
And  this  was  the  weak  point  of  David 
in  dealing  with  the  hosts  of  the  enemy. 
And  it  is  with  us.  A  sense  of  moral 
blamelessness  would  enable  us  to  con- 
front boldly  with  the  seraph  Abdiel  a 
myriad  enemies ;  but  "conscience  makes 
cowards  of  us  all,"  and  we  tremble  in 
the  presence  of  numbers.  Thus  our 
spiritual  adversaries  reproach  us ;  there 
is  no  salvation  for  him  in  God;  and  the 
consciousness  of  our  faithlessness  gives 
a  power  and  sting  to  their  words  which 
penetrate  our  soul  with  bitterness,  and 
which  might  well  drive  us  to  despair. 

II.  The  minority  with  God. 

The  Psalmist  felt  himself  to  be  in  a 
minority  of  one,  but  with  God.     Mark  : 

1.  His  consciousness  of  safety  (ver.  3). 
"^  shield  about  me,  or  around  me,  cover- 
ing the  whole  body ;  not  merely  a  part 
of  it,  as  ordinary  shields  do." — Alex- 
ander. Alone  with  God  the  believer 
feels  profoundly  safe,  "  If  God  be  for 
us,"  <kc. 

2.  }l\s,  refuge  in  prayer  {yer.  ^).  The 
Lord  heard  his  cry  of  penitence  and 
supplication.  It  was  in  this  cry  that 
the  guilty,  lonely  man  put  himself  right 
with  God.  He  is  away  from  the  sanc- 
tuary, away  from  the  ark ;  but  the  voice 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  in. 


of  the  solitary  and  sorrowful  reaches 
God  anywhere.  Alone  with  God,  this 
is  the  secret  of  the  martyr's  strength. 
If  the  world  forsakes  you,  if  men  and 
demons  mock  you,  knock  at  Heaven's 
gate  with  cries,  and  groans,  and  tears, 
and  God  shall  receive  and  shelter  you. 

His  sublime  peacefulness  (ver.  5, 
6).  "7  laid  me  down  and  slept,*' &,g. 
Many  lie  down  who  cannot  sleep,  but 
he  could  lie  down  on  a  rough  bed  and 
sleep.  God's  hand  was  his  pillow,  and 
his  sleep  was  sweet.  The  peace  of  God 
passe th  understanding,  and  the  wildest 
storms  of  temptation  and  persecution 
cannot  disturb  it.  The  Atlantic  Ocean 
is  swept  by  fearful  storms,  and  moun- 
tainous billows  traverse  its  surface,  but 
scientific  men  say  it  is  so  quiet  down  in 
the  depths  that  if  you  could  stretch  a 
rope  of  sand  from  one  side  of  the  ocean 
to  the  other,  there  is  not  disturbance 
enough  to  dissolve  it.  So  amid  the 
direst  storms  of  life  the  believer's  heart 
is  kept  in  perfect  peace,  a  peace  which 
the  world  gives  not,  and  which  the 
world  does  not  take  away. 

4.  His  assurance  of  victory  (ver.  7). 
He  looks  upon  victory  as  certain,  as 
indeed  already  accomplished  He  sees 
his  enemy  "  as  a  wild  beast  whose  jaw 
is  broken,  and  which  is  unable  to  devour 
its  prey." — Kay.  He  feels  assured  that 
God  will  rebuke  the  wrath  of  Shimei, 
confound  the  counsel  of  Ahithophel, 
frustrate  the  usurpation  of  Absalom, 
and  bring  to  nought  the  uprising  of 
Israel.  So,  having  put  ourselves  right 
with  God,  although  our  enemies  rage  as 
the  waves  of  the  sea,  we  may  confidently 
anticipate  victory. 

5.  His  generoTM  temper  (ver.  8).     He 


does  not  ask  for  vengeance,  but  blessing. 
This  verse  "  casts  a  bright  light  into  the 
very  depths  of  his  noble  soul." — Ewald. 
He  has  been  wronged ;  but  as  God  has 
forgiven  him,  so  he  forgives  those  who 
have  injured  him.  Too  often  when 
minorities  become  majorities  they  exact 
and  tyrannise ;  but  when  God  exalts  us 
in  the  gate,  our  spirit  should  be  forgiving 
and  tender. 
Lessons : 

1.  Do  not  always  trust  in  the  verdicts 
of  majorities.  "  The  longest  sword,  the 
strongest  lungs,  the  most  voices,  are 
false  measures  of  truth." — Whichcote. 

2.  Do  not  confide  in  majorities. 
David  was  at  one  time  most  popular ; 
but  how  soon  the  people  deserted  him. 
*'  Mortality  is  but  the  stage  of  muta- 
bility."—2Va??jo. 

3.  Do  not  fear  to  be  in  a  minority 
with  God.  "  Everybody,"  said  Talley- 
rand, "is  cleverer  than  anybody."  This 
is  fine  worldly  wisdom  no  doubt,  but 
God  is  wiser,  stronger  than  all,  and  he 
who  is  in  a  minority  with  God  need  not 
fear.  "  He  that  is  in  you  is  greater 
than  he  that  is  in  the  world." 

4.  Remember  that  the  majority  will 
be  against  you  when  God  is.  When 
the  people  thought  that  God  had  for- 
saken the  king,  they  forsook  him  too. 
Men  often  sell  their  conscience  for  a 
majority,  but  know  when  God  forsakes 
you,  the  universe  forsakes  you. 

5.  The  way  to  conquer  majorities  is 
through  penitence  and  prayer.  Thus,  in 
great  social  and  religious  reforms,  Luther, 
Wilberforce.  So  in  our  spiritual  life; 
"  One  shall  chase  a  thousand,"  <kc.  And 
thus  shall  the  majority  against  the  Chris- 
tian Church  be  changed  into  a  minority. 


Mistaken  Verdicts. 
{Verses  2,  S.) 


In  the  second  verse  you  have  the 
verdict  of  sense  touching  the  Psalmist's 
character ;  in  the  third  verse  you  have 
the  judgment  of  faith. 

I.  The  verdict  of  sense. 

Ver.  2.  The  verdict  of  sense  was  that 
the  king  was  deserted  of  God.  And 
observe : 


1.  This  verdict  was  popular,  **  Many 
there  be,"  &c.  It  appeared  thus  to  his 
enemies,  and  it  would  seem  as  if  many 
of  his  friends  shared  the  same  opinion. 
It  was  the  verdict  of  the  multitude. 

2.  It  was  plausible.  It  regarded  the 
king's  sin.  The  devil's  advocates*  would 
not  fail  to  keep  the  dark  crime  of  the 

11 


PSALM  IT* 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  FSALM8. 


fallen  king  before  the  eyes  of  the  nation. 
Would  not  God  forsake  such  a  sinner  ? 
And  then  there  were  the  circumstances 
of  the  king.  He  appears  fallen  and 
discrowned.  Driven  away  from  his 
palace,  and  accompanied  in  exile  by  a 
few  trembling  friends.  *  Surely  God  had 
deserted  the  royal  sinner/  they  said. 

3.  It  was  confident,  "There  is  no 
help"  (fee.  They  felt  sure  that  his 
cause  was  utterly  hopeless :  God  had 
cut  him  off  altogether. 

II.  The  judgment  of  faith. 

Ver.  3.  The  voice  of  the  people  was 
not  the  voice  of  God.  The  Psalmist 
puts  his  personal  consciousness  over 
against  the  anathemas  of  the  people. 
He  knows  God  to  be  his  shield,  his 
glory,  and  the  restorer  of  his  fortunes. 

How  often  has  this  fact  been  repeated ! 
The  verdict  of  men  passed  upon  their 
brother  is  one  of  capital  condemnation, 
and  yet  the  condemned  one  has  hope 
in  God.  How  often  does  the  world 
speak  thus : — *  The  chief  of  sinners 
amongst  men,'  'the  woman  that  is  a 
sinner.'  How  soon  society  regards  these 
as  lost,  hopeless !  How  often  has  a 
corrupt  Church  spoken  thus !  The 
Catholics  kindled  the  stake,  and  con- 
signed the  souls  of  glorious  saints  to 
the  devil.  Nay,  is  not  the  true  Church 
of  Christ  sometimes  in  danger  of  falling 
into  this  mistake  1  Are  we  not  ready 
to  give  up  some  cases,  some  classes, 
perhaps,  as  impracticable?  How  is  it 
that  we  fall  into  this  great  mistake  ? 

1.  We  take  circumstances  as  the  sign 
of  a  man's  spiritual  status  and  relation- 
ship. The  people  did  in  Jerusalem ;  we 
do,  and  it  is  a  great  error.  A  man  may 
be  poor,  friendless,  afflicted,  reduced  to 


saddest  straits,  and  yet  not  be  forsaken 
of  God. 

2.  We  ignore  the  power  of  penitence, 
Ver.  4.  The  Psalmist  "cried  unto  the 
Lord,"  &c.  The  world  knows  a  man's 
sins,  when  it  does  not  know  bis  deep 
sorrow  and  burning  tears. 

3.  We  limit  the  mercy  and  grace  of 
God.  God's,  pity  is  greater  than  ours, 
and  the  blood  of  Jesus  makes  the  foulest 
clean.  "No  help  for.  him  in  God." 
Some  sinners  are  sO.  obtuse,  defiant, 
brutal,  their  wickedness  so  profound, 
and  chronic,  and  desperate,  that  we 
practically  despair  of  their  salvation. 
Yet,  have  not  our  brightest  saints  been 
raised  out  of  most  abandoned  and  des- 
perate sinners?  The  natural  historian 
tells  us  that  the  rich  olive  was  once  dry 
and  offensive,  the  luscious  peach  bitter, 
the  apple-tree  full  of  thorns,  the  aro- 
matic rose  a  mere  thorn,  and  the  fields 
of  wavy  gold  but  wild  grasses.  But 
far  more  surprising  transformations 
have  been  wrought  in  the  Church  of 
God.  "  Be  not  deceived  :  neither  forni- 
cators, nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor 
effeminate,  nor  unchaste,  nor  thieves, 
nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers, 
nor  extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  king- 
dom of  God.  And  such  were  some  of 
you :  hut  ye  are  washed^  hut  ye  are  sane- 
tifiedf  hut  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  the  Spirit  of  our 
God"  (1  Cor.  vi.  9-11).  We  forget  the 
greatness  of  redeeming  mercy  and  power. 

Lessons : 

1.  Human  judgments  are  not  infaU 
lihle. 

2.  Despair  not  of  the  worst  of  men. 

3.  Despair  not  of  yourselves  in  lif^s 
darkest  mom^ents* 


PSALM  IV. 

Night  Thoughts. 

Introduction, 

**  The  Psalmist  prays  God  to  deliver  him  from  present  as  from  past  distresses  (ver.  8). 
1.  He  assures  the  haters  of  his  regal  dignity  that  God  bestowed  it,  and  will  certainly  protect 
it  (ver.  3,  4).  2,  3.  He  exhorts  them  to  quiet  submission,  righteousness,  and  trust  in  God  (ver. 
6,  6).  4,  5.  He  contrasts  his  own  satisfaction,  springing  from  such  trust,  with  the  hopeless  dis- 
quietude of  others,  even  in  the  midst  of  their  enjoyments  (ver.  7,  8).  6,  7.  He  closes  with 
an  exquisite  proof  of  his  tranquillity  by  falling  asleep,  as  it  were,  before  U8,  under  the  Divine 
protection  (ver.  9).  8.  The  third  psalm  may  be  described  as  a  mormng,  and  this  fourth  as 
au  evening  ^salm."— Alexander. 

12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  IV. 


Man  appealing  to  God. 

(Verse  \.) 


In  the  midst  of  trials  and  perils  the 
Psalmist  seeketh  audience  with  God, 

Observe  : 

He  first  appeals  to  God.  He  does 
not  go  to  God  when  all  human  inven- 
tions have  been  tried  and  failed,  but  his 
first  cry  is  to  Heaven.  It  is  a  good 
thing  to  take  life's  questions  to  Him 
"straightway."  Before  you  go  to  the 
doctor,  go  to  God  ;  before  you  go  to 
the  lawyer,  go  to  God ;  before  you  go 
to  your  friend,  to  your  minister,  go  to 
God.  Go  directly  from  your  trouble, 
with  your  trouble,  to  God.  We  often 
suffer  loss  by  keeping  back  our  burdens. 
Consult  Heaven  at  first,  and  you  will 
feel  after  that  that  you  have  little  to  ask 
from  human  counsellors  and  comforters. 

I.  He  appeals  to  the  Divine  right- 
eousness. 

*'  0  God  of  my  righteousness."  He 
recognises  the  fact  of  God's  righteous- 
ness. Man  is  unjust,  the  world  often 
seems  to  be  full  of  injustice ;  but 
David  recognises  the  justice  of  the 
Divine  character  and  government.  And 
not  only  so,  but  he  recognises  his  per- 
sonal relation  to  the  righteous  God.  *'  O 
God  of  my  righteousness."  "  0  God  ! 
who  art  righteous  Thyself,  and  art  the 
patron  of  my  righteousness,  of  my  right- 
eous cause,  and  of  my  righteous  life." 
— Leighton.  The  Psalmist  claims  to  be 
righteous,  but  acknowledges  God  as  the 
author  of  his  righteousness.  "A  cele- 
brated heathen  said,  *  I  wrap  myself  up 
in  my  own  virtue.'  A  true  believer  has 
something  infinitely  better  to  wrap  him- 
self in.  When  Satan  says,  Thou  hast 
yielded  to  my  suggestions  ;  when  Con- 
science says.  Thou  hast  turned  a  deaf 
ear  to  my  admonitions  ;  when  the  Law 
of  God  says.  Thou  has  broken  me ; 
when  the  Gospel  says.  Thou  hast  ne- 
glected me;  when  Justice  says.  Thou 
hast  insulted  me;  when  Mercy  says, 
Thou  hast  slighted  me ;  Faith  can  say, 
All  this  is  too  true  !  but  I  wrap  myself 
up  in  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ." 
^-Toplady.  God  cannot  hear  our  appeal 
except  we  recognise  His  righteousness, 


and  except  through  His  grace  we  are 

righteous  ourselves. 

II.  He  appeals  to  the  Divine  faith- 
fulness. 

"  Thou  hast  enlarged  me  when  T 
was  in  distress."  The  Psalmist  had 
truly  a  good  memory.  He  did  not  for- 
get God's  help  and  mercies  in  days  past; 
his  memory  was  full  of  sun-pictures  ; 
and  with  faultless  logic  he  inferred  that 
still  God  would  deliver  him.  Our 
memory  is  often  bad,  and  we  forget 
God's  mercies ;  our  reasoning  is  often 
bad,  and  we  argue  from  past  deliver- 
ances to  future  desertions  and  disasters. 
May  God  mend  our  memories  and  our 
logic  !  In  the  day  of  trouble  and  perse- 
cution, remember  how  God  has  ever 
stood  by  His  people,  and  remember  that 
His  faithfulness  faileth  not. 

III.  He  appeals  to  the  Divine  mercy. 
*'  Have  mercy  upon  me."     However 

just  we  way  feel  our  cause  to  be,  we  have 
always  need  to  feel  how  much  there  is 
about  us  which  needs  to  be  forgiven, 
and  that  we  must  crave  help  on  the 
ground  of  mercy,  not  demand  it  in  the 
name  of  justice. 
Observe  : 

1.  The  blessedness  of  appealing  to 
God.  How  grand  it  is  thus  to  open  the 
heart  to  God  in  dark  and  trying  days  ! 
'*  The  life  of  man  upon  earth  is  a  war- 
fare ;  and  it  is  much  better,  in  the 
midst  of  enemies  and  dangers,  to  be 
acquainted  with  one  fortress  than  with 
many  inns.  He  that  knows  how  to 
pray  may  be  pressed,  but  cannot  be 
overwhelmed." — Leighton,  "  Hear  me 
when  I  calV^  In  the  very  hour  and 
article  of  trouble.  The  other  day  there 
was  a  great  storm,  and  the  electric  wires 
were  all  broken,  and  messages  could 
not  be  transmitted ;  but  the  direst 
storms  interrupt  not  our  intercourse 
with  Heaven ;  nay,  then  the  lines  of 
communication  act  best,  and  we  no 
sooner  cry  than  He  answers. 

Observe : 

2.  The  conditions  of  appealing  to  God. 
It  is  the  prerogative  only  of  the  just  and 

13 


PSALM  IV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


believing  man.  We  must  remember 
the  rectitude  of  God's  nature  and  rule. 
"  David  asks  nothing  inconsistent  with 
God's  holiness,  and  the  same  rule  should 
govern  all  our  prayers." — Alexander. 
And  we  must  live  in  a  right  relation  to 
the  just   and  gracious  God.     *'  Right- 


eousness and  grace  are  not  opposed  to 
one  another  in  God,  but  man  must  not 
forget  that  he  must  enter  into  positive 
and  active  relations  with  reference  to 
both  of  these  attributes  of  God,  if  he 
would  obtain  and  retain  righteousness, 
peace,  and  joy." — Moll. 


Expostulation. 
(Fer«e5  2-6.) 


The  Psalmist  here  addresses  his  ene- 
mies. 

I.  He  reminds  them  of  the  vanity 
of  their  opposition  to  himself. 

Ver.  2.  "How  long  will  ye  turn  my 
glory  into  shame] " — i.e.,  my  personal  and 
official  honour  and  character.  *'  How 
long  will  ye  utter  slanders  against  me,  and 
trail  my  honour  in  the  dusf?" — Delltzsch, 
The  Psalmist  declares  their  conduct  to 
b«  vain,  their  hostility  to  be  fruitless. 

(1.)  Because  he  was  Divinely  dected. 
Ver.  3.  "  How  long  will  ye  deem  lightly 
of  my  Divine  election,  which  is  the  syle 
cause  of  my  occupying  so  high  a  dignity." 
— Kay.  He  felt  that  God  had  chosen 
him,  and  had  not  rejected  him. 

(2.)  Because  he  was  T)i\me\y  protected. 
*'  The  Lord  will  hear  when  I  call  unto 
Him  "  (ver.  3).  He  is  still  my  glory  and 
refuge. 

1.  There  is  warming  here  for  the  ene- 
mies of  Christ.  David  was  a  type  of 
the  Messiah ;  and  Borne  well  observes  : 
"  If  the  Israelitish  monarch  conceived 
he  had  just  cause  to  expostulate  with 
his  enemies  for  despising  the  royal 
majesty  with  which  Jehovah  had  in- 
vested His  anointed,  of  how^  much  severer 
reproof  shall  they  be  thought  worthy 
who  blaspheme  the  essential  'glory'  of 
King  Messiah,  which  shines  forth  by 
his  Gosjiel  in  the  Church  1  Thou,  O 
Christ,  art  everlasting  truth ;  all  is 
*  vanity  and  falsehood,'  transient  and  fal- 
lacious, but  the  love  of  Thee  ! "  God 
hath  set  forth  Jesus  Christ ;  He  hears 
Him  always;  and  he  who  contends 
against  the  Lord  Jesus  fights  against 
God.     How  vain  such  a  rebellion  ! 

2.  There  is  comfort  here  for  the  dis- 
ciples of  Christ.     The  ''  word  here  used, 

U 


'godly,'  commonly  denotes  one  who 
loves  God." — Kay.  And  there  is  great 
comfort  here  for  the  lovers  of  God. 
"  The  Lord  hath  set  apart  him  that  is 
godly  for  Himself."  God  knows  those 
who  fear  Him  ;  He  prizes  them ;  He 
watches  over  them  with  loving  jealousy. 
"  What  rare  persons  the  godly  are  I 
*  The  righteous  is  more  excellent  than 
his  neighbour '  (Prov.  xii.  26).  As  the 
flower  of  the  sun,  as  the  wine  of  Leba- 
non, as  the  sparkling  upon  Aaron's  breast- 
plate, such  is  the  orient  splendour  of  a 
person  embellished  with  godliness.  .  .  . 
The  godly  are  precious,  therefore  they 
are  set  apart  for  God.  We  set  apart 
things  that  are  precious  ;  the  godly  are 
set  apart  as  God's  peculiar  treasure  (Ps. 
cxxxv.  4) ;  as  His  garden  of  delight 
(Cant.  iv.  12) ;  as  His  royal  diadem 
(Isa.  xliii.  3) ;  the  godly  are  the  excel- 
lent of  the  earth  (Ps.  xvi.  3)  ;  compar- 
able to  fine  gold  (Lam.  iv.  2) ;  double 
refined  (Zech.  xiii.  9).  They  are  the 
glory  of  the  creation  (Isa.  xlvi.  13). 
Origen  compares  the  saints  to  sapphires 
and  crystals.  God  calls  them  jewels 
(Mai.  iii.  17)." — Thomas  Watson,  quoted 
by  Spurgeon.  And  God  will  preserve 
His  jewels.  We  often  read  now-a-days 
of  great  'jewel-robberies  ;'  but  if  we  will 
be  faithful  to  God,  "  none  shall  pluck 
us  out  of  His  hand."  In  the  second 
place  the  Psalmist 

II.  Exhorts  his  enemies  to  repent- 
ance and  amity. 

Ver.  4,  5.  Here  the  Psalmist  rises  to 
a  great  height.  He  has  forgotten  him- 
self and  his  apparent  peril,  and  .is  soli- 
citous only  about  his  enemie^.  He  is 
anxious,  but  it  is  on  their^  account ; 
they  are  in  the  greatest  danger  who  are 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY .  PSALMS, 


VSALMIV 


found  figlitir.g  against  God.  Sublimely 
Belf-forgetfui,  he  admonishes  his  adver- 
saries. "  He  passes  on  to  wise  and 
loving  counsels." — Perowne. 

1.  He  exhorts  them  to  solemn  reflec- 
tion. Ver.  4.  "  In  your  secret  cham- 
bers." "  Let  the  still  hours  of  the  night 
bring  calmer  and  wiser  thoupfhts  with 
til  em." — Perowne.  It  is  a  good  thing  to 
talk  with  ourselves  in  the  silence  of  the 
soul,  in  the  secrecy  of  our  chambers. 
*'  Unless  a  man  takes  himself  sometimes 
out  of  the  world  by  retirement  and  self- 
reflection,  he  will  be  in  danger  of  losing 
himself  in  the  world." —  Whichcote.  And 
as  Trapp  quaintly  says :  "As  it  is  a  sign 
that  there  are  great  distempers  in  that 
family  where  husband  and  wife  go  divers 


days  together  and  speak  not  the  one  to 
the  other,  so  in  that  soul  that  flieth  from 
itself,  and  can  go  long  without  self-exa- 
mination." 

2.  He  exhorts  them  to  practical  piety. 
Ver.  6.  "  Sacrifices  accompanied  by  up- 
rightness of  intention  and  innocency  of 
life." — Kay.  **  Fruits  meet  for  repent- 
ance." All  sacrifices  wanting  in  sin- 
cerity and  righteousness  are  but  provo- 
cations of  God. 

It  is  the  duty  of  all  Christian  people 
thus  to  expostulate  earnestly  and  affec- 
tionately with  the  enemies  of  Christ. 
Oh !  that  the  enemies  of  the  Church  of 
God  would  listen  to  His  heralds,  im- 
prove the  truce  of  God,  and  lay  down 
the  weapons  of  rebellion. 


The  Chief  Good. 


(  Verses 

I.  The  grand  question. 

"  Who  shall  show  us  any  good  1  "  (ver. 
6).  1.  It  is  the  universal  question. 
"  There  be  many  that  say,"  <fec.  Men 
of  all  ranks,  gifts,  ages,  are  thus  crying. 
Thei-e  is  within  them  a  strange  void,  a 
great  discontent ;  they  want  something 
which  they  have  not.  2.  It  is  a  pas- 
sionate,  imperative  question.  *'Who 
shalH"  Who  can?  With  what  rest- 
less avidity  men  seek  to  find  the  grand 
remedy  for  their  profound  discontent  ! 
3.  Is  it  not  a  despairing  question  1 
"  Who  shall  1 "  as  if  in  mockery.  There 
is  no  such  thing,  seems  to  be  implied. 

"  Arts,  superstition,  arms,  philosophy. 
Have  each  in  turn  possessed,  betrayed,  and 
mocked  us  ;  " 

and  men  lose  faith  in  the  chief  good, 
and  cynically  ask,  Who  shall  declare 
it  ]  As  in  Noel  Paton's  great  picture, 
the  vast  multitude  is  pursuing  a  sha- 
dowy shape,  which  seems  to  promise 
them  ineffable  satisfaction,  but  which 
ever  eludes  their  eager  grasp. 

II.  The  true  answer. 

"  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy 
countenance  upon  us  "  (ver.  6). 

There  is  a  true  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion, and  here  we  have  it.  The  smile  of 
God  is  the  essential  good.     Mark  : 

1.  The  spirituality  of  the  supreme 
blessing. 


6-8.) 

Here  the  world  errs  in  imagining  the 
chief  good  to  be  natural,  sensible.  "  Who 
shall  sliow  us  any  good  ?  "  "  Through 
all  their  life,  with  an  unstable  pace,  they 
catch  at  flying  forms  of  good ;  and  after 
all  their  falls  and  their  bruises,  they  cry 
out  again  and  again.  Who  will  show  us 
any  good  ?  And  when  they  behold  any 
new  species  or  shadow  of  it,  they  imme- 
diately run  to  it." — Leighton.  In  oppo- 
sition to  this,  the  Psalmist  avers  that 
the  supreme  blessing  is  the  Hght  of  God's 
countenance.     Observe : 

(1.)  Natural  things  will  not  atone  for 
the  absence  of  God.  Nothing  will  take 
the  place  of  God.  Chemistry  alleges 
that  it  has  discovered  a  means  of  pro- 
ducing artificial  sunlight.  From  natural 
elements  a  flame  is  to  be  evolved  which 
shall  equal  in  quality  and  intensity  the 
light  emitted  from  the  sun.  Wonderful 
things,  no  doubt,  have  come  from  the 
brains  of  chemists,  but  it  will  be  a  long 
time,  nevertheless,  before  they  make  us 
independent  of  the  sun.  It  will  be  a 
long  time  before  "  artificial  sunshine " 
melts  the  snows  of  winter,  paints  the 
flowers  of  summer,  ripens  the  fruits  of 
autumn,  shoots  life  through  the  swelling 
year.  So  we  may  try  to  find  in  natural 
things  substitutes  for  the  light  of  God's 
face,  but  they  must  all  prove  in  vain. 
Oh  1  cease  your  vain  attempts  to  create 

15 


FBALMIV, 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


light  and  joy  out  of  merely  worldly 
elements;  look  up,  and  in  the  light  of 
God's  countenance  find  the  vital  sun- 
shine of  the  soul. 

*'  Mark  what  is  good  in  the  creatures 
you  behold,  in  the  song  of  birds,  in  the 
beauty  of  flowers,  in  the  wealth  of 
metals,  in  the  sweetness  of  meats ;  these 
are  but  rills  proceeding  from  God,  the 
abounding  Fount ;  all  these  utter  the 
things  which  are  in  God ;  for  all  crea- 
tures are  but  voices  manifesting  Him. 
Yet  we  must  not  rest  in  them.  It  has 
happened  that  painters  have  pictured 
fruit  with  such  accuracy,  that  birds 
have  come  out  of  the  sky,  thinking  them 
real,  in  order  to  feed  upon  them ;  but 
finding  them  to  be  painted,  and  that 
there  is  no  food  in  them,  they  fly  away 
to  seek  their  true  sustenance.  The 
Divine  painter  has  traced  with  His 
brush  in  His  creatures  the  beauties 
which  live  in  Himself,  and  in  them  they 
seem  to  live.  Yet  are  they  but  figures, 
not  verities,  for  the  fashion  of  this  world 
passeth  away.  Would  you  know  how  to 
act,  knowing  that  these  are  but  pictures 
and  not  realities  ?  Act  as  the  bird,  which, 
finding  no  food  in  the  painting,  seeks 
its  real  meat  elsewhere.  Mark  this, 
you  will  find  in  creation  no  true  food, 
no  satiety,  no  repose ;  mark  this  and 
fly  away  to  your  God.  He  is  very  good, 
He  is  true  food,  in  Him  alone  is  repose." 
— John  Osorius,  1558. 

(2. )  The  blessing  of  God  is  the  sweetness 
of  all  natural  things.  So  far  from 
natural  things  atoning  for  the  absence  of 
God,  they  have  no  power  to  satisfy 
except  by  virtue  of  the  Divine  blessing. 
*'  As  with  manna  there  fell  a  dew,  so  to 
a  good  soul,  together  with  corn  and 
wine  there  is  a  secret  influence  of  God, 
which  the  carnal  heart  is  not  acquainted 
with." — Trapp. 

(3.)  The  blessing  of  God  is  enough 
in  the  absence  of  all  natural  gifts  and 
^jcclesiastical  privileges.  Without  natural 
gifts.  He  can  satisfy  the  soul  directly 
without  the  corn  and  wine  at  all.  "  He 
is  enough  without  the  creature,  but  the 
creature  is  not  anytliing  without  Him. 
It  is,  therefore,  better  to  enjoy  Him 
without  anything  else,  than  to  enjoy 
everything  else  without  Him,  It  is 
16 


better  to  be  a  wooden  vessel  filled  with 
wine  than  a  golden  one  filled  with 
water." — Seeker^  quoted  by  Spurgeon. 
Without  ecclesiastical  agencies.  David 
was  at  a  distance  from  the  tabernacle, 
and  he  had  sent  back  the  ark  to 
Jerusalem,  but  he  felt  that  God  put 
joy  into  his  heart  all  the  same.  He 
and  his  friends  rejoice,  although  cut  off 
from  the  Tabernacle,  to  feel  God  near 
and  precious.  "  We  cannot  now,  it  is 
true,  off'er  the  sacrifices  of  victims  before 
the  ark  at  Jerusalem,  but  we  may  offer 
the  sacrifice  of  the  spirit.  We  have 
not  access  to  the  Urim  and  Thummim, 
on  the  high  priest's  breastplate  in  the 
sanctuary ;  but  God  will  lift  up  the 
light  of  His  countenance  upon  us.  That 
is  the  true  Urim  and  Thummim.  We 
cannot  now  receive  the  benediction  of 
the  priests,  *  The  Lord  bless  thee,  and 
keep  thee ;  *  but  the  Lord  Himself  is 
ever  present  with  us  to  bless  us,  and  He 
lifts  up  the  light  of  His  countenance 
upon  us.  There  is  our  true  good.  There 
is  our  genuine  gladness." — Wordsworth. 
So,  if  God  take  away  from  us  material 
good,  and  deprive  us,  or  permit  us  to  be 
deprived,  of  ecclesiastical  ceremonies  and 
services,  He  can  come  into  our  soul  and 
fill  it  with  sublime  delights.  Ah  I  God 
sometimes  takes  away  proprieties  and 
ceremonies  that  we  may  realise  more 
richly  and  fully  the  spiritual  blessed- 
ness which  those  agents  sometimes  veil 
and  limit. 

2.  The  sufficiency  of  the  supreme 
blessing.  "  More  than  in  the  time," 
&c.  (ver.  7).  *'  David's  enemies  have 
at  their  command  all  earthly  means  of 
support  and  enjoyment.  He  finds  it  dif- 
ficult to  collect  supplies  for  himself  and 
his  army,  yet  God  has  given  him  a  better 
joy  than  that  of  harvest  or  vintage." — 
Perowne.  *'  The  joy  of  godliness  is  in- 
finitely greater  than  that  of  worldliness. 
There  is  as  much  difference  between 
heavenly  comforts  and  earthly,  as  be- 
tween a  banquet  that  is  eaten  and  one 
that  is  painted  on  the  wall." — Watson^ 
quoted  by  Spurgeon.  The  delight  of 
the  saint  is — 

**  What  nothing  earthly  girea  or  can  destroy, 
The  soul's  calm  sunshine  and  the  heart-felt 
joy." — Pope. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSAtM  T. 


3.  The  fruits  of  this  blessing  : 
(1.)  The  consciousness  of  peace.  "I 
will  both  lay  me  down  and  sleep"  (ver. 
8).  *'  At  once,  as  soon  as  I  lie  down,  I 
sleep,  not  harassed  by  disturbing  and 
anxious  thoughts." — Phillips.  In  the 
drama  the  sleepless  king  wonders  that 
sleep — 

"  Upon  the  high  and  giddy  mast 
Seals  up  the  ship-boy's  eyes,  and  rocks  his 

brains 
In  cradle  of  the  rude  imperious  surge  j 
And  in  the  visitation  of  the  winds, 
Who  take  the  ruffian  billows  by  the  top, 


Curling  their  monstrous  heads,  and  hanging 

them 
With   deaf'niiig   clamours  in   the  slippery 

clouds, 
That,  with  the  hurly,  death  itself  awakes. 
Canst    thou,    0    partial   sleep!    give    thy 

repose 
To  the  wet  sea-boy  in  an  hour  so  rude  I" 

But  in  those  storms  of  life  which 
are  stronger,  wilder  than  fiercest  sea- 
storm,  "  God  giveth  His  beloved  sleep." 

(2.)  The  consciousness  of  safety.  To 
"dwell  in  safety."  "He  needs  no  guards, 
for  he  is  guarded  round  about  by  Jeho- 
vah, and  kept  in  safety/' — Belitzsch, 


PSALM  V. 

Introduction, 

•*  A  morning  prayer  of  David,  appealing  to  God  as  his  king,  against  whose  sovereignty  his 
own  enemies  were  really  in  rebellion." — Kay.  **  This  psalm  must  have  been  composed  at  Jeru- 
salem, since  David  had  access  to  the  house  of  God  (see  ver.  7)  ;  probably  a  short  time  before 
the  open  revolt  of  Absalom,  when  the  king  was  aware  of  the  machinations  of  conspirators  under 
a  bloodthirsty  and  treacherous  chief  (ver.  6).  Like  Psalm  iii.,  it  is  a  morning  song  (ver.  6)." 
— Speakers  Commentary, 

Morning  Prater. 
(Verses  1-4.) 


We  are  taught  here  some  great  truths 
concerning  prayer. 

I.  True  prayer  is  personal 

"i/y  words,"  "  J/y  meditation,"  *^My 
cry,"  '^  My  King,"  "  My  God."  David 
was  a  king,  yet  was  he  his  own  chaplain. 
We  must  pray  for  ourselves.  A  parent's 
prayer,  a  minister's  prayer,  will  not  do 
for  us.  No  one  can  become  deputy  for 
us  before  the  throne  of  grace.  And  in 
prayer  we  must  realise  our  personal 
relation  to  God.  He  is  "  My  Father," 
''My  King,"  *' i/y  God." 

II.  True  prayer  is  profound  and  pas- 
sionate. 

1.  It  begins  with  words.  *'  Give  ear 
to  my  words."  Many  have  an  idea  that 
words  are  not  necessary  to  prayer,  that 
the  finest  prayer  does  without  words. 
When  Curran  asked  Grattan  if  he  ever 
prayed ;  *'  No,"  said  Grattan,  **  but  I 
have  aspirations  all  the  day  long." 
There  is  a  subtle  danger  here.  True 
prayer  cannot  indeed  fully  express  it- 
self, but  it  will  labour  to  do  so.  If 
our  sense  of  need  is  real  and  intense, 


we  shall  speak  out  in  broken,  burning 
words.  Robert  Hall,  in  his  private  de- 
votions prayed  aloud,  lest  his  prayers 
should  become  vapid  and  wandering. 
If  there  is  no  audible,  verbal  prayer, 
the  "aspirations"  will  become  ever  more 
shadowy  and  vague.  "  None  of  God's 
children  are  possessed  with  a  dumb 
devil." — Spur g  eon. 

2.  True  prayer  deepens  into  sighs. 
**  O  Lord,  consider  my  sighs."  "  Under- 
stand my  sighing." — Horsley.  "Medi- 
tation— moanings  of  that  half-uttered 
form  to  which  deep  feeling  gives  rise — 
groanings,"  as  Rom.  viii.  26,  27. — 
Jamieson.  If  language  could  express 
all  we  feel,  ours  could  hardly  be  a  true 
prayer ;  language  breaks  off  into  groan- 
ings. 

3.  True  prayer  rises  into  cries. 
"  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  my  cry." 
It  rises  into  a  cry,  and  a  cry  has  a  voice 
which  pierces  heaven.  Prevailing  prayer 
comes  from  the  profound  of  the  bosom, 
and  is  heard  in  the  high  places  of  the 
firmament, 

17 


rSALM  7. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


III.  True  prayer  is  resolute. 

"  For  unto  Thee  will  I  pray."  "  There 
is  a  holy  boldness  here.  God,  as  the 
King  of  His  people,  could  not  deny  them 
His  protection,  and  tliey  asked  no  otlier. 
For  to  Thee,  and  Thee  only,  will  I  pray. 
As  if  he  had  said,  it  is  in  this  capacity 
that  I  invoke  Thee,  and  I  therefore  must 
be  heard." — Alexander. 

IV.  True  prayer  is  obedient. 

Ver.  3.  "In  the  morning  will  I  set 
in  order  for  Thee,  and  will  look  out." — 
Kay.  David  speaks  of  himself,  figur- 
atively, as  a  ministering  priest,  setting 
in  order  the  altar  wood  and  the  morn- 
ing sacrifice.  Now  the  Levite  acted  ac- 
cording to  the  law  of  God  in  presenting 
the  sacrifices,  and  they  were  accepted 
only  as  they  were  so  offered.  In  prayer 
we  must  recognise  the  word  and  will  of 
God.  Prayer  is  not,  as  some  suppose, 
a  wild,  arbitrary,  lawless  overriding  of 
Divine  law;  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  pro- 
foundly consults  the  mind  of  God;  it 


regulates  its  petitions  by  the  revealed 
will  of  God,  and  seeks  to  conform  all 
life  to  the  purpose  and  plan  of  God. 

V.  True  prayer  is  expectant. 

"  And  will  look  ttp,^'  or  look  out. 
"Look  out  expectantly  for  the  thing 
prayed  for." — Kay.  Alexander  says  : 
"  The  image  presented  is  that  of  one 
looking  from  a  wall  or  tower  in  anxious 
expectation  of  approaching  succour." 
Horsley  says  :  "  I  will  watch  for  Thee 
— i.e.,  watch  for  some  usual  signal  of 
God's  favour,  some  appearance  in  the 
flame  of  the  sacrifice,  or  a  ray  of  the 
Shekinah  issuing  from  the  sanctuary." 
Let  us  look  for  answers  to  our  prayers. 
When  a  man  has  lodged  his  prayers  with 
God  he  may  look  up,  he  ought  to  look 
up,  and  God  will  not  disappoint  him. 

Let  us  then  each  morning  thus  draw 
nigh  unto  God.  We  cannot  tell  what  a 
day  shall  bring  forth,  but  if  we  greet 
the  morning  sun  with  prayer,  we  shall 
see  the  setting  sun  with  praise. 


The  Relation  of  God  to  the  Wicked. 
(Verses  4-6.) 


It  is  a  relationship  of  direct  and 
passionate  antagonism.  Observe  the 
gradations  of  the  text, 

I.  God  has  no  pleasure  in  wicked- 
ness. 

Ver.  4.  The  Psalmist  seems  to  say. 
There  are  such  gods  in  other  nations,  gods 
delighting  in  blood  and  lust ;  but  Thou 
dost  not  delight  in  iniquity.  The  gods 
of  Greece  and  Rome  found  pleasure  in 
licentiousness  ;  hut,  however  Christianity 
may  be  a  *  civilised  heathejiism,'  it  sets 
before  us  Deity  in  another  light  than 
that. 

More : 

II.  God  does  not  tolerate  wicked- 
ness. 

"  Neither  shall  evil  dwell  with  Thee." 
Many  would  teach  us  that  God  does 
tolerate  evil — that  He  employs  it  to 
perfect  man,  to  develop  the  universe. 
No  ;  He  cannot  dwell  with  it,  cannot 
tolerate  it.  Remember  this  in  the 
Church.  History  relates  that  Red- 
wald.  King  of  East  Anglia,  built  a 
church,  at  one  end  of  which  was  an 
Id 


altar  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass, 
and  at  the  other  end  an  altar  for  sac- 
rifice to  the  old  British  idols.  How 
frequently  the  Church  is  in  danger  of 
making  analogous  compromises,  allow- 
ing certain  evils  to  exist  within  its 
borders  for  the  sake  of  gold,  or  popu- 
larity, or  peace.  It  must  not  be,  or 
God  will  not  dwell  with  us.  And  we 
must  remember  this  in  omt  personal  life. 
"  Rest  assured,  Christ  will  not  live  in 
the  parlour  of  our  hearts  if  we  entertain 
the  devil  in  the  cellar  of  our  thoughts." 
— Spurgeon.  God  does  not  tolerate 
wickedness.  It  is  no  part  of  His 
pleasure,  no  part  of  His  policy,  that  evil 
should  be  found  in  the  human  heart  or 
in  the  world. 

III.  God  hates  wickedness. 

"  Thou  hatest  all  the  workers  of 
iniquity"  (ver.  5,  6).  "The  Lord 
abhors  the  wicked."  He  "  will  destroy 
them."  It  is  unspeakably  repugnant  to 
Him.  "  God  perfectly  hateth  wicked- 
ness and  wicked  persons.  God  hateth 
sin  worse  than  He  doth  the  devil ;  for  He 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


psalms; 


hatetli  the  devil  for  sin's  sake,  and  not 

sin  lor  the  devil's  sake." — Trapp. 

We    see    here    the    condemnation    of 

wnatever  speaks  lightly  or  tolerantly  of 

sin.     Of  the  pldlosophy  wliich  does — 

tlie  philosophy  which  pleads  for  evil  as 

necessary  to  effect   God's  purposes  ;  as 

one  of  our  poets  speaks  of  the  devil — 

'*  Existing  for  some  good, 
By  us  not  understood." 

Of     the     morality    which    does  —  the 
morality  which  regards  sin  as  an  incon- 


venience or  impolicy,  rather  than  as 
damnable  in  its  essence.  Of  the  Chris- 
tianity which  does  —  Antinomianism  ; 
Roman  Catholicism,  with  its  division  of 
sin  into  venial  and  mortal ;  and  that 
general  Christian  experience  which  has 
no  burning  hatred  to  evil. 

In  our  personal  life,  in  the  Church,  in 
all  departments  of  worldly  action,  we 
must  look  upon  foulness  with  horror,  or 
with  horror  God  will  look  upon  us. 
*'  Ye  that  love  the  Lord  hate  evil." 


The  Kelation  of  God  to  the  Saints, 
(Ftfm«7-12.) 


**  Throughout  the  psalm  there  breathes 
a  strong  feeling  that  God  is  pledged  by 
His  very  character  as  a  righteous  God 
to  defend  and  bless  the  righteous." — 
Peroivne. 

I.  God  is  their  Shepherd. 

*'  Lead  me,  O  Lord,"  <fec.  As  a 
shepherd  leads  his  flock.  "  Make  Thy 
way  straight,"  &c.  "  Do  not  let  me 
choose  my  own  way,  but  Thine ;  and  do 
Tliou  make  Thy  way  level  and  manifest 
before  me.'' — Wordsworth.  Is  God  your 
Slie[)herd  ?  Are  you  following  obedi- 
ently in  His  way?  Then  you  need  fear 
no  pit  or  wolf. 

II   God  is  their  Shield. 

In  the  12th  verse  the  Psalmist  recog- 
nises that  God  is  a  shield.  In  the  9th 
and  10th  verses  we  see  the  greatness 
of  the  Psalmist's  peril.  His  enemies  are 
profoundly  depraved.  "  Their  inward 
part  is  an  abyss."  They  are  altogether 
corrupt.  And  yet  his  enemies  are  most 
plausible.  "  They  flatter  with  their 
tongue."  "I  have  my  doubts  whether 
*  flattery '  be  the  thing  meant  by  the 
Hebrew  words.  Is  it  not  rather 'that 
tlie  persons  in  question,  by  plausible 
arguments  and  an  ensnaring  eloquence, 
contrived  to  set  a  fair  appearance  upon 
mischievous  maxims  and  pernicious 
practices  ?  Libertines,  in  all  ages,  have 
not  wanted  excuses  for  their  riot  and 


debaucheries.  The  idolaters  of  an- 
tiquity contrived  to  give  an  air  of 
mysterious  sanctity  to  the  idlest  fables 
and  the  foulest  rites ;  and  the  philo- 
sophical atheists  of  modern  times  throw 
an  air  of  wisdom  over  the  most  absurd 
doctrines  and  the  most  wicked  prin- 
ciples. Thus  the  words  of  the  wicked 
are  fair  while  their  practices  are 
abominable,  and  they  promise  well  with 
the  worst  intentions." — Horsley.  The 
enemies  of  the  P.-alniist  were  vicious 
and  guileful,  and  he  felt  the  need  and 
blessedness  of  God's  shield.  So  the 
opposition  which  the  saints  have  to  over- 
come is. similar  to  that  encountered  by 
David.  Corrupt  and  plausible — such  is 
the  world,  such  the  devil,  such  the  flesh. 
God  is  our  Shield,  let  us  press  close  to 
its  shelter  ! 

in.  God  is  their  Song. 

Ver.  11,  12.  Enemies  throng,  but 
the  saints  can  sing. 

1.  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  saint  to 
rejoice.  ^^  Rejoice."  ^^  Shout  for  /oy." 
'' ^~^Q  joyful  in  Thee." 

2.  It  is  the  privilege  of  all  saints  thus 
to  rejoice.  "  Let  all  those  who  trust 
in  Thee  rejoice." 

3.  It  is  their  blessed  privilege  always 
to  rejoice.     "  Let  them  ever  shout  for 

joy- 


PSALM  VI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENT  AH  T :  PSA  LM8, 


PSALM  VL 

Introduction. 

"  The  first  of  the  seyen  Penitential  Psalms.  It  has  been  Baid  that  there  is  much  of  grief 
in  it,  but  nothinof  of  penitence.  This,  however,  is  an  error.  The  tears  shed  by  David  over 
Absalom  (2  Sam.  xviii.  33)  came,  we  are  sure,  from  the  fountain  of  a  penitent  heart.     He  knew 

well  that  Absalom's  rebellion  was  permitted  by  God  as  a  penal  consequence  of  his  sin." — Kay, 

Chastisement. 

{The  whole  Psalm.) 

Observe :  sufferings.     All  his  ideas  of  pride  and 

I.   The  twofold   character    of   the  power    are    gone,    and    he    is   broken 

Divine  chastisements.  down  in  body  and  soul.     (1.)  In  hody. 

Ver.  1.  "  Only  in  love,  not  in  wrath."  "  Have  pity  on  me,  O  Lord,  for  I  am 

■ — Kay.     There  is   the  chastisement  of  withered  away.    Drooping  as  a  blighted 

anger ^  and  the  chastisement  of  grace;  plant." — Kay.     *'  My  bones  are  vexed." 

the    'punitive   and    the    loving   chastise-  "  The  Hindoos,  in  extreme  grief  or  joy, 

ment.     "There  is  a  chastisement  which  declare:  ^ Our  bones  are  melted;'  that 

proceeds  from  God's  love  to  the  man  as  is,  like  boiling  lead,  they  are  completely 

being  pardoned,  and  which  is  designed  dissolved."  —  Roberts.       (2.)    In    soul, 

to  purify  or  to  prove  him ;  and  a  chas-  "  My  soul  is  also  sore  vexed  "  (ver.  3). 

tisement   which    proceeds    from    God's  "  His  soul  is  still  more  shaken  than  his 

wrath   against  the  man,  as  striving  ob-  body.     The  affliction  is  therefore  not  a 

stinately  against,  or  as  fallen  away  from,  merely  bodily  ailment,  in  which  only  a 

favour,  and  which  satisfies  Divine  jus-  timorous  man  loses  heart.     God's  love 

tice." — Delitzsch.  is  hidden  from  him.    God's  wrath  seems 

1.  The    one    is   measured,  the  other  as  though  it  would  wear  him  completely 
overwhelming.  away.    It  is  an  affliction  beyond  all  other 

2.  The  one  destroys,  the  other  perfects,  afflictions," — Delitzsch.    "  To  the  man  of 

3.  The  one  is  temporal^  the  other  God  the  bitterest  drop  in  the  cup  of 
eternal.  trouble  is  the  sense  of  the  wrath  of  God 

Consider  :  which  he  experiences  in  the  chastisement 

II.  The  grounds   of  appeal  to  the  of  God." — Tholuck.     "  Soul-trouble  is 

Divine  clemency.  the  very  soul  of  trouble." — Spurgeon. 

Oil  what  grounds  can  we  entreat  for  If  we   despise   the   chastisements  of 

the  milder  chastisement  ?    The  Psalmist  the  Lord — that  is,  if   we  resent  them, 

1.  Recognises  the  justice  of  the  suffer-  and  rise  up  defiantly  against  tbem — they 
ings  under  which  he  bows.  He  sees  must  continue  punitive  and  destructive; 
his  sin,  and  feels  it  just  that  that  sin  but  if  our  strength,  pride,  self-will,  are 
should  be  punished.  "  David  does  not  utterly  broken  down,  and  we  lie  emptied 
pray  for  the  removal  of  the  chastisement,  of  self  at  God's  feet,  then  we  may  look 
but  of  the  chastisement  in  wrath,  or,  for  the  punitive  chastisements  of  the 
what  is  the  same  thing,  of  the  judgment  just  God  to  change  into  the  loving 
proceeding  from  wrath." — Delitzsch.  "  I  chastisements  of  the  Merciful  One.  A 
indeed   confess   that  I  deserve  nothing  "  broken  and  contrite  heart,"  &c. 

but  destruction ;  but   because  I  could  3.   He  appeals  to  the  mercy  of  God 

not  endure   the  severity  of  Thy  judg-  (ver.  4).     "  Oh,  save  me  for  Thy  mercies' 

ment,   deal   not  with  me  after  my  de-  sake."     He  does  not  look  upon  himself 

Berts ;     yea,     rather    forgive    the    sins  as  an  ill-used  man,  but  knowing  himself 

whereby  I  have  provoked  Thine  anger  as  a  great  sinner,  he  casts  himself   on 

against  me." — Calvin.     God's  hand  can  the  sovereign  mercy  of  Heaven, 

only  cease  when  we  are  brought  to  ac-  4.   He  desires  to  live  to  glorify  God 

knowledge  the  justice  of  the  stroke.  (ver.  5).      "Men  who  sink  down  to  the 

2.  He  is  utterly  broken  down  by  his  grave  unforgiven,  unredeemed,  they  can« 

20 


BOMILSTia  COMMSNTAUT:  PSALMS, 


PSALlI  VI. 


not  celebrate  the  glories  of  Thy  mercy." 
— Ea^.  In  the  midst  of  his  sin  and 
sorrow  a  sincere  and  passionate  desire 
awakens  in  his  soul  for  the  honour  and 
praise  of  God.  He  passes  beyond  mere 
selfishness  into  sympathy  with  the 
Divine  rights  and  glory.  "  The  petition 
has  as  its  motive  the  fact  that  the 
Divine  interest  itself  is  concerned  in 
the  deliverance  of  the  man  who  can 
render  thanks  well-pleasing  to  God, 
only  as  living,  and  not  as  one  lost  in 
death  and  swallowed  up  in  Hades.  Yet 
this  is  only  one  side  of  the  thought. 
The  other  side  is  likewise  brought  into 
view,  namely,  that  the  petitioner  has  at 
heart  to  render  thanks  and  praise  to  the 
glory  of  God.  The  relation  is  therefore  in 
no  respect  a  selfish  one,  in  which  the  in- 
terests of  selfishness  prevail,  but  a  moral 
and  religious  one." — Moll. 

5.  He  is  overwhelmed  with  sorrow  on 
account  of  his  sin  (ver.  6,  7).  "  My 
eye  is  eaten  away  with  grief  ;  eaten 
away,  as  by  a  moth  fretting  a  garment." 
— Phillips.  The  great  deeps  of  his 
nature  were  broken  up,  and  he  would 
have  been  drowned  in  overmuch  sorrow 
had  it  not  been  that  hope  bore  him  up 
God  ward,  as  the  ark  rose  with  the  fiood. 
There  is  power  indeed  in  true  tears. 
"As  music  upon  the  waters  soundeth 


farther  and  more  harmoniously  than 
upon  the  land,  so  do  prayers  joined 
with  tears." — Trapp.  "  Even  when  the 
gates  of  prayer  are  shut  in  heaven,  those 
of  tears  are  open." — Hebrew  proverb. 

It  is  when  we  plead  as  the  Psalmist 
here  pleads,  that  God's  anger  is  softened, 
and  the  chastisement  of  wrath  is  changed 
into  the  discipline  of  grace.  '^Let  us 
pray,  with  our  whole  hearts,  for  mercy ; 
and  if  the  answer  to  our  prayers  be 
tardy,  because  we  have  deeply  trans- 
gressed, let  us  knock  ;  for  to  him  that 
knocketh  it  shall  be  opened  when 
prayers,  groans,  and  tears  beat  at  the 
door." — iS'^.  Cyprian. 

III.  The  Divine  response  to  the 
prayer  of  penitence. 

Ver.  8,  9.  **  They  that  sow  in  tears," 
(fee.  '*  The  Psalmist  always  contends 
with  the  Lord  before  he  dares  to  con- 
tend with  his  foes." — Sutcliffe.  But 
having  contended  with  the  Lord,  and 
found  forgiveness,  he  boldly  challenges, 
gloriously  triumphs  over,  all  his  enemies. 
When  God  has  delivered  him  from  his 
sins,  he  feels  that  God  will  deliver  him 
from  his  enemies.  So  if  God  pardon 
our  sin,  we  need  fear  neither  men  nor 
devils.  They  have  power  over  us  only 
as  long  as  our  sins  have  hold  of  us,  but 
when  God  pardons  our  sins  they  must  fly. 


Sorrow  for  Sin. 
{Verses  6,  7.) 


I.  The  necessity  for  such  sorrow. 
Some  speak  slightingly  of  repentance 

and  sorrow  for  sin,  but  such  sorrow  is 
required  from  saints  and  sinners.  It  is 
natural  and  evangelical.  "  In  respect  to 
the  Penitential  Psalms,  it  is  recorded  of 
St.  Augustine  that  in  his  last  sickness  he 
ordered  these  psalms  to  be  inscribed  in 
a  visible  place  on  a  wall  of  his  chamber, 
where  he  might  fix  his  eyes  and  heart 
upon  them,  and  make  their  words  his 
own  in  the  breathing  out  of  his  soul  to 
God." — Wordsworth. 

II.  Mistakes  concerning  this  sorrow. 

Many  true  penitents  perplex  them- 
selves touching  this  matter  of  sorrow 
for  sin.  They  think  that  they  do  not 
feel  enough,  feel  long  enough,  <fec.,  <fec. 

Let  us  be  concerned  : 


1.  About  the  quality  of  our  sorrow, 

not  its  quantity.  "Showers  be  better 
than  dews,  yet  it  is  suflBcient  if  God  at 
least  hath  bedewed  our  hearts,  and  hath 
given  us  some  sign  of  a  penitent  heart. 
If  we  have  not  rivers  of  water  to  pour 
forth  with  David,  neither  fountains  flow- 
ing with  Mary  Magdalene,  nor  as  Jeremiah 
desire  to  have  a  fountain  in  our  head  to 
weep  day  and  night,  nor  with  Peter 
weep  bitterly  ;  yet  if  we  lament  that  we 
cannot  lament,  and  mourn  that  we  can- 
not mourn  :  yea,  if  we  have  the  smallest 
sobs  of  sorrow  and  tears  of  compunction, 
if  they  be  true  and  not  counterfeit,  they 
will  make  us  acceptable  to  God ;  for  as 
the  woman  with  the  bloody  issue  that 
touched  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  was 
no  less  welcome   to  Christ  than  Thomas 

21 


BSAtK  Vt 


nOMILETJC  COMMENT AUT:  PSALMS, 


who  put  his  fingers  in  the  print  of  the 
nails,  so  God  looketh  not  at  the  quan- 
tity, but  the  sincerity  of  our  repentance." 
— Samson,  quoted  by  Spurgeon. 

2.  About  the  reality,  not  the  mani- 
festation of  our  sorrow.  "  Some  may 
say,  '  My  constitution  is  such  that  I  can- 
not weep ;  I  may  as  well  go  to  squeeze 
a  rock  as  think  to  get  a  tear.'  But  if 
thou  canst  not  weep  for  sin,  canst  thou 
grieve  ?  Intellectual  mourning  is  best ; 
there  may  be  sorrow  where  there  are  no 
tears  ;  the  vessel  may  be  full  though  it 
wants  vent ;  it  is  not  so  much  the  weep- 
ing eye  God  respects  as  the  broken 
heart." — Watson,  quoted  hy  Spurgeon. 

3.  About  the  sincerity  of  our  sorrow, 
not  its  duration.  Some  mourn  long  on 
account  of  sin,  but  let  us  not  doubt  for- 
giveness because  it  comes  the  sooner  to  us. 

III.  The  efficacy  of  this  sorrow. 

There  is  a  "  sorrow  of  the  world 
which  worketh  death,"  and  there  is  a 
*'  godly  sorrow,"  which  is  unto  life  and 
salvation.  "  Sin  draws  after  it  punish- 
ment, and  the  judgment  of  an  angry  God 
is  terrible  ;  but  only  the  impenitent  sin- 
ner is  lost,  not  the  penitent.  It  is  true, 
in  bitter^  heartfelt  grief  over  his  sins  he 
experiences  a  sorrow,  wdaich  not  only 
grieves  the  soul,  but  also  withers  the 
body  ;  but  he  feels  at  the  same  time 
that  he  is  mightily  drawn  towards  God 


by  this  godly  sorrow.  He  confesses  his 
guilt  and  the  justice  of  the  punishment 
with  which  the  holy  God  visits  him, 
and  makes  known  that  he  is  well  aware 
how  richly  he  deserves  the  disfavour  and 
wrath  of  God,  and  how  he  has  forfeited 
his  life  with  his  sins.  But  he  perceives 
in  this  very  punishment  that  God  is 
still  interested  in  him,  and  he  himself 
has  still  a  longing  after  God.  He  can 
still  believe  in  grace,  and  therefore  pray 
for  life  ;  and  in  this  consists  the  saving 
change  which  takes  place  in  his  condi- 
tion."— Moll.  There  is  a  Mohammedan 
legend  respecting  David,  which  says  that 
after  the  treachery  of  which  he  had  been 
guilty  towards  Uriah,  the  king  was 
seized  with  the  bitterest  remorse.  For 
forty  days  and  forty  nights  he  lay  in 
the  dust  and  wept ;  two  rivulets  gushed 
from  his  eyes,  and  the  weeping  wuUow 
and  the  incense-tree  sprang  up  upon 
the  spot.  Is  there  not  a  great  truth 
veiled  in  this  wild  fable  1  Whilst  the 
weeping  willow  stands  as  a  sign  of  that 
sorrow  which  bowed  David's  spirit  to 
the  earth,  does  not  the  incense-tree 
symbolise  that  faith  and  love  of  his 
which  trembled  up  to  heaven  1  When 
our  sorrow  for  sin  bows  us  down,  let  us 
still  look  up,  and  offering  God  the  in- 
cense of  a  penitent,  worshipping  spirit, 
He  shall  not  turn  away  our  prayer. 


The  Night  of  Repentance, 
(The  whole  Psalm.) 


Night  is  about  the  Psalmist,  and  the 
night  about  him  is  an  emblem  of  the 
night  within  him.  He  cannot  sleep  ;  all 
the  night  he  waters  his  couch  with  his 
tears.  The  fact  is,  his  sins  have  found 
him  out,  and  he  walks  in  darkness  and 
in  the  shadow  of  death — the  night  of 
repentance. 

Let  us  observe : 

I.  Its  darkness. 

There  is  darkness  in  the  Psalmist's 
#oul,  the  felt  absence  of  God.  "  Beturn, 
O  Lord"  (ver.  4).  God  is  away,  the 
sun  of  the  soul. 

(1.)  Darkness  means  misery.  How 
great  the  sorrow  here  pictured !  "Weak." 
*'  Bones  vexed."  **  Soul  also  sore  vexed  " 
22 


Sinner,  be  sure  some  day  or  other  sin 
will  make  your  soul  weep  and  bleed. 
(2.)  Darkness  means  guilt  and /ear  (ver. 
1).  Here  the  Psalmist  feels  his  guilt, 
and  dreads  the  unknown  terrors  of  God's 
wrath.  (3.)  Darkness  means  death.  The 
Psalmist  here  dreads  lest  he  should  sink 
lower  than  the  grave  (ver.  5).  He  feels 
that  his  sin  has  brought  him  to  the  verge 
of  everlasting  destruction. 

This  is  what  sin  brings  us  to.  It 
robs  the  soul  of  light,  of  life.  It  leaves 
the  sinner  trembling  within  the  shadows 
of  hell. 

II.  Its  duration. 

"  O  Lord,  how  long  ?  **  (ver.  3).  How 
swiftly  time   goes  when   we   are  living 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


KALH  VH, 


joyfully !  How  long  the  hours,  the 
months  of  suffering  and  unhappiness ! 
Seven  years  are  not  long  to  a  man  with 
health,  innocence,  and  freedom ;  but 
think  of  that  period  spent  in  a  jail  upon 
a  treadmill !  So  to  a  man  who  lives  in 
the  love  of  God,  the  hours  pass  with 
**  down  upon  their  feet ;  "  but  how  dreary 
and  leaden-footed  are  the  hours  to  a 
guilty  soul !  Sin  takes  all  the  glory 
and  joy  out  of  life,  and  makes  us  '*  curse 
the  day  that  we  were  born."  "  The 
pleasures  of  sin  are  but  for  a  season  ;  " 
the  pangs  and  penalties  of  sin  embitter 
many  days. 

III.  Its  spectres. 

"All  mine  enemies"  (ver.  7).  The 
Psalmist  felt  circumvented  by  enemies, 
and  in  his  enemies  he  saw  his  sins.  Men 
commit  sins,  and  pass  on  as  if  they  were 
to  know  those  sins  no  more,  but  the  day 
comes  when  they  all  live  again.  "  God 
require th  that  which  is  past,"  and  con- 
science throws  open  the  doors  of  memory, 
and  out  rushes  a  crowd  of  spectres. 
Little  sins ;  old  sins  j  quiet  sins ;  for- 
gotten sins  j  white-washed  sins ;  all  come 
from  their  graves.  Ghosts  of  falsehoods ; 
guilty  recollections  of  envyings  and 
hatreds ;  soiled  apparitions  of  dead 
lusts ;  all  return  to  accuse  and  condemn. 
Be  sure  that  some  day  or  other  your 
sin  will  find  you  out;  and  a  thousand 
spectres  will  people  the  darkness^  and 
fill  you  with  agony  and  fear. 

IV.  Its  stars. 

"  Oh,  save  me  for  Thy  mercies*  sake  " 
(ver.  4).  The  Psalmist  seizes  upon  the 
idea  of  the  Divine  mercy,  and  out  of 
this  grand  truth  springs  the  bright  con- 
stellations which  cheer  the  penitent  in 
his  night  of  sorrow.  The  penitent  re- 
members ; 


(1.)  The  mercifulness  of  the  Divine 
nature.  There  is  that  grand  star  which 
arose  out  of  the  blackness  of  Sinai  (Num. 
xxxiv.  6,  7).  He  "  is  plenteous  in 
mercy."  *'  He  delighteth  in  mercy." 
"  His  tender  mercy."  '*  Rich  in  mercy." 
"  Abundant  mercy."  "  His  mercy  en- 
dureth  for  ever."  Here  are  stars  of  light 
for  the  weeping  eyes  of  penitence.  (2.) 
The  promises  of  the  Divine  mercy. 
These  are  "  more  than  the  sands  of 
the  sea-shore."  Grand  promises  on 
every  page  of  the  Book  !  (3.)  The  acts 
of  the  Divine  mercy,  God  forgave 
David,  Noah,  Saul,  (kc,  <fcc.  Which  of 
them  did  He  not  forgive? 

"  Millions  of  transgressors  poor, 
Thou  hast  for  Jesus'  sake  forgiven  ; 
Made  them  of  Thy  favour  sure, 
And  snatched  from  hell  to  heaven," 

The  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
Gospel  of  mercy.  When  the  sinner  is 
harassed  by  ghost  and  ghoul,  he  looks 
towards  the  Gospel,  and  beholds  great 
stripes  of  stars,  which,  in  the  sinner's 
ear,  utter  forth  a  glorious  voice  of  con- 
solation and  hope.  "  I  had  fainted 
unless  I  had  believed  to  see  the  goodness 
of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living." 

V.  Its  sunrise. 

Yer.  8,  9.  "Mark  the  sudden  change, 
as  of  sunrise  upon  night.  Already  the 
prayer  and  the  weeping  have  been  heard. 
Already  faith  has  triumphed." — Perowne. 
"  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they 
shall  be  comforted."  *'  Weeping  may 
endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in 
the  morning."  Sinner,  watch  for  God 
more  than  they  that  watch  for  the  morn- 
ing, and  He  shall  rise  upon  you  with 
healing  in  His  wings,  and  there  shall  b« 
to  you  "  no  more  night,*' 


PSALM  VII. 


Introduction. 

"From  the  matter  of  this  psalm  it  appears  that  it  was  composed  with  reference  to  soma 

calumny  on  the  character  of  David;  but  commentators  are  not  agreed  as  to  when  and  by  whom 
this  injury  was  inflicted.  Perhaps  the  conduct  of  Doeg  might  give  occasion  to  this  poem,  inas- 
much as  this  man  had  grossly  misrepresented  David  to  Saul,  and  insinuated  that  he  was  con- 
spiring against  the  life  of  his  king ;  whereas  the  very  reverse  of  this  statement  was  the  truth." 
—PhiUips. 


KALM  Vll. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


The  Extremity  and  Asylum  of  the  Saints, 

(Verses  1,  2.) 


There  can  be  but  little  doubt  that 
this  psalm  was  uttered  by  David  when 
he  was  slandered  by  the  courtiers  of 
Saul,  and  when  he  was  pursued  by  that 
dehided  monarch.  The  situation  of 
David  is  a  picture  of  the  situation  in 
which  all  saints  often  find  themselves. 

Consider  : 

I.  Tlieir  extremity. 

The  Psalmist  was  like  a  partridge  on 
the  mountains,  "  like  a  roe  or  gazelle 
chased  by  the  lions." — Perowne.  So 
are  God's  people  frequently  tempted, 
tried,  borne  down  by  various  agents, 
and  shapes  of  evil.  (1.)  The  enemies 
of  the  righteous  are  multiplied.  ^^  All 
them  that  persecute  me "  (ver.  1). 
Some  one  has  said,  "If  we  have  an 
enemy  we  meet  him  everywhere."  This 
is  very  true  of  our  great  enemy  the 
devil;  we  meet  him  every  where.  "His 
name  is  legion."  "  There  is  a  devil 
in  every  berry  of  the  grape,"  said 
Mahomet.  Yes ;  and  a  devil  in 
everything  else  with  which  we  have  to 
do.  The  diabolical  creeps  into  every- 
thing, and  the  righteous  man  is  ever 
menaced  and  endangered.  In  the  flesh, 
in  the  world,  in  things  necessary, 
things  beautiful,  things  sacred,  are 
ambushed  enemies,  bending  the  bow, 
and  shooting  privily  at  the  righteous. 
(2.)  These  enemies  are  malign,  "  Lest 
he  tear  my  soul  like  a  lion  rending  it 
in  pieces"  (ver.  2).  As  a  wild  beast 
would  tear  to  pieces  a  lamb,  so  would 


the  devil  afflict  the  soul.  How  bitterly 
the  devil  hates  the  children  of  God  I 
How  bitterly  the  world  often  persecutes 
the  saints !  (3.)  Those  enemies  are 
resistless.  "  While  there  is  none  to 
deliver  "  (ver.  2).  He  could  not  deliver 
himself,  and  he  had  no  helper  among 
men.  His  enemies  felt  that  they  reigned 
supreme  and  would  crush  him  when 
they  pleased.  So  with  our  spiritual 
foes.  Policy,  reason,  pledges,  <fec.,  what 
are  these  but  hirelings  which  flee  in  the 
hour  of  trial,  and  the  wolf  catcheth  the 
sheep.  A  man  measures  himself  in 
vain  with  the  powers  of  darkness  ;  these 
powers  soon  vanquish  flesh  and  blood. 
No  matter  how  strong  the  iron-clads  of 
human  building,  tke  devil's  artillery 
soon  sinks  them. 

II.  Their  refuge. 

"  O  Lord,  my  God,  in  Thee  do  I  put 

my  trust"  (ver.  1).     "With  Thee  have 

I    taken    shelter." — Horsley.     (1.)  The 

security  of  this  shelter.     The  Almighty 

God.     Better    than    walls    of    granite, 

than  gates  of  brass,  than  lines  of  steel : 

**  Sufl&cient  is  Thine  arm  alone, 
And  our  defence  is  sure.'* 

*'  God's  assistance  is  the  strongest,  quick' 
est,  and  surest  help." — Moll.  (2.)  The 
co7idition  of  its  enjoyment,  (a)  A  per- 
sonal relationship  to  God.  "  My  God." 
(b)  A  constant  faith  in  God.  "  In  Thee 
do  I  trust."  "  The  door  is  closed  to 
prayer  unless  it  is  opened  with  the  key 
of  trust/' — Calvin^ 


Not    Guilty. 
(Verses  3-10.) 


The  Psalmist,  who  so  constantly  ac- 
knowledges and  bitterly  deplores  his  sin, 
here  puts  in  another  plea.  "  He  pro- 
tests passionately  his  innocence,  his 
Boul  surging  with  emotion  as  he  thinks 
bow  unjustly  he  has  been  assailed." — 
Perowne. 

Concerning  this  plea,  let  us  observe  : 
I.  We  may  plead  "  not  guilty "  of 
24 


some  particular  sin  when  we  cannot 
plead  freedom  from  sin. 

"  If  I  have  done  this"  (ver.  3).  We 
cannot  plead  freedom  from  sin  (1  John 
i.  8),  but  we  may  plead  freedom  from 
particular  faults  with  which  we  may  be 
charged  (Job  xxxi.  16).  Let  us  glorify 
the  grace  which  has  preserved  us  from 
80  many  sins  to  whicl\  we  are  prone. 


SOMJLETia  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALH  yn. 


n.  We  may  plead  "not  guilty  "  be 
fore  men  when  we  cannot  thus  plead 
before  God. 

Job  vindicated  himself  before  his 
friends,  but  in  the  presence  of  God 
abased  himself,  and  repented  in  sackcloth 
and  ashes.  We  may  often  most  properly 
assert  our  integrity  before  men,  but 
"  concerning  the  law  of  our  God,"  it  is 
another  thing. 

III.  We  may  plead  "not  guilty" 
before  God  when  we  have  rested  in 
the  merits  of  Christ. 

"  The  righteousness  of  faith  before 
God  must  be  distinguished  from  right- 
eousness and  innocence  of  life  before 
man  j  yet  a  true  Christian  must  be  able 
to  console  himself  with  both." — Starke. 
*'  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Christ  Jesus."  One  of  our  legal 
writers  says :  *^  So  completely  does  a 
pardon  of  treason  or  felony  extinguish 
the  crime,  that  when  granted  to  a  man, 
even  after  conviction  or  attainder,  it 
will  enable  him  to  have  an  action  of 
slander  against  another  for  calling  him 
traitor  or  felon ;  because  the  pardon 
makes  him  as  it  were  a  new  man,  and 
gives  him  a  new  capacity  and  credit. 
In  the  eye  of  the  law,  the  offender  is 
as  innocent  as  if  he  had  never  com- 
mitted the  offence."  So  completely  does 
the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ 
absolve  us  from  sin. 

**  Bold  shall  I  stand  in  that  great  day, 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  shall  lay  f 
Fully  absolved  through  these  I  am, 
From  sin  and  fear,  from  guilt  and  shame," 

IV.  When  we  can  justly  plead  "  not 
guilty"  before  God  or  man,  we  may 
rely  on  a  triumphal  acquittal. 

Ver.  6-10.  "Hitherto  the  Psalmist 
has  protested  his  innocence ;  now,  in  the 
full  consciousness  of  that  innocence,  he 
comes  before  the  very  judgment-seat  of 
God,  and  demands  the  fullest  and  most 
public  vindication.  Then  he  sees  as  it 
were  in  a  vision  the  judgment  set : 
*  Thou  hast  commanded  judgment.* 
Next,  that  sentence  may  be  pronounced 
with  due  solemnity,  he  calls  upon  God 
to  gather  the  nations  round  Him,  and 
to  seat  Himself  upon  His  judgment- 
throne.     Lastly,  he  prays  God,  as  the 


Judge  of  all  nations,  to  judge  himself." 
— Perowne. 

We  see  here  that  God  is  the  Judge  of 
all.  The  whole  ''  congregation  •"  all 
nations.  God  can  judge  righteously. 
Ver.  9.  "  The  reins  are  the  seat  of  the 
emotions,  just  as  the  heart  is  the  seat  of 
the  thoughts  and  feelings.  Reins  and 
heart  lie  naked  before  God." — Delitzsch. 
God  will  judge  righteously.  He  will 
condemn  the  guilty ;  He  will  establish 
the  just. 

Has  our  reputation  been  slandered? 
David  feels  bitterly  the  perfidious  say- 
ings of  his  foes,  the  injustice  of  their 
accusations.  The  French  proverb  says, 
'^  The  tongue  cuts  deeper  than  the 
lance ;  '*  and  David  felt  it  to  be  so. 
Some  men  are  said  to  labour  under  a 
strange  necessity,  that  whenever  they 
see  a  beautiful  dress,  they  must  throw 
vitriol  on  it ;  and  so  wicked  men  feel, 
and  yield  to,  the  devilish  impulse  of 
aspersing  noble  characters  and  noble 
names.  Have  we  suffered  from  the 
tongues  of  such  ]  Or  have  our  rights 
been  invaded?  Have  men  unjustly 
touched  our  position,  our  freedom,  our 
property  ?  Nay,  is  our  life  taken 
away  by  violent  or  unjust  men  ]  Let 
us  look  confidently  to  the  great  assize. 
God  will  vindicate  the  just,  anA  tread 
the  proud  oppressor  in  the  dust.  There 
is  a  famous  picture  entitled  "Waiting 
for  the  Verdict."  You  may  write  that 
over  all  graveyards — "  Waiting  for  the 
verdict."  We  play  our  part,  and  go  our 
way,  but  for  all  God  shall  bring  us  into 
judgment;  the  silent  nations  underground 
wait  the  peal  which  shall  call  them  to 
receive  the  final  verdict,  and  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  shall  do  right. 

Observe : 

1.  The  sense  of  innocence  makes  us 
hopeful  toivards  God.  "  Beloved,  if  our 
heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we 
confidence  towards   God  "  (1  John  iii. 

2.  The  sense  of  innocence  makes  us 
gentle  towards  men  (ver.  9).  **  His 
prayer  is  not  directed  against  the  indi- 
vidual as  such,  but  against  the  wicked- 
ness that  is  in  them.  This  psalm  is  the 
key  to  all  psalms  which  contain  prayers 
against  one's  enemies," — Delitzsch. 

26 


PSALM  YII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


God  as  a  Man  of  War. 

{Verses  11-13.) 


In  these  verses,  God's  dealing  with 
the  unrighteous  is  vividly  portrayed. 
We  see  God  troubled  by  sin,  and  rising 
up  to  take  vengeance  upon  it ;  and  these 
verses  are  an  epitome  of  the  entire  ac- 
tion of  God  with  sinners.  He  is  angry 
with  them,  and  proceeds  to  bring  them 
to  reason. 

Mark  : 

I.  The  Divine  admonition. 

"  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every 
day"  (ver.  11).  Barnes  says  on  this 
passage  :  *'  Continually,  constantly,  al- 
ways. This  is  designed  to  qualify  the 
previous  expression,  'angry.'  It  is  not 
excitement.  It  is  not  temporary  pas- 
sion, such  as  we  see  in  men.  It  is  not 
sudden  emotion,  soon  to  be  succeeded 
by  a  different  feeling  when  the  passion 
passes  off.  It  is  the  steady  and  uniform 
attribute  of  His  unchanging  nature  to 
be  always  opposed  to  the  wicked — to  all 
forms  of  sin  ;  and  in  Him,  in  this  respect, 
there  will  be  no  chansre.  The  wicked 
will  find  Him  no  more  favournl^le  to 
their  character  and  course  of  life  to- 
morrow than  He  is  to-day — no  more 
beyond  the  grave  than  this  side  of  the 
tomb.  What  He  is  to-day,  He  will  be 
to-morrow  and  every  day."  This  is  no 
doubt  true,  but  it  is  scarcely  the  truth 
taught  in  the  text.  Many  of  the  great 
commentators  agree  that  the  sense  of 
these  words  is — God  is  patient  with 
sinners,  and  gives  them  daily  warning 
of  His  displeasure,  and  of  the  gathering 
storm  of  His  wrath.  *'  If  God  will  in 
the  end  let  His  wrath  break  forth,  He 
will  not  do  it  without  having  previously 
given  threatenings  thereof  every  day, 
viz.,  to  the  ungodly  (c/.  Isa.  Ixvi.  14; 
Mai.  i.  4).  He  makes  these  feel  His 
anger  beforehand  in  order  to  strike  a 
wholesome  terror  into  them." — Delitzsch. 
"  Gi>d  is  not  a  Judge  who  punishes 
daily,  but  who  threatens  daily;  for  if 
God  should  punish  us  always,  and  as 
often  as  we  deserve  it,  the  world  would 
no  longer  endure ;  therefore  thou 
shouldst  know  that  God's  long-suffer- 
ing invites  thee  to  repentance." — Moll. 
*'  Although  He  is  not  angry  every  day— 
20 


i.e.,  His  anger  is  not  breaking  forth 
upon  every  occasion — yet  the  season  of 
judgment  will  surely  come." — Horsle.y, 
Thus  God  is  constantly  warning  the 
sinner.  One  of  our  philosophers  speaks 
of  "  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  Na- 
ture's displeasure."  So  in  the  moral 
world  are  there  premonitory  symptoms 
of  the  Divine  displeasure.  Every  day, 
in  the  sinner's  conscience  or  body,  in- 
tellect or  estate,  does  God  make  signs 
of  His  gathering  anger,  so  that  the 
wicked  may  forsake  their  wickedness 
and  escape  the  wrath  to  come. 
Notice  : 

II.  The  Divine  amnesty. 

"  If  he  turn  "  (ver.  12).  "  If  he  turn,'" 
there  is  forgiveness  and  life.  Oh,  most 
important  "  if  "  !  If  lie  turn,  all  is  well ; 
if  he  turn  not,  all  is  lost.  Blessed  op- 
portunity !  the  sinner  may  turn.  And 
all  sinners  have  the  ability  to  turn,  for 
God  commands  them  ail  to  turn,  and 
God  does  not  command  impossibilities. 
God's  commands  are  promises;  and  when 
He  invites  all  to  return  to  Him,  He 
strengthens  all  that  they  may  do  it. 
*'  Do  not  think  God  has  done  anything 
concerning  thee  before  thou  earnest  into 
being  whereby  thou  art  determined 
either  to  sin  or  misery.  This  is  a  false- 
hood, and  they  that  entertain  such 
thoughts  live  in  a  lie." — Whichcote.  O 
sinner  !  improve  this  truce  of  God. 

III.  The  Divine  arsenal 

Ver.  12,  13.  *' He  will  whet  His 
sword,"  &c.  God  is  a  man  of  war,  and 
here  we  get  a  glimpse  into  His  armoury, 
and  behold  the  artillery  with  which  He 
wars  on  obstinate  sinners. 

1.  Mark  the  variety  of  His  weapons. 
God's  armoury  is  full  of  weapons. 
"Sword,"  ''bow,"  "arrows."  Storms, 
diseases,  plagues,  famines,  wars,  earth- 
quakes, terrors  of  conscience,  secrets  of 
the  prison-house  we  know  not.  God's 
armoury  is  full  of  awful  weapons — 
weapons  which  can  destroy  both  body 
and  soul. 

2.  The  readiness  of  His  weapons. 
"  He  hath  bent  His  bow  and  made  it 
ready"  (ver.  12).     "He  ordaineth  Hi« 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  vn. 


arrows **  (ver.  13).  Or,  "He  will  put 
His  arrows  in  action."- — Horsley.  "  The 
wrath  of  God  may  be  slow,  but  it  is 
always  sure.  In  thoughtless  security 
man  wantons  and  whiles  away  the  pre- 
cious hours ;  he  knows  not  that  every 
transgression  sets  a  fresh  edge  on  the 
sword,  which  is  there  continually  whet- 
ting for  his  destruction  ;  nor  considers 
that  he  is  the  mark  of  an  archer  who 
never  errs,  and  who,  at  this  very  in- 
stant, perhaps,  has  fitted  to  the  string 
that  arrow  which  is  to  pierce  his  soul 
with  everlastin g  anguish. " —  Home.  * '  The 
sword  of  Heaven  is  not  in  haste  to  smite, 
nor  doth  it  linger." 

Observe,  finally : 

3.  The  deadly  effi^cacy  of  His  weapons. 
"  Instruments  of  death."  "  He  ordaineth 
His  arrows,''  or,  as  some  translate  it, 
*'  His  arrows  He  maketh  fiery."  "  Arrows 
wrapped  round  with  some  inflammable 
materia],  which  become  ignited  in  their 
passage  through  the  air,  and  set  on  fire 
whatever  they  light  upon." — Perowne. 
"  The  whetting  of  the  sword  is  but  to 
give  a  keener  edge,  that  it  may  cut  the 
deeper.  God  is  silent  as  long  as  the 
sinner  will  let  Him,  but  when  the  sword 
is  whet  it  is  to  cut,  and  when  the  bow 
is  bent  it  is  to  kill ;  and  woe  be  to  that 
man  who  is  the  butt." — Lecker,  quoted 
hy  Spurgeon.  ^^  ^  If  I  whet  My  glittering 
sword,  and  Mine  hand  take  hold  of  judg- 
ment, I  will  render  vengeance  to  Mine 
enemies'  (Deut.  xxxii.  41).  And  where 
will  God  Trhet   His   glittering   sword  'i 


Where  are  blades  usually  whetted  1  Let 
us  look.  Surely  on  a  whirling,  circular 
stone.  And  on  what  stone  will  God 
whet  His  sword  ?  I  reply,  On  that 
stony  heart  of  the  sinner  which  is  ever 
revolving,  never  at  rest.  Watch  the 
grindstone  a  little  while.  See  how  it 
plunges  down  into  a  trough  of  turbid, 
foul,  and  muddy  water.  O  stone,  stone  ! 
why  rush  down  into  this  filth  1  Eise  up  1 
rise  up  from  this  uncleanness.  I  put 
my  hand  to  it,  I  set  the  stone  in  motion. 
How  easily  is  it  made  to  revolve  !  It 
moves — it  leaves  that  sink  of  filth — it 
mounts  upwards.  In  vain  !  It  whirls 
round,  and  with  a  rush  seeks  again  its 
bed  of  pollution.  Heart  of  sinner,  hard 
and  stony  !  why  dost  thou  not  emerge 
from  the  corruption  in  which  thou  wal- 
lowest  ?  '  I  will  emerge,'  thou  repliest. 
Why  dost  thou  not  leave  thy  enmities, 
thy  passions,  thy  shameful  uncleanness  % 
*  I  will  leave  them,'  is  the  answer.  And 
yet  nothing  comes  of  these  fine  promises. 
Always  on  the  move  like  the  grindstone, 
you  never  remove  from  the  trough  of 
slime ;  always  leaving  sin,  that  with 
fresh  relish  you  may  plunge  into  it 
again.  Know,  you  sinners  who  are  so 
full  of  good  resolutions  which  come  to 
nought,  so  full  of  promises  of  amend- 
ment which  end  in  relapse,  that  it  is  on 
whirling  grindstones  such  as  you  that 
the  glittering  sword  of  Divine  vengeance 
is  whetted.  '  If  I  whet  My  glittering 
swordy  I  will  render  vengeance  to  Mine 
enemies.^  " — Joseph  de  £arzia,  1600. 


The  Self-Punishing  Nature  of  Sin. 
(Verses  14-17.) 


A  somewhat  different  view  of  retri- 
bution is  here  given  to  that  given  in 
ver.  12,  13.  There  God  is  represented 
as  using  against  the  sinner  His  own 
peculiar  weapons  ;  here  He  is  represented 
as  beating  and  punishing  His  enemies 
with  their  own  weapons.  "Evil  shaU 
slay  the  wicked." 

I.  All  sin  is  the  digging  of  a  pit. 

Sin  does  not  seek  to  rise  by  the  step- 
ping stones  of  lawful  and  noble  endea- 
vour ;  it  knows  of  no  eminence  but  by 
lowering   others.      Ambition^   with    its 


throne-building,  is  yet  a  pit-digging. 
It  seeks  to  raise  itself  on  the  trampled 
rights,  and  pleasures,  and  lives  of  others. 
Lying  is  a  pit-sinking  for  others.  Lust 
serves  itself  by  ensnaring  and  debasing 
others.  Envying  sickens  at  another's 
joy,  and  seeks  to  secure  itself  by  giving 
others  a  fall.  Covetousness  is  always 
grave-digging,  that  it  may  inherit  others' 
wealth.  Sin  would  sink  the  throne  of 
God.  Sin  knows  not  how  to  shine  but 
by  darkening  others,  knows  not  how 
to  exalt  itself  but  by  depress!  ig  others^ 

37 


PSALM  VIH, 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


knows  not  how  to  feast  itself  but 
by  starving  others,  knows  not  how 
to  enrich  itself  but  by  spoiling  others, 
knows  not  how  to  save  itself  but  by 
damning  others.  Pit-digging  is  hard 
work.  The  image  of  a  travailing 
woman,  in  the  14th  verse,  reminds  us 
that  the  development  of  evil  is  attended 
with  severest  labour  and  keenest  sor- 
rows. It  is  infinitely  harder  w^ork  to 
rise  by  violence,  fraud,  spoliation,  than 
by  virtuous  paths.  It  may  be  hard  to 
climb  the  steep  where  Fame's  proud 
temple  shines  afar;  but  the  bitterest 
toil  is  theirs  who  seek  to  rise  by  sink- 
ing. Pit-digging  is  humiliating  work ; 
it  is  a  perpetual  stoop.  It  kills  all  the 
nobility  of  a  man ;  it  is  full  of  shame. 


II.  All  sin  sinks  into  the  pit  which 
it  digs. 

The  workman  rises  with  his  work, 
and  the  workman  sinks  with  his  work. 
He  who  digs  a  pit  for  another  digs  a 
grave  for  himself.  How  often  has  the 
truth  of  these  verses,  15  and  16,  been 
seen  by  us  !  1.  Nature  guarantees  that 
it  shall  be  so.  The  sinning  member 
suffers  ;  the  sinner  suffers  on  the  same 
lines  as  he  transgresses.  2.  History 
teems  with  illustrations  of  this  truth. 
In  sacred  and  profane  history  we  find  a 
thousand  examples  of  men  falling  into 
the  pits  they  digged  for  others.  3.  The 
Scri'ptures  assure  us  that  this  will  be  so 
to  the  bitter  end.  "  Whatsoever  a  man 
soweth,  that  shall  he  reap." 


Alpha  and  Omega. 


(FiEST  verse 

The  contrast  between  the  opening 
and  the  closing  verse  of  this  psalm  is 
instructive.     It  reminds  us — 

I.  That  God's  eauity  may  be  ob- 
scured in  the  beginning,  but  it  shall  he 
vindicated  in  the  end. 

In  the  first  verse,  God's  righteous- 
ness is  hidden ;  the  wicked  triumph. 
But  in  the  last  verse  of  the  psalm  all 
is  clear,  and  the  Lord  is  praised  "ac- 
cording to  His  righteousness."     Wait ! 

XL  That    the    sinner's    beginning 


and  the  last.) 

may  be  grand,  but  his  end  shall  he 
disaster. 

In  the  opening  of  the  psalm  the 
sinner  is  a  lion,  strong,  proud,  domi- 
nant; but  in  the  end  of  the  psalm  the 
lion  is  howling  in  a  pit.     Wait ! 

III.  That  the  saints  may  have  be 
ginnings  of  sorrow,  hut  the  end  shall 
be  triumphant. 

With  the  commencement  of  the  psalm 
David  weeps  and  laments,  but  he  ends 
with  a  song.     Wait  1 


PSALM    VIII. 
Introduction. 

"  This  is  a  psalm  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the  exaltation  of  man  above  all  terrestrial 
creatures.  It  is  quoted  by  the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  with  reference  to  Christ ; 
but  whether  it  is  to  be  considered  a  prophecy,  or  whether  it  is  quoted  simply  because  it 
describes  by  way  of  accommodation  the  character  of  our  Lord,  does  not  appear  certain.  The 
most  sober  commentators  have  adopted  the  latter  view,  considering  that  the  author  of  the 
psalm  intended  simply  to  celebrate  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  and  the  power  and  dignity  He  has 
conferred  on  the  human  race.  It  is,  however,  they  say,  appropriately  applied  to  our  Lord  by 
way  of  illustration  ;  for  this  power  and  dignity  did  not  obtain  their  full  consummation  till  He 
became  invested  with  our  nature,  and  was  exalted  'above  all  principality,  and  power,  and 
might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  thia  world,  but  also  in  that 
which  la  to  come,*  " — Phillips. 

The  Gospel  of  the  Stars. 

{Verse  1.) 

We  are  led  to  consider  .  The  Psalmist  here  looks  upon  creation, 

I.    Creation   as   deriving  its   glory      not  as  God,  not  as  independent  of  God, 

from  God.  but  as  a  glass   reflecting  the  glory  of 
28 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


MALM  YIIL 


God.  "  Th^  heavens."  "  Who  hast  set 
Thp  glory  "  above  or  upon  the  heavens. 
"  It  here  implies  that  the  glory  belonging 
to  the  frame  of  nature  is  not  inherent, 
but  derivative." — Alexander.  "  The 
sense  of  God's  presence,  of  which  the 
Psalmist  is  so  profoundly  conscious  in 
his  own  s[)iritual  life,  is  that  which  gives 
its  glory  and  its  meaning  to  the  natural 
world.  There  is  a  vivid  realisation  of 
that  presence  as  of  a  presence  which  fills 
the  world.  Nature  is  full  of  God  ; 
nature  is  the  theatre  of  His  glory.  All 
admiration  of  nature  in  a  rightly-tuned 
heart  is  a  confession  of  that  glory.  To 
such  a  heart  there  can  be  no  praise  of 
nature  apart  from  the  praise  of  God.  All 
things  are  *  of  Him,  and  through  Him, 
and  to  Him.'  Apart  from  Him,  the 
unwise  is  void  and  waste  j  He  gives  it 
its  life  and  meaning." — Perowne.  "  God 
is  the  principle  of  beauty,  both  as  author 
of  the  physical  world,  and  as  father  of 
the  intellectual  and  moral  world.  He 
is  the  life,  the  light,  the  movement, 
the  ineffable  grace  of  visible  and  finite 
nature." — Cousin.  Let  us  remember 
that  the  glory  of  creation  is  but  the 
reflected  glory  of  Him  who  sits  above 
it.  Tills  as  against  atheism,  pantlitism, 
naturalism. 

Consider : 

II.  Creation  as  revealing  tlie  glory 
of  God. 


The  glory  of  God  as  seen  in  nature 
is : 

1.  Unspeakable,  "  How  excellent  !  " 
No  poet,  no  saint,  can  adequately  speak 
of  it.  It  fills  us  with  a  wonder  and  joy 
too  deep  for  words.  2.  Gracious.  "  How 
excellent/"  The  earth,  so  far  as  its  pri- 
mitive and  essential  arrangements  are 
concerned,  declares  the  loving  God.  The 
glory  of  God  is  His  goodness.  3.  Uni- 
versal. "  In  a/Z  the  earth."  Everywhere, 
under  the  whole  heavens,  we  see  the 
glory  of  God. 

"  Known  through  the  earth  by  thousand  signs, 
By  thousands  through  the  skies." 

"  He  whose  eyes  are  open  cannot  want 
an  instructor,  unless  he  wants  a  heart/' 
— Charnock,  quoted  by  Spur g eon. 

Consider: 

III.  Creation  as  awakening  admira- 
tion and  love  in  the  children  of 
God. 

"  O  Lord,  our  Lord  !  "  Unbelieving 
men  make  nature  to  hide  God,  to  put  Him 
far  away  ;  but  nature  rejoices  the  saint 
as  he  beholds  in  it  the  workmanship  of 
his  Father.  The  sceptical  philosopher 
is  reminded  by  nature  of  the  Eternal, 
the  Infinite,  the  Absolute  ;  but  the  saint 
responds — 

**  This  glorious  God  is  ourSy 
Our  Father  J  and  our  FriendP 


The  Apologetics  of  Childhood. 


(  Verse 

David  speaks  literally   of  children  j 

and  so  our  Lord  Himself  applies  the 
words  (Matt.  xxi.  16).  "Even  the 
faith  of  a  little  child  is  bulwark  enough 
against  the  folly  of  men  of  corrupt 
heart  and  perverted  intellect.  The 
stars  above,  and  the  lips  of  the  in- 
fants below,  show  forth  His  praise." — 
Perowne. 

The  Psalmist  has  been  looking  at  the 
magnificence  of  the  firmament,  and  he 
passes  at  once  to  children,  little  chil- 
dren. But  there  is  really  no  shock  in 
this,  for  children  are,  as  they  have  been 
justly  and  beautifully  designated,  "little 
majesties." 

Observe : 


2.) 

I.  The  religious  capacity  of  child- 
hood. 

This  is  indicated  here.  The  young 
children  with  their  first  breath  ask  for 
God,  and  recognise  Him  in  the  glory  of 
the  universe.  The  spirituality  of  child- 
hood is  frequently  recognised  in  the 
Old  Testament ;  and  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment Christ  distinctly  recognises  the 
spirituality  of  the  child-nature.  The 
poet  recognises  in  the  child  natural  in- 
nocence and  grace  ;  the  painter,  physi- 
cal beauty  ;  the  parent  exalts  the  child 
from  a  sentiment  of  natural  afifection  ; 
but  Christ  gave  children  a  conspicuous 
place  in  His  teaching  and  system,  on  the 
ground  of  their  spiritual  faculty.     The 


PSALM  VIII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


children  recognised  Christ  when  the 
patriarchs  of  the  nation  fuiled  to  do  so ; 
they  welcomed  Him  when  their  fathers 
were  cold  and  blind.  Christianity  is 
peculiarly,  as  no  other  religion  has  ever 
been,  the  religion  of  the  children.  Let 
them  have  it.  Give  them  "the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus;"  do  not  be  sceptical 
about  their  conversion. 

Observe  : 

II.  The  religious  service  of  child- 
hood. 

"  That  Thou  mightest  still  the  enemy 
and  the  avenger."  "  The  instinctive 
admiration  of  Thy  works,  even  by  the 
youngest  children,  is  a  strong  defence 
against  those  who  would  question  Thy 
being  or  obscure  Thy  glory.  The  effect, 
or  rather  the  legitimate  tendency  of  this 
spontaneous  testimony,  is  to  silence 
enemy  and  avenger,  i.e.,  to  stop  the 
mouths  of  all  malignant  railers  against 
God,  whose  cavils  and  sophisms  are  put 
to  shame  by  the  instinctive  recognition 
of  God's  being  and  His  glory  by  the 
youngest  children." — Alexander.  How 
often  the  simple  speech  of  a  little  child 
cleaves  to  the  heart  of  a  great  subject, 
and  silences  the  gaiiisayer  !  "  Have  we 
never  seen  how  a  child,  simple  and  near 
to  God,  cuts  asunder  a  web  of  sophistry 
with  a  single  direct  question  1  How, 
before  its  steady  look  and  simple  argu- 
ment, some  fashionable  utterer  of  a  con- 
ventional falsehood  has  been  abashed  1  '* 
— Rohertson.  And  it  is  remarkable  how 
at  great  crises  the  children  have  become 
defenders  of  Christ  and  His  cause. 
Notably,  Matt.  xxi.  16 ;  and  again 
in  the  Reformation.  When  Melancthon 
was  greatly  depressed  about  the  fortunes 
of  the  Reformation,  one  day  he  passed 
a  house  in  which  he  found  some  young 
people  praying  for  the  Protestant  cause. 
Coming  to  Luther,  he  exclaimed  triumph- 
antly, "  We  are  saved  :  the  children  are 
praying  for  us."  And  again,  in  the 
great  revival  of  religion  under  Wesley 
and  Whitfield.  When  Whitfield  was 
preaching  in  New  England,  a  certain 
lady  became  a  subject  of  grace  and  a 
praying  Christian.  But  she  could  in- 
fluence none  to  pray  with  her  but  her 
little  daughter,  about  ten  years  of  age. 
This  child  was  daily  in  her  closet  as  a 
30 


witness  of  her  cries  and  tears,  and  soon 
became  the  subject  of  Divine  grace. 
The  child,  in  a  transport  peculiar  to 
such  blessed  experience,  said,  "  O 
mother  !  if  all  the  world  knew  this  !  I 
wish  I  could  tell  everybody !  Pray, 
mother,  let  me  tell  all  the  neighbours, 
that  they  may  be  happy,  and  love  my 
Saviour  too!"  '*Ah!  my  dear  child," 
said  the  mother,  "  it  would  be  useless ; 
if  you  were  to  tell  your  experience,  they 
would  call  it  a  delusion,"  "  O  mother  ! 
I  think  they  would  believe  me.  I  must 
go  at  once  to  the  shoemaker,  and  tell  him ; 
he  will  believe  me."  She  ran  over,  and 
found  him  at  work  in  his  shop.  She 
began  telling  him  that  he  must  die ; 
that  he  and  she  were  sinners  ;  but  that 
Christ  had  heard  her  mother's  prayers, 
and  forgiven  all  her  sins,  and  that  now 
she  was  very  happy.  The  shoemaker 
was  struck ;  his  tears  flowed  down  like 
rain  ;  he  threw  aside  his  work,  and  so 
earnestly  cried  for  mercy  as  to  alarm  the 
neighbourhood ;  and  in  a  few  months 
from  that  time,  about  fifty  people  were 
brouojht  to  the  savino^  knowledge  of 
Christ.  Whitfield,  adverting  to  his 
preaching  in  Moorfields,  says,  '*  1  can- 
not help  adding,  that  several  little  boys 
and  girls  who  were  fond  of  sitting  round 
me  on  the  pulpit  while  I  preached,  and 
handed  to  me  people's  notes — though 
they  were  often  pelted  with  eggs,  dirt, 
(kc,  thrown  at  me — never  once  gave 
way ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  every  time 
I  was  struck,  turned  up  their  little 
weeping  eyes,  and  seemed  to  wish  they 
could  receive  the  blows  for  me.  God 
make  them,  in  their  growing  years,  great 
and  living  martyrs  for  Him  who,  out 
of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings, 
perfects  praise  ! "  There  is  a  feast  cele- 
brated at  Naumburg  called  the  "  Feast 
of  Cherries,"  in  which  troops  of  children 
parade  the  streets  with  green  boughs 
ornamented  with  cherries,  to  commemo- 
rate a  triumph  obtained  in  the  follow- 
ing manner  : — In  1432,  the  Hussites 
threatened  the  city  of  Naumburg  with 
immediate  destruction,  when  one  of  the 
citizens  proposed  that  all  the  children 
in  the  city  should  be  clad  in  mourning, 
and  sent  as  supplicants  to  the  enemy, 
Procopius  Nasus,  chief  of  the  Hussites, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  vin. 


was  so  touched  with  this  spectacle,  that 
he  received  the  young  supplicants,  re- 
galed them  with  fruits,  and  promised 
them  to  spare  the  city.  The  children 
returned  crowned  with  leaves,  holding 
cherries,  and  crying  ''  Victory  !  "  Thus 
the  children  are  often  ambassadors  for 
God,  and  their  words,  prayers,  tears, 
often  confound  or  melt  "  the  enemy  and 
the  avenger."     Every  house  that  has  a 


child  in  it  has  a  chaplain.  Let  us  in 
the  Christian  Church  believe  more  in 
the  spiritual  faculty  of  the  children ;  let 
us  teach  them  spiritual  truth  ;  let  us 
believe  in  their  conversion  ;  let  us  eco- 
nomise their  evangelic  power.  The 
smaller  magnets  have  proportionately 
much  the  greater  power;  and  the  chil- 
dren have  a  remarkable  spiritual  force 
which  the  Church  must  not  ignore. 


The  Dignity  of  Human  Nature. 


(  Verses 

We  observe  : 

I.  The  apparent  weakness  of  human 
nature. 

"  What  is  manV  '*  It  describes  man 
from  the  side  of  his  impotence,  frailty, 
and  mortality."  —  Delitzsch.  "  Man. 
The  Hebrew  word  denotes  man  in  his 
weal^ness  and  frailty,  as  in  the  next 
member,  Son  of  man  (son  of  Adam), 
refers  also  to  his  earthly  nature  as 
formed  out  of  the  ground." — Perowne. 
"  What  is  man  1  The  first  feeling  is  an 
overpowering  sense  of  man's  insignifi- 
cance in  presence  of  the  vastness  and 
splendour,  the  mysterious  depth,  and 
the  exceeding  glory  of  the  heavens,  as 
seen  at  night." — Perowne.  Compare 
the  vastness  of  creation  with  the  little- 
ness of  man  -,  the  power  of  creation  with 
the  feebleness  of  man ;  the  duration  of 
creation  with  the  fugitiveness  of  man. 
"  One  generation  goeth,  and  another 
Cometh,  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever." 

II.  The  essential  greatness  of  human 
nature. 

Ver.  5-9.  "  Although  man  appears  so 
insignificant,  yet,  through  God's  mar- 
vellous condescensicm,  how  great  is  man, 
little  less  than  Divine  in  nature,  and 
lord  of  all  creation." — Perowne.  This 
greatness  is  found  : 

1 .  Iv^  the  quality  of  his  being.  He  is 
a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature.  A 
*'  little  lower  than  the  angels."  It  is 
generally  acknowledged  that  the  A.  V. 
does  not  give  the  full  sense  of  the 
original  of  these  words.  "  '  Thou  madest 
him  only  a  little  lower  than  EloJiim  ; '  so 
the  original  ;  and  Elohim  is  by  some 
rendered,  as  A.  \.,  angels;  but  modern  in- 
terpreters, however,  generally  are  in 
favour  of  translating  the  words  thus  : — 


3-9.) 

'  Tfiou  madest  him  little  less  than  God.*  " 
—  Wordsivorth.  "  Thou  hast  made  him 
to  want  but  little  (or,  to  come  short 
but  little)  of  God.''—Fe7-oivne.  "And 
hast  made  him  a  little  less  than  divine." 
— Delitzsch.  '*And  madest  him  lack 
but  little  of  God." — Xay.  Man  only 
appears  insignificant.  His  rounded  brow 
speaks  more  than  the  arched  sky,  his 
eyes  shine  out  deeper  things  than  stars, 
and  in  his  lips  there  is  a  music  beyond 
that  of  wind  or  wave.  Less  bright  than 
the  sun,  less  bulky  than  the  planet,  less  , 
abiding  than  the  stars,  he  is  greater  } 
than  them  all!  "Noble  in  reason,  in-| 
finite  in  faculty,  in  action  like  an  angel,  in/ 
apprehension  like  a  god." — Shakespeare. 
The  day  was  when  the  Church  had  to 
insist  upon  the  depravity  and  degrada- 
tion of  human  nature  in  opposition  to 
the  philosophy  which  descanted  on  the 
purity  and  dignity  of  human  nature ; 
now,  perhaps,  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
Church  to  insist  on  the  dignity  of  human 
nature  in  opposition  to  the  dishonouring 
theories  of  modern  science.  The  great- 
ness of  man  is  seen  : 

2.  In  the  extent  of  his  dominion  (ver. 
6-8).  "  Man  is  a  king,  and  not  a  king 
without  territory  ;  the  world  around,  with 
the  works  of  creative  wisdom  which  fill 
it,  is  his  kingdom.^ ^—Delitzsch.  ^^  All, 
everything,  hast  Thou  put  under  his  feet, 
i.e.,  subjected  to  his  power." — Alexander. 
Earth,  sea,  sky  (Gen.  i.  26,  2S,  ix.  2). 
Man  is  God's  vicegerent,  and  through 
man  God  seeks  to  govern  all  things. 
We  ought  to  seek  to  exercise  our  regal 
glory  in  the  right  spirit  and  to  the 
right  e7id.  "  '  AH  things  under  his/eeA 
teaches  us  :  (1.)  To  trample  upon  earthly  I 
things  as  base  and  bootless,  not  to  dote  I 

31 


PBALM  Vra. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


It   is  because   God   *'is  mindful  of 

him."  All  his  glory  and  empire  is  de- 
rived from  God,  and  only  continues 
whilst  God  blesses  him.  God  puts  the 
crown  on  our  head  ;  let  us,  in  the  spirit 
of  ver.  9,  lay  that  crown  at  His  feet. 
*'  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Let  not  the  wise 
man  glory  in  his  wisdom,"  (fee.  (Jer.  ix. 
23,  24). 


upon  them  with  our  hearts,  nor  grasp 
them  greedily  with  our  hands.  (2.)  By 
this  posture  of  all  things  under  man's 
foot  God  would  teach  him  to  use  them 
as  a  stirrup,  for  the  raising  of  his  heart 
to  those  things  above.  A  sanctified 
fancy  can  make  every  creature  a  ladder 
to  heaven." — Trapp. 

III.  The  source  of  the  greatness  of 
human  nature. 

Human  Nature  in  the  Light  of  Christianity. 

This   psalm  is   frequently  quoted  in  seeks  to  put  the  lost  sceptre  into  his 

the  New  Testament,  and  may  be  con-  hand,  to  restore  the  fallen  diadem  to 

sidered  as  an  eminently  Christian  psalm.  Ms  brow.     It  aims  to  restore  : 

It  is  often  objected  to  Christianity  that  1-  Thegloryofhis  character.  (1.)  Christ 

it  deals  harshly  with  human  nature,  that  becomes  the  pattern  of  life.    He  shows  us 

it  i-nores  the  dignity  of  our  nature,  &c.  what  we  may  be,  what  we  ought  to  be. 

We°  submit,  on  the  contrary,  that   the  How    truly    kingly    is    Christ !       "  — 


Christian  estimate  of  human  nature 
commends  itself  to  the  common  con- 
science in  the  sight  of  God. 

I.  Christianity  recognises  the  in- 
trinsic grandeur  of  human  nature. 

It  asserts  the  spirituality,  the  infiriityy 
the  immortality  of  man.  He  is  made  in 
the  image  of  God's  spirituality,  infinity, 
immortality.  And  Christianity  gives 
the  crowning  illustration  of  man's  mys- 
terious greatness.  The  Psalmist,  in  the 
4th  verse,  affirms  that  the  glory  of 
man  springs  from  the  condescension 
and  visitations  of  God ;  but  do  we  not 
find  the  supreme  illustration  of  this 
verse  in  the  fact  that  Deity,  in  Christ,      man's  right  to  rule,  and  seeks  to  fit  him 


How 

glorious  is  the  human  character  as  seen 
in  Him,  arrayed  in  all  the  gold  and 
purple  of  sublimest  graces  !  (2.)  Christ 
becomes  the  perfecter  of  life.  He  is  the 
power  to  make  us  as  glorious  as  Himself. 
"  We  all,  with  open  face,"  (fee.  The 
Gospel  aims  to  restore  us  faultless  before 
the  throne  of  God.  It  aims  to  restore  : 
2.  The  fulness  of  his  dominion.  This 
has  beeti  lost.  A  mere  scrap  of  man's 
sovereignty  is  left  to  him  in  his  fallen 
estate.  Instead  of  ruling,  man  is  ruled ; 
instead  of  being  a  monarch,  he  is  a  slave. 
He  is  the  sport  of  elements  he  was  born 
to    rule.       But    Christianity  recognises 


took  upon  itself  our  human  nature  1 
Whilst  scepticism  is  degrading  human 
nature,  talking  of  its  origin  in  the  ape, 
and  its  destination  in  the  dust,  Chris- 
tianity crowns  man  with  honour  and 
glory  by  declaring  that  God  took  upon 
Himself  our  nature,  and  lived  on  the 
earth  as  man  with  man.  The  incarna- 
tion stands  out  as  the  crowning  demon- 
stration of  the  mysterious  grandeur  of 
human  nature,  and  as  a  lofty  protest 
against  all  those  theories  of  sceptical 
science  which  would  drag  man  down  to 
the  level  of  the  beasts  which  perish. 

II.  Christianity  restores  the  lost 
grandeur  of  human  nature. 

The  Gospel  denies  that  man,  as  we 
find  him  to  be,  dishonoured  and  dis- 
crowned, is  as  he  ought  to  be ;  it  says 
he  ought  to  be  far  otherwise,  and  it 
32 


once  more  to  exercise  that  rule.  (L) 
In  tlds  world.  Whilst  many  of  our 
scientific  men  are  denying  that  the  chief 
end  of  the  earth  is  for  man,  Christianity 
insists  that  it  is  so.  "The  world  is 
yours."  As  the  Gospel  prevails,  the 
earth  becomes  more  subjected  to  man. 
With  the  prevalence  of  Christianity  you 
have  the  advancement  of  civilisation,  of 
science,  of  art,  and  thus  the  earth  is 
more  and  more  made  the  property  of 
the  human  race,  and  subordinated  to  the 
utility,  and  in  a  great  measure  to  the 
command  of  man.  As  man  acquires  his 
kingly  character  in  Christ,  the  world 
returns  to  its  allegiance  to  him.  (2.)  In 
the  spiritual  and  eternal  world.  "  The 
centre  of  the  New  Testament  conscious- 
ness is  Jesus,  the  restorer  of  that  which 
is  lost.     The  dominion  of  the  world  lost 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  tX. 


to  fallen  man,  and  only  retained  by  him 
in  a  ruined  condition,  is  allotted  to  man- 
kind, when  redeemed  by  Him,  in  fuller 
and  more  perfect  reality.  This  dominion 
is  not  yet  in  the  actual  possession  of 
mankind,  but  in  the  person  of  Jesus  it 
now  sits  enthroned  at  the  right  hand  of 
God.  Everything  is  really  put  under 
Him  with  just  as  little  limitation  as  is 
expressed  in  this  psalm  :  not  merely  the 
animal  kingdom,  not  merely  the  world 
itself,  but  the  universe  with  all  the 
ruling  powers  in  it,  whether  they  be  in 
subjection  or  in  hostility  to  God,  yea, 
even  the  power  of  death  (1  Cor.  xv.  27  ; 


c/.  Eph.  i.  22y—Delitzsck  And  Christ 
is  thus  exalted  on  our  behalf,  to  make 
us  sharers  of  His  power  and  empire. 

Only  in  Christ  can  man's  magnificent 
destiny  be  realised.  **  Man's  destiny  as 
depicted  in  this  psalm  is  not,  and  cannot 
be,  accomplished  out  of  Christ.  He  is 
the  true  Lord  of  all.  In  Him  man 
reigns,  in  Him  man  shall  yet  be  restored 
to  his  rightful  lordship,  and  shall  really 
and  completely  be  in  the  new  world  of 
redemption  what  now  he  is  but  very 
imperfectly,  God's  vicegerent,  ruling  a 
subject  creation  in  peace,  and  harmony, 
and  love." — Perowne, 


PSALM  IX. 

Introduction. 

"A  psalm  of  thanksgiving  (ver.  1,  2)  after  a  victory  (ver.  8)  over  the  heathen  wrought  by 
Divine  judgment  (ver.  4-6),  expressing  confidence  in  His  constant  protection  of  the  oppressed 
(ver.  7-10);  therefore  the  pious  have  to  tbank  God  (ver.  11,  12),  and  pray  to  Him  in  every 
time  of  need  (ver.  13,  14).  The  judicial  government  of  God  causes  the  enemies  finally  to 
perish,  and  saves  the  sufiferers  (ver.  15-18) ;  therefore  the  prayer  (ver.  19,  20),  which  shows  the 
dangerous  position  of  the  Pealmist  and  his  people." — Moll. 


Praise. 

(Verses  1-3.) 


In  the  foregoing  psalms  we  have  had 
much  prayer,  but  here  we  have  a  sub- 
lime burst  of  praise.  The  Psalmist's 
soul  is  filled  with  admiration  and  joy  in 
view  of  the  Divine  character  and  govern- 
ment, and  in  glorious  language  he  gives 
utterance  to  the  ecstasy  of  his  soul. 
There  is  something  exceedingly  sublime 
in  praise ;  when  we  bless  God,  with  the 
angels  we  take  our  part.  One  of  our 
old  poets  has  some  quaint,  but  fine  lines, 
"  On  Praise." 

**  Praise  is  devotion  fit  for  mightie  minds ! 
The  difi'ring  world's  agreeing  sacrifice, 
Where  heav'n  divided  faiths  united  finds, 
But  pray'r  in  various  discord  upward  flies, 

•*  For  pray'r  the  ocean  is,  where  diversly 

Men  steer  their  course,  each  to  a  several 
coast; 
Where  all  our  int'rests  so  discordant  be, 
That  half  beg  winds  by  which  the  rest  are 
lost. 

*'  By  Penitence,  when  we  ourselves  forsake, 
'Tis  but  in  wise  design  on  piteous  heav'n ; 
In  praise  we  nobly  give,  what  God  may  take, 
And  are,  without  a  beggar's  blu8h,forgiv'n. 


*'  Its  utmost  force,  like  powder's,  is  unknown  ! 
And  though  weak  kings  excess  of  praise 
may  fear, 
Yet  when  'tis  here,  like  powder,  dang'rous 
grown, 
Heav'n's  vault  receives,  what  would  the 
palace  tear." 

— Sir  William  Davenant. 

Let  us  notice,  then,  the  thanksgiving 
of  the  text  : 

I.  The  minstrel. 

"I  will  praise  Thee"  (ver.  1).  "I 
will  show  forth  Thy  works."  All  God's 
works  praise  Him,  but  man  is  to  be  the 
leading  singer  in  the  great  choir.  The 
Esthonians  have  a  beautiful  legend  to 
explain  the  origin  of  Song.  The  god  of 
song  descended  on  the  Domberg,  on 
which  stands  a  sacred  wood,  and  there 
played  and  sang.  All  creatures  were 
invited  to  listen,  and  they  each  learnt 
some  fragment  of  the  celestial  sound ; 
the  listening  wood  learnt  its  rustling, 
the  stream  its  roar ;  the  wind  caught 
and  learnt  to  reecho  the  shrillest  tones, 
and  the  birds  the  prelude  of  the  son^ 

33 


PSALM  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Man  only  grasped  it  all,  and  therefore 
his  song  pierces  into  the  depths  of  the 
heart,  and  upwards  to  the  dwellings  of 
the  gods.  As  this  legend  pictures,  man's 
song  is  the  fullest  and  the  deepest ;  and 
whilst  creation  with  her  thousand  voices 
praises  God,  from  man  comes  the  music 
which  is  sweetest  to  the  throne  of  God. 
And  each  of  us  ought  to  find  a  tongue  to 
bless  God.  "  /  will  praise  Thee."  ''  I 
will  be  glad."  *'  /  will  sing  praise." 
We  must  not  leave  the  organist  and 
chorister  to  praise  God  for  us,  and  our- 
selves stand  dumb  images  in  the  pews. 
No  proxy  here.  He  has  blessed  me,  and 
/  will  glorify  Him.  Gratitude  ought  to 
make  musicians  of  us  all. 
Notice  : 

II.  The  harp. 

**  With  my  whole  hearV*  The  heart 
is  the  lyre  wherewith  to  worship  God. 
No  instrument  of  music  is  so  wonderful 
as  this  one — full  of  cunning  pipes  and 
exquisite  strings ;  and  this  is  the  true 
harp  to  take  into  the  closet,  into  the 
sanctuary.  Not  lips  merely.  "  The 
heart  is  the  instrument  of  praise,  the 
mouth  only  its  organ." — llengstenherg. 
True  praise  is  an  overflow  of  feeling ; 
we  thank  God  for  His  goodness,  and,  as 
the  French  say,  "  There  is  a  tear  in  our 
voice."  *'  Making  melody  in  our  heart 
unto  the  Lord."  *'  With  my  wJiole  heart." 
The,  harp  has  many  strings — some  longer, 
others  shorter,  some  of  one  tone  and 
colour,  whilst  the  other  chords  are  dif- 
ferently tuned  and  coloured ;  and  so 
there  are  many  strings  in  that  living 
harp  with  which  we  should  praise  God, 
and  every  chord  should  be  smitten  in 
His  honour.  Some  of  the  cathedrals 
on  the  Continent  contain  several  organs ; 
and  so  in  our  breast  are  reason,  will, 
imagination,  sensibility,  and  we  should 
summon  every  faculty  to  glorify  God. 
Let  us  call  upon  all  that  is  within  us  to 
bless  the  holy  name. 

Notice  : 

III.  The  song. 

L  The  theme  of  it ;  or  rather,  per- 
haps, we  should  say  themes.  "I  will 
show  forth  all  Thy  marvellous  works." 
I  will  praise  Him  for  all  His  grace,  gifts, 
deliverances,  consolations,  promises.  ''  If 
we  be  willing  to  talk  of  His  deeds,  He 
34 


will  give  us  enough  to  talk  about." — 
Power.  They  are  "  marvellous  works." 
*'A11  the  benefits  received  from  God  are 
real  wonders  to  the  humble  soul,  for  it 
is  an  inconceivable  grace  that  God  the 
Lord  should  show  so  much  mercy, 
bodily  and  spiritual,  with  wonderful 
wisdom  and  faithfulness  to  those  who 
are  in  the  highest  degree  unworthy." — 
Sta7'ke. 

'*  We  take  the  blessing  from  above, 
And  wonder  at  the  boundless  love.'* 

And  it  is  our  duty  to  show  these  forth. 
Tdl  what  God  has  done  for  you.  "  Songs 
without  words,"  the  unspoken  and  un- 
speakable joy  and  worship  of  the  heart, 
are  acceptable  before  God  ;  but  we  must 
utter  the  memory  of  His  great  good- 
ness that  the  world  may  know  and 
believe.  As  one  has  said,  "  Christian 
experience  will  save  the  world." 

2.  The  joyfubiess  of  it.  "  I  will  be 
glad"  The  knowledge  of  God's  love 
thrills  the  soul.  When  the  devil  played 
on  our  heart  he  brought  out  the  dismal 
wailing  of  a  perpetual  "  Dead  March  ;  " 
but  if  we  yield  our  heart  to  God,  it 
shall  utter  forth  an  endless  "Hallelujah 
Chorus  "  of  gladsomeness  and  tiiumph. 

3.  The  object  of  it.  "  I  will  praise 
Thee:\    "  I  will  rejoice  in  T'Aee."    '' I  ivill 

joy  and  triumph  in  Thee,  not  merely  in 
Thy  presence,  or  because  of  Thee,  i.e., 
because  of  what  Thou  hast  done,  but 
in  communion  with  Thee,  and  because 
of  my  personal  interest  in  Thee." — 
Alexander.  In  prayer  there  is  a  re- 
membrance of  ourselves,  but  in  praise 
God  fills  our  eye  and  our  heart.  As 
the  harp-string  passes  out  of  sight  trem- 
bling with  music,  so  self  is  forgotten 
when  we  joy  in  God. 

4.  The  occasion  of  it  (ver.  3).  *'  Be^ 
cause  my  enemies  are  turned  back,  be- 
cause they  stumble  and  perish  before  Thy 
countenance." — Speaker^ s  Com.  *'  The 
Romans  in  their  triumphs  presented  a 
palm  to  Jupiter." — Trapp.  So  in  each 
blessing,  victory,  joy,  let  us  afresh  tune 
our  harps,  and  glorify  the  great  source 
of  all  blessings.  More  than  this,  in  the 
dark  days  let  us  take  our  harp  from  the 
willow  and  glorify  God.  The  legend 
says  that  Orpheus  was  drowned,  and  it 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALH  IS. 


is  because  his  lyre  is  in  the  flood  that  flood  of  tears.     "  We  glory  in  tribula- 

the    waters    make    such    sweet    music.  tion  also.     That  is  truly  a  new  kind  of 

Certainly   the   harp  of   David   is   never  men,  that  live  among  the  dead,  and  are 

sweeter   than   when    it    sounds  from   a  glad  among  the  suffering." — Luther, 


The  Divine  Government  in  its  Relation  to  the  Nations. 


( Verses 

I.  The  Divine  government  is  charac- 
terised by  equity. 

Ver.  4.  "  Thou  satest  in  the  throne 
judging  right."  "  He  shall  judge  the 
world  in  righteousness"  (ver.  8).  It 
sometimes  seems  Q,?>ii  God  acted  towards 
nations  and  men  with  a  strange  partial- 
ity, but  it  is  really  not  so  ;  deep  down 
is  the  law  of  truth  and  righteousness, 
and  all  God's  ways  are  equal.  In  the 
4th  verse  the  Psalmist  says,  "  Thou  hast 
passed  sentence  for  me  and  done  me 
right." — Ilorsley.  And  thus  it  shall  be 
with  each  nation,  each  individual.  The 
Scriptures  assure  us  of  this.  Gonscitnce 
testifies  to  this.  Although  we  see  the 
saint  wronged,  and  the  sinner  triumphant 
a  thousand  times,  yet  conscience  per- 
sistently testifies  that  justice  will  be 
done. 

II.  The  Divine  government  is  vindi- 
cated with  severity. 

Ver.  5,  6.  "And  cities.  Thou,  O 
God,  hast  rooted  out ;  their  memorial, 
even  theirs  is  perished.  What  God 
destroys  cannot  be  restored,  and  their 
cities  are  desolate  for  ever." —  Words- 
worth. "  They  are  perpetual  ruins." — 
Ferowne.  "  The  Psalmist  appears  to  be 
speaking  of  the  entire  destruction  of  the 
cities  of  the  enemy,  and  he  seems  to 
state  in  this  clause  that  they  should  be 
completely  desolated,  so  as  to  prevent 
any  re-establishment  of  them  at  a  future 
time ;  or  so  as  to  make  it  impossible  for 
the  work  of  desolation  to  be  carried  any 
further.  The  memory  of  them  has  per- 
ished."— Phillips. 

1.  Observe,  God's  government  will 
vindicate  itself.  Some  one  has  said, 
"  That  the  Spanish  laws  are  the  best  in 
the  world,  but  they  are  never  acted 
upon,"  God's  laws  are  the  best  laws, 
and,  be  sure.  He  will  insist  upon  every 
one  of  them.  2.  God's  government 
vindicates  itself  7iow.  "  God  does  not 
postpone  judgment   and   salvation  till 


4-9.) 

the  end  of  the  world,  although  times  of 
trouble  come  for  the  pious,  and  days  of 
ap{)arent  victory  for  their  enemies.  He 
already  judges  in  history  individuals 
and  nations,  so  tliat  all  traces  of  them 
are  hlotted  out  from  the  earth,  and  their 
name  is  forgotlen.^^  —  Moll.  Thrones 
founded  in  unrighteousness  fall,  fortunes 
are  shipwrecked,  cities  perish,  empires 
and  armies  melt.  Assyrian,  Babylonian, 
Persian,  Grecian,  Roman,  Jewish — all 
are  illustrations.  3.  God's  government 
vindicates  itself  with  awful  severity. 
God  blots  out  the  impenitent  nation  or 
person.  The  nations  before  Him  are  as 
the  drop  of  a  bucket,  and,  as  such,  are 
dried  up  in  the  hot  light  of  His  wrath, 
when  once  He  is  angry. 

III.  The  Divine  government  survives 
all  opposition. 

Ver.  7.  "  The  enemy  has  been  utterly 
annihilated,  whilst  Jehovah  remains 
King  for  ever."  —  Ferowne.  "The  se- 
rene majesty  of  the  eternal  Judge  is 
contrasted  with  the  struggles  and  over- 
throw of  evil  men." — Speaker's  Com.  We 
are  reminded  (Isa.  vi.  1.),  "In  the  year 
that  King  Uzziah  died,  I  saw  also  the 
Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne,  high  and 
lifted  up,  and  His  train  filled  the 
temple."  Kings  die,  and  their  king- 
doms perish,  but  God  sitteth  a  King 
for  ever,  and  of  His  government  there 
shall  be  no  end.  The  kingdom  of 
Christ  will  survive  all  hostilities— ^o/i- 
tical,  ecclesiastical,  philosophical ,  per- 
sonal. 

IV.  The  Divine  government  compre- 
hends  all  nations,  and  shall  bring  them 
all  into  judgment. 

Ver.  8.  "And  He  shall  judge  the 
world  in  righteousness,  He  shall  minis- 
ter judgment  to  the  peoples  in  upright- 
ness." He  will  apply  to  us  in  modern 
times  the  same  severe  tests  which  He 
applied  to  the  peoples  of  the  past ;  and 
if,  when  weighed  in  the  balances,  we  are 

35 


fflALMIX. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


found  wanting,  He  shall  blot  out  our  His   fear,   our   throne    shall   be   estab- 

name  from  under  the  heavens.     Let  us  lished ;  and  the  way  for  God  to  dwell 

honour  God  in  our  age  and  nation,  for  in  a  nation  is  for  every  one  to  see  that 

if  we  rule,  and  legislate,  and  serve  in  God  dwells  in  his  heart. 


God  the  Protector  and  Avenger  of  the  Oppressed. 

(Verses  9-13.) 


God  has  His  eye  on  the  strong  and 
unjust,  and  He  will  not  fail  to  punish 
them  ;  He  has  His  eye  on  the  weak  and 
faithful,  and  will  vindicate  their  cause. 
What  a  record  of  injustice  is  history  ! 
How  the  true,  good,  noble,  in  every  age, 
have  been  wronged  !  Thousands  are 
still  being  similarly  wronged.  What  is 
the  relation  of  God  to  these  ? 

I.  He  is  their  Protector. 

Mark: 

1.  The  strength  of  this  protection 
(ver.  9).  "  The  Lord  will  be  a  refuged 
"Properly,  as  in  the  margin,  a  high 
place,  a  fort  on  the  summit  of  an  inac- 
cessible rock,  such  as  often  afforded  a 
refuge  to  David  in  early  days  of  exile." 
— Speahei'S  Com.  What  a  power  there  is 
in  the  grace  of  God  to  lift  a  man  above 
his  trouble  I  The  blessing  of  God  comes 
down  on  His  tried  and  persecuted  people, 
and  they  feel  at  once  they  are  sweetly 
lodged  in  an  inaccessible  Rock.  Violence 
cannot  overturn  it ;  Sorrow  cannot  get 
a  foothold  in  it ;  Fear  cannot  scale  it ; 
the  devil  can  find  no  secret  winding  in 
it  by  which  he  may  reach  the  saints. 
It  is  a  rock  of  strength  and  safety, 
and  blessed  are  all  those  who  claim  its 
shelter. 

**  How  happy  are  the  little  flock, 
Who,  safe  beneath  their  guardian-rock, 
Id  all  commotions  rest ! 

*  When  war's  and  tumult's  waves  run  high, 
Unmoved  above  the  storm  they  lie  ; 
They  lodge  in  Jesus'  breast." 

2.  The  seasonableness  of  it  (ver.  9). 
"  A  refuge  in  times  of  trouble^  i.e.,  steeped 
in  trouble." — Kay.  If  it  were  a  physical 
presence,  we  might  sometimes  justly  say, 
"  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,"  this 
and  that  disaster  would  not  have  oc- 
ourred ;   but  the  spiritual  presence  is 


ever  with  us.  He  is  a  help  in  the  time 
of  trouble  ;  a  present  help,  a  very  present 
help.  In  South-Eastern  India  there  is 
a  wild  race  which  believes  that  all  the 
evil  in  the  world  is  done  whilst  God  ia 
sleeping ;  if  He  were  not  obliged  to 
sleep  there  would  be  no  sickness,  no 
sorrow,  no  death.  What  a  comfort  to 
feel  that  God's  eyes  neither  slumber  nor 
sleep,  and  that  He  is  never  far  from  any 
one  of  us.  God  is  the  nearest  to  ua 
when  we  want  Him  the  most. 

3.  The  immutability  of  it.  "  Thou 
hast  not  forsaken  them  that  seek  Thee  " 
(ver.  10).  ^^  Hast  never  failed  them 
that  Keek  Thee." — P.  £,  Version.  And 
He  never  will. 

II.  He  is  their  Avenger. 

Ver.  12.  "  Like  the  Goel,  the  next  of 
kin,  who  was  bound  to  avenge  the  murder 
of  his  kinsman,  so  God  calls  the  mur- 
derer to  account,  requires  satisfaction  at 
his  hand." — Perowne, 

Let  us  learn  : 

1.  N^ot  to  oppress.  It  is  a  fearful 
thing  in  anywise  to  wrong  our  brother. 
The  cry  of  the .  oppressed  reaches  God, 
and  God  cannot  rest  on  His  throne 
until  that  cry  is  avenged.  Let  us  not 
do  anything  against  our  brother's  rights, 
freedom,  property,  conscience,  happiness, 
life,  character.  He  "  has  no  friend,  kick 
him."  But  the  weak  man  at  your  feet 
has  a  Friend  ;  don't  kick  him,  help  him 
on  his  feet,  and  God  shall  bless  you. 

2.  In  oppression  trust  in  God.  "  They 
that  know  Thy  name  will  put  their  trust 
in  Thee  "  (ver.  10).  '^  Those  knowing  Thy 
name,  i.e.,  those  who  are  acquainted  with 
Thy  power." — Phillips.  Such  will  trust 
God.  ^'  They  can  do  no  otherwise  that 
savingly  know  God's  sweet  attributes  and 
noble  acts  for  His  people." — Trapp, 


86 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  is:. 


The  Personal  Kealisation  of  General  Truths. 
(Verses  13,  14.) 


The  Psalmist  has  been  dealing  with 
great  principles,  and  regarding  these  in 
their  application  to  great  nations  and 
long  periods  of  time,  when  he  interrupts 
the  general  reflection  by  this  personal 
cry.  These  two  verses  are  considered 
to  break  the  unity  of  the  psalm.  "  They 
disturb  the  unity  of  the  psalm,  and  inter- 
fere awkwardly  with  its  general  strain 
of  triumph.'* — Delitzsch.  But  we  must 
remember  that  the  Psalmist  writes  as  a 
man,  not  as  an  artist,  and  we  have  here 
the  instinctive,  irrepressible  cry  of  his 
heart. 

He  recognises : 

I.  His  personal  fault. 

"  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord  '* 
(ver.  13).  Is  there  not  here  a  recog- 
nition of  his  own  unworthiness,  as  well 
as  his  own  suffering  ?  He  asks  for  help, 
but  it  is  on  the  ground  of  mercy.  So 
should  we  ever  in  acknowledging  the 
corruption  of  human  nature  remember 
the  corruption  of  our  own ;  and  in  de- 
ploring the  sin  of  the  world  take  care  to 
deplore  our  own  sin.  How  often  we 
forget  this  !  The  woman  of  Samaria  was 
versed  in  theological  lore,  and  acknow- 
ledged with  freedom  various  great  re- 
ligious principles,  but  how  strangely 
she  forgot  her  own  personal  situation ! 
In  the  presence  of  Sinai,  of  Calvary,  of 
an  imperfect  and  guilty  race,  let  us  cry 
before  Heaven,  **  God  be  merciful  to  me, 
a  sinner.'' 


II.  His  personal  need. 
"Consider    my  trouble"   (ver.    13). 

Whilst  the  Psalmist  thought  of  the 
general  sorrow,  he  recalled  before  God 
his  own.  Every  heart  knows  its  own 
bitterness,  and  it  is  our  privilege  to 
make  our  case  known  to  God.  Every 
one  of  us  may  go  to  God  and  cry, 
*' Consider  my  trouble."  We  cannot  go 
with  every  little  ailment  to  the  doctor, 
nor  with  every  little  perplexity  to  the 
lawyer,  nor  with  every  little  trouble  to 
a  friend ;  but  we  may  go  to  God  with  all 
our  distresses,  and  He  will  give  us  audi- 
ence and  relief.     He  appeals  to  God  as 

III.  His  personal  Helper. 

"  Thou  that  liftest  me  up  "  (ver.  13). 
He  has  seen  in  God  the  world's  Judge 
and  Redeemer,  and  he  now  recognises 
God  as  his  God.  Let  us  not  stay  short 
of  this  personal  relationship  and  plea. 
Let  us  not  lose  ourselves  in  a  crowd. 
Let  us  be  able  to  say,  "  O  Lord,  Thou 
art  my  Lord,  and  my  God,  and  my 
Helper."     Finally,  the  Psalmist  vows  : 

IV.  His  personal  consecration. 
Ver.  14.   "That  I  may  show  forth," 

&c.  In  "  the  gates,"  as  the  most  public 
place  of  concourse.  It  ought  not  only 
to  be,  "  All  the  earth  praises  Thee,"  but 
also,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul." 
Our  voice,  profession,  gifts,  service  are 
needed.  /  must  praise  God,  acknow- 
ledge Him,  love  Him,  and  seek  to  build 
up  His  kingdom. 


Thk  Extremities  of  the  Saints. 
{Verses  13,  14.) 


Observe : 

I.  The  depth  of  their  distress. 

"Thou  that  liftest  me  up  from  the 
gates  of  death"  (ver.  13).  "From 
desperate  and  deadly  dangers,  such  as 
threaten  present  destruction,  and  show 
a  man  the  grave  even  gaping  for  him. 
David  was  oft  at  this  pass ;  and  God 
delivered  Paul  from  so  great  a  death 
(2  Cor.  i.  10).  He  commonly  reserveth 
His  hand  for  a  dead-lift,  and  rescueth 


those  who  were  even  talking  of  their 
graves." — Trapp.  Believers  are  often 
brought  "very  low."  Constitutional 
infirmity;  hodily  sickness;  worldly 
trouble ;  spiritual  conflicts  ;  persecu- 
tion;  these  often  depress  and  bewilder 
the  saints,  and  they  are  at  their  "  wits' 
end." 

II.  The  fulness  of  their  deliverance. 

"  In  the  gates  of  Jerusalem "  (ver. 
14).     He  brings  His  people  from  the 

37 


F8ALM  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


gates  of  hell  to  tlie  gates  of  glory. 
"  There  is  a  beautiful  contrast  between 
'  the  gates  of  death/  in  the  preceding 
verse,  and  'the  gates  of  the  daughter  of 
Sion,'  or  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  in 
this — the  one  leads  down  to  the  pit,  the 
other  up  to  the  Mount  of  God  ;  the  one 
opens  into  perpetual  darkness,  the  other 
into  light  eternal ;  from  the  one  pro- 
ceeds nothing  but  what  is  evil,  from  the 
other  nothing  but  what  is  good  ;  infer- 
nal spirits  watch  at  the  one.  the  other 
are  unbarred  by  the  hands  of  angels. 
What  a  blessing,  then,  is  it  to  be  snatched 
from  the  former,  and  transported  to  the 
latter." — Home.  1.  God  Aas  thus  lifted 
up  His  people  in  their  conversion.  They 
were  *'  snatched  as  brands  from  the 
burning,"  and  placed  in  safety  in  the 
Church,  which  is  the  "  gate  of  heaven." 

2.  God  does  thus  lift  up  His  people  in 
their  experience.  When  our  sins,  our 
sorrows,  our  sufferings,  our  persecutors 
have  brought  us  very  low,  how  God 
interferes  on  our  behalf,  and  turns  the 
shadow    of    death    into    the    morning  ! 

3.  God  will  thus  lift  up  His  people  from 
death  and  the  grave.  He  will  trans- 
figure their  crown  of  thorns  into  amar- 
anth ;  change  their  corruptible  into  in- 
corruption ;  raise  them  from  the  dust 
and  worms  to  stars  and  angels ! 

"  Millions  of  transgressors  poor 

Thou  hast  for  Jesus'  sake  forgiven ; 
Made  them  of  Thy  favour  sure, 

And  snatched  frona  hell  to  heaven.** 

in.  The  expression  of  their  grati- 
tude. 

"That  I  may  show  forth  all  Thy 
praise,"  <fec.  (ver.  14).  "That  I  may 
recount  all  Thy  praise."     "  This  is  one 


important  end  for  which  he  asks  to  be 
delivered,  namely,  that  God  may  have 
the  praise  of  his  deliverance." — Alexan- 
der. We  will  praise  Him  on  earth,  and 
surely  no  song  in  heaven  shall  be  louder 
and  sweeter  than  ours. 

*'  My  soul,  through  my  Redeemer's  care, 
Saved  from  the  second  death  I  feel, 
My  eyes  from  tears  of  dark  despair, 
My  feet  from  falling  into  hell. 

"  Wherefore  to  Him  my  feet  shall  run, 
My  eyes  on  His  perfections  gaze  ; 
My  soul  shall  live  for  God  alone ; 
And  all  within  me  shout  His  praise." 

Lessons : 

1.  In  the  darkest  hours  do  not  despair. 
In  the  darkest  hours  of  life,  of  death, 
do  not  despair.  At  the  gates  of  death, 
believe,  hope  !  "  There  is  nothing  despe- 
rate in  the  state  of  good  men  where  there 
is  a  right  principle  within  them,  and 
God's  superintendency  over  them," — 
Whichcote.  *'  When  the  axe  already 
touches  thy  neck,  still  hope  in  God's 
saving  grace." — Talmud.  From  the 
deepest  pit  we  see  the  stars.  2.  In  the 
da7^kest  hours  remember  that  the  depth  of 
the  shade  prophesies  the  fulness  of  the 
glory  which  is  to  he  revealed.  As  much 
as  you  are  brought  low,  so  much  shall 
you  be  lifted  up.  From  gates  of  death 
you  spring  to  beautiful  gates  of  lofty 
Christian  life  and  worship ;  to  pearly 
gates,  golden  gates  of  heavenly  rest 
and  victory.  Men  measure  mountains 
by  their  shadows  ;  and  so  from  the  sor- 
rows of  to-day  we  may  argue  somewhat 
to  the  grandeurs  which  await  us.  But 
even  then  we  must  remember  that  "  the 
sufferings  of  the  present  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  glory 
which  shall  be  revealed  in  us.** 


Retribution. 


(Verses  15-20.) 

We  are  taught  here : 
L  That  the  pit  of  human  misery  and 
ruin  is  digged  by  man,  not  by  God. 

"  The  pit  that  they  made  "  (ver.  1 5). 
Yes ;  all  the  pits  into  which  man  falls 
are  self-digged.  That  is  true  of  all  the 
pits  on  earth.  God's  laws  were  all  made 
for  man's  good  and  joy,  but  we  create 
misery  for  ourselves.  What  scenes  of 
38 


misery  there  are  on  the  earth — jails, 
madhouses,  penitentiaries,  (fee,  <fec. ;  but 
God  did  not  design  these  places.  In 
the  original  arrangement  of  things  our 
perfection  and  pleasure  alone  were  de- 
signed ;  but  pride,  appetite,  folly,  covet- 
ousness,  have  dug  the  horrible  pits  from 
whence  coir.e  up  evermore  sighs  of  misery 
and  despair.     This  is  true  of  the  pit  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


FSALM  X. 


hell,  God  made  Eden  for  us,  the  beau- 
tiful earth,  heaven  beyond  ;  but  we  make 
hell  for  ourselves.  We  build  its  prisons, 
kindle  its  fires,  forge  its  fetters,  originate 
its  woe.  As  Dr.  Griffin  says,  "  God  is 
right,  and  man  is  wrong." 

II.  That  sin  may  be  cleverly  devised 
and  executed,  but  its  frustration  is 
certain. 

"  The  pit  that  they  made,  the  net 
which  they  hid."  How  subtlely  the 
thing  has  been  conceived  and  wrought ! 
Sin  is  often  an  attempt  to  overmatch 
man;  to  take  advantage  of  his  igno- 
rance, or  weakness,  or  unwariness.  It 
is  always  an  attempt  to  overmatch  God. 
It  is  dexterously  done,  so  to  break  the 
laws  of  God  as  to  escape  the  threatened 
penalty.  But  it  does  not  succeed.  The 
sinner  falls  into  the  pit,  is  taken  in  the 
snare.  We  think  of  cheating  man,  devil, 
God  ;  but  we  shall  only  cheat  ourselves. 

III.  That  sin  may  long  remain 
unpunished,  but  its  punishment  is 
certain. 

"  The  Lord  is  known  by  the  judg- 
ment which  He  executeth"  (ver.  16). 
**  Known  is  Jehovah,  or  has  made  Him- 
self known.  Justice  has  He  done,  or 
judgment  has  He  executed.  God  has 
revealed  Himself  as  present  and  attentive, 
notwithstanding  His  apparent  oblivion 
and  inaction,  by  doing  justice  on  His 
enemies,  or  rather  by  making  them  do 
justice  on  themselves."  —  Alexander, 
God  will  arise  to  punish  sinners  ;   and 


the  punishment  shall  be  all  the  more 
terrible  for  the  delay.  V.  Hugo  says 
concerning  the  sea  :  "  Beware  of  the 
gale  that  has  been  long  delayed.  It  was 
Angot  who  said  that  '  the  sea  pays  well 
old  debts.'  "  Sinner,  beware  of  the  wrath 
long  delayed  ;  justice  pays  well  old  debts. 

IV.  That  the  final  punishment  of 
sin  is  overwhelming. 

Ver.  17.  "  Not  the  heathen,  as  such, 
but  all  (of  whatever  race)  who  wilfully 
forget  and.  put  away  from  them  that 
knowledge  of  Himself  which  God  has 
inscribed  on  men's  consciences." — Kay. 
"  God's  righteousness  shall  be  seen  in 
cutting  off  the  wicked  by  a  sudden  and 
premature  end." — Ferowne. 

Lessons ; 

1.  The  saints  must  trust  in  God  (ver. 
18).  "  The  patient  abiding  of  the  meek" 
shall  not  be  in  vain. — P.  B.  Version. 

2.  The  ungodly  must  tremble  at  the 
judgments  of  God  (ver.   20).     They  are 

"  but  men,'  however  proud  and  defiant 
they  may  be.  "  Crowns  leave  their 
wearers,  but  men,  degrees  of  eminent 
learning,  make  their  owners  not  more 
than  men;  valour  and  conquest  cannot 
elevate  beyond  the  dead  level  of  '  but 
men;''  and  all  the  wealth  of  Croisus, 
the  wisdom  of  Solon,  the  power  of 
Alexander,  the  eloquence  of  Demos- 
thenes, if  added  together,  would  leave 
the  possessor  but  a  man." — Spurgeon. 
And  what  can  man  do  when  God 
awakes  to  judgment  1 


PSALM  X. 
Introduction. 

**  This  psalm  seems  to  belong  to  the  time  of  the  Captivity,  or  the  return  of  the  captives.  It 
*<ra8  probably  made  in  reference  to  Sanballat,  and  the  other  enemies  of  the  Jews.  There  is  a 
great  similarity  between  this  and  the  12th,  the  14th,  the  35th,  and  the  53d.  In  these,  as  Calmet 
remarks,  we  find  the  same  complaints,  the  same  sentiments,  and  almost  the  same  expressions." 
— Dr.  A.  Clarke, 

Soul  Perplexity. 
{Verses  I,  2.) 

I.  The  prohlem.  persecute    the   poor.^^      "  Through   the 

^^Whystandest  Thou  afar  off,  0  LcyrdV  proud  dealings  of  the  wicked,  their  vic- 

&c.,  i.e.,   "  like  an  idle,  passive  specta-  tims  are  [)laced  in  the  fire  or  furnace  of 

tor,   unconcerned  at   the   misery  which  affliction." — Ferowne.       "  'i'lirough    the 

he   sees,  but    refuses   to    relieve." — Fe-  pride  of   the  wicked  the  dfBicted    man 

rowne,     '' The  wicked  in  his  pride  doth  burns." — Moll.       The    soul    is    sorely 

39 


PSALM  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


puzzled  with  this  painful  problem,  and 
asks  earnestly,  Why  is  it  thus  ?  Let  it 
be  observed,  this  is  not — (1.)  k.  presump- 
tuous question.  "The  meaning  is  not 
that  of  searching  for  the  reason/' — 
Moll.  There  is  no  disposition  to  know 
the  secret  things  which  belong  unto 
the  Lord.  (2.)  Not  a  murmuring  ques- 
tion. "  In  the  anguish  of  external 
trouble  and  internal  affliction,  the  pious 
may,  with  propriety,  urge  God  to 
hasten  to  their  relief  ;  but  although  the 
voice  of  their  lamentation  may  resound, 
yet  it  must  not  contain  a  complaint 
against  God,  as  if  He  improperly  de- 
layed, or  as  if  He  left  the  afflicted  in 
continual  danger  ivithout  reason^  or  as  if 
He  had  purposely  &\i\i.\,  His  eyes  and 
ears  against  their  need  and  prayers.  In 
the  realisation  of  their  weakness^  they 
must  give  themselves  and  their  cause 
entirely  into  the  hands  of  God." — Moll, 
Neither  is  it,  (3.)  A  despairing  question. 
"  The  good  soul  knows  that  God  waiteth 
to  be  gracious  ;  and  as  He  seldom  com- 
eth  at  our  time,  so  at  His  own  (which  is 
ever  the  best)  time.  He  never  faileth." 
— Trapp.  It  is  a  lover's  question  ;  it 
is  the  cry  of  a  righteous  man,  impatient 
that  justice  should  be  done  ;  but  it  is 
a  question  nevertheless  which  bespeaks 
the  deep  sorrow  and  perplexity  of  the 
religious  soul.  A  little  child  cried  in 
the  night,  and  the  parent  came  to 
correct  it ;  said  the  little  thing,  "  Whip 
me,  but  don't  leave  me."  Tims,  the 
bitterest  trial  of  the  saints  is  the  con- 
sciousness of  God's  absence. 

II.  The  solution. 

The  explanation  of  the  problem  may 
be  found  :  1.  Partly  in  regard  to  our 
personal  discipline.     (1.)  It  rebukes  our 


faults.  In  these  hours  of  sorrow,  we 
remember  our  faults.  (2.)  It  reminds  us 
of  our  personal  helplessness.  We  never 
know  the  preciousness  of  our  friends 
until  we  have  lost  them  ;  and  it  seems 
necessary  that  our  greatest  Friend  should 
withdraw  His  presence  sometimes,  so 
that  we  may  realise  His  preciousness 
more  fully,  and  know  how  helpless  we 
are  without  Him.  (3.)  It  drives  us 
nearer  to  God.  2.  Partly  in  respect  to 
the  salvation  of  the  wicked.  God  delays 
to  do  justice  that  the  wicked  may  have 
space  for  repentance.  It  may  be  that 
the  wicked  abuse  these  delays,  put  upon 
them  a  wrong  interpretation,  but  God 
grants  the  longer  delay,  that  the  sinner 
may  turn  and  live.  Thus,  if  the 
righteous  suffer  because  Heaven  delays 
its  judgments,  let  them  not  complain. 
Let  them  regard  their  sufferings  on  this 
account  as  vicarious  suffering,  as  identi- 
fying them  with  their  thorn  crowned 
Master,  who  was  bruised  for  our  ini- 
quities, and  by  whose  stripes  we  are 
healed.  God  is  sublimely  patient,  bear- 
ing with  sinners,  and  suffering  whilst 
He  bears ;  let  us  imitate  His  long-suf- 
fering, and  not  complain  at  the  delays 
of  justice,  because  such  delays  are  in 
the  interests  of  mercy  and  salvation. 
3.  Certainly,  in  regard  to  the  glory  of 
God.  God  will  not  dishonour  Himself 
by  hiding  Himself;  when  all  things 
are  seen  clearly,  the  Divine  attributes 
will  shine  all  the  brighter  for  these 
obscurations.  Each  explained  mystery 
will  be  a  crown  on  God's  head ;  not  one 
of  them  a  blot  on  God's  throne.  The 
throne  at  last  will  be  "A  great  white 
throne  "(Rev.  xv.  3,  4). 


Practical  Atheism^ 
(Verses  3-1 4.) 


We  have  here  a  full-length  portrait  of 
the  practical  atheist.  The  Psalmist  is 
not  speaking  of  the  theoretical  atheist, 
not  of  the  man  who  ignores  God  with 
his  lips,  but  who  ignores  Him  in  his  life. 

Let  us  mark : 

I.  The  nature  of  this  atheism. 

1.  The  atheism  here  spoken  of  ignores 
40 


God  in  actual  life  (ver.  4).  "God  is 
not  in  all  his  thoughts.*'  "  There  is 
NO  God  :  not  that  he  is  literally  an 
atheist,  but  that  the  whole  of  his  con- 
duct, all  his  purposes  and  schemes,  are 
carried  on  as  if  there  were  no  God — in 
a  practical  denial  of  His  existence." — 
Ferowne,    "  David  does  not  speak  of  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  PiAUi  x. 


words,  but  of  the  innermost  thoughts,         3.  The  wicked  man  not  only  glories 

of  the  wicked — their  practical,  it  may  be  in  his  own  shame,  but  has  pleasure  in 

half-conscious  atheism." — Speaker^ s Com.  those  who  do  such  things.      "  Jle  blesseth 

How  much  of  this  secret  atheism  there  the  covetous.** 

is  in  the  world !  How  often  in  the  Out  of  this  rampant  wickedness  comes 
bed-chamber  of  the  heart  do  men  curse  — (1.)  The /ta^rec?  of  God.  **  He  ahhorreth 
the  King  !  How  continually  do  men  the  Lord.*'  When  we  have  wronged 
acknowledge  God,  and  yet  in  their  con-  any  one,  the  next  thing  is  we  hate  them, 
duct  deny  Him  !  The  Chinese  acknow-  (2.)  The  ignoring  of  God  (ver.  4). 
ledge  no  God  in  their  creed,  and  yet  "  He  is  so  wrapped  up  in  his  rapacious 
their  houses  and  shops  and  streets  are  propensities  that  he  forsakes  and  alto- 
full  of  idols.  The  reverse  of  this  is  seen  gether  despises  God." — Phillips,  Here 
in  Christendom  ;  our  creed  is  full  of  we  have  the  devil's  chain.  Each  several 
God,  and  then  we  shut  Him  out  from  link  is  manifest  of  that  awful  fetter  with 
our  shops,  homes,  hearts.  which  the  devil  binds  his  victims  ere 

2.    The   atheism  here   spoken  of  ex-  he    casts    them    into   hell.     Many    of 

eludes    God  from    si/stems   of  thought,  our  sceptics  give  atheism  a  very  proud 

**  No   God,  is   the  whole  of  his  philo-  lineage ;  its  ancestors  are  thought,  logic, 

sophy"  (ver.  4). — Horsley.       Such  are  love,  and   righteousness;    God's   Word 

intended  as  those  who  (1.)  Acknowledge  declares  atheism  to   be  the  monstrous 

that  God  isy  hut  that  He  cannot  he  Tcnown^  child    of    corruption.       Yes;    atheism 

putting  God  at  a  vast  and  inaccessible  springs   not  from  a  clear  head,  but  a 

distance ;  (2.)  Those  who  contend  that  disordered  heart ;  it  is  not  the  charac- 

we  cannot  affirm  or  deny  God's  existence,  teristic  of  a  pure  and  simple  age,  but 

(3.)  Those  who  deny  a  personal  God.  of  a  civilisation  debauched  with  luxuries, 

"  To  deny  the  existence  of  a  living,  act-  and  mad  with  pride, 
ing,  all-punishing  (in  one  word,  a  per-         III.  The  characteristics  of  it. 
Bonal)   God,   is    equivalent   to   denying  1.    Pride  (ver.   4).       *'  Through  the 

the  existence  of  any  real  and  true  God  j»ric?dof  his  countenance."    "  The  wicked 

whatever." — Ewald.      Ver.    11.    "  The  in  the  height  of  his  scorn." — Speaker's 

thought  of  a  personal  God  would  dis-  Co7n.    Ver.  5.  "  His  ways  are  always  vie- 

turb  the  ungodly  in  his  doings,  he  there-  torious.'* — Ewald.   Job  xii.  6.    His  ways 

fore  prefers  to  deny  His  existence,  and  always  prosper,  and  he  is  full  of  pride, 

thinks  there  is  only  fate,  and   fate    is  ^^  Thy  judgments^'' &g.  God's  judgments, 

blind,  only  an  absolute,  and  it  has  no  His  punishments  for  sin,  are  so  far  out 

eyes,  only  a  notion,  and  that  cannot  in-  of  the  sight  of  the  wicked  that  he  acts 

terfere  in  the  affairs  of  men."- — Delitzsch.  as  if  they  could  never  reach   him." — 

We  notice  :  Perowne.     *'  As  for  all  his  enemies'*  <fec. 

II.  The  history  of  this  atheism.  He  cares  as  little  for  man  as  he  does  for 

This  atheism  is  here  shown  to  spring  God. 
from  the  pride  and  corruption  of  the  2.    Presumption  (ver.    6).      "  In  his 

heart.  unbounded   carnal   security  he  lets  his 

1.  In  the  second  verse  the  atheist  is  wicked  tongue  have  free  course." — 
shown  to  be  personally  corrupt.  Delitzsch.     "The  idea  of  the  wicked  is 

2.  Next,  he  glories  in  his  corruption,  that  they  and  their  families  would  con- 
^*For  the  wicked  hoasteth  of  his  heart's  tinue  to  be  prosperous,  that  a  permanent 
desire"  (ver.  3).  *'  He  giveth  praise  to  foundation  was  laid  for  honour  and  suc- 
his  heart's  desire." — Perowne.  "  To  his  cess,  and  for  transmitting  accumulated 
soul's  lust."— Kay.  "  He  blesses  and  wealth  and  honours  down  to  far-distant 
idolises  himself  ;  he  sings  hallelujahs  to  times."— Barnes.  For  ever  and  ever 
himself,  and  forgets  God." —  Wordsworth.  they  shall  flourish. 

"This  seems  to  be  a  description  of  the  3.  Practical  and  outrageous  wickedness, 

last  stage  of  corruption,  in  which  men  Blasphemy,  falsehood,  injustice,  cruelty, 

openly    defend    or   applaud    their   own  murder.     When  you  have  ignored  God, 

yices." — Alexander.  and  denied  His  intervention  in  the  affairs 

il 


rSALM  X. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


of  men,  you  have  opened  the  flood-gates 
of  iniquity. 

IV.  The  doom  of  it. 

Ver.  12,  (fee.  God  marks  and  punishes 
this  atheism,  and  what  springs  out  of 
it.  In  the  11th  verse  the  wicked  say: 
"  God  hath  forgotten,"  (fee.  But,  says 
the  Psalmist  in  the  14th  verse:  *'  Thou 
hast  seen  it,  to  7'equite  it."  "  There  is  a 
time  coming,  he  feels  assured,  when  all 


this  disorder  will  be  set  right.  God  is 
not  the  passive  spectator  of  human  affairs 
which  these  men  deem  Him.  He  '  con- 
siders '  [i.e.,  regards  with  interest  and 
sympathy)  what  is  going  on.  The  help- 
less, therefore,  may  leave  all  to  God." 
— Peroivne.  And  woe  unto  the  godless 
(ver.  15,  16).  "  Let  the  wicked  and  his 
wickedness  disappear,  so  that  even  when 
souoht  for  it  cannot  be  found." — Perovme, 


Black    Arts. 


(  Verses 

A  missionary  who  recently  returned 
from  Polynesia  brought  home  with  him 
a  curious  object  called  a  soul-trap.    This 
consisted    simply   of   a    series    of   rings 
twisted  in  cocoa-nut  fibre.     If  a  native 
should  commit  a  great  offence,  or  have 
the  misfortune  to  offend  a  sorcerer,  the 
latter  immediately  proceeds  to  make  a 
new  ring  in  his  chain,  so  as  to  form  a 
trap    to    catch    the    poor    man's    spirit. 
Soon  a  bird  or  butterfly  alights  on  the 
ring,  and  the  sorcerer  asserts  that  the 
soul  of  the  culprit  assuming  this  form 
has  passed  into  the  trap.     It  is  imme- 
diately known  throughout  the  tribe  that 
a  certain  man  has  lost  his  soul.     As  a 
matter  of  fact,  it  invariably  happens  that 
the  soulless  man  shortly  afterwards  dies, 
of  course  through  sheer  mental  distress 
at  having  had  his  soul  thus  entrapped. 
We  smile  at  such  traps,  but  we  are  all 
familiar  with   soul- traps   of  a  far  more 
subtle  and  dangerous  character.      In  the 
verses  before  us  the  Psalmist  vividly  pic- 
tures the  crafty  schemes  of  the  wicked 
in  order  to  entrap  their  victims.      They 
seek  by  most  subtle  arts  to  entangle  and 
destroy. 

I.  It  is  thus  that  selfish  men  set 
traps  for  the  young  and  inexperienced. 

With  lies  and  enticements  the  cove- 
tous seek  to  entrap  and  destroy  the 
young.  Soul- traps  for  the  young  !  How 
numerous  they  are  !  How  cleverly  con- 
trived /  The  utmost  artifice  and  plausi- 
bility. How  successful  they  are  (ver. 
10).  "  Crouching  down  as  low  as  pos- 
sible, he  lies  on  the  watch,  and  the  feeble 
and  defenceless  fall  into  his  strong  ones, 
i.e.f  claws."  —  Delitzsch.  How  many 
thus  fall !  Our  cities  are  full  of  fallen 
young  men  and  women.  We  have  thou- 
42 


7-18.) 

sands  of  heartless  men  in  society  answer 
ing  to  the  vile  robber  pictured  in  these 
verses.  For  the  sake  of  gain  and  lust, 
they  set  traps  in  which  the  health, 
honour,  happiness,  and  hope  of  the 
youthful  perish.  The  whole  civilised 
world  was  shocked  the  other  day  by  the 
discovery  that,  by  means  of  an  infernal 
machine,  a  villain  sent  ships  and  their 
crews  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea  for  the 
sake  of  the  insurance  money ;  but  thou- 
sands of  atheistical,  covetous  men,  for 
the  sake  of  gain,  are  ingeniously  seeking 
to  sink  the  souls  of  the  people  in  the 
gulf  of  hell.  May  God  save  our  young 
people  from  their  cruel  schemes  ! 

II.  It  is  thus  that  the  world  con- 
trives traps  for  the  godly. 

The  world  does  not  like  the  godly, 
and  in  various  subtle  methods  it  seeks 
to  worst  them.  It  has  traps  for  their 
reputation.  "His  mouth  is  full  of  per- 
jury and  deceit."  He  sets  a  net  of 
cunningly-devised  speech,  that  he  may 
be  able  to  bring  their  good  name  into 
discredit.  It  has  traps  for  i\\e\v  fortune. 
It  will  "  privily  seek "  to  damage  their 
circumstances.  It  will  adroitly  circulate 
reports,  frame  laws,  to  bring  them  into 
financial  trouble.  It  has  traps  for  their 
character.  They  know  the  natural  weak- 
nesses of  a  Christian,  and  they  bait  their 
hook,  set  their  net,  accordingly.  He  is 
sl^ort-tempered,  and  they  contrive  to  put 
in  his  way  occasions  of  anger;  he  is 
given  to  levity,  and  they  provoke  his 
mirth  ;  he  has  strong  appetites,  and  they 
put  drink  to  his  lips ;  he  is  feeble  in 
faith,  and  they  piess  him  with  scepti- 
cisms. The  world  hates  the  righteous, 
and  when  it  cannot  injure  them  openly, 
it   will  secretly.     The  devil  is  a  wily 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALMr. 


destroyer,  and  his  children  imitate  Lis 
tactics,  and  seek  "  to  murder  the  inno- 
cent." 

III.  It  is  tlius  that  Satan  sets  traps 
for  us  all. 

He  is  the  great  bandit  pictured  in  the 
textj  he  is  the  great  sorcerer  whose 
soul-traps  beset  us  at  every  turn.  What 
a  clever  fowler  is  he !  what  a  politic 
huntsman  !  what  a  subtle  angler  !  The 
devil  hides  himself,  he  disguises  his 
movements,  and  in  an  evil  hour  men 
are  drawn  "  into  the  net."  Here  he  be- 
trays by  pleasure.  Bates  tells  us  of  a 
spider  in  South  America  which  looks 
like  a  blossom,  and  insects  alighting  on 
it  for  sweetness  find  death.  So  the 
great  foe,  under  the  aspect  of  pleasure, 
betrays  thousands.  Here  he  betrays  by 
honour.  One  of  the  Roman  Emperors 
used  to  fish  with  a  net  of  purple  and 
gold  ;  the  devil  has  used  this  net  largely, 
and  taken  great  prey.  And  by  many 
oilier  devices  does  he  destroy  the  unwary. 
Beware  !  That  was  a  clumsy  soul-trap 
in  Polynesia,  but  the  sorcerer  of  hell 
has  traps  of  strange  power — of  damning 
eflficacy.  Beware  of  those  soul-traps 
made  of  flowers  called  pleasure ;  of 
those  purple-lined  ones  called  greatness  ; 
of  those  gay- painted  ones  called  fashion  ; 
of  those  scientific  ones  called  philosophy; 
of  tiiose  jewelled  ones  called  honour ;  of 
those  golden  ones  called  wealth.  "  Satan 
himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of 
light."  The  devil  will  lie,  fawn,  flatter, 
and  do  this  patiently  for  years  to  ruin 
us. 

1.  Let  the  innocent  'put  their  trust  in 
God.  "  The  afflicted  committeth  him- 
self unto  Thee ;  Thou  art  the  helper  of 
the  fatherless  "  (ver.  14).  Alas  !  for  us 
if  we  attempt  to  stand  in  our  own 
strength,  and  take  our  defence  into  our 
own  hands.  ''  He  that  takes  himself 
out  of  God's  hands  into  his  own,  by 
and  by  will  not  know  what  to  do  with 
himself. " —  Whichcote.  A  n  d  i  n  o u r  d a rk- 
est  hours  of  temptation  and  trial,  we 
may  have  the  fullest  assurance  that  God 
has  not  forgotten  us.  The  wicked  say  : 
*' God  will  never  see  it"  (ver.  11). 
But  the  Psalmist  replies  :  "  Thou  hast 
seen  it ;  for  Thou  beholdeth  mischief 
and  spite  to  requite  it  with  Thy  hand  " 
(ver.    14).     "The    Psalmist   means   to 


say,  so  far  from  the  assertion  of  the 
wicked  man  being  true,  that  God  is 
forgetful  of  the  poor ;  He  is,  on  the  con- 
trary, observant  of  their  trouble  and 
vexation  ;  and  in  order  not  to  forget 
their  calamities,  He  places  a  memorial 
of  them  on  His  hands  (see  Isa.  xlix. 
26).  /  have  engraven  thee  on  the  palms 
of  My  hands  ;  which  would  be  done  for 
the  purpose  of  assisting  the  memory." — 
Phillips.  God  has  not  forgotten  His 
tried  ones  who  look  to  Him  ;  He  will  not 
forget  them.  "  The  Lord  preserveth 
the  simple." 

"  As  far  from  danger  as  from  fear, 
Whilst  Love,  Almighty  Love,  is  near." 

2.  Let  the  innocent  walk  circumspectly, 
*' Lurking  places,"  '* secret  places,"  "eyes 
privily  set,"  "  lieth  in  wait  secretly." 
"He  croucheth."  "The  image  is  that 
of  a  beast  of  prey,  a  fox  or  a  wolf,  lying 
upon  the  watch  about  the  farm-yard  in 
the  evening."  —  Horsley.  This  great 
enemy  is  ever  on  the  watch  for  us  in  the 
world.  Ambushed  often  where  least 
expected.  And  in  the  Church.  The 
wolf  prow^ls  about  Christ's  fold.  Let 
us  (1.)  Live  in  the  spirit  of  watchfulness. 
(2.)  Let  us  be  specially  on  our  guard 
against  what  promises  unusual  gain,  or 
liberty,  or  pleasure.  The  angler  makes 
his  artificial  fly  as  big,  and  fat,  and 
dazzling  as  he  can,  and  the  devil  acts 
thus  with  the  bait  which  he  dangles 
before  human  souls.  (3.)  Let  us  keep  as 
far  from  danger  as  we  possibly  can. 
They  try  sometimes  how  near  they  can 
swim  to  the  Niagara  falls  without  going 
over — it  is  not  wise.  God  will  keep  us, 
if  we  strive  thus  to  keep  ourselves. 

3.  Let  any  who  are  in  the  snare  of  the 
devil  look  up  to  the  Deliverer.  It  is  best 
to  keep  out  of  Satan's  claws,  but  Christ 
can  deliver  us  from  the  paw  of  the  lion 
and  the  mouth  of  the  bear.  In  the 
devil's  trap,  held  by  the  iron  teeth  of 
evil,  stained  with  blood  and  tears,  look 
up,  and  Mercy's  hand  shall  liberate  you, 
and  you  shall  sing:  ''My  soul  has  es- 
ca})ed  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of  the 
fowler ;  the  snare  is  broken,  and  I  have 
escaped." 

4.  Let  the  luicked  be  assured  that  God's 
eye  is  ujwn  them,  and  that  justice  must 
overtake  them  (ver.  15).     "  Because  the 

43 


PSALM  XL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Lord  continues  to  spare  them,  therefore 
they  go  on  to  provoke  Him.  As  He 
adds  to  their  lives,  so  they  add  to  their 
lusts.  Because  justice  seems  to  wink, 
men  suppose  her  blind;  because  she 
delays  punishment,  they  imagine  she 
denies   to   punish   them;    because   she 


does  not  always  reprove  them  for  their 
sins,  they  suppose  she  always  approves 
of  their  sins.  But  let  such  know  that 
the  silent  arrow  can  destroy  as  well 
as  the  roaring  cannon.  Though  the 
patience  of  God  be  lasting^  yet  it  is  not 
everlasting, " — Spur g  eon. 


PSALM  XL 
Introduction. 

**  The  friends  of  David  advise  him  in  this  psalm  to  flee  unto  the  mountainous  parts  of  the 
land  of  Judah,  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger  which  was  threatening  him,  should  be  remain  in 
the  place  where  he  was  then  residing.  The  psalm  is  written  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  of  which 
the  first  three  verses  contain  the  advice  of  David's  friends,  and  the  remaining  portion  his  reply, 
wherein  he  declares  his  unshaken  confidence  in  God,  and  his  conviction  that  the  wicked  will  be 
punished,  and  himself  duly  protected." — Phillips, 

Moral  Courage. 
(Verses  1 

"We  have  in  this  psalm  a  striking 
illustration  of  Christian  heroism.  The 
Psalmist  is  found  in  circumstances  of 
great  moral  perplexity  and  personal 
danger,  but  he  stands  his  ground  trust- 
ing in  God. 

We  notice  : 

I.  The  severity  of  the  trial. 

David's  timid  counsellors  bring  before 
him  several  pressing  reasons  why  he 
should  despair  of  his  cause,  and  retire 
from  the  scene  of  conflict.  They  urge — 
1.  The  desperate  designs  of  his  enemies. 
"  They  bend  their  bow,  and  make  ready 
their  arrow  upon  the  string"  (ver.  2). 
They  will  take  his  life  j  their  thoughts 
are  thoughts  of  blood.  2.  Their  per- 
fidious policy.  "  That  they  may  privily 
shoot  at  the  upright  in  heart "  (ver.  2). 
They  were  prepared  to  resort  to  the 
basest  stratagems  to  compass  his  death. 
3.  Their  success/id  action  (ver.  3).  "  What 
hath  the  righteous  done  ? '' — P.  B.  Ver- 
sion. "  The  question  in  the  last  clause 
of  this  verse  implies  that  the  righteous 
have  effected  nothing  in  opposition  to  the 
prevalent  iniquity." — Alexander.  "If 
Saul,  who  is  the  vicegerent  of  God,  has 
cast  aside  his  fear,  and  now  regards 
neither  truth  nor  justice,  a  righteous 
man  has  no  security  for  his  life.  This 
is  at  present  tliy  case,  therefore  flee ; 
they  have  utterly  destroyed  the  founda- 
tions of  truth  and  equity ;  what  can 
righteousness  now  effect?"  —  Clarke. 
The  position  here  is,  then,  that  righteous- 
44 


-7.) 

ness  has  been  unsuccessful,  and  the  in- 
ference  is  that  righteousness  will  be 
unsuccessful.  "  Thus  wickedness  seemed 
to  be  getting  the  upper  hand  to  such  a 
degree  that  the  godly  remnant  (Isa.  i.  9) 
felt  themselves  tempted  to  flee,  as  Lot 
was  bidden  to  flee,  from  the  city  to  the 
mountain." — Kay.  "  All  is  hopeless 
disorder  and  confusion." — Perowne.  The 
representatives  of  moral  ideas  were  false, 
the  practice  of  righteousness  ceased,  the 
very  principles  of  law  and  order  were 
subverted,  and  there  seemed  no  lio[)e. 

II.  The  constancy  of  the  tried. 

"  In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust "  (ver. 
1).  "  My  feet  are  on  the  true  rock, 
why  should  I  look  elsewhere  for  safety  V^ 
— Perowne.  "  How  say  ye  to  my  soul, 
Flee  as  a  bird  to  your  mountain  1  How 
can  ye  say  1 " — Phillips.  Dark  as  the 
hour  was,  the  Psalmist's  resolution  was 
unshaken.  What  were  the  sources  of 
this  sublime  courage  1  1.  The  presence 
of  God.  "The  Lord  is  in  His  holy 
temple "  (ver.  4).  God  may  seem  to 
have  deserted  the  earth,  but  He  has  not. 
2.  The  majesty  of  God.  "The  Lord's 
throne  is  in  heaven  "  (ver.  4).  Far  above 
all  human  or  devilish  energy.  The 
supreme  power  is  moral.  3.  The  know- 
ledge  of  God.  "  His  eyes  behold,"  <kc. 
(ver.  4).  "  His  is  a  fixed  and  pene- 
trating look  that  sees  into  a  thing  to  the 
foundation  of  its  inmost  nature.  The 
mention  of  the  eyelids  is  intentional. 
When    we   observe  a   thing  closely  or 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  ZI. 


ponder  over  it,  we  draw  the  eyelida 
together,  in  order  that  our  vision  may 
be  more  concentrated  and  direct,  and 
become,  as  it  were,  one  ray  piercing 
through  the  object.  Thus  are  men 
open  to  the  all-seeing  eyes,  the  all- 
searching  looks  of  Jalive,  the  just  and 
the  unjust  alike." — Delitzsch.  One  of 
the  Greeks  said  :  "  He  is  the  best  general 
who  knows  the  most  of  the  affairs  of  the 
enemy."  God  knows  His  enemies,  and 
the  enemies  of  His  people — all  their 
secrets,  subtleties,  stratagems,  and  in 
due  time  He  shall  confound  them.  4. 
The  righteousness  of  God.  God  hates 
wickedness  (ver.  5).  *'  A  cordial  hatred." 
— Alexander.  '*  He  hates  the  wicked 
with  all  the  energy  of  His  perfectly  and 
essentially  holy  nature." — Delitzsch. 

Here  the  Psalmist  rested;  here  we 
may  rest.  Truth  may  fail  in  the  Church, 
righteousness  in  the  State ;  the  magis- 
trate may  cease  to  be  just,  the  priest  to 
be  good,  the  king  to  be  honourable  ; 
but  God  liveth,  the  Wise,  the  Just,  the 
Good,  and  in  Him  we  may  rest. 

III.  The  certainty  of  the  triumph. 

The  wicked  shall  be  destroyed  with 
awful  terrors  (ver.  6),  but  the  righteous 
shall  triumph  (ver.  7).  "  The  upright 
shall  behold  His  face."  *'  His  unveiled 
countenance,  no  longer  hidden  behind 
deeds  of  strange  providential  discipline 
(xiii.  1),  no  longer  making  itself  felt  in 
a  few  straggling  rays  ;  but  like  '  the  sun 
in  a  morning  without  clouds.' " — Kay. 

1.  All  God's  people  may  expect  to  he 
thus  tried.  At  one  time  or  other  our 
faith,  principle,  hope,  will  be  thus 
severely  tested.  We  must  all  be  tried 
by  fire. 


2.  Let  us  in  such  days  heware  of  the 

temporising  policy  of  faint-hearted  men, 
"  Flee  like  a  bird  to  the  mountain." 
"  The  advice  here  given,  and  which  he 
repels,  is  that  of  timid  and  desponding 
friends,  who  would  persuade  him  that 
all  is  lost,  and  that  the  highest  wisdom 
is  to  yield  to  circumstances,  and  to  seek 
safety,  not  in  resistance,  but  in  flight. 
But  in  fact  the  voice  which  thus  speaks 
is  the  voice  of  the  natural  heart,  of  the 
selfish,  and  therefore  shortsighted  and 
cowardly  instinct,  which  always  asks 
first,  not  what  is  right,  but  what  is 
safe.  The  advice  may  be  well  meant, 
but  it  is  unworthy.  This  is  the  victory 
that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith.  But  it  is  often  a  sorer  trial  for 
faith  to  have  to  withstand  the  pleadings 
of  well-meaning  friends  than  to  arm 
itself  against  open  enemies." — Perowne, 

3.  Let  us  trust  confidently  in  God^  and 
He  shall  make  us  to  triumph.  Torsten- 
sohn,  the  great  commander  to  whom 
Gustavus  Adolphus  transmitted  the  pro- 
secution of  the  Thirty  Years'  War,  was 
a  man  so  shattered  by  disease  that  he 
had  to  be  carried  at  the  head  of  his 
forces  in  a  litter.  Yet  no  commander  of 
his  age  was  so  resistless  and  terrible  in 
his  onset  and  so  invariably  victorious. 
Schiller  has  expressed  his  leading  maxim 
in  these  words :  he  never  counted  his 
enemies.  Let  us  not  count  our  enemies, 
but  trust  our  God,  and  we  shall  be  more 
than  conquerors.  ''  Flee  as  sparrows  to 
your  mountain." — Phillips.  But,  trust- 
ing in  God,  the  sparrow  becomes  an 
eagle,  mounting  above  the  storm,  and 
delighting  itself  in  the  eternal  sunshine 
of  the  Father's  face. 


Forlorn  Hopes. 


( Verses 

I.  The  hopes  of  the  saint  often  ap- 
pear forlorn  hopes. 

The  Psalmist  trusted  in  God,  but  to 
the  timid  and  distrustful  ones  his  hope 
was  a  wild,  forlorn  hope.  A  hoping 
against  hope.  Thus  the  hopes  of  the 
Christian  often  seem  absurd  in  the  eye 
of  sense  and  the  count  of  reason.  1.  It 
is  thus  sometimes  in  the  troubles  of  life. 
There  are  Egyptians  behind,  the  sea 
before,  and  the  believer's  expectations 


1-7.) 

of  deliverance  seem  most  Utopian.  2. 
Amid  abounding  and  triumphant  wicked- 
ness. As  in  this  psalm.  "  '  For  the 
foundations  are  being  overthrown,'  say 
the  alarmed  and  timid  ones.  '  He  is  as 
much  in  a  minority  now  as  he  ever  was. 
Had  he  not  better  leave  the  field  of 
battle?  Why  struggle  against  (what 
men  call)  the  inevitable  course  of 
events  r" — Kay.  3.  As  to  the  entire 
sanctijication  of  character.     How  impos- 

45 


PSALM  XIL 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


■ible  it  seems  that  we  should  become 
entirely  holy,  and  love  God  with  all  our 
Heart !  Will  not  the  sky  always  recede 
as  we  approach  it  ?  ^.  At  the  grave. 
How  utterly  improbable  the  grand  hopes 
of  the  saint ! 

II.  Hopes  which  appear  forlorn  hopes 
to  the  world  have  nevertheless  strong 
foundations. 

The  timid  felt  that  the  foundations 
were  being  destroyed,  all  on  which 
a  rational  confidence  could  be  founded 
was  giving  way,  and  yet,  as  we  see,  the 
Psalmist's  hope  had  a  basis  strong  and 
deep.  "Yhe foundations  vfQiQ  gonQ.  "It 
is  not  said,  if  the  roof  be  ruinous,  or  if 
the  side  walls  be  shattered,  but  if  the 
foundations." — Fuller,  quoted  hy  Spur- 
geon.  Nothing  for  sense  or  reason  was 
left.     But  there  are  foundations  under 


foundations,  the  eternal  granite,  and  on 
this  David  built  (ver.  4,  5).  The  power 
of  God,  the  truth  of  God,  the  grace  of 
God,  the  uncbangeableness  of  God  ;  here 
was  the  everlasting  rock  on  which  David 
rested  his  hopes.  When  the  expecta- 
tions of  the  saints  seem  most  wild,  yet 
do  they  rest  more  securely  than  the 
pillared  firmament. 

III.  The  forlorn  hopes  of  the  saints 
are  destined  to  glorious  realisation. 

"  Which  hope  maketh  not  ashamed." 
In  deepest  trouble  He  will  deliver  us, 
opening  in  the  valley  of  Achor  a  door  of 
salvation.  Amid  triumphant  wickedness 
He  vindicates  the  just,  shattering  the 
proud  pottery  with  a  rod  of  iron.  He 
makes  us  without  spot  or  wrinkle.  He 
raises  from  the  sepulchre  to  immortal 
glory  and  honour. 


The  Tactics  of  the  Tempted. 
(Verse  1.) 

In  this  psalm  we  see   David  stand     providential  path.     2.  When  our  testi- 
firm  ;  he  will  not  accept  the  counsel  of      many   has   been  faithfully  given.        3. 
his  advisers  to  flee,  but  at  another  time 
he  seems  to  have  followed  this  advice. 

Observe  : 

I.  There  are  times  when  we  ought 
to  stand  firm  in  the  scenes  of  trial. 

Such  times  are  when — 1.  Such  trials 
come  in  our  providential  path.  2.  When 
our  testimony  for  God  is  specially  needed. 
3.  When  the  cause  of  God  imperatively 
demands  our  presence,  (fee,  &c. 

II.  There  are  times  when  we  may 
lawfully  withdraw  from  such  scenes. 

1.  When  they  do  not  seem  to  lie  on  our 


When  God^s  cause  would  seem  to  he  best 
served  by  our  retirement,  (fee,  (fee. 

III.  The  standards  hy  which  our 
conduct  should  be  regulated  in  the 
changing  scenes  of  life. 

Consult : 

1.   The  finger  of  God  in  Providence.   2. 
The  Word  of  God.     3.  The  Spirit  of  God. 
"Ob,  wouldst  Thou,  Lord,  Thy  servant  guard, 
'Gainst  every  known  or  secret  foe  ; 

A  mind  for  all  assaults  prepared, 
A  sober,  vigilant  mind  bestow, 

Ever  apprised  of  danger  nigh, 

And  when  to  fight,  and  when  to  fly," 


PSALM  XII. 
Introduction. 

"  This,  according  to  the  title,  is  one  of  David's  psalms,  but  there  i«  nothing  in  the  circum- 
stances, so  far  as  we  know  them,  of  his  history  which  can  lead  us  to  associate  the  psalm  with 
any  particular  period.  TJKjluck  thinks  it  is  aimed  at  persons  by  whom  David  was  surrounded 
in  the  court  of  Saul.  But  it  is  not  one  or  two  prominent  individuals  whose  conduct  forms  the 
burden  of  the  Psalmist's  complaint.  He  is  evidently  smarting  from  the  falseness  and  the 
hypocrisy  of  the  time.  The  defection  which  he  deplores  is  a  national  defection.  Like  Elijah 
m  the  desert,  he  feels  himself  alone.  A  taint  has  spread  through  society.  Falsehood  is  every- 
where,  truth  nowhere." — Perovme, 

DarkAges. 

(Verses  1-8.) 

We  observe :  may  he  a  "  dark  age  "  in  the  estimate 

I.  The   golden  age  of  a  country     of  the  saint. 
46 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


TSALKXH. 


"The  time  of  David,  incomparably 
the  best  age  in  the  history  of  Israel, 
and  yet,  viewed  in  the  light  of  the 
spirit  of  holiness,  an  age  so  radically 
corrupt." — Delitzsch.  The  age  of  David 
was  in  many  respects  the  "golden  age" 
of  Israel,  then  it  was  great  in  literature, 
commerce,  statesmanship,  music,  archi- 
tecture, and  arms.  And  yet  David  be- 
moans it,  and  sighs  amid  all  its  splen- 
dour. The  true  glory  of  a  country  is 
moral,  and  where  the  moral  element  is 
wanting,  all  other  glories  are  dim. 
David  felt  that  whilst  palaces,  people, 
chariots,  gems,  and  gold,  were  on  the 
increase,  pious,  honest,  true-hearted 
men  were  on  the  decrease ;  nay,  they 
seemed  in  danger  of  disappearing  alto- 
gether, and  he  felt  the  gravity  of  the 
situation.  David  lamented  over  Jerusa- 
lem in  the  supreme  hour  of  its  material 
and  political  greatness  ;  Paul  overlooked 
the  museums,  pictures,  statues,  palaces 
of  Athens,  and  "  his  spirit  was  stirred 
in  him  when  he  saw  the  city  wholly 
given  to  idolatry  ; "  and  when  we  survey 
the  magnificence  of  our  country,  we 
must  weep  to  think  of  the  atheism,  the 
sin,  the  folly  of  the  people.  Philosophers, 
poets,  commanders,  artists,  orators,  states- 
men, millionaires,  do  not  make  "a  golden 
age,"  but  the  presence  of  many  virtuous 
and  godly  men,  and  where  these  are 
wanting,  colours,  marbles,  jewels,  domes, 
and  plumes,  are  but  dust  and  ashes.  The 
age  that  we  call  "golden,"  Heaven  may 
call  "  dark;"  the  age  that  is  written  down 
in  human  histories  as  supremely  august 
may  be  an  age  which  angels  record  in 
Heaven's  "  Book  of  Lamentations," 

We  observe  : 

II.  The  faults  with  which  a  splendid 
civilisation  may  be  chargeable. 

Dr.  John  Brown  says,  "  In  observing 
the  advances  of  commerce,  we  shall  find 
that  in  iis>  first  stages  it  supplies  mutual 
necessities,  prevents  mutual  wants,  ex- 
tends mutual  knowledge,  eradicates 
mutual  prejudice,  and  spreads  mutual 
humanity.  In  its  middle  and  more  ad- 
vanced period,  it  provides  conveniences, 
increases  numbers,  gives  birth  to  arts 
and  science,  creates  equal  laws,  difi'uses 
general  plenty  and  general  happiness. 
If  we  view  it  in  its  third  and  highest 


stage,  we  shall  see  it  change  its  nature 
and  effects.  It  brings  in  superfluity 
and  vast  wealth,  begets  avarice,  gross 
luxury,  or  effeminate  refinement  among 
the  higher  ranks,  together  with  general 
loss  of  principle."  The  Jewish  nation 
seemed  to  have  entered  on  this  latest 
stage.  David  charges  his  age — 1.  With 
the  lack  of  faithfulness.  "  The  faithful 
fail "  (ver.  1).  Honest  and  true-hearted 
men  were  not  to  be  found.  Is  there 
not  a  counterpart  to  this  in  our 
day  ?  The  immorality  of  trade  is  con- 
stantly deplored,  and  the  strange  lack  of 
conscientiousness  in  all  classes  of  the  com- 
munity. 2.  With  untruthfulness  (ver. 
2).  Insincerity  and  falsehood.  "That 
which  the  writer  especially  laments  is 
the  prevailing  untruthfulness." — De- 
litzsch. Is  not  this  a  feature  of  our 
times?  3.  Pride.  "The  tongue  that 
speaketh  proud  things"  (ver.  3). 
"  Talking  big." — Horsley.  When  did 
the  tongue  speak  prouder  things  than 
now  ?  4.  Boasting  (ver,  4).  "  They 
declare  themselves  to  be  absolutely  free, 
and  exalted  above  all  authority." — 
Delitzsch.  Is  not  this  pride,  arrogance, 
defiance,  a  characteristic  of  our  day  1 
"  The  idea  of  the  whole  verse  is,  by  our 
own  lips  and  our  tongues  we  can  ac- 
complish what  we  will." — Alexander. 
And  is  not  this  the  idea  of  this  genera- 
tion 1  "Our  puissance  is  our  own  :  our 
own  right  hand  shall  teach  us  highest 
deeds,  by  proof  to  try  who  is  our  equal." 
— Paradise  Lost.  5.  And  the  fifth 
verse  seems  to  suggest  that  goodness  is 
treated  with  contempt.  Verses  5-8 
"  signify  that  at  that  time  wickedness 
was  the  way  to  preferment,  and  that 
good  men  were  the  objects  of  persecu- 
tion."— Clarke.  "It  is  the  fault  of  all 
high  civilisations  to  think  lightly  of  sin." 
— Arnold.  And  out  of  this  scepticism, 
pride,  and  sensuality,  come  crimes  of 
darkest  complexion  and  largest  propor- 
tion, peculiar  to  advanced  civilisations. 
According  to  the  height  of  the  moun- 
tain is  the  depth  of  the  valley ;  accord- 
ing to  the  intensity  of  the  light  is  the 
depth  of  the  shade ;  and  according  to 
the  wealth,  freedom,  learning,  splendor r 
of  a  nation,  are  its  crimes  exaggerated 
and  its  vices  crimson. 

47 


P8ALXXIL 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


m.  Duty  of  the  Christian  patriot.  3.    To   rest  in  days  of  triumphani 

1.  To  cri/  mightily  to  God  cigainst  the  wickedness  in  the  word  and  power  of  God 
prevailing  wickedness.     *'  Help,  Lord  ! "  (ver.  5,  6). 

(ver.  1).  The  etfectual  fervent  prayer,  <fec.  4.  To  claim  God's  promise,  and  keep 

2.  To  protest  by  word  and  act  against  himself  unspotted  from  the  world  (ver, 
this  iniquity,  as  David  did  (ver.  3).  7). 


The  Characteristic  of  a  Divine  Eevelation. 


of  a 


We  are  taught  here : 

I.  The   grand   characteristic 
Divine  revelation. 

"  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure 
words"  (ver.  6).  The  words  of  men, 
as  the  Psalmist  has  just  been  showing, 
are  mixed  and  impure,  but  God's  words 
are  free  from  all  base  elements.  Igjio- 
rance,  prejudice,  falsehood,  passion,  in- 
sincerity, impurity,  debase  the  words  of 
men,  but  not  God's  words.  '*  Every 
word  of  God  is  pure."  * '  His  words  are 
true  and  righteous  altogether."  The 
words  of  men  are  the  smoky  fires  of 
earth  ;  "  the  words  of  God "  are  the 
starry  lights  of  heaven,  pure  and  cloud- 
less, and  "  which  never  lead  astray." 

We  remark  : 

II.  That  the  Scriptures  which  pro- 
fess to  be  the  words  of  the  Lord  have 
been  tested,  and  their  divinity  esta- 
blished. 

Where  is  this  pure  light]  This  Book 
claims  to  contain  the  words  of  God  ;  its 
pretensions  have  been  tried,  and  it  comes 
forth  as  pure  silver  from  the  crucible. 

1.  It  has  been  tried  by  criticism,  its 
contents  discussed  and  analysed,  the 
genuineness,  authenticity,  canonicity,  in- 
spiration, of  the  various  books  discussed 
again  and  again.  What  is  the  result? 
Scores  of  critics — men  most  sincere, 
acute,  learned,  honest — have  tried  these 
pages,  and  approved  them  as  the  hand- 
writing of  God.  And  if  you  go  to  the 
different  schools  of  sceptical  criticism, 
each  school  will  give  you  back  some 
portion  of  the  Book  as  authentic  and 
Divine,  and  amongst  them  all  you  get 
back  pretty  nearly  the  whole  Book. 

2.  It  has  been  tried  by  science.  Says 
one  of  our  great  scientists  :  *'  Science  has 
established  no  results  hostile  to  the  evi- 
dences  of   Revelation."       Neither    the 

48 


{Verse  6.) 

stars  nor  the  stones  fight  against  it. 
Buckland,  Sedgwick,  Hugh  Miller,  the 
greatest  of  modern  geologists ;  Brewster, 
the  most  famous  of  modern  astronomers; 
Faraday,  the  most  illustrious  of  modern 
chemists ;  these  splendid  names  were 
Christian ;  these  master-spirits  of  the 
scientific  world  loved  this  book,  found 
no  fault  with  it,  died  resting  upon  it 
their  immortal  hopes.  There  is  not 
much  the  matter  with  Revelation  where 
it  touches  Nature,  or  these  masters  would 
have  found  it  out. 

3.  It  has  been  tried  by  experience. 
Do  the  Scriptures  accomplish  what  they 
promise  in  respect  to  man's  condition 
and  necessities  1  Christ  said  to  the 
Jews,  "If  I  do  not  the  works  of  My 
Father,  believe  Me  not."  So  we  may 
say  of  the  Scriptures.  (1.)  They  have 
been  tried  in  relation  to  man's  social 
necessities.  According  to  the  sceptic, 
the  Bible  is  false  in  fact,  false  in  philo- 
sophy, false  in  morals,  and  it  ought  to 
make  society  selfish,  anarchical,  barbaric. 
But  it  does  not.  It  does  the  very  oppo- 
site. Our  civilisation  has  its  roots  in 
the  Bible  ;  and  if  you  take  the  Bible  to 
a  pagan  land,  it  changes  everything 
into  purer  and  milder  forms.  It  creates 
everywhere  the  highest  intelligence,  the 
largest  liberty,  the  purest  morality,  the 
truest  progress.  (2.)  They  have  been 
tried  in  relation  to  man's  moral  and 
spiritual  necessities.  It  is  just  what  we 
need.  It  gives  us  that  light,  pardon^ 
liberty,  purity,  joy,  for  which  we  sigh. 
The  Scriptures  appeal  to  the  multitudea 
whom  it  has  saved  from  sin  and  misery, 
and  exclaims,  as  Christ  did,  "The  works 
that  I  do,  they  bear  witness  of  Me." 
The  Scriptures  have  been  tried  by  suf- 
fering men,  guilty  men,  dying  men, 
unsophisticated   men,    men    of    loftiest 


BOM  I  LET  W  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XIII. 


gifts,  and  they  have  found  it  just  what 
they  needed,  all  that  they  needed.  "  By 
its  fruits  we  know  it."  Know  it  to  be 
no  poison  tree  to  destroy  ;  no  barren 
tree  to  mock  hungering  men  with  leaves 
and  blossoms ;  but  a  tree  of  life,  whose 
fruits  satisfy  tlie  longing  soul,  and  whose 
very  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations. 

We  observe  finally : 


III.  The  consequent  preciousness  of 
the  Sacred  Scriptures. 

Precious  as  putified  silver.  Precious 
in  life,  in  death.  We  value  what  is  tried. 
In  sickness,  a  tried  medicine  ;  in  trouble, 
a  tried  friend ;  in  bad  weather,  a  tried 
ship,  a  tried  captain,  a  tried  anchor. 
Thank  God  !  we  have  a  tried  religion. 
The  Bible  never  failed  our  glorious  reli- 
gious ancestry,  and  it  will  never  fail  us. 


PSALM    XIII. 
Introduction. 

"  In  this  psalm  we  see  a  servant  of  God,  long  and  sorely  tried  by  the  persecutions  of  unre- 
lenting enemies,  and,  as  it  seems  to  himself,  forgotten  and  forsaken  of  God,  pouring  out  the 
agony  of  his  soul  in  prayer.  It  is  a  long  and  weary  stru^^gle,  it  is  a  daily  and  hourly  martyrdom  ; 
and  wrestling  with  his  despair,  he  can  but  cry  (like  the  souls  under  the  altar.  Rev.  vi.  10),  '  How 
long? '  And  then  calmer  words  of  prayer  rise  to  his  lips  (ver.  3,  4)  ;  and  at  last  Faith  asserts 
her  perfect  victory  (ver.  5).  The  rapid  transition  of  feeling,  from  a  depth  of  misery  bordering 
on  despair,  to  hope,  and  even  joy,  is  very  remarkable. " — Perowne, 

Soul  Eclipses. 


(  Verses 
We  assert : 
I.  The  nature  of  such  eclipses. 

Ver.  1,  2.     Ri/lands,  commenting  on 
this    psalm,    regards    it    as    exclusively 
applicable  to  the  Redeemer.      "  In  addi- 
tion   to    the    sufferings    which    human 
nature  is   exposed    to,  Messiah,  during 
His    sojourn    on    earth,    experienced    a 
peculiar  calamity  in  the  hiding  of  God's 
face  from  Him."     Then  he  goes   on   to 
say,  "  God  never  hides   His   face  from 
the  redeemed  ;"  and  speaks  of  "  The  ill 
effect  of    the  doctrine  that    God    hides- 
His  face  from  His  people."     Now,  it  is 
quite  true  that  God  never  ceases  to  love 
His  children,  but  still  the  people  of  God 
are  sensible  of  eclipses  of  the  soul,  such 
as  the  Psalmist  describes  in  this  psalm. 
God   has   not  really  deserted  His  chil- 
dren, but  it  often  seems  as  if  He  had. 
"  It  is  true  that  God  does  not  forget  any 
one,  yet  it  may  be  that,  to  the  human 
spirit,  it  appears  as  if  he  were  forgotten 
by  God,  and   that  the   Holy    One  had 
veiled  His  countenance  from  liim.     Then 
he  feels  at  once  that  he  is  forsaken  \<y 
God,  and  that  he  is  weak  with  reference 
to    his    enemies." — Moll.      And    whilst 
the  Psalmist  deplores  the  withdrawal  of 
the  Divine  face,  he   yet  recognises,   in 
the   same    moment,    that    it   is    only   a 
seeming  withdrawal.     Fhillips  renders 


1-6.) 

the  passage,  "  How  long  wilt  thou  be 
apparently  forgetful  of  my  troubles,  and 
withhold  from  me  Thy  assistance  1"  And 
Delitzsch  explains:  *' The  dejected  heart 
thinks,  God  has  forgotten  me  for  ever; 
but  the  Spirit,  which  thrusts  away  this 
thought,  changes  it  into  a  question 
which  sets  upon  it  the  mark  of  a  mere 
appearance,  not  a  reality :  How  long 
shall  it  seem  as  though  Thou  forgettest 
me  for  ever"?  Faith  holds  fast  the  love 
that  is  behind  the  wrath ;  it  sees  in  the 
disjilay  of  anger  only  a  self-masking  of 
the  lovino;  countenance  of  the  God  of 
love,  and  loners  for  the  time  when  this 
loving  countenance  shall  be  again  un- 
veiled to  it."  Thus,  although  God  never 
really  forsakes  or  neglects  His  people,  it 
often  seems  as  if  He  had  done  so.  In 
providential  matters,  they  fail  to  recog- 
nise His  hand  ;  His  consolations  cease 
in  their  spirit;  and  they  are  full  of 
darkness  and  bitterness.  And  yet,  as  at 
midnight  we  know  that  the  sun  still 
lives,  and  will  soon  again  shine  on  the 
earth  ;  so  in  the  saint's  "deepest  darkness, 
his  faith  penetrates  through  the  gloom, 
and  awaits  the  shining  of  God's  face. 

Observe  : 

II.  The  cause  of  these  eclipses. 

1.    Why    does    God    thus    a})pear   to 
denert  His  people  at  all  'i     Wliy  does  He 

4i) 


PSALM  XltL 


nOMILBTlC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


veil  His  hand  and  His  face  ?  The  end 
of  God's  discipline  with  all  His  people 
is  to  make  them  feel  their  absolute  de- 
pendence upon  Himself.  The  aim  of 
an  earthly  parent  is  to  render  the  child 
independent,  to  teach  it  to  live  upon  its 
own  resources,  to  go  by  itself,  to  be 
sujSicient  in  itself.  God's  aim  is  the 
opposite  of  this,  to  teach  us  that  we  are 
nothing,  and  can  do  nothing  in  our- 
selves, and  that  our  sufficiency  is  of 
Himself.     These  eclipses  teach  us  : 

(1.)  That  God  is  the  source  of  liappi- 
ness  (ver.  1).  How  deep  the  sorrow  of 
the  Psalmist's  soul !  When  God  hides 
His  face,  we  feel  that  the  fountain  of 
life  is  stopped.  No  matter  what  may 
be  left,  "  sorrow  is  in  our  heart  daily.'' 
There  is  a  flower  which  fades  imme- 
diately a  screen  is  interposed  between  it 
and  the  sun ;  and  let  God's  face  be 
hidden  from  us,  and  the  soul  sickens  as 
a  drooping  flower. 

(2.)  That  God  is  the  source  of  wisdom. 
"How  long  shall  I  take  counsel  in  my 
souH  "  "David  represents  himself  as 
meditating  plan  after  plan." — Speaker^s 
Com.  "  He  appears  to  be  devising  many 
plans  in  vain,  like  an  unsuccessful  general 
in  an  army." —  Wordsivorth.  "  This  strik- 
ingly describes  the  helpless  embarrass- 
ment of  the  suff'erer." — Ftrowyie.  When 
God  hides  His  face,  we  know  not  what 
to  do,  how  to  act.  We  soon  feel  that  He 
is  the  great  Counsellor,  and  that  we  are 
painfully  perplexed  without  His  light. 

(3.)  That  God  is  the  source  of  strength. 
"  How  long  shall  mine  enemy  be  exalted 
over  me  1 "  (ver.  2).  David  felt  weak, 
and  altogether  at  the  mercy  of  his 
enemies.  When  the  Spaniards  had 
beaten  the  Mexicans  in  a  great  battle, 
the  latter  called  in  the  assistance  of  their 
priests.  The  priests,  after  some  con- 
sultation, said  that  the  S[)aniards  were 
children  of  the  sun  ;  that  they  derived 
their  strength  from  that  luminary,  and 
when  his  beams  were  withdrawn,  their 
powers  would  also  fail.  They  recom- 
mended a  night  attack,  therefore,  as  one 
which  afl"orded  the  best  chance  of 
success.  As  these  Spaniards  were  sup- 
posed t<5  draw  their  strength  from  the 
orb  of  day,  so  reall}^  does  the  saint  draw 
bis  conquering  strejigth  from  God  ;  and 
50 


when  he  is  deprived  of  the  light  of 
God's  face  his  "  enemies  prevail  against 
him." 

(4.)  God  is  the  source  of  life  (ver.  3). 
"  Sleep  an  eternal  sleep." — Speaker's  Com. 
Without  God  we  feel  that  w^e  perish. 
"In  Him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have 
our  being."  Great  lessons  are  taught 
us  in  life's  dark  hours.  During  eclipses, 
astronomers  learn  secrets  of  the  heavens 
which  they  cannot  penetrate  in  days  of 
sunshine;  and  it  is  necessary  sometimes 
that  God  should  hide  His  face,  so  that 
we  may  see  more  clearly,  and  feel  more 
deeply,  these  great  truths  and  principles. 
'*  I  know  that,  as  night  and  shadows  are 
good  for  flowers,  and  moonlight  and 
dews  are  better  than  a  continual  sun,  so 
is  Christ's  absence  of  special  use,  and 
that  it  hatli  some  nourishing  virtue  in  it, 
and  giveth  sap  to  humility,  and  putteth 
an  edge  on  hunger,  and  furnisheth  a  fair 
field  to  faith  to  put  forth  itself,  and  to 
exercise  its  fingers  in  gripping  it  seeth  not 
what." — Rutherford,  quoted  hy  Spuvgeon. 

2.  Why  does  God  hide  His  face  so 
long  ?  "  How  long,"  four  times  repeated. 
Is  not  the  true  answer,  because  we  are 
so  slow  to  learn  the  great  truths  which 
He  designs  to  teach?  We  think  that 
we  have  learned  truths  when  they  are 
not  half-learned,  and  so  God  has  to  pro- 
tract the  eclipse.  Tholuck  well  says : 
"Tliat  the  length  of  trouble  is  harder  to 
bear  than  the  strength  of  it  ; "  but  it  is 
only  when  long  protracted  that  it  leaves 
behind  it  the  greater  treasures. 

III.  The  duty  of  the  saints  in  these 
hours  of  darkness.  Not  discontent ; 
not  despair. 

1.  Waitin.MV/i.  "O  Lord  my  God" 
(ver.  3).  And  there  is  faith  througliont. 
He  is  in  perplexity  and  trouble,  but  not 
in  despair.  In  the  dark  he  holds  to 
God. 

2.  Wait  in  prayer.  Mark  how  the 
Psalmist  pleads  (ver.  3).  "  It  is  well  for 
those  who,  although  in  the  greatest 
anxiety,  are  driven  by  the  feeling  that 
they  are  abandoned  by  God  to  seek  the 
grace  of  God." — Moll.  "  Ees<lve  never 
to  be  dumb  while  God  is  deaf." 

3.  Wait  in  hope  (ver.  5,  6).  Coleridge 
said  of  himself,  that  he  was  an  invete- 
rate hoper.     So  should  it  be  with  all  the 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


^ALM  lilt. 


people  of  God.     Hope  in  God's  mercy, 
and  tune  your  harp  for  a  song. 

Believer,  despair  not;  for  if  God 
seems  to  have  forsaken  you.  He  is  still 
strengthening  you.  "  As  when  the  sun 
is  eclipsed,  though  the  earth  wants  the 
light  thereof,  yet  not  the  influence 
thereof;  so   God's  supporting   grace  is 


ever  with  His  deserted," — Trctpp.  And 
when  the  trial  is  over,  your  soul  shall 
be  deeper,  brighter,  more  fruitful. 

*'  You  have  been  wretched  ;  yet 
The  silver  shower,  whose  reckless  burden 

weighs 
Too  heavily  upon  the  lily's  head, 
Oft  leaves  a  saving  moisture  at  its  root." 

— Wordsworth. 


The  Chequered  Life. 


( Verses 

What  changes  we  witness  in  the 
Psalmist's  life  and  experience !  This 
psalm  reflects  as  a  mirror  the  changing 
conditions  of  his  soul  and  history.  In 
this  little  psalm  David  is  seen  as  a  fugi- 
tive and  a  conqueror,  as  despairing  and 
triumphing,  as  weeping  and  singing. 
And  it  is  largely  thus  with  all  the 
people  of  God, 

Mark  : 

I.  The  vicissitudes  of  the  outer  life. 
What  contrasts  of  fortune  you   have 

in  the  life  of  David !  A  shepherd,  a 
king ;  a  king,  a  fugitive ;  and  strange 
alternations  of  fortune  throughout.  Few 
lives  present  such  marked  contrasts  as 
that  of  the  Hebrew  king,  yet  most  lives 
know  analogous  variations.  Our  lives 
play  up  and  down  the  scale  between 
health  and  sickness,  plenty  and  poverty, 
popularity  and  neglect,  activity  and  soli- 
tude, fortune  and  disappointment. 

II.  The  vicissitudes  of  the  inner  life. 
In  this  psalm  the  writer  passes  from 

despair  to  exultation,  from  doubt  to  as- 
surance, from  lamentation  to  praise ; 
and  so  might  as  easily  pass  back  again, 
as  indeed  we  see  him  do  in  other  psalms. 
How  constant  the  changes  of  the  mood 
of  the  soul !  We  are  ever  changingr 
from  bright  to  dark,  from  low  to  high, 
from  sweet  to  bitter,  or  the  reverse. 
How  extreme  these  changes  of  thought 
and  feeling  !  We  are  conquerois,  cap- 
tives ;  kings,  worms  ;  strong  as  Samson, 
reeds  sliaken  with  the  wind  ;  sincrina  at 
heaven's  gate,  weeping  on  ruin's  brink. 


1-6.) 

How  rapid  these  changes  I  The  Chris- 
tian soul  is  a  microcosm,  in  which  you 
may  see  in  an  hour  hope,  fear,  joy,  sor- 
row. In  Iceland,  we  are  told,  contra- 
dictory elements  and  phenomena  are 
strangely  blended.  Snow  is  often 
blackened  with  ashes,  ashes  are  white- 
washed with  snow ;  water  flows  under 
the  lava,  and  there  freezes  and  forms 
subterraneous  glaciers.  As  in  this 
strange  land  fire  and  frost  are  thus  fan- 
tastically mingled,  so  in  the  Christian 
soul  do  day  and  night,  summer  and 
winter,  snow  and  harvest,  strangely  mix 
in  j)erpetual  flux. 

III.  The  aim  of  this  discipline. 

To  purify  and  perfect  us.  "  Emptied 
from  vessel  to  vessel,"  with  each  transi- 
tion some  of  the  dregs  are  to  be  removed, 
so  that  at  lenoth  the  wine  of  our  life 
may  run  clear.  The  sharp  and  sudden 
contrasts  are  necessary  to  perfect  us  in 
the  deep  places  of  our  nature.  The 
Arabs  say  of  the  palm-tree  that  it  must 
have  "  its  feet  in  the  water  and  its  head 
in  the  fire."  And  so  the  soul  needs 
strong  contrasts  of  experience  to  ripen  it 
in  the  things  of  God.  The  continual 
variation  of  experience  is  necessary  to 
touch  and  perfect  us  on  every  side  of 
our  manifold  nature.  As  with  a  thou- 
sand changes  of  sky,  and  wind,  and 
atmosphere  God  ripens  the  fruit  of  the 
orchard,  so  with  countless  variations  of 
thought  and  emotion  does  God  lipeu 
the  Christian  heart  in  His  love  and 
likeness. 


Jealous  for  God. 

{Verses  3,  4.) 

The  doctrine  is  taught  here  that  God's  in  himself  because  God's  honour  and 
honour  is  bound  up  with  the  deliverance  cause  would  suffer  through  it  (ver.  4). 
of  His  people.    David  deprecated  failure       "  Moved  from  my  steadfastness  or  firm- 

51 


fSALMZIT. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


ness,  when  I  am  overcome.      Hitherto 
he  had  been  able  to  hold  out  against 
them,  now  he  began  to  despair,  and  to 
fear  that  they  would  accomplish  their 
object  by  overcoming  and  subduing  him. 
His  ground  of  apprehension  and  of  ap- 
peal was,  that  by  his  being  vanquished 
the    cause    in    which    he    was    engaged 
would  suflfer,  and   that  the  enemies  of 
religion  would  triumph." — Barnes. 
We  learn  here,  then  : 
That  God's  honour  is  bound  up  with 
the  conduct  of  His  people. 
This  should  teach : 

1.  The  necessity  of  circumspection  in 
the  saints.^  If  we  are  moved,  God's 
cause  is  injured  and  His  name  profaned. 
*'  And  certainly  it  should  be  a  powerful 
motive  to  restrain  us  from  transgression, 
when  we  consider  that  as  the  conversion 
of  a  sinner  brings  glory  to  God,  and 
causes  joy  among  the  angels  of  heaven, 
so  the  fall  of  a  believer  disgraces  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus,  opens  the  mouths  of  the 
adversaries,  and   would  produce  joy,  if 

such  a  thing  could  be,  in  hell  itself." 

Home,  "  Oh,  what  desolation  is  made  by 


the  fall  of  a  righteous  soul !  Itself  covered 
with  darkness  and  desolation,  infidels 
filled  with  scoffing,  the  Church  clad  in 
mourning,  the  Spirit  of  God  grieved, 
and  Jesus  crucified  afresh,  and  put  to 
an  open  shame  !    O  God  1  save  the  pious 

reader  from   such  wreck   and  ruin  ! " 

Clarke. 

2.  The  strong  ground  of  a  heliever'i 
confidence.  God  will  not  permit  us  to 
be  moved  if  we  are  faithful,  for  this 
would  dishonour  Himself  and  His  king- 
dom.    What  a  plea  in  prayer  ! 

"  Ah !  suffer  not  my  foe  to  boast 

His  victory  o'er  a  child  of  Thine, 
Nor  let  the  proud  Philistines'  host 
In  Satan's  hellish  triumph  join. 

"  Will  they  not  charge  my  fall  on  Thee  f 
Will  they  not  dare  my  God  to  blame  f 
My  God,  forbid  the  blasphemy  ! 

Be  jealous  for  Thy  glorious  name  !  " 

— Wesley. 
3.  A  warning  to  persecutors.  Perse- 
cuting saints,  they  aim  a  blow  at  God- 
**  As  unskilful  hunters  shooting  at  wild 
beasts  do  sometimes  kill  a  man,  so  per- 
secutors, shooting  at  saints,  hit  Christ, 
reproach  Him." — Trapp^ 


PSALM    XIV. 
Introduction. 

l«  A  *C  ^^  ^"i®^  not  appear  upon  what  occasion  David  composed  this  psalm.  The  revolt  of  Israel 
in  Absalom's  rebellion  is  by  most  writers  pitched  upon  as  the  subject  of  it.  But  be  this  aTit 
may,  the  expressions  are  general,  and  evidently  designed  to  extend  beyond  a  private  internre- 
tation.  And  accordingly,  the  apostle  (Rom.  iii.  10,  &c.)  produces  some  pasSrerfrrm  it  to 
evmce  the  apostasy  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  from 'their  King  and  th^'r  S^ and  t^  prove 
them  to  be  all  under  sm.  In  this  light,  therefore,  we  are  to  consider  it,  as  chaVac  eri^nrthe 
principles  and  practices  of  those  who  oppose  the  Gospel  of  Christ  in  all  ages.''-Xm.       ^ 

The  Immorality  of  Atheism. 
{Verses  1-3.) 


I.  It  is  immoral  in  its  principle. 

It  is  the  denial  of  the  existence,  an 
ignoring  of  the  rights,  of  the  Absolute 
and  Eternal  King.  Sceptics  often  talk 
of  the  rights  of  man  ;  but  they  end  with 


against  God,  inferentially  against  all 
being.  All  transgression  is  ambitious, 
and,  if  it  could  succeed,  it  would  scale  the 

universe  and  dethrone  its  Monarch." 

Duncan.     Atheism  is  the  essence  of  in- 


+1,^  .      ^-1   •  7   "^^ -.^^  w.^  vvxi^ix      u^unLait.     A Liieism  IS  tne  essence  ot  in- 

the  essential  immorality  of  denying  the      gratitude,  injustice,  lying,  pride   hatred 
crown  rights  of  God.     He  made  us  ;  He      and  selfishness.       '   ^    ^' ^  '"^'^  ""^^'^"^^ 


made  the  world,  and  all  that  is  in  it ; 
and  to  deny  His  existence  and  to  ignore 
His  government  is  profoundest  immor- 
ality.    <'  Sin,  if  unchecked,  would  go  to 


II.  It  is  immoral  in  its  origin. 

*'They  are  corrupt."  It  does  not 
spring  from  a  pure  and  honest  intellect, 
which   finds  itself  perplexed   by  a  pro- 


♦v,^      ^-     ^-         r    ,7  V  :      ' ^^6"  "^  «iiji.u    ijijua  iLseii  perpiexea    by  a   pro- 

^e  ex  taction  of  all  being,  and  of  God  bleni  too  great  for  it,  but  fron/a  proud 

Himseh      There  IS  no  doubt  that  all  sin  and     corrupt     heart        "  Pa.Ln  ^not 

designs    deicide        All    sin    is    directed  reason,  generates  atheism.     Si    sugg    t^ 

against  ^unversal  being.     It  is  primarily  a  dislike  of  Providence,  and  reason  t 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XIV. 


then  marshalled  to  drive  Him  out  of 
our  view." — Rylands.  *'  Their  foolish 
heart  was  darkened  "  (Rom.  i.  21).  The 
child  recognises  God,  but,  giving  place 
for  long  years  to  worldliness  and  sin, 
the  man  sinks  into  practical  atheism. 
He  lives  so  long  without  God  in  the 
world,  that  at  last  he  ventures  to  think 
that  there  is  no  God.  And  so  a  nation 
as  it  increases  in  wealth,  and  luxury,  and 
power,  becomes  self-sufficient ;  and  the 
outcome  of  this  is  a  general  prevalence 
of  speculative  and  practical  atheism. 
We  wrong  God,  and  then  we  forget 
Him;  we  forget  Him,  and  then  we 
deny  Him. 

IIL  It  is  immoral  in  its  conseq.uences. 

Sin  leads  to  scepticism,  and  scepti- 
cism to  sin.  With  the  denial  of  God  we 
lose  the  principle  of  moral  life  and 
beauty.  1.  Personally  we  become  "  cor- 
rupt." Belief  in  God  is  the  salt  of 
human  nature,  and  when  that  has  gone 
the  whole  man  rapidly  corrupts.  2, 
And  our  works  become  "  abominable." 
He  who  has  smothered  in  his  heart  the 
knowledge  of  God,  has  lost  the  vital 
principle  of  health,  beauty,  life,  and 
usefulness.     "  The  foolf   is   a   term  in 


Scripture  signifying  a  wicked  man  ;  the 
word  signifies  the  extinction  of  life  in 
men,  animals,  and  plants ;  so  the 
word  is  taken  Isaiah  xl.  7,  *  The 
flower  fadeth ;  '  a  plant  that  hath  lost 
all  that  juice  that  made  it  lovely  and 
useful.  So  a  fool  is  one  that  hath 
lost  his  wisdom  and  right  notion  of 
God  and  divine  things,  which  were 
communicated  to  man  by  creation  ;  one 
dead  in  sin."  —  Charnock.  Atheism 
cannot  create  a  noble  manhood.  It 
creates  a  fool.  Religion  and  right  rea- 
son gone,  natural  principles  extinct,  what 
can  you  have  but  a  distorted  and  ignoble 
humanity  1  Atheism  cannot  create  a 
noble  nation.  Without  God,  man  rots  ; 
without  God,  society  rots.  Atheism  is 
the  greatest  immorality.  "  Folly  is  a 
term  employed  in  Hebrew  to  signify  the 
greatest  possible  degree  of  guilt." — 
French.  "  The  Psalmist  makes  this  pro- 
minent as  the  very  extreme  and  depth 
of  human  depravity,  that  there  can  be 
among  men  those  who  deny  the  existence 
of  a  God." — Delitzsch.  It  is  the  source 
of  all  immoralities ;  and  God  will 
punish  it  with  great  retribution  (ver. 
5). 


The  Bane  and  the  Antidote. 
(Verses  1-7.) 


Observe : 

I.  The  corruption  of  the  race. 

Mark  : 

1.  This  corruption  is  universal  (ver.  2). 
God  is  represented,  in  the  history  of 
the  Flood,  as  looking  down  from  the 
windows  of  heaven  upon  mankind  to  see 
if  there  were  any  who  sought  Him. 
And  what  is  the  result  of  this  search  ? 
We  have  it  in  the  3d  verse.  "  Every  one 
hath  turned  away ;  or,  more  emphati- 
cally, the  whole  universe  hath  turned 
away." — Phillips.  ''  The  universality 
of  corruption  is  expressed  in  as  strong 
terms  as  possible ;  what  the  Psalmist 
says  applies  primarily  to  Israel,  his 
immediate  neighbours,  but  at  the  same 
time  to  the  heathen,  as  is  self-evident. 
What  is  lamented  is  neither  the  pseudo- 
Israelitish  corruption  in  particular,  nor 
that  of  the  heathen,  but  the  universal 
corruption  of  man,  which  prevails  not 
less  in  Israel  than  in  the  heathen  world." 


— Delitzsch.  "  Total  and  universal  cor- 
ruption could  not  be  more  clearly  ex- 
pressed than  by  this  accumulation  of  the 
strongest  terms,  in  which,  as  Luther 
well  observes,  the  Psalmist,  not  content 
with  saying  all,  adds  together,  and  then 
negatively,  no  not  one.  It  is  plain  that 
he  had  no  limitation  or  exception  in  his 
mind,  but  intended  to  describe  tlie 
natural  condition  of  all  men,  in  the 
widest  and  most  unrestricted  sense, 
llie  whole,  not  merely  all  the  individuals 
as  such,  but  the  entire  race  as  a  totality 
or  ideal  person." — Alexander.  It  is 
true  that  in  the  5th  verse  the  Psalmist 
speaks  of  "  the  generation  of  the  right- 
eous," but  this  is  not  to  be  regarded  as 
any  limitation  of  his  dark  judgment  of 
the  condition  of  man.  *'  The  recognition 
of  a  righteous  generation  on  earth  does 
not  contradict  the  statement  of  the 
total  corruption  of  the  children  of 
Adam,  embracing  all  without  exception. 

53 


FSALM  xre. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


For  the  righteous  generation  consists 
not  of  a  little  band  of  men  who  have 
remained  exempt  from  sin  and  its  cor- 
ruption, whom  God  has  somehow  over- 
looked, when  He  looked  about,  because 
they  stood  in  a  corner,  or  because  they 
are  not  brought  into  consideration  on 
account  of  their  small  number  in  com- 
parison with  the  awful  corruption  of  the 
masses.  To  this  class  belong  rather 
those  men  in  the  midst  of  the  generation 
of  the  children  of  Adam  who  have  been 
horn  again  as  children  of  God  of  incor- 
ruptible seed,  who  by  this  change  of 
their  inborn  nature  form  a  peculiar 
class  in  the  midst  of  the  generation  of 
men,  and  afford  the  seed  of  regeneration 
for  the  entire  people." — Moll.  The 
Psalmist  pictures  all  men  everywhere 
as  corrupt,  and  thus  the  apostle  inter- 
prets him  (Rom.  iii.  10-12). 

Mark: 

2.  This  corruption  is  thorough.  Not 
only  are  all  corrupt,  but  all  are  entirely 
so.  "  They  are  altogether  filthy."  The 
nature  is  depraved.  "  They  are  cor- 
rupt." The  "heart,"  the  inmost  per- 
sonality, is  corrupt,  and  thus  all  tlie 
powers  and  faculties  of  the  man  are  de- 
filed. "  The  source  of  all  his  move- 
ments, the  affections  and  heart,  are  pol- 
hited  y  the  waters  are  poisoned  at  the 
spring." — Rylands.  The  life  is  de- 
praved. (1.)  Many  have  done  ^^abomin- 
able works.^'  "  When  men  begin  with 
renouncing  the  Most  High  God,  who 
shall  tell  where  they  will  end  ?  Observe 
the  state  of  the  world  before  the  Flood, 
as  portrayed  in  Genesis  vi.  12,  and 
remember  that  human  nature  is  un- 
changed. He  who  would  see  a  terrible 
photograph  of  the  world  without  God 
must  read  that  most  painful  of  all  in- 
spired Scriptures,  the  first  chapter  of 
the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Things 
loathsome  to  God  and  man  are  sweet  to 
some  palates." — Spurgeon.  (2.)  And  if 
men  have  not  done  "  abominable  works," 
there  is  "  none  that  doeth  good^  *'  Do 
any  object  that,  beyond  the  circle  of 
the  righteous,  there  is  much  virtue  to 
be  found,  much  civil  righteousness, 
much  beautiful  natural  affection  ?  Tlie 
natural  virtues  that  still  adoni  the 
world  and  claim  the  admiration  of  men 
54 


are  vitated  before  God  by  this,  that 
there  is  no  regard  in  them  to  His  wilL" 
— Binnie.  They  "  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God." 

3.  This  corruption  is  jyrofound.  It 
is  not  a  taint,  but  a  deep  disease.  It  is 
deeply  "  corrupted,"  i.e.j  become  put- 
rid. It  is  a  deep  malignity  of  nature. 
In  Psalm  viii.,  we  have  the  picture 
of  the  ideal  man,  the  original  man,  the 
possible  man ;  here,  alas  !  we  have  a 
sorrowful  picture  of  the  actual  man. 
The  Bible  recognises  our  intrinsic  gran- 
deur, it  recognises  our  deep  degradation. 

Observe  : 

II.  The  Deliverer  of  the  race. 

Ver.  7.  '•  The  prayer  is,  in  a  subordinate 
sense,  that  God  would  raise  up  a  reformer. 
But  the  true  and  ultimate  spirit  of  the 
prayer  is  for  the  speedy  advent  of 
Christ  (Isa.  lix.  20 ;  Rom.  xi.  '^'o  ; 
Jer.  xiv.  8).  To  whom  could  the  pro- 
phets iy>peal  in  the  time  of  trouble  but 
to  the  only  Hope  of  Zion  1  (Ps.  liii.)." 
—Sutclife. 

1.  The  world  cannot  be  renewed  by 
philosophy.  "  Philosophy  may  adorn, 
but  it  is  impotent  to  regenerate  human 
nature." — Leclcy.  2.  Nor  by  education. 
The  fault  is  in  the  heart,  not  the  head; 
it  is  moral,  not  intellectual.  "  The 
word  chosen  by  David  in  the  1st  verse, 
nabal,  fool,  means  imbecile,  a  vapid, 
worn-out  fool,  one  whose  heart  and  un- 
derstanding are  degraded,  incapable  of 
seeing  truth.  It  is  a  woid  never  used 
of  mere  natural  obtuseness,  but  of 
spiritual  corruption." — Speakers  Com, 
3.  Nor  by  institutions.  No  change  of 
external  relations  will  brinii;  true  de- 
liverance.  Politics,  commerce,  manners, 
whatever  springs  from  man,  is  itself  im- 
perfect and  tainted  ;  and  to  attempt  to 
make  a  perfect  man  by  human  ins>titu- 
tions  is  like  a  man  attempting  to  clean 
his  face  with  a  dirty  duster.  4.  Nor  is 
there  any  7'estoraiive  }>rinciple  in  human 
nature.  "  At  last  man  will  be  healed, 
for  human  nliture  has  the  power  to 
recover  from  its  wounds  by  means  of  a 
certain  inward  power." — Goethe.  This 
is  not  true :  there  is  no  such  power. 
The  hope  of  the  world  is  in  the  Church 
of  Christ.  Out  of  Zion  comes  the  De- 
liveier;  out  of  the  Christian  Church  come 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XT. 


those  blessings  which  shall  make  society  the  tyranny  of  sin,  and  gives  to  the 
pure  and  free.  And  oh  !  what  joy  shall  world  the  freedom  and  pleasures  of 
there  be  everywhere  when  Christ  breaks      righteousness  1 


Cons  01 

(  Verses 

We  have  here : 

I.  Conscience  informed. 

"  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no 
knowledge?"  (ver.  4).  "Have  they  no 
conscience" — Delitzsch.  "  Have  they  no 
experience." — Moll.  Now  it  is  quite  true 
that  the  workers  of  iniquity  seem  like 
brute  beasts,  as  if  they  bad  no  common 
sense,  no  conscience  ;  but  they  had  these 
gifts,  and  it  is  this  fact  which  renders 
their  conduct  so  dark. 

I.  We  sin  against  understanding. 
Our  reason  jirotests  against  sin.  2.  We 
sin  against  conscience.  Our  moral  sense 
echoes  the  words  and  thunders  of  Sinai, 
and  protests  against  transgression.  3. 
We  sin  against  experience.  Our  his- 
tory shows  how  all  that  is  desirable  and 
honourable  lies  in  the  path  of  obedience, 
and  how  paths  of  transgression  are  paths 
of  misery  and  shame.  This  constitutes 
the  enormity  of  sin  ;  we  know  our  duty 
to  God  and  man.  We  have  moral  ideas 
and  sensibilities.  Sin  is  not  a  mistake, 
not  a  misfortune,  but  a  crime. 

II.  Conscience  asleep.  1.  Asleep  as 
to  men.  "  Who  eat  up  My  people  as 
they  eat  bread  "  (ver.  4).  That  is,  they 
commit  the  greatest  excesses  and  in- 
justice without  the  smallest  compunc- 
tion. Tn  wronging  the  weak,  the  good, 
the  poor,  "  they  think  that  they  are  not 
doing  anything  more  sinful, — indeed, 
rather  what  is  justifiable,  irreproachable. 


E  N  0  B. 

4-6.) 

and  lawful  to  them, — than  when  they  are 
eating  bread." — Hengstenherg.  "  The 
light  that  is  in  them  is  darkness."  2. 
Asleep  as  to  God.  "  And  call  not  upon 
the  Lord"  (ver.  4).  Tliey  have  forgotten 
God.  Practically  they  say,  "  There  is 
no  God."  Thus  men  stifle  their  moral 
sense  and  live  neither  fearinii;  God  nor 
regarding  man. 

III.  Conscience  aroused  (ver.  5). 
"  When  Jehovah  thus  bursts  forth  in 
scorn,  His  word,  which  never  fails  in  its 
working,  smites  down  these  brutish 
men,  who  are  without  knowledge  and 
conscience." — Delitzsch.  "  When  God's 
long-suffering  changes  into  wrath,  terror 
at  His  judgment  seizes  them,  and  they 
tremble  through  and  through.^' — De- 
litzsch.  "  Suddenly,  while  they  were  in 
complete  security  (liii.  6),  terror  lays 
hold  on  them." — Kay.  As  ver.  6  inti- 
mates, the  sceptical  worldlings  had 
laughed  at  the  piety  of  the  meek.  "  You 
pour  contempt  on  the  poor  man's  resolve, 
because  the  Lord  is  his  refuge,  you  must 
needs  deride  this  as  arrant  folly, — to 
trust  in  an  unseen  God  !  " — Kay.  But 
they  awake  to  find  that  "  God  is  in  the 
generation  of  the  righteous  ; "  all  is  true 
that  the  righteous  held,  and  the  angry 
God  is  ready  to  avenge  Himself  on  the 
proud  sinner.  Let  us  fly  to  the  great 
Deliverer  of  Zion.  He  can  give  the  guilty 
conscience  peace,  and  wash  away  its  stains. 


PSALM    XV. 
Introduction. 

**  This  psalm  teaches  the  necessity  of  moral  purity  as  a  condition  of  the  Divine  protection. 
It  first  propounds  the  ques  ion  who  shall  be  admitted  to  God's  household,  and  the  privileges 
of  its  inmates  (ver.  1).  This  is  answered  positively  (ver.  2),  and  negatively  (ver.  3);  then 
positively  again  (ver.  4),  and  negatively  (ver.  5).  The  last  clause  of  the  last  veise  winds  up  by 
declaring,  that  the  character  just  described  shall  experience  the  protection  tacitly  referred  to 
in  the  first  verse." — Alexander. 

The  Psalm  of  Life. 

We  observe :  <'  Lord,     who    shall    abide     in    Thy 

I.  The  question  which  the  Psalmist      tabernacle  T'  &c.  (ver.  1).     "  Who  may 

proposes.  hope    for   acceptance   as   a    worshipper 

65 


PSALM  XT. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


of  Jebovah?** — French.  "Tabernacle 
and  hill  together  signify  the  earthly 
residence  of  God.  It  is  a  figure  for  in- 
timate commuiuon  with  Jehovah,  and 
participation  of  His  favour." — A  lexander. 

Who  shall  enjoy  Thy  communion, 
Thy  friendship.  Thy  protection  ?  Who 
shall  commune  with  Thee  on  earth? 
Who  shall  dwell  with  Thee  in  heaven  ? 

This  is  the  grand  question  of  life. 
Who  shall  enjoy  the  Divine  favour  and 
protection,  now  and  for  ever?  surely 
this  is  the  question  of  first  and  supreme 
importance  !  It  is  a  question  which 
should  be  urged  before  God  with  a  per- 
sonal interest  and  anxiety.  Not  "  are 
there  many  that  be  saved  ? "  but,  "  what 
shall  /  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?  " 

We  notice : 

II.  The  comprehensive  answer  whicli 
is  given  to  the  great  question. 

Ver.  2-5.  Admission  to  the  Divine 
presence  and  eternal  joy  does  not  turn  : 
(1.)  On  what  is  national.  It  is  not  the 
privilege  of  Jew  or  Gentile,  as  such. 
(2.)  On  what  is  physical.  We  do  not 
enter  heaven  on  the  ground  of  affliction. 
Those  before  the  throne  came  out  of 
great  tribulation,  but  that  was  not  the 
reason  of  their  glorification.  (3.)  On 
what  is  social.  Dives  is  not  rejected 
because  he  is  rich ;  Lazarus  is  not  ac- 
cepted because  he  is  poor.  (4.)  On  what 
is  educational.  Some  of  our  philosophers 
have  lately  ventured  on  the  theory,  that 
if  men  achieve  a  certain  mental  develop- 
ment, they  will  become  immortal ;  but 
lacking  this  culture,  they  are  doomed  to 
extinction  at  death.  The  grand  test  is 
not  educational,  (5.)  On  what  is  eccle- 
siastical. The  whole  point  of  this 
psalm  is  directed  against  this  idea. 
Horsley  heads  the  psalm  :  "  True  god- 
liness described  as  distinct  from  the 
ritual."  "  With  regard  to  that  part  of 
the  hierarchical  theory  which  makes 
membership  in  the  visible  Church 
identical,  for  all  practical  purposes,  with 
membership  in  the  Church  invisible,  it 
is  tacitly  refuted  in  places  without  num- 
ber. The  true  citizen  of  Zion  is  '*  the 
man  that  walketh  uprightly,  and  worketh 
righteousness,  and  speaketh  the  truth 
in  his  heart."  "  He  that  hath  clean 
hands  and  a  pure  heart,  who  hath  not 
56 


lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity,  nor  sworn 
deceitfully ;  he  shall  receive  the  bless- 
ing from  the  Lord.  This  is  the  genera- 
tion of  them  that  seek  Him."  There  is 
an  all-important  distinction  between  the 
visible  and  invisible  Church  ;  the  true 
Church  and  the  professing  Church,  al- 
though they  ai'e  so  closely  connected 
that  the  eye  of  man  cannot  draw  a  line . 
of  separation  between  them,  are  by  no 
means  coincident.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew 
which  is  one  outwardly  ;  neither  is  that 
circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the 
flesh  :  but  he  is  a  Jew  which  is  one  in- 
wardly ;  and  circumcision  is  that  of  the 
heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter ; 
whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God 
(Rom.  ii.  28,  29y—Bijinie.  But  (6.) 
The  whole  question  of  our  acceptance 
with  God,  and  heirship  of  immortality, 
turns  on  character.  Holiness  is  the 
grand  requirement.  *'  In  the  foregoing 
psalm  David  had  lifted  up  his  eyes  to 
Zion,  the  hill  of  God,  where  the  ark  of 
His  presence  was.  He  was  mindful  of 
the  holiness  required  of  all  who  are  ad- 
mitted to  its  neighbourhood.  How  much 
more  is  this  true  of  the  heavenly  Zion, 
to  which  David  raises  his  eyes  and  heart 
from  the  earthly  citadel." —  Wordsworth. 
"  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord."  The  righteousness  required  by 
God  is — 1.  Perfect.  "  He  that  walketh 
uprightly,'"  i.e., perfectly  (ver.  2).  *'  One 
who  walks  uprightness,  i.e.,  one  who 
makes  uprightness  his  way,  his  mode  of 
action." — Delitzsch.  The  law  of  God 
requires  perfection  of  spirit  and  life. 
God  says  to  us  all,  as  to  Abram,  "  Walk 
thou  before  me,  and  be  thou  perfect." 
2.  Practical.  '^  Worketh  righteousness." 
"  The  piety  delineated  in  the  Psalter,  al- 
though it  soars  to  heaven  and  its  life  is 
hid  in  God,  never  omits  the  assiduous 
cultivation  of  the  lowly  duties  of  every- 
day morality.  The  Church  has  always 
been  infested  with  a  sort  of  people  whose 
religion  is  all  expended  on  the  first  table 
of  the  laws;  who,  along  with  a  great 
show  of  contrition,  and  faith,  and 
spiritual  joy,  and  delight  in  God's  wor- 
ship, are  ill-natured  in  the  domestic 
circle,  censorious  and  unfriendly  neigh- 
bours, unsafe  men  to  deal  with  in  busi- 
ness.    The  psalms  do  full  justice  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FSiXMXT. 


perfect  law  of  God  in  this  matter. 
Whatever  may  be  the  quarter  whence 
the  antinomian  perversion  of  the  Gospel 
may  derive  its  aliment,  certainly  it  is 
not  from  the  songs  of  Zion.  What  a 
fine  portrait  this  15th  Psalm,  for  ex- 
ample, draws  of  the  godly  man  !  He 
loves  God's  tabernacle  and  holy  hill ; — 
his  heart  is  there.  And  when  he  goes 
out  into  the  world,  he  does  not  leave  his 
religion  behind.  He  shows  the  influence 
of  the  fear  of  God  in  all  he  does.  His 
tongue  utters  no  malice.  He  is  a  man 
of  his  word.  He  will  not  make  gain  of 
his  neighbour's  necessity ;  nor  will  he, 
for  any  consideration,  oppose  the  cause 
of  one  whom  he  knows  to  be  innocent. 
These  are  the  true  fruits  of  faith  un- 
feigned. He  that  doeth  these  things 
shall  never  be  moved." — Binnie.  "  Thus, 
in  heart,  in  tongue,  in  actions,  in  his 
conduct  as  a  member  of  society,  he  is 
alike  free  from  reproach.  Such  is  the 
figure  of  stainless  honour  drawn  by  the 
pen  of  a  Jewish  poet.  Christian  chivalry 
has  not  dreamed  of  a  brighter.  We 
have  need  often  and  seriously  to  ponder 
it.  For  it  shows  us  that  faith  in  God 
and  spotless  integrity  may  not  be 
sundered ;  that  religion  does  not  veil  or 
excuse  petty  dishonesties ;  that  love  to 
God  is  only  then  worthy  the  name  when 
it  is  the  life  and  bond  of  every  social 


virtue.  Each  line  is,  as  it  were,  a 
touchstone  to  which  we  should  bring 
ourselves.  To  speak  truth  in  the  heart 
— to  take  up  no  reproach  against  a 
neighbour — would  not  the  Christian  man 
be  perfect  of  whom  this  could  be  saidi " — 
Perowne.  3.  Spiritual.  "  Speaketh  the 
truth  in  his  heart''  (ver.  2).  *' The 
characterising  of  the  outward  walk  and 
action  is  followed  in  verse  2,  by  the 
characterising  of  the  inward  nature." — 
Delitzsch.  "  This  speaking  truth  quali- 
fies not  merely  what  precedes,  but  the 
whole  description,  as  of  one  who  sin- 
cerely and  internally,  as  well  as  out- 
wardly, leads  a  blameless  life  by  doing 
right  and  speaking  truth." — Alexander. 
Oat  of  a  true  and  spiritual  heart  spring 
these  practical  graces.  It  will  not  do 
to  be  merely  moral,  or  only  professedly 
religious.  ''  God  only  admitteth  such 
as  are  righteously  religious,  and  religi- 
ously righteous." — Trapp.  We  must 
show  our  faith  by  our  works,  and  our 
works  must  be  spiritualised  by  our  faith. 
*'  Walk  in  the  heaven  of  the  promise, 
but  in  the  earth  of  the  law ;  that  in 
respect  of  believing,  this  of  obeying." — 
Luther. 

How  impossible  it  is  to  realise  this 
righteousness,  so  perfect,  so  profound, 
so  universal,  except  by  virtue  of  the 
grace  and  strength  of  Jesus  Christ ! 


Evangelical  Morality. 


(  Verses 

I.  Its  comprehensiveness  (ver.  2). 
**  Walking"  the  habitual  course  of 
life  must  be  right.  '•''Working^'  all  the 
action  must  be  right.  *'  Speaking," 
all  the  conversation  must  be  truth 
and  uprightness.  The  true  Christian 
seeks  to  be  free  from  evil  habits,  evil 
acts,  evil  words.  He  is  required  here 
to  be  free  from  insincerity,  censorious- 
ness,  pride,  untruthfulness,  covetous- 
ness,  injustice.  In  verse  2,  he  is  re- 
quired to  be  blameless  personally.  In 
verse  3,  he  must  be  a  good  neighbour. 
In  verse  4,  a  true  friend.  Standing 
faithfully  to  the  meritorious.  In  verses 
4,  5,  an  honest  merchant;  he  "that 
sweareth,"  &c.  A  man  of  his  word.  A 
just  merchant.     "  Usury."     Not  taking 


1-6.) 

advantage  of  any  man.  In  verse  5,  an 
upright  magistrate.  *'  Nor  taketh  re- 
ward," (fee.  Christian  morality  covers 
the  whole  ground  of  character  and  life. 
Feet,  hands,  heart,  tongue,  eyes,  influ- 
ence, money,  social  rank  and  power,  all 
are  required  by  this  psalm  to  be  con- 
secrated and  pure. 

II.  Its  loftiness.  Coarse,  gross  sins 
are  not  referred  to  here.  It  is  assumed 
that  they  must  be  laid  aside.  No  forni- 
cator, thief,  drunkard,  liar,  murderer, 
shall  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  This 
is  taken  as  so  evident,  that  such  offences 
are  not  named.  But  the  standard  is  a 
very  exalted  one.  These  various  crimes 
in  more  subtle  forms  are  seized  upon 
and  forbidden.     We  must  not  only  be 

57 


P6ALU  ZV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


free  from  gross  sins,  but  walk  perfectly ; 
not  only  abstain  from  falsehood,  but 
speak  the  truth  in  our  heart ;  not  only 
abstain  from  calumny,  but  from  repeat- 
ing reflective  re[)Orts  ;  not  only  abstain 
from  perjury,  but  cherish  a  high  sensi- 
tiveness as  to  our  promise  j  not  only 
abstain  from  tyranny  and  pride,  but 
cherish  a  deep  humility  ;  not  only  not 
injure  others,  but  esteem  them  better 
than  ourselves  ;  not  only  not  steal,  but 
not  take  advantage  of  any  one  in  the  way 
of  trade;  not  only  not  murder,  but  love 
our  brother.  All  this,  and  much  more 
than  this,  is  taught  in  the  various  words 
and  phrases  of  this  psalm.  Thus,  in  the 
New  Testament  (1  Cor.  xiii.),  the  apostle 
does  not  speak  of  Christian  love  as  pre- 
serving from  gross  vices,  but,  far  beyond 
this,  producing  clusters  of  graces,  rare, 
lofty,  delicate,  divine. 

How  much  superior  is  the   morality 
of  the  Gospel  to  mere  good  manners, 


to  a  mere  natural  amiability,  to  a  com- 
mercial utilitarian  inorality  ! 

III.  Its  inspiration  (ver.  1),  ''Lord, 
who  shall  abide  in  Tiiy  tabernacle  1  who 
shall  dwell  in  Thy  holy  hill  T'  The 
recognition  of  God  is  its  source  and 
strength.  In  God  we  find  the  grand  ex- 
ample of  this  holiness:  from  Him  comes 
the  strength  by  which  we  attain  supernal 
goodness.  A  comprehensive,  lofty  mo- 
rality, like  that  insisted  upon  in  this 
psalm,  is  altogether  beyond  the  reach  of 
nature.  It  is  only  as  we  admire  and  love 
God,  and  thirst  to  be  like  Him,  and  seek 
a  fitness  for  His  eternal  kingdom,  that 
we  are  able  to  reach  the  full,  deep,  tran- 
scendant  morality  pictured  in  this  psalm. 

IV.  Its  recompense  (ver.  5).  "He 
that  doeth  these  thinsfs  shall  never  be 
moved."  "  He  stands  fast,  being  u[)held 
by  Jehovah,  hidden  in  His  fellowship  ; 
nothing  from  without,  no  misfortune, 
can  cause  his  overthrow." — Delitzsch. 


The  Law  of  the  Lip. 


(  Verse 

I.  The  nature  of  slander.     1.  The 

origination  of  an  evil  report  concerning 
our  neighbours.  "  He  that  backbiteth 
with  his  tongue."  2.  The  circulation  of 
an  evil  report  invented  by  others.  "Nor 
taketh  up  a  reproach."  The  "  calum- 
niator takes  up  the  lie,  and  circulates  it." 
— Speaker's  Com.  "The  verb  seems 
strictly  to  denote  the  act  of  busy  or 
officious  tale-bearing." — Alexander.  3. 
The  listening  to  such  a  report.  Giving 
it  the  sanction  of  our  ear.  The  original 
may  be  translated  '*endureth;"  imply- 
ing that  it  is  a  sin  to  endure  or  tolerate 
tale-bearers.  "  The  tale-bearer  carrieth 
the  devil  in  his  tongue ;  the  tale-hearer 
in  his  ear." — Trapp.  We  are  not  "  to 
do  evil  to  our  neighbour  "  in  any  wise. 

II.  The  evil  of  slander.  What 
mighty  unhappiness  it  causeth  !  1.  It 
demoralises  the  slanderer.  2.  It  de- 
moralises the  person  to  whom  the  slan- 
der is  related.  3.  It  wrongs  the  party 
slandered.  "  '  Show  that  man  out  !'  we 
should  say  of  a  drunkard  ;  yet  it  is  very 
questionable  if  his  unmannerly  behaviour 
will  do  us  so  much  mischief  as  the  tale- 
bearer's insinuating  story.     *  Call  for  a 

58 


3.) 

policeman  ! '  we  say  if  we  see  a  thief  at 
his  business  ;  ought  we  to  feel  no  indig- 
nation when  we  hear  a  gossip  at  lier 
work  1  Mad  dog  !  mad  dog  !  !  is  a  ter- 
rible hue  and  cry,  but  there  are  few  curs 
whose  bite  is  so  dangerous  as  a  busy- 
body's tongue.  Fire !  fire  ! !  is  an  alarm- 
ing note,  but  the  tale-bearer's  tongue  is 
set  on  fire  of  hell,  and  those  who  indulge 
it  had  better  mend  their  manners,  or 
they  may  find  that  there  is  fire  in  hell 
for  unbridled  tongues." — Spurgeon. 

III.  The  cure  for  slander.  It  is  a 
most  diflacult  thing  to  rule  the  tongue, 
and  refrain  from  evil-speaking.  There 
is  a  story  told  of  an  illiterate  old  monk 
named  Pambos.  Being  unable  to  read, 
he  came  to  some  one  to  be  tausrht  a 
psalm.  Having  learnt  the  single  verse, 
'*!  said  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways, 
that  I  offend  not  with  my  tongue,"  he 
went  away,  saying  that  was  enough  if  it 
were  practically  acquired.  When  asked 
six  months  and  again  many  years  after, 
why  he  did  not  come  to  learn  another 
verse,  he  answered  that  he  had  never 
been  able  truly  to  master  this.  What  is 
the  grand   cure  for  all  sins  of  the  lip  % 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  ZVL 


He  ^* speaJceth  the  truth  in  his  heart" 

*'  It  is  not  falsehood  and  deceit  that  he 
thinks  and  plans  inwardly,  but  truth.' 
— Delitzsch,  "  Whose  heart-converse  is* 
truthful ; — who  in  that  hidden  council- 
chamber  of  the  soul  holds  no  parley  with 
what  is  false." — Kay.  The  heart  must 
be  changed,  enlightened,  exalted.  Out 
of  a  pure  fountain  flows  a  pure  stream. 


"What  !  never  speak  one  evil  word. 
Or  rash,  or  idle,  or  unkind  1 
Oh,  how  shall  I,  most  gracious  Lord, 
This  mark  of  true  perfection  find  ? 

"  Forgive,  and  make  my  nature  whole  ; 
My  inbred  malady  remove  ; 
To  perfect  health  restore  my  soul, — 
To  perfect  holiness  and  love." 


PSALM  XYI. 
Intkoduction. 

**  The  first  clause  contains  in  germ  the  thought  of  the  entire  psalm,  namely,  that  the 
pious  man  has  always  protection  with  God  against  all  his  enemies.  From  this  assurance  arises 
the  cry  of  prayer  (ver.  1),  whose  form  shows  the  experience  of  pressing  danger,  but  immedi- 
ately passes  over  into  the  confession  of  the  way  in  which  the  Psalmist  proposes  to  act  in  con- 
sequence of  his  relation  to  God  (ver.  2)  and  to  His  people  (ver.  3).  In  ver.  4  the  Psalmist 
maintains  himself  against  the  worshippers  of  idols.  In  ver.  5,  6  we  have  a  description  of  the 
good  chosen  in  God,  and  of  the  happiness  allotted  on  account  of  this.  It  then  turns,  praising 
Jehovah  (ver.  7),  to  testify  of  the  position  of  the  Psalmist  established  in  Him  (ver.  8),  and 
rises  from  the  assurance  of  this  communion  with  God,  not  only  to  a  jubilant  declaration  of 
present  Divine  protection  (ver.  9),  but  in  prophetic  inspiration  to  a  prophetic  promise  of  the 
everlasting  enjoyment  of  salvation  (ver.  10,  11)." — Moll.  "The  psalm  is  appropriate  to  the 
whole  class  of  pious  sufiferers,  of  which  Christ  is  the  most  illustrious  representative.  It  is  only 
in  Him,  therefore,  that  some  parts  of  it  can  be  said  to  have  received  their  highest  and  com- 
plate  fulfilment." — Alexander, 

Faith  in  God. 
( Verses 

The  Psalmist  in  a  time  of  trial  thus 
expresses  his  confidence  in  God.  This 
faith  in  God  is  : 

L  Personal.  "  Preserve  me,  O  God ' 
(ver.  1).  "  Thou  art  my  Lord  "  (ver.  2). 
It  was  an  individualising  faith.  Just  as 
Adam  sought  to  hide  himself  amid  the 
trees  of  the  garden,  so  do  we  imagine  our- 
selves hidden  in  the  multitude.  Let  us 
seek  to  realise  our  needful  personality  in 
the  sight  of  God.  L  Let  us  realise  Him  as 
my  Creator.  Not  as  creating  merely  all 
worlds  and  all  nations,  but  as  specially 
forming  me,  and  giving  to  me  a  singular 
and  independent  spirit.  Think  not  only 
of  the  ocean  of  humanity  as  flowing  from 
His  creative  hand ;  but  remember  that 
the  dewdrop,  I,  Me,  was  the  distinct 
creation  of  His  almighty  power  and 
love.  2.  As  my  Ruler.  Philosophy  has 
an  utter  contempt  for  individuals — it 
concerns  itself  with  masses,  multitudes, 
ages — God  rules  the  universe.  It  must 
contemplate  all  on  the  sublime  scale. 
We  are  often  told  that  the  danger  of 
society  in  these  days  is  in  centralisation ; 


1,  2.) 

certainly  the  danger  in  our  philosophy 
is  in  «nggregation.  We  are,  in  opposition 
to  this,  to  believe  in  God,  as  my  Ruler 
and  my  King.  3.  As  my  Saviour.  We 
are  not  to  look  on  the  Gospel  message 
as  a  public  proclamation  on  the  street 
wall,  but  as  an  autograph  letter  from 
our  clement  King,  addressed  with  our 
name,  and  left  by  the  postman  at  our 
door.     This  faith  in  God  is  : 

II.  Absolute.  "  In  Thee  do  I  trust " 
(ver.  1). 

1.  He  trusts  in  God  only.  In  the 
2d  verse,  he  acknowledges  God  as  His 
sovereign  Lord,  *'  Thou  art  my  Lord," 
*'  My  supreme  Lord; — who  hast  an  ab- 
solute right  to  all  my  services.'* — Kay, 
And  in  the  4th  verse,  he  re])udiates  all 
other  gods.  He  rests  his  wliole  weight 
on  God,  placing  no  expectations  else- 
where. "  God  is  recognised  as  the  only 
source  of  individual  enjoyment." — Alex- 
ander. 2.  He  trusts  in  God  for  alL 
"  My  goodness  extendeth  not  to  thee  '* 
(ver.  2).  "  I  have  no  good  beyond 
thee."     "  This  is  the  one  grand  thought 

59 


FSALMXVI. 


BOM  I  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


which  stamps  the  psalm,  *  Thou,  O  Lord, 
art  my  portion,  my  help,  my  joy,  my 
all  in  all.'" — Perowne.  What  the 
pagans  vainly  sought  for  in  many  gods, 
the  Psalmist  found  in  One  ;  what  the 
worldling  vainly  seeks  for  in  many  ob- 
jects, the  believer  exults  to  find  in  the 
favour  of  God. 

This  faith  is  : 

III.  Habitual.  "  Do  I  put  my  trust." 
Or,  "For  I  have  trusted  in  Thee." 
'*  This  is  no  new  or  sudden  act,  but  one 
performed  already.  He  not  only  trusts 
in  God  at  present,  but  has  trusted  Him  be- 
fore. The  recognition  of  God  was  not 
a  mere  momentary  act,  but  a  habitual 
affection  of  the  mind." — Alexander. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  crying  to  God 
in  a  moment  of  trouble  or  danger,  and 
neglecting  Him  in  days  of  peace.  A 
true  faith  is  a  constant  faith.  "  I  have 
set  the  Lord  always  before  me  "  (ver.  8). 
L  God  will  honour  faith  like  this  in  the 
hour  of  danger.  During  the  negro  re- 
bellion Mr.  Francis  Gardiner  was  travel- 
ling from  one  town  to  another,  in 
Jamaica,  in  a  gig.  Some  advised  him 
to  take  firearms  to  protect  himself,  and 
he  assented.  He  went  a  little  way  with 
the  firearms,  but  soon  returned,  saying, 
'*  I  am  not  comfortable  with  them  : " 
and  once  more  went  on  his  journey 
without  them.  Soon  he  fell  among  a 
party  of  negroes,  who  stopped  his  horse. 
One  said,  "  He  is  a  missionary ;  "  but  the 
others  said,  "No,  he  is  a  Government 


spy."  Then  they  said,  "  If  he  be  a  Go- 
vernment spy  he  will  have  firearms  ;  if  a 
missionary,  he  will  have  no  arms."  He 
was  searched,  and  no  firearms  being 
found  upon  him,  the  negroes,  instead  of 
murdering  him,  led  him  safely  on  his 
journey.  We  generally  have  too  much 
policy  and  too  little  faith.  2.  Such 
faith  will  be  honoured  in  the  hour  of 
trial.  The  world's  refuges  fail  just 
when  they  are  most  needed,  but  they 
who  hide  themselves  in  God  shall  not 
be  confounded.  Dr.  Livingstone  tells 
us  of  an  African  tree.  "  The  Mopan6- 
tree  is  pretty  to  look  at  in  the  bright 
sunshine  of  early  morning,  but  the 
leaves  hang  perpendicularly  as  the  sun 
rises  high,  and  afi'ord  little  or  no  shade 
through  the  day."  True  image  of 
worldly  shelters  and  helpers !  They 
look  promising  enough  in  the  bright 
sunshine  of  the  morning,  in  health, 
wealth,  popularity  ;  but,  alas  !  when  the 
burning  heat  of  trial  and  trouble  come, 
they  fail,  and  the  hot  beams  beat  on  our 
naked  head  !  The  Psalmist  here  takes 
God  for  his  hiding-place,  and  he  is  safe 
and  singing.  3.  Such  faith  will  be 
honoured  in  the  hour  of  death.  Jordan 
is  deeper  or  shallower  "  according  to  our 
faith  in  the  King  of  the  place."  David 
has  trusted  in  God,  and,  in  presence  of 
death  and  the  grave,  he  shouts  like  a 
conqueror  (ver.  9-11).  If  we  emulate 
his  faith,  we  shall  know  his  triumph. 


The  Peerage  of  Heaven. 


{Ver$e 

Alexander  translates  this  verse  :  "  As 
to  the  saints  who  are  in  the  land,  they 
are  the  nobles  in  whom  is  all  my  de- 
light." Thus  the  people  of  God  are 
designated  as  peers,  a  divine  aristocracy. 

We  observe  : 

I.  Their  patent  of  nobility.  By 
what  right  are  they  called  "  nobles  "  1 
They  are  the  children  of  the  King. 
They  have  been  begotten  again  to  a 
Divine  and  immortal  inheritance.  And 
this  fact  they  reveal — 1.  By  the  dignity 
of  their  character.  They  show  their 
lofty  birth  by  their  purity  and  sub- 
limity of  character  and  conduct.  Their 
60 


3.) 

glory  is  not  in  purple,  stars,  and  coro- 
nets, but  in  splendid  moral  qualities. 
"  The  excellent,  properly  the  outwardly 
illustrious  ;  the  root-meaning  is  that 
of  glitter,  splendour,  &c.  It  contains 
the  idea  of  a  moral  as  well  as  of  a  merely 
outward  glory." — Perowne.  2.  By  the 
elevation  of  their  life.  In  all  things 
they  seek  to  act  from  great  motives,  by 
great  principles,  to  great  ends.  One  of 
our  earls  was  derided  because,  when  he 
was  made  knight  of  the  garter,  he  put 
the  garter  on  all  his  shovels,  wheel- 
barrows, and  pickaxes.  But  the  moral 
noble  puts  the  sign  of  his  estate  on  all 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XVL 


that  he  has,  on  all  that  he  does,  down 
to  the  commonest  and  most  trifling 
things.  In  "  that  day  shall  there  be 
upon  the  bells  of  the  horses,  Holiness 
unto  the  Lord  ;  and  the  pots  in  the 
Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls 
before  the  altar.  Yea,  every  pot  in 
Jerusalem  and  in  Judah  shall  be  holi- 
ness unto  the  Lord  of  hosts "  (Zech. 
xiv.  20,  21).  Thus  are  they  real  nobles, 
"  men  of  whom  the  world  is  not  worthy." 
"  Some  think  rich  men  to  be  excellent, 
some  think  learned  men  to  be  excellent, 
some  count  men  in  authority  so  to  be ; 
but  here  we  are  taught  that  those  men 
are  excellent  who  are  sanctified  by  God's 
graces."  —  Greenham.  "The  title  of 
*  His  Excellency '  more  properly  be- 
longs to  the  meanest  saint  than  to  the 
greatest  governor.  The  true  aristocracy 
are  believers  in  Jesus.  They  are  the 
only  Right  Honourables.  Stars  and 
garters  are  poor  distinctions  compared 
with  the  graces  of  the  Spirit." — Spurgeon. 

Observe  : 

II.  Their  oath  of  fealty.  "  O  my 
soul,  thou  hast  said  unto  the  Lord,  Thou 
art  my  Lord  "  (ver.  2).  He  recalls  his 
covenant  with  God.  As  the  new-made 
peer  swears  fidelity  to  his  king,  so  have 
the  saints  vowed  to  be  the  Lord's.  Let 
us  remember  this  :  1.  In  tlie  hour  of 
danger  to  our  comfort.  We  are  God's 
sworn  ones,  and  shall  He  not  ever  shel- 
ter and  save  us  1  2.  In  the  hour  of 
temptation  to  our  caution.  When  allure- 
ments are  held  out  to  us  to  worldliness 
and  sin,  remember,  "  O  my  soul,  thoii 
hast  said  unto  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my 
Lord ; "  "  The  vows  of  God  are  upon 
us."  In  the  clearest,  loftiest,  most 
solemn  moments  of  life,  again  and  again 
have  we  pledged  ourselves  to  God ;  let 
us  not  in  a  moment  of  excitement  or 
weakness  forget  the  glorious  oath.  The 
righteous  man  "  sweareth  to  his  own 
hurt  and  changeth  not;"  surely  we 
shall  change  not  wherein  we  have  sworn 
to  our  eternal  advantage. 

**  High  Heaven,  that  heard  the  solemn  vow, 
That  vow  renewed  shall  daily  hear, 
Till  in  life's  latest  hour  I  bow, 
And  bless  in  death  a  bond  so  dear." 

Observe : 


III.  Their  bond  of  unity.  What  is 
the  esprit  de  corps  ?   (ver.    3).       "  The 

meaning  of  this  verse  is,  that  the 
Psalmist's  recognition  of  Jehovah  as  the 
Lord,  and  as  the  only  source  of  happi- 
ness, is  not  peculiar  to  himself,  but  com- 
mon to  the  whole  body  of  the  saints  or 
holy  ones,  in  whose  society  he  delighted." 
— Alexander.  What  is  expressed  here 
"  is  love  to  God  and  love  to  His  saints." 
— Delitzsch.  This  is  the  spirit,  the 
bond  of  union. 

1.  Love  to  God.  This  is  the  grand 
basis  of  their  oneness,  trust  in  God,  love 
to  God.  "  Where  any  two  souls  cry  out 
simultaneously,  '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,^  the  portion  wall  is  broken  down, 
and  they  are  bound  together  more  firmly 
by  a  sigh  than  by  the  loftiest  formulas. 
They  but  hinder  real  union  prevailing 
among  us  who  are  always  haggling  about 
words  and  isolated  expressions.'* — 
Biichsel.  A  common  faith  in  God  is  the 
innermost  evangelical  alliance. 

2.  Love  to  God's  peop/e.  "  In  whom 
is  all  my  delight  "  (ver.  3).  "  In  God's 
land  there  are  others  who,  like  David, 
cleave  to  God,  and  with  these  he  claims 
fellowship." — Perowne.  Where  there  is 
a  true  love  to  God,  there  will  be  a  living 
delight  in  His  people. 

IV.  Their  uncompromising  loyalty 
(ver.  4).  Their  sorrows  shall  be  multi- 
plied, "  who  wed  themselves  to  another 
god." — Kay.  "  Not  idols  merely,  but 
any  created  object  of  supreme  affection." 
— Alexander.  The  Psalmist  declares 
that  he  will  not  join  in  their  impious 
services,  nor  even  name  the  names  of 
their  divinities.  He  will  have  no  com- 
plicity with  such  whatever.  "  It  was  a 
great  consolation  that,  during  his  exile, 
being  much  with  heathens,  he  had  re- 
mained true  to  his  God.  He  liad  not 
lifted  up  his  hand  to  Dagon  while  pro- 
tected in  Philistia.  He  had  not  pro- 
nounced the  name  of  an  idol,  which 
Moses  had  forbidden  the  Jews  to  do,  nor 
had  he  attended  the  bloody  altar  of 
Moloch.  Come  then  to  this  school,  all 
ye  lukewarm,  ye  degenerate  souls,  who 
trim  between  the  world  and  the  Church. 
It  is  of  small  moment  to  you  to  protract 
the  hour  of  returning  from  market,  or 
with  whom  you  take  the  cheerful  glass. 

61 


ffSALHXn. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Take  care  what  you  do  :  you  may  go  a 
step  too  far." — Sutcliffe, 

Observe  : 

V.  Their   grand   inheritance    (ver. 

6,  6).  "  The  idea  is,  that  in  the  Lord 
the  Psalmist  has  all  that  he  can  wish  or 
hope  for." — Alexander.  And  it  is  a 
secure  and  everlasting  portion. 


The  old  saying  declares,  "  Carry  great 

ensigns  and  you  shall  be  great."  The 
believer  carries  "  great  ensigns " — a 
great  name,  a  great  service,  a  great 
king,  a  great  future.  May  "  all  that 
name  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from 
iniquity.'* 


The  Inheritance  of  the  Saints. 
(Verses  5,  6.) 


I.  Their  inheritance  is  Divine. 
1.  God  Himself.     "  Tiie  Lord  is  the 
portion  of  mine  inheritance  and  of  my 
cup  "  (ver.  5).     *'  There  is  an  allusion, 
probably,  to  the  division  of  the  land  of 
Canaan  among  the   tribes,   no   part   of 
which  wag  assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Levi, 
because,    as     was     expressly    declared, 
Jehovah  would  be  their  portion  or  share 
(Num.  xviii.   20),  and  the  gifts  conse- 
crated to  Jehovah  the  provision  for  their 
support.     That  which  was  true  nation- 
ally of    Levi  was    true    in    its    deepest 
spiritual     import     of     every    believing 
Israelite.     '  What  must  not  he  possess,' 
•says   Savonarola,     *  who    possesses    the 
Possessor   of    all  1  *  " — Ferowne.       "  In 
the  text  all  Israel  is  viewed  as  a  '  spiri- 
tual .priesthood ; '  who,  wholly  devoted 
to  God,  had  Him  for  their  everlasting 
reward." — Kay.     2.  And  God  alone  is 
the  portion  of  His  people.     They  ask 
for  nothing  beyond  Him.     Moll  renders 
the  2d  verse  of  this  Psalm  ;  *'  My  happi- 
ness  is  not   added  to   Thee.     Nothing 
that  must  be  added  to  Thee  makes  me 
happy,  but  Thou  alone,  giving  exclusive 
and     full     satisfaction.     Compare     the 
analogous  thought  and   expression,  Ps. 
Ixxiii.  25."     Yet,  3.     The   saints  have 
everything  in   God.     *'  The   heritage   or 
portion  thus  described  is  God  Himself, 
but  considered  as  including  all  desirable 
possessions." — Alexander.     We  have  all 
gifts  in  the  Giver.     The    *'  lines   have 
fallen  to  me  in  pleasant  places.^*     The 
blessing  of  God  makes  all  places  bright 
and    happy ;    or,   as  some  translate,  in 
pleasant    things.       *'  It    signifies    both 
pleasant  circumstances,  and  a  pleasant 
locality." — Delitzsch.     The    blessing    of 
God    imparts    a    profound    charm     and 
significance  to  all  our  possessions,    re- 
62 


lationships,  circumstances.    And  finally, 

the  blessing  of  God  makes  all  seasons 
bright.  In  the  7th  verse,  the  night 
seasons  are  full  of  holy  and  happy  com- 
munings. God's  smile  makes  all  seasons 
bright,  even  the  darkest.  *'  If  I  say,  The 
darkness  shall  cover  me,  even  the  night 
shall  be  light  about  me."  All  places,  all 
things,  all  seasons,  "  all  are  yours." 
This  inheritance : 

II.  Is  secure.  *'Thou  maintainest 
my  lot "  (ver.  6).  *'  Nor  is  this  com- 
parison unnecessary,"  says  Calvin,  "  for 
if  often  happens  that  the  rightful  owners 
are  thrust  out  from  their  own  possession, 
because  there  is  none  to  defend  them. 
But  God  hath  given  Himself  to  us  as 
our  inheritance  in  such  wise  that  by 
His  aid  we  are  ever  maintained  in  the 
enjoyment  thereof."  David  knew  that 
his  earthly  power  and  glory  might  be 
torn  away  from  him,  but  in  God  he 
had  a  kingdom  which  could  not  be  moved. 
Thus  in  the  8th  verse,  "  I  shall  never  be 
moved."  "  The  gates  of  hell  shall 
never  prevail ;  Christ,  our  Samson,  hath 
flung  them  off  their  hinges." — Trapp. 

It  is: 

III.  Joyful  (ver.  6).  *'  I  have  a 
goodly  heritage."  "  Yea,  my  inheritance 
is  acceptable  unto  me.  What  had  come 
to  him  as  his  inheritance,  he  embraced 
with  the  full  approval  of  his  judgment 
and  his  affections." — Kay.  '  It  was  just 
what  he  wanted.  Men  of  the  world  toil 
for  wealth,  splendour,  power,  notoriety, 
and  having  attained  the  object  of  their 
ambition,  grieve  over  it,  as  the  disap- 
pointed child  grieves  over  the  fingered 
butterfly.  But  in  the  knowledge,  love, 
and  service  of  God  we  realise  a  treasure 
and  joy  congenial  and  satisfying  to  our 
deepest  nature. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XTL 


It  is: 

IV.  Permanent  (ver.  9-11).  Here 
the  Psalmist  exults  in  a  glorious  hope, 
full  of  immortality.  "  David's  hope 
rests  on  this  conclusion  :  it  is  impossible 
for  the  man  who,  in  appropriating  faith 
and  actual  experience,  calls  God  his  own, 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  death." — 
Belitzsch.  His  life  is  hid  with  Christ 
in  God,  and  so  far  from  death  spoiling 
him  in  any  sense,  it  will  but  give  him 
fuller  possession  of  his  glorious  inherit- 
ance. How  perishable  all  merely  human 
good !  There  is  a  wild  Indian  story 
which  tells  of  a  girl  falling  in  love  with 
a   handsome  young   warrior,   who   was 


however,  really,  but  an  image  of  snow. 
Immediately  after  their  marriage  they 
took  a  journey,  and  as  the  sun  appeared 
in  the  horizon  the  bridegroom  melted 
away.  Man,  falling  in  love  with  earthly 
things,  is  wasting  his  affections  upon  an 
imasfe  of  snow  :  "  The  fashion  of  this 
world  passeth  away."  But  rich  and 
happy  in  the  blessing  of  God,  we  are 
rich  and  happy  for  evermore. 

**  A  house  we  call  our  own 

Which  cannot  be  o'erthrown  : 

In  the  general  ruin  sure, 
Storms  and  earthquakes  it  defies; 

Built  immovably  secure, 
Built  eternal  in  the  skies." 


Beulah. 


{Verses 

The  Psalmist  is  here  on  the  moun- 
tain top.  He  gains  a  bright  view  of  the 
glorious  future,  and  is  filled  with  rapture. 
He  is  assured  of  life,  resurrection,  im- 
mortality. 

Observe : 

I.  The  grandeur  of  Ms  hope. 

1.  In  the  10th  verse,  he  exalts  to  be- 
lieve that  he  shall  be  altogether  saved 
from  the  power  of  death  and  the  grave. 
He  believes  that  neither  his  nobler  part, 
his  glory,  nor  yet  his  body,  shall  suffer 
loss.  God's  holy  ones,  God's  favourites, 
shall  not  be  forsaken  ;  their  bodies  not 
abandoned  to  the  tomb,  their  souls  not 
abandoned  to  the  invisible  world.  But, 
2.  The  Psalmist  not  only  exults  in  being 
delivered  from  the  power  of  death,  he 
anticipates  unknown  glories  (ver.  11). 
Passing  out  of  the  shadow  of  death,  he 
will  pass  into  the  glorious  light  of  God's 
unveiled  face.  There  is  a  path  of  life 
winding  through  the  valley  and  shadow 
of  death,  leading  through  the  church- 
yard, and  leading  right  into  the  golden 
goal.  "  The  glory  to  be  revealed  "  is 
here  indicated.  (1.)  Its  fulness.  *' Ful- 
ness of  joy."  "  Satiety,  or  rather  satis- 
faction, in  its  strongest  sense. ** — ^4^*?^- 
ander.  (2.)  Its  variety/.  *'  Pleasures  " 
*'  The  plural,  joys,  denotes  not  only  rich- 
ness, but  variety." — Alexander.  Our 
manifold  nature  will  find  all  it  needs  when 
it  tlius  drinks  at  iXiQriversoi  His  pleasure. 
(3.)  Its  perpetuity.     **  For  evermore.'' 


9-11.) 

II.  The   ground  of   his    hope.     A 

certain  writer  has  defined  commentators 
as,  "  The  worthy  folks  that  too  often 
write  on  books  as  men  with  diamonds 
write  on  glass,  obscuring  light  with 
scratches."  But  on  this  passage  before 
us  we  have  the  benefit  of  two  inspired 
commentators,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul, 
who  quote  this  psalm  in  the  2d,  3d,  and 
13th  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles. 
They  show  that  the  Psalmist  had  the 
Messiah  in  his  illuminated  eye  when  he 
uttered  these  soaring  words.  These 
words  were  true  of  David  only  in  a  very 
limited  sense ;  they  found  their  full 
realisation  only  in  Him  who  was  David's 
Lord.  We  may  regard  David  as  exult- 
ing in  these  lofty  i)rospects  on  the  ground 
of  his  faith  in  the  Messiah.  Because 
Christ  should  thus  triumph,  he  knew  his 
triumph  assured  in  Christ.  "  The  hope 
of  his  own  immortality  was  based  upon, 
and  bound  up  in,  the  life  of  Him  who 
was  at  once  his  Son  and  his  Lord. 
What  was  true  of  David  in  the  lower 
sense,  was  true  in  the  fullest  and  highest 
sense  of  Christ ;  was  only  true  of  David, 
because  it  was  true  of  Christ;  and  is 
only  true  of  any  of  us  in  and  through 
Him,  according  to  His  own  words,  '  Be- 
cause I  live,  ye  shall  live  also.'" — 
Perowne. 

*'  The  path  of  life,''  is  the  work  of 
Christ.  '*  Thou  wilt  show  me  the  path 
of  life."      The  Guide  is  the  presence  of 

63 


PSALM  XVn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Christ.  The  true  Beiilah  is  Calvary ; 
from  the  shadow  of  the  Cross  we  gain  a 
clear  and  confident  vision  of  the  glory 


of  the  skies.  "  Yea,  though  I  walk 
through  the  valley  and  the  shadow  of 
death,"  &c. 


PSALM     XYIL 

Introduction. 

"David  pours  forth  to  God  in  this  psalm  an  earnest  prayer  for  deliverance  from  his  in- 
veterate enemies,  who  were  bent  on  taking  away  his  life.  We  find  in  it  his  opinion  of  the 
character  of  his  oj^pressors,  who  were  obviously  persons  of  consideration  and  influence,  and 
who  were  disposed  to  exercise  all  the  power  which  their  station  enabled  them  to  command,  to 
gratify  their  hatred  and  malice  against  him.  He  affirms  his  own  innocence,  and  expresses  his 
full  conviction  that  the  time  would  come  when  the  relative  condirions  of  himself  and  his 
opponents  would  be  changed.  Many  persons  think,  and  with  some  reason,  that  the  psalm  was 
written  on  the  occasion  when  Saul  and  his  men  pursued  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Engedi." — 
Phillips. 

Safe  Steps  on  Dangerous  Paths. 
(Verses  4,  5.) 


We  are  reminded  here : 

I.  Of  our  need  of  the  Divine  succour. 

"  Hold  up  my  goings  in  Thy  paths " 
(ver.  5).  This  is  the  language  of  one 
who  felt  that  he  could  not  hold  himself 
up.  Some  in  the  pride  of  their  heart 
imagine  that  they  can,  in  their  own  wit 
and  strength,  face  life  and  its  ditiS- 
culties.  Let  us  look  at  the  path  of 
life,  the  path  which  leads  to  heaven,  and 
we  shall  see  our  need  of  a  Divine 
Helper.  In  our  way  through  this  world 
to  a  better  we  must  often  encounter  : 

1.  Steep  paths.  How  pure,  perfect, 
high  are  the  statutes  of  God  !  We  are 
born  in  tlie  depths  of  sin  and  shame. 
All  that  is  truly  great  and  truly  good 
lies  far  above  us,  as  those  white  moun- 
tains of  Switzerland  lie  above  the 
traveller,  their  tops  touching  heaven. 
Now,  who  can  ascend  the  holy  hill  ? 
Can  we,  in  our  own  strengtli,  get  so  much 
above  ourselves,  so  much  beyond  our- 
selves ]  Surely  not.  Without  super- 
human help  we  siiould  soon  grow  faint 
and  weary  in  scaling  these  sublime 
heights,  and  glide  down,  or  fall  down, 
into  sense  and  sin. 

2.  Bough  jxdhs.  Life  has  its  paths 
of  suffering,  the  paths  that  have  to  be 
traversed  with  bleeding  feet.  Here 
human  nature  often  faints  and  falls. 
Men  strike  against  sick-beds,  bereave- 
ments, losses,  persecutions,  and  lose  all 
energy,  peace,  hope.  Our  heart  is  often 
"  discouraged  because  of  the  way,"  and 

64 


unless  we  have   Divine  strength,  com- 
fort,  guidance,  we  must  perish. 

3.  Dark  paths.  We  are  often  in  most 
perplexing  circumstances,  and  it  is  very 
easy  for  us  to  get  wrong.  "  Ye  have 
not  passed  this  way  heretofore."  Our 
path  is  often  untried,  strange,  and 
dangerous.  We  speak  of  taking  a  leap 
in  the  dark.  We  are  constantly  doing 
this,  compelled  to  do  it ;  life  is  a  series 
of  leaps  in  the  dark.  If  a  Heavenly 
Hand  does  not  aid  us,  we  must  stumble 
and  fall. 

4.  Slippery  paths.  Days  of  youth, 
when  the  blood  is  hot,  and  life  free  and 
full ;  days  of  temptation,  when  a  strange 
illusive  light  brightens  into  beauty 
things  of  death  and  darkness;  days  of 
comfort,  when  there  is  nothing  to  stir 
the  soul,  but  everything  to  lull  it ;  days 
of  prosperity,  when  riches  and  honours 
increase  :  these  are  the  times  when  we 
stand  on  slippery  paths,  on  enchanted 
ground  ;  and  unless  God  help  us,  we  are 
soon,  as  an  old  writer  says,  "  on  all 
fours."  Alpine  climbers  say  that  the 
icy  peaks  which  sometimes  they  attempt 
to  climb  are  like  "  the  neck  of  a  bottle," 
and  it  is  hard  work  to  keep  from  sliding 
into  the  abyss.  Life  has  paths  similarly 
slippery,  and  unless  a  Divine  guide  up- 
hold us,  our  steps  will  i^lide. 

"In  Ps.  xvi.  11  we  read,  '  Thou  wilt 
show  me  the  path  of  life ;^  here  the 
psalm  speaks  of  the  paths  of  the  de- 
stroyer.    The  path  of  life  is  one;  but 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY i  PSALMS, 


tsALM  xvn. 


there  are  man^  paths  of  the  destroyer." 
—  Wordsworth.  And  Satan  is  per- 
petually seeking  to  drive  or  to  draw  us 
from  the  King's  highway  into  his 
destructive  paths.  "  The  path  of  life 
is  like  the  vale  of  Siddiin,  slimy  and 
slippery,  full  of  lime-pits  and  pit-falls, 
springs  and  stumbling-blocks." — Trapp. 
*'  Hold  up  my  goings " — as  a  careful 
driver  holds  up  his  horse  when  going 
down  hill.  We  have  all  sorts  of  paces, 
both  fast  and  slow,  and  the  road  is 
never  long  of  one  sort,  but  with  God  to 
hold  up  our  goings,  nothing  in  the  pace 
or  in  the  road  can  cast  down." — Spur- 
geon,  "  Lord,  hold  me  up,  that  I  may 
hold  out." — Watson. 

We  are  reminded  : 

II.  Of  the  sufficiency  of  the  Divine 
succour.  The  Psalmist  has  no  doubt 
of  his  safety  if  only  God  will  save  him. 
Thus,  in  another  place  :  "  Hold  Thou  me 
up,  and  I  shall  he  safe  "  (Ps.  cxix.  117). 
There  is  no  royal  7'oad  to  heaven,  but 
there  is  a  royal  Helper,  and  none  can 
perish  who  cling  to  Him.  ''  God  is  able 
to  make  you  stand "  (Rom.  xiv.  4). 
There  is  a  Catljolic  story  which  relates 
that  once  a  holy  painter  was  painting  on 
the  lofty  ceiling  of  a  church  the  image  of 
one  of  the  apostles.  Absorbed  in  his 
work  the  artist  stepped  back  to  contem- 
plate it,  and  stepped  beyond  the  edge  of 
the  scaffolding ;  in  a  moment  the  figure 
that  he  was  painting  started  into  life, 
caught  the  falling  artist,  and  set  him 
down  safely  by  the  altar.  If  we  live  in 
the  Church,  and  seek  to  glorify  God, 
whenever  we  take  a  dangeruus  step,  or 
stand  in  perilous  slight,  a  Hand  stronger 
than  that  of  Peter's,  stronger  than 
Gabriel's,  shall  preserve  us,  and  keep  us 
in  safety. 

**  On  every  side  He  stands, 
And  for  His  Israel  cares ; 
And  safe  in  His  Almighty  hands, 
Their  souls  for  ever  bears." 

Learn : 

1.  That  we  are   safe  onlg  whilst  we 


rest  in  God.  All  other  securities  for 
good  living  are  valid  only  whilst  God 
gives  them  efficacy.  Promises,  vows, 
pledges,  all  are  unreliable,  except  as 
God  gives  them  fixity  and  force,  God's 
help  is  the  key-stone  of  all  prudential 
measures.  We  must  all  try  to  take  tne 
dying  minister's  advice  :  "  Stand  up 
for  Christ,  stand  up  in  Christ." 

2.  That  it  is  the  i)rivilege  of  the 
believer  to  be  held  up.  Not  only  to  be 
picked  up  when  we  have  fallen,  but  to 
be  held  up,  so  that  we  may  not  fall. 
The  old  poet  sings — 

"  That  which  makes  us  have  no  need 
Of  physic,  that's  physic  indeed." 

Preventing  grace  is  the  best  physic. 

3.  That  we  are  preserved  from  fall- 
ing bg  liolding  to  God's  Wo7-d"  (ver.  4). 
*'  Whatever  men  in  general  may  do  or 
say,  I  have  but  one  guide  and  rule  of 
action,  viz..  Thy  Word." — Perowne.  And 
Kay  renders  (ver.  5).  "  Because  my 
treadings  held  firm  to  Thy  paths,  my  steps 
have  been  unmoved."  "  By  holding  fast 
my  goings  in  Thy  paths,  or  rather,  tracks, 
ruts  of  wheels,  my  footsteps  leave  not  been 
moved.  I  owe  my  safety  to  the  care 
which  I  take  to  tread  in  Thy  footsteps." 
Wordsivorth.  If  we  hold  firmly  hy 
God's  Word,  that  Word  will  preserve  us. 
It  shows  us  which  are  the  false  paths. 
"  By  the  words  of  thy  lips  I  have 
marked  the  paths  of  the  transgressor.'" — 
Wordsivorth.  It  strengthens  us  to  walk 
in  tr^ie  paths.  Its  examples,  its  pro- 
mises, the  grace  which  is  ever  given  in 
the  reading  of  it,  energise  us  to  walk  in 
the  path  of  life  which  it  indicates. 

4.  That  the  text  gives  no  sanction  to 
carelessness  and  sloth.  If  God  hold  us 
up  we  have  something  to  do,  we  have 
to  hold  to  Him.  To  hold  God's  hand 
day  by  day  is  the  supremest  effort  of  the 
soul,  it  means  unceasing  thought,  prayer, 
endeavour.  God  only  saves  those  who 
daily  cling  to  Him  in  sighs,  and  prayers, 
and  tears. 


Special  Need,  Special  Help. 
{Verses  7-14.) 

L     Special     Need.       "Show     Thy      "Make  Tby   grace  wonderful." — Moll, 
marvellous     lovingkindness "    (ver.     7).      "Exhibit  Thy   special    mercies.    Thou 


VBALM  XVn. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


who  savest  them  that  flee  for  refuge." — 
Kay.  **  It  has  particular  reference  to  ex- 
traordinary favours,  implying  an  unus- 
ual necessity." — Alexander.  The  Psalm- 
ist was  in  a  position  of  peculiar  distress 
and  peril.  Mark  his  trying  position  as 
here  depicted  by  himself. 

I.  The  number  of  his  enemies  (ver. 
9).  They  compassed  him  about.  He 
felt  that  he  was  hemmed  in  by  them  on 
every  side.  2.  The  character  of  his 
enemies.  They  were  deadly  enemies 
(ver.  9).  As  the  10th  verse  particularises, 
they  were  proud,  arrogant,  unfeeling. 
**  Their  heart  is  not  a  pulsating  human 
heart,  but  a  lump  of  fat." — Moll.  In- 
sensil)le,  obdurate,  cruel.  3.  The  strategy 
of  his  enemies  (vers.  11,  12).  *' Tliey 
had  fixed  their .  eyes  intently  on  the 
Psalmist,  with  a  purpose  to  prostrate 
him  to  the  ground,  or  completely  over- 
whelm him." — Moll,  A  greedy  lion 
lurking  in  secret  places,  expresses  at 
once,  their  ferocious  disposition  and 
crafty  action.  It  was  then  with  the 
Psalmist  a  time  of  special  need.  All 
God's  people  know  such  times.  They 
are  often  in  deep  waters,  but  sometimes 
deep  calleth  unto  deep ;  their  sky  is 
often  clouded,  but  sometimes  it  is 
eclipsed  ;  they  often  pass  through  the 
fire,  but  sometimes  the  furnace  is  heated 
seven  times  hotter  than  it  is  wont  to  be 
heated.  Their  trouble  is  sore,  their  trial 
fiery.  Their  tribulation  seems  to  go 
beyond  tliat  of  Christians  in  general ;  it 
certainly  goes  beyond  any  which  they 
have  experienced  in  the  past.  They 
have  need  of  extraordinary  help,  mar- 
vellous loviiigkindnesses,  special  mercies. 

II.  Special  Help.  "  Keep  me  as  the 
apple  of  the  eye,  hide  me  under  the 
shadow  of  Thy  wings  "  (ver.  8).  How 
truly  sublime  these  conceptions  !  In 
the  seasons  of  deepest  distress  we  have 


the  brightest  visions  of  God's  love  and 
power  to  save.  In  times  of  deepest  trial 
we  are  :  1.  The  dearest  to  God.  "  Keep 
me  as  the  apple  of  the  eye."  This  is  a 
symbol  of  that  which  is  dearest  to  us. 
How  precious  is  the  eye,  how  carefully 
guarded  by  us  !  So  we  are  never  dearer 
to  God  than  when  we  want  Him  most. 
The  most  suffering  child  in  a  family  is 
the  best  beloved ;  and  so  it  is  in  God's 
family  (Zech.  ii.  8).  2.  The  nearest  to 
God.  "  Hide  me  under  the  shadow  of 
Thy  wings."  How  near,  how  safe ! 
**  The  wings  of  a  hen  cover  her  brood 
so  that  they  cannot  be  seen  by  birds  of 
prey  ;  she  covers  them  against  rain  and 
storms  ;  she  warms  them  and  strengthens 
them  when  they  are  cold  and  weak  ;  so 
likewise  does  the  Divine  grace  with  His 
children." — Moll.  Thus  in  times  of 
persecution  and  temptation  ;  of  suffering 
and  trouble  ;  of  weakness  and  fear,  God 
draws  us  all  the  closer  to  Himself,  and 
under  those  wings,  whose  golden  feathers 
are  wisdom  and  power  and  love,  we  hide 
in  safety.  3.  The  happiest  in  God. 
The  eaglet  hiding  under  the  wing  of  the 
parent  bird  is  a  figure  of  comfort  as  well 
as  safety.  It  is  only  as  we  realise  deeper 
experience  of  pain,  and  loss,  and  peril, 
that  we  realise  the  deeper  joys  of  the 
Divine  life.  *'  For  as  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation 
also  aboundeth  by  Christ"  (2  Cor.  i.  5). 
The  brighter  rainbow  decks  the  darker 
cloud ;  in  mid- winter's  gloom  the  stars 
burn  brightest.  God's  wing  is  as  soft 
as  it  is  strong,  and  the  sorrow  that 
drives  us  to  the  closer  communion  en- 
sures us  a  deeper  peace,  a  keener 
bliss. 

''When  my  sorrows  most  increase, 

Let  Thy  strongest  joys  be  given  S 
Jesus,  come  with  my  distress, 
And  agouy  ia  heaven  1 " 


Sanctified  Trial, 
{Verses  7-15.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  an  illustration 
of  the  purifying  and  ennobling  influences 
of  sanctified  trouble.  We  see  that  un- 
sanctified  prosperity  degrades  those  who 
enjoy  it,  whilst  sanctified  adversity  lifts 
up  those  who  suffer  it. 
66 


I.  Sanctified  sorrow  drives  us  nearer 
God.  In  the  7th  and  8th  verses  this  is 
very  apparent.  "  The  hard  usage  of  his 
enemies  drove  David  into  God's  blessed 
bosom ;  as  children  misused  abroad 
run   home   to   their  parents." — Trapp. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XTIL 


Wronged  by  the  world,  buffeted  by  the 
messengers  of  Satan,  overtaken  by  the 
storms  of  adversity,  in  closer  fellowship 
with  God  we  find  balm  to  our  soul. 
One  day  an  aide-de-camp  of  the  late 
Emperor  Nicholas  of  Russia  threw  him- 
self at  the  monarch's  feet,  and  begged 
from  his  sovereign  permission  to  fight 
a  duel.  The  Emperor,  who  was  a 
staunch  opponent  of  duelling,  imme- 
diately and  emphatically  refused. 
"  But,  sire,  I  am  dishonoured ;  I  must 
fight,"  cried  the  disconsolate  aide.  The 
Czar  frowned,  and  asked  him  what  he 
meant.  "  I  have  been  struck  in  the 
face,"  was  the  ready  reply.  "Well," 
said  the  Emperor,  *'for  all  that,  thou 
shalt  not  fight ;  but  come — come  with 
me."  And,  taking  him  by  the  arm,  the 
Emperor  led  him  into  the  presence  of 
his  court  which  was  assembled  in  an 
adjoining  saloon.  Then,  in  view  of  the 
flower  of  his  realm,  the  Emperor  kissed 
the  cheek  of  the  aide-de-camp  which 
had  received  the  blow.  **  Go  now,"  he 
exclaimed,  **  and  be  at  peace ;  thy 
affront  has  been  effaced."  Thus,  when 
we  are  wronged  by  men  or  devils,  we 
fly  to  our  God,  and  the  kiss  of  the  King 
of  the  universe  more  than  atones  for 
the  injury  and  dishonour  that  may  have 
been  done  us.  The  King's  love  and 
favour  till  the  wounded  soul  with  strength 
and  gladness. 

II.  Sanctified  sorrow  conducts  to  a 
higher  spiritual  life.  We  see  this 
specially  in  the  14:th  verse.  The 
Psalmist  has  been  led  to  feel  how  much 
superior  is  the  Divine  life  to  a  worldly 
life.  He  is  led  to  a  new  and  deeper 
appreciation  of  a  godly  nature,  and  of  all 
the  treasures  it  inherits.  In  the  midst 
of  persecution  and  sorrow  he  realises  a 
more  intense  spirituality.  A  naturalist, 
speaking  of  the  swarms  of  insects  which 
torment  cattle  in  tropical  lands,  shows 
that  the  sufferings  of  the  cattle  issue 
in  their  safety.  *'  Observe,"  says  this 
writer,  "  that  the  furious  eagerness  of  the 
winged  insects,  which  seem  to  be  the 
agents  of  death,  is  frequently  a  cause  of 


life.  By  an  incessant  persecution  of  the 
sick  flocks,  enfeebled  by  hot  damp  airs, 
they  ensure  their  safety.  Otherwise 
they  would  remain  stupidly  resigned, 
and  hour  after  hour  grow  less  capable 
of  motion,  gloomier  and  more  morbid  in 
the  bonds  of  fever,  until  they  could  rise 
no  more.  The  inexorable  spur  knows, 
however,  the  secret  of  putting  them  on 
their  legs ;  though,  with  trembling  limbs, 
they  take  to  flight,  the  insect  never 
quits  them  ;  presses  them,  urges  them, 
and  conducts  them,  bleeding,  to  the 
wholesome  regions  of  the  dry  lands  and 
the  living  waters,  where  their  furious 
guide  abandons  them,  and  returns  to  the 
pestilent  vapours,  to  its  realm  of  death." 
Thus  David's  enemies,  like  a  swarm  of 
winged  insects,  drove  him  to  loftier 
heights  of  life.  If  he  had  been  left  to 
a  level  life  of  care  and  prosperity  he 
might  have  fallen  a  victim  to  its  relax- 
ing influences,  but  persecutions  and  tri- 
bulations drove  him  to  the  higher  walks 
of  thought,  and  feeling,  and  life.  Is  it 
not  often  thus  with  God's  people  ?  They 
are  stung  by  many  losses  and  sorrows  ; 
but  these  afflictions  secure  their  salvation. 
With  trembling  limbs,  and  bleeding 
hearts,  they  take  their  flight  from  the 
miasmatic  plains  of  the  carnal  life,  to 
the  tablelands  of  which  God  Himself 
is  sun  and  moon. 

III.  Sanctified  sorrow  awakens 
longings  for  the  heavenly  and  eternal 
life  (ver.  15).  Here  we  see  the  Psalm- 
ist loosened  from  earth  by  his  troubles, 
and  looking  forward  to  the  heavenly 
and  immortal  for  the  satisfaction  of  all 
his  longings.  Such  is  the  beauty  of 
Damascus  that  we  are  told  Mahomet 
feared,  if  he  entered  it,  his  heart  would 
be  captivated  by  its  loveliness,  and  he 
would  be  unfitted  for  the  celestial,  so  he 
turned  away  from  the  gates  of  the 
Syrian  paradise.  Amid  scenes  of 
affluence  and  pleasure  we  may  easily 
forget  our  great  inheritance ;  but  in 
disappointment  and  affliction  our  heart 
goes  out  after  that  Divine  and  heavenly 
inheritance  which  fadeth  not  away. 


vr 


PSALM  XVII. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Men  of  the  World. 

"Men  of  the  World"  {Verse  14). 


We  will  first  consider  : 

I.  The  characters  thus   described. 
"Men  of  the  world"  observe  : 

1.  Their  portion.  "  Which  have 
their  portion  in  this  life."  "  The  word 
here  used  for  *  world '  denotes  the 
transitory  nature  of  the  world  as  a 
thing  of  time.  Men  of  the  world  are 
those  who  have  ni.ivle  it  their  home, 
and  who,  together  with  the  world  and 
the  lust  thereof,  are  passing  away. 
Being  thus  worldly-minded,  they  have 
their  portion  in  life,  i.e.  in  the  brief  years 
of  their  existence  upon  earth." — Perowne. 
*'  Life  is  by  some  understood  to  mean  a 
life  of  ease  or  pleasure  ;  but  this  is  far 
less  natural  than  the  obvious  sense  of 
this  life,  this  present  state  as  distin- 
guished from  futurity." — Alexander. 
(1.)  They  live  to  the  visible.  The 
"  world."  Their  pain  and  pleasure, 
hope  and  fear,  loss  or  gain,  all  have  to 
do  with  the  senses  and  the  worldly  life. 
(2.)  Tliey  live  to  the  present.  Their 
disposition  is  gross — their  highest  good 
and  happiness  is  in  the  purely 
natural  life.  "  Worldliness  consists  in 
these  three  things  : — Attachment  to  the 
Outward  ;  attachment  to  the  Transitory; 
attachment  to  the  Unreal  :  in  oppo- 
sition to  love  for  the  Inw^ard,  the 
Eternal,  the  True." — Robertson.  A 
man  may  not  be  an  atheist,  and  yet  be 
a  man  of  the  world  ;  a  man  may  not  be 
vicious,  and  yet  be  a  man  of  the  world ; 
nay,  a  man  may  be  moral,  amiable, 
kind,  and  yet  be  a  man  of  the  world. 
They  love  not  God  :  *'  The  friendship 
of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God."  They 
love  the  near  and  the  low,  not  the  dis- 
tant and  the  high — they  are  deaf  to  the 
injunction,  "  Set  not  your  affections 
upon  things  of  the  earth."  They  look 
at  the  things  which  are  temporal.  How 
many  there  are  with  many  good  qualities, 
but  who  at  their  best  are  never  more 
than  men  of  the  world  ! 

2.   Their  prosperity. 
enough  for  themselves. 
fchou   fillest    with    Thy 
'*  To  the  eye  of  sense  God  seems  some- 
68 


(1.)  They  have 
"  Whose  belly 
hid    treasure." 


times  to  have  reserved  His  choicest  gifts 
for  the  ungodly." — Alexander.  "  They 
have  more  than  heart  could  wish,  their 
eyes  stand  out  with  fatness  "  (Job.  xxi. 
7-15).  (2.)  They  have  enough  for  their 
children.  "  They  are  full  of  children," 
&c.  Margin,  their  children  are  full. 
"  The  obvious  signification  is,  that  they 
have  enough  for  themselves  and  for 
their  children." — Barnes.  They  found 
large  and  flourishing  houses.  The  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked  need  not  excite  any 
particular  surprise.  (1.)  They  set  their 
whole  heart  on  such  prosperity.  (2.) 
They  bend  their  whole  strength  to  com- 
pass their  aim.  (3.)  They  have  no 
moral  scruples  to  stand  in  the  way  of 
their  progress.  They  live  to  the  world, 
and  get  it.  Its  wreaths  theirs,  its  gold, 
its  purple,  its  dainties. 

Observe  : 

II.  The  disadvantages  of  their  lot. 

The  Psalmist  in  this  place  is  not 
envying  "  the  men  of  this  world ; "  but, 
on  the  contrary,  pities  them. 

1.  T}ie  hand  of  God  is  against  them. 
*'  From  the  wicked  by  Thy  sword  :  from 
men  by  Thy  hand"  (ver.  13,  14).  Many 
take  worldly  prosperity  as  a  sign  of 
God's  favour,  but  it  is  no  such  sign. 
God's  hand  is  against  men  of  the  world. 
His  sword  is  lifted  against  them,  and 
must  smite  erelong  if  they  repent  not. 

2.  They  have  a  profound  discontent. 
A  carnal  content  they  have,  but  does 
not  the  Psalmist  intimate  in  the  15th 
verse,  that  *'true"  satisfaction  comes 
only  through  righteousness?  Yes,  the 
men  of  the  world  are  full  of  precious 
things — pleasures,  honours,  gold,  and 
silver — but  their  spirit  is  desolate  and 
unsatisfied.  "  Their  portion  is  a  lean 
and  hungry  one  at  the  best — one  that 
may  fill  the  hand,  but  cannot  fill  the 
soul." — Binnie. 

3.  They  soon  part  with  their  inherit- 
ance for  ever.  "  This  world."  '*  This 
life."  Whatever  this  world  gives  us  it 
soon  takes  back  again,  just  as  the  hungry 
ocean-waves  suck  back  again  the 
glittering  shells  with  which  they  first 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XV 11. 


strewed  the  shore.     And  then?     *' For  of  the  world.     And   the  world  passeth 

all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  away,  and  the  lust  thereof:  but  he  that 

flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever  " 

pride  of  life,  is  not  of  the  Father,  but  is  (1  John  ii.  16,  17). 


Satisfaction. 

{Verse  16,) 


Satisfaction  !  What  a  magical  word ! 
Oh!  What  is  it?  Where  is  it  to  be 
found  1  Who  shall  teach  us  to  realise 
it  ?  In  this  verse  we  have  suggested  to 
us, 

I.  The  nature  of  true  satisfaction. 

1.  It  is  spiritual.  The  Psalmist 
bIiows  here  that  it  is  not  external  and 
physical,  but  internal  and  spiritual.  The 
sensual  men  in  the  14:th  verse,  are  not 
satisfied  men  are  not  men  seeking  satis- 
faction in  a  right  direction.  Not  in  mere 
sensuality  shall  we  ever  find  content. 
You  cannot  satisfy  the  body  with 
thoughts,  neither  can  you  satisfy  the 
soul  with  meats.  Not  in  social  rank 
and  glory  shall  we  prove  satisfaction. 
The  ancient  star-worshi[)pers  affixed 
mirrors  to  their  breasts  to  bring  near 
to  them  the  orbs  they  worshipped,  but 
the  orbs  themselves  were  far  away  in 
the  heavens,  nevertheless ;  and  titles, 
purple,  coronets,  golden  fortunes,  crowns 
of  fame,  are  but  mirrors  also  in  which 
you  have  the  reflections  of  high  and 
gh)rious  things — reflections,  and  nothing 
more.  Not  in  mere  intellectuality  shall 
we  find  content, — art,  science,  philoso- 
phy. St.  Augustine  complains  to  God 
of  his  friends  off"ering  him  the  books  of 
the  philosophers  ; — "  And  these  were 
the  dishes  in  which  they  brought  to  me, 
being  hungry,  the  sun  and  the  moon 
instead  of  Thee."  True  satisfaction  is 
not  in  the  sphere  of  the  senses,  but  of 
the  spirit. 

2.  It  is  complete.  The  satisfaction  of 
the  sensual  in  the  14th  verse,  is  one-sided, 
only  regarding  one  section  of  the  com- 
plex nature.  The  Psalmist's  satisfaction 
was  all  pervasive — the  gratification  of 
his  whole  being — appetite,  sensibility, 
imagination,  spirit.  *'  Their' s^  partial, 
defective,  such  as  would  but  gratify 
their  bestial  part ;  liis^  adequate,  com- 
plete, a  happiness  of  proportion^   such 


as   should    satisfy   the   man."  —  John 
Howe. 

3.  It  is  full  f  "satisfied,  fed  to  the  full." 
— French.  The  whole  nature  blessed,  and 
fully  blessed.  "  They  hunger  no  more, 
neither  do  they  thirst  any  more." 

4.  It  is  everlasting.  The  Psalmist 
looks  forward  here  to  the  great  future, 
and  anticipates  endless  blessedness. 
The  perpetuity  of  the  inheritance  of 
the  worldly  man  referred  to  in  verse  14, 
is  quite  a  mock  immortality — he  dies, 
and  his  estate  is  soon  dissipated  ;  but 
the  joy  of  a  spiritualised  and  perfected 
nature  flows  for  evermore. 

II.  The  source  of  true  satisfaction. 

1.  The  vision  of  God.  *' As  for  me — 
in  righteousness  let  me  behold  Tliy 
face." — Perovme.  The  knowledge  of  God 
— the  perception  of  His  goodness,  wis- 
dom, beauty.  The  secret  of  all  our 
discontents  is  our  misapprehension  of 
the  Divine  nature,  law,  government, 
purpose.  If  we  could  see  the  Throne, 
and  Him  that  sits  thereupon,  with 
unclouded  face — for  really  the  cloud 
is  on  our  face,  not  on  God's — our  soul 
would  be  filled  with  ecstasy.  To  know 
that  God  is  all  beauty,  and  His  law  all 
love,  and  His  government  all  wise,  and 
His  kingdom  and  eternity  all  joy — to 
know  this,  is  overflowing  and  everlasting 
gladness.  To  have  a  clear,  full  vision  of 
Jesus,  Who  is  the  brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory,  is  the  secret  of  satis- 
faction. Observe,  it  is  through  right- 
eousness that  we  gain  this  vision.  "  Tn 
righteousness  let  me  behold  Thy  face." 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they 
shall  see  God."  2.  The  likeness  of  God. 
''When  I  awake  with  Thy  likeness." 
"  When  Thy  likeness  is  awakened." — 
Horsley.  As  we  become  pure  we  get 
the  clearer  vision  of  God,  and  as  we  get 
the  clearer  vision  of  God,  the  Divine 
image  is  inwrought  once  more  in   our 

69 


MALM  XTIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


deepest  nature.  "We  all  with  open 
face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  iii.  18). 

"  "  Unlike  my  God  I  cannot  rest, 
For  sin  is  perfect  misery  : 
But  stamp  Thine  image  on  my  breast, 
Conform  my  hallowed  soul  to  Thee. 

"  Partaker  of  Tliine  utmost  grace, 
My  soul  would  then  be  satisfied; 
As  Moses,  when  he  saw  Thy  face. 
And  sank  into  Thine  arms  and  died." 

(].)  This  satisfaction  may  be  largely  at- 
tained in  this  lite.  It  is  a  grave  error 
to  place  this  satisfaction  wholly  in  the 
future.     lu  this  life  we  may,  through 


the  grace  of  Jesus,  attain  power  over 
sin,  fix  our  heart  singly  upon  God,  and 
attain  thus  to  the  vision  of  God,  the 
likeness  of  God,  and  all  the  joy  of 
which  God  is  the  tountain.  Let  us 
seek  a  pure  heart.  (2.)  This  satisfaction 
is  fully  attained  in  the  life  to  come. 
"  They  shall  see  His  face,  and  His  name 
shall  be  in  their  foreheads."  Here  we 
begin  to  awake  in  the  likeness  of  God, 
and  as  His  image  shines  more  clear  in 
our  soul,  our  satisfaction  becomes  more 
profound  ;  in  heaven,  that  likeness  shall 
be  complete — we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is, 
and  our  joy  shall  be  f  ulL 


PSALM   XVIII. 

Intkoduction. 

**  This  magnificent  triumphal  hymn  was  composed  by  David  in  celebration  of  his  deliver- 
ance from  his  enemies.  But  the  sublimity  of  the  figures  used  in  it,  and  the  consent  of  ancient 
commentators,  even  Jewish  as  well  as  Christian,  but,  above  all,  the  citations,  made  from  it  in 
the  New  Testament,  evince  that  the  kingdom  of  Messiah  is  here  pointed  at  under  that  of 
David.     It  may  thus  be  divided  into  five  parts. 

Part  I.  Consisting  of  the  first  three  verses,  is  the  proem  of  the  song. 

Part  II.  Celebrates  miraculous  deliverances  from  a  state  of  affliction  and  distress. 

Part  III.   Thanksgiving  ;  five  verses,  from  the  twentieth  to  the  twenty-fourth. 

Part  IV.  Celebrates  success  in  war ;  eighteen  verses,  from  the  twenty-fifth  to  the  forty- 
second. 

Part  V.  The  establishment  of  Messiah's  kingdom ;  eight  verses,  from  the  forty-third  to  the 
fiftieth."— -Bt«Ao/>  Mant. 


True  Love, 
(Verse  1.) 


This  verse  gives  a  picture  of  the  human 
heart  in  its  sublimest  mood.  It  is  an 
eloquent  expression  of  the  loftiest  affec- 
tion. The  love  of  the  Psalmist  was 
**  true,"  because, 

I.  The  object  of  it  was  right,  "  I 
will  love  Thee,"  Not,  nature.  Some  ex- 
pend the  whole  fund  of  their  admiration 
and  delight  on  the  works  of  God.  They 
admire  creation,  idealise  it,  idolise  it. 
They  give  a  fanciful  life  to  sun  and 
stars,  to  the  firmament,  to 
and  then  worship  them, 
inspires  our  naturalistic, 
poetry  —  a  poetry  sadly 
popular.  Not,  humanity.  We  see  many 
lavish  their  affection  on  their  friends, 
and  a  certain  philosophy  tells  us  that 
the  noblest  object  of  love  is  the  human 
race.  We  see  J.  S.  Mill  in  England, 
70 


moon  and 
the  earth, 
This  love 
pantheistic 


and  Corate  in  France,  denying  the  love 

of  God,  and  then  adoring  in  the  most 
extravagant  fashion  a  couple  of  women. 
We  may  easily  fall  into  the  same  mis- 
take— loving  the  creature  more  than  the 
Creator.  There  is,  indeed,  no  sin  in 
loving,  in  fervently  loving,  such  of  our 
fellows  as  may  appear  in  our  eyes  to  be 
beautiful  or  noble;  but  that  our  love 
should  be  confined  to  these  is  the  fault 
of  faults.  Not,  self.  How  common  is 
self-idolatry  !  To  be  wholly  occupied 
with  our  own  interests — ever  burning 
incense  to  our  own  greatness  !  How 
many  are  their  own  divinities,  living  to 
glorify,  to  serve,  to  worship  themselves  ! 
Not,  the  world.  The  Apostle  says  that 
the  love  of  the  world  is  enmity  with 
God.  What  is  this  love  of  the  world 
which  is   opposed  to  the  love  of  the 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XTHL 


Father?  The  setting  of  our  affections 
on  the  gifts  of  God — wealth,  rank, 
honours,  learning.  There  are  many 
such.  They  are  lovers  of  pleasure,  for- 
tune, fame,  more  than  lovers  of  God. 
They  forget,  or  almost  forget,  the  Giver 
in  the  gift.  God  is  true  object  of 
love.  1.  He  should  be  the  first  object. 
The  Psalmist  begins  with  extolling  God. 
The  first  verse  of  every  chapter  in  our 
life   should   be  :    "I    will    love   Thee, 

0  Lord,  my  strength."  2.  He  is  the 
worthy  object.  To  love  creation,  or  its 
gifts,  is  to  love  what  is  dead.  Love  is 
only  worthily  placed  on  a  living  person. 
To  love  the  creatures,  is  to  love  what  is 
imperfect :  when  we  love  any  person, 
we  love  not  so  much  the  actual  person, 
but  rather  an  ideal  person.  Their 
merits,  their  charms,  exist  to  a  large 
extent  in  our  imagination.  But  God  is 
the  all-perfect  One  ;  all  perfections  exist 
actually  and  absolutely  in  Him.  3.  He 
is  the  chief  object.  *'  Thee"  only  Thee; 
all  other  creatures  or  things  in  Thee. 
*'  Nothing  must  we  love  above  God,  or 
BO  much  as  God,  much  less  against  God." 
— Trapp. 

II.  The  measure  of  it  was  right. 

\.  It  was  a  boundless  love.  The  just 
measure  of  love  to  God  is  a  measureless 
love.  *'  I  will  love  Thee."  "  The  word 
signifies  to  love  with  the  greatest  in- 
tensity."— Phillips.     "  Affectionately  do 

1  love  Thee."— i/o//.  "Fervently  do  I 
love  Thee,  O  Jehovah,  my  strength." 
— Perowne.  The  Psalmist  loved  God 
from  the  depths  of  his  heart ;  loved  Him 
with  a  burning,  boundless  affection. 
As  one  has  said  :  "  Every  river  does  the 
most  good  whilst  it  keeps  within  its 
banks,  except  the  Nile,  and  that  does 
the  most  good  when  it  overflows  its 
banks;  so  each  human  passion  is  best 
kept  within  bounds,  except  love  to  God, 
and  that  is  best  when  it  overflows,  when 


it  is  shed  abroad."  2.  It  was  an  ever- 
lasting love.  It  overflowed  both  space 
and  time.  ''The  future  form,  /  will 
love,  represents  it  as  a  permanent 
affection,  and  expresses  a  fixed  purpose. 
"  I  not  only  love  Thee  now,  but  am 
resolved  to  do  so  for  ever." — Alexander. 
"  Nothing  shall  separate  me  from  the 
love  of  God,"  <fcc. 

**  What  though  my  flesh  and  heart  decay, 
Thee  shall  I  love  in  endless  day  ! " 

III.  The  inspiration  of  it  was  right. 
"  0  Lord,  my  strength.^'  The  Psalmist's 
heart  was  touched  by  the  love  of 
God.  "  The  simple  form  of  the  verb 
is  here  used  to  denote  the  reciprocal 
affection  of  the  inferior  party." — Alex- 
ander. He  had  felt  God's  love  to  him- 
self, and  in  return  He  loved  God. 
*'  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved 
us."  A  true  love  to  God  is  something 
more  than  a  mere  intellectual  admira- 
tion, something  more  than  a  moral 
appreciation  ;  it  is  the  offspring  of 
a  consciously,  indebted,  and  deeply- 
moved  heart.  The  idea  of  the  mystics, 
that  we  must  love  God  simply  for 
His  own  sake,  is  not  scriptural.  We 
love  much  because  much  has  been  for- 
given us  ;  because  great  gifts  have  been 
imi)arted  to  us  ;  because  great  deliver- 
ances have  been  wrought  out  for  us. 

Remember — the  love  of  God  is  the 
secret  of  strength  and  victory.  The  love  of 
God  gives  us  the  victory  over  all  inward 
foes.  Great  is  the  purifying  power  of 
this  sublime  affection.  *'  Faith  which 
worketh  by  love,  and  purifies  the  heart." 
"  The  love  of  God  gives  us  the  victory 
over  all  outward  foes"  (Rom.  viii.  35-39). 
"  So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish,  O 
Lord  ;  but  let  them  that  love  Him  be 
as  the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his 
might  "  (Judges  v.  31), 


Divine  Salvation. 
(Verses  2,  3.) 


We  observe : 

I.  The  Psalmist's  confession  (ver.  2). 

He  acknowledges,  1.  That  God  was 
hisdeliverer.  ^^  Jehovah  is  my  stronghold," 
dec.    "  My  God  is  my  strength,"  (fee.   The 


Psalmist  does  not  impute  his  deliver- 
ance from  Saul  and  his  other  enemies, 
to  his  own  prowess,  or  to  secondary 
causes ;  God  was  his  help.  There  was 
a  power  of  supernatural  faith  in  David 

71 


PBALM  XVni. 


BOMllETiC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


lifting   him   above   the    temptation   to 
idealise   and   deify   aspects  of   nature. 
The  rocks  and  fortresses  and  strongholds 
of  the  country,  where  many  of  David's 
exploits  were  performed,  might  have  led 
a  less  devout  mind  to  forget  God,  and 
ascribe  its  triumphs  to  its  own  prowess, 
combined  with  geographical  advantages. 
Not  so  with  David.    His  faith  penetrated 
secondary  causes,  and  visible  helps  and 
agencies  only  became  the  symbols  of  the 
invisible.     '^Jehovah  is  my  stronghold," 
&c.       Let    us    give    the    glory    of    our 
deliverances    to    God — not   to    self,    or 
nature,  or  chance.     Let  us  give  all  the 
glory  to  God.     Not  a  word  here  about 
geographical  help,  or    human    help,  or 
self-help.     If  we  thus  honour  God,  God 
shall  honour  our  faith,  and  save  us  in 
all  natural  and  spiritual  perils.     2.   God 
was  his  perfect  deliverer.     Seven  is  the 
number    of    perfection ;    and    here    we 
have  according  to  the  reading  of  Perowne 
seven  metaphors  crowded  together  set- 
ting forth  the  perfection  of  God  as  the 
Saviour  of  His  people.     "Jehovah  (is) 
my  stronghold  and  my  fortress,  and  my 
deliverer,  my  God  is  my  rock  wherein  I 
find  refuge,  my  shield  and  horn  of  my 
salvation,  my  high  tower."      God  is  a 
perfect  Saviour.       "  Rock ;"  *'  shield  ; " 
*'  horn ;"    indicate    various     forms    of 
defence  and  shelter,  of  immunity   and 
deliverance.       (1.)    God    preserves   His 
people  in   the   day   of  evil.      He  is  a 
garrison  to  them  in  the  time  of  trial  and 
temptation.     Talk  of  the  seven  wonders 
of    the  world  !  what  are    they  but  im- 
perfect images  of  the  magnificent  bul- 
warks  which    God    raises    about    His 
people  ] 

**  On  every  side  He  stands. 
And  for  His  Israel  cares  ; 
And  safe  in  His  Almighty  hands 
Their  souls  for  ever  bears." 

(2.)  God  delivers  His  people  from  the 
power  of  evil.  He  is  more  than  a  de- 
fender. He  is  a  deliverer.  He  causes  our 
foes  to  raise  the  siege,  and  leave  us  un- 
harassed  and  unharmed.  (3.)  God  causes 
His  people  to  triumph  over  the  ene- 
mies by  whom  they  have  been  menaced. 
"The  horn  of  my  salvation."  As  the 
**  shield  "  stands  for  a  weapon  of  defence^ 
•o  the  "  horn "  stands  for  a  weapon  of 
72 


offence.  "  The  horn  is  a  symbol  of 
strength  in  attack." — Perowne.  God 
not  only  shelters  and  delivers  His 
people,  but  He  enables  them  to  carry 
the  war  into  the  enemies'  camp,  and  to 
reap  glorious  spoils  in  the  battle.  God 
not  only  saves  His  people,  but  "  Satan 
is  bruised  under  their  feet ;  He  not  only 
delivers  His  Church  from  the  wrath  of 
men  and  devils,  but  strengthens  it  to 
overthrow  the  kingdom  of  darkness, 
3.  God  was  his  personal  deliverer.  "  My^ 
rock,  "  my  "  fortress,  "  my  "  deliverer. 
The  tried  saint  feels  that  he  has  a 
personal  and  peculiar  interest  in  God. 
God's  manifestations  of  help  and  power 
are  so  rich  and  multiform  in  their 
character  that  they  carry  a  separate 
secret  for  every  separate  heart.  Just 
as  there  were  rocks  and  strongholds 
about  Bethlehem  and  Engedi  that 
David's  eye  had  marked  for  many  a 
year,  and  that  his  own  foot  only  knew 
how  to  climb ;  so  there  are  forms  of 
Divine  help  and  blessing,  as  many  and 
as  varied  as  God's  relations  to  individual 
souls,  and  the  secret  paths  to  the  attain- 
ment of  which  lie  within  our  individual 
faith.  Let  us  not  be  afraid  of  tribu- 
lation, for  it  unites  us  all  the  more 
intensely  with  God.  Peril  deepens  ex- 
perience and  individualises  the  relations 
in  which  we  stand  to  God.  But  for  the 
years  of  danger  in  which  his  youth  had 
been  spent,  the  Psalmist  would  never 
have  been  able  to  realise  all  that  power 
of  intense,  believing,  personal  appropria- 
tion, signified  by  the  use  of  the  posses- 
sive pronoun,  "J/y  strength:"  '*i/y 
fortress:"   ''My  God." 

We  observe  : 

II.  The  Psalmist's  resolution  (ver. 
3).  "I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,"  &c. 
Having  shown  that  the  Lord  is  worthy 
to  be  praised  and  trusted,  how  natural 
it  is  that  this  resolution  should  follow  ? 
And  yet,  how  often  is  it  the  case  that 
we  acknowledge  the  glorious  perfections 
of  our  God  in  our  lips,  and  yet  do  not 
follow  up  the  acknowledgment  with  a 
hearty  practical  confidence  !  Call  upon 
the  Lord  for  help,  and  you  pidise  Him 
in  so  doing;  call  upon  the  Lord,  so 
shall  you  be  saved  from  your  enemies. 
Some  say  that  children,  weak  in  every 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALH  xvni. 


other  respect,  have  such  strong  voices 
that  they  may  be  able  to  cry  aloud,  and 
thus  secure  help  in  times  of  danger  ;  the 
children    of    God,   weak    and   helpless 


amid  foes  and  perils,  have  a  cry  to 
pierce  the  heavens  and  bring  down 
help.  Cry  !  cry  aloud  1  and  God  shall 
save. 


De  Profundis. 
(Verses  4-19.) 


Consider : 

I.  The  Psalmist's  peril  (ver.  4,  5). 
*' The  sorrows  of  death"  (ver.  4). 
"  According  to  the  reading  of  2  Sam. 
xxii.  5,  '  the  breakers  of  death.'  The 
metaphor  is  taken  from  those  dangerous 
waves  which  our  mariners  call  white- 
breakers." — Horsley.  "  The  floods  of 
ungodliness  made  me  afraid." — Perowne. 
"  The  reference  is  here  to  wicked  men, 
whose  number  and  violence  are  indicated 
by  the  figure  of  torrents  and  overflowing 
streams." — Alexander.  *' Tlje  sorrows 
of  hell,"  &c.  (ver.  5).  The  bands  of 
the  grave,  the  snares  of  death.  "  By 
hands  we  are  probably  to  understand 
the  cordage  of  a  net,  such  as  fowlers 
spread  for  birds.'' — Alexander.  *'  Death 
is  represented  as  a  hunter  with  a  cord 
and  net." — Delitzsch.  Whichever  way 
the  Psalmist  turns  there  is  dreadful 
danger.  Thus  are  we  found  in  our  sin- 
ful estate.  We  are  in  the  power  of  evil. 
Sin  as  a  torrent  carries  us  away ;  the 
devil  has  entangled  us  in  the  meshes  of 
his  net ;  there  seems  no  way  of  escape 
from  the  second  death.  When  our  eyes 
are  opened  to  our  true  situation  we  are 
overwhelmed  with  horror.  Thus  do  we 
sometimes  find  ourselves  in  days  of 
trouble  and  persecution.  We  are  com- 
passed about  with  sorrow  and  darkness. 
There  seems  to  be  no  way  of  escape. 

II.  The  Psalmist's  prayer  (ver.  6). 

1.  U^  fervency.       "Called."     "Cried." 

2.  Its  singleness.  "  I  called  upon 
Jehovah;  i.e.,  when  I  am  in  trouble  I 
call  on  Jehovah  only,  and  make  my 
supplication  to  no  other  deliverer." — 
Phillips,  3.  Its  efficacy.  "  He  heard 
my  voice  out  of  His  temple,"  &c.  "  Not 
the  temple,  or  tabernacle,  on  Mount 
Zion,  but  the  temple  in  heaven,  where- 
in God  especially  manifests  His  glory, 
and  where  He  is  worshipped  by  the 
heavenly  hosts — a  place  which  is  both 


temple  and  palace." — Perowne.  What 
wonderful  tenderness  and  oversight  are 
suggested  by  the  answer  that  met  the 
Psalmist's  cry  !  The  temple  full  of 
music,  but  the  cry  of  distress  carries  as 
far  as  the  angelic  symphonies,  and  reaches 
an  all-sensitive  ear  ;  the  temple  full  of 
radiance  and  glory  and  beauty,  but  away 
amidst  the  gloom  of  the  under-world  a 
Divine  eye  sees  the  prostrate  and  strug- 
gling form  of  a  servant  of  God  ;  God 
hears  the  cry  out  of  His  very  temple,  and 
leaves  the  very  temple,  as  described  in 
the  subsequent  verses,  for  the  help  and 
deliverance  of  His  servant.  The  celestial 
world  is  a  world  full  of  glory,  music, 
and  joy ;  and  yet,  it  is  quick  to 
sympathise  with  a  world  of  want  and 
sorrow.  Do  not  restrain  prayer  because 
of  heaven's  distance  ;  not  because  of  its 
magnificence  ;  not  because  of  its  sanctity, 
for  it  is  a  "  temple,"  a  place  of  mercy  and 
reconciliation. 

III.  The  Psalmist's  preservation 
(ver.  7—19).  "It  is  true  we  find  no  ex- 
press record  of  any  incident  in  David's 
life  of  the  kind  recorded  in  1  Sam.  vii, 
10,  but  it  must  be  some  real  experience, 
which  David  here  idealises." — Delitzsch. 

Observe : 

1.  The  power  of  the  Divine  Helper 
(ver.  7-9).  "The  earth  shook  and 
trembled,"  &c.  Whilst  God  was  a  rock 
and  refuge  to  David,  He  was  a  power 
that  rocked  the  very  mountains,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  frail  fortresses  of  the 
Psalmist's  foes.  God  is  a  wall  of  fire  to 
His  people,  but  a  consuming  fire  to  His 
enemies.  2.  The  swiftness  of  the  Divine 
Helper  (ver.  10).  "  He  rode  upon  a 
cherub,  and  did  fly,"  <kc.  "  He  is  a 
present  help  in  the  time  of  trouble." 

"  Ere  we  can  offer  our  complaints, 
Behold  Him  present  with  His  aid." 

3.  The  mystery  of  the  methods  i»f  the 

73 


PSALM  xym. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Divine  aid  (ver.  11).  "  He  made  dark- 
ness His  veil." — Moll.  "The  word 
rendered  secret  place — means  properly  a 
hidijig." — Barnes.  In  strange  ways 
God  saves  His  people.  Be  patient  and 
believing. 

"  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 
His  wonders  to  perform,"  &c. 

As  the  12tli  verse  intimates,  it  is  not 
all  obscurity.  "  At  the  brightness  that 
was  before  Him  the  thick  clouds  were 
scattered."  There  were  out-gleams.  So 
if  we  keep  our  eye  on  the  Divine 
government  we  shall  often  get  glimpses 
of  the  light  and  love  by  which  it  is  per- 
vaded. 4.  The  efficacy  of  the  Divine 
aid  (ver.  13-18).     God's  power  utterly 


discomfited  the  foes  of  His  people.  In 
the  7th  verse  "  the  earth  shook  and 
trembled,  the  foundations  also  of  the 
hills  moved;"  in  the  13th  verse  the 
^^ heavens"  shake,  and  pour  down  hail- 
stones and  fire.  No  wonder  that  the 
wicked  were  "  scattered "  in  dire  con- 
fusion. Let  us  not  forget  that  this 
glorious  power  is  pledged  to  the  weakest 
saint.  Our  enemies  may  be  too  strong 
for  us,  but  they  are  not  too  strong  for 
Him.  6.  The  fulness  of  the  Divine 
deliverance  (ver.  19).  God's  help  never 
stops  at  the  mere  point  of  deliverance. 
God's  power  never  comes  down  to  help 
us  out  of  our  perils  only ;  it  comes  to 
bring  us  to  better  things  than  we  had 
known  heretofore. 


Nature  and  the  Supernatural. 


(  Verses 

The  Psalmist  does  something  more 
here  than  "  idealise "  nature,  we  think 
that  he  suggests  some  important  thoughts 
concerning  the  relation  of  nature  to  the 
supernatural.  Dr.  Farrar  in  his  "  Chap- 
ters on  Language  "  observes  :  "  What 
Mr.  Ruskin  has  called  '  the  pathetic 
fallacy,'  is  the  indomitable  desire  to  see 
in  nature,  or  at  least  to  attribute  to  her, 
a  sympathy  in  our  joys  and  sorrows, 
hopes  and  fears.  Hence,  to  the  imagi- 
nation  of   the    Psalmist    and    prophet, 

*  the  hills  clap  their  hands  ;'  *  the  valleys 
sing  ;'  '  the  morning  stars  shout  for  joy  ;' 

*  the  fir-trees  howl,'  (fee,  (fee.  In  modern 
poets  the  same  fancy  recurs  with  con- 
stant intensity,  so  that  there  is  hardly  a 
single  aspect  of  nature  which  has  not 
been  made  to  express  or  to  interpret 
the  thoughts  and  passions  of  mankind, 
and  hardly  a  single  modern  poem  which 
does  not  illustrate  this  imaginative 
power,"  p.  214.  But  there  is  some- 
thing far  deeper  than  this  in  the  relation 
of  God's  people  to  nature ;  they  not 
only  see  their  experience  mirrored  in 
nature,  but  have  the  assurance  that 
nature  sympathises  with  them,  and 
ministers  to  them  in  a  far  more  profound 
sense.  In  that  portion  of  the  psalm 
which  is  now  before  us,  we  see : 

I.  Nature  as    obedient    to    super- 
natural power.     We  see  God  moving 
U 


7-19.) 

heaven  and  earth.  All  forces  doing 
His  bidding — the  wind,  the  clouds,  the 
lightning,  the  thunder,  the  mountains, 
the  sea.  The  Psalmist  in  this  song  may 
have  "idealised"  some  of  his  experiences, 
but  his  idealisation  assumes  the  obedi- 
ence of  nature  to  the  will  of  God.  The 
Scriptures  constantly  teach  this.  The 
Old  Testament  is  full  of  it,  and  the  New. 
Reason  sanctions  it.  It  is  so  natural  to 
think  of  the  world  being  plastic  to  the 
will  of  God,  that  when  men  cease  to 
believe  in  God  being  able  to  modify 
nature  they  soon  cease  to  believe  in 
Him  at  all.  Experience  confirms  it. 
There  are  few  good  men  but  who  are 
firmly  persuaded  that  God  has  interfered 
with  the  natural  order  on  their  behalf. 
Science  can  prove  nothing  to  the  con- 
trary. Science  not  only  tells  us  of  the 
invariability  of  law,  but  she  tells  us  with 
equal  emphasis  of  the  modificability  of 
law  ]  and  if  the  human  will  can  modify 
natural  law,  who  shall  set  the  limits  of 
the  Divine  interference  with  the  natural 
order  1 

We  see  : 

II.  Nature  as  the  executant  of  a 
supernatural  will.  We  see  in  this 
psalm  nature  as  an  executant  of  the 
Divine  anger.  How  all  the  forces  of 
nature  are  here  arrayed  against  the 
wicked  !     Nature  is  God's  minister  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  xym. 


execute  wrath  upon  them  that  do  evil. 
It  seems  sometimes  as  if  nature  were 
against  God,  and  for  sin  and  sinners ; 
but  if  we  look  further  down  we  shall  see 
that  nature  is  on  the  side  of  God  and 
righteousness.  Let  the  wicked  remem- 
ber that  the  visible  universe  is  God's 
vast  arsenal,  and  when  once  He  is  angry 
He  can  turn  all  the  bright  and  beautiful 
things  of  nature  into  the  swift  ministers 
of  death  and  ruin.  We  see  nature  also  as 
an  executant  of  the  Divine  grace.  There 
is  a  dark  side  of  nature  for  the  enemies 
of  God — there  is  a  bright  side  for  the 
friends  of  God.  All  this  storm  and 
earthquake  was  in  mercy  to  David. 
Child  of  God,  know  nature  to  be  thy 
friend  !  We  are  too  apt  to  look  upon 
nature  as  rigid  and  inexorable,  and  in 
no  way  sensitive  to  the  generous  will  of 
Heaven.  In  our  fear  and  suffering  we 
look  out  upon  nature  and  think  how 
reckless  she  is  of  our  sorrowful  moods ; 
we  aggravate  our  sufferings  by  deeming 
nature  unsympathetic,  as  we  should 
aggravate  them  by  encountering  the 
face  of  a  foe.  Remember,  if  your  purposes 
and  life  are  only  in  perfect  accord  with 


God,  God  is  always  with  you  to  aid,  and 
the  colossal  and  apparently  immobile 
forces  of  nature  are  fluttering  like 
threads  of  gossamer  in  delicate  sym- 
pathy with  all  His  manifestations  of 
care  and  help  and  succour  for  you. 

We  see  : 

III.  Nature  ministering  to  super- 
natural purpose.  Not  to  material,  but 
to  moral  and  spiritual  ends.  Remember 
the  higher  ministry  of  nature.  Nature 
is  really  but  a  mass  of  means  which  God 
uses  for  the  salvation  and  sanctifi cation 
of  His  creatures.  Heathen  fables  tell 
us  of  nature  being  affected  by  great 
military  and  political  events,  but  God's 
Word  shows  us  nature  ministering  to 
great  moral  and  religious  ends,  and  this 
is  well  worthy  of  credence.  The  inferior 
universe  serves  the  higher  universe.  We 
may  well  believe  that  the  sun  was 
darkened  at  man's  redemption  j  that 
natural  law  and  phenomena  are  con- 
trolled with  a  view  to  man's  moral 
education  ;  that  ordinary  laws  and  pro- 
cesses are  disturbed  to  secure  man's 
immortal  salvation. 


The  Bow  in  the  Cloud. 


{Yenes  16-20.) 


The  Psalmist  in  the  preceding  verses 
has  shown  us  the  earth  rent  by  earth- 
quakes and  the  heavens  blackened  by 
thunder- clouds,  here  we  see  the  rainbow 
span  the  horrible  tempest — God's  pity 
and  aid  to  His  afflicted  servant.  The 
rainbow  has  various  colours,  and  there 
are  several  aspects  of  God's  government 
towards  His  afflicted  people  shining  out 
brightly  in  this  paragraph. 

Notice  : 

L  The  supremacy  of  God's  govern- 
ment. "  He  sent/rom  above'*  (ver.  16). 
All  was  shaken  on  the  earth,  all  eclipsed 
in  the  sky,  but  above  the  firmament 
God  sits  in  perfect  repose.  Above  all 
the  storms  and  revolutions  of  earth  God 
reigns,  and  reigns  with  undisturbed 
sovereignty.  It  is  a  mighty  comfort  to 
the  believer  to  be  able  to  cry,  amid  wars 
and  tumults  and  eclipses  :  **  Hallelujah, 


the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reign eth." 
Oh  !  that  the  people  of  God  would  look 
in  dark  days  in  the  right  direction  ! 
'*  ffe  sent  from  above.''  We  look  to 
society,  or  to  self;  to  history,  to 
posterity ;  to  earth  beneath  us,  to  the 
world  around  us ;  we  look  anywhere 
instead  of  looking  up.  Await  salvation 
"from  above."  In  our  dark  days  the 
door  of  hope  is  a  door  which  opens  into 
heaven ;  let  us  knock  at  that  door,  and 
wait  the  help  which  is  never  denied. 
"God  being  enthroned  on  high,  and 
dwelling  in  the  heavens,  does  not 
separate  Him  from  His  servants  on 
earth  ;  it  merely  exhibits  Him  in  His 
exaltation  above  all  the  powers  of  the 
world  and  the  abyss  ;  it  no  more  pre- 
vents Him  from  hearing  the  sighs  and 
supplications  of  the  oppressed,  than 
from   making   knovm    His  presence,  to 

75 


FSALH  XVUL 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


help   in  gracious  condescension  to  the 
needs  of  men." — Moll. 

II.  The  discriminativeness  of  God's 
action.  "  He  took  me,  He  drew  me  out 
of  many  waters"  (ver.  16).  The  fright- 
ful storm  which  has  just  been  pictured 
sweeping  the  world  seems  as  if  it  would 
involve  the  guilty  and  the  innocent  in 
one  common  ruin,  but  we  are  reminded 
that  it  is  not  so.  In  the  midst  of  these 
appalling  displays  the  Psalmist  was  safe. 
The  Hand  that  was  hurling  lightnings 
and  hailstones  and  coals  of  fire,  was  out- 
stretched in  the  gentle  task  of  helping 
the  imperilled  good.  When  human 
authority  seeks  to  punish,  it  is  frequently 
un distinguishing,  and  strikes  the  inno- 
cent with  the  guilty.  And  it  often  seems 
as  if  the  Divine  authority  were  equally 
undistinguishing.  The  great  laws  which 
govern  nature,  society,  and  human  life, 
seem  blind  and  indiscriminating  ;  but 
let  us  be  sure  that  it  is  not  so.  "  The 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His." 
Fear  God,  and  serve  Him  with  all  your 
heart,  and  you  shall  know  that  there  is 
a  law  which  discerns  between  the  evil 
and  the  good.  "  Thou  shalt  not  be 
afraid  for  the  terror  by  night ;  nor  for 
the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day  ;  nor  for  the 
pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness ; 
nor  for  the  destruction  that  wasteth  at 
noonday.  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy 
side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right 
hand  ;  but  it  shall  not  come  nigh  thee  " 
(Psalm  xci.  5S). 

III.  Tlie  tenderness  of  God's 
methods.  "  He  drew  me  out  of  many 
waters."  "There  is  peculiar  beauty  in 
the  word  translated  draw,  which  is  the 
root  of  the  name  MoseSj  and  occurs,  be- 
sides the  place  before  us,  only  in  the 
explanation  of   that  name  recorded  by 


Himself"  (Exod.  ii.  10). — Alexander. 
In  this  psalm  God  is  seen  surrounded 
by  awful  terrors,  but  yet  He  deals  with 
His  servant  in  great  gentleness.  He 
has  thunder,  lightning,  hailstones,  for 
His  foes — music,  sunbeams,  dewdrops, 
for  His  people.  "  He  drew  me."  Softly, 
tenderly,  does  God  withdraw  His 
servants  from  scenes  of  peril. 

IV.  The  effectiveness  of  God's  aid 
(ver.  17,  18).  The  Psalmist  was  no 
match  for  his  foes.  They  were  strong, 
and  they  took  advantage  of  his  weakness. 
"  They  fell  upon  me  in  the  day  of  my 
calamity." — Moll.  And  in  his  various 
wars  David  repeatedly  sustained  partial 
defeats.  But  the  Lord  was  his  stay. 
"  The^  prevented  me  in  the  day  of  my 
calamity;  i.e.,  came  on  me  suddenly, 
unawares,  when  I  was  unprovided  and 
helpless,  and  must  have  destroyed  me 
had  not  God  upheld  and  supported  me 
when  I  was  in  danger  of  perishing. 
God  was  to  the  Psalmist  for  a  staff  to 
support  him.  What  the  staff  is  to  one 
that  is  ready  to  fall,  the  means  of  recover- 
ing and  preserving  him  ;  that  was  God 
to  David  in  the  time  of  his  extremity." 
— Dr.  Chandler  quo.  by  Spur g eon.  Our 
enemies  may  easily  be  too  much  for  us, 
but  they  cannot  prevail  against  God. 
Believer  !  rest  in  God.  Extremity  of 
help  will  come  in  extremity  of  need  ; 
and  when  you  are  the  weakest,  God 
shall  glorify  Himself  the  most  by  work- 
ing out  your  uttermost  salvation. 

V.  The  bountifulness  of  God  s  grace 
(ver.  19).  "He  brought  me  forth  to  a 
wide  place." — Phillips.  If  we  are  faith- 
ful to  God,  our  temptations  and  sorrows 
are  ever  working  out  for  us  a  more 
perfect  liberty,  a  higher  being,  a  greater 
weight  of  glory. 


The  Great  Salvation. 
(Verse  16.) 


There  can  be  little  doubt  but  that 
David  in  this  place  is  idealising  some  of 
his  own  experiences;  but  that  eye  is  very 
dim  which  cannot  perceive  in  the 
Psalmist's  language  something  far  beyond 
a  description  of  his  own  immediatQ 
76 


temporal  danger  and  rescue.  We  have 
not  exhausted  the  meaning  of  this 
magnificent  hymn  until  we  have  seen  in 
it  a  foreshadowing  of  the  world's  redemp- 
tion in  Jesus  Christ, 
Behold : 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


rSALM  XYm. 


I.  A  great  danger.  What  is  that 
danger?  A  world  of  sinners  on  the 
brink  of  hell.  The  Psalmist  pictures 
himself  surrounded  by  death  and  hell, 
and  altogether  helpless  in  their  grasp. 
It  is  a  picture  of  the  world,  considered 
apart  from  the  truth  and  mercy  of  God 
in  Jesus  Christ.  The  race  had  fallen 
under  the  power  of  sin,  and  the  whole 
earth  was  filled  with  wickedness  and 
wretchedness.  Man  could  not  help 
himself,  could  not  deliver  himself  from 
the  tyranny  of  the  devil.  And  each 
individual  sinner  feels  that  his  sins  have 
brought  him  to  the  brink  of  the  pit. 
Floods  of  ungodliness  are  sweeping  him 
onward  to  the  ocean  of  wrath.  We  are 
perishing  sinners. 

Behold  : 

II.  A  Divine  deliverer.  "He  sent 
from  above/'  Down  in  a  gulf  of  dark 
despair  we  wretched  sinners  lay,  when 
God's  eye  pitied  us,  and  His  right  arm 
brought  salvation.  There  was  no  help 
in  us.  Man  has  no  resource  within 
himself  to  cope  with  the  great  tide  of 
sin  and  wrath.  No  help  around  us. 
Society  cannot  save  us.  No  man  can 
redeem  his  brother,  or  give  to  God  a 
ransom  for  him.  There  was  no  human 
helper,  no  angelic  helper,  and  so  God 
Himself  becomes  our  helper.  Guilty 
man  was  like  a  broken  ship  in  a  storm, 
no  haven  in  view,  no  friendly  sail  bear- 
ing down  to  his  relief,  no  lighthouse 
star  to  cheer,  no  life-boat  on  the  wave, 
when  God  marked  his  signals  of  distress, 
and  out  of  the  opened  heaven  sent  him 
a  Saviour,  even  Christ  the  Lord.  "  He 
sent  from  above.'*  He  sent  His  Word. 
The  oracles  of  God.  He  sent  His  Son. 
May  we  not  say,  "  He  came  from 
above"?     He   sent   His   Spirit.      God 


has  come  down  to  the  scene  of  woe,  and 
invites  us  to  make  Him  our  deliverer. 
Mark,  1.  the  strength  of  this  Saviour. 
"  He  took  me."  This  expresses  the 
strength  of  His  grasp.  His  right  hand 
doeth  valiantly.  If  onr  soul  is  in  His 
hand,  who  shall  tear  us  out  of  it  ? 
Mark,  2.  the  tenderness  of  this  Saviour. 
"  He  drew  me."  As  humane  men  bend 
over  one  who  has  been  rescued  from  the 
river,  and  apply  warmth  to  the  chilly 
limbs,  and  chafe  the  livid  hands,  and 
pour  cordials  into  the  lips,  and  keep 
on  hour  after  hour  with  their  tender 
ministries,  until  the  closed  eyes  open, 
and  the  pallid  cheek  is  tinged  with 
crimson,  and  the  silent  lips  break  into 
the  music  of  speech ;  so  Christ  bends 
lovingly  over  sinners  plucked  from 
black  depths,  and  by  his  longsuffering 
and  tenderness  arouses  and  perfects  in 
them  a  Divine  and  immortal  life. 

Behold : 

III.  A  complete  redemption.  "  He 
drew  me  out  of  many  waters."  He 
gives  us  redemption  from  sin,  sorrow, 
fear,  death,  hell.  Christ  is  an  ark  to 
save  the  world,  and  to  save  us  all  from 
many  sorrows.  Noah's  ark  floats  on 
the  waters,  but  its  door  was  shut.  A 
thousand  eager  eyes  of  drowning  men 
might  behold  it,  a  thousand  cries  might 
be  addressed  to  it,  but  it  gave  no 
response.  For  a  while,  men,  women, 
children  might  cling  to  it,  only,  however, 
to  be  washed  into  the  awful  gulf.  But 
Christ  is  an  ark,  the  door  of  which  is 
wide  open,  and  every  sinking  despairing 
soul  may  enter  in  and  be  saved.  And 
as  the  ark  brought  Noah  in  safety  to 
the  new  earth;  so  Christ  shall  bring 
His  people  in  safety  "into  a  large 
place."     He  shall  land  them  in  heaven. 


Ultimate  Reasons. 


(Verse 

"He  delivered  me,  because  He  de- 
lighted in  me." 

We  inquire  : 

I.  Why  God  delivers  and  hononrs 
men  ?  "  Because  He  delighted  in  me." 
God's  regard  to  man  does  not  spring,  1. 
From  the  fact  that  He  could  not  do 


19.) 

without  us.  He  could  do  without 
us.  We  are  not  necessary  to  Him. 
''  What  shall  a  man  profit  God  1 "  2. 
Neither  is  this  regard  explained  by  any 
claim  we  might  have  on  God,  arising 
from  the  fact  that  He  is  our  Creator. 
By  a  thousand  wilful  transgressions  we 

77 


FBALM  xym. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


have  forfeited  any  such  claim.  One  of 
our  writers  insists  :  "  If  a  created  being 
has  no  rights  which  his  Creator  is  bound 
to  respect,  there  is  an  end  to  all  moral 
relations  between  them.'*  But  who  does 
not  feel  that  through  his  sin  and  folly 
he  has  lost  all  **  rights,"  and  must  cast 
himself  upon  the  mercy  of  God  ?  3. 
Neither  does  God  esteem  any  man  on 
the  ground  of  any  physical  or  intel- 
lectual quality  that  he  may  possess. 
The  creature's  skill  or  force,  the  piercing 
wit,  the  active  limb,  these  are  all  too 
mean  delights  for  God.  Apart  from 
moral  excellences  they  have  no  charms 
in  His  eyes.  4.  Neither  can  this  regard 
be  explained  on  the  ground  of  any 
arbitrary  election.  We  are  not  to 
imagine  that  God,  for  some  inscrutable 
reasons,  delights  in  some  and  rejects 
others.  On  what  grounds,  then,  does 
God  delight  in  men  ?  (1.)  On  the 
ground  oi  faith.  This  was  the  position 
of  the  Psalmist.  "  In  Thee  have  I 
trusted."  If  we  honour  God  with  our 
confidence,  He  will  honour  us  with  His 
protection.  As  we  trust  in  God,  we 
make  ourselves  dear  to  God ;  as  we 
trust  in  Him,  we  have  claims  upon  Him. 


(2.)  On  the  ground  of  moral  character. 

in  ver.  20-27  the  Psalmist  shows  why 
God  delighted  in  him.  According  to 
our  moral  sincerity  and  circumspection 
will  God  delight  in  us  and  bless  us. 
*'  God  deals  with  men  according  as  He 
sees  their  hearts  to  be  towards  Him. 
Those  who  walk  before  Him  in  simplicity 
and  uprightness  of  heart  may  expect  His 
succour." — Ferowne.  There  is  nothing 
arbitrary  or  partial  in  God  ;  He  will 
delight  in  us  all,  and  enrich  us  with  the 
uttermost  salvation,  if  we  trust  Him ; 
and  prove  the  sincerity  of  our  faith  by 
our  obedience.     We  observe  several 

II.  Practical  lessons  suggested  by 
this  truth.  1.  Let  us  not  perplex  our- 
selves by  imagining  any  favouritism  in 
God.  Acceptance  with  God  is  on  broad 
grounds,  equally  open  to  us  all.  2.  Let 
us  remember  that  we  cannot  recommend 
ourselves  to  God  on  any  grounds  of 
nature.  We  are  defaulters,  and  have 
lost  that  moral  beauty  in  which  alone 
God  can  delight.  3.  It  is  only  by 
believing  in  God's  grace  that  we  can 
enjoy  that  grace.  4.  It  is  only  by 
moral  sincerity  and  earnestness  that  we 
can  retain  that  grace. 


Good  Things  for  Good  Peoplk* 
(Verses  20-27.) 


In  these  verses  the  Psalmist  shows 
that  the  love  of  God  for  His  people  is 
not  a  blind  and  unrighteous  predilection, 
but  that  the  just  and  righteous  God 
loves  righteousness.  Observe  here  two 
great  canons  of  the  Divine  rule.     First  : 

I.  God  deals  with  us  as  we  deal 
with  Him.  (Ver.  20-25.)  "  The  truth, 
which  is  here  enunciated  is,  that  God's 
conduct  to  man  is  the  reflection  of  the 
relation  in  which  man  has  placed  him- 
self to  God.*' — Delitzsch,  David  does  not 
mean  in  these  protestations  to  lay  claim 
to  perfection  and  sinlessness,  but  he 
asserts  the  sincerity  of  his  desire  to 
please  God,  and  the  uprightness  of  his 
conduct  before  God.  '*  David  here,  as 
in  the  last  psalm,  asserts  not  his  freedom 
from  sin,  but  the  consciousness  of  his 
own  integrity." — Ferowne.  And  be- 
cause he  thus  sought  to  recognise  God, 
78 


and  glorify  Him — God  watched  over 
him,  and  blessed  him.  The  destiny 
which  God  prepares  for  a  man  is  a 
reflection  of  the  man's  personal  character. 
As  shadows  and  echoes  represent  their 
originating  substances  and  sounds  ;  so 
in  the  discriminating  character  of  God's 
judgments  there  is  a  complete  response 
to  personal  character.  He  who  honours 
God,  is  honoured  by  God.  1.  Let  us 
remember  that  we  cannot  expect  God's 
help  except  so  far  as  we  are  pure  in 
purpose  and  life.  2.  Let  us  observe 
the  loftiness  of  the  standard  of  conduct 
which  we  must  observe  if  we  are  to 
claim  Divine  patronage.  *^  All  His 
judgments  were  before  me  "  (ver.  22). 
And  they  were  constantly/  before  Him. 
"  And  I  did  not  put  away  His  statutes 
from  me  "  (ver.  22).  We  must  not  pick 
and    choose    the    statutes,    but    must 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XTin. 


observe  them  all,  even  those  which  try 
us  the  most;  and  observe  them  always, 
even  unto  the  end.     Learn  : 

II.  God  deals  with  us  as  we  deal 
with  one  another.  (Ver.  2Q.)  "  The 
Psalmist,  in  this  and  following  verses, 
intimates  that  the  plan  of  God's  pro- 
vidential conduct  to  men,  is  to  act 
towards  them  as  they  act  towards  each 
other.  This  is  an  undoubted  principle 
of  His  moral  government,  and  ought  to 
constitute  a  strong  motive  for  the  exer- 
cise of  all  Christian  virtues  in  the  social 
relations  of  life." — Phillips.  Through- 
out the  Word  of  God  this  truth  is 
insisted  upon.  It  is  recognised  in  the 
Lord's  Prayer :  "  Forgive  us  our 
trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that 
trespass  against  us."  If  we  are  harsh 
to  our  brother,  God  shall  exact  from  us  ; 
if  we  deceive  our  brother,  God  shall 
permit  us  to  be  blinded  by  strong 
delusions  ;  if  we  defraud  our  brother, 
God  shall  spoil  us ;  if  we  will  not 
forgive   our  brother,  neither  shall  our 


heavenly  Father  forgive  us.  God 
stands  behind  society,  and  marks  our 
integrity  or  faithlessness  in  all  the  social 
relations  of  life,  and  deals  with  us 
accordingly.  Whatsoever  a  man  sows, 
and  wheresoever  he  sows,  that  shall  he 
reap.  Let  us,  by  the  grace  of  God, 
keep  clean  hands,  and  sow  golden 
seeds,  and  blessed  shall  the  harvest  be. 
Lessons  :  1.  There  can  be  no  salvation 
except  through  righteousness.  On  this 
ground  alone  will  God  bless  us  on  earth  ; 
on  this  ground  only  admit  us  to  heaven 
(Rom.  ii.  6-9).  2.  There  can  be  no 
righteousness  except  through  grace. 
David  does  not  formally  recognise  here 
this  fact,  but  elsewhere  he  recognises  it 
fully,  and  here  he  assumes  it.  God's 
grace  originates  the  lofty  righteousness 
here  spoken  of.  It  is  a  Divine  right- 
eousness. God's  grace  preserves  this 
righteousness.  It  keeps  us  "  from  our 
iniquity."  God's  grace  crowns  this 
righteousness.  Giving  to  it  vast  re- 
wards. 


Besetting  Sins, 
{Verse  23.) 


"  I  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity." 
David  certainly  means  here  some 
particular  sin  to  which  he  was  most 
prone. 

Observe : 

I.  We  are  all  the  subjects  of  special 
weaknesses  and  temptations.  1.  Each 
nation  has  its  besetting  sin.  Scientific 
observers  tell  us  that  different  races  of 
men  have  different  kinds  of  weeds 
following  in  their  wake,  so  that  a  care- 
ful observer  can,  in  travelling,  see  at 
once,  by  merely  noticing  the  prevailing 
weeds,  whether  Europeans  or  Asiatics, 
Negroes  or  Indians,  have  dwelt  at 
certain  places.  So  each  nation  has  its 
peculiar  sin.  2.  Each  age  has  its  be- 
setting sin.  In  the  history  of  morals 
we  find  how  various  vices  have  prevailed 
at  various  times.  Now  an  age  of 
cruelty ;  now  of  intemperance ;  now  of 
superstition ;  now  of  scepticism.  Has 
not  our  own  age  its  besetting  sin  1  3. 
Each  individual  has  his  besetting  sin. 
John   Hunter   held    that    two   general 


diseases  cannot  co-exist  in  the  same 
individual.  It  is  somewhat  thus  with 
man  morally.  Usually  a  man  will  be 
under  the  influence  of  some  one  par- 
ticular passion  or  temptation.  All  sins 
are  in  us  seminally,  potentially,  sympa- 
thetically, but  in  some  one  direction  we 
are  specially  in  danger.  This  may  arise 
from  our  constitution.  *'As  in  the 
natural  man,  though  there  be  all  the 
faculties,  yet  some  faculties  are  in  some 
more  lively  and  vigorous  than  in  others, 
some  are  more  witty,  some  are  more 
strong,  some  quick  of  sight,  some  have 
a  ready  ear,  and  others  a  nimble  tongue, 
&c.  So  it  is  in  the  old  man  also  ;  there  is 
all  the  power  of  sin  in  an  unregenerate 
man,  but  in  some  more  dexterous  one  way 
than  another." — Strong  quo.  hy  Spurgeon. 
Or  it  may  arise  from  our  situation. 
"There  are  more  temptations  to  some 
sins  than  others,  from  the  different  pro- 
fessions or  courses  of  life  men  take  upon 
themselves.  If  they  follow  the  court,  I 
need  not  tell  you  what  temptations  and 

79 


fSALHZTIIL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


snares  there  are  to  divers  sins,  and  what 
danger  there  is  of  falling  into  them.  If 
they  be  listed  in  the  camp,  that  tempts 
them  to  rapine  and  violence,  neglect  of 
God's  worship,  and  profaneness.  If  they 
exercise  trading  and  merchandise,  they 
meet  with  greater  enticements  to  lying 
and  cozening,  over-reaching  and  unjust 
dealhig ;  and  the  mystery  of  some  trades, 
as  bad  men  manage  them,  is  a  downright 
'mystery  of  iniquity.'  if  husbandry,  to 
anxiety  about  the  things  of  the  world,  a 
distrust  of  God's  providence,  or  murmur- 
ing against  it.  Nay,  I  could  wish  in  the 
most  sacred  profession  of  all  there  might 
be  an  exception  made  in  this  particular ; 
but  Paul  tells  us  that  even  in  his  days 
*some  preached  Christ  even  of  envy 
and  strife,'  some  for  filthy  lucre  only,  as 
well  as  some  of  good  will." — Dove  quo. 
by  Spurgeon. 

We  proceed  : 

II.  To  make  several  observations 
touching  this  particular  class  of  sins. 
1.  These  besetting  sins  are  to  he  conr 
quered.  We  are  sometimes  ready  to 
apologise  for  these  sins.  We  are  ready 
to  regard  them  as  hereditary,  incurable. 
The  Scriptures  do  not  regard  any  taint 
of  blood  as  ineradicable,  any  passion  as 
invincible,  any  temptation  as  insur- 
mountable. The  Old  Testament  says, 
"  I  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity" 
The  New  Testament  says,  *'  Lay  aside 
every  weight  and  the  sin  which  so  easily 
besets  you."  To  say  that  religion  will 
not  strengthen  us  to  master  the  easily 
besetting  sin,  is  to  say  that  it  fails 
where,  and  when,  we  need  salvation 
most.  2.  In  the  subduing  of  our  be- 
setting sin  lies  the  great  struggle  of  life. 
Our  love  to  God,  our  allegiance  to  Him, 
is  tested,  not  by  ten  commandments,  but 
rather  by  one  or  two  of  them.  The 
question  of  our  moral  character  is  fought 
out  on  some  one  question.  If  we  con- 
quer here,  we  conquer  along  the  w^hole 
line ;  if  we  fail  here,  guilty  in  one  point 
we  are  guilty  in  all.     The  great  battle 


with  the  Philistine  host  is  decided  by 
single  combat.  Smiting  this  single  sin 
the  day  is  ours,  we  put  to  flight  the 
army  of  the  aliens.  This  sin  beneath 
our  feet,  and  the  crown  is  on  our  head. 
3.  We  must  estimate  our  character 
according  to  our  relation  to  the  besetting 
sin.  We  sometimes  flatteringly  estimate 
our  character  by  reckoning  up  the  sins 
to  which  we  have  no  inclination.  This 
is  a  fatal  miscalculation.  Is  it  not  a 
maxim  in  mechanics,  that  a  thing  is  no 
stronger  than  its  weakest  part?  This 
is  as  true  in  morals  as  in  mechanics. 
When  we  seek  to  estimate  our  character 
let  us  ask,  how  do  we  stand  in  regard  to 
our  weak  points  ?  Are  we  gaining,  or 
losing  ground  there  1  Never  mind  the 
strong  points.  If  we  perpetually  fail  in 
one  point  let  us  remember  that  that  is 
the  true  index  to  our  character,  and  that 
a  score  of  untried  virtues  will  not  atone 
for  the  one  virtue  which  fails  whenever 
it  is  put  into  the  fire. 

Observe  finally  : 

The  disciplijie  by  which  the  easily 
besetting  sin  is  to  be  subdued.  1.  We 
must  seek  the  gra^e  of  God.  It  is  im- 
possible for  us  to  cast  aside  these  sins 
in  our  own  strength.  We  must  "  look 
unto  Jesus."  We  are  to  be  made  perfect 
by  looking  at  Him,  the  perfection  of 
beauty,  and  ever  claiming  His  power 
and  grace.  2.  We  must  exert  ourselves. 
"  /  kept  myself  from  mine  iniquity." 
"  God,  indeed,  in  our  first  conversion 
works  upon  us  as  He  did  U[)on  the  earth, 
or  Adam's  body  in  paradise,  before  He 
breathed  a  soul  into  it  and  made  it  a 
living  creature ;  such  a  power  as  Christ 
put  forth  on  Lazarus  in  his  grave,  for 
we  are  '  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ; ' 
but  yet  being  living  he  must  walk  and 
act  of  himself,  the  Lord  will  have  us  to 
co-operate  together  with  Him,  for  we 
are  built  upon  Christ,  not  as  dead,  but 
as  'living  stones.'" — Strong  quo.  by 
Spurgeon, 


Thb  Light  of  Life. 

(^erse  28.) 

Here  the  Psalmist  recognises  God  as,      Thou  givest light  to  my  lamp;  Jehovah, 

my   God,  maketh  my  darkness   to    be 


The   source 


of  his   Light.       "For 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


psALif  xynt. 


bright." — Perowne.  In  2  Sam.  xxii.  29, 
"  Thou,  O  Jehovah,  art  my  lamp."  In 
days  of  deep  perplexity,  in  the  presence 
of  painful  problems,  God  was  his  coun- 
sellor. Blessed  are  those  who  seek 
light  in  God !  Take  your  candles  to 
Him,  and  He  shall  light  them  with  a 
shining  lustre.  Take  your  understand- 
ing to  Him,  and  He  shall  make  it  to 
shed  pure  illuminations  ;  take  your  heart 
to  Him,  and  He  shall  make  it  burn  with 
heavenly  brightness.  Light  your  candles 
at  the  radiant  luminary  of  the  Spirit, 
the  Word,  the  Throne. 

II.  The  source  of  Ms  joy.  "  Light 
is  often  in  Scripture  expressive  of  joy 
or  comfort,"  for  "  truly  the  light  is 
sweet,  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the 
eyes  to  behold  the  sun  "  (Eccles.  xi.  7  j 
Ps.  xcvii.  11  ;  xcii.  4).  By  a  natural 
opposition,  as  light  is  expressive  of  joy 
and  comfort ;  so  is  darkness,  of  sorrow 
and  misery.  The  Psalmist,  however, 
speaks  in  this  place  of  artificial  light, 
a  "  candle  "  or  *'  lamp  ; "  which  has  been 
supposed  to  be  illustrated  by  the  custom 
prevailing  in  Egypt,  of  never  suffering 
their  houses  to  be  without  lights,  but 
burning  lamps  even  through  the  night, 
so  that  tiie  poorest  people  would  rather 
retrench  part  of  their  food  than  neglect 
it." — BisJwp  Mant,  "  The  lamps  lighted 
in  the  house  is  the  image  at  once  of 
prosperity  and  continuance  of  life  and 
happiness." — Perowne.  Amid  the  dark- 
ness which  everywhere  presses  upon  us, 
God  is  the  lamp  of  His  people,  the 
source  of  their  comfort  and  gladness." 
A  lamp  or  candle  in  the  house  is  a 
common  Hebrew  figure  for  prosperity, 
and  its  extinction  for  distress.  See 
Job  xviii.  5,  6  ;  xxi.  17;  Pro  v.  xxiv. 
20." — Alexander.  And  when  God  de- 
serts a  man,  all  the  light  of  life  is  gone. 

III.  The  source  of  his  glory.  David 
himself  was  called  the  lamp  of  Israel 


(1  Kings  xi.  36,  (fee.)  He  was  its  light 
and  its  glory.  And  God  was  David'a 
light  and  glory.  "  David's  life  and 
dominion,  as  the  covenant  king,  is  the 
lamp  which  God's  favour  has  lighted  for 
the  well-being  of  Israel,  and  His  power 
will  not  allow  this  lamp  (2  Sam.  xxi. 
17)  to  be  quenched." — Delitzsch.  Bless- 
ed are  all  those  who  find  in  God  their 
life  and  glory.  They  want  nothing 
more.  He  fills  them  with  joy ;  He 
crowns  them  with  beauty  and  glory.  1. 
God  is  a  full  Light.  All  other  lights 
are  partial  and  dim.  He  is  a  Sun  ;  He 
giveth  grace  and  glory,  (fee.  Fulness  of 
light,  felicity,  honour,  in  fellowship  with 
Him.  He  is  everything.  "The  sun 
shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day ; 
neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon 
give  light  unto  thee ;  but  the  Lord  shall 
be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and 
thy  God  thy  glory"  (Isa.  Ix.  19).  2. 
God  is  a  true  Light.  Nothing  but  the 
pure  white  light.  "  God  is  light,  and 
in  Him  there  is  no  darkness  at  all." 
The  light  He  imparts  never  leads 
astray ;  the  joy  He  gives  has  no  sorrow 
added  to  it ;  the  honour  and  glory  He 
gives  to  His  children  has  no  abatement 
or  stain,  they  are  altogether  kings.  3. 
God  is  a  safe  Light.  Nothing  can  ex- 
tinguish the  central  orb.  And  if  we 
put  our  trust  in  God,  if  we  draw  the 
supplies  of  life  from  Him,  nothing  can 
extinguish  our  joy  and  hope.  We  see 
how  David's  life  and  joy  and  glory  were 
often  threatened  with  total  extinction, 
but  the  hand  of  God  preserved  him,  the 
very  darkness  of  death  was  lit  again  into 
day.  4.  God  is  an  everlasting  light. 
"Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down; 
neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself : 
for  the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting 
light,  and  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall 
be  ended  "  (Isa.  Ix.  20). 


Full  Conquest. 
(Verses  29-34.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  Psalmist 
exulting  as  *'  more  than  a  conqueror." 
Observe  : 
I.  The  fulness  of  his  victory  (ver. 


29).  1.  He  has  vanquished  a  host 
of  enemies.  A  "troop."  2.  He  has 
utterly  vanquished  them.  "  Through  a 
troop."      Divided   them,   broken  them 

81 


rsALMxvm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


up,  scattered  them.  3.  He  has  done  it 
easily.  "  I  have  run  through  a  troop." 
I  "leaped  over  a  wall.''  He  did  not 
secretly  undermine  it,  or  painfully  batter 
it,  or  just  succeed  in  scaling  it,  he  leaped 
over  it.  All  enemies,  all  obstructions, 
have  been  triumphantly  vanquished. 

II.  The  source  of  his  victory  (ver. 
29-34).  "By  thee"  (ver.  29).  '' Ift 
thee,  and  in  my  Gody  i.e.,  in  intimate 
union  with  Him  and  possession  of  Him, 
a  much  stronger  sense  than  that  of  mere 
assistance  (by  thee),  which,  however,  is 
\\\Q\vidiQdi"— Alexander.  1.  The  Psalm- 
ist trusted  in  God.  He  identified  him- 
self with  God  (ver.  30).  He  entertained 
a  lofty  sense  of  God's  truth,  and  faith- 
fulness, and  power.  2.  The  Psalmist 
trusted  in  God  alone  (ver.  31).  God  is 
a  rock,  a  ground  of  confidence  that  cannot 
be  shaken,  and  God  alone  is  such  a  rock. 
And  3.  God  gave  hm  the  victory.  God 
does  all  (ver.  32).  "  Perfect,  i.e.,  ab- 
solutely smooth,  free  from  stumblings 
and  errors,  leading  straight  forward  to 
a  divine  goal." — Delitzsch.  Strength  in 
both  its  beginning  and  continuance  is  of 
God.  He  "girds"  with  strength  at 
the  outset  and  maketh  the  whole  '*  way 
perfect  *'  (ver.  33).  God  establishes  his 
feet.  Enables  him  to  stand  where  it 
seemed  impossible  to  find  footing ;  to 
scale  heights  which  seemed  utterly  im- 
practicable (ver.  34).  God  gave  him 
wisdom  and  prowess  to  defeat  his  foes. 
"  It  is  not  the  bow  of  brass  which  has 
been  David's  protection,  but  Jehovah's 
shield  covered  him ;  Jehovah's  right 
hand  held  him  up ;  Jehovah's  wonder- 
ful condescension  made  him  great ; 
Jehovah  made  room  for  him  to  stand, 


and  subdue  those  that  rose  up  against 
him. " — Ferowne. 

Lessons : 

1.  We  shall  gain  the  victory  of  life  by 
allying  ourselves  with  God.  All  life  is 
a  warfare  to  us,  as  it  was  to  David  ; 
and  we  shall  achieve  the  victory  only 
in  Divine  strength.  In  the  natural 
world  we  see  how  feeble  men  are  whilst 
they  use  only  their  own  strength,  their 
own  eyes,  hands,  feet.  It  is  when  they 
learn  how  to  avail  themselves  of  God's 
power  that  they  accomplish  marvels. 
The  human  hand  is  feeble,  but  it  uses 
God's  power,  and  the  dynamite  rends 
asunder  the  rocks,  the  steam  drives  the 
mighty  ship  or  thundering  wheels  of 
mills,  the  electric  spark  tells  our  wishes 
on  the  other  side  of  the  world.  We  are 
slow,  feeble,  local,  considered  in  our- 
selves ;  but  when  science  has  taught  us 
to  avail  ourselves  of  God's  power,  we  dare 
winds  and  seas  and  mountains.  So  in 
the  moral  world.  We  are  feeble  indeed 
in  ourselves,  we  cannot  do  the  things 
that  we  would ;  but  when  w^e  listen  to 
revelation,  and  by  thought,  and  faith, 
and  prayer,  lay  hold  of  God's  strength, 
we  can  do  all  things.  2.  If  we  ally  our- 
selves with  God's  strength,  the  victory  of 
life  shall  be  most  complete  and  brilliant. 
We  shall  more  than  prevail.  The  "  high 
places  "  of  Christian  experience  shall  be 
reached;  the  "high  places"  of  the 
world,  the  most  difficult  undertakings 
of  Christian  zeal,  shall  be  proudly  com- 
passed ;  the  "  high  places  "  of  Christian 
hope  shall  be  climbed,  and  we  shall 
shout  the  song  of  victory  on  those  table- 
lands, of  which  God  Himself  is  sun  and 
moon. 


God's  Shield. 
{Verse  Zb.) 


"  Thou  hast  also  given  me  the  shield 
of  thy  salvation." 

This  "shield  "  indicates  : 

I.  The  availahleness  of  God's  help. 
The  fortress  can  only  shelter  within  its 
precincts,  but  the  shield  is  with  the 
warrior  wherever  he  may  go.  Whatever 
may  be  our  lot,  however  singular  and 
exposed,  God  is  with  us  to  uphold  and 
82 


save.      You   may  have    to    leave   the 

fortress  of  a  sweet  pure  home,  and  go 
into  the  midst  of  gay  and  worldly 
society,  the  "  shield  "  goes  with  you  \ 
you  may  have  to  leave  the  fortress  of  a 
moral  neighbourhood,  to  dwell  amid  the 
tents  of  wickedness,  the  shield  goes  with 
you ;  you  are  compelled  to  leave  the 
fortress  of  a  Christian  Church  and  dwell 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


VfAUIlCTItt 


where  you  are  cut  off  from  Christian 
privileges  aud  fellowship,  the  shield  goes 
with  you;  you  are  compelled  to  leave 
the  fortress  of  a  Christian  country  to 
dwell  in  heathenish  lands,  the  shield 
goes  with  you.  In  all  places  you  may 
realise  God's  aid.  Your  shield  is  ever 
with  you. 

This  shield  indicates  : 

II.  The  many-sidedness  of  God's 
protecting  love.  The  great  round 
shield  [)reserves  the  warrior  from  top  to 
toe.  So  the  loving  hand  of  God  shelters 
our  whole  personality,  and  all  our 
interests.  Be  sure  that  Satan  would 
seek  to  wound  us  in  the  eye,  to  darken 
our  understanding ;  in  the  heart,  to 
make  us  faint ;  in  the  knee,  to  injure 
our  devoutness ;  but  God's  protecting 
love  shelters  us  altogether.  Our  happi- 
ness, character,  circumstances;  in  life, 
in  death,  in  eternity. 

The  shield  indicates : 

III.  The  invincibility  of  God's 
strength.  It  is  the  shield  of  ^^  salvo- 
tion."  Whoever  places  himself  in  the 
hands  of  God  is  safe.  If  we  meet  evil 
in  our  own  strength  we  shall  be  over- 
come, but  confide  in  this  Divine  armour, 
and  you  come  out  of  life's  battle  with- 
out a  scratch.  Does  Satan  tempt  you  to 
error  f  Confront  him  as  the  Saviour 
did,  with  God's  Word  ;  let  "  His  truth 
be  thy  shield  and  buckler."  Are  you 
tempted  to  sinf  Be  strong  in  the 
truth,  aud  love,  and  righteousness  of 


God,  inwrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  into 
your  soul.  This  shield  quenches  every 
fiery  dart. 

Lessons : 

1.  Let  the  believer  who  has  triumphed 
in  life's  battles  give  glory  to  his  Shield. 
David  had  escaped  the  insidious  tempta- 
tion to  self-glory,  and  all  his  own 
strength  and  prowess  he  humbly  as- 
cribed to  God.  Let  us  remember  that 
God  helps  us,  not  only  outwardly  by 
His  providence,  but  inwardly  also  by  a 
thousand  untracked  influences,  therefore 
all  the  praise  is  His.  2.  Let  the  be- 
liever ever  hold  fast  that  Shield.  Never 
be  without  it.  Ever  living  in  close 
communion  with  God.  Never  have  it 
to  look  for.  3.  Let  those  who  have 
been  worsted  in  life's  conflicts  learn 
to  put  their  trust  in  God.  Baffled, 
wounded,  humbled,  turn  from  your  poor 
broken  self  to  the  immortal  love  and 
strength  of  a  Divine  Saviour. 

**  0  send  me  not  away  1  for  I  would  drink, 
E'en  I,  the  weakest,  at  the  fount  of  life ; 
Chide  not  my  steps,  that  venture  near  the 
brink, 
Weary  and  fainting  from  the  deadly  strife. 

**  Went  I  not  forth  undaunted  and  alone, 
Strong  in  the  majesty  of  human  might  ? 
Lo  !  I  return,  all  wounded  and  forlorn, 
My  dream  of  glory  lost  in  shades  of  night. 

"  Was  I  not  guided  for  the  battle-field  ? 

Bore  I  not  helm  of  pride  and  glittering 
sword  1 
Behold  the  fragments  of  my  broken  shield, 
And  lend  to  me  thy  heavenly  armour, 
LordI" 


Divine  Gentleness; 
(Verse  35,) 


''Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me 
great." 

Notice  : 

I.  The  greatness  of  the  good. 
"Hath  made  me  great."  David  was 
great  politically,  intellectually,  but  this 
greatness  must  be  understood  as  moral. 
The  Psalmist  humbly,  but  exultingly, 
recognises  the  fact  that  the  grace  of 
God  had  ennobled  his  nature,  crowned 
him  with  spiritual  glory  and  honour. 
The  end  of  religion  is  to  make  men 
great.  And  moral  greatness  is  true 
greatness.     It  alone  excites  true  admira- 


tion ;  makes  its  possessor  happy;  it  alone 

abides. 

Notice  : 

II  The  gracious  discipline  through 
which  this  greatness  is  realised.  "  Thy 
gentleness  hath  made  me  great."  We 
are  discrowned  kings,  and  through 
gentleness  God  seeks  to  put  the  diadem 
on  our  head  again.  Many  believe  only 
in  force  and  terror  as  restorative  factors, 
but  if  we  look  around  we  see  on  every 
side  the  triumphs  of  gentleness.  It  is 
so  in  nature.  Power,  amazing  power  is 
on  every  hand,  yet  acting  most  softly  ^ 

83 


Psalm  xviti. 


BOMILETIC  COMMSNTAUT:  PSALMS. 


and  because  it  acts  so  softly  filling  the 
landscapes  with  beauty  and  fruitfulness. 
Thus  it  is  in  art.  Gentleness  is  every- 
thing. And  this  it  is  in  society.  In 
the  physician,  the  parent,  the  tutor,  you 
see  the  grand  results  of  gentleness. 
God,  the  most  powerful  Being  in  the 
universe,  is  also  the  most  gentle,  and 
through  gentleness  seeks  to  raise  his 
fallen  children  to  true  and  lasting  great- 
ness. 

Mark  this  first : 

1.  In  God's  dealing  with  us  in  our 
sinful  state.  The  aspect  of  God  to  a 
guilty  world  is  altogether  kind  and  in- 
viting. The  aspect  of  the  Divine  Pro- 
vidence. "  He  maketh  his  sun,*'  &c. 
Of  the  Divine  Truth.  Great  and  gra- 
cious promises  to  sinners  are  on  every 
page  of  God's  Word.  Of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  The  spirit  of  God  is  ever  act- 
ing in  the  dark  heart  of  sinners — seek- 
ing to  inspire,  to  soften,  to  save.  In- 
finite love  struggles  with  human  perver- 
sity, and  so  we  see  our  way  back  again 
to  the  skies.  2.  God's  dealings  with  us 
in  our  penitential  state.  Our  first  ap- 
proaches to  God  are  usually  full  of 
imperfection,  and  the  best  penitent 
needs  large  indulgence.  Our  motives 
imperfect ;  our  methods  faulty ;  our 
faith  feeble.  Our  tears  are  not  pure ; 
our  sackcloth  equivocal.  God  grants  us 
this  indulgence.  We  are  often  rough 
with  penitents ;  but  at  a  thousand  im- 
perfections God  winks,  and  through  this 
gentleness  cheers  on  the  penitent  to 
greater  things.  "  A  bruised  reed,"  &c. 
3.  God's  dealings  with  us  in  our  ac- 
cepted state.  We  see  this  (1.)  In  what 
He  accepts  from  us.  Every  Christian 
man  has  the  full  and  clear  conviction  that 
he  is  never  all  that  he  ought  to  be — his 
actual  life  is  painfully  below  his  ideal 


life.  And  yet  we  have  the  conviction 
equally  full  and  clear,  that  although  we, 
and  our  works,  are  far  from  perfection, 
yet  God  accepts  us  and  them  ;  and  it  is 
this  truth  which  ever  encourages  us  on- 
wards to  loftier  attainments  and  experi- 
ences. (2.)  In  what  He  does  with  us. 
There  is  gentleness  in  all  the  discipline 
of  life.  "  He  does  not  permit  us  to  be 
tried  above  what  we  are  able  to  bear." 
Our  afflictions  may  often  seem  severe, 
but  they  are  the  expression  of  the 
Divine  pitifulness.  Indeed  many  com- 
mentators translate  the  text :  *'  Thy 
afflictions  have  made  me  great,"  ''  Thy 
humbling,  thy  chastening,  thy  disci- 
plining." —  Phillips.  "  Even  Thine 
afflicting  hand  tendeth  to  make  me 
great." — French.  "  Thy  loving  correc- 
tion."— Prayer  Book.  4.  God^s  deal- 
ing with  us  in  our  backsliding  states. 
How  the  Redeemer  brought  back  back- 
sliding Peter  to  repentance  and  life ! 
(Isa.  liv.  7,  8.)  Sinner,  do  not  despise 
this  gentleness.  You  will  not  be  driven 
to  heaven — will  you  be  drawn  ?  Be- 
lievery  economise  all  the  fine  influences 
of  life.  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine 
eye."  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto 
Israel."  Improve  all  the  delicate  im- 
pulses and  attractions  of  the  Divine 
world  which  lies  about  you,  and  ever 
acts  upon  you.  Let  us  pray  for  greater 
sensitiveness  to  the  love  of  God ;  and 
just  as  the  silver  moon,  with  its  soft 
charm,  draws  the  ocean  waters  round  the 
globe,  until  they  have  glassed  the  stars 
of  every  sky,  and  sung  their  anthems  on 
every  shore  ;  so  shall  the  good  Spirit  of 
God  master  the  wild  elements  of  our 
nature,  and  lead  us  on,  and  lead  us  out, 
until  we  have  seen  all  God's  glory,  and 
shown  forth  all  His  praise. 


The  Morality  op  Pbayeb. 
(Verse  41.) 


I.  Prayer  must  be  offered  in  a  right 
cause. 

Prayer  offered  in  a  wrong  cause  can 

never   be    availing.     In   the  preceding 

verses    we    see    Providence    helping   a 

righteous  cause.     The  Psalmist's   rela- 

84 


tion  to  God  was  not  a  selfish  contract 
for  help,  as  between  the  heathen  and 
his  idol — the  Psalmist  sympathised  with 
God's  rights  and  designs.  God  scatters 
many  prayers  in  the  air,  because  they 
are   offered  in  a  purely  selfish  cause. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS,  kalm  xvm. 

Many  prayers  also  are  rejected  because  cutting    the    sinews    of    your    future 
offered  in  a  wicked  cause.     "  Prayer  is  prayers,    by     your     present     conduct. 
80   notable   a   weapon    that    even   the  Righteousness  is  necessary  to  prayer — 
wicked  will  take  to   it  in  their  fits  of  not   as   a   channel    of    merit    for    our 
desperation.     Bad   men  have  appealed  prayers  up  to  God,  but  as  a  plane  of 
to  God  against  God's  own  servants,  but  moral   possibility    in    our    lives   down 
all  in  vain  ;  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  which  God's  answer  can  come  back  to 
not  divided,  and  God  never  succours  his  us.     Let  us  be  severe  in  the  purity  of 
foes  at  the  expense  of  his  friends.  There  our  thought  and  life,  or  we  shall  soon 
are  prayers  to  God  which  are  no  better  have  to  utter  the  lament  of  the  poet : 
than  blasphemy,  which   bring  no  com- 
fortable reply,  but  rather  provoke  the  "  g«?  «^°^«  "^^^"^TI  ^7,^^^?'  ^«  *  ^^<^^^' 
T       ,  ^          ^  •'            . ,    „       cf^  Returns  unop  ed  the  letters  of  a  son 
Lord  to  greater  Yfv^Xh.^—Spurgeon.  y^^io  hath  dishonoured  him." 

II.    Prayer  must  be  offered  in  a 

right  spirit.  3.  The  spirit  of  confidence.     The  spirit 

1.  The  spirit  of  penitence.  Sorrow  of  these  heathen  was  that  of  terror  and 
for  past  sins — but  there  was  none  of  despair.  "As  nature  prompteth  men 
that  in  these  heathen.  The  spirit  of  in  an  extremity  to  look  up  for  help  ; 
repentance  is  necessary  to  availing  but  because  it  is  but  the  prayer  of  the 
prayer,  and  if  that  spirit  is  wanting,  our  flesh  for  ease,  and  not  of  the  spirit  for 
prayers  are  abomination.  "  When  ye  grace,  and  a  good  use  of  calamities,  and 
spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide  not  but  in  extreme  despair  of  help  else- 
mine  eyes  from  you ;  yea,  when  ye  where,  therefore  God  hears  them  not. 
make  many  prayers,  I  will  not  hear :  In  Samuel  it  is,  *  They  looked,  but 
your  hands  are  full  of  blood.  Wash  there  was  none  to  save  them ; '  q.d.  If 
you,  make  you  clean ;  put  away  the  they  could  have  made  any  other  shift, 
evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine  God  should  never  have  heard  of  them." 
eyes ;  cease  to  do  evil ;  learn  to  do  well."  — Trapp.  Prayer  must  be  the  language 
(Isa.  i.  15,  16.)     2.  The  spirit  of  right-  of  confidence. 

eousness.     "  The  cry  extorted  in  terror,  III.    Prayer  must  be  offered  at  a 

and  not  coming  from  an  upright  heart  right  time.     They  cried  first  to  their 

(ver.  24,  &c.),  is  not  heard.     See  op-  own  gods,  and  when  there  was  none  to 

posite,   ver.   6." — Perowne.      We  must  answer,  then  they  cried  to  Israel's  God. 

live  in   the  love  and  practice  of  good-  They  prayed  too  late.     Men  often  do. 

ness.     **  The  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  There  is  an  accepted  time  in  which  God 

availeth    much."      "  Lifting    up   holy  will  hear  prayer,  and  it  is  our  duty  not 

hands."     Remember    the    morality    of  to  let  that  time  pass.     (Prov.  i.  24-33 ; 

prayer,  and  remember  it  in  your  daily  John   viii.    21  j    Luke   xvi.  24 ;    Rev. 

doings.     You  are  either  building  up,  or  vi.  16.) 

YiCTOBY  FOR  Christ  and  Victory  in  Christ. 

(rmc«  37-50.) 

We  have  here  a  picture,  pletely  under  His  feet.     Many  teachers, 

I.  Of  Christ's  victory  over  His  foes,  systems,  institutions,  which  are  proud 

*'  This   Psalm  looks   beyond  David.  enough    now    in    their    opposition    to 

David  and  David's   rule  over  the  na-  Christ,  will  be  very  low  before  Christ 

tions   are   but   a   type    and   image    of  has  done  with  them.     The  victories  of 

Christ,  and  of  that  spiritual  kingdom  the  Church  are  perpetually  stopping  at 

which  He  came  to  establish." — Perowne.  certain  points,  and  complete  and  per- 

We  have  suggested  here,  1.  The  com-  man  en  t   triumph    seems   scarcely   ever 

pleteness  of  Christ's  victory  (ver.  37-42).  attained.     But  let  us  not  be  discour- 

All  Christ's  enemies  are  to  be  "  put  un-  aged  ;  Christ  shall  ride  on  till  the  last 

der  His  feet."     And  all  of  them  com-  foe   has   fallen.      2.    The  rapidity  o/ 

S5 


^^ALMXIS. 


BOMILMTW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Christ's  march.  Up  to  a  certain  point 
David  had  to  fight  with  varying  for- 
tune, but  a  time  came  when  fighting 
was  no  longer  necessary  ;  a  panic  seized 
the  hearts  of  the  foe,  and  they  melted 
away.  Subsequent  victories  were  won 
by  the  moral  influence  of  the  first  vic- 
tories. May  it  not  be  thus  with  the 
progress  of  Messiah's  kingdom  ?  Slowly 
has  that  kingdom  seemed  to  prevail  up 
to  now  ;  but,  these  preliminary  struggles 
won,  may  not  the  triumphs  of  the  Gos- 
pel be  far  more  multiplied  and  swift  % 
Satan  shall  "  fall  as  lightning."  3.  The 
universality  of  Christ's  reign  (ver.  43, 
49).  David  ruling  over  Israel  and 
over  the  heathen  tribes,  was  a  fore- 
shadowing of  Christ  exalted  over  all  the 
lands.  Blessed  are  all  those  who  sub- 
mit to  Christ.  His  conquest  means 
freedom  and  life  and  glory  to  all  who 
accept  it.  Alas !  for  those  who  will 
not  have  this  man  to  rule  over  them. 


Man  or  multitude,  king  or  kingdom, 
whatever  sets  itself  against  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus,  must  be  broken. 

Observe : 

II.  The  saint's  victory  in  Christ. 
We  may  well  see  in  David's  triumph 
over  his  foes  a  picture  of  that  spiritual 
triumph  which  Clirist  ensures  to  all  his 
people.  1.  Do  n^t  be  content  until  all 
your  sins  are  overcome.  2.  Until  all 
your  sins  are  utterly  vanquished.  *'  Beat 
them  small  as  the  dust  before  the  wind." 
3.  Until  you  have  destroyed  them  for 
ever.  Fight,  until  God  crown  you  king 
to  all  eternity.  (I.)  Fight  in  Christ.  Be 
sure  of  that.  See  that  He  girds  you, 
leads  you,  saves  you.  (2.)  Put  forth  all 
personal  effort.  David  did  not  leave 
invisible  powers  to  fight  for  him,  but 
threw  himself  also  into  the  fight.  (3.) 
Give  God  the  glory  of  every  victory  (ver. 
49,  50). 


PSALM    XIX. 
Introduction. 


**  This  psalm  Instructs  its  readers  in  the  glory  and  goodness  of  God  ;  first,  by  directing  their 
contemplation  to  the  structure  of  the  heavens,  to  the  course  of  the  sun,  and  to  the  kindly 
influences  of  its  light  and  heat  upon  the  earth  ;  secondly,  by  inviting  their  attention  to  the 
revealed  law,  which  is  more  especially  adapted  to  impress  them  with  a  sense  of  God's  superin- 
tending care,  and  to  increase  their  understanding  and  knowledge  of  the  Divine  power  and  will. 
The  psalm,  therefore,  divides  itself  into  two  parts ;  the  first,  extending  to  the  8th  verse  ;  and 
the  second,  comprising  the  remainder." — Phillips. 


Natural  Theology. 
(Verses  1-7.) 


The  Psalmist  here  represents  the 
universe  as  a  grand  cathedral  in  which 
the  sun  is  the  great  preacher,  ever  de- 
claring the  glory  of  the  Creator. 

We  notice : 

I.  The  subject  of  the  revelation. 
"  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God.'" 
"The  contemplation  of  the  glory  of 
nature  must  not  lead  to  the  deification 
of  nature ;  it  should  lead  up  beyond 
the  entire  world,  and  beyond  all  the 
heavens,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  glory 
of  God  mirrored  therein,  and  excite  to 
the  adoration  of  the  Almighty  Creator 
declaring  Himself  therein.  The  ex- 
86 


pause  of  the  heavens  which  cannot  at  all 
be  surveyed  by  man,  has  yet  received 
its  limits  from  Him  who  is  alone  Infinite 
and  Almighty.  Even  the  sun,  which  is 
worshipped  by  so  many  nations  as  the 
king  of  heaven,  receives  the  measure  of 
its  motion,  and  the  revolution  of  its 
course  from  the  same  hand,  whose  govern- 
ment and  work  disclose  themselves  in  all 
things  as  by  the  hand  of  a  Master,  whom 
all  His  works  praise." — Moll.  We  must 
not  stop  with  nature,  but  see  in  her 
forces  and  glories  the  signs  of  a  Divine 
existence  and  love.  We  must  not  survey 
the  heavens,  as  some  do,  in   a  coarse 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XU. 


utilitarian  spirit.  The  heavens  reflect 
the  Divine  glory  in  their  own  glory. 
The  colours  in  the  heavens  bear  no  dis- 
coverable relation  to  the  utilitarian  ends 
of  light,  they  are  a  testimony  to  God's 
own  love  of  beauty ;  incidental  colours 
dashed  into  the  creation  without  any 
direct  bearing  upon  the  known  functions 
fulfilled  by  light ;  dashed  in  to  tell  us 
that  God  loves  beauty,  that  He  is  full 
of  it,  and  that  these  things  are  His  own 
dim  reflections.  Nature  declares  the  " 
wisdom,  poiver,  love,  and  faithfulness  of  / 
God.  Some  unbelieving  men  have 
dared  to  find  fault  with  the  works  of 
God.  One  of  these  recently  and  blas- 
phemously spoke  of  creation  as  a 
**  blundering  contrivance."  But  how 
poor  are  the  grandest  works  of  man 
when  compared  with  the  works  of  God  ! 
When  the  disturbed  fairies  left  the 
palace  they  were  building  incomplete, 
the  legend  tells  us  that  no  architects  or 
painters  could  be  found  to  complete  the 
edifice,  such  was  the  wondrous  beauty  of 
spiritual  workmanship  ;  but  if  God  had 
left  any  portion  of  the  universe  incom- 
plete, which  of  our  critics  would  have 
finished  it  1  Ah !  we  cannot  rival  the 
magnificent  proportions,  the  exquisite 
balancings,  the  splendid  hues,  the 
perennial  freshness  and  glory  of 
creation. 

II.  The  characteristics  of  the 
revelation.  Mark  1.  Its  fulness. 
"  Uttereth  speech."  "  Pours  forth 
speech." — Ka^.  It  streams  forth  as 
from  an  overflowing  spring,  is  the  sense 
of  the  original.  There  are  abundant 
evidences  of  God's  power  and  glory. 
2.  Its  constancy  and  perpetuity.  The 
heavens  are  declaring — always  declaring. 
"Day  unto  day,"  &c.  "The  idea  of 
perpetuity  is  here.  The  words  of  this 
discourse  of  praise  are  carried  forward 
in  an  uninterrupted  line  of  transmis- 
sion."— Delitzsch.  3.  Its  variety.  Day 
and  night,  with  their  various  phenomena. 
4.  Its  silence.  (Ver.  3.)  Mark  the  un- 
obtrusiveness  of  nature's  deeper  teach- 
ings. *'  Their  *  voice  is  not  heard,'  lit. 
*  is  inaudible.'  They  have  a  language, 
but  not  one  that  can  be  classed  with  any 
of  the  dialects  of  earth.  They  have  a 
voice,   but  one  that  speaks  not  to  the 


ear,  but  to  the  devout  and  understand- 
ing heart." — Perowne,  "  The  sense  of 
the  whole  passage  is  this  :  that  although 
the  heavens  are  not  endued  with  the 
power  of  human  s[)eech,  yet  the  instruc- 
tion which  they  convey  is  not  less  de- 
finite ;  the  lessons  which  they  teach  are 
not,  on  that  account,  less  clear  and  dis- 
tinct to  the  intelligent  and  pious  student 
of  nature.  The  number  and  stupendous 
magnitude  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ;  the 
sun  which  governs  the  day  ;  the  moon 
and  stars,  which  render  to  man  such 
important  service  by  night ;  the  clouds 
gathering  water,  which  descends  and  re- 
freshes the  earth ;  the  thunder  and 
lightning,  and  the  elements  ;  all  these 
preach  to  us  as  intelligibly  as  if  they  ad- 
dressed us  in  our  own  language  ;  and  not 
only  to  us,  but  to  all  nations  ;  the  great- 
ness and  wisdom,  the  mercy  and  loving- 
kindness  of  Jehovah." — Phillips. 

**  The  heavens  articulately  shine, 
And  speak  their  Architect  Divine." 

If  we  will  know  God  in  nature,  we 
must  have  a  seeing  eye,  and  a  hearing 
ear.  "  Holy  silence  itself  is  a  speech, 
provided  there  be  the  ear  to  hear  it." — 
Tlioluck.  5.  Its  universality  (ver.  4-7). 
"Their  line,"  (fee.  Their  measuring  line 
extends  to  the  confines  of  the  earth. 
The  glorious  sun  declares  the  glory  of 
God  all  over  the  earth. 

III.  The  importance  of  this  revela- 
tion. Some  Christians  speak  de- 
preciatingly of  nature,  but  it  is  a  mis- 
take. The  Psalmist  in  this  place  declares 
the  harmony  of  creation  with  the  moral 
law.  "  The  object  of  the  psalm  is  not 
to  contrast  the  moral  and  material 
revelations,  but  rather  to  identify  their 
author  and  their  subject.  The  doc- 
trinal sum  of  the  whole  composition 
is,  that  the  same  God  who  reared  the 
frame  of  nature  is  the  giver  of  a  law, 
and  that  this  law  is  in  all  respects 
worthy  of  its  author." — Alexander. 
The  first  part  of  the  psalm  treats  of 
God  in  visible  nature,  the  second,  of 
God  in  moral  law ;  and  these  two  great 
ideas  are  ever  needed  to  balance  each 
other.  If  we  think  of  God  in  nature 
only,  and  forget  God  as  revealed  in 
moral   law,    we  glide   into   pantheism. 

87 


fSALM  XIX. 


EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


The  most  perfectly  organised  and  com- 
manding form  of  pantlieism  the  world 
has  ever  seen  (that  of  India),  was  grow- 
ing up  at  the  very  moment  David  wrote, 
from  this  one-sidedness  of  view  :  the 
lights,  the  clouds,  the  winds  of  heaven, 
all  manifestations  of  God,  were  being 
substituted  for  the  moral  essence  of 
God  itself,  and  becoming  separate  gods. 
On  the  other  hand,  contemplation  of 
God  as  revealed  in  moral  law,  and  forget- 
fulness  of  Him  as  revealed  in  nature,  is 
apt  to  produce  a  narrow,  cramped,  and 
degenerate  type  of  religion  such  as  the 
Jews  presented  in  their  darkest  and  most 
exclusive  moods.  The  two  ideas  will 
always  be  needed,  the  one  to  counter- 
poise the  other ;  and  David  ever  ex- 
presses the  wisest  and  most  far-reaching 
instincts  of  inspiration  in  putting  them 
side  by  side. 

IV.  The  limitation  of  this  revela- 
tion. 

As  Lord  Bacon  says :  "  The  heavens 
indeed  tell  of  the  glory  of  God,  but  not 
of  His  will,  according  to  which  the  poet 
prays  to  be  pardoned  and  sanctified." 
■ — Delitzsch.  Lord  Bacon's  "Prayer  .•" 
"  I  have  delighted  in  the  brightness  of 
Thy  temple.  Thy  creatures  have  been 
my  books;  hut  Thy  Scriptures  much 
more.  I  have  sought  Thee  in  the  courts, 
fields,  and  gardens  ;  I  have  found  thee 
in  Thy  temples."  Fallen  man  needs  the 
truth  of  God  bringing  home  to  him,  with 
a  clearness  that  nature  cannot  accom- 
plish.    And  we   need  many  truths   of 


which  nature  knows  nothing,  "There 
is  this  great  difiference  between  God's 
book  of  nature  and  His  book  of  grace. 
The  one,  splendid  and  glorious  as  its 
Almighty  Maker,  was  formed  for  man 
in  innocency,  and  is  imperfectly  adapted 
to  a  fallen  state  ;  the  other  is  suited  to 
a  corrupt  nature,  and,  telling  of  mercy, 
addresses  itself  to  its  wants,  and  speaks 
with  a  Divine  power  which  refuses  to 
be  silenced  or  passed  by." — Ryland. 
Lessons  : 

1.  We  need  never  fear  that  the  true 
religion  of  nature  will  lead  us  away 
from  God. 

2.  The  believer  in  God  alone  appre- 
hends the  highest  glory  and  significance 
of  nature.  *'  None  save  a  believer  can 
rightly  meditate  on  the  works  of  God. 
Worldly  men  may,  and  do,  understand 
and  admire  the  wonderful  works  of  God; 
the  lover  of  science  can  truly  estimate 
the  wisdom  and  the  beauty  which  per- 
vade all  nature  ;  who  else,  indeed,  can  so 
well  do  it?  But  unassisted,  man  rests 
there ;  his  thoughts  go  no  farther.  It 
is  *  by  faith  that  we  understand  that  the 
worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of 
God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were 
not  made  of  things  which  do  appear ;  * 
and  thus  the  mind  is  led  from  nature  up 
to  nature's  God." — Ryland. 

3.  The  believer  finding  deep  joy  in 
the  workmanship  of  God,  finds  full 
satisfaction  only  in  turning  to  that 
moral  law  which  is  the  revelation  of 
God's  nature. 


The  Soul-Kestoring  Power  op  Law. 
(Va-sel,) 


"  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  con- 
verting the  soul."  *'  The  same  Almighty 
Hand  which  had  given  the  sun  his  light- 
giving,  life-sustaining  power  in  the 
physical  world,  had  provided  life  and 
light  also  for  the  spiritual  world." — 
Kay. 

Mark  : 

I.  The  attribute  of  the  law.  It  is 
**  perfect."  The  law  of  God,  the  moral 
law,  as  given  in  the  whole  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, is  perfect^  i.e.,  free  from  all  defect 
or  blemish..  It  is  spotless.  1.  It  is  the 
perfect  transcript  of  the  glory  of  God, 
68 


It  is  the  exact  expression  of  God's  moral 
nature.  The  earth  is  a  reflection  of 
God's  metaphysical  glory — it  tells  us 
of  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead  ;  but 
the  revelation  of  God's  will  in  moral 
law  is  the  revelation  of  His  highest 
nature  and  glory.  As  such  a  revelation 
it  is  "  perfect."  It  is  not  mixed  and 
marred  like  the  words  of  men  ;  it  is  a 
stainless  mirror  reflecting  the  sublime 
holiness  of  the  deity.  It  is  the  picture 
of  God  drawn  by  His  own  hand.  It  is 
"  light,  and  in  it  is  no  darkness  at  all." 
2.  It  is  the  perfect  theory  of  the  good  of 


EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XIZ. 


man.  "  The  divine  law  is  called  '  per- 
fect/ 1.5.,  spotless  and  harmless,  as  being 
absolutely  well-meaning,  and  altogether 
directed  towards  the  wellbeing  of  man." 
'^-Delitzsch. 

Through  the  disorder  of  our  nature 
we  regard  moral  law  as  our  great 
enemy,  as  that  which  stands  in  the  way 
of  our  freedom  and  our  joy,  but  really 
it  presents  us  with  the  grand  secret  of 
living  and  immortal  good. 

II.  The  effect  of  the  law.  "Con- 
verting the  soul."  Paul  tells  us  in  the 
Romans  how  the  law  condemns,  how  it 
threatens,  how  it  kills.  And  this  is  the 
effect  of  the  law  as  considered  in  itself. 
But  we  must  remember  that  when  the 
Psalmist  is  speaking  here  of  the  law,  he 
comprehends  in  it  the  promises  of  God, 
and  resjards  it  in  connection  with  the 
great  system  of  sacrifices.  The  evangeli- 
cal idea  is  included  in  the  views  of  law 
which  he  gives  us  in  this  psalm.  "If 
the  law  is  separated  from  the  hope  of 
forgiveness  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  it 


is  so  far  from  the  sweetness  of  honey, 
that  it  rather  kills  poor  souls  by  its 
bitterness."  —  Calvin,  Thus  under- 
stood, the  law  "  revives  the  soul."  1. 
It  brings  hack  the  soul  to  God.  "It 
calls  it  back  from  its  wanderings  by 
reminding  it  of  its  ingratitude,  by  setting 
before  it  its  high  destiny,  by  bringing  it 
to  its  true  Shepherd  and  Guardian." — 
Perowne.  Having  restored  the  soul  to 
God,  2.  The  law  strengthens  and  per- 
fects it.  The  law  harmonises,  vivifies, 
strengthens,  rejoices,  the  whole  moral 
man.  '*  It  gives  the  same  support  to 
the  mind  that  food  does  to  the  body 
when  exhausted  (Lam.  i.  11.  See  also 
Ps.  xxiii.  3;  Pro  v.  xxv.  13)." — French. 
"  The  word  here  translated  '  restoring ' 
is  used  of  restoring  from  disorder  and 
decay  (Ps.  Ixxx.  19),  from  sorrow  and 
affliction  (Kutli  iv.  15),  from  death  (1 
Kings  xvii.  21,  22)."— Z^ay.  The  per- 
fect law  makes  those  who  receive  it 
faultless. 


The  Light-giving  Power  op  the  Law. 
{Verse  7.) 


"The  testimony  of  the  Lord  is 
sure,  making  wise  the  simple."  Ob- 
serve :  ♦. 

I.    The    infallibility    of   the    law. 

"The  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  sure." 
"  Testimony,  i.e.  revealed  will.  Pro- 
bably the  two  tables  of  the  testimony, 
containing  the  decalogue,-  are  here 
especially  referred  to." — French.  But 
we  must  understand  the  moral  law  as  a 
whole.  This  law  is  sure,  or,  true.  It 
is  true,  therefore,  sure.  "It  is  raised 
above  all  doubt  in  its  declarations,  and 
verifying  itself  in  its  threatenings  and 
promises." — Delitzsch.  We  want  a  doc- 
trine that  is  infallible  ;  speculative  and 
unverified  teaching  we  feel  to  be  un- 
trustworthy and  powerless.  1.  We  can- 
not believe  in  the  infallibility  of  the 
Church.  One  Pope  contradicts  another ; 
the  same  Pope  is  inconsistent  with  him- 
self. Neither,  2.  In  the  infallibility  of 
philosophers.  The  faith  of  one  genera- 
tion of  thinkers  is  laughed  at  by  the 
next.     Neither,  3.  In  the  infallibility  of 


ourselves,  of  our  personal  opinions  and 
convictions  arrived  at  outside  revelation. 
There  is  no  infallible  guide  but  the 
moral  law  declared  on  Sinai  and  de- 
veloped in  Holy  Writ.  We  must  not 
live  according  to  the  maxims  of  men, 
neither  must  we  make  intuitions  and  in- 
ward impressions  our  rule  of  action,  but 
prayerfully  seek  light  on  the  holy 
oracles,  and  God  will  not  permit  us  to 
wander  into  false  ways. 

II.  The  subjects  of  its  illumination. 
"Making  wise  the  simple."  "The 
simple,  lit.  *  the  open,'  not  here  *  the 
foolish '  as  often  in  Proverbs,  but  he 
who  is  ready  to  become  a  fool,  that  he 
may  be  wise,  who  has  the  true  child- 
like spirit  (Matt.  xi.  25  ;  1  Cor.  i.  27), 
which  best  fits  him  to  become  a  dis- 
ciple in  the  school  of  God." — Perowne. 

1.  We  must  feel  our  need  of  guidance. 

2.  We  must  be  sincere  and  open  in  our 
search  for  instruction.  3.  We  must  be 
fully  prepared  to  obey  the  light  as  it  is 
given. 

89 


MALMXA 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


The  Jot-giving  Power  of  the  Law. 
(Verse  S.) 


"  The  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right, 
rejoicing  the  heart." 

If  our  moral  life  attain  to  complete- 
ness, we  shall  observe  in  it  three  stages 
in  relation  to  the  law  of  God. 

I.  The  period  of  rehelliou  against 
the  law. 

In  our  original,  natural  state,  we  fret 
against  God's  commandments.  There  is 
a  twofold  reason  for  this. 

1.  We  rebel  against  the  law  because  it 
denies  us  certain  gratifications  which  we 
covet.  Our  irregular  desires  lead  us  to 
covet  what  the  law  denies.     But, 

2.  We  rebel  against  the  law  chiefly 
because  it  is  the  law.  We  dislike  the 
law  because  it  is  the  will  of  another 
asserting  itself  above  our  will.  We 
resent  the  law  not  only  because  it  some- 
times comes  between  our  passion  and  its 
gratification,  but  because  of  its  dogmat- 
ism. Our  will  shall  be  supreme;  we 
will  be  our  own  law.  The  "  carnal 
mind  is  enmity  against  God,  for  it  is  not 
subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither,  in- 
deed, can  be." 

This  is  life's  first  stas^e.  Law  is  a 
tyranny  we  resent.     Next  comes, 

II.  The  period  of  submission  to  the 
law. 

We  come  to  the  conviction  that  it  is 
better  to  submit  than  to  rebel ;  we  cease 
to  be  God's  enemies,  and  become  His 
servants.  We  painfully  keep  the  law, 
but  cannot  be  said  to  love  it.  There  is 
a  constant  friction.     Then  comes, 

III.  The  period  of  joy  in  the  law. 
In  ancient  times  laws  were  put  into 

verse,  and  there  comes  a  period,  if  we 
live  rightly,  when  God's  laws  become 
poetry  to  us, — the  statute  becomes  a 
song.  Holiness  becomes  beauty  to  the 
eye,  sweetness  to  the  taste,  music  to  the 


ear.  God's  law,  the  grand  expression  of 
God's  nature,  becomes  the  great  object  of 
our  love  and  desire  !  "  I  delight  to  do 
Thy  will,  0  God."  Philosophers  rejoice 
in  natural  law, — they  are  never  weary  of 
celebrating  the  glorious  reign  of  law, 
and  to  discover  law  and  extol  it,  is  con- 
sidered the  highest  intellectual  triumph. 
But  to  admire  the  moral  law,  the  law 
which  denies  so  much  that  we  like,  and 
enjoins  so  much  that  we  do  not  like, 
this  is,  indeed,  the  triumph  of  life.  If 
the  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  to  rejoice 
our  heart,  (1.)  We  must  know  them 
better.  The  more  clearly  we  perceive 
the  nature  of  the  Divine  law,  the  more 
we  approve  of  it.  "  Open  Thou  mine 
eyes  that  I  may  see  wonderful  things 
out  of  Thy  law."  (2.)  We  must  grow 
in  love.  A  growing  love  turns  law  into 
music.  What  is  painful  to  dry  reason, 
the  heart  makes  light.  (3.)  We  must 
be  obedient.  Every  act  of  obedience 
makes  the  next  act  more  easy,  until  at 
last  what  was  forced  and  painful  becomes 
instinctive  and  delightful. 

Lessons  : 

1.  In  keeping  the  law  of  God,  we  find 
true  delight.  "  The  statutes  of  the  Lord 
are  right."  How  fatal  such  a  severe, 
inexorable,  unyielding  law  to  happiness ! 
No  ;  to  keep  the  law  of  God,  which  is 
given  in  all  its  fulness  in  Jesus  Christ, 
is  the  secret  of  sublime  content.  Let 
believers  not  rest  until  they  realise  this 
high  condition.  We  praise  God  because 
He  is  good  ;  but  not  enough  because  He 
is  righteous.  We  obey  the  law  because 
it  is  safe ;  but  do  not  sufficiently  find 
liberty  and  joy  in  it.  2.  There  is  no 
real  satisfaction  except  in  keeping  the 
statutes  of  God. 


The  Purifying  Power  of  the  Law. 

(Verse  S.) 


"The  commandment  of  the  Lord  is 
pure,  enlightening  the  eyes."     The  idea 
here  is  that  the  spotless  law  imparts  to 
90 


us  its  Divine  quality,  and  thus  fills  the 
soul  with  vision  and  joy.     Inquire, 
I.  How  the  law  makes  us  pure  ?   It 


HO  M I  LET  W  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XIX. 


does  this — 1.  By  setting  before  us  a 
pure  ideal.  It  brings  all  heaven  before 
our  eyes,  and  there  is  something  im- 
pulsive in  the  very  spectacle  of  perfec- 
tion. 2.  By  awakening  in  our  soul 
passionate  desires  for  purity.  3.  By 
strengthening  us  to  reach  the  highest 
planes  of  life.      Show, 

II.  How  this  purity  is  the  source  of 
spiritual  strength,  joy,  and  vision.  1. 
Strength.  '*  There  is  an  allusion  here  to 
the  dimness  of  the  eyes  produced  by 
extreme  weakness  and  approaching 
death,  recovery  from  which  is  figura- 


tively represented  as  an  enlightening 
of  the  eyes." — Alexander.  Sin  and 
corruption  mean  weakness,  but  the 
truth  of  God  in  Christ  brings  to  the 
soul  newness  of  life.  Purity  is  another 
word  for  power.  2.  Joy.  Dimness  of 
eyes  means  sorrow ;  enlightening  the 
eyes  means  the  return  of  gladness. 
Impurity  means  disorder  and  misery; 
purity  means  harmony  and  brightness. 
3.  Vision.  Our  bewilderments  spring 
from  our  passions.  Purity  is  vision. 
"  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God." 


The  Absolute  Perfection  of  the  Law. 
(Verses  ^-l\.) 


Consider : 

I.  The  incomparable  excellence  of 
the  law  as  considered  in  itself  (ver.  9). 

1.  The  purity  of  the  law.  "  The  fear  of 
the  Lord  is  clean."  The  commandments 
which  teach  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are 
without  any  admixture  of  error  or  un- 
righteousness. "  The  judgments  of  the 
Lord  are  true  and  righteous  altogether." 
(1.)  The  moral  law  as  contained  in  the 
Scriptures  contains  no  false  principle  of 
conduct  or  action.  (2.)  The  moral  law 
as  given  in  the  Scriptures  is  no  lower 
form  of  morality  for  an  imperfect  civilisa- 
tion, but  the  absolute  law  for  the  highest 
creatures  and  the  highest  worlds.  (3.) 
The  moral  law  is  not  merely  correct  in 
the  main,  but  all  and  every  of  its  special 
requirements    are  just    and    righteous. 

2.  Tije  stability  of  the  law.  "Endur- 
ing for  ever."  It  is  changeless  and 
everlasting.  The  moral  law  continues. 
The  ceremonial  law  was  abrogated — it 
served  its  purpose,  and  ceased  to  be ;  civil 
Jaw  is  susceptible  to  continual  modifica- 
tions ;  natural  law  will  be  changed,  for 
the  sun  and  sky  and  planets  shall  be 
dissolved  in  fire  ;  but  moral  law  abides 
firm  as  the  throne  of  God.  '*  Not  one 
jot  or  tittle  of  it  shall  perish." 

II.  The  incomparable  excellence  of 
the  law  considered  in  its  relation  to 
those  who  keep  it.  1.  Intellectually 
considered  it  is  of  .supreme  excellence. 
"More  to  be  desired  are  they  than  gold, 
yea,  than  much  fine  gold."     This  seems 


to  point  to  the  mental  appreciation  of 
the  truth.     More  than  gold,  than  fine 
gold,  than  much  fine  gold.     They  will 
do  that  for  us  which  gold  cannot  do.    2, 
Emotionally  it  is.     "  Sweeter  also  than 
honey   and  the   honeycomb."      Experi- 
mentally it  is  unutterably  grateful,  filling 
the  soul  with  sweetness.     Sweeter  than 
honey  and  the  droppings  of  the  comb. 
More  grateful  than  all  the  pleasures  of 
sense.     "  What  wonder  is  it  that  this 
converting,  instructing,  exhilarating,  en- 
lightening, eternal,  true,  and  righteous 
Word  should  be  declared  preferable  to  the 
riches  of  eastern  kings,  and  sweeter  to  the 
soul  of  the  pious  believer  than  the  sweet- 
est thing  we  know  of  is  to  the  bodily  taste? 
How  ready  we  are  to  acknowledge  all 
this  !     Yet  the  next  hour,  perhaps,  we 
part  with  the  true  riches  to  obtain  the 
earthly  mammon,  and  barter  away  the 
joys  of  the  spirit  for  the  gratification  of 
sense  !     Lord,  give  us  affections  towards 
Thy  Word  in  some  measure  proportion- 
ate to  its  excellence ;  for  we  can  never 
love  too  much  what  we  can  never  admire 
enoucfh." — Home.      Dr.  Duncan  said  a 
little  before  his  death  :    "  I  wish  I  had 
a  little  more   personal   faith.     I  think 
with  the  Psalmist  that  these  things  are 
more  precious  than  gold,  yea,  than  much 
fine  gold  ;  but  I  cannot  go  so  well  with 
him    in    that,    '  they    are    sweeter    also 
than    honey    and    the    honeycomb.'      I 
stick   at   that ;    that   has   often   been  a 
plague   with   me ;    the  precious  things 


PSALM  XIX. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


were  more  as  casketed  jewels  than  as 
meat  and  drink.  They  delight  the  in- 
tellect ;  but,  oh  !  I  wish  I  had  a  loving 
heart !  I  go  mourning  all  the  day  for 
want  of  it."  3.  Practically  it  is 
(ver.  11).  The  twofold  province  of 
revealed  law.  It  is  to  preserve.  It 
admonishes,  points  out  peril,  and  saves. 
A  miner's  safety-lamp  was  brought  out 
some  time  ago,  which,  besides  serving 
the  purpose  of  an  ordinary  safety-lamp, 
sounds  a  note  of  warning  to  the  work- 
men the  moment  the  air  around  becomes 
so  charged  with  fire-damp  as  to  be  dan- 
gerous or  explosive.  Thus  the  Word, 
which  is  a  lamp  unto  our  feet,  gives 
a  timely  note  of  warning  lest  we  fall 
into  temptation  and  sin.     And  in  the 


keeping  of  it  there  is  great  reward.  It 
is  true  that  in  the  end  it  will  bring 
us  great  recompense.  *'  The  Hebrew 
word  signifies  the  last,  the  end  of  a  thing  ; 
and  thence  it  may  signify  reward,  as  the 
consequence  or  result  of  an  action." — 
Phillips  But  this  is  hardly  tlie  truth 
intended  here.  "  In  the  act  of  keeping 
them — not  merely  as  the  consequence 
of  doing  so." — Kay.  *'  Not  only  for 
keeping,  but  in  keeping  of  them.  As 
every  flower  hath  its  sweet  smell,  so 
every  good  action  hath  its  sweet  reflec- 
tion upon  the  soul." — Trapp. 

"  The  work  of  righteousness  is  peace : 

The  great  reward's  already  given; 

And  all  Thy  servants,  Lord,  confess 

Obedient  love  is  present  heayen." 


Secret  Faults. 
{Verse  12.) 


Let  us  consider  what  these  secret 
faults  are,  and  our  duty  in  the  recol- 
lection of  them : 

I.  The  sins  known  to  ourselves,  but 
not  known  to  the  world.  There  is  a 
certain  portion  of  our  life  which  is 
sheltered  from  the  popular  gaze.  There 
is  a  certain  privacy  left  us,  so  that  God 
may  put  us  to  the  test  as  to  how  far  we 
are  good  because  the  world  looks  at  us, 
and  how  far  we  are  good  because  He 
looks  at  us.  How  have  we  acted  here  1 
How  acted  when  free  from  the  criticisms 
of  society  ?  Is  it  not  true  that  we  are 
Dften  more  pure  before  men  than  before 
God  ?  We  put  the  best  side  of  every- 
thing to  the  world :  but  this  is  more  true 
of  our  characters  than  it  is  of  anything 
else.  How  carefully  we  veil  our  faults 
from  our  neighbour  !  our  schemes  of 
pride  !  our  unspoken  anger  I  our  fits  of  • 
envy  !  our  greed  of  gold  !  our  stained 
imaginations  !  And  thus  it  comes  to 
pass  that  good  men  think  worse  of  them- 
selves than  society  does.  When,  on  a 
certain  festive  occasion,  Pestalozzi,  the 
German  philanthropist,  was  presented 
with  a  wreath,  he  put  it  gently  away, 
saying,  "  Crowns  are  not  for  me,  but 
for  the  innocent."  The  best  of  men 
have  ever  had  the  feeling  that  if  the 
92 


world  knew  them  better  it  would  praise 
them  less. 

II.  The  sins  known  to  the  world, 
but  not  to  us.  We  see  sins  that  the 
world  cannot  see  ;  they  see  sins  we  do 
not  see.  How  often  men  are  egregiously 
mistaken  concerning  themselves  and 
their  doings  !  And  this  applies,  per- 
haps, more  to  character  than  it  does  to 
anything  else.  Individuals  move  amongst 
us,  in  whose  countenance,  in  whose  eye, 
we  behold  the  evidence  of  a  fatal  dis- 
ease, and  yet  they  see  it  not ;  and  thus 
we  often  see  in  those  with  whom  we 
have  to  do  evidences  of  moral  disorder 
and  imperfection  which  they  apprehend 
not,  or  apprehend  very  imperfectly.  We 
may  be  very  sure  that  our  friends  see 
similar  faults  in  us.  The  portrait  our 
friends  paint  of  us  is  very  diff*erent  from 
that  rose-coloured  picture  we  draw  of 
ourselves. 

III.  The  sins  neither  known  to  us, 
nor  to  the  world,  but  which  are  known 
to  God.  There  are  deeps  of  evil  in  us 
with  which  we  have  but  the  slightest 
acquaintance.  As  Alexander  Smith  says, 
"  What  strangers  we  are  to  ourselves. 
In  every  man's  nature  there  is  an  in- 
terior unexplored  as  that  of  Africa,  and 
over  that  region  what  wild  beasts  may 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALM  XIX. 


roam."  **  The  perfection  and  spirituality 
of  God^s  law  render  it  almost  impossible 
for  a  fallen  son  of  Adam  ever  to  know 
all  the  innumerable  instances  of  his 
transgressing  it.  Add  to  which,  that 
false  principles  and  inveterate  pre- 
judices make  us  regard  many  things  as 
innocent,  and  some  things  as  laudable, 
which,  in  the  eye  of  heaven,  are  far 
otherwise.  Self-examination  is  a  duty 
which  few  practise  as  they  ought  to  do: 
and  he  who  practises  it  best  will  always 
have  reason  to  conclude  his  particular 
confessions  with  this  genial  petition, 
*  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults.*  " 
— Home.  To  society  we  wear  a  mask, 
to  ourselves  a  veil,  but  to  God's  eye 
neither  mask  nor  veil,  for  our  iniquities 
are  set  before  Him,  our  secret  sins  in 
the  light  of  His  countenance.  "  Neither 
is  there  any  creature  that  is  not  manifest 
in  His  sight ;  but  all  things  are  naked 
and  open  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with 
whom  we  have  to  do."     Learn, 

1.  To  recognise  the  reality  and  guilt 
of  our  secret  sinfulness.  These  secret 
sins  are  real  sins.  "  These  faults  are  of 
daily  and  hourly  incursion,  involuntary 
and  unavoidable  infirmities,  yet  are  they 
sins  properly  so  called  j  and  we  must 
be  cleansed  from  them  by  the  merit  and 
Spirit  of  Christ." — Trapp.  "  No  one  is 
to  plead  as  an  excuse,  or  to  justify  them- 
selves by  the  secrecy  and  delicacy  of 
many  sins^  the  unfathomableness  of  the 


human  heart,  the  impossibility  of  a  com- 
plete knowledge  of  self  and  sin." — Moll, 
Our  secret  faults  make  us  weak.  They 
rob  our  character  of  beauty,  as  a  flower 
fades  when  a  worm  is  at  the  root.  They 
are  likely  to  become  manifest  faults.  As 
Bishop  Hoplciu^  says:  "The  least  sin, 
if  let  alone  in  the  heart,  will,  like  a 
small  speck  in  fruit,  spread  to  a  total 
rottenness."  Our  secret  faults  will  con- 
front us  at  the  bar  of  God,  "He  shall 
bring  every  thought  into  judgment,  with 
every  secret  thing." 

2.  To  seek  forgiveness  and  cleansing 
from  this  secret  sinfulness.  "  Clear 
thou  me  from  hidden  faults."  "The 
word  translated  clear  is  borrowed  from 
the  law,  and  means  not  so  much  to 
cleanse  by  renovation  of  the  heart,  as  to 
acquit  by  a  judicial  sentence.  (See 
Exod.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Num.  xiv.  18.)  Such 
an  acquittal,  in  the  case  of  sinners 
against  God,  involves  the  idea  of  a  free 
forgiveness." — Alexander.  Let  us  seek 
this  forgiveness,  but  let  us  seek  also  the 
cleansing  grace.     Ver.  14. 

"  But  who  can  all  his  errors  tell, 
Or  count  the  thoughts  by  which  he  fell  f 
Omniscient  God,  to  Thee  alone 
My  sin's  infinity  is  known! 
Do  Thou  my  secret  faults  efface, 
And  show  forth  all  Thy  cleansing  grace.** 

Law  goes  further  than  our  power  ol 
introspection,  and  the  cleansing  power 
must  go  deeper  than  our  own  insight. 


Pbesumptuous  Sms. 
(Verse  13.) 


Let  as  inqnire : 

I.  What  these  sins  are  ?  De- 
liberate, wilful,  and  high-handed  sins. 
*'  Wilful,  insolent  ones." — Xat/.  "  Di- 
vines have  distinguished  sin  into  three 
kinds ;  called  sins  of  ignorance,  sins  of 
infirmity,  and  sins  of  presumption. 
The  will  is  supposed  to  concur  more  or 
less  in  all,  otherwise  they  could  not  be 
sins ;  but  they  have  their  names  from 
what  is  most  prevailing  and  predomi- 
nant in  each.  If  there  be  more  of  ig- 
norance than  wilfulness  in  it,  it  is  a  sin 
of  ignorance  ;  if  there  be  more  of  infir- 
mity than  wilfulness  in  it,  it  is  a  ein  of 


infirmity ;  but  if  there  be  more  of  wil- 
fulness than  of  either,  or  both  the 
former,  it  is  then  a  wilful  sin ;  and  that 
is  what  the  text  calls  presumptuous  sin." 
—  Waterland,  These  are  sins  of  scarlet 
dye — sins  evidently  against  reason,  con- 
science, society. 

II.  Out  of  what  they  arise  ?  The 
order  observed  by  the  Psalmist  is  most 
instructive — first  secret  faults,  then  pre- 
sumptuous sins.  The  latter  arise  out  of 
the  former.  We  ignore  our  secret  sins, 
and  they  are  uncared  for,  unrepented  of, 
unstriven  against,  and  they  develop  into 
bold  and  outrageous  ein.     Let  us  watch 

93 


K  ALM  XX.  HO  MI  LET IC  COM  ME  NT AR  7 :  PSA  LM8, 


tlie  first  strayings  of  our  heart  from  God  IV.  The  absolute  sin  in  which  they 

and  righteousness.     Not  all  at  once  do  culminate.     *'  Then  shall  I  be  upright, 

men    become    open     and    high-handed  and  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great 

sinners.     We  observe  :  transgression."     "  The  great  apostasy." 

III.  The  dark  tyranny  they  exercise.  The  idea  is,  that  wilful  sins  extinguish 

"  Let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  God's  Spirit  within  us.     The  unpardon- 

Dr.  Phillips  translates  this  :  "  F7'om  the  able  sin.     Secret  sins  lead  to  open  sin  ; 

proudf  i.e.f  from  tyrannical  or  haughty  and  open  sin  indulged  in,  persevered  in, 

governors.     This  is  much  better  than  to  leads    to    the   great    transgression — the 

render  it  by  presumptuous  sins."  But  this  quenching  of  the  Spirit,  and  final  apos- 

translation  has  not  the  sanction  of  the  tasy  from  God. 

great  commentators.      Alexander   says  :  1.  Let  us  beware  of  secret  faults. 

"  The    Hebrew  word    properly  denotes  2.  Let  us    beware   of   presumptuous 

proud  men,  but  seems  to  be  here  ap-  sins.      There  are  no  sins  so  dark  and 

plied  to  sins  by  a  strong  personification."  awful  but  we  are  capable  of  them.     Let 

**  Keep  thy  servant  f7'om presumptuous f  or  us    watch  and  tremble  lest  we  should 

wilful   sin;  literally,  from  proud,  pre-  fall  into    those    insolent,    defiant    sins 

sumptuous,  insolent  ones,  the  tyrants  of  which  provoke  the  mighty  and  glorious 

the  soul  (Num.   xv.   17-31);  let  them  Being  who  has  set  His  glory  above  the 

not  have  dominion  over  me." — Words-  heavens. 

worth     When  sin  comes  to  this  pass  it  3.  Let  us   live  in  dependence   upon 

is  hard  to  he  repented  of.     It  is  hard  to  Divine  aid.     "  Keep  back  thy  servant." 

renounce.     The  soul  is  at  the  mercy  of  Cry   mightily   to    God    for   preventing 

sin.     Like  tyrannical  governors  oppres-  grace. 

sing  a  captured  city,  so  does  sin  triumph  4.  Let  us  seek  for  entire  sanctification 
and  grind  down  the  soul.  It  is  com-  of  spirit  (ver.  14).  It  were  vain,  in- 
paratively  easy  to  shake  ofi"  faults  whilst  deed,  for  a  man  to  seek  to  purify  his 
yet  incipient,  private,  and  occasional ;  own  heart,  but  David  sees  in  God  his 
but  they  have  become  tyrants  whose  yoke  Strength  and  Deliverer.  Christ  delivers 
it  is  well  nigh  impossible  to  shake  off  from  sin  ;  His  Spirit  purifies  the  heart ; 
when  they  have  developed  into  habitual,  and  that  Spirit  preserves  us  with  gar- 
open,  shameless  sins.  The  sinner,  then,  ments  unspotted  from  the  world, 
is  the  slave  of  imperious  lusts.  Observe  : 


PSALM    XX. 

Introduction. 

"  This  is  evidently  a  liturgical  psalm,  and  was  intended  originally,  it  would  seem,  to  be 
■ung  on  behalf  of  a  king  who  was  about  to  go  forth  to  war  against  his  enemies.  As  the  king 
stands  within  the  sanctuary  offering  his  sacrifice,  the  whole  assembled  crowd  of  worshippers  in 
the  spacious  courts  lift  up  their  voices  in  the  prayer,  that  Jehovah  would  graciously  accept 
those  sacrifices,  and  send  him  help  and  victory  in  the  battle.  The  psalm  has  no  doubt  a 
prophetical  aspect,  from  the  fact  that  the  Jewish  king  was,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  a  type  of 
Christ.  Calvin  is  right  in  saying  that  inasmuch  as  this  kingdom  differed  from  all  other  king- 
doms, because  God  had  determined  to  govern  and  defend  His  people  by  the  hand  of  David  and 
of  his  seed,  therefore  we  ought  to  recognise,  under  the  type  of  the  temporal  kingdom,  that 
better  rule  on  which  the  Joy  and  happiness  of  the  Church  depend.*' — Perowne, 

The  Name  of  Jehovah. 
{Verses  1,  5,  7.) 

L  The  name  of  Jehovah  a  consola-  No  character  or  rank  is  exempt  from 

tion  in  trouble.     "  The  Lord  hear  thee  the  ills  of   life.     The  highest  dignity 

in  the  day  of  trouble ;  the  name  of  the  cannot  guard  off  troubles ;  and  crowns 

God  of  Jacob  defend  thee"  (ver.   1).  especially  are  often  lined  with  thorns„ 

94 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XX. 


The  history  of  David  records  many  a 
dark  day  and  sorrowful  night.  It  was 
a  day  of  distress  with  Jacob  when  he 
fled  from  his  brother  Esau,  and  arrived 
at  Bethel  a  distracted  wanderer  (Gen. 
XXXV.  3).  Few  plants,  says  an  old 
writer,  have  both  the  morning  and  the 
evening  sun  ;  and  an  older  than  he  has 
said — Man  is  born  to  trouble.  But  in 
the  deepest,  darkest,  wildest  distress 
Jehovah  is  the  refuge  of  His  people ; 
and  His  name  soothes  the  keenest 
anguish,  and  lifts  up  the  most  de- 
spairing. 

**  Thy  mighty  name  salvation  is, 

And  keeps  my  happy  soul  above  ; 
Comfort  it  brings,  and  power,  and  peace, 
And  joy,  and  everlasting  love." 

II.  The  name  of  Jehovah  an  in- 
spiring battle-cry.  "In  the  name  of 
our  God  we  will  set  up  our  banners" 
(ver.  5).  Banners  are  a  part  of  military 
equipage,  borne  in  times  of  war  to 
assemble,  direct,  distinguish,  and  in- 
spirit, the  soldiers.  They  have  been 
often  used  in  religious  ceremonies.  It 
is  the  practice  of  some  people  to  erect 
a  banner  in  honour  of  their  deity.  In 
a  certain  part  of  Thibet  it  is  customary 
for  a  priest  to  ascend  a  hill  every 
month,  to  set  up  a  white  flag,  and 
perform  some  religious  ceremonies  to 
conciliate  the  favour  of  a  dewta,  or 
invisible  being,  who  is  the  presiding 
genius  of  the  place.  The  Hindoos 
describe  Siva  the  Supreme  as  having 
a  banner  in  the  celestial  world.  Every 
nation  has  its  own  expressive  battle- 
cry.  "  For  hearth  and  home  "  was  the 
cry  that  found  a  deep  and  warm 
response  in  the  breast  of  the  ancient 
Roman ;  and,  in  modern  times,  the 
Germans    roused    the    enthusiasm   and 


bravery  of  every  soldier  by  the  cry  of 
"  Fatherland !"  But  the  militant  Church 
goes  to  war  with  the  name  of  the  Lord 
of  Hosts  on  her  banners — a  battle-cry 
which  inspires  every  heart  with  holy 
courage,  and  binds  it  with  the  cincture 
of  a  firm,  unalterable  purpose.  It  was 
this  that  nerved  the  youthful  David 
with  a  giant's  prowess  in  his  victorious 
combat  with  Goliath  (1  Sam.  xvii.  45). 
III.  The  name  of  Jehovah  the 
strength  of  the  Militant  Church. 
*'  We  will  remember  the  name  of  the 
Lord  our  God"  (ver.  7).  The  world 
trusts  in  the  material  —  in  rifles, 
mitraileuse,  turret-ships,  and  torpedoesj 
but  the  Church  is  taught  to  trust  in 
the  spiritual — the  mysterious,  invisible, 
but  almighty  power  of  Jehovah.  The 
material  fails ;  but  the  spiritual  never. 
Many  a  formidable  and  rarely-equipped 
army  has 

"  Melted  like  snow  in  the  glance  of  the  Lord," 

while  the  feeble  and  despised  champions 
of  the  Church  have  stood  forth  in  all 
the  honour  and  lustre  of  victory.  When 
the  saint  relies  fully  on  Jehovah,  and  is 
absorbed  in  His  holy  cause,  he  is  sur- 
rounded with  an  im})enetrable  defence. 
Numa,  being  told  that  his  enemies  were 
coming  upon  him  as  he  was  ofiering 
sacrifice,  thought  it  was  suflScient  for 
his  safety  that  he  could  say,  I  am 
about  the  service  of  my  God ;  and  yet 
how  slow  men  are  to  put  their  trust  in 
that  Name  where  alone  all  true  com- 
fort, the  holiest  courage,  and  the 
mightiest  strength  are  found !  It  is 
easy,  says  Arnot,  to  persuade  papists 
to  lean  on  priests  and  saints,  on  old 
rags  and  painted  pictures,  on  any  idol; 
but  it  is  hard  to  get  a  Protestant  to 
trust  in  the  living  God. 


Prayer  a  Preparation  for  Conflict. 


(  Verses 

I.  Prayer  should  have  reference  to 
future  emergencies.  ''  The  Lord  hear 
thee  in  the  day  of  trouble "  (ver.  1). 
War  is  a  time  of  trouble,  both  to  king 
and  people ;  and  considering  the  vicis- 
situdes and  sufi'erings  of  the  battle- 
field, it  is  wise  to  implore  the  aid  of 


1-5,  9.) 

Heaven  for  seasons  when  earthly  re- 
sources may  be  exhausted.  Prayer  has 
a  prevenient  power.  To-day's  prayers 
can  help  to-morrow's ;  the  congrega- 
tion's present  prayers,  the  king's  future 
prayers.  Prayer  may  bring  present 
power  that  shall  put  the  man's  heart 

95 


F8ALMZZ. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


right,  and  keep  it  right,  so  that  when 
the  hour  of  need  shall  come,  the  prayer 
of  his  heart  may  be  right  prayer,  and 
be  both  heard  and  answered.  "  Troubles 
roar  like  thunder;  but  the  believer's 
voice  will  be  heard  above  the  storm." 

II.  Prayer  invokes  the  invincible 
protection  of  Jehovah.  "  The  name 
of  the  God  of  Jacob  defend  thee" 
(ver.  1).  By  the  name  is  signified  the 
whole  revealed  character  of  Jehovah. 
He  is  called  the  God  of  Jacob,  because 
He  manifested  Himself  as  such,  in  a 
fulness  of  deeds,  to  Jacob  and  to  his 
posterity.  A  heavenlier  light  is  needed 
to  explain  all  the  mystery  and  glory  of 
the  Divine  name.  There  is  power  in 
the  historical  associations  of  the  name 
to  help  faith,  as  the  pleading  soid 
recalls  the  scenes  of  Bethel,  Peniel, 
Padan-jiram,  Sliechem,  and  Egypt.  The 
name  of  Jehovah  is  an  inviolable  pro- 
tection. "Defend  thee" — exalt  thee — 
"  to  be  upraised  to  a  high  and  fortified 
place,  made  safe." — Bythner.  "Set 
thee  up  on  high,"  i.e.,  "as  in  a  fortress 
where  no  enemy  can  do  thee  harm,  or 
on  a  rock  at  the  foot  of  which  the 
waves  fret  and  dash  themselves  in 
impotent  fury." — Ferowne,  The  name 
of  God  is  a  more  secure  retreat  than 
the  spot  defended  by  parks  of  artillery. 

III.  Prayer  should  be  accompanied 
with  sacrifice.  "Remember  all  thy 
offerings,  and  accept  thy  burnt  sacri- 
fice" (ver.  3).  It  was  customary  in 
ancient  times  for  warriors  to  offer 
sacrifice  before  going  into  battle ;  and 
this  was  often  done  with  most  imposing 
ceremony,  and  with  lavish  liberality. 
*'Thy  burnt  sacrifice" — thy  holocaust, 
"a  sacrifice  of  quadrupeds  and  birds, 
which  are  raised  altogether  upon  the 
altar  and  burned :  the  Greek  hecatomb 
.seems  borrowed  from  this." — Bythner. 
"  Accept " — graciously  accept — literally, 
make  fat ;  in  a  declarative  sense  "re- 
gard as  fat,"  and  so  "receive  as  fat," 
i.e.,  "as  worthy  to  be  offered,  the  fattest 
of  the  flock  being  chosen  for  sacrifice." 
— Perowne.  "  At  the  present  day  others 
as  well  as  David  may  use  this  psalm  in 
prayer,  for  as  the  person,  the  circum- 
stances, the  time  and  place,  are  all 
different  in  the  new  law,  so  likewise  is 

96 


the  sacrifice;  but  one  faith  and  one 
spirit  abide  through  all  ages,  and  amid 
all  diversities  of  places,  works,  persons. 
The  external  varies,  the  internal  re- 
mains ever  the  same." — Luther.  The 
individual  relation  to  God  is  recognised 
by  personal  offerings.  The  separate 
application  of  the  one  sacrifice  answers 
to  the  separate  sacrifices  of  old.  The 
one  sacrifice  must  have  its  separate 
acceptance  for  the  separate  individual. 
Prayer  to  be  efficacious  must  ever  be 
offered  in  the  spirit  of  sacrifice. 

IV.  Prayer  is  urgent  to  secure  a 
specific  answer  to  its  petitions. 

1.  As  they  relate  to  special  blessings, 
"  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own 
heart,  and  fulfil  all  thy  counsel :  the 
Lord  fulfil  all  thy  petitions  "  (ver.  4,  5). 
Prayer  is  offered  for  protection  in  time 
of  dai]ger,  for  wisdom  to  adopt  and 
execute  the  best  measures  in  the  emer- 
gencies of  war,  and  for  victory  over  the 
enemy.  Our  desires  and  counsels  are 
completely  dependent  upon  God  for 
their  attainment,  and  ought  to  ha 
prayers.  The  more  clearly  we  see  our 
peril,  and  the  more  pungently  we  feel 
our  need,  the  more  fervently  do  we 
wrestle  for  an  answer  to  our  petitions. 
"  Sometimes  God  doth  not  only  grant 
a  man's  prayer,  but  fulfilleth  his 
counsel;  that  is,  in  that  very  way,  by 
that  very  means,  which  his  judgment 
pitched  upon  his  thoughts." — Trapp. 

2.  As  they  relate  to  their  immediate 
subject.  "  Save,  Lord  ;  let  the  king 
hear  us  when  we  call"  (ver.  9). 
Rendered  by  the  LXX.,  "0  Lord, 
save  the  king,  and  hear  us  when  we 
call  upon  Thee."  The  king  is  the  sub- 
ject of  prayer,  that  he  may  be  blessed 
with  victory,  and  that  he  may  be  a 
blessing  to  others.  The  ninth  verse  is 
a  summary  of  the  whole  psalm.  The 
wellbeing  of  a  people  is  suspended  on 
the  character  and  doings  of  the  monarch. 
Prayer  should  be  offered  for  him  con- 
tinually that  he  may  be  guarded  from 
evil,  that  he  may  be  wise,  equitable, 
and  prosperous.  Prayer  must  not  be 
intermitted  even  when  confidence  of 
Divine  help  has  been  inspired.  Prayer 
will  still  be  necessary  to  sustain  that 
confidence   in  its   trials,   for   the    very 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  XX. 


confidence  is  a  contingent  virtue,  and, 
perhaps,  the  more  subject  to  risks  of 
deterioration,  because  it  is  an  inspired 
thing  and  not  a  thing  of  earth. 

V.  Answer  to  prayer  is  found 
wherever  the  presence  of  Jehovah 
is  manifested.  "  Send  thee  help  from 
the  sanctuary,  and  strengthen  thee  out 
of  Zion"  (ver.  2).  The  Jews,  whose 
weakness  found  it  so  difficult  a  task 
to  look  up  to  the  Invisible  God,  were 
favoured  with  a  visible  sanctuary  on 
Zion;  thither  the  devout  Israelite  di- 
rected his  prayer ;  thence  he  expected 
help  in  the  day  of  trouble.  Christ  is 
now  the  sanctuary  of  His  people ;  and 
in  their  worshipping  assemblies  He  is 
wont  to  manifest  His  presence  and 
power.  The  greatest  distress  is  experi- 
enced when  God  is  absent.  His  return 
banishes  our  fears,  and  nerves  us  with 


snperhaman  bravery.  ''Men  of  the 
world  despise  sanctuary  help ;  but  oui 
hearts  have  learned  to  prize  it  beyond 
all  material  aid.  They  seek  help  out 
of  the  armoury,  or  the  treasury,  or  the 
buttery ;  but  we  turn  to  the  sanctuary. 
Certain  advertisers  recommend  a 
strengthening  plaster  ;  but  nothing  can 
give  such  strength  to  the  loins  of  a 
saint  as  waiting  upon  God  in  the 
assemblies  of  His  people." — Spurgeon. 
God  always  puts  honour  upon  His 
appointed  services.  His  help,  when  it 
conies,  wiU  come  by  the  way  of  the 
sanctuary  and  out  of  Zion.  The  faith 
to  which  that  help  is  a  response,  wher- 
ever exercised,  was  first  begotten  amid 
the  holy  things  of  the  sanctuary.  The 
help  has  the  same  stamp  as  the  faith 
that  commands  it,  the  stamp  of  the 
sanctuary. 


Confidence  in  Jehovah  the  Pledge  of  Yictory. 

( Verses  5-8.) 


I.  Confidence  in  Jehovah  fills  the 
heart  with  gladness.  "  We  will  rejoice 
in  Thy  salvation  "  (ver.  5).  The  people 
are  so  assured  of  the  help  of  God  as  to 
break  out  in  a  song  of  anticipatory 
triumph.  Praise  raises  the  moral  tone 
of  an  army,  and  it  is  on  this  that  its 
success  largely  depends.  Jehoshapbat, 
before  entering  into  battle  with  the 
vast  armies  of  the  Moabites  and  Am- 
monites, appointed  singers  to  praise  the 
Lord.  He  obtained  an  easy  victory 
(2  Chron.  xx.  20-22).  When  Louis 
XIIL  of  France  had  invested  with  his 
army  a  city  of  the  Huguenots,  the 
besieged  assembled  one  evening  on  the 
city  wall  and  sang,  with  great  sweet- 
ness and  solemnity,  one  of  their 
favourite  psalms.  The  king  was  so 
impressed  with  the  whole  scene  and 
with  the  spirit  of  the  singers,  that  he 
turned  to  Mazarin,  his  favourite  general, 
who  was  by  his  side,  and  quietly  ob- 
served, **  We  can  do  nothing  with  this 
people."  The  siege  was  raised ;  and 
the  persecuted  Huguenots  triumphed  in 
their  Lord.  God  ought  to  be  remem- 
bered in  our  triumph  as  well  as  in  our 
need.     We    are    sometimes    so    much 


elated  by  the  triumph  as  to  forget  the 
help  by  which  it  has  come. 

II.  Confidence  in  Jehovah  inspires 
with  courage  for  the   conflict.     "In 

the  name  of  our  God  will  we  set  up  *' — 
v;ave — "our  banners"  (ver.  5).  When 
the  army  has  confidence  in  its  General 
it  unfurls  its  standard  with  resolute 
defiance,  enters  upon  the  contest  with  a 
stout,  brave  heart,  and  already  antici- 
pates the  shouts  of  victory  and  the 
triumphant  procession,  with  banners 
displayed.  "  Great  certainly  is  the 
faith  which  hath  such  courage  by  re- 
membering the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Soldiers  in  our  day  are  wont,  when 
they  go  into  battle,  to  recall  to  mind 
the  brave  exploits  of  their  fathers,  or 
former  victories,  and  the  like,  where- 
with to  warm  and  stir  their  hearts. 
But  let  our  princes  remember  the  name 
of  God,  wherein  all  salvation  and  vic- 
tory do  stand." — Luther.  "Confession 
of  Christ,  as  the  only  name  whereby  we 
can  be  saved,  is  the  banner  which  dis- 
tinguishes His  faithful  people.  Oh,  that 
this  confession  were  more  distinct,  more 
pure,  more  zealous,  then  would  His 
followers  be  more  united,   more  bold, 

97 


KALMZX. 


HO  Ml  LET W  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


more  successful — terrible   as  an   army 
with  banners." — W.  Wilson. 

III.  Confidence  in  Jehovah  secures 
the  exercise  of  His  Almighty  power. 
"Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  saveth 
His  anointed :  He  will  hear  him  from 
His  holy  heaven  with  the  saving  strength 
of  His  right  hand"  (ver.  6).  Prayer 
ought  never  to  stop  before  it  has  brought 
a  present  sense  of  help.  It  is  possible 
to  have  an  inspoken  answer  to  our 
prayers  before  the  outward  crisis  to 
which  we  are  looking  has  come.  **  The 
hope  suddenly  changes  into  certainty. 
Now  know  I  that  Jehovah  hath  saved, 
hath  given  the  victory.  The  singer 
speaks  in  the  full  assurance  of  faith 
that  the  prayer  is  heard,  and  as  if  he 
already  saw  the  victory  gained.  The 
prayer  had  been  that  God  would  hear 
and  send  help  from  the  earthly  sanc- 
tuary or  Zion.  Now,  the  answer  is  to 
come  from  His  holy  heaven.  For  if 
God  then  condescended  to  dwell  in 
visible  glory  among  men,  yet  He  would 
teach  His  people  that  He  is  not  limited 
by  the  bounds  of  time  and  space.  He 
is  not  like  the  gods  of  the  heathen,  the 
god  of  one  city  or  country.  He  sends 
help  out  of  Zion,  but  the  heaven  of 
heavens  cannot  contain  Him.  Calvin 
sees  expressed  in  the  earthly  sanctuary 
made  by  hands,  the  grace  and  con- 
descension of  God  to  His  people ;  in 
the  heavenly,  His  infinite  power,  great- 
ness, and  majesty." — Perowne,  Faith, 
says  Quesnel,  seems  to  put  the  Al- 
mighty power  of  God  into  the  hands 
of  man ;  whereas  unbelief  seems  to  tie 
up  even  the  hands  of  the  Almighty. 

IV.  Confidence  in  Jehovah  exposes 
the  inadequacy  of  the  best  human 
contrivances.  "  Some  trust  in  chariots 
and  some  in  horses :  but  we  will  re- 
member the  name  of  the  Lord  our 
God  "  (ver.  7).  The  remark  of  a  great 
warrior,  that  Providence  is  always  on 
the  side  of  the  strongest  battalion,  may 
be  applauded  as  an  evidence  of  military 
penetration,  but  the  sceptical  sneer  is 


none  the  less  apparent  in  the  sentiment. 

According  to  the  law,  Israel  was  for- 
bidden to  maintain  a  standing  army. 
They  were  taught  to  trust  in  God,  both 
for  defence  and  victory  (Deut.  xx.  2-4 ; 
xxxii.  30).  Some  of  the  conquests  of 
the  chosen  people  were  gained  by  means 
which  contradicted  and  defied  the 
ordinary  rules  of  warfare,  and  seemed 
absurd  to  the  believer  in  military  skill 
and  prowess.  Moral  power  was  pitted 
against  the  material,  and  won  the  day, 
as  it  ever  will.  When  the  Israelites 
depended  more  upon  their  armies  than 
their  God,  they  suffered  the  most 
humiliating  defeats.  "  The  most  dreaded 
war-engine  of  David's  day  was  the  war- 
chariot,  armed  with  scythes  which 
mowed  men  down  like  grass  :  this  was 
the  boast  and  glory  of  the  neighbouring 
nations ;  but  the  saints  considered  the 
name  of  Jehovah  to  be  a  far  better 
defence." 

V.  Confidence  in  Jehovali  turns 
apparent  defeat  into  victory.  "  They 
are  brought  down  and  fallen  j  but  we 
are  risen  and  stand  upright"  (ver.  8). 
The  prophetic  vision  of  faith  already 
sees  the  issue  of  the  conflict.  The 
ranks  of  those  who  trust  in  chariots 
and  horses,  who  rely  on  material  aid, 
seem  firm,  impenetrable,  defiant,  and 
the  onset  irresistible.  But  the  people 
of  God,  whose  trust  is  in  the  unseen, 
and  who  seem  overwhelmed  and  put  to 
the  worse,  rise  up  triumphant,  while 
their  enemies  are  brought  down  and 
crushed — the  instruments  of  war  in 
which  they  trusted  helping  to  make 
their  ruin  more  complete.  Faith  has 
surer  wheels  than  pride;  and  prayer 
will  carry  us  where  power  must  fall. 
"Faith  alone,  which  commits  itself  to 
God,  can  sing  the  song  of  triumph 
before  the  victory,  and  raise  the  shout 
of  joy  before  help  has  been  obtained  ; 
for  to  faith  all  is  permitted.  It  trusts 
in  God,  and  so  really  has  what  it 
believes,  because  faith  deceives  not; 
as  it  believes^  so  is  it  done.'' — Luiher. 


M 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALIC  XXI. 


PSALM   XXI. 
Introduction. 

•'The  prayer  which  the  Church  offers  up  at  the  conclusion  of  the  preceding  psalm  now 

issues  in  a  hymn  of  praise,  the  result  of  a  believing  view  of  the  glory  which  is  to  follow,  when 
Messiah's  sufferings  are  ended.  This  is  one  of  the  beautiful  songs  of  which  we  find  many  in 
Scripture,  prepared  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  awaken  and  enliven  the  hopes  and  expectations  of 
the  Church  while  she  waits  for  the  Lord,  and  to  give  utterance  to  her  joy  at  the  time  of  His 
arrival.  The  theme  is  Messiah's  exaltation  and  glory,  and  the  time  chosen  for  its  delivery  is 
just  the  moment  when  darkness  covered  the  earth,  and  all  nature  seemed  about  to  die  with  its 
expiring  Lord.  Scripture  deals  largely  in  contrasts.  It  seems  to  be  suitable  to  the  human 
mind  to  turn  from  one  extreme  to  another.  Man  can  endure  any  change,  however  violent  and 
contradictory,  but  a  long  continuance,  a  sameness  either  of  joy  or  sorrow,  has  a  debilitating  and 
depressing  effect." — Ryland. 

The  Jot  of  the  Heavenly  Kmo. 


( Verses 

I.  This  joy  arose  from  a  conscious- 
ness of  newly  achieved  victory.  "  In 
Thy  salvation  how  greatly  shall  He  re- 
joice" (ver.  1). 

1.  This  victory  ivas  achieved  hy  super- 
natural power.  *'  In  Thy  strength,  O 
Lord"  (ver.  1).  The  Man  of  sorrows,  as 
He  entered  into  the  stern  conflict  with 
evil,  knew  full  well  the  victory  could 
not  be  gained  by  the  ordinary  tactics  of 
military  genius,  or  by  the  prowess  of  a 
human  arm.  He  relied  on  the  strength 
of  Jehovah,  and  not  in  vain  :  He 
emerged  from  the  dark,  fierce  contest, 
an  exultant  conqueror.  How  often  do 
we  fail  in  the  great  battle  of  life  by 
being  too  self-reliant ;  and  in  proportion 
to  our  blind  confidence  in  an  arm  of 
flesh  is  the  humiliation  and  misery  of 
our  defeat !  "  Our  weakness  unstrings 
our  harps,  but  His  strength  tunes  them 
anew.  If  we  cannot  sing  a  note  in 
honour  of  our  own  strength,  we  can  at 
any  rate  rejoice  in  our  omnipotent  God." 
The  salvation  of  humanity  is  a  Divine 
work,  and  will  be  to  myriads  the  source 
of  ceaseless  and  ever-increasing  joy. 

2.  lliis  victory  was  granted  in  answer 
to  earnest  prayer.  "  Thou  hast  given 
Him  His  heart's  desire,  and  hast  not 
withholden  the  request  of  His  lips " 
(ver.  2).  On  the  lonely  shore,  among  the 
silent  hills  or  under  the  shadows  of  the 
solitary  garden,  the  Messiah  poured  out 
His  soul  in  earnest  prayer  for  strength 
to  suffer  and  to  prevail  on  behalf  of  His 
people ;  and  He  was  heard  and  mar- 
vellously answered.     "What  is  in  the 


1-7.) 

well  of  the  heart  is  sure  to  come  up  in 
the  bucket  of  the  lips  ;  and  those  are 
the  only  true  prayers  where  the  heart's 
desire  is  first,  and  the  lips'  request 
follows  after.  The  requests  of  the 
Saviour  were  not  withheld.  He  was 
and  still  is  a  prevailing  pleader.  Our 
Advocate  on  high  returns  not  empty 
from  the  throne  of  grace." — Sjmrgeon. 
The  agony  of  wrestling  prayer  is  often 
turned  into  the  rapture  of  success.  The 
last  psalm,  says  Perowne,  was  a  litany 
before  the  king  went  forth  to  battle.  This 
is  apparently  a  Te  Deum  on  his  return. 
II.  This  joy  was  accelerated  by  pos- 
sessing an  affluence  of  Divine  Blessing. 

1.  He  was  surrounded  vjith  evidences 
of  the  Divine  Beneficence.  "  Thou  pre- 
ventest  Him  with  the  blessings  of  good- 
ness." To  prevent  signifies  to  anticipate, 
to  go  before.  **  Thou  goest  before  Him 
with  the  blessings  of  Thy  goodness  as  a 
pioneer,  to  make  crooked  ways  straight 
and  rough  places  smooth  ;  or  as  one  who 
strews  flowers  in  the  path  of  another,  to 
render  the  way  beautiful  to  the  eye  and 
pleasant  to  the  tread.  God's  gifts  are 
God's  love  embodied  and  expressed. 
And  this  greatly  enhances  the  value  of 
our  blessings — that  they  are  cups  as  full 
of  God  and  of  God's  kindness  as  of  hap- 
piness and  blessedness." — S.  Martin, 

2.  He  wa^  invested  with  the  most 
illustrious  dignity.  "  Thou  settest  a 
crown  of  pure  gold  on  His  head.  His 
glory  is  great  in  Thy  salvation  :  honour 
and  majesty  hast  Thou  laid  upon  Him  " 
(ver.  3,  5).    Jesos  wore  the  thorn-crown, 

99 


PSALM  XXI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


but  now  wears  the  glory-crown.     It  is  a 
crown,  indicating  royal  nature,  imperial 
power,  deserved  honour,  glorious  con- 
quest,  and    Divine   government.      The 
crown  of  pure  gold  has  respect  to  His 
exaltation  at  the   right  hand  of  God, 
where  He  is  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour ;  and  this  crown  being  of  pure 
gold  denotes  the  purity,  glory,  solidity, 
and  perpetuity  of  His  kingdom.     The 
diadems  of  eartlily  monarchs  are  liable 
to   be    suddenly   displaced ;    but    this 
crown  is  set  upon  the  head  of  the  Ke- 
deemer   so   firmly  that   no  power  can 
remove  it.      *'  Honour  and  majesty  " — 
as     Parkhurst     reads — splendour     and 
heauty — **  hast  Thou  laid  upon  Him." 
As    the    wood   of    the   tabernacle  was 
overlaid   with   pure   gold,  'so   is  Jesus 
covered  with  honour  and  glory. — Spur- 
geon,  in  loco.    *'  Were  there  ten  thousand 
millions  of  heavens  created  above  these 
highest   heavens,    and    again    as    many 
above  them,  and  as  many  above  them, 
till  angels  were  wearied  with  counting, 
it  were  but  too   low  a  seat  to  fix  the 
princely  throne  of  that  Lord  Jesus  above 
them  all." — Rutherford. 

3.  He  enjoyed  the  consciousness  of 
an  imperishable  life  (ver.  4).  "  Even 
length  of  days  for  ever  and  ever."  The 
lavish  endowments  of  God  often  exceed 
our  greatest  petitions  and  loftiest  hopes. 
Jesus,  as  man,  asked  for  life,  and  He 
was  heard  in  that  He  feared.  He  was 
raised  from  the  dead,  to  die  no  more. 
The  power  of  God  and  all  His  moral 
attributes  secure  the  perpetuity  of  the 
life  of  the  risen  and  exalted  Saviour. 
He  was  endowed  with  length  of  days 
for  ever  and  ever — '*  the  prolonged  ages 
of  this  world  which  the  Church  was  to 
have,  and  after  them  an  eternity,  world 
without  end." 

4.  He  became  the  source  of  endless 
blessing  to  others.  "  For  Thou  hast  made 
Him  most  blessed  for  ever"  (ver.  6). 
Messiah  is  the  source  whence  all  bless- 
ings for  time  and  for  eternity  shall  be 
derived.  He  is  an  overflowing  well- 
spring  of  blessing  to  others,  a  sun  filling 
the  universe  with  light.  In  and  through 
Him  all  nations  of  the  earth  are  blessed. 
True  blessedness  is  found,  not  in  accumu- 
lating riches,  not  in  the  weary,  tread- 

100 


mill  circle  of  philosophic  research,  not 
in  travel  and  commune  with  Nature  in 
her  varying  moods :  it  is  found  only  in 
Christ.  And  yet  men,  in  seeking  for  the 
streams  of  bliss,  wander  from  its  source. 

5.  He  exults  in  the  Divine  favour. 
"  Thou  hast  made  Him  exceeding  glad 
with  Thy  countenance"  (ver.  6).  "Though 
this  be  metaphorically  used  for  favour ^ 
yet  is  the  speech  not  all  metaphor,  and 
that  well-experienced  Christians  will 
tell  you.  The  countenance  of  God 
makes  the  Prince  of  Heaven  glad  :  how 
ought  we  to  seek  it,  and  how  careful 
should  we  be  lest  we  should  provoke 
Him  by  our  sins  to  hide  His  face  from 
us!  Our  anticipations  may  cheerfully 
fly  forward  to  the  hour  when  the  joy  of 
our  Lord  shall  be  shed  abroad  on  all 
the,  saints,  and  the  countenance  of 
Jehovah  shine  on  all  the  blood-bought." 
— Spurgeon. 

III.  This  joy  was  intensified  by  the 
assurance  of  the  unshakeable  per- 
manency of    is  government. 

1 .  The  permanency  of  Messiah^ s  throne 
is  secured  by  the  Divine  mercy.  *  *  Through 
the  mercy  of  the  Most  High  He  shall 
not  be  moved "  (ver.  7).  He  who  is 
Most  High  in  every  sense,  engages  all 
His  infinite  perfections  to  maintain  the 
throne  of  grace  upon  which  our  King  in 
Zion  reigns.  He  was  not  moved  from 
His  purpose,  nor  in  His  sufferings,  nor 
hy  His  enemies,  nor  shall  He  be  moved 
from  the  completion  of  His  designs.  It 
is  an  encouraging  evidence  of  the  Divine 
mercy  that  the  throne  of  the  Great  Re- 
deemer still  exists  among  men.  If 
human  malice  and  Satanic  rage  had  not 
been  restrained  by  the  Divine  mercy, 
that  throne  would  have  been  overthrown 
long  ago. 

2.  The  assurance  of  this  permanency 
it  strengthened  by  Messiah^ s  confidence  in 
God.  "  For  the  king  trusteth  in  the 
Lord"  (ver.  7).  He  did  not  depend  on 
worldly  armies  or  human  skill  and 
stratagem ;  but  wholly  in  Jehovah,  the 
Lord  of  Hosts.  "  A  holy  confidence  in 
God  is  the  true  mother  of  victories." 
The  joy  and  confidence  of  Christ  our 
King,  is  the  ground  of  all  our  joy  and 
confidence,  and  the  pledge  of  final  con- 
quest over  all  our  foes. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXI. 


Christ  as  the  Source  of  BLEssma  to  the  Eaoe. 

{Verse  6.) 


L  Is  exalted  to  the  highest  dignity. 

He  who  was  despised  and  rejected  of 
men,  and  who  Himself  despised  and 
rejected  the  affluence  and  honours  of 
the  world,  was  lifted  up  on  high  and 
clothed  with  majesty  and  glory.  The 
cross  was  exchanged  for  a  throne,  the 
cast-off  garment  for  a  robe  of  peerless 
lustre,  comparative  obscurity  for  undy- 
ing fame,  suffering  for  felicity,  the 
ribaldry  of  the  mob  for  angelical  ap- 
plause. The  most  forbidding  and  un- 
likely appearances  may  disguise  great 
resources.  The  dry,  knotty,  leafless, 
sapless  vine  seems  past  all  recovery ; 
but  erelong  it  flourishes  in  verdant 
beauty,  and  bends  under  the  weight  of 
abundant  fruitfulness.  Christ  was  as  a 
root  out  of  a  dry  ground — lowly  and 
unattractive  in  the  beginning  of  His 
earthly  life  ;  and  it  seemed  very  im- 
probable that  anything  great  could  ever 
come  out  of  such  humble  and  miserable 
surroundings.  But  He  is  now  exalted 
to  the  highest  dignity,  and  has  become 
the  benefactor  to  the  race  :  before  His 
glory  all  earthly  splendour  fades,  and  on 
His  bounty  the  life  of  all  depends. 

II.  Is  endowed  with  all  power. 
Whatever  can  minister  to  the  happiness 
and  prestige  of  His  people,  Christ  has 
unlimited  ability  to  bestow.  "  All  power 
is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth."  All  the  forces  of  the  universe 
are  under  His  control.  All  created  in- 
telligences are  obedient  to  His  will. 
He  can  transmute  the  instruments  of 
evil  into  agencies  of  good.  He  can 
cripple  and  destroy  the  most  formidable 
opposition.  He  can  deliver  in  the  latest 
emergency  ;  and  turn  despair  into  vic- 
tory. The  soul  that  relies  on  Him  can 
never  be  confounded. 

III.  Is    inexhaustible    in    supply. 


**  Thou  hast  made  Him  most  blessed 
for  ever."  At  all  times,  in  all  circum- 
stances, His  aid  is  suitable  and  suffi- 
cient. The  river  that  has  flowed  for 
ages  and  borne  afar  its  treasured 
argosies,  is  not  more  certain  in  the  per- 
petual supply  of  its  liquid  current,  than 
is  the  vast  stream  of  the  Divine  benefi- 
cence that  flows  perennially  from  the 
heavenly  hills,  burdened  with  the  wealth 
of  blessing  to  every  needy  soul.  The 
fruit  of  the  vintage  may  fail  and  the 
gathering  time  may  not  come,  the 
earth  may  be  shut  up  in  hopeless  bar- 
renness, all  human  resources  may  be 
cut  off,  but  the  fountain  of  Divine  bless- 
ing is  never  sealed,  and  its  supplies  con- 
tinually abound.  *'0f  His  fulness  have 
all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace." 

IV.  Rejoices  to  communicate.  It 
was  the  saying  of  a  certain  generous 
Spanish  captain,  "  There  is  no  way  of 
enjoying  one's  property  like  giving  it 
away."  It  is  a  joy,  a  luxury  to  give. 
The  generosity  of  God  knows  no  stint. 
When  a  certain  English  monarch  once 
threw  open  his  park  and  gardens  to  the 
public,  the  royal  gardener,  finding  it 
troublesome,  complained  to  his  Majesty 
that  the  visitors  plucked  the  flowers. 
*'What,"  said  the  kind-hearted  king, 
"  are  my  people  fond  of  flowers  1  Then 
plant  some  more  ! "  So  our  heavenly 
King,  with  lavish  hand,  scatters  on  our 
daily  pathway  the  flowers  of  blessing, 
and,  as  fast  as  we  can  gather  them,  spite 
of  the  grudging,  churlish  world,  more 
are  supplied.  "Not  as  the  world  giveth, 
give  I  unto  you.'*  The  greater  our 
need,  and  the  more  urgent  our  cry  for 
help,  the  greater  the  rapture  of  our 
Divine  benefactor  in  supplying  that 
need.  "  The  Lord  rejoiced  over  you  to 
do  you  good  "  (Dent,  xxviii.  63). 


evitable. 


The  Exposure  and  Punishment  of  Sin. 
(Terse*  8,  9.) 
That  the  exposure  of  sin  is  in-     all  thine  enemies.'*     Iniquity  delights  in 


"  Thine  hand  shall  find  out 


cunning,  and  is  itself  a  masterpiece  of 

101 


PSALM  XXI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


cunning.  It  may  succeed  in  deluding 
its  victims,  and  for  a  time  escape  detec- 
tion. But  there  is  One  to  whom  every 
detail  of  the  plot  is  fully  known  ;  and 
He  grieves  to  see  the  toilsome  ingenuity 
of  the  wicked,  and  smiles  at  its  utter  im- 
potency.  Sin  is  often  its  own  detective. 
An  unguarded  word,  a  suspicious  sign, 
an  unconscious  oversight,  will  unmask 
the  most  carefully  disguised  plans,  and 
Jead  to  exposure  and  misery.  It  is  the 
theme  of  many  a  ballad,  how  the  cranes 
aided  in  the  discovery  of  the  assassins 
of  Ibycus,  the  poet.  Recently,  the 
house  of  the  Caliph  of  the  Ben  Oreazen 
in  Algeria,  was  entered  by  a  band  of 
robbers,  and  a  box  containing  25,000 
francs  stolen.  In  their  haste  to  escape, 
the  thieves  left  behind  them  an  Arab 
cake  bearing  a  particular  mark,  which 
one  of  the  bakers  of  the  town  recognised 
as  the  sign  used  by  Ben  Xerafas,  it  be- 
ing the  custom  for  each  family  in  send- 
ing their  bread  to  the  oven  to  mark  it 
so  as  to  distinguish  the  loaves.  The 
police  acted  on  the  information,  and, 
descending  on  a  certain  hut,  caught  the 
robbers  asleep,  with  a  portion  of  the 
plunder  still  in  their  possession.  A 
simple  Arab  cake  was  the  insignificant 
agent  of  discovery  and  exposure  !  If 
the  sinner  does  not  betray  himself,  the 
hand  of  God,  which  has  power  to  tear 
away  every  covering,  will  sooner  or  later 
find  him  out. 

II.  That  the  exposure  of  sin  will 
extend  to  the  inmost  feelings  of  the 
heart.  "  Thy  right  hand  shall  find  out 
those  that  hate  Thee."  That  sin  is  not 
always  the  worst  which  is  most  apparent. 
The  bland,  submissive  countenance  may 
cover  the  most  vile  and  malignant  feel- 
ings of  the  heart.  The  secret  haters  of 
God  only  want  the  opportunity  and  the 
power ;  and  they  would  outrival  the 
most  notoriously  wicked.  The  wilful 
and  obstinate  sinner  would,  if  it  were 
possible,  bury  Christ  again  within  the 
rock  of  his  hardened  heart,  and  seal  the 
stone  that  He  might  never  rise.  An 
electric  log  has  recently  been  con- 
structed, which  thrown  overboard  will 
register  the  speed  of  the  vessel  through 
the   water.      By  a  simple  contrivance, 


the  captain,  while  sitting  in  his  cabin, 

can  detect  the  dial  movements  of  the 
log  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  ascer- 
tain his  rate  of  sailing  every  quarter  of 
an  hour.  If  it  were  possible,  by  any 
method,  to  watch  the  operations  of  a 
sinful  heart,  what  a  depth  and  rush  of 
wickedness  would  be  discovered  there  ! 
And  yet  the  day  is  coming  when  the 
strong  hand  of  God  shall  turn  aside  all 
disguise  and  reveal  iniquity  in  all  its 
loathsomeness  and  deformity.  He 
"  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment, 
with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be 
good  or  whether  it  be  evil." 

III.  That  the  punishment  of  sin  will 
be  terrible  and  complete. 

1.  It  will  be  terrible.  "Thou  shalt 
make  them  as  a  fiery  oven  in  the  time 
of  Thine  anger  " — Thy  angry  look.  Since 
the  king  is  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah 
(ver.  6),  when  He  directs  His  face  upon 
His  enemies,  it  exerts  that  destructive 
power  which  is  usually  ascribed  to  the 
angry  look  of  Jehovah.  "However  coldly 
God  now  seems  to  look  upon  the  enemies 
of  Christ,  the  more  will  His  anger  burn 
against  them  in  the  future.  God  has 
His  limited  time  as  well  for  His  wrath 
as  for  His  grace." — Lange.  The  sins  of 
the  impenitent  wicked  will  supply  fuel 
to  the  fire  of  their  sufferings,  and  per- 
haps be  used  as  the  means  of  punishing 
others — one  class  of  sinners  tormenting 
another  class.  '*  Who  can  abide  in  the 
fierceness  of  His  anger  T'  (Nahum  i.  6). 

2.  It  will  be  complete.  **The  Lord 
shall  swallow  them  up  in  His  wrath,  and 
the  fire  shall  devour  them."  The  cer- 
tainty of  punishment  for  wrong-doing 
is  evident,  not  only  from  the  declara- 
tions of  Scripture,  but  also  from  the 
history  of  mankind.  Nations  are  an  ex- 
ample— the  Antediluvians,  the  Sodom- 
ites, the  Jews.  Individuals  are  an 
example — Korah,  Dathan,  Abiram,  Saul, 
and  Judas.  The  hearts  that  will  not 
glow  with  holy  gratitude  and  praise 
shall  burn  with  shame  and  infinite  re- 
morse, and  the  awful  sentence,  "  Depart, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,"  shall  be 
iout  the  echo  of  their  own  self-abhorring 
consciencea 


102 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PI»A.LM  XSl. 


The  utter  Overthrow  of  the  Enemies  of  Christ. 

(Fcrses  8-13.) 


As  God  had  already  granted  victory 
and  gone  so  far  beyond  the  expectations 
and  hopes  of  those  who  had  gone  forth 
to  battle,  the  idea  evidently  suggested 
by  these  verses  is,  that  there  will  be 
ultimately  a  complete  victory  over  all 
the  foes  of  Messiah  and  of  His  people. 
Note: 

I.  That  the  enemies  of  Christ  are 
full  of  malignity. 

1.  They  are  skilful  in  plotting  mis- 
chief. "  For  they  intended  evil  against 
Thee :  they  imagined  a  mischievous 
device"  (ver.  11).  They  extended,  or 
stretched  out  evil — an  idea  derived  from 
stretching  out  or  laying  snares  for  the 
purpose  of  entrapping  wild  beasts  or 
birds.  The  brain  of  the  evil-doer  is 
continually  racked,  either  in  devising 
new  plans  of  mischief,  or  in  counter- 
acting the  plans  of  others  that  threaten 
to  interfere  with  his  own.  It  is  hard 
work  to  be  wicked;  it  involves  anxious 
thought,  incessant  activity,  and  sleep- 
less vigilance.  The  fair  goddess  who 
lured  to  the  first  transgression  and 
threw  around  it  an  irresistible  charm, 
is  now  transformed  to  a  demon,  and 
tyrannises  over  its  victim,  forcing  him 
to  do  as  a  necessity  what  he  began  to 
do  as  a  pleasure.  All  wrong-doing 
begins  in  the  intention  :  there  the  most 
malignant  venom  is  secreted. 

2.  They  are  impotent  in  carrying  out 
their  wicked  designs.  "  Which  they  are 
not  able  to  perform"  (ver.  11).  The 
power  of  evil  is  limited,  else  virtue 
would  soon  cease  to  exist,  and  the 
throne  of  righteousness  be  overturned. 
But  sinners  are  not  permitted  to  do  all 
that  is  in  their  power ;  much  less  are 
they  able  to  accomplish  all  they  intend. 
There  is  all  the  virulence  of  malice 
aforethought,  all  the  barefaced  evidence 
of  guilty  intention;  but  there  is  the 
lack  of  that  which  can  alone  give  effi- 
ciency and  success  to  their  villany — the 
lack  of  power.  They  are  not  able  to 
perform.  "The  serpent  may  hiss,  but 
his    head    is    broken;    the    lion   may 


worry,  but  he  cannot  devour;  the 
tempest  may  thunder,  but  cannot 
strike." 

II.  That  the  enemies  of  Christ  will 
be  certainly  detected  and  exposed. 
'*  Thine  hand  shall  find  out  all  Thine 
enemies  :  Thy  right  hand  shall  find  out 
those  that  hate  Thee"  (ver.  8).  Not 
only  are  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  upon  the 
wicked,  but  His  hand  is  in  search  of 
them ;  and  as  sure  as  His  eyes  see,  so 
certainly  will  His  hand  grasp  all  the 
workers  of  iniquity.  None  can  hide 
from  His  gaze ;  none  can  escape  from 
the  terrible  grip  of  His  right  hand.  It 
is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands 
of  the  Living  God — the  offended  and 
avenging  God  !  Rocks  and  mountains 
will  be  no  better  shelter  at  last,  than 
fig-leaves  were  at  first.  The  finding 
out,  says  Spurgeon,  relates  not  only  to 
the  discovery  of  the  hiding-places  of  the 
haters  of  God,  but  to  the  touching  of 
them  in  their  tenderest  part,  so  as  to 
cause  the  severest  sufi'ering.  When  He 
appears  to  judge  the  world  hard  hearts 
will  be  subdued  into  terror  and  proud 
spirits  humbled  into  shame.  He  who 
has  the  key  of  human  nature  can  touch 
all  its  springs  at  His  will,  and  find  out 
the  means  of  bringing  the  utmost  con- 
fusion and  terror  upon  those  who  afore- 
time boastfully  expressed  their  hatred 
of  Him. 

III.  That  the  enemies  of  Christ 
will  be  stricken  with  dismay.  "  There- 
fore shalt  Thou  make  them  turn  their 
back  when  Thou  shalt  make  ready  Tliine 
arrows  upon  Thy  strings  against  the  face 
of  them"  (ver.  12).  "  Thou  shalt  cause 
them  to  turn  their  backs  and  fly  as  if  a 
volley  of  arrows  had  been  discharged  in 
their  faces.  God  can  in  a  moment 
strike  the  most  powerful  and  numerous 
army,  even  in  the  moment  of  victory, 
with  panic;  and  then  even  the  lame, 
the  army  which  they  had  nearly  routed, 
shall  take  the  prey  and  divide  the  spoil." 
— A.  Clarke,  The  idea  is  that  the  Al- 
mighty has  set  up  His  enemies  as  a  butt. 

103 


FSALM  XXL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


(Comp.  Job.  vii.  20,  xvi.  12;  Lam.  iii. 
12,  13).  "The  judgments  of  God  are 
called  His  arrows,  being  sharp,  swift, 
sure,  and  deadly.  What  a  dreadful 
situation,  to  be  set  as  a  mark  and  butt 
at  which  these  arrows  are  directed ! 
View  Jerusalem  encompassed  by  the 
Roman  armies  without,  and  torn  to 
pieces  by  the  animosity  of  desperate 
and  bloody  factions  within  !  No  further 
commentary  is  requisite  upon  this  verse." 
G.  Home. 

IV.  That  the  enemies  of  Christ  will 
be  utterly  overthrown. 

1.  Their  overthrow  ivill  entail  severe 
suffering.  "  Thou  shalt  make  them  as 
a  fiery  oven  in  the  time  of  Thine  anger  : 
the  Lord  shall  swallow  them  up  in  His 
wrath,  and  the  fire  shall  devour  them  " 
(ver.  9).  The  wicked  shall  be  con- 
sumed with  the  fire  of  Divine  wrath, 
like  wood  put  into  a  furnace.  The 
wrath  of  God  is  often  represented  under 
the  image  of  fire.  (See  Deut.  iv.  24, 
xxxii.  22;  Ps.  xviii.  8;  Matt.  xiii.  42, 
xviii.  8,  XXV.  41 ;  Mark  ix.  44 ;  2  Thess. 
i.  8.)  The  enemies  of  Christ  shall  not 
only  be  cast  into  the  furnace  of  fire ; 
but  the  Lord  shall  make  them  them- 
selves as  a  fiery  oven  :  they  will  be  their 
own  tormentors.  "  Onr  pleasant  vices 
are  made  the  whips  to  scourge  us."  It 
is  said  that  a  frown  of  Queen  Elizabeth 
killed  Sir  Christopher  Hatton,  the  Lord 
Chancellor  of  England.  Who  then 
can  stand  before  the  frown  and  fierce 
anger  of  the  insulted  Majesty  of 
Heaven  % 

2.  The  overthrow  will  he  complete. 
"  Their  fruit  shalt  Thou  destroy  from 
the  earth,  and  their  seed  from  among 
the  children  of  men"  (ver.  10).  That 
which  they  prize  the  most,  and  which 
has  cost  a  life  of  toil  and  anxiety  to 
acquire,  will  perish.  The  ambitious 
dream,  the  hoarded  treasure,  the  coveted 
honour,  shall  vanish  as  a  fractured 
bubble.  Even  their  posterity — the  chil- 
dren who  have  imbibed  their  acrimony 
and  trod  in  their  footsteps — shall  pass 
away,  so  that  the  race  shall  come  to  an 
end,  and  their  memory  be  forgotten. 


The  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlast- 
ing remembrance ;  but  the  name  of  the 
wicked  shall  rot.  The  possessions  of 
the  haters  of  Christ  are  a  heritage  of 
woe. 

V.  That  the  overthrow  of  the 
enemies  of  Christ  will  illustrate  the 
supreme  power  of  Jehovah. 

1.  The  supreTne  poiver  of  Jehovah  is 
self -sustained.  "  Be  Thou  exalted  Lord, 
in  Thine  own  strength"  (ver.  13).  Ex- 
alt Thyself,  0  Lord — Thy  creatures  can- 
not exalt  Thee.  Lift  Thyself  up  and 
discomfit  Thy  foes  by  Thine  own 
strength  !  God's  right  hand  has  often 
given  the  victory  to  His  followers, 
though  they  struck  not  one  blow  in 
their  own  defence.  How  little  can  the 
strength  of  man  avail  when  the  Lord 
raiseth  up  Himself  to  the  battle.  The 
end  of  all  conflict  with  evil  will  be  the 
eternal,  unchallengeable  exaltation  of 
Jehovah.  While  He  watches  over  and 
ensures  the  best  interests  of  His  people, 
He  preserves  inviolate  His  own  honour 
and  majesty. 

2.  The  supremacy  of  Jehovah  should 
he  joyfully  celebrated..  "  So  will  we 
sing  and  praise  Thy  power"  (ver.  13). 
"  God  is  to  receive  praise  in  reference  to 
that  attribute  which  He  has  exhibited 
most  in  the  defence  or  salvation  of  His 
followers.  One  feels  himself  lost,  con- 
demned, on  the  brink  of  hell ;  he  calls 
for  mercy,  is  heard  and  saved :  mercy 
therefore  will  be  the  chief  subject  of  his 
praise,  and  the  burden  of  his  song. 
Another  feels  himself  beset  with  power- 
ful adversaries,  with  the  weakest  of 
whom  he  is  not  able  to  cope ;  he  cries 
to  the  Almighty  for  strength ;  he  is 
heard  and  strengthened  with  strength 
in  his  soul.  He  therefore  will  naturally 
magnify  the  all-conquering  power  of  the 
Lord." — A.  Clarke.  Joy  should  always 
flow  in  the  channel  of  praise.  The 
leading  thought  in  the  whole  psalm  is, 
that  God  will  ultimately  triumph  over 
all  His  enemies,  and  that  this  triumph 
will  be  followed  by  universal  rejoicing 
and  praise.  Haste,  0  haste,  the  happy 
exal 


104 


HOMILLTIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


rSALMZZlL 


PSALM   XXII. 

Introduction. 

"The  subject  of  this  psalm  is  the  deliverance  of  a  righteous  sufferer  from  his  enemies,  and 
the  effect  of  this  deliverance  on  others.  It  is  so  framed  as  to  be  applied  without  violence  to 
any  case  belonging  to  the  class  described,  yet  so  that  it  was  fully  verified  only  in  Christ,  the 
Head  and  Representative  of  the  class  in  question.  The  immediate  speaker  in  the  psalm  is  an 
ideal  person,  the  righteous  servant  of  Jehovah,  but  his  words  may,  to  a  certain  extent,  be 
appropriated  by  any  suffering  believer  and  by  the  whole  suffering  Church,  as  they  have  been 
in  all  ages." — Alexander, 

FOKSAKBN. 


(  Verses 

I.  Forsaken  and  Suffering.  "Why 
hast  Thou  forsaken  me  ?  Why  art  Thou 
so  far  from  helping  me  and  from  the 
words  of  my  roaring]"  Suffering  is 
one  of  the  mysteries  of  our  complicated 
human  life.  None  are  exempt.  The 
voice  of  anguish  rises  towards  heaven 
in  a  ceaseless  wail.  As  there  are 
ecstasies  of  joy  when  the  soul  is  exalted 
into  a  state  of  inexpressible  rapture,  so 
there  are  corresponding  depressions 
when  the  soul  is  plunged  into  a  gulf 
of  darkness  and  despair.  The  bitterest 
element  in  all  suffering  is  the  sense  of 
desertion,  when  the  lonely  victim  is 
drifting  helplessly  before  the  black, 
pelting  storm,  without  a  hand  to  help, 
a  voice  to  cheer,  or  a  light  to  guide ! 
Who  can  fathom  the  feelings  of  the 
solitary  sufferer  of  Golgotha  indicated 
in  that  thrilling  and  mysterious  cry — 
''  My  God,  njy  God,  why  hast  Thou  for- 
saken Me  ! "  It  was  *'  not  the  why  of 
impatience  or  despair,  not  the  sinful 
questioning  of  one  whose  heart  rebels 
against  his  chastening,  but  rather  the 
cry  of  a  lost  child  who  cannot  under- 
stand wliy  his  father  has  left  him,  and 
who  longs  to  see  his  father's  face  again. 
What  these  words  were  in  the  lips  of 
the  Holy  One  of  God,  heart  of  man 
may  not  conceive.  For  a  moment  in 
that  last  agony  the  Perfect  Man  was 
alone  with  the  sin  of  the  world." — 
Perowne. 

II.  Forsaken  but  not  prayerless. 
"  O  my  God,  I  cry  in  the  daytime,  but 
Thou  hearest  not,  and  in  the  night  season 
and  am  not  silent "  (ver.  2).  "  It  is  as 
if  he  said,  I  cannot  understand  this 
darkness.     It  is  not  that  I  have  for- 


1,2.) 

gotten  Thee.  Day  and  night  I  cry,  to 
me  there  is  no  silence." — Perowne. 
Prayer  is  the  great  resource  of  the 
troubled  soul ;  and  though  deliverance 
does  not  come  immediately,  prayer  is 
not  abandoned.  The  more  continuous 
the  misery  the  more  intense  and  vocal 
the  prayer.  Though  the  door  refuse 
to  open  for  weeks  and  months,  the 
earnest  suppliant  knows  he  is  before  the 
right  door,  that  there  is  no  other  to 
which  he  can  go,  and  that  erelong  it 
must  open.  '*  The  greatest  pain  to  tlie 
troubled  soul  is  not  to  be  sure  of  the 
hearing  of  his  prayers.  Whoever  does 
not  give  up  God,  even  when  his  trouble 
of  body  and  pain  of  soul  has  advanced 
to  the  highest  point,  soon  has  the 
experience  that  God  has  not  forsaken 
him." — Lange.  The  solitude  is  not  so 
oppressive  whose  silence  is  broken  by 
the  voice  of  prayer.  Delay  increases 
the  soul's  importunity,  and  importunity 
wiU  succeed  (Luke  xi.  8). 

III.  Forsaken  but  trusting.  Dense 
as  may  be  the  darkness  and  acute  as 
may  be  the  anguish,  the  sufferer  does 
not  lose  his  hold  on  God.  It  is  still, 
''My  God,  my  God."  The  great  test 
and  triumph  of  faith  is  witnessed  in  the 
continuance  of  confidence,  not  only  in 
one  who  is  absent,  but  in  one  whom  we 
are  conscious  has  deserted  us. 

1.  This  trust  was  encouraged  by  con- 
templating the  holiness  of  the  Divine 
character.  "  But  Thou  art  holy,  O  Thou 
that  inhabitest  the  praises  of  Israel " 
(ver.  3).  Throned  above  the  myriad 
praises  of  the  congregation  which  thank 
fully  celebrate  the  many  acts  of  Divinti 
deliverance  and  redemption.     The  holi- 

105 


FgALMXZn. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


ness  of  God  is  but  another  aspect  of  His 
faithfulness  and  mercy.  The  more 
vivid  and  extensive  our  conception  of 
sin,  the  more  exalted  and  impressive 
will  be  our  view  of  the  Divine  holiness. 
The  Kedeeiner  of  the  world  drew  His 
mightiest  consolation  from  a  recollection 
of  the  holiness  of  God,  when,  in  His 
hour  of  darkness  and  sorrow,  He  was 
brought  into  close  and  lonely  contact 
with  the  enormity  of  human  sin. 
'*  While  the  holiness  of  God  is  in  the 
highest  degree  acknowledged  and  adored, 
the  afflicted  speaker  in  this  verse  seems 
to  marvel  how  the  holy  God  could  for- 
sake him,  and  be  silent  to  his  cries. 
The  argument  is,  Thou  art  holy,  oh  ! 
why  is  it  Thou  dost  disregard  Thy  holy 
One  in  His  hour  of  sharpest  anguish  1 
We  may  not  question  the  holiness  of 
God,  but  we  may  argue  from  it,  and  use 
it  as  a  plea  in  our  petitions." — Spurgeon. 
"The  expression,  *Thou  art  holy,'  is  a 
corroding  element  which  must  by  and 


by  entirely  consume  the  other,  *Thou 
hast  forsaken  me." — Hengsienherg. 

2.  TJiis  trtLst  was  encouraged  hy  re- 
(Meeting  the  experience  of  God's  people 
in  times  of  trouble.  "  Our  fathers 
trusted  in  Thee,"  <fec.  (ver.  4,  5).  Thrice 
"  they  trusted,"  and  only  once  "  they 
cried."  It  was  not  that  God  could  not 
deliver  those  who  trusted  in  Him  :  He 
had  done  it  for  those  of  old  time.  He 
who  could  deliver  the  sinful  when  they 
cried  to  Him  in  faith,  could  much  more 
deliver  the  Sinless  One  who  came  to  Him 
in  innocence.  A  genuine  trust  is  always 
succeeded  by  a  signal  deliverance.  Man 
is  often  disappointed  and  confounded 
when  trusting  to  human  policy  and 
power;  but  never  when  trusting  in  God, 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  lowest  level  of  suf- 
fering is  reached  wlien  the  soul  is  con- 
sciously/ forsaken  of  God.  2,  Prayer  is 
the  most  suitable  exercise  of  the  soul  in  the 
most  ti'ying  raoments.  3.  When  the  soul 
can  do  notldng  else  it  can  trust  in  God. 


The  Loneliness  of  Suffering. 

(Verses  6-18.) 


I.  Oppresses  the  soul  with  a  sense 
of  personal  unworthiness  (ver.  6-8). 

1.  This  unworthiness  is  humbly  ac- 
knowledged. "  I  am  a  worm  and  no 
man ;  a  reproach  of  men  and  despised 
of  the  people  "  (ver.  6).  The  first  step 
in  a  downward  career  is  to  sink  in  the 
estimation  of  others  ;  the  next  and  more 
fatal  one  is  to  sink  in  our  own  estima- 
tion. Pungent  and  continued  suffering 
depresses  the  mind,  and  fills  it  with 
gloomy  and  but  half-comprehended 
thoughts,  and  the  sufferer  is  tempted  to 
depreciate  himself  and  all  his  doings. 
"  Man  is  compared  to  a  worm  in  Job 
XXV.  6  on  account  of  the  nothingness  of 
his  existence.  The  worm  in  the  passage 
before  us,  as  in  Isa.  xli.  13,  serves  to 
designate  nothingness  within  nothing- 
ness. The  reproach  and  the  contempt 
are  brought  under  our  notice,  not  so 
much  in  themselves,  as  in  reference  to 
the  ground  on  which  they  rest — the  deep 
misery  of  the  sufferer,  whose  condition  is 
such  that  it  is  reckoned  by  all  men  as 
»1  toge  1 1 1  e  r  ( lesperate. " — Eengstenberg. 
106 


2.  This  sense  of  unworthiness  renders 
the  soul  more  keenly  sensitive  to  insult 
and  scorn.  "  All  they  that  see  me 
laugh  me  to  scorn,"  <kc.  (ver.  7,  8).  It 
is  painful  to  endure  the  scornful  ridicule 
of  our  enemies  when  we  are  in  health 
and  vigour,  and  able  to  repel  and  answer 
it.  But  when  all  our  powers  are  pros- 
trate by  affliction,  and  we  are  too  help- 
less to  reply,  the  torture  is  overwhelming. 
Still  more  cruel  and  unbearable  is  it 
when  the  sufferer's  God  is  maligned 
(ver.  8).  '*  This  is  the  most  lacerating 
kind  of  contempt.  Because  he  loves 
God  more  than  himself,  he  would  rather 
encounter  floods  of  derision  himself,  than 
that  one  drop  should  fall  on  the  name  of 
his  God.  The  shaking  of  the  head  and 
the  opened  mouth  denote  mocking  de- 
light."— Tholuck.  Oh!  how  inexpres- 
sibly  keen  must  have  been  the  sufferings 
of  the  Sinless  One  as  He  listened  to 
the  revilings  of  those  who  gloated  over 
His  crucifixion  I  How  often  is  it  that 
man  despises  what  God  holds  in  highest 
esteem  !     If  we  would  be  true  followers 


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  psalm  xixu 

of  Christ  we  must  be  content  to  bear  world's  Redeemer  was,  that  He  bad  to 

His  reproach.  endure    the    contradiction    of    sinners 

II.  Throws  the  mind  back  upon  the  against  Himself.  The  sorrows  of  the 
thought  of  the  Divine  Care  from  the  good  are  met  with  the  taunting,  malicious 
earliest   period    of  life   (ver.   9,   10).  revelry  of  the  wicked. 

He  who  protected  and  sustained  us  in  2.   They  are  cruel.     "  For  dogs  have 

the  helplessness  and  perils  of  infancy,  compassed    me :    the   assembly  of    the 

will  not-  leave  us  to  perish  in  the  darkest  wicked  have  enclosed  me  :  they  pierced 

and  loneliest  extremity.     Too  little  do  my  hands  and  my  feet"  (ver.  16).     The 

we  think  of  the  goodness  of  God  which  enemies   are   still  compared   to  savage 

brought   us   into    being,    provided   for  animals,    but   the   figure   is    somewhat 

every  want,  brightened  the  happy  period  different ;    "  dogs  "    not  only  as   fierce, 

of  youth,  and  led  us  to  trust  Him  in  but  as  unclean.     We   must   remember 

every  emergency  of  life.     Comfort  may  that  these  dogs  are  the  savage  wild  dogs 

be  found  in  the  hour  of  trial  by  reflect-  of  the  East  (1  Kings  xiv.  11  j  Ps.  lix.  6* 

ing  on  the  past  mercies  of  God.     The  14,  16). — Perowne.     Jews  and  heathens 

more  conscious  we  become  of  our  own  enclosed  the  solitary  Sufferer  of  Calvary, 

impotency,  the  more  tenaciously  do  we  as  dogs  in  their  madness  and  fury  close 

cling  to  the  Divine  arm  and  the  more  in  upon  the  hunted  stag.     They  pierced 

highly  do  we  prize  the  smallest  acts  of  His  hands  with  nails,   that   our  souls 

kindness  and  sympathy.     "I  began  to  might  not  be  pierced  with  judgments, 

rail  against  Providence,"  wrote  the  im-  Sin   is  the  most  terrific  instrument  of 

prisoned    Armand    Charratt    with    the  cruelty. 

blood  he   had   pricked   from  his  arm,  IV.   Intensifies  the  sense   of  utter 

"when  a  messenger  of  mercy  came  to  helplessness  and  agony  (vers.   11,   14, 

me  in  the  form  of  an  escaped  canary-  15,  17,   18).     It  is  impossible  to  find 

bird  down  a  chimney  of  the  Bastille.     I  words  that  will  depict  more  graphically 

kept    the    canary-bird,    and   for    three  a  condition  of  complete  exhaustion,  dis- 

years  I  was  no  longer  solitary."     "  God  tress,  and  despair,  than  those  contained 

begins  His  care  over  us  from  the  earliest  in    these    verses.     The    lonely   sufferer, 

hour.     We  are  dandled  upon  the  knee  after    referring    to    the    cruelty    of    his 

of   mercy  and  cherished  in  the  lap  of  tormentors,  passes  on  to  speak  of   the 

goodness;    our   cradle   is   canopied   by  effects  of  their  savage  treatment  upon 

Divine  love,  and  our  first  totterings  are  himself.      He  felt  absolutely  friendless 

guided  by  His  care.     He  who  was  our  and  alone: — "There  is  none  to  help." 

God  when  we  left  our  mother,  will  be  As    poured-out  water  dissolves  on    the 

with  us  till  we  return  to  mother-earth,  ground,  so  his  strength  is  dissolved :  he 

and  will  keep  us  from  perishing  in  the  is  utterly  spent.     "  I  am  poured  out  like 

belly   of    hell.       Paith    finds   weapons  water."     His  bones,  the  support  of  the 

everywhere." — Spurgeon.  physical  frame,  are  sundered  and    dis- 

III.  Is  embittered  by  the  violence  placed,  involving  unutterable  agony. 
and  cruelty  of  relentless  enemies.  "  All  my  bones  are  out  of  joint.     I  may 

1.   They  are  violent.      "  Many   bulls  tell  all  my  bones,  they  look  and  stare 

have    compassed    me ;    strong   bulls    of  upon  me."     His  courage  fails  hiui ;  the 

Bashan    have  beset  me  round.      They  brave  heart  can  hold  up  no  longer,  but 

gaped  upon  me  with  their  mouths,  as  a  sinks  in  despair.      "  My   heart  is   like 

ravening  and  a  roaring  lion"  (ver.  12,  wax;  it  is  melted  in  the  midst  of  my 

13).     The  lonely  sufferer  is  terrified  by  bowels."      The  sap  of  life  is  dried  up 

the  fierce  opposition  of  his  enemies,  who,  like  the  moisture    out    of   a   burnt-out 

like  strong  and  ravenous  beasts,  threaten  potsherd  :  his  misery  and  fevered  pain 

him  with  horrible   mutilation  and    de-  exhausted  his  endurance  and  strength, 

struction.       The    wild,    ferocious    out-  as  a  vessel  of  clay  is  dried  and    burnt 

breaks  of  the  wicked  are  ever  a  source  within    a   furnace.       "  My    strength    is 

of  distress  to  the  holy  soul.     One  of  the  dried    up  like  a  potsherd."      In  conse- 

bitterest  elements  in  the  sufferings  of  the  quence  of  excessive  thirst  and  anguish, 

107 


PSALM  xxn. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


his  tongue  is  sealed  to  his  jaws  ;  and  he 
feels  as  one  who  has  already  entered  the 
grave.  "My  tongue  cleaveth  to  ray 
jaws,  and  Thou  hast  brought  me  into 
the  dust  of  death."  As  a  last  act  of 
indignity,  as  though  he  were  already 
dead,  his  very  clothes  are  stripped  from 
him  and  raffled  as  plunder  among  his 
unpitying  enemies.  "  They  part  my 
garments  among  them,  and  cast  lots 
upon  my  vesture"  (ver,  18).  How  all 
these   particulars  were  fulfilled  in  the 


sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God,  is  narrated 
in  the  gospels  with  touching  simplicity 
and  realistic  power.  The  heaviest  stroke 
in  all  suffering  is  that  which  we  must 
bear  alone.  No  loneliness  is  more 
oppressive,  more  distressing,  more  in- 
supportable than  the  loneliness  of  suffer- 
ing. 

Learn  : — 1.  The  ^veakness  and  vanity 
of  man.  2.  The  terrible  consequences  of 
sin.  3.  The  only  source  of  help  in  ex- 
tremity is  Bivitie, 


A  Pathetic  Cry  for  Hblp. 

(Verses  19-21.) 


I.  That  God  is  the  unfailing  source 
of  help  in  time  of  trouble.     "Be  not 

Thou  far  from  me,  O  Lord :  0  my 
strength,  haste  Thee  to  help  me "  (ver. 
19).  Trouble  is  a  blessing  when  it 
drives  us  nearer  to  God.  The  fainting 
victim  turns  away  from  his  fierce 
persecutors  and  from  his  own  sufferings, 
and  fixes  his  eyes  on  God.  All  earthly 
help  has  its  limits,  but  Divine  help  never 
fails.  If  God  be  distant,  the  darkness 
deepens  and  the  sorrow  too.  But  when 
the  strength  of  Israel  hastens  to  the 
rescue,  the  light  of  hope  breaks  in  and 
the  antruish  is  assuasfed.  From  the 
lowest  depths  God  hears  the  piteous  cry 
of  the  helpless.  "  Prayer  is  the  weapon 
with  which  the  bars  of  the  gates  of 
heaven  aie  burst  open." 

II.  That  deliverance  is  implored 
from  imminent  peril  (ver.  20,  21). 

1.  From  threatened  death.  "Deliver 
my  soul  from  the  sword  :  my  darling  " 
— my  only  one.  "  From  the  parallelism 
=  my  soulf  my  life.  The  life  is  so 
called,  either  because  man  has  but  one 
life,  or  because  it  is  the  most  precious 
of  all  things." — Perowne.  This  life  was 
exposed  to  destruction  by  the  sword  ;  for 
"  the  sword  is  an  individualising  designa- 
tion of  whatever  is  an  instrument  of 
death."  The  Lord  can  blunt  the  point 
of  the  sharpest  weapon  ;  and,  at  the  last 
moment,  restore  the  stricken  one  who 
cries  to  Him. 

2.  From  the  ferocity  of  the  most  pitiless 
tormentors.  "  Save  me  —  from  the 
power  of  the  dog^from  the  lion's  mouth 

108 


— from  the  horns  of  the  unicorns." 
Luther  observes — "The  rage  of  the 
furious  devil  is  so  great,  that  the  prophet 
does  not  consider  it  enough  to  have 
represented  it  by  a  sharp  sword,  but 
introduces  further,  for  the  same  purpose, 
the  tearings  of  raging,  furious  dogs,  the 
mouth  of  the  greedy  and  hungry  lion, 
which  stands  already  open,  and  is  ready 
to  devour,  and  the  dreadfully  fierce  wrath 
of  the  raging,  terrible  unicorn.'*  The 
word  unicorn  is  from  a  Hebrew  verb 
which  signifies  to  elevate,  and  refers  to  an 
animal  "  having  a  high  horn  in  its  nose 
or  front,  an  un tameable  beast,  which  may 
be  slain,  but  cannot  be  taken  alive.  It 
is  spoken  of  in  Scripture  in  respect  to  its 
strength  in  Num.  xxii.,  its  untameable 
ferocity  Job.  xxxix.  9,  its  height  of 
h<ymVs.  xcii.  11." — Bythner.  The  fury 
of  the  most  violent  and  dreaded  enemy 
is  under  the  control  of  the  sufferer's  God. 
He  who  holds  the  winds  in  His  fists, 
whose  whisper  stills  the  angriest  storm, 
whose  look  smites  the  most  formidable 
hosts  with  paralysis,  can  dissipate,  like 
foam  before  the  breeze,  the  violent  anger 
of  our  persecuting  adversaries. 

III.  That  the  cry  for  help  is  em- 
boldened by  the  recollection  of  past 
deliverances.  "  For  Thou  hast  heard 
me"  (ver.  21).  None  are  so  poor  in 
blessings,  but  there  are  some  periods  in 
their  past  history  in  which  they  were 
specially  impressed  with  the  saving 
interposition  of  heaven,  in  answer  to 
prayer.  The  soul  in  its  deepest  distress 
falls  back  upon  sucli  a  well-tested  ex- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  psalm  xiu. 


perience,  and  gathers  confidence.     From  and    calm,    restful    assurance.      Faith, 

this  point  we  observe  a  marked  change  however  feeble  its  grasp,  if  persevering, 

in  the  condition  of  the  sufferer.     From  is  certain  to  triumph.     The  past  is  an 

a    state   of    abject    wretchedness    and  inspiration  for  the  present,  and  a  guide 

despair,   he    rises  into   the   apparently  for  the  future, 
sudden  enjoyment  of  a  radiant  hope, 

A  Song  of  DELiTERANcnL 
{Verses  23-31.) 

At  this  point  we  detect  a   marked  and  utterly  lost     The  sufferings  of  the 

change  in  the  tone    and  spirit  of   the  righteous  are  according  to  the  Divine 

psalm.     Light-  breaks  in  upon  the  for-  purpose  not  only  to  be  of  advantage  to 

lorn  sufferer.      Despair  gives  place  to  the  present  congregation  but  likewise  to 

hope;  and  the  prospect  of  speedy  and  the     heathen     throughout     the     entire 

certain    deliverance  animates    the   soul  world. — Lange. 

with  gratitude  and  joy.  3.  The  praise  is  general,     "  All   ye 

Observe :  the  seed  of  Jacob,  glorify  Him  "  (ver. 

I.  That  this  deliverance  was  cele-  23).      All    the    true    worshippers     of 

brated  by  grateful  praise.  Jehovah  are  called  upon  to  praise  Him. 

1.  The  theme  of  praise  is  the  Name  True  praise  is  characterised  by  profound 
of  the  Great  Deliverer.  "  I  will  declare  revei'ence.  "Ye  that  fear  the  Lord." 
Thy  Name  unto  my  brethren."  The  "  Humble  awe  of  God  is  so  necessary  a 
Name  of  Jehovah  is  inclusive  of  all  the  preparation  for  praising  Him  that  none 
Divine  perfections ;  but  that  perfection  are  fit  to  sing  to  His  honour  but  such 
which  is  more  immediately  exercised  in  as  reverence  His  word.  Holy  fear 
effecting  for  us  a  great  deliverance  will  should  always  keep  the  key  of  the 
naturally  be  most  prominent  in  our  singing  pew.  Where  Jesus  leads  the 
song.  The  deliverance  of  the  world's  tune  none  but  holy  lips  may  dare  to 
Redeemer  from  His  unutterable  suf-  sing." — Spurgeon.  True  praise  is  ac 
ferings,  and  the  consequent  deliverance  companied  with  substantial  thank- 
of  humanity  from  the  power  of  sin,  offerings,  **  I  will  pay  my  vows  before 
called  into  play  all  the  energies  and  them  that  fear  Him "  (ver.  25).  The 
perfections  of  the  Divine  Nature.  The  faithful  promiser,  who,  when  in  trouble 
Divine  Name,  therefore,  in  all  its  depth  had  vowed  to  offer  certain  sacrifices, 
and  expanse  of  meaning,  is  the  subject  was  accustomed,  after  deliverance,  to 
of  highest  adoration.  To  declare  the  invite  the  widow,  the  orphan,  and  the 
name  of  the  Lord  is  to  make  known  poor  to  participate  with  him  in  the 
what  He  has  done.  sacrificial  meal  (Deut.  xii.  18,  xvi,  11). 

2.  The  praise  is  offered  publicly.  The  grateful  heart  will  praise  God  with 
"  Unto  my  brethren — in  the  midst  of  a  full-handed  generosity,  and  delights  to 
the  congregation — in  the  great  congre-  share  its  bounty  and  joy  with  others, 
gation — before  them  that  fear  Him  "  The  salvation  of  one  adds  to  the  happi- 
(vers.  22,  25).     Instead  of  the  anxious  ness  of  many  (Luke  xv.  10). 

cry,  which,  in  contrast  with  the  praises  4.  The   praise   recognises  the   special 

of  Israel,  previously  sounded  from  the  character  of  the   deliverance  (ver.    24). 

mouth    of  the   innocent    and    horribly  God  esteems  what  others  despise.     The 

tortured  victim,  the  song  of  praise  of  abject   sufferer   who    sinks    below    the 

the  delivered,  is  in   future  to  resound  notice  and  help  of  man  is  i«ever  beyond 

in  the  assembly  of  his  brothers,  and  the  the  reach  and  sympathy  of  God.     The 

whole  congregation  is  to  hear,  to  their  recollection  of  the  horrors  from  which 

own  edification,  the  declaration  of  the  we   have   been   snatched,    will   giTe    a 

great  and  wonderful  things  that  God  has  colouring    to    the    expression    of    our 

done  to  this  one  who  was  so  afflicted  gratitude.     The  affliction  of  the  offJictcd^ 

109 


FSALM  XXII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


•*  The  same  word  is  used  with  Messianic 
reference  Isa.  liii.  4,  7 ;  Zech.  ix.  9. 
When  he  cried  He  heard.  What  a  con- 
trast to  vers.  1,  2  !  Very  remarkable 
is   this    confident    acknowledsfment    of 

o 

God's  goodness  in  hearing  prayer." — 
Perowne. 

5.  The  praise  will  bring  satisfaction 
to  the  most  needy.  *'The  meek  shall 
eat  and  be  satisfied,"  &c.  (ver.  26).  The 
gratitude  of  the  delivered  sufferer  and 
the  joy  it  occasions  to  others,  are  repre- 
sented under  the  figure  of  a  feast  in 
which  the  poorest  participate.  The 
grateful  and  extended  proclamation  of 
the  merciful  works  of  God,  especially 
as  exhibited  in  the  salvation  of  the 
human  race,  will  supply  the  spiritual 
banquet  for  which  millions  crave,  and 
for  lack  of  which  they  perish. 

II.  That  this  deliverance  will  be 
the  means  of  conferring  blessing  on 
all  mankind. 

1.  All  nations  will  acknowledge  the 
supremacy  of  Jehovah.  "  All  the  ends 
of  the  world  shall  remember,"  (fee.  (vers. 
27,  28).  The  heathen  may  have  for- 
gotten God,  but  they  are  not  forgotten 
by  Him  :  they  may  have  ignored  the 
Divine  rule,  but  they  cannot  destroy 
it — *'  He  is  the  governor  among  the 
nations."  The  heathen  who  share  in 
the  great  salvation  wrought  out  by  the 
suffering  Messiah  will  gladly  submit  to 
His  lordship.  *'  It  is  well  to  mark  the 
order  of  conversion  as  here  set  forth  : — 
They  shall  remember — this  is  reflection, 
like  the  prodigal  who  came  unto  him- 
self :  and  turn  unto  Jehovah — this  is 
repentance,  like  Manasseh  who  left  his 
idols ;  and  shall  worship — this  is  holy 
service  as  Paul  adored  the  Christ  whom 
once  he  abhorred." — Spurgeon. 

2.  All  ranlcs  of  men  shall  find  happi- 
ness in  the  worship  of  Jehovah  (ver.  29). 
Here  the  image  of  the  banquet  is 
resumed,  the  feast  is  provided  for  all, 
irrespective  of  national  or  personal 
distinctions.  "All  they  that  be  fat 
upon  the  earth  " — the  rich  and  mighty  ; 
"  all  they  that  go  down  to  the  dust  " — 
those  who  are  so  miserably  starved  and 
poor  that  they  are  ready  to  perish,  and 
"  cannot  keep  alive  their  own  soul " — 


all  shall  sit  down  together  at  the  same 
divinely-furnished  banquet.  Here  all 
guests  are  poor,  and  God  is  rich  for  all. 
The  Gospel  shall  win  the  homage  of  all 
nations  and  all  classes  of  men. 

III.  That  this  deliverance  will 
vindicate  the  Divine  Righteousness  to 
future  ages  (vers.  30,  31).  "  His 
Righteousness  not  only  as  manifested 
in  the  deliverance  of  His  righteous  ser- 
vant, but  as  manifested  in  all  His  great 
work  of  salvation,  both  in  the  suffering 
and  in  the  exaltation  of  Christ,  and  also 
in  providing  the  feast  for  all  who  will 
partake  thereof.  This  hope  of  the 
conversion  of  other  nations  to  the  faith 
of  God's  elect,  was  in  an  especial  man- 
ner characteristic  of  the  period  of  the 
return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity. 
The  prophecies  of  Zechariah  are  full  of 
it,  and  so  are  many  of  the  Psalms  which 
probably  date  from  that  period." — 
Perowne.  The  divine  conduct  in  the 
great  work  of  Redemption  will  be  con- 
tinually celebrated.  Posterity  will  per- 
petuate the  worship  of  Jehovah ;  each 
succeeding  generation  will  preserve  and 
disseminate  the  knowledge  committed  to 
it  by  the  generation  preceding.  The 
seed  of  the  righteous  is  indestructible 
and  ever  fruitful.  The  true  Church  of 
God  can  never  perish.  It  is  said  that 
the  Baobab-tree — the  largest  known 
tree  in  the  world — though  stripped  of 
its  bark  outside  and  hollowed  to  a  large 
cavity  within  its  trunk,  has  the  singular 
power  of  exuding  from  its  substance  a 
perfectly  new  bark,  which  lines  both 
the  inner  and  outer  surfaces  of  the  tree. 
So  is  it  with  the  Church  of  God. 
Though  pierced  and  peeled  and  wounded 
by  the  gleaming  axes  of  malicious 
enemies,  it  still  lives  and  grows  in 
irresistible  productiveness,  affording 
shelter  to  millions,  and  stretching  its 
life-giving  and  healing  foliage  over  all 
nations. 

Lessons  : 

1.  Deliverance  from  peril  should  be 
gratefully  acJcnovjledged. 

2.  The  world  is  most  indebted  to  those 
who  have  suffered  most  for  its  benefit. 

3.  The  influence  of  a  good  work  never 
dies. 


110 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  psalm  xxin. 


PSALM     XXIII. 

Introduction. 

•*  The  king  who  had  been  the  shepherd-boy,  and  had  been  taken  from  the  quiet  sheep- 
cotes  to  rule  over  Israel,  sings  this  little  psalm  of  Him  who  is  the  true  Shepherd  and  King  of 
men.  We  do  not  know  at  what  period  of  David's  life  it  was  written,  but  it  sounds  as  if  it 
were  the  work  of  his  later  years.  There  is  a  fulness  of  experience  about  it,  and  a  tone  of 
subdued,  quiet  confidence  which  speaks  of  a  heart  mellowed  by  years,  and  of  a  faith  made 
sober  by  many  a  trial.  A  young  man  would  not  write  so  calmly,  and  a  life  which  was  just 
opening  would  not  afford  material  for  such  a  record  of  God's  guardianship  in  all  changing 
circumstances.  If  we  think  of  the  psalm  as  the  work  of  David's  later  years,  is  it  not  very 
beautiful  to  see  the  old  king  looking  back  with  such  vivid  and  loving  remembrance  to  his 
childhood's  occupation,  and  bringing  up  again  to  memory  in  his  palace  the  green  valleys,  the 
gentle  streams,  the  dark  glens  where  he  had  led  his  flocks  in  the  old  days  ;  very  beautiful  to 
Bee  him  traversing  all  the  stormy  years  of  warfare  and  rebellion,  of  crime  and  sorrow,  which 
lay  between,  and  finding  in  all  God's  guardian  presence  and  gracious  guidance  ?  There  ia 
nothing  diflScult  of  understanding  in  the  psalm.  The  train  of  thought  is  clear  and  obvious. 
The  experiences  which  it  details  are  common,  the  emotions  it  expresses  simple  and  familiar. 
The  tears  that  have  been  dried,  the  fears  that  have  been  dissipated,  by  this  old  song ;  the  love  i' 
and  thankfulness  which  have  found  in  them  their  best  expression,  prove  the  worth  of  its  simple 
words.  It  lives  in  most  our  memories.  The  psalm  falls  into  two  halves,  in  both  of  which 
the  same  general  thought  of  God's  guardian  care  is  presented,  though  under  different  illustra- 
tions, and  with  some  variety  of  detail.  The  first  half  sets  Him  forth  as  a  Shepherd,  and  us  as 
the  sheep  of  His  pasture ;  the  second  gives  Him  as  the  Host,  and  us  aa  the  guests  at  His 
table  and  the  dwellers  in  His  house. " — A.  Maclaren. 

The  Divine  Shepherd  and  His  Flock. 

(Verses  1-4.) 

I.    The  Divine    Shepherd    supplies  interval  between  the  man  and  the  brute : 
every  want.      *'  The  Lord  is  my  shep-  the  single  point  of  union  is  felt  strongly, 
herd,  I  shall  not  want"  (ver.  1).     The  One   is   the  love  of    the  protector,  the 
/  shepherd   is,   literally,    one    who  feeds.  other  the  love  of  the  grateful  life ;  and 
It  is  an  image  that  would  be  specially  so    between    lives   so   distant,  there  is 
suggestive   to    a    nation    of    shepherds.  woven   by   night  and  day,  by  summer 
Most  beautifully  does  it  symbolise  the  suns    and  winter  frosts,   a    living   net- 
character    of  Jehovah  as  the   provider,  work  of  sympathy."     Between  the  Good 
protector,    guide,    and    unfailing    com-  Shepherd  and  His  people  there  exist  the 
panion    of   His   people.     To   appreciate  tenderest  relations — on  the  one  side  of 
the  force  of  the  image,  it  is  necessary  unfathomable  affection,  on  the  other  of 
to   understand    the    difference   between  calm    unlimited    confidence.      "/  s/iall 
the  modern  shepherd  and  the  Oriental  not    want'' — I    want    nothing.       With 
shepherd    of    olden    times.       "  Beneath  Jehovah  for  my  shepherd  and  guardian, 
the  burning  skies  and  the  clear  starry  whose  'hand  rests  on  all  the  sources  of 
night     of    Palestine,"    says    Robertson,  supply,    I    can    lack    no    temporal    or 
"  there  grows  up  between  the  shepherd  spiritual   good.      When   the   holy  John 
and  his  flock  a  union  of  attachment  and  Fletcher,    of   Madeley,    was    asked    by 
tenderness.      It  is   the  country   where,  George  III.  if  he  would  accept  prefer- 
I  at  any  moment,  sheep  are  liable  to  be  ment  in  the  Church  as  an  acknowledg- 
swept  away  by  some  mountain  torrent,  ment  for  an  able  and   timely  paper  he 
or  carried  off  by  hill-robbers,  or  torn  by  had    written    on    American    affairs,    he 
wolves.     At  any  moment  their  protector  returned    the   respectful   but   character- 
may    have    to    save    them    by  personal  istic  reply — '*  Sire,  I  want  nothing,  but 
hazard.     Alone  in  those  vast  solitudes,  more  grace." 

with  no  human  being  near,  the  shep-  II.    The   Divine   Shepherd    affords 

herd  and  the  sheep  feel  a  life  in  com-  tranquillising  rest  to  the  weary.  *'  ile 

mon.      Differences  disappear,  the   vast  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in  green  pas- 

lU 


PSALM  xxm. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY ;  PSALMS. 


tures,   and  leadeth  me  beside  the  sdll 
waters,"  or,  waten  of  rest  (ver.  2).     "  It 
is  the  hot  noon- tide,  and  the  desert  lies 
baking  in   the   awful  glare,  and  every 
stone  on  the  hills  of  Judea  burns  the 
foot  that  touches  it.     But  in  that  pant- 
ing breathless  hour,  here  is  a  little  green 
glen,  with  a  quiet  brooklet,  and  a  moist 
lush  herbage  all  along  its  course,  and 
great   stones  that  fling  a  black  shadow 
over  the  dewy  grass  at  their  base ;  and 
there  would  the  shepherd  lead  his  flock, 
while  the  *  sunbeams,  like  swords,'  are 
piercing  everything  beyond  that  hidden 
covert.      Sweet    silence    broods    there. 
The  sheep  feed  and   drink,  and  couch 
in    cool   lairs   till    he  calls  them  forth 
again.     So  God  leads  His  children." — 
Maclaren.      With    all    the   haste   and 
worry  and  toil  of  life,  there  is  much  of 
quiet,  pleasant  restfulness.     Seasons  of 
repose  are  necessary  to  recover  and  fit 
the  jaded  worker  for  the  ever-pressing 
and   imperative   duties   of    active   life. 
The  soul  must  rest  peacefully  in  God's 
favour  and  in  placid,  hallowed  cojnmu- 
nion  with  Him,  in  order  to  satisfy  its 
keenest   hunger  and   slake   its   fiercest 
thirst. 

III.  The  Divine  Shepherd  prepares 
the  soul  for  the  loftiest  service.  "  He 
restoreth  my  soul  :  He  leadeth  me  in 
the  paths  of  righteousness  for  His 
name's  sake"  (ver.  3.)  The  designed 
result  of  rest  and  refreshment  is  the 
accession  of  new  vigour  to  both  mind 
and  body.  The  weeks  spent  in  purpose- 
less loitering  on  the  shining  sands  of  the 
summer  sea,  or  in  rambling  among  the 
huge,  silent  hills,  or  on  the  banks  of  the 
brawling  trout  stream,  with  its  tree- 
shaded  nooks,  its  rustling  sedges  and 
glittering  weirs,  tend  to  refresh  and 
invigorate  the  whole  man,  and  prepare 
for  the  stern,  tugging  warfare  of  life 
and  for  nobler  enterprise.  So  is  it  in 
the  spiritual  life.  He  restoreth  my  soul. 
"When  the  soul  grows  sorrowful,  He 
revives  it :  when  it  is  sinful.  He  sancti- 
fies it :  when  it  is  weak,  He  strengthens 
it :  '*  when  it  wanders,  He  brings  it 
back.  God  blesses  not  simply  to  im- 
part happiness ;  but  to  fit  the  soul  for 
holier  service  and  more  extensive  use- 
fulness.    He  IcadfOi  me  in  the  paths  of 

in 


righteousness.  "Life  is  not  a  fold  for, 
the  sheep  to  lie  down  in,  but  a  road  for! 
them  to  walk  on.  We  get  blessings,  not 
to  let  them  pass  away  like  waste  steam 
puffed  into  empty  air,  but  that  we  may 
use  them  to  drive  the  wheels  of  life. 
The  waters  of  happiness  are  not  for  a 
luxurious  bath  where  a  man  may  lie, 
till,  like  flax  steeped  too  long,  the  very 
fibre  be  rotted  out  of  him ;  a  quick 
plunge  will  brace  him,  and  he  will  come 
out  refreshed  for  work.     B£^t|s_to_fitufor 

^^^ikjL^JPlfei'^-''^  §^?£t^ll-^§^'  There  is 
nothing  more  evanescent  in  its  nature 
than  a  mere  emotion,  even  though  it  be 
that  of  joy  in  God,  unless  it  be  turned 
into  a  spring  of  action  for  God.  Such 
emotions,  like  photographs,  vanish  from 
the  heart  unless  they  be  fixed.  Work 
for  God  is  the  way  to  fix  them."  — 
Maclaren. 

IV.  The  Divine  Shepherd  provides 
protection  and  consolation  in  the 
darkest  peril  "Yea,  though  I  walk 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death,  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art 
with  me ;  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they 
comfort  me "  (ver.  4).  The  soul  fears 
not  to  enter  the  '* sunless  gulfs"  of 
sorrow  when  assured  of  the  supporting 
presence  and  protecting  care  of  the 
Good  Shepherd.  The  darkness  of  death 
is  but  a  shadow  after  all.  The  trusting 
soul  enters  the  gloomy  gorge  only  to 
emerge  into  the  brighter  day  of  immor- 
tality. "  Some  evils  may  come  ;  some 
will  probably  come,  —  one  at  least  is 
sure  to  come.  However  bright  may  be 
the  path,  somewhere  on  it,  perhaps  just 
round  that  turning,  *  sits  the  shadow 
feared  of  man.'  But  to  the  Christian 
heart  there  is  the  conviction  that  the 
hand  which  guides  us  into  the  dark] 
valley,  will  guide  us  through  it  and  up 
out  of  it.  Yes,  strange  as  it  may  sound, ^ 
the  presence  of  Him  who  sends  the 
sorrow  is  the  best  help  to  bear  it.  The' 
assurance  that  the  hand  which  strikes  is 
the  hand  which  binds  up,  makes  the 
stroke  a  blessing, — sucks  the  poison  out 
of  the  wound  of  sorrow,  and  turns  the 
rod  which  smites  into  the  staff  to  lean 
on."  When  Dr.  Guthrie,  the  celebrated 
and  eloquent  Divine,  felt  himself  tread- 
ing the  deep,  dark  valley,  he  exclaimed. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXIII. 


^  Death  is  mining  away  here,  slowly 
but  surely,  in  the  dark.  Blessed 
Jesus  1  what  would  I  do  now  but  for 
Theer 


Lessons  :  1.  The  sheep  of  Jehovah 
are  saved  from  poverty.  2.  From  wan- 
dering. 3.  From  uselessness,  4.  From 
fear.     5.  From  sorrow. 


A  BoYAL  Banquet. 
(  Verses  5,  6.) 


The  image  is  changed,  but  we  have 
substantially  the  same  ideas  as  those 
given  in  the  earlier  portion  of  the 
psalm.  There  are,  as  before,  the  food, 
the  guardianship,  the  peril,  the  journey. 
Jehovah  is  here  regarded  as  a  Bountiful 
Host  and  His  people  as  guests  at  His 
banqueting  table.  The  verses  illustrate 
certain  striking  features  in  the  Royal 
Banquet. 

I.  This  bancLuet  is  provided  in  the 
midst  of  conflict.  "  Thou  preparest  a 
table  before  me  in  the  presence  of  mine 
enemies"  (ver.  5).  Life  not  only  in- 
volves work,  but  also  conflict.  Our 
enemies  are  numerous,  powerful  and 
cruel.  The  fight  is  fierce,  prolonged 
and  exhausting.  Yet,  spread  by  in- 
visible hands  is  the  table  in  the  wilder- 
ness, in  the  presence  of  our  grim-visaged 
enemies  who,  while  looking  on,  are 
restrained  by  some  irresistible  spell  from 
harming.  Unlike  the  soldier  on  the 
battle-field,  who,  if  he  eats  at  ail, 
snatches  a  hasty  meal  and,  wearied  and 
but  half  refreshed,  hurries  again  to  the 
fight,  the  Christian  warrior  pauses  to 
rest  and  feast.  There  is  no  hurry,  no 
confusion,  no  fear,  though  the  eyes  of 
his  enemies  flash  upon  him  with  vindic- 
tive glare,  the  presence  of  the  Divine 
host  is  an  impenetrable  shield  about 
him.  So  is  it  ever  in  the  progress  of 
spiritual  life.  There  is  always  the 
conflict,  always  the  foe;  always  the 
guardian,  always  the  banquet. 

II.  This  banquet  is  promotive  of 
abundant  joy.  "  Thou  anointest  my 
head  with  oil;  my  cup  runneth  over" 
(ver.  5).  The  allusion  is  to  the  custom 
in  the  East  of  anointing  with  oil  on  festal 
occasions  as  a  means  of  refreshment, 
and  as  indicating  prosperity  and  re- 
joicing. The  words  also  point  out  the 
lavish  outflow  of  the  Divine  beneficence, 
and  the  limitation  ot  the  human  capacity 


which  trembles  with  joy  under  the 
overflowing  current.  My  cup  runneth 
over.  "  He  had  not  only  a  fulness  of 
abundancey  but  of  redundance.  Those 
that  have  this  happiness  must  carry 
their  cup  upright,  and  see  that  it  over- 
flows into  their  poor  brethren's  emptier 
vessels." — Trapp.  "  Drink  the  cup  of 
gladness  as  men  do  when  their  foe  is  at 
their  side,  looking  askance  over  the  rim, 
and  with  one  hand  on  the  sword,  ready, 
aye  ready,  against  treachery  and  sur- 
prise. But  the  presence  of  the  danger 
should  make  the  feast  more  enjoyable 
too,  by  the  moderation  it  enforces  and 
by  the  contrast  it  affords — as  to  sailors 
on  shore  or  soldiers  in  a  truce.  Joy 
may  grow  on  the  very  face  of  danger, 
as  a  slender  rose-bush  flings  its  bright 
sprays  and  fragrant  blossoms  over  the 
lip  of  a  cataract." — Maclaren. 

III.  This  banoLuet  will  satisfy  all 
the  wants  of  a  lifetime.  ' '  Surely,  good- 
ness and  mercy  shall  follow  me  all  the 
days  of  my  life  "  (ver.  6).  Goodness  and 
mercy  are  the  staple  viands  of  the  feast, 
and  give  a  flavour  and  virtue  to  all  the 
rest.  Man  needs  goodness  to  supply 
all  his  wants,  and  mercy  to  cancel  all 
his  sins.  The  words  are  expressive  of 
simple  and  unbounded  confidence  in 
God  as  to  every  event  in  our  earthly 
future.  "  Shall  follow  me  all  the  days 
of  my  life."  Through  all  its  changes, 
its  shade  and  sunshine,  its  perils  and 
deliverances,  its  sorrows  and  joys,  to  its 
close.  "  His  enemies  had  pursued  him 
even  to  the  presence  of  his  host,  hence- 
forth grace  and  joy  will  pursue  him  and 
load  him  with  blessings."  New  tokens 
of  His  pity  and  love  shall  shine  upon 
us,  before  us,  and  behind  us,  on  our 
right  hand  and  on  our  left,  throughout 
the  whole  of  our  earthly  pilgrimage. 
The  most  indigent  are  rich  indeed  when 
encompassed   with   the    Divine   loving. 

113 


FBALM  XXIV. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


kindness.  *'  What,  all  this,  and  Jesus, 
too  ! "  said  a  poor  cottager,  as  she  broke 
a  piece  of  bread  and  filled  a  glass  with 
cold  water. 

IV.  This  banquet  is  the  type  and 
pledge  of  the  everlasting  feast  in  the 
heavenly  banqueting  hall.  "And  I 
will  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  for 
ever"  (ver.  6).  Suggestive  of  the 
closest  intimacy  with  God  and  the  cease- 
less enjoyment  of  His  favour.  I  will 
dwell  there,  "  where,  without  a  veil, 
irradiation  from  the  Eternal  Three  shall 
dart  unutterable  joys  into  my  glorified 
spirit,  transformed  into  the  image  of 
the  God  whom  I  behold ;  and  near  His 
throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  where  bright 
angelic  hosts,  His  train,  fill  the  vast 
temple  with  His  glory.  His  love  my 
all-sufiicient  portion,  and  my  happy 
labour,  everlasting  praise."  In  these 
words,  as  if  reluctant  to  dismiss  the 
thought,  the  psalmist  returns  to  the 
image  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  who,  at 
length,  conducts  His  flock  to  a  place  of 
safety  and  undisturbed  repose.  "  The 
sheep  are  led  by  many  a  way,   some- 


times through  sweet  meadows,  some- 
times limping  along  sharp-flinted,  dusty 
highways,  sometimes  high  up  over 
rough,  rocky  mountain-passes,  sometimes 
down  through  deep  gorges,  with  no  sun- 
shine in  their  gloom  ;  but  they  are  ever 
being  led  to  one  place,  and  when  the 
hot  day  is  over,  they  are  gathered  into 
one  fold,  and  the  sinking  sun  sees  them 
safe,  where  no  wolf  can  come,  nor  any 
robber  climb  up  any  more,  but  all  shall 
rest  for  ever  under  the  shepherd's  eye." 
— Maclaren.  Very  quaint  but  ex- 
pressive is  the  paraphrase  on  these  two 
verses  by  an  old  Elizabethan  poet. 
(Francis  Davison) — 

"  Thou  my  board  with  messes  large 

Dost  surcharge ; 
My  bowleg  full  of  wine  Thou  pow'rest^ 
And  before  myne  enemies' 

Enrious  eies 
Balme  upon  my  head  Thou  show'reat. 

Neither  dures  Thy  bounteous  grace 

For  a  space  ; 
But  it  knowes  nor  bound  nor  measure. 
So  my  daies  to  my  life's  end 

I  shall  spend 
In  Thy  courtes  with  heavenly  pleasure," 


PSALM  XXIV. 
Introduction. 

**  This  grand  choral  hymn  was  in  all  probability  composed  and  sung  on  the  occasion  of  the 
removal  of  the  ark  from  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  to  the  city  of  David,  on  Mount  Zion  (2  Sam. 
vi.).  It  was  a  day  of  solemn  gladness  aad  triumph.  No  long  period  had  elapsed  since  David 
had  wrested  the  stronghold  of  Zion  from  the  last  remnant  of  the  hill-tribes  of  the  Canaanitea 
which  lingered  in  Palestine.  Henceforth  this  mountain-city,  deemed  by  its  ancient  inhabitants 
impregnable,  was  selected  by  the  conqueror  as  the  seat  of  the  royal  residence  and  the  centre 
of  religious  worship  ;  and  thither,  after  having  subdued  his  enemies,  he  determined  to  bring  the 
ark  which,  for  nearly  fifty  years,  had  been  left  neglected  at  Kirjath-Jearim.  It  is  difficult  for 
us  to  conceive  the  feelings,  at  once  of  the  most  exalted  and  fervent  patriotism,  and  of  the 
deepest  religious  enthusiasm,  which  would  be  awakened  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  by  such  an 
event.  The  king,  and  priests,  and  people,  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  the  captains  over  thousands 
(1  Chron,  xv.  2),  in  solemn  procession,  and  with  all  the  accompaniment^  of  music  and  song, 
conducted  the  ark  to  its  resting-piace  on  the  holy  mountain.  It  was  then  that  this  majestic 
anthem  rose  to  heaven,  'Jehovah's  is  the  eartb,  and  the  fulness  thereof; 'and  the  gates  of 
that  grey  old  fortress  were  bid  to  lift  themselves  up,  as  being  too  narrow  to  admit  the  King  of 
glory.  The  ])sahn  consists  of  two  principal  divisions  :  I.  The  preparation  for  the  entry  of 
Jehovah  into  His  holy  mountain  (ver.  1-6).    II.  The  entry  itself  (ver.  2-10)." — Peroione. 


The  Divtne  Propeietoeship  of  the  Woeld. 


{Verses  1,2.) 

I.    The  Divine  prowietor  ship  of  the     the   Lord's." 
world   is  absolute   and   all-inclusive 
(ver.  1).     The  world  l)clono:s  to  Gcd — 
1.   As  to  its  matter.     "  The  earth  is 
114 


With  all  its  forms  of 
beauty  and  magnificence,  with  all  its 
ponderous  forces  and  mystic  laws,  with 
all  its  wealth  of  mineral  and  hidden  trea- 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXIV. 


sures  of  earth,  air,  and  ocean.     Man  has 
conquered  the  earth  by  the  power  of  the 
sword,  and  claimed  the  right  to  dispose 
of  it  in  petty  states  and  kingdoms ;  but 
the  earth  does  not  belong  to  man.     "He 
is  but  a  tenant  at  will, — a  leaseholder 
upon  most  precarious  tenure,  liable  to 
instantaneous     ejectment.       The    great 
Landowner    and    true  Proprietor    holds 
His  court  above  the  clouds,  and  laughs 
at  the  title-deeds  of  worms  of  £he  dust. 
The  fee-simple  is  not  with  the  lord  of 
the  manor,  nor  the  freeholder,  but  with 
the  Creator." — JSpurgeon.     2.  As  to  its 
productiveness.      "And  the  fulness  there- 
of."    It  is  God  who  makes  the  soil  fruit- 
ful, the  air  vital  and  sustaining,  and  the 
water  in  the  great  ocean-basin  maintain 
its  just  proportion   to  the  land.     Not- 
withstanding that  population  follows  so 
closely  on  the  heels  of  production,  there 
is    always   enough  for   man  and   beast. 
God    fills    the    earth   with   plenty,   and 
keeps  it  full.     "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's 
and  the  fulness  thereof,"  are  words  in- 
scribed on  the  front  of  the  Royal  Ex- 
change, London,  and  on  similar  institu- 
tions  throughout   the    country.       It  is 
fitting   that    the   great    centres   of   the 
world's   commerce  should   acknowledge 
the  Divine  source  and  ownership  of  the 
world's  wealth.     3.  As  to  its  inhabitants. 
"  The  world,  and  they  that  dwell  there- 
in."    The  Jews  claimed  to  be  the  sole 
and  peculiar  possession  of  Jehovah,  and 
yet  they  were  accustomed  to  sing  words 
like  these  !     They  are  not  the  only  peo- 
ple whose  sentiments  and  conduct  have 
been    beneath    the  nobler  teachings    of 
their  creed.     Christianity  has  done  brave 
work    in   breaking  down  the  exclusive- 
ness    of    nations.       Not    one    specially 
favoured  nation,  but  all  nations  belong 
to  the  Lord.     The   rights  and  freedom 
of  manhood  belong  to  every  individual 
member  of  the  human  family,  whatever 
his    country,    colour,    or    surroundings. 
All  living  beings — the  denizens  of  earth, 
air,  and  sea — are  the  property  of  Jeho- 
vah.     The  Supreme   Owner  of  all  de- 
serves the  obedience  and  homage  of  all. 
The  devout  mind  sees  all  things  in  God, 
and  God  in  all  things. 

II.  The  Divine  proprietorship  of  the 
world  is  based  on  the  act  of  creation. 


"For   He   hath   founded   it    upon    the 
seas  "   (ver.  2).     "  The  reference   is  no 
doubt    to    the    account  of    creation    in 
Genesis,  the  dry  land  having  emerged 
from   the  water,    and   seeming   to   rest 
upon  it.      (Compare  cxxxvi.   6  ;  Prov. 
viii.  29).     It  would,  however,  be  ']^uite 
out    of   place   to  suppose  that  in  such 
language  we  have  the  expression  of  any 
theory,  whether  popular  or  scientific,  as 
to  the  structure  of  the  earth's  surface." — 
Perowne.     The  human  mind  has  wearied 
itself    in    spinning    theories   about   the 
origin  of  the  world,  and  in  the  historic 
development  of  these  theories,  from  time 
to    time,    different    schools   of   pseudo- 
religious   philosophy    have    prevailed — 
modern  thought  being  but  a  reproduc- 
tion, in  a  new  setting,  of  the  ideas  of 
the  ancient  philosophers.     Deism,  repre- 
senting one  school  of  thinkers,  suffers  a 
God  to  exist,  but  {)lunges  Him   into  a 
state  of   apathetic  repose.      Pantheism 
confounds  Him  with  the  world.     Mate- 
rialism utterly  denies  Him,   while,  all 
along  the  line  of  these  theorists,  we  see 
the  world,  the  spirit  of  the  world,  the 
life  of  the  world,  and  the  matter  of  the 
world,  are  exalted  and  adored  in  suc- 
cession.    Proud,  vain,  puny  man  !     He 
is  like  a  fly  discussing  the  mechanism  of 
an  elephant,  or  a  wriggling  armelid  dis- 
coursing on  the  vastness  and  glory  of  the 
ocean.     Augustine,  in  a  splendid  pass- 
age of  his  "  Confessions,"  describes  the 
true  origin  of  creation  as  the  work  of 
God  :  "  I  asked  the  earth ;  it  said,  I  am 
not  He  ;  and  all  that  therein  is  made  the 
same  acknowledgment.     I  asked  the  sea 
and  the  depths,  and  all  that  move  and 
live  therein,  and  they  answered,  We  are 
not  thy  God ;  seek  higher.     I  asked  the 
winds,  but  the  air  with  all  its  inhabitants 
answered,  I  am  not  thy  God.    I  asked  the 
heavens,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  and 
they  answered.  Neither  are  we  the  God 
whom  thou  seekest.     And  I  said  to  all 
things  that  surrounded  me,  Ye  have  told 
me  concerning  my  God,  that  ye  are  not 
He ;  speak  then  to  me  of  Him.    And  thej' 
all  cried  with  loud  voices.  He  made  us ! " 
III.   The   Divine   proprietorship   of 
the  world  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of 
its  preservation.     "  And  established  it 
upon  the  floods,"  or,  upon  the  st/rea^m 

il5 


MAIiM  TKT7, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


doth  He  malce  it  fast.  The  preservation 
of  the  world  is  a  perpetual  miracle.  It 
requires  the  exercise  of  the  same  power 
of  God  as  that  which  first  called  it  into 
being.  The  area  of  the  sea  is  three 
times  greater  than  that  of  the  land. 
But  for  the  preserving  care  of  God,  the 
waters  of  the  ocean  would  inundate  and 
3ubmerge  the  earth,  and  destroy  all  its 
inhabitants.  As  much  water  is  con- 
tributed to  the  ocean  by  the  rivers  as 
would  make  a  new  ocean  every  year,  and 
yet  the  sea  is  not  augmented.  The 
preserving  power  of  God  has  put  into 
operation  the   law  of  evaporation,  by 


which  the  sea  loses  every  day  as  much 
moisture  as  it  receives  from  tributary 
streams.  How  insecure  are  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth — resting  on  treacher- 
ous and  unstable  water  !  If  God  were 
to  withdraw  His  hand  for  a  moment,  the 
elemental  forces  of  nature  would  anni- 
hilate the  world  and  they  that  dwell 
therein.  He  who  preserves  the  world 
has  an  undisputed  right  to  possess  it. 

Leaen  :  1.  The  folly  of  loving  the 
present  world.  2.  T lie  audacity  of  Satan 
in  claiming  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world. 
3.  The  duty  and  privilege  of  rendering  joy- 
ful worship  to  the  great  Proprietor  of  all. 


The  Moral  Fitness  of  the  True  Worshipper. 

(Verses  Z-^.) 


I  That  it  is  the  privilege  of  the 
true  worshipper  to  approach  near  to 
God  (ver.  3).  He  "  ascends  into  the 
hill  of  the  Lord,"  and  "  stands  in  His 
holy  place."  '*  His  holy  place  is  no  less 
than  the  very  place  and  seat  of  glory. 
And  being  such,  you  cannot  imagine  it 
but  hard  to  come  by ;  the  very  petty 
glories  of  the  world  are  so.  This  is  a 
hill  of  glopy,  hard  to  climb,  difficult  to 
ascend,  craggy  to  pass  up,  steep  to 
clamber,  no  plain  campagnia  to  it ;  the 
broad  easy  way  leads  some  whither  else 
(Matt.  vii.  13) ;  the  way  to  this  is 
narrow, — it  is  rough  and  troublesome. 
But  not  only  to  ascend  but  stand  there  ; 
to  continue  at  so  high  a  pitch,  to  be 
constant  in  truth  and  piety,  that  will  be^ 
hard  indeed,  and  bring  more  difficulties 
to  contest  with." — Mark  Frank.  The 
devout  and  sincere  worshipper  is  ad- 
mitted into  the  arena  of  the  heavenly 
temple,  his  spiritual  vision  is  intensified, 
he  becomes  familiar  with  the  deeper 
truths  of  God,  he  catches  glimpses  of 
unearthly  glories,  he  is  filled  with  the 
ecstasy  of  unutterable  emotions. 

n.  That  the  true  worshipper  must 
possess  a  moral  fitness  (ver.  4).  There 
must  be — 1.  Rectitude  of  conduct.  "He 
that  hath  clean  hands."  The  ceremoni- 
ally unclean  were  not  allowed  to  touch 
the  sacred  things  of  the  Temple,  and 
certainly  the  morally  impure,  whose 
hands  are  defiled  with  wrong-doing,  can- 
116  ^ 


not  enter  into  hallowed  fellowship  with 
God.     The  conscience   that  is  not  up- 
right in  the  practicatcommon-place  duties 
of  life  cannot  be  sincere  and  blameless 
in    the    solemn   worship   of  God.       2. 
Purity  of  heart.     *'  And  a  pure  heart." 
It  is  not  enough  for  the  outward  life  to 
be    consistent,   the    inward    experience 
must  be  holy.     The  inner  life  is  ever}'- 
thing  to  us  ;  if  we  are  wrong  there,  we 
are  wrong  everywhere  and  in  everything. 
There  is  a  moral  sympathy  between  the 
worshipper  and  the  worshipped,  and  the 
tendency  is  to  become  increasingly  like 
the  object  of  our  adoration.     The  holy 
God  can  accept  nothing  but  what  is  the 
oflfering   of   a   holy  heart.     Hence  the 
perpetual  need  of  the  sanctifying  merits 
of  the  great  Mediator  :  without  His  aid, 
the  best  effort  of  the  worshipper  is  im- 
perfect and  impure.     3.  Truthfulness  of 
thought  and  speech.     "  Who   hath   not 
lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity,  nor  sworn 
deceitfully."     "  Unto  vanity,  i.e.,  either 
(1.)  the  perishing  things  of  earth  (Job 
XV.  31) ;  or,  (2.)  falsehood  (Job  xxxi. 
5)7which  signification  passes  over  into 
a  wider  one   of    moral  evil  in  general 
(cxix.  37) ;   or,    (3.)   false    gods,   idols 
(xxxi.  6).     It  may  be  taken  here  in  the 
widest  sense  of  all  that  the  human  heart 
puts   in  the  place  of  God." — Perowne. 
Truthfulness  in   heart   and   lip   is   de- 
manded.    "God  will  have  nothing  to  do 
with  liars  except  to  cast  them  into  the 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXIV. 


lake  of  fire.  Every  liar  is  a  child  of  the 
devil,  and  will  be  sent  home  to  his 
father.  A  false  declaration,  a  fraudulent 
statement,  a  cooked  account,  a  slander, 
ft  lie, — all  these  may  suit  the  assembly 
of  the  ungodly,  but  are  detested  among 
true  saints  :  how  could  they  have  fellow- 
ship with  the  God  of  truth,  if  they  did 
not  hate  every  false  way." — Spurgeon. 

ni.  That  the  true  worshipper  is 
assured  of  the  Divine  benediction. 
"  He  shall  receive  the  blessing  from  the 
Lord,  and  righteousness  from  the  God 
of  His  salvation"  (ver.  5).  ^^ Righteous- 
neaSy  not  in  the  New  Testament  sense  of 
justification  but  in  the  Old  Testament 
acceptation  of  inward  and  outward  holi- 
ness ;  but  still  even  this  regarded  as  a 
gift  from  the  God  of  his  salvation." 
The  blessing  of  God  rested  on  the 
family  of  Obed-Edom  while  the  ark 
remained  in  the  vicinity  of  his  dwelling. 
Blessings  cluster  around  the  sanctuary, 
and  the  eager  and  earnest  worshipper 
gathers  them  there  to  his  everlasting 
enrichment.  Many  leave  the  sanctuary 
in  a  poorer  condition  than  when  they 
came,  because  of  their  moral  inability  to 
appreciate  and  take  in  the  offered  good. 
"  He  filleth  the  hungry  with  good  things, 
but  the  rich  He  hath  sent  empty  away." 

IV.  That  the  true  worshipper  is 
the   representative    of  a  distinctive 


and  privileged  class.  ''This  is  the 
generation  of  them  that  seek  Him,  that 
seek  Thy  face,  O  Jacob  "  (ver.  6).  In 
all  ages  there  have  been  seekers  after 
God;  and  all  seekers  who  have  pos- 
sessed the  moral  qualities  enumerated  in 
these  verses  are  recognised  as  true  wor- 
shippers. "  He  who  longs  to  see  his 
friend  when  he  passes  takes  care  to  * 
clear  the  mist  from  the  window,  lest  by 
any  means  his  friend  should  go  by  un- 
observed." Men  spend  years  of  study  in 
seeking  the  solution  to  a  mathematical 
problem,  in  perfecting  a  mechanical 
instrument,  or  in  verifying  a  scientific 
discovery.  A  whole  lifetime  cannot  be 
better  spent  than  in  seeking  after  God. 
Such  seekers  make  the  grandest  dis- 
coveries, and  confer  the  greatest  bless- 
ings on  the  world.  It  is  said  that  John 
Welsh,  of  Scotland,  often  leaped  out  of 
his  bed  at  midnight,  wrapped  a  plaid 
around  him,  and  wrestled  with  the  Lord 
till  the  breaking  of  day.  His  preaching 
was  irresistible  when  he  came  to  his  pulpit 
from  these  Fennels  of  pleading  with  his 
God. 

Lessons  :  1.  Divine  help  is  necessary 
to  worship  God  acceptably.  2.  Accept- 
able worship  is  productive  of  the  greatest 
hlessings.  3.  The  outward  life  should  he 
in  harmony  with  the  deepest  experiences 
of  the  heart. 


The  Triumphal  Entry  of  the  Glorious  King. 
{Verses  I-IO.) 


"The  festal  procession  has  now  reached 
the  gates  of  the  city  of  Zion.  The  singers 
go  before,  the  minstrels  follow  after,  and 
in  the  midst  of  these  is  the  ark,  whose 
name  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord 
of  Hosts,  that  dwelleth  between  the 
cherubim  (2  Sam.  vi.  2) ;  so  that  the 
entry  of  the  ark  is  the  entry  of  Jehovah 
Himself  into  Zion  (Numb.  x.  35).  By 
a  sublime  figure  the  poet  bids  *  the 
everlasting  gates '  of  that  grey  old  fort- 
ress be  lifted  up  ;  for  the  greatest  and 
most  glorious  of  all  Kings  is  He  who 
now  enters  in,  to  claim  it  for  Himself." 
— Perowne.  But  we  cannot  overlook 
the  prophetical  and  typical  reference  of 
this  magnificent  psalm,  as  pointing  to 


that  period  when  Christ  as  the  King  of 
glory,  after  having  gained  access  to  all 
hearts,  in  all  nations,  shall  enter  His 
heavenly  palace  and  take  His  seat  on 
that  throne  before  which  all  the  ran- 
somed will  bow  and  render  everlasting 
homage.  The  triumphal  entry  of  the 
glm'ious  King. 

I.  Will  be  into  a  palace  of  enduring 
splendour.  *'  Ye  everlasting  doors " 
(ver.  7,  9).  "  Doors  were  often  taken 
from  their  hinges  when  Easterns  would 
show  welcome  to  a  guest,  and  some 
doors  were  drawn  up  and  down  like  a 
portcullis,  and  may  possibly  have  pro- 
truded from  the  top :  thus  literally  lift- 
ing up  their  heads.'*     But  the  imagery 

117 


PSALM  XXIV 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


U  highly  poetical,  and  describes  the  vast, 
expansive,  and  generous  welcome  with 
which  the  conquering  monarch  is  greeted 
when  entering  His  heavenly  home.  The 
most  gorgeous  and  strongly-built  palace  of 
earth  is  doomed  to  crumble  and  perish  ; 
it  may  become  the  prison  and  the  grave 
of  those  who  entered  it  flushed  with 
conquest  and  elate  with  joy.  But  the 
heavenly  temple  knows  no  decay, — its 
beauties  are  unfading,  its  doors  are  ever 
open,  its  freedom  untrammelled.  "  The 
gates  of  it  shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by 
day ;  for  there  shall  be  no  night  there " 
(Rev.  xxi.  '25).  '*  Heaven's  gates  are 
called  everlasting,  because  they  shall  en- 
dure for  ever,  or  because  they  be  the 
doors  unto  the  life  which  is  everlasting." 
— John  Boys. 

II.  Will  be  in  the  character  of  a 
mighty  conqueror.  ^  "  The  Lord  strong 
and  mighty,  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle  " 
(ver.  8).  He  has  fought  the  grim,  fierce 
conflict  with  evil  and  all  the  powers  of 
hell,  and  won  a  signal  and  complete 
victory.  And  now  He  is  welcomed  as  a 
warrior,  strong  as  God  Himself, — as  one 
who  was  wounded,  but  whose  scars  are 
healed ;  as  one  who  was  dead,  but  is 
alive  aojain, — whose  soul  was  once  ex- 
ceeding  sorrowful  even  unto  death,  while 
the  sun  was  darkened  and  the  rocks 
were  rent  as  if  in  sympathy  with  tlieir 
struggling  and  suffering  Lord,  but  who 
has  conquered  sorrow,  and  sin,  and  the 
grave,  and  is  entering  into  the  coveted 
joy  He  has  so  bravely  won. 

III.  Will  be  attended  by  a  brilliant 
throng  of  celestial  hosts.  "The  Lord 
of  hosts  ;  He  is  the  King  of  glory  "  (ver. 
10).  Of  all  the  triumphal  processions 
of  antiquity,  perhaps  none  exceeded  in 
pride  and  magnificence  that  of  Aurelian, 
in  the  city  of  Kome.  The  pomp  was 
opened  by  twenty  elephants,  four  royal 
tigers,  and  above  two  hundred  of  the 
most  curious  animals  from  every  climate 
of  the  North,  the  East,  and  the  South. 
The  ambassadors  from  the  most  remote 
parts  of  the  earth,  all  remarkable  by 
their  rich  or  singular  dresses,  displayed 
the  fame  and  power  of  the  Roman 
Emperor,  The  victories  of  Aurelian 
were  attested  by  a  long  train  of  captives 
who  reluctantly  attended  his   triumph, 

118 


among  whom  was  the  beauteous  figure 
of  Zenobia,  the  Syrian  Queen,  confined 
by  fetters  of  gold,  and  almost  fainting 
under  the  intolerable  weiglit  of  jewels. 
{Vide  Gibbon's  ''Decline  and  Fall") 
But  infinitely,  beyond  all  earthly  com- 
parison will  be  the  grand  triumphal 
entry  of  the  heavenly  King  into  the  ever- 
lasting city  !  The  hour  is  coming  when, 
in  loud  and  rapturous  strains,  the  gates 
of  heaven  shall  be  bidden  to  enlarge 
themselves,  and  the  portals  of  eternity  to 
unfold  ;  and  angels,  principalities,  and 
powers,  with  the  innumerable  multitude 
of  the  redeemed,  shall  attend  the  Divine 
conqueror  in  His  exultant  entrance  into 
His  rightful  possession.  Neither  He 
nor  His  ransomed  ones  shall  struggle 
more.  The  King  of  saints  has  con- 
quered, and  they  in  Him :  they  shall 
now  share  in  His  victory,  His  kingdom, 
His  glory,  and  in  His  eternity. 

IV.  Will  be  the  occasion  of  inex- 
pressible joy  to  the  universe.  Earth 
is  too  narrow  to  hold  the  gladness ; 
heaven  is  invoked  to  share  it.  "  Lift  up 
your  heads,  0  ye  gates  j  and  be  ye  litt 
up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King 
of  glory  shall  come  in."  The  inquiry  of 
heaven,  trembling  with  a  rapture,  which 
it  strives  in  vain  to  suppress,  as  if  the 
anticipated  response  would  be  a  too  great 
excess  of  joy,  "  Who  is  this  King  of 
glory?"  is  answered  by  the  thundering 
plaudits  of  innumerable  voices,  every 
tone  ringing  with  transport,  ''  The  Lord 
of  hosts.  He  is  the  King  of  glory  ! "  It 
is  said  that  the  battle  between  the 
Romans  and  Carthaginians  at  Thrasy- 
mene  was  fought  amid  such  terrific  noise 
and  fury  created  by  the  combatants, 
that 

"  An  earthquake  reeled  unheedingly  away  !  " 

So  the  shout  of  joy  that  shall  greet  the 
triumphant  Monarch  of  the  skies,  shall 
drown  all  other  sounds,  even  the  loudest 
convulsions  of  nature,  and  shall  fill  the 
heavenly  welkin  with  everlasting  echoes. 

"  Throw  wide  your  portals,  Oh  ye  heavenly 
gates, 
And  let  His  ransomed  train  exulting  pass  ! 
Come  forth !  0  Conqueror,  in  Thy  royal  robes. 

For  Thou  alone 
Hast  triumphed  o'er  Thy  foM;  aad  uow 
Thou  b«ar'f)t 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXt. 


Upon  Thy  vesture  and  Thy  tbigh  the  name 
Of  King  of  kings.     Come,  then,  and  take 

Thy  throne, 
For  Thine  it  is  by  right,  too  long  usurped. 
Thme    is   the   kingdom,    all   the  power   is 

Thine 

For  ever ;  and  to  Thee— alone  to  Thee  shall 

endless  praise 
And  everlasting  glory  be  ascribed  I" 


Lessons:  1.  Evil  ivill  not  ahvays 
dominate.  2.  Strive,  hy  conquering  the 
evil  ivithm  thee,  to  gain  a  moral  fitness  to 
participate  in  the  triumph  of  the  glorious 
King  3.  Accept,  helievingly,  the  help  of 
the  Divine  conqueror. 


PSALM  XXV. 
Introduction. 

'•David  is  pictured  in  this  psalm  as  in  a  faithful  miniature  TTJa  lir^l^  4v^c*  i.- 
CJOnflicts,  his  great  trans-^ression,  his  bitter  repentanc?  Ind  hw  aL  l  !"''**  ^'*  ™^^^^ 
here;  so  that  we  see  the  very  heart  of  "the  ni^n  ?ff!,  a  v  ^\^^*^P  distresses  are  all 
composition  of  David's  lale?  days  for  h  m^n  ion  he'sin.'o?  h'"'  ./'  ^'  f'^.''''^^  ^ 
painful  references  to  the  craft  and  crueUv  of  h's  many  oe  i  w  11  i'ot'be  ton'  '  iT  ''' 
theory  to  refer  it  to  the  period  when  Absalom  waT  raid  [rg%legarre  bell  oLS^^^ 
This  has  been  styled  the  second  of  the  seven  penitential  psalms  Tf  i=  nV.  ^P^"/*  ^}^- 
Baint  that  his  sorrows  remind  him  of  his  sins,  ard"?^"  ?sin  rivesl^m  tfhis  Go'd  "" 
Spurgeon.  "The  psalm  hardly  admits  of  formal  division  It  is  n  n,^  v^r  "'"^.^^^^^^  "^d.  — 
orgiveness.  Its  prevailing  tho^ight  is  that  G^dls  thrt^a^her'  f  ufjfffl  e  "andThrriSe 
JV^''°^'  '      '^'"  ''  ''"'''"'^^  ''^''''^*  '^^''  ^^  '^'  ^^y  ''  statement  or  of  prayel"- 

Invariable  Topics  for  Prayeb. 


( Verses 

I.  That  all  prayer  should  be  ad- 
dressed to  Jehovah.  '^Unto  Thee,  O 
Lord,  do  I  lift  up  my  soul  "  ver.  1.  [do 
I  bear  my  soul.  The  bearing  of  the 
Boul  to  the  Lord  signifies  the  longing  of 
the  heart  after  Him.  When  in  distress, 
the  psalmist  does  not,  like  the  ungodly, 
draw  his  soul  at  one  time  in  this  direc- 
tion, and  at  another  time  in  that ;  does 
not  seek  to  catch  now  at  this,  now  at 
that  ignis  fatuus  of  human  help ;  but 
goes  straight  with  all  his  desire  to  God, 
and  rests  in  His  protection. "—^«?^5^en- 
herg.  Tlie  call  to  devotion  in  the  early 
church  was  sursum  corda,  up  with 
your  hearts.  Some  lift  up  their  hearts 
to  vanity,  and  idolise  a  creation  of 
man,  or  the  soulless  and  unresponsive 
forces  of  Nature,  or  an  assumptions 
sacerdotal  subordinate.  But  the  only 
legitimate  object  of  worship,  to  whom 
prayer  can  be  acceptably  offered,  is 
God.  '*  A  carnal  man  can  as  little  lift 
up  his  heart  in  prayer  as  a  mole 
can  fly.  A  David  finds  it  a  hard  task, 
Bince  the  best  heart  is  lumpish,  and 
naturally  beareth  downwards,  as  the 
poise  of  a  clock,  as  the  lead  of  a  net. 
Let  us  therefore  *  lay  aside  every  weight, 


1-7.) 

and  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset  us,' 
and  pray  to  God  to  draw  us  up  to  Hini- 

self,  as  the  loadstone  doth  the  iron." 

Trapp. 

II.  That  prayer  should  be  offered 
that  our  enemies  may  have  no  ground 
to  taunt  us  with  the  failure  of  our 
trust  in  God.     ''  O  my  God,  I  trust  in 
Thee ;  let  me  not  be  ashamed,  let  not 
mine  enemies  triumph  over  me  "  (ver.  2). 
The  enemies  of  religion  cannot  under- 
stand   the    principle    of    faith,     which 
fastens  on  the  unseen,  and  confidently 
looks    for    the    promised    good.     They 
have  faith  in  nothing  but  the   demon- 
strable, and  frequently  taunt  the  believer 
with  fanaticism,  and  prophesy  tlie  utter 
failure  of  his  expectations   from   God. 
In  a  sensitive  mind  this  is  hard  to  bear, 
and  the  more  so,  that  the  slightest  sus- 
picion is  cast  on  the  veracity  and  faith- 
fulness of  God.     The  best  of  men  have 
enemies  :  the  determination   to    do  the 
right  is  quite  enough  to  rouse  the  oppo 
Bition  of  some  men  ;  and  the  discomfoi- 
ture    of   God's  people    would    occasion 
them  the  most  malicious  joy.      1.   The 
tincere  believer  will  not   suffer  failure. 
"None    that    wait    on    Thee    shall    be 

119 


PSALM  ZXV. 


HOUILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


ashamed*'  (ver.  3).  The  words  em- 
phatically express  an  eternal  and 
unchanging  truth.  When  by  prayer  we 
come  near  to  God,  by  faith  we  rest  upon 
Him :  and  to  him  who  prays  and 
believes  all  things  are  possible.  He  can 
never  be  put  to  confusion  who  humbly 
seeks  Divine  guidance;  and  the  faith 
whose  grapnels  are  firmly  fixed  in  the 
Divine  Righteousness  can  never  be  over- 
turned. Trouble  widens  our  sympathies. 
Though  the  psalmist  had  burden  enough 
of  his  own,  he  felt  for  others  in  similar 
circumstances,  and  rejoiced  in  the 
assurance  of  their  triumph.  2.  Failure 
is  the  fate  of  the  perfidious.  *'Let  them 
be  ashamed  which  transgress  without 
cause  "  (ver.  3).  Thep  shall  be  ashamed 
who  are  faithless  without  cause.  He 
who  transgresses  without  cause  is  one 
who  acts  treacherously  towards  God  and 
man.  All  who  trust  in  their  own  crafti- 
ness and  act  with  wilful  dishonesty  and 
perfidiousness  shall  be  disappointed  of 
what  they  grasped  at,  and  be  covered 
with  everlasting  shame.  Shame  shall 
recoil  upon  the  shameless  perpetrator  of 
sin — the  disloyal  and  faithless  trans- 
gressor. 

III.  That  prayer  should  he  offered 
for  Divine  guidance. 

1.  In  the  ways  of  God,  "Show  me 
Thy  ways,  0  Lord ;  teach  me  Thy  paths." 
The  ways  of  God  are  often  dark,  mys- 
terious, circuitous,  and  painful  to  walk 
in,  but  they  are  safe  and  lead  to  peace 
and  happiness.  The  pride  and  pre- 
sumption of  man  often  impel  him  to 
shape  out  a  way  for  himself;  and  it 
often  terminates  in  disaster  and  ruin. 
(Prov.  xiv.  12.)  The  ways  of  God  are 
always  better  than  our  own  :  it  should 
be  our  continual  anxiety  to  become 
acquainted  with,  and  walk  in,  them. 
"  The  ways  and  stairs  of  God  are  known 
to  no  creature  so  well  as  to  Himself; 
therefore  He  can  give  us  the  best 
instruction  in  them.  It  is  not  enough 
to  be  taught  of  men;  we  must  go  to 
school  to  God — that  is,  resign  ourselves 
obediently  to  the  guidance  and  training 
of  His  Holy  Spirit."— -S'^ar^. 

2.  In  the  truth  of  God.  "  Lead  me 
in  Thy  truth  and  teach  me ;  for  Thou 
art  the  God  of  my  salvation  "  (ver.  5). 

120 


The  truth  specially  desired  is  that 
which  reveals  salvation.  The  whole 
plan  of  redemption,  from  its  first  dim 
promise  to  its  fullest  development  in 
later  times,  is  an  imposing  manifestation 
of  the  truthfulness  of  Jehovah.  The 
way  to  know  truth  is  to  feel  it; 
experience  is  a  test  impossible  to  ignore. 
All  moral  precepts  are  based  on  Divine 
truths.  To  be  well  versed  in  the  truth 
of  God,  and  to  experience  its  power  in 
the  government  of  life,  will  save  us  from 
the  fate  of  the  faithless  ones  who  are 
put  to  shame. 

3.  Prayer  must  he  persistent.  "  On 
Thee  do  I  wait  all  the  day."  The  more 
we  realise  our  dependence  and  need,  the 
more  tenaciously  do  we  cling  to  God. 
Many  rich  blessings  have  been  lost  for 
want  of  perseverance  in  prayer.  Not  to 
persevere  in  prayer  is  to  risk  the  loss  of 
all  we  ever  gained.  Patience  is  an 
important  element  of  success.  "  To 
patient  faith  the  prize  is  sure." 

IV.  That  prayer  should  be  offered 
for  Divine  mercy. 

1 .  Divine  mercy  is  unfailing.  "  Re- 
member, O  Lord,  Thy  tender  mercies 
and  Thy  lovingkindnesses ;  for  they 
have  been  ever  of  old  "  (ver.  6).  They 
are  from  eternity.  Mercy  has  ever  been 
an  attribute  of  Jehovah  ;  and  He  cannot 
be  unlike  Himself  :  He  cannot  deny  His 
character.  If  He  were  at  any  time  to 
cease  revealing  Himself  to  man  as  a 
God  of  mercy,  it  would  be  tantamount 
to  His  proving  untrue  to  Himself.  The 
mercies  and  love  of  God  are  indeed 
infinite  and  everlasting ;  but  it  needs 
infinite  mercy  and  everlasting  love  to 
pardon  our  uncounted  sins.  The  great- 
est blessings  of  life  are,  like  mercy,  very 
ancient — as  light,  air,  water,  and  earth 
fruits.  "  Divine  love  is  an  eternal  foun 
tain  that  never  leaves  off  running  while 
a  vessel  is  empty  or  capable  of  holding 
more.  It  stands  open  to  all  comers  i 
therefore  come;  and  if  you  have  not 
sufficient  of  your  own,  go  and  borrow 
vessels,  empty  vessels  not  a  few ;  pay 
your  debts  out  of  it,  and  live  on  the  rest 
(2   Kings  iv.   7)  to  eternity." — Misha 

Coles  (ms). 

2.  Divine  mercy  is  invoked  for  the 
pardon  of  sin,     "Remember  not  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  P8ALM3. 


FSALM  XXV. 


sins  of  my  youth,  nor  my  transgressions ; 
according  to  Thy  mercy  remember  Thou 
me,  for  Thy  goodness'  sake,  0  Lord'* 
(ver.  7).  How  many  would  like  to 
return  to  the  happy  time  of  youth  ! 
There  is  an  exquisite  pathos  in  those 
lines  of  Goethe  : — 

"  Give  me,  oh  I  give  me  back  the  daji  of 

youth, 
Poor,  yet  how  rich  1 — my  glad  inheritance, 
The  inextinguishable  love  of  truth, 

While  life's  realities  were  all  romance. 
Give  me,  oh  I  give  youth's  passions  uncon- 
fined, 
The  rush  of  joy  that  felt  almost  like  pain, 
Its  hate,  its  love,  its  own  tumultuous  mind  ; 
Give  me  my  youth  again  I " 

But  it  may  not,  it  cannot  be.  We  are 
young  but  once.  And  oh  !  how  much 
of  that  past  youth-time  would  we  like 
to  live  over  again  !  How  many  of  its 
wild,  mad,  sinful  actions  could  we  wish 
undone !  How  many  are  there  of  the 
Bins  of  our  younger  days  we  can  our- 


selves remember ;  and,  alas  !  how  many 
more  which  are  now  unknown  to  our- 
selves, and  forgotten  by  all  but  God  I 
**  The  world  winks  at  the  sins  of  young 
men ;  and  yet  they  are  none  so  little  after 
all :  the  bones  of  our  youthful  f eastings  at 
Satan's  table  will  stick  painfully  in  our 
throats  when  we  are  old  men.  He  who 
presumes  upon  his  youth  is  poisoning 
his  old  age.  How  large  a  tear  may  wet 
this  page  as  some  of  us  reflect  upon  the 
past ! " — Spurgeon.  The  recollection  of 
our  transgressions  shows  the  need  of 
mercy,  and  prompts  the  prayer  for  it. 
If  we  forget  our  sins,  we  shall  never 
appreciate  the  grace  which  provides  for 
their  removal.  The  cry  of  the  penitent 
should  be — O  Lord,  remember  not  my 
sins,  but  remember  me  ! 

Lessons  : — 1.  A  sinful  soul  is  never 
in  want  of  a  topic  for  prayer.  2.  Th& 
soul  finds  its  true  safety  by  trusting  in 
God,  3.  To  hear  and  answer  prayer 
are  both  acts  of  Divine  mercy. 


Thb  Hidden  Wats  of  God  Made  Plain, 
{Verses  ^-\6,) 


L  That  the  character  of  God  is 
a    guarantee  of  infallible  direction. 
"  Good  and  upright  is  the  Lord.     All 
the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and 
truth"   (ver.    8,  10).     Because    God  is 
good,  therefore  He  will  give    His  chil- 
dren His  Spirit  for  their  direction ;  and 
because    He    is   upright,    it    must    of 
necessity  be  a  good  and  most  certain 
one. — Diodati.     We  value  promises  of 
help  according  to  the  character  of  the 
person  who  makes  them.     All  the  pro- 
mises  of    God  are   based   on    His  in- 
finite perfections.     There  can  never  be 
any    real    disagreement    between    the 
nature  and  the  actions  of  Jehovah  :  His 
paths,  like  Himself,  are  mercy  and  truth. 
"  Paths  signify  the  tracks  or  ruts  made 
by   the   wheels   of    waggons  by   often 
passing  over  the  same  ground.     Mercy 
and  truth  are  the  paths  in  which  God 
constantly    walks   in   reference    to   the 
children  of  men ;  and  so  frequently  does 
He  show  them  mercy,  and  so  frequently 
does  He  fulfil  His  truth,  that  His  paths 
are    easily   discerned.     How    frequent, 
how  deeply  indented,  and  how  multi- 


plied are  those  tracks  to  every  family 
and  individual !  Wherever  we  go,  we 
see  that  God's  mercy  and  truth  have 
been  there  by  the  deep  tracks  they  have 
left  behind  them."— C^ar/ce.  *' These 
paths — the  ways  in  which  He  leads  His 
people — are  mercy  (loving-kindness),  for 
the  salvation  of  men  is  the  end  thereof  j 
and  truth,  for  they  give  proof  at  every 
step  of  the  certainty  of  His  promises. 
Grace  is  their  Alpha  and  truth  their 
Omega." — Delitzsch.  As  coals  feed  the 
fire,  so  the  remembrance  of  the  truths  of 
our  faith  should  keep  alive  the  flame  of 
our  prayers. 

XL  The  ways  of  God  are  made 
known  to  the  morally  needy.  These 
are  alluded  to  under  varied  phases  of 
character. 

1.  Sinners.  "Therefore  will  He 
teach  sinners  in  the  way  "  (ver.  8) — 
those  who  have  erred  and  strayed  from 
the  way — those  whose  sins  have 
assumed  gigantic  proportions.  "Par- 
rton  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great "  (ver. 
11).  Nothing  is  so  blinding  and  mis- 
leading  as    sin,   and    it   is    never    so 

121 


1>BALM  XXV. 


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


dangerously  deceptive  as  when  it  wears 
the  semblance  of  virtue.  Naturalists 
tell  us  that  certain  birds  and  insects 
have  the  curious  faculty  of  assuming  a 
likeness  to  tlie  vegetation  among  which 
they  sport  themselves — that  the  South 
American  heron  can  assume  a  perpen- 
dicular position,  so  as  to  look  exactly 
like  the  reeds  of  its  native  district,  that 
the  leaf-butterfly  of  Sumatra  is  readily 
mistaken  for  one  of  the  leaves  among 
which  it  alights,  and  that  the  walking- 
stick  insect  of  New  Zealand  can  closely 
resemble  an  upright  twig.  So  sin  has 
the  dangerous  power  of  assuming  a  tone 
and  attitude  of  certain  virtues.  But 
the  Divine  eye  detects  the  fallacy,  and 
the  Divine  hand  graciously  guides  into 
the  right  way. 

2.  The  humble.  "  The  meek  will  He 
guide  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  will 
He  teach  His  way "  (ver.  9).  Those 
who  are  afflicted  and  distressed  about 
sin,  who  desire  to  be  delivered  from  it 
and  led  in  the  right  way.  The  proud 
despise  instruction,  and  are  left  to  the 
hardness  of  their  hearts.  "Pride  and 
anger  have  no  place  in  the  school  of 
Christ.  The  Master  Himself  is  *  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart ; '  much  more,  surely, 
ought  the  scholars  to  be  so.  He  who 
hath  no  sense  of  his  ignorance  can  have 
no  desire  or  capability  of  knowledge, 
human  or  Divine." — G.  Home. 

3.  The  perplexed.  "  For  He  shall 
pluck  my  feet  out  of  the  net  "  (ver.  16). 
A  time  comes  in  the  mental  history  of 
most  when  the  mind  is  harassed  with 
doubts,  and  is  like  a  restless,  fluttering 
bird  cauo-ht  in  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 
Or,  it  may  be,  we  are  suddenly  over- 
taken with  calamity  and  plunged  into 
the  darkness  of  despair.  At  these  times 
God  comes  to  our  rescue,  allays  our 
fears,  and  lifts  us  out  of  our  entangle- 
ments. The  greatest  distresses  of  life 
are  only  temporary. 

"  I  stoop 
Into  a  dark  tremendous  sea  of  cloud. 
It  is  but  for  a  time  :  I  press  God's  lamp 
Close  to  my  breast  :  its  splendours,  soon  or 

late, 
Will  pierce  the  gloom  :  I  shall  emerge  ere 

long."  — Browning. 

III.  That  the  deeper  revelations  of 
God  are  reserved  for  the  morally  good. 


1.  For  the   obedient.     "Unto  such  as 

keep  His  covenant  and  His  testimonies" 
(ver.  10).  Obedience  is  the  organ  of 
spiritual  enlightenment  (John  vii.  17). 
The  ways  and  commandments  of  God 
cannot  be  fairly  and  accurately  judged 
as  simply  apprehended  by  the  under- 
standing. To  see  their  Godlike  beauty 
and  feel  their  holiest  force,  they  must 
be  obeyed.  *' Keepers  of  the  covenant 
shall  be  kept  by  the  covenant ;  those 
who  follow  the  Lord's  commands  shall 
find  the  Lord's  mercy  following  them." 

2.  For  the  God-fearing.  *'The  secret  of 
the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him, 
and  He  will  show  them  His  covenant'* 
(ver.  14).  The  great  secret  of  all  truth 
is  hid  in  God.  He  is  Himself  the  em- 
bodiment and  ultimate  end  of  truth,  and 
He  alone  can  impart  it,  and  He  will 
impart  it  only  to  them  who  fear  Him. 
"  What  man  is  he  that  feareth  the  Lord? 
him  shall  He  teach  in  the  way  that  he 
shall  choose"  (ver.  12).  The  God-fear- 
ing are  lowered  in  the  depths  of  the 
heavenly  mysteries,  and  discover  the 
unsearchable.  '*  Saints  have  the  key  of 
heaven's  hieroglyphics ;  they  can  un- 
riddle celestial  enigmas ;  they  are  initi- 
ated into  the  fellowship  of  the  skies  \ 
they  have  heard  words  which  it  is  not 
possible  for  them  to  repeat  to  their 
fellows.  He  who  does  not  know  the 
meaning  of  this  verse  (ver.  14),  will 
never  learn  it  from  a  commentary  :  let 
him  look  to  the  cross,  for  the  secret  lies 
there." — Spur g eon.  3.  For  the  earnest 
and  persevering  iiiquirer.  "  Mine  eyes 
are  ever  toward  the  Lord "  (ver.  15). 
The  eyes  of  a  fool  are  in  the  ends  of  the 
earth,  wandering  over  a  thousand  different 
objects,  but  fastening  on  none,  and  learn- 
ing nothing.  But  the  humble  and 
patient  inquirer  carefully  investigates 
the  minutest  phenomena  that  promises 
to  lead  to  the  interpretation  of  truth, 
and  conduct  the  mind  up  to  the  great 
source  of  truth.  There  are  some  things 
that  need  no  inquiry  about ;  they  are 
vile  on  the  face  of  them ;  and  every  year 
of  our  lives  we  grow  more  convinced 
that  it  is  wisest  and  best  to  fix  our  at- 
tention on  the  beautiful  and  the  good, 
and  dwell  as  little  as  possible  on  the 
evil  and  the  false.     The  eye  that  turns 


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXV. 


its  inquiring  gaze  towards  God  will 
make  the  grandest  discoveries  and  see 
the  most  entrancing  visions.  The  true 
attitude  of  humble  and  reverential  con- 
fidence consists  in  directing  the  eyes  of 
the  soul  "  ever  toward  the  Lord." 

IV.  That  the  revelation  of  the 
hidden  ways  of  God  is  morally  satis- 
fying. "  His  soul  shall  dwell  at  ease, 
and  his  seed  shall  inherit  the  earth" 
(ver.  13).  The  soul  of  the  pious  shall 
pitch  her  tent  and  lodge  in  goodness 
as  in  a  fruitful  land, — shall  reach  her 
home  and  possess  it  for  ever.  Moses 
made  the  promise  "to  possess  the  land" 
(to  inherit  the  earth)  in  a  literal  sense 
to  his  people  (Deut.  iv.  22,  xl.  5, 
xxxvi.  6,  18) ;  but  since  his  days  it  has 


been  used  to  denote  perfect  peace,  as  is 
apparent  from  Prov.  ii.  21  ;  Ps.  xxxvil 
8,  9. — Tholuch  The  posterity  of  the 
good  are  blessed,  though  the  inherit- 
ance they  possess  as  the  result  of  many 
prayers  is  often  abused.  Parents  should 
not  only  pray /or  but  with  their  children ; 
and  it  will  be  strange  indeed  if  those 
prayers  do  not  bear  gracious  fruit  in 
the  future  career  of  their  offspring. 
There  is  nothing  so  satisfying  to  the  soul 
as  a  sight  of  God. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Trust  in  God  when 
life  is  involved  in  darkness  and  mystery. 
2.  God  only  can  reveal  the  secret  of 
happiness.  3.  A  moral  fitness  is  neces- 
sary to  understand  the  hidden  ways  of 
God. 


Trouble  and  the  Wat  Out  of  it. 
{Verses  16-22.) 


I.  That  sin  is  the  prolific  source  of 
all  trouble.  1.  A  sense  of  personal  sin  is 
an  intensified  form  of  trouble  {wer.  16-18). 
The  language  of  these  three  verses  is 
pathetically  expressive  of  conscious  sin. 
"  Have  mercy  upon  me,  for  I  am  desolate 
and  afflicted.  The  troubles  of  my  heart 
are  enlarged  :  look  upon  mine  afflic- 
tion and  my  pain."  What  words  can 
more  graphically  depict  the  sorrow,  the 
loneliness,  the  anguish,  the  utter  wretch- 
edness of  a  soul  pressed  down  under  the 
burden  of  its  sins  !  There  is  an  insepar- 
able connection  between  sin  and  sorrow; 
and  yet  how  slow  men  are  to  see  it. 
Only  the  sonl  smitten  with  a  genuine 
penitence  understands  the  true  nature  of 
sin,  and  the  enormous  evils  of  which  it 
is  the  cause.  Often  when  the  spirit  is 
most  deeply  troubled,  when  the  pain  is 
sharpest,  when  our  self-reproach  is 
bitterest,  —  then  God  is  nearest  to 
strengthen  and  deliver.  Our  greatest 
blessings  have  sprung  out  of  the  vortex 
of  our  greatest  troubles.  2.  Trouble  is 
increased  by  the  number  and  ferocity  of 
our  enemies.  *'  Consider  mine  enemies, 
for  they  are  many  ;  and  they  hate  me 
with  a  cruel  hatred"  (ver.  19).  The 
enemies  of  a  good  man  multiply  with 
his  misfortunes,  and  the  more  helpless 
he  is^  the  more  furiously  they  assail  him. 


"  No  hate  so  cruel  as  that  which  is 
unreasonable  and  unjust.  A  man  can 
forgive  one  who  has  injured  him,  but 
one  whom  he  has  injured  he  hates  im- 
placably." The  madness  of  cruelty 
raves  the  more  violently  when  it  feels 
its  impotency  to  inflict  all  the  injury  it 
designs. 

II.  That  trouble  shall  not  be  per- 
mitted to  overwhelm  the  good.  "  Oh, 
keep  my  soul  and  deliver  me  :  let  me 
not  be  ashamed,  for  I  put  my  trust  in 
Thee.  Let  ititegrity  and  uprightness 
preserve  me,  for  I  wait  on  Thee  "  (ver. 
20,  21).  In  this  world  of  contradictions 
and  suffering,  the  best  of  men  are  not 
free  from  trouble  ;  but  they  have  the 
assurance  of  help  which  shall  render 
them  invincible  and  exultant  in  the 
fiercest  trial.  Their  God-given  virtues 
form  an  impassable  cordon  around  them, 
and  their  faith  in  the  unseen  Protector 
constitutes  an  all-encompassing  shield. 
The  presence  of  Christ  in  trouble  ban- 
ishes fear.  Alone,  Dante  feared  to  enter 
the  di^mdl  Inferno ;  but  with  Virgil,  the 
great  and  good,  to  guide  his  steps  and 
support  his  hand,  he  descended  fear- 
lessly into  the  abode  of  woe.  So,  rely- 
ing on  our  own  strength,  we  enter  the 
valley  of  darkness,  and,  beset  with  fears, 
we  find  it  the  valley  of  sorrow  and  of 

123 


rs^LM  an. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  P8ALMS. 


death.  But,  trusting  the  Almighty  arm, 
our  dismay  vanishes ;  we  see  it  to  be 
only  the  valley  of  the  shadow ,  and  even 
the  shadow  He  has  turned  for  us  into 
the  morning.  Our  trust  is  founded  on 
the  certainty  of  God's  righteousness  j 
and  though  encompassed  with  floods 
and  beaten  with  storms,  it  stands,  for  it 
is  founded  on  a  rock.  There  is  ever  a 
shelter  for  us  in  God,  and  our  souls  are 
safe  in  His  hands. 

III.  That  prayer  to  God  is  the  in- 
fallible method  of  deliverance  from 
the  greatest  trouble  (ver.  22).  Per- 
sonal trouble  deepens  and  widens  our 
sympathy  for  others.  Observe,  the  cry 
is  not  simply,  "Oh,  keep  my  soul,  and 
deliver  me "  (ver.  20) ;  but  the  prayer 
takes  a  more  generous  and  comprehen- 
sive sweep,  "  Redeem  Israel,  O  God, 
out  of  all  hig  troubles"  (ver.  22).     **  If 


Thou  wilt  not  pity  and  help  me,  yet 
spare  Thy  people  who  sufter  for  my  sake 
and  in  my  sufferings." — Al.  Fool.  They 
who  have  thus  struggled  with  their  own 
doubts  and  sins,  and  by  God's  grace 
have  conquered  them,  must  ever  feel 
they  have  an  interest  in  the  conflicts  of 
the  church  militant.  They  who  pray 
for  themselves  are  taught  to  pray  for 
others  :  they,  again  and  again,  commend 
their  suffering  brethren  of  the  true 
Israel  to  that  Almighty  Father  and  all- 
gracious  God  who  has  deigned  to 
deliver  them  from  all  their  troubles. 
True  prayer  is  the  precursor  and  lever 
of  redeeming  power. 

Lessons  : — 1.  The  cure  of  sin  is  the 
cure  of  trouble.  2.  The  potency  of 
prayer  is  never  so  thoroughly  tested  and 
triumphantly  vindicated  as  in  time  of 
trouble. 


PSALM  XXVL 

Introduction. 

The  date  of  this  psalm  is  uncertain.  It  is  supposed  hy  some  to  refer  to  the  assassination 
of  Ishbosheth  (2  Sam.  iv.  5-12) ;  and  by  others  to  the  rebellion  of  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xv.-xviii.) ^ 
but  it  is  more  probable  that  it  was  composed,  like  many  others,  in  the  dark  time  of  Saul's 
persecution  (1  Sam.  xviii.-xxiv.).  **lt  has  some  points  of  resemblance,  both  in  thought  and 
expression,  to  the  last.  Both  open  with  the  same  declaration  of  trust  in  God  (xxv.  2;  xxvi.  1); 
in  both  there  is  the  same  prayer  that  Qod  would  redeem  (xxv.  22,  xxvi.  11),  and  be  graciouj 
(xxv.  16,  xxvi.  11)  to  His  servants.  Other  points  of  contact  may  be  found  in  xxv.  21,  xxvi.  11 
and  xxv.  5,  xxvi.  3.  There  is,  however,  this  marked  difference  between  the  two,  that  there 
are  wanting  in  this  psalm  those  touching  confessions  of  sinfulness  and  pleadings  for  forgive- 
ness which  in  the  other  are  thrice  repeated.  Here  is  only  the  avowal  of  conscious  uprightness, 
— an  avowal  made  as  in  the  sight  of  the  searcher  of  hearts,  and  deriving,  no  doubt,  much  of  its 
intensity  and  almost  impassioned  force  from  the  desire  on  the  part  of  the  singer  to  declare  his 
entire  separation  from  and  aversion  to  the  vain  and  evil  men  by  whom  he  was  surrounded." — 
Perovme. 


The  Upright  Man  Pleading  for  Justice  in  the  Court  of  Heaven 

(Verses  1-12.) 


Calumny  has  been  common  in  all 
ages.  Jesus  Christ  Himself  was  de- 
famed, and  His  disciples  are  warned  to 
expect  similar  treatment  from  their  ene- 
mies (John  XV.  20  ;  Matt.  v.  11).  For 
such  as  suffer  thus,  the  example  of 
David  is  rich  in  counsel  and  comfort. 
In  time  of  trouble,  he  turns  to  God  for 
redress  and  refuge.  He  appeals  from  a 
world  where  **the  foundations  are  out 
of  course  "  to  a  world  where  all  is  right- 
eousness and  peace.  He  appeals  from 
124 


man,  whose  judgments  are  false,  to  God, 
who  judgeth  righteously. 

In  considering  David's  appeal,  mark — 
I.  That  it  was  made  to  the  rigth 
Judge  (ver.  1).  '*  Judge  me,  0  Lord.'' 
He  had  been  wronged.  His  enemies 
had  suspected  and  denounced  him. 
Even  the  very  king,  anointed  to  do 
justly  and  to  defend  the  oppressed,  had 
turned  against  him,  and  madly  sought 
his  life  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  11).  But,  though 
perplexed,  he  is  not  in  despair ;  though 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  xxn. 


persecuted,  he  is  not  forsaken.  He 
appeals  to  God.  **  Judge  me,  0  Lord^ 
Take  up  my  cause,  vindicate  my  cha- 
racter, deliver  me  from  the  machina- 
tions and  malice  of  my  foes.  This  is 
just  like  what  he  said  to  Saul  at  Engedi 
(1  Sam.  xxiv.  12),  "The  Lord  judge 
between  me  and  thee  "  (ver.  15),  '*  The 
Lord  be  judge,  and  see,  and  plead  my 
cause,  and  deliver  me  out  of  thine 
band." 

It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  stand  before 
an  earthly  judge,  but  it  is  a  far  more 
solemn  thing  to  come  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  God.  This  is  the  court  of 
last  resort.  Here  the  Judge  is  person- 
ally acquainted  with  all  the  facts  and 
circumstances  of  the  case,  and  His  judg- 
ments are  absolutely  just  and  final  (1 
Sam.  ii.  3). 

II.  It  was  presented  in  a  proper 
spirit. 

1.  Deep  seriousness.  He  feels  that 
he  is  in  the  presence  of  the  great  Searcher 
of  hearts.  His  very  life  is  at  stake;  but 
there  are  two  things  which  sustain  him : 
(1.)  Conscious  integrity.  ^^  For  I  have 
walked  in  mine  integrity. ^^  This  is  very 
bold.  It  startles  us  to  hear  such  words 
from  a  sinful  man.  We  are  almost 
ready  to  say,  *' Surely  this  is  to  err,  and 
to  fall  into  pride  and  self-righteousness." 
But  the  words  are  no  boast.  They  have 
the  ring  of  sincerity  and  truth.  David 
does  not  claim  moral  perfection,  but  up- 
rightness of  heart.  He  felt  that  he  had 
been  true.  In  spite  of  sore  provocations, 
he  had  not  returned  evil  for  evil;  though 
coming  short  in  many  things,  he  had 
honestly  endeavoured  to  do  justly,  to 
love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with 
God.  "  Walked :^^  this  implied  earnest- 
ness and  definiteness  of  purpose,  stead- 
fast and  delightsome  progress  in  the 
right.  ^^  Integrity  ^^  was  the  air  in 
which  he  had  lived  and  moved.  "  In- 
nocency  itself  is  no  fence  to  the  name, 
though  it  is  to  the  bosom,  against  the 
darts  of  calumny." — M.  Henry.  (2.) 
Confidence  in  God.  "  I  have  trusted 
also  in  the  Lord :  therefore  I  shall  not 
slide."  There  was  everything  in  God  to 
inspire  trust.  He  was  infinitely  just 
and  good.  In  His  laws  and  govern- 
ment He  wfts  wholly  and  eternally  op- 


posed to  all  evil.  However  it  might  be 
amongst  men,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
could  not  but  do  right.  David  had 
trusted  in  Him  in  the  past,  and  he 
would  trust  in  Him  for  ever.  Had  he 
been  conscious  of  insincerity,  he  could 
not  have  acted  thus.  Guile  puts  a  bar 
between  the  soul  and  God  ;  whereas, 
when  there  is  no  guile,  there  can  be 
frank  and  confiding  approach,  and  un- 
wavering confidence.  What  a  comfort- 
ing thought  that  there  is  a  God  in 
heaven  who  judgeth  righteously  I 
Happy  are  those  who  trust  in  Him. 

'*  True  dignity  abides  with  him  alone 
Who,  in  the  silent  hour  of  inward  thought, 
Can  still  suspect  and  still  revere  himself 
In  lowliness  of  heart." — WoiiDswoRTH. 

2.  Readiness  to  submit  to  tJie  most 
thorough  investigation  (ver.  2).  '*  Ex- 
amine me,  0  Lordf  and  prove  me." 
The  reference  here  is  to  the  methods  by 
which  metals  were  tested  (Ps.  xii.  6, 
Ixvi.  10).  As  gold  and  silver  were  tried 
in  the  furnace,  as  Israel  had  been 
tried  in  Egypt  and  the  wilderness,  so  he 
was  ready  to  be  tried  (Deut.  iv.  20, 
viii.  2).  "  Try  my  reins  and  my 
heart."  The  "  reins  "  may  refer  to  the 
lower,  and  the  *'  heart "  to  the  higher 
passions  of  the  soul.  He  thus  craves 
that  not  only  the  outward  but  the  inner 
man  should  be  tested.  He  would  hide 
nothing.  He  desires  to  be  perfectly 
open,  and  to  have  all  laid  bare  and 
sifted  to  the  very  core  of  his  being. 
Whatever  the  Lord  saw  to  be  just,  let 
Him  do.  The  deepest  desire  of  his 
heart  was  to  be  right.  Let  all  dross  of 
self-deception  and  sin  be  purged  away 
in  the  fire  of  the  Great  Refiner,  and  let 
the  true  and  the  good  remain.  "  The 
fining-pot  is  for  silver  and  the  furnace 
for  gold,  but  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts  " 
(Prov.  xvii.  3). 

**  What  lives  by  life  that  is  not  Thine, 
I  yield  it  to  Thy  righteous  doom  ; 
What  yet  resists  Thy  law  Divine, 
0  may  Thy  fire  of  love  consume." 

3.  Humble  acquiescence  in  the  result 
(ver.  3).  *^  For  Thy  loving-kindness  is 
before  mine  eyes,  and  I  have  walked  in 
Thy  truth.''  This  implies  that  God's 
love  was  the  life  of  his  heart.  He  un- 
derstood and  appreciated  His  "loving^ 

125 


rsALMxxn. 


SOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


kindness."     It  was  "before  Ms  eyes" 
(c/.  Deut.  vL  8).     It  was  the  object  of 
his   constant    meditation    and   delight. 
When  he  thought  thereon,  he  could  not 
but   give    thanks    and    take    courage. 
"  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear  "  (1  John 
iv.  18).      Godh  will  was  the  law  of  his 
life.      That  he  might  know   and   keep 
God's  commandments  was  his  continual 
prayer.     "  /  have  walked  in  Thy  truth" 
This  had  been  his  habit.     It  was  upon 
this   principle  that   his    life  had  been 
regulated.       Hence    he    felt    no    fear. 
Whatever  was  brought  to  light,  whether 
to  his  praise  or  to  his  blame,  could  not 
but  be  for  his  good.     "Light  is  sown 
for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the 
upright     in    heart "    (Ps.    xcvii.     11). 
'*  Every  one  that  doeth  evil  hateth  the 
light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest 
his  deeds  should  be  reproved ;  but  he 
that    doeth    truth    cometh  to  the  light 
that  his  deeds   may  be  made  manifest 
that  they  are  wrought  in  God"  (John 
iii.  20,  21).      Blessed  are  they  whose 
hearts  are  right  with  God.     Let  trials 
come,  let  them  be  subjected  to  sore  dis- 
cipline and  heavy  judgments,  still  they 
have  peace  within. 

"  Whate'er  my  Gk)d  ordains  is  right, — 
My  light,  my  Ufe  is  He. 
He  cannot  will  me  aught  but  good — 

I  trust  Him  utterly ; 

For  well  I  know, 

In  joy  or  woe. 
We  yet  shall  see  as  sunlight  clear, 
How  faithful  was  our  Guardian  here.** 

III.  Supported  by  ample  evidence 

1.  Negative  (ver.  4,  5).  The  wicked 
are  here  characterised  as  "  vain  per- 
sons," "dissemblers,"  "evil-doers." 
These  terms  are  terribly  significant. 
They  are  revelations  of  the  heart. 
They  are  proofs  of  a  state  of  society 
utterly  alien  and  hostile  to  the  life  of 
God.  David,  in  vindication  of  him- 
self, declares  his  entire  separation  from 
all  such  people.  He  expresses  his  re- 
pugnance to  their  society.  A  man  is 
known  by  the  company  he  keeps.  There 
is  a  power,  for  good  or  for  evil,  in  the 
society  we  love.  To  be  allied  with  the 
good  is  a  blessing  and  an  honour,  but 
to  be  confederate  with  the  bad  is  to  be 
doomed  to  infamy.  David  could  appeal 
to  his  past  life.  He  had  no  relish  for 
126 


the  society  of  the  bad.    "  /  have  not  i<U 
with  vain  persons,  neither  mil  I  go  in 
with    dissemblers.^'      He    expresses    his 
hatred  of  their  character.     His  language 
is  very  strong  :  "  I  have  hated  the  con- 
gregation  of   evil-doers."     It   was   not 
that  he  hated  them  as  men,  but  that  he 
hated   their  spirit    and    conduct — their 
character.      "  To    hate  the  person,  the 
existence,  of  any  man,  is  wrong  ;  it  is  to 
hate  the  workmanship  of  God.     But  to 
hate  the  character  of  a  bad  man  is  right, 
and   even  obligatory.      God  made  the 
person,  man  made  the  character ;  and  a 
bad   character    is    an    offence    to    the 
Almighty,   and  an    injury  to  the  uni- 
verse :  therefore  it  is  holy  to  hate  it." — 
Dr.  D.  Thomas.     2.  Positive  (ver.  6-8). 
"  /  will  wash  mine  hands  in  innocency  : 
so  will  I  compass  Thine  altar,  0  Lord ; 
that   I  may  publish  with   the  voice  of 
thanksgiving,  and  tell  of  all  Thy  won- 
drous works.      Lord,  I  have  loved  the 
habitation  of  Thy  house,  and  the  place 
where  Thine  honour  dwelleth."      David 
here  declares  his  love  for  God's  house 
and   worship.       Instead   of    consorting 
with  the  wicked,  his  delight  was  with 
the  people  of  God.     Mark  his  earnest 
preparation   (ver.   6),     "/  will  wa^h" 
(fee.     The    expression   is   figurative  {cf. 
Gen.  XX.  5  ;  Deut.  xxi.  6  ;  Matt,  xxvii. 
24).    It  is  taken  from  Exod.  xxx.  17-21, 
where   Aaron   and   his   sons   are    com- 
manded to  wash  their  hands  and  their 
feet  before   going  into   the  tabernacle. 
"  David,  willing  to  express  his  coming 
with  a  pure  heart  to  pray  to  God,  doth 
it  by  this  similitude  of  a  priest,  that,  as 
a    priest  washes    his    hands,  and  then 
offers    oblation,   so   had  he    constantly 
joined  purity  and  devotion  together." — 
Hammond.    Mark  his  devout  attendance 
upon    ordinances    (ver.    6,    7).       "  So 
will  I  compass,"  <fec.     "  The  meaning  is, 
that  he  will  go  round  and  round  the 
altar,  looking  at  it,  looking  at  the  blood 
on  its  base,  and  the  blood  on  each  of  the 
four  horns,  towards  north,  south,  east, 
and  west,  and  beholding  the  smoke  of 
the  fire,  and  thinking  of  the  sacrificial 
victim  that  has  died  there, — all  in  the 
way  of  joyful  thanks  for  salvation  pro- 
vided for  men." — A.  A.  Bonar.     Mark 
his  great  delight  in  the  public  worship 


HOMILBTIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALMZZTL 


of  God  (ver.  8).     **Lord,  I  have  loved 

the  habitation  of  Thy  housCj*  <fec.  It 
was  the  place  where  God's  glory  dwelt, 
where  God  made  Himself  known  as 
a  just  God  and  a  Saviour.  God's 
presence  is  the  attraction  and  life  of  all 
true  worship.  We  should  attend  upon 
Divine  ordinances  with  diligence,  pre- 
paration, and  prayer.  If  you  come  to 
church  fresh  from  the  company  of  the 
gay  and  the  thoughtless,  and  with  no  real 
seriousness  of  spirit,  it  is  no  wonder  if 
you  are  not  benefited.  But  come  with 
humility,  come  with  sincere  love  of 
truth,  come  with  hope  in  the  boundless 
mercy  of  God  and  the  grace  of  Christ, 
and  you  will  not  come  in  vain.  In- 
structed and  refreshed,  your  grateful 
song  will  be,  * '  This  is  none  other  but 
the  house  of  God,  this  is  the  gate  of 
heaven"  (Gen.  xxviii.  17). 

IV.  Enforced  by  strong  and  im- 
passioned arguments  (ver.  9-11). 
"  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners,  nor 
my  life  with  bloody  men  :  in  whose  hands 
is  mischiefs  and  their  right  hand  is  full 
of  bribes.  But  as  for  me,  I  will  walk 
in  mine  integrity:  redeem  me,  and  be 
merciful  unto  me."  He  here  prays  that 
God  would  judge  him  (ver.  1),  i.e., 
declare  what  he  is  by  separating  him 
from  the  wicked.  But,  in  fact,  his 
prayer  is  an  argument,  intensely  earnest 
and  powerful.  That  he  should  be  con- 
demned with  the  wicked  was — 1.  Con- 
trary to  the  spirit  of  his  past  life. 
^*  Sinner's  "  **  bloody  men,"  men  whose 
evil  designs  led  to  violence  and  crime, 
and  whose  hands  were  "  full  of  bribes  " 
to  corrupt  and  to  betray,  surrounded 
him.  But  though  he  could  not  alto- 
gether avoid  them,  he  had  always  re- 
garded them  with  aversion.  Their 
character  was  hateful  to  him,  and  he 


abhorred  their  company  as  hell.  2. 
Revolting  to  his  holiest  aspirations  and 
hopes.  He  was  unchanged  in  his  pur- 
pose. Truth  was  truth,  and  right  was 
right,  whatever  men  said  or  did.  He 
was  resolved  to  die  as  he  had  lived. 
His  heart  was  fixed.  But  he  shrank 
with  horror  from  the  doom  of  the 
wicked.  3.  Inconsistent  with  his  faith 
in  God^s  justice  and  mercy.  *^  Redeem 
me,  and  be  merciful  unto  me^  He  is 
far  from  pride  and  presumption.  He 
does  not  demand,  but  supplicates.  His 
exclusive  dependence  is  upon  God, 
There  was  a  moral  impossibility  in  his 
being  forsaken.  ''As  there  is  a  gathering- 
time  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  so  there 
is  a  gathering-time  for  men.  Death  is 
the  reaper.  With  his  scythe  he  mows 
down  the  generations,  and  Justice 
gathers  whom  he  mows,  —  some  to 
misery,  some  to  bliss.  Who  would  be 
gathered  with  the  sinners  in  the  great 
world  of  retribution  1" — Dr.  D.  Thomas. 
V,  Concludes  with  the  expression 
of  the  most  undouhting  assurance 
(ver.  12).  ^^  My  foot  standeth  in  an 
even  place;  in  the  congregations  will  I 
bless  the  Lord."  "  His  prayer  has  been 
heard.  He  is  safe.  He  stands  on  the 
open  tableland,  where  he  has  room  to 
move,  and  where  his  enemies  cannot 
hem  him  in,  and  therefore  he  fulfils  the 
resolve  made  before  (ver.  7),  and  pub- 
licly pours  out  his  thanksgivings  to 
God." — Perowne.  But  the  words  of 
the  Psalmist  may  be  understood  as 
looking  further  than  this  earth.  They 
not  only  imply  present  sure  standing  in 
the  love  of  God,  but  they  breathe  the 
spirit  of  holy  joy,  in  view  of  the  serene 
and  blissful  heights  of  heaven,  where 
there  shall  be  no  possibility  of  danger 
or  of  falling  any  more. 


A  Glorious  Piotubb. 
{Verse  3.) 


I.  The  Itlbject.  "7%y  loving-kind- 
ness." Creation,  providence,  redemption. 
What  subject  could  be  more  noble 
and  attractive  1 

II.  The  position.  "  Before  mine 
eyes."  Much  depends  on  the  placing 
of  a  picture.    The  most  excellent  should 


have  the  most  honourable  plaoo,  "  Be- 
fore mine  eyes."  Before  the  mind,  the 
conscience,  the  heart.  To  be  studied 
with  adoring  love  and  delight. 

III.  The  effect  upon  the  be- 
holders. 1.  Quickening.  2.  Illumin- 
ating.      3.     Transforming.       Soothes, 

127 


PSALM  XXVL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


strengthens,   ennobles.     "Beholding  as  With  what  feelings  do  we  regard   itl 

in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  "We  needs  must  love  the  highest  when 

are  transformed  into  the  same  image."  we  see  it." — Tennyson, 
What  interest  has  this  picture  for  us  ? 

Survey  of  Eedemption  Woek. 
(Verses  6,  7.) 

L    It  IS  A  FINISHED  WOKK.  I         III.    It  IS  AN  INSPIRING  WORK. 

II.  It  is  a  wondrous  work.         I       IV.  It  is  a  god-glorifyino  work* 


Love  of  God's  House. 


(  Verse 

What  the  Tabernacle  and  the  Temple 
were  to  the  pious  Jew,  the  house  where 
we  worship  God  should  be  to  us.  It 
should  be  dear  because — 

I.  Hallowed  by  the  Divine  pre- 
sence (2  Chron.  vi.  18;  Acts  vii.  49; 
Exod.  XXV.  21,  22;  Matt,  xviii.  20). 

II.  Consecrated  to  the  holiest  fel- 
lowship. " The  congregation."  More; 
though  physically  shut  in  by  the  walls, 
in  spirit  we  enter  into  fellowship  with 
all  God's  saints. 

III.  Devoted  to  tlie  cause  of  right- 


8.) 

eousness  and  love.  Not  sectarianism, 
but  "  the  truth  as  in  Jesus."  "  We 
preach  Christ  crucified."  Our  ceaseless 
prayer  is  "  Thy  kingdom  come." 

IV.  Endeared  by  the  most  sacred 
associations.  Here  our  fathers  wor- 
shipped. Here  our  hearts  have  often 
been  revived  by  the  word  of  truth, 
and  regaled  by  the  bread  of  life  sent 
down  from  heaven  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  2-5). 

V.  Suggestive  of  the  noblest  hopes 
and  inspirations  (Matt,  xxviii.  20;  Heb. 
xii.  22-29  ;  and  Thess.  iv.  13-18). 


Perdition  Dreadful. 
(Verse  9.) 


I.  The  good  man  is  chiefly  con- 
cerned about  his  soul.  Many  anxious 
as  to  health,  earthly  comforts,  the 
security  of  their  goods,  &c.  But  the 
cry  of  the  godly  is  "  my  soul."  Not  in 
selfishness.  1.  The  soul  is  the  man. 
2.  The  salvation  of  the  soul  is  necessary 
for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  true  ends 
of  our  being.  3.  The  soul  is  in  despe- 
rate peril,  and  none  but  Christ  can 
save. 

II.  The  good  man  knows  that  the 
destiny  of  the  soul  is  settled  at 
death.  "  Gather  not  my  soul,"  &c. 
Death  comes  to  all.  "  Gather  "  (of.  Gen. 
XXV.  8,  xxxv.  29,  xlix.  29-33 ;  Numb. 
XX.  24,  xxvii.  13.  ''Then  shall  the 
dust  return  to  the  earth  as  it  was,  and 
the  spirit  shall  return  unto  God  who  gave 
it "  (Eccles.  xii.  7).  Judgment.  Inferred 
by  reason.  Foreboded  by  conscience. 
Revealed  by  Scripture  (Heb.  ix.  27 ; 
Acts  xvii.   31  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10). 

III.  The  good  man    recoils  with 
128 


horror  from  being  associated  in 
destiny    with    the    wicked.      Why  ] 

1.  Because  he    abhors   their    character. 

2.  Their  society.  3.  Their  doom.  Evil 
without  restraint.  Misery  without  re- 
lief. Eternity  without  hope.  Would 
we  shrink  from  the  society  of  the  false, 
the  impure,  the  revengeful,  the  slaves  of 
lust  and  selfishness,  how  much  more 
should  we  recoil  from  eternal  fellow- 
ship with  these  and  such  as  these  ! 

Ver.  9,  10.  Social  degeneracy.  A 
corrupt  people  makes  a  corrupt  magis- 
tracy. 

Ver.  12.  The  connection  between 
private  and  public  worship. 

Ver.  12.  Rectitude  is  an  ^*even 
place"  as  contrasted  with  the  crooked 
paths  of  the  false,  the  hard  way  ot 
transgressors,  the  slippery  places  of  the 
world.  "  Certainly,  it  is  heaven  upon 
earth  to  have  a  man's  mind  move  in 
charity,  rest  in  providence,  and  turn 
npon  the  poles  of  truth." — Bacon. 


HOMTIETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS 


PSALM  XXVIL 


Sincerity  not  Enough, 
(Verse  1.) 


It  is  a  false  and  mistaken  liberality  to 
say,  "  If  a  man  be  sincere,  he  is  all  right." 
Sincerity  is  necessary.  Unless  a  man 
is  sincere,  he  cannot  be  truly  religious. 
But  sincerity  is  not  enough.  A  man 
may  be  sincere  in  his  opinions,  and  yet 
be  grievously  in  error.  So  it  was  with 
Eli  (1  Sam.  i.  14)  when  he  called 
Hannah  drunken.  A  man  may  be  sin- 
cere  in  his   religious   beliefs,  even   to 


zealotism,  and  yet  be  far  off  from  true 
godliness.  So  it  was  'vith  Saul  when 
he  made  havoc  of  the  Church,  and  did 
things  which  he  afterwards  bitterly  re- 
pented (Acts  xxvi.  9,  10).  Sincerity  im- 
plies being  true  to  conscience  ;  butKJon- 
science  is  no  safe  guide  by  itself.  It 
needs  to  be  cultivated  and  controlled 
by  the  Spirit  of  God. 


PSALM    XXVII. 

Introduction. 

This  psalm  has  been  referred  by  some  to  the  period  of  David's  waiting  for  the  kingdom  ; 
by  others,  to  the  time  of  Absalom's  rebellion.  Hengsttriberg  says  :  "  All  attempts  to  find  out 
any  occasion  to  which  the  psalm  especially  referred  have  failed,  and  from  this  failure  ;  we 
may  infer  either  that  David  originally  uttered  the  psalm  from  the  soul  of  the  oppressed  right- 
eous man,  or  that,  if  he  wrote  it  in  reference  to  a  particular  occasion,  he  generalised  his  own 
experience." 

The  Fearlessness  of  the  Good. 
{Verses  1-3.) 


I.  Springs  from  personal  faith  in 
God.  "The  Lord."  This  name  inspires 
hope.  Six  times  it  is  recited  in  the 
first,  and  seven  times  in  the  second  part 
of  the  psalm.  Jehovah  is  ever  the  object 
of  true  faith. 

1.  Intelligent.  The  cry  of  the  earnest 
soul  is,  "Light."  To  this  God  responds. 
He  revaals  Himself  in  Christ.  He  gives 
His  word  to  quicken  and  enlighten  the 
sonl,  and  to  illumine  its  pathway  up  to 
the  gates  of  heaven  (2  Cor.  iv.  6  ;  John 
viii.  12;  Ps.  xviii.  28,  xxxvi.  9,  Ixxxiv. 
11).  David  was  called  the  "  Light  of 
Israel "  (2  Sam.  xxi.  17),  but  he  himself 
gives  God  the  glory  :  "  The  Lord  is  my 
liglit."  In  this  word  he  anticipates  the 
great  saying  of  the  New  Testament, 
"God  is  light"  (1  Johni.  5). 

2.  Appropriating.  "  My  "  is  a  little 
word,  but  of  great  significance.  Only  a 
person  can  say,  "My."  "My  home," 
"  My  wife,"  "  My  child."  Faith  is  per- 
sonal. It  implies  recognition  of  the 
glory  and  preciousness  of  Jesus,  and  the 
receiving  and  resting  upon  Him  alone 
for  salvation.     This  faith  is  contrasted 


with  the  faith  of  devils  (Jas.  ii.  19; 
1  John  v.  10-12).  So  also  it  differs 
vitally  from  mere  belief  in  historical 
Christianity.  It  is  one  thing  to  say, 
"God  is  light,"  and  another  to  say, 
"  God  is  my  light."  It  is  one  thing  to 
cry,  "  The  Lord  He  is  God  "  (1  Kings 
xviii.  39),  and  an  altogether  different 
thing  to  take  hold  of  Christ  for  our- 
selves, saying,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  " 
(John  XX.  28).  Luther  says  the  marrow 
of  the  Gospels  is  in  the  pronouns  "  my" 
and  "  our."  Let  us  not  be  content  till 
we  can  say,  "The  Lord  is  my  light." 
Such  faith  fills  the  heart  with  courage 
and  joy  (Ps.  xviii.  1,  2,  cxviii.  28  ;  Song 
vi.  3). 

3.  Soul-saving.  "  Salvation  "  implies 
all  that  we  need  for  our  safety  and  good. 
God  not  merely  gives  salvation,  but  He 
is  salvation.  He  that  by  faith  has  laid 
hold  of  God  has  all  covenant  blessings 
made  sure  to  him.  "The  strength  of 
my  life : "  God  is  the  stronghold  in 
which  the  believer's  life  is  safe  (Prov. 
xviii.  10;  2  Cor.  xii.  2).  "My  light,'' 
"  My  salvation,"  "  The  strength  of  my 

129 


PSALM  XX  711. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


life."  Here  is  combined  all  that  the 
Boul  requires, — here,  as  from  behind  a 
triple  shield,  she  can  '*  fight  the  good 
fight," — here,  as  in  an  impregnable  for- 
tress, she  can  hoist  the  banner  of  the 
cross  and  bid  defiance  to  every  foe. 

II.  Strengthened  by  the  remem- 
brance of  past  deliverances. 

Memory  can  recall  and  re-live  the 
past.  When  rightly  used,  it  is  a  helper 
to  faith.  (Ver.  2)  Here  is  danger  re- 
called, David  in  imagination  goes  back 
to  some  time  of  great  peril.  His  ene- 
mies pressed  him  sore.  Strong  and 
fierce  as  wild  beasts,  they  thirsted  for 
his  blood  (Job  xix.  22 ;  Zeph.  iii.  3). 
So  believers  can  recall  times  when  they 
were  in  straits.  God's  enemies  are  our 
enemies.  "  It  is  a  hopeful  sign  for  us 
when  the  wicked  hate  us  :  if  our  foes  were 
godly  men,  it  would  be  a  sore  sorrow  ; 
but  as  for  the  wicked,  their  hatred  is 
better  than  their  love." — Sturgeon. 

Here  is  deliverance  recorded.  David's 
enemies  came  up  with  haughty  confi- 
dence. They  counted  him  their  sure 
prey  ;  but  discomfiture,  strange  and  un- 
expected, befell  them.  "  They  stumbled 
and  fell."  These  things  rise  up  before 
him  with  the  freshness  of  yesterday.  It 
was  the  doing  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
thought  strengthens  his  heart.  So  it 
was  in  the  encounter  with  Goliath  (1 
Sam.  xvii.  37).  So  it  was  at  Ziklag 
and  at  other  times  (1  Sam.  xxx.  6;  Ps. 
Ixxvii.  10,  11).  Here  is  a  lesson  for  us. 
Confidence  comes  of  experience.  The 
remedy  we  have  proved  we  readily  try 
again.  The  friend  we  have  found  faith- 
ful we  trust  to  death.  The  commander 
under  whom  we  have  conquered  we 
follow  bravely  to  other  fields.  So 
should  we  act  as  to  God.  "  The  Chris- 
tian is  rich  in  experienceSy  which  he 
wears  as  bracelets  and  keeps  as  his 
richest  jewels.  He  calls  one  Ubenezer, 
'  Hitherto  God  hath  helped  ;  *  another, 


NapJitaliy  *  I  have  wrestled  with  God 
and  prevailed  , '  another,  Gershoniy  *  I 
was  a  stranger;*  another,  Joseph,  'God 
will  yet  add  more ;  *  another,  Feniely 
*I  have  seen  the  face  of  God  '  (1  Sam. 
vii.  12;  Gen.  xxx.  8;  Exod.  ii.  22 ;  Gen. 
xxx.  24,  xxxii.  30).  I  have  been  de- 
livered from  the  lion^  therefore  from  the 
beary — from  the  lion  and  the  bear,  there- 
fore from  the  Philistine^ — from  thePliilis- 
tine,  therefore  from  Saul, — from  Saul, 
therefore  God  will  deliver  me  from  every 
evil  work,  and  preserve  me  blameless  to 
His  heavenly  kingdom." — J.  Sheffield, 

III.  Sufficient  for  the  greatest  emer- 
gencies. Imagination  is  a  great  painter. 
Here  David  conjures  up  a  terrible  scene 
(ver.  3).  We  see  the  mustering  of  the 
forces,  we  see  the  proud  array  of  the 
army  with  tents  and  banners,  we  see 
the  shock  and  terrors  of  the  battle,  and 
the  strife,  as  if  for  a  kingdom.  And  all 
this  pictures  the  danger  of  his  soul.  Yet, 
in  such  extremity,  his  eye  flinches  not 
and  his  heart  knows  no  fear.  What 
sustains  him  ?  Faith  in  God.  *'  In 
this  will  I  be  confident "  (cf.  Ps.  iii.  6, 
7).  So  with  the  saints.  If  enemies 
oppose,  they  can  say  with  Peter,  "  We 
must  obey  God  "  (cf,  Luther  at  Worms). 
If  dangers  thicken,  they  can  cry  with 
Paul,  "  None  of  these  things  move  me." 
What  terror  had  Ahab  for  Micaiah,  the 
man  who  had  seen  God  ?  (1  Kings  xxii. 
19).  What  cared  Elisha  for  "  the  horses 
and  chariots"  at  Dothan,  whose  eyes 
beheld  the  angels  of  God  ranged  in  his 
defence?  (2  Kings  vi.  15).  So,  what 
are  the  hosts  of  darkness  and  all  the 
powers  of  the  enemy  to  the  Chris- 
tian who  can  say,  **The  Lord  is  my 
light  and  my  salvation  V  *'  Whom  shall 
I  fear?"  The  law?  It  is  satisfied. 
Satan  ?  He  is  conquered.  Afflictions  1 
They  are  sanctified.  Death  ?  It  is 
overcome.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  ? "  (Eom.  viii.  31). 


The  Saint's  Kefugb. 
{Verses  4-6.) 

'*In  time  of  trouble."    It  may  be  a  from  the  malice  of  evil  men.     The  soul 

storm  of    conscience  or  of  providence,  flies  to  God  and  finds  shelter. 
It  may  be   perils    from   temptation  or  I.    Earnestly   sought   (ver.   4).      1 

130 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  zxvn. 


Whatt  **  That  1  may  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord^  Like  the  priests,  he 
"wished  to  be  wholly  devoted  to  God. 
Like  the  children  of  the  family,  he 
desired  to  dwell  constantly  in  his 
Father's  house.  Communion  with  God 
was  the  life  of  his  heart.  Such  free, 
affectionate,  'confiding  intercourse  with 
God  is  greatly  to  be  coveted,  and  should 
be  sought  not  as  the  privilege  of  special 
seasons,  but  as  a  daily  blessing ;  not  as 
the  pleasure  of  an  hour,  but  as  a  joy 
for  ever.  2.  Why  f  '<  To  behold  the 
beauty  of  the  Lord^  Luther  interprets 
this  of  the  services  of  the  sanctuary. 
Butit  cannot  be  thus  limited.  "  Beauty  " 
is  loveliness.  "  Beauty  of  the  Lord  "  is 
the  loveliness  of  the  Lord,  all  that  makes 
Him  an  object  of  admiration  and  delight. 
To  sinners,  the  "  Beauty  of  the  Lord  "  is 
"His  glory  as  it  shines  in  the  face  of  Jesus 
Christ."  "  To  inquire  in  His  temple.^* 
The  deepest  instincts  of  the  soul  prompt 
to  inquiry.  Truth  is  not  born  with  us, 
nor  can  it  be  obtained  irrespective  of  our 
own  efforts.  It  must  be  sought  for  its 
own  sake.  It  must  be  wooed  and  won, 
from  love,  before  it  can  be  enjoyed.  All 
right  investigation,  whether  of  God's 
works  or  God's  Word,  should  be  con- 
ducted as  under  the  eye  of  God.  His 
temple  is  wide  as  the  universe.  3.  How  f 
With  concentration  of  heart.  "  07ie 
thing."  With  constancy  of  endeavour. 
"  That  will  I  seek  after."  When  David 
fled  from  Absalom,  he  left  behind  him 
his  house,  his  treasures,  and  all  the 
glory  of  his  crown  ;  but  these  things 
were  as  nothing  compared  with  the 
worship  of  God  (Ps.  Ixiii. ;  2  Sam.  xv. 
25).  It  is  only  when  we  make  God  our 
Alpha  and  Omega,  the  supreme  object  of 
our  delight  and  study,  that  we  can  hope 
that  He  will  reveal  Himself  to  us.  In 
our  day,  there  are  manifold  objects  to 
distract  our  attention.  The  claims  of 
the  world  are  constant  and  oppressive. 
There  is  the  more  need,  therefore,  for 
watchfulness  and  prayer.  *'  Unite  my 
heart  to  fear  Thy  name." 

II.  Graciously  enjoyed  (ver.  6).  Here 
there  is  the  best  shelter  in  the  worst 
danger.  "Pavilion,''  "tent,**  "rock," 
(Lev.  xxiii.  42;  2  Sam.  vi.  17;  Ps. 
ix.  14).      This   may   express  sovereign 


love.  It  is  all  of  God's  grace.  Right- 
eous defence.  The  sinner  does  not  hide 
furtively,  but  is  led  by  the  hand  of  the 
Prince.  The  deliverance  is  not  the 
mere  act  of  power,  but  is  wrought  in 
righteousness.  God  is  a  just  God,  and 
a  Saviour.  The  sinner  flees  to  Christ, 
not  to  hide  from  God,  but  to  hide  with 
God  (Gen.  iii.  10  ;  Ps.  cxliii.  9).  Inr 
violable  security.  "Immutability,  eter- 
nity, and  infinite  power  here  come  to 
the  aid  of  sovereignty  and  sacrifice.  How 
blessed  is  the  standing  of  the  man  whom 
God  Himself  sets  on  high  above  his 
foes  upon  an  impregnable  rock,  which 
never  can  be  stormed ! " — Spurgeon.  "  He 
shall  set  me  up  upon  a  rock."  There 
may  be  a  reminiscence  here  of  the  hour 
when,  from  the  top  of  the  rock,  David 
reproached  Abner  for  his  remissness  in 
guarding  Saul  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  5-16). 
Rock  Rimmon  was  but  a  poor  retreat. 
The  fugitive  may  take  hold  of  the  horns 
of  the  altar,  and  yet  perish  (1  Kings 
ii.  29).  The  manslayer  might  reach  the 
city  of  refuge,  and  after  all  be  con- 
demned. But  he  that  trusts  in  the  Lord 
shall  never  be  moved.  The  attributes 
of  God,  that  were  once  arrayed  against  ^ 
the  sinner,  are  now  converted  into  a 
canopy  for  his  defence. 

III.  Exultingly  acknowledged  (ver. 
6).  Here  is  a  burst  of  ck. ight,  like  the 
trumpets  of  jubilee  (Numb.  x.  10,xxix.  1). 
**  Sacrifices  of  shouting,"  a  stronger  form 
of  expression  than  the  usual  "sacrifices  of 
thanksgiving,"  and  equivalent  to  "  sacri- 
fices accompanied  with  the  loud  and  glad 
expression  of  thankfulness." — Perowne. 

Implies :  "^ 

1.  Manly  confidence,  ^^  And  now 
shall  my  head  he  lifted  up  above  mine 
enemies  round  about  me^^  "  Two  things 
make  the  head  hang  down — fear  and 
shame.  Hope  easeth  the  Christian's 
heart  of  both  these,  and  so  forbids  liim 
to  give  any  sign  of  a  desponding  mind 
by  a  dejected  countenance." — W.  Giir- 
nall  (cf.  Ps.  ex.  7 ;  Luke  xxi.  28). 
2.  Devout  gratitude.  "  Therefore  will 
I  offer  in  His  tabernacle  sacrifices  of 
joy."  This  indicates  the  peace-offering, 
which  was  expressive  of  fellowship  with 
God  (Lev.  iii.,  vii.).  Since  the  peril 
was  past,  since  the  joy  of  salvation  was 

131 


JfSALM  XlLVtL 


SOMILETW  commentary  :  PSAlMS, 


restored,  he  would  praise  God.  3.  Ex- 
ulting joy.  "7  will  sing;  yea,  I  will 
sing  praises  unto  the  Lord."  '*  Sing  and 
celebrate."  The  latter  verb  intimates 
the     accompaniment    of     instrumental 


music  in  the  worship  of  God.  David 
does  not  speak  of  jubilations  in  his 
palace  or  feastings  in  his  banqueting- 
hall,  but  of  songs  of  praise  in  the  house 
of  God. 


Prayer  for  a  Time  op  Need. 
{Verses  1-12.) 


There  are  lights  and  shadows  in  the 
Christian  life.  We  see  this  here.  "  The 
triumphant  strain  of  confidence  now 
gives  way  to  one  of  sad  and  earnest 
entreaty.  Is  it  (as  Calvin)  that  the 
Psalmist  sought  in  the  former  part  of 
the  psalm  to  comfort  himself  with  the 
review  of  God's  unfailing  strength  and 
protection,  that  he  might  with  the  more 
reason  utter  his  prayer  for  help  1  Or  is 
it  not  rather,  that  even  while  he  is  thus 
strengthening  himself  in  his  God,  a 
sudden  blast  of  temptation  sweeps  over 
his  soul,  freezing  the  current  of  his 
life, — some  fear  lest  he  should  be  for- 
saken, some  thought  of  the  craft  and 
malice  of  his  enemies, — till  now  the 
danger  which  threatens  him  is  as  pro- 
minent an  object  as  the  salvation  and 
defence  were  before  ?" — Perowne.  This 
prayer  is  characterised  by — 

I.  Deep  humility  and  earnestness 
(ver.  7).  Here  there  is  utter  self-abandon- 
ment. The  Psalmist  casts  himself,  sin- 
ner as  he  is,  upon  the  mercy  of  God. 
His  "cry '*  finds  vent  by  the  "voice." 
This  gives  the  more  reality  and  force  to 
the  prayer.  The  craving  to  be  heard  is 
intense.  How  eagerly  do  we  wait  for 
the  reply  from  a  friend  to  an  important 
letter  !  So  should  we  watch  for  God's 
answer  to  our  prayers.  *'  Mercy  "  is  the 
hope  of  sinners  and  the  joy  of  saints. 

II.  Christ-like  trust  in  God's  word 
(ver.  8).  "  The  words.  Seek  ye  My  face, 
are  the  words  of  God,  which  the  ser- 
vant of  God  here,  as  it  were,  takes  from 
His  mouth,  that  so  laying  them  before 
God,  he  may  make  his  appeal  the  more 
irresistible.  Thou  hast  said.  Seek  ye  My 
face.  My  heart  makes  these  v/ords  its 
own,  and  builds  upon  them  its  resolve. 
It  takes  them  up  and  repeats  them, 
'  Seek  ye  my  face,'  It  first  claims 
thus  thine  own  gracious  words,  O  Lord, 

132 


and  then  its  echo  to  those  words  is,  *  Thy 
face,  Lord,  I  will  seek.*  Such  is  the 
soul's  dialogue  with  itself  when  it  would 
comfort  itself  in  God." — Perowne.  True 
obedience  is  prompt,  hearty,  and  unre- 
served. Not  truer  is  the  answer  of 
chord  to  chord,  not  readier  is  the  re- 
sponse of  the  echo  to  the  voice,  than  the 
reply  of  the  heart  to  the  call  of  God. 

III.  Grateful  recognition  of  God's 
favour  (ver.  9).  The  face  of  God  means 
His  favour  (Ps.  xxxi.  16,  cxix.  68).  To 
hide  the  face  indicates  disapproval  and 
estrangement  (Ps.  Iv.  1 ;  Isa.  liii.  3,  lix.  2 ; 
Jer.  xxxiii.  5).  To  put  away  a  servant 
in  wrath  expresses  the  highest  dissatis- 
faction and  displeasure.  David  felt 
that  to  be  thus  treated  by  God  would 
be  the  most  terrible  calamity.  Hence 
his  earnest  prayer.  He  was  God's 
servant,  and  he  could  not  live  without 
the  sunshine  of  His  love.  The  remem- 
brance of  past  joys  and  favours  made 
him  the  more  bold.  *'  Thou  hast  been 
my  help.*^  One  act  of  mercy  engages 
God  to  do  another.  Urgent  pleading 
rises  to  full  confidence.  ''  Leave  me  not, 
neither  forsake  me,  0  God  of  my  salva- 
tionJ^  God's  people  may  learn  here  to 
deprecate  desertion,  'plead  experience,  ex- 
pect deliverance. 

IV.  Steadfast  reliance  upon  God's 
faithfulness  amidst  the  failure  of 
earthly  comforts  (ver.  10).  During  the 
persecution  of  Saul,  David  committed 
his  parents  to  the  care  of  the  king  of 
Moab  (1  Sam.  xxii.  3,  4).  We  do  not 
hear  of  them  again.  Sooner  or  later, 
children  and  parents  must  be  separated. 
As  there  is  no  greater  earthly  comfort 
than  the  love  of  father  and  mother,  so 
there  is  no  greater  earthly  calamity  than 
their  loss.  (Moses,  Exod.  ii.  6-9 ;  Ish- 
mael.  Gen.  xxi.;  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  8, 19.)  But 
in  such  a  crisis,  God  will  not  fail  (Isa. 


BOM  1  LET  to  COMMENTARY:  PSAlMS. 


PSALM  XXVIIL 


xlix.  15).  We  may  rely  upon  God  in 
the  greatest  extremities  (Ps.  cxliii.  42; 
Tim.  iv.  10).  Remember  the  words  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  ''I  will  not  leave  you 
orphans"  (John  xiv.  18). 

V.  Practical  submission  to  God's 
will  is  the  truest  safety  (ver.  11,  12). 
From  weakness  within  and  trials  with- 
out, we  are  in  constant  danger  of  going 
astray  (Jer.  x.  23).  In  dealing  with 
Absalom,  David  felt  that  he  might  err 
on  the  side  of  mildness  or  of  severity. 
So  at  other  times.  God's  way  is  always 
the  best  way.  Here  it  is  described, 
commanded,  and  sought  after.  It  is 
right:  "Thy  way."  It  is  pleasant: 
"  Plain  path."  It  is  safe.  Here  it  is 
not  the  will  of  the  ungodly,  but  the 
holy,  loving  will  of  God  that  is  regnant 
(ver.  12). 

VI.  Encouraging  self  admonition  to 
hope  in  God  for  ever  (ver.  13,  14)  The 
psalmist  communes  with  himself.  The 
words  are  the  broken  utterance  of  deep 
feeling  {cf.  Gen.  xxxi.  42 ;  Exod.  xxxii. 
32).     Here  we  see  the  weakness  of  the 


soul.  "  I  had  fainted."  Whenever  we 
lose  sight  of  "the  goodness  of  the 
Lord,''  we  grow  weak.  Faith,  hope, 
and  love,  are  ready  to  fail.  TJie  strength 
of  the  soul.  "  Unless  I  had  believed," 
— "a  cordial  made  up  of  three  sove- 
reign ingredients — a  hope  to  see,  and  to 
see  the  goodness  of  God;  and  the  good- 
ness of  God  in  the  land  of  the  living.'" — 
jSir  R.  BaTcer.  "  Look  unto  me  and  be 
ye  saved."  Inspired  with  new  courage, 
the  believer  consecrates  himself  afresh  to 
God.  "  There  is  no  more  dignified 
species  of  worship  to  be  found  than 
that  of  exemplifying  our  faith  in  the 
omnipotence  and  wisdom  of  God,  by 
humble  and  joyous  perseverance  under 
the  greatest  difficulties." — Tholuck.  The 
great  lesson  of  the  psalm  comes  out 
at  the  close,  "  Wait.,  I  say,  on  the 
Lord:' 

"  Devote  yourself  to  God,  and  you  will  find 
God  fights  the  battles  of  a  will  resigned  ; 
Love  Jesus  !  love  will  no  base  fear  endure, 
Love  Jeaus  !  and  of  conquest  rest  secure." 

— Bishop  Kbbr. 


PSALM    XXVIIL 
Introduction. 

Hitzig  and  others  have  assigned  this  psalm  to  Jeremiah,  but  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any 
sufficient  reason  for  questioning  the  traditional  title  which  gives  it  to  David.  It  may  have 
been  composed  before  he  became  king  in  Jerusalem,  or  at  the  time  of  Absalom's  rebellion.  It 
consists  of  two  divisions.  After  earnestly  entreating  audience  (ver.  1,  2),  the  psalmist  prays 
that  he  may  not  be  confounded  with  the  wicked  in  their  just  punishment  (vers.  3-5).  He 
then  gives  thanks  for  anticipated  deliverance,  and  ends  with  a  catholic  prayer  for  the  blessmg 
of  God  upon  all  His  people  (vers.  6-9).  There  are  points  of  resemblance  between  this  psalm 
and  the  two  preceding. 

The  Instincts  of  the  Heart. 


This  psalm  may  be  held  to  express 
the  deepest  feelings  of  the  heart. 

I.  The  sense  of  dependence  upon 
God  (ver.  1).  This  "cry"  is  common. 
It  expresses  dependence.  It  is  founded 
on  the  relation  of  the  soul  to  God.  The 
creature  cries  to  the  Creator,  the  sub- 
ject cries  to  the  sovereign,  the  sinner 
cries  to  the  Saviour.  In  want  and  peril ; 
when  burdened  with  sorrow,  and  when 
bowed  to  the  dust  under  the  sense  of 
sin  and  tlie  fear  of  death,  the  soul  in- 
stinctively turns  to  God  for  relief. 

*'  My  Kock  "  {cf  Ps.  xviii.  2,  xxxi.  2, 
xlil  9).     There  is  everything  in  God  to 


meet  the  needs  of  His  people.  If 
they  are  weak,  with  Him  is  everlasting 
strength.  If  all  things  **  under  the 
sun  "  are  liable  to  change,  He  is  "  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
How  sweet  it  is  to  say  unto  God  "wy 
Rock."  This  gives  confidence  in  life 
and  in  death.  Said  a  dying  saint  (the 
Rev.  John  Rees),  ''  Christ  in  His  person, 
Christ  in  the  love  of  His  lieart,  and 
Christ  in  the  power  of  His  arm,  is  the 
rock  on  which  I  rest ;  and  now "  (re- 
clining his  liead  gently  on  the  pillow), 
''Death,  strike." 

II.  Craving  for  fellowship  with  God. 

133 


PSALM  XXVIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


The  more  we  love  a  friend,  the  more 
strongly  we  seek  his  presence,  and  the 
more  deeply  do  we  deplore  his  estrange- 
ment and  silence. 

Here,  1.  God's  silence  is  deprecated  as 
the  greatest  evil.  Many  feel  no  concern 
whether  their  prayers  are  heard  or  not. 
Mere  formalists.  Not  so  the  psalmist. 
For  God  to  be  silent  to  him,  was  terrible. 
It  left  him  without  resource  and  hope ; 
it  seemed  the  closing  in  upon  him  of 
the  *'  blackness  of  darkness,"  of  the  grave 
or  of  hell.  He  shrinks  from  such  a 
doom,  as  an  unspeakable  horror.  Hence 
his  passionate  cry,  "  Be  not  silent  to  me," 
&c.  ("the  pit"  cf.  Ps.  xxii.  29,  xxx.  3, 
Isa.  xiv.  19,  Ezek.  xxvi.  20).  2.  God's 
fellowship  sought  as  the  greatest  good  (ver. 
2).  Humhly.  The  lifting  up  of  the  hands 
is  the  symbolism  of  prayer  (Ex.  ix.  29,  1 
Kings  viii.  22).  It  expresses  the  desire 
of  the  humble,  the  reaching  forth  of 
the  heart  to  God.  Earnestly.  "The 
earnestness  of  the  cry  is  to  be  measured, 
not  only  by  the  greatness  of  the  peril 
which  is  threatened,  but  by  the  faith 
which  cleaves  to  God,  knowing  that  in 
Him  only  is  there  help." — Perowne. 
"  When  I  cry,"  that  is  now,  at  once, 
wliile  I  am  speaking.  Importunately. 
It  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death.  "  Sup- 
plications." This  word,  being  in  the 
plural,  shows  the  persistence  and  con- 
stancy of  the  good  in  prayer.  Through 
faith  in  the  mercy  of  God.  "  Holy 
Oracle,"  "This  is  the  Holy  of  Holies, 
where  the  mercy-seat  stood  ; "  for  the 
"  Oracle  "  is,  in  Hebrew,  the  spot  where 
Jehovah  spoke  to  men,  referring  pro- 
bably to  His  promise  in  Exodus  xxv.  22, 
"  There  will  I  meet  thee,  and  commune 
with  thee." — Bonar.  "  To  this,  as  the 
depositary  of  the  ark  and  the  earthly  re- 
sidence of  God,  the  ancient  saints  looked, 
as  we  look  now  to  Christ,  in  whom 
the  idea  of  the  Mosaic  sanctuary  has 
been  realised." — Alexander.  "We  stretch 
out  eni[)ty  hands,  for  we  are  beggars; 
we  lift  them  up,  for  we  seek  heavenly 
supplies ;  we  lift  them  towards  the  mercy- 
seat  of  Jesus,  for  there  our  expectation 
dwells." — Spurgeon.  God's  fellowship  is 
the  life  and  joy  of  the  soul.  We  want, 
not  so  much  what  He  gives,  as  Himself. 
III.  Confidence  in  the  eternal  justice 
134 


of  God.  This  world  is  not  left  to 
chance,  or  blind  fate,  or  mere  arbitrary 
will.  It  is  governed  by  a  power  that 
maketh  for  righteousness.  This  has 
been  the  faith  of  the  good  in  all  ages. 

**  If  this  fail, 
The  pillared  firmament  is  rottenness, 
And  earth's  base  built  on  stubble." — Milton. 

Hence,  there  is  room  for  prayer  (vers. 
3-6).  First,  deliverance  is  sought  from 
the  doom  of  the  wicked.  "Draw  me  not 
away,"  i.e.,  to  destruction  with  them  (Ex. 
xxxii.  20 ;  Job.  xxiv.  22  ;  Ps.  xxvi.  9). 
"The  wicked,  the  workers  of  iniquity, 
and  the  deceivers,  are  three  terms  for 
the  unrighteous,  referring  to  the  heart, 
the  hand,  and  the  tongue." — Murphy. 
The  good  man  shrinks  from  such  com- 
pany. He  appeals  confidently  to  God, 
not  to  confound  the  just  with  the  un- 
just. Next,  Retribution  is  craved  (ver. 
4).  This  implies  their  obstinate  impeni- 
tency.  Keason,  conscience,  and  revela- 
tion proclaim  that  for  such  there  can  be 
no  escape.  There  may  be  delay,  there 
may  be  seeming  inequality  and  failure, 
but  retribution  must  come  in  the  end, 
to  the  uttermost.  The  faith  of  the 
psalmist  rises  to  prophetic  certainty. 
There  is  nothing  of  mere  human  passion 
and  animosity.  "  The  reason  why  God's 
judgments  should  overtake  the  wicked, 
is  not  their  malice  against  the  psalmist, 
but  their  disregard  of  the  Most  High." — 
Peroione. 

IV.  Gratitude  for  the  Goodness  of 
God.  Prayer  leads  to  praise.  The  full 
heart  bursts  into  song.  "  Blessed  be 
the  Lord  ! "  For  answered  prayers  (ver. 
6).  Perhaps  the  very  thing  asked  was 
granted,  or  something  better  given  in- 
stead. Answered  prayers  demand  ac- 
knowledgment. For  assistance  in  time 
of  need  (ver.  7).  "  My  strength,"  in- 
ternal. "My  shield,"  external.  The 
former  includes  all  needful  grace  to  en- 
lighten, renew,  and  sanctify.  The  latter 
implies  help  and  defence  against  every 
foe.  How  complete  is  the  security  of 
the  people  of  God  ! 

For  assurance  of  hope.  "The  cer- 
tainty that  prayer  is  heard  anticipates 
visible  fulfilment." — Perowne.  "  My 
heart    trusteth    in    Him."      This   flows 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXIX. 


from  the  "strength,"  and  wins  the 
"  shield."  Twice  over  he  says  *'  my 
heart,"  not  only  showing  the  sincerity, 
but  the  strength  and  intensity  of  his 
gratitude,  "  With  (lit.  *  out  of  *)  my 
song,"  the  song  being,  as  it  were,  the 
source  and  the  occasion  of  his  praise 
(Ps.  xxii.  25).  "  He  who  enjoys  aught 
without  thanksgiving,  is  as  though  he 
robbed  God." — Talmud. 

V,  Exulting  Joy  in  the  Saving 
Strength  of  God  (ver.  8).  Every  be^ 
liever  is,  like  Paul,  "a  pattern."  What 
God  does  for  one.  He  is  able  to  do  for 
all.  The  attention  is  fixed  upon  Him 
as  an  Almighty  and  All-Merciful  Sa- 
viour. "The  Lord  is  their  strength," 
i,e.f  of  yonder  ones,  of  such  as  possess 
the  character  already  described  {cf.  Ps. 
cxix.  9-II,  Isa.  xxxiii.  2). 

*'  He  is  the  saving  strength  of  His 
anointed."  "First  the  people,  then  Him- 
self their  monarch,  but  not  David  the 
man,  but  David  the  king  as  anointed  of 
God,  and  chosen  to  feed  His  people." — 
Perowne.  Strength  that  is  rightly  used, 
to  help  and  not  to  oppress,  to  save  and 
not  to  destroy,  commands  admiration. 
Here  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel.  It  is 
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  Christ 
came  not  to  condemn  the  world,  but 
that  the  world  through  Him  might  be 
saved.  "  Let  the  children  of  Zion  be 
joyful  in  their  king." 


VL  Trust  in  the  ultimate  triumph 
and  blessedness  of  God's  people  (ver. 
9).  "  It  is  impossible  not  to  see,  in 
these  tender  loving  words,  *  feed  them, 
and  bear  them,'  the  heart  of  the  Shep- 
herd-King. Feed  them,  O  Thou  true 
Shepherd  of  Israel  (Ps.  Ixxx.  1);  bear 
them,  carry  them  in  Thine  arms  (L«a. 
Ixiii.  9,  xl.  11).  Perhaps  the  reference 
may  be  to  Deut.  i.  31,  xxxii.  11." — 
Perowne. 

Mark,  as  to  the  good.  1.  Their 
character.     "  Thy  people." 

2.  Their  privilege.  "Thine  inheri- 
tance" (Deut.  iv.  20;  Eph.  i.  16). 

3.  Their  destiny.  "  Save  "  from  sin. 
"  Bless  "  with  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness. "  Feed "  with  the  bread  of  life. 
"  Lift "  with  the  arm  of  the  Lord  to 
the  dignity  and  blessedness  of  heaven. 
This  prayer  breathes  throughout  the 
most  Catholic  spirit.  It  is  akin  to  that 
of  Paul  (Eph.  iii.  14-19). 

This  prayer  expresses  also  the  most 
delightful  confidence.  It  looks  to  the 
future  with  hope.  It  sees  a  good  time 
coming,  and  is  glad,  with  foretaste  of 
the  joy.  What  an  inspiration  to  all 
who  pray  and  work. 

"  Ah  !  when  shall  all  men's  good 
Be  each  man's  rule,  and  universal  peace 
Lie  like  a  shaft  of  light  across  the  land, 
And  like  a  lane  of  beams  athwart  the  sea, 
Thro*  all  the  circle  of  the  golden  year." 

— Tennyton. 


PSALM   XXIX* 

Introduction. 

**  This  psalm  !■  a  magnificent  description  of  a  thunder-storm.     Its  mighty  march  from 

north  to  south,  the  desolation  and  terror  which  it  causes,  the  peal  of  thunder,  the  flash  of  the 
lightning,  even  the  gathering  fury  and  lull  of  the  elements,  are  vividly  depicted.  The  psalm 
consists  of  five  parts :  a  prelude,  the  body  of  the  poem  in  three  divisions,  and  a  conclusion. 
The  structure  ('first  fully  explained  by  Ewald')  of  the  whole  is  highly  artificial,  and  elaborated 
with  a  symmetry  of  which  no  more  perfect  specimen  exists  in  Hebrew.  But  this  evidently 
artificial  mode  of  composition  is  no  check  to  the  force  and  fire  of  the  poet's  genius,  which 
kindles  and  glows,  and  sweeps  along  with  all  the  freedom  and  majesty  of  the  storm  ;  the  whole 
psalm  being  one  continued  strain  of  triumphant  exultation.  I.  In  the  prelude,  the  singer  lifts 
our  thoughts  at  once  from  earth  to  heaven,  by  calling  on  the  anp^els,  who  stand  around  the 
throne  of  God,  to  praise  Him  who  manifests  His  glory  in  the  thunder  and  lightning  which  He 
sends  upon  the  earth  (vers.  1,  2).     II.  Then  follows  the  description  of  the  storm  in  the  three 


•  Note. — Thunder  is  extremely  rare  in 
Palestine  during  summer.  Hence  the  miracle 
wroughtby  Samuel  at  the  time  of  wheat-harvest 
must  have  made  the  greater  impression  on  the 
people  (1  Sam.  xii.  17,  18).  Thunder  is  c:illed 
"the  voice  of  God"  {cf.  Job  xxxvii.  2  ;  xl.  9, 


Ps.  xviii.  13,  Isa.  xxx.  31).  It  is  the  symbol 
of  the  Divine  power  and  vengeance  (1  Sam.  ii. 
10  ;  vii.  10  ;  2  Sam.  xxii.  14  ;  Ex.  ix.  28).  On 
occasions  when  God  has  specially  intimated 
His  presence,  there  have  been  accompaniments 
of  thimder  {cf.  Sinai,  Ex.  xix.  16,  and  Heb. 

135 


PSALM  XXIX. 


HOMtLEfiC  COMMENTARY  :  PSALMS, 


strophes  which  constitute  the  main  body  of  the  poem.     These  are  so  constructed,  that  the  first 

(vers.  3,  4)  gives  us  the  lieginning  of  the  storm,  the  low,  faint  muttering  thunder  in  the  dis- 
tant heavens  ;  the  next  (ver  5-7)  describes  tlie  storm  at  its  height,  when  it  crashes  the  cedars 
and  shakes  the  mountains ;  the  last  (vers.  8,  9)  tells  how  it  passes  on  over  the  plain-country  to  the 
forest  of  Kadesh,  where  it  dies  away.  III.  The  conclusion  consists,  like  the  prelude,  of  two 
verses,  each  of  two  members.  And  here  we  are  beautifully  reminded  that  Jehovah,  whom  the 
angels  praise,  and  who  both  rules  and  stills  the  elements  in  their  wildest  uproar,  is  the  same 
Jehovah  who  gives  strength  and  ^eace  to  His  people  "  (vers.  10,  11). — Perowne. 


(  Verses 

If  Psalm  viii.  should  be  read  at  night, 
when  the  sky  is  bright  with  stars,  and 
Psalm  xix.  by  day,  when  the  sun  is  liigh 
ill  the  heavens,  this  ought  to  be  studied 
during  the  gloom  of  the  tempest,  when 
the  thunder  rolls,  and  the  lightnings 
flash,  and  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  are  on 
every  side.  It  is  then  we  can  best  rea- 
lise its  grandeur  and  beauty,  and  feel 
its  ])Ower  to  bring  us  nearer  God  (vers. 
1,  2).  First,  the  psalmist  would  raise 
us  to  the  true  stand-point,  that  side  by 
side  with  the  angels,  "the  godlike  ones,'* 
"  the  sons  of  the  mighty,"  and  inspired 
like  them  with  holy  love  and  joy,  we 
may  sing  Jehovah's  praise  : 

**  Give  unto  the  Lord,  ye  sons  of  the  mighty, 
Give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength  ; 
Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  of  His  name, 
Bow  down  to  the  Lord  in  the   beauty  of 
holiness. " 

^'  In  the  beauty  of  holiness."  This  is 
rendered  in  the  margin  of  our  Bibles, 
"  In  His  glorious  sanctuary,"  others 
translate,  *'in  holy  attire,"  "in  the 
vestments  of  the  sanctuary,"  "  in  the 
beautiful  robes  of  the  priesthood." 
True  holiness  is  of  the  soul.  All  things 
outwardly  beautiful  are  but  types  of  the 


xii.  1 8-24,  also  John  xii.  29,  and  Rev.  iv.  5, 
viii,  5,  &c.).  The  poets  of  all  lands  make  fre- 
quent reference  to  the  thunder.  There  is  a 
magnificent  description  of  a  thunder-storm  in 
Job  xxxvi.  27-xxxvii.  1-5,  which  maybe  com- 
pared with  that  in  this  psalm,  ^schylus, 
Virgil,  and  Lucretius  (book  vi.)  among  the 
ancients,  and  Milton,  Klopstock,  and  others 
amoJig  the  moderns,  have  passages  of  great 
sublimity  and  beauty,  describing  thunder- 
storms. The  following  extracts  are  from 
.^schylus  and  Milton  : 

*'  I  feel  in  very  deed 
The  firm  earth  rock  ;  the  thunder's  deepening 

roar 
Rolls    with    redoubled    rage  ;    the    bickering 

flames 
Flash  thick  ;   the  eddying  sands  are  whirl'd 

on  high  ; 
In  dreadful  opposition,  the  wild  winds 

136 


1-11.) 

beautiful  in  soul.  The  meaning  seems 
to  be  that  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth, 
God  should  be  worshipped  in  the  beauty 
of  holiness.  Standing  with  the  psal- 
mist, as  it  were,  on  the  heights  of  Zion, 
let  us  watch  the  tempest,  and  let  our 
hearts  answer  as  he  calls  us. 

I.  To  hear  the  voice  of  God  in  the 
thunder-storm  (ver.  3).  "  The  voice 
of  the  Lord."  This  was  heard  in  the 
garden  (Gen.  iii.  8)  calling  Adam  ;  on 
Mount  Sinai  (Deut.  iv.  12,  v.  22)  pro- 
claiming the  ten  commandments  ;  by 
the  prophets  (Isa.  vi.  8,  Jer.  xxvi.  13) 
announcing  the  invitations  and  warnings 
of  the  gospel;  and  in  the  thuiiderings 
with  which  the  mountains  tremble  (1 
Sam.  vii.  10).  The  inspired  writers  see 
a  unity  in  things,  and  discern  the  voice 
of  God  in  the  sounds  of  inanimate 
nature,  as  well  as  in  the  articulate  words 
of  human  speech.  In  the  present  pas- 
sage, the  voice  of  the  thunder  is  men- 
tioned seven  times  (Rev.  x.  3),  which 
points  to  its  sacred  nature,  and  heavenly 
source." — Murphy/.  Reason  and  reve- 
lation agree  in  their  teachings.  The 
cold  scientist  may  see  nothing  in  the 
thunder-storm   but  law  and  force,  and 


Rend  the  vexed  air ;    the  boisterous  billows 

rise. 
Confounding  earth  and   sky,  the   impetuous 

storm 
Rolls  all  its  terrible  fury." — Trans,  by  Potter. 

"  Either  tropic  now 
'Gan  thunder,  and  both  ends  of  heaven,  the 

clouds 
From  many  a  horrid  rift  abortive  pour'd 
Fierce  rain,  with  lightning  mix'd,  water  with 

fire, 
In  ruin  reconcil'd ;  nor  slept  the  winds 
Within  their  stony  caves,  but  rush'd  abroad 
From  the  four  hinges  of  the  world,  and  fell 
On  the  vex'd  wilderness,  whose  tallest  pines, 
Though  rooted  deep  as  high, and  sturdiest  oaks, 
Bow'd  their  stifif  necks,  laden   with   stormy 

blasts, 
Or  torn  up  sheer. " 

— Paradise  /Regained,  "book  iv. 


aOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXIX. 


the  trembling  savage  may  behold  only 
a  dreadful  power  which  he  cannot  com- 
prehend ;  but  the  Hebrew  poet  teaches 
us  to  recognise  the  presence  and  work- 
ing of  Jehovah.  What  is  law,  but  His 
will ;  what  is  force,  but  His  strength  ; 
what  are  all  the  phenomena  of  na- 
ture, but  manifestations  of  His  glory, 
A  voice  implies  a  speaker,  and  inter- 
prets to  us  his  thought.  Nature  is 
to  us  the  voice  of  God,  and  interprets 
to  us  His  thoughts.  We  should  think 
of  Him  as  present  not  only  representa- 
tively or  infiuentially,  but  personally, 
and  s[)eaking  to  us,  as  truly  by  His 
works,  as  by  His  Word. 

II.  To  adore  the  glory  of  God  in  the 
thunder-storm  (vers.  3-9).  Realising 
the  presence  of  God,  we  are  called  to 
behold  His  strength  and  glory  as  re- 
flected in  the  tempest.  The  description, 
though  artificial,  is  in  the  highest  degree 
vivid  and  powerful. 

"  i.  In  the  first  strophe,  we  hear  the 
first  yet  distant  sound  of  the  thunder 
in  the  words,  '  The  voice  of  Jehovah  is 
upon  the  waters.'  In  the  next  two 
clauses,  '  The  God  of  glory  thundereth  : 
Jehovah  is  upon  many  waters,'  the  long, 
loud  peal  grows  more  distinct ;  whilst  in 
ver.  4.,  again,  it  is  pitched  in  a  lower  key, 
as  if  telling  us  of  a  pause  in  the  storm. 

*'ii.  In  the  next  strophe,  we  have  again 
(a)  first,  the  renewed  fury  of  the  tem- 
peist,  as  coming  nearer  yet,  it  falls  on  the 
glory  of  Lebanon,  and  breaks  her  cedars 
in  its  might.  *  The  voice  of  Jehovah 
breaketh  the  cedars,'  &c.  (b)  Next, 
gathering,  with  a  wilder  intensity  of 
wrath,  it  bursts  upon  the  mountain 
peaks,  roaring  amid  their  rocks,  and 
shattering  them  ;  and  making  the  ever- 
lasting hills  themselves  to  tremble  as  if 
with  the  throes  of  an  earthquake,  so 
that  '  Lebanon  and  Sirion  skip  like 
young  buffaloes.'  (c)  Lastly,  we  hear 
it  sinking  down  in  the  line  which  de- 
scribes the  flashing  of  the  forked  light- 
ning :  '  The  voice  of  Jehovah  cleaveth 
the  flames  of  fire'  (vers.  6-7). 

"  iii.  Again,  the  same  structure  is  ob- 
servable. One  long  peal  after  another 
h;is  rolled  and  reverberated  along  the 
sky,  and  now  the  storm,  in  its  jubilant 
strength,   sweeps  the   whole  land  from 


north  to  south,  (a)  Again,  it  is  up  in 
its  majesty :  '  The  voice  of  Jehovah 
maketh  the  wilderness  to  tremble.'  (b) 
Again,  its  last  fury  is  poured  out  upon 
the  wilderness  of  Kadesh.  The  very 
hinds  bow  themselves  in  travail  pangs, 
and  the  forest  is  torn  open  and  laid  bare, 
as  the  hurricane  drives  through  it  in  its 
path,  (c)  And  again,  the  tempest  is 
stilled,  but  this  time  its  voice  is  hushed 
and  lost  for  ever  in  the  music  and  songs 
of  the  heavenly  host.  *  In  His  temple, 
all  that  are  therein  cry  Glory'  (vers.  8, 
9)." — Perowne. 

III.  To  confide  in  God  as  the  Al- 
mighty ruler  of  the  thunder-storm 
(vers.  10,  11).  The  tempest  has  fulfilled 
its  mission.  The  air  seems  purer,  and 
the  sun  shines  with  a  more  chastened 
radiance.  In  the  sweet  tranquillity  of 
the  scene,  the  psalmist  speaks  words  of 
instruction  and  comfort.  He  would 
strengthen  our  faith  and  hope  in  God. 
1.  We  are  taught  to  confide  in  God 
as  an  Almighty  King.  *'Sitteth"  in 
the  tranquillity  of  an  upright  and  Al- 
mighty Judge.  *'  Upon  the  flood,"  that 
overwhelmed  the  old  world,  and  rises 
and  surges  for  the  final  overthrow  of  the 
wicked  in  a  deluge,  not  of  water,  but  of 
fire  (2  Pet.  iii.  7-10).  "  Sitteth  King," 
to  defend  the  right  and  defeat  the 
wrong.  "  For  ever  !  "  The  dominion  that 
*'  has  no  beginning,  knows  no  end." — 
Murphy. 

2.  As  blessing  His  people  with  strength 
and  peace.  '*  These  are  -the  two  great 
blessings  of  salvation.  '  His  people,' 
who  are  born  of  God,  receive  from  Him 
the  inheritance  of  sons,  and  are  for  ever 
distino-uished  from  that  wicked  world 
that  rejects  the  offers  of  His  grace,  and 
reaps  the  vengeance  of  everlasting  de- 
struction."— Murphy.  '*  Very  beautiful 
is  the  conclusion  of  the  psalm.  If,  in 
His  heavenly  temple  above,  all  that  are 
therein  ascribe  'glory'  to  God,  upon 
earth,  too.  He  has  manifested  His  glory. 
He  sat  as  king  wheH  He  sent  the  flood 
of  water  to  destroy  the  earth.  He  sits 
now,  and  for  ever  will  sit,  as  king.  As 
then  He  saved  the  righteous  man  from 
death,  so  now  He  watches  over  His 
people,  for  Jehovah  is  the  God  of  Israel. 
It  was  He  who,  when  the  storm  waxed 

137 


fSALM  XXX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


strong,  gave  it  its  strength  •  it  was  He 
who,  when  it  was  hushed,  spread  over 
eartli,  and  sea,  and  sky,  the  sweet 
Sabbath  stiUness  of  peace.  And  He 
whose  almighty  power  was  seen  in  the 
inarch  of  the  tempest,  whose  voice  was 
heard  in  its  wildest  uproar,  and  whose 
word  stilled  its  fiercest  war,    shall  He 


not  give  both  strength  and  peace  ?  Yea, 
Jehovah,  who  is  strong  and  mighty, 
will  give  His  own  strength  to  His 
people.  And  He  who  is  the  Prince  of 
Peace,  will  bless  His  people  with  peace. 
Thus  the  psalm  begins,  as  Delitzch  says, 
with  a  gloria  in  excelsis,  and  ends  with 
a  pax  in  iorrit" — Ferowne. 


Nature  God's  Temple. 


I.  Built  by  His  hand  (ver.  9).  *'  I 
asked  the  earth,  and  it  said,  *  I  am  not 
He,'  and  all  that  is  upon  it  made  the 
same  confession.  I  asked  the  sun,  and 
the  depths,  and  the  creeping  things  that 
have  life,  and  they  answered,  'We  are 
not  thy  God ;  look  thou  above  us.'  I 
asked  the  breezes  and  the  gales ;  and 
the  whole  air  with  its  inhabitants  said 
to  me,  '  Anaximenes  is  in  error,  I  am 
not  God.'  I  asked  the  heaven,  the  sun, 
the  moon,  the  stars,  *We  too,'  said 
they,  '  are  not  the  God  whom  thou 
seekest.'  And  I  said  to  all  the  creatures 
that  surround  the  doors  of  my  fleshly 
senses,  '  Ye  have  said  to  me,  of  my  God, 
that  ye  are  not  He  ;  tell  me  somewhat 
of  Him."  And  with  a  great  voice,  they 
exclaimed,  *  He  made  us.'" — Augustine 
(Conf.  10,  6).  "  Every  house  is  builded 
by  some  man,  but  he  that  built  all 
things  is  God"  (Heb.  iii.  4). 

II.  Hallowed  by  His  presence. 
Nature  is  nt)t  an  empty  framework — 
a  house  without  an  inhabitant — a  temple 
without  a  God.  "  I  had  rather  believe 
all  the  fables  in  the  Legend,  and  the 
Talmud,  and  the  Alcoran,  than  that  this 
universal  frame  is  without  a  mind." — 
Bacon.  God  is  everywhere,  and  to  the 
eye  of  faith  He  is  ever  revealing  more 
and  more  of  His  glory.  "  How  precious 
are  Thy  thoughts  to  me,  O  Lord  "  (Ps. 


cxxxix.  17).  He  who  cannot  find  God  in 
His  works,  is  likely  to  miss  Him  in  His 
Word.  He  who  does  not  regard  earth 
as  sacred,  is  in  danger  of  treating  heaven 
as  profane. 

"  The  men, 
Whom  nature's  works  can  charm,  with  God 

Himself 
Hold  converse  ;  grow  familiar  day  by  day 
With  his  conceptions  ;  act  upon  His  plan. 
And  form  to  His,  the  relish  of  their  souls. " 

III.  Consecrated  to  His  worship 
(ver.  9).  This  implies  worshippers. 
Though  nature  reveals  God,  what 
boots  it,  if  there  were  none  to  "  speak 
of  His  glory."  The  devout  soul  turns 
to  nature  as  to  a  temple. 

"  To  that  cathedral,  boundless  as  our  wonder, 
Whose  quenchless  lamps,  the  sun  and  moon 

supply  ; 
Its  choir  the   winds   and    waves,  its  organ 

thunder. 

Its  dome,  the  sky. 
There  amid  solitude  and  shade  I  wander 
Through  the  green  aisles  ;  and  stretched  upon 

the  sod, 
Awed  by  the  silence,  reverently  ponder 
The  ways  of  God." 

Learn : 

1.  The  sanctity  of  nature. 

2.  The  holy  uses  of  nature. 

3.  The  subordination  of  nature  to  Christ. 

**  Read  nature,  nature  is  a  friend  to  truth, 
Nature  is  Christian,  preaches  to  mankind, 
And  bids  dead  matter  aid  us  in  our  Creed." 

— Young, 


PSALM    XXX 

Introduction. 

"  This  psalm  was  composed  after  recovery  from  a  sickness  which  had  very  nearly  proved 
fatal.  The  singer  begins  with  an  inscription  of  praise  to  God  for  His  great  goodness,  and  calls 
upon  all  who,  like  himself,  had  known  the  loving-kindness  of  Jehovah,  to  join  him  in  his  thanks- 
giving. Thence  he  passes  (ver.  6.)  to  a  recital  of  his  own  experience,  his  pleading  with  God  in 
his  affliction,  and  Gud's  answer  to  his  prayer.  According  to  the  inscription,  the  psalm  was 
composed  "at  the  dedication  of  the  house."  But  what  house  ?  Some  would  understand  the 
dedication  of  the  spot  on  which  the  Temple  afterwards  stood,  and  which  David  purchased  of 
Araunah  (2  Sam.  xxiv, ;  1  Chron.  xxi).  Others  conjecture  that  by  '*  the  dedication  of  the  house, " 
138 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALlf  XXX. 


18  meant  a  purification  and  reconsecration  of  David's  palace  which  Absalom  had  defiled  (2  Sam. 
XX.  3).  But,  perhaps,  if  the  inscription  be  trustworthy,  it  refers  to  the  house  which  David 
uuilt  in  his  new  city  of  Zion,  and  the  building  of  which  he  seems  to  have  regarded  as  a  pledge 
v«r  the  security  and  i)rosperity  of  his  kingdom  (2  Sam.  v.  11,  12).  We  must,  however,  still 
suppose  that  he  had  sufi'ered  just  before  from  a,  sickness,  about  which  the  history  is  silent." — 
Perowne, 

Thoughts  on  Recovery  from  Sickness. 


I  God's  hand  in  sending  sickness 

(vers.  1-5).  Sickness  is  common.  No 
house  is  exempt,  no  age  safe  from  its 
ravages.  Sooner  or  later  it  comes  to  all. 
But  we  err,  if  we  think  it  a  chance,  or 
the  result  of  mere  second  causes.  The 
psalmist  saw  in  it  the  hand  of  God. 
"  Thou  hast  lifted  me  up  "  (as  a  backet 
from  a  well,  Ex.  ii.  16,  19).  How 
changed  is  sickness,  when  we  recognise 
that  it  is  sent  of  God.  He  does  not 
act  from  caprice  or  passion.  There  is  a 
"need  be"  (1  Pet.  i.  6).  It  is  in  love, 
and  for  our  good,  that  He  afflicts.  As 
Jesus  took  the  blind  man  whom  He 
was  about  to  heal  '*  aside  from  the 
multitude  "  (Mark  vii.  33),  so  He  takes 
His  people,  in  sickness,  aside  from  the 
din  and  bustle  of  the  world,  that  in 
quietness  and  in  solitude,  He  may 
speak  to  their  hearts. 

II.  God's  mercy  in  alleviating 
sickness  (ver.  1).  David  felt  that  his 
case  might  have  been  far  worse.  As 
we  learn  from  1  Chron.  xxi.  12,  he 
was  offered  his  choice  of  three  evils, — 
war,  famine,  or  pestilence.  He  shrank 
from  the  first.  His  brave  heart  could 
not  bear  the  shame  of  being  driven 
before  his  foes.  In  his  strait  he  left 
the  decision  with  God.  "  Let  me  fall 
now  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  for 
very  great  are  His  mercies."  Nor  was 
he  disai)pointed.  Though  cast  down, 
he  was  not  cast  off;  though  visited 
with  sore  affliction,  "  God  had  not 
made  his  enemies  to  rejoice  over  him." 
There  are  alleviations  in  every  sickness. 
In  wrath  God  remembers  mercy.  There 
is  restraining  mercy.  "  He  stayeth  His 
rough  wind  in  the  day  of  His  east  wind  " 
(Isa.  xxvii.  8;  cf.  Ezra  ix.  13  ;  Mai.  iii. 
1 7.  There  is  upholding  mercy.  Not  only 
is  life  spared,  and  the  grave  deprived  of 
its  prey,  but  inward  strength  is  given. 
Faith  is  confirmed  ;  foes  who  watched 
for  falls  and  prophesied  evil  are  disap- 
pointed.      There    is  comforting   mercy. 


Books  are  a  great  help;  the  love  of 
friends  is  a  great  solace.  How  differ- 
ent to  be  watched  by  the  kind  eyes, 
and  to  be  ministered  to  by  the  gentle 
hands  of  those  who  love  us,  than  to 
pine  in  solitude,  or  to  be  waited  upon 
by  strangers  and  hirelings  !  But,  above 
all,  there  are  the  comforts  of  religion. 
Baxter  said,  *'  I  have  pain,  there  is  no 
use  arguing  against  sense  ;  but  I  have 
peace,  /  have  peace  !  "  Samuel  Ruther- 
ford said  of  Jesus,  "  His  sweet  presence 
eateth  out  the  bitterness  of  sorrow." 

III.  God's  loving  kindness  in  re- 
storing from  sickness.  There  are 
many  who  have  no  sense  of  God's  mer- 
cies. They  may  have  stirrings  of  heart 
and  relentings  so  long  as  sickness 
lasts,  but  when  it  is  over  they  go  back 
to  their  old  ways ;  they  are  little,  if  at 
all,  altered  for  the  better  by  what  they 
have  gone  through.  God  is  not  in  all 
their  thoughts.  But  it  is  different  with 
true  believers.  Their  grateful  cry  is, 
"  Thou  hast  healed  me  "  (vers.  2,  3).  Here 
recovery  from  sickness  is  represented — 
1.  As  granted  in  answer  to  prayer.  Mark 
the  earnestness  and  faith  of  the  sup- 
plicant. He  cries  to  God  as  a  child  to 
his  father.  He  takes  hold  of  God's 
strength,  and  pleads  with  Him  as  his 
covenant  God.  "  O  Lord  my  God." 
Happy  sickness  that  drives  the  soul  to 
Jesus ! 

2.  As  effected  by  sovereign  love  (ver. 
3).  It  was  the  Lord's  doing.  Thrice 
does  David  say,  "  Thou  hast."  And  it 
was  all  of  grace,  and  not  for  any  de- 
serving on  his  part.  This  thought 
awakens  the  liveliest  gratitude  (Ps. 
cxvi.  1). 

3.  As  designed  for  the  holiest  ends 
(vers.  4,  5).  If  he  had  been  brought 
back,  as  from  the  brink  of  the  grave, 
and  his  strength  restored,  it  was  that 
he  niio;ht  consecrate  himself  anew  to 
God,  and  serve  Him  with  greater  love 
and  steadfastness  (Ps.  cxix.  67) :   "  Be- 

139 


PSALM  XXX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


fore  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray  ;  but 
now  have  I  kept  Thy  word "  (cf.  Isa. 
xxxviii.  17-19  ;  Heb.  xii.  7-11 ;  1  Pet. 
V.  10). 

Jeremy  Taylor  says  that  "  God  who 
hi  mercy  and  wisdom  governs  the 
world,    would   never   have    suffered    so 


many  sadnesses,  and  have  sent  them 
especially  to  the  most  virtuous  and 
the  wisest  men,  but  that  He  intends 
they  should  be  the  seminary  of  thought, 
the  nursery  of  virtue,  the  exercise  of 
wisdom,  the  trial  of  patience,  the  ventur- 
ing for  a  crown,  and  the  gate  of  glory." 


A  Song  to  the  Lord. 
(Verses  4,  5.) 


1.  The  Singers.  **  Ye  saints  of  His." 
*'  Beloved,"  more  literally,  "  who  have 
obtained  mercy  of  Him."  —  Ferowne. 
"His  gracious  ones."  —  Alexande?'. 
"  His  pious  ones." — Murphy.  "  David 
would  not  fill  his  choir  with  reprobates, 
but  with  sanctified  persons  who  could 
sing  from  their  hearts.  He  calls  to 
you,  ye  people  of  God,  because  ye  are 
saints ;  and  if  sinners  are  wickedly 
silent,  let  your  holiness  constrain  you 
to  sing.  You  are  His  saints,  chosen, 
blood-bought,  called,  and  set  apart  for 
God,  sanctified  on  purpose  that  you 
should  offer  the  daily  sacrifice  of  praise." 
- — Spurgeon, 

II.  The  Song.  Consider :  —  1.  The 
Theme  (ver.  4).  "  His  holiness."  "  His 
holy  name,"  literally,  "  His  holy  memo- 
rial," with  reference,  no  doubt,  to  the 
passage  in  Ex.  iii.  15:  "  This  is  My  name 
for  ever,  and  this  is  My  memorial  to  all 
generations."  "  God's  name  is  His  reve- 
lation of  Himself  in  all  His  various  attri- 
butes of  love,  wisdom,  power,  holiness, 
truth,  and  righteousness.  God's  memorial 
is  that  great  history  of  redemption  which 
was,  so  to  speak,  the  setting  up  of  a  monu- 
ment to  His  glory,  on  which  all  these 
attributes  were  inscribed." — Ferowne. 

2.  The  Spirit.  Devoutness.  "  Unto 
the  Lord."  Sociality.  "  Ye  saints." 
Gratitude.  "  Give  thanks."  Gratitude  is 
a  free  and  joyous  affection.  It  has  been 
well  called  the  memory  of  the  heart. 

"  *  Holy,  holy,  holy  ! '  is  the  song  of 
seraphim  and  cherubim  ;  let  us  join 
it,  not  dolefully,  as  though  we  trembled 
at  the  holiness  of  God,  but  cheerfully, 
as  humbly  rejoicing  in  it." — Spurgeon, 


uo 


3.  The  occasion  (ver.  5.,  cf.  1  Chron. 
xxi.  15).  The  plague  that  followed  the 
sin  of  numbering  the  people  had  brought 
David  very  low,  but  the  voice  that  said 
"  It  is  enough,"  lifted  him  and  his  up 
again.  The  night  of  death,  like  that  of 
Egypt,  had  filled  the  land  with  weeping, 
but  the  morning  of  mercy  ushered  in  a 
day  of  gratitude  and  joy  for  the  forgiven 
king  and  his  people  (ver.  5).  "A 
reason  why  God's  saints  should  praise 
Him,  because  He  manifests  Himself  to 
them  in  love,  not  in  wrath,  or  if  in 
wrath,  but  for  a  moment.  Love  rules 
over  all.  The  literal  rendering  of  the 
verse  is  :  '  For,  in  His  anger  is  (but)  a 
moment,  in  His  favour  a  life ;  in  the 
evening,  weeping  may  come  in  to  pass 
the  night ;  but  with  the  morning  (there 
is)  a  shout  of  joy.'  The  parallelism  is 
carefully  preserved  in  each  member, 
'anger,  favour;'  'a  moment,  a  life;' 
'evening,  morning;'  'weeping,  joy.' 
We  must  not  repeat  the  verb  '  pass  the 
night '  with  the  second  clause.  Weep- 
ing is  described  in  the  first  under  the 
image  of  a  wayfarer  who  comes  in  at 
evening  to  lodge  for  the  night.  The 
suddenness  and  surprise  of  gladness,  on 
the  other  hand,  in  the  morning,  are 
beautifully  represented  by  the  simple 
nH)1  1p3.7   'at  dawn,  a  shout  of  joy,' 

with  out  a  verb.  Just  as  the  sun  in  Eastern 
lands,  withoutany  longpreludeo  ftwilight 
to  announce  his  coming,  leaps  in,  as  it 
were,  in  a  moment,  above  the  horizon,  so 
does  the  light  of  God's  love  dispel  in  a 
moment  the  long  night  and  darkness  of 
sorrow.  See  the  beautiful  parallel  (Isa. 
liv.  7,  8y\— Ferowne. 


1 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


FSALMXXX. 


Links  in  the  Chain  op  Life. 
{Verses  ^-\2.) 


I.  Prosperity  and  presumption  (ver. 
6).  The  pronoun  is  emphatic.  *'  And 
as  for  me."  "  There  is  a  tacit  opposi- 
tion between  the  psalmist's  present  and 
his  former  experience.  Now  he  had  learnt 
through  the  lesson  of  suffering  to  trust  in 
God.  Before  that  suffering  came,  he  had 
begun  to  trust  in  himself.  '  I  seemed 
so  strong,  so  secure,  I  began  to  think 
within  myself,  I  shall  never  be  moved.'  " 
— Pn'owne.  "  Prosperity, — the  Hebrew 
word  includes  the  idea  of  prosperity,  and 
of  that  self-confidence  which  it  produces." 
— Alexander  (cf.  Deut.  viii.  ll-18,xxxii. 
15,  Hos.  xiii.  6,  2  Chron.  xxxii.  25).  In 
itself  "  prosperity"  is  not  evil  but  good. 
It  is  promised  to  the  righteous  (Ps.  i.  3). 
It  is  a  token  of  God's  favour  (Gen.  xxvi. 
12,  13).  But  it  needs  much  faith  and 
humility  to  prevent  its  becoming  a  snare. 
It  often  leads  to  pride,  self-indulgence, 
and  forgetfulness  of  God.  Thus  what 
is  good  is  perverted  to  bad  uses. 

"  In  prosperity  conscience  is  a  pope 
that  gives  dispensations  to  the  heart." — 
Samuel  Rutherford. 

"  When  men  are  made  spiritually 
faint  by  dealing  in  and  with  the  world, 
Satan  sets  on  them,  as  Amalek  did  on 
the  faint  and  weak  of  the  people  that 
came  out  of  Egypt." — Owen. 

*'  Little  knows 
Any,  but  God  alone,  to  value  right 
The  good  before  him,  but  perverts  best  things 
To  worst  alone,  or  to  their  meanest  use." 

— Milton. 

II.  Presumption  and  chastisement 
(ver.  7).  God's  love  is  shown  in  divers 
ways.  He  treats  His  children  accord- 
ing to  their  special  requirements,  but 
His  ends  are  ever  the  same.  Prosperity, 
when  it  leads  to  presumption,  is  a  sore 
evil.  It  needs  sharp  treatment.  Speak- 
ing is  not  enough  (Jer.  xxii.  2).  An- 
other method  must  be  adopted.  *'  Thou 
didst  hide  Thy  face."  There  is  no  greater 
affliction  than  this.  The  loss  of  health 
and  prosperity  is  bad,  the  estrangement 
of  friends  is  worse,  but  the  withdrawal 
of  God,  as  if  in  anger,  is  worst  of  aU. 
The  light  of  God's  face  is  salvation  (Ps. 


xliv.  3).  Zion's  strength  was  nothing; 
all  the  glory  of  Israel  was  gone  if  God 
departed.  No  wonder  the  psalmist  says 
*'I  was  troubled,"  *'* agitated,'  'terri- 
fied,' *  perplexed.' " — Alexander, 

Let  us  thank  God  for  chastisement. 
It  is  for  our  good.  We  presume  upon 
our  health,  and  God  sends  sickness.  We 
presume  upon  our  friends,  and  God 
takes  them  from  us.  We  presume  upon 
our  reputation  and  worldly  goods,  and 
God  lets  us  be  put  to  shame.  We  pre- 
sume upon  our  frames  and  feelings  in 
religion,  and  God  suffers  us  to  be  tried 
with  doubts  and  to  walk  in  darkness.  So 
in  many  ways,  God  teaches  us  humility, 
and  shuts  us  up  to  Himself  as  the 
supreme  and  abiding  good. 

*'  Certainly  virtue  is  like  precious 
odours,  most  fragrant  when  they  are  in- 
censed or  crushed :  for  prosperity  doth 
best  discover  vice,  but  adversity  doth 
best  discover  virtue." — Bacon, 

III.  Chastisement  and  prayer  (vers. 
8-10).  *'Is  any  among  you  afflicted,  let 
him  pray."  The  two  things  are  naturally 
connected. 

Consider  David's  prayer.  1.  It  is 
earnest  (ver.  8).  "I  cried  unto  the 
Lord.'*  His  whole  soul  went  out  in  a 
cry  {cf.  1  Chron.  xxi.  16, 17). 

2.  It  is  argumentative  (ver.  9).  Like 
Job,  he  reasons  with  the  Almighty  (Job 
xxiii.  4,  cf.  Isa.  xxxiii.  18,  19).  "What 
profit  is  in  my  blood  ; "  in  my  death. 
"  Shall  the  dust  praise  Thee  %  "  ''  To 
thank  God  for  His  mercy,  and  to  show 
the  truth  of  His  grace,  form  the  chief 
end  for  which  He  leaves  His  people  here 
for  a  season.  The  dust  cannot  do  this, 
and  the  spirit  is  not  here." — Murphy. 

3.  It  is  disinterested.  He  does  not 
seek  prolonged  life  for  his  own  sake,  but 
in  order  to  serve  and  praise  God.  He 
felt  that  his  life  would  be  more  useful 
than  his  death  {cf  Phil.  i.  23-25). 

It  is  a  blessed  thing  when  chastisement 
thus  leads  the  soul  to  cast  itself  on  God, 
and  to  acquiesce  in  His  will. 

"  Nearer  my  God,  to  Thee,  nearer  to  Thee, 
E'en  though  it  be  a  cross  that  raiseth  me," 


FSALM  ZZZI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


IV.  Prayer  and  deliverance  (ver. 
11).  His  prayer  has  been  answered. 
Here  he  acknowledges  the  greatness  of 
his  deliverance. 

1.  It  was  the  Lord^s  doing.  "  Thou 
hast,"  &c.  ''  Turned  "  (c/.  John  xvi.  20), 
not  '*  exchanged  for,"  but  "  turned  intoy 

2.  It  ivas  complete.  "  Beating  the 
breast  was  a  token  of  mourning.  Danc- 
ing was  an  expression  of  pious  joy  (2 
Sam.  vi.  14).  So  sackcloth  was  the 
garb  of  mourning  (1  Chron.  xxi.  16). 
'  Girded  me  with  gladness.'  New  gar- 
ments are  the  wonted  symbol  of  salva- 
tion "  (Isa.  Ixi.  Z).— Murphy.  "Call 
upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble  ;  I  will 
deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify  Me  " 
(Ps.  \.  15). 

V.  Deliverance  and  praise  (ver.  12). 


"  The  sackcloth  of  his  humiliation  God 
had  taken  away  oflf  him,  and  had 
clothed  him  with  the  garment  of  praise. 
How  should  he  do  otherwise  than  praise 
God  for  ever  for  His  goodness." — Per- 
owne.  "  To  the  end  that  my  glory  may 
sing  praise  to  Thee."  The  soul  is  the 
noblest  part,  the  glory  of  man,  and 
God's  deliverances  are  worthy  of  the 
highest  efforts  of  the  soul,  in  gratitude 
and  praise.  How  often  have  God's 
saints  realised  the  truth  of  all  these 
things  in  their  experience  (Ps.  ciii.  3, 
cxvi.  1).  When  we  bow  our  hearts  to 
God  as  our  Father  in  Heaven,  and  say 
Thy  will  be  done,  we  can  confidently 
end  with  the  triumphant  song  *'  Thine 
is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the 
glory  for  ever." 


PSALM    XXXL 

Introduction. 

A  psalm,  in  which  the  psalmist  rises  by  prayer,  from  trouble,  to  lively  faith  and  hope  In 
God.  The  older  interpreters  founding  on  the  use  of  the  same  word  in  vers.  2,  3  (Heb,),  and 
1  Sam.  xxiii.  25,  for  the  most  part,  refer  the  psalm  to  the  time  when  David  fled  from  Saul  into 
the  wilderness  of  Maon.  Ewald,  Hitzig,  and  others  attribute  it  to  Jeremiah,  chiefly  because 
of  its  plaintive  character,  and  from  the  fact  that  certain  expressions  found  in  this  psalm  are 
also  found  in  Jeremiah  {cf.  ver.  14.  and  Jer.  xx.  10,  aud  the  recurrence  of  the  phrase  "Fear  on 
every  side,"  Jer.  vi.  25,  xx.  3,  xlvi.  5,  xlix.  29,  Lam.  ii.  22).  As  to  this,  Tholuck  says,  **  That 
the  prophets  used  the  psalms,  and  not  the  psalmist  the  prophets,  may  be  inferred  from  the  fondness 
of  Jeremiah  to  weave  the  sayings  of  the  ancients  into  his  compositions  {cf.  Ps.  i.  3,  xxxiii.  7). 
Perowne  says,  '*  On  other  grounds  there  is  no  reason  why  the  psalm  should  not  be  David's.  It 
breathes  throughout  his  rare  tenderness  of  spirit,  as  well  as  his  faith  and  courage.  The  figures 
of  the  stronghold  and  the  rock  so  often  repeated  (vers.  2-4),  are  most  suitable  in  his  mouth 
{cf.  Ps.  xviii.),  and  so  are  the  expressions  in  ver.  8  and  in  ver.  21.'* 

Prayer  the  Resource  of  the  Godly  in  Affliction. 

(Verses  1-8.) 


This  prayer : 

I.  Springs  from  trust  in  God  (vers. 
1-3).  \.  The  Almighty  Father.  This  is 
the  character  in  which  God  has  revealed 
Himself.  He  is  infinitely  just,  and  holy, 
and  merciful.  His  people  are  His  chil- 
dren. All  of  them  are  dear  to  Him, 
but  the  weak  and  the  sorrowful  are  the 
special  objects  of  His  care.  As  a  father 
watches  his  sick  child,  and  bends  to 
listen  to  his  feeblest  cry,  so  "our  Father  in 
heaven  "  bows  down  in  pitying  mercy  to 
His  people  when  they  are  in  trouble. 
2.  The  everlasting  refuge  (ver.  1).  "In 
Thee  have  I  found  refuge.*' — Perowne, 
142 


Various  figures  are  employed  to  set  forth 
the  strength  and  impregnableness  of  this 
refuge  (ver.  2),  "  Strong  Rock,"  "  House 
of  Defence  "  (ver.  3).  "  My  rock  and  my 
fortress "  {cf,  Ps.  xviii  2).  The  fitness 
and  force  of  these  images  must  have 
been  deeply  felt  by  David,  who  had  so 
often  found  safety  from  his  enemies  in 
the  caves  and  fastnesses  of  the  rocks. 
"The  psalmist  grounds  his  prayer  on 
the  fact  that  the  Lord  is  in  reality  his 
rock  and  his  fortress,  because  he  knew 
Him  as  such  by  the  faith  which  God 
never  puts  to  shame." — Hengstenherg, 
"  The  psalmist  prays  ^  Be  thou  to  me/ 


EOMILETW  CO  MATE  NT  A  RY:  PSALMS, 


MALMXXXL 


or  rather,  '  Become  to  me,  prove  Thyself 
to  he  my  rock  and  house  of  defence ; 
for  I  hnow  that  Thou,  and  Thou  only, 
art  my  refuge.'  This  is  the  logic  of  the 
heart,  if  not  of  the  intellect ;  the  logic, 
it  may  be  added,  of  every  prayer  of  faith." 
— Perowne. 

II.  Implores  the  highest  blessings. 
1.    Vindication   of    his    hope    (ver.    1). 
" '  Shamed,'    i.e.,     utterly    confounded, 
disappointed  and  frustrated  in  his  hopes  " 
(Ps.  vi.  11,  xxii.  5,  XXV.  2,  20).— Alex- 
ander.   Such  a  fate  would  be  terrible.    It 
would  be  dishonourable  to  God,  as  well  as 
to  His  servant.    But  God  will  never  suffer 
those  who  trust  in  Him  to   be  put  to 
confusion.     2.  Deliverance  in  righteous- 
ness (ver.   2).     "  In  Thy  righteousness 
set  me  at  liberty." — Perowne.    He  longed 
for   freedom ;  but   he   would  not    seek 
even  such  a  boon,  save  in  a  way  that 
was  for  the  glory  of  God.     "  God  is  a 
just  God  and  a  Saviour."     3.  Guidance 
in   the  way  of  holiness  (ver.    3.   cf.  Ps. 
xxiii.  2,  3).    "  The  double  word  indicates 
an  urgent  need — we  require  double  direc- 
tion, for  we  are  fools,  and  the  way  is 
rough.     Lead  me  as  a  soldier,  guide  me 
a.s  a  traveller !      Lead   me  as  a  babe, 
guide  me  as  a  man ;  lead  me  by  Thy 
hand,  guide  me  by  Thy  Word.       The 
argument  used  is  one  which  is  fetched 
from  the  armoury  of  free   grace ;    not 
for  my  own  sake,  but  for  Thy  name's 
sake,    guide   me."  —  G.    H.    Spurgeon. 
4.  Protection  to  the  end  of  life  (vers.  4,  5). 
The    '*  net  *'   refers   to    the   craft    and 
malice  of   enemies.     There  are  dangers 
known  and  unknown,  there  are  foes  who 
face  us  openly,  and  there  are  foes  who 
plot  and    work  in  secret.      Our   daily 
prayers  should  be,   "  Lead  us  not  into 
temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil." 

III.  Characterised  by  the  noblest 
emotions.  1.  Humility.  **  Bow  down." 
2.  Earnestness,    *^  JSpeedily,*'   3,  Aspira- 


tion. ^^  Be  Thou  my  strong  rock.** 
4.  Zeal  for  God's  glory.  "For  Thy 
name's  sake."  5.  Self-surrender.  *'  Into 
Thy  hand  I  commend  my  spirit."  **  My 
spirit  {ruach)  more  than  my  soul  or  life 
(Nephesh).  It  is  not  only  from  sickness 
and  death,  but  from  sin  and  all  ghostly 
enemies,  that  the  man  of  God  should  be 
kept,  and  therefore  he  commends  to  God, 
not  his  body  or  his  bodily  life  alone, 
but  the  life  of  his  spirit,  which  is  more 
precious"  (c/^.  Is.  xxxviii.  16). — Perowne, 
6.  Unbounded  trust,  "  Thou  hast  re- 
deemed me,  0  Lord  God  of  truth." 
Past  deliverances  are  strong  supports  of 
faith.  What  the  Lord  was.  He  is ;  what 
He  has  done.  He  is  able  to  do  again, 
yea,  and  much  more,  exceeding  abund- 
antly above  all  we  can  ask  or  think. 
He  is  the  mighty  one  who  is  ever  true 
to  Himself  and  to  His  word.  The 
gods  of  the  heathen  are  "  lying  vanities," 
but  Jehovah  is  worthy  of  the  highest 
trust. 

IV.  Followed  by  the  grandest  de- 
liverance (c/".  1  Sam.  xxiii.  1-11).  The 
psalmist  exults  (vers.  7,  8)  in  the  won- 
drous redemption  wrought  out  by  God. 
1.  Sovereign  mercy.  "I  will  be  glad 
and  rejoice  in  Thy  mercy."  2.  Tender 
sympathy.  "  Thou  hast  considered  my 
trouble.*'  There  are  different  forms  of 
consideration  (cf.  Job  i.  8 ;  Ps.  xxxi.  7, 
xli.  1).  3.  Benign  interposition  (ver.  8). 
4.  Delightful  freedom  (ver.  8,  cf  Ps.  iv.  1). 
"  Though  the  mariner  sees  not  the  pole- 
star,  yet  the  needle  of  the  compass 
which  points  to  it  tells  him  which  way 
he  sails.  Thus  the  heart  that  is  touched 
with  the  loadstone  of  divine  love,  trem- 
bling with  godly  fear,  and  yet  still  looking 
towards  God  by  fixed  believing,  interprets 
the  fear  by  the  love  in  the  fear,  and 
tells  the  soul  that  its  course  is  heaven- 
ward— towards  the  haven  of  eternal 
rest." — Leighton, 


The  Great  Deposit. 
{Verse  6.) 

"With  these  words,  our  Lord  breathed      words  were  from  a  psalm  (xxii.)  which, 

out  His  life  (Luke  xxiii.  46),  as  He  had  typically  at  least,  foreshadowed  His 
before  used  words  from  another  psalm  sufferings ;  whereas  this  is  not  in  the 
in  Hia  agony  on  the  cross.     The  first      same  way  predictive.       But  the   Holy 

143 


PSALM  XXXI. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


One  of  God,  in  that  last  hour  of  mortal 
agony,  chose  these  words  of  one  of  His 
servants  to  express  the  solemn  surrender 
of  His  life.  And,  in  so  doing,  He  gave 
them  a  new  interpretation.  The  Jewish 
singer  only  meant  by  them  that  he  put 
himself  and  all  his  hopes  into  the  hand 
of  God.  Jesus  meant  by  them,  that  by 
His  own  act,  of  His  own  free  ivill,  He 
gave  up  His  spirit,  and  therefore  His  life, 
to  the  Father.  And  they  who  have  died 
with  their  Lord,  have  died  with  the  same 
words  on  tlieirlips.  These  were  the  last 
words  of  Polycarp,  of  Bernard,  of  Huss, 
of  Jerome   of  Prague,  of   Luther,  Me- 


lancthon,  and  many  others.  'Blessed 
are  they,'  says  Luther,  *who  die  not 
only /o7- the  Lord,  us  martyrs, — not  only 
ill  the  Lord,  as  all  believers, — -but  like- 
wise with  the  Lord,  as  breathing  forth 
their  lives  in  these  words,  '*Into  Thy 
hand  I  commend  my  spirit." ' "  — 
Peroivne. 

I.  The  soul  survives  the  shock  of 
death. 

II.  The  care  of  the  soul  is  the 
supreme  concern  in  death. 

Ill  The  well-being  of  the  soul,  in 
life  and  in  death,  consists  in  its  dedi- 
cation to  Christ. 


The  Story  of  a  Sufferer, 
{Verses  9-18.) 


I.  Mark  the  divine  listener. 
"0  Lord"  (Jehovah).  Ten  times  does 
David  use  this  name  of  hope.  Who  is 
like  God,  so  kind,  so  patient,  so  sympa- 
thising 1  He  has  infinitely  more  pity 
than  the  most  loving  father  (Ps.  ciii. 
13),  infinitely  more  tenderness  than  the 
most  faithful  mother  (Is.  Ixvi.  13, 
xlix.  15).  The  sorrows  of  countless 
millions  are  being  poured  into  His  ear, 
but  He  is  never  weary.  He  listens  to 
the  tale  of  the  humblest  child,  as  if  he 
were  the  only  object  of  His  care. 

**  To  Thee  alone  my  sorrows  shall  appeal, 
Hath  earth  a  wound  too  hard  for  heaven  to 
heal. " — Quarles. 

II.  Ponder  the  sad  complaint.  Like 
Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xix.  4),  the  psalmist 
pours  out  his  heart  before  the  Lord. 
We  seem  to  hear  his  sobs  and  cries. 
1.  Consumed  hy  grief  (vers.  9,  10). 
*'Eye,  soul,  belly,  the  seats  and  means 
of  intelligence,  will,  and  power." — 
Murpliy.  Body  and  mind  were  alike 
exhausted.  2.  Depressed  hy  conscious 
sin  (ver.  10).  His  eye  turned  within 
as  well  as  without.  His  real  trouble 
was  in  his  sin.  "  Mine  iniquity. ^^  It 
was  his,  his  very  own,  for  which  he  and 
he  only  was  responsible.  So  it  is ; 
others  may  have  tempted  or  taken  part 
in  the  transgression,  but  so  far  as  it  is  our 
act,  it  is  our  property.  What  a  burden 
is  sin !  What  a  terrible  plague  is  the 
144 


plague  of  a  sinful  heart.     "  0  wretched 

man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  1" 

3.  Wounded  hy  the  cruel  treatment 
of  his  contemporaries.  The  reproach  of 
foes  was  bad,  the  distrust  of  acquaint- 
ances was  worse,  but  the  alienation  of 
friends  was  worst  of  all.  -  He  com- 
plains of  the  "  slander  of  many."  The 
tongues  of  not  only  Doeg,  Nabal,  and 
the  Ziphites,  but  of  many  more,  were 
let  loose  against  him. 

"  Be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice,  as  pure  as  snow, 
Thou  shalt  not  escape  calumny. " 

"  Its  edge  is  sharper  than  the  sword  ; 
whose  tongue  outvenoms  all  the  worms 
of  Nile  ;  whose  breath  rides  on  the 
posting  winds ;  and  doth  belie  all  cor- 
ners of  the  world." — Shakespeare. 

4.  Disheartened  hy  the  unrelenting 
malice  of  his  enemies  (ver.  13).  '^  Fear 
was  on  every  side."  Wherever  he  turned 
he  met  a  foe.  One  fell  purpose  inspired 
them  all.  They  were  like  the  conspira- 
tors against  Paul,  "  who  bound  them- 
selves with  an  oath  that  they  would 
neither  eat  nor  drink  till  they  had  killed 
him  "  (Acts  xxiii.  21).  Jeremiah,  who 
was  also  a  "  man  of  sorrows,"  complains 
in  the  same  words  :  "  Fear  was  on  every 
side  "  (Jer.  xx.  10) ;  and  once  and  again 
he  uses  similar  terras  (Jer.  vi.  25,  xx. 
3,  4,  xlvi.  5,  xlix.  29 ;  Lam.  ii.  22). 

5.  Utterly  self  -  desponding.  The 
brightness  of  life  was  gone — his  reputa- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P3ALM  XXXI. 


tion  and  usefulness  were  ruined.  He 
seemed  good  for  nothing.  Forsaken 
and  forlorn,  he  was  as  a  *'  dead  man  out 
of  mind.''  But  for  his  trust  in  God,  all 
hope  would  be  lost  (cf.  Ps.  xliii). 

III.  Rejoice  with  the  relieved  suf- 
ferer (vers.  14-18).  1.  Filial  trust  in 
God  (ver.  14).  "Mighty  strength  of 
faith  when  a  man  conscious  of  his 
own  sinfulness  (ver.  10),  and  with  a 
world  in  arms  against  him,  yea,  for- 
saken of  his  own  friends  (ver.  11),  can 
Still  turn  to  God  and  say,  *  Thou  art 
my  God.''' — Perowne. 

2.  ffumble  acquiescence  in  the  Divine 
will  (ver.  15).  "My  times,  i.e.,  all 
my  life,  with  its  *  sundry  and  manifold 
changes,'  its  joys  and  sorrows,  its  hopes 
and  conflicts,  are  not  the  sport  of  chance, 
or  the  creatures  of  a  blind  fate,  but  are 


in  Thy  hand,  '  0  Thou  living,  personal 
Redeemer.'  " — Perowne.  Thus,  to  have 
faith  in  God's  will  and  rule,  is  to  enter 
into  rest.  "  Providence  is  a  soft  pillow 
for  anxious  heads,  an  anodyne  for  care, 
a  grave  for  despair." 

3.  Confident  hope  of  a  happy  issue  to 
all  his  troubles  (vers.  16-18).  His  faith 
rises  to  certainty.  He  anticipates  the 
time  when  the  lips  of  lying  should  be 
struck  dumb,  when  his  enemies  should 
be  put  to  shame,  or  lie  silent  in  the  grave, 
and  when  he  himself  should  rejoice  in 
the  sunshine  of  Jehovah's  love  (Num. 
vi.  25). 

**  Oh  !  there  is  never  sorrow  of  heart 
That  shall  lack  a  timely  end, 
If  but  to  God  we  turn,  and  ask 
Of  Him  to  be  our  Friend." — Wordsworth. 


Buried  Alive. 
(Verse  12.) 


Now  and  again  accidents  happen, 
such  as  the  falling  of  earth  and  the 
closing  up  of  mines,  by  which  people 
are  buried  alive.  There  are  also  horrible 
tales  of  persons  who,  of  design,  have 
suffered  this  cruel  fate.  David  speaks 
here  of  a  sort  of  moral  counterpart. 
Driven  into  exile,  and  cut  off  from  the 
society  of  friends  and  the  business  of 
life,  he  soon  came  to  be  as  if  forgotten. 
He  whose  exploits  had  but  lately  been 
the  theme  of  song,  and  whose  name  was 
on  every  lip,  was  now  "  as  a  dead  man, 
out  of  mind."  This  has  been  the  expe- 
rience of  many  since,  though  the  form 
of  the  calamity  has  varied.  People  may 
be  buried  alive — 

I.  By  the  malice  of  enemies.  There 
may  be  such  a  persistent  covering  of 
their  names,  with  lies  and  slander,  that 
at  last  they  are,  like  David,  given  up 
to  ''contemptuous  oblivion."  "Public 
envy  is  an  ostracism." — Bacon. 

II.  By  the  neglect  of  contempo- 
raries. ''  Out  of  sight,  out  of  mind.'' 
After  Butler  had  preached  his  famous 
sermons  at  the  Eolls  Ciiapel,  he  accepted 
a  country  charge,  where  he  lived  in  great 
retirement.  Years  passed  and  he  was 
forgotten.     A  friend  spoke  to  the  Queen 


about  him,  and  slie  answered  that  she 
thought  he  was  dead,  and  appealed  to 
Archbishop  Blackburne  if  it  were  not 
so.  His  reply  was,  "No,  madam,  he  is 
not  dead,  but  he  is  buried.'''  This  is  the 
way  in  which  the  world  has  treated 
many  of  its  greatest  men. 

III.  By  the  lack  of  opportunities 
for  distinction.  While  every  one  has 
his  chance,  so  to  speak,  some  have  better 
chances  than  others.  Two  persons  may 
have  equal  merits,  but  one  rises  high, 
while  the  other  remains  to  the  last  in 
the  same  humble  position.  There  are 
latent  talents  that  are  never  called  forth, 
— minds  of  high  power  that  are  never 
developed.  Gray  sings  of  this  in  his 
*'  Elegy  in  a  Country  Churchyard": — 

"Perhaps  in  this  neglected  spot  is  laid 
Some  heart  once  pregnant  with  celestial  fire ; 
Hands  that  the  rod  of  empire  might  have 

sway'd, 
Or  wak'd  to  ecstasy  the  living  lyre  : 
But  knowledge  to  their  eyes  her  ample  page, 
Rich  with  the  spoils  of  time,  did  ne'er  un- 
roll ; 
Chill  penury  repress'd  their  noble  rage, 
And  froze  the  genial  current  of  the  soul." 

IV.  By  the  failure  of  capacity  for 
usefulness.  Changes  take  place.  Po- 
pularity may  fade.     Broken  health  or 

U5 


PSALM  XXXL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


misfortune  may  necessitate  retirement. 
Men  who  once  bulked  large  in  the  pub- 
lic eye  are  lost  sight  of  and  forgotten. 
Hence,  when  their  death  is  published,  it 
comes  as  a  surprise.  It  is  said,  We 
thought  they  had  been  dead  long  ago. 
They  had  been  virtually  Jwriec?  o/tw  years 
before  their  death. 


All  these  things  prophesy  of  a  here- 
after. If  we  serve  God  truly,  it  matters 
little  whether  we  have  praise  of  men  or 
not.  Our  record  is  on  high.  In  heaven 
there  will  be  a  balm  for  every  wound, 
and  redress  for  every  wrong,  and  many 
who  are  first  shall  be  last,  and  who  are 
last  shall  he  first. 


The  Goodness  of  the  Lord. 
{Verses  19-24:.) 


His  well-grounded  hope  now  brings 
triumphant  certainty,  and  this  breaks 
forth  in  glad  acknowledgment  of  God's 
goodness  to  the  righteous,  and  an  ex- 
hortation to  all  to  wait  on  Him  in  un- 
shaken confidence  of  heart.  "  Oh  !  how 
great  is  Thy  goodness." 

David's  exclamation  leads  us  to  con- 
sider the  goodness  of  God — 

I.  As  a  spectacle  of  surpassing 
beauty.  "  How  great ! "  Creation,  pro- 
vidence, redemption,  reveal  God's  good- 
ness. More  and  more,  in  the  course  of 
the  ages,  it  is  unfolded,  and  calls  forth 
wonder,  love,  and  praise. 

*'  My  heart  is  awed  within  me,  when  I  think 
Of  the  great  miracle  that  still  goes  on 
In  silence  round  me — the  perpetual  work 
Of  Thy  creation,  finish'd,  yet  renew'd 
For  ever." — Bryant, 

•*  His  are  the  mountains,  and  the  ralleys  his, 
And  the  resplendent  rivers, — his  t*  enjoy 
With  a  propriety  that  none  can  feel ; 
But  wbo  with  filial  confidence,  inspired, 
Can  lift  to  heaven  an  uii  presumptuous  eye, 
And  smiling  say,  My  Father  made  them  all  1 
Are  they  not  his  by  a  peculiar  right, 
And  by  an  emphasis  of  interest  his, 
Whose  eyes  they  filled  with  tears  of  holy 

Whose  heart  with  praises,  and  whose  ex- 
alted miud 

With  worthy  thoughts  of  that  unwearied 
love 

That  plann'd,  and  built,  and  still  upholds  a 
world 

So  clothed  with  beauty  for  rebellious  man." 

— Cowper. 

II.  As  a  treasury  of  inexhaustible 
wealth.  *'  Thou  hast  laid  up,"  lit. 
**  hidden  "  (cf.  xvii.  4,  and  "  the  hidden 
manna,"  Rev.  ii.  17).  "  This  is  the  love 
of  God  manifested  to  the  soul  in  etcrtt.** 

U6 


— Perowne,  "  Layest  up.**  "  This  inti- 
mates that  much  of  the  Divine  good- 
ness was  yet  in  store  for  him.  This  is 
true  of  all  God's  saints,  if  we  include 
the  unending  future." — Murphy.  God's 
goodness  is  partly  seen,  and  partly  un- 
seen. What  is  seen,  may,  as  it  were, 
be  measured;  but  what  is  unseen,  is 
boundless.  What  is  a  river  to  the 
ocean  !  What  is  the  landscape,  that  the 
eye  can  reach,  to  the  vast  unseen  realms 
of  the  earth.  What  are  the  thousand 
stars  that  crowd  the  winter  sky,  to  the 
millions  upon  millions  that  are  hid  in 
the  depths  of  space  !  So  with  the 
goodness  of  God.  The  sons  of  Jacob 
carried  away  their  "  ass  loads  "  of  the 
finest  of  the  wheat,  but  what  were  these 
to  the  stores  laid  up  in  Egypt's  gran- 
aries. The  Queen  of  Sheba's  heart 
fainted  when  she  saw  the  treasures  of 
Solomon,  for  the  half  had  not  been  told 
her  of  his  wisdom  and  his  wealth ;  but 
a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here,  whose 
riches  are  unsearchable,  and  whose  wis- 
dom is  past  finding  out.  "  The  secret 
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him." 
"  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, 
neither  hath  entered  into  the  heart  of 
man,  the  things  which  God  hath  pre- 
pared for  them  that  love  Him." 

III.  As  a  work  of  infinite  benefi- 
cence. *'  Oh  !  how  great  is  Thy  good- 
ness, which  Thou  hast  wrought  for  them 
that  trust  in  Thee,  before  the  sons  of 
men.''^  This  refers  to  the  open  manifes- 
tation of  goodness.  "  Goodness  is  laid 
up  ill  the  promise,  wrought  in  the  per- 
formance, and  that  goodness  which  is 
laid  up,  is  wrought  for  them  that  trust 
in  God ;  and  thus,  as  God's  faithfulness 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXX^ 


engageth  us  to  believe,  so  our  faith,  as 
it  were,  engageth  God*s  faithfulness  to 
perform  the  promise." — N.  Hardy. 

Scripture,  observation,  and  memory, 
supply  countless  proofs  of  God's  kind- 
ness. ''  The  earth  is  full  of  the  goodness 
of  the  Lord." 

What  God  hath  wrouo^ht  is  set  forth 
in  two  divisions.  1.  General  (ver.  20). 
"Thou  protectest  them  in  the  hiding- 
place  of  Thy  presence  from  the  factions 
of  men." — Delitzch.  "  The  hiding-place 
of  Thy  presence,  or  *of  Thy  counte- 
nance ; '  elsewhere  of  God's  tabernacle 
(xxvii.  5) ;  or  of  His  wings  (Ixi.  5) ;  or 
of  His  shadow  (xci.  1).  But  this  is  the 
most  striking  figure  of  all  :  to  be  hidden 
in  the  light  of  God's  face,  hidden  in  that 
splendour  where  His  power  is  hidden 
(Hab.  iii.  4).  What  an  image  at  once 
of  safety  and  blessedness  1 " — Ferowne, 


2.  Particular  (ver.  21).  David  liere 
speaks  of  himself.  Probably  the  refer- 
ence is  to  God's  signal  interposition  in 
his  behalf  at  Ziklag  (Delitzch). 

(Ver.  22).  "  In  my  haste."  "  David 
and  his  people  wept,  till  they  had  no 
more  power  to  weep,  for  the  burning  of 
Ziklag  and  the  capture  of  their  wives 
and  children  (1  Sam.  xxvii).  'I  am 
cut  off.'  This  was  a  fatal  blow,  appar- 
ently indicating  the  deep  displeasure  of 
God,  and  His  final  departure  from  him. 
*  Yet  Thou  heardest.'  David  at  length 
encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord  his 
God,  who  heard  his  cry,  and  restored  to 
him  all  that  he  had  lost." — Murphy, 

**  Through  every  period  of  my  life, 
Thy  goodness  I'll  proclaim  ; 
And  after  death,  in  distant  worldd^ 
Besume  the  glorious  theme." 


Two  Counsels  op  Wisdom. 


Vers.  23,  24.  David  speaks  here  to 
all  to  whom  God  has  been  gracious, 

I.  Love  the  Lord.  This  is  the  first 
and  great  commandment,  and  finds  an 
echo  in  every  true  heart. 

Reason  says  "  Love  the  Lord."  Who 
is  worthy  of  the  heart  but  the  Supremely 
Good?  "We  needs  must  love  the 
highest,  when  we  see  it." — Tennyson. 

Gratitude  says  "  Love  the  Lord." 
Consider  not  only  what  God  is  in  Him- 
self, but  what  He  has  done  for  His  people. 
**  His  saints."  They  are  His  favoured 
ones,  loved,  redeemed,  and  sanctified. 
**  We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved 
us"  (1  John  iv.  19). 

Experience  says  "  Love  the  Lord." 
This  is  the  voice  that  comes  down  from 
the  pious  of  every  land  and  age,  back  to 
the  days  of  paradise.  Nothing  but  good 
comes  from  loving  God.  The  more  we 
love  Him,  the  higher  we  rise  in  dignity 
and  strength.  The  more  we  love  Ilim, 
the  fitter  we  become  for  the  duties  and 
trials  of  earth,  and  the  meeter  for  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints  in  heaven, 
**  Faith-keeping  is  Jehovah,"  alike  as  to 
His  promises  and  His  threatenings,  alike 
in  His  retributive  providence  towards  His 
people  who  trust  in  Him,  and  towards 


the  proud  and  the  evil-doers,  who  reject 
His  counsel  and  His  love.  '*  In  H  is 
favour  is  life." 

IL  Be  of  good  courage  (ver.  24). 
There  are  differences  as  to  courage. 
There  is  the  courage  of  t\iQ  flesh.  This 
is  common  to  us  with  the  lower  animals. 
See  what  Job  says  of  the  war-horse  (Job 
xxxix.  19),  and  Solomon  of  the  lion  (Pro v. 
XXX.  30).  Most  men  when  their  blood  is 
up  will  do  what  are  called  brave  deeds. 

There  is  the  courage  of  the  mind. 
This  is  higher.  It  implies  resolution, 
firmness,  a  capacity  to  gird  one's  self  for 
deeds  of  daring  and  diflficulty. 

But  noblest  of  all,  is  the  courage 
of  the  soul.  This  implies  a  heart  that 
is  right  with  God,  and  hence  a  heart 
that  is  loyal  to  truth  and  to  duty,  a 
heart  that  is  continually  being  recruited 
with  new  strength,  and  that  is  ready  for 
any  fate.  '*  Be  of  good  courage,"  i.e., 
be  brave,  firmly  reliant  on  God,  "  and 
He  will  strengthen  your  heart."  "  Be 
strong  in  purpose  and  desire,  and  He 
will  make  you  strong  in  fact." — Alex- 
ander. "  AH  ye  that  hope  in  the  Lord." 
**  The  psalm  ends  as  Psalm  xxvii.  Hope 
and  waiting  are  marks  peculiarly  of  the 
Old    Testament    dispensation.      It    is 

147 


1?SALM  XXXli. 


UOMILETW  COMMENTAMY  :  PSALMS. 


true,  even  in  tlie  New,  one  apostle 
writes,  '  we  are  saved  by  hope.'  And 
another  says,  'It  doth  not  yet  appear 
what  we  shall  be,'  but  he  adds  what  no 
believer  in  the  days  of  types  and  shadows 
could  have  said,  '  We  knoiv  that  when 
He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him, 
for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.'  Won- 
derful is  the  hopeful  trust  of  the  saints 


of  old  in  God,  when  we  remember  that 
they  did  not  know  Him  as  God  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh." — Perowne. 

" Love  the  Lord,"  "Be  of  good  cour- 
age." These  two  counsels  are  intimately 
connected.  Love '  and  courage  go  to- 
gether. What  will  not  the  mother  dare 
for  love  of  her  child,  and  the  patriot  for 
the  love  of  his  country  1 


PSALM    XXXIL 
Introduction. 

**  This  is  the  second  of  the  seven  penitential  psalms,  as  they  are  called,  which,  says 
Selneoker,  *  St.  Augustine  used  often  to  read  with  weeping  heart  and  eyes,  and  which  before 
his  death  he  had  written  on  the  wall  over  against  his  sick-bed,  that  he  might  exercise  himself 
therein,  and  find  comfort  therein  in  his  sickness.'  St.  Augustine's  own  words,  *  IntelHgentia 
prima,  est  ut  te  noris  peccatorem,'  might  stand  as  its  motto.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
this  psalm  was  composed  after  Nathan  came  to  David.  Psalm  li.  was  the  confession  of  his  sin 
and  the  prayer  for  forgiveness.  This  psalm  is  the  record  of  the  confession  made  and  the  for- 
giveness obtained,  and  the  conscious  blessedness  of  his  position  as  a  son  restored  to  his  Father's 
house.  There  was  a  shelter  for  him  there  now, — *  Thou  art  my  hiding-place.'  There  was  joy 
and  gladness  on  his  return, — *  Thou  shalt  compass  me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance.'  And 
here  he  carries  out  the  resolve  of  Psalm  li.  '  Then  will  I  teach  transgressors  Thy  way,  and 
sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  Thee.'  The  instruction  of  the  psalm  may  be  summed  up  in 
the  words  of  Prov,  xxviii.  13,  or  in  those  of  1  John  i.  8,  9." — Perowne. 


The  Blessedness  of  the  Forgiven. 
{Verses  1-7.) 


L  Declared  as  a  doctrine  (vers.  1,  2). 
We  are  taught  here — 1.  That  sin  is  the 
real  cause  of  all  unhappiness.  As  Milton 
grandly  sings : 

"Disproportioned  sin 
Jarred  against  nature's  chime,  and  with  harsh 

din 
Broke  the  fair  music  that  all  creatures  made 
To  their  great  God." 

2.  That  the  removal  of  sinis  the  gracious 
act  of  God  (Ex.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25 ; 
1  John  i.  8,  9).  Ver.  1.  Manton  says 
that  it  is  here  as  in  law,  when  "many 
words  of  like  import  and  significance  are 
heaped  up  and  put  together  to  make  the 
deed  and  legal  instrument  more  com- 
plete and  perfect."  The  group  of  words 
is  the  same  as  in  Ex.  xxxiv.  7  and  Ps. 
li.  5,  6.  Though  dark,  they  show  the 
better  the  brightness  of  God's  love 
(Rom.  iii.  20,  21).  First,  sin  is  branded 
as  " transgression"  i.e.  revolt,  open  and 
daring  defection  from  God's  covenant 
148 


(Is.  i.  2,  xlii.  27 ;  Jer.  iil  13 ;  Amos  Iv. 
i'j  cf.l  Kings  xii.  19).  In  this  form 
sin  is  said  to  be  forgiven,  lit.  *^  taken 
awayT  Like  a  burden,  it  is  lifted  off 
the  soul.  Like  the  sins  laid  on  the 
scape-goat,  it  is  carried  away  into  the 
wilderness  {cf.  Lev.  xvi.  21,  John  i.  29). 
Next,  sin  is  described  as  '*  a  coming 
short  of  the  marhP  Eighteousness  is  the 
true  end  of  man,  and  sin  is  the  missing 
of  that  end.  This  is  not  from  mere 
weakness,  but  is  the  result  of  moral  ob- 
liquity and  wilfulness.  In  this  form, 
sin  is  said  to  be  "coverec?."  It  is  put 
out  of  sight,  as  by  the  blood  sprinkled 
over  the  mercy-seat  (Ex.  xxv.  21  \  Lev. 
viii.  14,  15);  and  the  sinner  is  treated 
as  if  he  had  not  sinned  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  2; 
Is.   xxxviii.  17,  xliv.  22 ;  1  John  i.  7). 

Lastly,  sin  is  regarded  as  '"''iniquity^ 
a  twisting  and  perversion  of  the  will 
from  the  right  way, — wrong-doing  which 
not  only  includes  guilt  but  punishment. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXXII. 


In  this  aspect  sin  is  said  not  to  be  reck- 
oned. Tlie  best  comment  here  is  in 
the  words  of  St.  Paul  (Rom.  iv.  6)  : 
"Even  as  David  also  describeth  the 
ble.^sedness  of  the  man  unto  whom  God 
itnputeth  righteousness,  without  works, 
saying,  *  Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities 
are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered. 
Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will 
not  impute  sin.^ " 

3.  That  the  removal  of  sin  is  wrought 
by  God  in  such  a  way  as  to  secure  the 
highest  blessedness  of  man.  "  Oh  !  the 
blessings,  oh!  the  happiness  of  the 
man  !  "  Not  only  is  guilt  removed,  but 
the  heart  is  renewed.  "  No  guile,"  no 
falseness,  either  to  himself  or  to  God. 
"The  man  whose  transgression  is  for- 
given, whose  sin  is  hidden — God  having 
<;ast  it  as  a  millstone  into  the  depths  of 
{he  sea, — whose  iniquity  and  perversion 
is  not  reckoned  to  his  account,  and 
whose  guile — the  deceitful  and  despe- 
rately wicked  heart — is  annihilated, 
being  emptied  of  sin,  and  filled  with 
righteousness,  is  necessarily  a  happy 
man." — Adam  Clarke.  "What  can  be 
heavy  to  that  man  who  is  eased  of  the 
intolerable  burden  of  sin?  How  ani- 
mated was  that  saying  of  Luther, 
*  Smite,  Lord,  smite,  for  Thou  hast 
absolved  me  from  my  sins  ! ' " — Leighton. 

II.  Illustrated  as  a  fact  (vers.  3-5). 
David  here  speaks  of  himself.  "  He 
had  long  struggled  with  the  sense  of  his 
sin,  had  long  been  crushed  to  the  earth 
with  his  burden,  because  he  would  not 
humble  himself  before  God ;  but  God 
had  given  him  again  the  heart  of  a  child. 
He  had  gone  to  his  Father  with  the 
penitent  confession,  'I  have  sinned;' 
and,  as  in  the  parable,  the  Father's 
heart  moved  towards  his  prodigal  son 
when  he  was  yet  a  long  way  off,  so 
David  found  that  his  Father  was  ready 
to  forgive.  '  I  said,  I  will  confess,'  and 
*Thou  tookest  away  the  guilt  of  my 
sin.'" — Perowne. 

1.  First  picture.  The  misery  of  the 
man  who  a-iminally  delays  confession 
(vers.  3,  4).  These  striking  words  show 
that  the  misery  was  great.  Body  and 
soul  suffered.  The  pain  was  exhausting, 
and  compelled  loud  and  passionate  com- 
plaints.    Constant.     It  lasted   as   long 


as  he  kept  silence.  The  struggle 
with  conscience  was  fearful.  Neither 
day  nor  night  was  there  relief.  It  waa 
as  if  the  fires  of  hell  were  already  kin- 
dled, consuming  his  strength,  and  drying 
up  the  springs  of  his  being.  Irremedi- 
able. There  was  no  remedy,  for  the 
misery  was  caused  by  his  own  sin,  and 
continued  by  his  obstinate  alienation 
from  God.  Every  effort  that  he  made 
to  better  himself,  so  long  as  he  refused 
to  humble  his  heart  before  God  by  con- 
fession, only  aggravated  his  pain.  The 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  the  sinner  till 
he  flies  to  Christ.  "Thy  hand  was 
heavy  upon  me."  "That  hand  which 
when  pressing  is  so  heavy,  when  raising 
is  so  sweet  and  powerful  (Ps.  xxxvii.  24), 
and  when  scattering  its  blessings  so  full 
and  so  ample  (Ps.  civ.  2^,  cxlv.  16). 
He  would  not  at  first  be  humbled  by  the 
confession  of  his  iniquity,  and  therefore 
he  is  humbled  by  the  weight  of  the  hand 
of  God.  Oh  !  powerful  hand  !  beyond 
all  comparison  more  grievous  than  any 
other  hand  to  press  down,  and  more 
powerful  to  raise  up.  He  who  suppresses 
his  sins  without  confessing  them, 

*  Conceals  an  inward  wound,  and  burns  with 
Becret  fire. ' 

Under  the  appearance  of  sparing,  he  is 
indeed  cruel  to  himself.  It  may  |)er- 
haps  occasion  more  present  pain  to  draw 
out  the  point  of  the  weapon  that  sticks 
in  the  flesh,  but  to  neglect  it  will  occa- 
sion greater  danger  and  more  future 
torment." — Leighton. 

2.  Second  picture.  The  blessedness 
of  the  man  who  frankly  confesses  his 
sins  to  God  (ver.  5).  Here  is  the 
end  of  the  struggle — confession,  and  so 
forgiveness  and  peace. 

Confession  must  be  made  to  God. 
"  Unto  Thee."  The  sin  is  against  Him. 
To  Him  we  must  answer.  He  only  can 
forgive.  We  need  neither  priest  nor 
angel  to  mediate.  God  Himself  "  re- 
ceiveth  sinners.^' 

Confession  must  be  frank  and  full. 
"  I  acknowledge  my  sin."  It  is  honour- 
able to  God  and  good  for  us  that  there 
should  be  a  complete  unburdening  of 
the  heart.  There  has  been  too  much  of 
extenuating,  excusing,  and  hiding.  Now, 

149 


rSALM  XXXIL 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


IS 


at 
inge- 


nothing  should  be  kept  back.  Sin  is 
before  the  soul  as  it  is  before  God.  The 
hard,  sullen  "  keeping  silence " 
end.  There  is  now  frank,  open, 
nious  confession. 

What  a  blessed  change  !  It  is  like 
passing  from  darkness  to  open  day.  It 
is  like  coming  out  from  the  concealment 
and  foulness  of  a  dungeon  to  the  pre- 
sence of  a  merciful  judge.  And  the 
response  is  immediate  (ver.  5).  The 
confession  and  the  taking  away  are 
simultaneous.  "  Oh  !  admirable  cle- 
mency. It  requires  nothing  but  that  the 
offender  should  plead  guilty,  and  this, 
not  that  it  may  more  freely  punish,  but 
more  liberally  forgive.  He  requires  that 
we  should  condemn  ourselves,  that  so 
He  may  absolve  us." — Leighton.  *'  Thou 
forgavest."  "  But  that  should  not  end 
the  matter.  Because  of  the  Lord's 
mercy,  nay,  rather  all  the  more  on  that 
very  account,  our  sins  should  be  still 
remembered.  So  it  was  with  David. 
So  it  was  with  Paul,  who,  long  after  he 
had  obtained  merc}^,  continued  to  be 
exercised  deeply  about  his  sin,  which  was 
ever  before  him.  So  let  it  be  with  you, 
Oh,  poor  sinner !  I  call  upon  you,  what- 
ever and  whosoever  you  are,  to  see  your 
sin  now,  to  embrace  your  Saviour 
now.  You  have  sin  enough  upon  your 
conscience  now.  Confess  now.  Believe 
now.  But  I  call  upon  you,  believing  now, 
not  lightly  or  hastily  to  dismiss  the  matter 
from  your  thoughts.  Ponder  your  sin. 
Consider  it  in  all  its  bearings.  Be  seeking 
ever,  as  it  is  ever  before  you,  to  get  deeper, 
more  searching,  more  humbling  views  of 
its  exceeding  sinfulness.  For  it  is  thus, 
and  only  thus,  that  by  God's  grace, 
under  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
you  will  be  getting  more  and  more  of  an 
insight  into  God's  marvellous  grace  and 
love,  and  proving  more  and  more  tho- 
roughly the  blessedness  of  a  full  as  well 
as  a  free  forgiveness,  of  complete  re- 
conciliation, of  perfect  peace." — Dr, 
Gandlish. 

III.  Confirmed  by  the  experience  of 
the  godly  of  all  ages  (ver.  6).  These 
words  suggest — 1.  The  force  of  GocTs 
forgiving  love.  It  holds  out  hope  to  the 
cliief  of  sinners.  It  inspires  boldness  in 
coming  to  the  throne  of  grace.  If  God 
150 


forgives  our  sin  freely,  what  is  there  we 
may  not  askl  (Rom.  ii.  4  ;  John  xii.  32). 

2.  The  power  of  recorded  examples  of 
forgiven  sinners.  Every  forgiven  sinner 
is  a  witness  for  Christ.  What  others 
preach  as  a  doctrine,  he  proclaims  as  a 
fact.  Bartimeus  could  say,  "  I  was 
blind,  but  now  I  see."  How  much  more 
powerful  this  testimony  than  the  mere 
report,  "  He  giveth  the  blind  their  sight." 
So,  what  multitudes  have  been  won  to 
Christ  by  the  stories  of  the  thief  on 
the  cross,  Zaccheus,  and  Saul  of 
Tarsus. 

3.  The  security  and  peace  of  the  godly 
who  have  made  Jehovah  their  refuge 
(ver.  6).  They  have  sought  mercy  in  an 
accepted  time.  There  is  a  day  of  grace. 
There  is  a  time  wherein  God  may  be 
found  (Isa.  Iv.  6,  7  ;  Heb.  iii.)  Every 
pang  of  conscience,  every  sorrow  of  heart, 
every  premonition  of  judgment,  calls  for 
instant  action.  Delay  may  be  fataL 
"  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day 
of  Thy  power." 

They  have  found  a  refuge  adequate  for 
every  emergency  (ver.  7).  When  God's 
judgments  are  let  loose  as  a  flood  they 
are  safe.  They  are  like  Noah  in  the  ark, 
Israel  in  Goshen.  The  emphasis  may  be 
laid  on  "  him."  God's  love  is  a  personal 
love ;  He  cares  for  individuals.  When 
trials  come  they  may  touch  the  things 
without,  but  not  those  within.  They 
may  reach  to  the  spoiling  of  goods  and 
the  filching  of  reputation,  and  even  to 
the  killing  of  the  body,  but  they  cannot 
touch  the  immortal  spirit.  When  the 
tyrant  Nicocreon  ordered  Anaxarchus  to 
be  beaten  to  death  in  a  mortar,  the  brave 
answer  was,  "  Beat  and  bray  as  thou 
wilt,  Anaxarchus  thou  canst  not  touch." 
If  a  heathen  could  speak  thus  how  much 
more  a  Christian ! 

They  have  secured  delights  which  shall 
surround  them  all  their  days  (ver.  7), 
"  Compass  me  about,'*  i.e.,  give  me 
abundant  cause,  turn  where  I  may,  to 
praise  Thee.  Can  this  be  the  same  man 
wjio,  erewhile,  was  so  wretched  1  What 
a  wondrous  change  !  Then  the  burden 
of  sin,  now  pardon  ;  then  the  grief  of 
estrangement,  now  the  joy  of  reconcilia- 
tion ;  then  the  misery  of  a  heart  torn 
by  conflicting  passions  and  full  of  un- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


TBALti  TOIL 


rest,  now  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  angels  and  the  love  of  God  for  ever. 
all  understanding  ;  then  the  terrors  of  "  Selah."  Fitly,  indeed,  may  we  be 
judgment  and  of  hell,  now  the  songs  of     called  to  pause  and  ponder. 


MULISHNESS, 
(F«fr5e«8-10.) 


Mulishness  is  a  hard,  sullen,  untract- 
able  spirit.  It  is  held  an  offence  among 
men,  how  much  more  heinous  must  it  be 
when  manifested  towards  God.  Yet  even 
good  men  have  erred  in  this  way.  David 
speaks  here  from  experience.  He  re- 
calls with  shame  the  time  when  he  had 
in  his  pride  "kept  silence,"  and  hardened 
his  heart  against  the  Lord ;  and  speaks 
words  of  warning  for  others.  Perhaps 
he  had  Solomon  specially  in  view,  but 
his  words  have  a  wider  reference,  and 
are  fraught  with  instruction  ("  maskil ") 
for  all  ages.  We  may  understand  him 
as  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

I.  Mulishness  thwarts  the  Divine 
plan.  God  has  a  will  concerning  us. 
He  would  have  us  to  walk — 1.  In  the 
right  way.  2.  From  conviction  and 
choice.  Not  of  coiistraint,  but  willingly, 
as  the  result  of  understanding.  3.  Under 
His  own  fatherly  guidance  and  protection. 
"  I  will  watch  over  thee  with  mine  eye." 
"  The  guidance  with  the  eye  is  a  gentle 
guidance.  A  look  is  enough,  as  opposed 
to  that  bit  and  bridle,  which  the  mulish 
nature  requires." — Perowne.  It  is  not 
only  "I  will  instruct  thee,"  *.e.,make  thee 
to  understand,  and  "  Teach  thee  in  the 
way,"  i.e.y  to  find  and  keep  the  right 
way,  but  also  "/  will  guide  thee  with  mine 
eye."  *'  He  will  consider  and  consult 
upon  us.  He  will  not  leave  us  to  con- 
tingencies j  no,  nor  to  His  general  provi- 
dence, by  which  all  creatures  are  in 
His  administration,  but  He  will  ponder 
us,  consider  us,  study  us  ;  and  that  with 
His  eye,  which  is  the  most  sensible 
organ  and  instrument,  soonest  feels  if 
anything  be  amiss,  and  so  inclines  Him 
quickly  to  rectify  us."  This  implies 
"the  constancy  and  perseverance  of  God's 
goodness  towards  us;  to  the  end  and  in  the 
end  He  will  guide  us.  Except  the  eye  of 
God  can  be  put  out,  we  cannot  be  put  out 
of  His  sight  and  his  care." — John  Donne. 


II.  Mulishness  debases  the  powers 
of  the  soul.  "The  mule  is  among 
various  nations  a  proverbial  type  of 
stubborn  persistency  in  evil,  and  we 
find  analogous  allusions  to  the  horse  in 
Jer.  V.  8,  viii.  6.  The  reason  for 
using  a  comparison  with  brutes,  is  in- 
timated in  the  second  clause,  to  wit, 
that  the  dehoMd  irrationality  of  sin 
might  be  distinctly  brought  into  view. 
The  analogy  is  carried  out,  with  no  small 
subtilty,  by  representing  that  what 
seems  to  be  the  trappings  or  mere  de- 
coration of  these  brutes,  is  really 
intended  to  coerce  them,  just  as  that 
in  which  men  pride  themselves  may  be, 
and  if  necessary  will  be,  used  by  God 
for  their  restraint  and  subjugation. 
The  common  version  of  the  last  clause — 
*  lest  they  come  near  unto  thee^ — would 
be  suitable  enough  in  speaking  of  a 
wild  beast,  but  in  reference  to  a  mule  or 
horse,  the  words  can  only  mean,  because 
they  will  not  follow  or  obey  thee  of  their 
own  accord,  they  must  be  constantly 
coerced  in  the  way  both  of  compulsion 
and  constraint." — Alexander.  Degrad- 
ing to — 1.  Reason.  2.  Conscience.  3. 
Affections.  The  man  who  stubbornly 
refuses  God's  instruction  necessarily 
sinks.  He  "  loses  the  Divine  property 
of  his  first  being."  He  becomes  like  the 
brutes  with  "  lower  pleasures,  lower 
pains."  Instead  of  being  guided  from 
within,  he  is  governed  from  without. 
Instead  of  being  ruled  by  reason  and 
through  his  affections,  he  is  controlled 
and  compelled  as  by  force.  "  God  never 
goes  about  to  rule  any  by  fear,  but  those 
who  have  first  trampled  upon  love,  and 
are  no  longer  subjects  but  rebels." 

III.  Mulishness  imperils  the  highest 
interests  of  being.  To  such  as  act  in 
this  way — peace,  true  progress,  fellow- 
ship with  God,  the  hope  of  a  blessed 
immortality  are  impossible*     Then,  "  Be 

151 


tSALM  XXXII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


ye  not  as  the  horse  or  as  the  mule." 
Be  warned, — this  temper  is  not  only  un- 
amiable,  but  bad.  It  is  contrary  to 
reason,  contradicted  by  experience,  con- 
demned by  revelation.  Remember  Cain, 
Balaam,  Saul,  Jonah.  We  should 
strive  to  rise  instead  of  sink,  we  should 
aspire  to  be  like  the  noblest  and  the 
best,  who  served  God  from  love  and 
not  from  fear.  "  We  may  consider 
mercies  as  the  beamings  of  the  Almighty's 
eye,  when  the  light  of  His  countenance 
is  lifted  upon  us ;  and  that  man  as 
guided  by  the  eye,  whom  mercies  attract 
and  attach  to  his  Maker.  But  oh  !  let 
us  refuse  to  be  guided  by  the  eye,  and 
it  will  become  needful  that  we  be  curbed 
by  the  hand.  If  we  abuse  our  mercies, 
if  we  forget  their  Author,  and  yield  Him 


not  gratefully  the  homage  of  our  affec- 
tions, we  do  but  oblige  Him,  by  His 
love  for  our  souls,  to  apportion  to  us 
disaster  and  trouble.  Complain  not, 
then,  that  there  is  so  much  of  sorrow  in 
your  lot ;  but  consider  rather  how  much 
of  it  you  may  have  wilfully  brought 
upon  yourselves.  Ah  !  if  you  would 
account  for  many  mercies  that  have 
departed,  if  you  would  insure  perman- 
ence to  those  that  are  yet  left,  examine 
how  deficient  you  may  hitherto  have 
been,  and  strive  to  be  more  diligent  for 
the  future,  in  obeying  an  admonition 
which  implies  that  we  should  be  guided 
by  the  soft  lustres  of  the  eye,  if  our  ob- 
duracy did  not  render  indispensable  the 
harsh  constraints  of  the  rein," — Henry 
Melville. 


Sorrow  and  Mercy  justly  Distributed. 


I.  The  sorrows  of  the  wicked  (ver. 
10).  1.  Many.  2.  Self  caused.  3. 
Inevitable.  ''Wicked."  This  is  their 
character,  and  their  lot  corresponds. 
They  refuse  instruction.  In  pride  and 
obstinacy  they  persist  in  their  own  evil 
thoughts  and  evil  ways,  and  pierce  them- 
selves through  with  many  sorrows. 
And  though  God  has  provided  a  way  of 
pardon  they  reject  it.  This  is  tlieir 
damning  sin.  A  rejected  Saviour  is 
hell. 

"  He  endures — 
What  does  he  not  ?    From  lusts  opposing  in 

vain, 
And  self  reproaching  conscience.     He  foresees 
Tlie  fatal  issue  to  his  health,  fame,  peace, 
Fortune,  and  dignity  ;  the  loss  of  all 
That  can  ennoble  man,  and  make  frail  life, 
Short  as  it  is,  supportable.     Still  worse — 
Far  worse  than  all  the  plagues  with  which  his 

sins 
Infect  his  happiest  moments,  he  forebodes 
Ages  of  hopeleoS  misery." — COWPEU. 

II.  The  mercy  promised  to  the 
righteous.  Mark  their — 1.  Character. 
"Trusteth    in    the    Lord."      2.    Their 


blessedness.  "  Mercy  shall  compass  him 
about."  "  He  shall  be  surrounded  with 
mercy,  as  one  is  by  the  air,  or  by  the 
sunlight." — Barnes.  "  Mercy  "  for  soul 
and  body.  "  Mercy  "  on  every  side  and 
at  every  turn.  "  Mercy  "  amid  all  the 
varied  trials  of  life.  "  Mercy  "  at  death 
and  judgment,  and  for  ever  and  ever. 
"  Mark  that  text,"  said  Richard  Atkins 
to  his  grandson  who  was  reading  to  him 
this  psalm.  "  I  read  it  in  my  youth 
and  believed  it,  and  now  I  read  it  in 
my  old  age,  and  thank  God,  /  know  it  to 
be  true.  Oh  !  it  is  a  blessed  thing  in 
the  midst  of  the  joys  and  sorrows  of 
the  world  to  trust  in  the  Lord." 

Think  of  the  light  thrown  upon  both 
of  these  truths  by  the  Word  of  God,  the 
experience  of  men,  and  especially  by  the 
Cross  of  Christ.  Let  the  sufferings  and 
death  of  Jesus  show  the  evil  of  sin,  and 
the  certain  ruin  of  the  ungodly.  Let 
the  example  and  life  of  Jesus  show  the 
blessedness  of  obedience,  and  the  eternal 
joy  of  all  who  trust  in  the  Lord, 


Joy  in  the  Lord  Christ. 
{Verse  II.) 


I.  Because  of  the  beauty  of   His 
character.     Everytliing  meets  in  Him 
152 


that  is  perfect.     He  is  supremely  lovely 

and  lovesome. 


no  Ml  LET  IC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  xxxin. 


"  Intellectual  culture  may  make  inde- 
finite progress,  the  natural  sciences  may 
push  forth  their  liaiits  and  gain  in  pro- 
fundity and  extent,  the  human  mind 
may  expand  as  it  will,  but  it  vA'ill  never 
surpass  the  moral  culture  of  Christianity 
as  seen  in  the  Gospels." — Goethe. 

"  Only  one  life  there  is  without  a  stain, 
Accomplishing  the  Father's  perfect  will, 
With  highest  aim,  yot  never  aimed  in  vain, 
Attempting   nought  whicli   must   be   tried 

again  : 
Even  all  the  thoughts  of  God  it  did  fulfil. 

"  Perfect  the  sinless  beauty  of  His  ways. 
Perfect  the  wisdom  of  His  faithful  love; 
Perfect  the   trust   that  walked   with    God 

always, — 
Perfect  in  suffering,  perfect  in  the  praise 
Which  still  like  incense  rose  to   Heaven 

above. 

**  Oh  !  fairer  thou  than  sons  of  men  !  and  yet 

Not  terrible  Thy  beauty.     In  sweet  accord 
All  tender  graces  in  Thy  being  met, 
And  of  their  fulness  all  Thy  people  get, 
Still  growing  to  the  fulness  of  their  Lord." 
— Walter  Smith. 

II.  Because  of  the  splendour  of  His 
achievements.  His  victories  are  moral. 
He  has  vanquished  sin  and  death.  He 
still  goes  forth  "  conquering  and  to  con- 
quer." Wherever  truth  prevails,  and 
righteousness  is  established,  and  im- 
mortal souls  are  rescued  from  sin  and 
woe,  and  brought  back  to  love  and  holi- 
ness, there  we  behold  the  wuiks  of  the 
Son  of  God. 

III.  Because  of  the  blessedness  of 
His  reign.  The  call  to  "  rejoice  "  finds  a 
response  in  every  true  heart.  It  is  obeyed, 
not  from  constraint,  but  willingly;  not  so 


much  as  a  duty  as  a  delight.  It  is  the 
irrepressible  impulse  of  admiration,  gra- 
titude, and  love.  When  the  poet  Car- 
pani  asked  his  friend  Haydn  how  it 
happened  that  his  church  music  was  so 
cheerful,  the  beautiful  answer  was,  "  I 
cannot  make  it  otherwise ;  I  write  accord- 
ing to  the  thoughts  I  feel.  When  I 
think  upon  God,  my  heart  is  so  full  of 
joy  that  the  notes  dance  and  leap,  as  it 
were,  from  my  pen ;  and  since  God  has 
given  me  a  cheerful  heart,  it  will  be  par- 
doned me  that  I  serve  Him  with  a  cheer- 
ful spirit." —  Whitecross  Anecdotes.  "  Be- 
yond the  sea  was  a  noble  lady,  on  whose 
house  alway  the  sun  shone  on  the  day, 
and  on  the  night  the  moon.  Of  this 
many  men  marvelled.  At  the  last,  the 
fame  of  this  came  to  the  Bishop,  a  worthy 
man,  and  he  went  for  to  see  her,  hoping 
that  she  was  of  gvQut  penance  in  clothing, 
or  in  meat,  or  in  other  things.  And 
when  he  came  he  saw  her  alway  merry 
and  glad.  The  Bishop  said,  '  Dame,  what 
eat  ye  1 '  She  answered,  and  said,  *  Divers 
meats,  and  delicate.'  Then  he  asked  if 
she  used  the  hair  (the  haircloths).  She 
said,  Nay.  After  this  the  Bishop  mar- 
velled. And  when  he  had  taken  his 
leave  of  the  lady,  and  was  gone  his  way, 
he  thought  he  would  ask  her  more  of 
another  thing,  and  went  again  to  her, 
and  said,  *  Love  ye  not  michle  Jesus 
Christ  ? '  She  said,  *  Yes,  I  love  Him^ 
for  He  is  all  my  love;  for  when  I  think 
of  His  sweetness  J  may  not  ivUhh.old  my- 
self for  gladness  ami  //a'.  .A.'" — Quoted 
by  Lord  Lyndsay  from  "  Gesta  Ro- 
manorum." 


PSALM    XXXIIL 

Introduction. 

"This  psalm  is  a  fit  companion,  but  by  no  means  the  second  half,  of  the  preceding  one, 
being  distinct  from  it  both  in  matter  and  form.  It  indicates  a  more  tranquil  frame  of  mind, 
such  as  flows  from  the  calm  assurance  of  peace  with  God.  There  is  nothing  against  its 
being  of  the  time  and  from  the  pen  of  David.  It  consists  of  twenty-two  verses,  like  the 
alphabetic  psalms.  It  celebrates  the  praise  of  the  Qod  of  providence  and  grace.  It  falls 
into  two  halves  of  eleven  verses  each.  Between  three  verses  of  adoration  at  the  beginning, 
and  three  of  devotion  at  the  end,  stand  eight  yerses  on  the  creative,  and  eight  on  the  saving 
Word  of  God." — Murj^hy, 


153 


PBALMZXXUL 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PS  ALMS, 


The  Character  of  True  Worship. 
{Verses  1-3.) 


I.  The  worship  of  God  is  the  chief 
joy  of  the  good.  "  Ye  righteous,"  ye 
who  have  the  new  heart,  and  so  have 
accepted  the  mercy  of  God,  and  are 
accepted  by  Him." — Murphy.  "  Ke- 
joice,"  i.e.,  exult,  shout  for  joy.  "  The 
Hebrew  verb,  according  to  etymologists, 
originally  means  to  dance  for  joy,  and  is 
therefore  a  very  strong  expression  for 
the  liveliest  exultation." — Alexander, 
Joy  is  the  soul  of  worship. 

II.  The  worship  of  God  is  the  high- 
est duty  of  the  good.  1.  It  is  agree- 
able to  their  character,  "  The  upright." 
"  Praise  in  the  mouth  of  a  sinner  is  like 
an  oracle  in  the  lips  of  a  fool  :  how  un- 
comely is  it  for  him  to  praise  God  whose 
whole  life  is  a  dishonour  to  God  !  The 
godly  are  only  fit  to  be  choristers  in  God's 
praise." — Thomas  Watson.  2.  It  is 
agreeable  to  their  obligations.  **  Those 
who  have  received  from  God  a  right 
spirit  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  have 
a  twofold  obligation  to  praise  Him," — 
Murphy.  3.  It  is  agreeable  to  their 
circumstances.  Placed  in  the  midst  of 
God's  works,  and  daily  receiving  fresh 
proofs  of  His  loving-kindness  in  provi- 
dence and  grace,  the  upright  are  always 
in  fitting  circumstances  for  praise. 

III.  The  worship  of  God  is  the 
noblest  employment  of  the  good. 
*'  Praise  the  Lord  with  harp."  This  is 
the  first  time  musical  instruments  are 
referred  to  in  the  psalms.  It  is  impos- 
sible now  to  ascertain  the  precise  form 
of  the  "  harp,"  and  the  "  psaltery,"  and 
the  "  lute  of  ten  strings."  The  chief 
thing  to  notice  is,  that  they  were  used 


as  accompaniments  and  supports  to  the 
voice,  as  if  the  voice  were  too  weak  by 
itself  to  utter  the  Divine  praises.  In- 
struments of  varied  power  and  sweetness 
were  employed,  so  as  to  secure  the 
grandest  effects.  Ver.  3:  "'Singurto 
Him  a  new  song,'  not  here  one  which 
has  new  marvels  of  God's  power  and 
grace  for  its  theme,  as  in  xl.  3,  xcviii.  1 
{cf.  Rev.  xiv.  3),  but  rather  one  which 
springs  freshly  from  a  thankful  and  re- 
joicing heart, — one  which  seeks  to  put 
an  old  theme  to  a  new  light." — Perowne, 
"  Play  skilfully."  Do  your  best  in  play- 
ing. '*  With  a  loud  noise."  Music 
should  not  only  be  correct  in  execution, 
but  joyous  in  spirit.  The  whole  heart 
should  be  thrown  into  it. 

The  worship  of  God  in  song  combines 
— 1.  Ui2ity  and  variety.  While  there 
may  be  both  vocal  and  instrumental 
music,  there  should  be  but  one  spirit. 

2.  Sameness  and  freshness.  The  same 
old  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs  may  be  sung,  and  yet  there  may 
be  the  freshness  of  ever-new  wonder, 
love,  and  praise,  while  "  new  songs " 
may  evermore  spring  from  the  heart  of 
the  revived  Church, 

3.  Devotion  and  art.  There  is  scope 
for  the  highest  efforts  of  genius  in  the 
service  of  song.  Music  should  be  cul- 
tivated. Religion  and  science  should  go 
together.  We  should  give  our  very  best 
to  God. 

4.  Fellowship  and  individuality. 
While  the  service  is  that  of  the  congrega- 
tion, every  separate  heart  should  take 
part^ 


The  Reasonableness  of  Worship, 
(Verses  4-22.) 


"For"    introduces   the    reasons   for 
praising  God.     The  order  of  the  thought 


I.  He  is  the  God  of  creation. 

We  are  called  to  notice — 1.  The  moral 
is  sufficiently  marked  to  admit  of  the  character  of  God  (vers.  4,  5).  Words 
subject  being  treated  under  the  heads  of  and  works  are  the  exponents  of  charac- 
creation,  providence,  and  redemption,  ter.  The  "word"  is  the  idea,  and  the 
God  is  to  be  worshipped,  because —  "  work  "  is  the  fact.     The  "  word  *'  is 

154 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


raALM  ZZZIII. 


the  promise,  and  the    "work"    is   the 
performance.     It  is  by  His  words  and 
works  that  God  reveals  Himself.     They 
are  the  expression  and  embodiment  of 
His  eternal  purpose.     And  the  great  at- 
tributes which  are  seen  in  beautiful  har- 
mony in  all   God's  words  and  works  are 
Righteousness     and     Goodness.        "  He 
loveth  righteousness,"  i.e.,  it  is  His  habit 
and  delight.      "  The  earth  is  full  of  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord,"  as  conspicuously 
as  the  heaven  with  stars,  as  completely 
as  the  sea  with  waters.     *' Righteousness 
and  goodness"  are,  as  it  were,  incarnated 
in  God's  words  and  works,  to   be  the 
study  and  delight  of  His  people  for  ever. 
2.  The  glory   of  creation.      "  From 
the    present    proofs  of   God's    love    in 
the  earth,  the  thoughts  of    the  sacred 
poet  naturally    goes  back  to  the  crea- 
tion of  all  things,  and  as  He  had  be- 
fore declared  what  the  *  word '  and  the 
*  work  '  of  Jehovah  are  in  their  essen- 
tial characters  (ver.  4),  so  now  He  de- 
scribes   further    the    operation  of    that 
word,  and  the  work  which  results  there- 
from."— Peroivne.     Ver.     6.     There   is 
allusion  here  to  the  history  of  Creation 
in  Genesis.     First  the  mode,  and  then 
the  extenty  of  the  Divine  working  are 
described.     "  By  the  word  of  the  Lord 
were  the  heavens  made."     *'The  word," 
"  the  creative  mandate"  (Gen.  i.  1).  "All 
the  host,"  the  universe  of  things  in  their 
perfect  order.    This  verse  has  special  re- 
ference to  the  work  of  the  second  day. 
"Gathereth  the  waters."     The  primary 
allusion  here  is  to  the  work  of  the  third 
day.     The  verse,  however,  expresses  not 
a  finished  act,but  a  continued  process,  dis- 
playing its  variations  in  the  dividing  of 
the  Red  Sea  and  the  Jordan.     Vers.  8,  9. 
The   consequent    obligation  to  worship 
God,  "Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord." 
This  carries  on  the  thought  to  the  second 
act  of  the  third  day,  by  which  the  dry 
land  was  clothed  with  vegetation,  and  the 
way  prepared  for  the  creation  of  animals 
and   of  man.     The   parallel  of  all  the 
earth  is  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  habi- 
table globe. — Murphy.     "  The  heavens 
and  the  sea  are  mentioned  as  the  theatre 
•  of  God's  almighty  power,  as  the  earth 
before,    of    His    loving-kindness ;    and 
thus   the   universe   is   summed  up," — 


Perowne.  The  argument  is  that  Jehovah 
is  the  omnipotent  Creator,  and  that  we 
who  are  all  His  creatures,  should  worship 
Him  with  Holy  reverence. 

II.  He  is  the  God  of  providence. 

"After  speaking  of  God's  power  in 
creation,  the  psalmist  goes  on  to  speak 
of  His  providence  as  ordering  the  world." 
— Perowne.  The  providence  of  God  is 
characterised  as — 1.  All  Wise  (ver.  10). 
He  who  created  and  sustains  the  uni- 
verse, can  overrule  or  frustrate  the  de- 
signs of  man,  whether  as  individuals  or 
nations,  according  as  He  deems  right. 
We  have  a  signal  example  of  this  in  the 
history  of  Babel. 

There  is  a  contrast  here  between  "the 
counsels"  of  men  and  the  "counsel"  of 
the  Lord.  Men  come  and  go,  and  their 
thoughts  are  like  the  changing  clouds, 
but  God  moves  on  in  His  ordained 
path,  like  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  with 
unswerving  fidelity.  The  counsels  of 
men  are  like  the  edicts  of  arbitrary 
kings,  which  come  to  nought ;  but  Je- 
hovah's counsels  are  His  eternal  and 
benign  purpose,  which  He  works  out  by 
His  almighty  power,  from  generation  to 
generation.  This  holds  true,  not  only 
with  regard  to  God's  providence  in  genera  1, 
but  also  with  regard  to  His  providence 
in  its  special  bearing  on  His  people. 
Hence  the  glad  burst  of  praise  (ver.  12), 
"  Blessed  is  the  nation  whose  God  is 
the  Lord,  and  the  people  whom  He  hath 
chosen  for  His  own  inheritance." 

2.  All  Seeing  (vers.  13-15).  "  He 
not  only  observes  men's  doings,  but 
knows  their  hearts,  as  having  created 
them." — Perowne.  "  From  the  place  of 
His  dwelling"  (ver.  14).  This  is  a 
coincidence  with  the  Song  of  Moses 
(Ex.  XV.  17).  This  is  His  dwelling- 
place  above,  of  which  earth  is  an  adum- 
bration. "  Fashioneth  their  hearts  alike'* 
(ver.  15).  "  The  principle  of  reason 
in  one  heart  is  the  identical  with  that 
in  every  other.  Hence  the  capacity  of 
mutual  understanding  and  the  certainty 
of  human  knowledge,  as  far  as  the  moral 
reason  retains  its  balance.  *  He  con- 
sidereth,'  not  only  understands,  but  ob- 
serves with  attention  the  conduct  of  His 
responsible  creatures.  There  is  a  philo- 
sophy of  human  nature  here." — Murphy. 

165 


FSALU  XXXIII. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


3.  All  Mighty  (vers.  16,  17).  "  The 
weakness  and  insufficiency  of  all  buman 
power,  however  great,  as  before  of  all 
human  intellect.  'King  and  mighty  man 
and  horse'  {i.e.,  war-horse,  as  elsewhere, 
*  chariot  and  liorse  ')  are  selected  as  types 
of  earthly  power  in  all  its  greatness." — 
— Perowne. 

**  People  of  God,  he  means  to  say,  let 
not  the  world  persuade  you  that  the 
throne,  on  which  your  king  is  seated,  is 
an  idle  easy  chair  ;  no,  He  is  seated  on 
a  throne,  on  a  judgment-seat,  from  the 
lofty  eminence  of  which  proceed  the 
destinies  of  the  world.  People  of  God, 
he  means  to  say,  firmly  believe  that  all 
things  are  either  openly  or  in  a  hidden 
manner  subject  to  the  influence  of  His 
might ;  not  only  the  works  of  men, 
which  are  evidently  so,  since  the  issue 
never  rests  with  them,  but  also  the  secret 
movings  of  their  hearts,  which  God 
can  strike  with  blindness,  and  can 
make  foolish  the  understanding  of  the 
})rudent,  and  wise  the  heart  of  babes. 
People  of  God,  believe  not  in  appear- 
ances according  to  which  kings  conquer 
by  their  might,  and  warriors  triumph  in 
battle  by  the  strength  of  their  horses;  it  is 
appearance  only,  for,  as  all  earthly  power 
is  borrowed  from  the  Governor  of  the 
worhl.  He  may  withdraw  it  at  any  time, 
and  give  it  to  whomsoever  He  pleases  ; 
so  that  all  the  victories  on  earth  are  won 
by  His  strength." — TholucTc. 

III.  The  God  of  redemption  (vers. 
18-22).  While  mortal  strength  is  vain 
for  defence  and  security,  they  who 
fear  the  Lord  and  hope  in  His  mercy 
shall  be  safe  under  Jehovah's  eye,  and 
kept  by  His  almighty  "power,  through 
faith  unto  salvation."     God  is  the  only 


true  deliverer.  His  deliverance  reaches 
to  the  soul,  and  transcends  all  the  perils 
of  time  and  all  the  powers  of  evil. 
"  While  such  omnipotence  terrifies  those 
who  love  not  the  Lord,  it  is  rich  in 
consolation  to  those  who  hope  in  His 
mercy.  The  whole  people  commit  them- 
selves to  the  Lord,  rejoicing  in  Him  and 
trusting  in  His  name"  —  Tholuck, 
"  Antigonus,  king  of  Syria,  being  ready 
to  give  battle  near  the  Isle  of  Andreos, 
sent  out  a  squadron  to  watch  the  motions 
of  his  enemies,  and  to  descry  their 
strength ;  return  was  made  that  they 
had  more  ships,  and  better  manned,  than 
he  had.  *  How,'  says  Antigonus,  *  that 
cannot  be,  for  how  many  dost  thou  reckon 
mg,'  intimating  that  the  dignity  ^of  a 
general  weighed  down  many  others, 
especially  when  poised  with  valour  and 
experience.  And  where  is  valour,  where 
is  experience  to  be  found,  if  not  in  God  % 
He  is  the  Lord  of  Hosts;  with  Him 
alone  is  strength  and  power  to  deliver 
Israel  out  of  all  her  troubles.  He  may 
do  it.  He  can  do  it.  He  will  do  it.  He 
is  wise  in  heart  and  mighty  in  strength, 
besides  Him  there  is  no  Saviour,  no 
Deliverer.  He  is  a  shield  to  the  right- 
eous, strength  to  the  weak,  a  refuge  to 
the  oppressed." — John  Spencer. 

"Dear  dying  Lamb  !  Thy  precious  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power, 
Till  all  the  ransomed  Church  of  God 
Be  saved,  to  sin  no  more. 

E'er  since,  by  faith,  I  saw  the  stream 

Thy  flowing  wounds  supply  ; 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  themes 

And  shall  be  till  I  die. 

Then  in  a  nobler,  sweeter  song, 

I'll  sing  Thy  power  to  save  ; 
When  this  poor  lisping  stammering  tongut 

Lies  silent  in  the  grave."—  Ck)W^» 


Three  Aspects  of  Piety, 
(Fmcs  20-22.) 


I.    Piety    waiting    on    the    Lord. 

"  Our  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord."  Wait- 
ing is  an  attitude  of  soul.  It  is  holding 
one's  self  still  till  the  accomplishment  of 
some  expected  event.  It  is,  therefore, 
patience  and  expectation  united.  "  We 
wait ''  for  the  day,  that  we  may  work. 
We  wait  for  the  spring  to  sow  and  the 
156 


harvest  to  reap.  But  waiting  is  con- 
sistent with  action.  It  is  not  only  test- 
ing and  disciplinary,  but  it  implies 
right  use  of  means  and  opportunities, 
working  while  it  is  day,  and  sowing  and 
reaping  as  the  seasons  of  God  come 
round.  True  waiting  implies  faith  in 
God's  love.      Heedfulness  of  His  will 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  ZXXIT. 


(Ps.  cxxiii.  3).  Intense  desire  for  His 
blessing  (Ps.  cxxx.  6).  Diligent  use  of 
all  the  means  of  grace.  And  what  en- 
couragement we  have  here  to  wait 
upon  Him.  *'  For  He  is  our  kelp  and 
shield.'^ 

II.  Piety  rejoicing  in  God.  '*Onr 
heart  shall  rejoice  in  Him."  This  is  not 
merely  rejoicing  in  God's  Word  and 
works,  but  rejoicing  in  Himself.  This  is 
the  highest  attainment  of  piety.  But  this 
joy  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  faith.  "  Because 
we  have  trusted  in  His  holy  name." 
The  more  we  know  of  God's  grace  in 


Christ,  the  more  shall  our  hearts  exult 
in  Him. 

III.  Piety  praying  to  God.  "Let 
Thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  upon  us,  accord- 
ing as  we  hope  in  Thee."  This  prayei 
is  marked  by  humility^  *' Mercy"  is 
sought,  mercy  for  the  sinner,  the  mercy 
of  the  Lord  which  bringeth  salvation. 
This  prayer  is  also  marked  by  faith. 
It  implies  confidence  in  God's  grace  and 
in  His  promises,  and  in  the  reality  of 
His  Spirit's  work  in  the  heart.  The 
hope  He  begets  He  will  not  put  to 
shame  (Matt.  ix.  29). 


PSALM  XXXIV. 

Introduction. 

'*  This  psalm  it  assigned  by  the  superscription  to  the  occasion  when  Darid,  persecuted  by 

Saul,  fled  to  the  Philistines,  and  being  brought  before  Achish  was  driven  away  by  him  as  a 
madman  (1  Sam.  xxi.  22,  see  Ps.  7).  There  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  the  historical 
validity  of  this  statement.  The  psalms  generally  rise  above  the  level  of  the  particular  occasion, 
and  dwell  on  general  principles,  and  so  it  is  here.  This  psalm  is  eucharistic  and  didactic.  It 
is  full  of  thankfulness  to  the  Almighty  Dehverer,  who  defends  the  penitent  against  the  ungodly. 
It  is  a  lesson  from  experience  for  those  who  are  tempted  and  afflicted.  It  is  the  second  of  the 
alphabetic  psalms  (Ps.  xxv.),  the  letter  vau  being  omitted,  and  a  second  pe  added  at  the  end." — 
Murphy.  "  This  psalm  was  selected  by  the  ancient  Church  to  be  a  communion  song  (Cyrill. 
Catech.  Myst.  v.  1?)  ;  and  from  the  expression,  *  Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  k  good,'  and 
from  its  evangelical  strain,  it  was  well  adapted  for  this  purpose." — Murphjf, 


A  SONQ  OF  Pbaisb. 
{Verses  1-7.) 


*'  Every  day  of  a  pious  man's  life  is 
marked  with  the  monuments  and  tokens 
of  the  mercy  of  God,  so  that  he  has 
every  day  to  sing  a  new  song.  But  each 
separate  experience  of  that  kind  should  fill 
our  heart  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  furnish 
the  theme  of  gratitude  and  praise  for  the 
entire  period  of  our  lives.  With  a  feeling 
of  this  kind  we  see  David  celebrate  the 
deliverance  he  has  just  experienced." — 
Tholuch     We  should  praise  God — 

I.  For  what  He  is  in  Himself. 
"The  Lord  'Jehovah.'"  "This  is  the 
only  name  of  God  in  the  psalm.  The 
self-existent  Creator  is  the^great  watch- 
word of  the  intelligent  creation." — 
Murphy.  Contemplation  of  God's  cha- 
racter calls  forth  praise.  This  praise  is, 
1.   Free.      "I   will."      It  is  from  the 


heart.  It  is  a  life,  not  a  form ;  a  delight, 
not  a  burden,  2.  Constant.  "At  all 
times  ;  '*  circumstances  alter,  but  God 
changes  not.  In  adversity  and  in  pros- 
perity, in  the  dark  hour  of  sorrow  as 
in  the  bright  moments  of  joy,  God 
claims  our  praise.  "Continually,"  the 
lamps,  the  shew-bread,  the  daily  sacrifice, 
the  priests  ministering  in  the  tabernacle 
continually,  were  witnesses  to  the  per- 
petuity of  spiritual  worship  (Ex.  xxv. 
30,  xxvii.  20,  xxix.  42).  3.  Exulting. 
"  Boast,"  "  glory,*'  t>.,  "  to  exult  in  the 
possession  and  enjoyment  of  some  ad- 
mired and  beloved  object." — Alexander. 
Many  glory  in  their  strength,  in  their 
riches,  in  their  learning,  in  their  religion. 
God  is  the  true  object  of  glory.  He  alone 
can  satiafy  and  bless  the  soul  for  ever 

157 


PSALM  xxxnr. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  PSALMS, 


(Jer.  ix.  23,  24).    4.  Influential     "The 
humble,  i.e.,  the  poor  and  needy,  or  the 
meek   who   bow   their   hearts   to  God. 
The    boastings    of   the  worldly  are   an 
offence.     They  have  the  bad  odour  of 
selfishness.      But  the    extolling  of   the 
Lord  is  pleasant  to  the  ear  of  His  people, 
and  strikes  a  chord  of  sympathy  in  their 
inmost  hearts.     As  one  touch  of  nature 
makes  the  whole  world  kin,  so  one  touch 
of  grace  makes  the  whole  Church  kin. 
As  one  songster  in  the  morning  wakens  the 
music  of  the  grove,  so  one  soul  hymning 
the  praise  of  Jehovah  calls  forth  the  voices 
of  other  kindred  souls,  till  the  Church 
resounds  with  songs  of  praise  (ver.   3). 
5.  Social,     "  O  magnify  the  Lord  with 
me."     It   is  not  that   we   can   add  to 
God's  glory.  He  is  infinite,  eternal,  and 
unchangeable.     Nothing  we  do  can  in- 
crease or  diminish  His  glory.     But  His 
name  may  be  said  to  grow  in  glory  as  it 
is  made  known  ;  and  His  character  to 
stand  higher  in  the  sight  of  men,  as  He 
becomes  more  and  more  the    supreme 
object  of  trust  and  love.     "  Let  us  exalt 
His  name  together."     Here  is  the  place 
for  union  and  concert ;  social  worship 
is  the  craving  of  the  new  heart,  and  the 
outgrowth  of  the  new  life.      In  heaven  it 
finds  its  highest  expression,  and  earth  is 
the  likest  heaven,  where  it  most  abounds. 
II.  For    what    He    does    for    His 
people  (vers.  4-7).     1.  Personal  deliver- 
ances  (ver.  4).     This  may  refer  to  God's 
rescue  of  David  in  the  land  of  the  Philis- 
tines.      He    was    then   in   great   peril. 
There  were  fears  on  every  side.     His 
own  conscience  was  not  free,  for  in  bis 
selfish  care  to  save  his  life  he  had  sinned 
against  truth  and  against  God.     But  in 
his   straits   he   sought  the    Lord.     Sin 
should  not  deter  us  from  prayer.     Rather 
should  the  sense  of  sin  make  us  pray 
the  more  earnestly.     We  have  an  Advo- 
cate with  God  the  Father.     There  are 
gifts   even   for  the   rebellious.     Where 
sin  abounded  grace   hath   much   more 
abounded,     **  He  delivered  me  from  all 
my   fears."      "  To   have    delivered    me 
from  all  my  troubles  had  been  a  great 
favour,  but  a  far  greater  to  deliver  me 
from  all  my  fears  ;  for  where  that  would 
have   but   freed  me  from  present  evil, 
this  secures  me  from  eyil  to  come,  that 
158 


now  I  enjoy  not  only  tranquillity,  but 
security — a  privilege  only  of  the  godly. 
The  wicked  may  be  free  from  trouble, 
but  can  they  be  free  from  fear  'i  No ; 
God  knows,  though  they  be  not  in 
trouble  like  other  men,  yet  they  live  in 
more  fear  than  other  men." — Baker. 

2.  Brighter  days  for  the  afflicted, 
"They  looked,"  viz.,  the  afilicted  men- 
tioned in  ver.  2 ;  or  it  may  only  mean 
generally,  "  men  looked ;"  others,  i.e.y 
besides  myself,  have  in  like  manner 
experienced  God's  lovingkindness. 
"Were  lightened,"  t.e.,  "  were  bright  with 
gladness  because  He  heard  them,  re- 
flecting, as-  it  were,  the  light  of  His 
countenance"  {cf,  iv.  6). — Perowne. 
Here  is  the  look  of  the  soul  to  God,  and 
the  quick  response  of  God,  as  when  the 
Israelites  looked  to  the  serpent  of  brass 
and  were  healed  (Numb.  xxi.  9),  and 
sinners  look  on  Him  whom  they  pierced 
(Zech.  xii.  11),  and  their  hearts  are 
melted  to  penitential  sorrow.  "  Light- 
ened." "  This  is  the  precise  answer  to 
a  look.  The  light  of  the  truth,  the 
promise,  and  the  countenance  of  God, 
fill  and  illuminate  the  eyes  of  the  souL" 
— Murphy,  How  often  is  this  fulfilled. 
Remember  Gideon.  Hence,  instead  of 
the  blush  of  shame,  there  is  the  bright- 
ness of  joy  ;  instead  of  the  shudder  of 
fear,  there  is  the  song  of  victory.  Each 
one,  as  he  remembers  what  God  has 
done,  speaks  as  for  himself.  "  This 
poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard." 

3.  Divine  guardianship  for  the  godly 
to  the  end.  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord." 
This  remarkable  phrase  occurs  only  twice 
in  the  psalms,  here,  and  in  the  next 
psalm.  It  denotes  one  who  is  at  the 
same  time  the  angel  of  Jehovah  and 
Jehovah  Himself  (Gen.  xvi.  7  ;  Ex. 
xxiii.  20).  *'He  is  God  manifest  to  man, 
and  mediating  for  man." — Murphy, 
"  Encampeth."  There  may  be  reference 
here  to  what  Jacob  said  when  the  angels 
met  him  (Gen.  xxxii.  1,  2).  "  This  is 
God's  host,  and  he  called  the  name  of 
that  place  Mahanaim "  (two  camps). 
The  angel  ht)st  is  under  the  headship  of 
Christ,  and  charged  with  the  care  of 
His  people.  "  Are  they  not  all  minister- 
ing spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ! " 


1 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS,  MALMZZn?. 


Three  Views  of  RELiaiON. 
(Verses  8-10.) 

1.  What  religion  is.     Plainly  it  is  of  great  importance.     It  is  so   among 

Bomething  belonging  to  the  soul,  not  a  men  ;    much   more  with  God.      If  the 

ritual,  but  a  life.     It  is  also  something  relations  of  the  soul  to  God  are  wrong, 

personal,  as  between  the  soul  and  God,  ail  is  wrong.     If  the  relations  of  the 

and  not  any  service  which  can  be  ren-  soul  to  God  are  right,  all  will  be  right, 

dered  for  us  by  priest  or  proxy.     It  is  Now,  in  religion,   '*  the  heart  is  made 

suggested  here  that  religion  consists  in  right   with    God."     There   is    *'  trust " 

— 1.   Personal  faith  that  God  is  good.  (ver.    8).     There  is  reverential  "fear" 

2.  Personal  devotedness  to  God  as  good,  (ver.  9).     There  is  holy  aspiration  and 

3.  Personal  communion  vdth  God  as  endeavour,    the    continual    seeking   of 
ffood.  God  (ver.  10). 

"  Religion  in  the  understanding  is  the  2.  Effects  a  moral  transformation  of 

knowledge  of  God  (Hos.  iv.  1) ;  of  His  character  (ver.  9).    '*  Fear  the  Lord,  ye 

will  and  commandments  ',  it  is  the  know-  His  saints."     *'  This  is  the  moral  conse- 

ledge  of  His 'mystery' or  secret  counsel  quence   of    becoming   acquainted   with 

revealed  in  Christ  (Eph.  i.  17).     When  God    and    His   goodness."  —  Murphy, 

the  Jewish  law  had  been  given,  religion  Those  who  are   in   a  right  relation  to 

was  practically  a  *  walking  in  the  law  God,  and  who  love  and  trust  Him,  are 

of  the  Lord '  (Ps.  cxix.  \  y  cf  Lukei.  6) ;  not  only   "  His   saints  "   in   respect  to 

when  the  Christian  revelation  has  been  consecration,  but  they  become  more  and 

made  it  is  an  *  acknowledgment  of  the  more   "  His    saints "   as    regards    chor 

truth    which  is   after   godliness  *    (Tit.  racier, 

i.  1).     But  in  this  truth,  in  that  law,  it  3.  Ensures  the  highest  blessedness  of 

seeks  a  Person  ;  it  is  fundamentally  the  being  {\eT,\Qi),  "The  young  lions  are  here 

maintenance  of  a  real  relation  with  the  the  representatives  of  those  who  glory 

Personal  God,  or  with  a  Divine  Person,  in  their  own  strength  and  resources." — 

really  incarnate  in  Jesus  Christ.     Ac-  Murphy,     The  meaning  is,  "  that  while 

cordingly   religion,    both    Jewish    and  the  most  powerful  and  least  scrupulous 

Christian,   is  described  as  a  covenant ;  of  men  may  be  reduced  to  want,  the 

it  is  a  bond  or  understanding  between  people  of  God  shall  be  abundantly  and 

the  nature,  or  the  soul,  and  God,  or  still  constantly   provided    for." — Alexander. 

more,  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  faith  {Cf  Jobiv.  10,  11  ;  Ps.  Ivii.  4  ;  Nahura 

which  worketh  by  love,  it  is  personal  ii.   12-14;  Ezek.   xix.    2,  xxxviii.   13; 

communion   with   God   (1   John  i.    3).  Is.  xl.  30,  31).     "  They  shall  not  want 

Thus  religious  life  is  more  than  feeling,  any  good." 

than  knowledge,  than   obedience  to  a  III.  What   Religion  deserves  (ver. 

moral   code.     It   is   the    sacred    bond  10).     This   is  the  language  of   experi- 

freely  accepted,  generously,  enthusiasti-  ence.     It  breathes  faith,  and  hope,  and 

cally,    persistently  welcomed,    whereby  love.      It  is  an  appeal  to  the  deepest 

the  soul  engages  to  make  a  continuous  feelings  of  the  heart.     It  implies  that  if 

expenditure  of   its   highest  powers   in  men  would  only  make  trial  of  religion 

attaching  itself  to  the  personal  source  for  themselves,  they  could  not  fail  to  be 

and    Object    of    its    being."  —  Canon  convinced  of  its  supreme  excellence. 

Liddon.  Religion  deserves — 1.  Earnest  study, 

II.  What  religion  does.     It  is  tho-  We  are    bound  to    investigate.      That 

roughly  practical.     It  is  God*s  power  in  only  is  truth  to  us  which  commends  it- 

the  soul,  and  worketh  in  every  one  to  self  to  our  own  conscience.     Our  faith 

bring  us  nearer  and  nearer  to  Himself.  should  stand,  not  in  the  wisdom  of  men, 

1.  Establishes  right  relations  between  but  in  the   power  of    God.       "  Search 

the  tout  and  God,     Right  relations  are  the  Scriptures."     Remember  how  th« 

159 


raALMxxxnr. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Boreans  were  praised  for  their  inde- 
pendent and  earnest  examination  of  the 
truth  (Actsxvii.  11).  Surely  that  which 
is  the  most  wondrous  thing  in  the  world, 
and  which  concerns  us  all  so  nearly, 
should  be  personally  and  profoundly 
studied. 

2.  Personal  Trial.  **  Taste  and  see." 
Nothing  is  so  convincing  as  experience. 
Only  by  trial  can  we  truly  reialise  what 
religion  is  and  what  it  does.  It  is  one 
thing  to  hear  honey  called  sweet,  and 
another  thing  to  know  that  honey  is 
sweet,  because  we  have  tasted  it  for  our- 
selves. "  He  that  believeth  hath  the 
witness  in  himself"  {cf.  1  John  v.  10). 

3.  Hearty  commendation.  It  is  the 
duty  of  every  godly  man  to  commend 
religion  to  others.     Loyalty  to  God  and 


love  to  our  brethren  alike  bind  us  to 
this.  "We  should  be  careful  to  give  a 
just  representation,  such  as  will  attract 
instead  of  repeL  By  our  humility,  our 
patience,  our  love,  our  trust  in  God,  and 
our  purity  in  the  sight  of  men,  we  should 
be  true  witnesses  for  our  holy  religion, 
true  preachers  of  Christ. 

"  0  taste  and  see  that  God  is  good." 
This  voice  comes  to  us  from  nature, 
sounds  throughout  the  Scriptures,  and 
is  echoed  by  the  godly  of  all  generations. 
Let  us  take  it  up  for  ourselves.  "  The 
inquiry  of  truth,  which  is  the  wooing 
of  it,  the  knowledge  of  truth,  which 
is  the  presence  of  it,  and  the  belief  of 
truth,  which  is  the  enjoyment  of  it,  is 
the  sovereign  good  of  human  nature.'* 
— Bacon, 


An  Adullam  Sermon. 

(Verses  ll-U.) 


We  may  imagine  that  these  words 
formed  the  substance  of  an  address  on 
some  quiet  Sabbath  in  the  Cave  of 
Adullam. 

Consider  I.  The  Congregation. 

"We  learn  from  1  Sara.  xxii.  1,  2,  that 
David  fled  from  Achish  to  Adullam  in 
Judah.  And  "  every  one  that  was  in 
distress,  and  every  one  that  was  in  debt, 
and  every  one  that  was  discontented, 
gathered  themselves  unto  him,  and  he 
became  a  captain  over  them  ;  and  there 
were  with  him  about  four  hundred  men." 
What  a  strange  gathering  !  What  di- 
versities in  age,  and  conduct,  and  experi- 
ence !  But  they  had  much  in  common. 
They  were  involved  in  the  same  cruel 
fate,  and  animated  with  the  same  re- 
solve, to  stand  by  each  other,  and  to 
struggle  to  the  uttermost  for  life  and 
liberty  under  their  chosen  leader. 

IL  The  Preacher. 

David  was  a  man  singularly  fitted  to 
address  such  an  audience.  His  manly 
presence,  his  chivalrous  nature,  his  ro- 
mantic history,  his  fame  as  a  soldier  and 
poet,  his  identification  with  the  poor  and 
the  oppressed,  and  with  all  that  was  no- 
blest in  his  country's  history,  and  above 
all,  his  simple  faith,  must  have  given  him 
160 


an  extraordinary  position  and  power. 
While  his  men  felt  that  he  was  truly  one 
of  themselves,  they  must  have  also  felt 
that  be  was  raised  above  them,  with  a 
higher  character  and  destiny.  He 
seemed  to  them  born  to  be  a  king  of 
men.  With  what  rapt  attention  and 
eager  hopes  would  they  hang  upon  his 
lips. 

"Children."  The  word  expresses 
both  authority  and  tenderness.  As 
Venema,in  substance  expounds,  he  might 
have  called  them  children,  "  because  he 
was  about  to  be  their  teacher,  and  they 
his  disciples ;  and  again,  because  they 
were  young  men,  in  the  flower  of  their 
age,  and  as  sons,  would  be  the  builders 
up  of  his  house;  and  still  more,  because 
as  their  leader,  to  whose  discipline  and 
command  they  were  subject,  he  had  a 
right  to  address  them  as  his  children." 

—a  E,  s. 

III.  The  Sermon. 

1.  The  S2ibject  was  supremely  impor- 
tant. "  The  fear  of  the  Lord."  They 
had  common  trials,  attachments,  and 
hopes,  but  beyond  these,  they  needed 
religion — the  fear  of  Jehovah — to  unite 
their  hearts  in  the  truest  sense,  and  to 
make  them  strong. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


rSALMXXXIT. 


2.  The  treatment  was  singularly  ap- 
propriate and  effective. 

He  invites  their  attention.  "  Hearken 
unto  me." 

He  addresses  their  understanding  and 
conscience.  "  I  will  teach  you  the  fear 
of  the  Lord." 

He  appeals  to  their  affections  and 
hopes.  "  What  man  is  he  that  desireth 
life  and  loveth  many  days,  that  he  may 
see  good  1 " 

He  demands  the  obedience  of  their 
hearts  and  lives  (vers.  13,  14).  The 
tongue  must  be  kept  from  evil,  and  the 
lips  from  guile.  This  could  not  be  done 
without  the  renewal  of  the  heart,  and 
earnest  personal  effort.  They  had  many 
temptations,  wrongs  to  exasperate  them, 
the  prosperity  of  their  enemies  to  make 
them  envious  and  revengeful,  and  the 
hard  struggle  for  existence  to  make  their 
life  bitter.  Some  might  say,  they  could 
only  succeed  by  fraud  and  violence,  by 


returning  evil  for  evil.    But  not  so.    Let 

them  trust  in  God  and  do  the  right. 
Let  them  keep  themselves  pure,  and 
be  followers  of  peace.  Only  thus  could 
they  enjoy  the  favour  of  God. 

"  Life  is  happiness  -,  good  days  are 
happy  days.  Happiness  consists  in  en- 
joying God's  favour.  His  favour  is 
life.  His  loving-kindness  is  better  than 
life.  To  have  His  eye  resting  compla- 
cently on  us,  to  be  the  objects  of  His 
love  and  care,  to  have  His  ear  open  to 
our  prayers,  to  have  Him,  infinitely 
powerful,  wise,  and  good,  always  ready 
to  listen  to  our  petitions,  and  supply 
our  need ;  this  is  life,  this  is  happi- 
ness. While,  on  the  other  hand,  to 
have  His  face  set  against  us,  to  have 
His  countenance  covered  with  frowns,  to 
have  Him  looking  out  at  us  as  He  did, 
out  of  the  pillar  of  cloud,  on  the  Egyp- 
tians struggling  with  the  billows,  this  is 
misery." — Dr.  J.  Brovm  on  \st  Peter. 


God  and  His  Peoplb, 
(Verses  16-22.) 


In  the  sight  of  God  society  is  divided 
into  two  classes.  The  principle  of  classi- 
fication is  not  rank,  wealth,  learning,  or 
worldly  power,  but  character.  On  the 
one  side  are  the  righteous,  and  on  the 
other  the  wicked.  The  difference  be- 
tween them  is  vital.  They  are  utterly 
opposed  in  their  principles  and  conduct, 
and  God  recognises  this  in  His  treatment 
of  them.  It  is  the  old,  old  story,  "  The 
wages  of  sin  is  death,  but  the  gift  of 
God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ." 
God's  people  are — 

I.  The  objects  ot  His  Fatherly  re- 
gard (ver.  15).  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord 
are  upon  the  righteous,  and  His  ears  are 
open  unto  their  cry."  The  eyes  and  the 
ears  are  the  great  sources  of  intelligence. 
The  terms  as  applied  to  God  may  imply 
— 1.  Perfect  knowledge.  2.  Abiding 
sympathy.  3.  Gracious  interposition. 
As  a  father  watches  his  child,  and  is 
ever  ready  to  act  for  its  good,  so  our 
heavenly  Father  deals  with  His  people. 
They  are  individually  the  objects  of  His 
unceasing  care.     The  awful  contrast  is 


depicted  in  the  condition  of  the  wicked 
(ver.  16).  God  is  against  them,  and 
they  are  doomed  to  destruction. 

IL  The  subjects  of  His  holy  dis- 
cipline (vers.  17-21).  They  have  trials 
as  well  as  joys.  This  world  is  to  them 
often  a  scene  of  suffering.  But  they  are 
not  forsaken.  God  is  with  them.  They 
have  the  sense  of  His  love  to  cheer 
them.  They  have  the  promises  of  His 
Word  to  comfort  them.  They  have  the 
ministers  of  His  providence  an  i  Spirit 
to  chasten  and  to  profit  them.  And 
evermore  the  throne  of  grace  is  open  to 
them,  to  which  they  may  com  boldly 
in  the  name  of  Jesus,  "  that  they  may 
obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in 
time  of  need." 

The  whole  of  God's  dealings  with  His 
people  are  disciplinary.  They  are  weak 
and  sinful,  and  God  dealeth  with  them 
as  with  children.  He  is  training  them 
through  suffering  for  glory.  Affliction 
leads  to  prayer,  prayer  leads  to  increased 
faith,  and  increased  faith  to  more  of 
love,   and   patience,   and   humility,   to 

161 


rSALM  XXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


wider  sympathies,  and  nobler  aims,  and 
holier  joys.  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto 
them  that  are  of  a  broken  heart."  What 
a  comforting  word  !  The  Lord  is  nigh 
in  all  His  tenderness  and  pity,  in  all  His 
power  and  grace.  "  Many  are  the  afflic- 
tions of  the  righteous,  but  the  Lord  de- 
li vereth  them  out  of  them  all." 

Mark,  again,  the  terrible  contrast. 
"  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked,  and  they 
that  hate  the  righteous  shall  be  deso- 
late." Afflictions  are  to  them  calamities 
instead  of  chastisements.  Under  them 
they    grow   worse    instead    of    better. 


Whatever  seemed  to  be  good  in  them  is 
destroyed,  and  in  the  end  they  are  left 
alone  and  hopeless  in  their  misery  and 
guilt. 

Ill  The  recipients  of  His  redeem- 
ing grace  (ver.  22).  From  first  to  last 
God's  purpose  is  to  do  them  good.  And 
all  is  of  grace.  The  righteous  did  not 
of  themselves  merit  God's  love  and  His 
deliverances.  What  He  has  done  for 
them  in  providence  and  in  grace  has  been 
done  for  them  in  and  through  Christ, 
and  unto  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  His 
name  for  ever  and  ever. 


PSALM    XXXV. 

Introduction, 

**  This  psalm,  if  it  be  as  the  inscription  tells  us  a  psalm  of  David,  must  have  been  composed 
either  during  his  persecution  by  Saul  or  during  the  revolt  of  Absalom.  It  is  usual  to  connect 
it  with  his  words  in  1  Sam.  xxiv.  15.  Its  peculiar  feature  is,  that  the  enemies  on  wliom  the 
poet  imprecates  the  righteous  judgments  of  God  are  men  who  had  formerly  been  his  friends, 
men  for  whom  he  had  prayed  in  their  sorrow  '  with  a  brother's  heart,'  and  who  now  requited 
his  love  with  ungrateful  hatred.  Such  an  enemy  Saul  may  have  been  ;  but  we  never  find  any 
trace  of  bitterness  in  David's  feelini^s  towards  Saul.  The  generous  enemy  whose  heart  smote 
him  l)ecause  he  had  cut  off  Saul's  skirt,  and  who  always  recognised  in  Saul  the  Lord's  anointed, 
would  never  have  called  down  the  judgments  of  God  upon  his  head.  It  seems  to  me,  there- 
fore, more  probable,  that  the  aiders  and  abettors  of  Absalom's  conspiracy,  men  like  Ahithophel 
and  his  associates,  are  aimed  at  in  the  poet's  burning  words.  But  all  this,  and  even  the 
authorship  itself,  must  be  matter  of  conjecture.  The  psalm  falls  into  three  principal  diTisioni, 
each  of  which  closes  with  a  thanksgiving." — Ptrovme. 


Whole  Psalm, 


The  views  taken  of  the  spirit  and 
purpose  of  this  psalm  vary  greatly. 
Some  interpreters  hold  that  there  is  re- 
ference throughout  to  the  Messiah. 
Thus,  A.  A.  Bonar  writes,  **  This  is  an 
awful  psalm.  Let  us  read  it  as  the 
words  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  what  do 
we  find  ]  We  find  Him  praying  to  the 
Father  for  help,  and  then  consenting  to 
the  doom  of  His  relentless,  impenitent 
foes ;  yea,  rather  pronouncing  the  doom 
with  His  own  lips,  even  as  when  He 
shall  say  to  the  barren  fig-tree,  '  Cut  it 
down,'  and  to  those  on  the  left  hand, 
'  Depart/  It  is  in  that  spirit  He  says, 
*  Let  them  be  confounded  *  (vers.  4-6). 
This  is  their  sentence  uttered  by  the 
lips  of  the  Judge.  It  is  not  the  wish  of 
one  who  is  revengeful  j  it  is  the  utter- 
ance of  justice  compelled  by  the  state 
162 


of  parties  to  speak  in  stern  severity. 
Our  Lord  Himself  quotes  ver.  19,  *  They 
hated  me  without  a  cause,'  in  John  xv. 
25,  on  the  last  evening  He  spent  with 
His  disciples  before  He  suffered.  For 
then  He  found  Himself  in  the  very 
situation  so  strikingly  described  in  vers. 
11,  12, — false  witnesses  rising  up — men 
rewarding  His  whole  career  of  kindness 
by  spoiling  His  soul." 

Other  interpreters  strongly  oppose 
this  opinion.  Thus,  Dr.  David  Thomas 
calls  the  supposition  that  the  psalm  is 
prophetical  of  the  Messiah,  "  simple 
blasphemy."  He  says,  "  There  is 
nothing  of  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  the 
psalm  ;  it  is  eternally  antagonistic  to 
the  teachings  of  His  Sernaon  on  the 
Mount,  and  to  the  tenor  of  His  whole 
life.     This  poem  burns  with  vengeance 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXXV. 


from  beginning  to  end."  As  an  ex- 
ponent of  the  more  general  opinion, 
Perowne  may  be  quoted.  "But  how 
are  we  to  account  for  such  prayers  for 
vengeance  at  all  ?  Are  these  the  mere 
outbursts  of  passionate  and  unsanctified 
feeling,  or  are  they  the  legitimate  ex- 
pression of  a  righteous  indignation  1 
Are  they  to  be  excused  as  being  animated 
by  '  the  spirit  of  Elias/  a  spirit  not  un- 
holy, indeed,  but  far  removed  from  the 
meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ  ?  or 
are  they  stereotyped  forms  in  which  the 
spirit  of  Christian  devotion  may  utter 
itself }  Are  they  Jewish  only,  or  may 
they  be  Christian  also?  An  unin- 
structed  fastidiousness,  it  is  well  known, 
has  made  many  persons  recoil  from  read- 
ing these  psalms  at  all.  Many  have 
found  their  lips  falter  when  they  have 
been  called  to  join  in  using  tbem  in  the 
congregation,  and  have  either  uttered 
them  with  bated  breath  and  doubting 
heart,  or  have  interpreted  them  in  a 
sense  widely  at  variance  with  the  letter. 
Some  have  tried  to  reconcile  them  with 
a  more  enlightened  conscience  by  regard- 
ing such  words,  not  as  the  expression  of 
a  wish,  but  as  the  utterance  of  a  predic- 
tion ;  but  the  Hebrew  optative,  which 
is  distinct  enough  from  the  simple 
future,  absolutely  forbids  this  expedient. 
Others,  again,  would  see  in  them  ex- 
pressions which  may  lawfully  be  used 
in  the  soul's  wrestling  against  spiritual 
enemies.  And,  finally,  some  would  de- 
fend them  as  utterances  of  righteous  zeal 
for  God's  honour,  and  remind  us  that  if 
•we  do  not  sympathise  with  such  zeal,  it 
may  be,  not  because  our  religion  is  more 
pure,  but  because  our  hearts  are  colder. 
Now,  the  real  source  of  the  difficulty 
lies  in  our  not  observing  and  bearing  in 
mind  the  essential  difference  between 
the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  The 
older  dispensation  was  in  every  sense  a 
sterner  one  than  the  new.  The  spirit  of 
Elias,  though  not  an  evil  spirit,  was  not 
the  spirit  of  Christ  (Luke  ix.  55).  And 
through  Him  His  disciples  are  made 
partakers  of  the  same  spirit.  But  this 
was  not  the  spirit  of  the  older  economy. 
The  Jewish  nation  had  been  trained  in  a 
sterner  school.  It  had  been  steeled  and 
hardened  by  the  discipline  which  had 


pledged  it  to  a  war  of  extermination 
with  idolators,  and  however  necessary 
such  a  discipline  might  be,  it  would  not 
tend  to  foster  the  gentler  virtues.  It  is 
conceivable  how  even  a  righteous  man 
under  it,  feeling  it  to  be  his  bounden 
duty  to  root  out  evil  wherever  he  saw  it, 
and  identifying,  as  he  did,  his  own 
enemies,  with  the  enemies  of  Jehovah, 
might  use  language  which  to  us  appears 
unnecessarily  vindictive.  To  men  so 
trained  and  taught,  what  we  call  "  reli- 
gious toleration "  was  a  thing  not  only 
wrong,  but  absolutely  inconceivable. 
It  may  be  quite  true  that  we  find  re- 
venge forbidden  as  directly  in  the  Old 
Testament  as  in  the  New,  as,  for  instance, 
in  Lev.  xix.  18.  And  it  may  be  no  less 
true  that  we  find  instances  of  impreca- 
tion in  the  New  (cf,  2  Tim.  iv.  14 ;  Acts 
xxiii.  3;  and  1  Cor.  xvi.  23).  But  even 
these  expressions  are  very  different  from 
the  varied,  deliberate,  carefully  con- 
structed, detailed  anathemas  of  the 
psalms.  And  our  Lord's  denunciations, 
to  which  Hengstenberg  refers,  are  in  no 
way  parallel.  They  are  not  curses  upon 
individuals,  but,  in  fact,  solemn  utter- 
ances of  the  great  truth  :  "  Except  ye 
repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish." 
But,  after  all,  whatever  may  be  said  of 
particular  passages,  the  general  tone 
which  runs  through  the  two  covenants 
is  unquestionably  different.  To  deny 
this  is  not  to  honour  Moses,  but  to  dis- 
honour Christ  (Matt.  v.  43,  xix.  8). 
On  the  other  hand,  we  must  not  forget 
that  these  imprecations  are  not  the  pa& 
sionate  longing  for  personal  revenge. 
The  singer  undoubtedly  sees  in  his 
enemies  the  enemies  of  God  and  His 
Church.  They  that  are  not  with  Him 
are  against  God.  And  because  the  zeal 
of  God's  house  ever  consumes  him,  he 
prays  that  all  the  doers  of  iniquity  may 
be  rooted  out.  The  indignation,  there- 
fore, is  righteous,  though  it  may  appear 
to  us  wrongly  directed,  or  excessive  in 
its  utterance.  Once  more,  the  very  fact 
that  a  dark  cloud  hid  God's  judgments 
in  the  world  to  come  from  the  view  of 
the  Old  Testament  saints,  may  be  alleged 
in  excuse  of  this  their  desire  to  see  Him 
take  vengeance  on  His  enemies  here. 
How  deeply  the  problem  of  God's  right- 

163 


PSALM  XXX  <r. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


eousness  exercised  their  minds  is  abun- 
dantly evident  from  numerous  places  in 
the  psalms.  Tliey  longed  to  see  that 
righteousness  manifested.  It  could  be 
manifested,  they  thought,  only  in  the 
evident  exaltation  of  the  righteous,  and 
the  evident  destruction  of  the  wicked, 
here.  Hence,  with  their  eye  always 
fixed  on  temporal  recompense,  they  could 
even  wish  and  pray  for  the  destruction 


of  the  ungodly.  The  awful  things  of 
the  world  to  come  were  to  a  great  ex- 
tent hid  from  their  eyes.  Could  they 
have  seen  them,  then,  surely,  their 
prayer  would  have  been,  not  "  Let  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  persecute  them,"  but 
rather,  with  Him  who  hung  on  the  cross, 
"  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do," 


I  AM  THY   SaLVATIOH. 
(Verses  1-10.) 


Revenge  was  alien  to  the  spirit  of 
David,  both  as  a  man  and  as  a  prophet 
of  tlie  Lord  ( 1  Sam.  xxiv.  9,  Ps.  vii. 
3-5).  It  seems  just,  therefore,  as  it 
certainly  is  more  pleasant,  to  regard  him 
as  speaking  here,  not  from  personal 
animosity,  but  from  a  holy  indignation 
against  evil  and  evil-doers.  At  first 
sight,  we  might  imagine  that  he  had 
particular  individuals  in  view  ;  whether 
he  bad  or  not,  we  cannot  tell.  It  is 
sufficient  for  us  to  take  his  vehement 
cries  for  Divine  judgment,  as  applicable 
more  to  principles  than  persons.  This 
interpretation  seems  in  accordance  with 
Paul's  use  of  Ps.  v.  9,  in  his  argument  for 
the  corruption  of  human  nature  (Rom.  iii. 
13).  It  is  also  agreeable  to  our  circum- 
stances, as  under  the  dispensation  of  the 
gospel  (Matt.  v.  43-45,  Rom.  xii.l  9-21). 

Vers.  1-10.  The  key-note  of  this 
passage  is  found  in  ver.  3.  *'  Say 
unto  my  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation.'^ 
This  is  confirmed  by  the  form  of  the 
thanksgiving  in  ver.  9.  "And  my 
soul  shall  be  joyful  in  the  Lord,  it  shall 
rejoice  in  His  salvation.'*  Outward 
deliverances  are  but  types  of  inward 
deliverances.  The  salvation  of  God 
caimot  be  held  as  consummated  short  of 
the  eteriiiii  redemption  of  the  soul. 

I.  Salvation  is  from  God  (vers.  1-3). 
''O  Lord."  "The  name  Jehovah,  the 
self-existent  Creator,  occurs  eight  times ; 
Adonai,  the  rightful  governor,  three 
times  ;  and  Elohim,  the  everlasting  Al- 
mighty, twice  in  this  psalm.  These 
names  are  in  keeping  with  the  tenor  of  the 
psalm,  as  it  speaks  of  mercy  and  of 
164 


judgment." — Murphy,  "  The  mani- 
festation of  God's  saving  and  protecting 
power  is  described  in  Scripture,  under 
various  figures  corresponding  to  the  form 
of  the  particular  suffering  or  danger. 
Against  injustice  He  appears  as  an  ad- 
vocate or  Judge  (ver.  23),  against  vio- 
lence as  a  warrior  (Deut.  xxxii.  41,  42). 
In  this  character  the  psalmist  here  en- 
treats Him  to  appear,  and  for  that  end 
to  seize,  grasp,  or  lay  hold  of  his 
weapons." — Alexander.  "  Such  figura- 
tive representations  of  God  tend  to  give 
us  a  more  vivid  apprehension  of  His 
powerful  help."— Tkoluck.  "Plead,  O 
Lord,  with  them  that  strive  with  me." 
This  means,  "  Oppose  my  opposers, 
devour  my  devourers,  strive  with  my 
strivers."  "  Shield  and  buckler  "  were 
weapons  of  defence.  They  may  re- 
present "the  greater  and  the  lesser 
protections  of  providence."  "  Draw  out 
the  spear,"  i.e.,  for  attack.  "  Stop  the 
way,"  i.e.,  encounter  and  thwart  the 
persecutor.  "  Say  unto  my  soul,  I  am 
thy  salvation."  This  appeal  expresses 
the  faith  and  hope  of  the  believer. 
Nothing  is  so  fitted  to  give  courage  as 
the  sense  of  Jehovah's  presence  and  love. 
The  cause  of  His  people  is  His  cause. 
He  identifies  Himself  with  them. 

II.  Salvation  implies  death  to  evil, 
and  life  to  good  (vers.  4-8).  "The 
psalmist  regards  all  men  simply  as  they 
stand  with  God,  and  therefore  divides 
them  into  those  who  accept  His  mercy, 
and  those  who  are  at  enmity  with  Him. 
And  his  own  enemies  he  regards  solely 
as  the  enemies  of  God ;  so  long  as  they 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


VSkUJL  XXXV. 


continue  in  this  frame  of  mind,  be  has 
no  prayers  for  them,  but  that  they  may 
be  disappointed  in  their  ungodly  designs. 
Such  a  result  is  the  only  one  likely  to 
bring  tliem  to  a  better  mind.  Plainly 
he  views  them  as  incorrigible  offenders, 
who  will  never  come  to  themselves  but 
by  the  rough  handling  of  adversity,  if 
even  by  that.  If  they  know  anything  of 
God,  and  still  defy  Him,  it  is  obvious 
that  nothing  but  the  actual  experience 
that  He  cannot  be  defied  will  bring 
them  to  repentance.  And  if  that  will 
not  do  it,  he  looks  upon  them  as  repro- 
bates."— Muvphy.  Carrying  out  the 
figure  of  Jehovah  as  a  Man  of  War,  the 
psalmist  depicts  with  terrific  force  the  dis- 
comfiture of  His  enemies.  1.  Shameful 
defeat  (ver.  4).  They  are  not  only 
arrested,  but  driven  back  in  confusion. 
All  their  malicious  efforts  are  frustrated. 
Their  faces  are  covered  with  shame.  So 
it  was  in  a  gracious  sense  with  Saul  of 
Tarsus,  but,  alas!  it  is  seldom  that  defeat 
implies  repentance.  2.  Headlong  rout 
(\  er.  5).  "  Chaff"  is  the  emblem  of 
vanity  (Ps.  i.  4),  as  "the  Wind"  is  the 
emblem  of  judgment.  In  the  previous 
psalm  (xxxiv.  7),  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
is  represented  as  the  angel  of  mercy, 
here  as  the  angel  of  judgment,  presiding 
over  the  storm  that  sw^eeps  away  God's 
enemies.  There  is  a  similar  contrast 
in  the  story  of  Peter's  deliverance  and 
Herod's  doom  ^Acts  xii.  7).  3.  Over- 
whelming ruin  (vers.  6-8).  The  image 
seems  that  of  an  army  broken  and 
driven  back  in  horrid  rout,  and  confu- 
sion worse  confounded.  With  such 
terrible  scenes  David  as  a  soldier  was 
not  unfamiliar.  "  Let  their  way  be 
dark  and  slippery."  Let  it  be  dark,  so 
that  they  cannot  see,  and  slippery,  so 
that  they  cannot  find  safe  footing.  How 
terrible  the  fate  of  God's  enemies,  with 
no  way  of  escape  before,  and  the  avenger 
pressing  hard  behind,  Ver.  7.  *'  For 
without  cause  have  they  hid  for  me  their 
net  in  a  pit.'*  The  reference  is  to  the 
artifices  used  for  taking  birds  and  beasts 
of  prey.  "  Without  cause"  ''wantonly, 
gratuitously,  unprovoked,  and  therefore 
prompted  by  mere  malice." — Alexander. 
This  is  their  condemnation.  Ver.  8 
indicates  how  the  ruin  of  the  wicked  is 


self  caused,  and  will  come  upon  them  at 
last  sudden  and  awful,  as  the  crash  of  a 
falling  house. 

III.  Salvation  demands  everlasting 
gratitude  and  praise  (vers.  9,  10). 
''  Neither  revenge  nor  any  other  form  of 
selfishness  is  the  source  of  the  soul's  joy, 
but  only  the  Lord  and  His  salvation. 
'  All  my  bones.*  This  is  the  vehement 
figure  employed  by  a  healthy  and  hearty 
gratitude.  '  Lord,  who  is  like  Thee.' 
This  verse  amplifies  the  thought  of 
the  preceding  one.  'Delivering  the 
humble.'  There  is  a  union  of  justice 
and  benevolence,  which  exhibits  at  the 
same  time  the  strength  and  the  charm  of 
the  moral  government  of  God.  The  very 
same  act  delivers  the  oppressed,  and 
defeats  the  oppressor." — Mmyhy.  "  He 
would  not  be  worthy  of  the  name  of  man 
who  should  look  calmly  on  the  tyrant, 
the  swindler,  or  the  murderer,  building 
up  his  fortunes  on  the  misery  and 
ruin  of  his  fellowmen,  and  thwarting  with 
cold,  determined  malignity  every  effort 
of  the  righteous  and  the  benevolent  to 
improve  their  condition.  As  little  would 
he  be  worthy  of  the  name  of  Christian, 
who  could  survey  unmoved  the  efforts 
of  unprincipled  men,  to  hold  the  souls 
of  their  fellows  in  eternal  darkness,  and 
drag  them  back  into  the  gulf  of  destruc- 
tion, when  others  were  helping  them  to 
glory,  honour,  and  immortality.  The 
first  wish  of  the  Christian  for  such 
persons  is,  that  their  hearts  may  be 
changed.  He  would  fain  save  the 
persons,  and  in  the  spirit  of  his  forgiving 
Master,  he  would  welcome  them  to  the 
mercy  and  the  blessedness  he  himself 
has  found.  But  come  what  may  of 
themselves,  the  only  wish  he  can  have 
respecting  their  cause  is,  that  it  may 
utterly  perish.  And  if  they  cling  to  the 
pernicious  cause,  in  spite  of  every  effort  to 
show  them  its  wickedness;  and  to  im- 
press them  with  its  doom,  if  the  cause, 
and  the  persons  upholding  it,  become  so 
indissolubly  blended  that  the  one  can- 
not be  destroyed  without  the  other; 
why,  then,  in  spite  of  sickly  sentimenta- 
lism,  it  is  the  manly  duty  of  God's 
servant  to  call  for  the  destruction  of 
both  ;  and  it  is  with  a  holy  satisfaction 
he  is  enabled  to  anticipate  the  fulfilment 

166 


FSALM  XZXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  T  ■  PSA  IMS, 


of  his  desire.  No  soft  synipatliy  for 
doomed  individuals  who,  in  their  deter- 
mined wickedness,  have  scorned  every 
warning,  and  resisted  every  appeal,  shall 
hinder  the  servant  of  God  from  rejoic- 
ing when  by  their  overthrow,  millions 
are  freed  from  fetters,  and  are  enabled 
to  set  forward  on  a  glorious  career  of 
light,  liberty,  and  joy." — W»  G.  Blaikie, 


God's  rescues  not  only  call  forth  gratitude 
of  His  people  on  earth,  but  awaken  the 
songs  of  heaven.  As  there  is  joy 
amongst  the  angels  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth,  so  there  are  exulting  alleluias 
over  the  overthrow  of  God's  enemies, 
and  the  final  triumph  of  His  kingdom 
(Eev.  xix.  1-3). 


Evil  for  Good. 

{Verses  11-18.) 


I.  Innocence  calumniated  (ver  11). 
*'  Unjust  witnesses." — Delitzch.  **  Un- 
scrupulous witnesses." — Perowne.  These 
were  men  accustomed  to  violence  and 
deceit.  They  wished  to  ruin  David, 
and  as  they  could  not  accuse  him  truly, 
they  had  no  scruple  in  accusing  him 
falsely.  They  even  endeavoured  to 
wring  from  him  a  confession  of  crimes, 
which  he  had  not  only  not  committed, 
but  of  which  he  had  no  knowledge. 
"To  please  Saul,  there  were  always 
men  to  be  found  mean  enough  to  im- 
peach David." — Spurgeon.  Such  things 
are  still  done. 

II.  Goodwill  repaid  with  bereave- 
ment (ver.  12).  There  was  nothing  but 
kindness  on  David's  part,  but  his  enemies 
returned  evil  for  good  {cf.  Saul,  1  Sam. 
xxiv.  17).  They  had  no  pity.  Their 
conduct  wounded  him  deeply.  *'  Spoil- 
ing of  soul,"  i.e.^  bereaving  my  soul. 
"  David  sent  his  parents  to  the  king  of 
Moab  for  safety  ;  he  was  severed  from 
Michal  his  wife  and  from  Jonathan  his 
friend,  and  he  was  estranged  not  only 
from  Saul,  but  from  all  his  court." — 
Murphy.  ' '  Very  touching  are  the  words, 
'  My  soul  is  bereaved,'  I  am  alone  in 
the  world ;  I  who  have  ever  sought 
to  help  the  friendless  and  comfort  the 
afflicted,  and  who  prayed  so  earnestly 
for  others,  am  forsaken  of  all." — 
Perowne. 

III.  Brotherly  kindness  requited 
with  hatred  (vers.  13,  U).  '*  The 
general  idea  is,  that  he  displayed  the 
deepest  sympathy  with  their  distresses. 
This  idea  is  expressed  by  figures  bor- 
rowed from  the  oriental  mourning  usages. 

166 


Sackcloth,  fasting,  and  prayer,  are  par- 
ticularly mentioned." — Alexander, 

"Yet  I,"  emphatic  in  contrast  with 
their  selfishness. 

**  Sackcloth,"  the  raiment  of  sympathy 
and  sorrow. 

"  Fasting,"  the  idea  of  overpowering 
compassion.  "  My  prayer  returned," 
"was  again  and  again  repeated  on  their 
behalf.  *  In  my  bosom,'  in  the  silent 
aspirations  of  my  heart." — Murphy. 
"  As  one  that  mourneth  for  his  mother, 
I  went  softly  about  in  mourning  attire." 
Delitzch.  The  loss  of  a  mother  is  held 
in  the  East  as  the  saddest  of  all  bereave- 
ments. "  How  few  professors  in  these 
days  have  such  bowels  of  compassion ; 
and  yet  under  the  Gospel  there  should 
be  far  more  tender  love  than  under  the 
law.  Had  we  more  hearty  love  to  man- 
kind, and  care  for  its  innumerable  ills, 
we  might  be  far  more  useful  ;  certainly 
we  should  be  infinitely  more  Christlike. 
*  He  prayeth  best,  who  loveth  best.'" — 
Spurgeon. 

IV.  Misfortune  met  with  derision 
(ver.  15).  "  But  in  mine  adversity." 
Whether  his  affliction  was  in  body  or 
outward  condition,  it  was  made  the  oc- 
casion of  scorn  instead  of  comfort,  and 
that  by  the  most  abject.  "  At  my  halt- 
ing, when  I  leaned  to  one  side  from  the 
upright  posture  of  prosperity.  When 
they  saw  the  first  change  in  the  counte- 
nance of  Saul  towards  him,  their  envy 
was  gratified." — Mtcrphy. 

"  When  I  limped,  cripples  mocked  at 
me,  I.e. J  those  who  were  themselves  con- 
temptible treated  me  with  contempt. 
'  I  did  not  know  it'     It  was  done  be- 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARr :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXXV. 


Iiind  my  back,  and  while  I  was  entirely 
unsuspicious.  *  They  rent  or  tore  me  ' 
by  their  slanders." — Alexander. 

V.  Piety  made  the  subject  of  ribal- 
dry and  scorn  (ver.  16).  The  language 
here  is  obscure.  Perowne  translates 
"with  them  that  are  profane  in  their 
outlandish  mockings."  Delitzch,  "  after 
the  manner  of  common  parasites."  Alex- 
ander, "  with  worthless  mockers  for 
bread."  The  reference  seems  to  be  to 
hangers  on  at  the  tables  of  the  rich  (lit. 
** cake-mockers"),  who  were  wont  for 
hire  or  a  "  bit  of  bread "  to  play  the 
buffoon,  and  to  make  entertainment  for 
the  guests.  Piety  would  be  a  common 
subject  for  their  mockery.  Thus  it  has 
been  often  in  the  world.  There  have 
been  historians  who  have  sneered  at 
things  sacred.  There  have  been  novelists 
who  have  ridiculed  evangelical  religion. 
There  have  been  poets  who  have  prosti- 
tuted their  genius  to  make  piety  the  sport 
of  fools.  Even  to  this  day  there  are  men 
so  base,  that  to  gratify  their  patrons,  in 
a  word,  ^^for  a  hit  of  bread"  they  will 


sell  the  truth,  mock  at  purity,  and  cast 
contempt  on  all  that  is  holy  and  God- 
like. 

"  Very  forcibly  might  our  Lord  have 
used  the  words  of  these  verses  !  Let  us 
not  forget  to  see  the  despised  and  re- 
jected of  men  here  painted  to  the  life. 
Calvary  and  the  ribald  crew  around  the 
cross  seem  brought  before  our  eyes." — 
Spurgeon. 

Vers.  17,  18.  "  The  sufferer's  appeal 
to  the  Lord,"  "Lord."  Adonai,  the 
governor  who  is  bound  to  administer 
justice.  "How  long"  (Ps.  vi.  3-13). 
This  is  the  expostulation  of  the  sufferer 
under  persecution.  How  often  has  it 
been  uttered ! 

"  From  their  destructions,"  their  de- 
structive intents  and  endeavours.  "  My 
only  one  "  (Ps.  xxii.  20). 

"  Young  lions "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  10),  in 
human  shape.  Ver.  18.  "I  will 
thank."  Confess  Thy  name,  especially 
Thy  goodness.  "  A  mighty  people." 
Mighty  for  their  numbers,  and  their  com- 
munion with  God. — Murphy. 


The  Causeless  Hateb. 
{Verses  19-28.) 


L  His  cliaracter  (vers.  19-22).     He 

is  described  as  false,  *'  false  enemies  ; " 
as  spiteful,  "  my  haters  without  cause," 
i.e.,  "  out  of  sheer  spite." — Alexander, 
(Ps.  vii.  4  ;  xxv.  3 ;  cf.  John  xv.  25), 
As  turbulent.  "  For  they  speak  not 
peace,  but  they  devise  words  of  deceit 
against  the  quiet  in  the  land,"  *.e.,  "  the 
land  of  promise,  considered  as  the  home 
of  God's  chosen  people,  who,  as  its 
rightful  proprietors,  are  characteristically 
peaceful,  and  averse  to  all  strife  and 
disorder." — Alexander.  He  is  further 
described  as  adding  insult  to  injury 
(ver.  21).  "The  gaping  mouth,  insult- 
ing laugh,  and  glaring  eye,  are  the  rude 
indications  of  malice." — Murphy.  Thus 
his  enemies  hated  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.  4),  thus 
Haman  hated  Mordecai  (Esther  iii.  5,  6), 
thus  the  ten  brethren  hated  Joseph. 
Every  conscious  malicious  effort  streng- 
thens the  unholy  passion.  "  Whom  we 
have    injured   we  are    sure    to    hate." 


There  is  a  fiendish  joy  in  the  discovery 

of  any  fault  which  may  afford  some  ex- 
cuse for  the  conduct  pursued  (Micah 
vii.  8). 

In  hating  without  a  cause,  they  may 
be  said  not  merely  to  hate  truth  and 
goodness,  but  to  hate  God  Himself.  It 
is  the  spirit  of  hell  {cf.  John  xv.  18-25 ; 
1  John  ii.  9  ;  iii.  15,  iv.  20). 

II.  His  righteous  doom  (vers.  22-26). 
There  is  here  a  twofold  and  earnest 
appeal  to  God  for  judgment.  He  is 
regarded — 1.  As  a  silent  witness.  "  Thou 
hast  looked  on,  0  Lord,  be  not  silent." 
Mine  enemies  "  are  not  the  only  wit- 
nesses of  my  distress,  for  Thou,  Lord, 
likewise  seest,  and  hast  long  seen  it. 
Seeing  it,  therefore,  be  no  longer  silent." 
— Alexander. 

2.  As  an  almighty  friend.  "  O  Lord, 
be  not  far  from  me."  Be  my  shield  and 
helper.  The  sense  of  God's  nearness 
gives  comfort  and  courage. 

167 


PSALM  XXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


3.  As  a  righteous  judge  (vers.  23, 
24).  **Do  me  justice,  clear  me  from  as- 
persion, grant  an  attestation  of  my  inno- 
cence, in  the  exercise  and  exhibition  of 
Thine  own  essential  rectitude,  and  in 
accordance  with  that  covenant  relation 
which  exists  between  us;  and  thus  in 
the  most  effectual  manner  take  away 
from  my  malignant  enemies  all  pretext 
and  occasion  for  exulting  in  my  over- 
throw, or  otherwise  triumphing  at  my 
expense. " — A  lexander. 

Vers.  25,  26.  The  appeal  to  God  is 
renewed,  showing  the  necessary  result 
of  judgment  in  the  confusion  and  dis- 
grace of  the  wicked,  and  the  exaltation 
of  the  righteous. 

**  Here  is  the  eternal  result  of  all  the 
laborious  and  crafty  devices  of  the  Lord's 


enemies.  God  will  make  little  of  them, 
though  they  magnified  themselves.  He 
will  shame  them  for  shaming  His  people, 
bring  them  into  confusion  for  making 
confusion,  pull  off  their  fine  apparel,  and 
give  them  a  beggarly  suit  of  dishonour, 
and  turn  all  their  rejoicing  into  weep, 
ing,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 
Truly  the  saints  can  afford  to  wait." — . 
Spurgeon. 

Vers.  27,  28.  "•  The  psalmist  is  as- 
sured of  a  favourable  answer  to  his  ap- 
peal, and  therefore  betakes  himself  to 
thanksgiving.  '  Let  them  shout  and  be 
glad  that  delight  in  my  righteousness,* 
i.e.,  that  desires  to  see  justice  done  to 
me.  He  calls  upon  his  friends,  as  well 
as  himself,  to  praise  the  Lord  for  the 
justice  of  His  government." — Murphy. 


The  Eeturn  of  Prayer. 


Ver.  13.  This  word  is  obscure. 
Some  understand  it  of  posture  (1  Kings 
xviii,  42)  ;  others  of  inward  prayer ; 
others  of  repeated  prayer,  and  others  of 
ineffectual  prayer.  Perowne  says,  "I 
prefer  rendering,  ^  And  my  prayer,  may 
it  return  into  mine  own  bosom.'  The 
prayer  I  offered  for  them  is  a  prayer  I 
might  have  offered  for  myself.  So  true  a 
prayer  was  it,  so  full  of  love,  that  I  could 
wish  nothing  more  than  that  the  blessings 
I  asked  for  them,  should  be  vouchsafed 
to  me  "  \cf.  Matt.  x.  13 ;  Luke  x.  6). 

Prayer  may  return  in  different  ways. 

I.  Unlieard.  The  priests  of  Baal 
cried  in  vain,  so  with  the  hypocrite  and 
the  formalist;  so  with  the  man  who 
prays  from  hate  and  not  from  love. 

"  My  words  fly  up,  my  thoughts  remain  below, 
Words  without  thoughts  never" to  heaven  go." 

— Shakespeare. 

II.  Unanswered.  Not  that  God  does 
not  hear,  or  hearing  does  not  care,  or 
caring  cannot  help,  but  that  for  reasons 
known  to  Himself,  He  withholds  what  is 


asked.  Perhaps  the  time  is  not  come 
or  the  petitioner  is  not  fit  to  receive  the 
blessing,  or  it  may  be  better  to  refuse 
than  to  grant  the  request.  God  gave 
Israel  a  king  when  they  wanted  one,  but 
it  was  in  His  wrath  (1.  Sara.  viii.  7-9) ; 
Hos.  xiii.  11).  God  refused  to  relieve 
Paul  from  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  though 
he  besought  Him  thrice,  but  it  was  in 
love.  He  gave  him  better  than  he  asked 
(2  Cor.  xii.  9). 

III.  Bringing  benedictions.  Others, 
and  ourselves  also,  are  benefited  (Job. 
xlii.  10).  Intercessions  not  only  binds 
us  more  to  God,  but  brings  us  nearer 
our  brethren.  It  is  an  antidote  to  sel- 
fishness and  hate.  It  fills  the  heart  with 
love. 

"  For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats, 
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain ; 
If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer, 
Both  for  themselves,  and  those  who  call  them 

friend  ? 
For  so  the  whole  round  earth  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God. " 

— Tennyson, 


Behaving  as  a  Friend. 

Ver.  14.  This  implies —  (cf.  Satan,  Job  i.  8,  and  God  Ps.  xxxl 

I.   Kind  consideration.      There    are  7).     Mark   the  Priest,  the  Levite,  and 

ditlerences.  All  depends  on  the  spirit  the  Samaritan  (Luke  x.  30-36). 
16$ 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


rSALM  XXXVl. 


n.  Generous  sympathy.  Observa- 
tion without  sympathy  is  torture.  But 
how  sweet  is  true  sympathy.  It  is  like 
cold  water  to  a  thirsty  soul.  It  is  like 
balm  to  a  bleeding  heart.  It  is  the  man 
who  sympathises  that  can  help.  Others 
may  be  dull,  but  he  is  quick  to  see. 
Others  may  stand  by  silent  and  power- 
less, but  he  knows,  as  if  by  intuition, 
how  to  speak  a  word  in  season.  His 
very  presence  is  an  inspiration  (c/.  Job 
vi.  14;  1  Sam.  xxiii.  16). 

III.  Self-denying  service.  Love  is 
the  essence  of  friendship.  Sacrifice  is 
the  highest  form  of  love  (cf.  John  xv. 
13;  1  John  iii.  18;  Rom.  v.  8).  A 
Moravian  missionary  sold    himself    to 


slavery,  that  he  might  win  the  love  and 
trust  of  the  slaves.  The  appeals  of 
others  they  might  scorn,  but  their  hearts 
were  opened  to  the  man  who  had  thus 
proved  himself  their  friend. 

IV.  Constancy  in  love  and  devotion 
(Prov.  xvii.  17  ;  xxvii.  6  ;  Ps.  cxli.  5). 

"  Love  is  not  love 
Which  alters  when  it  alteration  finds  ; 
Or  bends  with  the  remover  to  i  amove. 
Oh  no  !  it  is  an  ever  fix^d  mark, 
That  looks  on  tempests,  and  is  never  shaken ; 
It  is  the  star  of  every  wandering  bark, 
Whose  worth's  unknown,  although  his  height 
be  taken."  — Shakespeare. 

**  The  noblest  friendship  ever  shown, 
The  Saviour  o£  the  world  makes  known." 

^^owper. 


PSALM    XXXVI. 
Introduction. 


This  psalm  was  written  by  David.  From  ver.  1-4  he  describes  the  rebelHou.^  •  iii 
vers.  6-9  he  extols  the  various  attributes  of  the  Lord ;  and  in  vers.  10  and  11  he  add,  sees 
the  Lord  in  prayer. 


The  Distinguishing  Characteristics  of  a  Wicked  Life. 

(Verses  1-4.) 


We  have  in  these  verses  a  graphic  de- 
lineation of  a  wicked  life,  in  every  way 
true,  yet  abhorrent.  The  picture  of 
an  ungodly  man  ought  to  be  enough  to 
save  others  from  an  imitation  of  his  pro- 
fane conduct. 

I.  A  wicked  life  is  characterised 
by  practical  atheism.  "  There  is  no 
fear  of  God  before  his  eyes." 

Wicked  men  are  virtually  atheistic. 
They  do  not  in  reality  recognise  the  ex- 
istence of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  this 
is  evident  from  the  feeling  of  their  inner 
nature,  from  their  speech,  and  from 
their  methods  of  activity.  They  are 
without  God  in  the  world.  They  may 
recognise  Him  in  the  form  of  a  creed, 
but  He  has  no  real  influence  over  them ; 
they  are  entirely  led  by  the  impulse  of 
the  moment,  by  the  speculation  of  the 
hour,   or  by  the  passion  of    the  lower 


nature.  They  are  not  influenced  by 
considerations  that  have  reference  to 
God  and  His  government  of  the  uni- 
verse. Prayer  forms  no  part  of  their 
lives.  A  wicked  life  is  not  consistent 
with  a  true  belief  in  the  Divine  exist- 
ence. 

II.  A  wicked  life  is  characterised 
by  self-adulation.  ''  For  he  flattereth 
himself  in  his  own  eyes." 

Wicked  men  are  generally  guilty  of 
self-flattery,  and  in  this  way  they  en- 
deavour to  appease  their  conscience,  and 
approve  their  plans.  Their  lives  are 
sinful,  and  hence  they  have  to  cover 
them  with  artificial  flowers,  and  with 
unreal  decorations.  They  daie  not  ad- 
mit the  facts  and  experiences  of  their 
own  heart  even  to  themselves.  Self- 
flattery  is  easy.  It  is  common.  It 
sometimes  has  to  serve  instead  of  flattery 

169 


PSALM  XXXTI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  PSALMS. 


from  others.  A  wicked  life  has  no  cause 
for  self-flattery ;  it  may  pride  itself  upon 
its  cunning,  or  upon  its  success,  but  that 
will  not  alter  its  guilt,  or  avert  the  unerr- 
ing sentence  of  infinite  Justice. 

III.  A  wicked  life  is  characterised 
by  verbal  profanity.  "The  words  of 
his  mouth  are  iniquity  and  deceit." 

Wicked  men  are  recognised  by  their 
perverse  and  profane  speech.  They 
hallow  not  the  great  name  of  God,  nor 
do  they  reverently  allude  to  the  solemn 
realities  of  the  moral  life  of  the  race. 
But  their  language  is  not  only  profane, 
it  is  also  deceitful.  It  is  characterised 
by  duplicity.  It  often  gives  a  misrepre- 
sentation of  moral  character,  of  events 
and  circumstances,  and  of  the  ordinary 
things  of  life.  Speech  is  a  good  index 
to  the  soul. 

IV.  A  wicked  life  is  characterised 
by  un-wisdom.  "  He  hath  left  off  to 
be  wise  and  to  do  good." 

Wicked  men  are  often  gifted  as  far  as 
secular  knowledge  and  wisdom  are  con- 
cerned. But  true  wisdom  cometh  down 
from  above,  and  of  this  they  are  sadly 


deficient.  Hence  they  lack  the  wisdom 
that  truly  makes  men  wise.  Sin  is  always 
evidence  of  the  greatest  ignorance  and 
folly.  The  un-wisdom  of  a  wicked  life 
is  seen  in  the  pleasure  it  seeks,  in  the 
study  it  pursues,  in  the  destiny  it 
selects,  and  in  its  hatred  of  philanthropy. 

V.  A  wicked  life  is  characterised 
by  cunning  artifices.  "  He  deviseth 
mischief  upon  his  bed." 

Tiie  wicked  man  deliberately  plans 
mischief.  His  late  and  early  thoughts, 
which  ought  to  be  concentrated  on  God 
and  His  mercy,  are  fixed  on  schemes  of 
fraud  and  cunning.  Wicked  men  are 
generally  cunning.  For  this  they  edu- 
cate their  faculties,  and  thus  they  hope 
to  enrich  themselves,  to  malign  their 
neighbours,  and  to  defeat  the  purposes 
of  the  good.  Thus  it  is  not  difficult  to 
know  the  ungodly  man  when  we  meet 
him. 

Lessons  : — 1.  That  a  wicked  life  is 
hateful  to  God.  2.  That  a  wicked  life 
is  despicable  to  men.  3.  That  a  wicked 
life  is  injurious  to  society.  4.  That  a 
wicked  life  may  be  reformed  by  grace. 


A  Welcome  Revelation  of  the  Character  of  God. 

( Verses  5-12.) 


The  psalm  commences  with  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  character  of  the  wicked  man, 
and,  by  way  of  sublime  contrast,  gives 
a  glad  revelation  of  the  character  of 
God.  There  are  grand  contrasts  in 
nature;  equally  so  in  the  inspired  volume. 
Here  we  have  a  striking  one  : — 

I.  The  Divine  Being  is  unspeakable 
in  mercy.  "  Thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  is  in 
the  heavens." 

Mercy  is  a  distinguishing  attribute  of 
God.  He  delighteth  in  mercy,  and  has 
ever  proved  this  in  His  dealings  with 
the  human  race.  This  is  evident  in  the 
temporal  gifts  He  bestows,  in  the  spiri- 
tual good  He  communicates,  and  in  the 
grand  redemption  He  has  provided  for 
the  soui,  whereby  it  can  be  made  free 
and  pure.  Nature  speaks  the  mercy  of 
God,  as  with  a  thousand  toTignes,  and 
the  Bible  lends  additional  emphasis  to 

no 


her  already  loud  voice.  The  greatest 
sinner  may  experience  the  mercy  of  God 
if  he  will  only  seek  it  prayerfully. 

II.  The  Divine  Being  is  immutable 
in  rectitude.  "Thy  righteousness  is 
like  the  great  mountains." 

And  thus,  while  mercy  is  an  attribute 
of  God,  rectitude  may  also  be  predicted 
of  Him,  The  Divine  mercy  proceeds 
upon  the  principle  of  Divine  equity. 
The  mountains  are  immutable,  they  are 
firm,  they  are  majestic,  they  are  impos- 
ing and  beautiful ;  and  so  is  the  recti- 
tude of  Gorl.  It  is  ever  the  same  to- 
wards rich  and  poor ;  it  is  worthy  the 
admiration  of  the  intelligent  universe, 
and  under  its  shade  men  may  safely  re- 
pose. The  Divine  rectitude  should  be 
consoling  to  the  good,  and  a  terror  to 
those  who  await  the  unknown  tribunal 
of  the  future. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  psalm  xxxvn. 


III.  That  the  Divine  Being  invites  gift  of  the  Infinite  Being.     We  should 
the  confidence  of  the  soul.      "  There-  measure  the  gift  by  the  Giver. 

fore  the  children  of  men  put  their  trust  V.  That  the  Divine   Being   is   the 

under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings."  protection  of  the  good  from  the  arti- 

The  mercy  and  rectitude  of  God,  as  fices  of  the  wicked.     "  And  let  not  the 

seen  in  the  principle  of  His  government  hand  of  the  wicked  remove  me." 

and  in  the  preservation  of  the  material  The  wicked  often  seek  to  injure  the 

universe,  awaken  men  to  confidence  in  good    by   cunning    artifice    and    sheer 

Him.       And  God    protects   those    who  strength  :  at  such  a  time  God  is  their 

put  their  trust  in  Him.     The  figure  of  only  protection  and  refuge.     Hence  we 

this  verse  is  very  beautiful  and  attrac-  have  here  a  very  glad  and  welcome  re- 

tive.     The  soul  of  man  can  rest  in  God  presentation    of    the  Divine  character  : 

by  trusting  in   Him.      Faith  is  moral  full  of  mercy,  firm  in  justice,  inviting 

repose.  the  confidence  of  the  soul,  the  source  of 

IV.  That  the  Divine  Being  is  the  life,   and   the  protection  of  the   good, 
source  of  all  life.     "  For  with  Thee  is  What  more  can  we  require  % 

the  fountain  of  life."  Lessons  : — 1.  We  ought  to  he  grateful 

God  is  the  source  of   all  life.     The  that  God  has  given  such  a  condescending 

angels  derive  their  existence  from  Him.  revelation  of  Himself.     2.    We  ought  to 

Man  lives  in  Him.     All  mental,  moral,  he    consoled    and    strengthened    hy   the 

and    spiritual    life    is    the    gift    of    the  thought  that  such  a  revelation  is  true  to 

Eternal.     Earth  has  no  life  to  bestow  ;  human  experience.     3.  Learn   a   lesson 

it  is  a  grave.     Life,  full  and  free,  is  the  of  trust  in  the  Eternal  God, 


PSALM  XXXVIL 

Introduction. 

Thii  psalm  was  probably  written  by  David  in  his  old  age,  and  contains  his  experience 
In  reference  to  the  providential  dealings  of  God  with  men.  It  acknowledges  the  transient  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked,  but  phices  in  sublime  contrast  therewith  the  confidence  and  destiny  of 
the  good,  and  proves  clearly  that  the  latter  have  little  cause  to  envy  the  former.  It  is  folly  to 
envy  a  man  because  he  is  clothed  in  the  garb  of  a  king  ;  he  may,  after  all,  be  only  a  pauper  in 
disguise. 

The  Transient  Prosperity  of  the  Wicked  Unworthy  the  Envy  of 

THE  Good. 

{Verses  1,2.) 

I.  That  there  is  apparently  much  that  they  succeed  in  it.    And  they  always 

in  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  to  ex-  take  good  care  to  display  their  grandeur, 

cite  the  fretful  envy  of  the  good.  so  that  it  may  be  universally  seen  and 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  wicked  men  admired.  Hence  they  are  the  occasion 
are  often  in  great  prosperity  even  while  of  perplexity  to  the  good,  and  often  of 
the  pious  are  poor  and  despised.  They  desponding  thoughts  and  envious  feel- 
are  eminent  in  social  position  and  for-  ings.  It  is  hard  to  understand  how  it 
tunate  in  commercial  speculation  ;  hence  is  that  so  many  good  things  should  fall 
they  are  surrounded  by  all  that  heart  to  the  lot  of  characters  so  unworthy  of 
could  wish.  This  is  a  matter  of  his-  them,  while  the  children  of  God  are  in 
tory.  It  is  also  a  matter  of  everyday  com])arative  need.  At  such  a  sight  it 
experience.  In  this  life  the  wicked  are  is  difficult  to  realise  that  Heaven  is 
prosperous.  They  live  for  this  life  just  in  its  providential  dealings  with 
alone,  they  are  often  cunning  and  sel-  men.  But  this  thought  will  come  with 
fish  j  hence  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  devotion  (Ps.  Ixxiii  16,  17). 

171. 


PSALM  XXXVII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


II.  That  it  is  foolish  to  envy  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  because  it 
is  only  of  temporary  duration. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  regard  the 
temporary  prosperity  of  the  wicked;  the 
good  cannot  be  indifferent  to  it ;  it  is 
thrust  upon  their  attention.  But  the 
good  are  not  obliged  to  envy  it,  or  to 
be  ill-tempered  at  it.  Their  envy  will 
do  no  good.  It  will  not  alter  tilings, 
or  make  them  better.  This  social  con- 
dition is  permitted  by  Heaven.  It  must, 
therefore,  be  accepted  by  the  devout 
mind  as  appropriate,  as  a  token  of  the 
beneficence  of  God  in  that  He  will  per- 
mit such  distinguished  mercy  to  attend 
a  wicked  life.  But  the  prosperity  of 
the  wicked  will  only  be  transient,  as 
the  beauty  of  the  grass,  or  as  the  mo- 
mentary bloom  of  the  flower.  And, 
therefore,  it  is  not  worthy  of  envy,  as  it 
is  prosperity  of  the  lowest  kind,  and 
will  soon  wither  in  the  grave  ;  whereas, 
though  the  good  may  endure  a  long 
period  of  want,  yet  it  will  only  be  as  a 
prelude  to  the  eternal  wealth  and  enjoy- 
ment of  heaven.  Surely,  then,  they 
have  no  need  to  envy  the  temporal  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked. 

III.  That  it  is  sinful  to  envy  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked,  because  it 
is  contrary  to  the  command  of  God. 

The  Bible  clearly  reveals  the  fact 
that  envy  is  a  sinful  passion,  and  that 
it  is  the  outcome  of  an  impure  heart. 
A  good  man  cannot  indulge  envy,  or  he 
will  soon  be  little  better  in  moral  char- 
acter than  those  whose  prosperity  he 
may  contemplate.  Envy  is  forbidden 
by  God.  It  is  an  unhallowed  flame 
within  the  soul.  It  hinders  prayer.  It 
leads  to  oppression.     It  is  contrary  to 


the  example  of  Christ.  Hence  if  good 
men  would  keep  their  souls  in  harmony 
with  the  law  of  God ;  if  they  would  be 
contented  in  spirit  and  happy  in  life, 
they  must  not  yield  to  the  dire  senti- 
ment of  envy. 

IV.  That  it  is  injurious  to  envy 
the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  because 
it  awakens  the  lower  sentiments  of 
the  soul. 

There  is  no  lower  passion  of  which 
man  is  capable  than  that  of  envy.  It 
is  a  mean  and  unhappy  companion.  It 
looks  askance  at  every  one  it  meets. 
In  its  light  a  friend  may  be  turned  into 
an  enemy.  And  for  a  good  man  to 
give  himself  up  to  it,  would  indeed  be 
to  allow  the  lower  feelings  of  his  soul 
to  gain  the  mastery  over  all  that  is  true 
and  magnanimous  within  him,  A  pure 
soul  cannot  indulge  envy. 

V.  That  it  is  presumptuous  to  envy 
the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  because 
it  is  rebellion  against  the  providence 
of  God. 

God  has  a  certain  method  of  provi- 
dence in  the  universe,  and  it  ill  becomes 
good  men  to  rebel  against  it.  It  is  just. 
It  is  disciplinary.  It  will  ultimately  be 
adjusted  to  all  the  moral  requirements 
of  the  universe.  The  good  should 
therefore  be  patient,  not  fretful.  They 
can  afford  to  wait.  They  have  mora] 
prosperity,  they  need  not  therefore  envy 
secular  pride.  They  must  fall  in  with 
the  providence  of  God,  even  though  at 
times  it  may  be  of  difficult  interpretation. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Not  to  cultivate  an  en- 
vious outlook  upon  the  social  conditions 
of  men.  2.  To  trust  in  God  during  the 
enigmas  of  the  present,  and  wait  the  final 
adjustment  of  all  things* 


The  Dispositions  and  Benedictions  of  the  Good. 


(  Verses 

In  the  opening  verses  of  this  psalm 
we  are  told  of  the  dispositions  which 
should  and  should  not  characterise  a 
pious  soul.  It  should  not  be  fretful  or 
envious.  It  should  be  trustful.  It 
should  be  joyous.  It  should  be  meek. 
These  dispositions  win  the  benediction 
of  Heaven.  The  blessings  of  the  soul 
172 


3-11.) 

are  intimately  allied  to  its  moral  disposi- 
tions. Men  find  the  world  what  they 
make  it  by  their  own  inner  spirit. 

I.  The  dispositions  that  should 
characterise  a  godly  life.  1.  Trust. 
"  Trust  in  the  Lord."  If  men  would 
avoid  a  fretful  spirit,  they  should  trust 
in  the  Lord.     Faith  is  the  noblest  dis- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXXVII. 


position  of  the  soul,  and  is  au  antidote 
for  envy.  It  has  an  elevating  influence 
upon  the  moral  character  of  those  who 
exercise  it.  The  Lord  is  worthy  of  the 
confidence  of  men.  He  is  omnipotent, 
and  cannot  fail.  He  is  faithful,  and 
will  never  forsake.  The  good  may  there- 
fore confide  their  life,  temporal  circum- 
stances, their  reputation,  and  the  govern- 
ment of  the  universe  to  Him,  knowing 
that  He  will  order  all  for  their  ultimate 
spiritual  welfare.  Trust  not  in  man,  not 
even  in  yourself.  Trust  in  God  must 
also  be  followed  by  appropriate  efi'ort  j 
only  they  who  "  do  good  "  have  any  right 
to  expect  Divine  help. 

2.  Joy.  "Delight  thyself  also  in  the 
Lord."  Hence  the  joy  of  the  good  is 
not  carnal  and  sinful,  but  spiritual  and 
pure.  It  is  delight  in  the  Supreme 
Being,  in  His  character  and  perfections, 
in  the  noblest  love,  and  in  the  highest 
wisdom  ;  hence  it  is  eminently  real  and 
secure.  In  what  better  object  can  the 
soul  delight  ?  In  uncertain  riches  1  In 
fleeting  pleasure  1  In  dying  friendship  1 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  both 
in  sorrow  and  in  service.  God  delights 
in  the  good,  and  what  more  reasonable 
than  that  they  should  rejoice  in  Him. 
The  life  of  the  Christian  is  one  of  holy 
delight  in  the  Eternal.  Faith  inspires 
delight. 

3.  Devotion.  "  Commit  thy  way  unto 
the  Lord."  The  good  are  not  to  take 
the  sole  guidance  and  responsibility  of 
their  own  life.  They  are  to  commit 
their  way,  their  sorrow,  their  moral  im- 
perfections, their  mental  perplexities, 
their  domestic  cares,  and  their  temporal 
circumstances,  entirely  into  the  hands 
of  the  Lord.  They  are  to  do  this  by 
prayer,  with  faith,  in  delight.  In  this 
consists  true  piety.  Though  the  great 
God  has  the  vast  concerns  of  the  universe 
to  watch  over,  He  is  willing  to  direct 
the  individual  life  committed  to  His 
care.  Some  men  commit  their  way  unto 
reason  ;  some  to  impulse ;  and  some  to 
passion.  But  God  is  the  only  true 
guardian  of  the  way  of  an  immortal 
soul. 

4.  Rest.  "  Rest  in  the  Lord."  This 
is  the  duty  and  privilege  of  the  good. 
This  is  not  a  world  for  much  repose; 


men  are  anxious  and  active  ;  they  make 
haste  to  be  rich ;  they  pursue  pleasure 
ardently  ;  they  are  tormented  by  care  : 
they  are  unrestful.  But  religion  gives 
moral  quietude.  It  calms  the  soul.  It 
silences  the  voice  of  complaint.  God  is 
the  only  true  resting-place  of  the  soul ; 
but  what  a  sweet  rest  is  found  in  Him ! 
See,  then,  the  accompaniments  of  faith, 
joy,  devotion,  rest.  Faith  bears  blessed 
fruit. 

5.  Patience.  "  Wait  patiently."  The 
good  must  be  patient  in  sufi'ering,  in 
service — under  adverse  circumstances, 
when  their  reputation  is  maligned,  and 
when  the  mystery  of  life  presses  heavily 
upon  them.  God  is  worth  waiting  for. 
His  time  is  the  best.  Men  tarry  for  the 
king.  Time  should  not  be  considered 
in  waiting  for  the  King  of  heaven.  The 
splendour  of  His  advent  will  more  than 
compensate  for  the  delay. 

6.  Meehiess.  ''  But  the  meek  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  The  good  should  be 
meek  and  contented  with  their  lot,  not 
haughty,  defiant,  or  restless.  Hence  we 
see  the  dispositions  which  should  charac- 
terise a  pious  soul,  and  the  benedictions 
they  attain,  and  the  admiration  they 
win. 

II.  The  benedictions  that  are  be- 
stowed upon  a  godly  life.  1.  That  a 
godly  life  is  watched  over  by  the  beneficent 
providence  of  God.  "  Thou  shalt  dwell 
in  the  land,  and  verily  thou  shalt  be 
fed."  The  Divine  providence  enables 
the  good  to  feel  at  home  in  this  world, 
even  though  they  do  not  regard  it  as 
their  home.  They  dwell  in  the  land 
because  it  is  the  property  of  their  Father 
in  heaven,  and  He  gives  them  the  right 
to  reside  in  it.  Thus  their  temporal 
and  moral  requirements  will  be  met. 
They  will  be  fed  with  the  bread  that 
perisheth,  as  also  with  the  bread  that 
Cometh  down  from  heaven.  Truth  is 
the  sustenance  of  the  soul,  and  it  shall 
never  be  lacking  to  the  good. 

2.  That  a  godly  life  is  privileged  by 
the  gratification  of  its  best  desires.  *'  He 
shall  give  thee  the  desires  of  thine  heart." 
The  desires  of  the  good  are  the  outcome 
of  their  trust  and  delight  in  the  Lord, 
and  therefore  may  safely  be  granted. 
Man  is  a  creature  of  desire.     He  often 

173 


IBALM  ZZXVn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


longs  for  that  he  can  never  attain.  His 
aspirations  are  often  ambitious,  and,  if 
realised,  would  prove  injurious.  But 
the  inclinations  of  the  good  are  pure  and 
spiritual,  they  are  in  harmony  with  the 
will  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  the  soul. 
Religion  alone  can  give  true  satisfaction 
to  human  desire. 

3.  That  a  godly  life  shall  be  vindi- 
cated from  the  slander  and  calumny  of 
men.  "  And  He  shall  bring  forth  thy 
righteousness  as  the  light."  The  good 
are  often  maligned  in  this  world  by  those 
who  envy  the  beauty  of  their  characters 
and  the  glory  of  their  reputation.  Some- 
times this  is  the  outcome  of  sheer  malice, 
and  occasionally  of  wanton  mischief. 
But  from  the  darkness  of  calumny  God 
will  bring  the  good  into  the  light  of 
day,  when  men  shall  see  the  untarnished 
beauty  of  their  characters,  the  injury 
that  has  been  done  them,  and  the  tender 
solicitude  of  Heaven  for  the  public  vin- 
dication of  the  pure. 

4.  That  a  godly  life  is  enriched  by 
a  true  ownership  of  the  earth.  *'  But 
the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth."  The 
world  is  not  inherited  by  the  busy  or  by 


those  who  are  given  to  speculation,  but 
by  the  meek.  They  inherit  it  by  their 
contented  spirit,  and  because  they  enjoy 
it.  It  is  the  gift  of  their  Father  to 
them,  and  they  possess  its  title-deeds  in 
Christ.  The  meek  are  the  true  and 
permanent  inheritors  of  the  soil  ;  they 
will  inherit  the  new  heaven  and  the  new 
earth. 

6.  That  a  godly  life  shall  experience 
a  sweet  and  affluent  peace.  *'  And  shall 
delight  themselves  in  the  abundance  of 
peace."  A  godly  life  is  generally  cha- 
racterised by  peaceful ness.  It  is  at 
peace  with  self,  with  God,  and  with  the 
universe.  Its  peace  is  afl3.uent ;  it  is  a 
delight ;  it  is  divinely  given  to  the  pure. 
*'  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  Weak 
men  are  agitated  by  the  storms  of  earth, 
while  good  men  know  the  peace  of  God 
which  passeth  all  understanding,  and 
anticipate  a  destiny  of  peace  which  shall 
never  be  broken  by  sorrow  or  sin. 

Lessons  : — 1.  To  cultivate  the  dispo- 
sitions of  soul  commended  by  God.  2.  To 
expect  the  benedictions  of  Heaven  promised 
to  a  trustful  soul. 


The  Plottings  op  the  Wicked  against  the  Good. 

(Verses  12-15.) 


That  the  wicked  plot  against  the  just 
is  matter  of  history,  and  also  of  every- 
day experience.  They  envy  the  moral 
character  of  the  good,  with  the  respect 
it  wins  and  the  influence  it  wields.  They 
cannot  interpret  its  inner  meaning  or 
understand  the  secret  of  its  modest 
power.  They  are  also  rebuked  by  the 
quiet  dignity  of  the  Christian  character, 
and  hence,  through  sheer  hatred,  seek  to 
persecute  and  remove  it  out  of  their 
sight.  To  this  end  they  employ  their 
best  genius  and  cunning,  and  await  the 
result  with  the  utmost  complacency, 
little  thinking  that  Heaven  holds  them 
and  their  schemes  in  derision. 

I.  The  plottings  of  the  wicked 
against  the  good  are  wrathful.  "  And 
gnasheth  upon  him  with  his  teeth." 
The  wicked  show  by  their  gestures  the 
rage  they  indulge  against,  and  injury 
they  would  inflict  upon,  the  good  if  it 
174 


were  in  their  power.  They  gnash  with 
their  teeth,  thus  indicating  their  angry 
but  curbed  rage.  They  have  not  the 
ability  or  the  opportunity  to  accomplish 
the  mischief  their  violent  passion  would 
devise.  Sinners  are  held  in  check  by 
the  restraining  providence  of  God,  by 
legal  penalties,  and  often  by  the  sheer 
force  of  public  opinion,  which  favours 
the  welfare  of  the  good.  But  if  the 
wicked  cannot  always  execute  their 
plottings  against  the  just,  they  do  not 
disguise  their  anger ;  they  little  think 
how  morally  impotent  and  vulgar  their 
puny  gnashing  makes  them  appear. 
They  show  that  they  are  the  creatures 
of  a  passion  they  cannot  vent. 

II.  The  plottings  of  the  wicked 
against  the  good  are  cruel  "  Tlie 
wicked  have  drawn  out  the  sword." 
They  have  drawn  the  weapon  out  of  the 
sheath   and  await  the  time  to  use  it. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALM  XXXTIL 


They  do  not  seek  to  overcome  the  just 
by  Scripture  truth,  by  logical  argument, 
or  by  cultured  means,  but  by  the  cruel 
and  deadly  instrument  of  war.  They 
employ  no  half  measures,  as  they  vainly 
imagine.  They  repose  more  confidence 
in  the  physical  and  material  agency  than 
in  the  intellectual  and  the  moral.  In 
seeking  the  injury  of  the  good,  they 
would  prefer  a  sword  to  any  other  in- 
strumentality. They  shrink  not  from 
murder  if  their  rage  can  only  achieve  its 
malicious  design.  They  are  of  the  lowest 
type  of  mind. 

III.  The  plottings  of  the  wicked 
against  the  good  are  determined. 
"  And  have  bent  their  bow."  They  not 
merely  carry  a  sword,  but  also  a  bow  j  nor 
would  they  refuse  any  other  instrument 
likely  to  accomplish  their  mischievous 
design  upon  the  good.  They  bend  the 
bow  with  all  the  determination  of  will 
they  can  possibly  summon.  They  take 
steady  aim  that  they  may  wound  a  vital 
part.  And  thus  the  wicked,  in  their'plot- 
tings  against  the  just,  make  use  of  all 
the  instrumentalities  they  can  command, 
exercise  all  the  talents  they  possess,  and 
are  strong  in  their  determination  to 
achieve  the  end  they  contemplate. 

IV.  The  plottings  of  the  wicked 
against  the  good  are  cowardly.  "  To 
cast  down  the  poor  and  needy."  The 
wicked  do  not  seek  to  engage  in  conflict 
with  the  strong  amongst  the  good,  who 


would  be  competent  to  expose  and  van- 
quish their  plottings,  but  with  the  poor 
and  needy.  They  attack  the  feeble  who 
are  too  meek  in  spirit  to  suspect  their 
mischief,  or  to  defend  themselves  from 
it ;  they  attack  the  poor  who  have  not 
wherewith  to  protect  themselves  from 
the  assaults  of  their  imperious  enemies. 
Wicked  men  are  generally  cowardly. 
They  have  not  the  courage  of  their  rage, 
or  the  valour  of  their  determination. 

V.  The  plottings  of  the  wicked 
against  the  good  axe  self-destructive. 
"  Their  sword  shall  enter  into  their  own 
heart."  The  very  weapon  intended  for 
the  destruction  of  the  good,  under  the 
mysterious  but  retributive  arrangements 
of  Divine  Providence,  shall  be  employed 
in  the  defeat  of  the  wicked.  The  wicked 
are  often  hung  upon  gallows  built  by 
themselves.  Their  plottings  are  self- 
destructive  ;  they  are  vain ;  they  are 
useless ;  their  bows  are  broken ;  their 
agencies  are  cut  ofif ;  their  plans  are  de- 
feated ;  they  outwit  themselves  ;  they 
invite  the  derision  and  retribution  of 
heaven. 

Lessons  :— 1.  That  it  is  foolish  for 
the  wicked  to  plot  against  the  good.  2. 
Such  plottings  are  intelligible  to  the  good, 
being  explained  by  the  enmity  of  the 
world  to  Christ,  3.  Such  plottings  are 
not  to  befearedj  hut  are  to  be  outlived  by 
trust  in  God, 


The  Righteous  and  his  Little  better  than  the  Wicked  with 

HIS  Much. 

(Verse  16.) 


It  is  a  fact  of  everyday  observation 
that  the  righteous  often  have  little, 
while  the  ungodly  have  much.  The 
little  may  be  better  than  the  much. 
This  is  the  arithmetic  of  Heaven,  not  of 
the  world.     Why  is  the  little  better  ? 

I.  Because  it  is  honestly  gained. 
The  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath  is 
sure  to  be  honestly  gained.  It  will  be 
either  the  product  of  healthy  labour,  of 
commendable  skill,  or  of  lawful  inherit- 
ance. This  cannot  always  be  said  of  the 
riches  of  the  wicked  ;  they  are  often  got 
by  fraud,  by  cunning,  from  the  orphan, 


and  the  widow.      The  way  in  which 

wealth  is  obtained  has  much  to  do  with 
its  real  value. 

II.  Because  it  may  be  safely  re- 
tained. The  little  that  a  righteous  man 
hath  is  far  more  likely  to  be  safely  re- 
tained than  are  the  riches  of  the  wicked. 
The  former  are  careful  in  the  use,  prayer- 
ful in  the  investment,  and  unselfish  in 
the  gift  of  their  little  ;  while  the  latter 
are  spendthrift,  godless,  and  selfish  in 
the  use  of  their  much.  Prayer  and  be- 
nevolence are  a  great  preservative  to 
wealth* 

175 


FSALM  XXXVII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


III.  Because  it  may  be  truly  en- 
joyed. T^e  little  of  the  righteous  is 
rightfully  earned,  and,  therefore,  may  be 
truly  enjoyed  ;  whereas  the  much  of  the 
wicked  is  often  unjustly  gained,  and  is, 
therefore,  associated  with  unhappy  deeds, 
with  unwelcome  memories,  with  self- 
accusation,  and  with  a  fear  of  retribu- 
tion.    It  cannot  be  truly  enjoyed. 

IV.  Because  it  will  be  carefully 
spent.  It  is  just  possible  that  the  little 
of  the  righteous  will  go  farther  than  the 
great  riches  of  the  wicked.  The  righte- 
ous are  careful  but  not  miserly  ;  they 
gather  up  the  fragments  that  nothing 
may  be  lost.  The  wicked  are  often 
speculative,  and  lose  more  than  they 
win.  They  are  spendthrift ;  they  make 
a  boast  of  their  prodigality ;  they  are 
well  bled  by  flatterers  and  by  sinful  ac- 
complices. 


V.  Because  it  will  be  benevolently 
used.  The  little  of  the  righteous  will 
be  given  to  the  Lord  j  to  His  cause  on 
the  earth ;  to  His  poor ;  and  to  institu- 
tions worthy  of  help.  Men  lose  nothing 
by  giving  to  the  prophet  of  the  Lord 
(1  Kings  xvii.  14;  Prov.  xi.  24).  The 
righteous  gain  by  giving.  The  wicked 
lose  by  withdrawing.  A  running  stream 
inherits  the  most  territory. 

VI.  Because  it  will  be  divinely 
blessed.  The  righteous  can  justly  ex- 
pect the  blessing  of  God  upon  their 
little,  because  it  is  honestly  gained  and 
it  is  benevolently  used.  The  wicked 
have  no  right  to  anticipate  the  benedic- 
tion of  Heaven  upon  their  riches.  No 
man  is  rich  without  the  blessing  of  God. 

Lessons: — 1.  To  he  satisfied  with 
little.  2.  To  make  little  sufficient,  3. 
To  use  little  well. 


Contrasted  Characters. 

{Verses  16-28.) 


We  have  in  these  verses  a  fine  con- 
trast between  the  wicked  and  the  righte- 
ous. It  is  drawn  by  unerring  skill, 
after  minute  observation,  and  is  in  keep- 
ing with  the  general  experience  of  man- 
kind.    The  wicked  and  the  good  : — 

I.  They  are  contrasted  in  their 
possessions.  "  A  little  that  a  righte- 
ous man  hath  is  better  than  the  riches  of 
many  wicked."  The  wicked  often  have 
greater  property  and  wealth  than  the 
good,  but  they  are  not  content  there- 
with ;  yea,  they  are  even  unrestful  in 
its  possession.  Whereas  the  righteous 
have  little,  but,  by  the  quietude  of  their 
soul,  their  little  becomes  much,  and  is  a 
true  enjoyment  to  them.  Wicked  men 
are  troubled  by  their  much  (Luke  xii. 
16).  Good  men  are  grateful  for  their 
little  (Ps.  ciii.  2). 

II.  They  are  contrasted  in  their 
strength.  "  For  the  arms  of  the  wicked 
shall  be  broken  :  but  the  Lord  up- 
holdeth  the  righteous."  The  arms  are  a 
token  of  power  and  strength,  and  the 
arms  of  the  wicked  shall  be  broken. 
They  shall  be  broken  by  the  retributive 
providence  of  God,  and  by  the  failure  of 
their  own  schemes.      What  a  pitiable 

176 


sight  they  present !  Revengeful,  yet 
armless.  Like  Samson  shorn  of  his 
strength.  The  strength  of  the  good 
man  does  not  consist  in  his  arms,  hence 
there  is  no  reference  to  them,  but  in  the 
inspiring  energy  of  God.  He  is  upheld 
by  the  Lord,  hence  his  superior  power 
and  safety. 

III.  They  are  contrasted  in  their 
perpetuity.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the 
days  of  the  upright ;  and  their  inherit- 
ance shall  be  for  ever."  "  But  the 
wicked  shall  perish."  The  good  are 
known  by  God.  He  knows  their  present 
estate  and  their  future  glory.  He  sees 
their  trials,  and  also  the  weight  of  glory 
in  reserve  for  them.  He  beholds  the 
sword  unsheathed,  and  the  bow  bent 
against  them,  but  no  weapon  formed 
against  them  can  prosper.  The  times  of 
the  good  are  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord, 
hence  He  will  deliver  them  from  special 
calamities,  and  will  feed  them  when 
famine  is  prevalent.  But  the  wicked 
shall  perish,  —  they  have  no  defence 
against  their  enemies,  they  have  no 
granary  in  Egypt  to  which  they  can  flee 
in  the  days  of  famine.  They  will  perish 
i^mhlyf     irreparc^l^j     and     etenially. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XXXVII. 


This  will  be  the  end   of  their   hatred, 
cunning,  and  wealth. 

IV.  They  are  contrasted  in  their 
integrity.  "  The  wicked  borroweth, 
and  payeth  not  again  :  but  the  righteous 
Bhoweth  mercy  and  giveth.'^  Though 
the  wicked  have  great  wealth,  they  are 
often  under  the  necessity  of  borrowing 
money,  because  they  are  prodigal.  They 
borrow  to  meet  the  demands  of  extrava- 
gant habits,  of  sinful  pleasures,  and  of 
accomplices  in  vices.  Sin  is  very  ex- 
pensive. It  involves  in  hopeless  debt, 
and  oftentimes  to  those  against  whom 
the  sword  has  been  unsheathed.  The 
wicked  pay  not  again.  They  are  not 
willing  to  reform  their  extravagant 
habits,  they  are  not  willing  to  work,  and 
they  are  dishonest  at  heart,  and  so  they 
pay  not  their  debts,  even  though  they 
violate  their  most  sacred  bonds.  The 
righteous  lend  to  the  wicked,  they  are 
merciful  and  generous  in  spirit.  Their 
wealth  was  lent  to  them,  and  they  are 
willing  to  lend  it  again,  and  to  receive 
their  usury  from  Him  who  ever  rewards 


a  beneficent  deed.  The  plottings  of  the 
wicked  do  not  interrupt  the  benevolent 
dispositions  of  the  good.  It  is  better  to 
lend  than  to  borrow. 

V.  They  are  contrasted  in  their  pos- 
terity. "  Yet  have  I  not  seen  the 
righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging 
bread.  But  the  seed  of  the  wicked  shall 
be  cut  off."  David  had  not  seen  the 
seed  of  the  righteous  begging  bread. 
He  was  a  king,  and  would  not  be  likely 
to  meet  with  such  poverty.  Yet  his  ex- 
perience was  wide  in  the  matter,  and  he 
was  competent  to  pass  an  opinion.  The 
children  of  good  men  are  seen  begging ; 
but  very  seldom.  This  is  the  exception, 
the  rule  is  in  harmony  with  the  state- 
ment of  this  verse.  The  children  of  the 
wicked  are  cut  off,  they  inherit  from 
their  parents  the  seeds  of  destruction 
(Prov.  lii.  33). 

Lessons  : — 1.  Which  character  is  the 
more  inviting^  the  more  prosperous,  the 
more  enduring  J  2.  Which  will  you 
cultivate  i 


The  Righteous, 
{Verses  29-34.) 


The  psalmist  found  congenial  employ- 
ment in  writing  about  good  men,  and 
their  relation  to  God,  to  His  govern- 
ment, and  to  the  world  at  large.  He 
delighted  to  show  the  Divine  care  for 
the  good,  their  excellencies  of  character, 
the  protection  they  enjoyed,  and  the 
future  they  anticipated.     The  righteous : 

I.  The  land  he  inherits.  "The 
righteous  shall  inherit  the  land,  and 
dwell  therein  for  ever."  The  righteous 
inherit  the  earth,  the  world  in  which 
they  now  are,  they  inherit  it  as  the  sons 
of  God  through  Christ,  and,  standing  on 
Calvary,  all  that  they  can  see  from  that 
hill  is  theirs.  They  will  dwell  eternally 
in  this  world  by  the  work  they  do,  by 
the  influences  they  exert,  by  the  inspira- 
tion they  impart,  and  by  the  silent  testi- 
mony they  leave  behind  (Heb.  xi.  4). 

II.  The  wisdom  he  speaks.  *'The 
mouth  of  the  righteous  speaketli  wisdom, 
and  his  tongue  talketh  of  judgment." 
Good  men  are  known  by  their  speech, 

M 


they  talk  on  good  eubjects,  and  talk  on 

them  wisely.  He  converses  about  moral 
questions,  his  tongue  talketh  of  judg- 
ment. He  speaks  not  about  the  follies  of 
the  age,  he  has  no  interest  in  the  gossip 
of  the  weak, — he  prefers  the  deeper  and 
more  solemn  themes  of  life  and  destiny. 

III.  The  law  he  keeps.  "  The  law 
of  his  God  is  in  his  heart ;  none  of  his 
steps  shall  slide."  This  is  the  secret  of 
his  wise  speech.  Men  who  know  God, 
and  who  search  His  law,  are  furnished 
with  themes  for  noble  conversation,  and 
are  imbued  \\  ith  a  true  spirit  of  wisdom. 
If  men  would  read  the  Bible  more,  they 
would  talk  more  wisely.  The  good  man 
not  merely  reads  the  law,  he  not  merely 
knows  it,  but  it  is  resident  within  him  as 
a  vital  and  transformative  principle  (Ps. 
cxix.  11).  Obedience  to  this  law  is  ele- 
vating, preserving,  safe,  and  sanctifying. 
It  is  the  highest  law,  and  obedience  to 
it  is  the  most  influential  and  worthy. 

IV.  The  safety  he  enjoys.      "The 

177 


P8ALM  ZXXVIL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


wicked  watcheth  the  righteous,  and 
seeketh  to  slay  him.  The  Lord  will  not 
leave  him  in  his  hand."  The  righteous 
are  watched  by  deceptive  and  cruel  men, 
they  are  often  unconscious  of  this  peril. 
But  they  have  another  watcher,  even  the 
Lord  who  is  their  Sun  and  Shield.  The 
Divine  Guardian  is  greater  and  more 
vigilant  than  the  human  foe.  Jesus  was 
watched  by  His  enemies. 

V.  The  condemnation  lie  escapes. 
"  Nor  condemn  him  when  he  is  judged." 
In  this  world  the  righteous  are  often 
condemned,  by  secret  slander,  by  cruel 
hatred,  by  violent  plots,  by  public 
opinion,  and  even  by  the  legal  tribunals 
of  the  land.  But  there  comes  a  day 
when  their  condemnation  will  be  re- 
versed, their  shame  will  be  removed, 
their  characters  will  be  cleared,  and  in- 
finite justice  will  receive  them  into  its 
eternal  protection.  The  good  can  afford 
to  wait  this  time,  and  no  doubt  many 
long  for  it  to  turn  their  darkness  into 
light,  their  sadness  into  joy.  A  false 
sentence  is  now  passed  on  moral  good- 


ness ;  the  future  will  reveal  its  injustice. 
The  pure  life  only  can  escape  condemna- 
tion. What  a  joy  to  escape  the  condem- 
nation of  God,  not  through  our  own 
merit,  but  through  the  cross  of  Jesus. 

VI.  The  exaltation  he  expects. 
"  Wait  on  the  Lord  and  keep  His  way, 
and  He  shall  exalt  thee  to  inherit  the 
land."  The  good  are  to  wait  on  the 
Lord,  because  He  may  be  long  in  coming 
to  them,  because  He  is  worth  waiting 
for,  and  because  at  His  coming  they  will 
realise  all  their  long-cherished  hopes. 
The  early  watchers  on  the  mountain 
wait  for  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  the 
multitudes  wait  for  the  coming  of  the 
king.  So  let  the  Christian  wait  for  the 
Lord.  The  good  must  not  only  wait  on 
the  Lord,  but  also  keep  His  way.  There 
must  be  keeping  as  well  as  waiting,  and 
then  there  will  be  inheriting.  Canaan 
is  the  inheritance  and  the  exaltation  of 
the  pure. 

Lessons  : — 1.  Talk  wisely,  2.  Obey 
diligently,  3.  Walk  carefully,  4.  An- 
ticipate joyfully. 


The  Temporary  Prosperity  op  the  Wicked  as  Contrasted  with 
THE  Peaceful  Destiny  of  the  Good. 

(Ferses  35-37.) 


The  first  verse  contains  the  pith  of 
the  entire  psalm.  '^Fret  not  thyself 
because  of  evil-doers,  neither  be  thou 
envious  against  the  workers  of  iniquity." 
The  following  reasons  are  given  as  a 
preventative  of  an  envious  spirit  :  The 
glory  of  the  wicked  is  of  brief  duration 
(ver.  2) ;  the  moral  rectitude  of  the  good 
will  be  finally  manifested  (ver.  6) ;  the 
good  are  divinely  protected  from  the 
attacks  of  evil  men  (ver.  12-15)  ;  they 
are  divinely  guided  (ver.  23);  they 
are  the  true  inheritors  of  the  soil  (ver. 
29) ;  their  destiny  is  peaceful.  Hence 
the  good  have  no  need  to  envy  the 
wicked  in  their  bright  but  transient 
prosperity,  especially  when  they  con- 
sider the  future.  Perhaps,  when  David 
wrote  this  psalm,  the  image  of  Saul  was 
floating  before  his  vision.  Truly,  in 
reference  to  that  monarch,  he  could  say, 
"  I  have  seen  the  wicked,"  <fcc. 
178 


I.  That  wicked  men  are  often  in 
the  possession  of  great  power.  *'I 
have  seen  the  wicked  in  great  power." 

1.  They  often  have  social  distinction. 
It  very  often  happens  that  the  wicked 
are  rich ;  they  have  a  productive  farm, 
or  a  good  business,  which  places  at  their 
command  the  luxuries  of  life.  Hence 
they  are  surrounded  by  men  of  like 
fortunes,  and  are  largely  courted  by  the 
multitude  beneath  them.  It  is  custom- 
ary in  these  times  to  make  wealth  rather 
than  character  the  test  of  companion- 
ship ;  hence  rich  men  are  suns  in  the 
firmament  of  our  social  life,  they  are 
surrounded  by  attendant  planets,  and 
stars,  hoping  to  catch  the  rays  of  their 
favour.  They  keep  up  appearances,  they 
give  grand  entertainments,  they  aid  phi- 
lanthropic institutions,  and  so  gain  social 
popularity.  Such  men  are  dangerous. 
They  are,  to  those  who  circle  near  them, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


P8ALM  XXXVn. 


as  the  bright  light  to  the  moth  :  they 
occasion  moral  ruin. 

2.  They  often  have  national  distinction. 
They  have  gained  influence  in  the  local 
circle  in  which  they  move,  hence  they  are 
elevated  to  a  seat  in  the  legislature ;  or, 
it  may  be,  that  they  are  clever  as  they  are 
wicked,  and  thus,  by  sheer  intellect,  gain 
the  pre-eminence  of  their  fellows.  They 
make  an  invention,  they  write  a  book, 
they  win  a  battle,  and  society,  not  being 
in  an  ideal  state,  is  in  danger  of  elevat- 
ing genius  rather  than  goodness.  Again, 
if  they  are  not  clever,  they  are  cunning, 
and  we  all  know  the  power  of  fraud  to 
out-do  honesty  for  a  time.  They  flatter 
the  great  men  of  the  age,  and  so  win 
their  help  to  fame.  For  even  great  men 
are  wonderfully  open  to  flattery.  But, 
sometimes  their  plots  are  so  deeply  laid, 
that  even  the  good  are  duped  by  them. 

3.  The  supremacy  of  the  wicked  is  a 
matter  of  history  and  experience.  "  I 
have  seen,"  &c.  History  is  a  record  of 
the  wicked  who  have  been  in  great  power. 
Human  society  exhibits  the  same  fact. 
Men  of  the  highest  genius,  whose  names 
are  household  words,  and  -whose  works 
will  be  read  to  the  end  of  time,  are  illus- 
trations of  this  statement.  We  think  of 
Byron  ;  and  also  of  many  kings  who 
have  ascended  our  throne.  This  outlook 
upon  history  and  society  may  be  per- 
plexing, but  the  problem  will  one  day 
be  solved,  when  it  will  appear  that  saints 
were  the  true  kings  of  the  world,  and 
that  ambitious  sinners  were  its  paupers. 

4.  In  this  supremacy  the  wicked  ap- 
pear strong  and  arrogant.  "  Spreading 
himself,"  ic.  They  imagine  that  their 
foundation  is  secure,  that  the  effects  of 
their  wealth  and  genius  upon  the  popular 
mind  will  never  die  away ;  that  their 
Bmile  will  win,  that  their  frown  will 
subdue  their  enemies.  Their  demeanour 
is  imperious.  Their  tones  of  voice  are 
emphatic.  They  forget  that  modesty 
and  humility  would  best  serve  their 
end.  They  are  like  the  swollen  stream, 
"which  spreads  itself  throughout  the  land, 
to  show  off  its  expansiveness,  but  cer- 
tainly not  its  depth. 

n.  That  wicked  men  often  expe- 
rience unexpected  reverses.  1.  Severe 
and  complete.     **  Yet  he  passed  away." 


Sometimes  these  men  pass  from  the 
highest  pinnacle  of  wealth  to  abject 
poverty,  through  speculation  or  panic  ; 
their  true  characters  are  unveiled,  and 
society  discards  them.  No  vestige  is 
left  of  their  power. 

2.  Unlikely  and  unexpected.  Such 
reverses  are  not  often  anticipated.  We 
expect  that  wealth  will  protect  from 
them.  The  wicked  are  like  the  rider 
through  the  desert,  unexpectedly  plun- 
dered by  some  stern  robber.  At  the 
roots  of  the  richest  flower  there  may  be 
an  insect  eating  away  its  life  unseen. 
The  calm  often  breaks  suddenly  into 
storm.  The  wicked  aristocrat  may  soon 
become  the  wicked  pauper. 

3.  Minutely  observed.  "  I  sought 
him."  Men  of  wealth  are  talked  about 
by  everybody;  their  houses,  clothes, 
habits,  are  the  staple  theme  of  the 
neighbourhood.  "  /  sought  him."  Men 
come  to  the  ruin  to  mock ;  to  search  to 
see  if  there  was  anything  left  they 
could  plunder,  and,  no  doubt,  to  weep. 
Some  would  pity  his  fall.  The  world 
soon  hears  of  the  destruction  of  its 
powerful  ones. 

III.  That  while  the  wicked  expe- 
rience these  reverses,  the  good  are 
happy  in  their  life,  and  peaceful  in 
their  futurity.  *'  The  end  of  that  man 
is  peace."  1.  The  good  are  a  great  con- 
trast to  the  wicked  just  contemplated. 
The  character  of  the  one  is  impure,  that 
of  the  other  is  holy  ;  the  circumstances 
of  the  one  are  affluent,  those  of  the  other 
may  be  needy ;  the  destiny  of  the  one 
is  ignominious,  while  that  of  the  other 
is  happy.  The  contrast  is  not  only 
great,  but  happy.  It  is  pleasant  to  turn 
from  the  one  to  the  other.  Good  men 
are  the  charm  of  history  and  of  life. 
They  are  welcome  as  the  shady  nook 
during  the  hot  summer  day.  The  con- 
trast is  solemn.  To  think  of  the  wicked 
in  their  power  and  ruin,  and  then  of  the 
good  in  their  peace  and  hope,  must  cer- 
tainly evoke  a  feeling  of  regret  that  one 
life  should  lack  the  beauty  and  safety 
of  the  other. 

2.  The  good  are  worthy  of  careful 
note  and  imitation.  "  Mark  the  perfect 
man."  He  is  worthy  of  note.  A  per- 
fect man  /    Are  you  astonished  %    Have 

179 


I?«ALM  XXXVIII. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


you  never  seen  one  1  True,  they  are 
not  often  to  be  met  with, — you  should 
therefore  note  him  the  more  when  you 
do  see  him.  If  you  go  into  a  picture 
gallery,  and  find  a  beautiful  work  of 
art,  you  study  it  from  every  point  of 
view,  its  every  feature  and  tint.  So 
with  the  flower  in  your  garden.  But 
here  is  not  a  lifeless  picture,  a  withering 
flower,  but  an  immortality, — therefore 
let  your  study  be  deeper  and  truer. 
Mark  his  moral  bearing,  his  strict  in- 
tegrity, his  untiring  zeal,  his  gentle 
spirit,  his  effort  for  the  good  of  others. 
But  do  not  look  at  him  merely  to  ad- 
mire, but  to  imitate;  not  merely  that 
the  natural  instincts  of  your  soul  may 
be  pleased,  but  that  your  manhood  may 
catch  the  glory  of  his.  Men  always  be- 
come like  the  object  they  study.  Moral 
character  is  the  highest  kind  of  study  If 
you  mark  the  perfect  man  you  will  see 
that  life  does  not  always  go  easily  with 
him ;  sometimes  the  night  is  dark  and 
rough,  but  he  always  has  one  star  to 
cheer  and  guide  him  on  his  journey. 
3.  The  life  of  the  good  will  ultimately 


com^  to  an   end.     "The    end   of   that 

man."  What  a  pity  !  We  should  like 
their  beautiful  light  to  shine  on  in  our 
midst  for  ever.  Good  men  are  the 
world's  jewels  ;  they  are  patterns  of  life ; 
they  are  prayers ;  they  are  inspirations. 
We  cannot  spare  them.  But  death  is 
rude,  and  takes  them  from  us ;  they 
gladly  step  into  heaven.  And  thus  are 
plucked  earth's  choicest  flowers,  to  be 
removed  to  the  Eden  above. 

4.  The  departure  of  the  good  will  he 
peaceful  in  its  issue.  There  may  be  the 
pain  of  disease,  but  that  only  touches 
the  surface  of  the  man.  In  the  depths 
of  his  soul  there  is  celestial  calm.  Peace, 
the  end  of  life  !  How  welcome  after 
the  storm.  "  Come  at  last,  has  it  ?"  ex- 
claims the  dying  saint.  "  Peace  ! " 
"  My  spirit  has  found  its  rest  in  the 
home  of  the  Eternal."  We  are  told 
that  Stephen  fell  asleep ;  God  turned 
the  angry  cries  of  the  murderous  mob 
into  the  lullabies  of  a  vsaintly  repose. 

Which  will  you  have?  1.  Wick- 
edness and  power ;  or,  2.  Piety  and 
peace* 


PSALM    XXXVIIL 
Introduction. 

ThiB  is  a  psalm  of  David  to  call  to  remembrance  his  past  life,  and,  no  doubt,  has  eapecial 
reference  to  his  sin  with  Bathsheba.  It  calls  up  to  the  view  of  his  memory  the  sins  of  the  past, 
the  afflictions  of  the  past,  tlie  enemies  of  the  past,  and  the  mercies  of  the  past.  It  is  well  to 
have  times  of  remembrance  in  life,  like  milestones  on  the  road,  to  remind  of  the  journey  we 
have  travelled,  and  to  inspire  us  onward  to  the  future.  The  past  is  not  entirely  to  be  for- 
gotten ;  it  is  to  be  called  up  as  evidence  of  our  own  depravity,  of  the  Divine  faithfulness,  and  as 
a  profitable  moral  reflection  for  the  soul. 


A  Conscience  Awakened  by  a  Sense  of  the  Divine  Chastisement. 

(Verses  1-22.) 


I.  That  the  Divine  chastisement  is 
greatly  afflictive  to  men.  This  is 
evident  throughout  the  entire  psalm ; 
in  fact,  it  would  appear  as  though  the 
writer  were  unable  to  find  similitude  by 
which  to  liken,  or  language  in  which  to 
express,  his  moral  pain  occasioned  by 
the  Divine  chastisement. 

1.   The  Divine  chastisement  makes  men 

apprehensive  of  the  wrath  of  God  (ver.  1). 

David,   no    doubt,   felt    that  he  justly 

merited  the  Divine  rebuke  in  its  mood 

180 


of  strong  displeasure.  He  had  sinned, 
and  sin  always  leads  men  to  regard  God 
as  offended.  It  changes  the  Divine 
favour  into  disapprobation.  The  soul 
is  certain  to  view  God  through  its  own 
moral  experiences,  and  hence,  accord- 
ing to  its  consciousness  of  innocence  or 
guilt.  He  appears  as  a  Father  or  as  a 
Judge.  The  Divine  anger  is  the  bit- 
terest element  in  the  sorrow  of  the 
good. 

2.  The  Divine  chastisement  is  keen  in 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XZXTIII. 


its  penetration  into  the  soul  of  man  (ver. 
3).  The  Divine  chastisements  are  keen, 
swift,  and  penetrating  as  barbed  arrows. 
They  are  shot  unseen ;  they  come  unex- 
pected ;  they  make  little  noise ;  they 
are  abiding  in  their  injury.  Thus  it  is 
with  those  who  are  convinced  of  sin. 
The  arrow  of  the  Holy  Spirit  penetrates 
to  their  innermost  soul,  and  causes  ter- 
rible pain  of  conscience.  God's  arrows 
always  hit  their  mark,  and  are  intended 
to  remind  of  the  bitterness  of  sin. 

3.  The  Divine  chastisement  makes  men 
morally  loathsome  to  themselves  (vers.  3 
and  5).  Here  we  see  the  view  which  an 
awakened  conscience  takes  of  its  moral 
condition.  When  the  soul  is  wounded 
by  sin  it  becomes  offensive  to  its  own 
inner  gaze.  The  sinner,  when  under 
conviction  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  sees  all 
his  life  as  one  festering  sore,  and  loathes 
it  with  penitential  grief. 

4.  The  Divine  chastisement  leads  men 
to  an  overwhelming  consciousness  of  sin 
(ver.  4).  A  man,  when  under  the  re- 
buke of  God,  feels  himself  to  be  over- 
whelmed in  the  sea  of  his  sins.  There 
is  no  human  refuge  for  him.  No  light 
reaches  him.  The  number  of  man's  sins 
are  an  index  to  the  woe  of  the  Divine 
chastisements.  If  the  sins  were  not 
deep  the  rebuke  would  not  be  so  loud. 
Sin  is  a  heavy  burden,  and  if  not  cast 
upon  the  Lord,  will  sink  the  sinner  into 
perdition. 

5.  TJie  Divine  chastisement  leads  men 
into  grievous  unrest  (vers.  3-8).  The 
Divine  chastisement  penetrates  to  the 
inner  being  of  man,  even  to  the  bones, 
and  causes  unrest.  The  good  in  this 
condition  are  like  a  ship  in  the  storm. 
There  can  be  no  quietude  of  soul  where 
there  is  sin.  An  awakened  conscience 
can  only  obtain  peace  in  Christ,  who  is 
the  Prince  of  peace. 

6.  The  Divine  chastisement  divests  life 
of  all  human  joy  (ver.  10). 

II.  That  the  Divine  chastisement 
often  tests  the  sincerity  and  worth  of 
human  friendship.  "My  lovers  and 
my  friends  stand  aloof  from  my  sore, 
and    my   kinsmen    stand  afar  off  (ver. 

11). 

1.  The  Divine  chastisement  tests  the 
sincerity  of  human  friendship.     Friends, 


who  are  thick  as  eagles  on  a  carcase 
while  the  feast  lasts,  are  scarce  in  that 
neighbourhood  when  the  repast  is  over. 
When  the  devil  divested  Job  of  his 
property,  he  also  relieved  him  of  his 
imagined  friends.  When  men  are  under- 
going the  Divine  chastisement  they  are 
generally  left  in  loneliness.  Then  com- 
panions fear  lest  they  should  share  the 
woe  of  their  afflicted  comrade.  They 
stand  aghast  at  the  reversed  condition  of 
things.  At  such  times  relatives  are  false 
to  the  natural  affection  they  ought  to 
bear  toward  their  brother  in  adversity. 
Our  Lord  was  forsaken  by  His  disciples. 
Only  true  friendship  survives  the  test 
of  adversity. 

2.  The  Divine  chastisement  generally 
stimulates  the  cunning  policy  of  the 
wicked  (ver.  12).  And  thus  it  often  hap- 
pens that  in  the  hour  of  Divine  chastise- 
ment inward  grief  of  soul  is  combined 
with  outward  exigencies.  When  wicked 
men  see  the  good  in  trouble  then  they 
consider  it  a  favourable  time  for  execut- 
ing their  hellish  schemes.  They  are 
unmerciful ;  they  are  cowardly ;  their 
strength  is  in  stealth ;  they  are  mali- 
cious ;  they  are  ever  active  ;  they  pro- 
mote slander;  they  delight  in  lies.  God 
only  can  defeat  their  cunning  devices. 

3.  The  Divine  chastisement  leads  men 
to  examine  the  moral  tendency  of  their 
lives  (vers.  17,  18).  Here  the  Psalmist 
acknowledges  the  moral  weakness  of 
his  life,  in  that  he  is  ready  to  halt  in 
despair.  He  also  confesses  his  sin  with- 
out reservation  of  thought  or  language. 
Thus  the  Divine  chastisement  revealed 
him  to  himself  in  no  pleasing  light. 
David  reviews  his  life  in  its  inner  mean- 
ing and  in  its  public  bearing,  and  inti- 
mates that  his  enemies  accuse  him 
falsely.  Sorrow  makes  men  review  all 
their  social  and  moral  relationships. 

III.  The  Divine  chastisements  call 
into*  recLuisition  the  self-restraint  of 
the  good.  "  But  I,  as  a  deaf  man, 
heard  not ;  and  I  was  as  a  dumb  man 
that  openeth  not  his  mouth"  (vers.  13, 
14).  David  was  silent,  notwithstanding 
the  strong  provocations  of  his  enemies. 
He  probably  knew  that  it  would  be  but 
little  use  to  contend  with  them  by  words, 
and  that  if  he  did,  he  would  only  arouse 

181 


HtALM  XXZIX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARl  ;  Fib  ALMS. 


tliem  to  fiercer  anger.  Hence  he  mani- 
fests the  wisdom  of  silence.  It  is  gene- 
rally wise  to  treat  angry  and  slanderous 
men  with  silence.  Silence  is  the  lan- 
guage of  dignified  innocence.  It  is  a 
token  of  noble  self-control.  Man  has 
the  ability  to  subdue  his  natural  feelings 
when  they  are  unduly  excited  by  cruel 
enemies.  Christ  answered  his  accusers 
not  a  word.  It  is  the  token  of  a  stronsj 
soul  that  it  can  bear  slander  and  per- 
secution in  silence,  only  seeking  the 
Divine  vindication  and  protection. 

IV.  That  the  Divine  chastisements 
awaken  the  repentant  soul  to  impor- 
tunate prayer.  "  Forsake  me  not,  O 
Lord.  O  my  God,  be  not  far  from  me. 
Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord  my 
salvation"  (vers.  21,  22).  Thus,  if 
David  was  silent  toward  men,  he  was 


not  silent  toward  God,  and  in  trouble 
it  is  far  better  to  pray  to  God  than  to 
talk  to  men.  Prayer  enables  men  to  be 
self-contained.  David  said  that,  if 
Heaven  forsook  him,  he  would  indeed  be 
friendless.  The  Divine  Companionship 
is  the  protection  of  the  good  from  all 
the  plottings  of  wicked  men.  Adverse 
circumstances  awaken  men  to  earnest 
prayer — to  prayer  which  is  soon  trium- 
phant in  its  experience  of  the  salvation 
of  God. 

Lessons  : — 1.  How  many  are  afflicted 
hy  the  chastisements  of  Heaven.  2.  How 
many  are  left  companionless  hy  the  sor- 
rows of  life.  3.  How  many  are  driven 
to  devotion  hy  anguish  of  heart.  4.  How 
the  mischief  of  the  wicked  may  he  turned 
hy  God  to  the  good  of  the  prayerful. 


PSALM    XXXIX. 

Introduction. 

Supericrtptton. — **  To  the  chief  musician,  to  Jeduthun,  a  psalm  of  David."  Jeduthun  was 
one  of  the  leaders  of  the  sacred  music  in  the  time  of  David  (1  Chron.  xvi.  41,  42  ;  xxv.  6  ;  2 
Chron.  xxxv.  16).  Jeduthun  is  also  the  title  of  one  of  the  twenty-four  musical  choirs  left 
by  David.  As  the  psalm  is  addressed  to  the  chief  musician,  it  was  obviously  intended  for  use 
in  the  public  worship  of  the  tabernacle.  David  is  said  to  be  the  author  of  the  psalm.  The 
particular  occasion  to  which  it  refers  is  unknown.  But  from  the  psalm  itself,  it  is  clear  that 
it  was  written  in  a  time  of  doubt  and  trouble,  when  the  psalmist's  thoughts  were  of  such 
a  character  that  he  could  not  express  them  without  injury  to  others  and  to  the  cause  of  God. 
We  have  no  means  of  determining  what  the  particular  trouble  was  from  which  David  was 
suffering.  Matthew  Henry  suggests  that  "  perhaps  it  was  the  death  of  some  dear  friend  or 
relation  that  was  the  trial  of  his  patience,  and  that  suggested  to  him  these  meditations  of  mor- 
tality ;  and  at  the  same  time,  it  should  seem  too,  he  himself  was  weak  and  ill,  and  under  some 
prevailing  distemper."  Hengstenberg  thinks  that  the  psalm  was  written  "  when  in  hot  persecu- 
cution  and  violent  conflict."  It  is  clear  that  the  Psalmist  was  in  affliction  and  trouble,  and 
his  mind  seems  to  have  been  sorely  exercised  as  to  the  Divine  dealings.  He  could  not  see  the 
wisdom,  the  benevolence,  or  the  justice  of  some  of  the  Divine  arrangements.  He  had  dark 
and  painful  thoughts  on  the  matter,  which  lie  dare  not  utter.  And  at  length  he  is  compelled 
to  seek  relief  in  prayer.  Homiletically  we  divide  the  psalm  thus, — Silence  in  Trouble  (vers. 
1-3  ;  Speech  in  Trouble  (vera.  4-6) ;  Supplication  in  Trouble  (vera.  7-13). 


Silence  in  Trouble. 
(Verses  1-3.) 


We  have  here  presented  to  our  con- 
sideration : — 

I.  Silence  maintained  in  trouble. 
"  I  said  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways, 
that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue,"  <fec. 
(vers.  1,  2). 

1.  God's  providential  dealings,  as  seen 
by  us,  sometimes  occasion  doubt  and 
trouble  to  good  men.  The  Paalniist  ap- 
182    • 


pears  greatly  perplexed  as  to  the  Di- 
vine administration  of  human  affairs. 
He  saw  so  much  grief  and  pain  in 
life,  apparently  proceeding  from  the 
hand  of  God,  he  was  himself  being 
consumed  by  the  blow  of  God's  hand, 
and  life  itself  was  so  short  and  vain, 
that  he  could  not  see  the  benevolence  of 
the  dealings  of  God  with  him.      The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXXIX. 


providence  of  God  has  occasioned  much 
perplexity  and  doubt  in  the  minds  of 
good  meiL  Asaph  was  sorely  tried  at 
one  time  by  some  of  its  problems  (Ps. 
Ixxiii.).  We  all  have  passed  through 
experiences  which  at  the  time  seemed 
utterly  irreconcilable  with  the  wisdom 
and  love  of  God,  and  unbelieving 
and  painful  thoughts  and  feelings  have 
filled  our  mind  and  heart.  At  such 
times  we  shall  do  well  to  remember  that 
we  see  only  a  very  small  portion  of  His 
ways,  and  that  small  portion  we  see  but 
dimly.  Moreover,  bitter  experiences 
often  lead  to  richest  blessings. 

2.  The  expression  of  such  doubt  and 
trouble  in  the  presence  of  the  wicked  is  to 
he  avoided  as  evil.  By  the  utterance  of 
the  sceptical  and  hard  thoughts  of  God 
which  filled  his  mind,  the  Psalmist 
would  probably  have  confirmed  the 
wicked  in  their  unbelief,  and  encouraged 
them  in  their  rebellion  against  God. 
Asaph  felt  that  if  he  spake  of  his  men- 
tal difficulties,  and  announced  the  dark 
conclusions  which  suggested  themselves 
to  him,  he  should  thereby  injure  the 
true  children  of  God.  "  If  I  say  I  will 
speak  thus ;  behold,  I  should  offend  the 
generation  of  Thy  children."  We  are 
not  at  liberty  to  express  our  doubts,  if, 
by  so  doing,  we  should  give  the  wicked 
an  occasion  to  blaspheme  the  Holy  One, 
or  if  we  should  unsettle  the  faith  of  any 
sincere  believer  in  God. 

3.  The  good  man  guards  against  this 
evil  by  maintaining  silence.  "  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  sin  not 
with  my  tongue,"  kc.  A  soul  resolutely 
maintaining  silence,  lest  by  speech  an- 
other should  be  injured,  is  surely  a 
brave  and  beautiful  sight.  **What  a 
strange  power,"  says  Emerson,  "  there 
is  in  silence/  How  many  resolutions 
are  formed,  how  many  sublime  con- 
quests eflfected,  during  that  pause  when 
the  lips  are  closed,  and  the  soul  secretly 
feels  the  eye  of  her  Maker  upon  her  ! 
When  some  of  those  cutting,  sharp, 
blighting  words  have  been  spoken  which 
send  the  hot  indignant  blood  to  the  face 
and  head,  if  those  to  whom  they  are  ad- 
dressed keep  silence,  look  on  with  awe, 
for  a  mighty  work  is  going  on  within 
them,   and  the  spirit  of  evil,  or  their 


guardian  angel,  is  very  near  to  them  in 
that  hour.  During  that  pause  they  have 
made  a  step  toward  heaven  or  toward 
hell,  and  an  item  has  been  scored  in  the 
book  which  the  day  of  judgment  shall 
see  opened.  They  are  the  strong  ones 
of  the  earth,  the  mighty  food  for  good 
or  evil,  those  who  know  how  to  keep 
silence  when  it  is  a  pain  and  a  grief  to 
them;  those  who  give  time  to  their  own 
souls  to  wax  strong  against  temptation, 
or  to  the  powers  of  wrath  to  stamp  upon 
them  their  withering  passage."  The 
good  man  is  ready  to  speak,  when  by  his 
speech  he  can  help  the  faith  of  others. 
He  says,  "  Come  and  hear,  all  ye  that 
fear  God,  and  I  will  declare  what  He 
hath  done  for  my  soul."  He  is  "  ready 
always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  man 
that  asketh  him  a  reason  of  the  hope 
that  is  in  him  with  meekness  and  fear." 
But  if  by  his  speech  he  should  incur  the 
risk  of  imperilling  the  faith  or  peace  of 
a  believing  soul,  or  of  hardening  the 
wicked  in  his  wickedness,  then  he  reso- 
lutely keeps  silent.  The  silence  of  the 
Psalmist  required  effort.  He  put  a 
muzzle  upon  his  mouth.  It  is  a  pity 
that  some  of  the  weaklings,  who  so  glibly 
prate  about  their  doubts,  and  parade 
their  so-called  religious  difficulties,  would 
not  try  to  imitate  the  Psalmist  in  this 
respect.  But  the  Psalmist  was  a  strong 
man,  while  the  majority  of  those  who 
exhibit  their  mental  and  religious  diffi- 
culties as  a  sign  of  a  superior  order  of 
mind,  are  the  very  reverse.  The  soul 
that  has  agonised  with  real  doubts  on 
the  most  vital  and  momentous  questions 
will  be  silent  concerning  such  doubts,  or 
speak  of  them  in  such  a  manner  and  to 
such  auditors  oidy  as  will  at  least  de- 
rive no  harm  from  his  speech. 

II.  Silence  increasing  trouble.  We 
adopt  Hengstenberg's  rendering  of  the 
second  verse.  *'  I  grew  dumb  and  was 
still ;  I  was  silent,  not  for  good,  and  my 
pain  was  stirred."  He  explains  it  thus, 
"  The  Psalmist  says  he  had  indeed  exe- 
cuted his  purpose,  declared  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  but  that  ill  had  thereby 
accrued.  The  obstinate  and  constrained 
silence,  so  far  from  producing  good,  had 
rather  made  his  pain  rise  to  a  frightful 
magnitude."     All  great  emotions  require 

183 


PBALM  XXXIX. 


HO  Ml  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


expression.  They  must  have  utterance, 
or  the  over-taxed  brain  will  reel  into 
madness,  and  the  over-charged  heart 
will  burst.  Sometimes  great  emotions 
find  utterance  in  poetry.  We  have 
many  instances  of  this  in  these  Psalms. 
Prose  is  all  too  hard  and  cold  for  the 
expression  of  intense  emotions.  The 
grief-stricken  spirit  pours  out  its  sorrows 
in  plaintive  minor  strains,  and  the  jubi- 
lant soul  hymns  its  gladness  in  some 
triumphant  "  Gloria  in  excelsis"  or  Jnhi- 
late.  Yet  words  the  most  intensely 
poetical  in  significance  and  arrangement 
not  unfrequently  fail  to  express  the 
soul's  emotion.  Very  often  great  emo- 
tions find  utterance  in  tears.  When 
words  fail  to  express  our  deep  grief  or 
thrilling  joy,  tears  often  come  to  our 
relief.  "They  are  the  safety-valves  of 
the  heart,  when  too  much  pressure  is 
laid  on."  "  They  speak  more  eloquently 
than  ten  thousand  tongues.  They  are 
the  messengers  of  overwhelming  grief, 
of  deep  contrition,  and  of  unspeakable 
love." 

*'  Sweet  tears  !  the  awful  language  eloquent 
Of  infinite  aflfection,  far  too  big 
For  words."  — Pollok. 

Thus  tears  relieve  the  soul  when  sur- 
charged with  sorrow  or  o'erburdened  by 
some  great  joy.  But  great  emotions 
may  always  find  relief  in  prayer.  No 
sorrow  is  too  great  or  too  sacred  for  us 
to  utter  it  to  the  ear  of  God.  We  may 
speak  our  highest,  holiest,  joy  to  Him. 
And  the  dark  and  agonising  doubt, 
which  we  dare  not  utter  to  any  of  our 
fellow-men,  we  may  tell  to  Him.  He 
understands    our   tears,   interprets   our 


sighs,  and  knows  the  mysteries  of  our 
awful  souls ;  and  His  ear  is  ever  open 
to  us.  At  His  throne  of  grace  we  may 
ever  find  relief  in  trouble,  and  grace  to 
help  in  time  of  need.  For  a  time,  the 
Psalmist  seems  to  have  reserved  his 
trouble  not  only  from  man  but  from 
God  also.  The  emotions  which  dis- 
tressed him  found  no  utterance  what- 
ever, and  so  they  became  more  intense 
and  painful.  Had  he  taken  his  grief  to 
God,  it  would  have  been  far  otherwise 
with  him. 

III.  Silence  growing  insupportable 
in  trouble.  "  My  heart  was  hot  within 
me,  while  I  was  musing,"  <fec.  The 
Psalmist  mused  upon  his  own  afflictions 
and  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  and 
the  seeming  contradictions  in  God's 
government  of  the  world.  By  medita- 
tion, he  realised  these  things  more  fully 
and  intensely,  until  at  length  further 
silence  was  an  impossibility.  The  time 
had  come  when  he  must  speak.  Upon 
one  occasion,  Jeremiah  said,  **  I  will  not 
make  mention  of  Him,  nor  speak  any 
more  in  His  name.  But  it  was  in  mine 
heart  as  a  burning  fire,  shut  up  in  my 
bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing, 
and  could  not  do  it."  Such  was  the 
state  of  the  Psalmist  at  this  time. 

Conclusion  : — 1.  Let  us  be  careful  in 
speaking  our  doubts  and  dark  thoughts 
to  men.  We  are  bound  to  see  to  it  that 
we  neither  shake  the  faith  of  the  be- 
liever, nor  afford  the  wicked  any  cause 
to  blaspheme  the  Holy  One.  2.  Let  us 
comrmmicate  all  our  mental  conflicts  and 
troubles  to  God.  By  so  doing  we  shall 
be  relieved  ;  and  He  will  help  us  by  His 
grace  and  Spirit. 


A  Commendable  Resolution. 
{Verse  1.) 


"  I  said  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways, 
that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue." 

We  have  here — 

I.  A  great  danger.  We  are  in  great 
danger  of  sinning  with  our  tongue. 
There  are  several  kinds  of  sinful  speech 
of  which  we  are  in  danger. 

1.  Sceptical  or  irreligious  speech.  The 
expression  even  of  honest  doubt  should 
184 


be  suppressed  if  it  is  likely  to  offend 
any  believer,  or  to  harden  the  ungodly 
in  wickedness. 

2.  Careless  speech.  To  talk  in  a 
trifling  spirit  of  sacred  things,  or  to 
speak  lightly  of  matters  which  concern 
the  reputation  and  honour  of  another,  is 
to  sin. 

3.  Untruthful  speech.     There  is  much 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XXXIX. 


false  speech  without  a  directly  uttered 
lie.  By  keeping  back  part  of  the  truth, 
by  colouring  a  narrative,  <kc.,  much  evil 
is  done.  "  A  lie  has  no  legs,  and  cannot 
stand  ;  but  it  has  wings,  and  can  fly  far 
and  wide." 

4.  Angry^  passionate  speech.  When 
we  have  lost  our  self-control,  we  are  not 
in  a  fit  state  to  speak  at  all.  In  mo- 
ments of  passion  men  utter  unjust  and 
bitter  words,  which  rankle  in  the  hearts 
of  those  to  whom  they  are  addressed  for 
years,  perhaps  for  ever.  Remember, 
"  words  once  spoken  can  never  be  re- 
called." 

5.  Malicious  speech.  Let  us  see  to  it 
that  we  never  open  our  lips  with  the 
deliberate  intention  of  injuring  any  one. 
Tale-bearers  and  slanderers  are  amongst 
the  most  guilty  of  men,  and  the  greatest 
pests  of  society. 

"  Slander ; 
Whose  edge  is  sharper  than  the  sword ;  whose 

tongue 
Outvenoms   all  the  worms    of   Nile;     whose 

breath 
Rides  on  the  posting  winds,  and  doth  belie 
All  corners  of  the  world :  kings,  queens,  and 

states, 
Maids,  matrons, — nay,  the  secrets  of  the  grave. 
This  viperous  slander  enters." — Shakespeare. 

The  danger  of  uttering  sinful  speeches 


arises  from  (1.)  The  facility  of  speech. 
No  organ  of  the  body  moves  with  greater 
ease  than  the  tongue.  (2.)  The  fact  that 
under  provocation  it  is  an  outlet  for  pent- 
up  feeling.  (3.)  The  many  temptations  to 
speech.  Loquacity  is  a  weakness  of  the 
age.  With  so  nmch  talking  there  must 
be  much  that  is  positively  evil,  and  yet 
more  that  is  worthless.  '*  In  the  multi- 
tude of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin." 

IL  A  wise  precaution.  "  I  will 
take  heed  to  my  ways,"  &c.  The 
Psalmist  resolves  to  guard  against  this 
evil.     We  need  to  exercise  care  as  to — 

1.  What  we  speak.  Let  us  speak  only 
the  pure,  the  true,  the  kindly,  the  faith- 
inspiring,  &c.  "Let  your  speech  be 
always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt." 

2.  When  we  speak.  "  A  word  spoken 
in  due  season,  how  good  is  it ! " 

3.  Hoio  we  speak.  Let  us  use  those 
words  which  most  correctly  and  clearly 
express  our  meaning.  In  our  tones  and 
manner  of  speech  let  us  avoid  the  objec- 
tionable and  evil. 

Conclusion  : — Let  us  not  only  avoid 
the  evil,  but  let  us  also  cultivate  the 
excellent  in  speech. 

**  Apt  words  have  power  to  'suage 
The  tumults  of  a  troubled  mind, 
And  are  as  balm  to  festered  wounds." 

— Milton. 


Speech  in  Trouble. 
{Verses  4-6.) 


The  Psalmist  in   his   speech  reveals 
his — 

I.  Desire  to  know  the  duration  of 
his  life.  "Lord,  make  me  to  know 
mine  end,  and  the  measure  of  my  days, 
what  it  is  ;  that  I  may  know  how  frail 
I  am."  Professor  Alexander  and  De 
Wette  translate  the  last  clause  :  "  When 
\  shall  cease."  And  Hengstenberg  :  "I 
wish  to  know  when  I  may  cease."  The 
Psalmist  believed  that — 

1.  His  days  were  determined  hy  God. 
Man's  "days  are  determined,  the  num- 
ber of  his  months  are  with  Thee  ;  Thou 
hast  appointed  his  bounds  that  he  cannot 
pass. "  "Is  there  not  an  apppointed  time 
to  man  upon  earth  1"  "  All  the  days  of 
my  appointed  time  will  I  wait,  till  my 


change  come.**  So  the  Psalmist  believed 
that  the  measure  of  his  life  was  fixed,  and 
the  number  of  his  days  determined  by 
the  Lord. 

2.  He  seeks  to  know  when  they  will 
come  to  an  end.  "  Make  me  to  know 
mine  end,"  &c.  At  this  time,  the  life  of 
David  was  one  of  trouble ;  apparently  it 
was  full  of  sorrow,  and  he  was  anxious 
to  know  when  his  sutfering  life  would 
terminate.  But,  whatever  may  be  the 
prevailing  tone  of  our  life,  it  is  not  a 
wise  thing  to  seek  to  know  the  times 
and  seasons  of  our  future  days. 

3.  He  desires  the  termination  of  his 
days.  David  seems  to  have  longed  in 
this  verse  for  his  life  to  be  brought  to  a 
close.     In  his  present  troubled  state  it 

165 


rSALMXXZIX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


seems  to  him  that  the  end  of  his  suffer- 
ings will  come  only  with  the  end  of  his 
life,  and  he  is  impatient  for  that  end. 
Job,  in  his  sufferings,  gives  expression 
repeatedly  to  the  same  feeling :  "  Oh, 
that  I  might  have  my  request ;  and  that 
God  would  grant  me  the  thing  that  I  long 
for  !  Even  that  it  would  please  God  to 
destroy  me,"  &c.  (Job  vi.  8-11).  The 
Psalmist  evidently  knew  that  this  im- 
patience and  this  want  of  submission  to 
the  Divine  arrangements  were  evil. 
Hence,  for  a  time,  and  before  men,  he 
had  curbed  their  expression  ;  but  now 
he  pours  them  out  before  God.  Blessed 
is  he  who,  whether  in  suffering  or  in 
rest,  calmly  leaves  his  life  to  God. 
*'  My  times  are  in  Thy  hand." 

II.  Impression  of  the  brevity  of  his 
life.  "Behold,  Thou  hast  made  my  days 
as  an  handbreadth  ;  and  mine  age  is  as 
nothing  before  Thee."  The  Psalmist 
gives  a  double  expression  to  his  sense  of 
the  brevity  of  his  life.  His  days  were 
"as  an  handbreadth."  "The  word  is 
used  to  denote  anything  very  short  or 
brief.  It  is  one  of  smallest  natural 
measures,  as  distinguished  from  the  foot, 
i.e.,  the  length  of  the  foot ;  and  from  the 
cubit,  i.e.,  the  length  of  the  arm  to  the 
elbow."  And,  as  compared  with  God's, 
his  life  shrunk,  as  it  were,  into  nothing- 
ness. "  My  life  is  as  non-existence  before 
Thee."  How  brief  is  life  even  at  its 
longest !  "Our  days  are  few  and  short 
indeed,  compared  with  the  eternity  to 
which  they  are  conducting  us — com- 
pared with  the  work  we  have  to  do,  for 
ourselves,  for  our  families,  for  our  gene- 
ration, for  God  —  compared  with  the 
talents  committed  to  our  trust,  and  the 
improvement  of  those  talents  required  at 
our  hands — compared  with  the  innumer- 
able obligations  that  press  upon  us,  from 
our  station  in  life,  our  relations  in  life, 
our  opportunities  of  usefulness,  and  the 
means  which  we  have  both  of  getting 
and  of  doing  good."  But,  compared 
with  the  eternal  existence  of  God,  our 
life  vanishes.  As  Matthew  Henry  says : 
"All  time  is  nothing  to  God's  eternity, 
much  less  our  share  of  time."  Know- 
ing that  life  is  so  brief,  yet  so  import- 
ant, let  us  prize  it,  improve  its  oppor- 
tunities,— make  the  most  of  it. 
186 


III.  Impression  of  the  vanity  of  life. 

1.  The  vanity  of  human  aiixieties, 
"  Surely  they  are  disquieted  in  vain.*' 
The  restless  strivings  and  exertions  of 
men  seemed  to  the  Psalmist  to  result  in 
no  worthy  issue.  "  Our  disquietudes," 
says  Matthew  Henry,  "are  often  ground- 
less (we  vex  ourselves  without  any  just 
cause,  and  the  occasions  of  our  trouble 
are  often  the  creatures  of  our  own 
fancy  and  imagination),  and  they  are 
always  fruitless ;  we  disquiet  ourselves 
in  vain,  for  we  cannot,  with  all  our  dis- 
quietment,  alter  the  nature  of  things  or 
the  counsel  of  God  ;  things  will  be  as 
they  are  when  we  have  disquieted  our- 
selves ever  so  much  about  them." 

2.  The  vanity  of  human  acquisitions. 
"He  heapeth  up  riches  and  knoweth  not 
who    shall   gather    them."       The    word 
riches   is    supplied    by  the    translators. 
Hengstenberg  :  "  He  gathers  and  knows 
not   who  will   enjoy  it."     The   idea  is 
that  it  is  vain  to  amass  treasures  know- 
ing not  what  will  become  of  them  when 
our  brief  tenure   of  life   is  at  an   end. 
Many  are  the  illustrations  of  this  truth 
which  might  be  adduced.     Here  is  one: 
"  M.    Foscue,    the    French    millionaire 
miser,  in  order  to  make  sure  of  his  trea- 
sures, dug  a  cave  in  his  wine-cellar,  so 
large  and  deep  that  he  could  go  down 
with  a  ladder.    At  the  entrance  was  a  door 
with  a  spring  lock,  which,  on  shutting,  j 
would  fasten  of  itself.     After  a  time,  he  \ 
was  missing.     Search  was  made  for  him,  j 
but  to  no  purpose.     At  last,  his  house  ? 
was  sold.     The  purchaser,  beginning  to  I 
rebuild  it,  discovered  a  door  in  this  cellar,  \ 
and,  going  down,  found  him  lying  dead  |' 
on  the  ground,  with  a  candlestick  near  % 
him ;    and,    on  searching   farther,    dis-  I 
covered  the  vast  wealth  which  he  had  ] 
amassed.     He  went  into  the  cave  ;  and  \. 
the    door,   by  some    accident,   shutting  \ 
after  him,  he  perished  for  want  of  food,   t 
He  had  eaten  the  candle,  and  gnawed   : 
the  flesh  off  both  his  arms.     Thus  died 
this  avaricious  wretch  in  the  midst  of 
the  treasures  he  had  heaped  together." 
— Dictionary  of  Illus. 

3.  The  vanity  of  man  himself  "  Every 
man  at  his  best  estate  is  altogether 
vanity."  This  rendering  is  not  correct. 
Hengstenberg    translates  :    "Only    for 


/ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PBALM  XXXIZ. 


utter  vanity  waa  every  man  ordained." 
P.-B. — *'  Verily,  every  man  living  is 
altogether  vanity.'*  Two  ideas  are  ex- 
pressed, (1.)  that  every  man  is  vanity; 
(2.)  that  this  is  so  because  of  the 
Divine  ordination.  God  has  consti- 
tuted every  man  vanity.  The  Psalmist 
employs  another  figure  to  set  forth  the 
vanity  of  man ;  "  Surely  every  man 
walketh  in  a  vain  show."  Hengsten- 
berg  :  **Only  as  an  image  walks  man." 
To  the  poet  man  seemed  an  image  rather 
than  a  reality, — a  mere  walking  phan- 
tom, a  thing  having  no  power,  no  life  in 
itself,  but  only  a  mere  shadow  of  life 
and  strength.  Such  was  the  gloomy 
and  one-sided  view  of  life  which  filled 
the  Psalmist's  mind  in  this  time  of 
trouble. 

IV.  Impatience  of  life.  This  is  not 
so  much  uttered  in  any  word,  or  number 
of  words,  as  it  breathes  in  the  spiiit  of 
all  the  words  of  our  text.  The  Psalmist 
was  impatient  of  life  by  reason  of  its 
shortness,  its  vanity,  and  its  sufierings. 
The  same  feeling  finds  outspoken  and 
strong  utterance  in  the  Book  of  Job : 
"  My  soul  chooseth  strangling  and  death 
rather  than  my  life.  I  loathe  it ;  I 
would  not  live  alway  :  let  me  alone,  for 
my  days  are  vanity."  Such  impatience 
of  life,  if  found  in  us  in  this  Christian 
age,  would  be  both  unwise  and  sinful. 
It  would  be  unwise,  because  of  its  ten- 
dency to  unfit  us  for  bearing  life's  burden 
and  performing  life's  work.  It  would 
be  unwise,  also,  because  it  takes  into 
consideration  only  a  small  fragment  of 
our  life.  This  is  but  *'the  bud  of 
being,  the  dim  dawn,  the  twilight  of  our 
day."  The  hereafter  must  be  taken  into 
account.  It  would  be  sinful,  because  of 
the  want  of  faith  in  God  which  it  in- 
volves, (kc.  But  David,  and  the  men  of 
his  age,  must  be  judged  by  the  light 
which  they  had,  and  not  by  that 
which  we  have,  much  of  which  they 
had  not. 

V.  Want  of  clear  and  assured 
knowledge  of  any  life  beyond  the 
present.  Had  he  possessed  such  know- 
ledge, he  could  not  have  spoken  so 
strongly  as  to  the  utter  vanity  of  man, 
not  only  of  his  anxieties,  and  pursuits, 
and  acquisitions,    but  of  man  himself. 


In  the  view  of  the  Psalmist,  at  the  time 
when  he  penned  this  psalm, 

"  When  death 
Has  quenched  this  finer  flame  that  moves  the 

heart, 
Beyond  is  all  oblivion,  as  waste  night 
That   knows   no    following   dawn,  where   we 

shall  be 
As  we  had  never  been  :  the  present,  then, 
Is  only  ours."  — Mallet. 

"  It  is  not  to  be  overlooked,"  says  Heng- 
stenberg,  "  that  the  psalm  possesses 
in  part  an  Old  Testament  character. 
While  still  there  was  no  clear  insight 
into  a  future  state  of  being,  a  long- 
continued  state  of  suffering  must  have 
sunk  very  deep  into  the  heart.  *  When 
a  man  dies,  will  he  live  again  V  says 
Job  ;  *  all  the  days  of  my  war-service 
will  I  wait,  till  my  discharge  come.' 
With  every  day  of  his  short  and  miser- 
able existence  was  the  space  narrowing 
for  the  display  of  the  retributive  justice 
and  grace  of  God  ;  and  when  the  powers 
of  body  and  of  soul  began  to  fail,  then 
the  disconsolate  thought  would  press 
upon  him,  that  he  would  never  come 
to  partake  of  the  blessing  which  God 
had  promised  to  His  people — it  would 
scarcely  be  possible  to  avoid  sinking 
into  perplexity  and  despair.  But  this 
special  Old  Testament  character  of  the 
psalm,  far  from  depriving  the  psalm  of 
its  edifying  signification  for  us,  rather 
serves  the  purpose  of  enhancing  it.  The 
declaration  :  '  My  hope  stands  in  Thee,' 
which  the  Psalmist  uttered  in  circum- 
stances when  it  was  against  all  reason  to 
hope,  may  well  put  us  to  shame,  who 
are  easily  brought  into  despair  by  light 
and  temporal  afflictions,  while  we  have 
the  prospect  of  an  exceeding  weight  of 
glory ;  and  the  more  that  he  hoped, 
while  there  was  the  less  to  hope  for,  so 
much  the  more  readily  should  our  hope 
be  kindled  by  the  light  of  his."  Con- 
sidering how  dim  their  revelation  was, 
as  compared  with  ours,  their  faith  in 
God  is  a  rebuke  to  us,  because  our  faith 
is  not  greater.  If  immortality  had  been 
clearly  revealed  to  the  Psalmist,  the  tone 
of  this  psalm  would  have  been  very 
different. 

Conclusion  :  1.  Learn  the  great 
value  of  '*  The  Book  of  Psalms."  In 
these  ancient   poems  we  have  true  re- 

187 


rSALM  XXXIX. 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


cords  of  the  life  of  godly  souls.  We  see 
the  sins  and  sorrows,  the  doubts  and 
fears,  the  conflicts,  temporary  defeats, 
and  glorious  triumphs  of  these  saints  of 
old ;  and  we  are  warned,  encouraged, 
&c.  Thank  God  for  such  a  record  of 
the  experience  of  godly  men. 

2.  Learn  the  great  value  of  Chris- 
tianity. How  different  does  life  appear 
since  Jesus  Christ  has  lived,  died,  and 
risen  I     He  ''  hath  abolished  death,  and 


hfrought  life    and  immortality  to  light 
through  the  gospel." 

3.  By  the  lielp  of  God  let  us  endeavour 
to  live  well  and  earnestly.  "  Think  of 
living!"  says  Thomas  Carlyle.  *' Thy 
life,  wert  thou  the  '  pitifulest  of  all  the 
sons  of  earth,'  is  no  idle  dream,  but  a 
solemn  reality.  It  is  thy  own ;  it  is  all 
thou  hast  to  front  eternity  with.  Work, 
then,  even  as  He  has  done,  and  does,  *  like 
a  star,  unhasting,  yet  unresisting.' " 


Man,  a  Walking  Shadow. 

[Verse  6.) 


"  Surely,  every  man  walketh  in  a  vain 

show." 

These  words  suggest  two  main  ideas  : 
I.  Life  is  a  journey.     "Every  man 

walketh."     This  figure  implies — 

1.  Motion.  Life  is  never  stationary. 
Its  wheels  know  no  pause.  We  remain 
not  a  day  in  the  same  position.  The 
traveller  moves  onward  to  fresh  scenes, 
&c.  So  in  life,  the  events  and  circum- 
stances of  yesterday  are  behind  us 
to-day,  and  those  of  to-day  will  be 
in  the  past  to-morrow.  Life's  motion 
is  incessant.  The  traveller,  in  bis 
journey,  may  pause  to  rest  or  to  admire 
the  scenery  through  which  he  is  passing, 
but  it  is  not  so  in  the  journey  of  life. 
In  this  there  is  no  pausing,  not  even  for 
a  minute.  Asleep  or  awake,  active  or 
indolent,  living  wisely  or  living  as  a 
fool,  every  man  moves  forward  without 
any  pause,  as  though  urged  by  a  resist- 
less hand.  Life's  motion  is  incessantly 
onward.  The  traveller,  in  his  journey, 
may  retrace  his  steps  ;  but,  in  the 
journey  of  life,  we  cannot  turn  back  a 
single  step.  Every  day,  we  are  "  going 
the  way  whence  we  shall  never  return." 
A  solemn  consideration  this.  The  wise 
man  will  note  it. 

2.  Destiny,  and  approach  to  it.  The 
traveller  journeys  with  an  end  in  view. 
And  life's  journey  has  an  end.  As 
regards  the  body,  we  are  travelling  to 
the  grave ;  as  regards  the  soul,  to  the 
solemn  retributions  of  eternity, — either 
to  heaven  or  to  hell.  And  how  rapidly 
we  advance  to  the  solemn  bomrne  of  our 
pilgrim ;io;e  !     The  eagle  hastening  to  its 

188 


prey,  the  arrow  speeding  to  its  mark,  the 
clouds  driving  before  the  strong  wind, 
move  not  so  swiftly  as  man's  life.  How 
solemn,  then,  is  life  !  how  important  its 
every  moment  and  every  action  ! 

II.  Life  is  a  journey  prosecuted 
falsely.  "  Every  man  walketh  in  a  vain 
show."  Hengstenberg :  "  Only  as  an 
image  man  walks."  What  does  this 
mean  1  It  does  not  mean  that  life  is  not 
real.  Life  is  not  a  vain  show,  not  phan- 
tasmal, but  a  most  solemn  reality.  Nor 
does  it  mean  that  man  himself  is  unreal, 
a  vain  show,  an  image.  Man  himself  is 
a  greater  reality  than  the  solid  earth  or 
lustrous  heavens.  What,  then,  does  it 
mean  ?  It  means  that  man  is  not  true 
to  himself  ;  that  he  is  false  to  the  reality 
of  his  own  being,  false  to  the  reality  of 
life  also.  Man  shuns  himself,  and  lives 
amid  unreality,  amid  vain  shows.  Prac- 
tically, he  ignores  his  own  true  being 
and  lives  in  the  realm  of  fiction.  This 
implies  that  man  is  not  in  his  normal 
condition.  He  was  not  made  for  shams, 
but  for  truth.  But  he  half-consciously 
realises  the  fact  that  he  has  lost  the 
blessedness  of  his  being,  and  by  his  false 
modes  of  seeking  to  regain  it  he  shows 
the  derangement  of  his  being  and  powers. 
He  seeks  it  in  vain  shows,  in  excitement^ 
pleasure,  wealth,  fame,  knowledge. 
*'  What  shadows  we  are,  and  what 
shadows  do  we  pursue,"  said  the  great 
Edmund  Burke.  Man  sometimes  pur- 
sues these  vain  shows  until  he  himself 
becomes  a  mere  image, — a  living,  acting, 
gaudy  simulacrum.  Can  we  discover 
the  reason  of  this  ]     Partly,  at  least,  we 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


rSALMZZXIZ. 


may  thug  account  for  it.     Man  feels  the 

greatness  of  his  own  being,  and  cannot 
interpret  it ;  and  he  becomes  perplexed, 
burdened.  He  has  impulses  which  urge 
him  to  activity.  He  has  also  an  in- 
stinctive consciousness  that  his  well- 
being  is  to  be  found  only  in  repose  j 
and,  prompted  by  these,  he  forms  con- 
fused designs  for  obtaining  satisfaction, 
by  overcoming  difficulties  and  thus  gain- 
ing repose.  But  he  does  not  reach  the 
desired  goal,  because  his  course  is  false, 
and  false  are  his  aims.  He  is  ever 
seeking,  never  finding.  And  deep  at 
the  root  of  all  this  falsity,  and  disap- 
pointment, and  unrest,  is  the  sad  fact 
that  his  own  being  is  not  in  harmony. 
The  cause  of  the  disquiet,  and  falsity, 
and  vanity,  is  within  him.     Upon  sdl 


the  unrest,  and  gaudy  show,  and  baffled 
hopes  of  men  we  may  write,  "Every 
man  walketh  in  a  vain  show."  And 
upon  the  men  themselves  we  may  write, 
*'  Only  as  an  image  man  walks."  Only 
in  God  can  man  be  true  and  blessed; 
and  only  through  Christ  can  man  rise 
into  union  with  God.  Restored  to  God, 
man  is  restored  to  himself,  and  is  able 
to  live  true  to  himself,  to  live  not  as 
**  an  image,"  but  as  a  reality.  He  then 
finds  that  true  rest  is  found  in  the 
harmonious  activity  of  the  powers  of  his 
being  in  accordance  with  the  will  of 
God.  Living  for  God,  and  in  God,  "  life 
is  real,  life  is  earnest." 

What  is  the  character  of  your  life- 
journey  1 


Supplication  in  Trotjbia 
(Ferns  7-13.) 


In  this  Instance,  we  use  the  word 
supplication  not  in  the  signification  of 
petition  or  entreaty  merely,  but  in  its 
broad  signification  as  including  request, 
acknowledgment  of  dependence,  thanks- 
giving, prayer.  So  using  it,  the  teach- 
ing of  this  section  may  fitly  be  grouped 
under  the  heading,  "  Supplication  in 
Trouble:' 

Consider  : 

I.  The  confidence  avowed.  "And 
now.  Lord,  what  wait  I  for  1  my  hope  is 
in  Thee." 

1.  Man's  need  of  hope.  Low  as  the 
Psalmist  was  sunk  in  misery,  he  had  not 
lost  hope.  "  The  miserable  hath  no 
other  medicine,"  says  Shakespeare,  "  but 
only  hope."  '*He  that  loses  hope  may 
part  with  anything." — Gongreve.  But 
he  that  retains  hope  may  rise  from  great 
depths  of  misery  to  calm  heights  of  joy. 
When  that  star'  is  quenched  in  the  fir- 
mament of  the  soul,  the  darkness  is 
unrelieved  and  total.  Judas  lost  hope, 
and  was  undone.  ",We  are  saved  by 
hope." 

2.  Man's  only  sufficient  hope.  "My 
hope  is  in  Thee."  The  Psalmist  has 
already  bewailed  the  vanity  of  man,  and 
of  his  pursuits.  Man  is  an  image  pur- 
suing shadows.     There  is  no  trust  to  be 


reposed  in  h!m:  to  tope  in  him  is  to 

invite  disappointment.  So  the  Psalmist 
turns  from  human  pursuits  and  posses- 
sions, and  from  man  himself,  and  fixes 
his  hope  in  God.  Although  he  regarded 
his  troubles  as  coming  from  the  hand  of 
God,  and  cried  bitterly  and  complain- 
ingly  to  Him,  yet  it  was  to  Him  that  ha 
looked, — in  Him  that  he  trusted.  God 
may  appear  severe,  and  His  ways  my- 
sterious and  painful,  yet  there  is  no  one 
beside  Him  to  whom  we  can  look  for 
help,  and  in  whom  we  can  place  our 
trust  in  the  great  trials  of  life.  And  He 
is  all-sufficient  in  all  things. 

II.  The  submission  expressed.  "I 
was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth, 
because  Thou  didst  it." 

L  The  submission.  "I  am  dumb,  I 
open  not  my  mouth."  The  silence  which 
is  spoken  of  here  is  very  diff'erent  from 
that  spoken  of  in  verse  2.  Then  he  was 
silent  lest  by  his  murmurings  against  the 
government  of  God  he  should  cause  the 
wicked  to  blaspheme ;  now  he  is  silent 
because  he  acquiesces  in  the  arrange- 
ments of  that  government.  That  was 
the  silence  of  rebellion,  or  at  least  of 
bitter  dissatisfaction  and  complaint; 
this  is  the  silence  of  trustful  submission 
to  the  will  and  ways  of  God.     He  sulr 

189 


PSALM  XXXOL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


mits  himself  to  God,  feeling  no  desire 
now  to  complain  of  Hia  providence. 

2.  The  reason.  "  Because  Thou  didst 
it."  The  Psalmist  looked  upon  his 
afflictions  and  sorrows  as  produced  by 
God,  and  in  that  he  found  reasons  for 
patient  acquiescence.  How  much  more 
should  we !  Knowing  how  wise  and 
loving,  how  tender  and  strong  He  is,  let 
us  immediately  check  any  rising  com- 
plaint with  the  consideration,  *'  It  must 
be  well,  for  Thou  hast  done  it." 

"  It  is  Thy  hand,  my  God  ; 

My  Borrow  comes  from  Thee  : 
I  bow  beneath  Thy  chastening  rod, 
*Tis  love  that  bruises  me." — Darbt. 

III.  The  petitions  presented. 

1.  For  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  "  De- 
liver me  from  all  my  transgressions; 
make  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  fool- 
ish." These  two  clauses  have  a  close 
relation.  That  relation,  as  we  under- 
stand it,  may  be  expressed  thus  : — The 
afflictions  of  the  Psalmist  were  regarded 
by  men  as  a  proof  that  he  was  wicked  : 
on  this  account  his  enemies  reproached 
him ;  if  his  sins  were  forgiven,  his  afflic- 
tions would  cease,  so  he  thought ;  and 
in  this  way  the  reproaches  of  the  wicked 
would  be  brought  to  an  end.  David 
seems  to  have  viewed  his  sins  as  the 
cause  of  his  sufferings  and  troubles.  He 
seeks  forgiveness  of  sin  before  he  asks 
for  removal  of  suffering.  This  is  well 
and  wise.  Would  that  all  efforts  for  the 
amelioration  of  human  condition  pro- 
ceeded in  this  order  !  When  moral  evil 
is  no  more,  "  natural  evil "  (so  called) 
will  soon  cease  to  be.  When  sin  is  not, 
suffering  will  not  long  continue.  When 
the  fountain  is  dry,  the  stream  will 
speedily  cease  to  run. 

2.  For  the  removal  of  affliction,  "  Re- 
move Thy  stroke  away  from  me ;  I  am 
consumed  by  the  blow  of  Thine  hand," 
&c.  (vers.  10,  11).  He  regarded  (1.) 
His  afflictions  as  Divine  correction^  "  Thy 
stroke,  .  .  .  the  blow  of  Thine  hand.  .  .  . 
When  Thou  with  rebukes  dost  correct," 
<fcc.  The  sufferings  of  the  people  of 
God  are  frequently  God's  chastisement 
by  reason  of  their  sins.  When  He  cor- 
rects us,  it  is  because  of  our  iniquity, 
and  in  love  to  us.  *'  My  son  despise  not 
thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  nor 

190 


faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  Him ;  foi 
whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth," 
&c.  (Heb.  xii.  5-11).  (2.)  His  afflio- 
tion  was  severe.  "  I  am  consumed  by 
the  blow  of  Thine  hand.  .  .  .  Thou 
makest  his  beauty  to  consume  away  like 
a  moth."  Margin  :  "  That  which  is  to 
be  desired  in  him  to  melt  away."  Heng- 
stenberg  :  "  Thou  dost  consume,  as  by  a 
moth,  what  he  loves."  As  the  moth 
consumes  the  most  beautiful  woollen 
garment  or  the  finest  sable,  so  the 
Psalmist  says  he  was  being  consumed 
away  by  the  afflictions  which  had  come 
upon  him, — his  strength  and  vigour,  his 
cheerfulness,  and  courage,  and  beauty, 
were  passing  away  before  the  expressions 
of  the  displeasure  of  God.  Yet,  severe 
as  these  corrections  were,  God  could 
remove  them.  Low  as  he  was  reduced 
by  suffering,  God  could  raise  him  up 
again.  For  this  he  prays.  He  turns 
for  healing  to  the  hand  that  wounded 
him  ',  for  lifting  up  to  Him  who  had 
brought  him  low. 

3.  For  invigoration  hefore  death. 
"  O  spare  me,  that  I  may  recover 
strength  before  I  go  hence,  and  be  no 
more."  Hengstenberg  :  "  Leave  off 
from  me,  that  I  may  be  revived,  before 
I  go  away  and  be  no  more."  The  first 
member,  literally  :  Look  away  from  me, 
that  I  may  brighten  up;  q.d.  turn  away 
from  me  Thy  angry  look,  so  that  my 
sorrowful  one  may  be  made  cheerful. 
*' The  idea,"  says  Barnes,  "is  that  of 
being  cheered  up  ;  of  being  strengthened 
and  invigorated  before  he  should  pass 
away."  He  desired  to  be  invigorated 
and  comforted  before  he  passed  away 
from  this  world  for  ever. 

IV.  The  pleas  urged.  "  Hear  my 
prayer,  O  Lord,  and  give  ear  unto  my 
cry ;  hold  not  Thy  peace  at  my  tears," 
<fcc.  (ver.  12).     The  Psalmist  pleads — 

1.  His  sorrow.  *'  Hold  not  Thy  peace 
at  my  tears."  "  Weeping,  if  unmurmur- 
ing," says  Barnes,  "is  of  the  nature  of 
prayer,  for  God  regards  the  sorrows  of 
the  soul  as  He  sees  them.  The  weeping 
penitent,  the  weeping  sufferer,  is  one  on 
whom  we  may  suppose  God  looks  with 
compassion,  even  though  the  sorrows  of 
the  soul  do  not  find  words  to  give  utter- 
ance to  them."    And,  says  John  Arnd, 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


niLM  zXk 


"  This  is  the  effect  of  tears,  when  one 
sees  or  hears  any  one  weeping  sadly,  one 
cannot  well  remain  silent,  as  the  Lord 
Jesus  said  to  the  woman  at  Nain,  '  Weep 
not ;'  and  to  Mary  Magdalene,  '  Woman, 
why  weepest  Thou?'  This  nature 
teaches'us.  Now,  if  a  man  can  scarcely 
be  silent  to  a  person's  tears,  how  much 
less  the  Lord  God  !  Therefore,  it  is 
said  in  Psalm  Ivi.  that  God  numbers  the 
tears  of  believers,  and  in  Isaiah  xxv.  that 
He  will  wipe  away  all  tears  from  our 
eyes."  In  thus  pleading  his  sorrow,  the 
Psalmist  appeals  to  the  compassion  of 
God.  "The  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  of 
tender  mercy." 

2.  His  dependence.  "  For  I  am  a 
stranger  with  Thee, — a  sojourner,  as  all 
my  fathers."  "  A  stranger  and  pilgrim 
has  nothing  of  his  own,  he  is  quite  de- 


pendent upon  the  goodness  of  those 
with  whom  he  lives,  is  everywhere  on 
the  footing  of  a  beggar."  By  thus 
pleading  his  dependence,  the  Psalmist 
appeals  to  the  faithfulness  of  God.  Such 
appeals  are  ever  met  by  a  full  and  gra- 
cious response. 

Conclusion  : — There  is  still  much 
vanity,  and  gloom,  and  sorrow,  in  life. 
There  are  times  when  our  *'  burden 
seems  greater  than  our  strength  can 
bear,"  and  we  are  ready  to  cry  out  in 
impatient  complaint  to  God.  But  let 
us  take  our  burdens  to  Him.  He  will 
interpret  their  meaning,  and  give  us 
strength  to  bear  them.  He  is  the  un- 
failing support  in  life's  troubles  of  all 
who  trust  in  Him.  "  Lord,  my  hope  is 
in  Thee." 


God  Afflicting,  and  Man  Submitting. 
(Versed.) 


"I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my 
mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it." 

1.  God  afflicting  man.  "  Thou  didst 
it."     This  will  apply — 

\.  To  many  temporal  losses,  e.g.,  those 
occasioned  by  floods,  storms,  earth- 
quakes, (fee. 

2.  7^0  many  bodily  afflictions. 

3.  To  the  bereavements  of  death.  "  I 
saw  this  verse  engraved  with  great  ap- 
propriateness on  a  beautiful  marble 
monument  that  had  been  erected  over  a 
grave  where  lay  three  children  that  had 
been  suddenly  cut  down  by  the  scarlet 
fever.  What  could  be  more  suitable 
in  such  a  trial  than  such  a  text  1 
What  could  more  strikingly  express. 
the  true  feelings  of  Christian  piety 
— the    calm   submission    of    redeemed 


souls — than  the  disposition  of  parents, 
thus  bereaved,  to  record  such  a  senti- 
ment over  the  grave  of  their  children  V 
— Barnes. 

II.  Man  submitting  to  God.  "  I  am 
dumb,  I  open  not  my  mouth,  because 
Thou  didst  it."  Submission  to  God 
may  be  enforced  by  the  following  con- 
siderations : 

1 .  The  folly  of  rebelling  against  Him. 

2.  The  perfection  of  His  character. 
He  is  perfect  in  wisdom,  goodness,  faith- 
fulness. In  accordance  with  these  glori- 
ous attributes,  He  governs  the  world. 

.  3.  The  uses  of  suffering.  Great  are 
the  benefits  of  sanctified  affliction. 
"Thou  didst  it,"  we  say  now  in  sub- 
mission. "  He  hath  done  all  things 
well,"  we  shall  soon  exclaim  in  rapture. 


PSALM    XL. 
Introduction. 

Su'pefseri'ption  :  **  To  the  Chief  Musician,  a  Psalm  of  David." 

The  psalm  is  addressed  to  "the  Chief  Musician,"  that  he  might  set  it  to  music  for  use  in 
public  worship.  We  have  no  means  of  determiniug  ou  what  occasion  the  psahn  was  written. 
It  does  not  come  within  our  province  to  enter  into  the  disputed  question  of  the  Messianic 
character  of  the  psalm.  The  different  opinions  which  are  held  on  this  question  are  stated  by 
Barnes  in  2oco,  and  by  Prof  eHSor  Stuart  in  his  "Commentary  ou  Hebrews  "  (Excursus  xx.). 

191 


FBALUXL. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


Both  these  writers  advocate  their  own  view  at  considerable  length.  See  also  Hengatenberg** 
Introduction  to  this  psalm.  One  thing,  perhaps,  we  ought  to  say,  viz.,  that  on  the  theory 
adopted  by  Barnes,  "that  the  psalm  had  an  original  and  exclusive  reference  to  the  Messiah,"  it 
seems  to  us  impossible  legitimately  aud  satisfactorily  to  interpret  it. 

Homiletically,  we  shall  view  the  psalm  thus : — The  Lord's  doings  for  His  servant  (vers. 
1-5);  The  servant's  offering  to  his  Lord  (vers.  6-10);  and,  The  servant's  prayer  to  his  Lord 
(vers.  11-17). 

The  Lord's  Doings  for  His  Servant. 

{Ver^ses  1-6.) 
stand." 


In  these  verses,  we  have — 

I.  A  sad  situation.  The  Psalmist 
represents  himself  as  having  been  in 
"  an  horrible  pit,"  and  in  '*  miry  clay." 
The  situation  was  one  of 

1.  Darkness,  "^i^,  =  a  pit,  a  prison,  a 
dungeon,  a  grave,  a  deep  well.  It  im- 
plies darkness.  The  sun  may  be  flood- 
ing the  world  with  his  beams,  but  in  the 
pit  all  is  midnight  darkness.  The  figure 
may  be  used  to  set  forth  a  state  of  sin 
or  a  state  of  deep  sorrow.  Both  these 
states  are  frequently  represented  in 
Scripture  by  "darkness."  "  The  people 
that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a 
great  light,"  &c.  "When  I  sit  in 
darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light  unto 
me."  To  open  their  eyes,  to  turn  them 
from  darkness  to  light,"  <fec.  "  The 
night  is  far  spent,  the  day  is  at  hand  ; 
let  us,  therefore,  cast  off  the  works  of 
darkness,  and  let  us  put  on  the  armour 
of  light."     Et  al. 

2.  Distress.  "  An  horrible  pit."  "The 
word    rendered    horrible,  Vii^"^^    means 

properly  noise,  uproar,  tumult,  as  of 
waters  :  of  a  crowd  of  men ;  of  war. 
De  Wette  understands  it  here  of  a  pit,  a 
cavern,  or  an  abyss  that  roars  and  is 
tumultuous  j  that  is,  that  is  impassable. 
Perhaps  this  is  the  idea, — a  cavern,  deep 
and  dark,  where  the  waters  roar,  and 
which  seems  to  be  filled  with  horrors." 
— Barnes.  Hengstenberg  takes  it  to 
mean,  "a  deep  of  raging  waters,"  "a 
roaring  deep."  In  any  case,  the  figure  in- 
dicates distress.  The  poet  was  not  only 
in  darkness,  but  in  misery  also.  Sin  is 
wretchedness.     Sin  is  hell. 

3.  Helplessness.  The  Psalmist  was  in 
the  "miry  clay,"  the  "slimy  mud," 
where  there  was  no  firm  footing.  He 
was  totally  unable  to  do  anything  to 
eff'ect   his  own  deliverance,  for  he  was 


"  sinking   in 
192 


deep  mire,  aud  could  not 


The  unrenewed  sinner  is  help- 
less in  effecting  his  own  deliverance 
from  sin  and  its  consequences.  If 
some  strong  arm  do  not  come  to  his 
rescue,  he  must  continue  to  sink  in  the 
miry  clay  until  he  is  hopelessly  lost. 
Such  is  the  sad  situation  of  the  sinner ; 
his  state  is  one  of  darkness,  distress, 
helplessness. 

II.  A  great  salvation.  "  I  waited 
patiently  for  the  Lord,  and  He  inclined 
unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry,"  &c.  Of 
this  salvation  the  poet  points  out  that 
— 1.  It  was  granted  in  answer  to  prayer. 
The  Psalmist  prayed.  "  He  heard  my 
cry."  In  his  darkness,  wretchedness, 
and  helplessness,  David  betook  himself  to 
prayer ;  and  though  the  pit  was  deep — 
"  a  roaring  deep" — yet  the  Lord  heard 
his  cry.  From  the  deepest  depth  the 
faintest  whisper  of  true  prayer  will  reach 
to  the  throne  of  God,  and  receive  audi- 
ence of  Him.  The  Psalmist  waited.  "  I 
waited  patiently  for  the  Lord."  Margin  : 
"In  waiting  I  waited."  He  continued 
to  wait  for  the  interposition  of  God. 
Many  prayers  are  not  answered  because 
the  suppliant  does  not  wait  for  the 
answer — does  not  expect  an  answer. 
David  persevered  in  prayer ;  he  waited 
expecting  the  succour  and  salvation  of 
►  God.  That  salvation  did  not  come 
quickly  ;  but  he  patiently  waited,  be- 
lieving, hoping,  praying,  expecting  its 
coming. 

2.  It  was  complete.  "  He  brought 
me  up  also  out  of,"  <kc.  We  have  here 
— (1)  Delive7^ance.  The  Psalmist  was 
rescued  from  his  wretched  and  perilous 
state.  God  delivers  both  from  sin  and 
misery  all  who  sincerely  seek  Him. 
(2)  Elevation.  "  Set  my  feet  upon  a 
rock,"  far  above  the  waters  of  the  roar- 
ing deep.  God  raises  souls  from  dark- 
ness into  light,  from  deep  despair  into 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MAUCXL* 


exalted  hope,  <fec.  (3)  Establishment. 
*'  Set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,"  where  I  may 
find  firm  footing.  *'  Established  my 
goings."  Made  my  steps  firm.  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  rock  on  which 
the  sinner  may  securely  stand.  On  Him 
we  may  build  our  character,  our  hopes, 
(fee.  (4)  Invigoration.  *'  Established 
my  goingsy  The  Divine  life  is  not  sta- 
tionary, but  progressive.  God  delivers 
man  from  sin,  and  starts  him  on  the 
road  to  holiness  and  heaven,  and  invigo- 
rates him  to  tread  that  road.  "  They 
go  from  strength  to  strength."  "We 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  God  bids 
us  "  Go  forward,"  and  gives  us  strength 
to  do  80, 

3.  It  was  joy-inspiring.  **  He  hath 
put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  even 
praise  unto  our  God."  The  Lord  had 
given  a  new  occasion  for  praise,  aiid  by 
fiUinsf  the  Psalmist's  heart  with  ojrateful 
gladness,  liad  given  him  the  disposition 
to  offer  fresh  praises  unto  Him.  Salva- 
tion is  a  joyous,  a  blessed  thing.  It 
tunes  a  man's  life  to  music.  It  fills 
his  heart  with  music,  and  the  world 
with  beauty  and  song. 

4.  It  was  influential.  "  Many  shall 
see  it  and  fear,  and  shall  trust  in  the 
Lord."  (1)  GocVs  doings  on  behalf  of 
His  people  are  manifest.  "  Many  shall 
see."  When  a  man  is  converted  the 
change  is  visible  in  his  life.  (2)  God's 
doings  on  behalf  of  His  people  command 
reverence.  "  And  fear."  The  fear  is 
reverential.  Not  dread,  but  veneration. 
(3)  God's  doings  on  behalf  of  His  })eople 
encourage  others  to  trust  in  Him.  "And 
shall  trust  in  the  Lord."  As  men  mark 
the  doings  of  God  on  behalf  of  His 
people,  they  have  such  exhibitions  of 
His  faithfulness  and  goodness  and  power 
as  lead  them  in  faith  to  seek  His  salva- 
tion. They  see  the  workings  of  His 
grace  in  their  lives,  and  are  led  to  seek 
that  grace  for  themselves.  "  They  glori- 
fied God  in  me."  Do  our  lives  testify 
to  the  power  of  Divine  grace  so  that 
men  through  us  are  led  to  trust  in 
Him? 

III.  A  hearty  celebration.  The 
Psalmist  celebrates — 

\.  The  blessedness  of  the  man  who 
trusts  in  the  Lord.  (1)  He  rejects  every 
N 


other  object  of  confidence.  "  He  respecteth 
not  the  proud,  nor  such  as  turn  aside  to 
lies."  Literally  :  "  he  looks  not  to  the 
proud,"  he  does  not  expect  help  or  bless- 
ing from  them.  Man,  however  strong 
and  proud,  is  not  an  adequate  object 
of  confidence  for  any  creature.  He 
is  liable  to  err,  and  may  be  deceived, 
and  may  be  deceitful  himself,  and  is 
therefore  not  sufiicient  as  an  object  of 
trust.  Neither  as  regards  faithfulness 
and  truth,  nor  as  regards  ability  and 
strength,  is  man  an  adequate  object  of 
trust.  (2)  He  places  his  sole  confidence  in 
God.  "Maketh  the  Lord  his  trust."  The 
Lord  is  ever  mighty  to  save,  and  is  faith- 
ful amid  all  changes.  We  may  safely 
trust  in  Him.  Trust  in  Him  is  blessed. 
He  who  trusts  in  Him  shall  never  be 
put  to  shame,  shall  realise  the  most 
blessed  security,  shall  find  his  highest 
expectations  more  than  fulfilled,  <kc. 

2.  The  wonderful  doings  of  God  for 
man  (ver.  5).  Matthew  Henry's  notes 
on  this  verse  are  excellent.  "  Many,  0 
Lord  my  God  I  are  Thy  wonderful  works 
which  Thou  hast  done  both  for  me  and 
others  ;  this  is  but  one  of  many.  Many 
are  the  benefits  with  which  we  are  daily 
loaded,  both  by  the  providence  and  by 
the  grace  of  God.  (1)  They  are  His 
works,  not  only  the  gifts  of  His  bounty, 
but  the  operations  of  His  power.  He 
works  for  us,  He  works  in  us,  and  thus 
He  favours  us  with  matter,  not  only  for 
thanks,  but  for  praise.  (2)  They  are 
His  wonderful  works,  the  contrivance  of 
them  admirable,  His  condescension  to 
us  in  bestowing  them  upon  us  admir- 
able ;  eternity  itself  will  be  short  enough 
to  be  spent  in  the  admiration  of  them. 
(3)  All  His  wonderful  works  are  the 
product  of  His  thoughts  to  us-ward.  He 
does  all  according  to  the  counsel  of  His 
own  will  (Eph.  i.  11),  the  purposes  of 
His  grace  which  He  purposed  in  Him- 
self (Eph.  iii.  11).  They  are  the  pro- 
jects of  infinite  wisdom,  the  designs  of 
everlasting  love  (1  Cor.  ii.  7;  Jer. 
xxxi.  3),  thoughts  of  good,  and  not  of 
evil  (Jer.  xxix.  11).  His  gifts  and  call- 
ings will  therefore  be  without  repentance, 
because  they  are  not  sudden  resolves, 
but  the  result  of  His  thouglits,  Hia 
many  thoughts,  to  us-ward.     (4)   They 

193 


FSALU  XL. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


are  innumerable;  they  cannot  be  me- 
thodised, or  *  reckoned  np  in  order.' 
There  is  an  order  in  all  God's  works, 
but  there  are  so  many  that  present  them- 
selves to  our  view  at  once  that  we  know 
not  where  to  begin  nor  which  to  name 
next;  the  order  of  them  and  their  natural 
references  and  dependencies,  and  how  the 
links  of  the  golden  chain  are  joined,  are 
a  mystery  to  us,  and  what  we  shall  not 
be  able  to  account  for  till  the  veil  be 
rent  and  the  mystery  of  God  finished. 
Nor  can  they  be  counted,  not  the  very 
heads  of  them.  When  we  have  said  the 
most  we  can  of  the  wonders  of  Divine 
love  to  us,  we  must  conclude  with  an  et 


ccetera — and  such  like,  and  adore    the 
depth,  despairing  to  find  the  bottom." 

Conclusion. — 1.  To  those  who  Iiave 
experienced  this  great  salvation.  Praise 
God  in  a  new  song,  celebrate  His  glo- 
rious deeds,  trust  Him  unfalteringly  and 
fully,  and  let  your  life  show  forth  His 
praise,  that  "  many  may  see,  and  fear, 
and  trust  in  the  Lord."  2.  To  those 
who  are  in  the  sad  state  of  unrenewed 
sinners.  Your  condition  is  indeed  de- 
plorable and  dangerous.  Do  you  realise 
it  as  such  1  The  Lord  waits  to  rescue 
you  from  it.  Cry  unto  Him,  wait 
patiently  for  Him,  and  He  will  incline 
His  ear  and  save  you. 


Hope  in  the  saddest  Situation. 
(Verses  l-Z.) 


If  some  parts  of  this  psalm  are  more 
applicable  to  the  Messiah,  other  parts, 
undoubtedly,  are  more  applicable  to 
David.  Of  himself  the  Psalmist  seems 
here  more  immediately  to  be  speaking. 
Observe — 

1.  The  situation  he  was  in.  This 
was  sad  indeed. 

L  He  was  fallen  low — in  a  "pit." 
How  sunk  in  guilt  and  corruption  is 
man  by  nature ! 

2.  He  was  besmeared,  having  stuck 
fast  in  mire  or  clay.  Sin  renders  our 
whole  persons  the  very  reverse  of  come- 
liness and  beauty  in  the  sight  of  God. 

3.  He  was  an  outcast — in  a  "pit," 
without  communion  with  society.  Thus, 
too,  are  all  naturally  far  off  from  God, 
separated  from  His  favour  and  protec- 
tion. 

4.  He  was  miserable — in  "  an  hor- 
rible pit."  Oh !  what  horrors  our  in- 
iquities bring  upon  us." 

5.  He  was  in  great  danger.  In  a 
"  pit "  he  could  devise  no  way  of  escape, 
so  that,  to  human  appearance,  his  case 
was  hopeless.  And  no  less  dangerous 
is  our  condition.  Ah !  what  dismal 
forebodings  we  have. 

II.  The  devout  exercise  of  his  mind. 
Distressing  as  the  condition  of  David  was, 
it  will  be  instructive  to  us  if  we  consider 
how  he  acted.  L  He  betook  himself  to 
prayer.  This  was  a  certain  mean  of 
194 


succeeding.  It  is  the  mean  which  God 
expects  every  weary  and  heavy-laden 
sinner  to  use.  Nor  can  the  wisdom  of 
such  an  appointment  be  doubted,  as 
constituting  a  test  of  our  humility  and 
of  our  obedience. 

2.  He  hoped  in  His  mercy.  The 
Lord,  not  immediately  vouchsafing  him 
an  answer,  he  became  more  and  more 
urgent,  trusting  ultimately  to  find  accept- 
ance. He  waited  for  the  Lord  patiently. 
Thus,  then,  it  is  good  to  wait,  without 
murmuring,  for  answers  of  peace,  on 
carrying  our  troubles  to  a  throne  of 
grace. 

in.  The  deliverance  he  ohtained. 
God  inclined  His  ear  to  Him  and  heard 
his  cry,  and  his  deliverance  was — 
1.  Elevating,  Though  before  in  a  pit, 
in  the  miry  clay  of  which  he  found  him- 
self sinking  yet  further,  he  is  now  brought 
up  out  of  it ;  and  not  only  so,  but  his 
feet  are  set  upon  a  rock.  And  all  who 
stand  upon  the  Rock  Christ  Jesus  are 
exalted  far  above  this  world,  and  are 
brought  already  to  the  confines  of 
glory. 

2.  Establishing,  "Established  my 
goings."  Oh  !  the  stability  we  have  by 
trusting  in  Christ.  We  may  then  defy 
all  the  powers  of  darkness  (Matt,  xvi 
18). 

3.  Joyous,  "  He  hath  put  a  new 
song  in  my  mouth,"  &c.     This  is  surely- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS,  ISALM  XL. 


applicable  to  the  believer,  who,  in  fact,  David  in  a  diligent  use  of  the  same 

has  not  only  cause  to  rejoice,  but  a  dia-  means.      For  this  glorious  example  is 

position  likewise  to  do  so.  intended  by  God  to  give  us  hope,  how- 

4.  Encouraging.      "  Many  shall  see,  ever  low  our  state  may  be,  He  being 

and  fear,  and  shall  trust  in  the  Lord."  always  able  and  always  near  to  deliver 

Yes,  all  may  expect  the  same  mercy  as  us  (Jonah  iL  2-6,  et  al.) — W,  Sleigh, 

The  Servant's  Offering  to  his  Lord, 

{Verses  6-10.) 

In  this  section  we  pass  from  the  great  was  entirely  unnecessary  as  a  condition 

and  gracious  doings  of  God  on  behalf  of  of  communion  with  the  Most  High  on 

the  Psalmist  to  the  Psalmist's  expression  the  part  of  sinful  man.     The  next  verse 

of  his  gratitude  to  God.     What  offering  explains  the   Psalmist's   meaning.     He 

will  he  present  to  his  Lord  ]     In  what  says,    *  The    sacrifices    of    God    are    a 

way   will   he   express   his  gratitude  to  broken  spirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite 

Him?  heart,  O  God,  Thou  wilt  not  despise.' 

L  By  obedience  to  God  (vers.  6-8).  This  shows  that  all  sacrifice  is  worthless 

1.  He  will  not  sacrifice  material  sacri-  which    is   not   vitalised   by   the  moral 

fijces   instead  of    obedience.      "  Sacrifice  element.     Where  the  sacrifice  represents 

and   offering   Thou   didst    not    desire  j  a  broken  spirit,  where  it  sets  forth  the 

burnt-offering  and  sin-offering  hast  Thou  operations  of  a  contrite  heart,  it  becomes 

not  required."     "  The  four  words   em-  acceptable  to  God,  and  useful  as  a  basis 

ployed  in  this  verse — sacrifice,  offering,  of  negotiation  with  Heaven.    Where  the 

burnt-offering,  sin-offering — embrace  all  moral  element  is  present,  the  physical 

the   species   of    sacrifice   and   offerings  element  will  not  be  forgotten;   this  is 

known  among  the  Hebrews." — Barnes,  beautifully   brought    out    in    the    last 

"In  what  respect  it  is  said  here,  that  expression  in  the  psalm.     'Then  shalt 

God  did  not  wish  sacrifices,  since  He  Thou  be  pleased  with  the  sacrifices  of 

had  expressly  commanded  them,  appears  righteousness,'   <fec.      From   this    it   is 

from    the    contrast.      Obedience,    the  clear   that   though    sacrifice    in    itself, 

willing    performance     of     the     Divine  without  the  presence  of  spiritual  feeling, 

command,  is  set  over  against  presenta-  is  absolutely  worthless  in  the  sight  of 

tion  of  offerings.     Offerings,  therefore,  God,  yet  where  the  moral  element  is 

are  rejected  in  so  far  as  they  form  a  present  in  the  form  of  a  broken  spirit 

compensation   for   that,   in    so    far  as  and  a  contrite  heart,  sacrifice  will  be 

they  would   in   a   manner   satisfy,  put  presented  even   in   its  material   forms. 

off  God." — Hengstenberg,     Our  outward  Thereby   the   penitent    man    expresses 

services,  offerings  of  prayer,  praise,  and  his  love,   and   fosters    his    faith,    and 

material  gifts,  are  of   no  value  in  the  testifies  his  gratitude.     Blessed  be  God, 

sight  of  God,  unless  they  are  the  expres-  in  our  case  it  is  unnecessary   that   we 

sion  of  the  homage  of  the  heart,  and  provide  bullock  or  burnt- offering.     The 

are  accompanied  by  obedience  of  life,  one  final  sacrifice  has  been  offered  in  the 

(Comp.    1  Sam.    xv.    22,   and    Ps.   li,  person  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 

16,    17.)     On   the   latter   passage   Dr.  Christ." 

Parker  says  :   "  We  have   been   led  to  2.  He  will  render  the  obedience  which 

believe  that  God  does  desire  sacrifice ;  God  requires.     "  Then   I   said :   Lo,  I 

that  sacrifice  is  the  basis  of  all  atone-  come,  in  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is 

ment,     and     that      without     sacrifice  prescribed  to  me.     To  do  Thy  will,  my 

approach  to   God  is  an   impossibility.  God,  I  delight,  and  Thy  law  is  in  my 

Were  we  to  pause  at  this  verse  (16),  inner    part." — (Hengstenberg's    trans.) 

however,  and  to  accept  the  words   in  "  The  volume  or  roU-boohy  is  the  Penta- 

their    literal    signification,   we    should  teuch,  which  from  the  first  was  written 

come   to  the  conclusion  that  sacrifice  on  parchment.     In  the  time  of  David, 

195 


PSALM  XL. 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


when  no  other  sacred  book  existed, 
every  one  would  at  once  understand 
what  was  meant  by  the  roll-book."  As 
confirming  this  interpretation  comp. 
Josh.  i.  7 ;  1  Kings  ii.  3 ;  and  2  Kings 
xxii.  13.  David  was  left  in  no  un- 
certainty as  to  what  the  will  of  God 
was.  In  the  Pentateuch  God  had  made 
known  His  will,  and  clearly  unfolded 
His  requirements ;  and  the  Psalmist 
resolves  that  he  will  obey  that  will. 

3.  He  will  render  that  obedience 
heartily.  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0 
my  God;  yea,  Thy  law  is  within  my 
heart."  On  the  law  of  God  in  the  heart 
of  His  people  comp.  Deut.  vi.  6 ;  Ps. 
xxxvii.  31 ;  Pro  v.  vii.  1-3;  and  Isa.  li. 
7.  "  Where  matters  are  as  they  should 
be,  there  the  law  is  not  merely  pre- 
scribed, but  inscribed."  "When  the 
law  of  God  is  written  in  our  hearts,  our 
duty  will  be  our  delight." 

4.  God  had  disposed  him  to  render 
that  obedience.  Such  we  take  to  be  the 
meaning  of  the  words  translated,  '*  Mine 
ears  hast  Thou  opened."  Margin : 
*'  digged."  Hengstenberg  :  "  Ears  hast 
Thou  dug  through  for  me."  "An  in- 
disposition to  obey  the  will  of  God  is 
often  expressed  by  the  fact  that  the 
ears  are  stopped:  Zech.  vii.  11  ;  Ps. 
Iviii.  4,  6 ;  Prov.  xxi.  13.  The  essen- 
tial idea  is,  that  this  truth  has  been 
communicated  to  him — that  God  pre- 
ferred obedience  to  sacrifice ;  and  that 
he  had  been  made  attentive  to  that 
truth,  as  if  he  had  been  before  deaf,  and 
his  ears  had  been  opened." — Barnes. 
Hengstenberg  paraphrases  the  clause : 
"  Thou  hast  made  me  hearing,  obedient." 
He  says,  "  The  LXX.  have  rendered  the 
words  by  GUifia.  hi  xarfj^Tiffu  (loty  but  a 
body  hast  Thou  prepared  for  me;  and 
the  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
has  adopted  them,  because  the  thought 
is  not  altered  by  this  translation.  The 
contiast  there  also  is  the  presentation 
of  thanks  through  the  whole  life  and 
conduct,  in  opposition  to  single  and 
merely  external  offerings :  Thou  hast 
given  me  a  body,  so  that  I  willingly 
serve  Thee  in  the  execution  of  Thy 
will."  If  we  render  hearty  obedience 
to  the  will  of  God,  if  obedience  be 
pleasurable  to  us,  it  is  because  He  has 

196 


"inclined  our  heart  unto  His  testi- 
monies." This  hearty,  grateful  obedience 
the  servant  offers  to  his  Lord. 

II.  By  publication  of  the  perfections 
of  God.  "  I  have  preached  righteous- 
ness in  the  great  congregation,"  &c., 
(verses  9,  10).     Notice — 

1.  What  it  is  that  he  announces.  (1) 
Righteousness.  "  I  have  preached 
righteousness  in  the  great  congregation," 
i.e.,  the  righteousness  which  God  pre- 
scribes for  man,  and  requires  from  him. 
"  I  have  not  hid  Thy  righteousness 
within  my  heart,"  i.e.,  the  righteousness 
which  God  displays  in  His  dealings  with 
man.  "  The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all 
His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His  works." 
(2)  Faithfidness.  "  I  have  declared 
Thy  faithfulness;  I  have  not  concealed 
Thy  truth."  Amid  all  the  mutations 
of  His  universe.  He  changes  not.  What 
He  hath  promised  He  will  perform. 
He  is  worthy  of  the  supreme  confidence 
of  all  His  creatures.  (3)  LovingTcind- 
ness.  "I  have  not  concealed  Thy 
lovingkindness."  He  had  announced 
God's  mercy  towards  sinners,  His  pity 
towards  the  wretched.  His  goodness 
to  all.  (4)  Salvation.  "I  have  de- 
clared Thy  salvation."  He  related  the 
deliverances  which  God  had  wrought 
on  behalf  of  His  people.  He  told  of 
His  gracious  doings  on  his  own  behalf. 

2.  Where  he  makes  his  announcement, 
"In  the  great  congregation."  Barnes 
objects :  "  It  would  be  difficult  to  see 
how  this  could  be  applied  to  David 
himself,  or  on  what  occasion  of  his  life 
this  could  be  said  of  him."  But  th( 
word  translated  "  preach  "  is  not  to  be 
understood  in  the  limited  sense  in  which 
that  word  is  now  used.  Fuerst,  in  his 
Lexicon,  gives  as  its  meaning  in  this 
place — "^0  announce,  to  relate,  to  tell 
qf.^^  Now  David  is  conspicuous  above 
all  the  men  of  his  age  for  having 
announced  in  these  immortal  Psalms 
the  perfections  of  the  character,  and  the 
greatness  and  glory  of  the  works  of 
God.  And  many  of  these  Psalms,  as 
the  superscriptions  show,  were  intended 
for  use  "in  the  great  congregation." 
So  David  "preached,"  t.e.,  announced, 
"righteousness  in  the  great  congrega- 
tion," &c.     He  made  known  the  glory 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XL, 


of  the  Divine  Being,  and  of  His  works 
and  ways,  in  the  most  public  manner, 
and  to  the  largest  audience  that  he 
could  secure. 

Conclusion. — What  a  worthy  offer- 
ing was  this  which  David  presented 
to  the  Lord  I  The  excellence  of  this 
method  of  expressing  his  gratitude  is 
seen  in  this,  that :  1.  It  reveals  his 
appreciation  of  the  Giver  as  well  as  of 
the  Gift.  He  rejoiced  not  only  in  the 
greatness  of  the  benefits  he  had  received, 
but  also  in  the  goodness  of  the  Bene- 
factor. He  celebrated  not  only  the 
gracious  dealings  of  God  with  him,  but 
also  the  glory  of  God  in  His  own 
character  and  perfections.  2.  It  was 
calculated  to  confer  great  heneits  on  men. 
He   who  imparts  to   man    true    ideas 


of  the  Divine  Being  is  rendering  the 
highest  service  to  his  race.  David  did 
this  in  two  ways :  by  celebrating  the 
character  and  doings  of  God  in  sacred 
song,  and  by  expressing  the  will  of  God 
in  a  life  heartily  conformed  thereto. 
The  manifestation  of  God  in  the  life  of 
a  good  man  is  of  unspeakable  value  to 
our  world. 

For  us  also  the  Lord  hath  done  great 
things.  What  offering  shall  we  make 
Him  in  return  1  We  cannot  do  better 
than  imitate  the  Psalmist  in  this 
respect. 

Note. — For  an  exposition  of  verses  6-10 
as  applied  to  the  Messiah,  see  Barnes  or 
Matthew  Henry  in  loco.  The  exposition  of 
the  latter  is  well  arranged  and  suggestive 
homiletically. 


He  that  Knows  God  will  Confess  Him. 
(Verse  10.) 


I  propose  to  speak  of — 

The  necessary  openness  of  a  holy  ex- 
perience;  or,  in  other  words,  tlie  im- 
possibility that  the  inward  revelation  of 
God  in  the  soul  could  he  shut  up  in  it, 
and  remain  hid  or  unacTcnowledged. 

I  shall  have  in  view  especially  two 
classes  of  hearers  that  are  widely  dis- 
tinguished one  from  the  other  :  first, 
the  class  who  hide  the  grace  of  God  in 
their  heart  undesignedly,  or  by  reason 
of  some  undue  modesty  ;  and,  secondly, 
the  class  who,  pretending  to  have  it,  or 
consciously  having  it  not,  take  a  plea- 
sure in  throwing  discredit  on  all  the 
appropriate  expressions  of  it,  such  as 
are  made  by  the  open  testimony  and 
formal  profession  of  Christ  before  men. 

Where  there  is  a  true  grace  of  ex- 
perience in  the  heart,  it  ought  to  be, 
must,  and  will  be  manifest. 

1.  A  true  inward  experience  or  dis- 
covery of  God  in  the  heart  is  itself  an 
impulse  also  of  self-manifestation,  as  all 
love  and  gratitude  are,  wants  to  speak 
and  declare  itself,  and  will  as  naturally 
do  it,  when  it  is  born,  as  a  child  will 
utter  its  first  cry. 

2.  The  change  implied  in  a  true 
Christian  experience,  or  the  revelation 
«f  God  in  the  heart,  is  in  its  very  nature 


the  soul  and  root  of  an  outward  change 
that  is  correspondent.  It  is  the  right- 
eousness of  God  revealed  within,  to  be 
henceforth  the  actuating  spring  and 
power  of  a  righteous  and  devoted  life. 

3.  If  any  one  purposes  beforehand, 
in  his  religious  endeavours,  or  in  seek- 
ing after  God,  to  come  into  a  secret 
experience  and  keep  it  a  secret,  his 
endeavour  is  plainly  one  that  falsifies 
the  very  notion  of  Christian  piety,  and 
if  he  succeeds,  or  seems  to  succeed,  he 
only  practises  a  fraud  in  which  he  im- 
poses on  himself. 

4.  The  grace  of  God  in  the  heart, 
unmanifested  or  kept  secret,  as  many 
propose  that  it  shall  be,  even  for  their 
whole  life,  will  be  certainly  stifled  and 
extinguished.  Nothing  can  live  that  is 
not  permitted  to  show  the  signs  of  life. 
"If  we  den^  Him,  He  also  will  deny 
us." 

5.  This  is  the  express  teaching  of  the 
gospel,  which  everywhere  and  in  every 
possible  way  calls  out  the  souls  renewed 
in  Christ  to  live  an  open  life  of  sacrifice 
and  duty,  and  so  to  witness  a  good  con- 
fession (Matt.  xix.  21 ;  Luke  ix.  23,  26; 
John  XV.  16,  19,  20). 

6.  There  is  no  shade  of  encourage- 
ment given  to  this  notion  of  salvation 

197 


PSALM  XL.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


by  a.  secret  piety  in  any  of  the  Scrip-  views  it  should  be  made.     It  should  be 

ture     examples     or    teachings.        The  made,  because  where  there  is  anything 

nearest    approach   to    such    encourage-  to  be  professed  it  cannot  but  be  made. 

raent  anywhere  given  is  that  which  is  ...  There  is  no  option  here,  save  as  all 

afforded  by  the  case  of  the  two  senators,  duties  are  optional,  and  eternity  hangs 
Joseph  and  Nicodemus  (John  iii.  1-21,    •  on  the  option  we  make, 

xix.  38).     They  were  good  as  disciples  3.  What  value  there  may  be  in  the 

to  bury  Jesus,  but  not  to  save  His  life  discoveries  of  Christian  experience,  and 

or  serve  Him  while  living.     The  most  the  legitimate  use   they  may   have  in 

fragrant  spices  are  those  that  honour  Christian   society.      Some  of  the    best 

one's   life,    and    not    the    posthumous  and  holiest  impulses  ever  given  to  the 

odours  that  embalm  His  body  (Matt.  v.  cause  of  God  in  men's  hearts  are  given 

14-16).  by  testimonies  of  Christian  experience 

Conclusion. — Notice  :    1.  The  very  (Mai.  iii.  16). 

absurd  pretence  of  those  who  congratu-  4.    The   true   wisdom,  in   all   these 

late  themselves  on  having  so  much  of  matters   of   holy   experience,  is  to   act 

secret  merit,  which  they  even  count  the  naturally.     If  you  seem  to  yourself  to 

more  meritorious  because  they  keep  it  have  really  passed  from  death  unto  life, 

secret.     It  is  not  the  righteousness  of  and   to   have   come   into  God's   peace, 

God  which   they  have  hidden  so  care-  interpose  no  affectations  of  modesty,  no 

fully,  but  it  is  their  own — which,  after  restrictions   of  mock-prudence,  but   in 

all,  is  not  hid.     They  do  not  break  out  true    natural    modesty    and    a    sound 

and   confess  the  Lord,  simply  because  natural  discretion  testify  the  grace  you 

He  is  not  in  them.  have    received   (Matt.    x.    32,    33). — 

2.  The  significance  of  the  profession  H.   Bushnell,  D.D,y  from   "  The  New 

of  Christ,  when  and  why,  and  with  what  Xt/c,"  abridged. 

The  Servant's  Prater  to  his  Losd. 
(F«r«e»  11-17.) 

This  prayer  of  the  poet  suggests  the  not  conceal  God's  lovingkindness  and 

following  observations —  truth,  is  the  sure  means,  but  also  the 

I.  The  most  assured  confidence  in  indispensable  condition   of   its  further 

God  is  not  regarded  by  His  servant  as  manifestation      in      our     experience." 

a  substitute  for  prayer.     In  the  pre-  Thankfulness    and    trust,   so   far  from 

vious  portion  of  the  psalm,  David  has  precluding  the  necessity  of  prayer,  are 

expressed  unshaken  and  unlimited  con-  incentives   and   encouragements   to   its 

fidence  in  God,  yet  here  we  find  him  exercise.     The  man  of  assured  faith  will 

confessing  his  sins,  complaining  of  his  be  a  man  of  frequent  prayer, 

troubles,   and  seeking  relief  from  God.  II.  A  true  servant  of  God  may  fall 

Thankfulness  and  trust  are  foundations  into    many  sins.       '*  Mine    iniquities 

for   prayer.       Hengstenberg  points  out  have  taken  hold  upon  me,"  <fec.     There 

that  the  relation  of  the  '*  withhold  not  is  great  force  in  the  expressions  used  by 

Thou  Thy  tender  mercies  *'  to  the  "  I  the  Psalmist  in  this  verse.     He  seems 

have  not  refrained,"  in  ver.  9,  suggests  to  have  had  a  deep  and  painful  impres- 

*'  the  doctrine  that  the  measure  of  the  sion  of  his  sins.     He  makes  mention  of 

further  salvation  proceeds  according  to  1.  Their  number.     "  They  are   more 

the  measure  of  thankfulness  for  the  ear-  than  the  hairs  of  mine  head."     When 

lier."    And  **  the  words  *Let  Thy  loving-  we  think  of  sins  of  infirmity  and  imper- 

kindness  and  Thy  truth  continually  pre-  fection,  and  sins  of  omission,  and  secret 

serve  me '  point  back  to  *  I  will  not  con-  sins    of   thought   and    feeling,    to    the 

ceal  Thy  lovingkindness  and  Thy  truth,'  awakened       conscience     they     appear 

with  which  the  Psalmist  had  closed  his  altogether  innumerable, 

promise  of  thanksgiving.     That  we  will  2.  Their  grasp,      "  Mine   iniquities 
198 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSJLLM  XL. 


have  taken  hold  upon  me."  His  sins 
had  seized  him,  arrested  him,  "as  the 
bailiff  does  the  poor  debtor."  Sin  with 
its  dark  memories  and  in  its  dire  con- 
sequences frequently  holds  a  man  as 
with  an  iron  grip. 

3.  Their  effect.  "  I  am  not  able  to 
look  up,  .  .  .  my  heart  faileth  me." 
*'  The  idea  here  is  not  that  he  was 
unable  to  looh  up,  but  that  the  calami- 
ties which  came  upon  him  were  so 
heavy  and  severe  as  to  make  his  sight 
dim  or  deprive  him  of  vision." — Barnes, 
Luther :  "  My  sight  gives  way  under 
great  sorrow."  Hengstenberg  :  "  The 
heart  is  here  not  exactly  the  feeling, 
spirit,  but  is  rather  considered  as  the 
seat  of  the  powers  of  life.  *  My  strength 
faileth  me/  in  Ps.  xxxviii.  10,  is 
parallel" 

If  this  confession  of  sin  and  its 
results  seem  exaggerated,  let  it  be 
remembered  that  an  awakened  and 
sensitive  conscience  detects  and  grieves 
for  sins  when  the  hardened  conscience 
would  not  discover  any  sin  at  all. 

"  That  the  Psalmist  speaks  here  of 
his  numerous  offences,  and  treats  of  his 
suffering  as  the  righteous  punishment 
of  these,  forms  an  irrefragable  proof 
against  the  direct  Messianic  exposition." 
— Hengstenberg. 

III.  If  a  true  servant  of  God  fall 
into  sin,  the  penalty  of  his  sin  will 
surely  come  upon  him.  "  Innumerable 
evils  have  compassed  me  about."  God's 
laws,  with  the  penalties  annexed  to 
every  breach  of  them,  are  universal  in 
their  operation.  They  are  not  respecters 
of  persons.  In  the  case  of  no  one  is 
this  more  conspicuous  than  in  the  life 
of  David.  His  sin  with  Bathsheba  and 
his  murder  of  Uriah,  in  their  conse- 
quences, never  ceased  to  darken  and 
trouble  his  life  even  to  its  very  close. 
"  Whoso  "  (saint  or  sinner)  "  breaketh 
an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite  him." 

IV.  A  servant  of  God  suffering  the 
penalty  of  his  sin  may  seek  deliver- 
ance from  God.  "  Be  pleased,  O  Lord, 
to  deliver  me;  O  Lord,  make  haste  to 
help  me."  An  essential  condition  of  de- 
liverance is  that  he  who  seeks  it  shall  have 
come  to  feel  the  heinousness  of  the  sin  for 
which  he  sufen. 


Where  the  sinfulness  of  the  sin  is 
deeply  realised,  the  penalty  has  in^reat 
part,  at  least,  accomplished  its  end.  But 
when  any  one  seeks  to  be  rid  of  the  suf- 
ferii^g  without  loathing  the  sin,  it  is  clear 
that  in  him  suffering  has  not  yet  accom- 
plished its  end.  But  in  what  way  does 
God  deliver  His  people  from  the  evils  of 
their  sins  'i 

1.  Bp  removing  the  guilt  and  the  con- 
sciousness of  it.  That  we  have  grieved  a 
holy  and  generous  Father  is  the  sorest 
part  of  our  suffering.  God  takes  that 
away  by  the  assurance  of  forgiveness. 

2.  By  removing  the  penalty.  Some- 
times in  answer  to  prayer  God  sees  fit 
to  remove  or  to  mitigate  the  sufferings 
which  have  come  upon  his  people  as  the 
result  of  their  sins. 

3.  By  imparting  grace  and  patience 
to  hear  the  penalty.  If  He  remove  not 
the  penalty.  He  will  take  the  bitterness 
out  of  it,  and  give  us  strength  to  bear  it. 

It  is  a  great  thing  to  be  able  to  go  to 
Him  and  seek  relief  and  deliverance. 
The  approach  to  Him  in  itself  is  help- 
ful. And  He  will  certainly  grant  to  us 
an  answer, — wise,  gracious,  and  satis- 
factory. 

The  Psalmist's  prayer  for  help  is 
marked  by  great  urgency.  "  O  Lord, 
make  haste  to  help  me."  *'  Make  no 
tarrying,  O  my  God."  Great  suffering 
and  a  deep  sense  of  need  make  us 
earnest  and  urgent  in  prayer.  They  do 
not  utter  themselves  in  long,  rhetorical 
petitions,  but  in  brief,  expressive,  heaven- 
reaching  cries. 

V.  In  his  prayer  the  servant  of  God 
has  reference  not  to  himself  alone,  but 
to  others  also. 

1.  Here  is  a  reference  to  his  enemies. 
"  Let  them  be  ashamed  and  confounded 
together  that  seek  after  my  soul  to 
destroy  it,"  &c.  (vers.  14,  15).  The 
enemies  of  the  Psalmist  seem  to  have 
been  many,  and  to  have  manifested 
their  animosity  in  different  ways.  Here 
are — (1)  The  actively  hostile;  "them 
that  seek  after  my  soul  to  destroy  it." 
(2)  The  evil  disposed  ;  *'  them  that  wish 
me  evil.*'  (3)  The  mockers;  *' them 
that  say  unto  me.  Aha,  Aha."  He 
prays  for  the  discomfiture  of  all  these. 
'^  There  is  no  sin  in  the  wish  that  the 

199 


PSAL3CXL. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


wicked  may  not  be  successful  in  their 
[>lans,  and  may  not  be  suffered  to  injure 
us." — Barnes. 

2.  Here  is  a  reference  to  the  godly. 
"  Let  all  those  that  seek  Thee  rejoice 
and  be  glad  in  Thee ;  let  such  as  love 
Thy  salvation  say  continually,  "  The 
Lord  be  masrnified."  There  is  a  beauti- 
ful  connection  between  the  character  in- 
dicated and  the  blessing  sought.  They 
that  seek  the  Lord  shall  find  Him,  and 
finding  Him  shall  rejoice  and  be  glad  in 
Him.  For  the  seeker  the  joy  of  becom- 
ing the  finder.  They  that  love  His  sal- 
vation shall  realise  it  so  fully  as  to  be 


filled  with  praise  and  to  cry,  "  The  Lord 
be  magnified."  May  they  so  continu- 
ously realise  His  saving  grace  as  to  have 
cause  for  continually  exalting  and  glori- 
fying God. 

VI.  The  servant  of  God  in  his 
deepest  distress  confides  in  the  Lord 
God.  ''  I  am  poor  and  needy  ;  yet  the 
Lord  thinketh  upon  me,"  (fee.  (For  an 
exposition  of  this  verse  see  the  homi- 
letic  sketch  on  it  given  below.) 

Conclusion. — Amid  both  the  sins 
and  the  sufferings  of  life,  let  the  ser- 
vants of  God  have  recourse  to  Him  in 
prayer. 


The  Hold  of  Sin. 
(Verse  12.) 


A  course  of  sin  is  a  course  of  lawless- 
ness. Certain  liberty  may  be  enjoyed, 
but  penal  consequences  are  sure  to  fol- 
low. "  Innumerable  evils  have  com- 
passed me  about."  Sin  takes  hold  upon 
the  sinner  by  violence  and  force.  Justice 
arrests  and  brings  him  before  the  tribunal. 

Sin  takes  hold  upon  men — 

I.  By  its  power.  It  overcon^es  them, 
subdues  them  by  habits,  and  keeps  them 
bound  in  captivity  and  degradation. 
*'  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the 
wicked  himself,  and  he  shall  be  holden 
with  the  cords  of  his  sins." 

II.  By  an  accusing  conscience.  All 
men  have  a  conscience,  speaking  in  still- 
ness, or  thundering  in  power — watching 


and  weighing  all  they  do, — &  monitor  in 
their  bosom — a  witness  for  God.  "  The 
candle  of  the  Lord  searching  all  their 
inward  parts." 

III.  By  its  evil  consequences.  Fear, 
shame,  and  liability  to  punishment — the 
curse  and  condemnation  of  a  broken  law. 
The  sinner  carries  within  his  bosom 
a  prediction,  a  foretaste  of  the  judg- 
ment to  come.  The  terrors  of  hell  get 
hold  upon  him,  and  there  is  no  deliver- 
ance but  in  Christ.  "  He  Himself  bare 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree — 
redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us."  He  can 
save  from  sin  and  its  consequences.- 
W.  in  ''  The  Study,'' 


Man's  Need  and  God's  Thought, 
{Verse  17.) 


"  I  am  poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord 
thinketh  upon  me." 

We  regard  these  words  as  the  ex- 
pression of  a  humble,  trustful  heart 
under  a  sense  of  need.  We  have 
here, 

I.  An  acknowledgment  of  human 
need.  "  I  am  poor  and  needy."  In 
the  world  there  is  lanch.  physical  poverty 
and  need.  That  is  bad.  Much  mental 
poverty  :  that  is  worse.  Much  spiritual 
poverty  :  that  is  worst  of  all.  Better 
to  be  Lazarus  at  the  gate  than  the  rich 
200 


man  in  the  palace.  Some  who  are 
spiritually  impoverished  are  quite  un- 
conscious of  it.  They  are  paupers,  yet 
they  imagine  themselves  millionaires. 
They  say  that  they  are  "  rich  and  in- 
creased with  goods,  and  have  need  of 
nothing;  and  know  not  that  they  are 
wretched  and  miserable  and  poor  and 
blind  and  naked."     Most  deplorable ! 

1.  This  need  is  an  evidence  of  sin.  A 
loving  Creator,  having  "  unsearchable 
riches,"  would  not  make  His  creatures 
poor  and  needy.     Some  disarrangement 


1 
i 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


rSALM  XLL 


of  His  order  must  have  taken  place. 
Spiritual  bankruptcy  cannot  be  a  re- 
sult of  the  plans  of  the  Infinite  and  all- 
generous  Spirit. 

2.  The  consciousness  of  this  need  is  a 
condition  of  its  removal.  When  men 
fall  asleep  in  the  frost  and  snow  by 
reason  of  cold,  and  become  insensible 
unto  the  cold,  they  sleep  the  sleep  of 
death.  While  they  feel  the  cold  they 
will  strive  to  preserve  vital  heat,  and  so 
repel  the  cold.  The  sense  of  this  poverty 
is  the  first  step  to  its  removal.  Until 
we  feel  our  hunger  we  shall  never  seek 
the  living  bread. 

3.  The  confession  of  this  need  is  well- 
pleasing  to  God.  It  indicates  a  true 
estimate  of  ourselves,  and  humility  be- 
fore God.  When  we  think  of  our  low 
attainments,  and  those  to  which  we  are 
called,  how  poor  are  we !  When  we 
consider  our  mean  acquisitions,  and  the 
"  unsearchable  riches,"  how  poor  are 
we  ! 

II.  An  expression  of  confidence  in 
God,  "  The  Lord  thinketh  upon  me." 
There  is  something  very  cheering  and 
strengthening  in  this.  I  am  lonely  and 
sad  and  weary ;  but  I  think  of  some 
loving  one,  perhaps  hundreds  of  miles 
away,  who  is  thinking  kindly  of  me,  and 
I  am  refreshed,  comforted,  strengthened. 

God  thinks  of  me,  of  all  men,  of  every 
man.  We  think  and  speak  of  the  par- 
ticular and  the  general,  of  the  individual 
and  the  collective  body.  We  cannot  at 
once  think  of  many  particulars,  or  of 
many  individuals,  as  such ;  so  we  think 
of  persons  collectively,  and  of  particulars 
as  classified.  But  the  Infinite  Mind  has 
no  such  limitations.  Amid  the  millions 
of  creatures  that  depend  upon  His  care 


and  are  the  recipients  of  His  bounty,  not 
one  escapes  His  notice.  Superintend- 
ing the  universe.  He  also  numbers  the 
very  hairs  of  the  head  of  every  one  of 
His  people. 

"  The  Lord  thinketh  upon  me."  He 
cares  for  every  individual ;  for  thee,  as 
though  in  all  His  universe  He  had  no 
other  to  care  for.  "  Ah  !  that  may  be 
true,"  say  you,  ''  of  David,  a  king,  and 
sacred  poet,  and  man  highly  favoured  of 
God ;  but  does  He  so  think  of  me,  a 
poor,  low,  unworthy  one  % "  To  doubt 
it  is  to  "  limit  the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 
*' The  Lord  thinketh  upon  mej"  then. 
He  knows  my  need.  He  sees  our  exact 
circumstances  and  condition,  and  con- 
sequent need.  He  knows  the  precise 
character  of  my  poverty,  and  will  re- 
move it  by  communicating  the  precise 
treasures  which  I  lack. 

"  The  Lord  thinketh  upon  me ; " 
then,  He  will  supply  my  need.  His 
thought  is  neither  purposeless  nor  re- 
sultless.  His  thoughts  receive  embodi- 
ment. His  thought  of  us  indicates  care 
for  us,  and  results  in  provision  for  us. 
Wherever  the  sense  of  poverty  and  need 
is,  there  may  the  assurance  of  the  Divine 
thought  and  care  also  be.  If  we  are 
hungering  after  Him,  most  assuredly  He 
is  thinking  of  us  individually. 

Examples  of  His  care  for  individuals 
abound.  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den,  Jo- 
seph in  prison,  Peter  in  prison,  and  our 
own  experience. 

In  this  thought  of  God  of  us  and  for 
us  we  have  : — 1.  What  a  solace  in  lone- 
liness /  2.  What  a  comfort  in  the  day 
of  sorrow  /  3.  What  an  iiLspiraiioii  for 
Christian  work  I  4.  What  an  assurance 
of  victory  in  death  / 


PSALM    XLI. 

Intkoduction, 

This  psalm,  like  the  preceding  one,  is  from  the  pen  of  David,  and  is  addressed  **  to  the 
chief  musician,"  for  use  in  public  religious  services.  It  seems  to  have  been  composed  with 
reference  to  a  period  when  the  Psalmist  was  suflfering  from  bodily  sickness,  and  from  the 
malice  of  his  enemies  and  the  faithlessness  and  ingratitude  of  friends.  "  The  kernel  of  our 
psalm,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "is  contained  in  Psalm  xxxv,  13,  14.  The  fundamental  idea  is 
this,  that  he  who  is  compassionate  will  receive  compassion,  that  he  who  has  the  consciousness 
of  having  wept  with  the  weeping,  may  console  himself  with  the  assurance  that  his  own  weeping 
shall  be  turned  by  God  into  laughing."  Homiletically  we  shall  consider  the  psalm  as  setting 
forth — The  blessedness  of  the  compassionate  (vers.  1-3) ;  the  complaint,  prayer,  and  confidence 
of  the  compassionate  (vera.  4-12);  and  the  doxology  (ver.  13). 

201 


PSALM  XLI. 


MOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


The  Blessbdnbss  of  the  Compassionate. 
(Versea  1-3.) 


The  blessings  mentioned  in  these 
verses  are  for  the  man  "  that  considereth 
the  poor."  By  "  the  poor  "  in  this  place 
we  must  understand  the  weak  and  feeble, 
those  who  are  in  a  depressed  condition, 
and  need  the  sympathy  and  aid  of  others. 
The  word  may  be  used  in  reference  to 
those  who  are  in  a  low  condition  by 
reason  of  poverty,  bodily  affliction,  or 
sorrow.  The  consideration  of  which  the 
Psalmist  speaks  is  a  thoughtful  sympathy 
and  help,  "  the  manifestations  of  a  ten- 
der fellow-feeling."  And  the  man  who 
extends  this  thoughtful  sympathy  and 
help  to  the  poor,  the  Psalmist  pronounces 
*'  blessed,"     He  is  blessed  with — 

I.  Divine  deliverance.  "  The  Lord 
will  deliver  him  in  time  of  trouble." 
Margin  :  "  in  the  day  of  evil."  Heng- 
stenberg :  *'  in  the  day  of  distress." 
"  The  day  of  evil "  is  a  period  with 
which  all  men  are  more  or  less  ac- 
quainted. The  present  state  is  charac- 
terised by  affliction  and  trial,  pain  and 
sorrow,  disease  and  death.  But  "  if 
any  be  hidden  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's 
anger,"  the  compassionate  shall.  The 
Lord  will  keep  them  in  the  day  of  dis- 
tress, and  will  deliver  them. 

II.  Divine  preservation.  "  The  Lord 
will  preserve  him,  and  keep  him  alive.'' 
**  This,"  says  Barnes,  "  refers  to  di.  general, 
not  a  universal  rule  in  the  Divine  ad- 
ministration, that  acts  of  piety  will  be 
partially  rewarded  on  the  earth ;  or  that 
the  Divine  favour  will  be  shown  to  those 
who  deal  kindly  with  others."  When 
the  shafts  of  death  fly  quickly  around 
them,  they  shall  be  shielded  by  God. 
He  who  manifests  kindness  and  care  for 
the  afflicted  and  sorrowful  may  expect, 
when  he  is  placed  in  similar  circum- 
stances, that  God  will  interpose  for  his 
preservation. 

III.  Divine  blessing.  "  He  shall  be 
blessed  upon  the  earth."  Hengsten- 
berg  :  "  in  the  land."  **  This  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  doctrine  noticed  above, 
and  so  often  referred  to  in  the  psalms 
and  elsewhere,  that  the  effect  of  religion 

202 


will  be  to  promote  happiness  and  pros- 
perity in  this  life." — Barnes.  "If  it 
may  be  for  God's  glory,  and  the  man's 
good,  this  temporal  life  shall  be  pre- 
served, and  evidences  of  God's  blessing 
shall  be  seen  upon  him." — Dickson. 

IV.  Divine  reservation.  "Thou  wilt 
not  deliver  him  to  the  will  of  his  ene- 
mies." When  attacked  by  foes  the  Lord 
will  defend  the  compassionate  man,  so 
that  they  shall  neither  ensnare  him  by 
their  wiles,  nor  overpower  him  by  their 
might.  "  The  most  potent  enemy  we 
have  can  have  no  power  against  us  but 
what  is  given  him  from  above.  The 
good-will  of  a  God  that  loves  us  is  suffi- 
cient to  secure  us  from  the  ill-will  of  all 
that  hate  us,  men  and  devils ;  and  that 
good-will  we  may  promise  ourselves  an 
interest  in,  if  we  have  considered  the 
poor  and  helped  to  relieve  and  rescue 
them." — M.  Henry. 

V.  Divine  support  in  affliction. 
"  The  Lord  will  strengthen  hiui  upon 
the  bed  of  languishing  ;  Thou  wilt  make 
all  his  bed  in  his  sickness."  God  has 
not  promised  His  people  "that  they 
shall  never  be  sick,  nor  that  they  shall 
not  lie  languishing,  nor  that  their  sick- 
ness shall  not  be  unto  death ;  but  He 
has  promised  to  enable  them  to  bear 
their  affliction  with  patience,  and  cheer- 
fully to  wait  the  issue.  The  soul  by 
His  grace  shall  be  made  to  dwell  at 
ease  when  the  body  lies  in  pain." — 
M.  Henry.  On  the  second  clause, 
Hengstenberg  says,  "  *  All  his  couch 
dost  Thou  change  in  his  sickness.'  The 
couch  stands  here  for  the  state  of  the 
sick;  God  changes  his  couch  of  pain 
and  sickness  into  one  of  convalescence 
and  joy,  and  that  entirely."  And  M. 
Henry,  "  That  bed  must  needs  be  well 
made  which  God  Himself  has  the 
making  of."  When  we  are  in  affliction 
it  is  no  small  comfort  to  remember  that 
we  have  kindly  ministered  to  others  in 
like  circumstances.  And  God  Himself 
will  relieve  and  comfort  those  who  have 
so  done  in  all  their  sufferings. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALM  XLI. 


Conclusion  :  —  1.  Heed  well  the 
princij^le  which  underlies  our  text^  that 
God  ivill  deal  loith  us  as  we  do  with 
others.  "  With  the  merciful  Thou  wilt 
show  Thyself  merciful/'  <fec.  (Ps.  xviii. 
25-27.  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful ;  for 
they  shall  obtain  mercy."     "  With  what 


measure  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured 
to  you  again.'* 

2.  Cultivate  a  kind  and  considerate 
spirit  toward  the  poor,  the  sorrowful^  the 
afflicted.  By  so  doing,  we  tread  in  the 
footsteps  of  our  Lord  and  become 
sharers  in  His  joy. 


The  Complaint,  Prayer,  and  Confidence  op  the  Compassionate, 

(Verses  ir\%) 


The  relation  of  this  section  to  the 
preceding,  as  we  understand  it,  is  thus 
stated  by  Hengstenberg  :  *'  The  Psalm- 
ist, who,  with  perfect  right,  could  appro- 
priate to  himself  the  words,  '  Blessed  is 
he  who  acts  wisely  towards  the  poor,' 
goes  on  to  mention,  in  two  strophes, 
that  now  it  was  the  day  of  distress  for 
him,  now  the  rage  of  his  enemies  was 
boiling  against  him,  now  he  was  pros- 
trated with  pain,  so  that  it  was  time  for 
him  to  receive  the  fulfilment  of  the 
promise,  He  will  deliver  him,"  &c. 

I.  The  complaint  of  the  compas- 
sionate. David  had  shown  himself 
compassionate  to  the  poor  and  needy, 
yet  now  that  the  day  of  his  distress  has 
come  he  has  to  complain  bitterly 'of  the 
treatment  he  received  from  men.  Here 
is  his  complaint  concerning 

1.  His  enemies.  He  complains  of 
(1.)  Their  malignity,  "Mine  enemies 
speak  evil  of  me.  When  shall  he  die, 
and  his  name  perish  ]  "  It  is  scarcely 
possible  to  imagine  malignity  more  in- 
tense than  this.  The  malignity  that 
desires  the  death  of  another  is  terrible ; 
that  which  desires  not  only  another's 
death,  but  also  the  blotting  out  of  his 
memory  from  amongst  men  is  more 
terrible;  whilst  that  which  desires  these 
things  concerning  a  good  man  is  most 
terrible.  Yet  such  was  the  malignity  of 
the  enemies  of  the  Psalmist.  (2.)  Their 
deceit.  "If  he  come  to  see  me,  he 
speaketh  vanity;  his  heart  gathereth 
iniquity  to  itself;  when  he  goeth 
abroad,  he  telleth  it."  Here  is  the 
most  cruel  hypocrisy.  These  enemies 
visited  the  poet  in  his  affliction  under 
the  pretence  of  friendship  and  kindly 
interest  in  his  welfare,  uttering  empty 
and  hypocritical  assurances  of  love  and 


sympathy.  Their  real  object  was  to 
gather  materials  for  slandering  him,  to 
discover  something  in  his  temper,  or 
speech,  or  condition,  which  they  might 
pervert  to  their  own  base  ends.  And 
then  they  went  abroad  and  published 
their  base  and  dastardly  perversions, 
"  There  is  no  fence  against  those  whose 
malice  thus  gathers  iniquity."  (3.)  Their 
confederacy.  * '  All  that  hate  me  whisper 
together  against  me ;  against  me  do  they 
devise  my  hurt."  Here  are  combina- 
tion and  consultation  with  a  view  to  the 
injury  of  the  poet.  His  enemies  were 
many,  and  they  conspired  to  effect  his 
overthrow.  "  Whisperers  and  back- 
biters are  put  together  among  the  worst 
of  sinners  (Rom.  i.  29,  30).  They 
whispered  that  their  plot  against  him 
might  not  be  discovered  and  so  de- 
feated ;  there  is  seldom  whispering  (we 
say)  but  there  is  lying  or  some  mischief 
on  foot." — M.  Henry.  (4.)  Their  fiend- 
ish exultation.  *'An  evil  disease,  say 
they,  cleaveth  fast  unto  him,  and  now 
that  he  lieth,  he  shall  rise  up  no  more." 
The  first  clause  of  this  verse  is  not 
easily  interpreted.  Our  translation  is 
incorrect.  Margin,  as  in  the  Hebrew : 
"  A  thing,"  or  word,  "  of  Belial."  Pro- 
fessor Alexander  :  "  A  word  of  Belial  is 
poured  upon  him."  Hengstenberg  says: 
"  The  first  member,  literally  :  a  matter 
of  mischief  is  poured  upon  him."  We 
take  it  that  "the  matter  of  mischief," 
or  "  word  of  Belial,"  is  the  diabolical 
plan  which  the  enemies  of  the  Psalmist 
had  framed  for  effecting  his  ruin  ;  and 
in  the  anticipated  success  of  which  they 
fiendishly  exulted.  It  was  not  without 
reason  that  David  complained  of  his 
enemies. 

2.  Those  whom  he  had  regarded  as  his 

203 


rSAJUlXLI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


friends.  "Yea,  mine  own  familiar 
friend,  in  whom  I  trusted,  which  did  eat 
of  my  bread,  hath  lifted  up  his  heel 
against  me."  "  Mine  own  familiar 
friend,"  or  "  the  man  of  my  peace,"  in- 
dicates one  who  was  associated  with 
David  in  the  most  peaceful  and  amicable 
relations.  "In  whom  I  trusted,"  points 
to  "  one  who  lived  on  a  footing  of  confi- 
dence with  the  Psalmist."  "  Who  eats 
my  bread,"  does  not  refer  to  one  who  had 
been  entertained  as  an  occasional  guest 
by  the  Psalmist,  but  to  one  who  was 
supported  by  him  as  a  member  of  his 
family.  "  The  participle  points  to 
something  continued."  Such  an  one, 
the  Psalmist  complains,  had  "lifted  up 
his  heel  against  "  him,  like  a  horse  that 
turns  and  kicks  a  kind  master.  Mat- 
thew Henry,  Hengstenberg,  et  al.,  think 
that  the  reference  here  is  to  Ahithophel 
(2  Sam.  XV.  12,  31).  Well  may  David 
complain  in  bitterness  of  soul  of  such 
treatment.  La  Fontaine  said  :  "Kare  is 
true  love;  true  friendship  is  still  rarer." 
"  In  trust,"  said  Queen  Elizabeth, 
**  I  have  found  treason."  "  Friends  !  " 
said  Socrates,  "  there  is  no  friend." 

Our  Lord  applied  part  of  this  verse 
to  Judas,  the  betrayer,  John  xiii.  8. 
But  it  is  significant  that  He  omitted  the 
words,  "  Mine  own  familiar  friend,  in 
whom  I  trusted."  The  omission  is  (1.) 
"An  evidence  against  the  direct  Mes- 
sianic interpretation "  of  the  psalm. 
(2.)  It  seems  to  show  that  Christ  had 
never  regarded  Judas  as  an  intimate 
and  trusted  friend. 

II.  The  prayer  of  the  compassionate. 
The  Psalmist  here  prays  that  the  blessing 
promised  to  those  who  consider  the  poor 
may  be  granted  unto  him.     He  prays — 

1.  Fo7^  mercy.  In  both  the  fourth 
and  the  tenth  verses  he  cries,  "  0  Lord, 
be  merciful  unto  me."  The  request  for 
mercy  implies  a  consciousness  of  un- 
worthiness.  It  is  also  an  appeal  to  the 
disposition  of  God  to  pity  the  miserable, 
and  succour  the  distressed. 

2.  For  restoration.  "  Heal  my  soul, 
for  I  have  sinned  against  Thee ;  .  .  . 
and  raise  me  up."  The  Psalmist  re- 
cognises the  intimate  connection  between 
sin  and  suff"ering.  He  regarded  his 
afflictions  as  a  consequence  of  his  sins. 

204 


"Sin,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "is  the 
sickness  of  the  soul ;  pardoning  mercy 
heals  it ;  renewing  grace  heals  it ;  and 
this  spiritual  healing  we  should  be 
more  earnest  for  than  for  bodily 
health."  The  request,  "and  raise  me 
up,"  looks  back  to  the  cruel  boast  of  his 
enemies,  "  and  now  that  he  lieth  down 
he  shall  rise  up  no  more."  It  is  a 
prayer  that  God  would  restore  him  to 
health  and  prosperity,  and  so  baffle  the 
wicked  designs  of  his  foes.  The  latter 
part  of  the  tenth  verse  is  not,  "  in  order 
that  I  may  requite  them,"  but,  "  so  will 
I  requite  them."  The  words  do  not 
necessarily  involve  a  desire  for  indivi- 
dual revenge  on  his  enemies.  They  may 
mean  simply  a  desire  for  the  vindication 
of  right  and  truth. 

III.  The  confidence  of  the  com- 
passionate. The  Psalmist  expresses 
his  assurance  of, — 

1.  The  Divine  favour.  "By  this  I 
know  that  Thou  favourest  me,  because 
mine  enemy  doth  not  triumph  over 
me."  The  possession  of  the  Divine 
favour,  and  the  defeat  of  his  enemies, 
are  in  his  mind  inseparably  associated, 
and  he  expresses  a  confident  assurance 
of  both.  "When  we  can  discern  the 
favour  of  God  in  any  mercy,  personal  or 
public,  that  doubles  it  and  sweetens  it." 

2.  The  Divine  support.  "  And  as  for 
me.  Thou  upholdest  me,"  &c.  The 
remarks  of  Matthew  Henry  on  this 
verse  are  excellent.  "(L)  When  at 
any  time  we  suffer  in  our  reputation, 
our  chief  concern  should  be  about  our 
integrity,  and  then  we  may  cheerfully 
leave  it  to  God  to  secure  our  reputation. 
David  knows  that,  if  he  can  but  per- 
severe in  his  integrity,  he  need  not  fear 
his  enemies'  triumphs  over  him.  (2.) 
The  best  man  in  the  world  holds  his 
integrity  no  longer  than  God  upholds 
him  in  it;  for  by  His  grace  we  are 
what  we  are ;  if  we  be  left  to  ourselves, 
we  shall  not  only  fall,  but  fall  away, 
(3.)  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  us  that, 
however  weak  we  are,  God  is  able  to 
uphold  us  in  our  integrity,  and  will 
do  it  if  we  commit  the  keeping  of  it 
to  Him.  (4.)  If  the  grace  of  God  did 
not  take  a  constant  care  of  us,  we 
should  not  be  upheld  in  our  integrity ; 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALM  XLII. 


we 


His  eye  is  always  upon  iis,  else 
should  soon  start  aside  from  Him.  (5.) 
Those  whom  God  now  upholds  in  their 
integrity  He  will  set  before  His  face  for 
ever,  and  make  happy  in  the  vision  and 
fruition  of  Himself.  He  that  endures 
to  the  end  shall  be  saved." 


Conclusion. — Let  us  cultivate  and 
pray  for-  strong  confidence  in  God. 
Then  shall  we  be  victorious  over  the 
infirmities  of  the  flesh,  the  weakness  or 
falseness  of  professed  friends,  and  the 
scheming  malignity  of  enemies. 


DOZOLOOT. 


(Verse 

This  verse  of  praise  marks  the  close 
of  the  first  book  of  the  psalms. 

1.  Blessing  is  ascribed  to  God  as  a 
God  holding  relations  with  His  people. 
"The  Lord  God  of  Israel."  In  the 
past  He  has  conferred  many  blessings 
dpon  them.  In  the  present  they  trust 
Him  ;  and  He  upholds  and  saves  them. 
He  has  promised  to  bless  them  with 
eternal  glory.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is 
the  God  of  Israel,  even  a  God  to 
Israel.'*  **  Blessed,"  i.e.,  praised, 
honoured,  "  be  the  Lord  God." 

L  God  is  supremely  blessed  in  Him- 
self.    '*  The  ever  blessed  God." 

2.  God  is  blessed  in  His  works, 
"All  Thy  works  shall  praise  Thee,  0 
God." 

3.  God  is  blessed  by  all  His  intelligent 
and  loyal  creatures.     By  angels,  and  by 


13.) 

the  redeemed  both  in  heaven  and  on 
earth. 

II.  Blessing  is  ascribed  to  God 
eternally.  "  From  everlasting  and  to 
everlasting."  From  the  unbeginning 
past  to  the  unending  future.  What  an 
existence  is  that  of  God ! 

III.  Blessing  is  ascribed  to  Him 
fervently.  "  Amen,  and  Amen."  Tlie 
repetition  of  the  "Amen"  shows  that 
the  ascription  of  blessing  is  the  intense 
wish  of  the  mind  and  heart.  Many  and 
forcible  are  the  reasons  which  urge 
all  intelligent  creatures  thus  to  ascribe 
blessing  to  God. 

We,  whom  He  has  redeemed  from 
sin  and  hell,  are  under  special  obligation 
to  praise  and  glorify  Him.  ''  What  shall 
I  render  unto  the  Lord  ? "  &c  "  Bless 
the  Lord,  O  my  soul,"  &G. 


PSALM     XLII, 

Introduction. 

Superscription  :    "  To  the  Chief  Musician,  Maschil,  for  the  ions  of  Korah.**     Maschil,  an 

instruction,  a  didactic  poem. 

"The  sons  of  Korah,"  descendants  of  Korah,  were  an  important  company  of  singers 
(1  Chron.  vi.  33 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  19).  Opinions  diflPer  as  to  whether  this  and  ten  or  eleven 
other  psalms  bearing  the  name  of  *'  the  sons  of  Korah"  were  composed  by  them  or  for  them. 
The  title  may  mean  ''for  the  sons  of  Korah,"  "  to  the  sons  of  Korah,"  or  "  o/the  sons  of  Korah." 
"Winer,  Origen,  Rosenraiiller,  Hensler,  Eichorn,  De  Wette,  Olshausen,  Hengstenberg,  etal.,  hold 
that  the  sons  of  Korah  were  the  authors  of  these  psalms.  Hengstenberg  regards  the  xlii.  and 
xliii.  psalms  as  the  composition  of  one  of  the  sons  of  Korah  concerning  the  experience  of 
David  ;  the  former  is  the  author  and  the  latter  is  the  abject  of  the  psalm  :  "  one  of  the  sons 
of  Korah  sang  this  psalm  as  from  the  soul  of  David."  The  psalms  which  bear  this  title  are 
remarkable  for  beauty,  sublimity,  and  intense  feeling.  "As,  however,  the  language  of  several 
of  these  psalms  —as  the  xlii.  and  xlviii.,  &c. — is  manifestly  meant  to  apply  to  David,  it  seems 
much  simpler  to  explain  the  title  'for the  sons  of  Korah,'  to  mean  that  they  were  given  to  them 
to  sing  in  the  temple  services.  If  their  style  of  music,  vocal  and  instrumental,  was  of  a  more 
sublime  and  lyric  character  than  that  of  the  sons  of  Merari  or  Gershon,  and  Heman  had  more 
fire  in  his  execution  than  Asaph  and  Jeduthun,  it  is  perfectly  natural  that  David  should  have 
given  his  more  poetic  and  elevated  strains  to  Heman  and  his  choir,  and  the  simpler  and  quieter 
psalms  to  the  other  choirs. " 

The  occasion  of  the  composition  was  probably  the  time  of  the  rebellion  of  Absalom,  when 
David  was  forced  into  exile  from  his  home  and  from  the  tabernacle  of  God.  This  and  the 
following  psalm  stand  in  rery  dose  relation  to  each  other,  and  were  probably  composed  on  the 
same  occasion. 

205 


PSALM  XLII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMEJSTARY:  PSALMS. 


Homiletically,  the  psalm  sets  before  us,  A  godly  soul  under  a  seuse  of  absence  from  God 
(vers,  1-6)  j  and  the  deep  depression  and  strong  consolation  of  a  godly  soul  (vers.  6-11), 


A  Godly  Soul  under  a  sense  of  Absence  from  God. 

(Verses  1-5.) 


I.    The    sorrow   of   a  godly  soul. 

*^  My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and 
night/'  &c.     David  here  sets  forth — 

1.  llie  cause  of  his  sorrow.  The 
Psalmist  was  driven  into  exile,  away 
from  home  and  from  the  tabernacle  of 
God.  And  in  his  trials  he  seems  to  have 
temporarily  lost  the  sense  of  the  Divine 
presence  and  favour.  It  was  probably 
the  weight  and  bitterness  of  the  trials 
of  the  Psalmist  at  this  time  which  led 
to  his  inability  to  realise  the  gracious 
presence  of  God.  Under  severe  afflic- 
tions, the  soul  is  apt  to  feel  itself  for- 
saken by  God.  This  was  the  cause  of 
David's  sorrow.  He  felt  himself  de- 
serted by  God.  "  Sometimes  God 
teaches  us  effectually  to  know  the  work 
of  mercies  by  the  want  of  them,  and 
whets  our  appetite  for  the  means  of 
grace  by  cutting  us  short  in  those 
means." 

2.  The  aggravation  of  his  sorrow. 
David's  sorrow  was  made  all  the  keener 
by  (1.)  The  reproaches  of  his  enemies. 
"  They  continually  say  unto  me,  Where 
is  thy  God  1 "  His  enemies  seem  to 
have  reproached  him  with  being  for- 
saken by  God  ;  that,  being  exiled  from 
the  tabernacle  of  God,  he  was  exiled 
also  from  God  Himself  ;  that  his  mise- 
ries were  an  evidence  that  he  was  aban- 
doned by  God.  "  This,"  says  Robert- 
son, "is  ever  the  'way  in  religions 
perplexity  :  the  unsynipathising  world 
taunts  or  misunderstands.  In  spiritual 
grief  they  ask,  Why  is  he  not  like 
others  %  In  bereavement,  they  call  your 
deep  sorrow  unbelief.  In  misfortune, 
they  comfort  you  like  Job's  friends  by 
calling  it  a  visitation.  Or,  like  the 
barbarians  at  Melita,  when  the  viper 
fastened  on  Paul's  hand,  no  doubt  they 
call  you  an  infidel,  though  your  soul  be 
crying  after  God.  Specially  in  that 
dark  and  awful  hour,  when  He  called 
on  God,  '■  Eloi,  Eloi,'  they  said,  '  Let  be, 
let  us  see  whether  Elias  will  come  to 

206 


save  Him.*  Now,  this  is  sharp  to  bear. 
It  is  easy  to  say  Christian  fortitude 
should  be  superior  to  it.  But  in  dark- 
ness to  have  no  sympathy, — when  the 
soul  gropes  for  God,  to  have  the  hand 
of  man  relax  its  grasp!"  (2.)  The 
recollection  of  past  joys.  "  When  I 
remember  these,  I  pour  out  my  soul  in 
me,"  <fec.  (ver.  4.)  Here  is  worship. 
David  was  a  devout  man.  His  delight 
was  in  the  worship  of  God.  *'  Lord,  I 
have  loved  the  habitation  of  Thy  house, 
and  the  place  where  Thine  honour 
dwelleth."  Here  is  social  worship.  "I 
had  gone  with  the  multitude,  I  went 
with  them  to  the  house  of  God."  His 
enjoyment  of  religious  ordinances  was 
increased  by  uniting  in  them  with 
others.  Here  is  joyous  social  tvorship. 
*'  With  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise,  with 
a  multitude  that  kept  holy-day."  Their 
religious  assemblies  were  characterised 
by  devout  gladness.  Now,  "  the  pain 
of  the  Psalmist  is  increased,  when  he 
brings  into  view  his  earlier  blessedness, 
and  places  it  beside  his  present  misery." 
His  experience  is  like  that  described  by 
Tennyson, 

**  A  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering 
happier  things." 

3.  The  continuousness  of  his  sorrow, 
"  My  tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and 
night,  while  they  continually,"  &c. 
His  grief  was  with  him  as  a  constant 
companion.  His  sorrow  knew  no  in- 
termission. And  the  reproaches  of  his 
enemies  were  ever  ringing  in  his  ears 
and  agonising  his  heart.  This  tear- 
stained  page  from  the  autobiography  of 
David,  represents  the  sorrows  of  many  a 
godly  soul  to-day. 

II.  The  desire  of  a  godly  soul.  "As 
the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks, 
so  panteth  my  soul  after  Thee,  O  God  " 
(vers.  1,  2).     Notice — 

1.  I'he  object  of  his  desire.  ''God, .  . . 
the  living  God."     David's  great  longing 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


tSALM  XLil, 


was  not  for  restoration  to  his  palace 
and  throne,  or  even  to  the  tabernacle  ; 
it  was  for  realisation  of  the  presence  of 
God.     It  is  quite  true  that  '*  lamenting 
after  God  is  as  sure  an  evidence  that  we 
love  Him  as  rejoicing  in  God."    But  the 
soul  thus  mourning  His  absence  fails  to 
realise  this,  or,  realising  it,  derives  little 
or  no  help  from  it.     We  are  so  consti- 
tuted that  we  cannot  rest  out  of  God. 
Now,    consider  the    God   the  Psalmist 
longed    for.      His  God   was   a  Person, 
"  Thee,    O    God."      He    was   a    living 
Person.      "■  The    living    God."      How 
different     from     the      heartless      God 
which  science  and    philosophy  offer  to 
men  !    a    God    which    is    but    another 
name  for  "law"  and  "order."     How 
different   also  from   the  God  of   meta- 
physical  creeds    and   rigid   theological 
systems  !     In  these,  the  Divine  Being 
is  too  often  represented  as  cold,  hard, 
far  remote  from  men,  and  having  little 
or   no   interest    in    the  affairs   of    His 
creatures.       The    God    for   whom    the 
Psalmist  longed  is  very  different.     He  is 
a  living  Person  who  takes  deep  interest 
in  His  creatures,  who  loves  them  and 
seeks   their  love,  who  listens   to  their 
prayers,  and  works  for  their  salvation. 
This  is  the  God  that  anxious  and  bur- 
dened men   cry  out  for, — the  God  for 
whom  the  Psalmist  thirsted  and  whom 
the  Saviour  revealed.      To  realise    the 
presence  and  favour  of  this  living  God 
was  the  great  object  of  desire  to  David. 
2.   The  intensity  of  his  desire.      "As 
the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks, 
so  panteth  my  soul  after  Thee,  0  God. 
My    soul    thirsteth,"    &c.       The    word 
translated  "hart"  is  a  common  noun, 
but,  inasmuch  as  it  is  here  joined  with 
a  feminine  verb,  it   must  be  taken  as 
denoting    the     hind    or    female    deer. 
"The  Psalmist    chose    the  hind,"  says 
Hengstenberg,"     "chiefly    because    the 
hind  rather  than  the  hart  is  suitable  as 
compared  with  the  feminine  soul,  which 
is  like  it  in  its  weakness."     And  Barnes  : 
"  There   is   an   idea   of    tenderness   in 
the   reference  to  the  word  hart  here — 
female  deer,  gazelle — which  would  not 
strike  us  if  the  reference  had  been  to 
any  other  animal.     These  are  so  timid, 
80  gentle,  so  delicate  in  their  structure. 


so  much  the  natural  objects  of  love  and 
compassion,  that  our  feelings  are  drawn 
towards  them  as  to  all  other  animals  in 
similar  circumstances."     We  are  not  to 
think  of   the   liunted    hind,    exhausted, 
parched,  and  alarmed  by  pursuit,  but  of 
the  hind  in  time  of  prevailing  drought 
(compare     Ps.    Ixiii.    1).        "My   soul 
thirsteth  for  Thee  in  a  dry  and  thirsty 
land   where   no    water  is."     The  word 
translated  "  panteth  " — margin,  "  bray- 
eth"— denotes    eager    desire.      So    the 
Psalmist      intensely     longed    for     the 
presence  and  fellowship  of  God.      His 
desire  "  is  very  importunate  :  it  is  his 
soul   that  pants,    his   soul  that   thirsts, 
which  denotes    not  only  the  sincerity,' 
but  the  strength  of  his  desire." 

III.  The  hope  of  a  godly  soul. 
"  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul?" 
<fec.  (ver.  5).  Calvin  says  :  "  David  re- 
presents himself  here  to  us  as  divided 
into  two  parts.  In  so  far  as  he  rests 
through  faith  in  God's  promises,  he 
raises  himself,  equipped  with  the  spirit 
of  an  invincible  valour,  against  the  feel- 
ings of  the  flesh,  and  at  the  same  time 
blames  his  weakness."  Hengstenberg: 
"  It  is  the  spirit  mighty  in  God  which 
here  meets  the  trembling  souV  Con- 
sider— 

1.  Whom  he  hoped  in.  "  Hope  thou 
in  God."  He  turned  the  eye  of  his  soul 
away  from  his  painful  circumstances, 
from  the  ingratitude  and  treachery  of  men, 
from  its  own  troubled  mood,  to  God.  He 
is  always  the  same,  always  gracious, 
always  strong  to  save.     Hope  in  Him. 

2.  What  he  hoped  for.  "  The  help  of 
His  countenance."  "  The  salvation  of 
His  countenance."  "  Cause  Thy  face  to 
shine,  and  we  shall  be  saved."  "  Lord, 
lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Tliy  counte- 
nance upon  us."  "  In  His  favour  is  life." 
The  Psalmist  hoped  for  complete  de- 
liverance and  restoration  by  the  favour 
of  God.  This  he  designates,  "  the  sal- 
vation of  His  countenance." 

3.  Whereon  he  grounded  his  hope. 
"For  I  shall  yet  praise  Him,"  &c. 
"  The  ground  of  his  hope  is  his  believ- 
ing confidence  that  the  Lord,  who  is 
always  his  God,  will  by  his  deliverance 
give  him  occasion  for  thanks." — Ileng- 
stenherg. 

207 


FSALM  XLII. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Conclusion. — Here  we   have   a   re-  cheerless    prospects,    away   from    thine 

medy  for  despondency.     Look  up  and  own   troubled    condition,   look  up  and 

hope   in   God.     Away  from  thine  un-  hope  in  God ;  and  thy  moan  shall  be 

happy   circumatances,   away   from    thy  changed  into  a  grateful  song. 


Man  SPEAKma  to  his  Soul. 
(Verteh.) 


We  hare  in  these  words — 

I.    Self-remonstrance.      "  Why    art 

thou  cast  down,  0  my  soul?  and  why 
art  thou  disquieted  in  me  ?  "  "  It  is  the 
spirit  mighty  in  God,  which  here  meets 
the  trembling  souV^  It  is  faith  inter- 
rogating feeling.  We  all  have  had  some 
experience  of  this  duality  in  unity  in 
our  own  being.  We  know  what  it  is  for 
the  human  soul  to  shrink  and  tremble 
and  suffer,  while  the  spirit,  nerved  by 
faith,  is  calm,  fearless,  and  heroic.  These 
interrogations  imply — 

1.  Great  suffering  of  soul.  "  Cast 
down,"  bowed  down,  deeply  dejected. 
*'  Disquieted,"  anxious,  agitated,  troubled. 
Godly  souls  sometimes  pass  through  deep 
waters. 

2.  Groundless  suffering  of  soul.  * '  Why 
art  thou  cast  down  % "  &c.  The  interro- 
gation implies  that  there  was  no  suflS- 
cient  reason  for  this  depression  and 
anxiety.  The  man  who  can  call  the  Lord 
his  God  can  never  have  sufficient  reason 
to  be  so  deeply  troubled  as  David  was. 

IL  Self-exhortation.  "Hope  thou  in 
God."  "  In  God,"  as  contradistinguished, 

1.  From  man.  Man  is  not  always 
willing  to  aid  us  in  the  day  of  distress. 
Even  when  he  is  willing,  his  power  to 
do  so  is  very  limited.  Man  is  some- 
times unreliable,  false.  Supposing  this 
psalm  to  have  been  written  during  the 
rebellion  of  Absalom,  or  to  refer  to  it, 
David  was  having  painful  experiences 
of  the  ingratitude  and  treachery  of  men, 
notably  in  the  cases  of  Absalom  and 
Ahithophel.     "  In  God  ;*'  not  in  man. 


2.  From  circumstances.  The  circum- 
stances and  prospects  of  the  poet  were 
very  dark.  Circumstances  are  some- 
times as  variable  as  April  weather. 
They  are  not  to  be  relied  on.  "  In 
God  ;  "  not  in  circumstances. 

3.  From  ourselves.  We  are  foolish, 
weak,  changeable.  The  moods  of  our 
soul  are  influenced  by  almost  countless 
circumstances.  To-day  we  are  on  Her- 
mon ;  to-morrow  we  must  enter  Geth- 
semane.  "In  God;"  not  in  ourselves. 
*'  In  God  •"  for  He  is  (1)  Ever  gracious, 
(2)  All-sufficient.     (3)   Unchangeable, 

III.  Self-encouragement.  "  For  I 
shall  yet  praise  Him,"  <kc. 

1.  The  facts  concerning  salvation 
which  are  here  suggested.  (1)  That  it 
is  the  result  of  the  favour  of  God.  "  The 
salvation  of  His  countenance."  (See 
preceding  exposition  of  these  words.) 
(2)  That  it  inspires  the  praise  of  man. 
"For  I  shall  yet  praise  Him."  The 
salvation  of  God  gives  both  matter  for 
praise  and  the  disposition  to  praise. 

2.  The  assurance  of  salvation.  There 
is  no  faltering  or  hesitation  in  the  de- 
claration of  the  Psalmist.  The  spirit  is 
triumphant  in  faith,  though  the  soul  is 
dejected  by  suffering. 

3.  The  ground  of  this  assurance.  The 
Psalmist's  faith  rests  in  the  relation  of 
God  to  him.  This  is  brought  out  in 
the  eleventh  verse,  which  is  an  almost 
exact  repetition  of  this  one.  "My 
God."  He  who  can  so  speak  of  God 
may  well  be  confident  of  full  and 
glorious  salvation. 


The  Deep  Depression  and  Strong  Consolation  of  a  Godlt  Soul. 

{Verses  6-11.) 

The  Psalmist  has  addressed   himself     turns  to  God  and  addresses  Him  on  the 
to  his  own  soul,  but  has  not  obtained      matter, 
the  victory  over  his  troubles.     Now  he         I.    The    deep     depression 


of     a 


208 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  XLII. 


godly  souL  "  O  my  God,  my  soul  is 
cast  down  within  me."  He  sets  before 
us — 

1.  The  greatness  of  his  troubles.  He 
expresses  this  variously.  (1)  He  de- 
clares his  great  dejection  of  soul.  "  My 
soul  is  cast  down  within  me."  It  was 
sinking  under  the  weight  of  its  trials. 
(2)  He  compares  his  troubles  to  an  angry 
flood.  "Deep  calleth  unto  deep  at  the 
noise  of  Thy  waterspouts,"  &c.  Heng- 
stenberg  says :  "  The  floods  are  the 
roaring  sea-billows  of  suffering  and 
pain.  Flood  calls  to  flood,  one  invites, 
as  it  were,  another  to  pour  itself  forth 
on  the  Psalmist."  The  waves  of 
anguish  were  beating  pitilessly  upon  the 
poet's  soul.  (3)  He  compares  his  troubles 
to  the  slaughter  of  his  soul.  "  As  with 
a  sword  in  my  bones,"  <fec.  Margin : 
"  As  with  a  killing,"  <fec.  Hengsten- 
berg  :  *'  It  is  as  a  murder  in  my  bones," 
&c.  "  The  murder  here  is  used  figura- 
tively for  designating  a  deadly  anguish 
of  soul  :  the  reproaches  are  to  the  soul 
of  the  Psalmist  what  murder  is  to  the 
body.  (Comp.  Luke  ii.  35.)  *  A  sword 
shall  pierce  through  thine  own  soul 
also.'  That  the  murder  is  represented 
as  having  its  seat  in  the  bones  of  the 
Psalmist,  is  designed  to  mark  the  pain 
as  going  through  the  marrow  and  bones 
wounding  the  heart." 

2.  The  causes  of  his  trouble.  Of 
these  he  mentions  two: — (1)  His  forced 
exile  from  his  home  and  from  the  taber- 
nacle of  the  Lord.  He  was  now  far  away 
from  home,  in  "  the  land  of  Jordan  and 
the  Hermonites,  and  the  hill  Mizar." 
Jordan  was  the  eastern  boundary  of 
Canaan.  Hermon,  a  mountain  on  the 
north  eastern  border  of  Palestine,  having 
three  summits,  for  which  reason  prob- 
ably it  is  spoken  of  here  as  "the 
Hermonites"  or  Hermons.  "Mizar"  is 
probably  the  name  of  a  small  moun- 
tain ;  but  what  mountain  is  now 
unknown.  But  the  point  for  us  to 
seize  is  this,  the  Psalmist  "was  now 
driven  to  the  utmost  borders  of  the 
land  of  Canaan,  to  shelter  himself  there 
from  the  rage  of  his  persecutors."  He 
is  far  from  home,  far  from  the  tabernacle 
and  worship  of  His  God.  (2)  The 
reproaches    of    hit    enemies,       "Mine 


enemies  reproach  me,"  <fec.  (See  notes 
on  ver.  3.) 

3.  The  relation  of  his  trouble  to  God. 
*^  Thy  waterspouts,  all  Thy  waves  and 
Thy  billows."  He  regarded  his  troubles 
as  in  some  sense  coming  from  God. 
God  is  either  the  originator  or  permitter 
of  all  our  troubles.  "  Whatever  waves 
and  billows  of  affliction  go  over  us  at 
any  time  we  must  call  them  God's  waves 
and  Hia  billows,  that  we  may  bumble 
ourselves  under  His  mighty  hand,  and 
may  encourage  ourselves  to  hope  that 
though  we  be  threatened  we  shall  not 
be  ruined;  for  the  waves  and  billows 
are  under  a  Divine  check." — M,  Henry. 

When  we  consider  these  things  we 
wonder  not  that  the  Psalmist  was  deeply 
depressed. 

II.  The  strong  consolation  of  a 
godly  soul. 

1.  In  the  remembrance  of  God.  "  O 
my  God,  my  soul  is  cast  down  within 
me;  therefore  will  I  remember  Thee." 
He  recollected  the  great  goodness  and 
the  mighty  acts  of  God,  and  was 
comforted.  "The  way  to  forget  the 
sense  of  our  miseries  is  to  remember 
the  God  of  our  mercies." 

2.  In  the  assurance  of  God^s  constant 
mercy.  "  The  Lord  will  command  His 
loving-kindness  in  the  day-time,"  &c 
The  loving-kindness  of  God  consists, 
says  Hengstenberg,  "in  the  inward 
consolations  which  are  granted  to  the 
Psalmist  in  the  midst  of  his  outward 
misery.  In  and  along  with  the  favour 
the  song  is  also  at  the  same  time  given. 
For  the  person  who  is  comforted  through 
God's  favour,  is  enabled  to  sing  praise 
to  Him.  Upon  the  song  and  out  of  it 
follows  the  prayer."  "Believing  ex- 
pectation of  mercy  must  not  supersede, 
but^quicken,  our  prayers  for  it."  "  Day- 
time "  and  "  night  "  we  understand,  as  in 
ver.  3,  as  indicating  continuance.  The 
assurance  of  the  Psalmist  is  that  God 
would  always  show  him  His  mercy. 
Even  in  our  greatest  troubles  there  is 
Divine  mercy.  "  The  Psalmist  called  the 
Lord  the  God  of  his  life,  because  He 
preserved  and  supported  it,  and  must 
awaken  him  out  of  the  death  to  which 
he  seemed  now  appointed." 

3.  In  cmjident  access  to  God  in  prayer, 

209 


FSALM  XLIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


**  I  will  say  unto  God  my  rock,  Why 
hast  Thou  forgotten  ine  1 "  &c.  Notice, 
(1)  His  characterisation  of  God.  "  God, 
my  Rock ; ''  implying  that  God  was  his 
strength,  his  defence,  firm  and  immov- 
able. (2)  His  expostulation  with  God, 
"  Wliy  hast  Thou  forgotten  me  ? "  &c. 
To  his  suffering  soul  it  seemed  as  though 
God  had  forgotten  him.  But  his  spirit, 
strong  in  faith,  knew  otherwise.  The 
inquiry,  "  Why,"  &c.,  implies  the  con- 
viction that  God  could  not  possibly 
even  in  appearance  forget  him  much 
longer,  that  soon  his  mourning  must  be 
changed  into  rejoicing.  Thus  to  have 
access  to  God  is  no  small  consolation  to 
His  people  when  they  are  tried. 

4.  In  the  assured  anticipation  of  de- 
liverance from  trouble.  *' Why  art  thou 
cast  down,  O  my  soul  1 "  &c.  (See 
notes  and  homiletic  sketch  on  ver.  5.) 
This  verse  is  a  repetition  of  ver.  5,  with 


this  difference,  instead  of  "  His  counte- 
nance "  we  have  "  my  countenance,*'  and 
the  words  "and  my  God"  are  added  at 
the  close.  The  idea  is  that  when  David 
found  salvation  in  God's  countenance  or 
favour,  the  clouds  would  pass  away  from 
his  own  countenance,  and  it  would  be- 
come radiant  with  gratitude  and  glad- 
ness. '*  And  my  God "  is  a  note  of 
triumph  in  response  to  the  enemies  who 
had  mockingly  challenged  him,  "  Where 
is  thy  God  1 "  So  the  psalm  closes  with 
notes  of  assured  and  complete  victory. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Here  is  instruction 
for  the  depressed  believer.  In  your  deep 
dejection  remember  God,  pray  unto 
Him,  trust  Him.  In  the  land  of  the 
Hermons  He  is  as  near  to  save  thee  as 
in  the  sacred  worship  of  the  sanctuary. 
2.  Here  is  encouragement  for  the  de- 
pressed  believer.  "Hope  in  God;  for 
thou  shalt  yet  praise  Him,"  &c. 


PSALM     XLIII. 

Introduction. 

This  psalm  was  composed  by  the  same  author  as  the  preceding  one,  and  has  reference  to  the 
same  occasion.  It  is  fitted  to  impart  help  and  encouragement  to  the  afflicted  and  desponding 
in  their  troubles.     The  pious  spirit  of  the  author  is  clearly  seen  in  the  psalm. 

Devout  Longings. 


The  poet  pours  out  his  heart  to  God 
in  petitions,  expostulations,  and  pro- 
mises ;  but  the  prevailing  tone  of  the 
psalm  is  that  of  intense  desire.  He 
longs 

I.  For  vindication  and  deliverance. 
"  Judge  me,  O  God,  and  plead  my  cause 
against  an  ungodly  nation;  O  deliver 
me  "(vers.  1,  2).     Notice — 

1.  The  character  of  his  enemies.  "An 
ungodly  nation,  .  .  .  the  deceitful  and 
unjust  man."  The  word  which  is  trans- 
lated "  ungodly  "  is  in  the  margin  more 
correctly  rendered  "unmerciful."  Heng- 
stenberg  renders  it  "  unloving."  It  is  a 
word  which  may  most  fitly  be  applied 
to  the  conduct  of  the  Jewish  nation  at 
the  time  of  the  rebellion  of  Absalom,  to 
which  time  the  psalm  most  probably 
refers.  In  the  conduct  of  an  immense 
number  of  the  people  towards  David, 
there  was  no  love,  no  mercy ;  but  base 
210 


ingratitude,  injustice,  and  cruelty. 
"  The  deceitful  and  unjust  man "  may 
have  been  said  of  many  at  the  time 
to  which  we  suppose  the  psalm  to  refer, 
and  pre-eminently  of  Absalom  and  Ahi- 
thophel  (Comp.  2  Sam.  xv.,  xvi.,  and 
xvii.)  The  Psalmist  was  contending 
against  men  who  were  cruel,  treacher- 
ous, and  unjust. 

2.  The  dejection  of  his  spirit.  "  Why 
dost  Thou  cast  me  off?  Why  go  I 
mourning  because  of  the  oppression  of 
the  enemy?"  The  entire  tone  of  the 
psalm  forbids  us  to  think  that  David 
felt  himself  rejected  of  God.  But  his 
circumstances  at  the  time  seemed  in- 
consistent with  the  guardianship  of 
God ;  and  he,  therefore,  appeals  to 
Him  on  the  matter.  See  notes  on  Ps. 
xlii.  9. 

3.  The  nature  of  his  petition* 
"Judge   me,    O    God,   and  plead    my 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XLDI. 


cause."  The  enemies  of  the  poet  were 
many  and  virulent.  They  persecuted 
him  and  reproached  him  as  a  man  for- 
saken by  God.  And  here  he  appeals  to 
God  for  vindication.  He  could  honestly 
and  fearlessly  appeal  to  the  Lord  to 
judge  between  him  and  his  enemies. 
He  had  given  no  occasion  to  them  for 
the  treatment  he  received  from  them. 
And  if  God  grant  him  deliverance  from 
them,  that  will  be  an  unmistakable 
evidence  of  the  Divine  judgment,  a 
clear  vindication  of  the  persecuted  and 
much -suffering  poet.  So  he  prays  that 
God  would  interpose  and  deliver  him  and 
thus  vindicate  him.     For  this  he  longs. 

4.  The  strength  of  his  plea.  '^  For 
Thou  art  the  God  of  my  strength." 
Hengstenberg :  "  For  Thou  art  my 
guardian- God."  The  Psalmist  pleads 
that  he  was  looking  to  God  for  strength 
and  protection  ;  that  he  was  trusting  in 
the  Lord.  This  plea  is  never  urged 
sincerely  and  earnestly  but  what  it 
avails  with  God. 

II.  For  restoration  to  the  tabernacle 
of  God.  ^'  0  send  out  Thy  light  and 
Thy  truth ;  let  them  lead  me,"  <fec. 
(vers.  3,  4).     Notice — 

1.  He  longs  chiefly  for  restoration  to 
the  tabernacle  of  God.  His  great  desire 
is  to  be  brought  again  unto  God's  "  holy 
hill  and  tabernacles."  "The  centre  of 
all  the  Psalmist's  wishes  is  his  return  to 
the  sanctuary,  because  the  exclusion 
from  that  was,  of  all  the  marks  of 
the  Divine  displeasure  under  which  he 
suffered,  the  most  palpable.  In  his 
return  to  the  sanctuary,  he  would  find 
a  matter-of-fact  justification,  a  pledge 
of  the  return  of  God's  grace. — Hengsten- 
berg. "  His  heart  is  set,"  says  Matthew 
Henry,  "  upon  the  holy  hill  and  the 
tabernacles,  not  upon  his  family  com- 
forts, his  court  preferments,  or  his 
diversions ;  he  could  bear  the  want  of 
these,  but  he  is  impatient  to  see  God's 
tabernacles  again  ;  nothing  so  amiable 
in  his  eyes  as  those, — thither  he  would 
gladly  be  brought  back." 

2.  He  looks  for  the  realisation  of  his 
longings  through  the  favour  and  faith- 
fulness of  God.  ''  O  send  out  Thy 
light  and  Thy  truth."  God's  light  here 
is   equivalent  to  His  favour  or  mercy, 


and  His  truth  to  His  faithfulness.  And 
the  Psalmist  prays  that  through  these 
he  may  be  led  back  to  the  enjoyment  of 
the  privileges  and  blessings  from  which 
he  was  at  present  so  cruelly  exiled. 
Blessed  is  that  man  who,  like  David, 
sets  his  hope  firmly  in  the  favour  and 
faithfulness  of  God.  His  hope  shall 
attain  unto  splendid  fruition. 

3.  He  promises  to  avail  himself  of  the 
opportunities  of  worship  when  he  is 
restored  to  the  tabernacles  of  God. 
"Then  will  I  go  unto  the  altar  of  God," 
&c.  He  will  worship  (1)  With  sacrifice. 
"  I  will  go  unto  the  altar  of  God,"  with 
sacrifices  for  sin  and  offerings  of  grati- 
tude. (2)  With  delight.  *'  Unto  God 
my  exceeding  joy."  (See  the  sketch  on 
this  verse.)  (3)  With  praise.  "Yea, 
upon  the  harp  will  I  praise  Thee,  O 
God,  my  God."  Instrumental  music 
was  largely  used  by  the  Hebrews  in 
their  worship.  "  David  excelled  at  the 
harp  (1  Sam.  xvi.  16-18),  and  with  that 
in  which  he  excelled  he  would  praise 
God  ;  for  God  is  to  be  praised  with  the 
best  we  have  ;  it  is  fit  He  should  be, 
for  He  is  the  best." — M.  Henry. 

4.  He  encourages  his  soul  to  expect  the 
realisation  of  his  longings.  "  Why  art 
Thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul  ] "  <fec. 
(ver.  5).  (See  homiletic  sketch  on  ver. 
5,  and  notes  on  vers.  5  and  11  of  the 
preceding  psalm.) 

Conclusion. — In  this  psalm  the 
poet  appears  to  us  as  a  glorious  example 
of  a  man  whose  hope  is  steadily  fixed  in 
God.  Heroic  was  he  in  his  trust  in  the 
Lord.  In  the  first  verse,  we  see  him 
calmly  trusting  in  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God  ;  in  the  second,  he  rests  in 
God  as  his  strength  ;  in  the  third,  he 
looks  expectantly  to  God  for  restoration 
to  his  dearest  privileges  ;  in  the  fourth, 
he  resolves  to  adore  Him  as  his  ex- 
ceeding joy  and  his  most  treasured  pos- 
session ;  in  the  fifth,  he  exults  in  con- 
fident anticipation  of  the  enjoyment  of 
all  that  he  most  deeply  longed  for  ;  and 
all  this  at  a  time  when  circumstances 
seemed  all  against  him,  and  when  to 
the  eye  of  sense  his  prospects  were  of 
the  darkest.  Brave,  trustful  poet,  we 
cannot  but  admire  thee  !  Let  us  also 
imitate  him  in  this  respect. 

211 


PSALM  XLin. 


BOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMX 


The  Altab  of  God. 

(Versed.) 


"Then  will  I  go  unto  the  altar  of 
God,  unto  God  my  exceeding  joy." 

The  text  opens  to  us  two  important 
views. 

I.  The  peculiar  nature  of  that 
worship  which  God  has  authorised. 
It  is  going  to  the  altar  of  our  God.  By 
the  altar  only  can  God  be  approached. 
Behold,  then,  the  true  character  of  ac- 
ceptable worship. 

1.  There  is  in  it  a  recognition  of  our 
sin.  There  was  no  altar  in  Paradise. 
When  John  beheld  a  vision  of  heaven, 
he  "saw  no  temple  therein."  But  in 
the  present  state,  in  approaching  God, 
we  go  to  His  altar.  The  sacrifice  of 
Christ  is  made  particularly  prominent 
in  the  Christian  scheme  to  remind  us 
that  we  are  sinful  men,  and  cannot 
draw  near  to  God  in  our  own  name. 

2.  An  acknowledgment  of  our  just 
liability  to  punishment.  Worship  is  not 
a  claim  of  right,  but  a  plea  for  mercy. 
Sentence  of  death  is  denounced  against 
every  transgressor  of  the  law  of  God, 
and  in  such  a  prayer  as  that  of  the  pub- 
lican its  justice  is  acknowledged.  The 
ancient  offerer  of  sacrifice  acknowledged 
this,  and  we  do  the  same  when  we  flee 
to  Christ's  atonement. 

3.  The  true  vsorship  of  God  recognises 
Him  as  propitious  through  an  atonement 
appointed  by  Himself  It  was  not  an 
altar  of  human  device  to  which  the 
Psalmist  resolved  to  go,  but  to  the  altar 
of  his  God.  The  cross  is  "  the  altar  of 
God,"  His  Son  is  the  victim ;  the  pre- 
cious blood  of  Christ  is  the  accepted 
atonement ;  and  coming  to  Him  in  faith, 
our  sin  is  purged  and  our  persons  are 
accepted. 

4.  (Jur  worship  being  an  approach  to 
the  altar  of  God^  we  are  assured  of  con- 
stant access  to  Him.  The  priests  had 
their  courses,  that  there  might  be  no 
intermission  in  the  service.  The  fire  of 
the  altar  was  never  extinct.  The  altar 
was  always  there  to  receive  the  sacrifice, 
and  the  altar  of  incense  was  an  emblem 
of  the  acceptance  of  perpetual  prayer. 
The  sacrifice  of  Christ  needs  never  to  be 

212 


repeated.    It  was  offered  "  once  for  all," 

for  "  by  one  offering  He  hath  for  ever 
perfected  them  that  are  sanctified." 
Our  High  Priest  never  dies,  but  '*  hath 
obtained  an  unchangeable  priesthood." 
Access  to  the  throne  of  grace  is  ever 
given,  and  our  prayers  are  always 
accepted. 

II.  The  emphatic  description  which 
is  given  us  of  the  joy  which  results 
from  it.  "  To  God  my  exceeding  joy." 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  Thou 
choosest,"  <fec.  "  How  amiable  are  Thy 
tabernacles,  O  Lord  of  hosts  ! " 

Contemplate  the  sources  of  this  joy, 
that  you  may  aspire  after  it. 

1.  We  are  placed  in  the  presence  of  a 
Being  of  infinite  glory  and  perfection. 
The  joy  in  question  supposes  reconcilia- 
tion with  God,  and  when  that  is  effected 
all  our  intercourse  with  Him  may  be 
adoring  gratitude.  We  cannot  approach 
the  sublime  of  nature,  we  cannot  be 
brought  into  the  presence  of  an  ele- 
Tated  character,  without  a  deeply  in- 
terested and  joyous  impression  j  but 
here  God  reveals  Himself  to  man.  In- 
finite beauty,  glory,  purity,  and  perfec- 
tion says,  "  Come  up  to  me  in  the  holy 
mount ; "  and  in  answer  to  our  prayer, 
"  I  beseech  Thee,  show  me  Thy  glory/* 
He  makes  all  His  goodness  pass  before  us. 
David  anticipated  this  joy  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1,  2). 

2.  True  worship  enables  us  to  appro- 
priate this  display  of  glory  to  ourselves. 
There  is  an  inexpressible  emphasis  in  the 
words  "  My  God."  All  His  glory  is  ours. 
Is  He  the  everlasting  God  ?  Then,  be- 
cause He  lives,  I  shall  live  also.  Is  His 
fulness  infinite  ?  Then  my  supplies  are 
secure.  "  All  my  springs  are  in  Thee." 
Is  He  omnipotent  ?  Then,  "  if  God  be 
for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  %  "  And 
whatever  other  perfections  He  has  are 
mine.  Mine  is  His  wisdom,  His  mercy, 
and  His  love. 

3.  It  is  the  joy  of  confidence.  The 
very  reason  why  we  seek  God  is  the 
want  of  confidence  in  everything  beside, 
and  in  Him  we  may  confide  absolutely. 
God  in  Christ  assures  us  of  this.     The 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XLIT. 


philosopher  tells  me  to  span  the  hea- 
vens. I  am  an  atom,  a  nothing.  I 
look  upon  God  incarnate,  and  all  my 
chilling  calculations  fly.  I  am  not  un- 
noticed among  His  works.  He  came  to 
this  world,  minify  it  as  you  may,  to  seek 
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  When 
I  go  "to  the  altar  of  my  God,"  I  see 
that  He  is  love.  He  that  so  loved  me 
can  never  be  indifferent  to  me,  and  can 
never  forget  me. 


4.  The  joy  of  renewed  assurances  of 
His  favour  to  us.  Doubts  and  fears 
may  oppress  and  chill,  till  we  steadfastly 
behold  His  beauty  in  the  sanctuary,  and 
by  renewed  acts  of  faith  obtain  richer 
manifestations  of  His  love,  when  our 
peace  flows  like  a  river.  Comp.  Ps.  Ixxiii. 
16,  17,  28. 

5.  There  is  the  joy  of  hope.  The 
tabernacle  was  an  emblem  of  heaven. — 
Richard  Watson^  abridged. 


PSALM    XLIV. 

Introduction. 

Supersertption. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician  for  the  sons  of  Korah,  Maschil."  See  introduo« 
tion  to  Psalm  XLH. 

We  have  no  means  of  determining  who  was  the  author  of  the  psalm.  Nor  are  we  able  to 
ascertain  with  certainty  upon  what  occasion  it  was  composed.  The  various  speculations  and 
conjectures  on  the  subject  are  not  amongst  the  most  satisfactory  things  with  which  we  are 
acquainted.  Looking  at  the  psalm  from  the  homiletic  standpoint,  we  have  :  a  well-founded 
assurance  (rer.  1-8)  ;  a  painful  experience  (ver.  9-1 6) ;  and  an  earneit  appeal  and  prayer  (ver. 
17-26). 

A  Well-founded  Assurakos. 
(Versa  1-8.) 


In  the  consideration  of  the  Psalmist's 
confidence  in  God,  founded  upon  His 
former  doings  on  behalf  of  His  chosen 
people,  many  points  will  arise  which, 
without  any  forced  interpretation,  will 
illustrate  His  work  for  and  in  the  soul 
of  the  Christian  believer,  and  which  are 
fitted  to  encourage  our  confidence  in 
Him.     We  have  here — 

I  A  commemoration  of  God*s  for- 
mer and  glorious  doings. 

1.  7' he  nature  of  these  doings.  "Thou 
didst  drive  out  the  heathen  with  Thy 
hand,  and  plantedst  them ;  Thou  didst 
afflict  the  people,  and  cast  them  out." 
The  Psalmist  here  sets  forth  (1)  The 
exjmlsion  of  the  Ganaanites  and  the  es- 
tablishment of  the  Israelites  in  their 
land.  By  the  Divine  power  the  original 
inhabitants  of  Canaan  were  driven  from 
that  country,  and  the  chosen  people 
planted  therein.  The  figure  of  planting 
a  nation  or  a  people  is  frequent  in  both 
literature  and  conversation.  We  meet 
with  it  in  Exod.  xv.  17  and  Ps.  Ixxx.  8. 
The  figure  suggests  the  ideas  of  life^ 
growthy  and  fruitfulness.  It  is  with  a 
view  to  these  that  we  plant  trees.     (2) 


The  affliction  of  the  Ganaanites^  and  the 
growth  of  the  Israelites,  "  Thou  didst 
afflict  the  people,  and  cast  them  out." 
Upon  the  heathens  the  Lord  brought 
calamities,  while  He  blessed  His  own 
people  with  increase  in  the  land.  The 
words  "  cast  them  out,"  or  "  spread 
them  abroad,"  refer  not  to  the  Ca- 
naanites,  but  to  the  Israelites.  God 
had  extended  them  like  the  branches  of 
a  tree.  We  meet  with  the  same  idea  in 
Ps.  Ixxx.  11.  "It  sent  out  its  boughs 
to  the  sea,  and  its  branches  to  the  river." 
Barnes  says  that  "  the  parallelism  here 
clearly  demands "  this  interpretation. 
This  view  is  adopted  by  Alexander, 
Hengstenberg,  Luther,  De  Wette,  Tho- 
luck,  et  al.  Now,  whether  we  view 
this  work  in  relation  to  the  nation  ex- 
pelled or  to  the  nation  planted  and  in- 
creased, it  is  a  great  work;  and  illus- 
trates His  work  in  us.  It  is  He  that 
casts  out  our  spiritual  foes,  our  inbred 
sins ;  that  plants  us  in  the  kingdom  of 
His  grace ;  and  that  enables  us  to  grow 
in  grace.  The  beginning  and  the  pro- 
gress of  spiritual  life  are  with  Him. 
2.  The  Author  of  these  d^ngs,    "Work 

S13 


r^A.JU  ILIT. 


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Thou  didst,"  &c.  {\)  Negatively.  "They 
got  not  the  land  in  possession  by  their 
own  sword,  neither  did  their  own  arm 
save  them."  It  was  by  neither  their 
might  nor  their  courage  that  they  dis- 
possessed the  Canaanites  and  took  their 
land.  (2)  Positively.  "  But  Thy  right 
hand,  and  Thine  arm,  and  the  light  of 
Thy  countenance."  He  favoured  them 
and  fought  for  them,  or  they  would 
have  fought  in  vain.  How  true  is  this 
in  spiritual  life  !  The  foes  of  our  soul- 
life  laugh  to  scorn  our  unaided  efforts 
to  conquer  them.  God  alone  has  the 
power  to  quicken  us  into  spiritual  life, 
enable  us  to  grow,  and  vanquish  our 
foes. 

3.  The  reason  of  these  doings.  "  Be- 
cause Thou  hadst  a  favour  unto  them." 
The  Israelites  did  not  merit  the  glorious 
doings  of  God  on  their  behalf.  We 
discover  little  merit  in  them,  but  much 
c?emerit.  They  owed  all  to  God's  free 
and  sovereign  favour.  "  Not  for  thy 
righteousness,"  said  Moses,  "  or  for  the 
uprightness  of  thine  heart,  dost  thou 
go  to  possess  their  land ;  but  for  the 
wickedness  of  these  nations  the  Lord 
thy  God  doth  drive  them  out  from  be- 
fore thee,  and  that  He  may  perform  the 
word  which  the  Lord  sware  unto  thy 
fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 
Understand,  therefore,  that  the  Lord 
thy  God  giveth  thee  not  this  good  land 
to  possess  it  for  thy  righteousness ;  for 
thou  art  a  stiffnecked  people."  God's 
work  in  us,  for  our  salvation,  is  entirely 
due  to  His  own  free,  unmerited,  sove- 
reign favour.     "  By  grace  are  ye  saved." 

4.  The  obligation  of  every  generation 
to  transmit  to  'posterity  an  account  of  the 
doings  of  God  in  their  day.  "  We  have 
heard  with  our  ears,  O  God,  our  fathers 
have  told  us,"  &c.  Generation  after 
generation  had  been  thrilled  with  the 
narration  of  God's  glorious  deeds  of 
former  times.  "  Those  that  went  be- 
fore us  told  us  what  God  did  in  their 
days,  we  are  bound  to  tell  those  that 
come  after  us  what  He  has  done  in  our 
days,  and  let  them  do  the  like  justice 
to  those  that  shall  succeed  them ;  thus 
shall  one  generation  praise  His  works 
to  another,  the  fathers  to  the  children 
shall  make  known  His  truth." 

214 


5.  The  obligation  of  every  generation 
to  profit  by  the  experiences  of  those  who 
have  gone  before.  We  are  the  *'  heirs  of 
all  the  ages,"  and  ought  to  be  wiser, 
braver,  holier  than  those  who  have  gone 
before  us.  History  is  charged  with  (1) 
Admonition  as  to  the  evil  of  sin,  (fee. 
(2)  Encouragement  to  trust  in  God,  to 
serve  humanity  for  Him,  &c.  Are  we 
heeding  its  teachings  ? 

II.  A  declaration  of  confidence 
in  God.  (Ver.  4-8).  This  confidence 
is  set  forth,  and  is  worthy  of  imitation 
in  several  respects. 

1.  In  the  ground  on  which  their  faith 
rested.  It  rests  on  what  He  had  done 
for  their  fathers  and  for  them  in  former 
times.  Out  of  what  He  has  done,  their 
faith  in  what  He  will  do  grows.  There 
is  implied  here  belief  in  His  unchange- 
ableness  and  faithfulness.  He  had  ful- 
filled His  promises  to  their  fathers ; 
will  He  not  fulfil  them  to  them  also? 
He  had  done  glorious  things  for  their 
fathers ;  will  He  not  do  glorious  things 
for  them  also  ?  Is  He  not  The  Immut- 
able ?  God's  past  doings  in  and  for  us 
should  encourage  us  to  put  strong  con- 
fidence in  Him.  We  are  *'  confident  of 
this  very  thing,  that  He  which  hath 
begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform 
it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ." 

2.  In  the  relationship  which  He  sus- 
tained to  them.  "  Thou  art  my  King, 
O  God."  "They  had  taken  God  for 
their  sovereign  Lord,  had  sworn  alle- 
giance to  Him,  and  put  themselves  under 
His  protection."  He  who  as  the  King 
of  their  fathers  did  put  forth  His  power 
and  glory  on  their  behalf,  is  appealed  to 
by  the  Psalmist  and  people  as  their 
King  in  expectation  of  protection  and 
victory  for  them.  As  Hengstenberg 
puts  it,  *'As  certainly  as  God  is  the 
King  of  Israel  —  this  His  past  deeds 
plainly  testify — so  certainly  must  these 
deeds  again  revive,  must  He  also  at  the 
present  time  dispense  salvation  to  His 
people."  If  God  is  our  King,  we  may 
look  for  protection  from  Him. 

3.  In  the  petition  which  they  present 
to  Him.  "  Command  deliverances  for 
Jacob."  Notice  here  (1)  The  extent  of 
their  desires.  "  Deliverances."  Not 
one ;  but  as  many  as  are   needed   for 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM   XLIY. 


their  complete  salvation.  (2)  The  great- 
ness of  their  faith.  "  Command." 
Michaelis  says  :  *'  Because  he  had  named 
God  his  King,  he  makes  use  of  a  word 
which  points  to  kingly  authority  and 
irresistible  power."  He  has  but  to 
command  it,  and  their  salvation  shall  be 
accomplished.  He  speaks,  and  it  is 
done.  We  are  reminded  of  the  centurion 
and  our  Lord.  *'  Speak  the  word  only, 
and  my  servant  shall  be  healed."  Let 
us  honour  God  by  a  like  faith  in  His 
power  to  save. 

4.  In  the  renunciation  of  other  objects 
of  trust.  *'  I  will  not  trust  in  my  bow, 
neither  shall  my  sword  save  me."  In 
ver.  3  the  Psalmist  declares  that  it  was 
not  their  power  or  weapons  that  had 
saved  them,  but  God  alone,  and  in  this 
verse  he  announces  their  abandonment 
of  all  confidence  except  that  which  is 
fixed  in  God.  In  the  spiritual  life  our 
faith  must  be  fixed  in  Christ  alone  for 
all  things,  for  pardon,  power,  purity, 
victory,  glory.  From  first  to  last  we 
have  no  Saviour  but  Jesus,  and  He  is 
all-sufficient. 

5.  In  their  assurance  of  victory. 
*'  Through  Thee  will  we  push  down  our 
enemies  ;  through  Thy  name  will  we 
tread  them  under  that  rise  up  against  us. 
.  .  .  Thou  savest  us  from  our  enemies, 
and  dost  put  to  shame  them  that  hate 
us."  The  idea  of  the  5th  verse  is  that 
of  a  conqueror  with  his  foes  completely 
vanquished,  and  prostrated  and  power- 
less before  him.  And  the  7th  verse 
should  be  translated  and  interpreted  not 
in  reference  to  their  past   but  present 


foes ;  not  to  what  God  had  done  for 
them,  but  what  He  would  do  for  them. 
They  were  confident  of  complete  victory 
through  Him.  In  the  Christian  life 
and  conflict  we  may  confidently  anticipate 
victory  through  our  Lord.  *'  The  God 
of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your 
feet  shortly."  "  We  are  more  than  con- 
querors through  Him  that  loved  us." 

6.  In  their  praise  of  God.  *'  In  God 
we  boast  all  the  day  long,  and  praise 
Thy  name  for  ever."  "  Boast "  is  not  a 
good  rendering.  Praise  would  express 
the  meaning.  Or  as  Hengstenberg  tran- 
slates :  "  God  we  extol  continually,  and 
Thy  name  we  praise  for  ever."  They 
extolled  Him  as  their  God,  their  King, 
in  whom  they  confidently  trusted  for 
salvation.     They  resolve  to  praise  Him, 

(1)  Continually.     "All  the  day  long." 

(2)  Perpetually.  "  For  ever." 
Conclusion.  Surely  this  well- 
founded  assurance  in  God,  rising  out  of 
the  recollection  and  celebration  of  His 
glorious  doings  for  His  people  in  former 
days,  and  exercised  in  the  midst  of  such 
dark  and  distressing  circumstances,  is  a 
thing  to  be  emulated  by  us.  Let  every 
Christian  believer  seek  to  tread  the  path 
of  life,  perform  its  duties,  bear  its  trials, 
and  fight  its  battles,  singing, — 

"  This  God  is  the  God  we  adore, 

Our  faithful,  unchangeable  Friend ; 
Whose  love  is  as  great  as  His  power, 

And  knows  neither  measure  nor  end. 
*Tis  Jesus,  the  First  and  the  Last, 

Whose  Spirit  siiali  guide  us  safe  home  ; 
We'll  praise  Him  for  all  that  is  past, 
And  trust  Him  for  all  that's  to  come." 

'-Hart. 


A  Painful  Experience. 
{Verses  9-16.) 


We  here  come  at  once  upon  a  complete 
change  of  sentiment.  In  this  and  the 
preceding  section  of  the  psalm  we  have 
a  double  contrast.  Here  is  a  contrast 
between  the  exultant  confidence  in  God 
expressed  by  the  poet  as  the  mouth- 
piece of  the  people  in  the  former  section 
and  the  sorrowful  complaint  of  their 
miseries  in  this  section.  Here  also  is 
a  contrast  between  what  God  had  done 


for  them  and  for  their  fathers  in  time 
past  and  what  He  was  doing  for  them 
now.     Consider, — 

I.  The  miseries  of  which  they  com- 
plain.    Of  these  there  are  several. 

L  Their  rejection  by  God.  "  But 
Thou  hast  cast  off,  and  put  us  to  shame, 
and  goest  not  forth  with  our  armies." 
The  word  translated  *'  cast  off "  means 
rejected,  forsaken.      We  are  not  to  sup- 

215 


PSALM  XLIV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


pose  that  the  Psalmist  believed  that  God 
had  utterly  abandoned  them.  With  the 
previous  section  of  the  psalm  in  our 
mind  such  a  supposition  is  impossible. 
But  judging  from  their  outward  and 
visible  circumstances  they  seemed  for- 
saken by  God.  The  usual  tokens  of 
His  favour  and  presence  with  them  were 
altogether  wanting.  One  of  these  tokens 
is  here  mentioned,  "  Thou  goest  not 
forth  with  our  armies."  In  former 
times  they  went  forth  to  war  confident 
of  His  presence  with  them,  and  returned 
victorious.  Now  they  go  forth  not 
realising  His  presence,  and  return  de- 
feated and  "  put  to  shame."  (We  will 
not  attempt  to  decide  what  battles  and 
other  events  in  Jewish  history  are  here 
referred  to.  Such  attempts  as  have  been 
made  in  this  direction  are  of  little  worth.) 
2.  Their  defeat  in  battle  and  its  con- 
sequent evils.  "  Thou  makes t  us  to  turn 
back  from  the  enemy."  They  had  no 
courage.  They  did  not  fight  like  brave 
men.  They  acted  as  mere  mercenaries 
of  war  and  cowards.  "  O  Lord,  what 
shall  I  say,  when  Israel  turneth  their 
backs  before  their  enemies  ? "  Defeat  was 
followed  by— (1)  Slaughter.  '*  Thou 
hast  given  us  like  sheep  appointed  for 
meat."  Hengstenberg  :  '*  Like  sheep  for 
slaughter."  Margin:  '*A8  sheep  of  meat." 
M.  Henry:  "  They  make  no  more  scruple 
of  killing  an  Israelite  than  of  killing  a 
sheep  ;  nay,  like  the  butcher,  they  make 
a  trade  of  it,  they  take  a  pleasure  in  it 
as  a  hungry  man  in  his  meat."  (2) 
Spoiling.  "  They  which  hate  us  spoil 
us  for  themselves."  *'  The  enemies  had 
plundered  according  to  their  heart's  de- 
sire, and  without  any  effective  restraint." 
(3)  Captivity  or  Slavery.  *'  Thou  hast 
scattered  us  among  the  heathen.  Thou 
sellest  Thy  people  for  nought,  and  dost 
not  increase  Thy  wealth  by  their  price." 
We  do  not  aflfirm  that  the  people  had 
been  literally  taken  captive  into  other 
lands,  or  sold  into  slavery.  But  some 
of  the  results  of  their  defeat  in  battle 
had  been  such  that  they  may  fitly  be  so 
described.  On  ver.  12  Hengstenberg 
says — "  The  sense  is  :  Thou  hast  given 
Thy  people  into  the  power  of  their  ene- 
mies without  trouble,  without  causing 
the  victory  even  to  be  dearly  bought, 
216 


as  one  who  parts  with  a  good  for  any  price, 
which  he  despises  and  hates,  desiring 
merely  to  get  rid  of  it ;  so  that  there  is  an 
abbreviated  comparison.  Parallel  is  Jer. 
XV.  13,  *  thy  substance  and  thy  treasures 
will  I  give  to  the  spoil  without  price.*** 

3.  The  reproaches  of  their  enemies. 
"  Thou  makest  us  a  reproach  to  our 
neighbours,"  <fec.,  vers.  13,  14.  Ac- 
cording to  ver.  13,  the  surrounding  na- 
tions treated  them  with  contempt,  as 
a  people  forsaken  by  God,  and  power- 
less to  defend  themselves  against  their 
foes.      WDj  here  translated  "  byword," 

properly  signifies  a  similitude.  So 
Hengstenberg  translates  it  here,  and 
explains  it  thus  :  "  The  misery  of  Israel 
is  so  great,  that  people  would  figuratively 
call  a  miserable  man  a  Jew,  just  as  liars 
were  called  Cretans,  wretched  slaves, 
Sardians.  So  far  are  the  people  from 
being  now  *  the  blessed  of  the  Lord,'  in 
whom,  according  to  the  promise,  all 
the  heathen  are  to  be  blessed."  The 
"  shaking  of  the  head  "  means  that  their 
enemies  shook  their  heads  at  them  in 
scorn  and  derision. 

4.  Their  own  shame.  "  My  confu- 
sion is  continually  before  me,  and  the 
shame  of  my  face  hath  covered  me,"  <fec., 
vers.  16,  16.  Notice  here — (1)  The 
reason  of  this  shame.  "  For  the  voice  of 
him  that  reproacheth  and  blasphemeth ; 
by  reason  of  the  enemy  and  avenger." 
The  people  were  slandered,  God  was  bias- 
phemed,  and  their  enemies  were  about 
to  wreak  their  vengeance  upon  them ; 
therefore  were  they  ashamed.  (2)  The 
greatness  of  this  shame.  "  The  shame  of 
my  face  hath  covered  me. "  "  The  shaming 
is  ascribed  to  the  countenance,  because 
it  always  betrays  itself,  especially  there." 
So  great  was  the  shame  of  the  Psalmist, 
who  speaks  in  the  name  of  the  people, 
that  he  represents  himself  as  "  covered  " 
with  blushes.  (3)  The  incessancy  of 
this  shame.  "  My  confusion  is  con- 
tinually before  me."  There  was  no  in- 
termission from  the  sense  of  disgrace 
which  they  felt.  Such  are  the  deep 
miseries  of  which  they  complain  to  God. 

II.  The  author  of  their  miseries. 
"Thou  hast  cast  me  off,"  <fec.  Six 
times  in  as  many  verses  they  attribute 
all  their  suffering  and  shame   to  God. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


TBALU  XLIT. 


He  has  done  it  all     Now  a  statement 
of  this  kind  needs  to  be  weighed,  and 
its  exact  meaning  ascertained  before  it 
is  accepted.     We  know  that  "  He  doth 
not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  chil- 
dren of  men."     His  great  aim  is  to  pro- 
mote the  well-being   of   His  creatures. 
To  this  end  all  His  plans  and  workings 
tend.       That   He  should   forsake   His 
people  who  trust  in  Him  is  inconceivable, 
impossible.     How,  then,  can  He  be  said 
to  be  the  Author  of  their  miseries  ?     In 
this  way  we  understand  it :  **  the  meri- 
torious cause  "  must  have  been  in  the 
people.     God  never  forsakes  His  people 
unless   they  first   forsake  Him.     There 
must  have  been  some  important  defec- 
tion on  their  part  in  their  relation  to 
God  ere  He  would  have  allowed  these 
miseries  to   come   upon   them.       This 
being  the  case  we  can  understand  how 
the  inflicting  of  the  calamities  was  of 
the  Lord.     Their  enemies  were  but  the 
instruments    by  which    their    troubles 
were  effected ;  and  they  could  have  had 
no  power  against  them  unless,  at   the 
least,  it  had  been  permitted  them  from 
above.     And  that  power  would  not  have 
been   permitted   them    had    there   not 
been  some  defection  on  the  part  of  the 
chosen  people  in  their  relation  to  God. 
This,  then,  we  take  to  be  the  meaning 
of  the  Psalmist,—  Thou  hast  done  it  by 
withdrawing  the  light  of  Thy  presence 
and  the  shield  of  Thy  protection. 

III.  The  instruction  which  their 
miseries  axe  fitted  to  afford.  Three 
lessons,  at  least,  stand  out  prominently 
here  to  which  we  shall  do  well  to  give 
heed. 

1.  That  God,  in  perfect  consistency 
with  His  faithfulness  and  love  to  His 
people,  may  under  certain  circumstances 


withdraw  from  them  the  signs  of  Hit 
presence  and  favour,  and  for  a  time  ap- 
parently abandon  them  to  their  enemies. 
He  may  do  so  (1)  As  a  chastisement  for 
their  sins,  "  If  his  children  forsake  My 
law,  and  walk  not  in  My  judgments,  if 
they  break  My  statutes,  and  keep  not 
My  commandments;  then  will  I  visit 
their  transgression  with  the  rod,  and 
their  iniquity  with  stripes."  (2)  For 
the  perfecting  and  showing  forth  of  their 
character.  The  case  of  Job  is  an  ex- 
ample of  this. 

2.  That  when  the  professed  people  of 
God  lose  the  signs  of  His  presence  and 
favour,  they  are  held  in  contempt  hy  the 
world.  Of  this  the  Psalmist  complains. 
When  Samson  had  proved  unfaithful, 
and  forfeited  the  Divine  favour,  he 
became  an  object  of  scoffing  and  ridicule 
to  those  who  had  formerly  trembled  at 
the  mere  mention  of  his  name.  "  If  the 
salt  have  lost  his  savour,  it  is  thenceforth 
good  for  nothing,  but  to  be  cast  out,  and 
to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  men."  Here 
is  solemn  warning  for  us. 

3.  That  the  people  of  God  when  hereft 
of  His  presence  and  help,  and  suffering 
at  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  do  well  to 
carry  their  complaints  to  God  Himself 
(1)  Because  the  effort  to  draw  near  to 
Him  is  good  and  helpful.  It  relieves 
the  troubled  heart,  lessens  the  conscious 
distance  between  Him  and  their  soul, 
&c.  (2)  Because  He  only  is  able  to  re- 
store the  strength  and  joy  which  they  have 
lost.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto 
the  Lord  ;  for  He  hath  torn,  and  He 
will  heal  us ;  He  hath  smitten,  and  He 
will  bind  us  up.  After  two  days  will 
He  revive  us  ;  in  the  third  day  He  will 
raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  in  His 
sight." 


An  Earnest  Appeal  and  Praykb, 
(Verses  17-26.) 

I.  An  earnest  appeal.  Vers.  17-22.  have  not  forgotten  Thee,  neither  have 

This  appeal  of  the  people  to  God  is  we  dealt  falsely  in  Thy  covenant."     By 

based  on  the  ground  that  they  had  not  this  we  understand  the  Psalmist  to  mean, 

apostatised  from  Him.     In  it  there  are  that  there  had  been  in  the  history  of 

several  prominent  points.     They  assert  the  people  no  marked  forgetfulness  of 

that  they  have —  God,   nor  had   there   been  any  conspi- 

1.  Not   broken  His  covenant.     "We  cuous  or  prevalent  departure  from  the 

217 


PSALM  XLIT. 


HO  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


covenant   wliich   He   made   with   their 
fathers. 

2.  Not  lapsed  into  idolatry.  They 
assert  that  they  have  not  "  forgotten  the 
name  of  their  God,  or  stretched  out 
their  hands  to  a  strange  God."  The 
stretching  out  of  the  hands  is  significant 
of  worship  or  prayer.  The  force  of  this 
verse  is,  that  they  have  not  apostatised 
either  by  worshipping  a  strange  god,  or 
forgetting  the  God  of  their  fathers. 

3.  Not  backslidden  from  God  either 
in  heart  or  in  life.  *'  Our  heart  is  not 
turned  back,  neither  have  our  steps 
declined  from  Thy  way."  They  had  not 
departed  from  Him  in  their  heart.  They 
were  still  loyal  to  Him  in  their  afi'ections. 
And  in  their  goings  they  followed  the 
path  which  He  had  prescribed  for  them. 

4.  They  appeal  to  the  Omniscience  of 
God  in  proof  of  this.  ''  Shall  not  God 
search  this  out  %  for  He  knoweth  the 
secrets  of  the  heart."  The  ^^  this-'  de- 
notes the  apostacy  of  which  they  had 
protested  that  they  were  not  guilty. 
The  force  of  the  verse  is,  that  if  as  a 
nation  there  had  been  any  considerable 
departure  from  God,  if  in  their  hearts 
they  had  apostatised  from  Him  unto 
idols,  He  would  have  known  it,  for  He 
knoweth  all  things,  even  the  secrets  of 
the  heart.  Thus  the  verse  is  a  very 
solemn  declaration  that  they  had  not 
forsaken  God. 

5.  As  additional  proof  that  their 
miseries  had  not  come  upon  them  be- 
cause of  their  departure  from  God,  the 
Psalmist  says  that  they  were  suffering 
severely  and  constantly  because  of  their 
attachment  to  Him.  "  For  Thy  sake 
are  we  killed  all  the  day  long ;  we  are 
counted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter," 
The  most  conclusive  proof  that  they 
have  not  fallen  away  from  God  is,  *'  that 
they  are  persecuted  for  the  very  sake 
of  God."  That  which  perplexed  the 
Psalmist  was,  that  they  should  suffer  so 
severely  although  there  had  not  been 
any  prevalent  departure  from  God.  Can 
we  reconcile  this  protestation  of  their 
faithfulness  with  their  miseries  1  Our 
statement  on  *'  the  author  of  their 
miseries "  in  the  preceding  homily  ap- 
pears irreconcileable  with  the  statements 
made  by  the  poet  in  this  appeal.     Can 

218 


we  explain  this  1  and  how  1  Matthew 
Henry  says  :  "  Though  we  cannot  deny 
but  that  we  have  dealt  foolishly,  yet  we 
have  not  dealt  falsely  in  Thy  covenant, 
so  as  to  cast  Thee  off  and  take  to  other 
gods."  "  Tholuck  accuses  the  Psalmist 
of  a  superficial  view  of  sin  (comp.  on 
the  other  hand  the  impressive  reference 
to  the  heart,  vers.  18-21),  whereby  he 
was  led  to  charge  God  with  breach  of 
fidelity,  instead  of  seeking  the  blame  in 
the  Church.  The  following  remarks,  it 
is  hoped,  will  remove  the  difficulty  : — 
(1)  When  the  Church  here  maintains 
that  she  had  not  broken  God's  covenant, 
this  manifestly  refers  only  to  fi.delity  in 
the  main,  as  to  the  chief  matter,  and 
manifold  smaller  infidelities  and  weak- 
nesses are  not  thereby  excluded.  These 
smaller  deviations  justify  the  chastise- 
ments of  God,  faithfulness  in  the  main 
excludes  a  total  rejection.  (2)  When 
the  Church  regards  the  suffering  that 
had  come  upon  her  as  an  anomaly,  she 
does  so  only  in  so  far  as  this  appears  to 
carry  the  aspect  of  continuance, — comp. 
the  words  :  *  Cast  us  not  off  for  ever,' 
in  ver.  23.  The  whole  of  the  last 
strophe  shows,  that  the  temptation  will 
be  at  an  end  the  moment  God  has,  in 
point  of  fact,  removed  this  appearance. 
But  this  would  not  have  been  the  case 
if  the  suffering  had  formed  in  itself  a 
stone  of  stumbling  for  the  Church.  (3) 
It  is  not  to  be  overlooked,  that  we  have 
here  before  us  a  didactic  psalm.  What 
is  declared  in  the  form  of  history,  forms 
at  the  same  time  indirectly  an  impressive 
admonition.  (4)  We  must  not  expect 
that  every  psalm  shall  fully  exhibit  all 
particular  points  of  truth,  and  so  render 
all  misapprehension  impossible.  They 
rather,  on  the  contrary,  require  some- 
what to  be  supplied." — Hengstenberg. 

II.  An  Earnest  Prayer  (vers.  23- 
26).     We  have  here — 

1.  Believing  expostulations.  *' Awake, 
why  sleepest  Thou,  O  Lord  1 "  "  Why  " 
seems  to  imply  the  impossibility  of  any 
reason  being  assigned  for  His  sleep,  and 
the  assurance  that  He  will  speedily 
awake.  "  Faith,"  says  David  Dickson, 
"  doth  not  allow  nor  subscribe  unto 
carnal  sense,  but  in  presenting  the  ob- 
jections thereof  unto  God,  really  refuteth 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  FJSALMS. 


PSALM  XLIY. 


them,  by  avowing  that  such  misregard- 
ing  of  His  own  cause  and  servants,  as 
sense  and  temptation  vented,  is  incon- 
sistent with  His  nature,  covenant,  pro- 
mises, and  practices  towards  His  people ; 
for,  '  whi/  sleepest  Thou,'  is  as  much  as, 
it  is  not  possible  that  Thou  sleepest ; 
and  '  why  '  here  is  not  a  word  of  quarrel- 
ing, but  a  word  of  denying,  that  any 
reason  can  be  given  for  such  a  thought, 
as  God  sleepeth."  ''Wherefore  hidest 
Thou  Thy  face,  and  forgettest  our  afflic- 
tion and  oppression  1  "  Sense  says, 
God  is  asleep  and  hath  cast  off  His 
people  for  ever.  Faith  replies,  If  so, 
"  why  "  is  it  so  1  Sense  says,  God  hath 
forgotten  the  affliction  of  His  people. 
Faith  replies  with  a  persistent  "  Where- 
fore r' 

2.  Urgent  entreaties.  "  Awake,  arise, 
cast  us  not  off  for  ever.  Arise  for  our 
help,  and  redeem  us  for  thy  mercies' 
sake.''  This  is  a  prayer  that  God,  who 
had  seemed  to  take  no  interest  in  them, 
would  speedily  evince  an  interest  in  them 
and  arise  and  save  them.  In  ver.  12 
they  had  complained  that  God  had  sold 
them  ;  in  ver.  26  they  entreat  Him  to 
redeem  them.  "  If  He  sell  us,  it  is  not 
any  one  else  that  can  redeem  us." 

3.  Effective  pleas.  (1)  Their  misery. 
"For  our  soul  is  bowed  down  to  the 
dust  ;  our  belly  cleaveth  unto  the 
earth."  The  expression  of  the  former 
clause  denotes  great  grief  and  fear,  and 
the  figure  of  the  latter  clause  extreme 
prostration  and  affliction  and  inability 
to  assist  themselves.  (2)  God's  mercy. 
"  Redeem  us  for  Thy  mercies'  sake," 
i.6.,  in  maintenance  and  illustration 
of  His  character  as  a  God  of  mercy. 
Or,  as  the  word  is  plural,  '*  mercies," 
may  it  not  mean  for  the  sake  of  the 
long  line  of  mercies  He  had  bestowed 
upon  them  and  their  fathers?  Let  not 
the  long  series  of  Thy  mercies  to  Thy 
people  fail,  and  let  them  not  perish  by 
reason  thereof.     In  any  case,  it  is  an 


appeal^  to  God  on  the  ground  of  Hia 
unmerited  grace  to  save  His  afflicted 
people. 

Conclusion. — There  are  here  some 
practical  points  of  great  importance, 
which  we  shall  do  well  to  ponder  in 
their  relation  to  our  own  life. 

1.  The  completeness  of  the  Divine 
scrutiny  of  human  life.  There  is  no 
province  of  our  life  which  escapes  Hia 
examination.  There  is  no  flaw  or  sin, 
however  cleverly  disguised,  that  will 
escape  detection  when  He  searches  us 
(ver.  21). 

2.  The  great  support  afforded  hy  a 
clear  conscience  in  the  time  of  affliction. 
It  was  no  small  thing  for  the  people 
that  in  this  the  day  of  their  distress 
they  were  able  to  appeal  to  God  as  they 
did  (ver.  17-22).  In  his  unparalleled 
afflictions.  Job  received  immeasurable 
support  and  comfort  from  the  posses- 
sion of  "a  conscience  void  of  offence 
toward  God  and  men"  (Job  xiii.  15). 
And  Shakespeare  represents  Wolsey  as 
thus  sustained  in  the  depth  of  his  mis- 
fortunes, and  as  saying  of  himself  that 
he  was 

**  Never  so  truly  happy.  .  ,  . 
I  know  myself  now  ;  and  I  feel  within  me 
A  peace  above  all  earthly  dignities, 
A  still  and  quiet  conscience." 

3.  A  grand  inspiration  and  consolation 
in  the  difficulties  and  disappointments  oj 
Christian  life  and  work.  "  For  Thy 
sake."  What  is  there  that  we  cannot 
dare,  or  do,  or  suffer  for  the  sake  of  our 
Lord,  when  we  love  Him  supremely  1 

4.  In  the  whole  of  this  section  of 
the  Psalm  we  have  a  splendid  example 
of  Faith  fighting.  Here  it  is  attacking 
doubt,  repudiating  the  conclusions  oi 
sense,  scrutinising  life  and  conduct,  ex- 
postulating and  pleading  with  God. 
Such  faith  must  come  out  of  conflict 
victorious.  Such  faith  may  be  ours. 
Let  us  seek  it. 


219 


pgALM  XLV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PS  ALMS, 


PSALM  XLV. 
Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician  upon  Shoshannim,  for  the  sons  of  Korah,  MaschiL 
A  song  of  loves." 

"  To  the  chief  musician,**  See  notes  on  the  title  to  Ps.  zzxix.  **  Upon  Shoshannim  "  "  is  a 
musical  direction  to  the  leader  of  the  Temple  choir,  and  most  probably  indicates  the  melody 

'after'  or  *iu  the  manner  of  y*!^y  al-,  A.  V.  'upon*)  which  the  Psalms  were  to  be  sung.  As 
*  Shoshannim '  literally  signifies  '  lilies, '  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  word  denotes  lily-shaped 
instruments  of  music,  perhaps  cymbals,  and  this  view  appears  to  be  adopted  by  De  Wette  {Die 
Pealmen,  p.  34).  Hengstenberg  gives  to  it  an  enigmatical  interpretation,  as  indicating  *  the 
subject  or  subjects  treated,  as  lilies  figuratively  for  bride  in  Ps.  xlv.  ;  the  delightful  cousola- 
tions  and  deliverances  experienced  in  Ps.  Ixix.,  &c.,'  which  Dr.  Davidson  very  truly  characterises 
as  *a  most  improbable  fancy.*     The  LXX.  and  Vulgate  have  in  both  psalms  i^Tr^p  tCjv  &X\oi- 

tadrjffo/x^vojv  and  pro  iis  qui  immutdbuntur  respectively,  reading  apparently  Q  ixj~  ^^  for 

D  jpDW  7^.  ggjj  2eb  regards  it  as  an  instrument  of  psalmody,  and  Junius  and  Tremellius, 
after  Kimchi,  render  it  *  hexachorda,'  an  instrument  with  six  strings,  referring  it  to  the  root 
sMsh,  'six,'  and  this  is  approved  by  Eichorn  in  his  edition  of  Simonis." — W.  Aldis  Wright^  in 
Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible. 

Fuerst  in  his  Lexicon  says  on  "0  l^yvDj  the  name  of  a  musical  choir,  Ps.  xlv.,  Ixix., 
Ixxx.,  identical  with  1^^^,  Ps.  Ix.  (which  see)."  On  the  latter  word  he  says,  "  -^^"^^ 
\tW  (Ps.  Ix.,  for  which  Ps.  Ixxx.  has  D''aty*li:^  '^^"^^,  and  also  D^i)Ii?it:^  alone)  proper  name 
of  one  of  the  twenty-four  music  choirs  (1  Chron.  xxv.)  left  by  David  (jn*7ij^,  Neh.  xii.  31)^ 
Ps.  Ix.,  so  called  from  a  master  yU^'V  (comp.  the  proper  name  l^»f ,  1  Chron.  ii.  31),  which 

musical  guild  may  have  been  stationed  in  ^*'  '^f  =  u  Jj  ij/  (Josh.  xv.  36). 

"  For  the  sons  of  Korah."     See  notes  on  the  title  to  Ps.  xlii. 

"Maschil,"  a  didactic  poem. 

"A  song  of  loves,''  says  Barnes,  "would  properly  denote  a  song  devoted  to  love,  or  in  cele- 
bration of  love;  that  is,  in  which  love  would  be  the  main  idea." 

The  author  of  the  psalm,  and  the  occasion  on  which  it  was  written,  are  both  unknown. 

The  reader  who  desires  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  various  opinions  as  to  whom  the 
psalm  refers  or  is  applicable,  we  would  E«fer  to  the  "Introductions"  to  the  psalm  in  the 
commentaries  of  Barnes,  Hengstenberg,  et  al.  For  ourselves,  we  believe  in  its  Messianic  ap- 
plication. "The  forty-fifth  psalm,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "is  a  picture  of  the  peaceful  and 
glorious  union  of  the  King  Messiah  with  His  mystical  bride,  the  Church  of  redeemed  humanity. 
Messiah  is  introduced  as  a  Divine  King  reigning  among  men.  His  form  is  of  more  than  human 
beauty;  His  lips  overflow  with  grace;  God  has  blessed  Him  for  ever,  and  has  anointed  Him 
with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows.  But  Messiah  is  also  directly  addressed  as  God  ;  He 
is  seated  upon  an  everlasting  throne. "  This  psalm  cannot  "  be  adapted  without  exegetical 
violence  to  the  circumstances  of  Solomon,  or  of  any  other  king  of  ancient  Israel ;  and  the  New 
Testament  interprets  the  picture  of  the  Royal  Epithalamium  of  the  one  true  King  Messiah." 

The  Praise  of  the  Messiah-King. 

(Verses  1,  2.) 

I.  The  reasons  why  He  is  praised.      larity  of  this  reduplicated  form  merely 

1.    Because    of    the    beauty    of  His      consists  in  this,  that  it  stands  for  113^3^ 

character.     "Thou  art  fairer  than  the  .^              jtt-j      4.u-  4.i,^4.I^i; 

,  ., ,           .           »  mu     TT  V                J  the  second  Yod  not  beuiff  the  iirst  radi- 

children  of  men."  ine  Hebrew  word  i           ^  j  u  i.     •  •  i.    t  *.\.    ^.\.\r,A 

;        1  ^   i    .,  mu  1.  r  •       »  •  cal  repeated,  but  arising  out  of  the  third 

translated,  "  Thou  art  fairer,    is  a  very  /— \     ^  -,  -,J^^  ,    .           x  v     ^.v, 

'          .  rru-          A    ^>,r^sr-i  (H)  I  and /T'B^  being  put  by  the  punc- 

unusual  expression.  This  word,  /l^B^H)^  '          %   -  r         ^  ^  ^          ^ 

,.        ^     -c        .    .     .,      oj^    "^'^'  tuators    after    the     analogy    of    Kal." 

according  to  Fuerst,  is  the  2d  person  tt        x    i.  •         ^i      /  ^   +v.^ 

,.  »     -  -,^*,^^        u  ^    7>  S.  Hengstenberg   gives    the    force    of    the 

masculine  of  n^^B^  =   ^^  to  he  very  beau-  ?        iiw\  4.  v      .-^  1  t^^ 

Tt:  T  ^  word  as,  *'Thou  art  beautifulness,  for, 

tifully  formed,    with    ]p    {more   than)      rpj^^^    ^^^    perfectly    beautiful.       The 
Ps.  xlv.  3"    (2  A.  V.)       '*The  irregu-      beauty    here,   since   it  is  described   in 
220 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


KALM  XLV, 


what    follows,    as    the    ground    of  the 
Divine,  blessing,  cannot  be  simply  out- 
ward beauty,    but   only   the  expression 
and    image     of     spiritual    perfection." 
The  beauty  of  Christ's  character  when 
studied  as  it  is  presented  to  us  by  the 
four  evangelists  is  an  exhaustless  theme. 
We  can  only  indicate  certain  points  and 
leave  them.      Consider  (1)  His  righte- 
ousness as  attested  hy  unbelievers.    When 
He  demanded  of  His  enemies,  "Which 
of   you    convinceth   me   of  sin  % "  they 
were    speechless.     Pilate   said,   "  I  find 
no   fault    in   this   man."      The   Roman 
centurion   said,   "  Certainly  this   was  a 
righteous    man."      (2)    His   association 
with    sinners    ivithout    contracting    the 
slightest  impurity.      (3)  His  treatment 
of  personal   enemies.       He    prayed    for 
those  V7ho  crucified  Him,  "  Father,  for- 
give them,  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do."     (4)  His  everhurning  hatred  of  sin, 
and   His    quenchless    love  for   sinners. 
(5)  His  unreserved  and  hearty  devotion 
to   the  Supreme  Will.      (6)  His  Divine 
self-sacrifice.       We    can    only    mention 
these  points  out  of  many  others.     But, 
if  the  reader  desires  to  see  the  singular 
and  superhuman  beauty  of  Christ's  cha- 
racter most  thoughtfully  and  eloquently 
set  forth,  we  refer  him   to  the  chapter 
on  "  The  Character  of  Jesus  forbids  His 
possible    Classification    with    Men,"    in 
^^  Nature    and    the   Supernatural^^    by 
H.  Bushnell,  D.D.     Read    the  chapter, 
and  with  deeper  conviction  and  intenser 
fervour,  you  will    exclaim,  *'  Thou  art 
fairer  than  the  children  of  men  ! " 

2.  Because  of  the  excellency  of  His 
speech.  "  Grace  is  poured  into  thy 
lips."  "  The  grace  which  is  here  speci- 
ally ascribed  to  the  lips  is  manifestly 
but  a  reflection  of  the  loveliness  of  the 
speech  which  streams  from  the  lips." 
See  this  when  he  was  a  child  talking 
with  the  doctors  in  the  temple  :  "  All 
that  heard  Him  were  astonished  at  His 
understanding  and  answers."  And 
afterwards,  when  He  taught  in  the  syna- 
gogue, the  people  "were  astonished  and 
said,  Whence  hath  this  man  this 
wisdom  1 "  When  certain  officers  had 
been  sent  by  the  chief  priests  and  Phari- 
sees to  seize  Him,  they  returned  saying, 
"Never   man    spake    like    this   man." 


When  He  spake  in  the  synagogue  at 
Nazareth,  "all  bare  Him  witness,  and 
wondered  at  the  gracious  words  which 
proceeded  out  of  His  mouth."  Recall 
His  words  to  the  penitent,  to  the  doubt- 
ing, to  the  anxious,  to  the  bereaved,  (fee. 
Think  of  His  words  concerning  the 
Father,  &c.  Truly,  "  Grace  is  poured 
into  Thy  lips." 

3.  Because  of  His  constant  enjoyment 
of  the  Divine  favour.  "Therefore,  God 
hath  blessed  Thee  for  ever."  Mysterious 
is  the  union  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son.  But  we  know  it  affords  un- 
speakable delight  to  the  Father.  "Mine 
elect  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth." 
"  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased."  Here,  then,  are  the  highest 
reasons  for  praising  the  Messiah- 
King. 

II.  The  manner  in  which  He  is 
praised. 

1.  Heartily.  "My  heart  is  inditing 
a  good  matter."  Margin  :  "  My  heart 
boileth,  or  bubbleth  up."  Hengsten- 
berg:  "My  heart  boils  with  good 
words."  He  speaks  not  the  coolly 
calculated  praise  of  the  intellect,  nor  is 
he  about  to  produce  some  beautiful 
work  of  poetic  art  merely,  but  to  utter 
the  irrepressible  emotions  of  admiration 
and  love.  His  heart  is  about  to  relieve 
itself  in  praise.  Hearty  praise  is  the 
only  praise  which  God  accepts. 

2.  Readily.  "My  tongue  is  as  the 
pen  of  a  ready  writer."  The  heart  of 
the  poet  is  so  filled  with  his  theme 
"  that  he  has  no  need  to  seek  for  words ; 
but  they  flow  in  upon  him  of  themselves 
and  flow  out  again."  In  the  case  of  the 
Psalmist,  a  full  heart  made  a  fluent 
tongue. 

III.  The  excellence  of  this  praise. 
"  A  good  matter."     It  is  good — 

1.  Because  of  the  excellence  of  the 
person  praised.  It  is  fitting  and  right 
that  goodness  should  be  reverenced, 
that  beauty  should  be  admired,  <fec. 
He  is  "  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand, 
.  .  .  yea.  He  is  altogether  lovely." 

2.  Because  of  the  reflex  influence  of 
the  exercise  upon  the  person  offering 
praise.  By  sincerely  praising  God  we 
become  like  Him  in  those  features  for 
which  we  praise  Him.     The  exercise  is 

221 


PSALM  XLV* 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


transforming.  As  we  dwell  with  devout 
admiration  on  His  beauty  we  ourselves 
become  beautiful.  The  praise  of  the 
supremely  good   ia   an   important  con- 


dition of  the  true  development  of  our 
nature,  and  one  of  the  chief  elements 
of  human  joy.  In  heaven  the  praise  is 
ceaseless. 


The  Messiah  as  a  Majestic  Conqueror, 
{Verses  3-5.) 


The  Messiah  is  here  represented  as  a 
Hero  going  forth  to  battle.  He  whose 
character  is  so  beautiful,  whose  words 
are  so  gracious,  is  also  a  man  of  war. 
"  The  royal  bridegroom,"  says  Matthew 
Henry,  "is  a  man  of  war,  and  His 
nuptials  do  not  excuse  Him  from  the 
field  of  battle ;  nay,  they  bring  Him  to 
the  field  of  battle,  for  He  is  to  rescue 
His  spouse  by  dint  of  sword  out  of  her 
captivity,  to  conquer  her,  and  to  conquer 
for  her,  and  then  to  marry  her."  It  is 
important  to  bear  in  mind  that  "  the 
imperatives  have  prophetic  import. 
The  Psalmist  calls  upon  the  king  to  do 
that,  which  He  shall  surely  perform." 

I.  The  enterprise  which  He  has 
undertaken.  He  is  here  represented 
as  going  forth  to  subdue  His  enemies  in 
the  world.     Here  are  two  points — 

1.  Christ  has  enemies  in  the  world. 
"  The  carnal  miud  is  enmity  against 
God."  The  unrenewed  man  in  his 
heart  and  by  his  deeds,  if  not  in  words, 
says,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to 
reign  over  us." 

2.  Christ  is  engaged  in  the  conquest  of 
His  enemies  in  the  world.  He  conquers 
them  by  converting  them  into  His 
friends.  He  destroys  rebels  by  making 
them  His  loyal  subjects.  His  great 
work  is  the  conversion  and  salvation  of 
souls. 

II.  The  manner  in  which  He  goes 
forth  to  this  enterprise.  "  Gird  Thy 
sword  upon  Thy  thigh,  0  Hero,  with 
Thy  glory  and  Thy  majesty."  The 
"  sword  "  of  the  Hero  is  the  Word  of 
God.  "  The  sword  of  the  Spirit  is  the 
Word  of  God."  "The  Word  of  God  is 
quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than 
any  two-edged  sword,"  <fec.  "By  the 
promises  of  that  Word,  and  the  grace 
contained  in  those  promises,  souls  are 
made  willing  to  submit  to  Jesus  Christ 
and  become  His  loyal  subjects ;  by  the 
222 


threatenings    of    that   Word,    and   the 

judgments  executed  according  to  them, 
those  that  stand  out  against  Christ 
will  in  due  time  be  brought  down  and 
ruined."  (Comp.  Kev.  xix.  15.)  The 
Hero  goes  forth  also  in  His  "  glory  and 
majesty."  "  He  has  a  threefold  glory. 
His  glory,  as  God,  consists  in  a  display 
of  the  infinite  perfections  and  excel- 
lencies of  His  nature.  This  glory  He 
possessed  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was.  His  glory,  as  man,  consists 
in  the  perfect  holiness  of  His  heart  and 
life.  His  glory,  as  God  and  man  united 
in  one  Person,  the  Mediator,  consists  in 
His  perfect  fitness  to  perform  all  those 
works  which  the  office  of  Mediator 
requires  of  Him.  This  is  the  glory  in 
which  Christ  appears,  when  He  goes 
forth  to  subdue  sinners  to  Himself ;  and 
this,  therefore,  is  the  glory  which  is 
meant  in  our  text."  .  .  .  He  possesses 
"  everything  which  is  necessary,  either 
to  satisfy  the  justice  and  honour  of 
God,  or  to  excite  and  justify  the  utmost 
love,  admiration,  and  confidence  of  man. 
.  .  .  He  wished  Him  also  to  appear  in 
His  majesty.  The  difference  between 
majesty  and  glory  consists  in  this : 
Glory  is  something  which  belongs  to 
either  the  person  or  the  character  of 
a  being ;  but  majesty  is  more  properly 
an  attribute  of  office,  especially  of  the 
regal  office.  This  office  Christ  sustains. 
He  is  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  as  well  as 
a  Saviour  ;  He  is  King  of  kings  and 
Lord  of  lords ;  and  it  is  principally  in 
His  character  of  a  king,  that  He  sub- 
dues His  enemies,  and  dispenses  pardon. 
The  Psalmist,  therefore,  wished  Him  to 
appear  in  this  character,  arrayed  in  all 
His  awful  majesty,  that  while  His  glory 
excited  admiration,  and  delight,  and 
love,  His  majesty  might  produce  re- 
verential awe,  and  lead  sinners  to  sub. 
mission  and  obedience." — Payson, 


ROM  I  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


FSALM  XLT. 


III.  The  Reasons  for  which  He  goes 
forth  to  this  enterprise.  "  Because  of 
truth  and  meekness  and  righteousness." 
"  Truth "  as  opposed  to  all  lying  or 
fraud  ;  *'  meeknesi  "  as  opposed  to  pride 
and  arrogance  ;  and  '*  righteousness  "  as 
opposed  to  all  injustice.  The  King  rides 
forth  to  war  in  the  cause  of  the  truthful, 
the  meek,  and  the  righteous.  He  wages 
relentless  war  against  falsehood,  violence, 
and  injustice.  His  kingdom  is  founded 
and  extended  neither  by  deceit,  nor 
arrogance,  nor  mere  irresistible  force. 
His  reign  is  the  reign  of  truth,  gentle- 
ness, and  equity. 

IV.  The  success  which  He  achieves 
in  this  enterprise.  The  Messiah  is 
represented  as  "  riding  prosperously  "  on 
in  His  career.  He  advances  successfully, 
victoriously.  *'Thy  right  hand  shall 
teach  Thee  terrible  things.  Thine  ar- 
rows are  sharp  in  the  heart  of  the  King's 
enemies  ;  whereby  the  people  fall  under 
Thee."  With  His  right  hand  the  Hero 
achieves  deeds  which  strike  the  world 
with  amazement  and  fear.  On  ver.  5 
Barnes  says:  '^  Ijiter  aWy^  Thine  arrows 
are  sharp — the  people  under  Thee  shall 
fall — in  the  heart  of  the  enemies  of  the 
King.     The  process  of  thought  in  the 


verse  seems  to  be  this  :  First,  The  arrous 
are  seen  as  sharp  or  penetrating.  Second, 
The  people  are  seen  falling  as  tho.se 
arrows  are  shot  forth.  Third,  It  is  seen 
that  those  who  fall  are  the  enemies  of  the 
Xing,  and  that  the  arrows  have  pierced 
the  heart.  .  .  .  The  reference  here  is  to 
the  truth,  and  to  the  power  of  that  truth 
in  penetrating  the  hearts  of  men."  The 
arrows  pierce  some  hearts  with  convic- 
tion, and  conversion  follows.  But  the 
incorrigibly  impenitent  will  be  pierced 
with  the  sharp  arrows  of  His  wrath. 

Conclusion. — 77ie  ultimate  success  of 
the  Messiah's  enterprise  is  certain.  1. 
The  nature  of  His  government  secures  it. 
Truth  is  stronger  than  error  ;  love  than 
hatred  ;  righteousness  than  injustice,  &c. 
2.  The  march  of  events  shows  it.  Christ's 
ideas,  principles,  &c.,  are  conquering  the 
world.  3.  God  guarantees  it.  '*  I  shall 
give  Thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheri- 
tance," &c.  *'  He  must  reign  until  He 
hath  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet." 
Are  we  with  Him  or  against  Him  1 
Sinners,  will  you  bow  to  the  sceptre  of 
His  grace,  or  resist  Him  until  you  are 
smitten  down  by  his  terrible  right  hand  \ 
Choose  ye. 


The  Messiah's  Reign  and  Jot. 
{Verses  6-9.) 


We  pass  from  the  contemplation  of  the 
Messiah  as  a  Hero  to  regard  Him  as  a 
King.  Vers.  6  and  7  are  quoted  by  the 
author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
in  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  Christ  is 
exalted  by  God  above  the  angels.  He 
certainly  regards  the  words  in  the  Psalm 
as  applying  originally  to  Christ.  So 
that  we  have  excellent  authority  for 
regarding  the  P.salni  as  Messianic. 

I.  The  reign  of  the  Messiah.  "  Thy 
throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever," 
<fec.     The  Psalmist  here  announces — 

1.  The  righteousness  of  His  reign. 
"  The  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom  is  a  right 
sceptre."  "A  sceptre  of  righteousness 
is  the  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom  "  (Heb. 
i.  8).  Hengstenberg  :  "  A  sceptre  of 
equity  is  the  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom." 
The  laws  and    administration   of   the 


Messiah's  empire  are  just.  (1)  His  rule 
over  man  as  an  individual  is  right.  All 
His  requirements  are  in  harmony  with 
and  tend  to  promote  our  wellbeing.  In 
keeping  His  commandments  "  there  is 
great  reward."  (2)  His  rule  over  man  in 
his  social  relations  is  rigid.  What  could 
be  more  equitable  or  more  wise  than  the 
great  ru^^  laid  down  by  our  Lord  for  the 
regulation  of  our  conduct  towards  each 
other,  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  would 
that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even 
so  to  them ;  for  this  is  the  law  and  the 
prophets  "  ?  (3)  His  rule  over  man  in 
his  relations  to  God  is  right.  He  re- 
quires us  to  obey,  reverence,  and  love 
God.  Is  it  not  reasonable  and  equitable 
that  the  most  excellent  and  gracious 
Being  should  be  loved ;  that  the  most 
holy  and  glorious  Being  should  be  reve 

223 


PSALM  XL7, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Fenced ;  that  our  Creator,  Siistainer, 
and  Sovereign  should  be  obeyed  1  "  The 
law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  is 
holy  and  just  and  good."  His  reign  is 
not  only  equitable,  but  benevolent. 
Moreover,  the  Psalmist  represents  the 
righteous  administration  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  as  proceeding  from  His  own 
habitual  righteousness  and  love  there- 
unto. "  Thou  hast  loved  righteousness 
and  hated  iniquity.'' 

2.  The  perpetuity  of  His  reign. 
"  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and 
ever."  The  righteousness  of  His  domi- 
nion and  its  perpetuity  are  closely  related 
to  each  other.  It  is  eternal  because  it 
is  equitable.  "  Of  the.  increase  of  His 
government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no 
end,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and 
upon  His  kingdom,  to  order  it,  and  to 
establish  it  with  judgment  and  with 
justice  from  henceforth  even  for  ever." 
Earthly  monarchs  have  to  yield  up 
crown  and  sceptre  at  the  bidding  of 
death  ;  but  the  Messiah- King  ever  lives. 
Earthly  dynasties  pass  away  ;  but  His 
empire  is  ever  increasing,  and  shall  for 
ever  endure. 

II.  The  joy  of  the  Messiah.  "There- 
fore, O  God,  Thy  God  hath  anointed 
Thee,"  &c. 

1.  His  joy,  which  is  here  expressed  hy 
the  anointing  of  the  Father.  Alford 
says :  **  We  must  distinguish  this 
anointing  from  the  fe^f'O'fi'  alirh  6  dihi 
'TTVivfiari  kyitx)  x..  duvd/jjH  of  Acts  x.  38, 
and  the  i^^isiv  fis  of  Isa.  Ixi.  1.  For  it 
is  a  consequent  upon  the  righteous  course 
of  the  Son  of  God  in  His  humanity,  and 
therefore  belongs  to  His  triumph,  in 
which  He  is  exalted  above  His  mroyoi. 
Again,  *  the  oil  of  gladness '  seems 
rather  to  point  to  a  festive  and  triumph- 
ant than  to  an  inau2;urative  unction. 
We  should  therefore  rather  take  the 
allusion  to  be,  as  in  Psalms  xxiii.  5  j 
xcii.  10,  to  the  custom  of  anointing 
guests  at  feasts  ;  so  that  as  the  King  in 
the  Psalm  is  anointed  with  the  oil  of 
rejoicing  above  His  fellows,  because  of 
His  having  loved  righteousness  and 
hated  iniquity,  so  Christ  in  the  jubilant 
celebration  of  His  finished  course  at  His 
exaltation  in  heaven  is  anointed  with 
the  festive  oil,  'kclou  rovg  /ui^iro^oug  aurou 
224 


.  .  .  '  Oil  of  rejoicing '  (oil  indicative 
of  joy,  as  it  is  of  superabundance  :  cf, 
Isa.  Ixi.  3)  beyond  thy  felloivs  (?>.,  in 
the  Psalm,  other  kings)  .  .  .  We  must, 
I  think,  take  {j^ir6')^o\jg  (Heb.  i.  9)  as 
representing  other  heavenly  beings, 
partakers  in  the  same  glorious  and  sii^ 
less  state  with  Himself,  though  not  in 
the  strict  sense  His  '  fellows.'  .  .  . 
Thus  only  can  the  figure  of  anointing  at 
a  triumphant  festival  be  carried  out 
consistently — that  triumph  having  take^ 
place  on  the  exaltation  of  the  Redeemer 
to  the  Father's  right  hand  and  throne 
when  the  whole  of  the  heavenly  com- 
pany, His  ,airo;^o/in  glory  and  joy,  being 
anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness.  His 
share  and  dignity  was  so  much  greater 
than  tiieirs." 

2.  His  joy,  in  His  bride — the  Church. 
"  Upon  Thy  right  hand  did  stand  the 
queen  in  gold  of  Ophir."  The  Church 
is  here  and  elsewhere  in  Scripture  re- 
presented as  the  Bride  of  Christ.  Con- 
cerning the  Church,  two  things  are  here 
indicated  by  the  Psalmist.  (1)  Her 
honourable  position,  "  upon  Thy  right 
hand."  "  The  place  on  the  right  hand 
is  the  place  of  honour."  In  the  affec- 
tions of  the  Messiah  the  Church  has  the 
place  M'hich  the  bride  has  in  the  affec- 
tions of  her  husband.  **  Christ  loved 
the  Church,  and  gave  Himself  for  it," 
&c.  (Eph.  V.  25-27).  (2)  Her  glorious 
dress.  ''  The  queen  in  gold  of  Ophir." 
The  gold  of  Ophir  was  proverbial  for  its 
fineness.  The  dress  of  the  Church  con- 
sists of  the  graces  of  character  ex- 
emplified by  her  members.  These  are 
marked  by  two  prominent  features. 
Purity.  Christians  are  "  arrayed  in  fine 
linen  clean  and  white  ;  for  the  fine  linen 
is  the  righteousnesss  of  saints."  Pre- 
ciousness.  We  owe  our  redemption  and 
all  our  graces  to  *'  the  precious  blood  of 
Christ."  More  precious  than  "gold  of 
Ophir  "  are  the  virtues  and  graces  of  a 
Christ-like  soul. 

3.  His  joy  in  the  handmaids  of  Him- 
self and  His  bride.  "  Whereby  they 
have  made  Thee  glad.  Kings'  daughters 
are  among  Thy  honourable  women." 
The  King  was  made  glad  by  the  dis- 
tinguished persons  who  attended  upon 
Him  and  His  consort.     "  The  number- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  ZLV. 


iiig  of  kingV  daughters  among  His 
honourable  women,  or  maids  of  honour, 
intimates  that  the  kings  whose  daughters 
they  were,  should  be  tributaries  to  Him, 
and  dependents  on  Him,  and  would 
therefore  think  it  a  preferment  to  their 
daughters  to  attend  Him."  May  we 
not  discover  here  a  prophecy  that  every- 
thing which  is  distinguished,  exalted, 
and  beautiful  shall  become  a  handmaid 
to  the  religion  of  Christ?  Science  shall 
bring  her  discoveries  and  lay  tbem  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus,  to  be  used  for  the  pro- 
motion of  His  cause.  Architecture 
shall  put  forth  her  noblest  efforts  in  His 
service.  And  poetry  and  music,  paint- 
ing and  sculpture,  shall  consecrate  them- 
selves to  Him.  To  a  great  extent  this 
is  already  true.  One  day  it  shall  be 
completely  and  universally  true. 

4.  The  greatness  and  diffusiveness  of 
His  joy.  "  All  Thy  garments  smell  of 
myrrh,  and  aloes,  and  cassia,  out  of  the 
ivory  palaces."  Palaces  whose  chambers 
were  adorned  and  probably  inlaid  with 


ivory  seem  to  have  been  common 
amongst  princes  and  wealthy  men. 
Comp.  1  Kings  xxii.  39  ;  Song  of  Sol. 
vii.  4;  Amos  iii.  15,  vi.  4.  From  such 
palaces,  the  maids  of  honour  and  the 
consort  are  represented  as  coming,  to  the 
great  joy  of  the  King.  The  garments 
smelling  of  myrrh,  and  aloes,  and  cassia, 
seem  to  us  to  refer  to  the  anointing, 
which  was  so  generous  that  His  gar- 
ments were  impregnated  with  the 
odours  and  diffused  the  choice  perfumes 
around. 

Conclusion. — We  have  two  most  in- 
spiring facts — 1.  The  Messiah  reigneth, 
reigneth  in  righteousness,  and  shall 
reign  for  ever.  2.  TJie  Messiah  7'ejoiceth, 
in  the  Father's  delight  in  Him,  in  the 
Church  which  He  loves,  and  in  the  dis- 
tinguished handmaids  who  wait  upon 
His  cause.  One  day  His  joy  will  be 
complete.  He  "  shall  be  satisfied."  Be 
it  ours,  however  feebly,  to  the  utmost  of 
our  powers  to  extend  His  reign  and 
enhance  His  joy. 


The  Church  and  Her  Lord, 
{Verses  10-17.) 


In  these  verses  we  have — 

I.     Exhortation     to    the    Ckurch. 

"  Hearken,  0  daughter,  and  consider, 
and  incline  thine  ear,"  &c.  (vers.  10 
and  11).  This  is  the  language  of  the 
Psalmist  addressed  to  the  Church,  and 
the  Bride  of  the  Messiah.  She  is  ex- 
horted— 

1.  To  devote  herself  unreservedly  to 
Him.  "Forget  thine  own  people  and 
thy  father's  house."  '*  The  idea  here  is 
that  which  we  find  so  often  enforced  in 
the  New  Testament,  that  they  who  be- 
come the  followers  of  the  Saviour  must 
be  willing  to  forsake  all  for  Him,  and  to 
identify  themselves  with  Him  and  His 
cause.  The  strongest  earthly  ties  are 
to  be  made  subservient  to  a  higher  and 
stronger  tie,  if  we  would  become  true 
foUoNvers  of  the  Saviour."  —  Barnes. 
"  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more 
than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me,  and  he 
that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than 
Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me."  Chrisit 
requires  our  supreme  affection. 


2.  To  reverence  Him.     "He  is  thy 

Lord,  and  worship  thou  Him."  *'  Sarah 
obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord." 
*'  Let  the  wife  see  that  she  reverence 
her  husband."  "  Christ  is  the  Head  of 
the  Church.  The  Church  is  subject 
unto  Christ."  The  Church  must  pay 
Divine  honours  to  her  Lord;  must  sub- 
mit to  His  authority,  and  worship  Him 
as  God. 

II.  Encouragement  to  the  Church. 
The  Church  is  encouraged  by  the 
Psalmist  to  expect,  if  she  thus  reverences 
and  devotes  herself  to  her  Lord,  that — 

1.  The  King  shall  delight  in  her, 
"  So  shall  the  King  greatly  desire  thy 
beauty."  The  more  we  renounce  all 
sinful  and  selfish  inclinations,  that  we 
may  please  the  Lord  Christ,  the  more 
acceptable  shall  we  be  found  in  His 
sight.  And  not  simply  acceptable,  but 
pleasureable.  "The  Lord  taketh  plea- 
sure in  His  people."  By  supreme  devo- 
tion to  Him  we  may  gratify  the  heart  of 
Christ, — give  Him  joy. 

225 


PSALM  XLT. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


2.  Distinguished  peoples  shall  honour 
her,  "  And  the  daughter  of  Tyre  shall 
be  there  with  a  gift;  the  rich  among 
the  people  shall  intreat  thy  favour." 
"  In  the  time  of  the  Psalmist,  Tyre  was 
probably  the  most  wealthy  and  luxuri- 
ous commercial  town  then  existing ;  and 
it  is  referred  to  here  as  meaning  that 
persons  of  highest  rank,  and  of  the 
greatest  riches,  and  those  who  were  sur- 
rounded most  by  affluence  and  luxury, 
would  honour"  the  Church  when  faith- 
ful to  her  Lord.  Hengstenbero;  trans- 
lates  :  "  So  will  the  daughter  Tyre  im- 
plore thee  with  gifts,  the  rich  among 
the  people."  He  says  :  "  The  object  of 
the  earnest  entreaty  is  reception  into  the 
community  of  the  people  of  God  (comp. 
Is.  xliv.  5,  Prf.  xlvii.  9).  .  .  .  Only 
when  the  Church  of  God  really  occupies 
the  position  of  the  Church  of  God,  can 
prayer  be  directed  to  her  for  reception 
into  her  society.  The  Church  exercises 
a  drawing  power  toward  those  that  are 
without,  in  exact  proportion  to  her  own 
internal  connection  with  the  Lord.  Her 
surrender  to  the  Lord  forms  the  ground 
of  the  heathen's  surrender  to  her." 
When  the  Church  is  thoroughly  de- 
voted to  her  Lord,  the  world  will  hon- 
our her  by  seeking  union  with  her.  A 
devoted  Church  would  speedily  result 
in  a  converted  world. 

III.  The  glory  of  the  Church.  "  The 
King's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within, 
her  clothing  is  of  wrought  gold."  The 
^^  within"  is  to  be  understood  in  a  local 
sense.  The  bride  was  glorious  within 
her  father's  palace.  The  Church  of 
Christ  is  glorious  when  fully  conse- 
crated to  Him.  The  glory  of  holiness 
adorns  her  splendidly  as  a  garment  of 
fine  gold.  Christ  has  given  her  His 
own  glory.  "  The  glory  which  Thou 
gavest  me  I  have  given  them."  ^*  The 
beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  is  upon " 
her.  The  glory  of  the  Church  is  in  her 
faith,  hope,  love,  patience,  righteous- 
ness, holy  zeal,  &c.  As  these  are  ex- 
pressed in  her  life,  she  honours  God 
and  is  honoured  by  man. 

IV.  The  marriage  celebration  of  the 
Church.  "  She  shall  be  brought  unto 
the  King  in  raiment  of  needlework," 
&c.  (vers.  14,  15).    The  figure  is  that  of 

226 


an  Oriental  marriage.  These  verses 
speak  of  the  procession  of  the  bride 
from  the  house  of  her  father  to  that  of 
her  husband.  The  figure  probably  points 
to  the  reception  of  the  redeemed  Church 
into  heaven  to  be  for  '*  ever  with  the 
Lord."  This  reception  is  spoken  of  in 
Kev.  xix.  7,  8.  Concerning  this  cele- 
bration, the  poet  brings  into  view  two 
features — 

1.  Its  splendour.  The  glory  of  the 
bride,  her  clothing  of  wrought  gold,  her 
raiment  of  needlework,  and  her  brides- 
maids are  all  indicative  of  this.  "  Christ 
loved  the  Church,  and  gave  Himself  for 
it ;  that  He  might  sanctify  and  cleanse 
it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the 
word,  that  He  might  present  it  to  Him- 
self a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot, 
cr  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that 
it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish." 

2.  Its  joyousness,  "  With  gladness 
and  rejoicing,"  (fee.  Great  will  be  the 
joy  when  the  redeemed  are  received  into 
the  full  glories  of  heaven.  How  great 
the  joy  of  the  bride  !  of  the  Bridegroom  ! 
of  the  angels  !  of  the  Eternal  Father  ! 

V.  The  assurances  given  to  the 
Lord  of  the  Church.  "  Instead  of 
Thy  fathers  shall  be  Thy  children,"  <fec. 
(ver.  16,  17).  The  Messiah-King  is 
here  assured  of — 

1.  A  numerous  offspring.  The  16th 
"  verse  rests  upon  the  custom  of  wish- 
ing to  the  married  pair  a  numerous  and 
mighty  offspring"  (comp.  Gen.  xxiv.  60, 
Ruth  iv.  11,  12).  Christ  shall  bring 
"  many  sons  unto  glory."  "  Many  shall 
come  from  the  east  and  the  west,  and 
from  the  nor^h  and  the  south,  and  shall 
sit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God." 
"  Lo,  a  great  multitude  which  no  man 
could  number,  of  all  nations,"  <fec. 

2.  A  distinguished  offspring.  "  Whom 
Thou  mayest  make  princes  in  all  the 
earth."  "  The  image  here  is  derived, 
undoubtedly,  from  the  custom  prevail- 
ing among  kings  of  assigning  portions 
of  an  empire  as  provinces  to  their  sons  " 
(comp.  2  Sam.  viii.  18,  2  Chron.  xi.  23). 
All  who  become  subjects  of  the  Messiah 
are  invested  with  sovereign  authority. 
They  are  "  made  kings  and  priests  unto 
God  and  His  Father." 

3.  Perpetual  praise.     "  I  will  make 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XLY 


Thy  name  to  be  remembered  in  all 
generations ;  therefore  shall  the  people 
praise  Thee  for  ever  and  ever."  "  God 
hath  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given 
Him  a  name  which  is  above  every 
name,"  &c.     The  praise  of  the  Messiah- 


King  will  be  eternal,  and  ever-increas« 
ing  in  fervour  and  depth  and  fulness. 

Conclusion. — What  is  thy  relation 
to  this  glorious  Being  ?  Trust  Him, 
love  Him,  loyally  serve  Him,  and  great 
and  endless  will  be  thy  blessedness. 


Religious  Worship. 


{Vene 

"  For  He  is  thy  Lord  ',  and  worship 
thou  Him." 

In  the  institution  of  worship  we  have 
the  encouraging  declaration  that  God 
may  be  sought,  that  God  may  be  found. 

Consider  the  nature,  the  reason,  and 
the  importance  of  religious  worship. 

I.  Its  nature. 

1.  Its  internal  principles.  There  must 
be  reverence;  .  .  .  not,  indeed,  terror, 
but  sacred  awe.  And  as  we  are  sinful 
creatures,  there  must  be  that  deep  hu- 
miliation which  implies  self-displacence 
and  abhorrence.  .  .  .  The,  very  thought 
of  God,  the  recollection  that  we  are  in 
His  immediate  presence,  will  prostrate 
and  humble  us,  if  we  worship  Him 
aright.  Another  principle  of  worship 
for  fallen  man  must  be  trud  in  atone- 
ment. Whatsoever  things  we  ask  in 
})rayer  must  be  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
believinsr  in  Him.     There  must  be  sub- 

O 

mission.  For  a  rebel  to  worship  is  only 
mockery.  Another  principle  is  love. 
Gratitude  for  past  mercies,  .  .  .  su- 
preme affection,  .  .  .  delight  in  Divine 
goodness,  &c. 

2.  Its  external  manifestations.  And 
here  we  have  Acts.  As  prayer, — thanks- 
giving,— commemoration,  &c.  Places. 
The  closet, — the  family, — the  church, — 
the  great  assembly. 

II.  The  ground  and  reason  of  wor- 
ship.    "  For  He  is  thy  Lord." 

1.  This  declares  to  us  the  Divine 
greatness  ;  for  the  Lord  of  the  Church  is 
Lord  of  all ;  and,  if  so,  the  highest  views 
are  presented  of  His  grandeur  and  glory. 
.  .  .  Sum  up  all  the  particulars  of 
creature-glory  ;  collect  it  into  one  mass  ; 
it  i.4  all  from  Him  ;  and  He  who  could 
impart  so  much,  has  yet  more  in  Him- 
Bell.  .  .  If  worship  implies  reverence 
and  sacred  awe,  surely  this  is  He  to 
whom  worship  belonga. 


11.) 

2.  As  He  is  our  Lord,  He  stands  to 
us  in  the  relation  of  an  absolute  dominion. 
We  ourselves,  our  family,  our  country, 
our  world,  are  all  under  His  sway.  Our 
life  is  given,  supported,  terminated  by 
Him.  If  worship  implies  prayer,  we 
see  the  reason  for  it  in  His  boundless 
dominion,  His  absolute  lordship. 

3.  He  is  our  Lord  legislatively.  As 
He  is  holy  and  good,  His  will  must  reier 
to  a  holy  and  felicitous  course  of  action. 
And  in  proportion  to  the  wisdom,  holi- 
ness, and  goodness  of  this,  must  He  be 
bound,  by  the  perfection  of  His  own 
character,  to  guard  His  law,  the  expres- 
sion of  His  will,  from  violation.  This 
He  has  done.  The  law  is  sanctioned 
by  the  penalty  of  eternal  death.  Now 
we  have  sinned  against  Him,  and  thus, 
do  we  stand  in  relation  to  His  law 
and  Himself,  as  guilty  and  con- 
demned sinners.  If,  then,  we  have 
offended  our  sovereign  Lord ;  and  if 
worship  implies  penitence  and  confes- 
sion, here  is  another  reason  why  we 
should  worship. 

4.  But  to  the  Church  may  it  be 
specially  said,  ^^  He  is  thy  Lord.""  The 
true  Church  is  a  society  arising  from  the 
fact  of  actual  reconciliation  to  God  by 
Christ  Jesus.  To  this  He  stands  in  the 
special  relation  of  a  gracious  Sovereign. 
And  here  we  find  another  ground  of  the 
worship  of  the  Church.  There  is  praise 
to  Him  for  His  goodness, — trust  in  His 
everlasting  mercy, — the  thankful  recog- 
nition of  all  His  mighty  and  marvellous 
interpositions,  <fec. 

III.  The  importance  of  worship. 

1.  Wherever  there  is  true  worship, 
there  the  great  fundamental  truths  of 
religion  are  proclaimed  before  the  world. 
The  true  God  is  proclaimed.  Faith  tells 
of  the  altar  of  the  perfect  Sacrifice,  and 
the  smoke  of  His  atonement  fills  hei 

227 


tSAtM  XL VI. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


courts.     Her  services  proclaim  Christ  to 
be  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life,  <fec. 

2.  T7'iie  Christian  worship  secures  the 
constant  publication  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Does  any  one  neglect  that  Word  at 
home  ?  It  is  here  sounded  in  his  ears. 
Or  does  he  read  without  understanding 
it  ?  It  is  here  explained  and  enforced, 
&c. 

3.  In  the  public  assemblies  of  the 
Church,  there  is  the  special  presence  of 
God.  "  I  Lave  seen  Thee,  "  says  Lord 
Biicon,  "  in  Thy  works,  and  sought  Thee 
in  Thy  providences,  but  I  have  found 
TLee  in  Thy  temples."  Wherever  two 
or  three  meet  together  in  the  name  of 
Christ  He  is  present  with  them. 

4.  Public  worship  both  presents  to  us  the 


most  perfect  type  of  heaven  on  earth  and 
furnishes  an  efficient  preparation  for  it. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  us  feel  it  our 
duty  to  ujjhold  His  worship . 

2.  Let  us  know  and  feel  the  evil  of  a 
careless,  formal  service.  "  God  is  a 
Spirit;  and  they  that  worship  Him 
must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in 
truth." 

3.  Let  us  be  ourselves  increasingly 
spiritual  in  worship,  preserving  the  spirit 
of  devotion  amidst  all  the  engagements 
and  trials  of  life  ;  so  shall  we  never  be 
denied  the  blessed  privilege  of  access  to 
the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace ;  and 
in  the  manifested  love  of  God,  we  shall 
enjoy  a  heaven  upon  earth. — Richard 
Watson.     Abridged. 


PSALM  XLYI. 
Introduction. 

Superscription. — "  To  the  Chief  Musician  for  the  sons  of  Korah."  See  Introduction  to  Psalm 
xlii.  "A  song  upon  Alamoth."  Great  uncertainty  attaches  to  the  meaning  of  "Alamoth." 
Some  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  the  name  of  a  musical  instrument.  Others  that  it  is  the  name 
of  a  melody.  While  Fuerst  says  it  is  the  "  proper  name  of  a  musical  choir,  dwelling  perhaps  in 
^'?J^f  over  whom  was  placed  a  0?f^^  (director)  Ps.  xlvi."  The  word  occurs  in  1  Chron.  xv. 
20,  last  clause,  wliich,  says  Fuerst,  "is  to  be  understood  with  harps  over  the  corps  Alamoth 
{to  direct  it)  ;  O^r?^  to  be  applied  as  it  stands  in  xv.  21." 

It  is  impossible  to  determine  who  the  author  of  the  psalm  is.  Nor  are  we  able  to  say  with 
certainty  upon  what  occasion  it  was  composed.  We  think  it  very  probable  that  it  refers  to  the 
threatened  invasion  of  Jerusalem  by  Sennacherib,  and  the  destruction  of  his  army  in  the  night 
by  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  See  2  Kings  xix.  and  Isa.  xxxvi.,  xxxvii.  Barnes  points  out  that 
"all  the  circumstances  in  that  invasion — the  tumultuous  hosts  summoned  for  the  war  (Isa. 
xxxvi.  2)  ;  the  overthrow  of  numerous  nations  by  their  armies  (Isa.  xxxvi.  18-21)  •  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  itself  (Isa.  xxxvi.  2) ;  the  confidence  of  Hezekiah  and  his  people  in  God 
when  the  city  was  besieged  (Isa.  xxxvii.  14-20) ;  and  the  final  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  host 
by  the  angel  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36)  agree  well  with  all  the  statements  in  the  psalm." 

A    TUMULTUOUS  WoRLD  AND  A  TRANQUIL  ChURCH. 


(Verses 

We  have  here — 

I.  A  tumultuous  World.  The  poet 
sets  before  us  a  scene  of  wild  commo- 
tion. Kingdoms  were  shaking;  peoples 
were  roaring,  the  earth  itself  seemed 
unstable,  the  sea  was  rolling  in  trouble 
and  breaking  in  thunder,  and  the  firm 
and  lofty  mountains  seemed  to  tremble 
with  the  breaking  of  the  billows  upon 
their  base.  This  would  very  fitly  describe 
the  state  of  affiiirs  at  the  time  of  the  in- 
vasions of  Sennacherib.  That  monarch 
has  already  taken  "all  the  cities  of  the 
228 


1-7.) 

tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  by  force." 
Hezekiah  has  made  considerable  prepa- 
rations for  the  defence  of  Jerusalem. 
He  has  "  strengthened  the  walls,  added 
to  the  fortifications,  laid  in  great  store 
of  arrows  and  other  ammunition,  deep- 
ened the  trenches,  and  cut  off  all  the 
waters  which  might  have  supplied  the 
besieging  army."  In  order  to  avert  the 
storm,  Hezekiah  submitted  to  Senna- 
cherib, and  paid  to  him  an  enormous 
tribute,  for  which  he  was  obliged  to 
strip  the  gold  from  the  walls  and  pillars 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


rSALM  XLTL 


of  the  Temple,  Sennacherib  having  pro- 
mised that,  if  this  tribute  were  paid,  he 
would  depart  in  a  friendly  manner.  And 
then,  although  he  departed  to  the  con- 
quest of  Egypt,  he  perfidiously  left 
behind  him  a  large  force  which  marched 
upon  Jerusalem  and  demanded  its  un- 
conditional surrender.  Thus  Senna- 
cherib, with  his  immense  and  apparently 
irresistible  army,  was  spreading  commo- 
tion and  terror  among  the  nations.  The 
tumult  described  by  the  Psalmist  is  a 
picture  of  the  commotions  of  the  world 
to-day.  At  this  moment  in  Europe  we 
have  the  tumult  of  war,  and  the  unrest 
and  anxiety  of  statesmen  and  nations  as 
to  "the  balance  of  power."  In  politics  at 
home  there  are  the  strife  and  contention 
of  parties.  In  the  commercial  world 
there  are, countless  anxieties  and  fierce 
competitions.  Even  the  religious  world 
is  not  free  from  the  noise  of  controversy 
and  the  din  of  party  strife.  In  every 
realm  of  life  there  are  unrest  and  tumult 
to  a  greater  or  less  extent.  All  things 
here  are  in  commotion.  '*  What  nations 
have  passed  away,  like  tracts  of  earth 
carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea  !  What 
mighty  empires,  like  mountains,  have 
sunk  into  the  abyss  !  What  an  emblem 
of  earthly  change  and  disquiet  is  the 
ocean  !  restless  when  most  at  rest  j  and 
affording  no  security,  under  its  most 
placid  aspects,  against  the  rushing  storm 
and  the  heaving  surge.  How  much  is 
swept  aw;iy  already  I  and  there  are 
still  mountains  of  worldly  pomp  and 
power  which  at  this  moment  *  shake 
with  the  swelling  thereof.'  " 

I.  The  tumult  of  the  world  is  an 
evidence  of  the  sin  of  the  world.  In 
some  instances  it  is  a  direct  expression 
of  sin.  In  all  cases  it  is  a  sign  of  sin. 
The  world  is  tumultuous  because  of  the 
guilt,  the  selfish  ambitions,  the  evil  pas- 
sions, &c.,  of  men.  2.  The  tumult  of 
the  world  will  one  day  be  removed.  The 
great  mission  of  Christ  is  to  put  away 
Bin.  In  that  mission  He  will  certainly 
succeed.  When  sin  is  put  away  all 
strife  and  tumult  will  cease.  There  is 
a  calm  and  peaceful  realm  where  strife 
and  commotion  are  unknown,  because 
sin  is  unknown  there. 

II.  A  tranquil  Church.     The  poet 


sketches  a  scene  of  most  delightful  quiet. 
He  shows  us  **  a  valley  over  which  the 
winds  sweep,  and  are  not  felt;  along 
which  the  river  flows  and  is  not  troubled, 
in  which  stands  the  city  of  God."  We 
have  here — 

1.  An  assurance  of  security.  "  God 
is  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very 
present  help  in  trouble.  Therefore  will 
not  we  fear,"  &c.  **God  is  in  the 
midst  of  her  ;  she  shall  not  be  moved." 
(1)  The  ground  of  this  assurance,  (a) 
The  presence  of  God.  "  God  is  in  the 
midst  of  her."  '<  The  Lord  of  hosts  is 
with  us."  God  in  the  visible  symbol  of 
His  presence  dwelt  between  the  cheru- 
bim in  the  holy  of  holies.  The  holy 
city  was  His  chosen  abode,  and  He 
would  defend  it.  The  Jews  under  Heze- 
kiah  were  His  people,  and  He  would 
protect  them.  The  city  or  people  which 
is  kept  by  God  is  inviolably  secure. 
The  Church  can  never  suflfer  real  loss  or 
harm  while  she  is  able  truthfully  to  say, 
"  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us.  God  is 
in  the  midst  of  us."  (b)  The  seasonable 
help  of^  God,  "  God  shall  help  her,  uiid 
that  right  early."  Margin  :  "  When 
the  morning  appeareth. "  Hengstenberg : 
"  God  helps  her  at  the  break  of  morn- 
ing." "  Distress  with  the  Lord's  people 
can  have  only,  as  it  were,  a  night's  quar- 
ters. Whenever  the  morning  breaks, 
the  Lord  drives  it  from  its  resting-place, 
and  sends  another,  an  abiding  guest, 
salvation.  There  is  probably  an  allusion 
to  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrians, 
Then,  in  reality,  did  there  stand  but  one 
night  between  the  highest  pitch  of  dis- 
tress and  the  most  complete  deliverance, 
comp.  Isa.  xvii.  14 :  '  And  behold  at 
evening-tide  trouble,  before  the  morning 
comes,  it  is  no  more  '  (xxxvii.  36);  '  And 
they  arose  in  the  morning,  and  lo  !  they 
were  all  dead  corpses.'"  (2)  7'he  vin- 
dication of  this  assiwance.  (a)  In  the 
character  and  7'esources  of  God.  Char- 
acter. He  is  "the  God  of  Jacob," — a 
God  in  covenant  with  His  people,  a 
faithful  God ;  therefore  it  is  wise  to 
trust  Him.  Resources.  He  is  "  the 
Lord  of  hosts."  He  rules  the  hosts  of 
the  stars.  The  armies  of  heaven — the 
angela — loyally  follow  His  command. 
And  He  has  sovereign  right  and  power 

229 


PSALM  XLYX. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


over  all  the  hosts  of  men.  "  Hosts  may 
be  against  us,  but  we  need  not  fear  them 
if  the  Lord  of  hosts  be  with  us."  "  Fear 
not;  for  tkey  that  be  with  us  are  more 
than  they  that  be  with  them."  (6)  In 
the  mighty  doings  of  God.  "  He  uttered 
His  voice,  the  earth  melted."  Barnes 
says  :  "  The  very  earth  seemed  to  melt 
or  dissolve  before  Him.  Everything 
became  still.  The  danger  passed  away 
at  His  command,  and  the  raging  world 
became  calm."  Mark  the  ease  with 
which  it  is  done.  "  It  shall  not  cost  the 
Lord  any  business  to  despatch  the  ene- 
mies of  His  people ;  let  Him  show 
Himself  a  little,  let  Him  but  say  the 
word,  and  they  are  gone  ;  as  snow  before 
the  sun,  or  fat  cast  into  the  fire,  so  are 
they  consumed ;  He  uttered  His  voice, 
the  earth  melted." — Dickson.  Remark- 
ably this  is  illustrated  in  the  destruction 
of  the  Assyrians. 

"  For  the  angel  of  death  spread  his  wings  on 

the  blast, 
And  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he 

passed  ! 
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  wax'd  deadly 

and  chill, 
And  their  hearts  but  once  heaved,  and  for 

ever  grew  still." 

In  the  morning  one  hundred  and  eighty- 
five  thousand  warriors  lay  dead  upon  the 
plain.  God  had  spoken  ;  and  Assyria 
was  utterly  crushed,  and  Jerusalem  was 
delivered.  So  will  it  be  with  all  the 
enemies  of  the  Church  when  God  ariseth. 
2.  An  assurance  of  Refreshment. 
"  There  is  a  river  the  streams  whereof 
shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God."  This 
figure  was  probably  suggested  by  the 
arrangements   made   by    Hezekiah    for 


cutting  off  the  water-supply  from  the 
invading  army  and  securing  the  same 
to  Jerusalem.  The  refreshment  and 
gladness  afforded  by  the  Divine  provi- 
sions are  set  forth  under  the  image  of 
this  river.  "  How  fit  an  emblem  is  this 
of  the  supplies  with  which  God  blesses 
His  Church  !  See  it  in  the  rich  supply 
of  truth  and  grace.  Here  flows  the 
stream  of  heavenly  truth,  bright  and 
pure.  It  has  widened  as  it  has  flowed  ; 
and  it  now  sweeps  with  all  the  fulness 
of  the  last  and  perfect  revelation  from 
God.  Grace  to  apply  that  revelation  to 
practical  purposes  is  equally  free.  *  If 
any  man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of 
God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally 
and  upbraideth  not.'  See  here  the  rich 
supply  of  grace  and  blessing.  Here  the 
penitent  guilty  are  freely  forgiven  ;  here 
the  corrupt  and  degenerate  heart  is 
made  new,  <kc.  Life,  love,  and  holiness, 
all  are  given.  Life,  supernatural  vigour, 
love,  which  connects  our  affections  with 
God  and  heaven  ;  and  holiness,  leading 
to  present  fellowship  with  God,  and 
fitting  us  for  a  blissful  immortality." — 
Watson.  Here  in  the  Church  the  '*  river  " 
of  Divine  grace  flows  deep  and  full,  and 
from  it  "  streams  ^  of  blessing  go  forth 
diffusing  life  and  joy. 

Conclusion. — Let  us  seek  this  trust- 
ful and  conquering  spirit,  which,  in  the 
midst  of  dangers  and  when  confronted 
by  powerful  foes,  confidently  sings, — 
"  God  is  our  refuge  and  strength,"  &c. 
Now,  in  the  midst  of  the  strife  and 
storm,  let  us  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  the 
Lord.  In  due  season  victory  and  calm 
rest  shall  be  ours. 


Contemplation  of  the  Doings  op  God. 
(Verses  8-n.) 


The  Psalmist  here  calls  upon  the 
people  to  behold  the  marvellous  doings 
of  God,  which  laid  so  firm  a  foundation 
for  confidence  in  His  protection  and 
help. 

I.  The  object  contemplated.  The 
Poet  calls  to  the  contemplation  of  "  the 
works  of  the  Lord,"  and  indicates  what 
works  he  particularly  refers  to.  He  speaks 
of  the  "  desolations  He  hath  made  in  the 
230 


earth."  Hengstenberg  says :  "  The  deso- 
lation must  have  for  its  object  those  who 
had  raised  themselves  against  the  people 
of  God,  and  threatened  to  swallow  them 
up."  And  Matthew  Henry:  "The 
destruction  they  designed  to  bring  upon 
the  Church  has  been  turned  upon  them- 
selves. War  is  a  tragedy  which  com- 
monly destroys  the  stage  it  is  acted 
on.''     What  desolations  were  brought 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALM  XLYI. 


upon  the  Assyrians  when  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  smote  in  their  camp  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty-five  thousand  men  ! 
'*  He  maketh  wars  to  cease  unto  the  end 
of  the  earth.'^  "  The  means  by  which 
God  silences  war  to  the  end  of  the 
earth,"  says  Hengstenberg,  *'isthe  over- 
throw of  the  wild  conquerors  and  tyr- 
ranical  lords."  Barnes  points  out  that 
"  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  army 
would  probably  put  an  end  to  all  the 
wars  then  raging  in  the  world.  The 
Assyrian  empire  was  then  the  most 
mighty  on  the  globe ;  it  was  engaged  in 
wide  schemes  of  conquest;  it  had  al- 
ready overrun  many  of  the  smaller  king- 
doms of  the  world  (Isa.  xxxvii.  18-20) ; 
and^it  hoped  to  complete  its  conquests, 
and  to  secure  the  ascendancy  over  the 
entire  earth,  by  the  subjugation  of  India 
and  Egypt.  When  the  vast  army  of 
that  empire,  engaged  in  such  a  purpose, 
was  overthrown,  the  consequence  would 
be,  that  the  nations  would  be  at  rest,  or 
that  there  would  be  universal  peace." 
"  He  hreaketh  the  how,  and  cutteth  the 
spear  in  sunder.'''  The  enemies  of  the 
Church  were  "  rendered  as  incapable  of 
prosecuting  their  devastations,  or  even 
of  preserving  what  they  had  won,  as  if 
their  implements  of  war  were  destroyed." 
"  He  burneth  the  chariot  in  the  fire" 
There  may  be  a  reference  here  "  to  a 
custom  of  collecting  the  spoils  of  war 
into  a  heap  and  setting  them  on  fire. 
This  was  particularly  done  when  the 
victors  were  unable  to  remove  them,  or 
so  to  secure  them  as  to  preclude  all 
danger  of  their  being  taken  again  and 
used  against  themselves.  This  custom 
is  alluded  to  by  Virgil,  Mn.  viii.  561, 
662. 

*  Quahs  eram,  cum  primam  aciem  Praneste 
sub  ipsa, 
Stravi,  scutorumque  incendi  victor  acervos.* 

The  idea  here  is,  that  God  had  wholly 
overthrown  the  foe,  and  had  prevented 
all  danger  of  his  returning  again  for  pur- 
poses of  conquest." — Barnes. 

This  termination  of  war  and  inaugura- 
tion of  universal  peace  is  an  earnest  of 
what  He  will  one  day  do  finally  and  foi 


ever.  "  They  shall  beat  their  swords 
into  plough-shares,"  &c.  (Isa.  ii.  4,  and 
Mich.  iv.  3).  The  Lord  speed  the  day 
when  the  war  drum  shall  throb  no 
longer,  and  the  battle  flags  be  for  ever 
furled. 

II.  The  design  of  the  contemplation. 
There  is  some  wise  and  worthy  end 
aimed  at  in  thus  calling  upon  men  to 
contemplate  the  doings  of  the  Lord. 
What  is  that  end  1 

1.  The  warning  of  the  enemies  of  the 
Church.  Let  them  behold  these  deso- 
lations, and  learn  that  if  they  oppose 
God  and  His  cause,  however  mighty 
they  may  be,  they  will  be  broken  "  in 
pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel." 

2.  The  encouragement  of  the  Church. 
Let  the  people  of  God  look  on  His 
doings  on  their  behalf  and  sing  with  in- 
creased force  and  fervour, — "  The  Lord 
of  hosts  is  with  us,  the  God  of  Jacob  is 
our  refuge."  (See  remarks  on  ver.  7.) 
Let  them  not  fear  the  wrath  and  power 
of  any  enemy  \  for  the  Lord  hath  said, 
"  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee 
shall  prosper."  In  this  way  history  is 
an  ever-growing  aid  to  faith. 

3.  The  instruction  of  all.  The  Lord 
speaks  :  "  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am 
God,  I  will  be  exalted  among  the 
heathen,  I  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth." 
Let  the  world  listen  and  cease  from 
war  against  the  people  of  God,  "  which, 
as  the  foregoing  fact  shows,  is  a  contest 
oi  feebleness  against  omnipotence,  ruinous 
to  those  who  undertake  it."  Tunmltu- 
ous  world,  *'be  still,  and  know  that,'* 
&c.  Let  the  Church  listen  and  cease  to 
fear,  for  God  will  assuredly  maintain 
His  own  cause  and  honour.  "  Be  still, 
anxiety  and  fear  I  *  I  will  never  leave 
thee  nor  forsake  thee.'  Be  still,  appre- 
hension !  The  whole  world  around  may 
be  disquieted  ;  but  I  am  God,  and  I 
rule  the  whole.  Be  still,  impatience  ! 
I  am  God ;  and  the  times  and  seasons 
are  in  my  power."  With  such  an 
assurance  as  this  from  God  Himself, 
we  may  well  unite  in  chanting,  *'  God  is 
our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  present 
help  in  trouble  :  therefore,  will  not  we 
fear,"  <fcc. 


231 


Psalm  xlvii. 


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM     XLVII. 

Introduction, 

Superscription. — "To  the  Chief  Musician,  a  psalm  for  the  sons  of  Korah."  See  Introduction 

to  Psalm  xlii. 

The  author  of  the  psalm,  and  the  occasion  on  which  it  was  composed,  are  alike  unknown. 
It  is  a  psalm  of  triumph,  and  presents  indications  of  having  been  composed  on  the  occasion  of 
Bome  signal  victory.  Professor  Alexander  and  Hengstenberg  suggest  that  it  was  composed  to 
celebrate  the  victory  of  Jehoshaphat  over  the  combined  forces  of  the  Moabites,  Ammonites, 
and  Edomites  (2  Chron.  xx.).  The  suggestion  seems  to  us  very  reasonable.  Reasons  such  aa 
these  are  offered  in  support  of  it  : — 1.  The  manifestation  of  the  hand  of  God  in  the  victory,  as 
it  was  obtained  without  any  fighting  on  the  part  of  the  chosen  people.  2.  Special  mention  of 
the  Kohathites  as  having  been  present  in  the  army  (2  Chron.  xx.  19).  3.  A  service  of  praise 
to  God  was  held  in  the  valley  before  the  departure  of  Jehoshaphat  and  his  people  (2  Chron. 
XX.  26),  which  probably  suggested  ver.  5  of  the  psalm.  "  From  that  valley  God  made,  as  it 
were,  His  ascent  to  heaven,  after  having  achieved  redemption  for  His  people." 


Exhortation  to  Praise  God,  because  of  His  Government  op 

THE  World. 


We  have  in  the  psalm — 

I.  Reasons  why  we  should  praise 
God.  The  one  great  general  reason 
upon  which  the  Psalmist  bases  his  ap- 
peal to  men  to  praise  God  is  that  of 
His  reign  over  the  earth.  But  he 
brings  forward  particular  reasons. 

1 .  Because  of  His  majesty  and  power. 
*'  For  the  Lord  most  High  is  terrible." 
He  is  exalted  infinitely  above  the 
noblest  created  being.  He  is  "  Most 
High  "  over  all,  and  should  be  rever- 
enced by  all.  He  had  shown  Himself 
"  terrible "  in  the  destruction  of  the 
enemies  of  His  people  ;  therefore,  let  all 
who  are  not  loyally  subject  unto  Him 
stand  in  awe  of  Him.  The  justice  and 
power  of  God  are  "  terrible  "  to  the  ene- 
mies of  His  Church. 

2.  Because  of  the  universality  of  His 
rule.  "A  great  King  over  all  the  earth, 
.  .  .  God  reigneth  over  the  heathen." 
He  reigns  over  all  kings  and  princes. 
He  "  bringeth  the  princes  to  nothing, 
He  maketh  the  judges  of  the  earth  as 
vanity."  Over  the  affairs  of  the  whole 
universe  God  is  supreme.  The  dark- 
ness and  evil  He  permits  and  curbs ; 
the  light  and  goodness  He  enjoins  and 
originates.  He  has  abandoned  no 
part  of  the  earth.  He  "hath  estab- 
lished His  throne  in  the  heavens  and 
His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all."  All 
things  are  being  ordered  and  controlled 
and  overruled  by  Him  for  the  accom- 

232 


plishment  of  His  own  wise  and  blessed 
purposes.  Even  the  hostility  of  sin  and 
sinners,  and  of  the  devil,  He  restrains 
and  overrules  for  the  good  of  His 
universe.  Satan  is  but  a  vassal  in  the 
great  empire  of  the  Lord  our  King. 
Therefore  let  us  praise  Him. 

3.  Because  under  His  government  the 
interests  of  His  loyal  subjects  are  specially 
secured.     We  see  this  (1)  In  the  sub- 
jugation of  their  enemies.     "He  shall 
subdue   the   people   under  us,  and  tha 
nations  under  our  feet."     The  people  of 
God  had  just  witnessed  a  striking  proof 
of  this.     Their  foes  had  been  utterly 
defeated,    and    they    had    neither    dis- 
charged  an   arrow  nor  struck  a  blow ; 
nothing  was  left  for  them  to  do  but  to 
gather  the  spoil.     The  words  in  which 
the  Psalmist  sets  forth  the  subjugation 
by  God  of  the  enemies  of  His  people 
suggest  two  ideas,     (a)  The  ease  with 
which  it  is  accomplished.     "  He  shall 
subdue."     The  word  which  is  here  tran- 
slated   "subdue"    ("^^7)    signifies    to 
speak,  to  command,  to  decree,  &c.     God 
has  but  to  utter  His   commands,  and 
His  enemies  are  discomfited.     (6)  The 
completeness  with   which   it   is   accom- 
plished.    "  Under  us,  .  .  .  under   our 
feet."     What  an  illustration  we  have  of 
this  in  the  battle  which  this  psalm  is 
supposed  to  celebrate  !     "  When  Judah 
came  toward   the  watch-tower   in   the 
wilderness,  they  looked  unto  the  multi 


EOMHETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


rSALH  ZLTIL 


tilde,  and,  behold,  they  were  dead  bodies 
fallen  to  the  earth,  and  none  escaped." 

(2)  In  the  excellence  of  their  own  por- 
tion. '*  He  shall  choose  our  inheritance 
for  us,  the  excellency  of  Jacob  whom 
He  loved."  God  had  given  to  them  the 
holy  land  as  their  portion.  He  selected 
it  for  them.  He  enabled  them  to  take 
possession  of  it.  He  enabled  them  to 
guard  that  possession ;  or,  as  in  this 
victory,  He  guarded  it  for  them  without 
any  effort  on  their  part.  The  poet 
speaks  of  this  land  as  "the  excellency 
of  Jacob,'' — literally,  "  the  pride  of 
Jacob."  It  was  a  land  of  which  he 
would  have  been  proud,  and  in  the 
possession  of  which  he  might  well  have 
gloried.  It  was  **  a  good  land,  a  land 
of  brooks  of  water,  of  fountains  and 
depths  that  spring  out  of  valleys  and 
hills,"  &c.  (Deut.  viii.  7-9).  God  in 
His  government  still  has  special  regard 
to  the  interests  of  His  loyal  subjects. 
*'  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against 
them  shall  prosper."  "  Who  is  he  that 
will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that 
which  is  good?"  ''We  know  that  all 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them 
that  love  God."  "If  God  be  for  us, 
who  can  be  against  us?"  In  this  aspect 
of  His  government  we  have  a  most 
powerful  reason  for  praising  God  and 
His  reign. 

4.  Because  of  the  holiness  of  His 
government.  "  God  sitteth  upon  the 
throne  of  His  holiness."  God's  govern- 
ment is  (1)  Holy  in  its  authority.  He 
has  a  right  to  reign.  He  is  the  greatest, 
the  most  mighty,  the  best  Being  in  the 
universe.  He  created  and  sustains  all 
creatures ;  He  is  the  Father  of  all  His 
intelligent  creatures.  On  these  grounds 
the  righteousness  of  His  authority  is 
indefeasible.  (2)  Holy  in  its  aim.  All 
its  laws  are  true  and  just,  and  are  both 
designed  and  fitted  to  abolish  all  false- 
hood, error,  and  evil,  and  to  establish 
righteousness  and  truth  in  all  places 
firmly  and  for  ever.  The  end  of  all 
God's  dealings  with  our  race  has  been 
to  bless  us  in  turning  us  from  darkness 
unto  light,  and  from  sin  unto  holiness. 

(3)  Holy  in  its  results.  In  proportion 
as  men  yield  loyal  obedience  to  the 
commands  of  God,  holiness,  peace,  and 


joy  are  diffused  in  our  world.  Let  all 
men  everywhere  yield  hearty  obedience 
to  the  Lord  our  King,  and  holiness 
shall  be  universal,  and  the  blessedness 
of  the  race  complete.  Here,  then,  we 
have  an  urgent  incentive  to  praise  God 
because  of  His  government. 

5.  Because  of  the  success  of  His  govern- 
ment. "  The  princes  of  the  people  are 
gathered  together  unto  the  people  of  the 
God  of  Abraham ;  for  the  shields  of  the 
earth  belong  unto  God ;  He  is  greatly 
exalted."  We  understand  this  as  a 
voluntary  gathering  of  heathen  princes, 
that  they  may  be  received  among  the 
people  of  the  Lord.  "  All  kings  shall 
fall  down  before  Him ;  all  nations  shall 
serve  Him."  "  He  shall  speak  peace 
unto  the  heathen ;  and  His  dominion 
shall  be  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the 
river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  The 
government  of  the  Lord  shall  not  fail, 
but  succeed  gloriously.  He  is  the 
rightful  Sovereign  of  all  the  mighty 
ones.  That  right  shall  be  completely 
established.  All  powers  shall  own  His 
supremacy.  He  shall  be  greatly  exalted. 
That  which  to  the  eye  of  the  poet  was 
present  as  he  closed  this  psalm  shall 
one  day  be  fully  and  splendidly  realised. 
Here,  then,  we  have  another  reason  for 
praising  God  for  His  government.  It 
shall  succeed,  and  all  men  shall  enjoy 
its  blessings.  Some  would  limit  the 
"  all  ye  people  "  of  the  first  verse  to  the 
Jewish  people.  There  is  no  need  to  do 
that,  for  the  time  is  hastening  on  when 
all  the  people  from  all  lands  will  gladly 
respond  to  the  exhortation  of  the  Psalm- 
ist, and  praise  God  for  His  government 
of  the  world. 

II.  Directions  how  we  should  praise 
God. 

1.  Enthusiastically.  "0  clap  your 
hands,  all  ye  people ;  shout  unto  God 
with  the  voice  of  triumph.  God  is 
gone  up  with  a  shout,  the  Lord  with  the 
sound  of  a  trumpet.  Sing  praises," 
<kc.  In  the  fifth  verse  the  poet  repre- 
sents God  as  having  come  down  to  earth 
to  aid  His  people  in  the  war,  and  having 
wrought  salvation  for  them,  returning 
to  heaven  amid  the  enthusiastic  rejoic- 
ings of  the  people.  There  is  perhaps  a 
reference   to  the   thanksgiving   on  the 

233 


PSALM  XLVIt 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


field  of  battle,  and  the  joy  with  which 
JeUoshaphat  and  his  people  returned  to 
Jerusalem  (2  Chron.  xx.  26-28).  Cer- 
tainly this  poetical  statement,  and  the 
exhortations  of  the  Psabnist,  urge  us  to 
enthusiasm  in  the  praise  of  our  King 
and  God.  The  clapping  of  the  hands 
for  joy,  the  shout  of  triumph,  the  blast  of 
the  trumpet,  and  the  voice  of  song,  are 
all  called  for  by  the  poet  in  this  celebra- 
tion. Let  not  our  praise  of  our  Redeemer 
and  King  be  measured,  cold,  and  heart- 
less, but  hearty,  warm,  and  enthusiastic. 
If  we  are  rightly  sensible  of  what  He 
has  done  for  us,  we  shall  feel  that  even 

"  Eternity's  too  short 
To  utter  all  His  praise." 

2.  Intelligently.  "  Sing  ye  praises 
with  understanding."  Margin  :  '*  Every 
one  that  hath  understanding."  But 
neither  the  textual  nor  the  marginal 
rendering  expresses  the  meaning  of  the 
Hebrew.     The  word  is  TDli^D  maschiL 

"  Sing  a  maschil."  Hengstenberg  : 
"Sing  a  song  with  edification."  Their 
praise  of  the  King  was  to  be  intelligent 
and  instructive.  "  Every  song  in  praise 
of  God,  on  account  of  His  glorious  deeds, 
contains  a  rich  treasure  of  instruction 
and  improvement.    Here  the  instruction 


which  should  be  drawn  out  of  the  fore- 
going deeds  is  expressly  declared.  It  is 
this,  that  God  is  King  over  the  whole 
earth,  that  He  reigns  over  the  heathen, 
that  these  shall  also  some  time  own  His 
sovereignty."  St.  Paul  in  like  manner 
exhorts  Christians  to  pray  and  "  sing 
with  the  spirit,  and  with  the  under- 
standing also,"  that  the  Church  might 
be  edified.  If  others  are  to  be  edified 
by  them,  our  praises  must  be  intelligent. 
Conclusion.  —  Are  we  praising  or 
rebelling  against  this  government? 
Consider,  sinner,  the  wickedness  of  thy 
rebellion.  This  government  is  perfectly 
holy,  and  is  exercised  to  bless  men. 
Rebellion  against  it  is  sin  against  all 
that  is  true  and  right  and  good  in  the 
universe.  Consider  the  madness  of  thy 
rebellion.  "  He  is  wise  in  heart,  and 
mighty  in  strength  ;  who  hath  hardened 
himself  against  Him  and  hath  pros- 
pered 1 "  "  He  must  reign  till  He  hath 
put  all  enemies  under  His  feet."  You 
must  yield  to  be  saved  by  His  grace,  or 
be  crushed  by  His  power  and  wrath, 
"  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be  angry,"  &c. 
Cease  your  rebellion  ;  accept  the  mercy 
of  the  King ;  serve  Him  as  a  loyal  sub- 
ject ;  and  unite  in  praising  Him  because 
of  His  glorious  government  of  the  world. 


The  Choice  of  our  Inheritance, 
(Verse  4.) 


This  verse  presents  to  us  three  matters 
for  consideration. 

I.  Distrust  of  self.  We  would  not 
choose  our  own  inheritance  because  of, 

1.  Our  ignorance.  (1)  We  are  to  a 
great  extent  ignorant  of  ourselves.  Pos- 
sibilities of  both  good  and  evil  are  latent 
within  us  which  God  only  knows.  If 
the  choice  of  our  lot  were  with  us,  we 
might  choose  such  an  one  as  would  tend 
to  crush  the  true  and  good  in  us,  and 
to  quicken  the  evil  into  awful  and  ruin- 
ous development.  God  alone  thoroughly 
understands  our  heart.  (2)  We  are 
ignorant  of  the  future.  We  know  not 
what  a  day  or  an  hour  may  bring  forth. 
The  choice  which  amid  the  circumstances 
of  to-day  seems  wise  and  good,  amid 
those  of  to-morrow  may  seem  evil  and 


painful.  God  alone  thoroughly  knows 
what  is  before  us  in  the  future. 

2.  Our  proneness  to  self-indulgence. 
We  are  apt  to  choose  the  pleasant  rather 
than  the  painful,  the  bright  rather  than 
the  dark,  &c.  And  yet  the  dark  and 
painful  may  be  good  for  us,  and  quite 
essential  to  our  wellbeing.  We  dare  not 
choose  our  own  inheritance. 

II.  Trust  in  God.  "He  shall  choose  our 
inheritance  for  us."  Committing  freely 
the  choice  to  Him  implies  confidence, — 

1.  In  His  wisdom.  "  His  under- 
standing is  infinite."  "  The  only  wise 
God."     He  cannot  err. 

2.  In  His  goodness.  Unless  assured 
of  this  we  could  not  thus  commit  the 
choice  of  our  inheritance  to  Him.  "  The 
Lord  is  gracious,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxlv.  8,  9). 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  xLvnr. 


3.  In  His  interest  in  us  individually/. 
Before  we  can  heartily  trust  God  as  to 
the  appointments  of  our  life  and  lot  we 
must  have  a  persuasion  of  His  knowledge 
of  us  and  interest  in  us  individually. 
We  have  this.  "He  calleth  His  own 
Bheep  bi/  name*^  No  act  of  kindness 
rendered  even  "unto  one  of  the  least  of 
the  brethren  "  of  our  Lord  is  overlooked 
by  Him.  He  never  loses  sight  of  the 
particular  in  the  general,  or  of  the 
individual  in  the  community.  So  we 
trust  in  Him.     "  He  shall  choose,"  &c. 

III.  Trust  in  God  rewarded.  "  The 
excellency  of  Jacob  whom  He  loved." 
He  ehooses  an  inheritance  for  us  such  as 


Jacob  might  have  been  proud  of  and 
rejoiced  in.  And  He  who  chooses  also 
bestows  the  inheritance.  What  a  precious 
spiritual  heritage  is  ours  in  the  present ! 
pardon,  purity,  peace,  sustaining  and  sanc- 
tifying grace !  &c.  And  for  temporal  and 
material  things  we  have  the  assurance 
that  "  no  good  will  He  withhold  from  " 
us.  What  a  glorious  heritage  awaits  us 
in  the  future  I  He  hath  chosen  for  us 
"an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  un- 
defiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,"  <kc. 
And  He  will  bestow  it  upon  us. 

Thankfully  and  gladly  let  us  accept 
in  all  things  His  wise  and  gracious 
ordering  of  our  life  and  affairs. 


PSALM  XLVIIL 
Introduction. 

Superscription:  "A  Song  and  Psalm."     **  It  is  not  easy,"  says  Barnes,  "  to  account  for  thia 

double  appellation,  or  to  distinguish  between  the  meaning  of  these  words,  though  probably  the 
real  distinction  is  that  the  word  Psalm  refers  to  that  to  which  it  is  applied,  considered  merely 
as  a,  poem  or  composition ;  Song  is  applied  with  reference  to  its  being  sung  in  public  worship," 
**  It  embraced  what  was  usually  understood  by  the  word  Psalm,  and  it  was  intended  also 
specifically  to  be  sung." 

"For  the  sons  of  Korah."  See  Introduction  to  Ps.  xlii.  The  author  of  the  psalm  is  un- 
known. Professor  Alexander,  Hengstenberg,  and  others  suppose  that  this  psalm  has  reference 
to  the  same  event  as  the  previous  one,  a  supposition  which  seems  to  us  very  probable.  They 
suggest  that  that  was  sung  on  the  field  of  battle  (2  Chron.  xx.  26),  and  this  on  the  triumphant 
return  to  Jerusalem  and  to  the  temple  (2  Chron.  xx.  28).  Homiletically  we  regard  the  psalm 
as  presenting,  A  Striking  Illustration  of  the  Glory  of  the  Church  (vers.  1-7)  ;  and  an  Instructive 
Illustration  of  the  Glory  of  the  Church  (vers.  8-14).  Or  we  may  express  the  subjects  thus.  The 
Glory  of  the  Church  as  manifested  by  God's  doings  on  her  behalf  ;  and,  The  Improvement  to 
be  made  by  the  Church  of  God's  doings  on  her  behalf. 


A  Striking  Illustration  of  the  Glory  of  the  Church, 

{Verses  1-7.) 


The  remarkable  victory  wrought  on 
behalf  of  Jehosbaphat  and  his  people 
leads  the  poet  to  celebrate  the  praises 
of  God  and  of  the  holy  city  which  He 
had  protected.  That  holy  city  repre- 
sents the  Church  of  God.  The  poet 
sets  forth  the  glory  of  the  Church  in 
three  main  aspects — 

I.  As  the  city  of  God.  **  The  city 
of  our  God ;  .  .  .  the  city  of  the  great 
King."  Two  characteristics  are  brought 
forward  to  distinguish  it  as  "  the  city 
of  God." 

1.  God  manifests  His  greatness  and 
glory  there.  "  Great  is  the  Lord,  and 
exceedingly  glorious  in  the  city  of  our 


God.''  His  greatness  He  had  displayed 
in  overthrowing  the  mighty  and  com- 
bined enemies  of  His  people  ;  and  His 
glory  was  manifested  in  the  temple, 
with  its  solemn  and  stately  services,  its 
multitudes  of  devout  worshippers,  its 
revelation  of  Himself  in  the  law  and 
in  the  sacrifices,  and  especially  in  the 
mysterious  and  ever-radiant  Shekinah. 
"The  Lord  hath  chosen  Zion,  He  hath 
desired  it  for  His  habitation,"  (fee.  So, 
in  this  Christian  dispensation,  it  is  in 
the  Church  that  the  glory  of  God  is 
most  clearly  and  brightly  manifested. 
I  see  much  of  His  glory  in  nature. 
"  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God," 

235 


PSALM  XLVIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


&c.  But  I  see  more  in  the  conversion 
of  sinners,  in  the  spiritual  education  of 
Christian  believers,  in  the  holy  lives  and 
self-sacrificing  labours  of  the  followers 
of  Christ,  &c.  Christ  is  the  highest 
and  fullest  revelation  of  God ;  and  He 
specially  dwells  in  the  Church.  ''  Where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
My  name,"  &c. 

2.  It  is  hallowed  hy  His  presence, 
"  The  mountain  of  His  holiness." 
P.  B.  V.  :  ''  Upon  His  holy  hill." 
Hengstenberg  :  *'  Upon  the  holy  moun- 
tain." Mount  Zion  was  regarded  as  holy 
because  the  temple  of  God  was  built 
upon  it.  It  was  hallowed  by  its  sacred 
uses  and  associations.  The  Church  of 
Christ  is  described  by  St.  Paul  as  "  an 
holy  temple  "  (Eph.  ii.  21).  Again,  he 
writes,  "  The  temple  of  God  is  holy, 
which  temple  ye  are."  The  glory  of  the 
Church  is  in  the  realisation  of  the 
presence  of  God  in  the  hearts,  and  its 
manifestation  in  the  lives  of  its  mem- 
bers. The  only  glorious  Church  is  the 
God-inspired,  Christ-like  Church. 

II.  As  exalted  before  men.  **  Beau- 
tiful for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth  is  Mount  Zion,"  <fec.  (ver.  2). 
"  What  is  there,"  says  Dr.  Thomson, 
"  or  was  there  about  Zion  to  justify  the 
high  eulogium  of  the  Psalmist?  The 
situation  is,  indeed,  eminently  adapted 
to  be  the  platform  of  a  magnificent 
citadel.  Bising  high  above  the  deep 
valley  of  Gihon  and  Hinnom  on  the 
west  and  south,  and  the  scarcely  less 
deep  one  of  the  Cheesemongers  on  the 
east,  it  could  only  be  assailed  from  the 
north-west ;  and  then,  '  on  the  sides  of 
the  north,'  it  was  magnificently  beauti- 
ful, and  fortified  by  walls,  towers,  and 
bulwarks,  the  wonder  and  terror  of  the 
nations."  And  Dean  Stanley  says  : 
"  As  in  J  udah  no  rival  city  ever  rose 
till  the  time  of  the  Herods,  the  whole 
splendour  of  the  southern  monarchy 
was  concentrated  in  Jerusalem,  and 
contributed  to  that  magnificence  which 
has  before  been  described  as  probably 
excelling  any  sight  of  the  kind  within 
the  Holy  Land."  "The  joy  of  the 
whole  earth  is  Mount  Zion."  "  From 
the  time  of  Constantine  to  the  present 
day,  this  name  has  been  applied  to  the 
236 


western  hill,  on  which  the  city  of 
Jerusalem  now  stands,  and  in  fact 
always  stood.  Notwithstanding  this,  it 
seems  equally  certain  that,  up  to  the 
time  of  the  destruction  of  the  city  by 
Titus,  the  name  was  applied  exclusively 
to  the  eastern  hill,  or  that  on  which  the 
temple  stood."  —  Smithes  Diet,  of  the 
Bible,  art.  Jems.  But  we  must  not  fix 
our  attention  solely  or  even  chiefly  on 
the  material  situation.  As  Hengsten- 
berg says  :  "  The  key  for  the  exposition 
of  ver.  2  is  found  in  the  remark  that 
the  Psalmist  describes  not  the  external 
but  the  internal  glory  of  Jerusalem, 
views  it  not  with  fleshly  eyes  but  with 
the  eye  of  faith, ^speaks  not  as  a 
geographer  but  as  a  divine."  By 
"  the  whole  earth,"  the  Psalmist  pro- 
bably meant  the  whole  land  of  Pales- 
tine. By  its  celebrations  of  the  worship 
of  God,  by  the  great  assemblies  of  the 
people  at  the  great  religious  feasts,  and 
by  the  recent  victory  over  the  foes  of 
Judah,  Jerusalem  was  conspicuously 
exalted  before  men.  The  Church  of 
Christ,  when  animated  by  the  Spirit  of 
her  Lord,  and  arrayed  in  the  beauties  of 
holiness,  is  distinguished  and  honoured 
before  men.  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the 
world.  A  city  that  is  set  on  an  hill 
cannot  be  hid.  Let  your  light  so 
shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see 
your  good  works,  and  glorify  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven."  When  the 
Church  reveals  God  to  the  world,  the 
whole  earth  has  reason  to  rejoice 
because  of  her. 

III.  As  victorious  over  enemies. 
"  For,  lo,  the  kings  were  assembled," 
(fee.  (verses  4-7).     Notice — 

1.  The  gathering  of  the  foes.  The 
kings  which  gathered  themselves  to- 
gether against  Jehoshaphat  were  those 
of  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Mount  Seir,  and 
perhaps  others  who  are  not  specified. 
They  "were  gathered  together  against 
Jerusalem.  They  came  into  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood  of  the  city,  into 
the  wilderness  of  Tekoa,  which  is 
certainly  not  further  than  a  journey  of 
three  hours  from  Jerusalem,  which 
commands  an  extensive  prospect,  and  in 
particular  of  the  environs  of  Jerusalem." 
What   foes   are   gathered    against    the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XLVm. 


Churcli  of  Christ  to-day  ?  Superstition, 
in  Roman  Catholicism,  Sacrameiita- 
rianism,  Ritualism,  <fec.  Scepticism^  which 
is  to  a  great  extent  the  product  of 
superstition.  Worldliness,  the  insatiable 
craving  for  increase  of  material  wealth, 
the  slavish  obedience  to  custom  and 
fashion  as  though  they  were  of  supreme 
authority,  &c.  Sensuous  self-indulgence. 
These  and  other  foes  are  gathered 
together  against  the  Christian  Church 
of  our  day. 

2.  The  dispersion  of  the  foes,  "  They 
passed  by  together.  They  saw,  so  they 
marvelled,"  <fec.  Consider  (1)  The 
manner  in  which  the  dispersion  was 
effected.  It  wao  marked  by  (a)  Sudden- 
ness. "  They  passed  by  together." 
Hengstenberg  :  *'  They  vanished  alto- 
gether." They  "hasted  away."  Their 
overthrow  was  so  sudden  that  they,  as  it 
were,  vanished  from  sight.  (6)  Alarm, 
"  Fear  took  hold  upon  them  there." 
Hengstenberg:  "They  saw,  so  they 
were  astonished,  were  frightened,  fled 
away ;  Trembling  took  hold  on  them 
there."  They  came  within  sight  of  the 
city ;  but,  before  they  could  strike  a 
blow,  terror  seized  upon  them,  they 
were  filled  with  consternation.  (c) 
Distress.  "Pain  as  of  a  woman  in 
travail."  This  comparison  is  used  here, 
as  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  to  denote  the 
severest  kind  of  pain.  Julius  Caesar 
announced  to  the  senate  his  victory 
over  Pharnaces  in  the  following  brief 
despatch. — "  Veni,  vidi,  vici."  But  the 
general  of  the  forces  that  had  gathered 
together  against  Jerusalem  might  well 
have  summed  up  the  history  of  their 
expedition  thus. — "  Venif  vid%  victus 
8um,"     (2)  The  agent  by  whom  the  dis- 


persion was  effected,  "God  is  known 
in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge.  .  .  .  Thou 
breakest  the  ships  of  Tarshish  with  an 
east  wind."  God  had  scattered  the 
forces  that  had  gatliered  together 
against  Jerusalem.  Jehosliaphat  and 
his  army  struck  not  a  single  blow  in  the 
warfare  (2  Chron.  xx.  22-24).  The 
breaking  of  the  ships  of  Tarshish  is 
mentioned  here  as  an  illustration  of 
the  almighty  power  of  God.  "The 
occasion,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "that 
gave  rise  to  this  comparison  is  lecorded 
in  1  Kings  xxii.  48 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  36, 
37.  Jehoshaphat  had  united  with 
Ahaziah  in  getting  ships  of  merchandise, 
but  the  ships  were  wrecked.  The 
internal  connection  between  the  two 
events  was  the  greater,  as  in  that 
annihilation  of  the  ships  of  Tarshish, 
there  was  discerned,  according  to  2 
Chron.,  a  judgment  of  God."  So  as 
regards  the  enemies  of  His  Church  God 
Himself  will  scatter  them.  The  more 
God  is  realised  "in  her  palaces  for  a 
refuge,"  the  more  completely  and 
gloriously  victorious  will  the  Church 
be  over  all  her  enemies.  Superstition 
and  scepticism  shall  be  conquered  by 
the  truth  of  God.  Worldliness  and  self- 
indulgence  shall  be  vanquished  by  the 
cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Herein,  then,  is  the  true  glory  of  the 
Church.  Not  in  her  splendid  edifices, 
or  social  prestige,  or  immense  endow- 
ments, or  gorgeous  ritual,  or  eloquent 
ministry.  But  in  the  manifest  presence 
of  God  in  her  midst, — manifest  in  holy 
living,  and  self-denying  working,  in  the 
sublime  victories  of  faith  and  love  over 
her  foes,  and  in  unfaltering  loyalty  to 
her  king  and  God. 


An  Instructive  Illustration  op  the  Glory  of  the  Church, 

{Verses  8-14.) 


In  these  verses  the  Psalmist  points 
out  the  use  and  improvement  which  the 
Church  should  make  of  the  doings  of 
God  on  her  behalf.  Those  doings  not 
only  displayed  the  glory  of  the  Church, 
but  were  rich  in  instruction  for  the 
Church.    The  Psalmist  exhibits  them, — 

I.  As  a  conflrmation  of  faith.     "  As 


we  have  heard,  so  have  we  seen  in  the 
city  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  the  city  of 
our  God  :  God  will  establish  it  for 
ever."  The  event  which  they  had  wit- 
nessed had  vindicated  their  former  trust 
in  God,  and  encouraged  them  to  trust 
Him  for  the  future.  But  as  for  Jeru- 
salem, her  towers  have  long  since  fallen 

?37 


PSALM  XLVIII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMEfrrART:  PSALMS. 


to  the  ground,  her  bulwarks  have  been 
overthrown,  her  palaces  have  crumbled 
to  dust,  her  holy  and  beautiful  temple 
has  been  utterly  demolished.  But  these 
things  are  only  an  apparent  contradic- 
tion of  the  assurance,  "  God  will  estab- 
lish it  for  ever."  "  The  Jerusalem  that 
has  been  laid  in  ruins  is  not  that  which 
the  Psalmist  means;  it  is  only  its  life- 
less corpse."  The  Church  of  Christ  is 
founded  upon  the  rock,  '*  and  the  gates 
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it." 
Every  additional  illustration  that  we 
have  of  the  faithfulness  of  God,  whether 
to  us  individually  or  to  the  Church, 
should  encourage  us  to  continued  and 
increased  confidence  in  Him. 

II.  As  an  incentive  to  meditation 
on  the  grace  of  God.  "  We  have 
thought  of  Thy  loving- kindness,  O  God, 
in  the  midst  of  Thy  temple."  We  have 
here — 

1.  An  excellent  theme  for  meditation, 
"  Thy  loving-kindness."  It  had  been 
very  fully  manifested  in  the  victory 
which  He  had  achieved  for  Judah.  But 
to  us  God  has  given  still  brighter  dis- 
plays thereof.  God's  loving-kindness  is 
the  source  of  all  our  blessings. 

2.  A  suitable  place  for  meditation. 
"  In  the  midst  of  Thy  temple."  "  It  is 
evident  that  the  psalm  was  sung  as  a 
song  of  thanks  in  the  temple."  "  When 
we  enjoy  the  benefit  of  public  ordinances 
undisturbed,  when  we  meet  in  His 
temple  and  there  is  none  to  make  us 
afraid,  we  should  take  occasion  thence 
to  think  of  His  loving-kindness." — M. 
Henry.  J  is  both  our  interest  and  our 
duty  to  meditate  upon  God's  gracious 
dealings  with  us.  Gratitude  urges  us 
to  ponder  every  fresh  proof  of  His  good- 
ness to  us.  And  as  it  is  necessary  to 
digest  our  food  for  it  to  nourish  and 
strengthen  our  bodies,  so  God's  mercies 
must  be  spiritually  digested  by  means 
of  meditation,  if  they  are  to  prove 
helpful  to  the  spiritual  life.  By  medi- 
tation we  realise  their  greatness  and 
their  significance ;  we  feel  our  obligation 
to  God,  and  are  encouraged  to  trust  Him 
by  reason  of  them. 

III.  As  a  stimulus  to  praise  God. 

1.  In  the  CMirch.     *'Let  Mount  Zion 
rejoice,"  &c.  (ver.   11).     This  is  a  call 
238 


to  all  the  cities  of  Judah  to  joyous 
praise.  The  manifestation  of  the  favour 
of  God  should  always  rejoice  the  hearts 
of  His  people. 

2.  Beyond  the  Church.  *'  According 
to  Thy  name,  O  God,  so  is  Thy  praise 
unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  The  idea 
of  the  Psalmist  seems  to  be  that  where- 
ever  the  doings  they  were  celebrating 
were  known,  men  would  be  so  impressed 
with  the  "  name "  or  character  of  God 
that  they  would  praise  Him.  The  best 
commentary  on  the  words  of  the  Psalm- 
ist is  the  result  on  the  nations  of  the 
victory  achieved  on  behalf  of  Jehosha- 
phat.  *'  The  fear  of  God  was  on  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  countries  when  they 
had  heard  that  the  Lord  fought  against 
the  enemies  of  Israel.  So  the  realm  of 
Jehoshaphat  was  quiet,  for  his  God 
gave  him  rest  round  about"  (1  Chron. 
XX.  29,  30).  It  is  noteworthy  that  in 
the  praise  of  God,  both  in  the  Church 
and  beyond  the  Church,  the  righteous- 
ness of  His  doings  is  recognised.  The 
chosen  people  were  "  glad  because  of 
His  judgments."  And  in  His  praise 
among  the  nations  it  is  observed  that 
His  '*  right  hand  is  full  of  righteous- 
ness." Just  and  true  are  all  His  ways. 
All  His  doings  are  in  complete  accord 
with  eternal  and  immutable  righteous- 
ness. 

IV.  As  a  reason  for  considering  the 
security  and  beauty  of  the  Church, 
**  Walk  about  Zion,  and  go  round  about 
her,"  &c.  (vers.  12,  13). 

1.  The  survey  to  which  the  Psalmist 
exhorts  the  people.  The  "  towers"  were 
for  observation  and  defence ;  the  **  bul- 
warks "  were  the  outermost  circumfer- 
ence of  the  city,  and  in  this  place  they 
are  in  contrast  to  the  palaces  in  the  in- 
terior. The  exhortation  of  the  Psalmist 
is  to  a  thorough  survey  of  the  city,  that 
the  people  may  see  how  entirely  free 
from  injury  it  was,  and  how  capable  of 
resisting  the  attacks  of  foes. 

2.  The  design  of  the  survey.  "  That 
ye  may  tell  it  to  the  generation  follow- 
ing." "  One  generation  shall  praise 
Thy  works  to  another,  and  shall  declare 
Thy  mighty  acts."  By  this  means  the 
generation  following  may  be  encouraged 
to  put  their  trust  in  the  Lord.     In  this 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  XLIZ* 


way  one  generation  may  render  valuable 
service  to  another.  So  the  testimony  to 
the  goodness  and  faithfulness  of  God 
grows  more  voluminous  and  convincing 
with  every  generation.  Let  us  survey 
the  Church  of  Christ,  and  mark  its 
beauty  and  security.  "  What  precious 
ordinances  are  its  palaces,  what  precious 
promises  are  its  bulwarks  "  and  towers  ! 
Its  foundations  are  immovably  and 
eternally  secure.  It  is  guarded  by  the 
incessant  vigilance  and  almighty  power 
of  God,  and  need  not  fear  the  gates  of 
hell.  Let  us  tell  to  the  generation 
following  our  impressions  and  experi- 
ences of  the  Church  of  Christ,  that  they 
may  be  led  heartily  to  seek  citizenship 
therein. 

V.  As  an  encouragement  to  triumph 
in  God.  "  This  God  is  our  God  for  ever 
and  ever;   He  will  be  our  guide  even 


unto  death."  Here  are  two  reasons  foi: 
triumph  in  God. 

1.  Sis  relations  to  us  personally. 
'*  Our  God,  ....  our  guide."  He 
guides  us  (a)  by  the  counsels  of  His 
word ;  (b)  by  the  influences  of  His 
Spirit  ;  (c)  by  His  providential  inter- 
positions ;  (d)  by  special  help  in  special 
trials ;  (e)  by  shedding  light  upon  our 
path  when  in  perplexity  and  doubt ;  and 
(/)  by  support  and  direction  when  we 
tread  that  dark  and,  to  us,  unknown  way 
which  conducts  to  the  grave." — Barnes. 

2  Bis  relations  to  us  permanently/. 
"  For  ever  and  ever ;  .  .  .  unto  death." 
His  love  to  us  and  care  for  us  are  con- 
stant and  unchangeable.  He  will  guide 
and  protect  us  even  to  the  last. 

Conclusion. — I.  Let  the  citizens  of 
Zion  rejoice  in  their  privileges.  2.  Let 
her  enemies  submit  themselves  to  her  King, 


PSALM  XLIX. 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician,  a  psalm  for  the  sons  ofKorah!*    See  Introduction 

to  Psalm  xlii.  Both  the  author  of  the  psalm,  and  the  occasion  on  which  it  was  composed,  are 
unknown.  "  This  psalm,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "is  a  sermon,  and  so  is  the  next.  In  most  of 
the  psalms  we  have  the  penman  praying  or  praising ;  in  these  we  have  him  preaching ;  and  it 
is  our  duty,  in  singing  psalms,  to  teach  and  admonish  ourselves  and  one  another."  "  The 
psalm  meets  the  temptation,  which  arises  to  the  righteous  from  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
(whose  persecution  it  sets  forth),  with  the  very  consolation  which  ia  presented  for  it  throughout 
the  Old  Testament,  viz.,  that  the  issue  divides  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  that  the 
glory  and  ascendancy  of  the  latter  are  only  temporary^  that  they  end  in  terrors,  while  the 
righteous  is  deUvered  by  God. " — Hengstenberg. 

The  Preacher  of  Wisdom, 
(Verses  1-4.) 


The  Psalmist  appears  as  a  preacher 
discoursing  of  wisdom,  and  in  these 
verses,  which  are  introductory  to  the 
main  theme,  he  calls  the  attention  of  all 
men  to  what  he  is  about  to  say.  It  was 
not  of  wisdom  in  general,  but  of  wisdom 
in  estimating  the  value  of  worldly  wealth 
and  honour,  that  he  was  about  to  speak. 

I.  The  preacher  of  wisdom  ad- 
dresses himself  to  all  peoples.  "  Hear 
tliis,  all  people  ;  give  ear,  all  ye  inhabi- 
tants of  the  world."  This  summoning 
all  men  to  attention  implies — 

1.  TJie  great  importance  of  the  subject. 
It  19  common  in   Scripture  when  im- 


portant announcements  are  made  to  call 
the  whole  world  to  listen  (Deut.  xxxii. 
2 ;  Psa.  I.  1  ;  Mic.  i.  2).  How  im- 
portant is  the  message  of  the  Gospel 
Preacher  ! 

2.  The  universal  applicability  of  the 
subject.  The  statements  he  was  about 
to  make  pertained  not  to  one  nation  or 
race  only,  but  to  all  mankind.  The 
gospel  of  Christ  pertains  to  the  whole 
race  of  man.  All  men  need  the  gospel. 
The  gospel  is  sent  to  all  men.  "  Go  ye 
into  all  the  world,"  <kc. 

II.  The  preacher  of  wisdom  ad- 
dresses liimself  to  all  classes.    ''  Both 

239 


PSALU  XLCL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART:  PSALMS, 


low  and  liigh,  rich  and  poor  together." 
**  What  the  Psalmist  has  delivered,  serves 
to  the  rich  for  warning,  to  the  poor  for 
consolation."  The  poor  are  in  danger 
from  the  inordinate  desire  of  wealth, 
and  the  rich  from  an  inordinate  delight 
in  it.  Let  the  poor  neither  fear  nor 
envy  the  rich  ;  let  the  rich  neither  trust 
nor  boast  in  tbeir  riches.  The  message 
of  the  Christian  preacher  is  to  all  classes. 
The  gospel  is  addressed  to  man  as  man, 
without  regard  to  any  distinctions  of 
wealth  or  rank. 

III.  The  preacher  of  wisdom  duly 
considers  his  subject.  "The  meditation 
of  my  heart  shall  be  of  understanding." 
"  The  idea  is,"  says  Barnes,  "  that  he 
had  meditated  on  the  subject,  and  that 
he  would  now  give  utterance  to  the 
result  of  his  meditations."  And  Matthew 
Henry  :  "  It  was  what  he  had  himself 
well  digested.  What  his  mouth  spoke 
was  *  the  meditation  of  his  heart ; '  it 
was  what  God  put  into  his  mind,  what 
he  had  himself  seriously  considered,  and 
was  fully  apprised  of  the  meaning  of 
and  convinced  of  the  truth  of."  "  I 
will  incline  mine  ear  to  a  parable," 
saith  the  Psalmist,  implying  clearly  that 
the  wisdom  he  was  about  to  "  communi- 
cate is  no  self-sprung  possession,  but 
one  that  has  been  acquired  by  him." 
7^D  =  similitude,  parable,  proverb. 
Hengstenberg  translates  it  here,  '*  simili- 
tude." And  Fuerst ;  a  *'  sententious 
poem."  "  The  Psalmist  will  incline  his 
ear  to  it.  This  intimates — 1.  That  he 
was  taught  it  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and 
did  not  speak  of  himself.  Those  that 
undertake  to  teach  others  must  first 
learn  themselves.  2.  That  he  thought 
himself  nearly  concerned  in  it,  and  was 
resolved  not  to  venture  his  own  soul 
upon  that  bottom  which  he  dissuaded 
others  from  venturing  theirs  upon.  3. 
That  he  would  not  expect  others  should 
attend  to  that  which  he  himself  did  not 
attend  to  as  a  matter  of  the  greatest 
importance.  When  God  gives  the 
tongue  of  the  learned  He  first  wakens 
the  ear  to  hear  as  the  learned." — M. 
Henry.  An  unthoughtful  ministry  is  a 
great  curse.  Meditation,  patient  and 
earnest  thought,  should  ever  precede  the 
speech  of  the  preacher. 
240 


IV.  The  preacher  of  wisdom  deals 
with  difficult  questions.  "  Dark  say- 
ings." "ni'^n  =  entwined,  hence,  (a) 
cunning i  trickery  (Dan.  viii.  23),  i.e.  dis- 
simulation, (b)  enigmas,  riddles  (Judg. 
xiv.  12).  (c)  pointed^  enigmatical  speech 
that  surprises,  a  proverb  (Prov.  i.  6)  ;  a 
parable  (Ezek.  xvii.  2) ;  poesij  (Ps.  xlix. 
6) ;  oracle  "  (Num.  xii.  8).  —  Fuers{& 
Lexicon.  It  seems  to  us  to  mean  in  this 
place  something  which  was  obscure,  or 
only  imperfectly  understood.  Heng- 
stenberg explains  it  thus :  *'  riddle,  a 
discourse  of  difficult  comprehension,  of 
deep  sense."  There  are  *'  dark  sayings," 
difficult  questions,  in — 1.  The  Scriptures, 
in  which  there  are  "  things  hard  to  be 
understood,"  not  a  few.  2.  The  Fro* 
vidence  of  God.  **  Thy  way  is  in  the 
sea,"  <kc.  *'  Clouds  and  darkness  are 
round  about  Him."  3.  Every  human 
life.  *'  Man's  soul  is  written  all  over 
with  dark  sayings."  The  preacher 
deals  with  these  "  dark  sayings  ;"  looks 
into  them,  exhibits  their  uses,  explains 
their  significance,  endeavours  to  make 
them  clear  and  luminous. 

V.  The  preacher  of  wisdom  deals 
with    difficult    questions    poetically, 
musically.     "  I  will  open  my  dark  say- 
ing upon  the  harp."     He  would  speak 
them   in    poetry,  and   attune   them  to 
music.    "  The  most  sorrowful  people  have 
known  most  and  felt  most  the  soul  of 
music.     The  expression  of  the  sorrows 
and  aspirations   of   the   soul  in  music 
ministers  to  our  reserve,  while  it  also 
flows  forth   in  a  stream,   sad    in  itself 
perhaps,  yet  productive  of  a  divine  cheer- 
fulness.    There  is  a  mystery  and  a  mean- 
ing in  music  we  can  never  either  expound 
or    explore;    and  it  is  felt  that   those 
natures,  which  are  the  greatest  burden 
and  mystery  to  themselves,    find  most 
the  solace  of  song  in  the  combinations 
of  all  great  sounds ;  we  have  known  this, 
it  is  not  always  that  in   joyfulness  of 
heart  we  sing.     The  girl  oppressed  by 
some  great  trial  or  loss,  as  she  bends 
over    her    needle,    or    goes   about   her 
house-work,  will    sing;    and  while  she 
sings,  finds  unconsciously  that  her  song 
has  been  her  medicine,  and  has  given 
to  her  relief.     I  have  known  a  woman, 
disappointed  and  forsaken,  flying  to  her 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTAkY.  IS' ALMS. 


PSALM  XLIX. 


piano ;  her  fingers  rushing  over  tlie  keys 
Lave  given  liberation  to  ber  spirit,  and 
the  chords  opened  the  sealed  well  of 
tears,  and  the  rains  descended,  and  the 
floods  came.  And  something  like  this 
is  a  very  general  experience.  Hence 
we  bave  poetry  for  all  cultured  people, 
and  hymns  for  holy  people ;  and  do  we 
not  know  what  it  is  to  become  happy 
while  we  sing  1    Good  it  is  sometimes 


to  utter  the  dark  saying  to  tbe  barp 
rather  than  to  others ;  it  composes, 
allays,  and  tranquillises  the  mind  while 
we  utter  it."— ii\  P.  Hood. 

Conclusion.  Let  us  learn  how  to 
deal  with  our  dark  sayings.  Seek  light 
and  help  in  worship.  Devotion  will 
illuminate  the  mind.  Intellectual  diflS- 
culties  will  vanish  before  the  religious 
fervour  of  a  grateful  and  reverent  heart 


The  foolish  way  of  Wealthy  Worldlings. 
(Verses  6-16.) 


I.  The  characteristics  of  their  way. 

Their  way  is  marked  by — 

1.  *'  Trust  in  their  ivealth."  They 
place  confidence  in  their  riches  as  the 
source  of  all  good  to  them,  and  the 
means  by  which  all  their  wants  may  be 
sup[)lied  and  all  their  desires  gratified. 
"  How  hard  is  it  for  them  that  trust  in 
riclies  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
Grod."  "  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in 
this  world,  that  they  be  not  high- 
minded,  nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches, 
but  in  the  living  God  who  giveth  us 
richly  all  things  to  enjoy." 

2.  Boasting  in  their  wealth.  *'  Boast 
themselves  in  the  multitude  of  their 
riciies."  They  pride  themselves  in  the 
extent  of  their  possessions.  *'  Many 
years  ago  Judge  B.  resided  in  New 
Jersey.  His  family  was  considered  the 
most  aristocratic  in  the  town  ;  and  not 
unfreqnently  some  of  its  members  would 
give  their  acquaintances  to  understand 
that  this  was  their  opinion  also.  On 
a  certain  occasion  a  fishing-party  was 
made  up  among  the  ladies.  Mrs.  Judge 
B.  was  one  of  the  number.  While  fish- 
ing, tiie  subject  of  losing  property  was 
discussed.  Mrs.  B.  paused  a  little,  and 
slipped  a  splendid  gold  ring  from  her 
finger,  and  dr()p[)ed  it  into  the  lake, 
remarking  as  she  did  so,  that  it  was 
*  as  impossible  for  them  to  become  poor 
as  it  was  for  her  to  recover  that  ring.' 
The  party  returned  to  their  homes,  and 
Mrs.  B.  gave  her  fish  to  the  servants. 
Not  long  after,  the  cook  came  into  the 
sitting-room  and  showed  to  Mrs.  B.  a 
gold  ring  that  she  had  taken  from 
one  of  the  fish.     The  ring  dropped  into 


the  lake  was  recovered.  Mrs.  B.,  who 
was  so  confident  that  she  could  never 
become  poor,  died  a  pauper  in  Elizabeth- 
town,  Nova  Scotia ;  and  her  husband, 
the  judge,  died  a  pauper  also  in  an  ad- 
joining town." — Diet,  of  Illus. 

3.  Fancied  power  to  retain  wealth. 
*'  Their  inward  thought  is  that  their 
bouses  shall  contiime  for  ever,"  &c.  (ver. 
11).  They  calculated  that  they  should 
retain  their  possessions  until  death,  and 
then  transmit  them  to  their  children. 
There  are  few  wealthy  persons  who 
realise  tbe  uncertain  tenure  by  which 
they  hold  their  possessions.  The  great 
majority  seem  to  regard  themselves,  not 
as  stewards,  but  as  proprietors  of  their 
possessions,  and  as  able  to  retain  or  dis- 
pose of  them  as  they  please. 

II.  The  folly  of  their  way.  "  This 
their  way  is  their  folly."  Their  folly  is 
seen  in — 

1.  Their  inability  to  retain  their 
wealth.  All  men  must  die,  "  and  leave 
their  wealth  to  others."  "  (1)  They 
cannot  continue  with  it,  nor  will  it 
serve  to  procure  them  a  reprieve.  (2) 
They  cannot  carry  it  with  them,  but 
must  leave  it  behind  them.  (3)  They 
cannot  foresee  who  will  enjoy  it  when 
they  have  left  it ;  they  must  leave  it  to 
others,  but  to  wliom  they  know  not, 
perhaps  to  a  fool  (Eccles.  ii.  19),  perhaps 
to  an  enemy." — M.  Henry.  "  Riches," 
says  Gataker,  "  though  they  have  great 
eagles'  wings,  to  fly  away  from  us  while 
we  are  here  in  this  world,  yet  have  not 
so  much  as  little  sparrows'  wings  to  fly 
after  us  and  follow  us  when  we  go 
hence.     We  brought  nothing  into  this 

2i\ 


PSALM  XLIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


world,  neither  shall  we  carry  anything 
hence."  Even  before  the  rich  man 
passes  away  from  this  world,  his  riches 
may  pass  away  from  him.  A  storm  at 
sea,  a  spark  of  fire,  a  flood,  &c.,  may 
transform  him  into  a  beggar.  How 
foolish,  then,  to  trust  and  glory  in 
wealth  ! 

2.   The   limitation    of   the   power   of 
wealth.     The    wealthiest    man    has    no 
power   (1)   to   turn  aside  the  stroke  of 
death    even   from    his    dearest   friend. 
"  None  of  them  can  by  any  means  re- 
deem his  brother,  nor  give  to   God  a 
ransom   for   him."     The    wealthiest   of 
men  is   unable  to  prolong  by  an  hour 
the    life    that    is    most    dear    to    him. 
**  *  Redeeming,  he  cannot  redeem ; '  that 
is,  according  to  Hebrew  usage,  he  can- 
not possibly  do  it ;  it  cannot  be  done." 
"  What  folly  is  it  to  trust  to  that,  and 
boast  of  that,  which  will  not  enable  us 
so  much  as  for  one  hour  to  respite  the 
execution  of  the  sentence  of  death  upon 
a  parent,  a  child,  or  a  friend  that  is  to 
us  as  our  own  soul ! "     The  wealthiest 
man  has  no  power  (2)  to  turn  aside  the 
stroke  of  death  from  himself      "  Wise 
men   die,    likewise    the    fool    and    the 
brutish    person."      **  No    matter    what 
may  be   the   character  of   the   man   of 
wealth,  whether  wise  or  foolish,  he  must 
certainly  die.     His  wealth  cannot  save 
him  from  the  grave."     It  is  said  that  a 
queen    of   England,  knowing    that    her 
death  was  at  hand,  cried,  **  A  million  of 
money  for  a  moment  of  time,"  and  cried 
in  vain.     (3)  Wealth  has  no  power  to 
favourably  affect  the  condition  of  its  pos- 
sessors after  death.      **  Like  sheep  they 
are   laid   in   the   grave,"   &c.   (ver.    14). 
When   death   comes  to   them,  all   their 
possessions    and    honours    must    be    re- 
linquished finally  and  for  ever.      Then 
the   superiority   of    the   portion   of    the 
upright     will    be     apparent.      All    the 
strength  and  beauty  of  wealthy  world- 
lings   shall    be    consumed ;    but    "  the 
righteous  shall  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in 
the  kingdom  of  their  Father."     He  who, 
when  upon  earth,  was  "  clothed  in  purple 
and  fine  linen,  and   fared  sumptuously 
every  day,"  could   not   obtain   so  much 
as  a  drop  of  cold  water  in  hell.      How 
great,  tlien,  is  the  folly  of  putting  our 

242 


trust  in  and  making  our  boast  of  our 
wealth  !  And  yet,  notice  how  continu- 
ous this  folly  is.  "  This  their  way  is 
their  folly ;  yet  their  posterity  approve 
their  sayings."  In  this  folly  there  is  a 
sad  successiveness.  The  children  tread 
in  the  footsteps  of  their  fathers.  *'  They 
adopt  their  principles,  and  act  on  their 
maxims ;  and,  attaching  the  same  im- 
portance to  wealth  which  they  did,  seek, 
as  they  sought,  to  perpetuate  their  names 
upon  the  earth." 

And  now  turning  our  attention  from 
the  wealthy  worldling  to  "  the  poor  of 
this  world  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the 
kingdom  which  He  hath  promised  to 
them  that  love  Him,"  two  remarks  are 
justified. 

First :  The  godly  man  has  no  reason- 
able cause  to  fear  the  poiver  of  the 
wealthy  worldling.  "  Wherefore  should 
I  fear  in  the  days  of  evil,  when  the 
iniquity  of  my  heels  shall  compass  me 
about  % "  It  is  difficult  to  get  any 
reasonable  meaning  out  of  the  last 
clause  as  it  is  rendered  in  our  version. 
We  take  it  that  the  word  here  rendered 
"  heels"  —  2,\)V  is  from  the  verb  2pV 

and  signifies  a  persecutor  or  lier-in-wait  j 
and  so  we  should  translate,  ''  When  the 
iniquity  of  liers-in-wait  compass  me 
about."  See  Fuerst's  Lexicon.  The 
Psalmist  was  exposed  to  danger  by 
reason  of  the  crafty  designs  of  his 
wealthy  enemies  ;  but  why  should  he 
fear  them  1  With  all  their  wealth,  how 
powerless  were  they  !  What  could  they 
do  to  him,  they  who  were  weak  mortals 
like  himself?  They  were  leaning  on  a 
broken  reed,  and  boasting  in  a  shadow. 
He  had  no  reason  to  fear  them ;  for  his 
trust  was  in  the  Lord  Jehovah,  in  whom 
is  everlasting  strength. 

Second :  The  portion  of  the  godly 
man  is  far  superior  to  that  of  the 
wealthy  worldling.  "The  upright  shall 
have  dominion  over  them  in  the  morn- 
ing. .  .  .  God  will  redeem  my  soul  from 
the  power  of  the  grave ;  for  He  shall 
receive  me."  The  superiority  of  the 
portion  of  the  upright  consists  in  this — 

1.  They  shall  not  be  held  in  Sheol. 
God  will  rescue  them  from  the  power 
of  the  grave.  They  shall  arise  to  a  life 
of  blessedness. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  XLIJt» 


2.  They  shall  he  received  by  God. 
God  will  receive  His  people  into  glory, 
both  soul  and  body,  at  the  resurrection. 
So  shall  they  ever  be  with  the  Lord. 

This  superiority  will  soon  he  made 
manifest.  *'In  the  morning,"  i.e.  in  a 
little  time.  The  night  will  speedily 
pass  away,  and  "in  the  morning  "the 
vanity  of  the  portion  of  wealthy  world- 
lings and  the  excellence  of  the  portion 


of    the    godly   will    be    clearly   mani- 
fested. 

Conclusion. — 1.  My  rich  brother, 
"  trust  not  in  uncertain  riches  ; "  but 
use  thy  wealth  wisely,  and  it  shall  prove 
a  blessing  to  thyself  and  to  others.  2. 
My  poor  brother,  do  thou  neither  envy 
nor  fear  the  power  of  wealthy  world- 
lings ;  but  rejoice  in  thine  own  in- 
alienable and  blessed  portion* 


Redemption, 
(Verse  8.) 


L  The  subject  of  redemption.     To 

acquire  right  views  of  the  importance 
of  redemption  as  to  its  subject,  we  may 
gl.'uice  at  the  powers,  the  affections, 
and  the  duration  of  the  soul. 

1.  Its  powers.  (1)  It  is  endowed 
with  the  facidty  of  knowledge.  Paul 
tells  us  that  knowledge  is  a  feature  of 
the  image  of  God.  The  object  of 
redemption  is  not  mere  matter,  but  an 
intelligent  being,  the  only  being  on  this 
earth  capable  of  apprehending  the 
discoveries  which  God  has  made  of 
Himself.  (2)  It  is  endued  with  the 
power  of  choice.  Man  is  a  moral  agent ; 
he  acts  under  the  influence  of  moral 
motives  ;  he  is  not  the  creature  of 
chance  ;  he  is  not  willingly  the  prey  of 
accident;  he  has  the  power,  to  a  certain 
extent,  of  controlling  his  circumstances. 
He  is,  further,  capable  of  knowing  and 
of  loving  God,  and  of  becoming  like  God. 

2.  Its  affections.  The  soul  has  lost 
the  image  of  God.  The  temple  is  in 
ruins,  and  the  Great  Inhabitant  gone. 
It  is  utterly  corrupt,  polluted,  debased, 
at  enmity  against  God.  It  is  the  prey 
of  every  bad  passion,  of  every  polluting 
affection  ;    consequently  its  tendency  is 


to  misery ;  and  unless  it  be  redeemed,  it 
will  be  miserable  for  ever. 

3.  Its  duration.  The  soul  of  man 
will  live  for  ever,  and  through  the  eter- 
nity of  its  existence,  it  must  either  be  a 
happy  spirit  before  the  throne  of  God, 
or  a  hopeless  outcast  from  His  heaven. 

II.  The  price  of  its  redemption. 
How  vast  the  price  paid  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  soul !  The  precious  blood  of 
Christ.  Had  the  whole  creation  been 
consumed  in  one  mighty  conflagration 
as  the  price  of  redemption,  it  would  have 
been  as  nothing  compared  with  this. 
How  precious  the  price  of  redemption ! 
The  Deity  became  enshrined  in  man — 
not  changed  into  a  man,  but  most  mys- 
teriously united  to  a  man  ;  the  price  of 
redemption  was  His  blood.  This  price 
was  given  (1  John  iii.  16  ;  1  Pet.  i.  18, 
19). 

III.  The  period  of  its  accomplish- 
ment is  limited.  "  It  ceaseth  for  ever." 
How  infinitely  precious  is  time  !  It  is 
in  time  only  that  the  redemption  of  the 
soul  can  be  ensured.  The  value  of  one 
opportunity  of  hearing  the  Gos[)el  is 
unspeakably  great. — M'A.,  from  Sketches 
of  Sermons. 


Men  of  the  World  who  have  their  Portion  in  this  Life, 

{Verses  16-20.) 


I.  Men  who  have  their  portion  in 
this  life  must  resign  it  at  death.  We 
have  here — 

1 .  Man  possessing  wealth  and  honour. 
"  One  is   made   rich,   the   glory   of  his 


man  is  able  to  surround  himself  with  all 
the  luxuries  and  ornaments  produced  by 
nature  and  by  man.  "  The  rich  have 
many  friends,"  who  fawn  upon  and 
flatter  them,  and  extol  their  state  and 


house  is  increased."    By  means  of  wealth      their  doings.     In  these  days  many  men 

243 


fftALMZUX. 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTART :  PSALMS. 


speedily,  from  small  beginnings,  grow 
rich  and  pompous,  and  fond  of  display. 

2.  Man  rejoicing  in  wealth  and  honour, 

*'  In  his  life  he  blessed  His  soul."     He 

is  like  the  rich  man  described  by  our 

Lord,  who  said  to  his  soul,  "  Soul,  thou 

hast  much  good  laid  up  for  many  years ; 

take  thine  ease,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry. 

But  God  said  unto  him.  Thou  fool,"  (fee. 

Oh,  the  awful  degradation  of  manhood 

when  a  man  calls  upon  his  soul  to  find 

its  chief  good  in  material  possessions  ! 

In  answer  to  the  inquiry,  "  Who  will 

show  us  any  good  ?  '*  such  men  are  so 

far  from  saying,  "  Lord,  lift  Thou  up  the 

light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us,"  that 

they  point  you  to  their  well-filled  barns 

or  their  vast  estates.     Yet  it  is  true  that 

**He  aims  too   low   who  aims  beneath  the 
skies." 

3.  Man  praised  because  of  his  wealth 
and  honour.  "Man  will  praise  thee 
when  thou  doest  well  to  thyself."  "  This 
is  the  sentiment  of  all  the  children  of 
this  world,  that  those  do  best  for  them- 
selves that  do  most  for  their  bodies,  by 
heaping  up  riches,  though,  at  the  same 
time,  nothing  is  done  for  the  soul,  no- 
thing for  eternity."  Low-natured  people 
abound  who  court  and  fawn  upon  the 
man  of  wealth.  Mean  sycophants  are 
ever  ready  obsequiously  to  flatter  the 
**  men  of  the  world,  who  have  their 
portion  in  this  life." 

4.  Man  compelled  to  relinquish  his 
wealth  and  honour.  "  When  he  dieth 
he  shall  carry  nothing  away  ;  his  glory 
shall  not  descend  after  him."  *'  For 
we  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and 
it  is  certain  that  we  can  carry  nothing 
out."  To  the  man  who  elects  to  have 
his  portion  in  this  life  it  may  be  said  in 
the  future  state,  "  Son,  remember  that 
thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good 
things."  "What  disarrays  like  death? 
It  defaces  the  fascination  of  the  beauti- 
ful. It  withers  the  strength  of  the 
mighty.  It  snatches  the  store  of  the  rich. 
Kings  are  stripped  of  trapping,  trophy, 
treasure  :  '  Their  glory  shall  not  descend 
after  them.'  " — JR.  W.  Hamilton. 

II.  Men  who  have  their  portion  in 

this  life  when  they  depart  hence  are 

gathered   to   their   moral    ancestors. 

"  He  shall  go  to  the  generation  of  his 

244 


u 


fathers ;  they  suall  never  see  light. 
They  depart  to  their  own  place  and  their 
own  company.  "  Under  the  generation 
of  the  fathers,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  are 
here  to  be  understood,  not  so  much  the 
corporeal  ancestors  of  the  ungodly,  as 
his  predecessors  in  wickedness."  And 
M.  Henry  :  "  Hi.s  worldly  wicked 
fathers,  whose  sayings  he  approved,  and 
whose  steps  he  trod  in."  They  dwell 
in  a  dark  and  melancholy  realm. 
"They  shall  never  see  light" — i.e.,  they 
shall  never  have  the  least  glimpse  of 
any  joy  or  comfort.  They  are  banished 
into  the  outer  darkness. 

Ill  Men  who  have  their  portion 
in  this  life  degrade  their  being. 
"  Man  that  is  in  honour,  and  under- 
stand eth  not,  is  like  the  beasts  that 
perish."  How  unspeakable  is  the  de- 
gradation of  a  spiritual  and  immortal 
being,  created  in  God's  image  and  re- 
deemed by  Christ's  blood,  when  he  lives 
for  this  life  only,  the  life  of  the  senses 
merely  !  "  Many  there  are,"  says  Barnes, 
"  in  exalted  stations,  who  are  surrounded 
by  all  that  wealth  can  g'ive,  yet  who  no 
more  admit  the  thought  of  a  future 
world  into  their  hopes  and  plans  than  if 
they  had  no  other  endowment  than  the 
camel  or  the  ox,  and  whose  conduct  in 
this  respect  would  not  be  changed  if  all 
the  higher  endowments  which  constitute 
the  nature  of  man  were  withdrawn,  and 
they  were  at  once  reduced  to  the  con- 
dition of  a  brute."  M.  Henry  :  "  It  is 
better  to  be  a  beast  than  to  be  a  man 
that  makes  himself  like  a  beast." 

Conclusion  :  1.  To  those  who  have 
wealth,  hut  not  godliness.  "  What  shall 
it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the 
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?" 
2.  To  those  who  have  godliness,  but  not 
wealth.  "  It  is  a  temptation,''  says 
Dickson,  "  which  shaketh  the  faith  of 
the  godly  sometimes,  when  they  see  the 
flourishing  prosperity  of  the  wicked  and 
their  own  daily  afiliction ;  but  this 
should  not  move  the  godly,  nor  make 
them  suspect  themselves  to  be  in  a 
wrong  coarse  and  the  ungodly  in  a 
better  way:  *be  not  thou  afraid  when 
one  is  made  rich.' "  Your  portion  is  in- 
comparably superior  to  that  of  the  most 
wealthy  and  distinguished  of  those  who 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FSALM  L. 


Imve  their  portion  in  this  life.     "The  of  trouble.     And  the   Lord  shall  help 

end  of  the  wicked  shall  be  cut  off.     But  them  and  deliver  them  ;  He  shall  deliver 

the  salvation  of  the  righteous  is  of  the  them  from  the  wicked,  and  save  them, 

Lord ;  He  is  their  strength  in  the  time  because  they  trust  in  Him." 


PSALM  L. 
Introduction. 

Superseriptton.  **  A  Psalm  of  Asaph."  Asaph  was  "  a  Levite,  son  of  Berachiah,  one  of  the 
leaders  of  David's  choir  (1  Chron.  vi.  39).  Psalms  1.  and  Ixxiii.  to  Ixxxiii.  are  attributed  to 
him,  but  probably  all  these,  except  1.,  Ixxiii.,  and  Ixxvii.,  are  of  later  origin.  He  was  in  after 
times  celebrated  as  a  Seer  as  well  as  a  musical  composer,  and  was  put  on  a  par  with  David 
(2  Chron.  xxix.  30 ;  Neh.  xii.  46).  The  office  appears  to  have  remained  hereditary  in  his 
family,  unless  he  was  the  founder  of  a  school  of  poets  and  musical  composers,  who  were  called 
after  him  *  the  sons  of  Asaph'"  (1  Chron.  xxv.  1;  2  Chron.  xx.  14;  Ezra  ii.  41). — Smith's 
Did.  of  the  Bible. 

The  occasion  on  which  the  psalm  was  composed  is  unknown.  '*  The  object  of  the  psalm," 
says  Barnes,  "  seems  to  be  to  set  forth  the  value  and  importance  of  spiritual  religion  aa  com- 
pared with  a  mere  religion  of  forms. " 

A  Scene  of  Judgment. 
(Verses  1-6.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  a  poetical 
representation  of  the  appearance  of  the 
Most  High  to  judge  His  people  as  to 
their  conduct  in  respect  to  His  worship. 
Though  the  judgment  spoken  of  in  this 
psalm  is  a  particular  one,  yet  most  of 
the  features  of  this  scene  are  elsewhere 
represented  as  characterising  the  general 
and  final  judgment.  We  have  here  set 
before  us — 

I.  The  Judge.  "  The  mighty  God, 
even  the  Lord,  hath  spoken.  .  .  .  God 
is  Judge  Himself."  Professor  Alexander 
translates :  *'  The  Almighty,  God, 
Jehovah,  speaks ; "  and  he  points  out 
tliat  El  is  not  an  adjective  agreeing 
with  JElohim,  but  a  substantive  in 
apposition  with  it.  Hengstenberg  takes 
the  same  view,  and  says:  "The  heaping 
up  of  names  must  fill  the  hypocrites 
with  terror,  as  these  bring  before  their 
eyes  the  majesty  of  Him  whose  judg- 
ment they  underlie.  In  the  relation  of 
these  designations  there  is  a  gradation. 
Elohim  is  more  than  El.  to  which  its 
singular  Eloah  is  equivalent.  The  plural 
marks  the  fulness  and  the  richness  of 
the  Divine  nature.  Jehovah  is  the 
highest  name  according  to  its  deriva- 
tion— it  marks  God  as  the  only  real 
Being — and,  according  to  the  usage 
also,    which    ascribes   to    Jehovah    the 


most  glorious  manifestations  of  God  to 
and  in  behalf  of  His  people."  He  who 
summons  the  world  to  judgment  has 
the  right  to  do  so,  and  the  power  to 
enforce  His  right.  •  ^5  Judge  God  is 
perfect.  Two  things  are  essential  to  a 
just  judgment. 

1.  Competent  knowledge  of  the  case  to 
be  tried.  In  this  respect  God  is  perfect 
as  the  Judge  of  man.  He  is  fully 
acquainted  with  (1)  all  spoken  words 
and  overt  actions ;  (2)  all  unuttered 
thoughts  and  unwrought  purposes ;  (3) 
all  motives  by  which  we  have  been 
actuated  ;  and  (4)  all  the  circumstances 
and  influences,  both  good  and  evil,  by 
which  we  have  been  affected  (Ps. 
cxxxix.  1-16). 

2.  Perfect  Justice  in  trying  the  case. 
"Is  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  ven- 
geance ?  God  forbid :  for  how  then 
shall  God  judge  the  world  1"  "A  God 
of  truth  and  without  iniquity,  just  and 
right  is  He."  His  judgment-throne  is 
"a  great  white  throne,"  i.e.,  a  throne 
whose  judgments  are  characterised  by 
perfect  purity  and  righteousness.  God 
is  the  Judge  ;  and  He  is  perfect  in  all 
things. 

II.  The  principles  upon  which 
judgment  will  be  administered.  "Out 
of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,  God 

245 


KALICL. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


hath  shined/*  On  "  Zion,  the  perfection 
of  beauty,"  see  remarks  on  Ps.  xlviii. 
2.  "The  meaning  here  is,  that  the 
great  principles  which  are  to  determine 
the  destiny  of  mankind  in  the  final 
judgment  are  those  which  proceed  from 
Zion  ;  or  those  which  are  taught  in  the 
religion  of  Zion  ;  they  are  those  which  are 
inculcated  through  the  Church  of  God. 
God  has  there  made  known  His  law ; 
He  has  stated  the  principles  on  which 
He  governs,  and  on  which  He  will  judge 
the  world." — Barnes.  To  the  Church 
God  has  clearly  revealed  His  will,  and 
made  known  the  principles  upon  which 
He  will  administer  the  final  judgment. 
(See  Eccles.  xii.  14;  Matt.  xxv.  14-46. 
Acts  xvii.  31 ;  Rom.  xiv.  10,  12.  ;  f^  al.) 
III.  The  certainty  of  the  judgment. 
**  God  shall  come,"  &c.  Here  is  no 
peradventure,  but  an  unmistakable 
affirmation.  Evidence  is  not  wanting 
of  the  certainty  of  future  judgment. 

1.  Conscience  foreshadows  it.  "The 
consciousness  of  obligation,"  says  R.  W. 
Hamilton,  "  would  lead  us  to  believe 
that  God  would  bring  us  into  judg- 
ment with  Him." 

2.  Moral  government  requires  it, 
"Even-handed  justice"  is  not  adminis- 
tered here  and  now.  As  Dr.  R.  W.  Dale 
points  out,  "the  physical  penalties  of 
certain  forms  of  sin  torture  and  destroy 
Jill  inhabitant  of  Fiji ;  while  they  are 
alleviated  and  almost  wholly  averted  by 
the  resources  which  science  and  wealth 
place  at  the  disposal  of  a  European  ; 
one  merchant  who  is  guilty  of  gross 
fraud  escapes  detection,  while  another 
who  is  guilty  of  precisely  the  same  crime 
is  accidentally  discovered,  and  expiates 
his  ojffence  by  long  years  of  disgrace  and 
misery;  a  lad  who  has  no  friends  is 
ruined  for  life  by  a  single  act  of  folly 
and  sin,  while  another,  who  may  have 
been  his  confederate  in  wrong-doing,  is 
rescued  by  the  energy  and  constancy  of 
human  affection,  recovers  his  reputation, 
and  after  long  years  of  prosperity  and 
honour  leaves  behind  him  a  name 
which  his  children  are  proud  to  bear." 
Many  other  inequalities  of  retribution 
as  administered  in  this  life  might  be 
pointed  out.  These  demand  a  "judg- 
ment to  come." 

246 


3.  The  word  of  God  affirms  it.  (See 
passages  cited  above,  et  al.)  That  last 
great  Assize  is  certain  as  the  throne  of 
God. 

IV.  The  terrible  majesty  of  the 
judge  at  His  appearing.  "  A  fire  shall 
devour  before  Him,  and  it  shall  be  very 
tempestuous  round  about  Him."  There 
is  doubtless  a  reference  here  to  the 
sublime  and  terror-inspiring  phenomena 
which  accompanied  the  giving  of  the 
law  on  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.  16,  18).  In 
the  last  judgment  Christ  the  Judge  will 
come  in  "  the  clouds  of  heaven  "  and 
with  "flaming  fire,"  and  attended  by 
"mighty  angels"  (Mark  xiii.  26;  2 
Thess.  i.  7  - 10  ;  Rev.  i.  7).  Such 
descriptions  are  not  designed  simply  to 
represent  God  as  clothed  with  appro- 
priate majesty  when  appearing  to  judge 
the  world.  The  flaming  fire,  the  stormy 
tempest,  the  cloudy  gloom,  the  flashings 
of  His  glory,  are  emblematical  of  the 
purity  and  the  power  and  the  consuming 
wrath  of  the  Judge.  And  they  are  in 
keeping  with  the  vast  and  important 
transactions  and  results  of  the  solemn 
occasion,  and  the  Divine  dignity  of  the 
Judge.  Such  an  appearance  should  fill 
the  hearts  of  saints  with  holy  fear,  and 
sinners  with  unutterable  terror. 

V.  The  persons  to  be  judged. 
"  Judge  His  people.  .  .  .  My  saints, 
.  .  .  those  that  have  made  a  covenant 
with  Me  by  sacrifice."  The  people  of 
God  are  here  represented  as  having 
entered  into  a  solemn  covenant-relation 
to  Him.  They  have  taken  God  to  be 
their  God,  and  given  themselves  up  to 
Him  and  to  His  service,  and  the  Jews 
in  doing  this  presented  solemn  sacrifices 
to  Him.  The  Christian  covenants  with 
God  through  Christ  the  great  sacrifice, 
through  whom  alone  we  come  to  God. 
The  Jews  were  the  professed  people  of 
God, — His  covenanted  people  (Exod. 
xix.  3-9).  But  how  often  and  how 
sadly  did  they  break  the  covenant  ! 
"  It  is  at  first  sight  strange,  that  those, 
whom  the  Lord  will  judge  as  trans 
gressors  of  His  covenant,  should  be 
described  as  His  saints.  But  the  allu 
sion  to  the  height  of  their  standing  and 
destiny  is  particularly  fitted  to  cause 
shame,  on  account  of  their  present  actual 


HOMILETIC  COMMBNTinT:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  lu 


condition/'  Let  not  the  professed  people 
of  God  deceive  themselves  by  imagining 
that  if  they  sin  God  will  not  judge  them 
for  it  j  for  He  certainly  will  do  so.  The 
greater  the  privileges  and  profession  of 
any  people,  the  more  deserving  of  punish- 
ment will  they  be  found  if  they  dis- 
honour God  and  walk  not  in  His  statutes. 
But  at  the  last  judgment  all  men,  with- 
out any  exception  whatever,  must  appear 
and  be  judged  (Rom.  xiv.  10,  12  ;  2 
Cor.  V.  10  ;  et  al.) 

VI.  The  witnesses  of  the  judgment. 
"  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  from 
above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  He  may 
judge  iJis  people."  The  universe  is 
called  upon  to  be  present  as  witness  to 
the  solemn  transactions  of  the  judgment. 
Such  appeals  to  the  heaven  and  earth 
to  witness,  in  Scripture,  always  indicate 
the  importance  and  solemnity  of  the 
scenes  and  transactions  to  which  they 
are  called.  Thus  Moses  warned  the 
children  of  Israel  of  the  danger  of  pro- 
voking God  to  anger, — "  I  call  heaven 
and  earth  to  witness  against  you  this 
day,  that  ye  shall  soon  utterly  perish," 
&c.  (Deut.  iv.  26  ;  see  also  Micah  vi.  2.) 


"  All  His  holy  angels  "  will  attend  the 
Judge,  and  witness  the  proceedings,  and 
testify  to  their  righteousness. 

VII.  The  righteousness  of  the 
judgment.  "  And  the  heavens  shall 
declare  His  righteousness  ;  for  God  is 
Judge  Himself."  The  perfections  of 
God,  especially  His  holiness  and  know- 
ledge, guarantee  the  righteousness  of 
His  judgment,  (See  previous  remarks 
on  the  perfection  of  God  as  a  Judge.) 
The  angelic  witnesses  of  the  judgment 
will  declare  its  justice,  saying,  "  True 
and  righteous  are  His  judgments."  The 
redeemed  will  praise  the  generosity  of 
His  dealings  with  them.  The  con- 
sciences even  of  the  condemned  will 
acknowledge  the  righteousness  of  their 
doom.  The  whole  universe  will  sub- 
scribe to  the  justice  of  His  judgments. 

Conclusion.  —  1.  Here  is  solemn 
warning  to  the  people  of  God.  If  you 
depart  from  Him,  He  will  summon  you 
to  meet  Him  for  judgment.  2.  Here  is 
a  solemn  inquiry  for  all.  How  shall  we 
meet  Him  in  judgment  1  Only  through 
Christ  Jesus  can  we  do  so  (see  Rom. 
viii.  1,  33). 


The  Formal  and  the  Spiritual  in  Divine  Service. 

{Verses  7-15.) 


The  poet  represents  the  judgment  of 
the  chosen  people  as  commencing  with 
God's  address  to  them  :  '*  Hear,  O  My 
people,  and  I  will  speak,"  &c.  He 
testifies  against  them  because  of  the 
formality  of  their  services  ;  and  calls 
upon  .them  to  offer  to  Him  spiritual 
sacrifices. 

I.  The  worthlessness  of  merely 
formal  and  material  sacrifices  in  the 
Divine  service.  ^'  I  will  not  reprove 
thee  for  thy  sacrifices  or  thy  burnt- 
offerings  continually  before  Me.  I  will 
take  no  bullock  out  of  thy  house,  nor 
he-goats  out  of  thy  folds."  Such  sacri- 
fices are  shown  to  be  worthless. 

1.  Because  of  the  infinite  resources  of 
God.  "  For  every  beast  of  the  forest  is 
mine,"  &c.  (vers.  10-12).  He  is  the 
absolute  proprietor  of  all  things.  We 
are  but  stewards  of  our  possessions. 
We  hold  them  under  Him  and  for  Him. 


"  What  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not 
receive  "  from  Him  1  The  devout  and 
godly  soul  recognises  this  fact,  and 
blesses  God,  as  David  did,  because  He 
has  given  to  us  wherewith  we  may  offer 
to  Him.  "  Blessed  be  Thou,  Lord  God 
of  Israel  our  father,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  greatness,"  &c. 
(1  Chron.  xxix.  10-16).  Only  of  His 
own  can  we  give  unto  Him.  This  is 
true  of  the  man  of  temporal  wealth,  the 
man  of  genius,  the  man  of  piety  and 
spiritual  power,  &c.  Utterly  worthless, 
therefore,  are  all  our  offerings  in  His 
sight,  unless  they  are  spiritually  and 
heartily  given  (Acts  xvii.  25). 

2.  Because  of  the  S2n7'ituality  of  God, 
"  Will  I  eat  the  flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink 
the  blood  of  goats  1  "  Did  they  sup- 
pose that  the  Infinite  Spirit  needed 
meat  and  drink  for  His  support  as  our 
bodies  do  %      Being  a  spirit,   the  mere 

247 


PSALM  £. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


outward  sacrifices  could  afford  no  satis- 
faction to  Him.  "  Among  the  heathen 
the  opinion  prevailed  that  the  gods  ate 
and  drank  what  was  offered  to  them  in 
sacrifice  ;  whereas  the  truth  was,  that 
these  things  were  consumed  by  the 
priests  who  attended  on  heathen  altars, 
and  conducted  the  devotions  of  heathen 
temples,  and  who  found  that  it  con- 
tributed much  to  their  own  support, 
and  did  much  to  secure  the  liberality  of 
the  people,  to  keep  up  the  impression 
that  what  was  thus  offered  was  con- 
sumed by  the  gods."  The  Divine  appeal 
implies  that  they  to  whom  it  was  ad- 
dressed knew  better.  "  God  is  a  Spirit : 
and  they  that  worship  Him  must 
worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth." 
Therefore,  in  His  sight  the  mere  mate- 
rial offering  was  worthless.  But  let  us 
not  suppose  that  God  rejects  all  out- 
ward offerings  and  sacrifices.  He 
rather  requires  them.  It  is  quite  clear 
from  the  eighth  verse,  "  that  if  the 
outward  sacrifices  had  not  been  offered, 
this  also  would  have  been  a  ground  of 
complaint."  But  when  they  are 
offered  as  substitutes  for  the  lovinar 
reverence  of  the  heart,  and  the  loyal 
obedience  of  the  life,  He  rejects  them  as 
abominations.  When  they  are  the 
expressions  of  the  souPs  prayerful 
penitence  or  thankful  praise,  He 
accepts  them  with  delight.  (See  the 
remarks  on  Ps.  xl.  6.) 

II.  The  worth  of  spiritual  sacrifices 
in  the  Divine  service.  "  Offer,"  or 
sacrifice,  "  unto  God  thanksgiving,"  <fec. 
(vers.  14,  15).  The  worth  of  spiritual 
offerings  is  shown  here  in  several  re- 
spects : 

1.  They  are  enjoined  hy  God,  He 
commands  us  to  present  them  unto 
Him.  Notice  (1)  The  ground  of  this 
requirement.  **  Hear,  O  My  people,  and 
I  will  speak :  I  am  God,  thy  God." 
"  On  the  one  side,  my  people  and  Israel, 
the  people  of  God  and  of  the  covenant ; 
on  the  other  side  God^  the  God  of  hea- 
ven and  of  earth,  thy  God^  who  has 


bound  Israel  to  Himself  by  so  many 
benefits,  has  purchased  his  obedience 
so  dearly." — Hengstenherg.  He  de- 
mands the  spiritual  worship  of  His 
people  on  the  twofold  ground  of  His 
own  Divine  perfections  and  sovereignty, 
and  His  covenant  relation  to  them. 
(2)  The  inclusiveness  of  this  require- 
ment. These  spiritual  offerings  include 
praise,  payment  of  vows,  and  prayer. 
"  The  giving  of  thanks,"  says  John 
Arnd,  '*  comprehends  many  virtues  in 
itself, — acknowledgment  of  God  as  the 
fountain  of  all  good  ;  fear  of  God, 
namely,  the  childlike  fear  which  re- 
ceives all  benefits  from  God  as  the  child 
from  the  father :  humility,  confessing 
that  we  have  nothing  of  ourselves,  but 
obtain  all  from  God,"  <fec.  Hengsten- 
herg translates :  "  Offer  to  God  praise, 
and  THUS  pay  to  the  Highest  thy  vows." 
He  explains  :  "  He  only  who  has  ren- 
dered the  substance  of  this  thank- 
offering,  thanks^  has  truly  paid  his 
vow.'*  Lives  of  penitence,  prayer,  grati- 
tude, praise,  affection,  obedience,  and 
trust,  constitute  the  acceptable  sacrifices. 

2.  7%ey  secure  His  blessing.  "  The 
whole  fifteenth  verse  is  of  a  promissory 
nature.  It  announces  the  7-eivard  which 
is  appointed  for  the  spiritual  worship  of 
God.  Whoever  thaiiks  God  in  the  right 
manner  for  deliverance  obtained,  may 
console  himself  in  the  time  of  distress 
with  the  assured  hope  of  a  new  deliver- 
ance."— Hengstenberg. 

3.  They  are  a  means  hy  which  we 
glorify  God.  "  Thou  shalt  glorify  Me." 
God  is  glorified  not  by  our  outward 
professions  or  material  offerings,  but  by 
grateful  and  trustful  hearts  expressed  in 
holy  and  earnest  lives. 

Conclusion. — Are  we  thus  honour- 
ing Himi  Our  material  offerings  and 
formal  services  He  will  not  accept  un- 
less we  give  Him  our  heart  and  life. 
Be  it  ours,  throusrh  the  atonement  of 
Christ  Jesus,  and  in  imitation  of  His  ex- 
ample, to  devote  ourselves  unreservedly 
and  for  ever  to  God* 


248 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  t  PSALMS, 


PSALM  L. 


Besourob  and  Comfort  in  Trouble. 
(Verse  15.) 


Noticf 

L  The  period  descril)ed.     "  The  day 

of  trouble."  We  are  often  called  to 
pass  through  trouble  in  the  present 
world.  We  sometimes  are  troubled 
with  opposition  from  the  world  (2  Tim. 
iii.  1 2),  sometimes  with  painful  family 
discord  (Prov.  xvii.  1),  sometimes  with 
great  bodily  infirmities  (Isa.  xxxviii.  14, 
15),  sometimes  with  inward  conflicts 
(Rom.  vii.  22—24),  sometimes  with  per- 
plexities in  business,  sometimes  with 
worldly  disappointments,  sometimes  with 
the  unfaithfulness  of  friends  (2  Tim.  iv. 
10,  16),  sometimes  with  the  weight  of 
declining  years,  sometimes  with  slander- 
ous reports  (Ps.  xli.  5-8),  sometimes 
with  pecuniary  losses,  sometimes  with 
afflictive  bereavements  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  18), 
and  sometimes  with  tormenting  fears  (2 
Cor.  vii.  5). 


II.  The  direction  given.  "  Call 
upon  Me."  We  should  do  this — in  the 
language  of  deprecation  (Ps.  cxliii.  2); 
in  the  language  of  petition  (Ps.  Ixix.  14) ; 
in  the  language  of  confession  (Ps.  li.  2, 
1  John  i.  9)  j  in  the  language  of  hu- 
mility (Gen.  xviii.  27,  xxxii.  10);  and 
in  the  language  of  submission  (Matt. 
XX vi.  42). 

III.  The  consolation  introduced. 
''  I  will  deliver  thee."  This  He  will  do 
at  the  fittest  time,  by  the  fittest  instru- 
ments, through  the  fittest  mediums y  and 
in  the  fittest  manner, 

IV.  The  consequence  anticipated. 
"Thou  shalt  glorify  Me."  In  the 
memory,  by  lively  recollections  of  My 
kindness ;  in  the  conscience,  by  fearing 
to  prove  ungrateful ;  in  the  affections, 
by  loving  Me  supremely ;  in  the  life,  by 
devotedness  to  My  service. — W.  Sleigh. 


God's  Challenge  to  Eeligious  Hypocrites. 
(Verses  16-23.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  Religious  hypocrites  proclaiming 
God's  law.  *'  What  hast  thou  to  do 
to  declare  My  statutes,  or  that  thou 
shouldest  take  My  covenant  in  thy 
mouth  ? "  It  is  a  great  evil  when 
private  professors  of  religion  are  untrue 
to  their  profession.  In  them  hypocrisy 
is  an  evil  and  pernicious  thing.  But 
for  hypocrites  to  declare  and  teach  God's 
law  to  others,  and  set  it  at  nought  them- 
selves, is  an  outrageous  evil.  He  who 
preaches  the  law  to  others  should  en- 
deavour to  keep  the  law  himself.  A 
man  who  is  not  himself  sincerely  reli- 
gious has  no  Divine  authority  to  preach 
the  Word  of  God  to  others.  Neither 
has  he  the  ability  to  do  so  aright.  To 
represent  the  power  and  beauty  of  truth 
and  grace  faithfully,  we  must  know 
their  beauty  and  power  for  ourselves. 
"  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of 
the  Lord."     (See  Rom.  ii.  17-24.) 

II.  Religious  hypocrites  despising 
God's  Word.     "  Thou  Wtest  instruction. 


and  castest  My  words  behind  thee."  A 
teacher  of  others,  yet  unwilling  to  learn 
himself.  A  preacher  of  the  Word  of 
God  to  others,  yet  contemptuously  dis- 
regarding that  Word  himself.  It  is  to 
be  feared  that  there  are  still  teachers 
of  religion  who  themselves  refuse  to  be 
taught  of  God  ;  and  who,  by  neglecting 
its  study  or  disobeying  its  precepts,  de- 
spise the  Word  of  God.  Such  persons 
occupy  and  profane  the  sacred  position 
of  religious  teachers  for  the  gratification 
of  their  ambition,  or  for  the  emoluments 
of  the  ofiice,  &c.  But  whatever  may  be 
their  motive,  their  sin  is  most  heinous 
and  mischievous. 

III.  Religious  hypocrites  breaking 
God's  laws.  "  When  thou  sawest  a 
thief,  then  thou  consentedst  with  him," 
&c.  (vers.  18-20).  These  teachers  of  the 
law  are  here  charged  by  God  with 
breaking  its  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth 
commandments.  He  accuses  them  of 
adultery,  theft,  and  false  witness.  They 
approved  the  practices  of  thieves  and 

249 


PSALM  L. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


Kbared  in  their  plunder.  Adultery  was 
''very  common  among  the  Jews,  for 
even  the  Tahnud  accuses  some  of  the 
most  celebrated  Rabbis  of  this  vice." — 
M.  Stuart.  The  charge  of  evil  speaking 
is  very  strong.  It  was  not  an  occasional 
thing  with  them  ;  they  were  addicted  to 
it.  Mouth  and  tongue  were  devoted  to 
wickedness  and  deceit.  "  The  expres- 
sion in  ver.  20,  '  thou  sittest,'  is  a  de- 
lineation to  the  life  of  babbling  com- 
panies." In  the  enjoyment  of  social 
intercourse  they  employed  themselves 
in  backbiting  and  slandering.  Even 
the  nearest  relations  were  not  exempt 
from  their  venomous  tongues.  Their 
"  brother,"  their  "  own  mother's  son," 
they  would  assail.  "  It  is  to  be  remem- 
bered that  where  polygamy  prevailed 
there  would  be  many  children  in  the 
same  family  who  had  the  same  father, 
but  not  the  same  mother.  The  nearest 
relationship,  therefore,  was  where  there 
was  the  same  mother  as  well  as  the 
same  father.  To  speak  of  a  brother,  in 
the  strictest  sense,  and  as  implying  the 
nearest  relationship,  it  would  be  natural 
to  speak  of  one  as  having  the  same 
mother." — Barnes.  Now  these  sins — 
slander,  even  of  the  nearest  relations, 
adultery,  and  complicity  with  thieves — 
are  charged  against  not  merely  professors 
of  religion,  but  teachers  of  the  law.  The 
effect  of  such  sins  in  persons  holding 
such  a  position  and  making  such  a  pro- 
fession is  most  baneful.  These  effects 
are — 

1.  Ruin  to  the  hypocrites  themselves. 
(See  2  Pet.  ii.) 

2.  Paralysis  and    corruption   to   the 
Church. 

3.  Stnmhling  to  the  world.     (Rom.  ii. 
24  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  2.) 

IV.  Eeligious  hypocrites  deceiving 
themselves  as  to  the  Divine  character 
and  conduct.  "  These  things  thou  hast 
done,  and  I  kept  silence;  thou  thoughtest 
that  I  was  altogether  such  an  one  as  thy- 
self." God  had  borne  long  with  them 
in  their  evil  ways.  His  forbearance  and 
long-suffering  were  exercised  with  a  view 
to  their  repentance.  But  they  misin- 
terpreted His  non-interference  as  an  indi- 
cation that  He  regarded  sin  even  as  they 
did.  Sinners  take  God's  silence  for 
250 


consent,  and  His  patience  with  them  as 
palliation  of  their  sins,  and  are  thus 
encouraged  in  evil.  But  great  is  their 
mistake  in  this.  "  Because  sentence 
against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed 
speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons 
of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil." 
Yet  it  surely  will  be  executed. 

V.  Religious  hypocrites  interrogated 
by  God.  "What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare 
My  statutes]"  &c.  (ver.  16).  Thus  God 
challenges  their  right  and  title  to  pro- 
claim His  statutes.  What  right  had 
they  to  speak  of  His  covenant  when 
they  were  constantly  and  flagrantly  vio- 
lating it  1    This  challenge  implies — 

1.  The  inconsistency  of  their  conduct. 

2.  The  enormity  of  their  conduct. 
They  were  profaning  the  most  sacred 
realities ;  endangering  the  most  precious 
interests  of  human  souls ;  dishonouring 
God. 

3.  The  rejection  hy  God  of  their  pro- 
fessional duties.     He  rejects  with  utter 
abhorrence  the  professional  services  in 
His  cause  of  those  whose  hearts  and  lives 
are  profane  and  impure. 

VI.  Religious  hypocrites  convicted 
of  their  sins.  "  I  will  reprove  thee,  and 
set  them  in  order  before  Mine  eyes." 
The  word  translated  **  reprove  "  means 
to  demonstrate  against,  reprove,  rebuke, 
chastise.  We  take  it  to  mean  here  that 
God  would  thoroughly  convince  them  of 
the  charges  which  He  brings  against 
them,  by  setting  their  sins  in  order 
before  their  eyes.  He  would  summon 
their  sins  from  the  graves  of  the  past  to 
rise  and  confront  them,  and  so  convince 
them.  "  He  declares,"  says  Calvin, 
"that  they  will  soon  be  drawn  into 
open  light,  that  they  shall  be  compelled 
to  see  with  their  eyes  the  shameful  deeds 
which  they  had  imagined  they  could 
conceal  from  the  eyes  of  God.  For  so 
I  understand  the  setting  in  order,  that 
God  will  lay  before  them  in  exact  order 
a  full  catalogue  of  their  misdeeds,  which 
they  must  read  and  own,  whether  they 
will  or  not."  Unless  our  sins  are  blotted 
out  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  we  must  con- 
front them  all  again  to  our  utter  con- 
fusion. 

VII.  Religious  hypocrites  warned  by 
God.     "  Now  consider  this,  ye  that  for- 


HOUILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


FSALM  L. 


get  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces,"  <fec. 
"  It  is  the  doom  of  hypocrites  to  be 
cut  asunder  (Matt.  xxiv.  51).     Note, — 

1.  Forgetfulness  of  God  is  at  the  bottom 
of  all  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked. 
Those  that  know  God,  and  yet  do  not 
obey    Him,    do    certainly   forget  Him. 

2.  Those  that  forget  God  forget  them- 
selves, and  it  will  never  be  right  with 
them  till  they  consider,  and  so  recover 
themselves.  Consideration  is  the  first 
step  towards  conversion.  3.  Those  that 
will  not  consider  the  warnings  of  God's 
Word  will  certainly  be  torn  in  pieces  by 
the  execution  of  His  wrath.  4.  When 
God  comes  to  tear  sinners  in  pieces, 
there  is  no  delivering  them  out  of  His 
hand.  They  cannot  deliver  themselves, 
nor  can  any  friend  they  have  in  the 
world  deliver  them." — M.  Henry, 

VIII.  All  men  instructed  by  God. 
"  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  Me," 
&c.  (ver.  23).  The  first  clause  of  this 
verse  is  a  compend  of  vers.  14  and 
15.  On  the  second,  Matthew  Henry 
remarks  ;  "1.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  to 
ofier  praise,  but  we  must  withal  order 
our  conversation  aright.     Thanksgiving 


is  good,  but  thanksliving  is  better.  2. 
Those  that  would  have  their  conversa- 
tion right  must  take  care  and  pains  to 
order  it,  to  dispose  it  according  to  rule, 
to  understand  their  way  and  to  direct  it. 
3.  Those  that  take  care  of  their  conver- 
sation make  sure  their  salvation.  The 
right  ordering  of  the  conversation  is  the 
only  way,  and  it  is  a  sure  way,  to  obtain 
the  great  salvation." 

Conclusion. — Let  professors  of  reli- 
gion, and  especially  ministers  thereof, 
examine  themselves.  To  each  of  us 
who  are  ministers  or  teachers  our  Lord 
by  His  apostle  says, — "  Be  thou  an 
example  of  the  believers,  in  word,  in 
conversation,  in  charity,  in  spirit,  in 
faith,  in  purity."  Brethren,  are  we 
such  an  example  1  If  there  be  any 
hypocrisy,  any  insincerity  in  us,  let  us 
take  warning,  and  repent,  and  be  saved 
while  yet  we  may. 

And  let  the  sincere  Christian,  who 
sacrifices  unto  God  thanksgiving,  and 
orders  his  conversation  aright,  be  en- 
couraged, for  his  salvation  is  of  the 
Lord,  and  faileth  not. 


An  Awful  Fallacy. 


Ver.  21.  "Thou  thoughtest  that  I 
was  altogether  as  thyself." 

There  are  certain  features  in  which 
we  are  like  God.  "  God  said.  Let  us 
make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  like- 
ness." There  are  certain  features  of 
that  likeness  which  sin  has  not  destroyed. 
Our  reason  remains.  Our  moral  sense, 
though  injured,  is  not  destroyed,  <fec. 
If  we  were  not  in  some  respects  like 
God,  we  could  receive  no  revelation  of 
Him.  But  it  is  a  sinful  fallacy  to  sup- 
pose that  God  is  altogether  like  us.  Let 
us  exhibit  the  fallaciousness  and  evil  of 
such  a  supposition. 

I.  Men  are  able  to  hide  their  sins 
from  each  other,  and  the  wicked  act 
as  though  they  could  hide  them  from 
God.  Wicked  men  do  impose  upon 
their  fellow-men  by  means  of  religious 
professions  and  practices.  The  Jews 
addressed  in  this  psalm  imagined  that 
their  ritualistic  observances  would  hide 
from  God  the  enormity  of  their  moral 


conduct.  They  thought  that  th^y  could 
impose  upon  God  by  their  religious 
forms.  This  is  what  men  are  doing 
now.  If  men  realised  the  impossibility 
of  hiding  anything  from  God,  sin  would 
become  an  exceptional  thing.  And  yet, 
how  preposterous  it  is  to  think  to  hide 
anything  from  the  All  -  Seeing  !  He 
has  "  set  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of 
His  countenance." 

II.  Men  are  apt  to  lose  all  concern 
for  the  insignificant  when  occupied 
with  the  important,  and  the  wicked 
act  as  though  this  were  the  case  with 
God.  The  statesman  dealing  with  na- 
tional problems  and  influencing  the 
destinies  of  mighty  empires  may  over- 
look the  beggar-child  that  stands  at  his 
gate.  The  wicked  argue,  **  God  is  great 
and  occupied  with  concerns  of  unlimited 
extent  and  unspeakable  importance  ;  He 
upholds  the  entire  universe ;  do  you 
think  He  leaves  these  vast  concerns  to 
notice  the  sins    of  one   ma?)  1     I   can 

251 


PSALM  L. 


'HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


understand  His  punishing  the  sins  of  a 
host  of  angels,  or  of  a  multitude  of  men, 
or  of  a  nation ;  but  the  failings  of  one 
imperfect  man  He  does  not  concern 
Himself  about."  How  foolish  !  Great 
and  small  are  only  the  relative  terms  of 
imperfect  beings.  To  God  nothing  is 
unimportant,  &c. 

III.  Men  become  unmindful  of  an 
offence  in  course  of  time,  and  the 
wicked  think  that  in  this  God  is  alto- 
gether as  they  are.  We  are  indifferent 
now  to  an  offence  which  we  bitterly 
resented  some  years  ago  when  it  was 
offered  to  us.  Time  has  wonderfully 
toned  down  our  feeling^.  But  God  never 
forgets  or  becomes  indifferent  to  any 
sin.  He  knows  the  dark  history  of 
every  sin,  sees  all  its  awful  relations  and 
bearings,  and  so  He  never  becomes 
indifferent  as  we  do.  Moreover,  He 
knows  that  sin  must  either  be  pardoned 
or  punished,  and,  therefore,  His  solici- 
tude for  the  sinner's  good  keeps  the  sin 
ever  before  Him.  We  may  grow  in- 
different to  a  wrong,  but  God  never 
can. 

IV.  Men  regard  sin  with  great  leni- 
ency, and  the  wicked  imagine  that  God 
does  so.  "  Fools  make  a  mock  at  sin." 
Society  says  of  the  profligate  that  he  is 
"  somewhat  gay,"  or  "  a  trifle  fast." 
Philosophers  speak  of  sin  as  "  misdirec- 
tion," or  as  a  result  of  deficient  educa- 
tion, or  unfavourable  circumstances  and 
surroundings.  These  tolerant  and  false 
views  of  sin  men  are  prone  to  transfer  to 
God.  But  with  Him  sin  is  the  *'  abo- 
minable thing  which  He  hates."  He 
has  proclaimed  His  hatred  of  it  in  the 
punisliment  of  the  angels  who  sinned, 
in  the  destruction  of  the  ungodly  world 
by  the  flood,  in  the  overthrow  of  the 
cities  of  the  plain,  &c.  The  sufferings 
and  death  of  Jesus  His  Son  to  put  away 
sin  are  God's  great  protest  against  evil. 
He  is  completely,  unchangeably,  eter- 
nally opposed  to  it. 

V.  Men  treat  sin  and  sinners  in  a 
very  changeable  manner,  and  the 
wicked  think   that  God  will  do  sa 


Man  burns  with  anger  against  an  offen- 
der, and  threatens  stern  punishment;  but 
the  anger  cools  and  the  punishment  is 
never  inflicted.  Or  man  threatens  a 
punishment  which  he  cannot  inflict. 
Men  are  prone  to  think  that  God  is  as 
they  are  in  this  respect.  "  Because  sen- 
tence against  an  evil  work  is  not  exe- 
cuted speedily,"  &c.  His  threatenings, 
they  think,  are  designed  to  deter  men 
from  evil;  but  if  it  is  committed.  He 
will  not  arise  to  punish  for  it.  But  this 
is  a  fatal  mistake.  He  will  fulfil  His 
threatenings  against  the  impenitent. 
Judgment  is  delayed,  because  in  His 
mercy  God  waits  for  the  wicked  to  turn 
penitently  to  Him.  But  if  His  for- 
bearance do  not  result  in  their  penitence. 
His  judgment  will  be  the  more  terrible. 
He  will  set  their  sins  before  them  in  all 
their  multiplicity  and  enormity,  and  the 
sight  will  extinguish  their  hope,  and  call 
upon  Despair  henceforth  to  be  their 
attendant  angel. 

Sin  must  be  either  cast  behind  God's 
back,  or  it  will  cast  the  sinner  into  hell. 
There  is  forgiveness  with  God.  He 
delighteth  in  mercy.  He  abundantly 
pardons.  "  The  Son  of  Man  hath  power 
on  earth  to  forgive  sins."  Seek  Him 
while  He  may  be  found. 

Let  us  not  imagine  that  God  is  alto- 
gether like  unto  us  in  His  estimate  of 
evil  and  evil-doers ;  but  let  us  seek  to 
view  sin  as  He  does,  with  implacable 
hatred,  and  to  resist  it  with  relentless 
vigour. 

Others,  imagining  God  to  be  like 
themselves,  conclude  that  He  regards 
sin  with  feelings  of  stormy  passion  and 
sinful  revenge.  They  do  greatly  err. 
And  others  that  He  is  partial  in  His 
redemptive  purposes  and  sectarian  in 
His  sympathies.  They  also  err.  His 
love  is  far  greater  than  the  best  of  our 
conceptions  of  it. 

Let  us  not  think  that  God  is  alto- 
gether like  unto  us,  but  endeavour, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  to  become  alto- 
gether like  unto  Him. 


252 


BOMILSTIC  COMMENTARY i  PSALMS. 


PSALlf  LZ, 


PSALM     LL 

INTRODUCTION. 

The  superscription  informs  us  both  as  to  the  author  of  the  psalm,  and  the  occasion  of  its  com- 
position. "  To  the  Chief  Musician,  a  Psalm  of  David,  when  Nathan  the  prophet  came  unto 
him,  after  he  had  gone  in  to  Bathsheba."  The  contents  of  the  psalm  accord  with  the  super- 
scription on  both  points.  For  the  history  of  the  painful  circumstances,  see  2  Sam.  xi.,  and  xii. 
1-14. 

That  the  psalm  is  addressed  '*  To  the  Chief  Musician  "  shows  that  it  was  not  merely  a 
private  confession  of  the  poet's  guilt  to  God,  but  a  public  expression  of  his  penitence.  Heng- 
stenberg,  quoting  the  Marburg  Bible,  says  :  "  '  David  wrote  this  psalm  not  for  himself  alone 
to  be  used  as  a  prayer,  but  for  those  also  who  had  charge  of  the  temple  music,  that  he  might 
again  edify,  by  his  repentance,  the  people  of  God,  whom  he  had  offended  by  his  sin  ;  and  till 
then  he  had  no  rest  in  his  bosom,  as  he  confesses  in  Ps.  xxxii.  2.'  This  publicity  in  the  con- 
fession of  the  sin  was  quite  as  great  a  work  of  God's  grace  in  David,  as  the  depth  of  his  know- 
ledge in  regard  to  it.  Nature  must  have  struggled  hard  against  it.  But  the  design  of  the 
publicity  he  gives  us  in  ver.  13.     He  would,  through  his  repentance,  lead  others  to  the  same." 


The  Penitent's  Psalm. 


"  This  psalm,"  says  Robertson,  "  writ- 
ten three  thousand  years  ago,  might 
have  been  written  yesterday  :  it  describes 
the  vicissitudes  of  spiritual  life  in  an 
Englishman  as  truly  as  of  a  Jew.  *  N'ot 
of  an  age,  but  for  all  time.^ "  We  have 
here — 

I.  The  Penitent's  Confession.  Con- 
fession is  not  a  single  act.  It  compre-. 
bends,  at  least,  three  things :  (a.)  A 
right  estimate  of  sin.  The  true  peni- 
tent regards  sin  not  as  mere  misdirec- 
tion, or  the  result  of  imperfect  develop- 
ment, but  as  the  guilty  violation  of  a  holy 
law.  (/3.)  A  right  feeling  in  relation  to 
sin.  The  sincere  penitent  loathes  sin, 
and  **  grieves  for  having  grieved  his 
God."  (y.)  Right  conduct  in  relation  to 
tin.  He  endeavours  to  forsake  sin,  and 
to  follow  after  holiness.  The  Psalmist 
in  his  confession — 

1.  R(  cognises  the  evil  of  sin.  He  re- 
gards it  (1).  As  an  unrighteous  thing. 
**  Mine  iniquity."  Sin  is  a  reversal  of 
true  moral  relations  and  order.  (2.) 
As  a  breach  of  moral  law.  "  My  trans- 
gressions." By  his  sins  he  had  violated 
the  holy  laws  of  the  supreme  and  gra- 
cious Sovereign.  (3.)  As  a  defiling 
thing.  He  felt  himself  utterly  polluted 
by  his  sins,  and  asks  again  and  again 
for  cleansing.  Thus  David  recognises 
the  essential  evil  of  sin,  and  its  inju- 
rious influence  upon  human  life  and 
character.     He  does  not  attempt  to  pal- 


liate its  wickedness ;  but  exhibits  un- 
mistakably its  blackness,  and  deformity, 
and  blasting  power. 

2.  Recognises  the  sin  as  his  own.  "  My 
transgressions  .  .  .  mine  iniquity  .  .  . 
my  sin."  We  are  prone  to  try  to  shift 
the  responsibility  of  our  sins  from  our- 
selves to  others.  We  blame  the  circum- 
stances in  which  we  were  placed,  or  the 
temptations  by  which  we  were  assailed, 
or  the  tendencies  which  we  have  in- 
herited, or  the  training  which  we  have 
received.  But  of  this  we  find  nothing 
in  this  penitential  psalm.  David  feels 
that  the  sin  and  guilt  of  his  crimes  were 
his,  and  his  only.  '*  I  acknowledge  my 
transgression,"  <fec.  **  I  have  sinned," 
&c.  His  sins  appeared  so  aggravated  to 
him,  that  he  could  only  express  his  feel- 
ing in  this  respect  by  saying  that  he 
was  born  in  sin.  As  Robertson  says, 
"  He  lays  on  himself  the  blame  of  a 
tainted  nature,  instead  of  that  of  a  single 
fault :  not  a  murder  only,  but  of  a  mur- 
derous nature.  *  Conceived  in  sin.* 
From  his  first  moments  up  till  then,  he 
saw  sin — sin — sin  :  nothing  but  sin." 
Sin  and  guilt  cannot  be  transferred  from 
one  to  another.  If  I  do  evil,  the  guilt 
is  my  own.  "  Every  man  shall  bear 
his  own  burden."  The  Divinely-awak- 
ened conscience  ever  feels  this — con- 
fesses this — says,  "  I  acknowledge  my 
transgressions." 

3.  Regards    sin    cw   hostile   to   GocL, 

253 


PSALU  LL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


'*  Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sin- 
ned," <kc.  The  Most  High  has  no  com- 
plicity with  evil.  Sin  is  ever  to  Him 
the  *'  abominable  thing  which  He  hates." 
He  brings  good  out  of  evil,  overrules 
evil  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  glo- 
rious purposes.  Yet  He  is  not  the 
author  of  evil,  but  its. sworn  and  un- 
compromising antagonist.  His  laws  in 
both  the  material  and  spiritual  realms 
are  against  it ;  His  administration  is 
against  it ;  His  great  redemption  is 
against  it ;  His  essential  nature  is  utterly 
opposed  to  it.  True  penitence  feels  this, 
and  says,  "  Against  Thee,  Thee  only, 
have  I  sinned."  David  had  sinned 
grievously  against  human  society;  but 
it  was  the  fact  that  his  offences  were 
wrongs  against  his  God  that  chiefly  im- 
pressed and  distressed' him.  All  sins 
against  man  are  sins  against  God  also. 
You  cannot  harm  your  fellow-man  with- 
out wronging  God.  "  Every  blow  struck 
against  humanity  is  a  blow  struck  against 
God."  A  fact  this  pregnant  with  so- 
lemn suggestions.  Thus  the  confession 
of  this  royal  penitent  expresses  the  judg- 
ments and  emotions  of  the  penitent 
heart  to  day. 

II.    The    penitent's    prayer.      The 
Psalmist  prays  for, — 

1.  Forgiveness   of  his   sins.      "Have 
mercy  upon  me,  0  God,"  &c.   (ver.   1). 

/  "  Hide  Thy  face  from  my  sins,  and  blot 
out  all  mine  iniquities."  Confession 
and  forgiveness  are  inseparably  con- 
nected (Ps.  xxxii.  5  ;  Luke  xvii.  3,  4 ; 
1  John  i.  9).  Confession  is  not  the 
efficient  cause  of  forgiveness,  but  it  is 
its  indispensable  condition.  It  is  "  a 
necessary  basis  of  forgiveness."  The 
figures  here  used  to  denote  forgiveness 
give  clearness  and  prominence  to  the 
idea  of  its  completeness.  "Blot  out  my 
transgressions,  .  .  .  blot  out  all  mine 
iniquities  : "  as  the  account  of  a  debt  is 
wiped  away  or  cancelled  by  the  creditor, 
or  as  a  cloud  is  dispelled  by  the  beams 
of  the  sun,  "  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a 
thick  cloud,  thy  transgressions,  and,  as  a 
cloud,  thy  sins."  *'  Hide  Thy  face  from 
my  sins ; "  do  not  regard  them  ;  "  cast 
all  my  sins  behind  Thy  back  ; "  remem- 
ber them  against  me  no  more  for  ever. 

2.  Cleansing  and  renewal  of  his  spirit. 

254 


"  Wash  me  throughly  from  mine  iniquity, 
and  cleanse  me  from  my  sin.  Purge  me 
with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean  ;  wash 
me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow. 
Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God  j  and 
renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  "  Mark 
the  thoroughness  of  this  desire.  Not 
only  must  sin  be  blotted  out,  but  the 
sinner  himself  must  be  washed  and 
cleansed.  There  must  not  be  merely  a 
change  of  states  but  a  change  of  nature. 
Not  only  must  the  debt  be  forgiven,  but 
all  disposition  to  contract  further  debt 
must  be  eradicated.  All  true  and  last- 
ing change  must  be  made  in  the  nature. 
The  heart  is  the  seat  of  all  wrong. 
Hence  no  prayer  will  avail  that  does  not  \ 
come  from  the  heart,  and  express  the  ' 
deepest  and  holiest  aspirations  of  the 
soul.  Such  was  David's  prayer." — 
Parker. 

3.  Restoration  of  the  joy  of  salvation, 
"  Make  me  to  hear  joy  and  gladness. 
Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  Thy  salva- 
tion." Here  are  three  ideas  (1.)  The 
experience  of  the  salvation  of  God  is 
joyous.  The  joy  of  assured  forgiveness, 
of  the  Divine  favour,  of  exalted  hopes, 
&c.  (2.)  By  indulgence  in  sin  man  for- 
feits this  joy.  David  did  so.  (3.)  By 
sincere  penitence  and  prayer  those  who 
have  lost  this  joy  may  regain  it. 

4.  Preservation  from  sin  and  7'uin. 
"  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy  presence  j 
and  take  not  Thy  holy  Spirit  from  me. 
Uphold  me  with  Thy  free  Spirit." 
David's  great  fear  was  that  God  might 
abandon  him,  might  leave  him  to  him- 
self. To  the  penitent  soul  exile  from 
God  would  be  the  deepest  misery.  And 
feeling  his  weakness  and  proneness  to 
fall  into  sin,  the  Psalmist  entreats  God 
to  uphold  and  keep  him.  Such  are  the 
main  points  in  this  penitent's  prayer. 
We  shall  do  well  to  heed  one  feature^  of 
it  to  which  Robertson  gives  clear  and 
forcible  expression.  This  prayer  *'  is 
not  the  trembling  of  a  craven  spirit  in 
anticipation  of  torture,  but  the  agonies 
of  a  noble  one  in  the  horror  of  being 
evil.  .  .  .  Do  you  fancy  that  men  like 
David,  shuddering  in  sight  of  evil, 
dreaded  a  material  hell  1  I  venture  to 
say,  into  true  penitence  the  idea  of 
punishment  never  enters.     If  i\  did,  it 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LI. 


would  be  almost  a  relief  :  but,  oh  !  those 
monients  in  which  a  selfish  act  has 
appeared  more  hideous  than  any  pain 
which  the  fancy  of  a  Dante  could  devise  ! 
when  the  idea  of  the  strife  of  self-will 
in  battle  with  the  loving  will  of  God 
prolonged  for  ever,  has  painted  itself 
to  the  imagination  as  the  real  Infinite 
Hell  !  when  self-concentration  and  the 
extinction  of  love  in  the  soul  has  been 
felt  as  the  real  damnation  of  the  Devil- 
nature  ! " 

III.  The  penitent's  resolution. 
David  resolves  that,  when  the  joy  of 
salvation  is  restored  to  him — 

1.  He  will  seek  the  conversion  of 
sinners.  "  Then  will  I  teach  trans- 
gressors Thy  ways."  The  forgiven 
penitent  will  seek  to  lead  others  to  the 
source  whence  he  has  derived  his  bless- 
ing, that  they  also  may  partake  of  it. 
The  \yays  of  God  which  David  would 
teach  transgressors  are  (1)  The  way 
which  He  would  have  sinners  pursue, — 
the  way  of  penitence.  And  (2)  The 
way  which  He  pursues  towards  sinners, 
— the  way  of  rich  and  free  forgiving 
mercy.  Now  the  converted  man  is 
fitted  to  teach  transgressors  these  ways. 
He  knows  them  ;  for  he  has  trodden  the 
one  and  experienced  the  other.  He 
alone  is  fitted  to  teach  these  ways.  It 
is  essential  that  he  who  would  teach 
others  the  way  of  salvation  knows  that 
way  experimentally  himself.  He  is  also 
impelled  to  teach  transgressors  these 
ways.  Gratitude  urges  him  to  do  so, 
forbids  him  to  be  silent.  He  must  tell 
others  of  the  blessings  he  has  received, 
and  urge  them  to  seek  them  for  them- 
selves. "  We  cannot  but  speak  the 
things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard. *' 
"  Necessi'Ey  is  laid  upon  me  j  yea,  woe 
is  unto  me,"  &c. 

2.  He  will  worship  God.  "  My 
tongue  shall  sing  aloud  of  Thy  right- 


eousness. . .  .  My  mouth  shall  show  forth 
Thy  praise.  For  Thou  desirest  not 
sacrifice,"  &c.  (See  "  The  Horn.  Com." 
on  Ps.  xl.  6-8,  and  1.  7-15.)  (1.)  The 
one  great  sacrifice  for  sin  has  been 
offered  and  accepted,  and  is  gloriously 
perfect  (Heb.  x.  1-18).  (2.)  Our  sacri- 
fice of  praise,  our  thank-off'erings  of 
gifts  to  the  cause  of  God,  are  worthless 
in  His  sight  unless  they  proceed  from 
feelings  of  sincere  devotion  and  grati- 
tude. (3.)  When  the  heart  is  moved  by 
penitence,  and  gratitude,  and  reverence, 
it  will  offer  itself  in  praise  to  God,  and 
in  service  in  His  cause.  When  the 
heart  is  truly  sacrificed  to  God,  all  other 
possessions  will  be  freely  offered  to 
Him.  On  this  point,  the  testimony  of 
ver.  19  is  conclusive.  David  would  not 
content  himself  with  offering  the  sacri- 
fices prescribed  by  the  ceremonial  law, 
but  would  offer  himself  to  God  in 
humblest  penitence  and  heartiest  praise. 
This  self-sacrifice  is  the  very  soul  of  all 
acceptable  sacrifices.  David  anticipates, 
as  a  result  of  his  restoration,  that — 

3.  The  whole  Church  would  praise 
God  (vers.  18,  19).  He  feared  lest,  by 
reason  of  his  sins,  the  Divitie  judg- 
ments should  fall  upon  the  city  and 
kingdom,  or  the  Divine  favour  be  with- 
drawn from  them.  No  man  stands 
alone.  The  sin  of  one  man  may  lead 
to  the  injury  or  even  to  the  ruin  of 
many  others.  David,  therefore,  im- 
plores the  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
favour  in  granting  them  security  and 
prosperity.  And  he  promises  that  then 
acceptable  sacrifices — the  costliest  sacri- 
fices offered  by  sincere  worshippers — 
shall  be  presented  unto  Him. 

Note — The  exposition  of  this  psalm  might  i 
be  suitably  divided  into  three  discourses, —  I 
one,    on    The  Confession ;    another,    on    The  i 
Petitions  ;  and  the  third,  on  The  Resolutions  \ 
of  the  Penitent. 


As  Indispensable  Prayer  for  Evert  One. 

(Verse  2.    "  Cleanse  me  from  my  sin.") 

The  guilt  of  your  sin  you  cannot 


Consider — 
I.  The  need  you  have  to  offer  this 
prayer. 

1.   You  cannot  cleanse  yourselves  from 


sm. 

blot    out.       The  pollution  of  your  sin 
you  are  equally  unable  to  take  away. 
2.  You  cannot  live  happily  ivlthout  you 

255 


V 


FSALM  LI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PS  ALMS. 


are  cleansed  from  sin.  Surely,  as  the 
shadow  follows  the  substance,  sorrow 
follows  sin,  and  joy  holiness. 

3.  You  cannot  die  peacefully  unless 
you  are  cleansed  from  sin.  *'  The  sting 
of  death  is  sin." 

4.  You  cannot  be  acquitted  at  the 
Divine  tribunal  except  you  are  cleansed 
from  sin.  "  We  must  all  appear  before 
the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,"  &c. 

5.  You  cannot  be  admitted  into 
heaven  without  you  are  cleansed  from 
your  sin.  "  Without  holiness  no  man 
shall  see  tbe  Lord."  *'  There  shall  in 
no  wise  enter  into  it  anything  tbat 
defiletb,"  &c. 

6.  You  cannot  escape  hell  uidess  you 
are  cleansed  from  your  sin.  There  is 
no  world  between  heaven  and  hell. 
"  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell," 

<fec.  _.y' 

II.  The  requisites  you  must  possess 
to  present  this  prayer  successfully. 

1.  You  must  be  alive  to  your  sin. 
Men  must  be  convinced  of  sin,  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment,  before 
they  will  be  anxious  to  be  saved.  Where 
guilt  is  not  felt,  pardon  will  not  be 
desired. 

2.  You  must  see  that  your  sin  has  been 
committed  against  God.  Every  evil  deed 
perpetrated  is  done  against  the  Almighty. 
This  David  felt. 

3.  You  must  take  the  blame  of  your 
sin  to  yourselves.     The  common  practice 


is  to  attribute  it  to  the  temptet  Adam 
laid  it  on  his  wife,  and  Eve  cast  it  on 
the  serpent.  Like  them  we  seek  to 
exculpate  ourselves.  But  there  must  be 
the  impression  that  we  are  utterly  in- 
excusable, &c. 

4.  You  must  be  desirous  to  part  with 
your  sin.  Unwilling  as  men  are  to  for- 
sake their  vicious  course,  they  would 
fain  be  quit  of  its  dire  consequences. 
But  he  who  will  have  his  sin  must  have 
its  evils.  The  cause  must  be  removed 
before  its  effects  can. 

5.  You  must  be  sorry  for  your  sin. 
There  is  a  fitness  between  contrition  and 
pardon  ;  but  there  is  none  between  im- 
penitence and  remission.  The  peiutent 
are  in  a  proper  state  to  be  forgiven ; 
the  impenitent  are  not. 

6.  You  must  have  faith  in  the  clen  us- 
ing efficacy  of  Christ's  blood.  Beqiu.^ite 
as  are  the  foregoing  to  your  being  in  a 
proper  condition  to  ask  or  to  have  the 
blessings  spoken  of,  they  cannot,  if 
relied  on,  secure  it,  as  there  is  not  the 
slightest  merit  in  them.  The  only  merit 
on  the  ground  of  which  we  can  be  re- 
deemed from  all  iniquity  is  in  Christ, 
and  in  Him  alone.  For  Him  to  be 
your  redemption  you  must  have  faith  in 
His  blood. 

In  conclusion,  have  you  prevailingly 
urged  this  petition  ? —  John  Smith. 
Abridged  from  "  The  Congregational 
Pulpit,"    :^ 


The  chief  evil  of  Sin. 


Ver.  4.  "Against  Thee,  Thee  only, 
have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy 
sight." 

Since  the  crimes  of  the  Psalmist  were 
of  that  class  which  are  most  directly 
against  society,  and  since  he  appears  at 
the  time  to  have  regarded  them  in  that 
very  relation,  what  is  the  import  of  the 
phrase,  "Against  Thee,  Thee  only^  have 
I  sinned  "  \  The  following  is  the  only 
possible  solution.  Notwithstanding  the 
deep  sense  of  his  crime,  as  viewed  in  its 
social  relation,  he  had  such  an  over- 
whelming sense  of  its  enormity  as  com- 
mitted against  God,  that  it  threw  into 
comparative  obscurity  the  injury  to  man. 
This  language,  therefore,  dictated  by 
256 


the  Divine  Spirit,  must  afford  ample 
authority  for  the  following  doctrine  : — 

The  evil  of  sin  consists  chiefly  in  its 
being  committed  against  God. 

This  doctrine  does  not,  in  the  least 
degree,  invalidate  the  obligations  of 
mortals  to  each  other ;  or  diminish  the 
guilt  of  crimes  viewed  merely  in  their 
social  relation.  The  man  who  considers 
the  chief  evil  of  sin  to  consist  in  a  vio- 
lation of  Divine  obligations,  has  as 
strong  a  view  of  social  obligations,  as 
he  who  overlooks  all  duty  to  God,  and 
makes  human  injury  the  only  criterion 
of  guilt.  That  sin  is  an  evil,  so  far  as 
it  infringes  on  the  rights  and  happiness 
of   fellow- mortals,   is  admitted  by   all. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


P8ALM  U. 


But  the  Word  of  God  compels  us  to 
believe,  that  the  same  transgressions  are 
an  immensely  greater  evil  considered  as 
offences  against  God.  Should  any  one 
ask,  "  Why  is  it  a  thousand-fold  worse 
for  me  to  murder  my  neighbour  than  if 
God  had  not  forbidden  it  ? "    I  answer, — 

1.  Because  God  is  your  Maker.  We 
who  are  parents  claim  the  right  to  com- 
mand our  children ;  and,  when  they 
disobey,  we  place  the  main  point  of  their 
offending  in  simple  disobedience.  And 
what  is  the  aggravation  of  violating  a 
parent's  authority,  compared  with  that 
of  rebellion  against  the  Eternal  Father 
of  our  spirits  % 

2.  God  sustains  us.  From  the  dawn 
of  our  existence  to  this  hour,  He  has 
been  mindful  of  us,  with  more  than  a 
parent's  tender  care.  Amid  countless 
dangers,  He  has  cast  His  shield  about 
us. 

3.  He  has  encompassed  us  with  count- 
less blessings.  For  us  the  rivers  flow, 
the  oceans  roll,  the  clouds  distil,  and 
the  seasons  keep  their  appointed  times. 
His  sun  is  made  to  light  us  by  day — 
His  moon  and  stars  by  night.  To  shield 
us  from  cold.  He  has  provided  raiment 
— from  heat,  a  shade — from  storms,  a 
shelter. 

4.  He  has  prepared  a  heaven  for  our 
eternal  home.  It  is  the  abode  of  His 
OTii  infinite  blessedness,  the  palace  of 
His  glory,  and  the  home  of  holy  angels. 

5.  when  we  had  forfeited  this  bright 
heaven,  and  plunged  ourselves  in  guilt  and 
woe,  God  gave  His  own  dear  Son  to  re- 
deem us.  To  achieve  this  work,  it  was 
needful  that  the  Saviour  take  upon 
Himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  be  made 
under  the  law,  pass  a  life  of  suffering 
and  scorn,  and,  finally,  be  crucified  by 
wicked  hands.  Yet  to  all  this  He  sub- 
mitted, not  by  constraint,  but  willingly — 
—nay,  joyfully. 

6.  God  has  given  us  a  revelation  com- 
prising the  knowledge  and  motives  requi- 
site for  the  attainment  of  this  great  sal- 
vation. And  how  is  this  sacred  volume 
filled  with  entreaties  to  sinful  man  to 
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  lay 
hold  on  the  hope /set  before  him  ! 

7.  He  bears  long  with  us,  as  a  race  of 
guilty  beings,  and  as  individuals.    Each 


spared  sinner  is  a  perfect  demonstration 
of  the  infinite  goodness  of  God.  And 
the  aged  impenitent  is  as  great  a  monu- 
ment of  the  Divine  forbearance  as  he  is 
of  guilt.  Reflect,  then,  that  against 
this  same  God  you  have  committed 
every  sin  that  has  polluted  your  life. 
Under  this  convictio::,  if  your  conscience 
be  not  dead,  you  cannot  but  exclaim 
with  the  Psalmist,  '*  Against  Thee,  Thee 
only,  have  I  sinned,"  (fee. 

From   the  foregoing    we  may   draw 
the  following  inferences  : — 

1.  The  punishment  denounced  against 
the  tvicked  is  manifestly  Just. 

2.  There  is  not  so  great  a  difference 
as  men  often  imagine  between  different 
kinds  of  sin.  I  would  not  deny  that 
"  some  sins  in  themselves  are  more 
heinous  in  the  sight  of  God  than  others." 
Nor  would  I  at  all  intimate  an  equality 
of  guilt  among  transgressors  possessing 
different  degrees  of  light,  or  actuated  by 
different  degrees  of  malignity.  .  .  .  But 
we  have  seen  that  the  chief  evil  of  sin 
consists  in  its  violation  sf  Divine  obliga- 
tion. Let  no  one,  then,  speak  of  small 
sins — little  offences — and  assign  as  his 
reason  that  he  injures  no  one  but  him- 
self,— that  he  does  not  infringe  on  the 
rights  of  his  fellow-men.  It  is  idle  and 
delusive  and  impious  to  indulge  in  thus 
comparing  and  extenuating  our  crimes 
of  rebellion  against  the  infinite  Sove- 
reign. Each  sin,  thus  viewed,  is  of 
magnitude  sufiScient  to  sink  a  world. 

3.  2^he  most  upright  man  is  a  great 
sinner.  Suppose  him  perfectly  honest 
— exculpate  him  from  falsehood — and 
say  that  he  never  injured  the  character 
or  feelings  of  any  mortal.  A  human 
tribunal  would  then  acquit  him.  But 
has  he  kept  all  God's  commandments  1 
<kc. 

4.  We  are  taught  by  this  doctrine  our 
need  of  Christ's  atonement.  And  the 
glorious  work  is  accomplished,  and  a 
ready  pardon  offered,  <fec. 

5.  We  see  the  nature  of  true  convic- 
tion. It  consists  in  seeing  and  feeling 
the  evil  of  sin  as  committed  against 
God.  Fear  of  punishment  is  often  mis- 
taken for  convictioii ;  but  it  is  really 
not  even  a  necessary  part  of  it.  Real 
conviction  does  not  cea»e  at  conversion, 

267 


I^ALM  LI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


but  increases  with  our  growth  in  grace  abhor  themselves,   and  repent   in   dust 

and  knowledge  of  God.     David,  Isaiah,  and     a&hes.  —  Balph    Emerson^    A.M, 

and   Paul  ap[)eared  to  feel  it  with  in-  Abridged  from  "  The  Preacher' a  Treor 

creasing   emotion,   and    to   loathe   and  sury.^' 


David's  Prayer. 
(Verse  7.) 


A  sermon  useful  when  it  goes  with  a 
man  to  his  closet,  as  well  as  affects  him 
for  the  present.  Nathan's  to  David. 
Hyssop — alluding  to  the  cleansing  the 
leper  (Lev.  xiv.  1—7).  Or  to  the  waters 
of  separation  (Num.  xix.)      Observe  : — 

I.  When  God  leads  us  to  reflect  on 
our  sins,  we  feel  ourselves  awfully 
polluted.  David  in  the  text.  (Job 
xlii.  1-6  ;  Ps.  xxxviii.  4 ;  Is.  vi.  1-5, 
Ixiv.  6  ;  Ezek.  xx.  43  ;  Luke  xv.  17-19, 
xviii.  13  ;  Acts  ii.  36,  37 ;  Titus  iii.  3.) 
O  my  soul  !  O  my  hearers  !  reflect. 

IL  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  even 
more  than  a  remedy  for  the  foulest 
iniquities.  *'  Whiter  than  snow  "  (Rom. 
V.  20,  21).     How  1 

1.  As  it  makes  the  penitent  more  ac- 
ceptable to  God,  and  more  secure  m  His 
favour  than  Adam  in  Paradise.  (Luke 
XV.  7,  22,  32  ;.Eoin.  viii.  1,  (fee;  Epii. 
i.  6,  v.  27;  Col.  iii.  3,  4.) 

2.  As  it  excites  tJiem  to  obey  God  in 
resisting  temptation  more  than  Adam. 
(Gen.  iii.  11-13,  compared  with  Eph. 
vi.  11-17,  Rev.  xii.  10,  11.) 

3.  As  God  will  be  more  glorified  in 
recovering  a  fallen  sinner,  than  in  mak- 
ing man  uprigfU.     As  Redeemer  than 


as  Creator.     As  the  God  of  grace  in  the  * 
Gospel    than  as  Law-Giver.     (Is.  xliv. 
22,    23;    Luke  ii.    10-14;    2   Cor.   iii. 
7-li;  1  Pet.  i.  11,  12.) 

4:.j^As  the  happiness  of  the  penitent 
will  be  idtlmately  greater  than  that  of 
Ada7n  in  Paradise.      (Rev.  vii.  9,  <fec.) 

III.  This  remedy  becomes  effectual 
by  an  application  to  our  own  case. 
See  text.  As  food — physic — clothing, 
(fee.  Noah's  ark.  The  brazen  serpent. 
The  cities  of  refuge. 

IV.  The  application  of  this  remedy 
to  ourselves  is  to  be  sought  in  prayer. 
See  text.  (Ps.  cvi.  4,  5,  cxxx.  1-6 ; 
Luke  xviii.  13.) 

V.  Though  God  has  pardoned  the 
penitent  he  can  scarcely  believe  it, 
and  will  be  applying  for  pardon  again 
and  again.  Thus  David  in  this  psalm, 
though  Nathan  had  told  him  of  God's 
forgiveness  (2  Sam.  xii.  13). 

Uses. — 1.  Alarm  to  sinners  impeni- 
tent and  unpardoned  in  their  sins.  2. 
Caution  to  the  self-righteous.  3.  Bless 
God  for  the  cleansing  blood  of  Jesus^ 
and  use  it  to  God's  glory, — to  your  own 
salvation. — F r. 


David's  Prayer  and  Vow. 
(Verses  10-13.) 


There  is  an  essential  diff'erence  be- 
tween the  prayers  offered  up  under  the 
influence  of  habit  merely,  and  those 
which  are  induced  by  a  deep  sense  of 
guilt,  dependence,  and  want.  When 
David  uttered  the  words  before  us,  he 
felt  that  he  needed  the  grace  and  mercy 
of  his  Maker, — consequently  his  re- 
quests were  simple,  important,  and 
earnest.  Perhaps  th^re  is  no  one  here 
that  has  fallen  into  sin  such  as  that 
which  the  Psalmist  had  committed — 
258 


still,  there  is  no  one  but  may  offer  up 

his  prayer  with  the  greatest  propriety. 

I.  Let  us  glance  at  the  petitions. 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God." 
The  Psalmist  felt  that  his  heart  was 
defiled — that  it  was  not  in  bis  power 
to  cleanse  it — he  therefore  prayed  that 
God  would  perform  the  work.  "  Renew 
a  right  spirit  within  m*?."  These  words 
refer  to  the  temper  of  the  mind.  The 
Psalmist  knew  that  his  was  wrong  ;  and, 
consequently  prayed  that  God  would  re- 


BOMlLETtO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


tS^IM  LL 


new  a  right  spirit  within  him.  "  If  any 
man  have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  he  is 
none  of  His."  "  Cast  me  not  away  from 
Thy  presence."  In  the  presence  of  God 
is  "fulness  of  joy:"  therefore,  to  be 
cast  away  from  His  presence  is  to  be 
deprived  of  happiness.  *'  Take  not  Thy 
holy  spirit  from  me."  Tlie  Spirit  of 
God  "  helpeth  our  infirmities :  "  there- 
fore, to  be  deprived  of  the  Spirit  is  to 
be  deprived  of  help.  The  Holy  Spirit 
is  our  Comforter :  therefore,  to  be  de- 
prived of  the  Spirit  is  to  be  deprived 
of  comfort.  *'  Restore  unto  me  the  joy 
of  Thy  salvation."  The  knowledge  of 
salvation  produces  joy, — this  joy  the 
Psalmist  had  experienced, — it  was  not 
his  portion  when  he  uttered  these  words, 
— he  therefore  desired  its  restoration. 
"  Uphold   me   with    Thy  free   spirit''^ 


Having  experienced  the  sad  conse- 
quences of  falling  into  sin,  the  Psalmist 
here  prays  that  when  restored  he  might  be 
upheld,  and  prevented  from  falling  again. 
II.  Notice  the  predicated  results  of 
a  gracious  answer ;  or  the  connection 
between  piety  and  usefulness.  *'  Then 
will  I  teach  transgressors  Thy  way ; 
and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto 
Thee."  He  that  enjoys  the  blessings 
of  salvation,  can  speak  on  religious  sub- 
jects with  more  feeling,  and,  conse- 
quently, with  more  effect  than  others. 
This  may  remind  Christians,  and  es- 
pecially Christian  ministers,  that  emi- 
nent piety  is  exceedingly  desirable,  not 
only  on  their  own  account,  but  also  that 
they  may  be  qualified  for  extensive  use- 
fulness.— "  The  Young  Minister^t  Com- 
panion.'* 


The  Joys  of  Salvation. 
Q^erse  12.) 


«  The  joy  of  Thy  salvation." 
It  is  God's  salvation.  It  is  no  dreamy 
following  of  the  upward  instincts  and 
aspirations  of  the  nature ;  no  trying  to 
be  just,  pure,  and  good,  and  then,  if  we 
fail,  and  become  selfish,  sensual,  and 
devilish,  forgetting  the  failure  and  try- 
ing again,  always  trying,  always  hoping, 
with  a  vague  belief  that  though  sin 
always  gets  the  better  of  us,  there  is 
some  good  thing  in  us  which,  after  all, 
cannot  be  lost.  Neither  is  it  a  vasue 
reliance  on  God's  goodness  and  mercy, 
a  feeling  that  He  is  a  Father,  and  can- 
nnt,  therefore,  doom  His  children  to 
despair  and  death.  These  dreams  and 
hopes  are  the  salvations  which  men  pro- 
vide for  themselves;  but  they  are  not, 
nor  are  they  like,  God's  salvation. 

God's  salvation  rests  upon  the  know- 
ledge of  God  Himself,  as  He  has  re- 
vealed Himself — His  name — His  word 
— His  promises — His  work;  whereby, 
not  by  our  own  dreams  or  hopes,  but 
by  His  declaration,  "  We  have  strong 
consolation,"  &c.  It  is  one  thing  to  feel 
that  He  is  a  Father,  and  must  be  full  of 
love  to  His  children  ;  it  is  another  thing 
to  hear  Him  say,  "  I  am  a  Father ;  I 
love  as  no  human  father  can  love,    ^c. 


(John  iii.  16,  17).     It  is  one  thing  to 

trust  vaguely  to  God's  goodness  for  par- 
don ;  it  is  another  thing  to  hear  Him 
say,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason 
together,"  &c. ;  and  to  follow  His  guid- 
ing finger  till  we  behold  **  the  Lamb  of 
God,"  &c.  It  is  one  thing  to  have  our 
hopes  and  instincts  looking  on  towards 
immortality,  &c. ;  it  is  another  thing  to 
see  "  life  and  immortality  brought  to 
light  by  the  Gospel,"  to  stand  by  the 
unsealed  tomb  of  Lazarus  and  hear  such 
awful  words  as  these,  "  I  am  the  resur- 
rection, and  the  life  : "  &c,  (John  xi. 
25-44 ;  xiv.  1-5  ;  xx.  17). 

The  man  who  has  received  these  truths 
from  God,  these  gifts  of  God,  and  knows 
why  and  *'  whom  he  has  believed,"  is 
the  man  in  whom  the  joys  of  God's  sal- 
vation abound.  He  has  God's  salvation  ; 
his  ground  is  the  everlasting  rock,  the 
Word  of  God.     What  are  its  joys  t 

I.  The  joy  of  a  sufficient  and  final 
answer  to  the  self-upbraidings  of  a 
guilty  soul.  The  sense  of  guilt,  the 
dread  of  doom,  must  be  disposed  of, 
before  there  can  be  any  freedom,  any 
upright,  manly  activity,  any  pure  and 
lasting  joy.  The  man  who  wakes  up  to 
comprehend  the  breadth  and  the  depth 

269 


PSALM  U. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


of  God's  law,  stands  self-condemned. 
All  refuges  of  lies  have  vanished,  the 
naked  realities  appear,  and  his  sin 
clouds  over  utterly  the  heaven  of  God's 
love.  The  sense  of  guilt  torments  him. 
"  O  miserable  man  that  I  am,  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  1 " 
This  question  of  the  purging  of  guilt  is 
the  fundamental  question  of  all  the  re- 
ligions of  heathendom — of  all  simple, 
untutored  souls  (Micah  vi.  6-8).  To 
this  questioning  there  is  but  one  joyful 
answer :  "  I  thank  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,"  &c.  (Rom.  vii.  25 ; 
viii.  1-4,  33-39).  The  burden  falls  off; 
the  darkness  is  chased  by  dawn. 

II.  The  joy  of  a  portion  which  satis- 
fies the  heart's  largest  conceptions  and 
desires.  ''  My  soul  panteth  for  God, 
for  the  living  God."  There  is  that  in 
man  which  the  knowledge  of  the  living 
God  only  can  satisfy,  which,  having 
God,  has  all  things  in  Him.  We  know 
what  it  is  to  love  the  creature — to  feel 
that  the  love  and  communion  of  some 
fond,  fair  idol  would  make  the  bliss  of 
earth,  the  bliss  of  eternity.  He  has  the 
joys  of  God's  salvation  who  has  done 
with  idols — who  loves  only  that  which 
has  eternal  beauty  and  fairness  in  the 
creature,  and  finds  that  he  has  the  very 
substance  of  all  that  may  be  loved  in 
the  Lord.  The  commerce  between  the 
believing  soul  and  Christ  is  the  ravish- 
ing sweetness  of  the  present — the  hope 
of  unclouded  vision,  of  unbounded  com- 
munion, is  the  glorious  treasure  of  the 
future. 

III.  The  joy  of  an  answer  to  all  the 
difficulties  and  perplexities  which  be- 
set the  spirit  and  the  intellect  in  their 
progress.  I  do  not  say  that  the  be- 
liever, in  full  communion  with  Christ 
and  with  the  joys  of  His  salvation,  is 
freed  from  the  mental  and  the  moral 
cares  which  beset  the  path  of  a  soul's 
progress.  That  joy — the  joy  of  knowing 
that  doubt,  darkness,  and  the  anguish  of 
mental  and  moral  conflict,  are  done  with 
for  ever — we  shall  realise  when  we  can 
take  up  the  song,  *'  For  I  am  now  ready 
to  be  offered,"  &c.  (2  Tim.  iv.  6-8). 
We  must  win  our  creed  by  mental  con- 
flict, we  must  win  our  crown  by  moral 
conflict ;  but  the  joy  of  God's  salvation 

260 


is  tasted  by  those  who  feel  that  the 
great  central  truths,  at  any  rate,  are 
sure.  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed." 
I  have  found  the  centre ;  to  explore  the 
circumference  may  be  matter  of  danger, 
difficulty,  suffering,  but  hope  lights  the 
way,  the  sorrow  can  never  darken  into 
despair.  One  thing  is  clear  to  me,  let 
what  will  be  dark,  '*  I  know  that  my 
Redeemer  liveth."  .  .  .  There  is  hope  of 
his  knowing  all  things  that  is  good  to 
know,  who  has  already  the  mind  of  Christ. 

IV.  The  joy  of  having  the  key  to  all 
the  mysterious  ways  of  Providence  in 
the  world.  God  writes  the  record  of  His 
Providential  government  in  ciphers.  Wo 
know  the  cipher  ;  it  is  a  blank  to  others. 
To  those  who  know  God  it  is  plain  and 
clear.  To  the  soul  well  grounded  in  the 
conviction,  *'  He  doeth  all  things  well," 
there  is  no  mystery.  This  or  that  thing 
may  be  difficult  to  understand;  but  to 
him  who  believes,  the  mystery,  at  any 
rate,  is  dissipated — the  full  understand- 
ing will  come  in  time.  How  deadly  is 
the  difficulty  to  those  who  have  not 
found  the  key  in  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ,  let  these  passages  show  :  Job 
xxiii.  1-9,  xi.  5-10;  Is.  xxxviii.  9-19. 
But  "  we  know  that  all  things  work  to- 
gether for  good,"  (fee.  And  we  believe 
that  God  forsaketh  not  the  world  in  all 
its  agonies  and  perils,  for  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  died.  We  can  even  take 
these  sorrows,  and  make  them  into  joys 
(Rom.  V.  3 ;  1  Pet.  i.  7). 

V.  The  joy  of  victory  over  death. 
It  is  an  awful  thing  to  look  upon  the 
face  of  the  dead.  Where  is  the  spirit 
which  a  moment  since  %  <fec.  The  most 
dread  moment  of  our  experience  is  be- 
fore us — every  one  of  us.  We  may 
have  mastered  many  agonies ;  we  have 
yet  to  wrestle  with  the  agony  of  death. 
Then  the  dearest  must  leave  you ;  alone 
you  must  then  face  your  destiny.  As 
the  dear  forms  of  earth  grow  dim,  a 
grander,  more  beautiful,  more  glorious 
form  will  come  shining  through  tie 
gloom  (Ps.  xxiii.  4;  1  Cor.  xv.  55-58). 
"  Absent  from  the  body,  present  with 
the  Lord." 

VI.  The  joy  of  living  union  with 
God.  with  Christ,  with  all  living  and 
blessed   beings,   eternally.     What   i« 


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALBI  tL 


tha^t  world?  What  its  speech,  its  habit, 
the  forms  of  its  life?  We  know  not. 
The  veil  hangs  over  all  these  (1  John 
iii.  2,  3).  "  We  know ; "  for  He  is  there 
— the  God-man  glorified;  and  the  God- 
man  glorified,  through  trial,  suffering, 
and  death,  is  the  key  to  the  life  of 
eternity.  This  "we  know"  for  we  see 
Jesus.  We  can  wait  to  know  more  till 
we  see  Him  unveiled  in  heaven  (1  Cor, 
li.  9). 

These  are  the  joys  of  His  salvation, 


and  now  they  are  freely  offered  to  yon 
by  the  Gospel — "  Ho  !  every  one  that 
thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  Take 
in  your  hand  NOW  the  riches  that  add  no 
sorrow,  the  joy  that  leaves  no  aftertaste 
of  pain  j  and  let  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord 
be  your  strength" — strength  for  duty, 
strength  for  making  known  to  others 
the  joys  of  salvation  God  has  given  you 
as  your  portion. — J.  Baldwin  Br  own  j 
B.A.  Abridged  from  ^^  Aids  to  the  De- 
velopment of  the  Divine  LifeJ* 


David's  Prayer. 
(Verse  14.) 


Notice — 

I.  To  whom  David  goes  when  con- 
viction of  sin  is  brought  home  to  his 
conscience  by  the  Holy  Spirit  through 
the  ministry  of  Nathan. 

1.  Man  shuns  and  avoids  his  accuser. 
It  was  God  who  had  accused  David  of 
his  sin.  Yet  to  God  he  goes  with  con- 
fession of  guilt  and  prayer  for  forgive- 
ness. When  God  convinces  of  sin,  turn 
not  away  from  Him,  but,  <fec. 

2.  Man  shuns  and  avoids  his  judge. 
It  was  God  who  had  condemned  David 
to  suffer  in  his  own  family  for  unholy 
inroad  made  on  sacred  family  ties  of 
another.  Yet  to  God  he  goes.  When 
God  lays  His  hand  upon  us,  let  us  not 
turn  away  from  Him  who  corrects  (Heb, 
xii.  10). 

II.  The  spirit  and  frame  of  mind  in 
which  he  approaches  God. 

1.  As  regards  himself  —  with  self- 
abasement.  "  Deliver  me  from  blood- 
guiltiness."  Is  he  not  too  hard  upon 
himself  ?  Had  he  actually  slain  Uriah  ? 
He  had  slain  him  by  sword  of  children 
of  Ammon  (2  Sam.  xii.  9).  True  peni- 
tent feels  he  cannot  be  too  hard  upon 
himself.  Confesses  sin  in  all  its  hein- 
ousness. 

2,  As  regards  God — with  hope  in  His 
mercy.  "  Deliver  me  .  ,  ,  0  od^  Thou 
God  of  my  salvation."  Were  not  God 
the  **  God  of  my  salvation,"  access  with 
favour  would  be  for  ever  denied.  But 
He  \A  **  the  God  of  whom  cometh  salva- 


tion." And  the  God  of  mp  salvation 
when  I  approach  Him  through  Jesus 
Christ. 

III.  The  prayer  of  David.  "De- 
liver me,"  (fee.  All  of  us  must  make 
this  prayer  our  own.  The  blood-guilti- 
ness of  David  was  on  account  of  murder 
of  Uriah.  Blood-guiltiness  may  be  ours 
in  one  or  other  of  three  ways : 

1.  If  condition  not  by  grace  changed, 
miserable  in  blood-guiltiness,  because 
crucified  Son  of  God. 

2.  If  any  of  us  stand  condemned  be- 
fore God  at  last,  miserable  in  blood- 
guiltiness,  because  condemned  suicides. 
Salvation  offered  will  have  been  de- 
spised. The  Spirit  resisted — Christ  re- 
jected. 

3.  At  the  last  day  shall  have  to 
answer  for  others  (Gen.  iv.  9 ;  Prov. 
xxiv.  11,  12). 

Is  there  not  need  that  we  say,  with 
David,  *' Deliver  me"  &c.  ? 

In  last  clause  of  text,  pious  resolve 
for  the  future.  Delivered  from  blood- 
guiltiness,  cannot  we  take  up  language 
of  Psalmist  and  say,  **  And  my  mouth 
shall  sing"  &c.  ?  Not  our  own,  but 
His.  The  answer  of  peace  comes  to  us 
in  way  of  righteousness.  Our  theme  of 
praise  and  thanksgiving  on  earth.  And 
in  heaven  (Rev.  v.  12).  What  shall  I 
render  unto  the  Lord  ?  (Rom.  xii.  1). — 
a.  C.  Billing y  B.A.  Abridged  from 
*'  The  Homileiic  Quarterly  J* 


261 


fSALM  Lit. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


The  Prosperity  of  Zion  Sought, 
{Verse  ld>.) 


"  Do  good  in  Thy  good  pleasure  unto 
Zion."     Consider — 

I.  The  importance  of  the  object 
sought.  David  prays  for  the  prosperity 
of  Zion. 

1.  2^he  Church  is  exposed  to  many 
dangers,  and  needs  to  he  protected  by  an 
almighty  arm.  David  probably  feared 
that  by  his  own  sin  he  had  brought 
danger  upon  Zion ;  that  God  might 
justly  manifest  His  displeasure  by  giv- 
ing her  into  the  hand  of  her  enemies, 
or  by  withdrawing  His  favour  from  her. 
The  Church  of  Ckrist  riQ^d^  preservation 
(1)  from  sectarian  or  denominational 
strife;  (2)  from  disunion  and  discord 
in  individual  churches;  (3)  from  for- 
mality ;  (4)  from  prevalent  errors. 
Hence  the  importance  of  the  prayer. 

2.  The  Church  is  imperfect,  and  its 
prosperity  consists  in  its  improvement. 
"Do  good  in  Thy,"  &c.  "Let  Thy 
work  appear  unto  Thy  servants,"  &c. 
(Ps.  xc.  16,  17).  The  prosperity  of  the 
Church  is  promoted — 

(1)  When  there  is  an  increasing  ad- 
herence to  those  truths  on  which  primi- 
tive Christianity  was  established. 

(2)  When  under  the  influence  of  these 
truths,  the  citizens  of  Zion  are  persever- 
ing in  holiness.  "  The  path  of  the  just 
is  as  the  shining  light,"  &c. 

II.  The  grounds  of  encouragement 
we  have  in  seeking  this  object.  We 
might  refer  to  some  particulars  suggested 


by  the  words,  "Thy  good  pleasure:"  ^ 
e.g.,  (a)  that  God  is  the  Founder  of  His 
Church ;  (fi)  He  established  it  at  the 
greatest  expense.  Christ  died  to  re- 
deem it.  (y)  In  doing  good  to  His 
Church  He  is  glorifying  His  Son,  who 
is  "Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church;" 
(b)  The  purposes  and  promises  of  God 
to  the  Church.     But — 

1.  To  pray  for  Zion  is  a  duty  en- 
joined by  Divine  authority.  *'  Pray," 
said  Christ,  "  hallowed  be  Thy  name," 
&c.  The  security,  improvement,  and 
success  of  the  Church  depend  upon 
prayer. 

2.  Cod  is  the  hearer  of  prayer, 

III.  The  manner  in  which  we  should 
seek  this  object.  We  may  lose  bless- 
ings through  not  seeking  them  aright. 
"  Ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not.  Ye 
ask,  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask 
amiss." 

1.  We  should  ourselves  he  identified 
with  the  Church.  2.  We  should  feel  a 
deep  interest  in  its  welfare.  3.  We 
should  be  constant  in  prayer  for  its 
prosperity;  should  seek  it  in  our  closets, 
in  our  families,  <fec.  4.  We  should  unite 
in  prayer  for  this  object.  6.  We  should 
present  our  prayers  in  faith.  6.  We 
should  he  importunate  and  fervent  in 
prayer  for  this  object.  Conclude  by  en- 
deavouring to  enforce  this  duty  upon 
Christians. — Abridged  from  an  unpub- 
lished MS. 


PSALM    LIT. 
Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician,  Maschil,  a  Psalm  of  David,  when  Doeg  the 

Edomite  came  and  told  Saul,  and  said  unto  him,  David  is  come  to  the  house  of  Ahimelech." 

"  To  the  Chief  Musician, ^^  see  on  the  title  to  Ps.  xxxix. 

"  Maschil"  an  instruction,  a  didactic  poem.  "  The  didactic  character  of  this  Psalm,"  says 
Moll,  "  which  is  brought  into  prominence  by  the  title,  and  its  devotional  aim,  are  especially 
noticeable,  from  the  fact  that,  with  respect  to  its  form,  the  invocation  of  God,  which  is  peculiar 
to  prayers,  lamentations,  and  hymns,  is  entirely  absent ;  with  respect  to  its  contents,  the  niighty 
man,  who,  according  to  ver.  7,  is  proud  of  his  riches,  is  upbraided  for  his  impudence,  wicked- 
ness, and  falseness  (vers.  1-4),  the  punishment  of  God,  which  will  destroy  him,  is  proclaimed 
(ver.  5),  the  action  of  the  righteous,  which  will  be  called  forth  thereby,  is  contrasted  with  it 
(vers.  6,  7),  and  the  lot  and  conduct  of  the  pious  Psalmist,  corresponding  with  his  trust  in  God's 
grace,  is  pronounced.  It  is  advisable  to  abide  by  the  statements  of  the  title,  and  refer  to  the 
262 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


rSALliUL 


informing  of  Doeg,  the  overseer  of  the  royal  asses  (1  Sam.  xxii.  9,  sqq.),  in  consequence  of  which 
eighty-five  priests  were  slaughtered,  whilst  David  retained  his  courage,  and  expressed  it  to 
Abiathar,  who  escaped  to  David  from  that  blood-bath,  the  son  of  Ahimplech,  that  priest  of 
Nob,  who  had  thoughtlessly  given  David,  as  the  king's  son-in-law,  the  shew-bread,  and  the 
sword  of  Goliath,  which  was  hung  up  behind  the  ephod  in  the  sanctuary,  and  this  had  excited 
the  suspicion  and  vengeance  of  Saul,  who  now  made  Doeg,  the  informer  of  that  act,  likewise 
tlie  executioner  of  his  bloody  sentence." 

Homiletically,  the  Psalm  sets  before  us  an  impressive  beacon  (vers,  1-5),  and  the  effect 
upon  the  righteous  of  the  judgment  of  God  upon  the  wicked  (vers.  6-9). 


An  impressive  Beacon. 
(Verses  1-5.) 


"We  have  here — 

I.  The  moral  portrait  of  a  wicked 
man.  In  this  delineation  of  the  moral 
features  of  Doeg  the  Edomite,  we  see, — 

1.  Inventiveness  in  evil.  "  Thy  tongue 
deviseth  mischief."  The  tongue  uttered 
the  mischiefs  which  the  heart  devised. 
He  invented  malicious  speeches,  and 
framed  skilfully  evil  designs.  Baron 
Huddlestone,  on  April  23,  1877,  in  sen- 
tencing a  prisoner  to  fifteen  years'  penal 
servitude,  remarked,  *'  That  he  was  a 
man  of  great  talent,  and,  if  he  had 
employed  it  in  a  proper  manner,  he 
might  have  obtained  a  position  of  the 
liigliest  honour  and  respectability ;  but 
instead  of  this,  he  appeared  to  have  de- 
voted his  mental  strength  against  man- 
kind." Like  him  of  whom  the  judge 
spake,  and  like  Doeg,  there  are  many 
who  are  subtle  and  inventive  in  evil 
doing.  Such  deliberation  in  wickedness 
involves  the  greatest  guilt. 

2.  Rooted  mendacity.  •'  Thou  workest 
deceit  .  .  .  thou  lovest  lying  .  .  . 
O  deceitful  tongue."  M.  Henry  :  "  It 
may  refer  to  the  information  which  he 
gave  in  against  Ahimelech ;  for  the 
matter  of  fact  was,  in  substance,  true, 
yet  it  was  misrepresented,  and  false 
colours  were  put  upon  it,  and,  therefore, 
he  might  well  be  said  to  love  lying,  and 
to  have  a  deceitful  tongue.  He  told 
the  truth,  but  not  all  the  truth,  as  a 
witness  ought  to  do ;  had  he  told  that 
David  made  Ahimelech  believe  he  was 
then  going  upon  Saul's  errand,  the 
kindness  he  showed  him  would  have 
appeared  to  be  not  only  not  traitorous 
against  Saul,  but  respectful  to  him.  It 
will  not  save  us  from  the  guilt  of  lying 
to  be  able  to  say,  *  There  was  some  truth 
in  what  we  said,'  if  we  pervert  it,  and 


make  it  appear  otherwise  than  what  it 
was."  Beecher  :  *'  A  lie  always  needs  a 
truth  for  a  handle  to  it,  else  the  hand 
would  cut  itself  which  sought  to  drive  it 
home  upon  another.  The  worst  lies, 
therefore,  are  those  whose  blade  is  false, 
but  whose  handle  is  true." 

3.  Cruel  malignity,  *'  Thy  tongue 
deviseth  mischiefs  like  a  sharp  razor. 
Thou  lovest  all  devouring  words."  Pe- 
rowne  :  lit.  "  Words  of  swallowing  up." 
His  words  were  wounding  as  a  sharp 
razor,  and  ruinous,  as  if  they  engulfed 
those  against  whom  they  were  directed. 
*'  An  untrue  man  is  a  moral  murderer, 
his  tongue  the  deadly  weapon,  and  his 
neighbour  the  victim." 

4.  Utter  and  terrible  perversion  of 
character.  "  Thou  lovest  evil  more  than 
good,  and  lying  rather  than  to  speak 
righteousness.*'  Moll  :  "  The  accused 
not  only  loves  evil  more  than  good,  but 
he  prefers  evil  to  good,  so  that  he  loves 
it  instead  of  that  which  he  should  love." 
What  terrible  moral  perversion  does  this 
involve  !  He  "  boasted  himself  in  mis- 
chief ;  "  he  triumphed  in  that  which  was 
his  ignominy ;  he  exulted  in  falsehood 
and  cruelty.  When  sin  is  characterised 
by  so  much  deliberation  and  malignity, 
when  men  love  it,  and  make  their  boast 
in  it,  who  can  estimate  its  criminality  ] 

In  this  moral  portrait  of  a  wicked 
man,  have  we  not  an  impressive  beacon 
warning  us  away  from  sin  ^  Look  upon 
it,  and  beware  of  falsehood,  and  all  evil 
speaking.  "  Let  your  speech  be  alway 
with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt."  Look 
upon  it,  and,  as  you  mark  its  unrelieved 
and  utter  blackness,  beware  of  the  begin- 
nings of  evil,  &c. 

II.  Remonstrance  with  a  wicked 
man.     "  Wiiy  boastest  Thou  thyself  in 

263 


PSALM  LIT. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


mischief,  0  mighty  man  1 "  &c     This 

inquiry  implies — 

1.  That  his  boasting  was  vain.  The 
folly  of  his  boast  appears  from  (1)  the 
nature  of  his  deeds.  **  0  mighty  man," 
or,  "  O  hero  I  "  "  can  only  be  sarcastic," 
says  Moll.  In  what  he  had  done  he 
had  exhibited  no  courage,  no  fortitude. 
A  veritable  hero  art  thou,  Doeg  !  for 
thou  didst  first  slander  a  noble  man  and 
a  priest,  and  then  thou  didst  courageously 
slay  eighty-five  unarmed  priests,  and 
then,  O  paragon  of  heroism  !  thou  didst 
slay  *'  women,  children,  and  sucklings  !  " 
O  valiant  Doeg  !  Boast  on,  thou  mighty 
man.  The  folly  of  his  boast  appears 
from  (2)  the  result  of  his  deeds.  In 
his  calculation  of  results  Doeg  had  not 
taken  account  of  God.  "  The  goodness 
of  God  endureth  continually."  That  is 
a  guarantee  of  the  ultimate  security  and 
well-being  of  the  righteous,  and  of  tho 
destruction  of  the  wicked.  M.  Henry  : 
"  Thou  thinkest  with  the  mischief  which 
thou  boastest  of  (so  artfully  contrived, 
and  so  successfully  carried  on),  to  run 
down  and  ruin  the  people  of  God  ;  but 
thou  wilt  find  thyself  mistaken :  the 
goodness  of  God  endures  continually  for 
their  preservation,  and  then  they  need 
not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  them. 
The  enemies  in  vain  boast  in  their  mis- 
chief while  we  have  God's  mercy  to 
boast  in."  They  who  now  boast  in 
their  iniquities  shall,  ere  long,  be  covered 
with  reproach  and  confusion  of  face. 

2.  That  his  boasting  was  wicked.  He 
was  glorying  in  his  shame.  The  deeds 
he  had  done  had  heavily  weighted  him 
with  guilt;  and,  by  glorying  in  them, 
he  was  increasing  the  burden  of  his 
criminality.  To  do  evil  is  wrong ;  but 
to  boast  of  having  done  it  is  far  more 


wrong.  Let  us  heed  this  beacon.  Sin 
is  folly ;  but  to  boast  of  sin  is  the  most 
egregious  folly,  and  indicates  the  most 
deplorable  moral  depravity.  Be  rational, 
be  wise,  and  shun  sin. 

III.  The  doom  of  a  wicked  man. 
**  God  shall  likewise  destroy  thee  for 
ever,"  &c.  Doeg  is  here  threatened 
with  utter  destruction,  with  irretriev- 
able ruin. 

1.  The  ruin  is  complete  and  irretriev- 
able. He  will  destroy  thee  for  ever," 
as  walls  are  torn  down  to  the  ground, 
never  more  to  be  rebuilt.  He  will  for- 
cibly remove  '*  thee  from  thy  dwelling- 
place  "  for  ever ;  and  as  a  tree  is  torn 
up  from  the  roots  and  so  destroyed,  so 
will  He  cut  thee  off  out  of  the  land  of 
the  livinor.  A  terrible  destruction  awaits 
the  persistent  workers  of  iniquity — the 
destruction  of  all  that  makes  life  worth 
having. 

2.  The  ruin  is  retributive,  "  God 
shall  likewise  destroy  thee,"  <fec.  "  Like- 
wise introduces  the  corresponding  be- 
haviour of  another."  "  Destroyers  shall 
be  destroyed."  "  With  what  judgment 
ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged  :  and  with 
what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  mea- 
sured to  you  again  "  (Judg.  i.  6,  7  j  Isa. 
iii.  10,  11). 

Mark  well,  then,  this  impressive  bea- 
con. See  the  enormity  to  which  wicked- 
ness may  grow,  and  avoid  the  beginnings 
of  evil ;  the  irrationality/  of  wickedness, 
and  walk  in  the  ways  of  wisdom ;  the 
dread  consummation  to  which  wicked- 
ness tends,  and  "  abstain  from  all  ap- 
pearance of  evil."  "  As  righteousness 
tendeth  to  life ;  so  he  that  pursueth  evil 
pursueth  it  to  his  own  death."  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  Almighty  Saviour  from 
sin.    Trust  Him  j  obey  Him ;  and  live. 


The  Effect  upon  the  Righteous  op  the  Judgment  of  God  upon 

THE  Wicked. 


(  Verses 
I.  The  righteous  behold  the  judg- 
ment of  God  upon  the  wicked.     "  The 

righteous  also  shall  see."  The  Psalmist 
expresses  his  confidence  that  the  right- 
eous would  live  to  see  the  ruin  of  tho 
wicked;  that  they  who  saw  their  sin, 
264 


6-9.) 

should  also  see  God*s  judgment  on  them 
because  of  their  sin.  This  idea  is  more 
fully  expressed  by  David  in  Ps.  xxxvii. 
34-36.  The  godly  man  shall  live  to  see 
that  a  life  of  sin,  however  prosperous  it 
may  seem  to  be,  leads  to  the  destruction 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y:  PSALMS, 


FflALMLQ. 


of  those  who  pursue  it.  **  When  the 
wicked  are  cut  off  thou  shalt  see.'*  Even 
in  the  present  state  we  may  see  that  the 
issue  of  an  upright  life  is  blessed,  and 
that  of  a  sinful  life  is  ruinous. 

II.  They  are  awed  by  the  judgments 
of  God  upon  the  wicked.  **  The  right- 
eous also  shall  see,  and  fear."  This 
fear  is  not  slavish,  but  reverent.  The 
godly  stand  in  holy  awe  in  the  presence 
of  the  divine  judgments,  and  fear  lest 
they  should  transgress  the  law  of  God, 
and  so  expose  themselves  to  their  stroke. 
The  most  hardened  sinner  cannot  stand 
before  the  judgments  of  the  Almighty. 
And,  inasmuch  as  every  man  by  sin  has 
merited  His  displeasure,  we  all  have 
need  to  humble  ourselves  at  the  foot- 
stool of  the  Divine  mercy.  When  the 
righteous  see  the  judgments  of  God,  the 
effect  upon  them  is  most  salutary  :  they 
fear  Him,  they  shun  sin,  &c. 

III.  They  approve  the  judgment  of 
God  upon  the  wicked.  "  The  right- 
eous shall  laugh  at  him."  There  is  a 
laughter  because  of  the  fall  of  tbe  wicked 
which  is  sinful  (Job  xxxi.  29 ;  Prov.xxiv. 
17,  18).  There  is  also  a  laughter  because 
of  the  Divine  judgments  upon  them  which 
is  lawful  and  right,  viz.,  the  laughter  of 
joy,  because  of  the  triumph  of  the  Divine 
government.  Moll  ;  '*  If  they  laugh^  it 
is  not  a  laughing  in  the  joy  of  injuring, 
in  scorn  and  reproaching,  but  the  bring- 
ing into  view  the  absurd  inconsistency 
in  which  the  ungodly  have  become  in- 
volved by  their  abandonment  of  God,'^ 
Barnes  :  "  The  idea  here  is  not  exulta- 
tion in  the  sufferings  of  others,  or  joy 
that  calamity  has  come  upon  them,  or 
the  gratification  of  selfish  and  revenge- 
ful feeling  that  an  enemy  is  deservedly 
punished  ;  it  is  that  of  approbation  that 
punishment  has  come  upon  those  who 
deserve  it,  and  joy  that  wickedness  is 
not  allowed  to  triumph.  This  may  be 
entirely  free  from  any  malignant  or  any 
revengeful  feeling.  It  may  even  be 
connected  with  the  deepest  pity,  and 
with  the  purest  benevolence  towards  the 
sufferers  themselves."  "  Just  and  true 
are  Thy  ways.  Thou  King  of  nations." 

IV.  They  are  instructed  by  the  judg- 
ment of  God  upon  the  wicked.  *'  Be- 
hold the  mau  that  maketh  not  God  his 


strength,"  <fec.  Perowne  :  "  The  words 
in  which  the  righteous  express  their 
triumph,  pointing,  as  it  were,  to  the 
fallen  oppressor,  and  the  lesson  to  be 
learnt  from  his  overthrow."  Here  are 
three  lessons — 

1.  That  to  trust  in  wealth  is  folly, 
"  Behold  the  man  that  trusted  in  the 
abundance  of  his  riches."  It  would 
appear  from  this  verse  that  Doeg  was  a 
rich  man,  and  had  great  faith  in  the 
power  of  his  wealth.  Barnes :  "  He 
had  that  spirit  of  arrogance  and  self-con- 
fidence which  springs  from  the  conscious 
possession  of  property  where  there  is  no 
fear  of  God ;  and  into  all  that  he  did  he 
carried  the  sense  of  his  own  importance 
as  derived  from  riches."  Comp.  Ps. 
xlix.  6  ;  Prov.  x.  15,  xviii.  11. 

2.  That  the  strength  of  wickedness  is 
weakness.  He  "  strengthened  himself  in 
wickedness."  By  subtle  and  evil  de- 
vices he  endeavoured  to  establish  him- 
self, and  fancied  himself  secure  therein. 
No  deeds  which  he  deemed  would  in- 
crease his  power,  ever  gave  him  pause 
because  of  their  wickedness.  He  who 
builds  his  hopes  upon  wicked  devices, 
even  though  they  be  framed  with  the 
utmost  skill,  builds  upon  sand.  Utter 
ruin  is  the  destiny  of  the  fabric  which 
he  rears.  Wickedness  is  weakness. 
Lies  must  perish.  Truth  and  right- 
eousness alone  are  abiding  and  strong. 

3.  That  God  is  the  only  adequate  sup- 
port of  human  life.  "  The  man  made 
not  God  his  strength,"  and  his  end  was 
destruction.  A  consideration  of  His 
almighty  power,  infinite  wisdom,  un- 
changing faithfulness,  and  essential 
kindness,  is  calculated  to  inspire  strong 
confidence  in  the  all-sufficiency  of  God 
as  the  support  of  human  life.  And 
there  is  no  other  adequate  support. 
Wealth,  wisdom,  rank,  power,  friend- 
ship, (fee,  are  insufficient.  He  who 
leans  ujjon  any  or  upon  all  of  them  is 
doomed  to  bitter  disappointment  and  a 
grievous  fall.  Such  are  the  lessons 
which  the  poet  learned  from  the  judg- 
ment of  God  upon  the  wicked. 

V.  They  flourish  in  the  midst  of  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  the  wicked. 
"  But  I  am  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the 
house  of  God,"  <fec.     Consider — 

265 


PSALM  LII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


1.  The   nature   of  this   liap'py  state. 
The  state  of  the  Psahiiist  was  charac- 
terised by  (1)  Divine  security.     Barnes: 
"  A  tree  planted  in  the  very  courts  of 
the    sanctuary    would    be    regarded    as 
sacred,  and  would  be  safe  as  long  as  the 
tabernacle  itself  was  safe,  for  it  would 
be,  as  it  were,  directly  under  the  Divine 
protection.     So   David   had   been,   not- 
withstanding   all     the    efforts    of     his 
enemies  to  destroy  him."     The  righteous 
are  inviolably  secure  from  any  real  harm, 
for  the  Lord  is  their  keeper  (Ps.  cxxv. 
1,  2  ;  Eom.  viii.  31,  37).     (2)  Religious 
privileges.     David  looked  forward  with 
confidence  and  gladness  to  the  termina- 
tion of  his  exile  and  his  return  to  the 
sanctuary.     To  him  the  tabernacle  and 
the  ordinances  of  worship  were  precious 
and    hallowed    things.     The    people   of 
God  find  strength  and  joy  in  the  means 
of    grace,   while    the   wicked    are   over- 
thrown  by  their  own  wickedness.     (3) 
Spiritual  prosperity.     In  the  Scriptures 
a  green  tree  is  the  emblem  of  prosperity 
(Ps.   i.    3,   xcii.    12  j   Jer.  xi.   16).     M. 
Henry  :  "  Those  that  by  faith  and  love 
dwell  in  the  house  of  God  shall  be  like 
green  olive-trees  there  ;  the  wicked  are 
said    to   flourish   like   a  green   bay-tree 
(Ps.  xxxvii.  35),  which  bears  no  useful 
fruit,  though  it  has  abundance  of  large 
leaves  ;  but  the  righteous  flourish  like  a 
green  olive-tree,  which  is  fat  as  well  as 
flourishing  (Ps.   xcii.   14),  and   with  its 
fatness  honours  God  and  man  (Judg.  ix. 
9),  deriving   its   root   and  fatness  from 
the  good   olive   (Rom.    xi.    17)."     Not- 
withstanding the  bitter  opposition  of  the 
wicked,  the  people  of  God  shall  grow  in 
grace,  and  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  holy 
living  and  useful  working. 


"  When  wrath  the  wicked  shall  destroy, 
The}'  shall  abide  in  peace  aud  joy 
Who  love  Thy  righteous  laws.** 

2.  The  condition  of  this  happy  state. 
"  I  trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever 
and  ever."  The  Psalmist  was  well  as- 
sured of  the  constancy,  the  unchange- 
ableness,  and  the  perpetuity  of  the 
mercy  of  God,  and  in  that  he  trusted. 
Faith  in  God  is  the  condition  of  spiritual 
safety  and  prosperity. 

VI.  They  worship  God  because  of  His 
judgment  upon  the  wicked.  "  I  will 
praise  Thee  for  ever  because,"  &c.  The 
judgments  of  God  as  viewed  by  the 
righteous — 

1.  Incite  to  praise.  *'  I  will  praise 
Thee,"  &c.  They  reveal  the  righteous- 
ness of  His  administration ;  His  regard 
for  His  people,  &c. ;  and  so  enkindle 
gratitude,  reverence,  (fee. 

2.  Inspire  confidence.  "  And  will 
wait  on  Thy  name."  Barnes  ;  "  There 
are  two  ideas  essentially  in  the  lan- 
guage, (1)  The  expression  of  a  sense  of 
dependence  on  God,  as  if  the  only  ground 
of  trust  was  in  Him.  (2)  A  willingness 
to  await  His  inter{.)Osition  at  all  times ; 
a  belief  that,  however  long  such  inter- 
position might  be  delayed,  God  would 
interfere  at  the  proper  time  to  bring 
deliverance;  and  a  purpose  calmly  and 
patiently  to  look  to  Him  until  the  time 
of  deliverance  should  come  "  (Ps.  xxvii. 
14,  xxxvii.  7,  9,  34;  Is.  xl.  31). 

Application. — 1.  What  is  our  rela- 
tion to  the  Divine  judgments  ?  2.  WJiat 
is  the  ground  of  our  confidence  ?  Is  it 
wealth  i  or  the  power  of  cunning  and 
unscrupulous  wickedness  1  or  the  Lord 
God?  3.  What  is  the  spirit  and  what 
the  condition  of  our  life  9 


The  Folly  of  Trusting  in  Riches. 
(  Verse  7.) 


"  Behold  the  man  that  trusted  in  the 
abundance  of  his  riches."  We  have 
here — 

I.  A  great  mistake.  To  trust  in 
riches  is  to  err  greatly  : 

1.  Because  of  the  uncertainty  of  the 
tenure  of  riches.  "  Labour  not  to  be 
rich  :  for  riches  certainly  make  them- 
266 


selves  wings ;  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle 
toward  heaven"  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  At 
the  farthest  we  must  relinquish  them  at 
death  (Ps.  xlix.  17  ;  Eccles.  v.  15). 

2.  Because  of  the  limited  poiver  of 
riches.  Wealth  can  do  much,  but  there 
are  many  things  which  it  cannot  do.  It 
can   buy    books,    but    not    intellectual 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LnZ, 


power ;  paintings,  but  not  appreciative 
taste ;  service  nnd  sycophancy,  but  not 
esteem  and  affection,  (fee.  It  cannot  buy 
pardon,  peace,  purity,  &c.  It  cannot 
bribe  death,  <fcc. 

3.  Because  of  the  utter  inability  of 
liches  to  satisfy  those  who  possess  them. 
He  who  has  much  wealth  would  fain 
have  more.  The  cravings  of  the  soul  of 
man,  created  for  truth,  immortality,  and 
God,  cannot  be  satisfied  with  the  bribes 
which  wealth  can  offer.  How  mistaken 
then  is  he  who  trusts  in  wealth  1 


IL  A  common  mistake.  The  great 
race  of  the  age  is  for  the  acquisition 
of  wealth.  If  you  ask  what  a  man  is 
worth,  people  tell  you  how  much  money 
he  possesses.  Manhood  is  sacrificed  for 
money.  Eiches  are  the  deity  of  thou- 
sands in  Christian  England, 

III.  A  ruinous  mistake  if  persisted 
in.  *'  What  is  a  man  profited,  if  he 
shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his 
own  soul  %  "  "  Thy  money  perish  with 
thee/*    (Comp.  Luke  xii.  15-21.) 


PSALM  LIIL 
Introduction. 

According  to  the  superscription  this  Psalm  was  composed  by  David  and  dedicated  "  To 

the  Chief  Musician;"  to  be  used  in  public  worship  under  his  direction.  The  term  '* uj)on 
Mahalath^^  is  variously  interpreted.  In  the  Geneva  version  it  is  rendered,  "To  him  that 
excelletli  on  Mahalath  ; "  which  is  explained  in  the  margin  to  be  "  an  instrument  or  kind  of 
note."  "  This  expresses  the  opinions  of  most  commentators.  Aben  Ezra  understands  by  it 
the  name  of  a  meh>dy  to  which  the  Psalm  was  sung.  Calvin  and  J.  H.  Michaelis,  among 
others,  regarded  it  as  an  instrument  of  music,  or  the  commencement  of  a  melody.  Fuerst 
explains  Mahalath  as  the  name  of  a  musical  corps  dwelling  at  Abel-Meholah,  just  as  by  Gittith 
he  understands  the  band  of  Levite  minstrels  at  Gaih  Bimmon.  On  the  other  hand,  the  opinion 
that  Mahalath  contains  an  enigmatical  indication  of  the  subject  of  the  Psalm  is  adopted  by 
Hengstenberg  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other.  He  translates  *  on  Mahalath  '  by  *  on  sickness,* 
referring  to  the  spiritual  malady  of  the  sons  of  men.  A  third  theory  is  that  of  Delitzscb,  who 
considers  Mahalath  as  indicating  to  the  choir  the  manner  in  which  the  Psalm  was  to  be  sung, 
and  compares  the  modern  terms  mesto,  andante  mesto  "  (Smith's  Diet  of  the  Bible).  The  term 
"  MaschU^'  shows  that  the  Psalm  was  designed  to  afford  instruction. 

This  Psalm  is  almost  exactly  similar  to  Ps.  xiv.  The  only  difference  which  requires 
notice  here  is  between  verses  5  and  6  of  Ps.  xiv.  and  verse  5  of  this  one. 

"  There  were  they  in  great  fear  ;  for  God  is  in  the  generation  of  the  righteous.  Ye  have 
shamed  the  counsel  of  the  poor,  because  the  Lord  is  his  refuge  "  (xiv.  5,  6.) 

"  There  were  the}'^  in  great  fear,  where  no  fear  was  ;  for  God  hath  scattered  the  bones  of 
him  that  encampeth  against  thee  :  thou  hast  put  them  to  shame,  because  God  hath  despised 
them." 

For  the  chief  exposition  we  refer  the  reader  to  *'The  Horn.  Com,**  on  Pg.  xiv.  We  add, 
as  supplementary  to  that,  a  few  Homiletic  suggestions. 


God  Inspecting  Man. 
{Verse  2.) 


**  The  original  word  here —  ^(?tf^,'* 
says  Barnes,  "  conveys  the  idea  of  bend- 
ing forward,  and  hence  of  an  intense 
and  anxious  looking,  as  we  bend  forward 
when  we  wish  to  examine  anything  with 
attention,  or  when  we  look  out  for  one 
who  is  expected  to  come.  The  idea  is, 
that  God  looked  intently,  or  so  as  to 
secure  a  close  examination,  upon  the 
children  of  men,  for  the  express  purpose 
of  ascertaining  whether  there  were  any 


that  were  good.  He  looked  at  all  men ; 
He  examined  all  their  pretensions  to 
goodness,  and  He  saw  none  who  could 
be  regarded  as  exem})t  from  the  charge 
of  depravity."     The  text  suggests — 

I.  God's  profound  interest  in  hu- 
manity. He  bows  Himself  forward, 
and,  with  zeal  and  concern,  examines 
man's  moral  state.  Such  is  the  form 
in  which  important  truths  are  repre- 
sented— this  amongst  others,   that  the 

267 


PSALM  Lin. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Most  High  is  deeply  interested  in  man's 
moral  condition  ?     Why  is  He  so  ? 

1.  Because  of  the  dignity  of  marCs 
nature.  To  God  nothing  is  unimport- 
ant— nothing  mean.  But  man  is  the 
noblest  of  His  creations  in  this  world. 
"  God  created  man  in  His  own  image." 

2.  Because  of  the  peculiarity  of  marl's 
moral  condition.  By  disobedience  man 
entered  into  the  dread  knowledge  of 
evil.  Unf alien  angels  are  entirely  holy. 
Fallen  angels  are  utterly  depraved. 
In  human  nature  tlie  battle  between 
good  and  evil  is  being  waged. 

3.  Because  of  the  capabilities  of  man's 
nature.  Man  is  capable  of  rising  to  the 
highest  or  sinking  to  the  lowest  position 
in  the  universe  of  God.  It  would  be 
passing  strange  if  God  were  not  deeply 
interested  in  man.  Nothing  that  con- 
cerns thee,  ray  brother,  is  unimportant 
in  the  Divine  estimation. 

II.  Grod's  searching  scrutiny  of  hu- 
manity. The  poet  represents  him  as 
earnestly  examining  "  the  children  of 
men."     His  is  the  scrutiny  of — 

1.  An  all-seeing  Being.  Nothing  can 
be  hidden  from  His  all-searching  eye 
(Ps.  cxxxix.  11-16;  Ezek.  xi.  5;  Heb. 
iv.  13). 

2.  An  infinitely  holy  Being.  He 
hates  sin  with  awful  and  unappeasable 
hatred.  His  dwelling,  His  ways,  His 
works,  His  essential  nature,  are  all  holy 
(Isa.  Ivii.  15;  Hab.  i.  12,  13;  1  John 
i.  5  ;  Rev.  iv.  8). 

3.  An  infinitely  merciful  Being.  *' A 
God  ready  to  pardon,  gracious  and  mer- 
ciful, slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kind- 
ness." If  there  be  in  us  any  sincere 
efforts  after  truth  and  righteousness,  He 
sees  and  approves  them.  In  His  judg- 
ment of  His  creatures  He  makes  allow- 
ance for  their  weakness,  for  the  force  of 
temptation,  &c.  He  is  not  harsh,  &c. 
His  holiness  which  leads  Him  to  hate 
sin  leads  Him  also  to  seek  the  salvation 
of  the  sinner.  Such  is  the  Being  who 
is  ever  earnestly  observing  man,  examin- 
ing man.  How  solemn  and  sacred  should 
our  life  he,  since  it  is  ever  under  His 
inspection  !  What  an  inspiration  and 
encouragement  does  this  inspection  afford 


to  the  godly  I  What  a  restraint  it  should 
prove  to  the  workers  of  iniquity  I  "  For 
His  eyes  are  upon  the  ways  of  man,  and 
He  seeth  all  his  goings.  There  is  no 
darkness,  nor  shadow  of  death,  where 
the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  them- 
selves." 

III.  The  supreme  concern  of  human- 
ity. Why  does  God  so  earnestly  exa- 
mine man  %  "  To  see  if  there  were  any 
that  did  understand,  that  did  seek  God." 
As  these  are  the  things  which  God  de- 
sires to  discover  in  man,  man's  great 
concern  should  be  to  have  and  to  exer- 
cise them.     We  should  seek — 

1.  Moral  intelligence.  "  Understand," 
or  act  prudently — the  antithesis  of  the 
fool  in  ver.  1.  Not  intellectual  attain- 
ment, but  practical  wisdom. 

**  Knowledge  and  wisdom,  far  from  being  one, 
Have  ofttimes  no  connection.     Knowledge 

dwells 
In  heads  replete  with  thoughts  of  other  men; 
Wisdom  in  minds  attentive  to  their  own. 
Knowledge,  a  rude  unprofitable  mass, 
The  mere  materialswith  which  wisdom  builds, 
Till  smooth'd,  and  squared,  and  fitted  to  its 

place, 
Does  but  encumber  whom  it  seems  t'enrich. 
Knowledge  is  proud  taat  he  has  learn'd  so 

much ; 
Wisdom  is  humble  that  he  knows  no  more." 

— Cowptr. 

"  The  wisdom  of  the  prudent  is  to 
understand  his  way." 

2.  Divine  aspiration.  "  Seek  God." 
Hengstenberg  :  *'  To  seek  God,  desig- 
nates the  desire  of  the  heart  after  Him, 
the  longing  directed  towards  Him." 
Where  there  is  any  true  wisdom,  or  any 
spiritual  life,  it  will  manifest  itself  in 
seeking  fellowship  and  union  with  God. 
Only  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ  can  this  union  be  obtained.  Our 
well-being  is  impossible  apart  from 
Him. 

Conclusion. — 1.  He  who  now  scruti- 
nises will  one  day  judge  man.  2.  His 
judgment  of  man  is  infallible.  He  de- 
liberately, patiently,  and  thoroughly 
examines  into  every  case  before  pro- 
nouncing judgment.  3.  He  is  also  the 
merciful  Saviour  of  men.  4.  Our  supreme 
interest  is  to  seek  to  know  Him  as  our 
Saviour. 


268 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LITT. 


Tub  Salvation  of  the  Church  and  the  Destruction  of  hib  Enemiks, 

(  Verses  5,  6.) 


The  poet  here  represents  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  wicked — 

L  As  utter  and  irreversible.  "God 
hath  scattered  the  bones  of  thy  be- 
siegers." The  figure  points  to  the 
most  complete  and  terrible  destruction 
of  the  enemies  of  the  Church.  Not 
only  is  their  power  broken  and  their 
forces  dispersed,  but  they  are  slain, 
and  their  bones,  unburied,  are  scattered 
upon  the  earth.  Moll :  "  It  was  the 
greatest  disgrace  that  the  bones  which 
had  not  been  gathered  and  buried  should 
be  scattered  to  become  the  prey  of  wild 
beasts,  or  manure  of  the  field  "  (Ps.  cxli. 
7 ;  Jer.  viii.  2,  ix.  22,  xvi.  4,  xxv.  33 ; 
Ezek.  vi.  5).  The  wicked  must  either 
submit  themselves  unto  God,  or  suffer 
irretrievable  overthrow.  If  any  one 
will  resist  Him  to  the  uttermost,  by  so 
doing  he  will  bring  upon  himself  utter 
destruction  (Job  ix.  4,  xl.  9). 

II.  As  effected  by  God.  "God  hath 
scattered,"  &c.  Doubtless  there  is  an 
historical  allusion  here.  Most  probably 
the  allusion  is  to  the  destruction  of  the 
vast  and  mighty  host  of  Sennacherib 
before  Jerusalem.  In  one  night  one 
hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  Assy- 
rians were  slain  by  "  the  angel  of  the 
Lord."  "  I  will  defend  this  city  to  save 
it,"  said  the  Lord,  "  for  Mine  own 
sake,  and  for  My  servant  David's  sake." 
There  was  no  battle.  He  needed  no 
assistance.  With  the  breath  of  his 
nostrils  he  slew  them.  How  insane  for 
any  creature  to  battle  against  Him  !  He 
can  crush  the  mightiest  with  a  word,  or 
wither  the  most  vigorous  with  one  glance 
of  His  eye ! 

III.  As  overtaking  them  when  they 
regarded  themselves  as  quite  secure. 
*'  There  were  they  in  great  fear  where 
no  fear  was."  It  is  incorrect  to  inter- 
pret this  as  groundless  alarm  or  unne- 
cessary fear.  The  meaning  is,  that 
when  the  enemies  of  the  Israelites  saw 
no  reason  to  be  terrified,  and  felt  them- 
selves entirely  safe,  suddenly  and  utterly 
contrary  to  their  expectation,  destruc- 


tion overtook  them.  "  A  sound  of  ter- 
rors is  in  his  ears ;  in  prosperity,"  &c. 
(Job  XV.  21).  "  When  they  shall  say, 
Peace  and  safety,"  <fec.  (1  Thess.  v.  3). 
In  opposition  to  God  there  can  be  no 
safety,  under  any  circumstances.  In 
alliance  with  Him  there  can  be  no  real 
peril,  however  threatening  the  aspect  of 
affairs  may  be.  (Comp.  2  Chron.  xx. 
1-30.) 

IV.  As  inflicted  because  of  their 
hostility  to  the  people  of  God.  The 
enemy  was  utterly  overthrown  because 
he  was  besieging  the  chosen  people. 
No  one  can  attempt  to  injure  even  the 
least  of  the  people  of  God  without  call- 
ing forth  His  interposition. 

1.  He  is  in  covenant  relation  with  His 
people f  and  is  pledged  to  help  them.  He 
is  ever  true  to  His  covenant  engage- 
ments. *'  He  abideth  faithful ;  He  can- 
not deny  Himself." 

2.  He  is  profoundly  and  tenderly  inte- 
rested in  His  people  (Isa.  xlix.  14-16; 
Matt,  xviii.  5,  6,  xxv.  40,  45 ;  Acts  ix. 
4).  From  these  portions  of  Scripture  it 
is  quite  clear  that  He  identifies  Himself 
with  them :  what  is  done  against  them 
He  regards  as  done  against  Him  ;  what 
is  done  for  them,  as  done  for  Him.  In 
this  we  have — (1)  An  inspiring  and 
strengthening  consideration  for  the 
people  of  God.  (2)  Motive  and  en- 
couragement to  those  who  would  aid 
them.  (3)  Warning  to  those  who  would 
injure  them. 

V.  The  destruction  of  the  wicked 
in  former  times  as  an  encouragement 
to  the  good  to  expect  salvation  from 
present  dangers.  This  we  take  to  be  the 
connecting  link  between  verses  5  and  6. 
"  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  were 
come  out  of  Zion,"  <fec.     Notice — 

1.  2%e  poetic  view  of  salvation.  It  is 
here  represented  as  deliverance  from 
captivity.  Captivity  is  a  figure  to  re- 
present restraint,  misery,  &c.  "  Turning 
the  captivity  "  is  a  figure  for  the  turning 
of  an  unhappy  condition  into  a  restora- 
tion to  former  prosperity.     A  state  of 

269 


PSALM  LIV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


sin  is  a  state  of  bondage  and  misery. 
The  Lord  Jesus  introduces  man  to  free- 
dom and  joy. 

2.  The  grand  source  of  salvation. 
"  Out  of  Zion,"  &c.,  because  there  the 
Lord  was  enthroned  in  the  sanctuary  as 
in  His  habitation.  The  salvation  of  man 
from  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  life  can 
come  only  from  God.  It  is  His  to 
"  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,"  &c. 

3.  The  earnest  desire  of  salvation. 
"  Oh  that  the  salvation  of  Israel,"  &c. 
Our  fervent  desires  are  our  true  prayers. 
Through  all  ages  the  prayers  of  true 
hearts  have  been  ojffered  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  world  from  sin  and  misery. 

4.  The  anticipated  result  of  salvation. 
**  Jacob  shall  rejoice,  Israel  shall  be 
glad."  To  the  individual  the  realisa- 
tion of  salvation  is  a  joyous  experience. 
And  when  its  blessings  shall  be  enjoyed 
by  all  mankind,  the  exultation  will  be 


universal  in  its  extent,  and  enthusiastic 
and  reverent  in  its  character.  And 
unto  God  shall  all  the  glory  be  ascribed. 
5.  The  encouragement  to  expect  salva- 
tion. Past  deliverances  inspire  the  poet 
with  confident  hope  of  salvation  from 
present  difficulties  and  dangers.  God 
is  unchangeable.  What  He  has  done 
in  the  past  He  is  able  to  do  in  the  pre- 
sent. He  is  faithful.  What  He  has 
promised  that  will  He  perform.  Every 
new  deliverance  is  an  additional  reason 
for  trusting  Him.  "  Because  Thou  hast 
been  my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow 
of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice." 

**  His  love  in  time  past 

Forbids  me  to  think 
He'll  leave  me  at  last 

In  trouble  to  sink  : 
Each  sweet  Ebenezer 

I  have  in  review, 
Confirms  His  good  pleasure 

To  help  me  quite  through." — Newton. 


PSALM    LIV. 

Introduction, 

Superscription. — "To  the  Chief  Musician  on  Neginoth."  There  is  very  little  doubt  that 
"  Neginoih"  is  "the  general  term  denoting  all  stringed  instruments  whatsoever,  whether  played 
with  the  hand,  like  the  harp  and  guitar,  or  with  a  plectrum.  *  The  chief  musician  on  Neginoth  ' 
was  therefore  the  conductor  of  that  portion  of  the  Temple-choir,  who  played  upon  the  stringed 
instruments." — Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible. 

*'  Maschil,"  an  instruction.  Berleb.  Bible — "  We  should  learn  from  the  example  of  David 
that  even  in  the  greatest  danger  we  should  resort  to  no  forbidden  means,  nor  grow  faint,  but 
should  call  upon  the  name  of  God,  and  commit  to  Him  all  our  concerns  as  to  the  Supreme 
Judge." 

"  A  Psalm  of  David,  lohen  the  Ziphims,^^  &c.  The  psalm  was  composed  by  David  when  the 
Ziphites  informed  Saul  that  David  concealed  himself  in  their  country.  This  occurred  on  two 
occasions,  1  Sam.  xxiii.  19  ;  xxvi.  1.  Probably  the  first  of  these  is  referred  to  here,  as  the 
words  of  the  superscription  literally  agree  with  the  words  of  the  Zipbites,  as  reported  in  1  Sam. 
xxiii.  19.  The  psalm,  says  Moll,  "is  plain  and  sim])le  in  form  and  contents.  It  expresses  at 
first  a, prayer  to  God  for  deliverance  in  a  just  cause  from  dreaded  ungodly  enemifes  (vers.  1-3). 
It  then  expresses,  in  a  lively  manner,  confidence  in  the  Divine  help  a' id  the  punishment  of  His 
enemies  (vers.  4,  5)  ;  finally  it  concludes  with  the  vow  of  thanksgiving  for  such  acts  of  God  in 
confirmation  of  His  name." 

Homiletically  we  regard  the  psalm  as  presenting  to  view  The  troubled  life  of  a  good  man 
vers.  1-3  ;  and,  The  triumphant  life  of  a  good  man,  vers.  4-7. 


A  Glimpse  of  a 
{Verses 

Consider — 

I.  The  cause  of  the  trouble.     "  For 

strangers  are  risen  up  against  me,"  (fee. 
His  distress  arose  from  his  enemies, 
whom  he  here  represents  as — 

1.   Unnatural.     "  Strangers  are  risen 
270 


Troubled  Life. 
1-3.) 

up  against  me."  The  expression  is  not 
to  be  taken  literally  as  denoting  foreign- 
ers, "  since  the  inhabitants  of  Ziph,  a 
town  situated  in  the  mountain  wilder- 
ness of  Judah,  a  few  miles  south-east 
of  Hebron,  were  of  the  same  race  ^ 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LIV. 


David."  His  own  countrymen  had  be- 
come as  foreigners  to  him,  had  treated 
him  as  an  enemy.  The  Psalmist,  like 
St.  Paul  in  an  after  age,  was  in  "  perils 
among  false  brethren."  Dickson  :  "  No 
strangers  are  more  strange  than  they 
who  cast  off  the  bands  of  civility  and 
nature,  whereby  they  were  bound: 
false  countrymen,  false  brethren,  false 
friends,  false  alliance,  are  those  of  whom 
men  may  expect  least  in  their  need, 
for  David  findeth  such  men  to  be  his 
greatest  enemies." 

2.  Cruel.  "  Oppressors  seek  after 
my  soul."  As  a  cruel  tyrant,  Saul  was 
seeking  to  compass  the  death  of  David. 
Nothing  less  than  the  precious  life 
itself  would  satisfy  the  jealous  and 
malignant  monarch. 

3.  Practically  atheistic.  "  They  have 
not  set  God  before  them."  Arnd.  : 
"  Not  to  have  God  before  the  eyes, 
means  to  speak  and  act  without  dread, 
whatever  one  pleases — nay,  what  is  con- 
trary to  God  and  His  holy  Word,  as  if 
God  did  not  see  and  hear  it ;  nor  to  be 
afraid  of  God's  anger,  or  of  His  judg- 
ment, and  to  have  no  remembrance  of 
God  in  the  heart."  When  men  thus 
ignore  the  Divine  Being,  can  we  wonder 
that  they  trample  under  foot  all  ideas 
of  humanity  and  justice  in  their  treat- 
ment of  their  fellow-men  1  So  we  have 
a  glimpse  of  this  troubled  life.  Exter- 
nally the  poet  knew  no  safety  or  peace  ; 
he  was  hunted  from  place  to  place  with 
unrelenting  cruelty,  &c.  We,  too, 
know  the  meaning  of  trouble,  and  are 
not  unacquainted  with  false  brethren 
and  fierce  enemies,  <fec. 

II.  The  comfort  in  the  trouble.  The 
Psalmist  found  relief  and  help  in  prayer 
to  God. 

1.  The  object  of  his  prayer.  He 
prayed   for    audience    and    acceptance. 


"  Hear  my  prayer,  0  God  ;  give  ear  to 
the  words  of  my  mouth."  But  the 
grand  object  of  his  prayer  was  deliver ^ 
ance  from  his  dangers,  salvation  from 
his  troubles.  "  Save  me,  0  God,  by 
Thy  name,"  &c.  David  seems  to  have 
been  aware  that  the  Ziphites  had  in- 
formed Saul  of  his  whereabout ;  he  felt 
how  perilous  his  position  was  ;  and  he 
appealed  to  God  for  protection  and 
deliverance. 

2.  The  encouragement  of  his  pyrayer. 
This  he  drew  from  two  sources.  (1) 
The  Being  to  whom  he  prayed,  (a)  His 
power  to  save.  "  Judge  me  by  Thy 
strength."  He  will  "  show  Himself 
strong  in  the  behalf  of  them  whose 
heart  is  perfect  toward  Him."  *'  Thou 
hast  a  mighty  arm  ;  strong  is  Thy  hand, 
high  is  Thy  right  hand."  (/3)  The  per- 
fections of  His  nature.  "  Save  me,  O 
God,  by  Thy  name."  Barnes:  "The 
word  '  name '  here  may  include  the  per- 
fections or  attributes  properly  implied 
in  the  name."  It  implies  all  the  bene- 
volence, faithfulness,  and  power  that 
were  needed  to  warrant  the  most  san- 
guine hope  of  salvation  from  Him.  (2) 
The  righteousness  of  his  cause.  "  Judge 
me."  These  words  indicate  that  David 
was  conscious  of  the  righteousness  of 
his  cause.  If  he  obtained  his  rights  in 
the  case,  he  would  be  triumphantly  de- 
livered. Arnd.  :  "  From  these  words 
we  learn,  if  we  would  pray  rightly,  and 
indeed  would  make  a  strong,  powerful 
prayer,  we  must  have  a  good  cause,  so 
that  our  conscience  may  not  condemn 
us,  and  render  our  prayer  impotent." 

Conclusion. — Learn  1.  What  the 
good  may  not  expect  in  this  life  :  exemp- 
tion from  trouble.  2.  What  the  good 
may  expect  in  this  life  :  support  and 
comfort,  in  trouble.  Let  us  seek  it  in 
prayer,  as  David  did. 


A  Glimpse  of  a  Triumphant  Life. 

{Verses  4-7.) 

The  outward  life  of  the  Psalmist  at         I.  The  nature  of  the   triumphant 
this  time  was  characterised  by  constant      life.     The  poet  brings  into  notice  two 
peril  and  trial ;  but  his  inward  Ufa  was      prominent  features  of  this  life — 
marked  by  peace  and  triumph.     Con-  1.  Faith.     Faith  is  the  soul  of  all 

eider—'  heroisms,  whether  of  patient  endurance, 

371 


PSALM  LIV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


or  brave,  persistent  performance.  DaTid 
believed  in  (1)  God.  To  him  God  was 
not  a  myth  or  the  mere  article  of  a  creed 
to  which  he  had  assented ;  but  the 
grand  Reality  of  being.  His  faith  was 
living  and  realising  in  its  character. 
He  felt  the  presence  of  God  with  him, 
&c.  (2)  The  righteousness  of  God's 
government.  "He  shall  reward  evil 
unto  mine  enemies."  Notwithstandingj 
his  present  distresses,  David  was  fully- 
persuaded  of  the  righteousness  of  the 
Divine  laws  and  administration.  Ulti- 
mately the  apparent  inequalities  in 
God's  government  of  the  world  will  all 
be  removed.  Men  will  be  retributed 
according  to  their  character  and  con- 
duct. (3)  God's  interest  in  the  indi- 
vidual life  of  those  who  trust  Him. 
"  Behold,  God  is  mine  Helper,"  ^c. 
God  is  personally  interested  in  every 
one  whose  confidence  is  reposed  in  Him. 
In  his  distressing  wanderings,  David 
never  passed  beyond  the  Divine  care. 
In  his  extremest  danger  he  was  covered 
by  the  shield  of  the  Divine  protection. 
It  was  his  faith  in  these  things  that 
enabled  him  to  live  a  triumphant  life, 
even  in  the  midst  of  incessant  persecu- 
tions and  perils.  It  is  true  of  all  men 
and  in  all  ages  that  life  can  become 

VICTOEIOUS       ONLY      THROUGH     FaITH. 

Faith  enlarging  the  horizon  of  life, 
realising  the  future  and  invisible,  feel- 
ing the  presence  of  God,  and  resting  in 
His  promises,  transforms  common  men 
into  heroes  (Heb.  xi.  32-40). 

2.  Worship.  "  I  will  freely  sacrifice 
unto  Thee,"  &c.  Here  we  have  (1) 
The  forms  of  worship.  "  Sacrifice, 
.  .  .  praise."  Forms  are  indispens- 
able to  us.  They  express,  and,  by 
expressing,  often  increase,  religious 
feeling.  (2)  The  spirit  of  worship. 
"  Freely."  This  is  not  to  be  inter- 
preted as  signifying  either  (a)  Spiritual 
as  opposed  to  ceremonial  offerings ;  or 
(J5)  Voluntary  sacrifices  as  contrasted 
to  those  offered  in  fulfilment  of  vows  ; 


but  (7)  Offerings  brought  with  a  willing 
mind  and  a  glad  heart.  Sacrifice  and 
praise,  gifts  and  songs,  are  acceptable 
unto  God  and  helpful  to  man  only  in 
the  measure  of  their  spontaneousness 
and  heartiness.  Here  is  another  thing 
which  contributed  to  the  triumph  of 
the  Psalmist, — he  delighted  in  worship. 
Worship  calms,  emboldens,  strengthens 
man.  Faith  and  worship  are  of  the 
essential  nature  of  a  victorious  life. 

II.  The  concLuering  power  of  the 
triumphant  life. 

1.  It  gives  assurance  of  victory, 
"Behold,  God  is  mine  helper,"  <kc., 
vers.  4,  5.  The  believer  in  Christ  has 
an  unfailing  assurance  that,  through 
Him,  he  will  vanquish  all  his  enemies. 

2.  It  enables  its  possessor  to  realise 
the  deliverance^  and  to  triumph  even  in 
the  midst  of  the  trouble  and  conflict.  "  He 
hath  delivered  me  out  of  all  trouble," 
&c.  The  victorious  spirit  enables 
David,  even  in  the  midst  of  his  anxie- 
ties and  perils,  to  realise  (1)  Complete 
deliverance  from  trouble  ;  and  (2)  Com- 
plete triumph  over  his  enemies.  "  Mine 
eye  hath  seen  his  desire  upon  mine 
enemies."  Wordsworth  :  "  The  words 
*  his  desire '  are  not  in  the  original,  and 
would  be  better  omitted.  What  David 
says  is,  that  his  eyes  look  calmly  on  his 
enemies  :  he  views  them  without  alarm  ; 
for  he  feels  that  the  shield  of  God's 
power  and  love  is  cast  over  him  to  pro- 
tect him." 

Conclusion. — Let  us  thankfully  re- 
joice in  the  victorious  life.  Even  now, 
while  beset  by  troubles  and  confronted 
by  enemies,  we  triumph  in  and  through 
Jesus  our  Lord.  "  These  things  I  have 
spoken  unto  you,  that  in  Me  ye  might 
have  peace,"  &c.  (John  xvi.  33).  "  We 
glory  in  tribulations  also,"  &c.  (Rom. 
V.  3—5).  "  In  all  these  things  we  are 
more  than  conquerors,"  <kc.  (Rom.  viii. 
31-39).  "Now  thanks  be  unto  God, 
which  always  causetb  us  to  triumph  in 
Christ." 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


f  SALM  LV. 


God  our  Helper. 


( Verse 

"  Behold,  God  is  mine  helper. '* 
Man  often  stands  in  need  of  Divine 
help.  It  is  good  and  pleasant  to  enjoy 
the  help  of  our  fellow-t^aints;  but  their 
help  is  limited,  uncertain,  and  often  value- 
less. Not  so  God — He  is  possessed  of 
every  qualification,  so  there  never  can 
be  faihire  with  him.     Notice — 

I.  When  God  is  the  helper  of  His 
people. 

1.  In  the  great  crisis  of  their  conver- 
sion. He  raiseth  from  the  pit,  delivers, 
saves,  (fee. 

2.  In  the  troubles  and  afflictions  of 
life.  These  are  many,  varied,  some- 
times severe,  &c.  Job,  the  Apostles 
(2  Cor.  i.  8-10). 

3.  In  the  perils  and  conflicts  of  their 
warfare  (Ps.  xxxvii  14, 15  ;  Ix.  11, 12  ; 
cxlvi.  5). 


4.) 

4.  In  their  labours  and  toils  in  Hit 

kingdom  (Ps.  cxxi.  1,  2). 

5.  In  weakness,  sickness,  and  death 
(Ps.  xxiii.  4  ;  cxvi.  1-9). 

II.  What  kind  of  a  Helper  is  God. 

1.  Always  near  at  hand.  2.  Always 
efficient  and  sufficient.  3.  Perpetual 
and  everlasting. 

III.  The  conclusions  to  which  the 
subject  should  lead  us. 

1.  Personal  knowledge  and  reliance 
on  God. 

2.  Unwavering  faith  and  hope. 

3.  Constant  prayer  and  supplication. 
He  will  be  sought  and  inquired  of. 

4.  Acknowledgment  and  praise, 
*' Bless  the  Lord  at  all  times,"  <fcc — 
Jahez  Burns,  D,D, 


PSALM     JjY. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Supenertption. — *' To  ike  Chief  Musician  on  Ncginoth.**  Se©  introduction  to  Ps.  liv. 
"  Maschil"  an  instruction.  Hengstenberg  :  "The  Psalmist  wishes  to  show  how,  in  such  a 
situation  of  excitement,  a  person  should  conduct  himself  ;  how  he  should  carry  up  what  has 
occasioned  it  to  God,  and  compose  himself  to  rest  again  through  the  consideration  of  God's  love 
and  righteousness." 

Occasion. — We  have  no  doubt  that  the  psalm  has  an  historical  reference ;  but  to  what 
occasion  it  refers  cannot  now  be  determined  with  certainty.  Barues  :  "  Of  all  the  known 
events  in  the  life  of  David,  the  supposition  which  regards  the  psalm  as  composed  during  the  re- 
bellion of  Absalom,  and  at  the  special  time  when  he  learned  that  the  man  whom  he  trusted — 
Aliithopliel — was  among  the  traitors,  is  the  most  probable.  All  the  circumstances  in  the 
psalm  agree  with  his  condition  at  that  time,  and  the  occasion  was  one  in  which  the  persecuted 
and  much-afflicted  king  would  be  likely  to  pour  out  the  desires  of  his  heart  before  God"  (2 
Sam.  XV.  10-31). 


A  Cry  from  a  Soul  in  Distress. 
{Verses  1-8.) 


This  cry  of  the  troubled  Psalmist 
reveals — 

I.  The  cause  of  his  distress.  This 
was  the  conduct  of  his  enemies  as  set 
forth  in  ver.  3 — 

1.  Their  evil  speeches.  "  Because  of 
the  voice  of  the  enemy."  At  this  time 
David  was  assailed  with  reproaches, 
slanders,  and  threats  (2  Sam.  xv.  3,  4). 
(See  "  The  Horn.  Com.;'  on  Ps.  xli.  5-9; 
xlii.  2.) 


2.  Their  wicked  deeds.  "  Because  of 
the  oppression  of  the  wicked ;  for  they 
cast  iniquity  upon  me.*'  Hengstenberg 
renders  the  last  clause  thus  :  "  for  they 
bend  mischief  over  me."  And  Conant : 
"  For  they  cause  mischief  to  impend 
over  me."  Absalom  and  Ahithophel 
and  their  followers  were  doing  their  ut- 
most to  take  away  both  the  kingdom 
and  the  life  of  the  poet-king.  Their 
evil  doings  were  an  intolerable  burden 

273 


;PsAtM  lv. 


no  MI  LET tC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


to  him,  beneath  which  his  heart  fainted 
and  his  strength  failed. 

3.  Their  deadly  haired.  "  In  wrath 
they  hate  me."  Hengstenberg :  "  In 
wrath  they  persecute  me."  Conant : 
"  In  anger  they  lay  a  snare  for  me." 
They  had  nursed  their  ambitious  and 
wicked  schemes  until  their  hearts  were 
full  of  deep  and  deadly  hatred  against 
him  who  stood  in  the  way  and  prevented 
their  attainment.  "  There  was  in  their 
enmity  both  the  heat  and  violence  of 
anger,  or  sudden  passion,  and  the  impla- 
cableness  of  hatred  and  rooted  malice." 

II.  The  description  of  his  distress. 
The  Psalmist  represents  himself  as  suf- 
fering— 

1.  Great  mental  anxiety.  This  seems 
to  be  the  idea  of  the  second  clause  of 
ver.  2.  "  I  mourn  in  my  complaint, 
and  make  a  noise."  Moll :  "  I  reel  to 
and  fro  in  my  complaint  and  must 
groan."  Conant:  "  I  am  restless  in  my 
complaining  and  disquieted."  Perowne: 
"  T^i^  from  a  verb,  ^H,  which  occurs 
in  three  other  passages,  Gen.  xxvii.  40 ; 
Jer.  ii.  31 ;  Hos.  xii.  1.  Properly  it 
signifies  to  wander  restlessly,  especially 
as  homeless,  without  fixed  abode,  &c. 
Here  it  is  used  of  the  restless  tossing  to 
and  fro  of  the  mind,  filled  with  cares 
and  anxieties."  The  mind  of  David 
was  at  this  time  exercised  by  the  most 
aiixious  thought  as  to  the  measures  he 
should  adopt,  and  the  course  he  should 
pursue  for  his  own  safety  and  the  good 
of  his  distracted  realm. 

2.  Deep  pain  of  heart.  "  My  heart 
is  sore  pained  within  me."  Moll :  "  '  My 
heart  writhes  within  me.'  The  trouble 
is  not  merely  an  external  one,  it  afiects 
his  bowels,  his  vitals,  his  inmost  souh" 
David  was  deeply  wounded  in  the  inner- 
most and  most  sensitive  part  of  his 
nature.  His  own  son  whom  he  loved 
was  tlie  head  and  origin  of  the  rebellion. 
"  I  have  nourished  and  brought  up  chil- 
dren, and  they  have  rebelled  against  me.*' 
And  his  bosom  friend  whom  he  trusted, 
Ahithophel,  was  chief  counsellor  of  the 
rebels.  Well  may  his  "  heart  writhe 
within  "  him. 

3.  Overwhelming  and  U7isp€akahle 
dread.  "  The  terrors  of  death  are  fallen 
upon   me.     Fearfulness    and    trembling 

274 


are  come  upon  me,  and  horror  hath 
overwhelmed  me."  Hengstenberg:  "The 
terrors  of  death  seize  the  Psalmist,  be- 
cause the  enemies  threaten  his  life." 
Barnes  :  "  '  Horror  hath  overwhelmed 
nie.'  Marg.,  as  in  Heb.,  *  covered  me.' 
That  is,  it  had  come  upon  him  so  as  to 
cover  or  envelop  him  entirely.  The 
shades  of  horror  and  despair  spread  all 
around  and  above  him,  and  all  things 
were  filled  with  gloom.  The  word  ren- 
dered horror  occurs  only  in  three  other 
places ;  Ezek.  vii.  18,  rendered  (as  hert^^ 
horror;  Job  xxi.  6,  rendered  trembling; 
and  Is.  xxi.  4,  rendered  fearfulness.  It 
refers  to  that  state  when  we  are  deeply 
agitated  with  fear."  If  we  think  of  the 
scenes  and  circumstances  through  which 
David  was  passing,  we  shall  see  that 
they  were  likely  to  occasion  feelings  so 
deep  and  painful  and  dreadful,  that 
even  the  strong  language  here  used  does 
not  adequately  express  them.  "  The 
ingratitude  and  rebellion  of  a  son, — the 
fact  of  being  driven  away  from  his 
throne, — the  number  of  his  enemies, — 
the  unexpected  news  that  Ahithophel 
was  among  them, — and  the  entire  un- 
certainty of  the  result,  justified  the  use 
of  this  strong  language." 

III.  His  desire  in  his  distress. 
"  And  I  said,  Oh  that  1  had  wings  like 
a  dove,"  &c.  He  desires  to  escape 
quickly  from  the  wrath  and  strife  of 
men  to  the  peace  and  safety  of  Nature's 
retirements, — to  get  away  from  the 
falsity  and  cruelty  of  human  society 
into  the  solitudes  of  true  and  kindly 
Nature.  Jeremiah  :  "  Oh  that  I  had  in 
the  wilderness  a  lodging  place  of  way- 
faring men ;  that  I  might  leave  my 
people  and  go  from  them  !  for  they  be 
all  adulterers,  an  assembly  of  treacher- 
ous men." 

"  Oh  for  a  lodge  in  some  vast  wilderness, 
Some  boundless  contiguity  of  shade, 
Where  rumour  of  oppression  and  deceit, 
Of  unsuccessful  or  successful  war, 
Might   never  reach   me   more.     My  ear  is 

pain'd, 
My  soul  is  sick  with  every  day's  report 
Of  wrong  and  outrage  with  which  earth  ia 

fill'd."— (7oM7i>er. 

The  Psalmist  desired  to  depart  (1) 
quickly.  "  Wings  like  a  dove "  is  a 
figure  of  raj;^^,  flight.     "  I  would  hasten 


no  Mi  LET tC  COMMENTARY:  PSALM3. 


PSALM  L^. 


my  escape."  (2)  Completely.  "  I  would 
wander  far  otf."  "I  would  make  the 
distance  far  by  wandering.''  He  would 
completely  separate  himself  from  the 
strife  and  tumult  of  the  city  and  human 
society.  (3)  Permanently.  "  I  would 
flee  away,  and  abide."  "  This  is  more 
literal,  and  more  in  accordance  with  the 
parallelism  than  the  translation,  '  he  at 
rest,^  of  the  A.  Y. ; "  and  is  adopted  by 
Delitzsch,  Hengstenberg,  Hupfield,  Moll, 
et  al. 

1.  This  desire  was  natural.  There 
was  no  feeling  of  revenge  in  it.  He  did 
not  sigh  for  the  wings  of  a  hawk  to  fly 
upon  the  piey,  but  for  those  of  the  inno- 
cent dove,  to  escape  from  the  birds  of 
prey.  Suffering  as  he  was  from  men 
whom  he  had  loved  and  trusted,  it  was 
natural  that  David  should  long  to  escape 
from  man  to  nature,  and  to  have  done 
with  the  faithless  and  unsjrateful. 

2.  This  desire  was  mistaken.  If  he 
had  obtained  his  wish,  the  issue  would 
probably  have  been  disappointing.  Our 
well-being  and  joy  depend  on  our  inner 
condition,  not  on  our  outward  circiim- 
stnnces.  If  the  brain  and  heart  be  un- 
quiet themselves,  neither  society  nor  so- 
litude can  give  them  rest.  If  the 
peace  of  God  be  in  the  soul,  the  world's 
most  tumultuous  and  trying  scenes  can- 
not deprive  us  of  it. 

3.  This  desire  was  significant.  To  us 
it  clearly  suggests  that  there  is  for  man 
a  place  as  well  as  a  state  of  rest.  The 
h)nging  of  the  heart  for  rest  is  prophetic 
of  a  realm  where  peaceful  souls  dwell 
amid  peaceful  circumstances.  There  is 
a  world  into  which  sin  and  sorrow  and 
strife  never  enter;  but  it  is  not  here. 
Our  rest,  our  home,  is  not  here.  "  Arise 
ye  and  depart ;  for  this  is  not  your  rest," 
<kc. 

IV.  His  prayer  in  his  distress. 
"  Give  ear  to  my  prayer,  O  God ;  and 
hide  not  Thyself  from  my  supplication. 
Attend  unto  me,  and  hear  me."  These 
petitions  involve  a  large  measure  of  faith 
ID  God* 


1.  In  His  accessihleness.  David  be- 
lieved in  the  possibility  and  privilege  of 
man  speaking  unto  his  Maker.  He  re- 
garded God  as  the  hearer  of  prayer. 

2.  hi  His  intreatihleness.  "  Hide  no^ 
Thyself,"  &c.  Arnd  :  "  In  great  straits, 
it  seems  as  if  God  hides  Himself  from 
us,  as  the  prophet  Jeremiah  speaks  in 
chap.  iii.  of  his  Lamentations :  *  Thou 
hast  covered  Thyself  with  a  cloud,  that 
our  prayer  should  not  pass  through.' 
But  our  gracious  God  cannot  hide  Him- 
self from  our  prayer ;  the  prayer  does 
still  press  through  the  clouds  and  find 
Him.  God's  fatherly  heart  does  not 
permit  Him  to  hear  us  cry  and  beg, 
without  turning  to  us,  as  a  father  when 
he  hears  his  children  cry."  David  re- 
garded God  as  the  answerer  of  prayer. 

3.  In  His  sufficiency.  The  Psalmist 
was  convinced  that  if  God  graciously 
received  his  prayer  and  entertained  his 
case,  it  w^ould  be  well  with  him  not- 
withstanding the  malice  and  might  and 
multitude  of  his  foes.  "  He  is  able  to 
do  exceeding  abundantly,"  &c. 

Conclusion.  —  Learn  :  1.  That  the 
best  of  men  in  this  world  are  exposed  to 
severest  trials.  2.  TJiat  religion  does  not 
make  men  insensible  to  pain  and  grief. 
3.  That  religion  provides  for  men  an 
all-sufficient  resource  in  trial.  Prayer 
to  a  gracious,  all-wise,  and  almighty 
Friend.  4.  That  religion  faithfully 
promises  full  and  Messed  satisfaction  to 
man's  craving  for  rest.  (1)  Here  the 
rest  of  faith,  satisfied  affections,  &c. — 
rest  amidst  trial,  peace  in  conflict.  (2) 
Hereafter,  in  addition  to  this  rest  of 
soul,  complete  rest  from  conflict,  trial, 
suffering,  and  sin. 

"  There  shall  no  tempests  blow. 
No  scorching  noontide  heat ; 
There  shall  be  no  more  snow, 

No  weary  wand'ring  feet; 
So  we  lift  our  trusting  eyes 

From  the  hills  our  fathers  trod, 
To  the  quiet  of  the  skies 

To  the  Sabbath  of  our  God." 

— Memans* 


375 


ffSALHLV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Sad  Scenes  and  Painful  Expebienoss. 
(Verses  9-15.) 


"  The  tone  of  sadness  and  melancholy 
now  gives  way  to  one  of  hot  and  pas- 
sionate indignation ; "  and  the  poet 
sketches  the  sad  scenes  which  he  had 
witnessed  in  the  city,  and  the  painful 
experiences  through  which  he  had  passed. 

I.  Sore  evils  in  the  city.  "  I  have 
seen  violence  and  strife  in  the  city,"  <fcc., 
vers.  9-11. 

1.  The  evils  were  manifold  in  form. 
Here  we  have : — (1)  Rebellion  against 
the  civil  power.  "  Violence  and  strife 
in  the  city."  (2)  Extortion  and  fraud 
in  commerce.  "  Deceit  and  guile  de- 
part not  from  her  streets."  Hengsten- 
hQrg :  "  There  depart  not  from  its 
market  oppression  and  deceit."  Conant: 
'''^  From  her  market-place  depart  not  ex- 
tortion and  deceit."  The  word  which  is 
rendered  "  streets  "  and  "  markets  "  de- 
notes '*  the  large  open  spaces  at  the 
gates  of  the  oriental  cities,  where  were 
the  markets,  the  courts  of  justice,  and 
general  places  of  public  concourse." 
Every  phase  of  life  seems  to  have  be- 
come depraved.  "  Wickedness  was  in 
the  midst "  of  the  city. 

2.  The  evils  were  universal  in  extent. 
They  were  "  in  the  city  *'  and  going 
"  about  it  upon  the  walls ; "  they  were 
"  in  the  midst  thereof ''  and  in  the  open 
spaces  before  the  gates.  "  The  city  was 
wholly  and  utterly  filled  with  wicked- 
ness." 

3.  The  evils  were  continuous  in  their 
activities.  *'  Day  and  night  they  go 
about,"  &c.  They  "  depart  not,"  &c. 
Wickedness  was  unwearied  and  incessant 
in  its  doings. 

4.  The  evils  were  painful  in  their  re- 
sults. "  Mischief  and  sorrow  are  in  the 
midst  of  it."  Conant :  *'  Trouble  and 
sorrow  are  within  her."  The  whole  city 
in  all  its  parts  and  at  all  times  was  full 
of  wickedness ;  and  the  result  was  dis- 
tress and  grief.  Where  wickedness 
abounds,  misery  will  not  be  wanting. 
Sin  is  the  fruitful  parent  of  sorrow.  It 
is  well  that  trouble  does  follow  trans- 
gression.    We  wonder  not  that  David's 

276 


heart  was  stirred  with  grief  and  indig- 
nation as  he  beheld  the  city  so  filled 
with  untiring  wickedness  and  sore 
anguish.  No  person  of  enlightened 
piety  can  contemplate  the  sins  and  sor- 
rows of  a  great  city  without  emotions  of 
deep  grief  and  earnest  solicitude. 

The  poet  also  sketches  some  of  his 
own  painful  experiences. 

II.  Base  treachery  in  friendsliip. 
"  For  it  was  not  an  enemy  that  re- 
proached me,"  &c.,  vers.  12-14.  We 
see  here  : — 

1.  Friendship  enjoyed.  The  Psalmist 
dwells  upon  this  point  with  touching 
minuteness.  He  shows  us  a  friendship  : 
(1)  Of  great  intimacy  and  trust.  "A 
man  mine  equal,  my  guide,  and  mine 
acquaintance."  "  Mine  equal."  "  Friend- 
ship, according  to  the  rule,  *  binds  only 
equals,'  and  these,  wherever  it  actually 
obtains,  with  peculiarly  intimate  bonds." 
"  My  guide."    "  5j^7N  is  here  not  guide, 

but  companion,  associate,  one  joined  in 
intimate  communion."  Barnes  :  "  The 
phrase  *  mine  acquaintance  *  is  a  feeble 
expression,  and  does  not  convey  the  full 
force  of  the  original,  which  denotes  a 
more  intimate  friend  than  would  be 
suggested  by  the  word  *  acquaintance.' 
It  is  language  applied  to  one  whom  wo 
thoroughly  know,  and  who  knows  us; 
and  this  exists  only  in  the  case  of  very 
intimate  friends."  David  had  regarded 
Ahithophel  as  such  a  friend.  (2)  In 
holiest  engagements.  "  We  walked  unto 
the  house  of  God  in  company."  More 
correctly  :  *'  We  walked  into  the  house 
of  God  in  the  festal  crowd."  They 
united  as  dear  friends  in  acts  of  sacred 
worship  to  the  one  God.  "  The  fellow- 
ship of  devotion  entwines  the  hearts  of 
men  with  the  most  tender  cords."  Such 
friendships  should  triumph  over  death 
itself.  (3)  Affording  great  pleasure. 
"  We  took  sweet  counsel  together." 
Literally :  **  We  sweetened  counsel  to- 
gether." Their  familiar  converse  was 
mutually  delightful.  In  public  and  in 
private,  in  religion  and  in  politics,  their 


HOMILMTIC  COMMENTARY ;  PSALMS, 


PdALM  LV« 


friendship  had  been  most  intimate  and 
confiding  and  pleasurable. 

2.  Friendship  violated.  (1)  By  slan- 
der. *'  It  was  not  an  enemy  that  re- 
proached me."  This  trusted  friend  had 
taken  part  with  his  detractors  and  ca- 
lumniators (2  Sam.  XV.  31).  (2)  By 
base  and  cruel  opposition.  "  Magnify 
himself  against  me."  Conant  :  *'  Hath 
acted  proudly  against  me."  The  trea- 
cherous man  was  seeking  to  accomplish 
the  downfall  and  ruin  of  David,  that  he 
might  thereby  rise  to  greater  distinction 
and  power.  So  the  tender  and  holy 
bonds  of  friendship,  which  should  ever 
be  softer  than  gossamer,  yet  stronger 
than  cable,  were  utterly  outraged. 

3.  Friendship  injured  and  complain- 
ing, David  felt  that  he  bad  been  bit- 
terly wronged,  and  very  pathetically  he 
complains  of  the  wrong.  His  complaint 
suggests  that  the  hostility  of  those  we 
counted  friends,  is — (1)  More  painful 
than  that  of  enemies.  "  It  was  not  an 
enemy  that  reproached  me,  then  I  could 
have  borne  it."  Berleb.  Bible :  **  For 
from  such  one  would  expect  nothing 
better,  and  might  still  find  consolation 
respecting  it  from  one's  friends."  The 
treachery  of  those  whom  we  have  taken 
into  our  innermost  confidence  is  one  of 
the  most  bitter  of  life's  experiences. 
(2)  More  perilous  than  that  of  enemies. 
"  Then  I  would  have  hid  myself  from 
him."  We  can  guard  against  the  inju- 
ries of  an  open,  or  of  a  suspected  enemy ; 
but  who  can  guard  against  the  injuries 
of  a  secret,  treacherous  foe,  whom  we 
regard  and  trust  as  a  friend  1  (3)  More 
criminal  than  that  of  enemies.  Such 
hostility  outrages  the  tenderest  and 
holiest  feelings,  and  violates  the  most 
sacred  obligations.  Such  were  some  of 
the  painful  experiences  of  the  poet  at 
this  time.  Alas,  that  thousands  have 
drank  of  the  same  bitter  cup  ! 

**  Where   you  are  liberal  of  your  loves  and 

counsel 
Be   sure  you  be  not  loose ;  for  those  you 

make  friends, 
And  give  your  hearts  to,  when  they  once 

perceive 
The  least  rub  in  your  fortunes,  fall  away 
Like  water  from  ye,  never  found  again, 
But  where  they  mean  to  sink  ye." 

— Shakespeare. 


"  And  what  is  friendship  but  a  name^ 
A  charm  that  lulls  to  sleep  ! 
A  shade  that  follows  wealth  or  fame^ 
And  leaves  the  wretch  to  weep  ! " 

— Ooldsmitk, 

See  "  The  Horn.  Com.;'  on  Ps.  xli. 
9. 
III.  Earnest    prayer   in    suffering. 

David  prays  for — 

1.  The  defeat  of  his  enemies*  plans  hy 
the  division  of  their  counsels.  "  O  Lord, 
divide  their  tongues."  Alexander : 
"  Confound  their  speech,  or  make  it 
unintelligible,  and,  as  a  necessary  con- 
sequence, confound  their  counsels.  There 
is  obvious  reference  to  the  confusion  of 
tongues  at  Babel  (Gen.  xi.  7-9),  as  a 
great  historical  example  of  the  way  in 
which  God  is  accustomed  and  deter- 
mined to  defeat  the  purposes  of  wicked 
men  and  execute  His  own." 

2.  The  sudden  destruction  of  his  ene- 
mies. *'  Destroy,  0  Lord."  Hengsten- 
berg :  "  Devour,  Lord."  The  word 
properly  signifies,  swallow  up.  "  Let 
death  seize  upon  them,  let  them  go  down 
quick  into  hell."  Conant's  translation 
is  more  accurate  :  "  Desolations  are 
upon  them  ;  they  shall  go  down  alive  to 
the  under  world."  There  is  a  reference 
here  to  the  destruction  of  Korah,Dathan, 
and  Abiram  (Num.  xvi.  33).  David 
prays  that  a  similar  destruction  may 
befall  his  enemies.  And  the  reason 
upon  which  his  prayer  is  based  is  that 
"  wickedness  is  in  their  dwellings,  among 
them."  Let  them  perish  because  of  their 
wickedness. 

Conclusion. — \.  Be  careful  in  the 
selection  of  friends  and  the  formation  of 
friendships.     2.  Prize  true  friends. 

"  The  friends  thou  hast,  and  their  adoption 
tried, 
Grapple  them  to  thy  soul  with  hooks  of 
steel. " — Shakespeare. 

"  A  man  that  hath  friends  must  show 
himself  friendly,"  &c.  3.  Yet  confide 
not  too  fully  in  any  human  friend;  for 
even  the  truest  may  fail  us  in  life's  great 
needs  for  lack  of  power  to  aid,  <kc.  4. 
God  alone  is  supremely  trust-worthy. 
He  cannot  fail  either  in  faithfulness  or 
in  power,  <fec. 


m 


^ALM  W, 


MOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMB, 


A  Triumphakt  Confidence. 

{Verses  16-23.) 


In  this  portion  of  the  Psalm  the  poet 
expresses  his  assured  hope  of  deliver- 
ance from  all  his  enemies  and  dangers. 
Consider — 

I.  The  nature  of  his  confidence.  '*  As 
for  me,  I  will  call  upon  God,  and  the 
Lord  shall  save  me,"  &c. 

1.  His  confidence  was  comprehensive. 
He  trusted  that  (1)  God  would  destroy 
his  enemies,  "  God  shall  hear  and  afflict 
them."  Hengstenberg  :  *'  God  shall  hear 
and  answer  them."  He  would  hear  the 
angry  voices  of  the  wicked,  and  in  judg- 
ment He  would  give  them  a  sharp 
answer.  •'*  Thou,  O  God,  shalt  bring 
them  down  to  the  pit  of  destruction," 
&c.  *'  The  pit  of  destruction  "  is  Sheol. 
The  idea  is,  that  God  would  cut  them 
off  even  as  the  Psalmist  had  already- 
prayed  Him  to  do.  (2)  God  would 
save  him.  He  regards  this  salvation  as 
including  (a)  Support  and  preservation 
during  his  trials  and  dangers.  "  He 
shall  sustain  thee,  He  shall  never  suffer 
the  righteous  to  be  moved."  (|S)  De- 
liverance from  his  trials  and  dangers. 
"  The  Lord  shall  save  me  .  .  .  He  hath 
delivered  my  soul  in  peace  from  the 
battle  that  was  against  me."  He  was 
quite  confident  that  God  would  deliver 
him  in  safety  from  those  who  were 
making  war  against  him.  This  confi- 
dence had  brought  peace  to  him  in  the 
midst  of  danger,  and  he  had  an  assured 
hope  of  the  restoration  of  outward 
peace.  This  is  a  confidence  which  every 
believer  in  the  Lord  may  cherish  as  re- 
gards his  salvation  from  inward  and 
from  outward  enemies.  If  our  trust  is 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  complete 
triumph  and  our  full  salvation  are  glo- 
riously certain. 

2.  His  confidence  was  strong.  There 
is  no  trace  of  hesitation  or  doubt  in  the 
declaration  of  the  Psalmist.  He  speaks 
with  the  clear  accent  of  assured  con- 
viction. He  is  so  certain  of  his  deliver- 
ance that  he  speaks  of  it  as  already 
accomplished.  "  He  hath  redeemed  my 
Boul  in  peace,"   &c.     He  is  as  sure  of 

278 


the  victory  as  if  it  were  already  won. 
Such  confidence  (1)  honours  God,  (2) 
imparts  courage  and  strength,  and  (3) 
insures  a  rich  reward. 

3.  His  confidence  was  intelligent.  It 
was  neither  ignorant  nor  presumptuous, 
but  intelligent  and  reverent.  He  does 
not  helplessly  and  unreasonably  look  to 
God  to  save  him  by  miracle  ;  but  re- 
cognises the  fact  that  salvation  is  given 
to  us  in  the  use  of  the  means.  He 
mentions  as  means  to  his  deliverance 
— (1)  Prayer.  "  As  for  me,  I  will 
call  upon  God,"  <fec.  He  resolves  to 
'prSiY frequently.  "Evening,  and  morn- 
ing, and  at  noon,  will  I  pray."  Moll : 
"  The  three  principal  parts  of  the  day, 
usually  observed  as  the  special  times  of 
prayer  among  the  Orientals.  Or  it  may, 
perhaps,  be  a  practical  expression  for 
the  whole  day,  equivalent  to,  at  all 
times,  without  ceasing."  He  resolves 
to  pray  fervently.  "  I  will  pray  and 
cry  aloud."  Hengstenberg  :  *'  I  will 
meditate  and  cry  aloud."  Conant :  "  I 
will  lament  and  sigh."  Moll :  "  Com- 
plain and  groan."  The  idea  seems  to 
be  that  his  feelings  were  deep  and 
strong,  and  that  he  would  give  to  them 
appropriate  expression  in  prayer  to  God. 
Deep  emotions  cannot  be  restrained  in 
their  utterance  within  the  limits  of  for- 
mal and  ordinary  expressions.  Such 
were  the  emotions  of  the  Psalmist.  (2) 
Trust.  He  regarded  the  continuance 
of  his  confidence  as  essential  to  his  sal- 
vation. Hence  he  exhorts  himself — 
"  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord  ; " 
and  he  resolves,  "  I  will  trust  in  Thee." 
The  continued  exercise  of  faith  is  an 
essential  condition  of  calmness  and 
strength  and  conquest.  And  we  know 
from  the  history  that,  in  grappling  with 
the  rebellion  of  Absalom  and  the  trea- 
chery of  Ahithophel,  David  not  only 
prayed  and  trusted,  but  planned  and 
laboured  also.  To  faith  and  prayer  he 
added  thought  and  effort  (2  Sam.  xv.- 
xviii.).  In  all  this  the  poet  is  an 
example  to  us.      Our  confidence  in  God 


BOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


t»SALM  Vf. 


should  be  intelligent.  Tlie  faith  which 
is  inculcated  and  encouraged  in  the 
Bible,  and  which  God  has  promised  to 
reward,  is  sublimely  reasonable.  It  is 
a  discerning,  strong,  victorious  thing. 
And  God  has  promised  to  crown  the 
exercise  of  it  with  His  blessing. 

11.  The  grounds  of  his  confidence. 
The  Psalmist  shows  to  us  that  his  faith 
was  based  on — 

1.  Tlie  number  of  his  enemies.  "  For 
there  were  many  with  me."  Moll : 
"  The  translation  of  the  A.  V.  '  with  me ' 
is  literal,  but  conveys  a  wrong  meaning. 
The  Heb.  preposition,  like  the  English 
%vith,  has  a  double  use,  mutual  action 
may  be  co-operative  or  antagonistic. 
Thus  we  say  :  fight  zmVA  =  against,  to  be 
angry  with  =  against.  The  meaning 
here  as  determined  by  the  context  is 
clearly  against.'^  The  rebel  army  that 
was  waging  war  against  David  was  a 
numerous  one  (2  Sam.  xv.  12  ;  xvii.  11 ; 
xviii.  7).  David  took  encouragement 
from  this  fact  to  expect  the  interposi- 
tion of  God  for  his  salvation.  When 
our  enemies  are  many  and  strong,  then 
God  will  interpose  for  us,  if  our  cause 
be  righteous,  and  our  trust  reposed  in 
Him  (2  Kings  vi.  13-18;  2  Chron.  xx. 
12,  23-25). 

2.  The  cl tar acter  of  his  enemies.  They 
were — (1)  Irrelvjious.  "  They  fear  not 
God."  They  lived  in  open  disregard  of 
God.  (2)  Fersistent  in  evil.  "  They 
have  no  changes."     The  word  /li3  vH 

translated  "changes,"  is  used  in  Job  x. 
17  ;  xiv.  14,  in  a  military  sense,  signify- 
ing discharges,  relief-troops.  Accord- 
ingly Heiigstenberg  translates :  "  To 
whom  there  is  no  discharge,"  and  inter- 
j)rets  it  as  signifying  "  they  who  inces- 
santly and  constantly  serve  sin  and  fear 
not  God."  Or  it  may  mean  that  there 
was  no  change  in  their  conduct.  They 
were  not  occasional,  but  persistent, 
evil  doers.  Thus  in  the  latter  part  of 
ver.    19    we    have    a    compendium   of 


ver.  9-11.  (3)  Treacherous.  "He 
hath  put  forth  his  hands  against  such 
as  be  at  peace  with  him  :  he  hath  broken 
his  covenant.  The  words  of  his  mouth 
were  smoother  than  butter,  but  war  was 
in  his  heart;  his  words  were  softer  than 
oil,  yet  were  they  drawn  swords."  The 
use  of  the  singular  points  to  some  one 
who  was  pre-eminent  in  treachery,  e.g.^ 
Ahithophel.  These  verses  are  a  com- 
pendium of  vers.  12-14.  (4)  Cruel. 
The  Psalmist  speaks  of  them  as  "  bloody 
and  deceitful  men."  Violent  and  cruel 
were  they  in  heart  and  in  action.  The 
wickedness  of  his  enemies  is  to  David  a 
ground  of  assurance  that  God  will  de- 
liver him  from  their  base  designs  and 
doings.  While  God  is  God  He  must  be 
hostile  to  men  of  such  character.  He 
must  oppose  and  thwart  their  designs. 
He  must  deliver  His  servants  from  them. 

3.  The  ancient  sovereignty  of  God, 
"  He  that  abideth  of  old."  Hengsten- 
berg  :  "He  who  is  throned  of  old.'  Moll : 
*'  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  of  old," 
(Comp.  Ps.  Ixxiv.  12;  Hab.  i.  12.)  The 
deeds  by  which  the  Lord  had  manifested 
His  righteous  sovereignty  in  past  ages 
encouraged  the  Psalmist  to  expect  His 
interposition  for  his  deliverance  from 
present  perils.  M.  Henry  :  "  Mortal 
men,  though  ever  so  high  and  strong, 
will  easily  be  crushed  by  an  eternal 
God,  and  are  a  very  unequal  match  for 
Him."  Arndt  :  "  It  is  a  great  consola- 
tion when  one  is  in  trouble  and  persecu- 
tion to  think  how  God  still  lives,  and  has 
always  proved  Himself  to  be  a  gracious 
God  towards  those  who  fear  Him." 

Such,  then,  was  the  sure  basis  upon 
which  the  triumphant  confidence  of  the 
distressed  and  imperilled  poet -king 
rested. 

Conclusion.  —  See  the  conquering 
power  of  faith  in  God,  and  exercise  it. 
See  it  in  David.  In  Paul  (2  C'or.  iv. 
8-18),  "  This  is  the  victory  that  over- 
corn  eth  the  world,  even  our  faith." 


Man's  burden  and  Sustainer. 

Ver.  22.  "  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the      &c.      Hengstenberg  :  "  Cast  upon  the 
Lord;  and  He  shall  sustain  thee."  Lord  thy  salvation,  and  He  shall  take 

This    verse    is    variously    translated.      care   of   thee,"   &c.       Gesenius :  "  Cast 
*'  Cast  thy  gift  upon  the  Lord,"      upon  Jehovah  what  He  hath  given  (or 

27i) 


Maririn 


PSALM  LV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


laid  upon)  thee ;  that  is,  thy  lot." 
Fuerst :  "  Leave  to  God  the  lot,  intrust 
God  with  it.  According  to  another 
meaning  of  ^JV  (to  give  up,  to  impose) 
2r\]   may   signify   a   burden."      Moll: 

"  That  which  is  laid  upon  thee."  Co- 
nant ;  "  Cast  thy  burden  on  Jehovah," 

I.  Man  is  "burdened.  This  fact  is 
too  painfully  obvious  to  require  proof. 
Physically  many  are  burdened  by  severe 
labours  and  sufferings.  Mentally  many 
are  burdened  by  anxieties,  perplexities, 
over-tasked  brain,  &c.  Our  social  rela- 
tions^ which  are  frequently  of  much 
benefit  and  blessing  to  us,  are  seldom 
free  from  cares,  sorrows,  and  distresses. 
Even  the  religious  life  has  its  burdens 
for  man.  Religion  itself  is  not  a  bur- 
den ;  but,  by  becoming  religious,  a  man 
becomes  sensible  of  burdens  that  he  did 
not  feel  before.  The  mysteries  of  the 
Divine  administration  of  human  affairs, 
the  imperfection  of  our  individual  life, 
the  seeming  abortiveness  of  much  of  our 
effort  for  the  good  of  ourselves  and 
others,  seasons  of  spiritual  darkness,  &c. 
— these  are  burdens.  The  fact  that  we 
are  burdened  is  significant. 

1.  It  indicates  that  man  is  not  in 
unison  with  the  Divine  order.  God  did 
not  create  man  with  a  load,  did  not 
make  him  to  be  burdened,  &c. 

2.  It  indicates  also  the  greatness  of 
human  nature.  We  feel  the  burden,  we 
struggle  against  it,  we  bear  up  under  it, 
we  strive  to  be  rid  of  it.  In  this  we 
have  a  reminiscence  of  a  free  and  blessed 
past,  and  a  pledge  of  a  free  and  glorious 
future.  Our  sense  of  the  burden  is  an 
augury  of  approaching  release  from  it. 

II.  Man  is  exhorted  to  cast  his 
burden  upon  the  Lord.  We  have  a 
strong  tendency  to  strive  to  bear  our 
own  burden  even  when  we  are  almost 
sinking  beneath  it.  In  itself  this  ten- 
dency is  good.  It  is  the  principle  of 
self-reliance  leading  us  to  attempt  self- 
help.  But  this  tendency  has  become 
corrupted  by  association  with  pride  and 
a  false  independence.  Hence,  when 
man  is  being  crushed  by  it,  in  imagined 
self-sufficiency,  he  refuses  to  take  his 
burden  to  the  Lord.  Spiritual  weak- 
ness is  ever  boastiul,  while  spiritual 
280 


strength  is  ever  humble.  We  mistake 
weakness  for  strength  when  we  refuse 
to  cast  our  burden  upon  the  Lord. 
There  are  some  who  do  not  take  their 
burden  to  the  Lord  because  their  ideas 
of  Him  are  false,  arising  from  a  heart 
alienated  from  Him.  They  say — "  God 
does  not  care  for  man  ;  we  may  suffer, 
we  may  perish ;  but  He  does  not  care. 
He  is  indifferent,  even  if  He  be  not  cruel 
to  us."  Estrangement  from  God  ex- 
plains this.  David  exhorts  his  soul  to 
cast  its  burden  upon  the  Lord,  &c.  *'  The 
strong  part  of  the  soul  speaks  to  the 
weak."  Or  he  speaks  as  one  of  the 
suffering  righteous,  and  in  their  name. 
So  let  the  troubled  children  of  God  do 
now.  But  how  can  we  cast  our  burden 
upon  the  Lord  ?  By  believing  prayer. 
Lay  all  at  the  foot  of  God's  throne : 
tell  Him  all  your  troubles,  even  as  a 
child  tells  all  its  sorrows  to  its  mother. 
You  know  how  the  heart  is  relieved  by 
unfolding  its  burdens  to  a  dear  friend. 
We  can  tell  all  to  God — nothing  is  too 
secret,  nothing  too  sacred. 

III.  Man  is  encouraged  to  cast  his 
burden  upon  the  Lord  by  the  assur- 
ance of  his  support.  *'  He  shall  sus- 
tain thee."     How  1 

1.  By  removing  the  burden.  The 
poverty  that  cruslies,  the  mystery  that 
bewilders,  the  suffering  that  distresses, 
in  answer  to  prayer  He  sometimes  re- 
moves. 

2.  By  disclosing  the  design  of  the 
burden.  When  we  know  the  reason  of 
our  troubles,  in  many  instances  their 
chief  painfulness  is  gone,  and  we  bow 
reverently  to  the  will  of  God. 

3.  By  increasing  our  strength^  so  that 
we  shall  not  be  crushed  by  its  load.  This 
is,  perhaps.  His  most  frequent  method 
of  relief.  This  the  text  distinctly  pro- 
mises, "  He  shall  sustain  thee."  "  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  My 
strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 

4.  By  unfolding  to  us  a  bright  future. 
The  toil  and  burden  will  not  continue 
long :  then  rest  and  joy,  &c. 

Conclusion. — The  character  of  God^ 
the  promises  of  His  Word,  and  the  expe- 
rience  of  His  people  in  all  ages^  unite  in 
encouraging  us  to  trust  the  assurancCy  and 
comply  with  the  precejpt  of  the  text. 


EOMlLETia  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


F8AL1I  LVL 


Preoept  and  Pbomiss. 
{Verse  22.) 


I.  The  duty  enjoined.  "Cast  thy 
burden  upon  the  Lord."  A  person's 
burden  is  his  trouble,  his  care,  or  what- 
ever disturbs  the  peace  of  his  mind. 
There  is  no  trouble  in  heaven  ;  there 
was  none  in  Eden ;  and  believers  in 
Christ  will  be  delivered  from  trouble 
when  thej  shall  be  delivered  from  sin 
(Isa.  XXXV.  10). 

To  have  a  refuge  in  trouble  is  a  great 
privilege.  .  .  .  God  has  made  Himself 
to  be  as  a  refuge  through  the  mediation 
of  Jesus  Christ  (John  xiv.  6 ;  Eph.  ii. 
18),  .  .  .  God  is  a  suitable  refuge :  He 
can  sustain  ;  He  can  deliver ;  He  is  all- 
sufficient,  (fee.  ...  By  precept,  by  pro- 
mise, by  the  example  of  others,  and  the 
deliverances  which  they  have  expe- 
rienced, we  are  encouraged  to  "  cast 
our  burden  upon  the  Lord."  We  should 
do  so — 

1.  When  oppressed  with  a  sense  of 
sin  and  guilt. 

2.  In  times  of  temptation, 

3.  In  times  of  trouble.  There  are  per- 
sonal troubles,  family  troubles,  troubles 
from  providential  changes,  e.g.^  Job's, 
and  troubles  from  the  wickedness  of  our 
fellow-men,  and  the  treachery  of  pro- 
fessed friends. 

4.  In  seasons  of  affliction.  "  Cast 
thy  burden  upon  the  Lord."  Go  to 
Him  as  you  would  to  your  best  friend, 
and  pour  out  your  wants  before  Him. 


II.  The  promises  with  which  this 
precept  is  enforced. 

1.  *'  He  shall  sustain  thee."  This  im- 
plies that,  if  we  make  God  our  refuge, 
(1)  He  will  save  us  from  despondency. 
He  will  sustain  us  with  hope.  (2)  He 
will  impart  to  us  spiritual  strength. 
"  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be." 
(3)  He  will  overrule  all  our  trials  and 
afflictions  for  our  good. 

2.  "  He  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous 
to  he  moved."  This  promise  applies  to 
those  who  make  God  their  refuge,  and 
in  all  their  trials  pursue  a  course  of  holy 
obedience.  It  implies — (1)  That  they 
shall  not  he  drawn  aside  by  their  trials 
from  the  path  of  obedience.     (2)  Thai 

they  shall  not  he  moved  from  the  source 
of  their  comfort.  (3)  Some  read  the 
words,  they  shall  not  be  moved  for  ever, 
implying  that  they  shall  not  he  utterly 
cast  down. 

Application. — 1.  Learn  the  import- 
ance of  faith  in  the  Divine  promises. 

2.  In  making  God  our  refuge  in  our 
troubles  we  must  he  in  the  path  of  duty. 

3.  The  miserable  condition  of  those  who 
have  not  God  for  their  refuge.  4.  The 
privilege  of  having  God  for  our  refuge 
shows  the  value  and  the  importance  of 
religion.  5.  How  awful  will  he  the  end 
of  those  who  never  make  God  their  refuge/ 
— Abridged  from  an  unpublished  MS, 


PSALM   LYL 
Introduction. 


Superscription. — "To  the  Chief  Musician  upon  Jonath-Elem-Rechokim."  The  phrase 
^  Jonath-Elem-RtcJiokim"  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible  ;  and  Biblical  critics  are  by  no  means 
agreed  as  to  its  meaning.  Gesenius  renders  it,  "The  silent  dove  among  strangers."  W.A.Wright, 
in  Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible'.  "A  dumb  dove  of  (in)  distant  places,"  De  Wette,  "Dove  of 
the  distant  terebinths."  Aben  Ezra  regards  it  as  merely  indicating  the  modulation  or  the 
rhythm  of  the  Psalm, — "after  the  melody  of  the  air  which  begins  Jonath-Elem-RechokimJ'* 
Fuerst  regards  it  as  referring  to  "an  old  poem,  after  which  the  56th  Psalm  was  sung."  *'  In 
the  Biour  to  Mendelsshon's  version  of  the  Psalms,  Jonath-Elem-Bechokim  is  mentioned  as  a 
musical  instrument  which  produced  dull,  mournful  sounds."  Hengstenberg,  Alexander,  et  al.^ 
interpret  the  phrase  as  describing  the  unhappy  condition  of  David  during  his  exile  from  the 
land  of  Israel,  as  an  innocent  and  uncomplaining  sufferer  among  strangers.  "  Michtam  of 
David."     Margin:  "A  golden  Psalm  of  David/'  which  is  interpreted  as  signifying  that  "the 

231 


PSALM  LVL 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Psalm  was  to  David  precious  as  fine  gold."  Luther:  **  A  golden  jewel."  Gesenius,  De  "Wette, 
et  al.'.  "Writing."  Hengstenberg:  **  A  secret  of  David."  He  explains  it  as  "a  song  with  a 
deep  import."  W.  A.  Wright  in  Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  says,  —  '*  Beyond  the  general  pro- 
bability that  it  is  a  musical  term,  the  origin  of  which  is  uncertain  and  the  application  lost, 
nothing  is  known." 

The  superscription  also  gives  us  the  occasion  of  the  composition  of  the  Psalm.  "  When  the 
Philistines  took  liim  in  Gath."  The  history  is  contained  in  1  Sam.  xxi.  10,  sej.  Ps.  xxxiv, 
refers  to  the  same  occasion. 

The  leading  idea  of  the  Psalm  is  that  of  confidence  in  Ood  in  time  of  danger,  which  finds 
expression  in  the  refrain,  vers.  4  and  10,  11. 

The  Godly  Man  and  his  Enemies. 


(Verses  1-7.) 


These  verses  may  suitably  be  regarded 
as  illustrating  the  life  of  a  good  man  in 
this  world  in  relation  to  his  enemies. 
Consider — 

I.  The  enemies  of  the  godly  man. 
They  are  here  represented  as — 

1.  Eager.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea 
of  the  clause  which  is  incorrectly  ren- 
dered, "  man  would  swallow  me  up." 
Moll  renders  it :  "  Mortal  man  snorts 
against  me.''  Hengstenberg  :  "  Man 
snuffs  after  me."  The  meaning  is  either 
that  his  enemies  panted  after  him  as 
animals  greedy  of  their  prey,  or 
snorted  against  him  as  animals  en- 
raged. The  foes  of  the  Psalmist  were 
hot  and  eager  in  their  hostility  against 
him.  The  enemies  of  the  godly  now 
are  active  and  zealous.  Satan  and  his 
numerous  allies  amongst  men  display  an 
earnestness  and  enthusiasm  worthy  of  a 
good  cause. 

2.  Numerous.  "  They  be  many  that 
fight  against  me."  David  had  many 
enemies — Saul  and  his  followers,  and 
Achish,  the  king  of  Gath,  and  his  ser- 
vants. The  godly  soul  has  many  foes, — 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil — 
enemies  within  his  own  breast,  and 
enemies  without,  in  society,  &c. 

3.  Constant.  "  Mine  enemies  would 
daily,"  &c.  "Every  day  they  wrest," 
&c.  The  enemies  of  the  Poet  were  in- 
cessant in  their  efforts  to  effect  his  over- 
throw. Every  day  their  hostility  was 
renewed.  The  enemies  of  the  godly 
manifest  great  unweariedness  of  effort. 
Evil  never  rests.  Its  dread  activities 
are  untiring. 

4.  Dishonest.  ''They  wrest  my 
words."  They  twisted,  perverted,  tor- 
tured his  words,  so  as  to  get  from  them 

282 


a  meaning  which  he  never  intended, 
and  by  which  they  might  injure  him. 
Good  men  are  exposed  to  the  misrepre- 
sentations and  slanders  of  their  foes. 

5.  Confederate.  "  They  gather  them- 
selves together."  The  enemies  of  David 
combined  against  him.  It  seems  some- 
times in  the  history  of  the  godly  soul  as 
though  the  forces  of  evil  were  united 
against  it.  All  evil  is  one  in  this,  that 
it  is  directed  against  God  and  the  in- 
terests of  His  kingdom  and  people. 

6.  Secret.  "  They  hide  themselves," 
(fee.  They  were  like  foes  lying  in  am- 
bush. The  designs  of  evil  are  crafty 
and  cunning.  The  people  of  God  have 
to  guard  "  against  the  wiles  of  the 
devil."  "  Satan  himself  is  transformed 
into  an  angel  of  light."  Hence  the  peril, 
and  the  necessity  for  watchfulness. 

7.  Cruel.  "  They  wait  for  my  soul." 
The  enemies  of  David  sought  to  take 
his  life.  Our  spiritual  enemies  seek 
not  to  deprive  us  of  physical  life,  but 
to  ensnare  and  ruin  our  soul.  "  Your 
adversary  the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion, 
walketh  about,  seeking  whom  he  may 
devour." 

(a.)  How  foolish  it  is  to  mahe  light 
of  our  spiritual  enemies  I  and  it  may  he 
ruinous!  (Eph.  vi.  12). 

(/3.)  How  great  is  the  importance  of 
gua7'dedness  of  spirit  I  {Fi^h..  vi.  13-18). 

(y.)  How  needful  is  the  Divine  pro- 
tection/ (Ps.  cxxv.  2). 

II.  The  prayer  of  the  godly  man 
in  the  midst  of  his  enemies.  This  con- 
tains— 

1.  A  comprehensive  petition.  "Be 
merciful  unto  me,  O  God."  If  the 
Psalmist  secured  the  exercise  of  the 
Divine  mercy  ou  his  behalf,  he  would 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LVI. 


need  nothing  more.  The  active  exer- 
cise of  the  mercy  of  God  toward  us  is  a 
guarantee  of  all  needful  good, — protec- 
tion, guidance,  support,  ultimate  victory. 

2.  A  powerful  plea  is  implied  in  this 
petition.  In  asking  for  mercy  the 
Psalmist  renounces  all  idea  of  merit  in 
himself,  and  looks  to  the  riches  of 
Divine  grace  as  the  source  and  the 
reason  of  blessing.  We  do  well  to  plead 
the  unspeakable  generosity  of  the  Divine 
disposition.     "  He  delighteth  in  mercy." 

3.  An  earnest  appeal  to  the  Divine 
justice.  "  Shall  they  escape  by  iniquity?" 
&c.  We  have  here — (1)  An  expectation 
involving  extreme  wickedness.  The 
enemies  of  the  Psalmist  were  so  de- 
praved that  they  cherished  the  hope 
that  they  should  escape  the  just  conse- 
quences of  their  transgressions  by  their 
own  cunning  and  violence,  lawlessness, 
and  treachery.  (2)  An  assurance  of  the 
rectitude  of  the  Divine  government. 
The  inquiry  of  the  Psalmist  implies  his 
firm  belief  that  his  foes  would  not 
escape  the  Divine  judgment  by  their 
wickedness.  "The  sin  of  sinners  will 
never  be  their  security."  "  Though 
hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not 
be  unpunished."  (3)  A  desire  for  the 
exercise  of  the  Divine  judgment.  "  In 
anger  cast  down  the  people,  O  God." 
David  prays  that  God  in  judgment 
would  defeat  the  plans  and  destroy  the 
power  of  his  enemies,  who  wickedly 
sought  his  life.  We  do  well  to  pray  for 
the  overthrow  of  evil  and  the  exercise 
of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God. 


m.  The  confidence  of  the  godly  man 
in  the  midst  of  his  enemies. 

1.  It  was  reposed  in  the  grandest 
object.  "  In  God  I  have  put  my  trusi." 
Ps.  xxxii.  10;  xxxvii.  39,  40;  cxxv. 
1  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  3,  4  ;  Jer.  xvii.  7,  8. 

2.  It  was  exercised  in  the  most  trying 
season.  "What  time  I  am  afraid,  I 
will  trust  in  Thee."  Calvin  :  "  It  seems, 
indeed,  as  iifear  and  hoj^e  were  feelings 
too  contrary  the  one  to  the  other  to 
dwell  in  the  same  heart ;  but  experience 
shows  that  hope  there  in  fact  really 
reigns  where  some  portion  of  the  heart 
is  possessed  by  fear.  For  when  the 
mind  is  calm  and  tranquil,  hope  is  not 
exercised,  yea  rather  is,  as  it  were, 
hushed  to  sleep;  but  then,  and  not  till 
then  does  she  put  forth  all  her  strength, 
when  the  mind  has  been  cast  down  by 
cares  and  she  lifts  it  up,  when  it  has 
been  saddened  and  disturbed  and  she 
calms  it,  when  it  has  been  smitten  with 
fear  and  she  sustains  and  props  it." 

3.  It  produced  the  suhlimest  results. 
(1)  It  raised  him  above  the  fear  of  man. 
"I  will  not  fear;  what  can  flesh  do 
unto  mel"  Arnd :  "He  sets  against 
each  other  the  mighty  God,  and  im- 
potent flesh,  which  is  as  grass  and  as 
the  flower  of  the  field."  (2)  It  inspired 
him  with  the  praise  of  God.  "  In  God 
I  will  praise  His  word."  .The  Psalmist 
extols  God  because  of  His  gracious 
word  and  its  precious  promises.  Thus 
by  faith  the  godly  man  may  triumph  in 
the  midst  of  his  enemies,  and  is  sure  of 
complete  victory  over  them  ultimately. 


Times  of  Fear,  and  Trust  in  God. 
(Verse  3.) 


Consider, — 

I.  What  is  implied  and  included  in 
trusting  in  God. 

1.  A  knowledge  of  God  as  accessible 
through  a  Mediator.  We  have  sinned, 
and  there  is  only  one  way  in  which  the 
guilty  can  approach  the  Most  High, 
and  their  prayer  can  be  accepted  by 
Him.  The  blood  of  the  great  sacrifice 
is  the  medium,  and  faith  in  Christ  is 
the  only  method  (John  xiv.  6). 

2.  A  full  surrender  of  the  soul  to  God 


to  be  governed  by  His  holy  laws.  God 
claims  the  first  place  in  our  heart.  His 
requirements  are  binding,  and  His 
authority  must  be  regarded.  It  is  vain 
to  say  we  are  trusting  in  God  if  we 
refuse  subjection  to  His  rightful  do- 
minion. 

3.  Acquiescence  in  the  arrangements 
of  providence,  and  submission  to  His 
will.  Habitual  discontent  and  mur- 
muring is  incompatible  with  a  life  of 
confidence  in  God.     Losses,  afflictions, 

S83 


MALM  LYI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


and  bereavements  are  painful,  but  con- 
fidence in  God  will  lead  us  to  bear  them 
with  submission,  and  to  say,  "  It  is  the 
Lord,  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  Him 
good." 

II.  The  circumstances  in  which  this 
confidence  is  most  needful  and  im- 
portant. "  What  time  I  am  afraid,"  <fec. 
There  are  seasons  in  which  fear  will  be 
awakened  ;  in  such  seasons  we  should 
trust  in  God.     Fear  may  be  excited — 

1.  By  a  sense  of  guilt  When  the 
sinner  is  convinced  of  the  evil  and 
danger  of  sin  he  feels  himself  under  the 
curse  of  a  broken  law,  and  in  danger  of 
everlasting  misery.  A  sense  of  guilt 
may  be  experienced  after  conversion. 
When  the  conscience  is  wounded  by 
remorse  nothing  can  give  it  rest  but  the 
application  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
the  enjoyment  of  the  mercy  of  God. 
"  What  time  I  am  afraid,"  &c. 

2.  In  seasons  of  temptation.  The 
believer  may  be  walking  in  darkness, 
and  may  have  no  light,  he  may  be 
lamenting  the  hardness  and  carnality  of 
his  own  heart,  he  may  be  fearing  apos- 
tacy,  <fec.  In  such  seasons  our  best 
refuge  is  God. 

3.  In  seasons  of  domestic  trials. 
Troubles  to  parents  through  the  per- 
verseness  of  children,  as  Jacob  and  David 
had.     Or  trials  by  reason  of  affliction. 

4.  Under  bereaving  providences.  These 
are  some  of  the  heaviest  trials  which 
are  experienced.  Unless  we  go  to  the 
right  refuge  we  shall  be  in  danger  of 
sinking  into  darkness. 


6.  Under  personal  afflictions.  To  the 
people  of  God  these  are  not  judgments, 
but  fatherly  chastisements.  The  hand 
that  wounds  can  heal,  &c, 

6.  In  the  prospect  of  death.  Death 
is  an  event  the  most  serious  and  im- 
portant, and  the  prospect  of  it  has  a 
tendency  to  awaken  fear.  But  "  What 
time,"  &c. 

III.  The  advantages  which  attend  a 
life  of  confidence  in  God. 

1.  It  will  be  an  evidence  of  religion. 

2.  It  will  bring  with  it  peace  and 
satisfaction. 

3.  It  will  lead  to  support  under  the 
trials  of  life.  "  My  grace  is  sufficient 
for  thee,"  &c. 

4.  It  will  lead  to  deliverance  from 
troubles.  Through  all  his  troubles  the 
believer  shall  be  brought  in  safety,  and 
he  shall  stand  and  look  back  upon  life 
and  view  them  all  left  behind  him  for 
ever. 

5.  It  will  lead  us  to  account  all  our 
troubles  as  blessings. 

**  E'en  croBses  from  His  sovereign  hand 
Are  blessings  in  disguise." 

"  All  things  work  together  for  good," 

6.  It  will  lead  to  an  eternity  of  happi- 
ness. "  There  remaineth  a  rest  for  the 
people  of  God." 

Conclusion. — Learn  the  importance 
of  trusting  in  God.  It  is  essential  to 
our  salvation. — Abridged  from  an  un^ 
published  MS, 


The  Rejoicing  Exile. 
(Verses  8-13.) 


In  these  verses  David,  an  exile  and 
wanderer,  bitterly  persecuted,  appears 
as  glad  and  triumphant  by  faith  in  God. 
He  rejoices — 

I.  In  the  minuteness  of  the  Divine 
knowledge  and  the  tenderness  of  the 
Divine  regard. 

1.  The  perfection  of  the  Divine  know- 
ledge. "Thou  tellest"  (or  numberest) 
*' my  wanderings."  David  was  at  this 
time  an  exile  and  wanderer,  fleeing 
from  place  to  place  because  of  the  ceg-se- 
284 


less  and  malicious  persecutions  of  Saul. 
Barnes  {in  loco)  cites  eight  of  these 
wanderings ;  Rudinger  counts  fourteen. 
All  of  them  were  counted  by  God.  Not 
one  was  omitted.  Nor  would  any  one 
of  them  be  forgotten ;  for  like  his  tears, 
they  were  recorded  in  His  book,  Mai, 
iii.  16. 

2.  The  tenderness  of  the  Divine  re. 
gard.  "  Put  Thou  my  tears  into  Thy 
bottle."  The  persecutions  which  drove 
David  into  exile  and  wandering  caused 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALM  LVI. 


him  to  weep,  but  he  was  comforted  by 
the  thouf^bt  that  God  cared  for  him  as 
a  friend  who  would  gather  and  preserve 
his  tears.  "It  seems  probable  that 
there  is  an  allusion  here  to  the  custom 
of  collecting  tears  shed  in  a  time  of 
calamity  and  sorrow,  and  preserving 
them  in  a  small  bottle  or  lachrymatory ^ 
as  a  memorial  of  the  grief.  The  Ro- 
mans had  a  custom,  that  in  a  time  of 
mourning — on  a  funeral  occasion — a 
friend  went  to  one  in  sorrow,  and  wiped 
away  the  tears  from  the  eyes  with  a 
piece  of  cloth,  and  squeezed  the  tears 
into  a  small  bottle,  which  was  carefully 
preserved  as  a  memorial  of  friendship 
and  sorrow."  Perowne  :  *'  He  knows 
that  each  day  of  his  wandering,  each 
nook  in  which  he  found  shelter,  each 
step  that  he  had  taken,  every  artifice  by 
which  he  had  baffled  his  foes, — all  have 
been  numbered  by  his  Heavenly  Keeper, 
Yea,  no  tear  that  he  has  shed,  when  his 
eye  has  been  raised  to  heaven  in  prayer, 
has  fallen  to  the  ground.  God  he 
prays  to  gather  them  all  in  His  bottle, 
and  trusts  that  He  will  note  them  in  His 
book."  This  confidence  strengthened, 
cheered,  rejoiced  the  Poet.  So  also 
Job  :  "  But  He  knoweth  the  way  that  I 
take,"  <fec.  To  the  sincere  believer  in 
God  there  is  a  rich  fund  of  consolation 
and  encouragement  in  the  Divine  know- 
ledore  of  us  and  refirard  for  us. 

II.  In  his  assurance  of  deliverance 
from  his  enemies.  "  When  I  cry,  then 
shall  mine  enemies  turn  back,"  &c. 

1.  The  condition  of  deliverance. 
"  When  I  cry."  Believing  prayer  is  a 
condition  of  the  Divine  interposition 
for  us.  "  I  will  yet  for  this  be  in- 
quired of  by  the  house  of  Israel  to  do 
it  for  them." 

2.  The  promptitude  of  deliverance, 
"  When  I  cry,  then  shall,"  (fee.  '*  It  shall 
come  to  pass,  that  before  they  call  I 
will  answer ;  and  while  they  are  yet 
speaking,  I  will  hear."  (Comp.  Dan.  ix. 
20-23.)  Spurgeon  :  "What  irresistible 
artillery  is  this  which  wins  the  battle  as 
soon  as  its  report  is  heard  !  " 

3.  l^he  assurance  of  deliverance.  "This 
I  know."  Mark  (1)  the  strength  of  this 
assurance.  He  does  not  speak  with  a 
perhaps  or  a  peradventure,   but  confi- 


dently says,  "  I  know."  (2)  The 
ground  of  this  assurance,  "For  God  is 
for  me."  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  ? "  "  The  Lord  is  for  me  ; 
I  will  not  fear ;  what  can  man  do  unto 
meV 

III.  In  his  triumphant  confidence  in 
God.  "In  God  will  I  praise  His 
word,"  &c.  (vers.  10,  11).  See  our  notes 
on  ver.  4. 

IV.  In  his  delightful  obligations  to 
God.  "Thy  vows  are  upon  me,  O 
God,"  (fee.  (vers.  12,  13).  It  is  worthy 
of  distinct  and  careful  observation  that 
to  the  Psalmist  obligation  to  God  was 
a  privilege  and  pleasure — a  thing  to  be 
celebrated  in  glad  song. 

1.  The  nature  of  this  obligation. 
"  Thy  vows  are  upon  me,  O  God ;  I  will 
render  praises  unto  Thee."  Hengsten- 
berg :  "  The  vows  consist  of  offerings. 
To  the  kind,  the  vows,  the  Psalmist, 
however,  adds  the  species,  thank-offer- 
ings." David  had  vowed  thank-offerings 
to  God,  and  he  looks  forward  with 
pleasure  to  the  fulfilment  of  his  vows. 
Tholuck:  "David  thinks  of  songs  of 
praise  whilst  he  still  sings  lamentations, 
of  vows  of  thanksgiving  whilst  yet 
praying." 

2.  The  reason  of  this  obligation,  (1) 
What  God  had  done  for  him.  "For 
Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from 
death."  The  Lord  had  delivered  the 
Psalmist  from  imminent  danger  and 
from  death  again  and  again.  The 
shield  of  the  Almighty  Protector  had 
covered  him,  and  the  deadly  darts  of 
his  enemies  were  unable  to  injure 
him.  (2)  What  God  would  yet  do  for 
him.  "  Wilt  not  Thou  deliver  my  feet 
from  falling'?"  The  Psalmist  was  con- 
fident that  God  would  continue  to 
defend  and  sustain  him.  What  He  has 
done  may  be  safely  taken  as  an  assur- 
ance of  what  He  will  do.  (3)  The 
design  of  God's  doings  for  him.  "  That 
I  may  walk  before  God  in  the  light  of 
the  living."  "  The  light  of  life  "  is  in 
contrast  with  the  darkness  of  the  realm 
of  death.  To  walk  before  the  face  of 
God  is  to  live  in  the  enjoyment  of  His 
favour  and  protection.  For  these  rea- 
sons David  felt  under  binding  and 
blessed  obligations  to  praise  God.    And 

285 


PBALM  LVI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


by  all  these  things  his  heart  was  glad- 
dened though  his  outward  circumstances 
were  so  depressing  and  painful. 

Application. — If  our  trust  is  re- 
posed in  God  we  may  and  ought  to 
apply  this  exposition  to  ourselves.  Let 
us  be  strengthened  and  encouraged, 
however  many  and  sore  our  trials,  be- 
cause— 1.    God's    knowledge    of    us    is 


minute  and  perfect.  2.  His  regard  fot 
us  is  tender  and  unceasing.  3.  He  has 
assured  us  of  final  and  full  salvation, 
4.  His  past  deliverances  also  warrant 
our  present  confidence.  5.  Faith  in  Him 
should  enable  us  to  triumph  even  in  the 
most  trying  circumstances  (Rom.  v.  3-6 ; 
viii.  31-39). 


The  Knowledge  of  God  a  Comfort  to  His  People. 

{Verse  8.) 


The  Psalmist  refers  to  Ms  removals 
from  place  to  place  for  safety — "  Thou 
tellest  my  wanderings."  He  desired 
that  God  would  pity  him  under  his 
sorrows — "Put  Thou  my  tears  into 
Thy  bottle."  An  allusion  here  to  a 
custom  of  the  ancients. 

I.  That  the  pilgrimage  of  the  right- 
eous and  the  changes  of  life  are  num- 
bered and  written  in  the  book  of  God's 
remembrance.  "  Thou  tellest  my  wan- 
derings," &c. 

1.  I' he  life  of  the  righteous  is  a 
spiritual  pilgrimage.  It  begins  at  con- 
version ;  it  has  its  "  wanderings ;  "  some 
of  them  sinful  j  all  of  them  known  to 
God. 

2.  The  changes  in  the  life  of  the 
righteous  are  numbered  by  the  Lord,  and 
are  in  the  book  of  His  remembrance.  (1) 
Many  pass  through  chaiiges  in  the 
place  of  their  residence.  They  are  led 
in  a  way  that  they  know  not  and  in 
paths  that  they  have  not  known.  The 
Lord  telleth  all  these  wanderings.  (2) 
Many  are  the  changes  of  circumstances ; 
e.g.,  Job ;  David  from  his  wanderings 
to  the  throne. 

II.  The  sorrows  of  the  righteous  are 
known  to  God,  and  David  desired  Him 
to  keep  them  in  His  mind.  "  Put  Thou 
my  tears  into  Thy  bottle,"  &c. 

1.  The  tears  ai  penitents  are  put  into 
His  bottle.  God  looks  with  compassion 
upon  the  wanderer  returning  home,  &c. 

2.  The  tears  of  the  righteous  shed 
over  the  remains  of  sin. 

3.  The  tears  of  the  righteous  in  their 
spiritual  conflicts,  occasioned  by  sinful 
dispositions,  hardness  of  heart,  &e. 

i.  The  tears  caused  by  the  trials  of 
286 


life.  *'  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his 
children,"  &c.  All  the  afflictions  and 
sorrows  of  life  are  known  unto  God. 
"  The  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender 
mercy." 

III.  God's  knowledge  of  His  people 
is  a  source  of  comfort  to  them. 

1.  That  He  knows  the  course  they  take 
in  their  sorrows  is  a  comfort  to  them 
(Job  xxiii.  10).  This  comfort  may  be 
taken  (1)  By  the  penitent  at  the  foot  of 
the  cross.  "  The  sacrifices  of  God  are 
a  broken  spirit,"  &c.  (2)  By  the  Chris- 
tian whose  daily  prayer  is  that  he  may 
be  found  in  Christ.  (3)  By  the  believer 
seeking  tlie  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  conflicts  of  life.  (4)  And  by  the 
godly  in  all  the  changes  and  trials  of 
their  pilgrimage. 

2.  Their  views  of  God  afford  them 
consolation  in  their  sorrows.  (1)  The 
Lord  is  their  God,  their  Father,  and 
their  friend.  (2)  The  conduct  of  God 
is  governed  by  infinite  wisdom  and 
goodness.  (3)  Many  trials  come  from 
the  hand  of  God.  "The  Lord  trieth 
the  righteous."  (4)  The  purposes  of 
God  afford  his  people  comfort.  The 
discipline  may  be  painful,  but  its  design 
is  their  perfection.  (5)  They  have 
access  to  the  throne  of  grace  in  all  their 
sorrows.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are 
upon  the  righteous,  and  His  ears  are 
open  to  their  cry."  (6)  The  promises 
of  God  inspire  them  with  confidence 
and  hope  (2  Pet.  i.  4  j  2  Cor.  i.  20; 
Isa.  XXXV.  10). 

Learn  in  Conclusion. — 1.  That 
sorrows  are  a  part  of  our  present  por- 
tion. "  In  the  world  ye  have  tribula- 
tion."    2.    All  our  sorrotvs  are  known 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LVII. 


unto  God.      3.   In  all  our  sorrows  we  such  regard  to  His  people  in  the  changing 

should  trust  in  God  (Nah.  i.  7).     4.    We  scenes  of  life,   how  important    is   it    to 

should  keep   on  such  terms  ivith  God  as  enjoy  the  privilege  /  and  to  enjoy  it  we 

will  e7iahle  us  to  derive  comfort  from  His  must  he  the  subjects  of  true  religion,—' 

infinite  knowledge.     5.  If  God  manifests  Abridged  from  an  unpublished  MS. 


The  State  of  the  Godly  in  this  World. 
{Verse  13.) 


We  shall  regard  these  words  of  the 
Psalmist's  as  setting  forth  the  present 
state  of  Christian  believers.      It  is — 

I.  A  Divinely  delivered  state. 
"  Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from 
death."  Tlie  unrenewed  8oul  is  spiritu- 
ally dead  (Epb.  ii.  1-5;  iv.  18).  Man 
is  delivered  from  death — 1.  Through 
the  mediation  of  Jesus.  2.  By  the  in- 
st7'umentality  of  redemptive  truth.  3. 
By  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  4. 
On  condition  of  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  (John  iii.  36  ;  v.  24). 

II.  A  Divinely  sustained  state. 
"  Wilt  not  Thou  deliver  my  feet  from 
falling?"  Notice:  1.  The  danger  im- 
plied. The  renewed  soul  is  in  danger 
of  falling.  Three  things  show  this — (1) 
The  fact  of  temptation.     (2)  Our  sus- 


ceptibility to  temptation.  (3)  Some  of 
the  best  men  have  fallen.  2.  The  con- 
fidence involved.  That  God  is  "  able  to 
keep  us  from  falling "  (Jude  24).  3. 
The  encouragement  aforded.  "  Thou  hast 
delivered.  .  .  .  Wilt  Thou  not,"  &c. 
What  He  has  done  is  an  earnest  of  what 
He  will  yet  do  (Phil.  i.  6). 

III.  A  Divinely  approved  state. 
*'  That  I  may  walk  before  God  in  the 
light  of  the  living."  This  includes — 1. 
Life  governed  by  God.  Living  as  in  His 
sight.  His  will  our  rule  of  action.  2. 
Life  well-pleasing  to  God.  "  To  walk 
before  the  face  of  God  "  is  to  live  in  the 
enjoyment  of  His  favour  (Ps.  iv.  6 ; 
xxi  6  ;  Ixxxix.  15).  Such  a  life  naturally 
tends  to  fulness  of  joy  in  His  immediate 
presence  (Ps.  xvi.  11), 


PSALM  LVII. 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — "To  the  Chief  Musician."  The  chief  musician  was  the  director  of  the 
music  in  public  worship.  And  the  Psalms  which  were  addressed  to  him  were  intended  for  use 
in  the  Temple  services.  *^  Al-taschith"  =  "destroy  not."  According  to  some  expositors,  the 
expression  denotes  the  melody  to  which  the  Psalm  was  to  be  sung.  The  Psalm  was  to  be  sung 
to  the  same  tune  as  the  song  known  as,  "  Destroy  not."  According  to  others  it  is  a  musical 
expression,  probably  denoting  the  key  in  which  the  Psalm  was  to  be  sung.  And,  **  according 
to  others,  it  must  be  a  maxim,  wbich  the  Psalmist  at  that  time  continually  revolved  in  his 
heart,  and  must  indicate  tbe  quintessence  of  the  Psalm."  ^'  Michtam  of  David."  See  Intro- 
duction to  Ps.  Ivi.  "  \V?ien  he  fled  from  Saul  in  the  cave.'^  Moll  :  **  We  cannot  decide  wbether 
the  cave  is  the  one  mentioned  in  1  Sam.  xxi.  as  the  cave  of  Adullam,  or  that  situated  by  the 
sheepcotes  upon  the  Alpine  heights  of  Engedi  (1  Sam.  xxiv.).  These  caves  are  numerous  in 
the  limestone  and  chalk  mountains,  and  are  often  of  great  extent,  and  are  still  the  hiding- 
places  of  fugitives." 


A  Safe  Refuge  in  sore  Peril, 
(Verses  1-6.) 


Let  us  consider — 

I.  The  extreme  perils  in  a  good 
man's  life.  David  mentions  three  things 
as  causes  of  danger  and  trial  to  him  at 
this  time 


1.  The  bitter  reproaches  of  his  enemies. 
"  The  reproach  of  him  that  would  swal- 
low me  up."  The  rendering  of  Heng- 
stenberg  and  Moll  presents  what  we 
regard  as  the  true  idea  of  this  clause. 

287 


PSALM  LYII. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


"  He  reproaches  that  snuflfs  after  me." 
**  He  reproacheth  who  snorts  at  me." 
It  is  not  that  God  would  reproach  the 
enemies,  but  that  the  enemies  reproached 
the  Psalmist.  Calumny  and  slander 
were  freely  plied  by  Saul  and  his  party 
at  this  time  against  David. 

2.  The  fierce  cruelty  of  his  enemies. 
"  My  soul  is  among  lions,"  &c.  *'  The 
enemies  are  lions,  greedy  of  their  prey, 
but  the  teeth  of  these  men-lions  are 
spears  and  arrows,  and  the  tongues  of 
these  men-lions  are  a  sharp  sword.  As 
the  lion  uses  his  teeth  and  tongue,  these 
children  of  men  use  their  S[)ears,  arrows, 
and  swords  to  destroy  their  prey,  having 
the  same  greedy^  lickerish  natures  as  the 
wild  beasts." — (C.  A.  Briggs.)  Their 
eagerness  for  the  destruction  of  the  Poet 
is  brought  into  prominence.  They  snorted 
at  him  as  enraged  wild  beasts,  or  as 
wild  beasts  greedy  for  their  prey.  We 
know  how  eagerly  and  ferociously  Saul 
and  his  companions  at  this  time  sought 
to  kill  David. 

3.  The  subtle  schemes  of  his  enemies. 
"  They  have  prepared  a  net  for  my 
steps,"  (fee.  Not  content  with  open 
and  fierce  pursuit,  they  concocted  deep 
plans,  hoping,  by  means  of  them,  to 
ensnare  the  Poet.  They  used  fraud  as 
well  as  force  against  him.  They  left 
no  means  unemployed  by  which  they 
thought  they  might  effect  his  overthrow. 
Such  were  the  trials  from  which  the 
Psalmist  was  suffering,  and  the  perils  to 
which  he  was  exposed.  The  enemies 
had  so  far  succeeded  that,  in  some  mea- 
sure, the  spirit  of  the  Psalmist  drooped. 
"  They  have  bowed  down  my  soul." 
He  was  not  insensible  to  trial.  He  felt 
the  pressure  of  their  persecutions.  He 
was  aware  of  the  danajers  with  which 
they  surrounded  him. 

II.  The  secure  refuge  from  the 
perils  of  a  good  man's  life.  "In  the 
shadow  of  Thy  wings  will  I  make  my 
refuge."  The  figure  is  very  beautiful 
and  expressive.  Perowne  :  "  This  ex- 
ceedingly striking  image  may  have  been 
suggested  by  Deut,  xxxii.  11.  (See 
Ps.  xvii.  8.)  Still  more  tender  is  the 
New  Testament  figure  (Matt,  xxiii.  37). 
Perhaps  there  is  nothing  more  remark- 
able in  the  Psalms  than  this  ever-recur- 
288 


ring  expression  of  a  tender  personal 
affection  on  the  part  of  the  sacred  poets 
to  God.  There  is  no  parallel  to  this  in 
the  whole  range  of  heathen  literature." 
Delitzsch  :  **  The  soft  shading  of  God's 
wings  is  the  protection  of  His  soft, 
sweet  love,  and  the  shadow  of  His  wings 
is  the  refreshing,  trusting  comfort  con- 
nected with  this  protection.  In  this 
shadow  the  Poet  takes  his  refuge  until 
the  ruinous  danger  which  threatens  him 
passes  by."  The  image  is  suggestive 
of  affection,  rest,  shade,  safety.  The 
Psalmist  indicates — 

1.  The  ground  of  his  trust  in  God. 
(1)  His  supremacy.  "I  will  cry  unto 
God  Most  High."  However  great  the 
power  and  the  nmltitude  of  our  enemies, 
they  cannot  injure  us  if  we  have  made 
the  Most  High  our  Refuge.  "  Now 
that  he  takes  in  view  the  Most  High,  the 
giants  of  the  earth  become  changed  into 
pitiful  dwarfs."  Franke  :  '*  When  it  is 
clearly  manifested  to  the  heart  of  man 
that  God  is  the  Most  High,  he  fears 
nothing,  not  even  the  devil  and  his 
hosts  of  hell,  but  is  confident  and  un- 
terrified."  (2)  His  continuous  activity 
on  his  behalf.  **  God  that  performeth 
all  things  for  me."  Or,  "  God  who 
accomplisheth  for  me."  "  The  Lord 
will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  me." 
"  He  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in 
you  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of 
Jesus  Christ."  Hengstenberg  :  "  With 
God  the  beginning  furnishes  a  pledge 
for  the  finishing,  the  word  for  the  deed." 
(3)  His  kindness  toward  him.  '*  God 
shall  send  forth  His  mercy."  David 
confided  in  the  infinite  and  free  favour 
of  God.  (4)  His  fidelity.  "And  His 
truth."  The  Psalmist  had  an  unshaken 
reliance  on  the  faithfulness  of  God.  He 
knew  that  He  would  fulfil  His  promises, 
and  save  those  who  trusted  in  Him. 
"  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away, 
but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away." 
Surely  here  we  have  most  firm  and 
ample  ground  for  trusting  in  God.  He 
in  whom  all  these  perfections  inhere 
must  be  worthy  of  the  fullest  confidence 
as  a  secure  Refuge  in  the  trials  of  life. 

2.  The  expression  of  his  trust  in  God. 
"  Be  merciful  unto  me,  O  God,  be  mer- 
ciful  unto   me.  ...  I   will  cry  unto 


EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LYIL 


God  ]\Iost  High."  The  trust  expresses 
itself  lieie  iii  prayer.  Calvin:  "He 
makes  the  calling  upon  to  follow  the 
confiding^  for  it  cannot  fail,  but  that 
those  who  trust  in  God  should  direct 
their  prayer  to  Him."  In  this  brief 
prayer  there  are  three  points  worthy  of 
notice.  (1)  It  reveals  a  just  estimate 
of  the  poet^s  own  moral  condition.  He 
pleads  no  merit  of  his  own  ;  he  does  not 
urge  his  innocence,  but  asks  for  mercy. 
(2)  It  honours  God.  By  appealing  to 
the  Divine  mercy,  David  manifests  an 
exalted  estimate  of  the  kindness  and 
faithfulness  of  God ; — he  honours  Hira 
by  his  faith,  &c.  (3)  It  is  fervent. 
The  urgency  of  need  and  desire  is  indi- 
cated by  the  repetition  of  the  cry. 

3.  The  greatness  of  his  trust  in  God, 
This  is  seen — (1)  In  his  sense  of  his 
own  perfect  security.  '*  I  lie  among 
them  that  are  set  on  fire,"  &c.  In  the 
midst  of  his  enemies  he  lay  down  to 
rest  calmly  as  on  a  soft  couch  in  perfect 
safety.  Moll :  "It  expresses  not  a  com- 
plaint of  his  dangerous  situation,  but 
the  resolution  of  trust  in  God,  with 
which  he  will  lie  down  to  sleep  in  the 
midst  of  dansferous  circumstances." 
Faith  is  triumphant  over  fear.  (2)  In 
his  supreme  desire  for  the  universal 
Jwnour  of  God,      "  Be  Thou  exalted,  0 


God,  above  the  heavens,  Thy  glory 
above  all  the  earth."  The  grand  wish 
of  the  Psalmist,  to  which  all  other  feel- 
ings were  subordinated,  was  that  God 
might  be  supremely  and  universally 
glorified.  The  Psalmist  loses  sight  of 
his  own  peril,  or  rises  quite  superior  to 
it,  in  his  fervent  desire  for  the  exaltation 
of  God.  (3)  In  his  assurance  that  the 
wicked  designs  and  doings  of  his  enemies 
would  issue  in  their  own  ruin.  "  They 
have  digged  a  pit  before  me,  into  the 
midst  whereof  they  are  fallen  them- 
selves." "  In  the  cave,  when  Saul 
thought  David  should  fall  into  his  hands, 
he  fell  into  the  hands  of  David,  and 
lay  at  his  mercy."  *'  God  beats  the 
enemies  of  His  servants  with  their  own 
weapons."  (See  "  The  Horn.  Com^  on 
Ps.  vii.  14-16.) 

Conclusion. — The  application  is  ob- 
vious. 1.  To  all,  life  is  more  or  less  a 
scene  of  trial.     2.  Trial  involves  danger. 

3.  In  trial,  every  man  needs  a  refuse. 

4.  Various  are  the  refuges  resorted,  to 
by  men  in  trial.  5.  Only  one  Refuge 
is  adequate  and  trustworthy.  6.  To 
that  One  all  may  have  access.  7.  "  Trust 
in  Him  at  all  times ;  ye  people,  pour 
out  your  heart  before  Him;  God  is  a 
Eefugefor  vs,** 


A  Life  of  Confidence  in  God. 

(Vei'se  1.) 


Consider — 

I.  The  grounds  on  which  a  life  of 
confidence  in  God  is  encouraged.    His 

holy  Word  affords  the  greatest  encour- 
agement unto  His  people  to  put  their 
trust  in  Him.  The  whole  life  of  a  be- 
liever consists  in  trusting  in  God.  The 
very  first  exercise  of  religion  is  an  act 
of  confidence  in  the  mercy  of  God,  &c. 
The  believer  may  take  encouragement 
to  trust  in  God,  from — 

1.  The  relation  which  the  Divine  Being 
sustains  to  him.  He  is  his  Father.  "  Like 
as  a  father  pitieth,"  &c.  A  child  trusts, 
&c.  He  is  his  God.  All  His  Divine 
perfections  are  engaged  on  behalf  of  His 
people. 

2.  The  efficiency  of  the  mediation  of 


Jesus  Christ.  The  atonement  for  sin 
which  He  has  made,  and  the  interces- 
sion which  He  offers  on  our  behalf  are 
perfect,  and  should  encourage  our  trust 
(Heb.  iv.  14-16). 

3.  The  promises  of  God,  These  are 
suited  to  all  our  circumstances,  <kc. 

4.  The  deliverances  which  He  has 
wrought  for  His  people. 

II.  The  nature  of  trust  in  God,  and 
the  circumstances  in  which  we  should 
trust  Him. 

1.  T'he  nature  of  trust  in  God,  It 
consists  in  rel}  ing  upon  the  declarations 
and  promises  of  God,  in  believing  the 
truth  of  God,  and  in  acting  accordingly. 
(1.)  Trust  in  God  can  be  exercised  only 
in  connection  with   a  proper  regard  to 

289 


PSALM  LTII. 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


the  precepts  of  His  Word  ;  without  this, 
reliance  upon  His  promises  would  be 
presumption,  not  the  confidence  of  faith. 
(2)  To  rely  upon  the  Divine  promises 
whilst  regarding  the  Divine  precepts  is 
the  proper  exercise  of  confidence  in 
God. 

2.  The  circumstances  in  which  we 
should  trust  in  God.  We  should  trust 
in  Him  at  all  times  and  in  all  circum- 
stances, but  especially — (1)  When  op- 
pressed with  guilt.  (2)  In  seasons  of 
temptation.  (3)  In  seasons  of  per- 
secution (2  Tim.  iii.  12.)  (4)  Under 
all  the  trials  of  life  (Ps.  1.  15). 

III.  The  advantages  of  a  life  of 
confidence  in  God.  Trust  in  God  is  a 
duty  enjoined  by  many  precepts,  and 
enforced  by  many  examples.  It  is  also 
a  privilege  of  the   greatest  value   (Ps. 


cxlvi.  5.)     A  life  of  confidence  in  God 
will  be  attended  with — 

1.  Peace  (Isa.  xxvi.  3). 

2.  Security.  The  arm  of  Omnipo- 
tence is  engaged  for  the  defence  of  those 
who  trust  in  God. 

3.  Support  under  trial. 

4.  Deliverance  from  troubles. 

5.  The  sanctijication  of  trials  to  our 
good. 

Conclusion. — 1.  It  is  manifestly  our 
wisdom  to  trust  in  God.  2.  A  life  of  con- 
fidence in  God  is  one  of  the  best  evidences 
of  true  religion.  If  we  would  know 
whether  we  are  the  subjects  of  religion, 
let  us  inquire  whither  we  go  for  refuge, 
&c.  3.  The  believer  has  the  prospect 
of  everlasting  rest  in  God,  &c.  *'  There 
remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God." 
— Abridged  from  an  unpublished  MS, 


The  Providence  of  God  a  Motive  to  Prayer. 

(Verse  2.) 


The  Psalmist  felt  himself  and  all  his 
affairs  in  the  hands  of  Providence.  He 
knew  that  God  performed  all  things  for 
him.  From  this  view  of  providence  he 
took  encouragement  to  make  Him  his 
refuge.  **  I  will  cry  unto  God,"  (fee. 
These  words  suggest  the  interesting  and 
important  truth  that  the  providence  of 
God  presents  us  with  a  powerful  motive 
to  prayer. 

I.  Endeavour  to  illustrate  this 
truth. 

1.  The  providence  of  God  is  closely 
connected  with  His  existence.  If  we 
believe  in  His  existence  we  cannot  con- 
sistently deny  His  providence. 

2.  The  Sacred  Volume  teaches  the 
doctrine — (1)  It  represents  all  the  affairs 
of  the  universe  as  under  the  government 
of  God  (Ps.  xxxi.  15,  ciii.  \^  ;  et  al). 
(2)  Its  precepts  which  enforce  the  duty 
of  putting  our  trust  in  Him  imply  that 
His  providence  is  universal,  and  extends 
to  all  our  concerns  (Prov.  iii.  5,  6; 
Matt.  vi.  31-34  ;  et  al).  (3)  The  his- 
tory of  the  Church  and  of  individual 
believers,  which  it  records,  testifies  to 
the  exercise  of  the  Divine  providence — 
Jewish  Church,  Jacob,  Joseph,  Job, 
David,  DanieL 

290 


3.  The  conduct  of  providence  is  go- 
verned by  the  infinite  perfections  of  God, 
Wisdom,  goodness,  faithfulness,  power. 

4.  We  are  at  all  times,  and  under  all 
circumstances,  under  the  care  of  the 
Divine  providence.  In  infancy,  youth, 
(fee.     In  prosperity,  adversity,  (fee. 

5.  It  is  ijnportant  to  realise  the  uni- 
versality of  the  Divine  providence.  Such 
realisation  will  lead  us  to  commit  our 
ways  unto  Him,  will  afford  peace,  (fee. 

II.  The  circumstances  in  which  it  is 
important  to  realise  this  truth,  and 
to  make  God  a  refuge  by  prayer.  It 
is  important  to  realise  it  continually; 
but  especially — 

1.  In  difficulties.  These  arise  from 
various  causes. 

2.  In  troubles  from  enemies.  David 
at  this  time. 

3.  In  painful  trials. 

4.  Prayer  ought  to  be  esteemed  a  pri- 
vilege. 

III.  The  advantages  of  a  life  of  faith 
and  prayer  are  many  and  great. 

1.  We  realise  that  some  wise  end  is 
to  be  answered  by  trials. 

2.  Our  trials  are  accounted  as  for  our 
good. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LVn. 


3.  Support  under  trial  and  deliver- 
ance from  it  are  granted  in  answer  to 
prayer. 

4.  A  review  of  the  conduct  of  provi- 
dence may  he  profitable  under  peculiar 
trials.  David  found  it  so.  Every  man 
may  study  Divine  providence  to  his 
profit. 


Conclusion. — 1.  Bring  all  troubles 
to  the  throne  of  grace.  2.  Every  deliver- 
ance in  answer  to  prayer  should  he  ac- 
knowledged by  p7-aise.  3.  Past  provi- 
dences afford  encouragement  to  trust  God 
for  the  future.  4.  The  mysteries  of  pro- 
vidence will  he  explained  in  a  better  state. 
— Abridged  from  an  unpublished  MS. 


Exemplary  Praise. 
(Verses  7-11.) 


The  Psalmist's  praise  of  God  ex- 
pressed in  these  verses  is  worthy  of 
imitation  in  each  and  all  of  its  main 
features. 

I.  In  its  Theme.  *^  I  will  sing  and 
give  praise.  For  Thy  mercy  is  great 
unto  the  heavens,  and  Thy  truth  unto 
the  clouds."  Mercy  and  truth  are  the 
Divine  perfections  which  are  most  pro- 
minent in  God's  covenant  relations  with 
His  people.  His  mercy  is  the  source  of 
all  blessings  to  sinful  men.  And  His 
truth  is  an  assurance  that  He  will  fulfil 
His  word,  that  He  will  perform  His 
promises.  The  poet  represents  these 
perfections  as  infinite.  Such  is  the 
meaning  of  the  figures  \Ahich  he  em- 
ploys. "  Great  unto  the  heavens,"  &c. 
From  the  infinity  of  God's  mercy  and 
truth  we  infer — 

1.  That  the  blessings  which  flow  from 
them  reach  unto  all  men. 

2.  That  they  are  worthy  of  the  unre- 
served confidence  of  all  men. 

II.  In  the  spirit  of  its  Offerer.  The 
poet  manifests — 

1.  Strong  confidence  in  God.  **  My 
heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart  is  fixed." 
Perowne  :  "  My  heart  is  steadfast." 
Moll:  "My  heart  is  confident."  His 
confidence  in  God  was  firm  and  abiding. 
It  enabled  him  to  rise  above  all  fear  of 
danger. 

2.  Fervent  gratitude  and  reverent 
admiration  toivards  God.  "  I  will  sing 
and  give  praise."  His  confidence  was 
religious.  .He  was  sensible  of  his  obli- 
gations to  God,  and  gratefully  praised 
Him.  He  recognised  the  perfections  of 
God,  and  reverently  adored  Him.  This 
is  the  true  spirit  in  which  praise  should 
be  offered  to  the  Most  HigL 


III.  In  its  enthusiasm.  This  is 
clearly  seen  in  his  resolution  to  praise 
God—   ^ 

1.  With  the  noblest  powers  of  his 
being.  "  Awake  up,  my  glory."  His 
"glory"  is  his  soul,  with  all  its  won- 
drous faculties  and  capacities,  as  created 
in  the  image  of  God.  David  summons 
his  noblest  powers  to  the  worship  of 
God.  Soulless  praise  is  worthless, 
and  even  offensive  in  the  sight  of 
God. 

2.  Wkh  choice  instrumental  accom- 
2:>animent.  "  Awake,  psaltery  and  harp." 
David  would  use  the  sweetest  and  most 
musical  aids  in  this  hallowed  exercise. 
He  seeks  to  give  worthy  expression  to 
the  feelings  of  his  soul  in  praise  of  so 
glorious  a  Being. 

3.  With  affectionate  zeal.  "  I  myself 
will  awake  early."  More  correctly  :  "  I 
will  awake  the  morning-dawn."  He 
resolves  to  anticipate  the  morning-dawn 
with  his  songs  of  praise,  so  great  were 
his  zeal  and  love  for  the  hallowed  exer- 
cise. To  him  the  praise  of  God  was  the 
purest  pleasure.  Surely  this  enthu- 
siasm in  the  worship  of  God  is  worthy 
the  imitation  of  all. 

IV.  In  its  sphere.  "  I  will  praise 
Thee,  O  Lord,  among  the  people  ;  I  will 
sing  unto  Thee  among  the  nations." 
He  would  celebrate  the  praise  of  God 
to  the  widest  possible  extent.  De- 
litzsch  :  **  His  song  of  praise  is  not  to 
sound  in  a  narrow  space  where  it  can 
scarcely  be  heard  ;  he  will  appear,  as  an 
evangelist  of  his  deliverance  and  his 
Deliverer,  among  the  nations  of  the 
world  ;  his  calling  extends  beyond  Israel; 
the  experiences  of  his  person  are  for  the 
benefit  of  humanity."      The  praise  of 

291 


fSALMLVm. 


ttOMILMTlG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


God  should  be  universal,  as  "  His  mercy 
and  truth  "  are. 

V.  In  the  sense  of  its  imperfection. 
The  Psalmist  was  conscious  that  his 
song  fell  far  below  the  merit  and  glory 
of  his  theme ;  and  he,  therefore,  prays, 
"  Be  Tliou  exalted,  O  God,  above  the 
heavens,  Thy  glory  above  all  the  earth." 
Our  most  reverent  and  most  enthusiastic 
praise  is  inadequate  to  so  sublime  and 
glorious  a  theme. 

**  Weak  is  the  effort  of  my  heart, 
And  cold  my  warmest  thought ; 
But  when  I  see  Thee  as  Thou  art, 
m  praise  Thee  ai  I  ought." 

— Newton, 


Conclusion. — 1.  Let  us  "not  make 

that  narrow  which  God's  love  has  made 
wide — wide  as  the  heavens"  (ver.  10). 
2.  Let  us,  like  the  Psalmist,  anticipate 
the  promised  deliverances  of  God  with  our 
praises.  3.  Let  us  strive  to  make  our 
praise  of  God  commensurate  with  His 
mercy  and  truth.  In  this  we  shall  never 
succeed ;  yet  the  effort  will  be  'pleasing 
to  Him  and  beneficial  to  us.  *'  The 
glory  of  the  Lord  should  be  praised 
early  and  late,  near  and  far,  in  heaven 
and  on  earth,"  aud  yet  it  would  immea- 
surably surpass  our  praise. 


Decided  Piety, 


(Verse 

Consider — 

I.  The  properties  of  a  pious  or  godly 
Hfe. 

1.  True  piety  has  its  seat  in  the  heart. 
"  My  heart  is  fixed." 

2.  True  piety  springs  from  just  views 
of  truth.  The  heart  will  not  be  fixed 
until  the  great  facts  which  lie  at  the 
foundation  of  religion  are  known, 
&c. 

3.  Decided  piety  may  he  traced  to  just 
views  of  redemption  and  the  greatness  of 
its  blessings. 

4.  Relief  from  the  burden  of  guilty 
through  the  great  sacrifice  for  sin,  tends 
to  fix  the  heart,  <kc. 

5.  Piety  is  strengthened  by  religious 
exercises. 

6.  Divine  deliverances  strengthen  piety. 
Answers  to  prayer  promote  firmness  of 
purpose  to  trust  in  God. 

7.  Progress  in  religion  strengthens 
fielff. 


7.) 

II.  The  advantages  of  a  life  of  de 

cided  piety.     Decided  piety — 

1.  Is  attended  with  security.  Reli- 
gious principles  in  the  heart  are  a  safe- 
guard, &c. 

2.  RecomTnends  religion  (Matt.  v.  1 6). 

3.  Is  attended  with  happiness.  De- 
liverance from  guilt,  fear,  &c.  Expe- 
lience  of  the  joy  of  salvation,  <kc. 

4.  Inspires  confidence  in  God. 

5.  Strengthmis  hope  in  God. 

6.  Inspires  praise  to  God,  "  I  will 
sing  and  give  praise." 

Conclusion. — Learn — 1.  The  im- 
portance of  the  heart  being  right  with  God, 
2.  The  importance  of  a  correct  acquaint- 
ance with  the  principles  of  religion.  3. 
The  importance  of  religious  decision. 
Indecision  is  dangerous  (Matt.  12. 
30).- — Abridged  from  an  unpMished 
MS. 


PSALM    LVIIL 

Introduction. 

Supericrlptton.  —  "To  the  Chief  Musician,  Al-taschiih.**  See  Introduction  to  Pa.  Ivii. 
"  MicMam  of  David."  See  Introduction  to  Ps.  Ivi.  Moll :  "  This  complaint  respecting  domestic 
administrations  of  justice  gushes  forth  irom  the  Psalmist  in  a  threatening  language,  which  is 
almost  obscure  owing  to  bold  and  mingled  figures  of  speech.  It  is  like  a  torrent  which  plunges 
over  every  hindrance,  foaming  and  raging.  We  may  certainly  credit  this  original  poet  with  a 
richness  of  figures  and  changes  in  their  use,  as  well  as  in  the  turns  of  language  and  of  thought, 
in  accordance  with  particular  circumstances  and  feeling.  Yet  we  lack  sufficient  evidence  to 
»how  whether  the  composition  occurred  in  the  time  of  Saul,  who  was  at  the  same  time  David's 
Judge  and  persecutor,  who  endeavoured  to  hide  the  persecution  under  the  appearance  of  a  right* 
292 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LVIII. 


ecus  judgment ;  or  in  the  time  of  Absalom,  who  made  the  administration  of  justice  a  means  of 
stealing  fioui  David  the  hearts  of  the  people,  whilst  he  pretended  to  be  impartial.'' 

It  seems  to  us  probable  that  this  Psalm,  like  Psalms  Ivi.,  Ivii.,  and  lix.,  relates  to  the  Sauline 
persecutions.  The  similarity  in  the  superscriptions  and  the  character  of  the  contents  support 
this  view. 

The  History  of  Human  Wickedness, 


In  dealing  with  these  wicked  judges, 
whom  he  addresses  in  the  early  portion 
of  the  Psalm,  David  gives  us  a  general 
description  of  the  origin,  progress,  and 
destiny  of  liuman  wickedness. 

I.  Wickedness  in  its  root.  *'  The 
wicked  are  estranged  from  the  womb," 
&c.  An  innate  estrangement  of  the 
heart  from  God  is  the  root  from  which 
tlie  wickedness  of  men  springs.  The 
doctrine  of  original  sin  rests  on  an  awful 
fact.  Moral  qualities  are  transmissible. 
We  enter  upon  life  with  tendencies  to 
evil.  In  some  natures  these  tendencies 
are  terrible  in  their  activity  and  strength. 
In  this  light  David  regards  his  enemies. 
"  The  most  lovely  infant  that  is  ushered 
into  being,"  says  Dr.  Gumming,  "  has 
within  it  by  nature  the  germs  of  those 
elements  which  feed  the  flames  of  hell, 
and  leaven  its  forlorn  inmates  with  their 
direst  misery.  It  has  in  its  own  heart 
the  embryo  of  that  Upas  tree,  which 
distils  upon  humanity  on  earth,  and  on 
humanity  in  hell,  its  death-drops;  and 
so  living  are  the  seeds,  and  so  congenial 
is  the  soil,  that,  unless  overborne  by  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  appli- 
ances of  the  Gospel,  they  will  inevitably 
spring  up  and  flourish." 

II.  Wickedness  in  its  manifestation. 

1.  In  the  mal- ad  ministration  of  jus- 
tice (vers.  1,  2).  The  exact  meaning  of 
these  verses  is  somewhat  obscure.  The 
rendering  of  the  first  clause  of  the  first 
verse  in  the  A.  V.  is  certainly  incorrect. 
Alexander  translates  :  "  Are  ye,  indeed, 
dumb,  when  ye  should  speak  righteous- 
ness 1 "  Conant :  '* '  Do  ye,  of  a  truth, 
in  silence,  speak  righteousness?'  A 
bitter  sarcasm.  Is  it  with  silence  that 
ye  perform  the  office  of  speech,  dumb 
when  ye  ought  to  speak,  and  declare 
the  right  1*'  Perowne,  on  the  latter 
clause  of  ver.  2,  remarks,  "  This  is  said 
sarcastically.  Ye  pretend,  indeed,  to 
hold  the  balance  of  justice,  and  nicely 
to  weigh  out  to  each  his  just  award,  but 


violence  is  the  weight  with  which  ye 
adjust  the  scales."  Moll :  "  It  is  very 
bad  when  those  persons  and  magistrates, 
who  are  appointed  to  administer  justice, 
instead  of  pronouncing  judgment,  are 
silent,  and  are  dumb  to  the  prayers  of 
their  subordinates  and  the  earnest  en- 
treaties of  their  frends,  not  less  than  to 
the  demands  of  the  law,  honour,  and 
conscience.  They  then  not  only  misuse 
the  scales  of  justice  intrusted  to  them 
in  an  irresponsible  manner,  to  the  in- 
jury of  their  fellow-men,  but  they  are 
likewise  hypocrites  and  liars,  since  they 
violate  justice  at  the  very  time  that  they 
pretend  to  exercise  it,  and  in  this  mani- 
fest their  serpent-like  nature."  Here, 
then,  are  three  counts  in  the  indictment 
against  these  judges.  (1)  They  were 
silent  when  they  ought  to  have  declared 
for  righteousness.  (2)  Their  hearts  were 
bent  on  wickedness.  (3)  Under  the 
pretence  of  justice  they  did  evil.  Thus 
in  the  place  of  judgment  there  was 
wickedness,  and  in  the  place  of  right- 
eousness there  was  iniquity. 

2.  In  falsehood.  "Speakinglies."  This 
is  a  manifestation  of  wickedness  from 
which  David  suffered  much,  and  which, 
in  various  forms,  has  been  widely  pre- 
valent in  the  whole  history  of  human 
wickedness. 

3.  In  malice.  "  Their  poison  is  like 
the  poison  of  a  serpent."  Their  spirit 
was  malignant,  and  their  utterances 
were  spiteful,  cruel,  and  deadly. 

III.  Wickedness  in  its  full  develop- 
ment. *'  Like  the  deaf  adder  that  stop- 
peth  her  ear;  which  will  not  hearken 
to  the  voice  of  charmers,  charming  never 
so  wisely."  It  is  not  the  adder  which 
stoppeth  the  ear,  but  the  wicked.  What 
is  already  deaf  by  nature  has  no  need 
to  stop  its  ear.  We  may  read  the  clause, 
"  As  a  deaf  adder,  he  stoppetii  his  ear." 
By  means  of  stopping  their  ears  the 
wicked  make  themselves  like  the  deaf 
adder.    (On  serpent  charming,  see  **  The 

293 


tSALM  LTHl. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Land  and  the  Book,"  by  Dr.  Thomson, 
p.  154,  and  Barnes  and  Lange,  in  loco.) 
As  there  are  serpents  which  cannot  be 
charmed,  so  tliere  are  men  who  will 
yield  to  no  good  influence.  They  har- 
den themselves  against  the  grace  of  God, 
and  close  their  ears  against  His  Word, 
and  stren2;then  themselves  in  wicked- 
ness,  and  so  prepare  themselves  for  a 
terrible  and  inevitable  ruin.  It  is  not 
simply  that  the  tendency  to  evil  with 
which  they  were  born  has  developed 
itself,  but  it  has  developed  itself  un- 
ciiecked,  and  without  any  obstruction, 
and  the  influences  which  have  been 
brought  to  bear  upon  them  to  lead  them 
to  resist  that  development  they  have 
resisted,  and  the  aids  which  have  been 
offered  to  them  to  enable  them  to  do  so, 
they  have  rejected.  "  Ye  do  always 
resist  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  this  way 
that  which  at  first  was  merely  a  ten- 
dency to  evil  becomes  an  irresistible 
despot.  "  His  own  iniquities  shall  take 
the  wicked  himself,  and  he  shall  be 
holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins." 
"  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or 
the  leopard  his  spots  1  then  may  ye  also 
do  good  that  are  accustomed  to  do  evil." 
We  see  this  stopping  of  the  ears  and 
hardening  of  the  heart  in  the  disregard 
of  those  who  eagerly  pursue  wicked- 
ness— 

1.  To  the  remonstrances  and  entreaties 
of  men,  even  of  their  best  friends. 

2.  2^0  the  invitations  of  Divine  mercy , 
and  the  warnings  of  Divine  judgment. 

3.  To  the  Divine  influence  working  in 
and  through  their  own  conscience.  All 
these  they  disregard.  Saul  is  a  con- 
spicuous and  terrible  example  of  this. 
Men  wilfully  close  their  eyes  against  the 
light,  and  blindness  supervenes  ;  they 
wilfully  stop  their  ears  against  Divine 
voices,  and  deafness  results.  "  Sin, 
when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death." 

IV.  Wickedness  in  its  consumma- 
tion. "  Break  their  teeth,  0  God,  in 
their  mouth,"  &c.  (vers.  6-9).  "  There 
is,"  says  Perowne,  "  an  abrupt  change 
in  the  image  employed.  As  these 
men  are  incorrigible  in  their  wickedness, 
as  they  cannot  be  tamed,  the  Psalmist 
prays  to  God  to  destroy  their  power  for 
294 


mischief;  but  instead  of  continuing  the 
figure  of  the  serpent  charmer,  who  robs 
the  serpent  of  his  poison,  he  suddenly 
represents  them  as  young  lions,  whose 
teeth  he  would  see  broken  that  they 
may  no  longer  devour."  In  this  portion 
of  the  Psalm  we  see  the  destination  of 
wickedness. 

1.  'The  power  of  the  wicked  shall  he 
destroyed.  "  Break  their  teeth,"  &c, 
''  The  young  lions  "  are  not  the  whelps, 
but  those  who  are  youthful  in  vigour 
and  strength.  God  will  break  the  power 
of  wickedness.  "  The  arms  of  the 
wicked  shall  be  broken." 

2.  The  plans  of  the  wicked  shall  he 
defeated.  "  When'he  bendeth,"  &c.  The 
Hebrew  here  is  diflicult.  Hengstenberg 
translates  :  "  He  takes  aim  with  his 
arrows,  as  if  they  were  cut  in  pieces." 
Conant :  "  He  will  fit  his  arrows,  they 
shall  be  as  if  severed."  The  idea, 
doubtless,  is,  that  the  arrows  of  the 
wicked  would  be  without  effect  as  though 
they  had  their  points  cut  off.  "  The 
Lord  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen 
to  nought,"  &c. 

3.  The  end  of  the  wicked  shall  he  fail- 
ure and  ruin.  (1)  Here  are  the  ideas 
of  ivasting  a,nd  failure  as  the  end  of  the 
wicked.  "  Let  them  melt  away  as 
waters  which  run  continually.  As  a 
snail  which  melteth,"  (fee.  (On  the 
metaphor  of  the  snail,  see  Tristram's 
"  Natural  History  of  the  Bible,"  p.  295, 
quoted  in  Lange.)  Wickedness  tends 
to  failure.  Sin  is  truly  a  missing  of 
the  mark.  The  life  of  the  wicked  shall 
pass  away  like  an  abortion  (Ps.  xxxvii. 
35,  36).  (2).  Here  is  the  idea  of  dread 
7min  as  the  end  of  the  wicked.  "  Before 
your  pots,"  &c.  Another  difficult  verse. 
A  more  correct  translation  would  be, 
"  Before  your  pots  feel  the  thorn,  whe- 
ther fresh  or  burning ;  He  will  sweep  it 
away  as  with  a  tempest."  "  Whether 
fresh  or  burning "  we  take  as  applying 
to  the  thorns.  Perowne  :  "  The  general 
sense  of  this  difficult  verse  seems  to  be 
this :  As  a  sudden  whirlwind  in  the 
desert  sweeps  away  the  thorns  which 
have  been  gathered  for  cooking  almost 
as  soon  as  they  have  been  set  on  fire, 
and  before  the  cauldron  has  grown  hot, 
so  shall  the  wicked,  and  all  their  yet 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LIX. 


incomplete  designs,  be  swept  away  by 
the  wrath  of  God."  The  ruin  of  the 
wicked  is  here  represented  as  (a)  sudden 
(1  Thess.  V.  3).  (/S)  Irresistible,  "as 
with  a  whirlwind "  (Prov.  xiv.  32). 
Such  is  the  dread  consummation  to 
which  wickedness  tends. 

V.  Wickedness  as  viewed  in  its 
ultimate  aspects.  The  consummation 
of  wickedness  affords — 

1.  Satisfaction  to  the  righteous.  "The 
righteous  shall  rejoice  when  he  seeth 
the  vengeance/'  tfec.  Alexander  :  "  To 
bathe  his  step;s  in  the  blood  of  others  is 
to  walk  where  their  blood  is  flowing,  to 
tread  the  battlefield  where  they  have 
fallen,  to  gain  a  sanguinary  triumph 
over  them,  or  rather,  to  partake  in  the 
triumph  of  another."  The  righteous 
rejoice  that  wickedness  does  not  triumph, 
but  is  defeated,  destroyed.  "  The  Lord 
reigneth." 

2.  Gonnctionto  men  in  general.  "And 
men  will  sa}'',  Verily,  there  is  fruit  for 
the  righteous,"  &c.  When  the  ultimate 
aspects  of  wickedness  are  seen  men  will 


be  convinced  that  the  moral  govern- 
ment of  the  world  is  in  the  hands  of  a 
righteous  Gcd.  Even  in  the  present 
state  of  affairs  events  are  frequently 
conducted  to  such  issues  thnt  men  can- 
not resist  the  conclusion  that  "  there  is  a 
God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth." 

Conclusion. — 1.  Leam  the  danger  of 
following  the  bias  of  our  nature  apart 
frorfi  the  grace  of  God.  "  When  we  fol- 
low our  inborn  nature  we  ruin  ourselves 
and  others."  2.  Rejoice  that  the  bias  of 
our  nature  to  evil  may  be  changed.  By 
the  grace  of  God  we  may  "  be  renewed 
in  the  spirit  of  our  mind,"  <fec.  (Eph.  iv. 
23,  24).  3.  Let  those  who  are  pursuing 
evil  turn  from  it  to  Jesus  Ghrist  and  to 
life  ere  it  reaches  its  dread  consumma- 
tion (Isa.  Iv.  6,  7;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11). 
4.  Learn  to  take  a  comprehensive  view 
of  the  divine  dealings  with  men.  By  so 
doing  we  shall  be  likely  correctly  to 
understand  the  ways  of  God.  5.  Cul- 
tivate a  strong  and  constant  faith  in  tht 
exercise  and  rectitude  of  the  Divine  ad- 
ministration in  human  affairs. 


PSALM    LIX 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician,  Al  taschith."  See  Introduction  to  Pb,  Ivii. 
"  Michtam  of  David. ^^  See  Introduction  to  Ps.  Ivi.  "  When  Saul  sent,  and  they  watched  the 
house  to  hill  him"  The  history  here  referred  to  is  contained  in  1  Sam.  xix.  li-18,  Moll  : 
"  The  contents  and  form  of  this  Psalm  do  not  lead  us  to  limit  that  dangerous  situation  in 
Gibeah  to  the  one  night  before  the  flight  which  was  rendered  possible  by  Michal.  It  is  par- 
ticularly the  recurring  verses  (vers,  6,  14),  which  describe  repeated  hostile  waylaying,  which 
begaii  with  the  evening." 

Both  the  nature  of  the  contents  and  the  style  of  the  composition  of  the  Psalm  confirm  the 
statement  of  the  superscription  as  to  its  authorship  and  occasion. 


The  Hunted  Life  and  its  Divine  Guardian, 
{Verses  1-10.) 


In  this,  as  in  several  preceding  Psalms, 
complaint,  prayer,  and  confidence  are 
the  chief  feelings  which  find  expression. 
Notice — 

I.  The  character  and  conduct  of  the 
persecutors. 

1.  They  were  wicked.  "  Workers  of 
iniquity."  The  expression  denotes  great 
activity  in  wickedness,  and  is  justly 
applied  to  Saul  and  his  base  agents. 

2.  They  were  cruel.      "  Bloody  men" 


They  sought  the  life  of  the  Psalmist 
though  he  had  done  them  no  wrong. 
"  They  make  a  noise  like  a  dog,  and  go 
round  about  the  city."  *'  He  compares 
his  enemies  to  those  half- wild  dogs, 
which  are  the  scavengers  of  the  cities 
of  the  East.  They  prowl  about  the 
streets  at  night  hunting  for  offal,  and 
hesitate  not  to  i)rey  upon  the  dead,  and 
even  the  feeble  and  helpless."  So  fierce 
and  cruel  were  they.     No  figure  is  too 

295 


PBALM  UZ. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


strong  to  represent  the  fierce  cruelty  of 

Saul  towards  David. 

3.  They  were  secret  "  They  lie  in 
wait  for  my  soul."  They  were  subtle 
and  politic  in  their  designs,  and,  as  it 
were,  lay  in  ambush  that  they  might 
destroy  his  life  (1  Sam.  xix.  11). 

4.  27iei/  were  strong.  "  The  mighty 
are  gathered  against  me."  *'  It  is  not 
mere  strength/'  says  Barnes,  "  that  is 
here  referred  to,  but  that  kind  of 
strength  or  courage  which  can  be  em- 
ployed in  a  desperate  enterprise,  and 
which  is  fitted  to  accomplish  any  scheme 
of  wickedness,  however  daring  or  diffi- 
cult." Unscrupulous,  bold,  and  strong 
were  the  men  whom  Saul  employed 
against  David  at  this  time. 

5.  I'hey  were  resolute  and  impetuous. 
"  They  run  and  prepare  themselves." 
Hengstenberg  translates  :  ''They  run  and 
plant  themselves  firmly."  The  terms 
and  the  metaphor  are  military.  David 
compares  his  enemies  to  an  attacking 
host,  which,  having  obtained  a  firm 
footing  on  the  walls  of  a  beleaguered 
city,  is  ready  to  rush  over  them,  or 
through  the  breaches  made  in  them,  into 
the  city.  They  were  settled  in  purpose, 
and  were  eager  to  execute  that  purpose. 
*'  Their  feet  were  swift  to  shed  blood." 

6.  They  were  slanderous.  "  Behold, 
they  belch  out  with  their  mouth,  swords 
are  in  their  lips."  Alexander  :  "  The 
first  verb  is  expressive  of  a  constant 
flow  or  gush.  What  it  is  that  they  thus 
pour  out,  although  not  expressed,  may 
be  readily  gathered  from  the  context, 
namely,  slanders  and  reproaches.  The 
swords  in  their  lips  are  significant  of 
sharp  and  cutting  speeches.  (See  Ps.  Iv. 
21,  and  comp.  lii.  2).  Arndt :  "Just 
as  a  naked  sword  inflicts  wounds,  so  do 
lies  and  calumnies  cut  in  pieces  innocent 
hearts." 

7.  They  were  practically  atheistic, 
*'  For  wiio,  say  they,  doth  hear?"  They 
were  wholly  destitute  of  the  fear  of 
God.  They  acted  as  though  there  were 
no  God.     (Comp.  Ps.  x.  11.) 

Such  were  the  foes  by  which  the  poet 
was  assailed  on  this  occasion.  They 
were  calculated  to  strike  terror  into  a 
brave  heart. 

IL  The  Prayer  of  the  persecuted. 
296 


**  Deliver  me  from  mine  enemies/'  dca 

Notice — 

1.  The  requests  presented.  David  en- 
treats God — (1)  For  defence.  *'  Defend 
me  from  them  that  rise  up  against  me." 
Margin  :  "  Set  me  on  high,"  &c.  He 
seeks  to  be  raised  far  above  the  reach  of 
his  enemies,  and  above  all  fear  of  them. 
The  man  who  trusts  in  God  "  shall 
dwell  on  high;  his  place  of  defence 
shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks."  (2) 
For  deliverance.  "  Deliver  me  from  mine 
enemies,  0  my  God.  Deliver  me  from 
the  workers  of  iniquity  "  &c.  The  foes 
were  many,  the  danger  was  great ;  but 
the  Psalmist  knew  that  God  could 
thwart  their  designs,  and  deliver  him 
from  their  hands.  (3)  For  judgment 
on  his  enemies.  "  Thou,  therefore,  O 
Lord  God  of  hosts,"  &c.  (ver.  6).  On 
'*  all  the  heathen."  Perowne  says,  "  The 
nations,  to  an  Israelite,  would  be  the 
embodiment  of  all  that  opposed  itself  to 
God  j  and  in  appealing  to  God  to  punish 
them,  he  would,  in  fact,  be  appealing  to 
Him  to  punish  all  evil  wherever  mani- 
fested. The  special  judgment  would 
follow  from  the  universal,  and  be  an  in- 
stance of  it.  .  .  .  To  the  true  Israelite, 
the  whole  outer  heathen  world  was  a 
world  lying  under  the  heavy  wrath  of 
God,  and  to  him  the  greater  part  of 
Israel  itself  seemed  corrupt  and  apos- 
tate." The  Psalmist  entreats  God  to 
visit  them  in  judgment.  The  perse- 
cutors of  the  servants  of  God  and  the 
enemies  of  His  cause  will  certainly  meet 
with  the  punishment  which  they  de- 
serve, unless  they  penitently  turn  from 
their  evil  ways.  When  He  arises  for 
the  help  of  His  people  He  will  smite 
their  foes  in  His  anger. 

2.  The  pleas  by  which  these  requests 
are  urged.  He  pleads — (1)  The  might 
and  malice  of  his  foes.  In  this  he  found 
a  powerful  reason  why  God  should  help 
him.  The  greatness  of  our  danger  and 
our  need  are  strong  arguments  with 
Him.  (2)  His  own  innocence.  *'  Not 
for  my  transgression,  nor  for  my  sin,  O 
Lord.  Without  my  fault,"  &c.  David 
had  not  in  any  way  injured  Saul,  or  any 
of  his  enemies.  So  clear  was  he  in  this 
respect,  that  he  could  appeal  to  the 
great  Searcher  of  hearts  that  ha  had. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALM  LIZ. 


neither  in  heart  nor  in  action,  wronged 
Saul,  or  merited  this  treatment  from 
him.  "  There  are  two  kinds  of  inno- 
cence, one  before  God,  the  other  before 
men."  David  was  quite  conscious  of 
the  latter  kind  of  innocence.  However 
great  a  sinner  he  was  against  God,  he 
knew  he  had  not  injured  Saul  even  in 
thought.  When  seeking  deliverance 
from  God  from  such  dangers  this  is  a 
powerful  plea.  (3).  The.  might  and 
majesty  of  God,  **  Thou  therefore,  O 
Lord  God  of  hosts/'  (kc.  These  names 
are  not  empty  formulas  or  poetical 
figures.  As  "  Lord  God  of  hosts "  all 
forces  bow  to  His  command.  He  can- 
not be  overmatched.  The  names  and 
titles  add  force  to  the  argument.  (4). 
His  personal  relation  to  God.  "Oh,  my 
God  .  .  .  the  God  of  Israel."  Blessed 
are  they  who,  in  their  trials  and  perils, 
can  plead  their  personal  relation  to  Him, 

in.  The  confldence  of  the  perse- 
cuted. The  Psalmist  was  not  dismayed 
by  reason  of  his  enemies,  but  confident 
in  the  all-sufficiency  of  his  God. 

L  In  God  as  infinitely  superior  to  his 
enemies.  **  Thou,  O  Lord,  shalt  laugh 
at  them,"  <fec.  It  is  for  God  a  light 
matter  to  confound  their  designs,  <fec. 
(Comp.  Ps.  ii.  4). 

2.  In  God  as  his  sure  defence.  "  Be- 
cause of  His  strength  will  I  wait  upon 
Thee  ;  for  God  is  my  defence."  Conant : 
"  My  strength,  I  will  wait  on  Thee ;  for 
God  is  my  defence."  God  is  our  high 
place.    In  Him  we  are  inviolably  secure 


— far  above  the  reach  of  the  utmost 
eflfort  of  our  enemies. 

3.  In  God  as  a  gracious  and  timely 
Deliverer.  "  The  God  of  my  mercy 
shall  prevent  me,"  <fec.  Conant :  "  God 
with  His  loving-kindness  will  anticipate 
me."  Moll :  "  My  God  will  come  to 
meet  me  with  His  grace."  Spurgeon  : 
"  How  frequently  have  we  met  with 
preventing  mercy — the  supply  prepared 
before  the  need  occurred — the  refuge 
built  before  the  danger  arose.  Far  ahead 
into  the  future  the  foreseeing  grace  of 
heaven  has  projected  itself,  and  fore- 
stalled every  difficulty."  So  David  rose 
triumphant  over  his  trials  and  fears,  (fee. 

Conclusion. — What  message  has  this 
chapter  from  the  history  of  the  pious 
Psalmist  for  us  in  our  life  to-day  ?  1. 
The  godly  are  still  subject  to  sore  trials^ 
sometimes  to  hitter  persecutions,  (fee.  2. 
Happy  are  they  who,  in  their  trials,  are 
conscious  of  their  inuoce^ice.  Suffering 
is  far  more  severe  and  intolerable  when 
it  is  the  direct  result  of  sin,  and  is 
accompanied  with  a  sense  of  gnilt,  than 
when  we  are  sustained  by  the  conscious- 
ness of  our  integrity.  3.  More  happy 
are  they  who,  in  their  trials  arid  perils, 
can  look  to  God  for  defence  and  deliver- 
ance as  a  God  in  covenant  relations  with 
themselves.  *'  Oh,  my  God  ...  The  God 
of  Israel."  In  Him  they  have  all-suffi- 
ciency. "  They  that  be  with  us  are 
more  than  they  that  be  with  them." 
"  Greater  is  He  that  is  in  you  than  he 
that  is  in  the  world."  "If  God  be  for 
us,  who  can  be  against  us  1 " 


The  Diverse  Destinies  of  Men  manifesting  the  Reign  of  God. 

{Verses  11-17.) 


The  Psalmist  here  prays  for,  or,  as 
some  say,  {>redicts,  the  infliction  of  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  the  wicked  who 
were  persecuting  him,  and  announces  his 
determination  to  celebrate  the  praise  of 
his  protecting  and  delivering  God. 

I.  The  destiny  of  the  enemies  of 
the  good.  Their  destiny  is  here  set 
forth  in  two  aspects. 

1.  Life  protracted  in  misery.  "Slay 
them  not,"  (fee.  Here  are  three  elements 
of  misery.      (1).  Fruitless  wanderings- 


"  Scatter  them  by  Thy  power."  Heng- 
stenberg  :  *'  Make  them  wander  up  and 
down  through  Thy  power."  It  is  a 
prayer  that  God  would  lead  them  astray, 
so  that  they  might  fail  of  their  object. 
This  verb  is  used  of  Cain  (Gen.  iv.  12), 
and  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  (Num. 
xxxii.  13).  The  wicked  do  miss  the 
mark  in  life.  They  achieve  no  great 
purposes.  And,  even  when  they  are 
able  to  carry  their  plans  to  a  successful 
issue,  they  find  no  satisfaction    in  the 

297 


fSALM  LIS. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


result.  (2).  Heavy  afflictions.  "  Bring 
them  down,  O  Lord  our  shield."  God 
will  certainly  bumble  and  abase  the 
enemies  of  His  people.  Calvin  :  ''  He 
wills  that  they  should  be  thrown  down 
from  their  honourable  position,  be  cast, 
as  it  were,  before  one's  feet,  so  that  they 
may  afford  in  their  misery  and  disgrace 
a  standing  spectacle  of  the  Divine  in- 
dignation." (3).  Want  of  satisfaction. 
"  And  at  evening  let  them  return,"  &c., 
vers.  14,  15.  Ver.  14  is  a  repetition  of 
ver.  6.  The  idea  is.  Let  them  come,  and 
prowl  and  howl  in  vain,  and  meet  with 
the  mortifying  disappointment  which 
they  deserve.  The  marginal  rendering 
of  ver.  15  is  correct.  "As  for  them, 
they  shall  wander  up  and  down  for 
food,  if  they  be  not  satisfied,  then  they 
will  stay  all  night."  They  shall  wander 
in  search  of  food  and  find  none,  and 
shall  [)ass  the  night  full  of  disgust  and 
pain  from  unsatisfied  cravings.  "  It  is 
the  image  of  a  wretched  existence  in 
hunger  and  pain."  Wickedness  does 
not  satisfy  its  agents.  The  evil  heart  is 
not  restful.  It  is  a  stranger  to  satisfac- 
tion and  peace.  "  The  wicked  are  like 
the  troubled  sea  when  it  cannot  rest," 
&c.  The  Psalmist  prays  that  this  dis- 
appointment and  wretchedness  may  be- 
fall his  enemies,  that  they  may  thus 
become  monuments  of  the  righteousness 
of  the  Divine  rule. 

2.  Life  ending  in  ruin.  '*  Consume 
them  in  wrath,"  &c.  Perowne :  "This 
does  not  contradict  the  previous  im})re- 
cation.  He  would  have  his  enemies 
destroyed  at  last,  but  only  after  they 
had  been,  by  a  protracted,  miserable 
existence,  a  warning  to  men  of  God's 
righteous  severity."  The  idea  and  de- 
sire of  the  Poet  was,  that  God  would 
visit  them  with  one  judgment  after  an- 
other, and  ultimately  bring  them  to 
utter  ruin.  Wickedness,  if  persisted  in, 
must  terminate  in  destruction.  "  Sin, 
when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death." 

Let  it  be  distinctly  noted  that  the 
destiny  of  the  wicked  is  directly  connected 
ivith  their  sin.  "  For  the  sin  of  their 
mouth,"  &c.  On  the  sin  of  their  mouth 
we  have  remarked  on  ver.  7.  The 
destruction  of  the  wicked  is  viewed  as 
the  just  consequence  of  their  sin.  The 
298 


slander,  pride,  and  cruelty  of  the  enemies 
of  David  drew  down  upon  them  the 
righteous  judgments  of  heaven.  Men 
meeten  themselves  by  wickedness  for 
ruin  before  God  dooms  them  to  it.  A 
man's  hell  grows  out  of  his  own  cha- 
racter and  conduct. 

II.  The  destiny  of  the  suffering 
good.  In  the  midst  of  his  persecutions 
and  trials  the  Psalmist  confidently  anti- 
cipates a  life  of  devout  and  hearty  praise. 
Notice — 

1.  The  object  of  his  praise.  "  Unto 
Thee,  O  my  strength,  will  I  sing."  God 
was  the  source  of  the  strength  of  the 
Psalmist.  In  Him  he  found  all  that 
he  needed,  and  to  Him  his  praise  was 
offered. 

2.  The  reason  of  his  praise.  "  For 
Thou  hast  been  my  defence  and  refuge 
in  the  day  of  my  trouble.  For  God  is 
my  defence,  the  God  of  my  mercy." 
The  rich  grace  of  God  tow^ard  us,  and 
His  sure  protection  of  us,  are  a  most 
sufficient  reason  for  heartiest  and  grate- 
fullest  praise. 

3.  The  theme  of  his  praise.  "  I  will 
sing  of  Thy  powder;  yea,  I  will  sing 
aloud  of  Thy  mercy."  M.  Henry  : 
"Power,  without  mercy,  is  to  be  dreaded; 
mercy,  without  power,  is  not  what  a 
man  can  expect  much  benefit  from  ;  but 
God's  power  by  which  He  is  able  to 
help  us,  and  His  mercy  by  which  He  is 
inclined  to  help  us,  will  justly  be  the 
everlasting  praise  of  all  the  saints." 

4.  The  manner  of  his  praise.  (1.) 
He  would  "  sing."  Devout  song  is  a 
natural  and  becoming  expression  of  gra- 
titude and  joy.  (2.)  He  w^ould  "  sing 
aloud."  In  this  way  he  would  make 
his  boast  in  the  Lord,  and  seek  to  en- 
kindle the  spirit  of  worship  in  others. 
(3.)  He  would  "  sing  aloud  in  the  morn- 
ing." The  morning  is  the  emblem  of 
deliverance  from  trial,  of  prosperity  and 
of  joy.  Morning  is  the  beautiful  sym- 
bol of  the  destiny  of  the  righteous.  God 
will  turn  the  darkness  of  their  night  of 
suffering  into  the  beautiful  light  of  the 
morning  of  gladness.  (Comp.  2  Sam. 
xxiii.  4 ;  Job  xi.  17  ;  Ps.  xc.  14,  xcii.  2). 
The  wicked  are  advancing  to  the  thick 
darkiiess  of  a  dread  night :  the  righteous 
to  the  unwaning  light  of  a  joyous  day. 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LIZ. 


III.  The  reign  of  God  manifested 
in  these  diverse  destinies.     The  dark 
destiny   of  the  wicked,  and  the  joyous 
one  of   the  good,  are  regarded   by  the 
Psalmist  as  supplying  evidence  of  the 
righteous  government   of   God.       **  Let 
them   know   that   God  ruleth  in  Jacob 
unto   the   ends   of   the  earth."      David 
desired  that  it  might  be  known  among 
the   nations   that   God   ruled    over  His 
people — not  the  cruel  and  wicked  Saul, 
but    the   holy    God.       His   feeling  was 
similar  to  that  to  which  he  gave  expres- 
sion as  he  encountered  Goliath,  "  That 
all  the  earth  may  know  that  there  is  a 
God  in  Israel."      The  design  of  God's 
judgments  is  to  convince  men  that  the 
Lord   reignetli.      They  aim  not  merely 
at   the  punishment   of   the  impenitent, 
but  at  the   warning   of  the  wiclced,  the 
confirmation  of  the  faith  of  helievers,  and 
the  instruction  of  all  men. 

Conclusion. — L  If  there  he  revenge 


fonnd  in  the  desire  of  the  Psalmist  con- 
cerning his  enemies,  in  that  he  is  not  an 
example  to  us.  In  him  revenge  cannot 
be  commendable.  In  us,  in  this  Chris- 
tian dispensation,  it  would  be  exceed- 
ingly sinful. 

2.  Yet  wickedness  brings  misery  and 
leads  to  ruin.  It  is  well  that  it  does. 
It  would  be  evil  and  unspeakably  cala- 
mitous were  it  otherwise.  Every  right- 
minded  and  true-hearted  man  must 
approve  this, — rejoice  in  this.  3.  So 
righteousness  tendeth  to  life  and  peace 
and  joy.  He  who  by  faith  is  interested 
in  the  Divine  power  and  mercy  may 
triumph  even  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies. 
"  Liglit  is  sown  for  the  righteous,"  (fee. 
4.  Though  appearances  sometimes  seem 
inconsistent  with  the  supremacy  of  the 
righteous  government  of  God,  yet  he  ever 
ruleth,  and  in  the  end  His  government 
shall  he  universally  acknowledged. 


Meditation  and  Praise. 
{Verses  16,  17.) 


Consider — 

I.  The  subject  of  the  Psalmist's 
meditation. 

1.  He  meditated  upon  the  Divine 
mercy.  All  the  perfections  of  the  Divine 
nature  are  glorious  and  furnish  matter 
for  deliii-htful  meditation.  But  it  is 
from  His  mercy  that  we  draw  our  chief 
consolation,  encouragement,  and  hope. 
Every  good  man  has  an  experimental 
knowledge  of  the  mercy  of  God.  In  every 
age  God  has  exercised  his  mercy  to  men  ; 
but  the  gift  of  Christ  is  its  grandest  ex- 
pression. To  seek  an  interest  in  the 
mercy  of  God  is  of  the  first  importance. 

2.  He  contemplated  God  as  his  refuge 
in  trouble.  "  Thou  hast  been  my  de- 
fence and  refuge,"  <fec.  To  have  a  refuge 
in  time  of  trouble  is  desirable.  "  Lord, 
Thou  hast  been  our  dwellirig-phice  in  all 
generations."  We  have  every  encourage- 
ment to  put  our  trust  in  God.  He  is 
represented  as  a  '*rock,"  a  "fortress," 
a  *'  high  tower,"  a  "  shield,"  and  a 
"buckler."  God  as  a  refuge — (1.)  Is 
near, — always  at  hand.  (2.)  Affords 
the  greatest  security.     (3.)  Is  suitable. 


Our  troubles  differ,  but  He  is  a  suitable 
refuge  in  every  trouble.  (4.)  David 
proved  God  as  his  refuge.  Saul  had 
laid  plots  to  destroy  him,  but  the  Lord 
had  delivered  him.  We  also  have 
obtained  support  and  relief  by  trusting 
in  God. 

3.  He  contemplated  God  as  his  strength 
and  confided  in  His  power.  "  I  will 
sing  of  thy  power.  Unto  Thee,  O  my 
strength,  will  I  sing."  In  what  respects 
are  we  to  consider  God  as  the  strength  of 
His  people  ?  (1.)  He  defends  them  from 
danger  by  His  power.  (2. )  He  assists  and 
strengthens  them  for  duty  by  His  grace. 

II.  The  influence  of  the  Psalmist's 
meditation.  It  led  him  to  praise 
God.     ''  I  will  sing,"  (fee. 

1.  Praising  God  is  most  reasonable. 

2.  Is  a  pleasant  and  delightful  exer- 
cise. 

3.  Should  be  a  part  of  every  day^s 
employment.  Divine  goodness  is  daily 
manifested  and  should  be  daily  ac- 
knowledged. 

4.  Will  tend  to  prepare  us  to  meet  the 
trials  which  may  yet  be  before  us. 

299 


PSALM  LX. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


5,  Will  tend  to  meeten  us  for  the 
enjoyment  of  heaven. 

6.  JUquires  a  suitable  frame  of  mind. 
True  praise  springs  from  gratitude ;  and 
is  [)roinoted  by  a  consideration  of  what 
God  is,  what  He  has  done  for  us,  and 
what  he  has  promised  to  do  for  us. 


Conclusion. — 1.  How  great  are  tht 
privileges  of  the  people  of  God  !  2.  How 
important  seriously  to  consider  ivhethef 
we  are  interested  in  these  privileges. 
3.  Learn  the  importance  of  continuing 
to  make  God  our  refuge  in  trouble,"^ 
Abridged  from  an  unpublished  M.S, 


PSALM    LX. 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician."  See  Introduction  to  Ps.  Ivii.  "  Upon  Shushan- 
eduth"  is  probably  a  musical  direction  to  the  leader  of  the  choir.  In  the  superscription  to 
Psalms  xlv.,  Ixix.,  and  Ixxx.,  we  have  Shoshannim,  the  plural  of  Shushan.  See  Introduction 
to  Ps.  xlv.  **  Shushan -eduth''  signifies  "the  lily  of  testimony,"  and,  possibly,  contains  the 
first  words  of  some  psalm  to  the  melody  of  which  this  psalm  was  to  be  sung.  **  Michtam  of 
David."  See  Introduction  to  Ps.  Ivi.  '*  To  teach."  Moll  :  "  As  for  the  expression  *to  teach,' 
there  is  nothing  to  decide  whether  it  designates  the  psalm  as  designed  for  the  instruction  of 
posterity,  or  whether  it  refers  particularly  to  the  design  of  bringing  the  unmanageable  tribes  to 
recognise  the  Divine  choice  of  David  by  teaching  them  that  his  government  was  pleasing  to 
God,  or  whether  it  states  directly  its  purpose  of  being  committed  to  memory  by  the  people  on 
account  of  its  national  significance,  as  Deut.  xxxi.  19,  or  whether  it  is  to  be  explained  by 
2  Sam.  i.  18,  and,  accordingly,  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  song  of  military  exercise,  which  was  to  be 
Bung  in  connection  with  shooting  with  the  bow."  "  When  he  strove  with  Aram-naharaim,'* 
fee.  **  Aram-naharaim"  or  Aram  of  the  two  rivers,  is  a  name  sometimes  applied  to  Syria  or 
Mesopotamia.  **  Aram-Zobah"  is  the  name  of  a  portion  of  Syria,  which  at  this  time  formed  a 
separate  kingdom.  Its  exact  position  and  limits  cannot  now  \.>e  determined.  "  The  valley  of 
salt,"  says  Robinson,  **can  be  nothing  else  than  the  district  adjoining  the  Salt-Mountain,  to  the 
south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which,  in  reality,  formed  the  boundary  between  the  ancient  territories 
of  Judah  and  Edom."  The  events  referred  to  in  the  superscription  are  recorded  in  2  Sam.  viii., 
and  1  Chron.  xviii.  This  victory  is  here  said  to  have  been  achieved  by  Joab  ;  but  in  2  Sam. 
viii.  13,  it  is  attributed  to  David ;  and,  in  2  Chron.  xviii.  12,  Abishai  is  mentioned  as  the  con- 
queror. The  explanation  of  Michaelis  is  admirable  :  **  David,  as  king,  Joab,  as  commander-in- 
chief,  and  Abishai,  as  sent  by  his  brother  on  this  particular  expedition,  defeated  the  enemy." 
There  is  a  difi'erence  in  the  number  mentioned  as  slain.  Here,  it  is  said  to  be  twelve  thousand ; 
but  in  2  Sam.  viii.  13,  and  1  Chron.  xviii.  12,  it  is  said  to  be  eighteen  thousand  The  discre- 
pancy may  indicate  that  both  numbers  are  mere  estimates,  or  it  may  have  arisen  from  a  mistake 
of  a  copyist,  or,  as  seems  to  us  most  probable,  it  is  accounted  for  in  this  way,  that  here  the 
reference  is  to  one  engagement,  while  the  history  refers  to  the  entire  campaign. 


Complaint,  Prayer,  and  Encouragement. 
(Verses  1-4.) 


It  is  probable  that  the  lamentation 
and  petitions  of  verses  1-3  are  a  record 
of  past  experiences,  not  the  utterance 
of  present  feelings,  because  the  psalm 
refers  to  a  time  when  a  considerable 
measure  of  prosperity  had  been  granted 
to  Israel.  The  Poet  speaks  in  the  psalm 
not  as  an  individual,  but  as  the  mouth- 
piece of  the  whole  people.  In  this  first 
strophe  we  have  three  homiletic  points — 

I.  Complaint.     (Verses  1-3). 

1.  Great  calamities  are  here  com- 
plained  of.  "  Thou  hast  broken  us  ; 
Thou  liast  made  the  earth  to  tremble; 
300 


Thou  hast  broken  it ;  it  ahaketh  ;  Thou 
hast  showed  Thy  people  hard  things; 
Thou  hast  made  us  to  drink  the  wine 
of  astonishment."  The  reference  is  to 
the  severe  injuries  and  "  losses  which 
Israel  had  formerly  sustained  in  the 
war  against  the  Syrians,  and  especially 
through  the  irruption  of  the  Edomites." 
The  figures  employed  by  the  Psalmist — 
the  trembling  and  rent  land,  the  people 
broken,  and  prostrate  as  though  drunk 
with  strong  wine — indicate  the  greatness 
of  the  calamities,  and  the  deep  sense 
of  them  realised  by  the  people.      The 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALH  LZ. 


Church  of  God  upon  earth  is  sometimes 
visited  with  sore  trials,  and  is  called  to 
pass  through  fiery  persecutions,  which 
cause  bitter  lamentation,  &c. 

2.  These  calamities  are  regarded  as 
signs  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  "  O 
God,  Thou  hast  cast  us  off,  Thou  hast 
been  displeased."  It  seemed  to  them 
in  their  distresses  that  God  treated  them 
as  though  they  were  loathsome  and 
offensive  to  Him,  and  as  though  He 
were  angry  with  them.  Their  miseries 
and  calamities  are  viewed  as  coming 
from  Him.  When  His  people  griev- 
ously sin  against  Him,  God  withdraws 
from  them  the  shield  of  His  protection, 
and  allows  their  enemies  to  triumph 
over  them. 

3.  The  Divine  displeasure  is  always 
the  result  of  human  sin.  Perowne  : 
"  When  men  will  drink  presumptuously 
of  the  cup  of  their  wickedness,  God 
forces  it,  as  it  were,  into  their  hands, 
till  they  have  drained  the  very  dregs  as 
the  cup  of  His  wrath."  He  never  casts 
off  man  until  man  has  first  cast  off  Him. 
Never  forsakes  a  church  until  that  church 
has  first  forsaken  Him. 

II,  Prayer.     The  Psalmist  prays — 

1.  For  the  restoration  of  the  Divine 
favour.  *'  0  turn  Thyself  to  us  again  ; " 
t.e.,  be  gracious  to  us  again,  restore  to 
us  the  signs  of  Thy  favour  and  friend- 
ship. When  the  favour  of  God  is  re- 
stored to  His  people,  their  prosperity 
and  triumph  will  not  be  long  delayed. 
**  In  Thy  favour  our  horn  shall  be  ex- 
alted." 

2.  For  the  repair  of  their  calamities. 
*'  Heal  the  breaches  thereof."  Repair 
the  disasters  which  have  befallen  Thy 
people.  Grant  unto  them  their  former 
prosperity  and  power.  Such  is  the 
meaning  of  the  petition.  Moll :  "  Wars 
are  for  nations  what  earthquakes  are  for 
their  lands ;  God  sometimes  visits  men 
with  both,  and  then  likewise  strikes  the 
congregation  with  hard  blows  and  shakes 
them  ;  but  He  heals  again  the  breaches 
and  rents  which  arise  thereby."  The 
Church,  in  times  of  distress,  should 
always  seek  God  in  prayer.  Prayer 
imparts  patience  under  trial,  power  to 
grapple  with  difficulty,  deliverance  from 
distress  and  calamity. 


ni.  Encouragement.  "Thou  hast 
given  a  banner,"  &c.  From  an  exami- 
nation of  the  context,  we  conclude  that 
the  ^^  banner"  is  the  promise  of  salva- 
tion which  God  has  given  to  Israel,  and 
"  the  truth "  is  the  faithfulness  and 
trustworthiness  of  the  promise.  The 
following  are  the  chief  points  in  this 
verse  as  related  to  the  main  scope  of  the 
Psalm. 

1.  God  has  given  to  His  people  most 
glorious  promises.  What  rich  and  splen- 
did promises  He  gave  to  ancient  Israel ! 
Victory  over  their  enemies,  salvation 
from  calamities,  undisturbed  possession 
of  Canaan,  &c.  What  "  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises"  He  has  given 
to  His  spiritual  Israel ! 

2.  These  promises  are  thoroughly  re- 
liable.  "  Displayed  because  of  the 
truth."  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  He 
should  lie  ;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that 
He  should  repent :  hath  He  said,  and 
shall  He  not  do  1  or  hath  He  spoken, 
and  shall  He  not  make  it  good  1 " 

3.  Being  so  glorious  and  so  reliablCf 
these  promises  should  be  conspicuously 
exhibited,  that  men  may  trust  in  them. 
The  banner  must  "  be  displayed."  These 
promises  of  salvation  are  compared  "  to 
a  highly  exalted  banner,  which  serves 
as  a  signal  to  one  lying  prostrate  in  his 
misery,  to  rise  up.''  To  the  people  of 
God  in  depression  and  distress,  let  us 
exhibit  the  promises  which  He  has  given 
to  them. 

4.  The  precious  and  faithful  promises 
of  God  should  inspire  His  people  with 
hope  and  courage  in  the  time  of  trial. 
This  we  take  to  be  the  chief  idea  in  this 
verse.  The  promises  encouraged  Israel 
in  their  distresses  and  calamities.  And 
in  the  present,  to  the  people  of  God  in 
time  of  trial,  they  should  impart  hope, 
and,  in  their  prayers  for  relief,  they 
should  strengthen  their  faith. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  people  of 
God  beware  of  sin,  for  it  is  the  parent  of 
darkness,  distress,  (Ssc.  2.  Let  the  dis- 
tressed seek  Him  in  penitence  and  prayer, 
<icc.  3.  Let  them  be  encouraged  in 
doing  so  by  the  exceeding  great  and 
precious  promises  which  He  has  given  to 
them, 

301 


PSALM  LZ. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


The  Glorious  Contliot. 

{Verse  4.) 


We  have  given  above  what  we  regard 
as  the  meaning  of  this  verse  in  its  rela- 
tion to  the  context.  We  purpose  re- 
garding it  at  present,  as  setting  forth 
certain  features  of  the  great  conflict 
with  evil  in  which  the  people  of  God 
are  engaged.     Notice — 

I.  The  object  of  the  conflict.  Many 
wars  have  been  waged  for  mean,  selfish, 
ambitious,  wicked  objects.  But  here 
is  a  banner  given  for  a  most  worthy 
object,  "  that  it  might  be  displayed 
because  of  the  truth."  The  people  of 
God  fight  for  the  banishment  of  igno- 
rance and  the  promotion  of  knowledge ; 
for  the  overthrow  of  error  and  the  en- 
thronement of  truth  ;  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  evil  and  the  diffusion  of  goodness; 
for  the  utter  defeat  of  the  father  of  lies, 
and  the  complete,  universal,  and  per- 
petual triumph  of  the  King  of  truth. 
Here  is  a  holy  war — a  war  against  all 
injustice,  falsehood,  error,  oppression, 
evil ;  and  in  favour  of  righteousness, 
truth,  kindness,  holiness. 

II.  The  character  of  the  soldiers. 
*'  Them  that  fear  Thee."  They  reverence 
God ;  they  obey  Him,  <kc.     Notice — 

1.  The  expulsive  power  of  this  fear. 
It  expels  all  other  fear.  He  who  fears 
God  much  will  fear  neither  men  nor 
devils  at  all. 

2.  The  impulsive  power  of  this  fear. 
It  inspires  enthusiasm  in  the  holy  cause 
— imparts  courage  in  the  conflict,  <kc. 
Cromwell's  Ironsides  were  men  who 
feared  God,  and  acted  as  ever  in  His 
presence.  Their  time  before  going  to 
battle  was  spent  in  prayer,  and  they  went 
into  the  fight  singing  psalms.  Their 
wathchword  was,  *^  The  Lord  of  hosts  is 


with  us ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  onr  refuge." 
They  were  never  defeated.  The  men  to 
do  the  work  and  fight  the  battles  of  the 
Lord  must  be  godly  men — men  who 
fear  Him. 

IIL  The  authority  of  the  Com- 
mander. "  Thou  hast  given  a  banner." 
God  has  given  to  His  people  the  stand- 
ard as  of  an  army,  that  they  might  go 
forth  and  fight  His  battles.  He  has 
commissioned  His  people  for  this  war, 
and  He  commands  them  in  it.  In  this 
we  have  a  guarantee  of — 

1.  The  rectitude  of  the  conflict.  He 
would  not  send  us  forth  in  an  unright- 
eous cause,  or  with  unrighteous  weapons, 
or  in  an  unworthy  manner.  The  object, 
the  weapons,  and  the  methods  of  this 
war  are  all  righteous  and  honourable. 

2.  Support  in  the  conflict.  To  every 
soldier  fighting  beneath  His  banner.  He 
says,  '*Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world."  He  sup- 
ports the  workman  in  the  vineyard,  and 
the  warrior  on  the  battle-plain. 

3.  Victory  in  the  conflict.  The  battle 
may  be  long  and  arduous,  but  the  issue 
is  certain  victory  to  those  who  fight  in 
the  cause  of  God.  He  who  has  given 
us  our  banner  will  also  give  us  the  palm 
of  the  victor. 

Con  clusion. — 1 .  Under  whose  banner 
are  you  fighting  ?  "  Who  is  on  the 
Lord's  side  ] "  2.  Who  will  enlist  under 
the  banner  of  the  Gross  ?  Christ,  our 
Leader,  will  receive  loyal  recruits.  3. 
Courage,  ye  soldiers  of  Christ,  for  you 
shall  gain  the  victory.  Teacher,  preacher, 
&c.,  go  on ;  for  you  shall  surely  win  the 
well-fought  day. 


Human  Perfection. 

(Ferses  5-12.) 

In  these  ▼erses  David  rejoices  in  the  forward  to  complete  victory  and  posses- 
victories  already  achieved  by  Israel,  and  sion  of  the  entire  land.  The  promises 
in  the  possession  of  the  promised  land  made  to  ancient  Israel  illustrate  the 
so  far  as  they  had  attained  it,  and  rely-  promises  given  to  the  Christian  believer. 
ing  on  the  promises  of  God,  he  looks  Canaan  is  a  type  of  the  spiritual  inherit- 
302 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LX. 


ance  of  the  Christian.      In  this  way  we 
see  here  an  illustration  of  human  per- 
fection. 
I.  The  nature  of  human  perfection. 

Here  are  three  aspects  of  it. 

1.  Salvation  from  troubles.  "That 
Thy  beloved  may  be  delivered,  save 
with  Thy  right  hand,  and  hear  me.  .  .  . 
Give  us  help  from  trouble ;  for  vain  is 
the  help  of  man."  The  troubles  of 
human  life  upon  earth  are  many  and 
sometimes  severe.  But  God  saves  His 
people  from  them.  He  does  so  some- 
times— (1)  By  removing  the  cause  of  the 
trouble.  Or  (2)  By  giving  grace  to  bear 
the  trouble  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  Or  (3)  By 
revealing  the  meaning  and  uses  of  trouble 
(2  Cor.  iv.  10-18).  (4)  By  sanctifying 
trouble  to  promote  tJie  well-being  of  the 
troubled  (Rom.  viii.  28).  By  the  grace 
of  God,  the  Christian  rises  superior  to 
trouble,  makes  it  minister  to  his  spiri- 
tual advancement,  and  shall  soon  pass 
away  from  it  for  ever. 

2.  Victory  over  enemies.  Israel  had 
to  contend  with  Philistia,  Moab,  and 
Edom  ;  but,  in  His  holiness,  God  had 
promised  them  complete  victory  over 
every  enemy.  The  Christian  has  to 
fight  against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and 
the  devil — against  evil  in  himself,  and 
in  society ;  but  he  has  the  promise  of 
more  than  victory  (Rom.  viii.  37,  xvi. 
20;  Eph.  vi.  10-13). 

3.  Possession  of  promised  privileges, 
God  had  promised  to  Israel  the  complete 
and  peaceful  possession  of  Canaan.  The 
Psalmist  looked  forward  to  the  realisa- 
tion of  that  promise.  Glorious  are  the 
blessings  promised  to  the  Christian — 
pardon,  peace,  holiness,  fellowship  with 
God,  heaven.  Here  are  some  of  the 
promised  privileges  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26-27; 
2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  2  Pet.  i.  4 ;  1  John  i.  3, 
iii.  2.  Surely  in  these  promises  we  have 
the  perfection  of  being.  To  have  God's 
Spirit  within  us,  and  to  walk  in  His 
statutes ;  to  be  changed  into  the  image 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord ;  to  be  par- 
takers of  the  Divine  nature  ;  to  have 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with 
His  Son  Jesus  Christ;  to  be  tlie  sons  of 
God,  and  to  look  forward  to  the  vision 
of  God  and  likeness  to  Him — this  is 
human  perfection. 


II.  The  attainment  of  hnman  per- 
fection.   This  is  here  set  before  us  as — 

1.  Promised  by  God,  "  God  hath 
spoken  in  His  holiness."  Moll :  "  It  is 
most  appropriate  to  understand  this  pro- 
mise, which  refers  to  the  duration  of 
the  possession  of  the  promised  land, 
and  the  supremacy  over  neighbouring 
nations,  not  of  a  special  oracle  given 
through  the  Urim  and  Thummim  of  the 
high-priest,  or  the  answer  just  sought, 
nor  to  limit  it  to  the  promise  given  to 
David  (2  Sam.  vii.  9  sq.),  and,  as  a  figu- 
rative reproduction  of  the  same,  but  to 
regard  it  as  a  free  summary  of  the 
ancient  prophecies,  especially  those  con- 
tained in  the  Pentateuch."  God  has  pro- 
mised clearly  and  repeatedly  to  the  be- 
liever the  perfection  of  being  and  bless- 
edness. He  "  hath  spoken  in  His  holi- 
ness." He  has  promised  as  a  holy  God, 
One  who  is  infinitely  superior  to  deceit 
and  change.  One  who  is  true,  and  who 
ever  fulfils  His  word.  The  Christian's 
hope  of  perfection  rests  upon  that  promise. 

2.  Promoted  by  prayer.  The  Psal- 
mist prays  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
mise. In  so  doing — (1),  lie  appeals  to 
the  Divine  strength.  "  Save  with  Thy 
right  hand."  With  the  right  hand  man 
wields  the  sword,  hurls  the  spear,  effects 
his  tasks,  &c.  God  has  power  to  achieve 
His  purposes  and  fulfil  His  promises. 
He  is  "  mighty  to  save."  *'  He  **  is 
able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly,"  &c. 
(2).  The  Psalmist  pleads  the  Divine  re- 
lationship. "  Thy  beloved."  God's 
people  are  dear  to  Him  as  the  apple  of 
His  eye.  He  has  loved  them  with  an 
everlasting  love.  This  love  is  one  of 
the  most  effective  pleas  which  they  can 
urge  in  their  prayers  to  Him.  (3).  The 
Psalmist  pleads  the  vanity  of  human 
help.  "  Give  us  help  from  trouble ;  for 
vain  is  the  help  of  man."  Man  is  un- 
reliable because  of  the  limitation  of 
his  power,  and  because  of  his  mutability. 
In  God  is  our  hope.  To  Him  we  direct 
our  prayer.  Prayer  is  a  condition  of 
blessing. 

3.  Guaranteed  by  past  triumphs  and 
present  possessions.  "I  will  rejoice,  I 
will  divide  Shechem,"  &c.  (vers.  6-10). 
Shechem  on  the  west  of  Jordan,  and 
Succoth  on  the  east ;  Qilead  (including 

303 


PSALM  LXI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


the  territory  occupied  by  the  tribes  of 
Gad  and  Reuben)  and  Manasseh  on  the 
east,  and  Ephraim  and  Judah  on  the 
west,  are  mentioned  as  representing  the 
whole  land  of  Canaan.  The  powerful 
tribe  of  Ephraim  is  spoken  of  as  the 
strength  of  the  head,  i.e.,  the  great  pro- 
tector of  the  most  vital  interests  of  the 
nation  in  time  of  war.  Judah  is  named 
as  the  lawgiver,  probably  in  reference  to 
the  ancient  prediction,  *'  The  sceptre 
shall  not  depart  from  Judah,'*  &c.  (Gen. 
xlix.  10).  Ephraim  was  the  helmet, 
and  Judah  the  sceptre  of  the  chosen 
people.  All  the  land  of  Canaan  east 
and  west  of  the  Jordan,  which  the  Poet 
thus  brings  into  view,  was  subdued. 
Moab  also  was  conquered.  "  Moab  is 
my  washpot,"  is  a  phrase  denoting  that 
the  Moabites  were  completely  reduced 
to  servitude  to  Israel  (2  Sam.  viii.  2). 
But  the  victory  of  Israel  was  not  com- 
plete. Edom  remained  unsubdued.  But 
its  subjugation  is  anticipated.  "  Upon 
Edoui  will  I  cast  my  shoe."  Moab,  in 
the  preceding  clause,  is  described  as  a 
mean  vessel,  in  which  the  feet  are 
washed,  and  now  Edom  is  spoken  of  as 
a  servant  of  the  lowest  grade,  to  whom 
the  sandals  are  thrown,  to  be  removed 
and  cleaned.  Or  the  figure  of  casting 
the  shoe  may  signify  the  placing  of  the 
foot  upon  Edom  in  token  of  its  com- 
plete subjection.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  the  idea  is,  that  Edom  should  be 
completely  vanquished  by  and  subjected 
to  Israel.  Philistia  is  also  described  as 
conquered.  During  the  period  of  the 
Judges  the  Philistines  had  severely 
oppressed  Israel  ;  but  David  com- 
pletely conquered  them  (2  Sam. 
viii.  1).  "  The  strong  city  *'  was  the 
rock-built  and  fortified  city  of  Petra, 
the  capital  of  Idumea  or  Edom.  From 
the   victories   already  achieved,   David 


was  encouraged  to  believe  that  God 
would  lead  him  into  Petra,  and  to  com- 
plete victory  over  the  Idumeans.  So  in 
our  spiritual  history,  our  past  triumphs 
and  present  attainments  contribute  to 
our  assurance  of  the  full  realisation  of 
the  privileges  which  God  has  promised. 
They  do  so  in  two  ways.  (1).  Our  past 
achievements  tend  both  to  encourage  and 
to  qiialify  us  for  further  achievements  in 
thef%Lture.  (2).  God^s  goodness  and  faith- 
fulness in  the  past  are  an  assurance  of 
His  blessing  in  the  future.  Thus  every 
temptation  conquered  is  a  prophecy  of 
the  full  and  final  victory.  Every  privi- 
lege enjoyed  is  a  pledge  of  the  complete 
possession  of  the  "  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible and  undefiled,"  &c. 

4.  Demanding  strenuous  effort. 
"  Through  God  we  shall  do  valiantly." 
We  must  "  do  valiantly "  if  we  would 
attain  perfection.  If  we  would  gain  the 
victory  we  must  fight  manfully  in  the 
battle.  If  we  would  wear  the  crown  we 
must  patiently  bear  the  cross.  If  we 
would  win  the  prize  we  must  run  the  race 
that  is  set  before  us  diligently  even  to 
the  end  (Luke  xii.  24  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  24-27; 
Heb.  xii.  1,  2). 

5.  Ascribed  to  God.  "  Through  God 
we  shall  do  valiantly ;  for  He  shall 
tread  down  our  enemies."  He  gives  us 
courage  in  battle,  patience  in  trial, 
strength  in  labour.  Our  salvation  was 
begun  by  Him,  and  He  alone  can  per- 
fect it.  To  Him  be  all  the  praise.  "  Not 
unto  us,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy 
name  give  glory,"  &c. 

God  in  Christ  is  the  beginning  and 
the  end,  the  commencement  and  the 
crown,  of  human  perfection.  "  For  in 
Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head bodily.  And  ye  are  complete  in 
Him,  which  is  the  Head  of  all  princi- 
pality and  power." 


PSALM  LXL 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — "  To  the  Chief  Musician."  See  introduction  to  Ps.  Ivii.  **  Upon  Neginah." 
Hebrew:  Neginath.  "The  LXX.  and  Vulg.,  evidently  read  Neginoth  in  the  plural,  which  occurs 
m  the  title  of  five  psalms,  and  is  perhaps  the  true  reading.  Whether  the  woid  be  singular  or 
plural,  it  is  the  general  term  by  which  all  stringed  instruments  are  descrihed."  **  Of  David** 
The  contents  of  the  psalm  confirm  the  title  as  to  its  Davidic  authorship.  The  psalm  was 
probably  composed  by  David  when  he  was  in  exile  in  consequence  of  the  rebeUion  of  Absalona 
(2  Sam.  XV.  -xviii.,  especially  xvii.  22). 

304 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


ssKUihVs 


The  Cry  of  a  Troubled  Heart. 
(Verses  1-4.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  A  painful  experience.  "  From 
the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto 
Thee,  when  my  heart  is  overwhelmed." 
The  experience  of  David  included — 

1.  Distressing  exile.  "From  the  end 
of  the  earth  "  is  an  expression  denoting 
a  painful  sense  of  removal  to  a  great 
distance  from  the  dwelling-place  of  God. 
The  country  to  the  east  of  Jordan,  into 
which  David  had  been  compelled  to 
retreat,  was  not  accounted  the  Lord's 
land  properly.  (Comp.  Num.  xxxii.  29  ; 
Josh.  xxii.  19).  In  this  country  the 
Psalmist  felt  himself  as  it  were  banished 
to  the  extremity  of  the  earth,  far  from 
the  face  of  God.  He  was  far  from  the 
city  that  he  loved  most,  from  his  home, 
from  his  throne,  and  from  the  taber- 
nacle of  his  God.  To  the  godly  soul 
separation  from  the  ordinances  of  wor- 
ship is  a  sore  trial. 

2.  Overwhelming  sorrow.  "When 
my  heart  is  overwhelmed."  Moll:  "In 
the  covering  of  my  heart."  The  idea  is 
that  his  heart  was  enveloped  with 
trouble.  Anxiety  and  grief  wrapped 
his  soul  as  a  garment.  Terribly  bitter 
and  painful  were  the  experiences  of  the 
Psalmist  at  this  time.  Our  souls,  too, 
have  known  the  bitterness  and  desola- 
tion of  great  sorrows  and  severe  trials. 
Like  David,  there  are  times  when  we 
are  in  anguish  because  of  the  feeling  of 
absence  from  God,  and  the  rebellion  of 
our  own  children,  and  the  ingratitude 
and  treachery  of  those  we  esteemed  our 
friends,  &c. 

II.  A  fervent  prayer.  "Hear  my 
cry,  O  God,"  &c. 

1.  The  object  of  the  prayer.  The 
Psalmist  seeks  Divine  audience.  "  Hear 
my  cry,  O  God."  And  Divine  con- 
sideration, "Attend  unto  my  prayer." 
But  the  chief  object  of  his  prayer  was 
Divine  protection,  "  Lead  me  to  the 
rock  that  is  higher  than  I."  More  cor- 
rectly :  "  Lead  me  to  a  rock  that  is  too 
high  for  me ; "  i,e.^  a  rock  so  high  that 
he  could  not  ascend  it  by  his  own 
power,  and  which  his  enemies  would 


not  be  able  to  ascend.  His  own  r<»- 
sources  were  inadequate  to  secure  his 
safety;  so  he  seeks  the  protection  of 
God.  The  high  rock  is  a  frequent 
figure  for  security.  He  who  stands 
upon  it  is  far  above  the  reach  of  his 
enemies.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
true  Rock  for  human  souls. 

^  The  self-distrust  involved  in  this 
prayer.  "Lead  me"  is  the  cry  of  the 
man  who  feels  incompetent  to  direct  his 
own  steps,  or  choose  his  own  path. 
"  To  a  rock  that  is  too  high  for  me," 
indicates  a  sense  of  insufficiency  and 
the  abandonment  of  self-dependence. 
If  we  are  to  be  secure  and  blessed,  we 
must  be  led  to  One  who  is  far  above  us 
in  wisdom,  power,  &c. 

3.  7'Ae  personality  of  this  prayer, 
"  Hear  my  cry,  O  God ;  attend  unto 
my  prayer,"  &c.  "  Though  all  men 
pray,"  says  Dr.  Parker,  "yet  each  man 
has  his  own  prayer.  The  heart  has  its 
own  way  of  telling  its  own  tales,  and 
cannot  be  satisfied  with  paraphrase  or 
generalisation.  It  must  tell  all  its  sins, 
and  set  forth  in  order  its  troubles,  its 
plagues,  and  its  high  desires ;  with 
broken ness  of  speech,  which  is  often  the 
most  perfect  of  eloquence,  it  must  recite 
the  number  of  its  failures,  and  tell  of 
all  its  groping  and  stumbling  along  the 
path  of  life.  No  man  will  it  accept  as 
a  hired  advocate ;  no  voice  could  do  it 
justice;  it  must  utter  my  cry  and  my 
prayer,  and  where  it  cannot  find  words 
it  will  heave  the  sigh  or  the  groan 
which  asks  God  to  be  His  own  inter- 
preter. We  may  have  great  helps  in 
prayer,  the  spirit  may  accept  the  choicely 
wise  and  tender  words  of  other  men ; 
yet  there  is  a  point  at  which  the  heart 
breaks  away  to  hold  secret  intercourse 
with  the  Father  and  Saviour  of  men." 

This  is  indeed  a  fervent  prayer — a 
pathetic,  urgent,  earnest  cry  of  the 
human  heart  to  God. 

III.  A  cheering  recollection.  "Thou 
hast  been  a  shelter  for  me,  a  strong 
tower  from  the  enemy."  In  former 
times  God  had  been  to  the  Psalmist  a 

305 


PlAUf  LXL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


sure  refuge,  had  preserved  him  safely 
amid  many  and  great  dangers,  <fec.  To 
the  thoughtful  and  devout  heart  life 
abounds  with  memorials  of  the  Divine 
goodness  and  faithfulness.  "It  is  in- 
expressibly important  to  keep  the  mind 
up  to  a  full  realisation  of  all  that  God 
has  done  in  one's  personal  history. 
When  a  man's  own  history  goes  for 
nothing  with  him,  he  may  be  regarded 
as  having  sunk  below  the  level  of  a 
man  ;  but  if  he  will  watch  how  God  has 
developed  his  life,  how  wondrously  He 
has  turned  it,  how  gently  He  has  with- 
drawn it  into  *  shelter  *  when  the  storm 
was  coming,  how  graciously  He  has 
placed  it  in  the  *  strong  tower'  when 
sounds  of  war  shook  the  air,  he  will  be 
moved  from  thankfulness  to  eloquence, 
and  will  say  to  those  who  doubtfully 
look  on — *  In  God  is  my  salvation  and 
my  glory;'"  <fec.  Recollections  such  as 
this  of  David's  should  be  cherished; 
because — 

1.  They  impress  us  with  our  obliga- 
tions to  God. 

2.  They  inspire  us  with  hope  in  time 
of  trials  and  courage  in  time  of  danger. 

IV.  An  exemplary  resolution.     "  I 


will  abide  in  Thy  tabernacle  for  ever ; " 
(fee.  The  Psalmist's  recollection  of  past 
mercies  inspired  him  with  confidence  in 
his  present  dangers.  "  Few  of  us  would  be 
doubtful  of  the  future  if  we  would  make 
a  right  use  of  the  i)ast."  "  Experience 
is  the  nurse  of  faith."  Trusting  in  God, 
the  Psalmist  looks  forward  to  a  life  of — 

1.  Perpetual  worship,  "  I  will  abide 
in  Thy  tabernacle  for  ever."  He  has  a 
firm  assurance  that  he  will  be  restored 
to  his  home  and  to  the  public  worship 
of  God.  It  may  be,  perhaps,  that  he 
looked  forward  to  a  home  in  heaven 
with  God  for  ever.  A  life  of  worship 
is  ennobling  and  blessed. 

2.  Hearty  confidence.  "I  will  trust 
in  the  covert  of  Thy  wings."  A  very 
tender  and  assuring  figure,  suggestive  of 
affection,  security,  rest.  Such  was  the 
full  and  hearty  trust  of  the  Psalmist  in 
God. 

Conclusion. — Let  us  aspire  and 
strive  after  a  life  of  confidence  and 
worship.  Such  a  life  will  raise  us  above 
the  dread  of  dangers,  will  bring  to  us 
rest  and  comfort  in  the  midst  of  sore 
trials,  and  will  lead  us  to  the  taber- 
nacle of  God  as  our  eternal  home. 


The  Sheltering  Book. 

{Versed.) 


I,  The  season  referred  to.  "  When 
my  heart  is  overwhelmed."  There  ire 
seasons  in  which  the  soul  of  the  (Jmis- 
tian  is  overwhelmed : — 1.  From  a  sense 
of  the  Divine  claims  on  our  obedience 
(Deut.  vi.  5 ;  Matt.  xxii.  37).  2.  From 
the  pressure  of  heavy  trials  (Psa.  Iv. 
12-14:).  3.  From  the  keenness  of  temp- 
tation. The  very  best  of  men  are  sub- 
ject to  temptation.  Moses  and  David, 
Daniel  and  Job.  Yea,  Christ  Himself. 
4.  From  the  anticipations  of  future  evils. 

II.  Whither  the  Psalmist  desires  to 
be  led.  "To  the  rock  that  is  higher 
than  I."     The  rock  gives  the  idea — 1. 


Of  strength  (Psa.  Ixii.  2,  6,  8).  2, 
Durability.  *'  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change 
not."  "Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yester- 
day, and  to-day,  and  for  ever." 

III.  The  grounds  of  the  Psalmist's 
plea.  "  From  the  ends  of  the  earth," 
&c.  1.  This  prayer  is  prompted  by  a 
consciousness  of  need.  2.  In  this  prayer 
we  have  the  true  source  of  ability  ad- 
dressed. 3.  In  this  prayer  we  see  the 
encouragement  he  derives  from  past  ex- 
perience. "  For  Thou  hast  been  a  shelter 
for  me,  a  strong  tower  from  the  enemy." 
— Geo.  Stockdale,  in  "  The  Pulpit 
Analyst." 


The  Confidence  op  a  Troubled  Heart. 

(Jenesb-S.) 

life ;    his   years   as   many  generationSw 


We  have  here — 
I.  Confidence  of  safety  and  stability 
in  God.     "  Thou  wilt  prolong  the  king's 
306 


He  shall  abide  before  God  for  ever." 
These    expressions    of    confidence    are 


EOMtLEftC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


nALMUL 


variously  interpreted.  They  are  inter- 
preted of  (a)  David  himself — that  God 
would  deliver  him  out  of  the  danger  in 
which  he  was  placed,  would  grant  him 
long  life,  and  restore  him  to  the  throne 
and  the  tabernacle  without  danger  of 
being  driven  into  exile  again.  (/3)  Of 
the  dynasty  of  David.  Hengstenberg : 
"David  speaks  designedly  of  the  days 
of  the  king  instead  of  his  own  days  for 
the  purpose  of  showing  that  he  con- 
sidered the  promise  of  eternal  dominion 
as  relating  not  to  himself  personally, 
but  to  his  family — the  royal  family  of 
David."  (7)  Oi  the  Messiah.  *' David, 
realising  that  he  is  the  anointed  of  the 
Lord,  does  not  always  distinguish  be- 
tween himself  and  the  Messianic  dy- 
nasty, so  that  the  latter  thought  fills  up 
as  it  were  the  background  of  his  con- 
sciousness." 

We  certainly  have  here  an  expression 
of  his  assurance  of  his  own  safety  and 
BtabiJity.  His  occupancy  of  the  throne 
was  imperilled.  Absalom  and  the  rebel 
army  sought  to  take  even  his  life.  But 
he  was  confident  that  God  would  pre- 
serve his  life,  and  restore  him  to  his 
throne.  "He  shall  abide  before  God 
for  ever,"  may  signify  more  than  a  con- 
stant abode  at  Jerusalem  in  the  enjoy- 
ment of  the  ordinances  of  worship. 
Barnes  :  *'  His  restoration  to  his  home, 
to  his  throne,  and  to  the  privileges  of 
the  sanctuary,  he  may  have  regarded  as 
an  emblem  of  his  ultimate  reception  into 
a  peaceful  heaven,  and  his  mind  may 
have  glanced  rapidly  from  the  one  to 
the  other.  On  earth,  after  hia  restora- 
tion, he  would  have  no  fear  that  he 
would  be  banished  again  ;  in  heaven,  of 
which  such  a  restoration  might  be  re- 
garded as  an  emblem,  there  would  be 
no  change,  no  exile." 

Notwithstanding  the  subtlety  and 
malice  and  power  of  his  enemies,  the 
spiritual  interests  of  the  godly  man  are 
perfectly  secured  by  Divine  grace  (John 
X.  28,  29;  Rom.  viii.  31-39;  2  Tim. 
i.  12).  Every  faithful  disciple  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  may  through  Him  triumph 
in  the  assurance  of  *'  a  crown  of  glory 
that  fadeth  not  away,"  and  of  "  an  in- 
heritance incorruptible  and  uudefiled," 
dec. 


n.  Confidence  arising  ont  of  past 
experiences.  "  Thou,  O  God,  hast  heard 
my  vows ;  Thou  hast  given  me  the 
heritage  of  those  that  fear  Thy  name." 

1.  David  had  proved  the  efficacy  of 
prayer.  His  vows  included  petitions. 
They  were  prayers  accompanied  with 
solemn  promises.  Prayer  was  not  a 
mere  theory  or  form  with  David,  not  a 
spiritual  gymnastic  either.  He  knew 
its  reality  and  power  and  preciousness 
by  experience. 

2.  He  had  received  the  heritage  of  the 
godly.  "  Thou  hast  given  me  the  heri- 
tage of  those  that  fear  Thy  name." 
Perowne :  *'  Primarily  this  would  be  the 
land  of  Canaan,  and  then  it  would  in- 
clude all  blessings,  temporal  and 
spiritual,  which  were  in  fact  implied 
and  comprised  in  the  possession  of  the 
land."  Glorious  is  the  heritage  of  those 
who  fear  God  now  (Rom.  viii.  16,  17). 
It  is  clear,  from  both  the  experience  of 
the  Psalmist  and  the  statement  of  the 
apostle,  that  the  heritage  of  the  godly 
Toay  include  severe  trials.  It  is  a  point 
of  great  practical  importance. 

These  past  experiences  were  an  en- 
couragement to  the  Psalmist  to  trust 
God  in  his  present  dangers  and  trials. 
"  History  is  rightly  used  when  it  becomes 
the  guide  of  hope.  Yesterday  enriches 
to-day.  All  the  historic  triumphs  of 
the  Divine  arm  stimulate  us  in  the 
present  battle."  What  God  has  been 
and  done  is  an  earnest  of  what  He  will 
yet  be  and  do.  "  Because  Thou  hast 
been  my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow 
of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice." 

III.  Confidence  expressing  itself  in 
prayer.  "  Oh,  prepare  mercy  and  truth 
which  may  preserve  him." 

1.  He  looks  for  preservation  to  God  as 
the  covenant  God.  "  Mercy  and  truth," 
loving-kindness  and  faithfulness,  are  the 
attributes  which  the  Psalmist  is  accus- 
tomed to  mention  when  he  looks  to 
God  as  a  Being  in  covenant  relations 
with  His  people.  In  His  *'  mercy  "  God 
has  entered  into  gracious  engagements 
with  His  people  ;  and  in  His  "  truth  " 
He  will  fulfil  those  engagements. 

2.  His  confidence  does  not  supersede, 
but  stimulate  prayer.  Presumption  may 
lead   to   neglect   of   prayer;  but   faith 

307 


^saLM  Lxit.  BOMILETIG  COMMENTARf:  PSALMS, 


quickens  it.     The  attitude  of  true  con-  2.    The  ascription  of  praise  to  God 

fidence   is  that  of  the  bent  knee   and  constantly,       "  Praise    for    ever,  .    .    . 

the  uplifted  eye.  daily   perform    my   vows."      Praise   to 

IV.  Confidence  issuing  in  constant  God  should  not  be  an  occasional  exer- 
praise.  "  So  will  I  sing  praise  unto  Thy  cise,  but  a  permanent  element  in  the 
name  for  ever,  that  I  may  daily  per-  spirit  of  our  entire  life.  Gratitude,  re- 
form my  vows."  As  the  result  of  his  verence,  and  trust  should  characterise  us 
trial  and  prayer  and  assurance  the  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances. 
Psalmist  looked  forward  to —  Conclusion. — In  the  trials  of  life  let 

1.   The  ascription  of  praise  to  God.  the  Psalmist,  in  this  exercise  of  strong 

*'  His  praising  God  was  itself  the  per-  and  devout  confidence  in  God  in  the 

formance  of  his   vows."     He  felt  and  time  of  his  great  trial,  be  to  us  both  an 

acknowledged  the  binding  force  of  the  example   and    an    encouragement.       Be 

vows  which  he  had  made  to  God.    And  encouraged  to   exercise   trust  in   God, 

their  fulfilment  he  regarded  not  as  a  and    imitate    the     character    of    this 

duty  merely^  but  as  a  joyous  privilege.  trust. 


PSALM     LXH 

INTRODUCTION. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician.*^  See  introduction  to  Psa.  Ivii.  **  To  Jeduthun.** 
See  introduction  to  Psa.  xxxiz.  **  A  Psalm  of  David.*'  "There  are  no  historical  statements  or 
decisive  references  to  known  events  in  the  life  of  David,"  says  Moll  ;  "  yet  the  relationships  with 
Psa.  xxxix.  on  the  one  side,  and  with  Psa.  iv.  on  the  other,  point  to  the  time  of  his  persecu- 
tion by  Absalom.  This  relation  with  Psalm  xxxix.  makes  it  desirable  to  translate  the  charac- 
teristic ^^i  which  is  repeated  (vers.  1,  2,  4,  5,  6,  9)  not  by,  yea^  surely  ;  but  by,  only.  ...  In 

order  to  allow  the  designed  repetition  of  the  same  word  to  be  clearly  manifest  in  the  translation, 
it  is  better  to  retain  the  translation  only  as  this  is  appropriate  throughout.  For  the  assertion, 
that  only  with  God  is  the  soul  entirely  quieted  (ver.  1),  because  God  only  is  the  rock  (ver.  2), 
upon  which,  when  the  singer  is  established,  he  can  designate  as  vain  (ver.  3)  the  attacks  of 
those  who  only  desiie  to  cast  him  down  from  his  high  place  (ver.  4) ; — this  assertion  is  at  once 
the  foundation  for  the  exhortation  of  his  soul,  to  turn  to  God  alone  in  confident  submission 
(ver.  5),  because  God  only  is  the  reliable  helper  (ver.  6).  This  repetition  forms  not  only  the 
transition  to  the  renewal  of  the  appropriate  personal  confession  (ver.  7),  but  likewise  to  the 
exhortation  of  the  people  to  constant  trust  in  God  (ver.  8),  because  men  are  only  breath  one  and 
all  (ver.  9),  the  trust  in  temporal  possessions,  whether  goods  or  powers,  is  vain  (ver.  10);  but 
God  has  spoken  the  word,  which  has  been  frequently  heard,  and  is  valid  once  for  all,  that  the 
power  is  His  (ver.  11).  Therefore  the  petitioner,  moved  by  the  assurance  of  the  government 
of  God,  which  recompenses  justly,  turns  to  the  grace  of  God  which  is  equally  essential  with 
His  power  (ver.  12)."  The  psalm  is  divided  into  three  strophes,  each  of  four  verses.  Amyraldus 
calls  attention  to  a  peculiar  characteristic  of  this  psalm,  viz.,  that  it  does  not  contain  any  ex- 
pression of  *'  fear  or  dejection,  and  there  is  also  no  prayer  in  it,  although  on  other  occasions, 
when  in  danger,  he  never  omits  to  pray."  Thus  the  psalm  is  the  utterance  of  "the  full 
assurance  and  perfection  of  faith." 

Homiletically  we  shall  view  the  psalm  as  setting  forth,  Tlce  Triil,  Triumph,  and  Exhortation 
offai^ 

The  Trial  and  Triumph  of  Faith. 
(Verses  1-7.) 

L  The  trial  of  the  good  man's  faith,  to  thrust  him  from  his  elevation."  The 
The  trials  of  which  the  Poet  speaks  in  **  excellency,"  or  "  elevation,*'  points  to 
this  [)salm  arose  from  the  assaults  of  his  the  high  station  of  David,  and  it  is  note- 
enemies.     Notice —  worthy  that  the  word  to  "  cast  down," 

1.  Their  design.     They  aimed  at  the  or  "  thrust  from,"  is  used  in  2  Sam.  xv. 

overthrow  of  the  Psalmist.  '*  They  only  14,  by    David  with    reference  to   Ab- 

consult  to  cast  him  down  from  his  ex-  salom.     The    enemies  were  envious  of 

cellency."  Conant  :  "  They  only  consult  David's  dignity,  and  sought  to  defame 

308 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


^ALM  LXlt. 


his  reputation  and  to  thrust  him  from 
his  throne.  The  enemies  of  the  godly 
seek  to  drag  them  down  from  their 
spiritual  elevation,  to  overthrow  them, 
by  engaging  them  in  sinful  practices  or 
pursuits. 

2.   Their  method.    They  endeavoured 
to  carry  out  their  atrocious  design — (1). 
By  violence.      "  How  long  will  ye   ima- 
gine mischief  against  a  man?"  &c.    We 
incline  to   the  translation   of    Conant : 
"  How  long  will   ye  rush  upon  a   man, 
will   break  him  down,  all  of  you,  as  a 
wall  inclined,  as  a  fence  that   is   thrust 
down  ]  "      Hengstenberg  and  Hupfield 
translate  H^"),  murder.      But    Ewald, 
Delitzsch,  Moll,  Perowne,  et  at.,  tran- 
slate :  to  break  dovm.     The  enemies  of 
the  Psalmist  were  violent.      They  as- 
saulted  him   by  force.     They  rose  in 
arms  against  him  to  effect  his  overthrow 
and  to  destroy  him.     There  have  been 
times  in  the  history  of  the   Christian 
Church  when  bonds  and  imprisonments, 
fire  and  sword,  have  been   used  against 
its    members.      (2).     By    deliberation. 
*'They  consult.*'    They  employed  sub- 
tlety as  well  as  strength  to  effect  their 
wicked  designs.     "  Craft  and  power," 
says  Starke,  "are  the  weapons   of  the 
ungodly ;  if  the  one  is  not  enough,  they 
seize  the  other,  and  not   unfrequently 
make  their  attacks  with  both  at  once." 
*  (3).    By  fahehood.     "  They  delight  in 
lies ;  they  bless  with   their  mouth,  but 
they  curse  inwardly. *'     These  words  are 
literally  true  of  Absalom.     By  means  of 
fair  speeches,  when  his  heart  was  false 
and  black,  he  "  stole  the  hearts  of  the 
men  of  Israel."    In  falsehood  they  took 
delight.     "  A  chief  weapon  which  the 
world  has  always  employed  in  its  bitter 
contest  with  the  Church,  has  been  that 
of   lies."     The    great    leader    of    the 
forces  of  wickedness    is  the  great  liar. 
(John  viii.  44.)     Force,  subtlety,  false- 
hood are  all  employed  to  promote  the 
triumph  of  evil. 

3.  Their  cowardice  in  all  this. 
*'  How  long  will  ye  rush  upon  a  man, 
will  break  him  down,  all  of  you  V* 
Mark  the  contrast — "  all "  opposed  to 
"  a  man."     All  against  one  ! 

Such  was  the  trial  of  the  Psalmist. 
Will  his  faith  in  God  bear  the  strain. 


and  enable  him  to  rise  superior  to  his 
troubles  ?  Will  he  issue  from  the  trial 
victor,  or  vanquished  %  retaining  his  hold 
on  God,  or  drifting  from  Him  ? 

The  trial  of  his  faith  is  an  illustration 
of  the  trial  of  the  faith  of  the  godly  now, 
both  in  its  design  and  in  its  method. 

II.  The  triumph  of  the  good  man's 
faith.  The  victory  of  the  Psalmist  is 
manifest, — 

1.  In  his  intense  realisation  of  the 
all-sufficiency  of  God  (vers.  2,  5,  6,  7). 
He  trusted  in  God  as  the  rock  of  his 
strength,  his  salvation,  his  defence,  his 
refuge.  Here  are  the  ideas  of  abiding 
and  unchanging  strength^  a  "rock;" 
secure  shelter  and  protection^  a  "  refuge;  '* 
elevation  above  danger^  a  "  defence,"  or 
*'  high-place  ; "  and  complete  deliverance 
from  trials  and  perils j  "my  salvation.*' 
Calvin  :  "  The  reason  why  he  heaps 
together  so  many  names  of  God  is,  that 
he  may  meet  and  throw  back  the 
assaults  of  Satan,  by,  as  it  were,  so 
many  shields."  Again  :  "The  epithets 
which  David  applies  to  God,  in  re- 
ference to  His  power  to  uphold,  are  like 
so  many  pillars,  by  which  he  supports 
his  steadfastness."  Moll :  "  God  can 
screen  believers  against  their  enemies 
with  as  many  shields  as  He  has  names." 

2.  In  his  reliance  upon  God  alone. 
The  only,  which  is  the  characteristic 
mark  of  the  psalm,  is  used  not  less  than 
four  times  of  the  Psalmist's  trust  in  God 
(vers.  1,  2,  5,  6).  Spurgeon  :  "  We  can- 
not too  often  hear  the  toll  of  that  great 
bell  only  ;  let  it  ring  the  death-knell  of 
all  carnal  reliances,  and  lead  us  to  cast 
ourselves  on  the  bare  arm  of  God."  In 
himself  alone  God  is  more  than  suffi- 
cient to  meet  all  the  needs  of  His  people. 

3.  In  his  assurance  of  safety  and 
stability.  In  ver.  2,  he  says,  "  I  shall 
not  be  greatly  moved."  He  might 
be  shaken;  but  would  not  be  over- 
thrown. He  might  be  troubled  ;  but 
would  not  be  distressed — he  might  be 
perplexed  ;  but  would  not  be  left  in 
despair,  &c.  And  in  ver.  6  he  exclaims, 
"  I  shall  not  be  moved."  His  confidence 
increased  as  he  sang  this  psalm  of  faith. 
*'  The  more  faith  is  acf".ed  the  more  active 
it  is.  It  grows  by  being  exercised." 
How  triumphant  was  the  assurance  of 

309 


niLU  LXII. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


St.  Paul  as  to  the  security  of  believers 
in  Christ  Jesus  !     (Rom.  viii.  31-39.) 

4.  In  his  rest  in  God.  **  My  soul 
waiteth  only  upon  God."  Margin  : 
"My  soul  is  silent,"  <fec.  Conant :  "  Only 
in  God  is  my  soul  quieted."  Hengsten- 
berg  :  *'  Only  to  God  is  my  soul  silent." 
The  silence  *'  denotes  the  opposite  of 
that  state  of  tumultuous  agitation  which 
prevails  in  the  soul  as  long  as  it  looks 
anywhere  else  for  help,  when  in  great 
trouble,  than  to  God."  (Comp.  Psa.  xlii. 
5,  and  xxii.  2.)  Barnes  : — *'  The  feeling 
is  that  which  exists  when  we  have 
entrusted   all   to  God ;   when,   having 


entire  confidence  in  His  power,  His 
goodness,  His  wisdom,  His  mercy,  we 
commit  the  whole  case  to  Him  as  if  it 
were  no  longer  our  own.  Such  is  the 
calmness — the  peace — the  quiet — the 
silence  of  the  soul — when  all  is  left  with 
God."  See  on  this  point  the  beautiful 
hymn  in  "  The  Child's  Christian  Year,** 

**  O  Lord,  how  happy  should  we  be 
If  we  could  cast  our  care  on  Thee,"  &c. 

Here  then  we  have  faith  triumphantly 
resting  in  God.  Such  triumph  may  be 
the  portion  of  every  godly  souL  (Comp. 
1  Pet.  i.  3  9.) 


The  Exhortation  of  Faith. 
(FersM  8-12.) 


The  Psalmist  having  expressed  his 
own  unfaltering  confidence  in  God,  pro- 
ceeds in  these  verses  to  exhort  all  men 
to  exercise  a  similar  trust  in  God.  In 
this  exhortation  let  us  consider — 

I.  The  trust  prohibited.  (Vers.  9 
and  10.)  The  objects  of  trust  which  the 
Psalmist  prohibits  are — 

1.  Man.  *'  Only  vanity  are  men  of 
low  degree,"  &c.  David  regards  both 
common  men  and  men  of  distinction  as 
alike  unworthy  of  confidence  : — 

( 1 . )  Because  of  their  inability.  * '  Only 
vanity  are  men  of  low  degree."  They 
are  empty,  unsubstantial  creatures — a 
mere  breath — utterly  incapable  of  aiding 
any  one  in  the  great  needs  of  life.  In 
the  ordinary  and  everyday  trials  of  life 
men  can  be  sympathetic  and  helpful  to 
each  other;  but  in  its  great  and  deep 
and  solemn  experiences  how  powerless 
are  they  to  help  each  other  1  (2). 
Because  of  their  unfaithfulness.  "  Men 
of  high  degree  are  a  lie."  Men  of  exalted 
rank  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  objects 
of  the  soul's  trust.  As  an  object  of  con- 
fidence man  may  fail  by  reason  of  his 
want  of  constancy  as  well  as  by  his  want 
of  power.  Test  men  in  this  respect,  and 
you  will  find  them  either  feeble,  or  false, 
or  both.  "  To  be  laid  in  the  balance, 
they  are  altogether  lighter  than  vanity." 
Artidt :  "  If  there  were  any  one  among 
men,  immortal,  not  liable  to  sin,  or  to 
change,  whom  it  were  impossible  for  any 
310 


one  to  overcome,  but  who  was  strong  as 
arfangel,  such  a  one  might  be  something, 
but  inasmuch  as  every  one  is  a  man,  a 
sinner,  mortal,  weak,  liable  to  sickness 
and  death,  exposed  to  pain  and  terror, 
like  Pharaoh,  even  from  the  most  insigni- 
ficant animals,  and  liable  to  so  many 
miseries,  that  it  is  impossible  to  count 
them,  the  conclusion  must  be  a  valid 
one  :  *  man  is  nothing.'  '*  *'  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  Cursed  be  the  man  that 
trusteth  in  man,"  <fec.  (Jer.  xvii.  5, 
6.) 

2.  Oppression,  "  Trust  not  in  op- 
pression." Let  no  man  hope  to  render 
himself  safe  and  strong  by  oppressing 
others.  The  victories  of  the  conqueror 
may  be  reversed.  The  arm  of  the  tyrant 
may  be  broken.  And  then  the  oppressed 
may  arise  and  crush  the  oppressor.  He 
who  thinks  to  "  strengthen  himself  in 
wickedness  '*  will,  sooner  or  later,  find 
that  in  so  doing  he  has  made  an  utter 
mistake.     (Comp.  Psa.  lii.   7.) 

3.  Unlawfully  acquired  wealth.  "  Be- 
come not  vain  in  robbery."  There  are, 
we  fear,  thousands  in  this  nominally 
Christian  land  who  are  trusting  in 
wealth  which  has  been  unrighteously 
obtained.  Men  who  have  made  their 
fortunes  by  robbing  their  employes  of 
their  fair  wages,  by  adulterating  their 
goods  or  otherwise  defrauding  in  busi- 
ness, by  **  sharp  practice  "  in  trade  and 
speculation,    by    deceptive     advertise- 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXll. 


ments,  <fcc.  ; — let  not  these  men  pride 
themselves  on  their  wealth,  **  Treasures 
of  wickedness  profit  nothing."  "  Go  to 
now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for 
your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon 
you  ;"  <fcc.  (James  v.  i-4.) 

4.  Lawfully  acquired  wealth.  *'  If 
riches  increase,  set  not  your  heart  upon 
them."  The  word  "increase,**  or 
"  spring  up,"  is  used  as  the  antithesis  of 
"  robbery,^'  to  denote  wealth  obtained  by 
lawful  means.  Even  such  wealth  is  not 
to  be  trusted  in.  See  an  outline  on 
The  folly  of  Trusting  in  Riches  (Psa.  lii. 

None  of  these  things  constitute  a  true 
ground  of  trust  for  man.  Neither  any 
one  of  them  nor  all  of  them  combined  can 
meet  his  deepest  needs — the  needs  of 
his  awful  soul.  He  who  trusts  in  them 
is  doomed  to  disappointment,  to  misery, 
and  to  ruin. 

IL  The  trust  prescribed.  (Vers.  8, 
11,  12.) 

1.  Its  nature.  The  Psalmist  repre- 
sents this  trust  as  comprising  (1) 
Abiding  confidence  in  God.  "  Trust  in 
Him  at  all  times."  '*  We  must  have  an 
actual  confidence  in  God,"  says  Matthew 
Henry,  '*  upon  all  occasions,  trust  in 
Him  upon  every  emergency,  to  guide  us 
when  we  are  in  doubt,  to  protect  us  when 
we  are  in  danger,  to  supply  us  when  we 
are  in  want,  to  strengthen  us  for  every 
good  word  and  work."  "  At  all  times," 
even  in  the  severest  affliction,  the  ex- 
tremest  danger,  (fee  (2)  Unreserved 
communication  with  God.  "  Pour  out 
your  heart  before  Him."  Tell  Him  all 
its  griefs  and  fears,  all  its  sins  and 
sorrows,  all  its  hopes  and  desires.  We 
can  thus  pour  out  our  heart  unto  God. 
We  cannot  unto  man  ;  not  even  to  the 
most  trusted  amongst  men. 

*'  Not  e'en  the  tenderest  heart,  and  next 
our  own, 
Knows  half  the  reasons  why  we  gmile 
and  sigh.** 

But  unto  God  we  can  unfold  our  most 
"  secret  throbbings."  He  is  wise,  con- 
Biderate,  merciful,  &c.  We  may  thus 
pour  out  our  heart  unto  Him.  He  will 
not  repulse  us  ;  but  will  kindly  and 
patiently  listen  to  us.  We  should  thus 
pour  out  our  heart  unto  Him.      It  is 


our  duty  as  well  as  our  privilege  to 
fully  unburden  the  heart  to  God.  (3) 
This  trust  is  represented  as  an  exercise 
for  all  '*  people."  Not  simply  the  people 
of  Israel  are  meant  by  ''ye  people,"  but 
all  mankind.  "  All  shall  be  welcome  to 
trust  in  God,  for  He  is  the  confidence  of 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth.** 

2.  Its  ground.  *'  God  is  a  refuge  for 
us.  .  .  .  God  hnth  spoken  once,"  <fec.  (i) 
God  is  the  Almighty  refuge  oi  those  who 
trust  in  Him.  *'  God  hath  spoken  once  ; 
twice  have  I  heard  this,  that  power 
belongeth  unto  God.'*  The  power  of 
God  is  a  guarantee  of  His  ability  to 
protect  and  save  those  who  trust  in 
Him.  This  truth  God  had  deeply  im- 
pressed upon  the  mind  and  heart 
of  the  Psalmist.  "  God  hath  spoken 
once ;  twice  have  I  heard  this,'*  <fec. 
As  he  had  marked  God's  works  in 
creation  David  had  heard  this  testimony 
— *'  Power  is  God's."  He  found  the 
same  great  truth  in  the  wintten  Word  ; 
and  had  witnessed  confirmations  of  it  in 
Providence.  He  "  is  able  to  do  ex- 
ceeding abundantly,'*  tfec.  (2)  God  is  the 
gracious  refuge  of  those  who  trust  in 
Him.  Mere  strength  is  not  sufficient  to 
inspire  confidence.  It  may  awaken  aj)- 
prehension  and  alarm.  But  God  is  as 
kind  as  He  is  strong.  "  Also  unto  Thee, 
O  Lord,  belongeth  mercy."  Perowne  : 
**  Power  without  love  is  brutality,  and 
love  without  power  is  weakness.  Power 
is  the  strong  foundation  of  love,  and  love 
is  tlie  beauty  and  the  crown  of  power." 
(3)  God  is  the  righteous  refuge  of  those 
who  trust  in  Him.  *'  Thou  renderest 
to  every  man  according  to  his  works.** 
He  never  does  wrong  to  any  of  His 
creatures.  He  is  the  vindicator  of  the 
oppressed  and  injured.  Here  then  we 
have  a  broad,  immovable,  and  eternal 
ground  for  confidence  in  God. 

Conclusion. — How  unspeakably  im- 
portant is  the  object  of  the  soul's  trust ! 
"  We  may  make  unsuccessful  S[)ecula- 
tions  in  business,  we  may  venture  all  we 
have  on  some  ruinous  enterprise,  we 
may  even  put  our  lives  in  jeopardy  and 
lose  them  ;  still  all  may  not  be  lost : — 
the  soul  may  be  safe.  But  if  we  trust 
the  soul  to  something  that  will  fail  us 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  then  the  loss 

311 


?SALM  LXII. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


will   be  tremendous    and   irreparable/*      *'  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust 

*'  Trust  in  Him  at  all  times,  ye  people.*'      in  Him." 

Psa.    cxxv.    1,    2;    Jer.    xviii.    7,    8,  In  what,  or  in  whom,  are  we  trusting? 


God   a    Refuge. 


(Jer.  8.) 


"  God  is  a  Refuge  for  us.** 

I.  Illustrate    the  interesting    fact 
here  declared. 

Consider — 

1.  The  medium  through  which  God  is 
the  refuge  of  His  people.  The  godly 
among  the  Israelites  believed  in  the 
promised  Messiah,  and  to  them  God  was 
a  refuge.  It  is  through  the  work  of 
Christ  and  by  faith  in  Him  that  God  is 
our  refuge.  Sin  had  created  a  breach 
between  God  and  us.  That  breach  is 
healed  by  the  work  of  the  Messiah. 
Through  His  mediation  we  have  access 
to  God. 

2.  The  perfections  of  His  nature  which 
qualify    God    to  he   the   refuge   of    his 
peo]>le.     The  power  of  God  is  engaged 
on  their  behalf.      To  have  an  Almighty 
friend  for  our  refuge  is  an   inestimable 
privilege.       Divine    ivisdom.      All    our 
dangers  and  difficulties,  all  our  enemies 
and  their  designs,  are  known  unto  God  ; 
and    He  is  able  to  guard  us  from  every 
danger,    to    lead    us     through     every 
difficulty,  and  to  frustrate  the  designs  of 
all  our  foes.     Infinite  goodness.     God  is 
ready  to  afford  His  aid.     Nahum  1—7. 
Faithfulness.       On   His    promises    and 
engagements  we  may  safely  rely.     Ac- 
cessibility.    God  is  with  us.     He  is  a 
refuge  ever  near  to  us.     Immutability, 
Creatures   may  be   fickle  and   change- 
able, but  God  is  unchangeable.     Self- 


existence  and  independence.  Our  best 
earthly  friends  may  die,  &c. ;  but  God  is 
an  ever-living  friend.  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27.) 

3.  This  interesting  truth  is  confirmed 
hy  historical  facts.  In  all  ages  God  has 
been  the  refuge  of  His  people.  The 
preservation  of  the  Church  is  an  illus- 
tration of  this  truth.  It  has  been  like 
a  bush  burning  with  fire,  yet  not  con- 
sumed. 

II.  Consider  the  uses  to  which 
the  subject  may  be  applied. 

1.  As  connected  with  the  events  of 
Providence.  A  wise  and  good  and 
righteous  God  governs  human  affairs. 

2.  As  a  source  of  consolation  and  joy 
to  the  Church.  The  aspect  of  things  may 
in  many  respects  be  such  as  to  awaken 
our  fears  ;  but  "  God  is  a  refuge  for 
us." 

3.  As  a  comfort  to  individual  believers. 
In  losses,  family  trials,  bereavements, 
&c.,  *'  God  is  a  refuge  for  us." 

Learn — 1.  The  importance  of  trust- 
ing in  God.  In  troubles,  difficulties, 
temptations,  afflictions,  and  in  death, 
trust  in  Him  as  your  refuge. 

2.  The  importance  of  religion.  If  you 
neglect  religion  you  will  have  no  refuge. 
But  if  you  believe  the  Gospel,  God  will 
be  your  refuge.  He  will  guide  you  by 
His  counsel,  and  afterward  receive  you  to 
glory. — Abridged  from  an  unpublished 
MS. 


The  Power  of  God. 


{Verse  11.) 


.  Though  the  truth  of  God's  power  is 
one  of  the  most  simple  and  elementary, 
though  it  is  one  taught  by  reason  and 
nature  as  well  as  by  revelation,  it  is  one 
which  is  thoroughly  learnt  only  after 
much  Divine  teaching  and  often  many 
painful  experiences. 

I.  Produce  some  proofs  that  men 
do  not  generally  believe  in  the  power 
of  God. 

312 


1.  In  the  fact  of  sin.  By  his  every 
sin  the  sinner  proclaims  his  disbelief  of 
God's  power.  He  regards  all  His 
declarations  of  it  as  so  many  vain- 
glorious boastings.  He  cannot  fulfil  His 
threatenings,  &c.  Vain  imaginations 
these. 

2.  In  open  and  avoimd  infiaelity. 
Miracles  are  impossible  ;  and  as  the 
Gospel  is  full  of  mirdclns  it  must  be  re- 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS,  psalm  LZin. 


jected.     Though  God  may  have  power,  for    God    to    stem.  .  .  .  He   may   be 

He  has  not  omnipotent  power.  mighty  to  save,  but  not  omnipotent  to 

3.  In   the   trust  which  is  reposed  in  save. 

means  altogether  apart  from  God.     Is  it  II.    Offer   some   helps  to   faith   in 

not    still    true    that    oppression     and  God's  power. 

robbery    and    increased    riches   are  re-  1.   That  by  which  David  encourages 

garded   as.  means    which    will    be    all-  his    faith    in    Psa.    cxxi.        "  My    help 

sufficient  for  the  attainment   of  desired  cometh    from    the    Lord    which    made 

ends  ?    When  success  comes  we  worship  heaven  and  earth.^^    Is  not  He  who  made 

the  instrument ;  and  when  distress  visits  heaven  and  earth  sufficient  unto  you  % 

us  the  last  place  which  we  think  of,  when  2.  In  the  resurrection  of  Christ.     His 

we  are  seeking  help  and  deliverance,  is  tombstone  was  pressed  down  by  the  law, 

Jehovah's  footstool.  sin,  death,  and  hell.     Of  all  the  tasks 

4.  Distrust  is  another  proof  of  dis-  which  His  power  ever  had  to  overtake, 
belief  in  God's  power.  All  distrust  im-  this  was  assuredly  the  greatest  ;  and  if 
plies  not  only  a  doubt  of  His  faithful-  He  failed  not  here,  where  elsewhere  is  it 
ness,ora  questioning  of  His  omniscience,  possible  for  Him  to  fail  ?  Now  we  may 
but  also  a  want  of  faith  in  His  power.  proclaim  Him  omnipotent  to  save. 
Behold  the  Israelites,  &c.,  (Num.  xi.  4;  3.  The  abiding  of  His  grace  in  the 
Psa.  Ixxviii.  19  ;  Num.  xiv.  1-4).  heart  of  man  is  a  proof  of  the  mighty 

5.  In  the  fear  of  man  (Isa.  li.  12,  13).  power  of  God. 

Faith  in  God's  power  would  overshadow  4,  And  the  continued  existence  of  the 

the  fear  of  man.  Church    of     Christ    is    one    continued 

6.  One  more  proof  is  furnished  by  miracle,  one  living,  present,  impressive 
despair.  If  despair  relates  to  temporal  proof  of  the  mighty  power  of  God. 
things,  the  conclusion  to  which  it  has  Conclusion. — Believe  in  God^s  power 
come  is,  that  things  have  gone  too  far;  — (1)  for  the  pardon  of  your  sins.  (2) 
&c.  Or,  if  it  relates  to  heavenly  hopes,  For  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  His 
it  reasons  on  similar  grounds.  These  strength  will  be  made  perfect  in  your 
sins  are  too  great  for  God  to  pardon  ;  weakness. — A.  F.  Douglas  {Abridged 
this  torrent  of  corruption  is  too  strong  from  The  Christian  World,) 

PSALM  LXIII. 
Introduction. 

Superscription. — "  A  Psalm  of  David,  when  he  was  in  the  wilderness  ofJudah,**  Hengsten- 
bcrg:  '*  The  wilderness  of  Judab  is  the  whole  wilderness  towards  the  east  of  the  tribe  of  Judah, 
bounded  on  the  north  by  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  stretching  southward  to  the  south-west  end  of 
tlie  Dead  Sea,  eastward  to  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Jordan,  and  westward  to  the  mountains  of 

Jndah This  wilderness  is  not  unfrequently  designated  simply  The  wilderness.    In  this 

wilderness  David  was  often  found  when  flying  from  Saul.  In  the  same  wilderness  also  he  took 
refuge  during  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  That  he  did  so  is  self-evident,  inasmuch  as  the  road 
from  Jerusalem  to  the  Jordan  leads  through  it:  it  is,  moreover,  expressly  asserted  in  more  than 
one  passage  in  the  Books  of  Samuel  (2  Sam.  xv.  23,  28 ;  xvi.  2,  14  ;  xvii.  16).  We  cannot  refer 
our  psahn  to  the  time  of  Saul,  because[mention  is  expressly  made  of  a  king  in  verse  11.  On  the 
other   hand,  in   favour   of  the  time  of  Absalom  ;  besides  this  reason  we  have  a  very  marked 

reference  in  ver.   1,  '  iu  a  dry  land,  and  is  weary  l^..';  )  without  water,'  to  2  Sam.  xvi.  14, 

*  And  the  king  and  all  the  people  that  were  with  him  came  weary  (Q  ...*!^)j  ^nd  he  rested 
there.'  Comp.  xvi.  2,  according  to  which  Ziba  brought  out,  in  the  way,  toine^  'that  such  as 
were  faint  in  the  wilderness  might  drink,'  with  the  word  "j    in  xvii.  2." 

M.  Henry:  **  As  the  sweetest  of  Paul's  epistles  were  those  that  bore  date  out  of  a  prison, 
so  some  of  the  sweetest  of  David's  Psalms  were  those  that  were  penned,  as  this  was,  in  a  wil- 
derness." Donne:  "The  spirit  and  soul  of  the  whole  Book  of  Psalms  is  contracted  into  tbia 
psalm."  Perowne:  *'  This  is  unquestionably  one  of  the  most  beautiful  and  touching  psalms  in 
the  whole  Psalter." 

Homiletically,  we  see  in  this  psalm,  the  thirst,  the  satisfaction,  and  the  anticipation  of  the 
godly  soul, 

313 


PSALM  LXm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


The  Thirst  of  the  Godly  Souu 


(Vtrm  1-4.) 


Consider — 

L  The  nature  of  this  thirst. 

1.  It  is  a  thirst  for  God.     "I    seek 
Thee ;  my  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee,"  &c. 
In  the  second  verse  mention  is  made  of 
God's    **  power    and   glory "   as   things 
■\vbich  the  Psalmist  desired  to  see.     In 
the  A.  V.   the  clauses  of  this  verse  are 
needlessly  transposed.     The  Hebrew  is  : 
"Thus    have    I    beheld    Thee    in    the 
sanctuary,  to  see  Thy  power  and  Thy 
glory."     The  power  and  the  glory  are 
not  the  external  pomp  and  splendour  of 
public    worship ;    but    the    communica- 
tions of  Divine  grace,  as  manifested  in 
the  experience  of  the  devout  soul.     The 
Psalmist  longs  for  such  communion  with 
God  as  he  had  formerly  enjoyed  in  the 
sanctuary.     The  thirst  is  not  merely  for 
the  ordinances  of  religion,  or  for  teach- 
ing  concerning   God,  or  even   for  His 
"  power  and  glory  ; "  but  for  God  Him- 
self.     The    thirst    of  the  soul  of    man 
needs  for  its  satisfaction  that  the  soul 
shall    be  brought  into   vital   and  sym- 
pathetic relations  with  (1)   A   Person. 
Creeds   and    ordinances    cannot    satisfy 
the  soul.     (2)  A   living  Person.     Not 
one  whose  work  and  life  and  love  are 
things  of  the   i)ast ;  but  One  who  "  is 
able   to  save,  because  He  ever  liveth," 
&c.     (3)  A   Divine  Person,     One  who 
is   able  satisfactorily  to   respond   to  its 
deepest  yearnings,  to  help  it  to  realise 
its    loftiest    aspirations,   &c.     One  who 
ever    liveth,    who    changeth    not,    <fec. 
Only   in   God   can    the  thirst  of  man's 
soul  find  satisfaction.     (See  on  Ps.  xlii. 
1,  2). 

2.  It  is  an  intense  thirst.  "I  seek 
Thee  earnestly"  (not  "early,"  as  in  the 
A.  V.     The  verb  in^  is  not  to  be  re- 

T 

ferred  to  the  noun  ")ni£f  =  the  dawn. 

It  means  to  "  seek  zealously,"  a  *•  solicit- 
ous seeking  ") ;  "  my  soul  thirsteth  for 
Thee,  my  flesh  longeth  "  (Hengstenberg : 
"  fainteth  :  "  Moll :  ''  languisheth  ")  "  for 
Thee."  Each  of  the  verbs  indicates  in- 
tense desire. 

3.  It  is    a    thirst  of  the  entire  man 


"  My  soul  thirsteth,  my  flesh  pineth  for 
Thee."  Soul  and  flesh  are  used  to 
denote  the  whole  man  by  his  two  prin- 
cipal parts.  His  whole  being  went  out 
after  God  in  fervent  desire. 

IL  The  occasion  of  this  thirst.  ''In 
a  dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water 
is." 

1.  These  words  are  true  literally. 
The  wilderness  of  Judah  where  David 
was  at  this  time,  even  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  Jordan,  was  a  desert  country 
(2  Sam.  xvi.  2,  U). 

2.  These  words  are  true  figuratively. 
The  desert  was  a  picture  of  his  condition. 
An  exile  from  his  throne  and  home,  and 
from  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord.  His 
own  son  and  his  most  trusted  counsellor, 
with  a  great  host  of  his  subjects,  in 
armed  rebellion  against  him.  The  cir- 
cumstances in  which  he  was  placed  led 
him  to  seek  the  Lord  the  more  earnestly. 
Sorrow  and  trial  often  drive  us  the  more 
closely  to  God.  "When  my  blood 
flows  like  wine,"  says  Beecher,  "  when 
all  is  ease  and  prosperity,  when  the  sky 
is  blue,  and  birds  sing,  and  flowers 
blossom,  and  my  life  is  an  anthem  mov- 
ing in  time  and  tune,  then  this  world's 
joy  and  aflfection  suffice.  But  when  a 
change  comes,  when  I  am  weary  and 
disappointed,  when  the  skies  lower  into 
a  sombre  night,  when  there  is  no  song 
of  bird,  and  the  perfume  of  flowers  is 
but  their  dying  breath,  when  all  is  sun- 
setting  and  autumn,  then  I  yearn  for 
Him  who  sits  with  the  summer  of  love 
in  His  soul,  and  feel  that  all  earthly 
aff'ection  is  but  a  glow-worm  light,  com- 
pared to  that  which  blazes  with  such 
efi'ulgence  in  the  heart  of  God." 


"  Trials  make  the  promise  sweet. 
Trials  give  new  life  to  prayer. 


Why 
Two 


m.  The  reason  of  this  thirst, 
did  David  thus  yearn  for  God] 
reasons  are  suggested — 

1.  Because  of  his  personal  relation  to 
God.  "Thou  art  my  God."  Jehovah 
was  the  God  of  the  Poet,  not  only  by 
creation,  but  by  covenant ;  not  only  bjr 


SOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALU  LXIIL 


virtue  of  His  claims,  but  also  by  the 
Poet's  choice  and  consecration.  There 
was  a  recognised  and  sacred  relation 
between  tbem,  because  of  which  it  was 
right  and  appropriate  that  the  Psalmist 
should  seek  God.  Blessed  are  we  if, 
"  when  the  woes  of  life  o'ertake "  us, 
we  can  address  ourselves  to  Him,  saying, 
"  O  God,  Thou  art  my  God." 

2.  Because  of  his  exalted  estimation  of 
God.  David  says  that  he  longs  for  God, 
*' Because  Thy  lovingkindness  is  better 
tban  life."  We  regard  "  life "  here  as 
signifying  more  tban  mere  existence ; 
for  the  statement  of  the  Psalmist  implies 
tliat  life  is  good;  and  that  mere  exist- 
ence is  not  a  boon  is  clear  from  Matt, 
xxvi.  24,  and  Kev.  ix.  6.  The  Psalmist 
regarded  the  lovingkindness  of  God  as 
better  than  a  life  of  prosperity  and 
pleasure.  Having  God's  lovingkindness 
in  his  troubled  life  in  the  wilderness  of 
Judah,  David  would  esteem  himself 
more  blessed  than  in  a  life  of  pleasure 
in  his  palace  at  Jerusalem  without  it. 

"  Better  than  life  itself,  Thy  love, 
Dearer  than  all  beside  to  me; 
For  whom  have  I  in  heaven  above, 
Or  what  on  earth  compared  with  Thee  f  " 

IV.  The  relation  of  this  thirst  to 
the  praise  of  God.  "  My  lips  shall 
praise  Thee.  Thus  will  I  bless  Thee 
while  I  live ;  I  will  lift  up  my  hands  in 


Thy  name."  The  lifting  up  of  the 
hands  was  the  attitude  of  worship,  and 
symbolised  the  lifting  up  of  the  heart. 

1.  In  his  sorrowful  exile  while  thirst- 
ing  for  God^  the  Psalmist  praises  Him 
because  of  what  He  is  in  Himself  what 
He  is  to  him,  what  He  has  done  for  him, 
and  what  He  ha^s  promised  to  do  for  him. 
In  the  bitterest  experiences  of  life  the 
devout  heart  will  find  matter  and  motive 
for  praising  God. 

2.  In  the  delightful  realisation  of  His 
presence,  ivhich  he  now  seeks  and  antici- 
pates, he  will  praise  Him  yet  more.  The 
prospects  of  the  godly  soul  should  in- 
spire the  most  joyous  songs. 

3.  In  his  whole  life  he  will  praise 
Him.  "I  will  bless  thee  while  I  liva" 
The  entire  life  of  the  godly  man  should 
be  grateful,  reverent,  and  songful. 

"  My  days  of  praise  shall  ne'er  be  past. 
While  life  and  thought  and  being  last, 
Or  immortality  endures." 

Conclusion. — How  are  you  endea- 
vouring to  quench  the  thirst  of  your 
Boul?  Avoid  tbe  delusive  promises  of 
satisfaction  held  out  by  the  world.  At 
no  earthly  stream  can  you  find  the  re- 
freshing draught  which  you  seek  (Jer. 
ii.  13).  "Jesus  cried,  saying,  If  any 
man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Ms  and 
drink,"  <Se;c 


I.  How  should  we  seek  God  7 

I.  Intelligently.       2.   Earnestly.       3. 
Constantly.      4.    Hopefully. 

II.  Where  should  we  seek  Him  7 

I.  In  the  closet.     2.   In  His  Word, 
3.  In  the  ordinances. 
m.  When  should  we  seek  Him  7 


Seeking  God, 
{Verse  1.) 

1.  Early  in  life.     3.  In  advance  of 


temporal  things. 

IV.  Why  should  we  seek  Him  7 
I.    He    is    the    soul's   life  — "  6^oc/." 

2.  His  nature  is  communicative — "My 

God."—W.  W.  Wythe, 


God's  Poweb  and  Glory  Manifested  in  the  Sanctuary. 

{Verse  2.) 

In   nothing  is   genuine    piety   more  By  the  "^^ory"  of  God  as  displayed 

strikingly  manifested  tban  in  the  esteem  in    the    sanctuary    we    understand    the 

for  Divine  ordinances.     In   the  proper  glory  of  His  character  as  developed  in 

use  of  the  public  means  of  grace,  com-  the  principles  of  His  moral  government 

munion  with  God  is  enjoyed,  spirituality  and  in  tbe  method  of  redemption.     The 

of  mind  is  promoted,  &c.  natural   perfections   of  God  are  mani- 

315 


PSALM  LXm. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


fested  in  the  works  of  nature ;  His 
moral  attributes  are  made  known  in 
His  Word. 

By  the  ^* power"  of  God  as  mani- 
fested in  the  sanctuary,  we  understand 
the  spiritual  energy  which  renders  His 
Word  effectual.      Consider — 

I.  How  God  has  manifested  His 
glory  in  the  sanctuary.  1.  In  the 
sanctuary  He  has  made  known  the  moral 
excellences  of  His  character — His  holi- 
ness, mercy,  wisdom,  faithfulness.  2. 
In  the  sanctuary  His  peo'ple  are  favoured 
with  communion  with  Him.  This  privi- 
lege is  enjoyed  in  meditation,  'praise, 
and  prayer. 

II.  How  God  has  manifested  His 
power  in  the  sanctuary.  The  means 
designed  for  the  conversion  of  sinners 
and  the  edification  of  saints  are  admir- 
ably adapted  to  the  end  for  which  they 
are  designed ;  yet,  through  the  depravity 
of  mankind,  they  are  inefficient  unless 
accompanied  with  Divine  influence. 
Thus  the  power  of  God  is  seen  in  the 
sanctuary — 1.  When  sinners  are  con- 
verted.     2.    When  believers  are  edified. 

III.  The  pleasure  which  the  Divine 


manifestations  have  afforded  the 
people  of  God.  In  contemplating  the 
Divine  character,  in  communing  with 
Him,  and  in  witnessing  displays  of  the 
Divine  power,  great  has  been  the  plea- 
sure which  they  have  enjoyed  (Ps.  xxvi. 
8,  and  Ixxxiv.). 

IV.  The  desirableness  of  being 
favoured  with  the  constant  manifes- 
tations of  the  Divine  power  and 
glory.  "My  soul  thirsteth  for  Thee," 
(fee.  If  these  things  are  so  desirable, 
how  may  we  attain  them]  1.  Esteem, 
Divine  ordinances,  attend  with  delight 
upon  them,  and  pray  that  the  blessing 
of  God  may  attend  them.  2.  Pray 
fervently  for  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  His  agency  is  indispensable, 
&c. 

Conclusion. — 1.  How  great  is  the 
criminality  of  those  who  neglect  Divine 
ordinances.  2.  Those  who  m  gleet  them 
need  not  wonder  if  they  are  not  converted. 
3.  How  great  is  the  privilege  of  having  a 
place  in  the  sanctuary  of  God.  4.  What 
will  it  be  to  behold  His  power  and  glory 
in  heaven.^ — {Abridged from  an  %mpub' 
lished  MS.) 


The  Lovingkindness  of  God  Better  than  the  Life  of  Man. 

(Verse  3.) 


"Thy  lovingkindness  is  better  than 
life." 

These  words  imply — 

I.  That  life  is  good.  This  could 
not  be  said  of  mere  existence.  Exist- 
ence may  be  an  evil  —  (1.)  Because 
of  its  miserableness.  In  his  great  suf- 
ferings, Job  felt  his  existence  to  be  a 
curse  (Job.  iii.  Comp.  Matt.  xxvi.  24; 
Rev.  ix.  6).  (2.)  Because  of  its  per- 
niciousness.  From  the  holy  Word  we 
learn  that  there  are  certain  beings  in  the 
universe  whose  characters  are  utterly 
depraved,  whose  aim  in  life  is  utterly 
destructive,  and  whose  influence  is  only 
and  continually  malignant  (John  viii. 
44 ;  1  Pet.  v.  8).  Their  existence  is 
good  neither  for  themselves  nor  for 
others.  It  is  a  bane  and  blight  in  the 
universe.  According  to  the  tone  and 
teaching  of  the  Scriptures  a  life  of  misery 
or  a  life  of  sin  is  not  to  be  accounted  life 
316 


at  all,  but  only  a  form  of  death.  David 
thought  of  a  life  of  peace  at  home,  in 
secure  possession  of  the  throne,  and  in 
the  enjoyment  of  Divine  ordinances; 
and  he  affirmed  that  the  lovingkindness 
of  God  was  better  than  such  a  life,  and 
his  statement  clearly  implies  that  life 
itself  when  it  is  not  blighted  by  sin  or 
sorrow  is  a  good  thing.     It  is  so — 

1.  Because  of  its  great  faculties.  How 
remarkable  a^e  the  powers  of  recollec- 
tion, reflection,  anticipation,  ratiocina- 
tion, imagination,  aftection,  with  which 
human  life  is  endowed  !  How  great  its 
power  of  usefulness  ! 

2.  Because  of  its  great  capacities. 
How  immense  is  man's  capacity  for 
enjoyment !  The  streams  of  delight 
from  which  be  drinks  are  countless  and 
inexhaustible.  The  whole  endless  future 
is  before  him  for  the  satisfaction  and 
development  of  his  capacities.     He  was 


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXm. 


created  in  the  image  of  the  ever-blessed 
God,  and,  therefore,  capable  of  partici- 
pating in  His  peace,  joy,  <fec. 

3.  Because  of  its  conditions  and  cir- 
cumstances. The  world  in  which  at 
present  we  spend  our  life  is  full  of 
interest,  instruction,  utility,  beauty.  It 
is  a  great  treasury,  exhibition,  school, 
temple.  Heaven,  to  which  we  look  for- 
ward as  the  scene  of  our  life  in  the 
future,  is  of  unspeakable  glory,  <kc. 
Truly  life  is  good.  But  the  Psalmist 
states — 

II.  That  the  lovingkindness  of  God 
is  bej;ter  than  life  even  at  its  best. 
"Thy  lovingkindness  is  better  than 
life."     It  is  ao— 

1.  Because  all  that  is  good  in  life 
flows  from  the  lovingkindness  of  God, 
The  powers  and  capacities  of  human 
life,  and  all  that  is  pleasing  and  precious 
in  its  circumstances  and  conditions,  are 
streams  from  the  fountain  of  the  Divine 
lovingkindness.  "  All  my  springs  are 
in  Thee."  "  With  Thee  is  the  fountain 
of  life."  All  that  is  true,  useful,  good, 
and  beautiful  in  the  universe  springs 
from  the  infinite  grace  of  God. 

2.  Because  while  much  that  is  good 
and  pleasant  in  life  is  transient  and  in- 


termittent^ the  lovingkindness  of  God  is 
constant  and  abiding.  In  life  joyous 
hours  are  succeeded  by  sorrowful  ones. 
Like  David,  we  pass  from  peace  and 
home  and  the  sanctuary  of  God  into  the 
exile  and  weariness  of  "the  wilderness 
of  Judah."  Fairest  prospects  soon  fade. 
But  the  lovingkindness  of  God  is  eter- 
nal, unchangeable,  <fec.  It  is  "that 
good  part  which  shall  not  be  taken 
away  from  "  the  man  who  trusts  in  God. 

3.  The  lovingkindness  of  God  sancti- 
fies even  the  pains  and  trials  of  life,  so 
that  by  means  of  them  life  is  enriched 
and  blest  (Rom.  v.  3-5 ;  viii.  28 ; 
2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18;  Jas.  i.  2,  3,  12; 
1  Pet.  i.  6-9). 

4.  The  lovingkindness  of  God  is  the 
croum  and  glory  of  life.  The  enjoy- 
ment of  it  makes  life's  fairest  scenes 
more  divinely  beautiful  ;  its  most 
precious  experiences  more  precious.  It 
ennobles  the  pleasures  of  life,  it  conse- 
crates its  friendships,  it  sanctifies  its 
successes,  <fec.  It  is  the  heaven  of 
the  soul. 

Conclusion. — 1.  What  is  the  eha- 
racter  of  your  life  9 

2,  What  is  your  estimate  of  the  Divine 
lovingkindness  f 


The  Satisfaction  of  the  Qodlt  Soul. 
{Verses  6-8.) 


The  Psalmist  passes  from  thirst  to 
the  assurance  of  satisfaction  in  God. 
And  in  these  verses  we  see  the  nature  of 
this  satisfaction.  He  found  satisfac- 
tion— 

I.  In  the  provisions  of  God.  "  My 
soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow 
and  fatness."  The  provisions  of  God 
for  the  spiritual  needs  of  men  are 
frequently  represented  in  the  Scriptures 
as  a  sumptuous  feast.  David  looked 
forward  confidently  to  the  realisation  of 
spiritual  satisfaction  and  delight. 

1.  The  Divine  provisions  are  spiri- 
tual, "  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied.'' 
Satisfied  with  delightful  experiences, 
exalted  and  blessed  fellowship,  ennobling 
occupations,  enrapturing  prospects,  <kc. 
Pardon,  communion  with  God,  work  for 
Qod,  hope  of  holiness  and  heaven,  dec. 


2.  The  Divine  provisions  are  rich, 
"  Marrow  and  fatness."  The  provisions 
of  the  Gospel  are  like  a  "  feast  ot  fat 
things,  a  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,  of 
fat  things  full  of  marrow,  of  wines  on 
the  lees  well  refined."  Its  blessings  are 
not  only  useful  but  delightful ;  not  only 
healthful,  but  pleasant. 

3.  The  Divine  provisions  are  abun- 
dant. The  Psalmist  was  assured  of 
satisfiiction.  "  My  soul  shall  be  satis- 
fied." Whatever  God  gives  He  gives 
abundantly.  Pardon  (Psa.  cxxxvi.  5, 
16  ;  ciii.  8  ;  Isa.  Iv.  7)  ;  Redemption 
(Ps.  cxxx.  7).     Grace  (2  Cor.  ix.  8). 

II.  In  meditation  on  God.  "  I  re- 
member Thee  upon  my  bed,  and  meditate 
on  Thee  in  the  night  watches." 

1.  The  nature  of  this  exercise.  "  Re* 
membeii  •  •  •  meditate.'    Recollection 


FSALMLXm. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY  :  PSALMS. 


presented  the  doings  and  sayings  of 
God,  and  then  the  mind  meditated 
upon  them,  and  upon  Him.  Meditation 
is  not  mere  reverie,  but  musing,  or  fixed 
and  continuous  thought.  One  of  the 
most  important  mental  exercises,  es- 
pecially in  relation  to  spiritual  life  and 
progress.  And  we  fear  that  it  is  also  a 
most  neglected  exercise. 

2.  The  subject  of  this  exercise.  *'  Re- 
member Thee,  ....  meditate  on 
Thee."  The  grandest,  most  glorious 
subject  that  is  possible.  Meditation  on 
God  is  (1)  humbling  J  inasmuch  as  it 
reveals  our  feebleness,  insignificance, 
sinfulness.  (2)  Spiritualising,  inasmuch 
as  it  withdraws  us  from  the  material  and 
worldly  into  association  with  the  spiri- 
tual and  Divine.  (3)  Transforming, 
inasmuch  as  we  become  like  unto  those 
with  whom  in  thought  and  feeling  we 
dwell  (2  Cor.  iii.  18). 

3.  The  season  of  this  exercise.  "  On 
my  bed,  in  the  night  watches."  Night 
is  favourable  to  meditation  on  God  and 
spiritual  things,  (1)  Because  of  its  dark- 
ness. Material  things  are  then  hidden 
from  our  view  and  spiritual  things  ap- 
pear with  reality  and  vividness.  (2) 
Because  of  its  stillness.  The  noise  and 
tumult  of  the  day  ill  accord  with  medi- 
tation on  spiritual  and  Divine  themes. 
The  quiet  of  the  night  harmonises  with 
and  aids  such  meditation.  Great  are 
the  advantages  of  meditation  like  this. 

III.  In  the  protection  of  God.  "  Be- 
cause Thou  hast  been  my  help,  there- 
fore in  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings  will  I 
rejoice." 

1.  This  protection  is  well  assured.  It 
is  guaranteed  both  by  God's  promise  and 
by  man's  experience.  *' Because  Thou 
hast  been  my  help,  therefore,"  <fec.  2. 
This  protection  is  perfect.  *'In  the 
shadow  of  Thy  wings."  (See  the 
Horn.  Com.  on  Psa.  Ivii.  1.)  3.  This 
protection  is  joy-inspiring.  *'  Will  I 
rejoice."  (See  the  outline  below  on  this 
verse.) 

IV.  In  the   sustentation   of   God. 
"  My  soul  followeth  hard  after  Thee, 


Thy  right  hand  upholdeth  me."  In  the 
support  of  the  godly  soul  two  important 
things  are  here  brought  into  clear  view  : 

1.  Man's  trust.  "  My  soul  followeth 
hard  after  Thee."  More  correctly : 
"  *  My  soul  cleaveth  to  Thee.'  Heng- 
stenberg  :  '"  My  soul  depends  on  Thee.' 
In  ver.  8,  there  are  the  mutual  relations 
between  the  believing  soul  and  the  Lord  : 
it  depends  on  Him,  and  cleaves  to  Him, 
like  a  bur  to  a  coat,  and  He  takes  hold 
of  it,  and  holds  it  up  with  His  powerful 
right  hand,  so  that  it  does  not  sink  into 
the  abyss  of  destruction  and  despair." 
Our  business  is  to  depend  upon  God, 
by  faith  to  cleave  to  Him  with  the  ut- 
most tenacity. 

2.  God's  power.  "  Thy  right  hand 
upholdeth  me."  The  right  hand  is  the 
instrument  of  skill  and  strength.  With 
infinite  wisdom  and  almighty  power  God 
sustains  the  souls  that  trust  in  Him. 
This  "representation  of  the  mutuaraflfec- 
tion  and  reciprocal  relation  of  God  and 
His  servant "  is  both  beautiful  and 
encouraging. 

V.  In  the  celehration  of  the  praise 
of  God.  "  My  mouth  shall  praise  Thee 
with  joyful  lips."  The  satisfaction  of  his 
soul  the  godly  man  seeks  to  express  in 
praise  to  God.  David  resolves  to  praise 
God— 

1 .  Vocally.  "  My  mouth  shall  praise," 
By  so  doing  he  would  express  the  praise 
of  his  own  heart,  and  excite  the  hearts 
and  voices  of  others  to  praise  God. 

2.  Joyfully.  **  With  joyful  lips." 
To  David,  praising  God  was  pleasurable 
employment.  He  viewed  it  not  as  a 
duty,  but  as  a  delightful  privilege. 

Conclusion.  —  Here  then  is  satis- 
faction for  the  thirsting  soul.  In  the 
protection,  provision,  and  support  of 
God,  and  by  our  meditation  and  trust 
and  praise  of  Him,  our  spiritual  anxieties 
may  be  calmed,  our  wants  supplied,  our 
joy  inspired,  <kc.  Turn  thee,  thou 
thirsting  soul,  from  the  shallow  and 
muddy  streams  of  earth  to  the  clear  and 
deep  river  of  heavenly  grace ;  and  drink, 
and  be  for  ever  blessed  (John  iv.  13, 14). 


SI  8 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


F8ALM  LXIII. 


The  Argument  of  Exfbbienoi. 


(Versel.) 


These  words  speak  alike  of  sorrow 
and  joy.  We  need  help.  We  can  ex- 
perience joy.  Thus  read,  the  text  is 
true  to  life. 

In  commencing  fresh  eras  in  life  the 
Christian  feels  that  there  will  be  nothing 
really  new.  The  forms  and  dresses  of 
things  will  alter;  but  the  pensive  features 
of  sorrow  and  the  open  face  of  joy  will 
be  there  too.  The  servant  of  God  has 
an  experience.  God  has  been  his 
"  refuge  and  strength."  What  words, 
then,  can  I  select  as  the  basis  of  an 
argument  from  experience  more  appro- 
priate than  these — *'  Because  Thou  hast 
been  mine  help,"  <fec. 

I.  The  rejoicing  is  reasonable.— 
"  Because J^  It  is  not  founded  on  pro- 
mise alone  (though  if  that  be  God's,  never 
will  it  be  broken),  but  upon  past  ex- 
perience. And  upon  this  experience, 
as  it  divides  itself  into  thousandfold  cir- 
cumstances. Ob,  what  seasons  there 
have  been  !  <fec. 

II.  The  rejoicing  is  personal.— 
^^My  help."  That  does  not  exclude 
others.  Every  soldier  in  the  army  lifts 
up  his  answering  Amen.  Who  cau  ex- 
plain that  strange  mystery  of  indivi- 
duality ?  At  the  heart  of  each  of  us 
there  are  unspoken  mysteries  of  soli- 
tude.    Even  a  child  lives  in  a  tiny  world 

of  its  own "  My  help.^^     "  I  am 

not  alone.     God  is  my  help." 

m.  The  rejoicing  is  real.  There 
is  joy.  Something  more  than  rest  or 
quiescent  peace.  The  soul  was  made  for 
delight  as  well  as  for  discipline  and  duty. 
Nay,  rather  shall  I  not  say,  for  gladness 
in  discipline  and  duty  %  In  Christ  there 
is  a  fountain  of  blessedness  springing  up 
unto  everlasting  life.  For  us  all  to-day 
there  may  be  joy  in  the  Saviour,  the 
joy  of  forgiveness  through  the  redeeming 
sacrifice  of  the  cross,  the  joy  of  a  new 
life  which  sanctifies  suffering  and 
sweetens  toil,  the  joy  of  immortal  life 
through  the  resurrection. 

IV.  The  rejoicing  is  restful.     There- 
fore under  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings." 


This  is  beautiful.  You  and  I  can 
make  no  such  protection  by  machine- 
made  covering  for  our  beds,  as  a  bird 
makes  for  its  young.  No  !  Rain  and 
snow  cannot  pierce  those  shadowing 
wings  !  How  roof-like  their  setting  ! 
How  softly  the  inner  covering  makes  all 
complete ;  resistance  in  the  feathers 
without,  down  in  the  wings  within. 
Can  anything  better  represent  the  idea 
of  security  than  this  1  of  rest  than  this  1 
of  comfort  than  this  1  for  it  is  the  bird's 
beating  heart  that  is  the  warm  glow  of 
the  nest ;  and  it  is  God's  great  heart  of 
love  in  Christ  that  is  near  to  us — so 
very  near,  taking  our  manhood  up  into 
God,  clothing  Himself  in  our  nature, 
that  He  might  succour  and  help  us  in 
temptation  as  well  as  in  grief.  .  .  . 

....  The  Psalmist  had  been  medi- 
tating. Quiet  hours  bring  quiet 
memories.  He  reminds  us  of  the  still 
night,  in  which  the  memory  is  set  free, 
and  unfolding  its  wings  in  the  silence, 
broods  over  the  pilgrim  way.  Yes, 
there — and  there — and  there,  the  word 
of  the  Lord  was  tried,  and  the  promise  of 
the  Lord  was  tested,  and  the  deliverance 
of  the  Lord  was  vouchsafed,  and  lo, 
there  are  memorial  stones  all  along  the 
way  !  "  Surely  goodness  and  mercy 
shall  follow  me,'*  &c.  *'  Oh,  give 
thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  He  is  good," 
&c. 

V.  The  rejoicing  is  prophetic.  "  Will 
I  rejoice."  So  we  anticipate  life's 
future  with  entire  and  holy  confidence. 
What  can  that  future  bring  with  it  that 
our  gracious  Saviour  cannot  prepare  us 
for,  and  order  for  our  good  ?  (Rom.  viii. 
31-39). 

This,  then,  is  to  be  written  on  our 
banners,  "  In  the  shadow  of  Thy  wings 
I  will  rejoice."  Change  and  trouble 
must  come  to  us  all.  But  God's  right 
hand  will  uphold  us  all.  *'  Because 
Thou  hast  been  mine  help,"  &c. — W.  M . 
Statham  {Abridged  from  The  Christian 
World  Fulpit,) 

319 


IISALM  LXXU. 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALJUS. 


The  Anticipation  of  the  Godlt  Sottl. 
(Verses  9-11.) 


The  Poet  here  looks  forward  confi- 
dently to  the  defeat  and  destruction  of 
his  enemies,  and  to  his  own  exaltation 
because  of  his  deliverance.  The  verses 
present  to  us  a  triple  contrast. 

I.  A  contrast  of  character. 

1.  The  malignant  and  mendacious. 
The  rebels  were  animated  by  a  most 
cruel  and  malicious  feeling  against  the 
king.  They  were  as  false  as  they  were 
malicious.  They  spake  lies.  They  de- 
lighted in  lies.     (See  on  Psa.  Ixii.  3,  4.) 

2.  The  religious  and  truthful, 
"Every  one  that  sweareth  by  Him." 
M.  Henry  :  "  That  is,  by  the  blessed 
name  of  God,  and  not  by  any  idol 
(Deut.  VL  13),  and  then  it  means  all 
good  people,  that  make  a  sincere  and 
open  profession  of  God's  name."  Swear- 
ing by  Him  indicates  truthfulness  also. 
They  appeal  to  Him  as  the  true  God, 
the  God  who  delights  in  truth. 

This  great  contrast  of  character  still 
exists  amongst  men  in  this  world.  The 
false  and  the  true,  the  good  and  the  evil 
are  still  here. 

.  A  contrast  of  pursuit. 

1.  The  rebels  sought  the  life  of  the  king. 
"They  seek  my  soul."  Though  the 
words  "  to  destroy  it "  must  be  applied 
to  the  rebels  ;  still  it  is  true  that  they 
sought  to  take  the  life  of  David.  The 
objects  for  which  they  were  striving 
were  utterly  cruel  and  base. 

2.  The  king  sought  his  own  salvation 
and  God's  glory.  They  thirsted  for  the 
life  of  another ;  he  thirsted  for  God. 
They  looked  forward  to  seizing  his 
throne  and  kingdom;  he  to  grateful, 
joyful,  lifelong  worship  of  God. 

Of  what  character  are  our  pursuits  1 
Will  they  bear  the  searching  scrutiny  of 
truth  and  honesty  1 

III.  A  contrast  of  destiny.  1.  The 
mendacious  shall  be  silenced,  and  the 
truthful  exalted. — "Every  one  tbat 
sweareth  by  Him  shall  glory ;  but  the 
mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall  be 
stopped."      Hypocrisiei,   shams,   false- 


hoods, may  live  long,  as  life  appears  to 
us  ;  but  they  must  perish ;  and  they 
who  utter  them  will  come  to  silence 
and  shame.  Truth  cannot  perish,  but 
must  grow  and  advance  to  splendid 
triumph.  The  truth-seeker  and  the 
truth- speaker  will  have  abundant  reason 
for  exultation. 

2.  The  malignant  shall  be  utterly  and 
ignominiously  destroyed,  and  the  religious 
shall  have  cause  for  rejoicing,  "And 
they  to  (their)  destruction  will  they  seek 
my  soul  j  they  shall  go  into  the  depths 
of  the  earth.  They  shall  be  given  over 
to  the  power  of  the  sword ;  a  portion 
for  jackals  shall  they  be.'*  The  jackals 
are  the  scavengers  of  the  East.  They 
prey  on  dead  bodies  ;  and  assemble  in 
troops  on  battle-fields  to  feast  on  the 
slain. 

What  a  terrible  fulfilment  the  words 
of  the  Poet  had  in  the  case  of  Absalom, 
Ahithophel,  and  twenty  thousand  of  the 
rebels  !  In  seeking  the  life  of  the  king 
they  brought  upon  themselves  dread 
destruction.  A  fearful  doom  awaits  all 
persistent  workers  of  iniquity.  "  Sin 
when  it  is  finished  bringeth  forth  death." 
"  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell.** 
"  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his 
wickedness."  They  "  shall  be  punished 
with  everlasting  destruction,"  &c. 

"  But  the  king  shall  rejoice  in  God." 
The  destruction  of  the  rebels  was  the 
salvation  of  the  king.  And  his  rejoicing 
by  reason  thereof  was  religious — "  in 
God."  Those  who  truly  trust  in  God 
shall  come  forth  from  the  trials  and 
conflicts  of  life  "  more  than  conquerors  " 
through  Him. 

Conclusion. — How  unspeakably  im- 
portant is  individual  character/  Our 
character  expresses  itself  in  our  pursuits, 
and  determines  our  destiny.  "As 
righteousness  tendeth  to  life  ;  so  he  that 
pursueth  evil  pursueth  it  to  his  own 
death."  Oidy  through  Christ  can  man 
attain  righteousness  of  character.  What 
is  your  characte?  ? 


320 


HOMILETiG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXIV. 


PSALM  LXIV. 
Introduction. 

Superscription.  "To  the  chief  Musician:*^  see  Introduction  to  Ps.  Irii.  **A  Psalm  of 
David.'"  The  structure  and  character  of  the  psalm  confirm  the  title  as  to  its  Davidic  authorshipg 
The  allusions  in  the  psalm  are  so  general  that  they  might  have  been  used  by  the  poet  on  many 
occasions  in  his  life;  so  that  we  are  unable  to  determine  the  particular  occasion  of  its 
composition.     Homiletically  we  see  in  the  psalm — 

The  Prayer  and  Pkediction  of  the  Good  Man  Concerning 

His  Wicked  Enemies. 


We  ha^e  here — 

I.  Prayer  for  preservation  from 
wicked  enemies  (vers.  1-6).  Con- 
sider— 

1.  The  description  of  the  enemies. 
This  the  poet  has  given  at  some  length. 
(1.)  Their  character,  *'  The  wicked, 
.  .  .  the  workers  of  iniquity."  The 
words  indicate  positive  and  unmistak- 
able wickedness  of  character,  and  terrible 
constancy  and  activity  in  evil  doing. 
(2.)  Their  object.  It  is  clearly  implied 
in  ver.  1  that  they  aimed  at  the  life  of 
David.  "  Preserve  my  life  from  fear  of 
the  enemy."  They  sought  to  kill  him. 
This  was  true  of  Saul  and  those  who 
aided  him  in  his  persecutions  of  David. 
It  was  true  also  of  Absalom  and  the 
rebels.  (3.)  Their  weapons.  "  Who 
whet  their  tongue  like  a  sword,"  &c. 
Conant :  "  Who  have  sharpened  their 
tongue  like  a  sword,  have  fitted  their 
arrow — bitter  speech,  to  shoot,"  (fee. 
Slander  is  the  weapon  of  which  David 
makes  mention  here.  It  was  not  by 
any  means  the  only  weapon  used  against 
him,  but  it  was  one  which  evidently 
caused  him  acute  suffering.  The  figures 
here  used  to  set  it  forth  we  have  met 
with  before.  (See  on  Ps.  lii.  2  j  Ivii.  4  ; 
lix.  7  ;  and,  for  that  of  the  fixed  arrows 
Iviii.  7.)  (4.)  Their  method.  This 
included  (a.)  Conspiracy.  "  The  secret 
counsel  of  the  wicked,  .  .  .  they  com- 
nmne  of  laying  snares  privily,  .  .  . 
both  the  inward  thought  of  every  one, 
and  the  heart  is  deep."  In  confidential 
council  they  formed  their  secret  plans 
by  which  they  hoped  to  effect  their 
wicked  designs.  They  were  deliberate, 
secret,  methodical.  (b.)  Tumultuous- 
nes8.  "  The  insurrection  of  the  workers 
of   iniquity."      Or,    "  The    tumultuous 


throng  of  evil  doers."  The  secret  coun- 
sel led  to  the  exciting  of  the  passions  of 
evil  men  against  the  Psalmist,  (c.) 
Secret  and  sudden  attack.  "  They  shoot 
in  secret  at  the  perfect "  (or,  upright) ; 
"  suddenly  they  shoot  at  him  and  fear 
not."  The  Psalmist  had  not  to  meet 
manly  foes  in  fair  encounter.  His 
enemies  were  like  robbers  or  murderers 
who  waylay  the  defenceless  traveller  in 
a  secret  place,  and  suddenly,  when  he 
deems  himself  secure,  make  their  attack 
upon  him.  And  in  doing  this  they  were 
fearless.  They  were  unseen  of  men ; 
and  they  regarded  not  God.  They  had 
no  fear  of  God,  no  dread  of  His  judg- 
ment, (d.)  Fersistent  effort.  *'  They 
encourage  themselves  in  an  evil  matter," 
(fee.  Hengstenberg :  *'  They  strengthen 
for  themselves  an  evil  plan."  Perowne  : 
"  They  take  every  means  to  secure  their 
object,  follow  it  up  resolutely."  (e.) 
Inventiveness.  **  They  search  out  ini- 
quities," (fee.  Conant :  *'  They  search 
for  iniquities ;  we  are  ready  (say  they) ; 
a  device  searched  out ! "  They  invented 
or  contrived  iniquitous  plans ;  and  when 
they  succeeded  in  so  doing,  they  made 
their  boast  of  it. 

This  description  of  the  enemies  of  the 
Psalmist  impresses  us  with  two  things : 

First :  The  terrible  perversion  and 
depravation  of  their  nature.  How  fear- 
ful the  misuse  of  the  powers  of  thought, 
invention,  action,  persistence  I 

Second  :  The  alarming  criminality  of 
their  character  and  conduct.  How 
tremendous  is  their  guilt ! 

2.  T'he  prayer  of  the  Psalmist. 
"  Hear  my  voice,  O  God,  in  my  prayer," 
<&c.  (1.)  Its  object.  "Preserve  my 
life  from  fear  of  the  enemy.  Hide  me 
from  the  secret  counsel  of  the  wicked,** 

321 


PSALM  LXIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


<fec.  The  Psalmist  was  conscious  of  his 
cxposedness  to  danger,  and  of  his  in- 
ability to  protect  or  deliver  himself; 
and  be  seeks  the  protection  of  the  Most 
High.  He  asks  for  preservation  not 
simply  from  peril,  but  from  alarm  or 
terror.  God  can  preserve  in  the  midst 
of  the  greatest  dangers,  and  inspire  the 
soul  with  the  most  exultant  confidence. 
(2.)  Its  confidence.  "  Thou  wilt  hide 
me  from  the  secret  counsel,"  &c. 
Barnes :  "  There  is  both  an  implied 
prayer  that  this  might  be  done,  and  a 
confident  belief  that  it  would  be  done." 
The  prayer  was  not  the  cry  of  despair, 
but  the  expression  of  trustful  desire. 

In  the  foregoing  we  have  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  foes f  and  the  resource  of  the 
godly  soul  in  danger.  We  have  spiritual 
enemies — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil.  They  are  aiming  at  the  ruin  of 
our  souls.  They  seek  to  accomplish 
this  by  various  means — by  subtlety  and 
by  strength,  by  persistent  efforts  and  by 
sharp  and  sudden  attacks,  &c.  We 
have  neither  the  skill  nor  the  strength 
successfully  to  cope  with  them.  Our 
need  of  Divine  preservation  and  help  is 
great  and  constant.  Our  safety  is  in 
believing  prayer  to  God. 

II.  Prediction  of  the  destruction 
of  wickea  enemies  (vers.  7-10).  The 
Psalmist  utters  his  confident  expectation 
that  God  would  destroy  his  foes.  In 
so  doing  he  mentions — 

1.  The  Author  of  their  destruction. 
"  God  shall  shoot  at  them,"  &c.  Let 
us  not  misunderstand  or  misuse  the 
word  "  author  "  here.  The  meritorious 
cause  of  their  destruction  is  in  them- 
selves. "  O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed 
thyself."  But  in  the  administration  of 
His  righteous  government  God  visits 
them  with  the  judgments  which  their 
sins  have  deserved.  He  smites  them 
justly  with  the  punishment  they  have 
merited. 

2.  Its  instruments.  "  With  an 
arrow  :  suddenly  shall  they  be  wounded. 
So  they  shall  make  their  own  tongue  to 
fall  upon  themselves."  "  The  arrow  of 
God  here  corresponds  to  the  arrow  of 
the  wicked  in  vers.  3  and  4."  And 
their  tongue  by  which  they  sought  to 
injure  others  shall  prove  the  instrument 

322 


of  their  own  destruction.  God  destroys 
the  wicked  with  their  own  weapons. 
(Comp.  Ps.  vii.  15,  16;  ix.  15,  16.) 

3.  Its  manner.  *'  Suddenly  shall 
they  be  wounded."  When  they  think 
that  they  are  about  to  succeed  in  their 
evil  plans,  on  what  they  deem  the  very 
eve  of  their  triumph,  the  Divine  judg- 
ment bursts  upon  them.  (Comp.  1 
Thess.  V.  3.) 

4.  Its  effect.  (1.)  Upon  the  com" 
panions  of  the  wicked.  "  All  that  see 
them  shall  flee  away,"  so  that  they  may 
not  be  involved  in  their  ruin  (Num. 
xvi.  34).  (2.)  Upon  men  in  general, 
(a.)  It  would  lead  to  some  knowledge 
of  the  Divine  government.  "  They 
shall  wisely  consider  of  His  doing." 
Both  Hengstenberg  and  Moll  render 
this :  "  And  understand  His  work." 
They  shall  see  that  the  judgment  is  not 
the  result  of  chance  or  human  agency ; 
but  the  work  of  a  just  and  Holy  God. 
(6.)  It  would  inspire  awe.  "  All  men 
shall  fear."  Barnes :  "  Judgments, 
punishments,  wrath  are  adapted  and 
designed  to  make  a  deep  impression  on 
mankind.  On  this  principle,  the  final 
punishment  of  the  wicked  will  make  a 
deep  and  salutary  impression  on  the 
universe  for  ever."  (c.)  It  would  incite 
to  a  declaration  of  the  hand  of  God. 
*'  Men  shall  declare  the  work  of  God." 
**  A  man  shall  say.  Verily  there  is  a 
reward  for  the  righteous ;  verily  He  is 
a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth."  (3.) 
Upon  the  upright.  "  The  righteous 
shall  be  glad  in  the  Lord,"  &c.  (a.) 
It  inspires  their  joy."  *'  Glad  in  the 
Lord ; "  because  of  the  vindication  of 
the  government  of  God,  and  the  cer- 
tainty of  their  own  safety.  (6.)  It 
increases  their  confidence.  "  Shall 
trust  in  Him;"  because  His  doings 
furnish  additional  grounds  and  encour- 
agements to  confidence.  (c.)  It  en- 
kindles their  triumph.  "All  the  up- 
right in  heart  shall  glory."  Their  soul 
shall  make  its  boast  in  the  Lord.  And 
their  joy  and  trust  and  triumph  are  all 
religious — not  vindictive,  or  revengeful, 
or  self-conceited ;  but  religious — "  in 
the  Lord.'' 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  wicked  take 
warning.      2.   Let  the  godly   take  en- 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


psALif  Lsnr* 


conragement.     Be  not  dismayed  in  the  triumph   over  them.     "  Through   God 

struggles  of  the   spiritual   life.     How-  we   shall   do   valiantly;   for   He  shall 

ever  many  or  mighty,  however  subtle  op  tread  down  our  enemies.'' 
skilful  our  enemies  may  be,  we  shall 


Omniscience  Ignored. 
{Verse  5.     "  They  say,  who  shall  see  themf") 


I.  This  notion  has  great  influence 
upon  the  conduct  of  man. 

It  is  worthy  of  consideration,  as  in- 
dicating the  nature  of  evil,  that  it  finds 
such  a  notion  convenient  and  necessary. 

Offenders  against  man  retire  to  the 
dark  when  they  mean  to  perpetrate  their 
evil  deeds.  The  murderer,  the  thief,  &c. 
Concealment  is  the  helpmeet  of  wrong. 

Because  they  sometimes,  perhaps 
often,  escape  the  most  watchful  human 
eyes,  they  fancy  it  possible  to  escape 
the  eye  of  God. 

They  would  have  no  interest  whatever 
in  reaching  this  conclusion  if  they  never 
wished  to  do  anything  wrong.  The 
siimer  persuades  himself  of  two  or  three 
things :  he  has  gained  his  end ;  he  has 
escaped  observation  ;  he  has  avoided  the 
punishment.  It  is  not  necessary  that 
all  this  be  formulated.  It  is  sufficient 
if  the  mind  accustoms  itself  to  question 
whether  God  sees.  The  sinner  will 
take  advantage  of  a  doubt. 

II.  This  notion  is  utterly  untruth- 
ful and  delusive.  Whether  our  sinful 
deeds  are  seen  by  man  or  not,  there  is 
One  to  whom  they  are  open  as  the  day. 
If  there  is  a  God  at  all,  this  must  be  so. 
If  you  persuade  yourself  that  God  does 
not  see,  you  persuade  yourself  that 
God  is  not.  That  part  of  the  universe 
which  God  does  not  know,  has  no  God. 
He  who  does  not  know  everything  is 
limited  :  therefore  he  is  not  God. 

But  you   cannot   see    Him.     When 


you  cannot  see  a  man  yon  infer  that 
he  is  not  present.  Because  you  cannot 
see  God  you  infer  that  He  is  not  pre- 
sent. Thus  you  require  that  which 
would  argue  Him  nothing  more  than  a 
man  after  all.  The  spirituality  of  the 
Divine  nature  makes  it  possible  for  Him 
to  be  everywhere  and  see  everything. 

III.  God  has  often  in  human  ex- 
periences, shown  the  delusiveness  of 
this  notion,  and  the  time  is  fixed  for 
the  complete  demonstration  of  its  de- 
lusiveness. 1.  Character  is  often  seen 
through  by  man.  We  may  be  deceived 
as  to  individual  acts.  But  our  view  of 
a  man's  general  character  is  usually 
correct.  2.  Retribution  often  follows 
man's  deeds  in  the  present  world.  It 
followed  and  overtook  Joseph's  brethren, 
Achan  and  Saul.  3.  The  future  state 
will  show  that  God  saw.  At  the  judg- 
ment day  the  books  will  be  opened. 
What  is  written  there  will  prove  that 
sin  was  seen.  Hell  will  be  an  ever- 
lasting proof. 

Conclusion. — Sinner,  God  sees  you  : 
has  seen  you  all  along.  Be  warned ! 
Christian,  1.  Be  encouraged  and  com- 
forted by  the  thought  that  God  sees. 
He  sees  the  good  and  their  goodness. 
2.  Be  more  constantly  influenced  by 
this  thought.  (1.)  Let  it  restrain  from 
sin.  (2.)  Let  it  stimulate  to  holy 
obedience  and  earnest  work. — J,  E.,  in 
The  Pulpit  Analyst, 


The  Character  and  Privilegks  of  the  Godlt, 

{Verse  10.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  A  description 
"  The  righteous,  .  .  . 
heart." 

1.   Righteousness  of  character. 


of    character, 
the   upright   in 

Not 


merely  correctness  of  external  conduct, 
but  uprightness  of  heart — moral  excel- 
lence of  principle  and  disposition  and 
tendency.  But  how  is  this  to  be  at- 
tained %     "  There  is  none  righteous,  no, 

323 


PSALM  LXrV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


not  one."  Man  is  prone  to  sin,  his 
heart  is  prone  to  crooked  ways,  &c. 
In  the  sight  of  God,  "  all  have  sinned." 
But  the  sinful  may  be  made  righteous 
by  faith  in  the  righteousness  and  love 
of  God  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ — or, 
more  correctly,  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  Revealer  of  God  and  Saviour  of 
men.  The  godly  in  pre-Christian  ages 
attained  unto  righteousness  through 
faith.  And  for  us  to-day  righteousness 
of  character  is  attainable  only  by  faith  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Rom.  iii  20- 
28.) 

2.  Righteousness  of  conduct.  "  The 
upright  in  heart "  will  be  the  upright 
in  action.  "  Every  one  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  born  of  Him.  .  ,  . 
Let  no  man  deceive  you :  he  that  doeth 
righteousness  is  righteous."  But  how 
shall  we  acquire  the  strength  to  do  this  % 
We  have  it  not  in  ourselves.  "  To  will 
is  present  with  me,  but  to  perform  that 
which  is  good  is  not."  In  the  work, 
and  death,  and  life  of  our  Lord  we 
have  not  simply  an  atonement,  but  an 
inspiration  also.  Through  Him  we  ob- 
tain both  pardon  and  power,  both  for- 
giveness and  "grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need."  "  When  I  am  weak,  then  am  I 
strong."  "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me." 

II.  A  declaration  of  privilege. 
"The  righteous  shall  be  glad,"  ike. 
Here  are  three  privileges — 

1.  Joy.  "■  Shall  be  glad  in  the 
Lord."  Notice  concerning  this  joy,  (1.) 
Its  cause,  (a.)  Because  of  the  vindica- 
tion of  the  government  of  God.  This 
was  a  reason  of  the  gladness  spoken  of 
by  the  Psalmist.  "  The  Lord  reigneth." 
The  world  is  neither  anarchic,  nor 
governed  by  the  strongest  temporal 
power,  nor  by  chance,  nor  by  Satan  ; 
but  by  God.  (b.)  Because  under  His 
government  the  interests  of  the  right- 
eons  are  secure.  Those  of  the  Psalmist 
had  seemed  extremely  imperilled ;  but 
God  had  overthrown  the  wicked,  <fec. 
God  governs  the  world  so  as  to  secure 
the  safety  and  blessedness  of  His  loyal 
subjects.     He  is  on  their  side.     (RonL 


viii.    31;   1    Pet.    iii.    13).     (2.)    Itt 

character.  **  Glad  in  the  Lord."  The 
rejoicing  of  the  righteous  is  religious. 
It  is  not  vindictive,  or  revengeful,  or 
self-confident.  It  proceeds  from  God 
as  its  source,  and  it  flows  to  Him  as  its 
end.  It  originated  in  His  doings ;  it 
expresses  itself  in  His  praise.  "  In  the 
Lord "  how  abundant  are  the  reasons 
and  how  wide  the  scope  for  joy  ! 

2.  Trust.  "  And  shall  trust  in  Him." 
In  the  case  of  the  Psalmist,  God's  judg- 
ment upon  the  wicked  (1.)  supplied 
additional  evidence  of  His  trustworthi- 
ness ;  and  (2.)  was  especially  fitted  to 
encourage  trust  in  Him  in  time  of 
darkness,  trial,  and  peril.  He  had 
watched  the  progress  of  the  wicked 
enemies  of  the  Psalmist,  and  at  the 
moment  when  they  seemed  about  to 
leap  into  triumph.  He  had  interposed. 
His  interposition  carried  irresistible  ruin 
to  them,  and  complete  salvation  to  His 
people.  What  He  had  done  He  would 
in  like  circumstances  and  conditions  do 
again.  How  great  are  our  encourage- 
ments to  trust  Him  !  His  goodness  and 
wisdom  and  poweVy  His  purposes,  pro- 
mises and  performances,  all  are  charged 
with  incitements  to  confidence  in  Him  ! 

3.  Triumph.  "  Shall  glory."  Every 
man  has  some  object  in  which  he  glories 
or  boasts.  One  glories  in  his  wisdom, 
another  in  his  might,  another  in  his 
riches,  another  in  his  honours.  All 
these  are  mistaken,  &c.  (Jer.  ix.  23,  24). 
**  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory  in  the 
Lord."  "  My  soul  shall  make  her 
boast  in  the  Lord."  He  whose  confi- 
dence is  reposed  in  God  has  the  most 
excellent  reasons  for  exultation.  He  is 
the  greatest  Being,  the  best  Being.  He 
has  pledged  Himself  to  defend  and  save 
those  who  trust  in  Him.  He  cannot 
fail. 

Conclusion. — 1.  The  portion  of  the 
righteous  at  its  worst  is  immeasurably 
superior  to  that  of  the  wicked  at  its  best. 
2.  By  prayer  andfaith,  by  consecration 
and  effort^  let  tks  seek  to  make  thai  por- 
tion ours* 


824 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXV. 


PSALM  LXV. 
Introduction. 

Superscriptum. — "To  the  Chief  Musician."  See  Introduction  to  P«.  Ivii.  "  A  Psalm  and 
song  of  David."  Or,  **A  Psalm  of  David,  a  song."  See  Introduction  to  Ps.  xlviii.  In  the 
Peaim  itself  there  are  evidences,  wbicli  Hengstenberg  points  out,  that  it  is  the  production  of 
David.  The  Psalm  was  probably  composed  as  a  psalm  of  thanksgiving  for  the  blessings  of  the 
harvest ;  in  anticipation  of  an  approaching  harvest,  as  Hengstenberg  suggests,  or  on  the  com- 
pletion of  harvest,  as  Hitzig  suggests. 

Homiletically  the  Psalmist  sets  forth,  Aspects  of  Divine  worship  (vers.  1-4)  ;  Manifestations 
<jf  Divine  jpower  (vers.  6-8) ;  and  The  Beneficent  activity  of  God  in  Nature  (vers.  9-13). 

Aspects  of  Divine  Worship. 
(Verses  1-4.) 


We  see  here — 

1.  Worship  in  its  source.  "  Blessed 
is  the  man  whom  Thou  choosest,  and 
causest  to  approach,"  &c.  God  is  the 
Author  of  all  true  worship. 

1  He  grants  the  opportunity  of  wor- 
thip.  The  revelation  of  Himself  in 
Jesus  Christ,  the  institution  of  religious 
ordinances  and  of  Christian  ministries, 
the  fixing  our  lot  in  a  land  and  asje  of 
Christian  privileges — these  are  all  from 
Him. 

2.  He  inspires  the  disposition  to  wor- 
ship. All  reverent  feeling,  holy  desire, 
and  devout  aspiration  in  us,  are  the 
result  of  the  gracious  influences  of  his 
Holy  Spirit.  The  cause — the  efficient 
reason — why  any  man  worships  his 
Maker  at  all,  is  to  be  found  in  God 
Himself.  Whatever  there  is  of  good  in 
us,  and  whatever  of  good  belongs  to  us, 
proceeds  from  Him.  "All  my  springs 
are  in  Thee."  "Every  good  gift  and 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,"  &c. 
The  source  of  all  true  worship  is  God 
Himself. 

II.  Worship  in  its  object.  "  Praise 
waiteth  for  Thee,  0  God,"  &c.  As  God 
is  the  Author  of  all  true  worship,  so  He 
is  also  its  End.  Worship  is  offered  to 
Him  here — 

1.  As  the  Hearer  of  prayer.  "O 
Thou  that  hearest  prayer."  How  sub- 
lime and  beautiful  and  true  is  this  ap- 
pellation as  addressed  to  God  !  His  ear 
is  ever  open  to  the  cries  of  the  sinful, 
the  suffering,  the  sorrowful,  the  dying. 
(See  an  outline  on  ver.  2,  below.) 

2.  Ai  the  Pardoner  of  sin.  "  Ini- 
quities prevail  against  me;  our  trans- 


gressions. Thou  shalt  purge  them  away." 
God  is  praised  here  because  of  His 
goodness  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin. 
There  are  two  points  here.  (1)  The 
greatness  of  human  sin.  The  iniquities  ■ 
of  the  Psalmist  are  represented  as  over- 
powering him  with  a  superior  hostile 
force.  Man  cannot  contend  with  his 
sins.  He  cannot  answer  for  them,  or 
atone  for  them.  "  Enter  not  into  judg- 
ment with  Thy  servant ;  for  in  Thy 
sight  shall  no  man  living  be  justified." 
(2)  The  greatness  of  Divine  forgiveness. 
"  Thou  shalt  pnrge  them  away."  God 
pardons  the  most  heinous  transgressions 
(Jsa.  i.  18); — the  most  nume7'ous  tr<M\&- 
gressions  (Ps.  ciii.  3 ;  cxxx.  7  ;  Isa.  Iv. 
7)  ;  and  He  pardons  them  completely 
Ps.  ciii.  12;  Isa.  xxxviii.  17;  Mic.  vii. 
19). 

3.  As  the  Saiisfier  of  the  soul.  "  We 
shall  be  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of 
Thy  house,  even  of  Thy  holy  temple." 
Man  has  great  needs.  In  addition  to 
forgiveness  he  requires  cleansing,  su}> 
port,  guidance,  love,  hope,  &c.  God 
alone  can  supply  these  needs.  The 
goodness  of  His  house  all  flows  from 
Him.  Eeligious  ministries  and  ordi- 
nances are  worthless  apart  from  His 
blessing.  "With  Thee  is  the  fountain 
of  life,"  <fec.  In  God  the  soul  finds 
complete  satisfaction  and  blessedness. 
To  God  as  the  Hearer  of  prayer,  the 
Forgiver  of  sins,  the  Satisfier  of  souls, 
human  worship  should  be  addressed. 

III.  Worship  in  its  nature.  It  is 
here  represented  as  consisting  in — 

1.  Submission  to  the  will  of  God, 
"Praise  waiteth  for  Thee,  O  God,"  is 

325 


ySALM  LXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


not  a  correct  rendering.  Conant  trans- 
lates: "To  Thee  belong  submission, 
praise,  O  God."  Hengstenberg :  "  Thou 
art  praised  in  the  silence,  O  God." 
Margin :  "  Praise  is  silent  for  Thee,  O 
God."  Moll:  "To  Thee  is  silence 
(resignation),  praise,  O  God."  Eesigna- 
tion  to  the  Divine  will,  the  silence  of 
the  heart  before  God,  is  a  duty  which 
we  owe  to  Him,  and  is  worship  of  the 
very  highest  character.  To  trust  Him 
in  darkness  and  mystery,  to  bow  loyally 
to  His  will  when  its  dispensations  to 
us  are  painful,  to  exclaim  in  the  supreme 
agony  of  life,  "  Though  He  slay  me,  yet 
will  I  trust  in  Him," — surely  this  is  the 
very  highest  worship  that  we  can  render 
to  Him. 

2.  Celebration  of  the  praise  of  God. 
The  Poet  represents  praise  as  belonging 
to  God ;  and  it  constitutes  one  of  the 
chief  elements  of  worship.  God  is 
praised  by  His  people  because  of  what 
He  has  done  and  is  ever  doing  for  them, 
because  of  what  He  is  to  them,  and 
because  of  what  He  is  in  Himself. 

3.  The  fulfilment  of  our  voivs  to  God, 
"Unto  Thee  shall  the  vow  be  per- 
formed." There  seems  to  be  two  ideas 
here :  (1)  Gratitude  for  benefits  re- 
ceived. God  had  blessed  His  people 
by  gracious  doings  for  them  and  gener- 
ous gifts  to  them,  and  they  thankfully 
remember  these  things,  and  recognise 
their  own  obligation  by  reason  of  them. 
(2)  Faithfulness  in  keeping  promises 
which  they  had  made.  Formerly  they 
had  uttered  their  vows,  and  now  they 
resolve  to  perform  them.  These,  then, 
are  some  of  the  elements  of  worship — 
hearty  submission  to  God's  will,  celebra- 
Mon  of  His  praise,  and  performance  of 
our  vows  to  Him. 

IV.  Worship  in  its  locality..  "  In 
Zion,  ....  in  Thy  courts,  ....  Thy 
house,  •  •  •  •  Thy  holy  temple."     Zion 


was  the  scene  of  special  Divine  mani- 
festation. It  was  authoritatively  ap- 
pointed the  chief  place  for  the  worship 
of  Jehovah.  "The  Lord  hath  chosen 
Zion,  He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habita- 
tion." Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  now 
the  true  Zion.  Every  one  who  worships 
God,  believing  in  Christ  as  the  Divine 
Mediator,  will  find  acceptance  and 
blessing  in  so  doing.  Through  Him  the 
devout  heart  may  worship  God  any- 
where (John  iv.  21-24). 

V.  Worship  in  its  extent.  "Unto 
Thee  shall  all  flesh  come."  Here  is  a 
declaration  that — 

1.  The  needy  shall  worship  the  All- 
sujicient.  The  use  of  the  word  "  flesh  " 
here  to  denote  man,  indicates  his  weak- 
ness and  need.  Man  is  an  entirely  de- 
pendent creature  —  frail,  feeble,  and 
needy.  God  is  the  inexhaustible  Foun- 
tain of  life,  strength,  and  blessing :  to 
Him  needy  man  shall  come  for  supply. 

2.  All  the  needy  shall  worship  the  All- 
sufficient.  "Unto  Thee  shall  all  flesh 
come."  Hengstenberg :  "  God  is  rich 
not  only  for  a  few,  but  for  all :  all  to 
whom  the  name  of  man  belongs  come  to 
Him,  in  order  to  draw  from  His  inex- 
haustible fountain."  (See  the  Outline 
on  ver.  2,  below.) 

VI.  Worship  in  its  influence. 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  Thou 
choosest,"  &c.  They  are  blessed  inas- 
much as  their  prayers  are  heard,  their 
sins  are  pardoned,  and  their  souls  are 
satisfied  in  God.  All  the  spiritual  joys 
and  blessings  of  Divine  grace  are  theirs. 
"They  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied 
with  the  fatness  of  Thy  house ;  and 
Thou  shalt  make  them  drink  of  the 
river  of  Thy  pleasures."  The  worship 
of  God  spiritualises  and  ennobles  the 
worshipper — transforms  him  into  the 
Divine  image.     Worship  is  heaven. 


A  Great  Fact,  Privilege,  and  Prospeot. 
(Verse  2.) 

We  have  in  this  verse —  Being  of  infinite  intelligence  must  hear 

I.  A  glorious  fact.    God  hears  prayer.  every  request  that  is  made  to  Him.     A 

This  fact  may  be  proved —  Being    of   infinite    kindness    must  hear 

1.    From    the    nature   of    God.      A  with    regard — with   consideration   and 

326 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXV. 


favour.  A  Being,  in  whom  infinite  re- 
sources are  joined  to  infinite  kindness, 
must  answer. 

2.  From  the  teachings  of  Scripture, 
"  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  I 
will  deliver  thee,"  &c.  "  Ask,  and  it  shall 
be  given  you ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ; 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you  ] 
for,"  &c.  *'  Men  ought  always  to  pray 
and  not  to  faint."  "  Whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  name,  He 
will  give  you.  Ask,  and  ye  shall  re- 
ceive, that  your  joy  may  be  full."  "  The 
effectual,  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
man  availeth  much." 

3.  From  the  experiences  of  believers, 
Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  11-14,  31-35; 
Num.  xi.  1-3)  ;  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii. 
17-24;  xviii.  42-45);  Eiisha  (2  Kings 
iv.  28-36) ;  the  Psahnist's  (Ps.  cxvi.  1, 
2  ;  et  al.) ;  Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviii.  1-8) ; 
Daniel  (Dan.  ix.  20-23) ;  the  early  Chris- 
tians praying  for  Peter  (Acts  xii.  1-17) ; 
innumerable  instances  since ;  and  thou- 
sands of  persons  to-day. 

II.  A  precious  privilege.  We  may 
come  unto  God  in  prayer. 

1.  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  he  per- 
mitted to  unburden  our  heart  to  a  Being 
of  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness  and  sym- 
pathy. The  heart's  highest,  holiest  joy, 
and  its  most  secret  and  sacred  sorrow, 
we  may  tell  with  confidence  to  Him. 
And  the  mere  telling  of  such  experiences 
to  such  a  Being  will  afford  relief. 

2.  How  much  greater  is  the  privilege 
when  that  Being  has  power  to  aid  and 
bless.  Such  power  has  God.  In  per- 
plexity, in  want,  in  sorrow,  in  aflQiction, 
la  spiritual  distress,  &c.,  we  may  come 


to  the  all-kind  and  all-sufficient  Friend. 
"  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplica- 
tion with  thanksgiving,  let  your  requests 
be  made  known  unto  God." 

III.  An  inspiring  prospect.  "  Unto 
Thee  shall  all  flesh  come." 

1 .  The  weak  and  needy  shall  approach 
unto  the  infinite  Source  of  strength  and 
blessing.  Man's  frailty  and  need  are 
indicated  by  the  word  "  flesh."  Man  is 
weak  and  poor  ;  God  is  almighty  and  un- 
searchable in  riches  ;  to  Him  shall  man 
come,  and  be  strengthened,  blessed,  &c. 

2.  All  the  weak  and  needy  shall  come 
unto  the  infinite  Source  of  strength  and 
blessing.  "  Unto  Thee  shall  all  flesh 
come."  AH  the  helpless  and  poor  shall 
come  to  God  with  prayers  and  thanks- 
givings. He  is  '*  the  confidence  of  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  of  them  that 
are  afar  off  upon  the  sea."  Our  faith  in 
the  approach  of  all  men  to  God  in  prayer 
rests  upon  considerations  such  as  these  : 
(1)  There  is  a  correlation  between  God's 
resources  and  man's  needs ;  between 
man's  dependence  and  God's  all-suf- 
ficiency. (2)  Divinely-appointed  means 
are  in  operation  for  bringing  needy  men 
to  the  wealthy  God.  The  ministries  of 
nature,  providence,  and  the  Gospel  are 
all  designed  and  fitted  to  lead  men  to 
the  all-sufficiency  of  God.  (3)  The 
Word  of  God  announces  the  approach 
of  all  men  to  the  Hearer  of  prayer 
(Ps.  Ixxii.  8-17 ;  Isa.  xlv.  23,  24 ;  Rom. 
xiv.  11). 

Conclusion. — 1.  Appreciate  this  pri- 
vilege. 2.  Seek  to  extend  it  to  others. 
Announce  it  to  others.  Persuade  them 
to  avail  themselves  of  it. 


The  Blessedness  of  Communion  with  God. 

{Verse  i.) 


I.  Make  a  few  explanatory  remarks 
on  the  several  particulars  implied  and 
expressed  in  the  text. 

1.  The  words  imply  that  the  public 
means  of  grace  ought  to  be  viewed  as  a 
distinguished  privilege.  **  Blessed  is  the 
man  whom  Thou  choosest,"  (fee. 

2.  In  the  public  means  of  grace  com- 
munion with  God  may  be  enjoyed.  "  And 
causest   to    approach    unto    Thee,"   kc. 


To  approach  unto  God  is  to  enjoy  com- 
munion with  Him.  We  may  approach 
unto  God :  (1)  by  prayer  through  the 
mediation  of  Jesus  Christ ;  (2)  with 
sentiments  of  thanksgiving  and  praise ; 
(3)  in  receiving  instruction  from  His 
Word ;  and  (4)  under  the  most  endear- 
ing and  interesting  relations  in  the  ordi- 
nances which  He  has  appointed — as 
Father,  <kc.    Do  we  know  by  experience 

327 


PSALM  LXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


the  blessedness  of  thus  approaching  unto 
Godi 

3.  The  house  of  God  is  here  repre- 
sented as  the  habitation  of  His  people. 
"  That  he  may  dwell  in  Thy  courts." 
The  good  man  is  not  an  occasional 
visitor  of  the  house  of  God,  but  a  resi- 
dent. The  godly  are  diligent  in  their 
attendance  there;  they  embrace  every 
opportunity,  &c. 

4.  Special  advantages  which  afford 
rich  pleasure  and  solid  satisfaction  are 
experienced  hy  those  who  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  and  enjoy  communion 
with  Him.  "  We  shall  be  satisfied  with 
the  goodness  of  Thy  house,  even  of  Thy 
holy  temple."  The  satisfaction  and 
pleasure  arise  (1)  from  its  being  the 
dwelling-place  of  God.  He  dwells  there 
as  a  king  in  his  courts — as  God  in  His 


temple.     (2)  From  the  communications 

of  the  Divine  favour.  They  are  satis- 
fied with  His  goodness  in  the  pardon  of 
sins,  in  the  bestowment  of  eternal  life, 
&c. 

II.  Improve  the  subject  with  a  few 
reflections. 

1.  Hoiu  great  is  the  value  of  religious 
privileges. 

2.  How  important  is  it  to  improve  our 
privileges. 

3.  How  great  are  the  advantages  which 
attend  the  improvement  of  the  means  oi 
grace. 

4.  How  great  is  the  sin  of  those  who 
slight  the  means  of  grace. 

5.  How  important  it  is  that  those  who 
have  slighted  the  means  of  grace  should 
repent  and  reform. — Abridged  from  an 
unpublished  MS. 


Manifestations  of  Divine  Power. 
(Verses  5-8.) 


Notice — 

I.  The  sphere  of  the  manifestations 
of  the  Divine  power.  It  is  represented 
by  the  Psalmist  as  manifested — 

1.  In  nature  (vers.  G,  7).  We  have 
it  here  (1)  Establishing  the  most  stable 
things.  "Who  by  His  strength  setteth 
fast  the  mountains,  girded  with  power." 
The  mountains  are  the  most  secure, 
abiding,  and  unchangeable  things  in 
nature.  Generations  come  and  go,  but 
the  mountains  remain.  Cities  arise  and 
flourish,  decay,  and  pass  away;  but  the 
mountains  continue,  and  apparently 
change  not.  Empires  are  founded  and 
fortified,  assaulted  and  o\erthrown  ;  but 
the  ancient  and  firm-set  mountains  move 
not  and  change  not.  The  Almighty,  as 
a  master  workman  girded  with  power, 
firmly  founded  and  securely  keeps  them. 
Their  stability  is  an  abiding  and  impres- 
sive witness  to  His  omnipotence.  (2) 
Controlling  the  most  restless  and  tumul- 
tuous things.  *'  Who  stilleth  the  noise 
of  the  seas,  the  noise  of  their  waves." 
How  restless  is  the  sea !  How  fierce 
and  furious  and  terrible  when  it  is  agi- 
tated by  storm  !  But  His  voice  can 
curb  it  even  in  its  wildest  moods,  can 
reduce  its  mountainous  billows  to  gentle 
328 


undulations,  can  hush  its  roaring  thun- 
ders into  soft  rippling  cadences.  (Comp. 
Ps.  cvii.  29;  Matt.  viii.  2^.)  Thus 
nature  is  ever  witnessing  to  the  almighty 
power  of  God. 

2.  In  human  society.  "  Who  stilleth 
the  tumult  of  the  peoples."  Perowne : 
"  The  sea  and  nations  are  mentioned  to- 
gether, the  one  being  so  often  used  as 
an  image  of  the  other."  Luther  :  "  Like 
as  He  stilled  Pharaoh  with  all  his  people, 
when  he  stormed  and  raged  against 
Israel,  as  if  he  would  have  devoured 
them.  In  like  manner  as  He  stilled  the 
king  of  Assyria,  when  he  roared  and 
raged  against  Jerusalem."  Barnes : 
"  This  is  perhaps  a  more  striking  and 
wonderful  exhibition  of  the  power  of 
God  than  that  of  calming  down  the 
waves  of  the  ocean.  In  the  one  case,  it 
is  the  exertion  of  mere  power  on  nature, 
acting  through  its  established  laws,  and 
where  there  is  no  resistance  of  will ;  in 
the  other,  it  is  power  exerted  over  the 
will ;  power  over  agents,  conscious  that 
they  are  free,  and  where  the  worst 
passions  meet  and  mingle  and  rage." 

The  Psalmist  indicates  the  continuous- 
ness  of  these  manifestations  of  the  Divine 
power.      "  Who   setteth,   ....  Whc» 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXT. 


stilleth."  God  is  ever  present  and  active 
both  in  nature  and  in  human  society. 
He  is  the  Author  and  Superintendent 
of  all  laws  of  nature,  the  Force  of  all 
forces,  «fec. 

II.  The  significance  of  the  manifes- 
tations of  the  Divine  power.  *'  Thy 
tokens."  These  manifestations  of  the 
power  of  God  are  regarded  as  indications 
of  His  presence  and  activity.  They  are 
signs  and  pledges  of  something  more 
than  and  beyond  themselves  ;  they  are 
indications  of  the  character  and  ability 
of  the  mighty  Worker.  Thus  the  doings 
of  God  in  nature  are  significant  of  His 
existence  and  presence,  His  power  and 
vmchangeableness.  His  control  of  tu- 
multuous peoples  witnesses  to  His  might 
and  majesty,  His  righteous  sovereignty, 
kc.  Both  nature  and  history,  to  the 
thoughtful  and  reverent  observer,  are 
most  fruitful  of  wise  suggestion  as  to 
the  works  and  ways  of  God. 

III.  The  influence  of  the  manifesta- 
tions of  the  Divine  power. 

1.  H'hei/  inspire  awe.  "They  are 
afraid  at  Thy  tokens."  The  exhibitions 
of  the  power  and  glory  of  God  are  fitted 
to  impress  the  mind  and  heart  of  men, 
to  awaken  reverence  and  fear  of  One 
who  is  so  great  in  power,  <kc. 

2.  They  inspire  confidence.  (Ver.  5.) 
We  have  here,  (1)  Confidence  for  a 
great  blessing.  "By  terrible  things  in 
righteousness  wilt  Thou  answer  us." 
The  word  translated  terrible  contains 
the  idea  of  the  wonderful  and  the  sub- 
lime. Reference  is  made  in  it  to  such 
events  as  took  place  in  Egypt  previous 
to  the  emancipation  of  Israel  from  bon- 
dage— events  fitted  to  impress  men  with 
a  deep  sense  of  the  power  and  greatness 
and  majesty  of  God.  The  Psalmist  is 
confident  that  by  such  events  God  would 
answer  the  prayers  of  His  people.     To 


be  assured  of  sufficient  answers  to  our 
prayers  is  confidence  for  a  great  blessing. 
Such  assurance  would  not  be  possible 
except  in  a  being  of  great  power.  Thus 
God's  might  is  a  basis  of  trust  for  man. 
(2)  Confidence  in  the  highest  Being. 
Trust  is  here  reposed  in  God  as  a  Being 
whose  power  is  always  exercised  righte- 
ously, and  for  the  salvation  of  those  who 
trust  in  Him.  "  In  righteousness  Thou 
wilt  answer  us,  0  God  of  our  salvation." 
Mere  power,  however  great,  is  inade- 
quate to  inspire  confidence.  It  may 
excite  alarm.  But  the  power  of  God  is 
ever  righteous  in  aim,  and  beneficent  in 
operation.  (3)  Confidence  in  the  widest 
extent.  "The  confidence  of  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sea  afar 
off","  denotes  the  dwellers  on  the  most 
distant  coasts  and  islands,  and  the  navi- 
gators of  the  most  distant  seas.  The 
blessings  of  God  are  coextensive  with 
the  wants  of  man.  There  is  no  other 
being  in  the  whole  universe  in  whom 
man  may  safely  confide.  The  true  and 
only  ground  of  trust  for  man  is  the 
great  and  gracious  God. 

3.  They  inspire  joy.  "Thou  makest 
the  outgoings  of  the  morning  and  even- 
ing to  rejoice."  Moll;  " The  outgoings 
of  the  morning  and  evening  mean  the 
east  and  west  as  practical  parallels  of 
the  ends  of  the  earth."  The  manifesta- 
tions of  the  righteous  and  beneficent 
power  of  God  are  calculated  to  inspire 
joy  amongst  all  peoples  everywhere. 

Conclusion. — We  are  living  amid 
the  manifestations  of  the  Divine  power. 
Do  we  heed  their  significance  1  Do  we 
hear  and  ponder  their  message?  Are 
the  phenomena  of  the  material  world 
revealing  to  us  the  realities  of  the 
spiritual  universe  1  Are  they  aiding  us 
to  know  God?  to  reverence,  trust,  and 
rejoice  in  Him  I 


The  Beneficent  Activity  of  God  in  Nature. 

(Verses  9-13.) 


The  Psalmist*8  view  of  nature  is  not 
that  of  the  Atheist.  He  regards  nature 
as  having  been  created,  and  as  being 
constantly  sustained  by  God.  Nor  that 
of  the  Positivist.     He  discovered  in  na- 


ture not  only  law,  and  order,  and  force, 
but  the  presence  and  activity  of  a  Divine 
Person — God.  Nor  that  of  the  Pa7i- 
theisL  He  off'ers  praise  to  God  as  a 
Person  having  an  existence  distinct  from 

329 


PSALM  LZV. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


and  independent  of  nature.  He  saw  in 
the  world  around  him  the  personal  pre- 
sence and  the  beneficent  activity  of  the 
Supreme.  And  the  beneficent  activity  of 
God  in  nature  he  represents  as  being — 

I.  Incessant.  (Vers.  9-11.)  The 
activity  of  God  in  His  works  is  cease- 
less.    This  is  manifest — 

1.  From  the  operations  which  are 
ascribed  to  Him.  He  is  said  to  prepare 
the  earth  for  the  corn,  and  the  corn  for 
man  ;  to  bless  the  springing  of  the  corn, 
and  to  carry  it  onward  in  its  progress  to 
maturity,  until,  in  the  abundance  and 
ripeness  of  autumn,  the  year  is  crowned 
with  His  goodness. 

2.  From  the  forms  of  the  verbs  which 
are  used  to  describe  those  opei^ations. 
"  Thou  visitest,  .  .  .  waterest,  ...  en- 
richest,  .  .  .  preparest,  .  .  .  blessest, 
.  .  .  crownest,"  &c.  "  The  present 
tenses  are  employed  here  to  express  that 
this  God  does  not  in  one  year  only,  but 
every  year."  His  operations  in  nature 
are  characterised  by  continuity.  In  all 
ages  and  in  all  seasons  He  is  at  work 
amidst  His  creations.  He  is  ever  active. 
This  is  well  expressed  by  Thomson  in 
his  Hymn  on  the  Seasons — 

**  These,  as   they  change,  Almighty  Father, 

these 
Are  but  the  varied  God.     The  rolling  year 
Is  full  of  Thee.    Forth  in  the  pleaisiug  Spring 
Thy  beauty  walks,  Thy  tenderness  and  love. 
Wide  flush  the  fields  ;  the  softening  air  is 

balm; 
Echo    the    mountains   round ;    the    forest 

smiles, 
And  every  sense  and  every  heart  is  joy. 
Then    comes    Thy   glory   in    the   Summer 

months, 
With  light  and  heat  refulgent.     Then  Thy 

sun 
Shoots  full  perfection  through  the  swelling 

year: 
And    oft   Thy   voice    in    dreadful   thunder 

speaks ; 
And  oft  at  dawn,  deep  noon,  or  falling  eve, 
By  brooka  and  groves,  in  hollow-whispering 

gales. 
Thy  bounty  shines  in  Autumn  unconfined, 
And  spreads  a  common  feast  for  all  that 

lives. 
In   Winter  awful  Thou !   with  clouds  and 

storms 
Around  Thee  thrown,  tempest  o'er  tempest 

rolled. 
Majestic  darkness  I  On  the  whirlwind's  wing 
Hiding  sublime,  Thou  bid'st  the  world  adore, 
And  humblest  nature  with  Thy  northern 

blast." 

330 


II.  Omnipresent.  The  "  furrows"  and 
the  "  ridges "  of  the  earth  He  waters 
abundantly.  He  gives  fertility  and 
beauty  to  "  the  pastures  of  the  wilder- 
ness ; "  He  girds  "  the  little  hills  "  with 
joy,  and  He  enrobes  the  fruitful  valleys 
with  corn  or  covers  them  with  flocks. 
There  is  no  part  of  His  universe  in 
which  He  is  not  present  in  His  benefi- 
cent activities.  On  mountain  summits, 
which  are  accessible  to  the  gaze  only  of 
the  strong- wino-ed  easrles  and  the  sub- 
lime  stars,  He  causes  beauty  to  spring 
forth.  And  in  dense  forests,  into  which 
even  the  most  adventurous  of  men  have 
not  penetrated,  He  is  at  work  producing 
luxuriant  and  beautiful  forms  of  vege- 
tation and  life.  The  omnipresence  of 
His  beneficent  activities  may  be  used— 

1.  As  a  restraint  from  sin. 

2.  As  an  encouragement  to  constant 
trust  in  Him. 

3.  As  an  incentive  to  reverence  Him  at 
all  times  and  in  all  places. 

III.  Abundant.  "Thou  visitest  the 
earth  and  waterest  it ;  Thou  greatly 
enricbest  it  with  the  river  of  God,  which 
is  full  of  water;  Thou  waterest  the 
ridges  thereof  abundantly;  Thy  paths 
drop  fatness."  Thus  with  fulness  of 
expression  the  Psalmist  represents  the 
abundance  of  the  Divine  beneficence  in 
nature.  The  psalm  was  probably  writ- 
ten upon  the  occasion  of  a  bounteous 
harvest,  or  after  a  copious  and  much- 
needed  rain.  But  it  is  true  at  all  times 
that  the  beneficent  activities  uf  God  are 
on  the  largest  and  most  generous  scale. 
We  may  see  this  in  the  great  fertility 
of  the  earth  when  wisely  and  diligently 
cultivated.  How  rich  is  the  reward  of 
such  cultivation !  Scenes  of  fertility, 
plenty,  and  beauty,  like  that  sketched 
by  the  Poet,  are  to  be  found  in  vast 
numbers  in  our  own  land  to-day.  Both 
in  nature  and  in  grace  God  bestows  His 
gifts  with  infinite  munificence. 

IV.  Joy-inspiring.  "  The  little  hills 
rejoice  on  every  side.  The  pastures  are 
clothed  with  flocks;  the  valleys  also  are 
covered  over  with  corn ;  they  shout  for 
joy,  they  also  sing."  Nature  is  here 
represented  as  singing  for  joy  in  its 
prosperity.  The  idea  is  both  natural 
and  poetical.     And  to  man  the  benefi- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


FSALH  LXV. 


cent  activities  of  God  in  the  material 
creation  should  ever  be  a  source  of 
grateful  and  reverent  joy.  The  abun- 
dant provision  which  He  thus  makes 
for  our  needs  should  awaken  our  grati- 
tude. The  wide-spread  diffusion  of 
beauty  should  enkindle  our  admiration. 
And  in  all  we  should  see  and  praise  Him. 
Conclusion. — Let  us  learn — 1.  7'o 
recognise  the  presence  and  power  of  God 
171  nature.  2.  To  praise  the  goodness  of 
God  in  nature,     3.   To  worship  God  as 


seen  in  nature.  Let  us  tread  the  earth 
as  a  temple  alive  with  the  presence  and 
radiant  with  the  glory  of  God.  4.  To 
trust  God  as  the  God  of  nature.  We 
have  His  promise — "  While  the  earth 
remaineth,  seed  time  and  harvest,  and 
cold  and  heat,  and  summer  and  winter, 
and  day  and  night,  shall  not  cease."  He 
will  not  fail  to  fulfil  His  promise.  5. 
To  regard  His  beneficence  in  nature  as 
an  illustration  of  the  more  precious 
blessings  of  salvation. 


A  May  Homily. 
{Verse  10.  "Thou  blessest  the  springing  thereof.") 


Nature  in  all  her  moods  and  phases 
Is  always  ministerial,  if  we  will  have  it. 
One  may  speak,  for  instance,  of  the 
opening  of  the  spring,  as  a  kind  of  an- 
nual Divine  Sacrament,  by  attending 
upon  which  with  wise  and  meek  surren- 
der, the  better  man  in  us  may  be  awak- 
ened and  stimulated As  Christ 

instituted  the  bread  and  wine,  to  be  a 
means  of  aiding  His  followers  in  their 
remembrance  of  Him  and  their  com- 
munion with  Him ;  so  does  the  holy 
Father  give  us  every  year  the  marvels 
and  minstrelsies  of  spring,  to  aid  us  in 
growing  fine  and  rising  higher.  He 
blesses  the  general  flushing  and  budding. 
It  is  consecrated  for  us,  to  be  an  advan- 
tage to  us  spiritually,  if  we  will  allow 
it.  We  speak  of  our  Sundays,  our  re- 
ligious services,  our  daily  tasks  and 
difficulties  as  means  of  grace  ;  and  the 
vernal  advent  and  encompassment  is  no 
less  really  a  means  of  grace,  to  be  util- 
ised to  profit,  or  neglected  to  loss  and 
condemnation. 

I.  Who  is  there  who  ha^  not  felt  and 
acknowledged  the  softening,  expanding , 
genialising  influence  of  the  spring ;  its 
sweetening  effect  upon  the  mental  mood 
and  temper  ?  .  ,  ,  ,  Only  look  at  the 
people's  faces,  as  they  meet  one  another 
by  the  way,  some  fine  morning  in  the 
first  burst  of  spring  !  How  full  of  good- 
humour  they  are,  how  warmly  they 
salute,  how  disposed  they  seem  to  be 
more  generous  and  charitable  than 
usual !  .  .  .  .  You  may  explain  it  physio- 
logically, I  am  quite  aware ;  but  then, 


it  is  not  less  God  coming  to  you,  in  and 
through  physiological  laws  and  processes, 
with  an  opportunity  of  improvement, 
with  a  tide  to  bear  and  lift  you,  if  taken 
at  the  flood,  toward  a  permanently 
better,  a  permanently  sweeter  and  more 
gracious  spirit.  It  is  a  Divine  means 
of  grace.  What  you  have  to  do  is,  just 
to  seize  the  vernal  feeling  that  has  risen 
in  you,  and  cherish  and  go  forth  with  it : 
namely,  by  starting  from  the  height  of 
it,  under  the  impulse  of  it,  with  new 
resolves  and  endeavours  to  cultivate  the 
genial  and  generous  temper ;  and  by 
seeking  to  put  it  at  once,  before  it  fades, 
into  some  corresponding  deed.  Now, 
while  it  is  upon  you,  go  and  give  some- 
thing to  somebody's  need  ;  go  and  do 
something  for  somebody's  good. 

II.  Does  not  the  present  season  tend 
to  excite  in  us,  at  times,  strange,  vague, 
mysterious  yearnings — yearnings  amount- 
ing often  to  pain  ^  ....  I  recall  vividly 
a  sketch  I  once  saw — a  slight  but  very 
striking  sketch — a  lone  evening  shore, 
with  the  sun  slowly  sinking  into  the  sea, 
and  a  woman  sitting  gazing  at  it  from  the 
beach,  her  hands  clasped  round  her 
knees,  a  far-off,  weary,  wistful  look  in 
her  eyes,  her  face  as  the  face  of  one  who 
listens  for  something  that  is  unheard, 
and  longs  for  more  than  is  seen.  It  was 
as  though  the  dying  sun  were  drawing 
her  to  himself;  as  though  presently  she 
must  arise  and  seek  him  through  the 
waves,  aching  to  fin^  with  him — she 
knew  not  what — but  the  larger,  the 
brighter,  the  happier  thai  seemed  to  be 

331 


FSALM  LXV. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


calling  her.  Now  that  is  an  illustration 
of  what  I  mean ;  when  nature  lays  her 
hand  upon  us,  and  sets  us  dreamily 
yearning,  as  she  is  especially  apt  to  do 

in    her   annual   springing You 

feel  pensive.  There  are  strange  stirrings 
and  pinings  in  your  breast  that  you 
hardly  understand.  The  life  in  which 
hitherto  you  have  been  content  and 
happy,  seems  poor  and  insipid  and  un- 
satisfying. The  money  you  have  made, 
the  secular  successes  you  have  won, 
seem  less  worth  than  they  were;  and 
you  reach  home  rather  low-spirited, 
oppressed  with  a  vague  sense  of  want, 
a  vague  longing.  What  does  it  mean  ? 
The  grace  of  the  season  has  somehow 
swept  the  diviner  depths  in  you,  and 
caused   a    sudden    blind    motion    and 

flutter   there Turn   the   feeling 

before  it  dies  into  a  prayer — a  prayer 
to  be  filled  and  satisfied  from  the  Lord ; 
a  prayer  to  be  made  willing  to  seek  and 

do  in  harmony  with  His  will It 

is  an  accepted  time,  a  day  of  salvation ; 
do  not  lose  it. 

III.  Has  not  the  loveliness  of  spring, 
and  the  beautiful  order  which  it  expresses 
and  reveals,  brotight  home  to  us  now  and 


again,  hy  the  force  of  contract,  the  ugli- 
nesses and  disorders  that  abound  in 
man's  world,  and  constrained  us  to 
ponder  and  bewail  them  afresh  ?  .  ,  ,  . 
Whenever  the  spring  leads  you  to  lament 
thus,  what  is  it  but  a  fresh  Divine  call 
to  you  to  philanthropic  labour  and  effort ; 
a  fresh  Divine  impression  upon  you  of 
humanity's  sore  needs  and  woes ;  that 
you  may  be  awakened  to  increased  sym- 
pathy with  them,  and  urged  to  attempt 
more  towards  their  relief  ?  Seek,  then, 
to  waken  and  urge  yourselves  with  it. 
Do  not  allow  the  feeling  to  evaporate  in 
mere  melancholy  musings  or  pensive 
poetry ;  but  let  it  bear  you  forth  to 
heartier  and  more  earnest  ministry; 
make  it  a  means  of  stimulating  your 
benevolent  activity.  Go,  with  the  tears 
for  the  miseries  and  evils  of  man's 
world  which  the  musical  groves  and  the 
fine  order  of  nature  may  have  started 
in  your  eyes,  to  weep  helpfully  with 
them  that  weep,  and  to  stream  with 
renewed  endeavour  against  the  works  of 
the  devil.  So  shall  the  springing  which 
the  Lord  blesses  be  blessed  indeed. — 
S,  A.  Tipple,  Abridged  from  The  Day 
of  Rest, 


The  First  Sabbath  in  the  New-Yeab. 
(Verse  11.  "Thou  crownest  the  year  with  Thy  goodness.") 


Let  us,  though  it  be  generally  and 
rapidly,  mark  that  goodness  which  has 
crowned  the  year — 

I.  As  to  our  country.  I  love  the 
pious  patriotism  of  the  ancient  Jews, 
whose  hearts  hovered  over  Zion  even  in 
her  desolations  and  pronounced  their 
blessing  upon  all  the  lovers  of  Jerusa- 
lem. Nor  does  justice,  less  than  piety, 
demand  this  recognition  of  our  national 
mercies,  since  there  is  not  one  of  them 
which  is  not,  in  some  of  its  results,  a 

blessing  to  ourselves Ours  is  a 

country  to  which  God  has  given  one  of 
the  mightiest  empires  ever  swayed  by 
man  ; — a  country  where,  amidst  much 
of  darkness,  a  brighter  light  of  evan- 
gelical truth  is  shining ;  where,  in  the 
midst  of  awful  vice,  there  is  a  higher 
degree  of  public  and  private  virtue  than 
in  any  other ;  a  country  whose  civil  and 
332 


religious  institutions  are,  at  once,  the 
light  and  admiration  of  a  great  part  of 
the  world,  (fee. 

That  such  a  state  of  things  has  been 
continued,  by  the  good  providence  of 
God,  through  another  year,  is  matter 
of  devout  thanksgiving,  &c. 

II.  As  to  our  families.  I  love  to 
mark  the  blessed  effects  of  Christianity 
upon  families  connected  by  blood,  and, 
as  it  were,  identified  in  the  same  joys, 
and  sorrows,  and  interests  of  life.  .  .  . 
Such  was  the  family  at  Bethany  which 
Jesus  loved  ;  and  many  such  are  found, 
I  trust,  among  you.  Remember  your 
family  mercies.  As  to  most  of  you, 
how  exempt  have  you  been  from  any 
but  those  ordinary  cares  and  transient 
visitations  to  which  all  are  subject  I 
The  circle  of  your  family  hearth  is  un- 
broken, (fee 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  psalm  lxvi. 

III.  As  to  our  personal  experience,  faithful  dealings  with  Him,  <fec.  Let 
I  lose  sight  of  your  preservations  from  this  recollection  of  the  goodness  of  God 
bodily  danger  and  death,  <fec.  Subjects  come  to  you,  giving  greater  tenderness 
these  not  to  be  forgotten  by  you,  and  to  your  sorrows,  strength  to  your  de- 
never  to  be  remembered  without  grateful  sires,  and  new  life  to  your  hopes.  "  Re- 
devotion.  But  I  merge  them  now  in  turn,  ye  backsliding  children,"  &c. 
the  higher  considerations  suggested  by  IV.  As  to  the  universal  Church. 
the  spiritual  blessings  which  have  been  True  piety  identifies  us  with  the  uni- 

granted  to  you When  consider-  versal  Church.     How  gladdened  should 

ing  spiritual  blessings  as  the  portion  of  be  our  hearts  if  she  has  been,  through 

any  man,  we  cannot  but  mount  up  to  the  grace  of  God,  faithful  to  her  high 

that  boundless,   that   mysterious  good-  calling,  and  has  prospered  in  her  work  ! 
ness  which  humbled  the  eternal  Word  Conclude — 1.   Bi/  addressing   those 

to  humanity,  and  spared  Him  not  from  to  wJiom  it  has  been  a  year  of  special 

the  sorrows  of  the  cross,  in  order,  so  to  affliction.     You  have  had  afflictions,  but 

speak,  to  free  itself  from  the  restraints  you  have   likewise   had   mercies.     Nor 

of  Divine  justice,  that  it  might  recover  has  God  visited  you  with  all  the  suflFer- 

and  bless  mankind What  affect-  ing  that  you  have  deserved,  and  which, 

ing  instances  of  goodness  spring  from  therefore,  He  might  have  inflicted.    And 

this  !  &c.  what  have  been  many  of  your  troubles 

Some  during  the  past  year  have  been,  but  blessings  in  disguise  ]  .  .   .  .  The 

for  the  first  time,  made  the  subjects  of  chastening  was  not  joyous,  but  grievous  ; 

the  renewing  grace   of  God  ;  on  you  I  nevertheless,  it   has  yielded   to  you  the 

call    this   day    for   special    acknowledg-  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.     Can 

ment.     From  what  a  depth  of  misery  you    number    no    mercies    among    the 

and  danger  have  you  been  plucked  !  &c.  wants  of  the  past  year]     Thank  God, 

I   address    others   of  you   who   have  then,  and  take  courage, 
longer  known  this  grace  in  truth,  and  2.  /  beseech  you,  brethren,  hy  all  these 

to  whom  the  experience  of  the  past  year  mercies,   that   you  present  yourselves  a 

has    been    comforting    and    advancing.  living   sacrifice   unto    God.      Renounce 

And  this  you  owe  to  the  special  good-  every   other   authority,   and  submit  to 

ness  of  God Your  light  is  light  Him  (Ps.  cxviii.  27 ;  cxvi.  8,  9).    Every 

from  Him  ;  your  strength,  strength  from  renewed  mercy  increases  our  obligations 

Him.     "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  to  love  and  serve  Him  ;  and  happy  is 

I  am."    *'  Thou  crownest  the  year  with  that  man,  who,  under  the  full  power  of 

Thy  goodness."  joyous  and  grateful  feeling,  so  surrenders 

But  do  I  awaken  in  any  heart  the  himself  to  God,  as  to  live  for  no  other 

painful  remembrance  of  religious  bar-  purpose  than  that  of  glorifying  Him. — 

renness  and  declension]     God  has  not  Richard  Watson*     Abridged, 
dealt  with  you  according  to  your  un- 


PSALM  LXVL 
Introductioit. 

Supersertption, — **To  the  chief  Musician."  See  Introduction  to  Fs.  Ivil  **A  Psalm  or 
Song*     See  Introduction  to  Ps.  xlviii. 

Both  the  author  and  the  occasion  of  the  psalm  are  unknown. 

Hengstenberg  :  "The  psalm  is  a  song  of  thanksgiving  of  the  Church  of  God,  after  a  pro- 
tracted and  severe  trial.  It  is  divided  into  three  great  parts.  In  the  first,  God  is  praised 
(1-7),  on  account  of  what  He  does  to  Israel  at  all  times,  in  the  second  (8-12),  on  account  of  what 
He  had  Just  now  done,  and  in  the  third  (13-20),  the  Church  vows  her  gratitude." 

Homiletically  we  have  in  the  psalm  the  folio  wing,  themes  for  meditation,  Praise  to  God  for 
His  mighty  works  (vers.  1-7) ;  Praise  for  His  great  kindness  in  affliction  (vera  8-12) ;  and  The 
declaration  of  a  grateful  .<toul  (vers.  13-20). 

333 


rSAtiM  LXVI. 


UOMILETl  C  CO  MM  EM  TAR  Y :  PSA  LMS, 


Pbaisinq  God  for  His  Mighty  Works. 
(Verses  1-7.) 


Consider — 

I.  The  reason  of  this  praise.     The 

Psalmist  calls  upon  all  lands  to  praise 
God  because  of  His  mighty  and 
majestic  doings.  And  in  so  doing  he 
sets  forth — 

1.  The  nature  of  His  works.     With 
mighty  power  God  is  ever  engaged  in 
governing   the   nations    of   the    world. 
"  He  ruleth  by  His  power  for  ever,"  &c. 
Three  features  of  His  government  are 
here   indicated   by  the   poet.     (1.)  Its 
perfect   knowledge.     "  His    eyes  behold 
the  nations."     Moll :  *'  His  eyes  keep 
watch  upon  the  nations."     The  plans  of 
the   enemies   of   Himself   and   of    His 
people    are    all     known     unto     Him. 
They  can  conceal  nothing  from   Him; 
and    His  people   in   all  their    circum- 
stances and  all  their  needs  are  ever  be- 
fore   Him.     He  has  a  clear   and   full 
view  of  all  things.     (2.)  Its  subjugation 
of  enemies.     In  the  second  verse    it   is 
said,  "How  terrible  art  Thou  in  Thy 
works  I  through  the   greatness  of  Thy 
power  shall  Thine  enemies  submit  them- 
selves unto  Thee ; "  i.e.,  yield  a  feigned 
submission  unto    Him.     By  His  great 
power  they  would  be  compelled  to  make 
a  hollow    and   unwilling  profession   of 
loyalty  to  Him.     And  in  the  sixth  verse 
there  is  a  reference  to  the  overthrow  of 
Pharaoh  and  his  hosts  in  the  Red  Sea. 
There  are  to-day  those  who  submit  to 
God  in  loving  loyalty,  and  those  who 
submit  only  outwardly  and  from  slavish 
fear.     And  if  men  will  resist  Him   to 
the  utmost,   then,   like    the    tyrannical 
monarch  of  Egypt,  they  will  be  crushed 
by   His   power.     (3.)    Its   salvation   of 
His  people,     "  He  turned  the  sea  into 
dry  land  ;  they  went  through  the  flood 
on  foot :  there  did  we  rejoice  in  Him.'' 
His  power  is  exerted  for  the  defence 
and  deliverance  of  those  who  put  their 
trust  in  Him ;  as  was  seen  in  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  passage  of 
the  Jordan.     In    His   government   the 
interests  of  His  loyal  subjects  are  speci- 
ally cared  for.     He  is  '*  mighty  to  save  " 
all  who  confide  in  Him,  and  to  crush 
334 


incorrigible  rebels,  however  nnmerons 
or  powerful  they  may  be. 

2.  The  constancy  of  His  works.  "  He 
ruleth  by  His  power  for  ever."  Heng- 
stenberg  :  "  The  Psalmist  refers  to  the 
passage  through  the  Red  Sea  and  the 
Jordan,  but  not  as  to  transactions 
which  took  place  and  were  concluded  at 
a  given  period  of  time,  but  as  happen- 
ing really  in  every  age.  God's  guid- 
ance of  His  people  is  a  constant  drying 
up  of  the  sea  and  of  the  Jordan,  and 
the  joy  over  His  mighty  deeds  is  always 
receiving  new  materials."  The  exhorta- 
tion, "  Come  and  see  the  works  of  God," 
implies  that  these  works  are  actually 
present.  His  rule  is  continuous  and 
everlasting.  Though  He  no  longer 
manifests  His  power  in  miraculous 
deeds,  that  power  is  ever  working  for 
the  overthrow  of  evil,  the  salvation  of 
His  people,  and  the  extension  of  His 
kingdom. 

3.  The  influence  of  His  works.  The 
mighty  deeds  of  the  Most  High  are 
calculated,  (1.)  To  excite  awe.  "  How 
terrible  art  Thou  in  Thy  works !  .  .  . 
He  is  terrible  in  His  doing  toward  the 
children  of  men  ! "  His  deeds  reveal  His 
tremendous  majesty,  and  are  fitted  to 
inspire  the  mind  with  reverent  fear. 
(2.)  To  check  rebellion  against  Him, 
"Let  not  the  rebellious  exalt  them- 
selves." What  is  the  strength  of  the 
mightiest  when  measured  against  Hisi 
The  sinner  is  battling  against  Omnipo- 
tence. "  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God  ] 
or  canst  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like 
Him?"  "Kiss  the  Son,  lest  He  be 
angry,  and  ye  perish,"  <kc.  (3.)  To  in- 
spire confidence  in  Him,  The  Psalmist 
represents  the  mighty  deeds  of  God  as 
a  reason  for  praise,  an  incitement  to 
universal  worship,  and  a  cause  for  re- 
joicing in  Him.  These  things  imply 
trust  in  Him.  His  majestic  works 
quickened  the  souls  of  His  people  into 
the  exercise  of  a  lively  confidence  in 
Him.  When  we  mark  how  righteously 
and  beneficently  His  almightiness  is 
exercised,  we  see  that  it  is  well  fitted 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PBALM  LXVL 


to  quicken  and  strengthen  our  faith  in 
Him. 

4.    The    necessity   of   observing  His 

works.  "  Come  and  see  the  works  of 
God."  It  is  only  as  the  glorious  deeds 
of  God  are  thoughtfully  and  reverently 
regarded  by  us.  that  they  will  beneficially 
affect  our  mind  and  heart.  But  when 
they  are  attentively  and  devoutly  con- 
sidered, they  will  inspire  trust  and 
gratitude,  admiration  and  praise  in  us, 
even  as  they  did  in  the  poet.  Do  we 
thus  consider  the  doings  of  God  in  His 
government  of  the  world  to-day  1  Do 
these  doings  enkindle  our  hearts  into 
resolute  trust  and  holy  song?  Surely 
they  are  well  fitted  to  do  so,  unless  we 
are  in  arms  against  Him. 

11.  The  enthusiasm  of  this  praise. 
"  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  God,  all  ye 
lands.  Sing  forth  the  honour  of  His 
name;  make  His  praise  glorious." 
The  praise  for  which  the  poet  calls  is  to 
be  offered — 

1.  Heartily,  "  Make  a  joyful  noise 
unto  God."  "  Shout  for  joy  to  God." 
The  mere  "  shout "  is  worthless  in  the 
sight  of  God.  But  when  the  shout  is 
the  natural  expression  of  the  heart's 
zeal  and  fervour,  it  is  acceptable  to 
Him.  Languid  praises  are  utterly  in- 
adequate to  celebrate  His  doings,  and 
are  repugnant  to  Him. 

2.  Joyfully.  **  Make  a  joyful  noise 
unto  God."  ''  Shout  for  joy."  To  be 
acceptable  to  God  praise  must  be  offered 
not  as  a  duty,  but  as  a  privilege.  To 
the  devout  heart  praise  is  pleasure,  wor- 
ship is  delight. 

3.  Openly.  **  Shout  for  joy  unto 
God ;  .  .  .  sing  forth  the  honour  of 
His  name,"  &c.  We  must  celebrate  the 
p raise  of  God  openly,  that  men  may  see 
that  we  are  not  ashamed  of  doing  so, 
and  that  they  may  be  encouraged  to 
unite  with  us  in  the  holy  and  joyous 
exercise.     When  we  think  of  what  God 


is  ever  doing  for  us,  how  enthusiastia 
should  our  praise  to  Him  be  !  When  we 
think  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  blessings  of 
redemption,  how  fervent  and  rapturous 
and  ceaseless  should  be  our  songs  ! 

III.  The  universality  of  this  praise. 
**  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  God,  all  ye 
lands,  .  .  ,  All  the  earth  shall  worship 
Thee,  and  shall  sing  unto  Thee ;  they 
shall  sing  to  Thy  name."  The  poet 
was  confident  that  the  heathen  world 
would  be  won  from  their  idolatries  and 
atheism  to  the  worship  of  the  living 
and  true  God.  His  prophetic  announce- 
ment is  not  yet  fully  accomplished. 
But  we  are  confident  that  it  will  be — 

1.  Because  of  the  character  and  per- 
fections of  God.  He  is  good  to  all  men, 
and  His  goodness  is  calculated  to 
awaken  the  gratitude  of  all.  His  cha- 
racter is  fitted  to  inspire  the  admira- 
tion and  adoration  of  all  men.  "  Who 
is  like  unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  among  the 
gods  *?  Who  is  like  unto  Thee,  glorious 
in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing 
wonders  *? " 

2.  Because  of  the  history  of  His  wor- 
ship amongst  men.  The  worship  of 
many  heathen  deities  has  passed  away. 
Men  are  casting  their  "  idols  which 
they  made  to  worship  to  the  moles  and 
to  the  bats."  But  the  number  of  His 
worshippers  is  ever  increasing.  His 
empire  over  human  souls  grows  con- 
stantly and  rapidly.  Its  past  history  is 
prophetic  of  its  full  and  final  triumph. 

3.  Because  of  the  predictions  of  His 
Word.  The  Holy  Book  is  clear  and 
triumphant  in  its  declarations  on  this 
point.  (See  Ps.  xxii.  27,  Ixxii.  8-19 ; 
Isa.  xlv.  23  j  Mai.  i.  11  ;  Luke  xiii.  29  ; 
Kom.  xiv.  11  ;  et  al.) 

Conclusion. — Let  this  glorious  pros- 
pect— 1.  Incite  us  to  toil  for  its  realisa- 
tion. 2.  Encourage  us  to  pray  for  its 
realisation.  3,  Stimulate  us  to  praise 
Him  who  has  promised  its  realisation. 


Pbaisinq  God  fob  His  Gkbat  Kindness  in  Affliction. 

(Verses  8-12.) 


The  Psalmist  in  these  verses  sets  be- 
fore us — 

I.  A  great  affliction.  This  affliction 
is— 


1.  Variously  represented.  The  poet 
uses  a  number  of  expressive  figures  to 
set  forth  the  distress  through  which  th« 
people  had  passed.     These   figures  re- 

336 


PSALM  LXVL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


present  it  as,  (1.)  Imprisoning,     "  Thou 
brouglitest   us   into    the    net."     Moll : 
"  Thou  hast  brought  us  into    the   en- 
closure."    The  idea  is  that  of  straitness, 
confinement.     The  soul  sometimes  seems 
surrounded    with    trouble,    from    which 
there    is    no    escape.      (2.)    Oppressing. 
''  Thou  laidst  affliction  upon  our  loins." 
Moll :  "  Haet   laid  an    oppressive  bur- 
den on  our  loins."     Barnes  :  *'  The  loins 
are  mentioned  as  the  seat  of  strength 
(comp.  Deut.  xxxiii.   11  ;  1  Kings  xii. 
1 0  ;  Job  xl.  1 6)  ;  and  the  idea  here  is, 
that  He  had  put  their  strength  to   the 
test :    He  had  tried    them  to   see   how 
much  they  could  bear ;    He  had  made 
the  test  effectual  by  applying  it  to  the 
part  which  was  able  to  bear  most.     He 
had  tried  them  to   the  utmost."     (3.) 
Degrading.     ''  Thou  hast  caused  men  to 
ride  over   our  heads."     Hengstenberg : 
"  Thou  didst  let   men    ride   upon    our 
head."     The  head  is  mentioned  as  the 
noblest  part.     And  the  idea  is  that  the 
sufferers  had  been  not  only  vanquished, 
but   treated    by  their   conquerors    with 
the    utmost     indignity    and     tyranny. 
Their     enemies     had     insulted     them, 
scorned    them,    degraded    them.       (4.) 
Consuming.     "We  went  through  fire." 
The  passing  through  fire  indicates  trial 
which    involves    extreme    danger.     The 
severest  trials   we   speak    of    as    "  fiery 
trials."       (5.)     Overwhelming.        *'  We 
went   through    water."      Barnes  :    "  It 
was  as  if  they  had  been  made  to  pass 
through    burning    flames    and     raging 
floods  (comp.  Isa.  xliii.  2).     Instead  of 
passing   through    the    seas    and    rivers 
when  the  waters  had  been  turned  back, 
and  when  a  dry  and  safe  path  was  made 
for  them,  as   was  the  case   with  their 
fathers  (ver.  6),  they  had  been  compelled 
to   breast   the   flood    itself."     This   re- 
presentation  of   the    affliction    of    the 
people  shows  that  their  distresses  were 
numerous f   various,    and    severe.     From 
trials  of  one  kind  they  passed,  and  then 
had  to  encounter  trials  of  another  kind. 
And  some  of  these  trials  threatened  to 
destroy    their    very    existence.       Their 
experience  in  this  respect  is  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  experience  of  some  of  the 
people  of  God  in  all  ages. 
This  severe  affliction  was — 
336 


2.  Permitted  by  God,  '*  Thou 
broughtest  us  into  the  net;  Thou  laidst 
affliction  upon  our  loins.  Thou  hast 
caused,"  (fee.  They  recognised  the  hand 
of  God  in  their  distresses.  The  strongest 
and  most  daring  enemy  of  the  people  of 
God  has  no  power  but  what  is  given 
him  from  above.  These  afflictions 
could  not  have  befallen  them  without 
the  Divine  permission.  All  suflPerings 
are  either  sent  by  God,  or  permitted  by 
Him.  The  realisation  of  this  hy  the 
unhelieuer  is  an  aggravation  of  suffering  ; 
hy  the  believer,  a  blessing  in  suffering. 
*'  It  is  the  Lord ;  let  Him  do  what 
seemeth  Him  good."  (See  on  Ps. 
xxxix.  9.) 

II.  Great  kindness  in  great  afliic- 
tion.  The  kindness  of  God  as  celebrated 
by  the  Psalmist  was  manifest — 

1.  In  prese7'ving  the  afflicted. 
*'  Which  holdeth  our  soul  in  life,  and 
suffereth  not  our  feet  to  be  moved." 
He  had  protected  them  amid  the  dan- 
gers which  threatened  their  life  ;  and 
He  had  not  left  their  feet  to  totter  or 
stumble  so  as  to  cause  them  to  fall. 
Their  enemies  failed  to  crush  them,  and 
the  fire  to  consume  them,  and  the  flood 
to  overwhelm  them ;  because  God  de- 
fended them. 

2.  In  the  design  of  the  affliction, 
"  Thou,  O  God,  hast  proved  us ;  Thou 
hast  tried  us  as  silver  is  tried."  The 
design  of  their  affliction  was,  (1.)  The 
testing  of  character,  "  As  silver  is 
tried  "  in  the  fire,  so  God  had  tested 
the  reality  of  their  faith,  and  hope,  and 
patience.  "  When  God  doth  afflict 
you,"  says  Caryl,  "  then  He  doth  bring 
you  to  the  touchstone  to  see  whether 
you  are  good  metal  or  noj  He  doth 
bring  you  then  to  the  furnace,  to  try 
whether  you  be  dross  or  gold,  or  what 
you  are.  Affliction  is  the  great  dis- 
coverer that  unmasks  us.  .  .  .  Some 
will  hold  on  with  God  as  long  as  the 
sun  shineth,  as  long  as  it  is  fair  weather ; 
but  if  the  storm  arise,  if  troubles  come, 
whether  personal  or  public,  then  they 
pull  in  their  heads,  then  they  deny  and 
forsake  God,  then  they  draw  back  from 
Him,  and  betray  His  truth ;  what  they, 
such  and  such  men  !  Trouble  makes 
the  greatest  trial;  bring  professors  to 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXVI. 


the  fire,  and  tlien  they  show  their 
metal."  So  He  tried  Abraham  and  Job, 
et  al.  (2.)  The  improving  of  character. 
Silver  is  put  into  the  smelting  furnace 
in  order  to  remove  its  dross.  Afflictions 
are  designed  to  purify  and  perfect  the 
character.  (Comp.  Isa.  i.  25  ;  xlviii.  10; 
Zech.  xiii.  1 9 ;  Mai.  iii.  3 ;  Jas.  i.  2,  3, 
12  ;  1  Pet.  i.  7.) 

3.  In  the  issue  of  the  affliction. 
"  Thou  broughtest  me  out  into  a  wealthy 
place."  Margin :  "  Moist."  Hengsten- 
berg :  "  Thou  didst  lead  us  out  to 
affluence."  Conant :  *'  Thou  hast 
brought  us  out  to  overflowing  plenty." 
Moll :  "  Thou  hast  brought  us  out  into 
abundance."  Calvin :  "  The  sum  is, 
although  God  at  times  may  chastise 
severely  His  own  people,  yet  He  always 
gives  them  a  happy  and  joyful  issue." 
M.  Henry :  "  God  brings  His  people 
into  trouble  that  their  comforts  after- 
wards may  be  the  sweeter,  and  that 
their  affliction  may  thus  yield  the  peace- 
able fruit  of  righteousness,  which  will 
make  the  poorest  place  in  the  world  a 
wealthy  place."  The  troubles  of  the 
people  of  God  will  be  brought  by  Him 
to  the  most  blessed  and  glorious  issue. 

III.  Praise  for  great  kindness  in 
great  affliction.  "O  bless  our  God, 
ye  people,  and  make  the  voice  of  His 


praise  to  be  heard."     Three  points  are 
here  suggested — 

1.  Praise  for  general  mercies  does  not 
supersede  the  obligation  of  special  praise 
for  special  mercies.  The  poet  in  the 
former  strophe  had  called  for  enthusi- 
astic praise  to  God  for  His  regular  and 
constant  activity  for  the  benefit  of  His 
people ;  now  he  calls  again  for  praise 
for  the  special  deliverance  and  blessing 
which  he  commemorates. 

2.  Praise  for  the  great  kindness  of 
God  is  all  the  more  fervent  and  delight- 
ful when  we  are  assured  of  our  personal 
interest  in  Him.  *'  O  bless  our  God  !  " 
Blessed  indeed  are  they  who  can  thus 
regard  Him.  His  mercies  to  them  will 
be  doubly  precious.  And  their  praise 
of  Him  will  be  specially  hearty  and 
confiding  and  pleasurable. 

3.  The  heart  that  is  fervent  in  His 
praises  ivill  seek  to  engage  others  therein. 
"  0  bless  our  God,  ye  people,  and  make 
the  voice  of  His  praise  to  be  heard." 
The  grateful  and  fervent  heart  would 
enlist  multitudes  in  this  service,  and 
sound  His  praise  abroad  on  all  sides. 

Conclusion.  —  1.  Let  the  afflicted 
wait  upon  God  in  patience  and  hope, 
2.  Let  those  delivered  from  affliction 
praise  Him  with  gratitude  and  glad 
ness. 


The  Declaration  of  a  Grateful  Soul. 
(Verses  13-20.) 


"We  have  now,"  says  Perowne, 
"  the  personal  acknowledgment  of  God's 
mercy,  first,  in  the  announcement  on 
the  part  of  the  Psalmist  of  the  offerings 
which  he  is  about  to  bring,  and  which 
he  had  vowed  in  his  trouble;  and  then, 
in  the  record  of  God's  dealings  with  his 
soul,  which  had  called  forth  his  thank- 
fulness."    We  have  here — 

I.  Help  in  trouble  implored  by 
man.  The  poet  is  speaking  of  the  time 
"  when  he  was  in  trouble,"  and  he  says, 
**  I  cried  unto  Him  with  my  mouth," 
&.C.  From  his  statements  we  learn 
til  at — 

1.  His  prayer  was  presented  in  up- 
rightness of  heart.  "  If  I  regard  ini- 
quity in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not 


hear  me."  The  Psalmist  was  sincere  in 
his  approaches  to  God.  He  did  not 
cherish  sin  in  his  heart  while  seeking 
the  help  of  God.  The  man  who  loves 
sin  will  not  obtain  favourable  answers 
to  his  prayers.  On  this  point  the 
Sacred  Scriptures  are  most  explicit. 
(Job  xxvii.  8,  9 ;  Pro  v.  xv.  29  ;  xxviii. 
9  ;  Isa.  i.  15  ;  lix.  1,  2 ;  John  ix.  31  ; 
.1  John  iii.  21,  22.) 

2.  His  prayer  was  offered  with  solemn 
promises.  The  Psalmist  says,  "  I  will 
pay  Thee  my  vows,  which  my  lips  have 
uttered,  and  my  mouth  hath  spoken 
when  I  was  in  trouble."  Under  the 
pressure  of  great  suffering  he  had 
uttered  solemn  promises  to  God.  It  is 
a  very  common  occurrence  when  men 

337 


PSALM  LXVI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


are  suffering  some  great  affliction  to 
make  vows  of  reformation  of  life,  or,  in 
the  case  of  the  godly,  of  more  thorough 
consecration  to  God,  if  He  will  remove 
the  affliction. 

3.  His  prayer  was  offered  in  confident 
anticipation  of  a  gracious  answer.  "  I 
cried  unto  Him  with  my  mouth,  and  He 
was  extolled  with  my  tongue."  Heng- 
stenberg :  "  A  song  of  praise  was  under 
my  tongue."  The  meaning  seems  to  be 
that  the  poet  was  so  confident  of  a 
favourable  response  to  his  prayer  that 
he  had  in  readiness  a  hymn  of  praise, 
which  he  would  sing  as  soon  as  the  help 
sought  was  obtained.  He  was  "  enabled 
by  faith  and  hope  to  give  glory  to  Him 
when  he  was  seeking  for  mercy  and 
grace  from  Him,  and  to  praise  Him  for 
mercy  in  prospect  though  not  yet  in 
possession." 

II.  Help  in  trouble  granted  by  God. 
"Verily  God  hath  heard  me  ;  He  hath 
attended  to  the  voice  of  my  prayer." 
The  Psalmist  had  received  from  God  a 
favourable  answer  to  his  prayer.  The 
help  which  he  had  sought  God  granted 
unto  him.  The  answer  to  his  prayer 
may  be  regarded — 

1.  Asa  proof  of  the  uprightness  of  his 
heart.  A  fundamental  condition  of  ac- 
ceptable prayer  is  that  the  soul  shall  be 
sincere  and  free  from  secretly-cherished 
sin.  "  As  it  is  a  settled  and  universal 
principle  that  God  does  not  hear  prayer 
when  there  is  in  the  heart  a  cherished 
love  and  purpose  of  iniquity,  so  it  fol- 
lows that,  if  there  is  evidence  that  He 
has  heard  our  prayers,  it  is  proof  that  He 
has  seen  that  our  hearts  are  sincere,  and 
that  we  truly  desire  to  forsake  all  forms 
of  sin." 

2.  As  a  result  of  his  confidence  in  God. 
God  always  graciously  hears  and  answers 
the  prayer  of  faith.  If  we  honour  God 
oy  confidently  anticipating  His  blessing, 
He  will  reward  us  by  abundantly  be- 
stowing that  blessing.  In  our  dealings 
with  Him  trustful  anticipation  of  His 
grace  will  ever  lead  to  joyous  celebra- 
tion of  His  praise. 

III.  Help  in  trouble  recounted  to 
men.  "  Come  and  hear,  all  ye  that  fear 
God,  and  I  will  declare  what  He  hath 
done  for  my  soul."     Notice — 

338 


1.  The  invitation.  "  Come  and  hear ; 
and  I  will  declare."  It  is  natural  for 
the  heart  rejoicing  in  some  great  deliver- 
ance granted,  or  some  great  blessing 
bestowed,  to  tell  to  others  its  glad  ex- 
perience. Because  (1)  All  great  emo- 
tions seek  expression.  Thus  the  for- 
given sinner  longs  to  declare  his  grati- 
tude and  gladness,  and  thus  to  honour 
God.  (2)  All  godly  souls  seek  to  lead 
others  into  the  possession  of  the  privi- 
leges and  joys  which  they  have  received. 
Tlie  genius  of  true  religion  is  broad, 
liberal,  generous. 

2.  The  audience.  "  All  ye  that  fear 
God."  Barnes:  "All  who  are  true 
worshippers  of  God — the  idea  of  fear  or 
reverence  being  put  for  worship  in  gene- 
ral. The  call  is  on  all  who  truly  loved 
God  to  hear  what  He  had  done,  in  order 
that  He  might  be  suitably  honoured, 
and  that  due  praise  might  be  given 
Him."  The  godly  man's  experience  of 
the  Divine  mercy  should  be  recounted 
to  a  fitting  audience.  Many  of  the  ex- 
periences of  the  spiritual  life  are  too 
tender  and  sacred  to  be  communicated 
to  any  save  sympathetic  hearers. 

3.  The  testimony.  "What  He  hath 
done  for  my  soul."  Much  that  is  called 
"religious  experience"  and  "personal 
testimony "  is  repulsively  egotistic  and 
conceited — the  narrative  of  the  feelings 
and  doings  of  small  and  selfish  souls, 
too  much  given  to  morbid  self-introspec- 
tion. The  world  would  be  much  the 
better  if  it  were  rid  of  such  stuff  com- 
pletely and  for  ever.  The  Psalmist 
wishes  to  recount  not  what  he  has  done, 
but  what  God  has  done  for  him.  Here 
is  a  kind  of  testimony  worth  listening 
to.  "  When  you  tell  others  of  the  guid- 
ances of  God  respecting  your  soul,  take 
care  lest  some  hypocrisy  or  self-love 
creep  in,  and  that  the  glory  of  God  be 
your  only  aim." 

IV.  Help  in  trouble  acknowledged 
to  God.  "  I  will  go  into  Thy  house  with 
burnt  offerings,"  &c.  (vers.  13-15,  20). 
This  acknowledgment  was  characterised 
by- 

1.  Faithfulness.  "I  will  pay  Thee 
my  vows,  which  my  lips  have  uttered," 
&c.  Note :  (1)  The  frequency  with 
which  vows  are  made  in  time  of  trouble. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LXVI. 


(2)  The  frequency  with  which  they  are 
forgotten  when  the  trouble  is  removed. 

(3)  The  solemn  obligation  to  fulfil  them. 
God  does  not  forget  them,  but  waits 
their  fulfilment.  Both  gratitude  for  the 
removal  of  the  affliction,  and  faithful- 
ness to  the  promise  made,  bind  us  to 
their  fulfilment.  The  vows  which  he 
made  in  the  night  of  adversity  the 
Psalmist  fulfils  in  the  day  of  prosperity. 

2.  Comprehensiveness.  "  I  will  go 
into  Thy  house  with  burnt  offerings ; 
I  will  offer  unto  Thee  burnt  sacrifices 
of  fatlings,  with  the  incense  of  rams  ;  I 
will  offer  bullocks,  with  goats.  Blessed 
be  God  which  hath  not  turned  away  my 
prayer,  nor  His  mercy  from  me."  He 
resolves  to  offer  fat  lambs  and  bullocks 
with  rams  and  goats,  and  to  offer  them 
as  burnt  sacrifices  to  be  wholly  con- 
sumed to  the  honour  of  God.  He  will 
"  present  sacrifices  in  all  the  forms  re- 
quired in  worship ;  in  all  the  forms  that 
will  express  gratitude  to  God,  or  that 
will  be  an  acknowledgment  of  depend- 
ence and  guilt ;  in  all  that  would  pro- 
perly express  homage  to  the  Deity." 
And  He  presents  the  offering  of  praise 
as  well  as  of  gifts.  Both  material  and 
Bpiritual  sacrifices  he  presented  unto  God. 


3.  Heartiness.  Hengstenberg  :  '*  The 
full  enumeration  of  the  animals  to  be 
offered  in  sacrifice,  shows  the  zeal  witu 
which  the  thanks  and  the  offerings  are 
given."  Kenschel :  "  A  noble  thanks- 
giving is  due  to  a  great  benefit."  Great 
mercies  should  be  acknowledged  in  fer- 
vent and  hearty  praise. 

"  King  of  glory,  King  of  peace, 
I  will  love  Thee: 
And  that  love  may  never  cease, 
I  will  move  Thee. 

Thou  hast  granted  my  request, 

Thou  hast  heard  me: 
Thou  didst  note  my  working  breast^ 

Thou  hast  spared  me. 

Wherefore  with  my  utmost  art 

I  will  sing  Thee, 
And  the  cream  of  all  my  heart 

I  will  bring  Thee. 

Though  my  sins  against  me  cried. 

Thou  didst  clear  me ; 
And  alone,  when  they  replied, 

Thou  didst  hear  me, 

Sev'n  whole  days,  not  one  in  seven, 

I  will  praise  Thee. 
In  my  heart,  though  not  in  heaven, 

I  can  raise  Thee. 

Small  it  is,  in  this  poor  sort 

To  enroll  Thee: 
Ev'n  eternity  is  too  short 

To  extol  Thee."— (?«).  HetUrt. 


The  Experience  of  a  Godly  Man. 
{Verses  16-20.) 


L  The  godly  man  is  anxious  to  im- 
part his  experience  to  others.  "  Come 
and  hear." 

1.  His  confession  is  volunteered,  not 
enforced.  There  is  nothing  here  to  jus- 
tify that  spiritual  inquisition  which  some 
have  sought  to  establish  in  the  Romish 
confessional,  or  its  Anglican  imitations . 

2.  Spiritual  experiences  should  be  told 
at  suitable  times.  "  Come  and  hear." 
It  is  wrong  to  parade  soul  matters  at 
unseasonable  times.  Many  have  brought 
religion  into  disrepute  by  preaching 
when  they  ought  to  have  simply  and 
unostentatiously  practised  its  precepts. 

3.  Spiritual  experience  should  be  ad- 
dressed to  congenial  hearers.  "All  ye 
that  fear  God."  We  should  remember 
that  spiritual  things  can  be  compre- 
hended only  by  the  spiritually-minded. 


4.  Spiritual  experiences  should  he 
strictly  personal.  "  What  He  hath  done 
for  my  soul."  In  this  matter  we  may 
properly  talk  about  ourselves  without 
egotism.  Much  that  has  obtained  cur- 
rency for  "  experience,"  has  been  either 
fiction,  or  religious  scandal. 

II.  The  godly  man's  experience  in- 
cludes both  penitence  and  praise. 

1.  He  has  to  tell  of  sin  mourned  over. 
"  I  cried  unto  Him."  This  is  just  the 
language  that  would  describe  the  out- 
burst of  a  penitent  soul. 

2.  He  has  to  tell  of  trouble  endured. 
The  trouble  has  been  greater  than  he 
could  bear ;  it  has  been  more  than  he 
could  fight  against ;  hence  he  has  cried 
to  One  higher  than  he. 

3.  He  has  to  tell  of  mercies  received. 
"He  was   extolled   with   my   tongue." 

339 


PSALM  LXVn. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


This  He  has  done  for  my  soul :  I  sinned, 
and  He  forgave  me ;  I  was  in  trouble, 
and  He  helped  me.  "This  poor  man 
cried,  and  the  Lord  heard,"  &c. 

III.  The  godly  man's  logic.  "  If  I 
regard  iniquity,"  &c.  The  purport  of 
the  Christianas  story  is — not  that  he  has 
not  sinned ;  but  that  God  has  forgiven 
the  iniquity  of  his  sin,  and  has  given 
him  grace  to  overcome  sin.  '*  Whoso- 
ever is  born  of  God  sinneth  not."  The 
Christian's  argument  is  this  :  If  I  cherish 
sin  in  my  heart,  God  will  not  hear  my 
prayer.  But  God  has  heard  me.  There- 
fore it  is  clear  that  His  grace  has  been 
effective  in  my  heart  in  subduing  the 
power  of  sin.     The  answered  prayer  is 


the  proof  that  I  have  been  enabled  by 
grace  to  overcome  sin. 

IV.  The  godly  man's  ezperience 
always  culminates  in  a  song  of  praise. 

Even  when  he  has  most  plainly  estab- 
lished his  innocence,  he  ascribes  the 
glory  to  God,  whose  mercy  has  not  been 
withdrawn,  and  who  still  hears  and 
ansu'ers  prayer.  This  closing  song  im- 
plies three  things — 

1.  That  God's  merer/  is  contimtorts ; 
else  iniquity  would  prevail,  and  be 
cherished  in  the  heart. 

2.  That  God  hears  prayer  unweariedly. 

3.  That  the  disposition  to  pray  is 
also  God's  gift, — "  The  Homiletic  Quar- 
terly:* 


PSALM   LXVIL 
Introduction. 

Superscription,  **  To  the  chief  Musician :  "  see  Introduction  to  Ps.  Ivu.  "  On  Neginoth:** 
iee  Introduction  to  Ps.  liv.     **  A  Song  or  Psalm  :*'  see  Introduction  to  Pb.  xlviii. 

Neither  the  author  of  the  psalm  nor  the  occasion  of  its  composition  are  known  unto  us. 

The  chief  feature  of  the  psalm  is  the  intense  desire  of  the  Psalmist  (who  wrote  the  psalm 
for  the  Temple  service)  for  the  universal  worship  of  God.  This  is  quite  clear  from  the  repeti- 
tion of  ver.  3.  Twice  in  this  brief  poem  he  exclaims,  *'  Let  the  people  praise  Thee,  0  God  ; 
let  all  the  people  praise  Thee. " 

Homiletically,  we  regard  the  psalm  as  setting  forth^ 

The  Missionary  Prayer  of  the  Church. 


Consider — 

I.  The  great  object  of  the  missionary 
prayer  of  the  Church.  In  this  psalm, 
the  Church  seeks, 

1.  That  God  may  be  known  by  all 
men.  {\.)  As  to  His  vjay.  "That  Thy 
way  may  be  known  upon  earth."  The 
way  of  God  is  His  procedure  towards 
mankind  ;  "  the  principles  and  methods 
of  the  Divine  administration ;  the  way 
in  which  God  rules  mankind,  and  in 
which  He  bestows  His  blessings  on 
men."  It  seems  to  us  that  to  under- 
stand this  way  aright  we  must  view  it 
as  comprising  two  aspects  :  the  way  of 
the  Divine  requirement,  or  what  He 
demands  from  men  ;  and  the  way  of  the 
Divine  treatment,  or  what  He  does  for 
men.  (2.)  As  to  His  salvation.  "  Thy 
saving  health  among  all  nations."  In- 
stead of  "saving  health,"  we  should 
340 


read,  salvation.  The  Church  prays  that 
the  Divine  salvation  may  be  known  by 
all  peoples — that  all  peoples  may  ex- 
perience it.  The  heart  that  knows  the 
blessedness  of  personal  religion  will  seek 
to  extend  that  experience  to  others. 
There  is  a  vital  connection  between  these 
two  branches  of  knowledge.  "  If  God 
make  known  His  way  to  us,  and  we 
walk  in  it,  He  will  show  us  His  saving 
health."  In  the  way  of  Divine  require- 
ment and  the  way  of  Divine  treatment, 
in  God's  grace  and  his  own  obedience  to 
God,  man  finds  salvation. 

2.  That  God  may  be  worshipped  by 
all  men.  "  Let  the  people  praise  Thee, 
O  God  ;  let  all  the  people  praise  Thee. 
O  let  the  nations  be  glad  and  sing  for 
joy."  We  have  here(l.)  Worship  in  its 
object.  "  Let  the  people  praise  Thee,  O 
God,"     It  is  nattira!  and  right  that  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXVII. 


kindest  Being  should  be  regarded  with 
gratitude,  the  best  Being  with  reverence. 
Both  on  account  of  what  He  is  and  of 
what  He  does^  God  should  be  praised. 
He  is  the  only  true  object  of  worship. 
(2.)  Worship  in  its  character.  "  0  let 
the  nations  be  glad  and  sing  for  joy." 
The  worship  of  God  should  be  joyous. 
Its  fitting  expressions  are  songs,  not 
groans  ;  declarations  of  confidence,  not 
the  murmurs  of  discontent.  (3.)  Worship 
in  its  extent.  "  Let  all  the  people  praise 
Thee.  O  let  the  nations,"  &c.  It  is  a 
prayer  that  all  the  Gentiles  may  be 
brought  to  know  and  worship  the  Lord 
God.  (See  on  Ps.  Ixvi.  4.)  Let  us 
clearly  and  firmly  apprehend  the  univer- 
sality of  the  aim  of  this  prayer.  How 
grand  this  aim  !  A  saved  world  joyously 
worshipping  the  one  living  and  true  God ! 
II.  The  means  by  which  the  attain- 
ment of  this  object  is  sought.  These 
means  are  various ;  but  that  which  is 
brought  into  prominence  here  is  Frayer 
for  the  gracious  presence  of  God  with 
His  Church.  "  God  be  merciful  unto 
us,  and  bless  us,  and  cause  His  face  to 
shine  upon  us."  Margin:  "With  us." 
Moll:  *' 'Among  us.'  The  expression 
among  or  with  us  does  not  indicate  the 
nearness  of  the  help  but  the  accompany- 
ing, or  better,  the  guiding  presence  of 
God."  There  is  a  manifest  reference  to 
the  benediction  of  the  High  Priest 
(Numb.  vi.  24-26).  To  cause  the  face 
to  shine  upon  any  one  is  to  look  upon 
him  with  favour.  It  is  a  beautiful 
representation  of  the  Divine  approval 
and  blessing.  This  blessing  is  sought 
as  a  favour,  not  demanded  as  a  right. 
The  Divine  mercy,  and  not  their  own 
merit,  is  the  ground  on  which  their 
petition  is  urged.  "  God  be  merciful 
unto  us."  How  profound  is  the  phil- 
osophy of  this  prayer !  Superficially 
the  idea  is  :  Bless  us  with  guidance, 
with  prosperity,  with  outward  and 
visible  tokens  of  Thy  blessing,  so  that 
the  heathen,  in  the  hope  of  sharing  in 
these  favours,  may  be  led  to  acknow- 
ledge Thee.  But  there  is  a  deeper  and 
more  spiritual  idea  here :  when  the 
Church  is  richly  filled  with  the  pres- 
ence and  blessing  of  her  Divine  Lord, 
men  will  numerously  and  eagerly  seek 


to  know  the  way  and  salvation  of  God. 
A  living,  active,  holy  Church  would 
speedily  result  in  the  conversion  of  the 
world  to  God.  What  the  Church  most 
pressingly  needs  for  the  accomplishment 
of  her  great  work  is  not  more  numerous 
agencies,  not  new  methods  of  evangeli- 
sation, not  increase  of  material  wealth, 
but  a  deeper  and  more  abiding  realisa- 
tion of  the  presence  and  blessing  of  God 
in  her  midst.  Our  successes  in  mis- 
sionary enterprise,  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  are  comparatively  few  and  small 
because  we  are  spiritually  feeble  ;  we 
are  spiritually  feeble  because  our  reali- 
sation of  the  presence  of  God  with  us 
is  so  fluctuating  and  faint;  and  our 
realisation  of  the  presence  of  God  with 
us  is  faint  and  fluctuating  because  we 
have  not  sought  it  with  earnest  purpose 
and  strong  faith.  *'  These,"  says  Guen- 
ther,  "  are  the  true  prophets  and 
teachers,  upon  whose  countenance  the 
glance  of  the  Divine  light  still  remains." 
When  that  light  shines  clearly  upon  the 
countenances  of  the  members  of  the 
Christian  Church,  the  day  will  not  be 
far  distant  when  "  all  the  people  "  shall 
praise  God. 

III.  The  confidence  in  which  this 
prayer  is  offered.  Here  are  two 
things — 

1.  The  confidence  expressed.  "God, 
even  our  own  God,  shall  bless  us.  God 
shall  bless  us  ;  and  all  the  ends  of  the 
earth  shall  fear  Him."  The  poet  ex- 
presses the  assurance  that  the  object 
prayed  for  would  be  granted ;  that  God 
would  bless  His  own  people,  and  that 
so  the  world  would  be  won  to  Him  in 
joyous  worship. 

2.  The  basis  of  this  confidence.  This 
is  twofold.  (1)  The  relation  of  God  to 
men,  and  His  work  for  men.  "  Thou 
shalt  judge  the  people  righteously,  and 
govern  the  nations  upon  earth."  God 
appears  here  as  the  righteous  Sovereign 
of  men.  The  great  principles  of  the 
Divine  government  as  seen  in  the  his- 
tory of  the  world  are  so  righteous  and 
gracious  that  the  heathen  will  joyously 
give  Him  their  allegiance.  He  also 
appears  here  as  the  gracious  Leader  of 
men.  Margin:  **And  lead  the  nations." 
Hengstenberg  :    "  And   guidest."      Pe- 

341 


PSALM  LXVII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


rowne  :  **  The  verb  is  the  same  as  in  Ps. 
xxiii.  3,  God  being  the  great  Shepherd 
of  all  nations."  He  guides  in  paths  of 
safety,  prosperity,  peace,  and  life.  His 
government  and  guidance  are  powerful 
incentives  to  trust  and  worship  Him. 
(2)  The  blessing  bestowed  upon  the 
Church.  The  Hebrew  verb  in  the  first 
clause  of  ver.  6  is  in  the  past  tense. 
Conant :  '*  The  earth  hath  yielded  her 
increase."  Hengstenberg  :  *'  The  land 
gave  its  increase."  There  is  an  obvious 
reference  to  a  recent  harvest.  Calvin 
expresses  what  we  hold  as  the  meaning 
and  bearing  of  the  clause  :  "  As  often 
as  God  adorned   that   ancient   people 


with  His  benefits,  He,  at  the  same  time, 
shone  upon  the  whole  world  with  a 
burning  torch,  so  as  to  allure  the 
heathen  to  seek  Him."  His  blessings 
to  His  Church  encourage  and  strengthen 
faith  in  the  progress,  and  ultimately  the 
complete  triumph  of  His  cause  and 
kingdom.  (For  additional  grounds  of 
confidence  see  on  Ps.  Ixvi.  4.) 

Conclusion. — The  subject  presents 
to  us  a  word  of — 1.  Encouragement. 
How  glorious  is  the  prospect !  2.  In- 
struction. How  wise  are  the  means  for 
realising  it !  3.  Exhortation.  Let  us 
diligently  use  these  means.  "  God  bo 
merciful  unto  us,"  &c 


God  realised  by  His  People. 
(Verse  6.) 


"  Our  own  God  shall  bless  us." 

The  heathen  nations  had  their  numer- 
ous gods, — gods  for  every  phase  of  na- 
ture, for  all  seasons,  and  for  all  events. 
But  these  gods  were  senseless  idols, 
puerile,  contemptible,  and  valueless  ;  so 
also  were  all  those  who  trusted  in  them. 
(See  Ps.  cxv.)  But  Jehovah  was  the 
God  of  Israel,  and  as  such  the  object  of 
their  faith  and  hope.  In  Him  they 
trusted,  to  Him  gave  homage,  and  in 
Him  exulted,  as  in  the  text. 

Observe — 

I.  The  Divine  Being,  in  the  text — 
"  God."  This  Being  wag  unknown  to 
the  heathen,  but  He  revealed  Himself 
to  the  holy  patriarchs,  and  especially 
to  Abraham  and  Moses.     Our  God, 

1.  Is  a  Spirit,  not  material.  Angels 
are  in  a  secondary  sense  spirits  ;  but  it 
is  obvious  that  they  have  ethereal  vest- 
ments, and  can  manifest  themselves, 
and  be  seen  by  men  ;  but  not  so  God 
(John  iv.  24 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17 ;  Col.  i.  15 ; 
Heb.  xi.  27). 

2.  Self-existent.  He,  the  Creator, 
has  no  maker ;  from  Himself  and  in 
Himself, — absolutely  underived;  before 
all  things  (Deut.  iv.  35  ;  Isa.  xliv.  6). 

3.  Eternal.  From  eternity  to  eter- 
nity,— God.  No  beginning,  nor  capable 
of  any  end  of  His  existence  (Isa.  Ivii, 
15  ;  Rom.  i.  20). 

4.  Unchangeable ;  or,  He  would  not 

342 


be  absolutely  perfect.  "The  same 
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever." 
So  in  His  essence,  attributes,  and  pur- 
poses ;  of  one  eternal,  unalterable  mind 
(Mai.  iii.  6  ;  Jas.  i.  17). 

5.  Omnipotent, — of  unlimited  energy. 
Able  to  do  all  things  worthy  of  His 
effectuating  (Gen.  xvii.  1 ;   Rev.  xix.  6). 

6.  Omniscient, — knowing  all  things 
accurately,  distinctly,  infallibly.  And, 
with  these  His  natural  attributes,  pos- 
sessing every  moral  perfection — wisdom, 
holiness,  goodness,  truth,  mercy,  love. 
Such  is  the  Divine  Being  exhibited  in 
the  text. 

II.  His  relationship  to  lis.  "  Our 
own  God."  Not  merely  the  God  of  the 
universe,  the  only  God,  the  God  of  the 
seraphim  and  the  holy  angels,  but 
*'our  God."     The  God— 

1.  Of  our  being.  Our  Maker,  Father, 
source  of  existence  (Gen.  ii.  7 ;  Job 
xxxiii.  4 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  14 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  6). 

2.  Our  good  Benefactor.  Fountain 
of  all  goodness,  the  Giver  of  every  good 
and  perfect  gift  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6 ;  1 
Chron.  xvi.  34 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  5). 

3.  Our  Divine  Lord  and  Ruler,  To 
whom  we  are  subject,  and  owe  all 
loyal  obedience,  and  worship,  and  love 
(2  Kings  xix.  15 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  6 ;  Ps. 
xcv.  3). 

4.  Our  covenant  God,  who  remem- 
bered ug  in  our  low  estate,  and  in  infi- 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXVin. 


nite  condescension  and  mercy  entered 
into  gracious  covenant  relationship  with 
His  Son  for  our  redemption  and  resto- 
ration to  holiness  and  eternal  life  (2  Sam. 
xxiii.  6  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  31  ;  Heb.  viii.  8). 

6.  Ow  gracious  God,  who  has  called 
us  and  adopted  lis  into  His  Divine 
and  heavenly  family. 

6.  The  God  of  our  profession  and 
worship.  Ours  by  obedience  to  His 
call,  and  faith  in  His  name,  and  avowal 
of  delight  in  His  service. 

7.  Our  God  for  ever  and  every — in 
close,  unbroken  fellowship,  and  eternal 
oneness  and  joy.  God  is  ours  con- 
sciously by  the  indwelling  of  His  Spirit, 
and  by  our  union  with  His  only  be- 
gotten Son  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  The  blessed  assurance  of  this 
relationship, — "  shall  bless  us." 

1.  With  all  the  good  we  need, 

2.  With  the  evident  tokens  of  His 
favour.  His  Spirit,  His  presence,  com- 
munion, <bQ. 


3.  With  the  rich  treasures  of  His 
grace. 

4.  With  eternal  life  and  glory, 
A  few  words  in  conclusion — 

1.  These  blessings  are  of  His  sovereign 
hestowment. 

2.  Are  laid  up  for  us  in  His  Son,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  all  fulness 
dwells. 

3.  Are  realised  by  us  as  we  ask  and 
believe. 

4.  Are  absolutely  certain,  as  based  on 
His  own  immutable  word,  ratified  by 
His  solemn  oath  and  sealed  with  the 
precious  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

5.  And  are  experienced  by  all  His 
saints  in  the  dispensation  of  His  grace 
and  love. 

Yes;  "God,  our  own  God  will  bless 
us."  Grateful  acknowledgment  and 
entire  consecration  are  His  right  and 
due.  To  our  God  be  glory  evermore. 
— Jabez  BurnSf  D.D, 


PSALM   LXVIII. 
Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  Chief  Musician.'''  See  Introduction  to  Pealm  Ivii.  **  A  Psalm  or 
Song  of  David."     See  Introduction  to  Psalm  xlviii. 

The  Superscription  does  not  mention  the  occasion  on  which  the  psalm  was  composed.  On 
this  point  various  opinions  have  been  held  and  advocated.  Most  of  the  older  expositors,  and 
Steir  and  Barnes  amongst  the  moderns,  are  of  opinion  that  it  was  composed  for  the  removal  of 
the  Ark  from  the  house  of  Obed-edom  to  Mount  Zion  (2  Sam.  vi. ).  The  view  of  others  is  that 
it  was  composed  to  celebrate  the  victorious  termination  of  some  war,  when  the  Ark  was  brought 
back  to  Zion.  Throughout  the  psalm  God  is  praised  as  the  Lord  of  battle  and  of  victory.  Can 
we  aacertain  what  victory  is  here  celebrated  ?  For  our  guidance  in  this  inquiry  we  have  two 
data.  **  First,  the  psalm  must  have  been  composed  at  a  time  when  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord 
was  'on  Mount  Zion  (vers.  15,  16,  29,  35).  The  choice  is  thus  very  much  narrowed.  There 
remain  only  two  great  victories,  the  Syrian- Edomite,  and  the  Ammonitic-Syrian.  Second,  in 
the  war  referred  to  in  this  psalm,  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  must  have  been  in  the  field,  accord- 
ing to  vers.  1  and  24.  It  is  evident  from  2  Sam.  xi.  11,  that  this  was  the  case  in  the  Ammonitic 
war.  We  may  therefore  with  great  probability  conclude,  that  the  psalm  was  composed  after 
the  capture  of  Rabbah  (2  Sam.  xii.  26-31),  which  terminated  that  war,  the  most  dangerous  with 
which  David  had  to  do.  It  was  quite  in  accordance  with  David's  usual  manner  to  celebrate  a 
great  religious  festival  at  the  close  of  such  a  war." — (Hengstenberg).  Alexander,  Moll,  Tholuck, 
et  al.y  also  take  this  view.     The  weight  of  evidence  seems  to  us  certainly  in  favour  of  it. 

"The  fundamental  thought  is  clear,"  says  Moll,  "namely  :  The  celebration  of  an  entrance 
of  God  into  His  sanctuary  on  Zion  after  a  victory,  and  His  rule  over  the  world  extending  itself 
from  thence."  The  development  of  this  thought  we  shall  endeavour  to  indicate  as  we  proceed 
with  our  homiletical  treatment  of  the  psalm. 

The  Victorious  March  of  the  Good, 

{Verses  \-lO,) 

The  Psalm  opens  with  a  reference  to  nant  in  the  journeyings  of  the  Israelites 
the  watchword  which  was  used  at  the  (Num.  x.  35).  God  is  entreated  to  arise 
Retting  forward  of  the  Ark  of  the  Cove-      for  the  overthrow  of  His  enemies  and 

343 


PSALM  LXVIIl. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART  :  PSALMS, 


the  salvation  of  His  people.  The  people 
Hie  exhorted  to  praise  God  as  the  glori- 
ous Leader  of  a  victorious  march  through 
the  desert — One  who  protects  and  pro- 
vides for,  who  saves  and  enriches  His 
people.  There  follows,  in  vers.  7-10, 
an  illustration  of  the  gracious  and  glori- 
ous guidance  of  God,  as  seen  in  the 
history  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.  We 
regard  this  section  of  the  psalm  as  an 
illustration  of  The  victorious  march  of 
the  good. 

I.  The  march  of  the  good  is  opposed 
by  enemies.  The  enemies  whom  God 
is  invoked  to  arise  against  are  the  ene- 
mies of  Israel.  The  people  of  God  in 
all  ages  have  been  a  militant  people. 
To  day  their  enemies  are  numerous  and 
subtle  and  strong.  They  have  to  con- 
tend against  unbelief  and  superstition, 
against  carnality  and  worldliness,  against 
temptations  from  without,  and  evil  ten- 
dencies from  within.  Conflict  is  an 
essential  condition  of  spiritual  life  and 
growth  in  our  present  state  of  being. 
Our  advancement  in  the  Christian  course 
is  disputed  and  opposed  at  every  step 
by  our  foes.  Concerning  these  enemies 
the  Psalmist  makes  two  things  to  stand 
prominently  forth — 

1.  They  are  depraved  in  character. 
He  speaks  of  them  as  *'  the  wicked." 
How  terrible  is  the  wickedness  of  any 
one  who  would  deliberately  tempt 
another  to  evil,  or  seek  to  corrupt  a 
pure  mind,  or  oppose  the  progress  of  a 
godly  soul ! 

2.  They  are  hostile  to  the  Most  High, 
They  are  "  His  enemies,"  they  "  hate 
Him."  Think  of  the  appalling  iniquity 
and  guilt  of  hating  that  Being  who 
is  supremely  righteous  and  kind  and 
beautiful !  What  a  terrible  perversion 
of  character  such  hatred  indicates ! 
They  who  oppose  the  people  of  God  are 
accounted  by  Him  as  His  enemies. 

II.  The  march  ofthe  good  is  marked 
by  trials.  The  character  of  this  jour- 
ney is  indicated  in  general  here  as  a 
march  through  a  desert.  Thus  in  ver. 
4,  instead  of  "Extol  Him  that  rideth 
upon  the  heavens,"  we  should  have, 
"  Make  a  way  for  Him  who  rideth  for- 
ward in  the  deserts,"  or,  *'  Cast  up  a  way 
for  Him  that  rides  through  the  deserts." 
344 


And  in  verse  7,  "O  God,  when  Thou 
didst  march  through  the  wilderness,"  or, 
"  through  the  desert."  There  is  much 
in  the  circumstances  and  experiences  of 
the  good  in  this  world  which  is  truly 
illustrated  by  a  pilgrimage  in  the  desert. 
But  this  general  idea  is  expanded  by  the 
Psalmist  in  vers.  6  and  6.  We  have 
here — 

1.  Th£  helpless  and  sorrowful.  "The 
fatherless  .  .  .  the  widows."  These 
expressions  must  not  be  restricted  to 
their  literal  meaning.  They  are  used  to 
set  forth  those  who  have  lost  their  pro- 
tector and  helper,  and  whose  hearts  are 
sorrowful  and  sore. 

2.  The  forsaken  and  lonely.  "The 
solitary "  is  intended  to  represent  those 
who  are  forsaken,  and  are  destitute  of 
human  friendship  and  help. 

3.  The  enslaved.  "  Those  which  are 
bound  with  chains,"  represents  not 
simply  those  who  are  literally  impri- 
soned or  enslaved,  but  those  who  are 
bound  by  evil  habits  or  associations,  the 
slaves  of  superstition  and  sin,  the  thralls 
of  fear,  who  cannot  rise  to  the  joy  of 
holy  assurance  in  God. 

These  classes  represent  some  of  the 
pilgrims  in  the  march  of  the  good  in 
our  own  day.  Even  amongst  true  and 
godly  souls  there  are  weary  feet  and  sad 
and  sorrowful  hearts.  "  Faint,  yet  pur- 
suing "  is  a  true  description  of  the  con- 
dition of  thousands  of  travellers  on  the 
heavenly  road.  From  our  pilgrim  state 
trial  is  inseparable.  We  are  in  the 
desert  with  its  consuming  heat,  and 
sandy  wastes,  and  vast  trackless  ex- 
panses, and  prowling  enemies. 

III.  The  march  of  the  good  is  led 
on  victoriously.  Mark  the  glorious 
Leader.  "  Let  God  arise.  .  .  .  Him 
who  rideth  forward  through  the  deserts. 
.  .  .  Thou  didst  march  through  the 
wilderness."  There  is  a  reference  to  the 
Ark  of  the  Covenant,  which  victoriously 
preceded  the  hosts  of  Israel.  The  Ark, 
with  the  pillar  of  cloud  by  day,  and  of 
fire  by  night  resting  upon  it,  was  the 
sign  of  the  Divine  presence.  It  was 
also  a  type  of  Christ.  He  is  the  great 
and  glorious  Leader  of  His  people ;  and 
He  leads  them  on  from  victory  to  vic- 
tory.    Under  His  guidance  they  are — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


rSALM  LXVUI. 


1.  Victorious  over  enemies,  "Let  God 
arise,  let  His  enemies  be  scattered,"  &c. 
Their  victory  is  (1)  Irresistible.  Tlieir 
foes  are  driven  before  them  as  smoke 
before  the  wind.  As  wax  has  no  power 
to  resist  heat,  but  melts  away  under  its 
influence,  so  the  enemies  of  the  hosts  of 
God  are  unable  to  stand  before  Him. 
When  He  leads  His  people  to  battle 
their  enemies  flee  powerless  and  panic- 
stricken.  "  Let  God  arise,  as  the  sun 
when  he  goes  forth  in  his  strength  ;  and 
the  children  of  darkness  shall  be  scat- 
tered, as  the  shadows  of  the  evening  flee 
before  the  rising  sun."  (2)  Complete. 
"  As  smoke  is  driven  away,"  <fec.  Who 
can  recover  the  smoke-cloud  which  the 
wind  has  scattered  far  and  wide  ?  *'  Let 
the  wicked  perish  at  the  presence  of 
God."  The  omnipotence  of  God  guar- 
antees the  destruction  of  His  enemies, 
and  the  triumph  of  His  people.  The 
good  have  to  contend  with  foes,  but  *'  in 
all  things  they  are  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved"  and  leads 
them. 

2.  Victorious  over  difficulties  and 
trials.  Are  they  marching  through  a 
desert  ?  Then  God  makes  the  desert  as 
a  fruitful  field  with  His  own  gifts  from 
heaven.  "  Thou,  O  God,  didst  send  a 
plentiful  rain,"  Alexander:  "A  rain 
of  free  gifts."  Hengstenberg  :  "  A  rain 
of  gifts."  There  is  a  reference  "  to  the 
provision  made  by  God  for  His  people, 
in  temporal  matters,  during  their  march- 
ings through  the  wilderness — the  manna, 
the  quails,  the  water  out  of  the  rock," 
&c.  In  this  we  have  an  illustration  of 
the  all-sufficiency  and  freeness  and 
abundance  of  the  provision  which  God 
has  made  for  His  people.  In  things 
temporal  He  will  withhold  no  good  from 
them.  In  things  spiritual  He  has  pro- 
vided for  them  *'a  feast  of  fat  things." 
The  provisions  of  Christianity  are  abun- 
dant, free,  rich,  satisfying,  and  pleasant. 
Are  they  helpless  and  sorrowful  ?  Then 
God,  their  Leader,  is  their  mighty 
Helper  and  their  gracious  Comforter. 
"A  Father  of  the  fatherless,  and  a  judge 
of  the  widows,  is  God  in  His  holy  habi- 
tation." God  has  ever  manifested  great 
regard  for  the  widow  and  fatherless 
(Exod.  xxii.  22-24;  Deut.  x.  18;  Psa. 


cxlvi.  7-9 ;  Hos.  xiv.  3).  He  interposes 
for  those  who  have  no  helper ;  He  com- 
forts the  mourner.  It  is  His  greatest 
glory  that  He  is  merciful  to  the  penitent 
transgressor,  and  compassionate  to  the 
miserable.  Are  they  faint  and  weary  ? 
Then  God  refreshes  them.  "  Thou 
didst  confirm  Thine  inheritance  when 
it  was  weary."  Hengstenberg  :  "  Thine 
heritage,  the  weary  one.  Thou  didst 
strengthen  it."  Conant :  '*  When  faint- 
ing. Thou  Thyself  hast  raised  it  up." 
When  the  Israelites  were  worn  out  with 
fatigue  by  reason  of  their  journey ings 
in  the  wilderness,  He  refreshed  and 
strengthened  them.  He  sustains  and 
cheers  His  people  in  the  most  exhaust- 
ing and  trying  circumstances  of  their 
pilgrimage.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the 
faint,"  <kc.  (Isa.  xl.  29-31).  Are  they 
enslaved.^  He  gives  to  them  joyous 
liberty.  "  He  bringeth  out  those  which 
are  bound  with  chains."  He  delivers 
from  the  slavery  of  evil  habits,  from  the 
tyranny  of  sin  and  Satan,  from  the 
bondage  of  fear,  <fec.  Under  this  glo- 
rious Leader  difficulties  are  vanquished 
and  made  to  contribute  to  the  success 
of  the  pilgrim  host,  trials  are  bravely 
borne,  and  ultimately  transformed  into 
blessings,  and  foes  are  utterly  van- 
quished. Triumphantly  the  great  Cap- 
tain of  the  good  leads  forward  His 
hosts. 

IV.  The  march  of  the  good  is  led 
on  to  a  glorious  termination.  The 
journey  of  the  Israelites  ended  at 
Canaan.  There  "  God  made  the  soli- 
tary to  dwell  at  home."  In  giving  them 
possession  of  that  land ;  and  in  protect- 
ing them  therein  against  their  enemies, 
He  manifested  His  kindness  to  them. 
"  Thy  congregation  hath  dwelt  therein  : 
Thou,  O  God,  hast  prepared  of  Thy 
goodness  for  the  poor."  "  Therein " 
refers  to  the  land  of  promise.  Though 
that  land  has  not  been  expressly  men- 
tioned in  the  preceding  verses,  yet  it 
was  prominently  in  the  mind  of  the 
Psalmist.  The  possession  of  it  was  the 
grand  end  of  the  journey  through  the 
wilderness.  There  they  found  rest,  re- 
freshment, provisions  in  abundance,  <fec. 
How  glorious  is  the  end  of  the  pilgrim- 
age of  the  good  1     Eest  from  wanderings, 

345 


PSALM  LXVm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


from  fears,  from  conflicts.  The  posses- 
sion of  purity,  peace,  joy,  &c.  Under 
the  guidance  of  our  Lord  our  march  will 
end  at  home — our  Father's  home. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Tlds  lead  should 
he  earnestly  sought,  *'  Let  God  arise," 
&c.  Without  it  we  shall  "  dwell  in  a 
dry  land."  Without  it  life  will  be  vain, 
fruitless,  and  will  end  in  failure.  But 
under  His  guidance  life  will  grow  in 
purity,  power,  and  usefulness,  and  will 
end  in  triumph  and  glory. 

"  Quide  me,  0  Thou  great  Jehovah,"  &c. 


2.  This  lead  should  he  heartily  rejoiced 
in.     "  Let  the  righteous  be  glad,"  &c. 

This  rejoicing  should  be  fervent.  "  Let 
them  exceedingly  rejoice,"  or,  "  exult 
for  gladness."  Great  blessings  should 
enkindle  great  joys.  It  should  be 
religious.  "  Let  them  rejoice  before 
God."  Grateful  and  reverent  should  be 
our  gladness  that  we  have  such  a 
Leader.  It  should  be  uttered.  "  Sing 
unto  God,"  &c.  Sing,  and  so  relieve 
the  full  heart ;  sing,  and  so  excite 
others  to  do  so  also. 


The  Barren  Lot  of  the  Wicked. 

(Verse  6.) 

**  The  rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  land." 


Keligion  has  been  misrepresented  as  a 
cheerless,  gloomy,  harsh  thing.  Our 
text  reverses  this.  It  teaches  that 
irreligion  is  unsatisfying,  that  a  life  of 
sin  is  a  life  of  want  and  disappointment. 
The  children  of  Israel  were  being  led 
through  the  desert  unto  a  land  of  corn 
and  wine,  of  milk  and  honey,  (fee.  But 
the  rebellious  are  said  to  dwell  in  the 
desert.  The  former  pass  through  it  to 
a  glorious  inheritance ;  the  latter  dwell 
in  it — their  lot  is  barren,  dreary,  dis- 
appointing, (fee.  A  life  of  rebellion 
against  God  is  without  satisfaction ;  it 
is  cheerless,  disappointed,  wretched. 
We  see  this : 

I.  In  relation  to  the  ordinary  events 
of  this  life.  Health  and  sickness,  gain 
and  loss,  triumph  and  defeat,  pleasure 
and  sorrow,  are  found  more  or  less  in 
the  life  of  every  man.  What  is  the 
meaning  of  these  things?  What  are 
their  uses  1  &c.  The  man  who  trusts  in 
God  is  in  a  condition  for  ascertaining 
these  things,  and  for  making  the  best 
use  of  life's  varying  experiences.  But 
the  opposite  is  true  of  "  the  rebellious." 
The  good  man  sees  in  his  successes,  and 
in  his  health,  &c.,  the  blessing  of  a 
gracious  God.  He  is  grateful  for  that 
blessing;  and  is  thus  twice  blessed. 
He  is  blessed  in  his  circumstances  and 
in  his  soul,  in  his  hand  and  in  his  heart. 
But  *'  the  rebellious  "  discover  no  trace 
of  the  goodness  of  God  in  the  successes 
346 


and  pleasures  of  life.  To  them  no 
spiritual  blessing  accrues  from  these 
things.  The  highest  ministry  of  these 
things  they  entirely  lose.  The  good 
man  derives  profit  from  the  dark  and 
trying  experiences  of  life.  He  believes 
that  trial  may  be  a  blessing  in  disguise, 
that  temporal  loss  may  result  in  spiritual 
enrichment,  <fec.  So,  by  the  blessing  of 
God,  his  greatest  losses  and  crosses  lead 
to  his  greatest  gains  and  joys.  But  it 
is  far  otherwise  with  "  the  rebellious." 
To  them  trials  and  sorrows  and  losses 
are  unmixed  evils.  They  rebel  against 
trials,  and  trials  become  more  severe. 
Temporal  losses  lead  to  bitterness  of 
spirit.  They  kick  against  the  goads, 
and  so  injure  themselves.  So  far  as 
their  spiritual  relation  to  the  circum- 
stances of  this  life  is  concerned,  **  the 
rebellious  dwell  in  a  dry  land." 

IL  In  relation  to  the  great  needs 
of  the  soul.  Whether  man  recognises 
and  acknowledges  it  or  not,  it  is  true 
that  every  man  has  great  spiritual  needs. 
We  need  pardon,  help  in  life's  toils  and 
trials,  hope  as  to  life's  future,  (fee.  Our' 
being  craves  rest.  And  to  olttain  rest 
we  need  truth  for  the  inteL.  t,  righte- 
ousness for  the  conscience,  love  for  the 
heart.  The  godly  man  finds  rest  in  the 
truth,  righteousness,  and  love  of  God  re- 
vealed in  Jesus  Christ.  The  only  way 
to  rest  for  man  is  through  Christ  (Matt, 
xi.  28-30;  John  xiv.  6;   Rom.  v.  1). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXVin. 


But  how  do  "  the  rebellious  "  fare  in  this 
respect?  Let  the  Scriptures  answer 
(Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21  j  Jer.  ii.  13  ;  Luke  xv. 
14-17).  Let  human  experience  answer : 
When  Alexander  the  Great  had  subdued 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  so  far  was 
he  from  being  satisfied  with  the  conquest 
of  a  world,  that  he  wept  because  he  had 
not  another  world  to  conquer.  The 
world  did  not  satisfy  his  soul's  cravings : 
nor  has  it  satisfied  the  needs  of  any 
soul.  All  who  have  chosen  the  world 
for  their  portion,  and  have  had  it,  have 
experienced  the  most  bitter  disappoint- 
ment. They  have  "  dwelt  in  a  dry  land." 
III.  In  relation  to  the  great  future. 
"  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  %  '* 
*'  Man  giveth  up  the  ghost,  and  where 
ishel"  Is  he  anywhere?  The  multi- 
tudes who  once  were  upon  this  earth, 
are  they  in  being  now  1  Whither  and 
to  what  are  we  hastening?      The  be- 


liever in  Christ  has  a  great  and  well- 
grounded  hope  as  to  the  future.  "  Our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished 
death,"  &c.  "  I  am  the  resurrection 
and  the  life,"  &c.  To  the  Christian  the 
future  is  radiant,  beautiful,  inviting. 
But  what  is  it  to  "the  rebellious"? 
Ah  !  what  ?  It  is  shrouded  in  sable 
gloom,  as  of  a  moonless,  starless  mid- 
night. The  darkness  is  unbroken,  or 
broken  only  by  dread  flashes  of  lurid 
light.  For  "  the  rebellious "  there  is 
"  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judg- 
ment and  fiery  indignation,"  <fcc. 

Let  "the  rebellious"  sue  for  pardon. 
Let  them  loyally  bow  to  the  authority 
of  God,  (fee.  "  Ye  worldlings,  who 
wander  joylessly  through  a  godless 
world,  with  weary  feet  and  withered 
hearts,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none, 
come  to  Jesus,  and  He  will  give  you 
rest." 


The  Triumph  of  the  Church. 
{Verses  11-14.) 


To  interpret  verses  13  and  14  is  con- 
fessedly a  very  diflficult  task.  On  ver. 
13,  Barnes  says,  "I  confess  that  none 
of  these  explanations  of  the  passage 
seem  to  me  to  be  satisfactory,  and  that 
I  cannot  understand  it."  And  Moll,  at 
the  end  of  a  long  note  on  ver.  14,  says, 
"  Since,  however,  there  is  no  historical 
statement  here,  but  rather  a  prophetical 
declaration,  we  are  rather  led  to  a  figura- 
tive mode  of  expression,  whose  sense, 
however,  is  as  obscure  as  its  foundation 
and  occasion  are  unknown."  And  in 
Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible,  art.  Salmon, 
we  read,  "  It  is  usually  supposed  that 
this  hill  is  mentioned  in  a  verse  of  per- 
haps the  most  difficult  of  all  tbe  Psalms  \ 
and  tills  is  probable  though  the  passage 
is  peculiarly  difficult,  and  the  precise 
allusion  intended  by  the  poet  seems 
hopelessly  lost.  .  .  .  Unless  the  passage 
is  given  up  as  corrupt,  it  seems  more  in 
accordance  with  reason  to  admit  that 
there  was  some  allusion  present  to  the 
poet's  mind,  the  key  to  which  is  now 
lost ;  and  this  ought  not  to  surprise  any 
scholar  who  reflects  how  many  allusions 
there  are  in  Greek  poets — in  Pindar,  for 


example,  and  m  Aristophanes — which 
would  be  wholly  unintelligible  to  us 
now  were  it  not  for  the  notes  of  Greek 
scholiasts.  To  these  notes  there  is 
nothing  exactly  analogous  in  Hebrew 
literature;  and  in  the  absence  of  some 
such  assistance,  it  is  unavoidable  that 
there  should  be  several  passages  in  the 
Old  Testament  respecting  the  meaning 
of  which  we  must  be  content  to  remain 
ignorant." 

We  are  quite  unable  to  grapple  suc- 
cessfully with  this  difficulty.  For  the 
various  renderings  and  interpretations 
of  verses  13  and  14,  let  the  reader  see 
the  Commentaries  of  Barnes  and  Moll. 
We  suggest  that  this  strophe  may  be 
used  to  illustrate  the  triumph  of  the 
Church  over  her  enemies. 

I.  In  its  source.  "  The  Lord  gave 
the  word."  The  word  is  not  simply  the 
announcement  of  the  victory,  but  the 
word  of  authority  and  power. 

1.  He  gives  the  word  of  command. 
The  war  against  evil  is  Divinely  autho- 
rised. God  Himself  bids  us  do  battle 
with  ignorance  and  vice,  with  unbelief 
and  superstition,  with  sin  and  suffering. 

347 


FSALM  LXVIU. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


The   crusade    against   evil   is    a    holy 
one. 

2.  He  gives  the  word  of  promise.  He 
has  granted  unto  us  the  assurance  of 
His  constant  presence  and  help  in  the 
warfare,  and  of  ultimate  victory.  His 
word  removes  all  doubt  as  to  the  issue 
of  the  conflict.  (See  Ps.  ii.  8  ;  Ixxii. ; 
Isa.  xi.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  25 ;  Heb.  viii. 
10,  11.)  The  triumph  of  the  Church  is 
Divinely  guaranteed. 

3.  lie  gives  the  luord  of  power.  "  The 
Almighty  scattered  kings."  He  inspires 
the  heart  of  His  soldiers  with  courage, 
and  nerves  their  arm  with  power  (Ps. 
cxliv.  1,  2).  The  Church  will  conquer 
evil  through  the  might  of  her  Saviour 
and  Lord.  "  We  are  more  than  con- 
querors through  Him  that  loved  us." 
"  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 
under  your  feet  shortly." 

II.  In  its  completeness.  Graphi- 
cally the  poet  represents  this.  He 
shows  it — 

1.  In  the  utter  rout  of  the  foes, 
*'  Kings  of  armies  did  flee  apace ; "  or, 
"  The  kings  of  the  hosts  fled,  they  fled." 
There  have  been  times  in  the  history  of 
the  Christian  Church  when  the  powers 
of  evil  have  fled  in  dismay  before  her 
faith  and  effort.  These  past  victories 
are  foreshadowings  of  grander  triumphs 
yet  to  come.  Darkness  and  evil  are 
destined  to  flee  before  the  light  and 
love  of  God  in  His  Church. 

2.  In  the  greatness  of  the  spoil.  "  She 
that  tarried  at  home  divided  the  spoil." 
M.  Henry :  "  Not  only  the  men,  the 
soldiers  that  abode  by  the  stuff,  who 
were,  by  a  statute  of  distributions,  to 
share  the  prey  (1  Sam.  xxx.  24),  but 
even  the  women  that  tarried  at  home 
had  a  share,  which  intimates  the  abund- 
ance of  spoil  that  should  be  taken." 
Hengstenberg :  "  The  victory  and  the 
spoil,  which  the  Lord  imparted  to  His 
people,  in  the  season  of  their  childhood, 
was  a  type  of  a  far  more  glorious  vic- 
tory and  a  more  precious  spoil.  Arnd. : 
^  Is  it  not  a  valuable  spoil  that  so  many 
thousands  of  men  have  been  converted 
from  heathenism,  among  whom  have 
been  so  many  glorious  teachers  and 
lights  of  the  Church,  such  as  Justin, 
Augustine,  Ambrose,   not  to  speak  of 

348 


the  innumerable  martyrs,  who  were  all 
brought  out  of  heathenism,  and  were 
put  to  death  because  of  their  attach- 
ment to  the  Christian  faith.'"  All  the 
wealth  of  the  world — its  silver  and  gold, 
its  power  and  beauty,  its  genius  and 
eloquence — shall  one  day  be  laid  at  the 
feet  of  the  Lord  in  joyful  homage. 

3.  In  the  subsequent  prosperity, 
"Though  ye  have  lien  among  the  pots, 
yet  ye  shall  be  as  the  wings  of  a  dove 
covered  with  silver,  and  her  feathers 
with  yellow  gold.  When  the  Almighty 
scattered  kings  in  it,  it  was  white  as 
snow  in  Salmon."  Hengstenberg  ; 
"  When  ye  rest  between  the  boundaries, 
ye  are  like  the  wings  of  doves  covered 
with  silver,  and  their  feathers  with  the 
gleam  of  gold.  When  the  Almighty 
scatters  kings  in  it,  it  snows  on 
Salmon."     He  says,  "  The  3Dli^  implies 

peaceful  rest,  as  at  Num.  xxiv.  9.  .  .  . 
The  D''in5^  signifies  either  sheepfolds  or 

boundaries.  .  .  .  At  all  events  the  terra 
denotes  a  state  of  peaceful  rest.  In  this 
condition  the  Israelites,  to  whom  the 
address  is  directed,  are,  taken  figura- 
tively, wings  of  the  doves,  &c.,  or  they 
are  like  doves,  whose  wings  glitter  with 
silver  and  gold.  The  allusion  is  to  the 
play  of  colours  on  the  wings  of  the  dove 
in  sunshine.  The  real  import  is  the 
peaceful  and,  at  the  same  time,  splendid 
condition  enjoyed  by  Israel  in  the  lap  of 

peace The  '  snow '  is  mentioned 

here  because  it  has  the  colour  of  purest 
light  (comp.  Ps.  li.  7 ;  Isa.  i.  18;  Mark 
ix.  3 ;  Matt.  xvii.  2,  xxviii.  3  ;  Kev.  i. 
14).  Salmon  is  *a  hill  mentioned  in 
Judg.  ix.  48,  which  was  covered  over 
with  great  thick  wood  (even  according 
to  that  passage),  so  that  it  might  be 
called  a  dark  forest^  the  hlach  or  dark 
mountain.^ — Luther.  There  is  no  need 
for  supplying  any  mark  of  comparison 
before  Salmon  :  it  is  rather  to  be  con- 
sidered as  used  in  a  figurative  sense  for 
the  land^  just  as  snow  is  a  figurative 
expression  for  the  clear  brightness  of 
prosperity."  According  to  this  exposi- 
tion these  obscure  verses  give  us  two 
ideas  :  (1)  Rest.  The  triumph  of  the 
Church  will  be  so  complete  that  it  will 
be  followed  by  perfect  and  endless  rest. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXTm. 


(2)   Prosperity,      The  age   of  warfare 

ended,  the  Church  will  enter  upon  the 
everlasting  age  of  progress  and  beauty 
and  glory. 

III.  In  its  celehration.  "  Great  was 
the  company  of  those  that  published 
it."  Conant :  **  The  women  that  pub- 
lish the  glad  tidings  are  a  mighty  host. 
Hengstenberg :  "  Of  the  female  messen- 
gers of  victory  there  are  a  great  host," 
Amongst  the  Israelites  when  the  army 
was  ordered  to  war  the  women  cheered 
the  soldiers  onward  with  their  songs. 
And,  when  they  returned  victorious, 
with  songs  and  dances  they  celebrated 
the  victory.      (See  Ezod.  xy.  20,  21; 


1  Sam.  xviii.  6,  7  j   et  a/.)     And  the 

triumph  of  the  Church  of  Christ  shall 
not  fail  of  celebration.  Those  who  have 
fought  and  suffered,  those  who  have 
watched  and  prayed,  a  countless  host 
of  faithful  souls,  shall  join  in  the  exult- 
ant songs  and  festivities  of  the  final 
triumph.  Glimpses  of  this  celebration 
we  have  in  the  Holy  Word.  But  the 
celebration  itself,  in  its  extent  and  en- 
thusiasm, in  its  rapture  and  splendour, 
shall  far  surpass  our  utmost  expectation 
and  imagination.  And  to  Jesus — 
Leader,  Saviour,  and  Sovereign — shall 
be  ascribed  *^  glory  and  dominion  for 
ever  and  dv«r.    AmetL** 


Thb  Glort  of  ths  Ohubob; 
(Verses  15-18.) 


We  regard  these  verses  as  illustrating 
the  glory  of  the  Church  of  God. 

I.  It  consists  in  its  being  the  dwell- 
ing-place of  God.  Zion  is  here  spoken 
of  as  "  the  hill  which  God  desireth  to 
dwell  in."  The  Most  Hiirh  dwells  in 
the  Church  as  He  does  not  in  the  world 
(Matt,  xviii.  20 ;  John  xiv.  22,  23).  In 
the  Church  He  reveals  His  will,  puts 
forth  His  saving  power,  manifests  the 
glory  of  His  grace,  &c.  (see  notes  on  Ps. 
xlviii.  1-3). 

1.  He  dwells  there  of  His  own  sovereign 
choice.  He  "has  chosen  to  dwell"  in 
Zion.  "  The  Lord  hath  chosen  Zion ; 
He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habitation. 
This  is  My  rest  for  ever :  here  will  I 
dwell ;  for  I  have  desired  it."  Moll : 
*'  Sinai  and  Zion  are  mountains  of  God, 
as  Israel  is  the  people  of  God,  not  on 
account  of  natural  advantages,  but  the 
Divine  election  of  grace."  God  dwells 
in  His  Church  because  of  His  own 
gracious  and  sovereign  choice. 

2.  He  dwells  there  permanently,  "  Yea, 
the  Lord  will  dwell  in  it  for  ever."  The 
ark  and  the  temple  have  long  since  passed 
from  Zion  ;  but  in  the  Christian  Church, 
the  spiritual  Zion,  God  still  dwells,  and 
will  do  so  for  ever.  In  this  promise  we 
have  a  guarantee  of  the  permanence  of 
the  Church.  "  It  is  impossible,"  says 
Kenschel,  "that  the  Christian  Church 
should  perish;  for  Qod  is  not  only  a 


guest  in  it,  bnt  He  dwells  therein  for 
ever  as  the  host."  Not  in  wealthy  en- 
dowments, or  worldly  power,  or  impos- 
ing edifices,  or  gorgeous  ritual,  or 
eloquent  ministers,  does  the  glory  of 
the  Church  consist ;  but  in  the  gracious 
presence  of  God  in  her  midst. 

II.  It  transcends  the  utmost  glory 
of  the  world.  "  The  hill  of  God  is  as 
the  hill  of  Bashan,  an  high  hill  as  the 
hill  of  Bashan.  Why  leap  ye,  ye  high 
hills  ?  this  is  the  hill  which  God  desireth 
to  dwell  in ;  yea,  the  Lord  will  dwell  in 
it  for  ever."  Bashan  "extended  from 
the  *  border  of  Gilead  *  on  the  south  to 
Mount  Hermon  on  the  north  (Deut.  iii. 
3,  10,  14 ;  Josh.  xii.  6 ;  1  Chron.  v. 
23),  and  from  the  Arabah  or  Jordan 
valley  on  the  west  to  Salchah  (Sulkhad) 
and  the  border  of  the  Geshurites  and 
the  Maacathites  on  the  east  (Josh.  xiL 
3-5 ;  Deut.  iii.  10).  This  important 
district  was  bestowed  on  the  half  tribe 
of  Manasseh  (Josh.  xiii.  29-31)  together 
with  *  half  Gilead.* "  It  was  famous  for 
the  oaks  of  its  forests  (Ezek.  xxvii. 
6),  the  wild  cattle  of  its  pastures  (Ps. 
xxii.  12),  and  the  fertility  and  beauty 
of  its  high  downs  and  wide  sweeping 
plains  (Jer.  1.  19;  Amos  iv.  1;  Mic 
vii.  14).  "The  hill  of  Bashan  is  the 
high  snow-summit  of  Anti-Lebanon  or 
Hermon,  the  extreme  limit  of  Bashan, 
yet  really  belonging  to  it."    The  monn- 

349 


rSALM  Lxvin, 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  P 8 ALMS, 


tain  of  Hermon  rises  to  a  height  of  fully 
10,000  feet.  For  conspicuousness  and 
elevation  Mo  int  Zion  cannot  be  com- 
pared with  it.  Hermon,  the  mountain 
of  Bashan,  is  used  here  as  an  emblem  of 
the  powerful  kingdoms  of  this  world. 
The  hills  of  Bashan  were  inhabited  for 
the  most  part  by  heathen  peoples  who 
were  hostile  to  Israel,  as  is  implied  in 
the  inquiry,  "Why  leap  ye,  ye  high 
hills  ?  "  Conant  :  ''  Why  watch  ye 
jealously,  ye  mountain  peaks  ? "  Moll : 
"  Why  do  ye  look  with  envy,  ye  many- 
peaked  mountains  ?  "  ''  The  reference 
is  to  lurking,  and  so  crafty  and  hostile, 
or  envious  and  jealous  looking  over  at 
them."  The  mighty  powers  of  the 
neighbouring  heathen  world  looked  with 
contempt  and  lurking  hostility  upon 
Israel.  And  the  poet  challenges  them 
for  the  reason  of  this,  and  boldly  claims 
for  Zion  superior  dignity  and  glory  than 
anything  of  which  they  could  boast,  in- 
asmuch as  it  was  selected  as  the  dwell- 
ing-place of  God.  The  greatest  temporal 
advantages  are  poor  when  compared 
with  spiritual  privileges  such  as  those 
which  Israel  enjoyed  on  Zion.  Because 
it  is  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Most  High 
the  humble  hill  of  Zion  is  exalted  far 
above  all  the  mighty  and  majestic  moun- 
tains of  earth.  "  It  is  much  more  hon- 
ourable to  be  holy  to  God  than  to  be 
high  and  great  in  the  world."  By  rea- 
son of  its  spiritual  privileges  the  Church 
of  God  outshines  the  most  glorious 
kingdoms  of  the  world. 

III.  It  is  seen  in  its  security.  "  The 
chariots  of  God  are  twenty  thousand, 
thousands  of  angels  :  the  Lord  is  among 
them."  In  the  Hebrew  there  is  no  men- 
tion of  angels.  Hengstenberg  translates  : 
"  The  chariots  of  God  are  two  myriads, 
many  thousands,  the  Lord  is  among 
them."  And  Conant :  *'  The  chariots  of 
God  are  myriadfold,  thousands  upon 
thousands."     Notice — 

1.  The  poetic  representation  of  the 
security  of  the  Church.  War  chariots 
were  much  used  for  attack  and  defence 
by  the  most  powerful  nations.  "  The 
main  strength  of  the  hostile  armies,  par- 
ticularly the  Syrian,  in  the  war  which 
had  just  been  brought  to  a  termination 
(comp.  2  Sam,  viii.  4^  x.  18),  lay  in 
3d0 


war-chariots."  So  Mount  Zion  is  repre- 
sented as  surrounded  by  a  countless  host 
of  these  chariots.  So  Eiisha,  when  the 
king  of  S\ria  had  "sent  horses  and 
chariots  and  a  great  host "  for  to  take 
him,  was  protected  ;  for  "  the  mountain 
was  full  of  horses  and  cliariots  of  fire 
round  about "  him.  What  are  the 
powers  of  worldly  kingdoms  to  the 
powers  which  do  the  Divine  bidding? 
"Thousand  thousands  minister  unto 
Him,  and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thou- 
sand stand  before  Him."  The  agents 
which  He  employs  to  guard  His  Church 
are  countless  in  number  and  invincible 
in  power. 

2.  The  secret  of  the  security  of  the 
Church.  "  The  Lord  is  among  them." 
His  presence  in  their  midst  makes  the 
defending  host  fearless  and  triumphant. 
The  security  of  the  Church  is  not  in  its 
members,  or  wealth,  or  organisation,  or 
hosts  of  angelic  defenders ;  but  in  the 
Lord    Himself.     "  Yea,  the    Lord  will 

dwell  in  it  for  ever The  Lord  is 

among  them,"  is  a  guarantee  of  the  com- 
plete safety  of  His  Church  against  all 
the  hostile  designs  and  doings  of  evil 
powers.  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her  j 
she  shall  not  be  moved." 

IV.  It  is  seen  in  its  sanctity.  "  As 
in  Sinai,  in  the  holy  place."  Or,  leav- 
ing out  the  words  supplied  by  the  trans- 
lators: "Sinai,  in  the  holy."  Heng- 
stenberg :  "  Sinai  is  in  the  sanctuary." 
Moll :  " '  A  Sinai  in  sanctity.'  Zion 
affords  a  sight  as  Sinai  afforded  it  when 
God  in  His  appearance  surrounded  it 
with  holiness."  On  Zion  as  on  Sinai 
God  reveals  the  majesty  of  His  glory ; 
and  His  presence  consecrates  and  hal- 
lows it.  The  glory  of  the  Church  is 
manifested  when  she  realises  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Lord  in  her  midst,  and 
reflects  His  glory  in  the  character  and 
conduct  of  her  members.  When  Chris- 
tians shine  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  tht 
glory  of  the  Church  will  be  seen  by  all. 

V.  It  has  been  strikingly  illus- 
trated. "  Thou  hast  ascended  on  high, 
Thou  hast  led  captivity  captive,  Thou 
hast  received  gifts  for  men,  yea,  for  the 
rebellious  also,  that  the  Lord  God  might 
dwell  among  them."  Barnes :  "  The 
idea  is,  that  God  had  descended  or  come 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


tSAtM  LXVIII. 


down  from  His  dwelling-place  in  the 
case  referred  to  in  the  psalm,  and  that 
having  secured  a  victory  by  vanquishing 
His  foes,  and  having  given  deliverance 
to  His  people,  He  had  now  returned,  or 
reascended  to  his  seat."  We  have  in 
the  verse — 

1.  A  great  victory.  This  is  clearly 
implied  in  the  words,  "  Thou  hast  led 
captivity  captive."  Primarily,  this  means 
that  God  had  achieved  a  complete  vic- 
tory in  the  war,  and  had  captured  the 
captives  of  the  enemies,  and  led  them 
away  in  triumph.  As  applied  to  the 
Redeemer,  it  signifies  that  He  triumphed 
over  His  enemies,  and  rescued  those 
whom  they  had  made  captive,  and  bound 
them  to  Himself  as  trophies  of  His 
conquest.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  van- 
quished the  hosts  of  hell,  rescued  my- 
riads from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  Satan, 
and  bound  them  to  Himself  by  the 
chains  of  loving  loyalty. 

2.  Precious  spoils.  "Thou  hast  re- 
ceived gifts  for  men,"  &c.  Expositors 
differ  in  the  interpretation  of  this  clause, 
and    that     chiefly    with    reference    to 

0"^^^^,    which  the  A.  V.  renders :   "  for 

T    T      T    ' 

men."  Margin  :  "  in  the  man."  Moll : 
"of  men."  Alford,  Barnes,  Conant, 
Hengstenberg,  Olshausen,  et  al. :  "  among 
men."  "  Thou  hast  received  gifts  among 
men,  yea,  among  the  rebellious."  The 
Most  High  is  represented  by  the  Psalm- 
ist as  having  taken  precious  spoils  from 
the  enemy,  and  returning  home  to  dis- 
tribute them  amongst  his  victorious 
hosts  and  people.  Even  the  most  re- 
fractory were  compelled  to  pay  tribute 


to  this  all-conquering  Foe.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  having  vanquished  sin, 
Satan,  and  death,  bestows  the  richest 
gifts  upon  all  who  submit  themselves  to 
Him. 

3.  A  glorious  ascension.  "Thou  hast 
ascended  on  high."  Hengstenberg : 
"  The  ascending  of  God  presupposes  His 
descending  (comp.  Eph.  iv.  9).  It 
denotes  His  ascent  to  heaven,  after  He 
had  made  Himself  known  on  earth  in 
deeds  of  omnipotence  and  love,  that  He 
may  there  manage  the  affairs  of  His 
people  (comp.  at  Ps.  xlvii.  5)."  This 
ascension  was  symbolised  by  the  en- 
trance of  the  Ark  into  Zion.  So  our 
Lord,  when  He  had  completed  His  work 
on  earth,  ascended  to  "  the  right  hand 
of  the  Majesty  on  high,"  to  conduct  the 
cause  of  His  people  there. 

4.  The  grand  object.  "  That  the  Lord 
God    might   dwell   among   them."     Or, 


"That  Jah  God  might  dwell."  The 
grand  end  of  the  victory  of  God  on  be- 
half of  His  people  was  that  He  might 
dwell  amongst  them  as  their  heavenly 
King.  And  the  grand  end  of  the  re- 
demptive work  and  \A'arfare  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  that  He  might  dwell  amongst 
men  as  the  gracious  Sovereign  of  their 
being. 

Conclusion. —  1.  Let  the  Church 
learn  in  what  its  true  glory  consists.  2. 
Let  it  estimate  truly  the  mean  and  tran- 
sient glory  of  the  world.  3.  Let  it  trust 
in  God  and  triumph  in  its  security.  4. 
Let  it  seek  to  realise  His  presence  more 
fidly,  and  spread  His  triumphs  more 
widely. 


The  Ascension  of  Christ. 

{Verse  18.) 


This  passage  is  applied  by  the  Apostle 
Paul  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  we  may 
therefore  use  it  in  the  way  of  illustra- 
tion of  some  things  connected  with  tlie 
exaltation  of  our  Kedeemer.  Let  us 
notice — 

I.  The  fact  of  His  ascension. 

1.  He  ascended  in  human  nature.  He 
assumed  that  nature  as  our  representa- 
tive, and  as  our  representative  He  has 
entered  into  heavenly  places.     He  took 


our  nature  in  its  state  of  degradation, 
but  He  has  exalted  it,  and  by  His  exal- 
tation He  has  given  us  the  pledge  of 
raising  our  nature  from  its  state  of 
degradation. 

2.  He  ascended  to  heaven.  The  place 
of  glory — of  God,  the  Father  of  glory — 
of  angels — and  of  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect. 

3.  The  circumstances  of  His  ascension. 
He  ascended  visibly;  while  He  was  iu 

351 


WALM  LXVin. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


the  act  of  blessing ;  having  led  out  His 
disciples  as  far  as  Bethany,  He  lifted  up 
His  hands  to  bestow  the  parting  bene- 
diction, and  then  with  uplifted  hands, 
and  the  word  of  blessing  yet  on  His  lips. 
He  was  parted  from  them.  He  ascended 
in  glory  ;  a  procession  of  **  twenty  thou- 
sand chariots,  even  thousands  of  angels," 
accompanied  Him  in  His  upward  course, 
and  as  they  drew  near  to  the  heavenly 
city,  the  anthem,  "  Lift  up  your  heads, 
O  ye  gates,"  burst  forth  from  the  atten- 
dant multitude,  and  amidst  the  rejoicing 
of  the  glorious  throng  He  entered  and 
gat  down  in  the  glory  of  His  Father. 

II.  The  triumphs  with  which  it  was 
attended.  "  He  led  captivity  captive," 
that  is.  He  led  a  multitude  of  captives 
captive,  who  had  formerly  been  remark- 
able for  leading  others  captive.  This 
supposes — 

1.  Our  Lord*s  conflict  with  His  foes. 
To  conquer  them  He  must  first  encoun- 
ter them.  Satan,  sin,  and  death,  were 
the  foes  He  had  thus  to  encounter. 

2.  His  conquest  of  them.  He  engaged 
in  the  deadly  conflict,  and  did  not  yield 
till,  "  It  is  finished,"  showed  how  it  had 
terminated.      That   was   the   shout   of 


triumph  of  Him  who  having  trod  the 
winepress  alone,  had  stained  all  His 
raiment  with  the  blood  of  His  enemies. 

3.  His  triumph  over  them.  "  Having 
spoiled  principalities  and  powers.  He 
made  a  show  of  them  openly;"  pro- 
claiming, as  He  passed  from  the  land  of 
His  enemies.  His  conquest  and  victory. 
"  I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty 
to  save." 

III.  The  inestimable  benefits  sup- 
plied by  it.     Let  us  look  at  them — 

1.  In  their  nature.  Soon  after  His 
ascension  Christ  bestowed  various  gifts 
on  the  world.  The  gift  of  His  Spirit 
— to  enlighten,  to  strengthen,  to  seal, 
and  perfect. 

2.  In  their  objects.  *'  For  the  re- 
bellious." For  the  human  race,  re- 
bellious in  mind,  in  profession,  in  life — 
for  those  who  might  justly  have  expected 
the  thunders  of  heaven's  wrath  to  burst 
upon  them. 

3.  In  their  design.  "  That  the  Lord 
God  might  dwell  among  them."  The 
Lord  dwells  among  men  by  mercy,  by 
His  manifold  grace,  in  His  eternal  glory. 
— H,  in  Sketches  of  Sermons, 


God  our  Salvation. 
{Verses  19,  20.) 


The  Psalmist  here  celebrates  the  praise 
of  God,  on  the  ground  that  He  is  the 
salvation  of  His  people.  He  is  our 
salvation — 

I.  In  relation  to  life's  burdens. 

1.  Man  is  burdened.  This  fact  is 
recognised  in  the  nineteenth  verse. 
Omitting  the  words  which  have  been 
supplied  by  the  translators,  it  reads, 
"  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  daily  loadeth  us, 
the  God  of  our  salvation."  Moll  trans- 
lates :  Blessed  be  the  Lord  day  by  day ! 
Are  we  burdened — He,  God,  is  our 
help."  And  Hengstenberg :  '*  Praised 
be  the  Lord  every  day,  they  lay  burdens 
on  us,  the  Lord  is  our  salvation."  We 
are  burdened  with  temporal  anxieties, 
with  family  solicitudes,  with  spiritual 
trials  and  sorrows,  and  with  the 
mysteries  and  responsibilities  of  life. 

2.  God  strengthens  man  to  hear  his 

352 


burdens.  He  is  "  the  God  of  our  salva- 
tion." "He,  God,  is  our  help."  He 
helps  us  by  Ilis  sympathy.  He  is 
burdened  in  feeling  with  us.  "  In  all 
their  affliction  He  was  afflicted,"  <fec.  He 
is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities."  He  helps  us  by  instruction 
as  to  the  meaning  and  design  of  our 
burdens.  He  helps  us  by  inspiration. 
He  inspires  the  soul  with  patience — in- 
creases its  faith — imparts  to  it  more 
grace,  so  that  the  burden  shall  not  prove 
distressing. 

II.  In  relation  to  life's  perils. 
"  Our  God  is  the  God  of  salvation." 
Hengstenberg :  "  God  is  to  us  a  God  of 
deliverances."  The  reference  is  to 
deliverance  from  great  dangers  and 
troubles. 

1.  The  life  of  every  man  is  charac- 
terised more  or  less  by  perils.     There  are 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


ISALM  LXTin. 


visible  and  known  dangers,  and  dangers 
invisible  and  unknown  to  us ;  dangers 
to  our  physical  and  temporal  interests, 
and  to  our  spiritual  and  eternal  in- 
terests. 

2.  God  delivers  His  people  from  these 
perils.  He  does  this  (1.)  By  removing 
the  dangers,  or  rescuing  His  people  from 
them ;  e.g.,  Peter  from  prison  (Acts  xii. 
2-20).  Or,  (2.)  by  keeping  them  safely 
in  the  midst  of  the  dangers ;  e.g.^  Joseph 
in  Egypt,  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den,  the 
three  Hebrew  youths  in  the  furnace  of 
fire.  Or,  (3.)  by  giving  them  the  vic- 
tory over  the  dangers ;  «.^.,  Stephen 
(Acts  vii.  59,  60;  and  Paul  (2  Tim. 
iv.  6-8). 

III.  In  relation  to  death.  "Unto 
God  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from 
death."  Conant :  "  And  to  Jehovah 
the  Lord  belong  ways  of  escape  from 
death."  *'  The  reference  here,"  says 
Moll,  "is  to  ways  of  deliverance  by 
which  we  may  go  forth  free  with  respect 
to  death,  or  at  the  expense  of  death." 
Bnt  how  does  He  thus  deliver  from 
death  ? 

1.  By  rescuing  from  imminent  death. 
When  death  is  threatening  and  drawing 


near  He  can  arrest  him  In  his  progress, 
or  turn  aside  his  stroke. 

2.  By  delivering  from  the  fear  of 
death.  A  great  end  of  His  incarnation 
was  *'  that  through  death  He  might 
destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of 
death,  that  is,  the  devil;  and  deliver 
them  who  through  fear  of  death,  were 
all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.'* 

3.  By  giving  complete  victory  over 
death.  For  all  who  believe  in  Him,  He 
takes  away  the  sting  from  death ; 
makes  death  to  them  the  messenger  and 
minister  of  life  and  blessedness ;  and 
will  complete  His  glorious  triumph  by 
the  resurrection  of  the  body.  He  has 
"  the  keys  of  death  and  of  Hades."  "  O 
death,  where  is  thy  sting  *?  "  <fec. 

Conclusion. — "  Blessed  be  the  Lord 
day  by  day."  The  God  of  so  great  sal- 
vation should  receive  the  heartiest 
praise.  Such  great  deliverances  be- 
stowed upon  us  call  for  great  gratitude 
from  us.  Such  constant  deliverances 
should  call  forth  constant  praise — "  day 
by  day."  The  highest  praise  which  we 
can  offer  for  past  and  present  mercies  is 
to  reverently  trust  Him  for  salvation  in 
the  future. 


A  Terrible  Character  and  Destiny. 
{Verses  2\-22>.) 


The  connection  of  this  strophe  with 
the  preceding  is  thus  stated  by  Calvin  : 
**  Because  the  Church,  attacked  on  all 
sides  by  strong  and  raging  enemies,  can 
obtain  nothing  otherwise  except  by  a 
strong  and  powerful  defence,  the  Psal- 
mist brine's  in  God  armed  with  terrible 
power,  for  the  destruction  of  all  the  un- 
godly. It  is  to  be  observed  that  all  who 
annoy  the  pious  are  called  enemies  of 
God,  so  that  we  need  not  doubt  that  He 
will  interpose  for  our  defence."  We 
have  in  the  text — 

I.  A  terrible  character.  "  God 
shall  wound  the  head  of  His  enemies," 
(kc.     Here  is — 

1.  Great  enormity  of  wickedness. 
**  His  enemies."  How  fearful  are  the 
depravity  and  guilt  involved  in  being  an 
enemy  of  God  !  It  is  to  be  an  enemy  of 
a  Being  of  perfect  holiness,  of  infinite 


kindness ;  to  be  an  enemy  of  our  best 
Friend  ;  to  trample  under  foot  the  most 
tender  and  sacred  and  binding  obliga- 
tions. He  who  persecutes  the  people 
of  God  is  held  by  Him  as  an  enemy  to 
Himself.  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest 
thou  Me?" 

2.  Great  persistence  in  wickedness. 
"  One  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  trespasses." 
Hengstenberg  :  *'  Him  that  walks  on  in 
his  iniquities."  If  a  sinner  turn  in 
penitence  unto  God,  he  will  meet  with  a 
gracious  reception.  God  will  pardon 
his  transgressions,  <fec.  But  here  awful 
perseverance  in  iniquity,  dread  progress 
in  sin,  are  indicated.  Such  persistence 
in  evil  must  lead  to  an  appalling  doom. 

II.  A  terrible  destiny.  God  will 
bring  fearful  destruction  upon  those  of 
His  enemies  who  walk  on  in  their 
iniquities. 

353 


PSALM  LXVIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


1.  This  destruction  is  complete. 
**  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  His 
enemies."  Barnes  :  ''  The  idea  is  that 
of  complete  destruction — as,  if  the  head 
is  crushed,  life  becomes  extinct."  (See 
Gen.  iii.  15  ;  comp.  Psa.  ex.  6.)  This 
idea  of  utter  and  dread  destruction  is 
expressed  in  the  23d  verse  also, 
by  the  figure  of  a  fearful  slaughter. 
Persistent  wickedness  must  issue  in 
overwhelming  ruin. 

2.  This  destruction  is  unavoidable. 
(1.)  No  one  shall  escape  from  it  by 
might.  "  God  shall  wound  the  hairy 
scalp,"  &c.  *'  The  hairy  scalp,"  says 
Moll,  "  is  best  understood  of  a  head 
with  luxuriant  growth  of  hair,  the  sign 
of  the  bloom  of  youth  and  power."  If 
man  persists  in  wickedness,  his  utmost 
might  shall  be  as  utter  weakness  when 
God  ariseth  in  judgment.  "  Who  may 
stand  in  Thy  sight  when  once  Thou  art 
angry  ?  "  (2.)  No  one  can  escape  from 
it  by  flight.  "  The  Lord  said,  I  will 
bring  again  from  Bashan,  I  will  bring 
again  from  the  depths  of  the  sea."  Im- 
properly, as  it  seems  to  us,  the  translators 
of  the  A.  V.  have  supplied  "  my  people'^ 
in  this  verse.  The  reference  is  not  to 
Israel,  but  to  the  enemies  of  Israel. 
The  idea  is  that  none  of  them  shall 
escape ;  that  they  shall  find  no  refuge 
from  the  judgment  of  God.  If  they 
have  hidden  themselves  in  the  mountain 
forests  of  Bashan,  God  will  bring  them 
forth  and  destroy  them.     Even  if  they 


could  take  refuge  in  the  abysses  of  the 
sea,  God  would  bring  them  out  from 
thence.  The  same  idea  is  expressed  at 
greater  length  by  Amos  the  prophet ; 
"  He  that  fleeth  of  them  shall  not  flee 
away,  and  he  that  escapeth  of  them 
shall  not  be  delivered.  Though  they 
dig  into  hell,  thence  shall  Mine  hand 
take  them  -,  though  they  climb  up  to 
heaven,  thence  will  I  bring  them  down," 
&c.  (ix.  1-3).  If  the  wicked  will  not 
repent,  but  will  persist  in  wickedness, 
there  is  no  possibility  of  escape  from  the 
retributions  of  the  Divine  judgment. 
With  dread  certainty  penalty  follows 
transgression  ;  punishment  succeeds  sin  ; 
irresistible  wrath  shall  seize  and  crush 
the  incorrigible  workers  of  iniquity. 

3.  This  destruction  is  solemnly  de- 
clared. "  The  Lord  said,  I  will  bring 
again  from  Bashan,"  (kc.  "  God  is  not 
a  man  that  He  should  lie  ;  neither  the 
son  of  man,  that  He  should  repent : 
hath  He  said,  and  shall  He  not  do  1  or 
hath  He  spoken,  and  shall  He  not 
make  it  good  1 "  The  statements  of 
Scripture  concerning  the  punishment  of 
the  wicked  are  not  rashly  uttered  threats, 
but  the  calm  declarations  of  the  holy 
and  unchangeable  God. 

Let  the  wicked  take  warning,  and 
turn  from  his  evil  way.  Let  him  seek 
for  mercy  through  Jesus  Christ.  "  Re- 
pent, and  turn  from  all  your  transgres- 
sions ;  so  iniquity  shall  not  be  your 
ruin." 


A  Glorious  Prospect. 
{Verses  24-35.) 


In  setting  forth  this  celebration  of  the 
triumph  of  God  and  His  people,  and  the 
results  arising  therefrom,  the  words  of 
the  Psalmist  reach  beyond  the  historical 
occasion  which  gave  rise  to  them  ;  and 
to  us  they  seem  to  throb  with  the  great 
hope  of  the  conversion  of  all  the  heathen 
world  to  the  God  of  Israel.  There  is  a 
clear  prophetic  ring  in  some  of  the 
declarations  of  the  poet.  They  unfold  to 
us  a  glorious  prospect.  Here  is  the 
picture  of  a  time — 

I.  When  the  Divine  triumphs  will 
be    extensively    witnessed.       '*  They 

354 


have  seen  Thy  goings,  O  God,"  <fec. 
Moll :  ''  They  have  seen  Thy  processions, 
O  God,  the  processions  of  my  God,  of 
my  King  in  holiness."  The  reference 
is  to  the  triumphal  procession  in  cele- 
bration of  victory.  Men  shall  see  the 
triumphs  of  the  Divine  arm  ;  and  shall 
observe  in  them  two  things. 

1.  That  they  are  holy.  They  have 
all  been  achieved  "  in  holiness."  We 
adopt    the    same  translation    of   I£^"Tp^ 

as  we  did  in  verse  17.  As  the  ages 
pass  it  will  become  increasingly  manifest 
that  all  the  doings  of  God,  the  achieve- 


ROM  I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXTTII. 


merits  of  His  providential  government 
of  the  world,  and  the  victories  of  His 
grace  in  human  souls,  are  wrought  in 
righteousness  and  truth  and  love.  His 
triumphs  are  those  of  truth  over  error, 
of  light  over  darkness,  of  justice  over 
oppression,  of  generosity  over  selfishness. 

2.  That  they  are  the  triumphs  of  the 
God  of  the  Church.  "  The  processions 
of  my  God,  of  my  King."  On  the  oc- 
casion for  which  the  psalm  was  first 
composed,  it  would  be  seen  that  the 
God  of  Israel  possessed  Divine  power 
and  used  it  on  behalf  of  His  people, 
that  Jehovah  was  God.  And  as  the 
victories  of  the  Christ  are  multiplied,  it 
will  become  more  and  more  clearly  ap- 
parent that  they  are  the  triumphs  of  the 
God  of  the  Church.  He  who  is  con- 
quering the  world  in  truth  and  right- 
eousness and  love  is  the  God  and  King 
of  the  Christian  Church.  The  humblest 
believer  may  look  up  to  Him,  saying, 
"  My  God,  my  King."  In  a  different 
form  we  have  a  similar  idea  in  verse  29  : 
"  Because  of  Thy  temple  at  Jerusalem 
shall  kings  bring  presents  unto  Thee." 
Men  will  mark  His  glorious  appearances 
as  the  God  of  Israel,  and  will  bow  in 
homage  to  Him.  The  day  is  coming 
when  the  triumphs  of  the  King  of  grace 
and  God  of  the  Church  shall  be  more 
widely  and  clearly  seen  and  more  care- 
fully observed  than  ever  hitherto. 

II.  When  the  Divine  triumphs  will 
be  joyously  celebrated  by  His  people 
(Vers.  25-27.)  This  celebration  will 
be— 

1.  Exultant.  "  The  singers  went 
before,  the  players  on  instruments  after, 
in  the  midst  were  the  damsels  playing 
with  timbrels."  Men  and  maidens, 
with  voices  and  instruments  of  music, 
and  souls  and  bodies,  shall  unite  to  ex- 
press the  enthusiasm  of  joy.  When  the 
predicted  triumphs  of  the  kingdom  of 
the  Christ  are  accomplished  the  rejoicing 
of  men  and  of  angels  M'ill  be  rapturous. 

2.  Comprehensive.  "  Bless  ye  God 
in  the  congregations,  even  the  Lord,  ye 
of  the  fountain  of  Israel,"  is  an  exhorta- 
tion to  all  the  descendants  of  Israel  to 
unite  in  celebrating  the  praise  of  God. 
And  in  the  following  verse  certain  tribes 
and   peoples   are    specially   mentioned. 


"  There  is  little  Benjamin,"   <fec.     But 
why  are  these  tribes  selected  from  the 
others  for  special  mention  1     Geographi- 
cal  considerations  probably  had   some- 
thing  to    do   with    the    selection ;    for 
Benjamin  and  Jndah  were  in  the  south, 
and  Zebulon  and  Naphtali  in  the  north. 
But  a  more  important  consideration  is, 
that  these  tribes  had  distinguished  them- 
selves in  warfare  and  otherwise.     "  The 
first  judges  belonged  to  the  tribes  men- 
tioned, Othniel  to  Judah,  Ehud  to  Ben- 
jamin :  "   the  first  kings   also,  for  Saul 
was   from   Benjamin,   and   David    from 
Judah.     And   the   bravery   of    Zebulon 
and  Naphtali  was  celebrated  in  the  song 
of  Deborah  and  Barak   (Judg.    v.    18). 
Benjamin  is  spoken  of  as  *'  little "  be- 
cause   it   was   among   "  the  smallest  of 
the  tribes  of  Israel"  (1   Sam.  ix.   21). 
Benjamin  is  also  spoken  of   as    ^'  their 
ruler,"  or  "  conqueror  ;  "  i.e.,  we  think, 
the  conqueror  of  the  enemies  mentioned 
previously,  with  reference  to  the  victories 
achieved  by  the  Benjamites   under  Saul 
(1    Sam.    xiv.   47,   48).     The   Psalmist 
further  speaks  of  "  the  princes  of  Judah 
and    their    council "   as   present  in   the 
festal    procession.       Instead    of    "  their 
council "  the  margin  has,    "  their  com- 
pany."    The  word  is  HD!!'!  (with  suf- 
fix DJ1D))"1    from  D^*)   =    to    heap   to- 
gether,    to    collect,    as    stones),    which 
signifies  here  a  throng  or  multitude.     It 
is  suitably  applied  to  the  tribe  of  Judah 
as  one  of  the    most   numerous   of   the 
tribes  of  Israel.     So  we  have  here  the 
idea  of  an  immense  and  comprehensive 
assembly   at    this   exultant   celebration. 
Princes  and  people,  high  and  low,  per- 
sons of  all  grades  and  classes,  from  all 
the  tribes  of  Israel,  join  in  this  trium- 
phant procession.     An  illustration  this 
of    the    countless    and    comprehensive 
multitude  which  shall  unite  to  celebrate 
the  approaching  triumph  of  Christ  our 
King.     Persons    ''  of   all    nations,    and 
kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,"  and 
stations,  and  ages,   shall  unite  in  cele- 
brating His  conquests  and  glories. 

3.  Religious.  The  spirit  manifested 
by  the  Psalmist  is  not  proud,  self- 
sufficient,  or  vain-glorious  ;  but  humble, 
grateful,   and  trustful.     (1.)  Past   suc- 

355 


PSALM  LXTin. 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


cesses  are  attributed  to  God.  "  Thy 
God  hath  commanded  thy  strength." 
The  words  are  addressed  to  Israel,  so 
that  the  people  may  trace  their  triumphs 
to  their  true  source."  The  God  of  Israel 
is  He  that  giveth  strength  and  power  unto 
His  people."  (2.)  Future  progress  is 
besought  from  God.  "  Strengthen,  O 
God,  that  which  Thou  hast  wrought  for 
us."  The  people  of  God  are  incapable 
of  accomplishing  success  in  spiritual 
labour,  or  triumph  in  spiritual  conflict 
of  themselves.  Apart  from  their  Lord 
the  Christ,  they  can  do  nothing.  And 
when  the  great  triumph  to  which  the 
Church  looks  forward  is  achieved,  all  the 
wisdom,  and  power,  and  honour,  and 
glory  of  that  triumph  shall  be  ascribed 
unto  Him. 

III.  When  heathen  nations  shall 
submit  themselves  unto  God  (vers. 
29-31).  Two  or  three  expressions  here 
require  explanation.  **  Kebuke  the 
company  of  spearmen,*'  Margin  :  **  Re- 
buke the  beasts  of  the  reeds."  Conant, 
Hengstenberg,  et  al:  "  Rebuke  the  beast 
of  the  reeds."  Most  likely  the  hippopota- 
mus is  here  referred  to,  as  the  symbol 
of  Egypt,  whose  emblem  is  the  reed 
(Job  xl.  21;  Isa.  xxxvi.  6).  *'The 
multitude  of  the  bulls,"  or,  "  the  herd 
of  the  strong  ones,"  is  a  figure  used  to 
represent  powerful  kings  or  princes. 
By  "  the  calves  of  the  people  "  we  under- 
stand the  subjects  of  these  powerful 
princes.  Universal  submission  shall  be 
made  to  God.  All  peoples  shall  come, 
bringing  tribute  unto  Him.  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia  are  mentioned  not  as  the  only 
nations  that  submit  unto  Him,  but  as 
representatives  of  the  great  heathen 
world.  All  classes  shall  give  in  their 
loyal  allegiance  unto  Him — kings  and 
their  subjects,  princes  and  peasants, 
nobles  and  plebeians.  And  when  all  are 
subject  unto  Him,  the  lovers  and  insti- 
gators of  war  shall  be  utterly  dispersed. 
**  He  scattereth  the  people  that  delight 
in  war."  Under  the  reign  of  *'  the 
Prince  of  Peace  "  war  shall  be  completely 
and  for  ever  abolished.  "  He  shall 
judge  among  the  nations,  and  shall  re- 
buke many  people  :  and  they  shall  beat 
their  swords  into  plowshares,"  &c.  (Isa. 
ii  4).  This  the  Psalmist  foresaw  and 
356 


prophetically  announced.  There  were 
times  when  heathen  peoples  brought 
presents  to  the  kings  of  the  chosen 
people  in  acknowledgment  of  the  power 
and  glory  of  God  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  23). 
Many  nations  of  the  world  have  now 
given  their  allegiance  to  the  one  living 
and  true  God.  His  kingdom  is  ever 
growing  in  extent  and  power.  And 
ultimately  the  widest  and  brightest 
visions  of  inspired  Psalmists  and  Pro- 
phets shall  be  fully  and  splendidly 
realized. 

IV.  When  God  shall  be  universally 
praised.  In  vers.  32-35,  the  Psalmist 
summons  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
to  sing  praises  unto  God,  on  the  grounds 
of— 

1.  His  sovereignty.  "  To  Him  that 
rideth  upon  the  heavens  of  heavens  of 
old."  His  sovereignty  is  universal.  He 
rideth  in  the  highest  heavens,  supreme 
over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world. 
"  Jehovah  hath  established  His  throne 
in  the  heavens,  and  His  kingdom  ruleth 
over  all."  His  sovereignty  is  ancient. 
"  Of  old."  "  God  is  my  King  of  old." 
Therefore,  let  all  men  praise  Hiin. 

2.  His  omnipotence.  "  Lo,  He  doth  send 
out  His  voice,  a  mighty  voice.  Ascribe 
ye  strength  unto  God;  His  excellency 
is  over  Israel,  and  His  strength  is  in  the 
clouds."  Delitzsch  :  "  Give  back  to 
Him  in  acknowledgment  and  praise  the 
omnipotence  which  He  has  and  proves. 
His  glory  rules  over  Israel  as  its  defence 
and  confidence.  His  power,  however, 
embraces  all  created  things,  not  only 
the  earth,  but  also  the  highest  region  of 
the  heaven.  The  kingdom  of  grace  re- 
veals the  majesty  and  glory  of  His 
redemptive  work  (Eph.  i.  6),  the 
kingdom  of  nature  His  all-prevalent 
omnipotence." 

3.  His  majesty.  *'  His  excellency  is 
over  Israel  .  .  .  O  God,  Thou  art 
terrible  out  of  Thy  holy  places."  His 
majesty  and  glory  are  over  His  people 

.  for  their  guidance  and  protection.  And 
His  manifestations  of  His  holiness  and 
power  are  fitted  to  inspire  all  men  with 
awe.  "  Wheresoever  God  showeth  His 
presence,  whether  in  heaven,  or  in  His 
Church,  in  any  place  of  the  earth,  there 
and  from  thence  He  showeth  Himself  a 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXIX. 


dreadful  God  to  such  as  fear  Hira  not/* 
Therefore,  let  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
earth  sing  praises  unto  Him. 

Conclusion. — 1.  This  subject  reminds 
ns  of  our  duty.  It  is  the  duty  and  the 
interest  of  rebels  against  God  to  submit 
themselves  to  Him.     It  is  the  duty  and 


privilege  of  the  people  of  God  to  spread 
abroad  His  kingdom  and  glory  wherever 
they  can.  2.  This  subject  affords  us 
encouragement.  How  glorious  is  the 
prospect !  and  how  certain  of  realisation ! 
God's  Word,  and  wisdom,  and  power, 
all  guarantee  it     "  Blessed  be  God  1  '* 


PSALM     LXIX. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Supersertptton. — **To  the  chief  musician  upon  Shoshannim,  a  Psalm  of  David.** 

"  To  the  chief  musician."  See  the  introduction  to  Ps.  Ivii.  **  Upon  Shoshannim.  See  the 
introduction  to  Ps.  xlv.  **A  Psalm  of  David."  The  Davidic  authorship  of  this  Psalm  is 
strongly  supported  by  its  close  resemblance  to  other  Psalms  which  are  ascribed  to  David. 
Both  in  thought  and  language  it  is  nearly  related  to  Psalms  vi.,  xzii.,  xxxi. ,  xxxv.,  xxxviii., 
xl.,  and  cix.  Ewald:  **  Our  Psalm  mauifests  such  a  strong  similarity,  not  in  the  least  proceed- 
ing from  imitation,  to  Psalms  xxxv.,  xxxviii.,  and  xl.,  that  it  must  have  been  composed  by  the 
same  author."  And  Hitzig:  **  The  author  of  the  xlth  Psalm,  whoever  he  was,  must  be  identically 
the  same  with  the  author  of  the  Ixixth."  And  again:  "The  similarity  between  Ixix.  32  and 
xxii.  26,  can  only  be  explained  by  the  assumption,  that  they  have  been  the  product  of  the 
same  mind." 

We  are  unable  to  determine  on  what  occasion  in  the  life  of  David  the  Psalm  was  composed. 
Probably  it  belongs  to  the  time  of  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  With  the  exception  of  the  22d, 
there  is  no  Psalm  which  is  so  frequently  quoted  and  applied  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  NewTestaraent 
as  this  one.  But  the  quotations  are  not  of  Buch  a  character  as  to  require  us  to  adopt  a  direct 
Messianic  interpretation.  They  are,  as  Barnes  points  out,  **of  go  general  a  character  that  they 
do  not  seem  to  have  been  designed  to  refer  exclusively  to  the  Messiah,  or  even  to  have  had 
any  original  reference  to  Him.  The  language  is  such  that  it  would  accurately  describe  the  events 
to  which  it  is  applied ;  and  the  fact  that  the  language  is  quoted  in  this  manner  in  the  New 
Testament  history  does  not  prove  that  the  Psalm  had  any  original  reference  to  the  Messiah." 
A  most  formidable  ejection  against  the  direct  Messianic  exposition  is  found  in  the  confession 
of  folly  and  guilt  in  ver.  5.  Hengstenberg  interprets  the  Psalm  as  referring  not  to  any  indi- 
vidual sufferer,  but  to  the  ideal  person  of  the  suflfering  righteous  man. 

Homiletically  we  view  the  psalm  as  presenting  to  us,  The  cry  of  the  righteous  in  extreme 
suffering ^  vers.  1-21 ;  The  imperfection  of  the  righteous  in  extreme  suffering,  vers.  22-28 ;  and 
The  hope  of  the  righteous  in  extreme  suffering,  vers.  29-8(J. 


The  Cry  of  the  Righteous  in  Extreme  Suffering. 

{Verses  1-21.) 


The  burden  of  this  cry  is  twofold. 
We  have — 

I.  A  cry  of  suffering.     In  this  wail 

of  the  Psalmist  we  discover — 

1.  The  nature  of  his  sufferings.  He 
represents  them  as  arising  from  (1)  The 
persecution  of  his  enemies.  *'  They  that 
hate  me  without  a  cause  are  more  than 
the  hairs  of  mine  head  :  they  that  would 
destroy  me,  being  mine  enemies  wrong- 
fully, are  mighty :  then  I  restored  that 
which  I  took  not  away."  We  see  here 
(a)  Their  multitude.  "  They  are  more 
than  the  hairs  of  mine  head."  His  foes 
were  an  innumerable  host.  Countless 
are  the  enemies  of  the  good.     (/S)  Their 


malice,  "  They  hate  me ;  they  would 
destroy  me.''  They  hated  him  so  fiercely 
that  they  sought  his  utter  destruction. 
"The  devil  was  a  murderer  from  the 
beginning."  (y)  Their  might.  "Mine 
enemies  are  mighty."  The  foes  of  David 
were  great  in  authority  and  power.  The 
righteous  have  to  contend  "  against 
principalities,  against  powers,  against 
the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world, 
against  spiritual  wickedness  in  high 
places."  (3)  Their  injustice.  They 
hated  him  "  without  a  cause ; "  they 
were  his  "enemies  wrongfully."  The 
Psalmist  had  done  nothing  to  provoke 
them  to  anger.     They  compelled  him  to 

357 


FSALM  LXIZ. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


give  up  his  own  possessions  as  though 
he  had  no  right  to  them,  or  had  gotten 
them  by  fraud  or  violence.  Malice  is 
always  unjust.  It  is  better  to  suffer  the 
worst  from  unjust  enemies  than  by 
wrong-doing  to  give  to  any  one  reason 
to  be  to  us  an  enemy.  Such  were  the 
enemies  who  persecuted  the  Psalmist. 
And  the  form  of  persecution  of  which  he 
complains  most  is  slander.  "I  have 
borne    reproach ;    shame    hath    covered 

my  face I  became  a  proverb " 

(byword)  "  to  them.  They  that  sit  in 
the  gate  speak  against  me  ',  and  I  was 
the  song  of  the  drunkards.  .  .  .  Thou 
hast  known  my  reproach,  and  my  shame, 
and  my  dishonour.  .  .  .  Reproach  hath 
broken  my  heart."  David  suffered 
much  from  the  wicked  aspersions  and 
calumnies  of  his  enemies.  (See  "  The 
Horn.  Com."  on  Ps.  xli.  5-9  ',  xlii.  2,  10, 
&c.)  To  an  honourable  man  nothing  is 
more  bitter  and  painful  than  reproach 
and  slander.  At  this  time  the  Psalmist 
was  smarting  severely  beneath  it.  It 
seemed  to  assail  him  in  every  form  and 
from  every  quarter.  The  men  of  busi- 
ness and  the  magistrates,  who  assembled 
in  the  gates,  spake  evil  of  him.  And 
the  drunkard  in  his  degrading  revels 
sang  in  derision  of  him.  Reproach, 
shame,  dishonour  covered  and  crushed 
him.  And  still  the  good  are  exposed 
to  the  assaults  of  the  slanderer.  *'  Virtue 
itself  'scapes  not  calumnious  strokes." 

"  Be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice,  as  pure  as  snow, 
Thou  shalt  not  escape  calumny." 

— Shakespeare. 

And  still  slander  assumes  many  forms, 
and  has  many  methods;  and  of  these 
the  most  subtle  are  the  most  perilous. 

*'  The  hint  malevolent,  the  look  oblique, 
The  obvious  satire,  or  implied  dislike. 
The  sneer  equivocal,  the  harsh  reply, 
And  all  the  cruel  language  of  the  eye  ; 
The  artful  injury,  whose  venomed  dart 
Scarce  wounds  the  hearing,  while  it  stabs 

the  heart; 
The  guarded  phrase  whose  meaning  kills, 

yet  told, 
The  list'ner  wonders  how  you  thought  it 

cold." — Hannah  More. 

Such  are  some  of  the  forms  and  methods 
of  slander.  But  the  sufferings  of  the 
Psalmist  arose  also  from  (2)  The  deser- 
tion of  his  nearest  relatives.  "  I  am 
358 


become  a  stranger  unto  my  brethren, 
and  an  alien  unto  my  mother's  children." 
The  expression,  "  my  mother's  children," 
denotes  the  most  intimate  relationship. 
Barnes  :  "  In  families  where  a  man  had 
many  wives,  as  was  common  among  the 
Hebrews,  the  nearest  relationship  would 
be  denoted  by  being  of  the  same  mother 
rather  than  of  the  same  father.  The 
idea  of  the  Psalmist  here,  therefore,  is, 
that  his  nearest  relatives  treated  him  as 
if  he  were  a  stranger  and  a  foreigner." 
(Com.  Job  xix.  13-19.)  It  is  probable 
that  in  the  time  of  Saul  David  passed 
through  this  painful  experience.  (Comp. 
1  Sam.  xvii.  28 ;  Ps.  xxvii.  10 ;  and 
xxxviii.  11.)  And  still  a  man  may  be 
forsaken  by  the  nearest  relatives  and 
friends  because  he  follows  truth  and 
righteousness  ;  or  he  may  have  to  for- 
sake them  that  he  might  cleave  to  Christ. 
(See  Matt.  x.  34-39.)  The  Psalmist 
was  suffering  also  because  of  (3)  The 
failure  of  human  sympathy.  "  I  looked 
for  some  to  take  pity,  but  there  was 
none ;  and  for  comforters,  but  I  found 
none."  Hengstenberg :  "  I  wait  for 
sympathy,  and  there  is  none."  ''  The 
word  sympathy ^^^  says  Perowne,  *'has 
nowhere  been  employed  by  our  trans- 
lators, but  it  exactly  conveys  the  force 
of  the  Hebrew  word,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
used  of  sympathy  in  joy  as  well  as  in 
sorrow."  (See  Job  xlii.  11 ;  Jer.  xv.  5  ; 
xvi.  5  ;  xlviii.  17.)  No  heart  was  moved 
with  compassion  for  the  suffering  poet. 
He  felt  himself  to  be  utterly  forsaken 
by  mankind.  Terrible  was  his  sense  of 
desolation.  Worse  even  than  this  did 
men  treat  him.  When  he  was  hungry 
and  thirsty  they  mocked  him  by  giving 
him  for  food  a  bitter  and  poisonous 
herb,  and  for  drink  vinegar.  By  this 
figure  the  Psalmist  expresses  the  addi- 
tion and  intensification  of  his  already 
severe  sufferings.  The  inhumanity  of 
men  towards  him  aggravates  his  misery. 
The  words  of  verses  20  and  21  might 
have  been  used  by  "  the  Messiah  upon 
the  cross,  who  bore  the  shame  of  an 
ignominious  death,  the  reproaches  of 
violating  the  law,  and  the  slanders  of 
wicked  enemies,  who  died  broken- 
hearted, with  no  one  to  pity,  alone  in 
His  shame  and  woe,"  and  to  whom  upon 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXIX. 


the  cross  was  given  sour  wine  with  an 
infusion  of  myrrh,  and  afterwards  vine- 
gar, when  He  had  cried,  "  I  thirst." 
Let  no  one  place  much  dependence 
upon  human  sympathy  or  support,  or 
bitter  will  be  his  disappointment.  But 
*'  there  is  a  Friend  that  sticketh  closer 
than  a  brother."  ''  I  will  be  with  thee  ; 
I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee." 
Let  us  trust  Him  alwcays  and  fully. 

2.  The  severity  of  his  sufferings.  This 
is  seen  in  at  least  four  things — (1)  The 
various  figures  hy  which  they  are  ex- 
pressed. "  The  waters  are  come  in  unto 
my  soul.  I  sink  in  deep  mire,  where 
there  is  no  standing  :  I  am  come  into 
deep  waters,  where  the  floods  overflow 
me."  (For  remarks  on  the  figures  here 
employed  see  "  The  Horn.  Com."  on  Ps. 
xl.  2 ;  and  xlii.  7.)  In  this  psalm  the 
Poet  represents  the  waters  as  *' having 
come  even  to  his  soul,"  thereby  placing 
his  very  life  in  imminent  peril.  Trouble 
was  not  only  without  him,  but  within 
him.  His  soul  was  suffering.  "  The 
spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity  ; 
but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear'?" 
The  Psalmist  also  speaks  of  himself  as 
heart-broken.  "  E-eproach  hath  broken 
my  heart,  and  I  am  full  of  heaviness." 
Barnes  :  ^'  Distress  may  become  so  great 
that  life  may  sink  under  it,  for  many 
die  of  what  is  called  '  a  broken  heart.' 
Undeserved  reproaches  will  be  as  likely 
to  produce  this  result  on  a  sensitive 
heart  as  any  form  of  suff'ering ;  and  there 
are  thousands  who  are  crushed  to  the 
earth  by  such  reproaches."  (2)  The 
extremity  of  his  peril.  The  waters 
having  come  even  to  his  soul,  his  rapid 
sinking  in  the  mire  of  the  depth,  the 
floods  which  are  overwhelming  him,  and 
his  broken  heart,  all  indicate  the  ex- 
tremity of  peril  and  need.  If  God  do 
not  speedily  interpose  for  him,  his  suf- 
ferings will  utterly  crush  him.  If  the 
Divine  help  come  not  quickly,  it  will 
come  too  late.  (3)  The  long-continued 
duration  of  his  sufferings.  "  I  am  weary 
of  my  crying ;  my  throat  is  dried : 
mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait  for  my  God." 
He  had  called  upon  God  so  long  and 
earnestly  that  his  strength  was  exhausted 
and  his  throat  was  parched.  He  had 
waited   and  watched   for  God  so  long 


that  his  eyes  were  worn  out  and  dim. 
Hengstenberg  :  "  The  eyes  fail :  lose 
their  power  of  vision,  when  a  person 
keeps  them  long  on  the  stretch,  fixed 
upon  a  distant  object,  in  hope  of  its 
coining  nearer,  till  the  outlines  become 
better  defined."  M.  Henry :  "  His 
throat  is  dried,  but  his  heart  is  not ; 
his  eyes  fail,  but  his  faith  does  not." 
(4)  The  connection  of  his  suferings  ivith 
his  religion,  "  Because  for  Thy  sake  I 
have  borne  reproach,"  &c.,  vers.  7-12. 
He  was  reproached  for  his  fidelity  to 
truth  and  to  God.  His  interest  in  the 
cause  of  God  was  deep  and  ardent. 
"  The  zeal  of  Thine  house  hath  eaten  me 
up."  The  house  of  God  is  not  the  mere 
temple;  but  "the  temple,  as  the  centre 
of  the  whole  Israelitish  religion."  "  Tlie 
true  and  godly  zeal,"  says  Bishop  Jewell, 
"  eateth  and  devoureth  up  the  heart, 
even  as  the  thing  that  is  eaten  is  turned 
into  the  substance  of  him  that  eateth  it ; 
and  as  iron,  while  it  is  burning  hot,  is 
turned  into  the  nature  of  the  fire,  so 
great  and  so  just  is  the  grief  that  they 
which  have  this  zeal  conceive  when  they 
see  God's  house  spoiled,  or  His  holy 
name  dishonoured."  Such  was  David's 
zeal  for  the  cause  and  kingdom  of  God ; 
and  because  of  it  he  was  ridiculed  by 
the  drunkards,  reviled  by  his  enemies, 
and  forsaken  by  his  nearest  friends  and 
relatives.  When  he  penitently  mourned 
with  fasting  and  sackcloth  on  account  of 
sin,  he  was  assailed  with  more  bitter 
reproaches  and  scorn  and  satire.  All 
this  greatly  aggravated  his  suff'erings. 
Moll :  *'  It  is  better  to  suffer  for  God's 
cause  than  to  be  punished  for  sins,  but 
it  is  not  easier. '^  Such  were  the  suf- 
ferings that  called  forth  this  sharp  and 
bitter  cry  from  David.  Let  not  the 
good  man  think  it  stratige  if  he  is  called 
to  experience  severe  suffering  because  of 
his  attachment  to  Christ  and  His  cause. 
In  such  sufferings  we  join  the  highest 
fellowship,  and  receive  the  most  tender 
and  strong  support.  (See  1  Peter  iv. 
12-16.) 

II.  A  cry  of  supplication.  In  the 
prayer  of  the  Psalmist  we  have — 

1.  A  confession.  ^'  O  God,  Thou 
knowest  my  foolishness,  and  my  sins  are 
not  hid  from  Thee."     Moll :  "  How  is  it 

359 


PSALM  LXIZ. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


consistent  that  one  should  be  persecuted 
as  innocent  and  yet  punished  as  a  sinner?" 
Hengstenberg  :  "The  words  are  to  be 
taken  in  their  obvious  sense,  as  an 
acknowledgment  of  guilt  on  the  part  of 
the  Psalmist,  which,  according  to  the 
just  judgment  of  God,  had  brought  upon 
him  the  unjust  persecution  of  his 
enemies."  Barnes  :  "  Though  conscious 
of  innocence  in  this  case — though  he  felt 
that  his  enemies  hated  him  without 
cause,  yet  he  was  not  insensible  to  the 
fact  that  he  was  a  sinner,  and  he  was 
not  unwilling  to  confess  before  God, 
that_,  however  conscious  of  uprightness 
he  might  be  in  his  dealings  towards 
men,  yet  towards  God  he  was  a  sinful 
man.  From  Him  he  deserved  all  that 
had  come  upon  him.  .  .  .  Trial  never 
comes  to  us  from  any  quarter  except  as 
founded  on  the  fact  that  we  are  sinners  ; 
and  even  where  there  is  entire  innocence 
towards  our  fellow-men,  God  may  make 
use  of  their  passions  to  rebuke  and 
discipline  us  for  our  sins  towards 
Himself." 

2.  Petitions.  Of  these  there  are 
several,  but  the  great  object  of  them  all 
is  expressed  in  the  first  line  of  the 
Psalm — "  Save  me,  0  God."  He  sup- 
plicates —  (1.)  Complete  deliverance. 
"  Deliver  me  out  of  the  mire,  and  let 
me  not  sink ;  let  me  be  delivered  from 
them  that  hate  me,  and  out  of  the  deep 
waters.  Let  not  the  water-flood  over- 
flow me,  neither  let  the  deep  swallow 
me  up,  and  let  not  the  pit  shut  her 
mouth  upon  me."  Thus  he  seeks  de- 
liverance from  all  the  perils  and  miseries 
of  which  he  had  previously  complained. 
(2.)  Speedy  deliverance,  "  Hear  me 
speedily."  Margin :  "  Make  haste  to 
hear  me."  Conant  :  "  Make  haste  to 
answer  me."  The  peril  of  his  situation 
was  extreme.  His  need  of  salvation  was 
urgent.  If  the  Divine  interposition 
were  delayed,  he  felt  that  he  should 
perish.  There  are  times  when  such 
urgency  of  entreaty  is  not  only  admis- 
sible, but  natural  and  commendable. 
(3.)  Representative  deliverance.  *'  Let 
none  that  wait  on  Thee,  O  Lord  God  of 
hosts,  be  ashamed  for  my  sake  ;  let  not 
those  that  seek  Thee  be  confounded  for 
my  sake,  O  God  of  Israel."  Hengsten- 
360 


berg  :  "  Comp.  on  Psa.  xxv.  3,  *  Those 
who  wait  on  Thee  shall  not  be  ashamed, 
those  shall  be  put  to  shame  who  act 
perfidiously  without  a  cause.'  This 
position  would  be  annihilated  were  the 
sufi'erer  to  be  destroyed.  For  in  him 
as  their  representative,  or  in  liis  case, 
through  his  fate,  all  who  wait  on  God 
would  at  the  same  time  be  put  to 
shame."  Moll :  "  He  may  hope  in 
God's  favour  and  help  the  more  confi- 
dently as  many  of  the  pious  look  upon 
him  and  his  fate  as  typical  and  instruc- 
tive. .  .  .  All  the  pious  are  interested 
in  what  concerns  one  of  them."  If  he 
were  left  to  perish  the  faith  of  the  godly 
would  receive  a  terrible  shock  ;  but  if 
he  were  delivered  it  would  be  confirmed 
and  invigorated. 

3.  Encouragements,  The  Psalmist 
encourages  himself  in  his  prayer  by 
several  inspiring  considerations.  (L) 
The  knowledge  of  God.  "  Thou  hast 
known  my  reproach,  and  my  shame,  and 
my  dishonour  ;  mine  adversaries  are  all 
before  Thee."  (a.)  He  knew  the  Psal- 
mist—  his  distress,  helplessness,  ex- 
tremity, need.  Blessed  be  His  name, 
suffering  and  persecution  can  never 
drive  us  beyond  the  region  of  His  per- 
fect knowledge.  (6.)  He  knew  the  ad- 
versaries of  the  Psalmist — their  multi- 
tude, might,  malice,  machinations.  In 
circumstances  like  those  of  the  Psalmist 
reflection  on  the  omniscience  of  God  is 
most  comforting  and  faith-inspiring  to 
the  godly.  (2.)  The  power  of  God. 
"  Lord  God  of  hosts."  The  title  indi- 
cates His  omnipotence.  He  is  the 
sovereign  of  countless  and  invincible 
armies.  "  They  that  be  with  us  are 
more  than  they  that  be  with  them." 
"  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us?"  (3.)  The  fidelity  oi  God  in  His 
relation  to  His  people.  "  0  God  of 
Israel"  He  has  engaged  in  solemn 
covenant  to  succour  and  save  His  own 
people.  So  David  pleads,  "  Hear  me 
in  the  truth  of  Thy  salvation."  The 
promises  of  salvation  which  He  has 
made  to  those  who  wait  upon  Him  are 
charged  with  encouragement  to  His 
people  in  time  of  trial.  (4.)  The  mercy 
of  God.  His  kindness  is  abundantly 
calculated  to   quicken   and   strengthen 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LZTZ. 


confidence  in  Him.  The  Psalmist  makes 
mention  of  (a.)  Its  excellence.  "  Thy 
loving-kindness  is  good."  Perowne : 
** '  Good,'  i.e.,  either  sweet,  comforting, 
as  in  Ps.  Ixiii.  3,  or  gracious,  %g>jffroc 
(comp.  Ps.  cxix.  21)."  His  kindnesses 
are  loving  kindnesses ;  His  mercies  are 
tender  mercies.  "  How  excellent  is  Thy 
loving-kindness,  O  God ! "  (6.)  Its 
abundance.  Twice  the  poet  pleads 
"  the  multitude  of  God's  mercies.     His 


mercy  is  rich  and  plenteous  and  free, 
M.  Henry  :  *'  There  is  mercy  in  God,  a 
multitude  of  mercies,  all  kinds  of  mercy, 
inexhaustible  mercy,  mercy  enough  for 
all,  enough  for  each  ;  and  hence  we 
must  take  our  encouragement  in  pray- 
ing." Moll :  "  He  who  relies  in  prayer 
upon  the  mercy  and  truth  of  God,  has 
the  surest  foundation  for  his  salvation, 
and  the  best  pledges  of  the  hearing  of 
his  'prayer^^ 


The  Object,  Season,  and  Hope  of  Prayeb* 

{Terse  13.) 


The  godly  man  is  not  turned  aside 
from  his  prayers  because  of  the  re- 
proaches and  scoffs  of  men.  Men  re- 
viled and  ridiculed  David  because  of  his 
religious  exercises;  but  he  was  not 
driven  from  them.  "  But  as  for  me," 
he  says,  **  my  prayer  is  unto  Thee,  O 
Lord,"  &c.  ''  Though  we  may  be  jeered 
for  well-doing,  we  must  never  be  jeered 
out  of  it."  By  reason  of  the  sc offings 
of  his  enemies,  the  Psalmist  is  impelled 
to  seek  help  in  prayer  the  more  persist- 
ently and  earnestly.  As  persecution 
and  trials  increase,  the  frequency  and 
fervour  of  our  prayers  should  also  in- 
crease.    Our  text  brings  before  us, 

I.  The  one  true  object  of  prayer. 
"  My  prayer  is  unto  Thee,  O  Lord."  It 
is  essential  that  the  true  object  of  the 
prayers  of  men  should  be — 

1.  Infinite  in  intelligence.  He  must 
be  able  to  hear  the  whispers  and  per- 
ceive the  desires  of  all  men  everywhere. 
Such  intelligence  has  the  Lord  God. 
(See  Ps.  cxxxix.  1-5 ;  Ezek.  xi.  5,  et 
at.)     He  hears  prayer. 

2.  Approachable.  Not  far  removed 
from  His  creatures;  but  accessible  to 
every  one  of  them.  Not  repulsive,  but 
attractive.  Such  is  God  as  revealed  in 
Jesus  Christ.  (See  John  xiv.  6 ;  Eph. 
ii.  18,  iii.  12.) 

3.  Entreatable.  Man  needs  not  only 
to  be  heard,  but  to  be  answered  also. 
God  can  and  does  answer  prayer. 
Prayer  has  a  real  place  and  function  in 
the  Divine  economy.  ''  I  have  a  sphere 
in  which,"  says  Dr.  Robert  Vaughan, 
"  I  can  use  natural  law  so  that  good 


shall  come  out  of  it.     By  an  act  of  my 

will,  giving  command  to  my  muscular 
skill  and  force,  I  can  wrest  a  dagger 
from  the  hand  of  an  assassin,  or  can  save 
a  drowning  man  from  his  apparent 
doom.  The  things  of  this  sort  which  I 
can  do  are  numberless ;  and  am  I  thus 
free  to  act  in  relation  to  these  laws,  and 
has  the  Almighty  no  freedom  to  act  in 
His  relation  to  them  1  Has  He  so  con- 
structed this  great  system  that  it  has 
become  His  tomb,  in  which  He  sleeps 
the  sleep  of  death,  while  man  lays  his 
living  hand  upon  law  everywhere,  and 
makes  it  do  his  bidding  ?  The  instinct 
of  man  through  all  lands  and  all  time  is 
on  the  side  of  prayer,  and  that  instinct 
cannot  be  a  falsehood — it  must  embody 
a  truth."  Prayer  and  answers  to  prayer 
are  great  facts  in  the  experience  of  godly 
men.  (See  Ps.  xxxiv.  17  ;  Pro  v.  xv. 
29  ;  Isa.  Ixv.  24 ;  Mic.  vii.  7  ;  Matt.  vii. 
7-11  ;  1  John  V.  14,  15.) 

II.  The  season  of  prayer.  ''An 
acceptable  time."  .Conant :  "  A  time 
of  acceptance."  Moll :  "  A  time  of 
good  pleasure."  Hengstenberg :  '*A 
time  of  grace."  He  presented  his  prayer 
to  God  at  a  favourable  season. 

1.  Whe7i  we  suffer  wrongfully  is  such 
a  season.  The  Psalmist  felt  this  at  this 
time.  No  time  for  prayer  can  be  more 
acceptable  to  God,  than  when  we  are 
suffering  persecution  for  righteousness' 
sake. 

2.  When  our  need  is  great  and  greatly 
felt.  M.  Henry  ;  '*  God  will  not  drive 
us  from  Him,  though  it  is  need  that 
drives  us  to  Him ;  nay,  it  is  the  more 

361 


FSALM  LXIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


acceptable,  because  the  misery  and  dis- 
tress of  God's  people  make  them  so 
much  the  more  the  objects  of  His  pity  : 
it  is  seasonable  for  Him  to  help  them 
when  all  other  helps  fail,  and  they  are 
undone,  and  feel  that  they  are  undone, 
if  He  do  not  help  them." 

3.  When  our  desire  for  spii'itual 
blessings  is  intense.  At  such  seasons 
God  is  very  near  to  us  to  enrich  us  \Yith 
the  treasures  of  His  grace.  *'  Blessed 
are  they  which  do  hunger  and  thirst  after 
righteousness  ;   for  they  shall  be  filled." 

4.  While  the  overtures  of  Divine  grace 
are  made  to  us.  The  time  of  acceptance 
is  that  in  which  God  makes  His  grace 
known  in  the  offer  of  His  salvation. 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord  in  an  acceptable 
time  have  I  heard  thee,  and  in  a  day  of 
salvation  have  I  helped  thee."  "  To 
proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
Lord,"  &c.  '*  Behold,  now  is  the  ac- 
cepted time,"  &c.  The  time  of  accept- 
ance may  pass  away,  and  be  succeeded 
by  the  time  of  rejection.  "  Then  they 
shall  call  upon  Me,  but  I  will  not 
answer;  they  shall  seek  Me  early,  but 
they   shall    not   find    Me."     Therefore, 


"  seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He  may  be 
found,  call  ye  upon  Him  while  He  is 
near." 

III.  The  great  encouragements  in 
prayer.  *'  O  God,  in  the  multitude  of 
Thy  mercy,  hear  me,  in  the  truth  of  Thy 
salvation."     The  Psalmist  here  pleads — 

L  The  abounding  mercy  of  God, 
Our  hope  is  in  God's  mercy.  (1.)  Be- 
cause we  have  no  merit  which  we  can 
plead  in  prayer.  (2.)  Because  of  the 
essential  nature  of  mercy.  Mercy  is 
that  in  God  which  disposes  Him  to  save 
the  sinful  and  succour  the  suffering. 
"  Mercy  hath  but  its  name  from  misery, 
and  is  no  other  thing  than  to  lay 
another's  misery  to  heart."  And  (3.) 
Because  of  the  fulness  of  the  mercy  of 
God.  It  is  inexhaustible,  infinite.  He 
'*  is  rich  in  mercy." 

2.  The  saving  truth  of  God.  "  Hear 
me,  in  the  truth  of  Thy  salvation."  He 
has  promised  salvation  to  all  who  trust 
in  Him.  He  is  unchangeable.  He  will 
fulfil  His  promises. 

In  our  prayers  to  God  let  us  hopefully 
plead  His  rich  mercy  and  firm  truth, 
and  gracious  answers  shall  be  ours. 


The  Imperfection  of  the  Righteous  in  Extreme  Suffering. 

{Verses  22-2^.) 


Let  us  hear  what  others  have  to  say 
concerning  the  terrible  utterances  of  this 
section  of  the  psalm.  Professor  Alex- 
ander says  :  "  The  imprecations  in  this 
verse  (22),  and  those  following  it,  are 
revolting  only  when  considered  as  the 
expression  of  malignant  selfishness.  If 
uttered  by  God  they  shock  no  reader's 
sensibilities,  nor  should  they  when  con- 
sidered as  the  language  of  an  ideal  per- 
son, representing  the  whole  class  of 
righteous  sufferers,  and  particularly  Him, 
who  though  He  prayed  for  His  mur- 
derers while  dying  (Luke  xxiii.  34),  had 
before  applied  the  words  of  this  very 
passage  to  the  unbelieving  Jews  (Matt, 
xxiii.  38),  as  Paul  did  afterwards  (Bom. 
xi.  9,  10).  The  general  doctrine  of 
providential  retribution,  far  from  being 
confined  to  the  Old  Testament,  is  dis- 
tinctly taught  in  many  of  our  Saviour's 
parables.  (See  Matt.  xxi.  41,  xxii.  7, 
362 


xxiv.  51)."  And  Professor  Stuart  ; 
"Great  difficulty  is  found  in  such  pas- 
sages by  many  minds,  inasmuch  as  they 
seem  to  be  so  opposed  to  the  tenor  of 
those  passages  in  the  New  Testament, 
which  require  us  '  to  love  our  enemies,  to 
bless  those  who  curse  us,  to  pray  for 
those  who  despitefully  use  and  persecute 
us.'  If  indeed  these  passages  in  the 
Psalms  are  to  be  viewed  as  the  mere 
utterance  of  private  and  personal  wishes 
and  feelings,  it  would  be  utterly  impos- 
sible to  reconcile  them  with  the  spirit 
of  the  gospel.  But  is  this  so  ?  Is 
David,  for  example,  when  he  utters  such 
things,  to  be  viewed  as  doing  it  merely 
in  the  way  of  giving  utterance  to  his 
own  private  personal  wishes  ?  It  seems 
to  me  not ;  but  David,  as  king  and 
magistrate,  might  wish  the  punishment 
of  the  seditious  and  rebellious ;  nay,  it 
would  be  an  imperious  duty  for  him  to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


VSklM  LXIX. 


punish  tliem.  Now,  was  it  lawful  for 
him  to  pray  that  the  same  thing  might 
be  done,  which  it  was  his  duty  to  do  1 
Could  he  not  express  desires  of  this 
nature  without  the  spirit  of  revenge? 
Cannot  we  wish  the  robber  and  the 
assassin  to  be  apprehended  and  punished, 
yea,  with  capital  punishment,  and  this 
without  being  actuated  by  a  spirit  of 
vengeance  and  a  thirst  for  blood  1  I 
trust  such  wishes  are  not  only  consistent 
with  benevolence,  but  prompted  by  it. 
If  60,  then  it  may  be  true  that  David 
and  other  Psalmists  had  the  like  views 
and  feelings.  And  if  this  may  he  so,  is 
it  not  probable  that  it  was  so  ]  Is  not 
the  general  character  and  spirit  of  their 
writings  a  pledge  for  this  ? " 

We  do  not  regard  these  statements  as 
satisfactory.  They  certainly  fail  to  re- 
move the  difficulties  which  many  reverent 
and  earnest  students  of  the  Sacred  Scrip- 
tures find  in  these  dread  imprecations. 
Much  more  helpful,  in  our  opinion,  is 
the  statement  of  Canon  Perowne  quoted 
on  pp.  163  and  164  of  this  work. 

Let  us  briefly  consider — 

I.  The  imprecations  urged.  We  say 
imprecations,  not  predictions  ;  because, 
as  Perowne  points  out,  ''  the  Hebrew 
optative,  which  is  distinct  enough  from 
the  simple  future,  absolutely  forbids" 
our  regarding  them  as  predictions. 

1.  That  the  pleasures  of  life  may  he- 
come  a  curse  to  them.  "  Let  their  table 
become  a  snare  to  them  ;  and  that  which 
should  have  been  for  their  welfare,  a 
trap."  Conant  :  *'  And  to  the  secure 
for  a  trap."  Hengstenberg  :  "And  their 
peace,  their  fall."  They  had  given  to 
the  Psalmist  gall  for  his  meat,  and  in 
his  thirst  vinegar  for  his  drink  ;  and  he 
now  prays  that  their  season  of  refresh- 
ment, when  they  feel  secure  and  look 
for  pleasure,  may  be  made  a  snare  and 
a  curse  to  them — ''  that  the  blessings  of 
life  may  become  fraught  with  death  to" 
them. 

2.  That  they  may  he  deprived  of  un- 
derstanding and  strength.  "  Jjet  their 
eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not ; 
and  make  their  loins  continually  to 
shake."  Perowne  :  "  The  darkening  of 
iJie  eyes  denotes  weakness  and  perplexity, 
as  the  enlightening  of  the  eyes  (see  Ps. 


xix.  8)  denotes  renewed  vigour  and 
strength.  Similarly  the  shaking  of  the 
loins  is  expressive  of  terror  and  dismay 
and  feebleness  (Nah.  ii.  10 ;  Dan.  v.  6). 
Or  the  first  may  mean  the  depriving  of 
reason  and  understanding ;  the  second, 
the  taking  away  of  all  strength  for 
action." 

3.  That  they  and  theirs  should  he 
rooted  out  of  the  land.  "Let  their 
habitation  be  desolate  ;  let  none  dwell 
in  their  tents."  Let  them  and  theirs 
perish  from  the  earth. 

4.  That  they  may  he  confirmed  in  sin. 
"  Add  iniquity  unto  their  iniquity  ;  and 
let  them  not  come  into  Thy  righteous- 
ness." Perowne:  "Let  it  all  stand 
against  them  in  Thy  book,  one  sin  after 
another,  as  committed,  not  being  blotted 
out,  but  only  swelling  the  fearful 
reckoning."    (Comp.  Jer.  xviii.  23.) 

5.  That  they  may  he  excluded  from 
the  kingdom  and  people  of  God.  "  Let 
them  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  the 
living,  and  not  be  written  with  the 
righteous."  Moll :  "  The  reference  is 
to  the  book  of  God  (Exod.  xxxii.  32),  in 
which  God  Himself  registers  every*\)ne 
(Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4-6),  who  is  appointed  to 
life  (Isa.  iv.  3),  and  in  this  book  (Dan. 
xii.  1),  as  the  citizens  of  Israel  in  the 
genealogical  tables  "  (Jer.  xxii.  30  ;  Ezek. 
xiii.  9  ;  comp.  Luke  x.  20  ;  Phil.  iv.  3 ; 
Rev.  iii.  5  ;  xiii.  8  ;  xvii.  8 ;  xxi.  27). 

6.  That  God  would  pour  upon  them 
His  severest  wrath.  "  Pour  out  Thine 
indignation  upon  them,  and  let  Thy 
wrathful  anger  take  hold  of  them." 

Such  are  the  things  that  God  is  en- 
treated to  do  to  the  wicked  enemies  of 
the  Psalmist. 

IL  The  reason  assigned.  "For 
they  persecute  him  whom  Thou  hast 
smitten  ;  and  they  talk  to  the  grief  of 
those  whom  Thou  hast  wounded." 
Perowne  ;  "  The  reason  of  the  impreca- 
tion is  given,  because  of  the  unpitying 
cruelty  which  delighted  in  adding  to  the 
pain  and  afiliction  of  one  whom  God  had 
already  brought  low — they  tell  as  if  they 
counted  one  by  one  every  blow  that  fell 
upon  him,  every  cry  that  he  had  uttered, 
only  to  turn  it  into  mocking"  (comp. 
Ps.  lix.  12  j  Ixiv.  5).  They  persecuted 
when  they  should  have  pitied.     Some- 

363 


FSALM  LXIX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


what  similar  conduct  greatly  aggravated 
the  sufferings  of  Job.  "  Have  pity  upon 
me,  have  pity  upon  me;  O  ye,  my  friends; 
for  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me. 
Why  do  ye  persecute  me  as  God,  and 
are  not  satisfied  with  my  flesh  1" 

This  section  of  the  Psalm  impresses 
us  with, 

First — The  imperfection  of  the  best 
men.  David  was  unquestionably  one 
of  the  best  of  men;  but  his  life  has 
some  foul  stains  upon  it.  And  this 
Psalm  shows  that  he  was  not  a  perfect 
man ;  for  he  here,  as  Moll  says,  "  gets 
into  such  a  carnal  excitement,  that  while 
he  does  not  contend  with  God  or  mur- 
mur against  Him,  but  on  the  contrary, 
relies  upon  God,  and  calls  upon  Him, 
yet  in  hungry  zeal  he  calls  down  the 
power  of  God  to  the  judgment  and  ruin 
of  those  enemies  who  ignore  it.  This 
belongs  to  that  folli/  and  guilt,  of  which 
the  Psalmist  is  conscious,  and  is  neither 
to  be  extenuated  nor  recommended. 
For  there  is  a  very  great  difference 
between  obligatory  proclamation  of  the 
Divine  judgment,  morally  justifiable 
assent  to  the  unavoidable  consequences 
of  this  judgment  and  holy  joy  in  the 
victory  of  righteousness  on  the  one  side, 
and  passionate  imprecation,  revengeful 
cursing,  and  an  evilly  disposed  suppli- 
cation for  Divine  judgment  in  order  to 
the  temporal  ruin  and  everlasting  de- 
struction of  certain  persons,  on  the 
other  side.  In  the  latter  case,  man  does 
not  give  over  retribution  to  the  all-wise 
and  holy  God,  but  of  his  own  will  and 
power  interferes  with  the  course  of  the 
just  government  of  God,  yes,  reallp 
anticipates  the  final  judgment.  For  this 
reason  it  is  at  least  a  zeal  for  God 
without  knowledge,  even  when  no  re- 
vengeful motives  come  into  play,  and  no 
personal  interests  are  involved,  but  when 
the  reference  is  to  such  men  as  put 
themselves  in  hostility  to  God  and  His 
word,  sacraments,  house,  glory,  and  con- 
gregation. Even  Jesus  has  not  antici- 
pated for  individual  cases  the  condem- 
natory decisions  of  the  final  judgment, 
but  has  merely  proclaimed  it  as  future, 
and  indeed  with  the  pain  of  love,  and  in 
connection  with  the  purpose  of  His 
coming  not  to  destroy  the  souls  of  men, 
364 


but  to  save  them.  Accordingly,  He 
censured  His  disciples  for  wishing  to 
call  down  fire  from  heaven  upon  those 
who  refused  to  receive  Him  (Luke  ix. 
53-55).  .  .  .  We  have  reason  to  exa- 
mine ourselves  earnestly,  whether,  in 
our  zeal  for  God,  there  is  more  wrath 
against  our  enemies,  than  love  to  His 
person  and  care  for  the  glory  of  His 
house."  In  estimating  these  impre- 
catory utterances  of  David,  we  are  bound 
to  remember  the  age  in  which  they  were 
penned.  But  when  every  allowance 
has  been  made  it  seems  to  us  only  too 
painfully  clear,  that  the  spirit  which 
breathes  in  them  is  not  good,  but  evil ; 
not  commendable,  but  reprehensible.  In 
these  terrible  cursings  of  his  enemies  the 
Psalmist  stands  before  us  not  as  a  pat- 
tern, but  as  a  beacon ;  his  example  in  this 
is  not  to  be  imitated,  but  shunned  by  us. 

Second — The  gradualness  of  the  edu- 
cation of  mankind.  God  has  revealed 
His  will  and  ways  to  men  slowly,  as 
they  have  been  able  to  receive  the  reve- 
lation. It  took  long  ages  of  teaching 
and  experience  before  men  were  able  to 
understand  such  precepts  as,  "Love 
your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse 
you,"  &c.  In  the  time  of  David  men 
were  by  no  means  prepared  to  receive 
such  teaching.  In  more  than  one  way 
"  the  law  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring 
us  to  Christ."  Legislation  such  as 
this — "  life  for  life,  eye  for  eye,  tooth 
for  tooth,  hand  for  hand,  foot  for  foot, 
burning  for  burning,  wound  for  wound, 
strife  for  strife,"  had  an  important  place 
and  work  in  educating  humanity  for 
higher  things.  The  Mosaic  legislation 
helped  to  prepare  man  for  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount  The  Jewish  Temple  was 
indispensable  as  a  preparation  for  the 
Christian  Church. 

Third — The  truth  of  the  Sacred  Scrip- 
tures. The  fact  that  we  find  utterances 
like  these  imprecations  in  the  Bible,  so 
far  from  militating  against  its  inspira- 
tion, is  to  our  mind  rather  an  evidence 
of  such  inspiration.  Both  in  historic 
record  and  religious  poem  it  faithfully 
sets  forth  the  sayings  and  doings  of 
men.  When  Abraham,  "  the  friend  of 
God,"  manifests  a  strange  want  of  faith 
in  Him,  and    is   not   strictly  truthful. 


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY  i  PSALMS, 


fSALMLXIX. 


Buch  failures  are  impartially  recorded. 
When  David,  "the  man  after  God's 
own  heart,"  commits  both  adultery  and 
murder,  the  perpetration  of  these  crimes 
is  set  down  against  him,  without  any 
attempt  to  extenuate  his  guilt.  And 
when  the  Hebrew  religious  poets  mani- 
fest improper  feelings  and  utter  impro- 
per sentiments ;  when  they  give  expres- 
sion to  unworthy  doubts  and  fears,  or 
to  sinful  anger  and  passionate  revenge, 
such  passages  are  not  pruned  off  the 
poems,  nor  are  the  poems  themselves 
excluded  from  the  volume.  This  ap- 
pears to  us  an  evidence  of  the  truth  and 


trustworthiness  of  the  Bible.  And  so 
in  these  ancient  Psalms  we  have  the 
real  utterances  of  holy  men,  setting 
forth  their  joys  and  sorrows,  their  doubts 
and  confidences,  their  triumphs  and 
temporary  defeats,  their  sinful  passions 
and  holy  aspirations.  Such  a  book 
meets  a  great  need  of  the  heart  and  life 
of  the  religious  man.  And  as  a  fact, 
this  Book  of  Psalms,  giving  utterance 
to  these  various  feelings  of  the  religious 
heart,  has  been  for  long  ages  and  still  is 
one  of  the  choicest  and  most  helpful 
treasures  of  all  godly  souls. 


Thb  Hope  of  the  Eighteous  in  Extreme  Suffebing. 

(Verses  29-36.) 


The  Psalmist  passes  from  terrible  im- 
precations to  triumphant  anticipations, 
from  passionate  revenge  to  pious  hope. 
Notice — 

I.  The  object  of  this  hope,  or  what 
It  was  that  he  hoped  for. 

1.  As  regards  himself,  "But  I  am 
poor  and  sorrowful ;  let  Thy  salvation, 
O  God,  set  me  up  on  high."  He  looks 
in  confidence  to  God  for  deliverance 
from  his  afflicted  and  mournful  condition, 
and  for  exaltation  to  a  condition  of 
safety  above  the  reach  of  his  enemies, 
and  the  fury  of  the  floods  of  trial.  All 
righteous  sufi'erers  shall  certainly  in  due 
time  be  delivered  from  all  their  sorrows, 
&c. 

2.  As  regards  the  Church,  "  For  God 
will  save  Zion,  and  will  build  the  cities 
of  Judah,  that  they  may  dwell  there, 
and  have  it  in  possession.  The  seed 
also  of  His  servants  shall  inherit  it ;  and 
they  that  love  His  name  shall  dwell 
therein."  We  regard  Zion  as  an  illus- 
tration of  the  Church  of  God.  In  his 
great  and  assured  hope,  the  Psalmist 
announces  (1)  Its  preservation.  *'  God 
will  save  Zion."  The  Church  may  be 
threatened  and  opposed,  but  it  shall  not 
be  overcome ;  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail  against  it."  (2)  Its  pro- 
gress. *'  And  will  build  the  cities  of 
Judiih."  David  looked  forward  to  the 
success  and  prosperity  of  the  chosen 
people      The   Church    of    God    has  a 


glorious  future — a  future  of  prosperity 
and  increase  in  purity,  possessions,  power, 
<fcc.  Its  past  history,  its  present  posi- 
tion, and  the  Divine  promises  unite  to 
assure  the  Church  of  increasing  pro- 
gress, and  of  complete  triumph  ulti 
mately.  (3)  Its  perpetuity/.  "  That 
they  may  dwell  there,  and  have  it  iu 
possession.  The  seed  also,"  &c.  God 
will  protect  His  people  from  generation 
to  generation.  Empires  once  powerful 
have  passed  away;  heathen  religions 
which  once  inspired  the  reverence  or 
awakened  the  dread  of  countless  multi- 
tudes of  souls,  have  perished  from 
amongst  men ;  scientific  and  philoso- 
phical systems  which  for  a  long  time 
appeared  to  be  indisputable  and  perma- 
nent, have  departed  for  ever.  But  the 
Church  of  God  shall  never  pass  away ; 
for  its  life  of  truth  and  righteousness 
and  love  is  by  its  very  nature  imperish- 
able and  immortal. 

II.  The  ground  of  this  hope.  The 
Psalmist  rests  his  assured  expectation 
of  salvation  on  the  fact  that  *'the  Lord 
heareth  the  poor,  and  despiseth  not  his 
prisoners."  '*  The  poor  "  are  those  who 
are  in  circumstances  of  distress  and 
want.  The  **  prisoners  "  are  either  those 
whom  He  has  visited  with  severe  suffer- 
ing, as  in  verse  26,  or  those  who  are 
suffering  for  His  sake,  as  in  verse  7. 
David  doubtless  includes  himself  as  at 
this  time  amongst  the  needy  and  the 

365 


PSALM  LXX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


prisoners.  God  regards  such  sufferers 
with  pity,  and  sends  them  help  when 
they  cry  unto  Him.  A  hope  of  salva- 
tion which  is  based,  as  this  is,  on  the 
gracious  regard  of  God  for  His  afflicted 
people  shall  surely  be  fulfilled  in  the 
case  of  every  righteous  sufferer. 

III.  The  influence  of  this  hope. 

1.  It  enables  him  to  anticipate  his 
own  salvation.  In  the  midst  of  his  suf- 
fering he  looks  forward  to  it  with 
assured  and  joyous  confidence ;  and 
resolves,  as  though  it  were  already  en- 
joyed, "  I  will  praise  the  name  of  God 
with  a  song,"  &c.  Very  great  and 
blessed  is  the  power  of  such  a  hope. 
"  We  are  saved  by  hope." 

2.  It  impels  him  to  summon  the  uni- 
verse to  praise  God.  "Let  the  heaven 
and  earth  praise  Him,  the  seas,  and 
everything  that  moveth  therein."  The 
Psalmist  feels  his  own  utter  insuflaciency 
worthily  to  set  forth  the  praise  of  God, 
and,  therefore,  he  calls  upon  all  things 
everywhere,  animate  and  inanimate,  to 
unite  in  the  celebration. 

IV.  The  anticipated  result  of  the 
fulfilment  of  this  hope.  This  is  two- 
fold— 

1.  The  Psalmist  will  worship  God, 
vers.  30  and  31.  (1)  With  spiritual 
offerings,  "  I  will  praise  the  name  of 
God  with  a  song,  and  will  magnify  Him 
with  thanksgiving."  Barnes  :  *'  As  the 
result  of  my  deliverance,  I  will  compose 
a  song  or  a  psalm  especially  adapted  to 
the  occasion,  and  fitted  to  express  and 
perpetuate  my  feelings.  It  was  in  such 
circumstances  that  a  large  part  of  the 


psalms  were  composed ;  and  since  others 
besides  the  Psalmist  are  often  in  such 
circumstances,  the  Book  of  Psalms  be- 
comes permanently  useful  in  the  Church." 
The  worship  resolved  upon  by  the  Psal- 
mist is  (a)  Joyful — "praise.  .  .  .  with 
a  song."  (jS)  Gi'atefid — "  with  thanks- 
giving." (2)  Such  worship  is  more 
acceptable  to  God  than  the  most  costly 
material  sacrifices,  "  This  also  shall 
please  the  Lord  better  than  ox  or  bul- 
lock that  hath  horns  and  hoofs." 
Perowne :  "  The  epithets  are  not  merely 
otiose.  The  first  is  mentioned  in  order 
to  mark  that  the  animal  was  not  under 
three  years  old,  and  therefore  of  the 
proper  age  according  to  the  law;  the 
last  as  intimating  that  it  belonged  to 
the  class  of  clean  four-footed  animals, 
parting  the  hoof  (Lev.  xi.) ;  and  the 
meaning  is,  that  the  most  perfect  and 
valuable  of  the  sacrifices  ordained  by 
the  law  was  not  to  be  compared  to  the 
sacrifice  of  a  grateful  heart."  (See 
"  The  Horn.  Com:'  on  Ps.  xl  6-8 ;  1. 
7-15;  li.  15-17.) 

2.  The  pious  will  he  encouraged, 
"  The  humble  shall  see  this,  and  be  glad  ; 
and  your  heart  shall  live  that  seek 
God."  The  exhibition  of  the  power  and 
faithfulness  and  goodness  of  God  in  de- 
livering His  suffering  servant,  would 
strengthen  the  faith,  revive  the  courage, 
and  promote  the  joy  of  all  godly  souls. 
The  deliverance  of  one  is  an  earnest  of 
the  full  salvation  of  all. 

Let  the  suffering  righteous  seek  for 
and  exercise  a  hope  like  this  of  the 
Psalmist. 


PSALM  LXX. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Superscription. — "To  the  chief  musician,  a  psalm  of  David,  to  bring  to  remembrance." 
"To  the  chief  musician."      (See  introduction  to  Psalm  Ivii.).      "To  bring  to  remembrance,** 

Barnes:  "  The  Hebrew  term  used — "T'Stn/.^eAa^Hr — means  simply  for  bringing  to  remem- 

hrance,  or  for  reminding.  The  meaning  is,  that  it  is  a  record  for  the  purpose  of  reminding; 
that  is,  of  keeping  up  the  remembrance  of  something  which  had  occurred  in  his  own  experi- 
ence, and  which  might  be  useful  to  himself  or  to  others  ;  the  record  of  some  valuable  lessond 
which  had  been  learned  from  what  he  had  experienced  in  the  trials  referred  to."  Some  are  of 
opinion  that  the  expression  indicates  that  the  Psalm  was  used  to  remind  the  Psalmist  and 
others  of  the  wants  and  circumstances  to  which  it  was  applied.  Others  that,  inasmuch  as  God 
Beemed  to  havs»  forgotten  them,  the  Psalm  was  intended  to  bring  the  Psalmist  and  people  to 
His  remembrance. 
The  Psalm  is  almost  exactly  similar  to  verses  13-17  of  Psahn  zL     It  seema  as  though  it 

*S66 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


FSALM  LXX. 


had  been  taken  from  that  Psalm  and  slightly  altered  to  adapt  it  to  some  new  occasion.  "We 
do  not  know  what  the  occasion  in  either  case  was,  but  it  would  seem  that  in  this  instance 
the  Psalmist  found,  in  the  closing  verses  of  the  40th  Psalm,  language  whi^^h  very  nearly  ex- 
pressed what  he  felt  on  some  particular  occasion,  and  which  might,  by  a  slight  change,  be 
applied  to  the  use  for  which  it  was  then  desired." 

Hengstenberg  regards  this  and  the  following  Psalm  as  forming  "  one  pair,  the  70th  being  like 
an  introduction  to  the  71st." 


Prayer  in  Persecution. 


We  regard  this  Psalm  as  the  prayer 
of  a  good  man  suffering  from  persecu- 
tion.    Consider — 

I.  The  circumstances  and  condition 
of  the  suppliant.  Of  these  he  sets  be- 
fore us  three  main  features — 

1.  Persecution  (vers.  2  and  3).  Here 
are  three  forms  of  persecution.  (1) 
Active  and  deadly  hostility,  "Them 
that  seek  after  my  soul."  There  were 
those  who  were  seeking  to  destroy  the 
life  of  the  Psalmist.  So  implacable  was 
their  enmity  that  nothing  less  than  his 
destruction  could  satisfy  them.  (2)  De- 
light in  injury,  *'  Them  that  desire  my 
hurt."  When  loss  or  trouble,  affliction 
or  calamity,  came  upon  the  Psalmist, 
there  were  those  who  were  glad  because 
of  it.  If  they  did  not  smite  him  them- 
selves, they  rejoiced  when  others  did 
so.  If  they  did  not  do  him  evil,  they 
heartily  wished  it  him.  (3)  Scoffing. 
*'Them  that  say,  Aha,  aha!"  This  is 
the  language  of  reproach  and  scorn.  It 
also  expresses  exultation  over  another, 
and  gratification  at  the  calamities  or 
troubles  that  befall  him.  "  The  damage 
of  the  godly  is  the  delight  of  the  wicked ; 
and  an  enemy  to  the  godly  is  he  that 
laughs  and  scorns  at  the  misery  of  the 
godly."  Christians  have  to  meet  with 
persecution  in  our  own  day.  The  forms 
of  persecution  change,  but  the  perse- 
cuting spirit  remains  unchanged  from 
the  time  of  the  Psalmist  even  until  now. 
*' All  tliat  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus 
shall  suffer  persecution." 

2.  AjHiction.  "  I  am  poor  and  needy." 
Conant :  "I  am  afflicted  and  needy." 
It  is  the  cry  of  one  who  was  in  distress 
or  suffering,  and  felt  himself  destitute 
of  all  help  and  resource  except  in  God. 

3.  Need.  This  is  consequent  upon 
the  persecution  and  affliction.  The  peril 
arising  from  his  persecutions  he  needed 
deliverance  from.    The  stress  and  strain 


of  his  affliction  were  so  severe  that  he 
needed  help  to  enable  him  to  endure 
them.  "  Poverty  and  necessity  are  very 
good  pleas  in  prayer  to  a  God  of  infinite 
mercy,  who  despises  not  the  sighing  of 
a  contrite  heart,  who  has  pronounced  a 
blessing  upon  the  poor  in  spirit,  and 
who  fills  the  hungry  with  good  things." 
II.  The  prayer  of  the  suppliant. 

1.  The  Being  to  whom  it  is  addressed, 
"  O  God,  .  .  .  Jehovah,  .  .  .  my  help 
and  my  deliverer."  The  Psalmist  directs 
his  prayer  to  the  Almighty  and  self- 
existent  One,  who  is  swift  to  hear  and 
strong  to  save  those  who  call  upon  Him. 
He  mentions  his  personal  interest  in 
this  great  Being.  "  My  help  and  my 
deliverer."  This  confidence  was  based 
upon,  (1)  The  promises  of  God  to  His 
people,  (2)  The  former  experiences  of 
the  Psalmist.  Again  and  again  he  had 
found  God  to  be  *'  a  very  present  help 
in  trouble." 

2.  The  objects  which  it  seeks  to  attain. 
The  Psalmist  seeks  (1)  His  own  de- 
liverance,  "  Make  haste,  O  God,  to 
deliver  me ;  make  haste  to  help  me,  O 
Lord."  Conant :  "  O  God— to  my 
rescue,  O  Jehovah — to  my  help,  make 
haste."  That  which  he  seeks  for  himself 
all  men  require.  Ultimate  deliverance 
from  all  trials  and  afflictions,  and  "  grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need,"  are  blessings 
which  each  and  all  men  should  seek  for 
themselves.  (2)  The  discomfiture  oj 
his  enemies.  '*  Let  them  be  ashamed 
and  confounded  that  seek  after  my  soul , 
let  them  be  turned  backward  and  put  to 
confusion  that  desire  my  hurt.  Let 
them  be  turned  back  for  a  reward  of 
their  shame  that  say,  Aha,  aha  ! "  These 
expressions  are  of  frequent  occurrence 
in  the  Psalms.  They  are  used  to  set 
forth  the  frustration  and  failure  of  the 
hopes  and  projects  of  the  wicked.  The 
number    and  variety  of   expressions — ■ 

367 


PSALM  LZI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


**  ashamed,  .  .  .  confounded,  .  .  .  turned 
backward,  .  .  .  put  to  confusion" — are 
intended  to  give  intensity  and  force  to 
the  idea.  It  is  not  only  lawful  but 
commendable  to  pray  that  the  designs 
and  hopes  of  wicked  men  might  be 
frustrated.  (3)  The  prosperity  of  the 
godly.  "  Let  all  those  that  seek  Thee 
rejoice  and  be  glad  in  Thee;  and  let 
such  as  love  Thy  salvation  say  continu- 
ally. Let  God  be  magnified."  The  bles- 
sedness of  the  true  seeker  after  God  is 
to  find  Him,  and  in  finding  Him  to 
realize  fulness  of  joy.  The  blessedness 
of  the  lover  of  the  salvation  of  God  is  to 
enjoy  it,  and  enjoying  it  to  give  God 
glory.  David  prays  for  the  frustration 
of  the  hopes  of  the  wicked,  and  for  the 
fruition  of  the  hopes  of  the  good. 

3.    The    urgency   with    which    it    is 
presented,     ^'  Make  haste  to   help  me, 


O  Lord,  ,  .  .  make  haste  unto  me,  O 
God  ;  .  .  .  O  Lord,  make  no  tarrying." 
The  Psalmist  was  so  deeply  conscious  of 
his  own  aflliction  and  peril  and  helpless- 
ness, and  of  his  entire  dependence  upon 
the  help  of  God,  that  he  prays  with  al- 
most passionate  urgency  for  the  im- 
mediate interposition  of  God  on  his 
behalf.  He  would  constrain  God  to 
appear  for  him  at  once.  "  He  who  can- 
not wait  for  the  help  of  God,  will  never 
gain  it;  but  he  must  pray  for  it  and 
may  urge  his  circumstances  in  prayer.*' 
Urgency  of  need  will  be  followed  by 
urgency  of  entreaty,  and  urgency  of  en- 
treaty by  speedy  help.  "  Though  death, 
or  danger  of  it,  were  never  so  near,  God 
can  come  quickly  and  prevent  it ;  and 
prayer  is  a  swift  messenger,  which  in 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye  can  go  and  re- 
turn with  an  answer  from  heaven." 


Urgency  in  Praybb. 


(  Verses  1  and  5.) 


"  Make  haste  to  help  me,  O  Lord.  .  ,  . 
Make  haste  unto  me,  O  God ;  .  ,  .  O 

Lord,  make  no  tarrying." 

The  urgency  of  the  Psalmist  im- 
plies— 

I.  A  deep  sense  of  present  and  im- 
mediate need.  This  was  awakened  in 
him  by — 

1.  The  extremity  of  the  danger  to 
which  he  was  exposed.  His  foes  were 
many  and  were  eagerly  seeking  to 
destroy  his  life.  His  afflictions  were 
severe.  He  felt  that  if  he  were  not 
speedily  relieved  he  must  perish. 

2.  The  limitation  of  the  resources  at 
his  command.  Personally  he  was  not 
able  to  cope  with  his  enemies,  or  to  bear 
up  under  his  distresses.  He  felt  that  any 
help  which  he  could  expect  from  man 
would  prove  insufficient  for  his  great 
and  pressing  requirements. 

3.  The  conviction  that  adequate  help 
could  he  found  only  in  God.  The  Psal- 
mist evidently  felt  that  the  help  of  God 
was  the  one  thing  that  he  required  for 
his  support  and  salvation.  If  that  help 
were  speedilv  given,  all  would  be  well 

368 


with  him  ;  but  if  it  were  withheld,  the 
issue  would  be  his  utter  overthrow  or 
his  destruction — hence  the  urgency  of 
his  prayer. 

II.  Apparent  delay  in  answering 
Ms  prayer.  There  is  never  any  real 
delay  in  answering  prayer  ;  but  at  times 
God  seems  to  us  to  disregard  our  cries 
to  Him.  We  cry  with  David,  "  How 
long  wilt  Thou  forget  me,  O  Lord  %  for 
ever?"  &c.  (Ps.  xiii.  1-4).  Or,  with 
Habakkuk,  "  O  Lord,  how  long  shall  I 
cry,  and  Thou  wilt  not  hear  ? " 

1.  During  what  seems  delay  to  us  God 
may  he  answering  our  prayer.  He  does 
not  always  answer  our  prayers  by  grant- 
ing our  requests.  During  the  apparent 
delay  we  are  kept  from  sinking,  our 
enemies  do  not  completely  triumph  over 
us,  we  are  graciously  sustained.  In 
such  cases  the  divine  answer  to  our 
prayers  is  not  deliverance  from  trouble, 
but  support  in  trouble ;  not  the  removal 
of  the  thorn  from  the  flesh,  but,  *'  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  My 
strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness" 
(2  Cor.  xii.  7-9). 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXZI. 


2.  The  seeming  delay  may  he  pro- 
ductive of  richest  blessing.  (1.)  It  may 
teach  us  the  most  important  lessons. 
How  eminently  fitted  to  teach  us  the 
true  nature  of  prayer  !  Its  grand  aim 
is  not  to  induce  God  to  do  our  will,  but 
to  lead  us  to  cheerfully  acquiesce  in  His 
will ;  not  the  gratification  of  our  desires, 
but  the  perfection  of  our  being.  (2.) 
It  may  develop  the  noblest  attributes  of 
character.  It  may  intensify  our  desires. 
**  Sometimes  God  seems  to  delay  helping 
His  own  people,  that  He  may  excite 
Buch  earnest  desires  as  these  "  which  are 
expressed  in  this  psalm.  Delay  may 
promote  patience ;  may  teach  and  train 
us  to  wait  calmly  and  resolutely  upon 
God.  "  Prayer,"  says  Dr.  Reynolds, 
**  however  importunate,  constant,  and 
fervent,  must  have  its  hours  of  rest,  and 
of  the  waiting  for  answer  and  fulfilment. 
Like  Elijah,  we  must  look  from  the 
height  of  Carmel  over  the  great  sea  for 
the  little  cloud  which  shall  arise  and 
cover  the  sky,  in  answer  to  our  prayer. 
We  must  open  our  every  faculty  to  receive 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  we  must  wait  with 
earnest  though  patient  expectation ;  we 
must  listen  for  the  gentle  knocking  of 
the  mighty  Stranger  at  the  door  of  our 
heart ;  we  must  wait  amid  the  discords 
of  the  world  and  the  swoop  of  the  storm 
through  the  wilderness,  and  when  the 
strong  wind  rends  the  mountains,  and 
the  earthquake  and  the  fire  follow  in 
wild  succession — for  the  still  small 
Toice — we  must '  rest  in  the  Lord,  and 


still  wait  patiently  for  Him.'"  More- 
over, delay  may  develop  trusty  may  train 
us  to  confide  in  God  in  times  of  immi- 
nent peril  and  deep  distress.  The  seem- 
ing delay  may  in  many  ways  be  far 
better  for  us  than  a  manifest  and 
immediate  answer  to  our  prayers.  Hun- 
tington :  "  One  of  our  hardest  lessons 
is  to  find  out  the  wisdom  of  our  hin- 
drances j  how  we  are  to  be  put  forward 
and  upward  by  being  put  back  and  put 
down  j  encouraged  by  being  rebuked ; 
prospered  by  being  baffled.  ...  It 
needs  wakeful  watchers,  spiritual  eye- 
sight, to  read  that  riddle  of  life,  how 
defeat  helps  progress ;  how  a  compul- 
sory standing  still  speeds  us  on ;  how 
humiliation  exalts ; "  and  how  what 
seems  to  us  the  continued  silence  of  God 
may  be  the  wise  and  gracious  answer  to 
our  prayers. 

III.  Strong  faith  in  the  entreatable- 
ness  of  God.  It  is  abundantly  clear 
that  the  Psalmist  did  not  regard  God  as 
imprisoned  and  bound  by  the  laws  and 
order  of  the  universe  which  He  created. 
Nor  did  he  regard  Him  as  a  Being  who 
cannot  be  moved  by 'any  urgency  of 
supplication.  A  great  faith  in  God  as 
the  hearer  and  answerer  of  prayer  throbs 
in  these  impassioned  cries  for  His  speedy 
help.  The  instinct  which  finds  utter- 
rance  in  such  cries  points  to  the  reality 
of  prayer — to  the  fact  that  it  has  a  real 
place  and  function  in  the  universe  of 
God. 


PSALM  LXXL 
Introduction. 

**This  Psalm,"  sayi  Barnes,  "is  without  a  title.     It  is  impossible  to  determine  on  what 

occasion  it  was  composed.  There  is  some  plausibility  in  the  supposition  that  Ps,  Ixx.  might 
have  been  placed  before  it,  or  in  connection  with  it,  as  a  kind  of  introduction,  or  as  indicating 
the  character  of  the  Psalms  among  which  it  is  found  ;  but  nothing  of  certainty  can  be  ascer- 
tained on  this  point.  It  evidently  belongs  to  the  class  of  Psalms  which  refer  to  the  trials  of 
the  righteous  ;  but  it  was  rather  in  view  of  past  troubles  than  of  those  which  were  then  exist- 
ing. There  is  no  certain  evidence  that  the  Psalm  was  composed  by  David.  If  so,  it  was  when 
he  was  advanced  in  life.  There  is,  indeed,  much  in  the  Psalm  which  would  be  appropriate  to 
David — much  which  he  might  have  written  ;  but  there  is  no  way  now  of  ascertaining  with 

certainty  who  was  the  author All  that  is  known  respecting  the  occasion  on  which  the 

Psalm  was  composed,  whoever  was  the  author,  is,  that  it  was  composed  when  old  age  was  draw- 
ing near,  and  in  view  of  the  trials  and  blessings  of  life,  as  considered  from  the  contemplation 
of  its  approaching  close. 

"  It  is  a  Psalra  of  great  value,  as  describing  the  feelings  of  a  good  man  when  he  is  growing 
old,  and  is  an  illustration  of  what  there  has  been  occasion  bo  often  to  remark  in  this  exposition 
2  A  369 


rSALM  LXXI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


of  the  Book  of  Psalms,  that  the  Bible  is  adapted  to  all  the  conditions  of  human  life.  In  a 
book  professing  to  be  a  revelation  from  God,  and  in  a  world  where  old  age,  with  its  trials,  its 
infirmities,  its  recollections,  and  its  hopes,  must  be  so  prominent  in  the  actual  state  of  things 
existing,  it  would  have  been  unaccountable  if  there  had  been  nothing  to  illustrate  the  feelings 
of  those  in  advancing  or  advanced  years — nothing  to  suggest  the  kind  of  reflections  appropriate 
to  that  period  of  life — nothing  to  cheer  the  heart  of  the  aged  man,  and  to  inspire  him  with 
hope — nothing  to  prompt  him  to  recall  the  lessons  of  the  past,  and  to  make  use  of  those  les- 
sons to  prepare  him  for  the  future  ;  even  as,  in  a  world  so  full  of  trial,  it  would  have  been 
strange  if  there  had  been  nothing  to  comfort  the  mind  in  affliction,  and  to  enable  men  to 
derive  proper  lessons  from  the  experiences  of  life.  This  Psalm,  therefore,  is  one  of  the  most 
valuable  portions  of  the  Bible  to  a  certain  class  of  mankind,  and  may  be  to  any  of  the  living, 
as  suggesting  the  proper  reflections  of  a  good  man  as  the  infirmities  of  age  draw  on,  and  as  he 
reviews  the  mercies  and  the  trials  of  the  past," 

Homiletically  we  view  the  Psalm  as  presenting — Trust  and  prayeVf  vers.  1-3 ;  The  precious 
recollections,  present  trials,  and  glorious  resource  of  an  aged  saintf  Yers.  4-13  ;  and  The  triurri' 
phant  faith  of  an  aged  saint,  vers.  14-24. 


Trust  and  Prayer. 
(Verses  1-3.) 


These  verses,  which  form  the  intro- 
duction to  the  Psalm,  are  borrowed, 
with  slight  changes,  from  Ps.  xxxi.  1-3  ; 
and  as  they  have  been  expounded  in 
that  place,  our  remarks  on  them  will  be 
brief.     We  have  here — 

I.  The  good  man's  trust.  "  In  Thee, 
O  Lord,  do  I  put  my  trust."  He  con- 
fides— 

1.  In  a  Divine  Person.  "  In  Thee,  O 
Lord,"  &c.  Not  in  mere  law,  or  order, 
or  fate,  or  force.  The  things  which 
these  terms  set  forth  satisfy  neither  the 
demands  of  the  intellect  nor  the  cravings 
of  the  heart.  They  are  cold,  heartless 
abstractions.  We  cannot  confide  in 
them.  But  the  Psalmist  trusts  in  the 
personal  God — a  Being  of  infinite  power, 
wisdom,  righteousness,  love,  &c.  In 
Him  both  the  intellect  and  the  heart 
may  repose. 

2.  In  a  Divine  Person  sustaining 
personal  relations  to  His  creatures. 
**  Thou  art  my  rock  and  my  fortress." 
The  Most  High  is  not  far  removed  from 
His  creatures,  or  indifi'erent  to  their 
needs  and  interests.  He  guards  their 
interests,  supplies  their  needs,  and 
graciously  cares  for  them  individually. 
He  encourages  every  man  to  claim  a 
personal  interest  in  Him,  and  in  His 
protection  and  provision.  Without  pre- 
sumption we  may  say,  "  Thou  art  mp 
rock,"  &c. 

3.  In  a  Divine  Person  who  has  given 
gracious  assurances  of  salvation  to  His 
people.     '*  Thou   hast  given  command- 

370 


ment  to  save  me.  Hengstenberg : 
"  Who  hast  ordained  to  help  me.*'  God 
has  given  many  gracious  and  faithful 
promises  of  salvation  to  all  those  who 
trust  in  Him.  Such,  then,  is  the  object 
of  the  good  man's  trust  as  presented  to 
us  by  the  Psalmist. 

II.  The  good  man's  prayer.  "Let 
me  never  be  put  to  confusion,"  <fec.  He 
supplicates — 

1.  Divine  audience.  "  Incline  Thine 
ear  unto  me."  It  is  a  request  that  God 
would  bestow  upon  him  His  gracious 
attention.  The  lisping  prayer  of  the 
little  child,  the  broken  sob  of  the  peni- 
tent, the  sigh  of  the  sorely  burdened 
spirit,  and  the  faint  whisper  of  the 
dying,  each  and  all  are  heard  by  Him, 
No  uprising  of  holy  desire  or  utterance 
of  need  escapes  His  notice,  or  fails  to 
secure  His  regard. 

2.  Divine  deliverance.  "Deliver  me 
in  Thy  righteousness,  and  cause  me  to 


escape, 


and   save  me."     He   was 


in  great  danger  by  reason  of  the  malicious 
schemes  and  enterprises  of  his  enemies. 
They  were  seeking  his  life.  He  looks 
to  God  for  deliverance  from  their 
subtlety  and  strength,  feeling  that  He 
was  too  righteous  a  Being  to  fail  in 
delivering  one  who  trusted  Him  so  fully, 
seeing  that  He  had  promised  salvation 
to  all  who  confide  in  Him.  When 
trusting  in  God  we  may  plead  His 
righteousness  for  salvation. 

3.  Divine  protection.     "  Be  Thou  my 
strong    habitation,   whereunto    I   may 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


F8ALM  LXXI. 


continually  resort."  Hengstenberg  :  "  Be 
to  me  a  rock  of  salvation,  to  which  I 
may  come  continually."  This  seems  to 
us  a  very  comprehensive  petition.  He 
asks  that  he  may  find  in  God  (1)  His 
home.  "  My  habitation."  God  Him- 
self is  the  true  home  of  the  soul.  *'  Lord, 
Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling-place  in 
all  generations."  (2)  His  secure  home. 
"  My  strong  habitation."  "  A  rock  of 
habitation."  A  rock  against  which  the 
tumultuous  waves  of  persecution  shall 
spend  themselves  in  vain.  He  that 
dwells  in  God  has  omnipotence  for  his 
defence.  (3)  His  secure  home  always 
accessible.  "Whereunto  I  may  con- 
tinually resort."  At  all  times  and  in 
all  circumstances  we  may  take  refuge  in 
God,  feeling  assured  of  protection  and 
welcome. 


4.  Divine  vindication.  "  Let  me  never 
be  put  to  confusion."  It  is  a  prayer 
that  God  would  vindicate  the  confidence 
which  he  had  reposed  in  Him.  If  the 
Psalmist  failed  to  find  salvation  in  God, 
his  highest  hopes  would  be  wrecked, 
his  most  sacred  and  precious  interests 
would  be  lost ;  he  would  be  covered 
with  confusion  and  shame.  If  it  be 
reposed  in  God,  our  confidence  will  never 
become  our  confusion.  *' Blessed  are 
all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  Him." 

Conclusion. — Mark  the  relation  be- 
tween trust  and  prayer.  There  can  be 
no  true  prayer  without  faith.  Prayer 
is  not  the  cry  of  despair,  but  the  aspira- 
tion or  entreaty  of  hope.  And  wherever 
there  is  genuine  trust  in  God  it  will  find 
expression  in  prayer  to  him. 


The  precious  Eecollections,  present  Trials^  and  glorious 
Kesource  of  an  Aged  Saint. 

{Verses  4-13.) 


In  this  section  of  the  Psalm  three 

things  require  notice : 

I.  The  precious  recollections  of  an 
aged  saint. 

1.  0/a  life  of  trust  in  God.  "  Thou 
art  my  trust  from  my  youth."  From 
his  earliest  years  God  had  been  the 
object  of  his  hope.  The  Psalmist  does 
not  boast  of  this.  He  "  does  not  in  the 
least  praise  his  own  faith,  but  the  grace 
of  God,  which  he  had  experienced  from 
his  childhood."  We  know  that  in  early 
life  David  exercised  strong  confidence  in 
God.  Blessed  are  they  whose  old  age  is 
soothed  and  brightened  by  memories  of 
early  trust  in  God,  and  consecration  to 
Him. 

2.  Of  a  life  sustained  hy  God.  "  By 
Thee  have  I  been  holden  up  from  the 
womb ;  Thou  art  He  that  took  me 
out  of  my  mother^s  bowels."  On  "^DDJ 
(Niph.    of    ^^D     to   support,    to    lean) 

Perowne  says  :  "  This  is  an  expression 
wonderfully  descriptive  of  what  faith 
is,  and  of  what  God  is  to  those  who 
trust  in  Him.  He  is  a  father  who  bears 
them  in  His  arms  and  carries  them  in 
His  bosom ;  they  are  as  children  who 


lean  all  their  weight  upon  Him,  and 
find  their  sweetest  rest  in  His  support- 
ing hand.  This  is  the  very  idea  of 
faith,  according  to  its  Hebrew  significa- 
tion. When  it  is  said  in  Gen.  xv.  6, 
that  '  Abraham  believed  God,'  it  means 
literally,  '  he  leaned  upon  God.' "  Look- 
ing back  upon  his  life  the  Psalmist 
could  say, 

"  Thy  mercy  heard  my  infant  prayer, 
Thy  love,  with  all  a  mother's  care. 
Sustained  my  childish  days : 
Thy  goodness  watched  my  ripening  youth, 
And  formed  my  heart  to  love  Thy  truth. 
And  filled  my  lips  with  praise." 

— Grcmt. 

David  had  recollections  of  the  gentle 
and  strong  hand  of  God  supporting  him 
through  all  his  life.  His  age  was  sus- 
tained and  cheered  by  memories  of  the 
rich  and  constant  goodness  of  God  to 
him.  The  stream  of  the  Divine  bless- 
ing had  never  ceased  to  flow  for  his 
refreshment  and  support.  Whatever  or 
whosoever  had  disappointed  him,  God 
had  never  failed  him.  Blessed  are  they 
who  in  old  age  have  a  retrospect  like 
unto  this. 
II.  The  present  trials  of  an  aged 

371 


PSALM  LXXr. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


saint.  Even  the  old  age  of  the  good  is 
not  always  exempt  from  trial.  We  are 
never  beyond  the  reach  of  the  storm 
while  we  are  in  this  world.  The  old 
age  of  David  was  darkened  by  trouble 
by  reason  of  the  great  sins  which  stain 
and  mar  one  period  of  his  life.  See 
2  Sam.  xii.  10,  11.  In  his  old  age  he 
"  was  tried  by  great  and  sore  troubles, 
by  debility  of  body  (1  Kings  i.  1-4), 
and  by  the  rebellion  of  Adonijah,  his 
son  usurping  his  throne  and  endeavour- 
ing to  supplant  Solomon  (1  Kings  i. 
6-10),  and  by  the  treachery  of  Abiathar 
and  Joab"  (1  Kings  i.  18, 19).  The  trials 
which  he  mentions  in  this  Psalm  arose 
from  his  enemies.     He  sets  before  us — 

1.  Their  character.  **The  wicked, 
the  unrighteous  and  cruel  man."  His 
foes  were  unjust,  malignant,  and  violent 
men.  Against  foes  of  such  a  character 
he  might  well  appeal  unto  God. 

2.  Their  aim.  "They  lay  wait  for 
my  soul."  They  watched  and  waited 
to  take  away  his  life ;  they  sought 
to  destroy  him.  An  illustration  of  the 
spiritual  foes  of  the  good. 

3.  Their  method.  This  comprised  (1) 
Slander.  **  Mine  enemies  speak  against 
me;  .  .  .  saying,  God  hath  forsaken 
him."  *'  The  tongue  of  slander  is  never 
tired.  In  one  way  or  another  it  manages 
to  keep  itself  in  constant  employment. 
Sometimes  it  drops  honey  and  some- 
times gall.  It  is  bitter  now,  and  then 
sweet.  It  insinuates  or  assails  directly 
according  to  the  circumstances.  It  will 
hide  a  curse  under  a  smooth  word,  and 
administer  poison  in  the  phrase  of  love. 
Like  death  it  *  loves  a  shining  mark.* 
And  it  is  never  so  voluble  and  eloquent 
as  when  it  can  blight  the  hopes  of  the 
noble,  soil  the  reputation  of  the  pure, 
and  break  down  the  character  of  the 
brave  and  strong.  And  how  much  of 
this  vile  work  is  dona  in  one  way  and 
another  in  society !  .  .  .  It  is  done  to 
the  hurt  and  agony  of  many  a  soul.  It 
is  done  by  a  look  sometimes,  by  the  curl 
of  a  lip,  by  the  wink  of  an  eye,  by  an 
insinuation,  a  phrase  of  suspicion,  by 
the  dexterous  and  malicious  handling 
of  a  rumour — ^in  a  thousand  ways 
are  men  and  women  stung  by  the 
poisoned   arrow  shot  from  the  devil's 

372 


tongue  of  slander."  David  suffered 
most  acutely  and  often  from  the  calum- 
nies of  his  enemies.  See  our  remarks 
on  Ps.  xli.  5-8;  xlii.  3.  (2)  Subtlety. 
"They  take  counsel  together."  They 
were  combined  and  designing;  and 
endeavoured  to  form  such  plans  and 
adopt  such  methods  as  would  enable 
them  with  the  greatest  certainty  to 
accomplish  their  cruel  and  malicious 
designs.  They  were  crafty  as  well  as 
calumnious.  (3)  Violence.  "  Persecute 
and  take  him,  for  there  is  none  to 
deliver  him."  They  imagined  that  the 
Psalmist  was  abandoned  by  God,  that 
his  defence  was  withdrawn,  and  that 
they  might,  therefore,  pursue  and  seize 
him.  They  employed  force  against  him, 
as  well  as  subtlety  and  slander.  The 
good  have  their  enemies  now.  These 
enemies  are  malicious,  cunning,  and 
strong.  They  aim  at  their  spiritual 
destruction.  "Be  sober,  be  vigilant, 
because  your  adversary,"  &c. 

III.  The  glorious  resource  of  an 
aged  saint.  The  aged  Psalmist,  in  his 
trials,  turned  to  the  Lord  God. 

1.  His  confidence.  "Thou  art  my 
hope,  O  Lord  God ;  Thou  art  my  trust 
from  my  youth.  .  ,  .  Thou  art  my 
strong  refuge."  His  confidence  was 
(1)  Of  long  continuance.  From  his 
youth  he  had  reposed  his  trust  in  God. 
His  faith  amid  the  trials  of  old  age 
was  sustained  by  a  long,  diversified, 
and  rich  experience.  Present  confidence 
was  encouraged  and  strengthened  by 
past  experience  of  great  fulness  and 
preciousness.  His  confidence  was  (2) 
Exultant.  "  My  praise  is  continually 
of  Thee.  .  .  .  Let  my  mouth  be  filled 
with  Thy  praise  and  with  thy  honour  all 
the  day."  His  trust  in  God  enabled  him 
to  triumph  over  his  enemies.  Faith  made 
him  songful  even  in  the  midst  of  his  trials. 

2.  His  prayer.  (1)  As  regards  his 
enemies.  "  Let  them  be  confounded  and 
consumed  that  are  adversaries  to  my 
soul,  let  them  be  covered  with  reproach 
and  dishonour  that  seek  my  hurt."  Mus- 
culus  :  "  His  desire  is,  that  they  may  be 
confounded  and  fail,  that  they  may  be 
covered  with  disgrace  and  shame.  He 
seeks  nothing  beyond  the  frustration  of 
their  attenxpts,  that  they  may  begin  to  be 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


fSJLLV  LXZI. 


ashamed,  and  have  no  cause  for  boasting 
that  they  came  off  victorious."  Caryl : 
"  Shame  ariseth  from  utter  disappoint- 
ments. If  hope  deferred  causeth  shame, 
then  much  more  hope  destroyed.  When 
a  man  sees  his  hopes  quite  cut  off,  so  that 
he  can  no  way  reach  the  thing  he  looked 
for,  shame  takes  hold  of  him  strongly." 
Spurgeon :  **  How  confounded  must 
Pharaoh  have  been  when  Israel  mul- 
tipliedj  despite  his  endeavours  to  exter- 
minate the  race;  and  how  consumed 
with  rage  must  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
have  become  when  they  saw  the  Gospel 
spreading  from  land  to  land  by  the  very 
means  which  they  used  for  its  destruc- 
tion." Satan  and  all  the  enemies  of  the 
good  shall  be  thus  confounded.  Their 
designs  shall  be  utterly  defeated,  <kc. 
(2)  As  regards  himself.  He  seeks  for 
(a)  Deliverance  from  his  enemies,  *'  De- 
liver me,  O  my  God,  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  wicked,  out  of  the  hand  of  the  un- 
righteous and  cruel  man."  He  prays  to 
be  rescued  from  the  strong  grip  of  his 
wicked  foes.  (jS)  The  continued  pre- 
sence and  help  of  God.  "  Cast  me  not 
off  in  the  time  of  old  age ;  forsake  me 


not  when  my  strength  faileth.  ...  O 
God,  be  not  far  from  me ;  O  my  God, 
make  haste  for  my  help."  The  kindness 
and  faithfulness  of  God  to  the  Psalmist 
in  youth  and  maturity  encourage  him 
to  seek  His  presence  and  aid  in  the  time 
of  old  age  and  failing  strength.  "  He 
is  a  Master  that  is  not  wont  to  cast  off 
old  servants."  David  feels  that  if  God 
be  near  unto  him  all  will  be  well  with 
him.  "  Nearness  to  God  is  our  con- 
scious security.  A  child  in  the  dark  is 
comforted  by  grasping  its  father's  hand." 
Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  young  learn 
the  importance  of  early  piety.  It  is  the 
best  preparation  for  the  trials  of  declin- 
ing years.  2.  Let  the  aged f  vnth  failing 
faculties  and  growing  infirmities^  seek 
help  and  comfort  in  God.  "  Hearken 
unto  me,  0  house  of  Jacob,  and  all  ye 
the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  ye 
that  have  been  borne  by  Me  from  the 
birth,  that  have  been  carried  from  the 
womb :  And  even  to  your  old  age,  I  am 
the  same ;  and  even  to  grey  hairs,  I  will 
carry  you.  I  have  made,  and  I  will 
bear;  I  will  carry,  and  will  deliver 
you." 


Thb  Aged  Saint  and  his  God. 


(  Verse 

Consider — 

I.  What  the  Psalmist  said  of  him- 
self. *'  I  am  as  a  wonder  unto  many." 
He  was  led  to  say  this  from  the  review 
which  he  had  taken  of  his  own  history. 
The  history  of  David  was  singular.  He 
had  been  raised  from  being  a  shepherd 
to  be  the  king  of  Israel.  The  deliver- 
ances which  had  been  wrought  for  him 
showed  that  the  hand  of  God  had  been 
with  him.  And  in  his  old  age,  having 
reigned  over  the  people  for  many  years, 
in  reviewing  his  life,  he  said,  **  I  am  as 
a  wonder  unto  many." 

1.  It  is  proper  to  review  past  expe- 
riences. (1)  As  to  the  methods  of  grace. 
Every  good  man  is  the  subject  of  grace, 
and  has  been  preserved  in  his  course  by 
supplies  of  grace ;  and  it  is  proper  for 
him  to  review  what  God  has  done  for 
him.  (2)  As  to  the  conduct  of  Provi- 
dence. This  is  proper  in  every  stage  of 
life,  but  especially  in  old  age.     Reflect 


7.) 

upon  the  many  blessings  which  a  kind 
Providence  has  bestowed,  the  many  de- 
liverances which  you  have  experienced, 

2.  It  is  profitable  to  review  paH  expe- 
riences, (1)  It  produces  humilityy  be- 
cause of  the  little  improvement  we  have 
made,  &c.  (2)  It  inspires  gratitude^ 
because  of  many  mercies,  many  kind  in- 
terpositions of  Providence,  &c.  See  Gen. 
xxxii.  10;  2  Sam.  vii.  18.  (3)  It  en- 
courages us  to  trust  in  God.  Reflecting 
upon  the  past  had  this  effect  upon  David, 
as  we  see  in  this  Psalm  (vers.  1,  14—24). 

II.  What  the  Psalmist  said  of  his 
God.     "  Thou  art  my  strong  refuge.'* 

1.  The  manner  in  which  David  speaks 
of  God,  "  Thou  art  my  strong  refiige." 
(1)  If  we  think  ot  the  perfections  of 
God  we  shall  see  that  we  may  view  Him 
as  a  "strong  refuge."  His  power  is 
almighty ;  His  wisdom  is  infinite,  to 
guide,  ko.     He  is  always  present^  faith- 

373 


PSALM  LXXL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


fulf  ujichangeahle,  (fee.  (2)  His  people 
in  all  ages  have  found  him  to  be  their 
"  strong  refuge." 

2.  In  all  circumstances  His  people 
map  make  Him  their  refuge.  (1)  In 
troubles.  These  are  different  in  their 
kind  with  different  persons.  Some  have 
poverty,  others  losses,  others  family 
trials,  others  bereavements,  others  un- 
faithful friends,  (fee.  But  there  is  no 
trouble  but  the  believer  may  bring  it  to 
his  God.  (2)  In  spiritual  trials,  e.g., 
wounded  conseienee,  Satanie  tempta- 
tions, painful  eonfliets,  (fee.  (3)  In  old 
age.  The  increasing  infirmities  of  old 
age,  the  loss  of  many  friends  who  cheered 
and  strengthened  us  in  former  years, 
the  certainty  that  the  days  of  labour 
and  usefulness  are  drawing  to  a  close, 
render  it  of  the  greatest  importance  to 
have  God  for  our  refuge.      (4)  In  death 


itself.  When  the  powers  of  nature  fail, 
when  the  last  enemy  comes,  God  will 
be  the  refuge  of  His  people.  "  Pre- 
cious in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the 
death  of  His  saints." 

Conclusion. — 1.  How  important  to 
live  so  as  to  enjoy  the  privilege  of  having 
God  for  a  refuge  I  If  we  are  walking  in 
the  way  of  holiness  we  shall  enjoy  this 
privilege.  2.  To  enjoy  this  pi^iviiege  we 
must  exercise  faith.  In  the  trials  of  life 
the  promises  of  God  are  a  source  of 
encouragement  and  comfort,  but  we  can 
enjoy  the  consolation  which  they  afford 
only  by  faith.  3.  How  great  is  the  im- 
portance of  true  religion  I  If  we  neglect 
religion  we  shall  have  our  trials,  but  we 
shall  have  no  adequate  refuge.  Seek 
an  interest  in  Christ,  and  the  Lord  will 
be  your  God. — Abridged  from  an  un- 
published  MS, 


The  Cry  op  the  Aged. 
{Ferse  9.) 


This  is  the  cry  of  trembling,  tottering 
age  to  man,  as  well  as  to  God.  Among 
the  very  saddest  of  human  experiences 
is  the  decay  which  is  the  harbinger  of 
death.  Decay  is  the  first  bitterness  of 
death.  I  believe  that,  at  last,  in  the 
act  of  dying  the  bitterness  of  death  is 
already  past.  There  is  a  great  physical 
preparation  for  dying,  when  the  moment 
has  at  length  come.  The  worn-out  body, 
weary  with  its  long  struggle,  sinks  at 
last  into  the  arms  of  death  without  a 
tremor ;  it  is  tired,  it  longs  to  be  at  rest. 
It  is  the  long  struggle  of  the  vital 
power,  while  its  vigour  is  still  capable 
of  the  effort,  which  is  so  hard  to  endure, 
so  sad  to  behold.  The  strong  man 
worsted,  but  yielding  slowly,  and  fight- 
ing every  inch  against  the  sure,  inevi- 
table progress  of  decay.  The  eye  daily  a 
little  dimmer,  the  limbs  a  little  feebler, 
(fee.  ...  It  is  a  dark,  sad  theme,  the 
sufferings  and  miseries  of  the  long  de- 
cline. That  God  should  suffer  it  must 
have  deep  reasons.   .  .   .     Consider — 

I.  The  phenomena  of  human  decay. 

"  The  outer  man  decayeth."      At  both 

ends  of  life  man  is  the  most  helpless  and 

the  weakest  of  the  creatures.    For  nearly 

374 


one-third  of  his  pilgrimage,  law  and  fact 
hold  man  to  be  an  infant,  dependent  on 
elders,  that  is,  cast  upon  the  care  and 
guidance  of  his  fellows ;  and  if  he  lives 
out  his  span,  and  fulfils  the  natural 
course,  he  is  certain  of  years  of  the  same 
dependence  before  his  death.  With  this 
grand  difference,  that  the  great  moving 
ing  principle  of  the  one  ministry  is 
memory,  the  inspiration  of  the  other  is 
hope.  The  aged  have  memory  chiefly 
to  look  to,  the  young  have  hope.  Among 
the  finer  spirits,  the  men  and  women  of 
high  culture  and  Christian  feeling,  there 
is  a  beautiful  sacred ness  about  the  hoary 
head  which  wins  for  it  abundant  care 
and  honour ;  but  alas !  for  the  old  and 
weary  among  the  great  mass  of  man- 
kind. .  .  .  Take  infirmity  in  its  best 
condition,  where  it  is  regarded  most  re- 
verently and  handled  most  tenderly,  and 
there  is  a  very  sad  side  to  it.  How 
much  more  when  the  surroundings  are 
hard  and  selfish,  and  the  poor  worn-out 
pilgrim  is  made  to  see  very  plainly  that 
his  life  is  a  burden  to  those  for  whose 
nurture  the  strength  of  it  was  spent ; 
and  that  declining  strength  will  be  but 
the  signal  for  new   hardships,  insults, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALM  LXXI. 


and  wronsrs.  When  circumstance  is  all 
that  is  happy,  the  tiling  remains — the 
most  painful  of  spectacles,  the  most 
bitter  of  experiences — the  strong  frame 
grown  weak  as  an  infant's,  and  dropping 
piecemeal  to  dust.  The  brain  that  was 
once  regal  in  power  wandering  wearily 
after  lost  thoughts,  and  failing  to  grasp 
them,  looking  forth  from  perplexed  and 
bewildered  eyes  with  that  look  which  is 
so  hard  to  meet  without  tears — the  look 
of  a  mind  conscious  that  it  is  losing  the 
power  to  hold  its  own.  The  lips  bab- 
bling idle,  incoherent  words,  the  hands 
groping  vaguely  after  familiar  objects, 
the  limbs  bending  beneath  the  weight  of 
the  shrivelled  form  whose  lusty  manhood 
they  bore  so  joyously  about  its  work. 
The  eyes  growing  dim,  as  though  a  thick 
veil  were  dropped  over  the  creation ; 
the  cheerful  and  courageous  spirit  queru- 
lous and  suspicious ;  all  the  noble  moral 
qualities,  the  self-denial,  the  wisdom,  the 
tenderness,  the  courage,  the  hope,  that 
rendered  in  their  prime  such  noble  mini- 
stry to  others,  seeming  to  share  the 
body's  decay,  and  passing  slowly  under 
utter  eclipse.  The  mind,  the  soul,  to 
the  eye  dying  with  the  body,  becoming 
puling,  feeble,  fretful  as  a  child's.  It 
is  "  a  sair  sight  *'  to  those  who  have  to 
watch  it,  a  bitter  experience  to  those 
who  have  to  pass  through  it. 

II.  The  reasons  of  this  law  of  physi- 
cal decay  as  far  as  we  can  explore  it. 
Why  should  such  a  law  reign  in  a  world 
which  is  under  the  wise  rule  of  a  merci- 
ful and  loving  God  ? 

1.  To  drive  home  the  lessons  which 
God  is  ever  seeking  to  teach  us  about  sin. 
Death  as  it  reigns  on  earth  is  not  transla- 
tion— the  calm  passage  of  a  spirit  from 
an  inferior  to  a  superior  sphere.  Nor  is 
it  intended  to  look  like  translation.  It 
is  a  curse  which  sin  has  inflicted  on  the 
world.  It  is  the  devil's  work,  not  God's. 
Death,  as  we  know  it  now,  though  it  is 
God's  judgment,  is  the  cursed  work  of 
evil.  And  God  intends  that  it  shall 
look  like  it.  There  is  no  hiding  of  any 
of  its  black  features.  Sin  is  corruption 
of  the  spirit,  paralysis  of  every  faculty 
of  the  being.  God  shows  us  the  cor- 
ruption, the  paralysis  of  force,  in  the 
phenomena  of  bodily  decay.    It  is  God's 


solemn  sermon  upon  sin.  What  you 
see  the  devil  do  for  a  body,  that  believe 
the  devil  is  doing  for  a  soul. 

2.  To  develop  the  noblest  qualities  of 
the  human  spirit  by  the  ministries  which 
sickness,  suffering,  and  decay  call  forth. 
Abolish  suffering  and  decay  God  will 
not.  He  maintains  it  while  this  sinful 
world  endures,  as  His  strong  witness 
against  sin.  But  he  seeks  to  make  it 
the  occasion  of  a  higher,  richer  blessing 
than  would  be  found  even  in  its  aboli- 
tion. The  stern  law  grows  beautiful  as 
it  calls  forth  tender  and  unselfish  minis- 
try. There  is  something  higher  and 
more  blessed  than  not  to  suffer.  It  is 
to  suffer  surrounded  by  exquisite  minis- 
tries of  love.  .  .  .  God  has  made  us  so 
weak  in  birth  and  in  death,  because  we 
have  men  and  women  and  not  beasts 
around  us.  And  it  is  in  caring  for  the 
helpless,  nursing  the  weak,  tending  the 
sick,  and  bearing  the  burdens  of  the  sad, 
that  men  and  women  are  to  grow  like 
God. 

3.  That  He  may  strengthen  faith  and 
hope  in  immortality.  Death  is  terrible 
that  life  may  be  beautiful.  The  de- 
stroyer is  suffered  to  ravage  that  the 
deliverer  may  be  welcomed  and  blessed. 
God's  judgment  is  not  unto  death,  but 
unto  life.  But  it  is  always  through  the 
judgment,  and  not  by  escaping  it  or 
turning  it  aside,  that  He  saves.  So 
through  death  the  great  Captain  of 
deliverance  destroyed  death.  .  .  .  The 
long  weary  decay  of  age,  the  declining 
strength  of  which  the  Psalmist  speaks 
so  touchingly,  has  but  one  alleviation, 
the  tender,  devoted  ministry  of  our  loved 
ones ;  it  has  but  one  consolation,  the 
hope  of  immortality.  As  we  watch  it, 
as  we  suffer  it,  that  hope  becomes  the 
soul's  sheet  anchor.  When  death  wears 
his  ghastliest  dress  of  terror,  we  cling 
but  the  more  closely  to  Him  who  has 
taught  us  to  triumph — yea,  to  exult 
over  death.  Don't  moan  like  a  trem- 
bling dove  when  death  has  his  grip  on 
you,  after  Hezekiah's  fashion.  Lift  up 
your  voice  and  sing  a  paean  like  Paul 
inspired  by  Christ.  **  For  which  cause 
we  faint  not ;  but  though  our  natural 
man  perish,"  &c.    (2  Cor.  iv.  16 — v.  4.) 

III.  The  duties  which  spring  out  of 

375 


PSALM  LXXT.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


the  facts  and  considerations  on  which  ful.     Bear  brightly  the  mistrust,  the 

we  have  dwelt.  fretfulness,  the  dulness.   Let  the  whisper 

1.  The  tender  care  of  the  old  and  grey-  of  the  aged  lips,  and  the  sign  of  the  aged 

headed.     God    commits    them   to   our  hand,  be  like  royal  commands  to  you. 

ministry.     He  makes  us  responsible  for  2.  Let   ws  press  home  on  the  hearts 

their  charge.     If  we  will  not  joyfully  of  the  aged  with  double  earnestness  the 

bear  that  burden,  it  is  His  counsel,  His  Gospel  which   brings  to  light   life   and 

charge,  His  gift  which  we  despise.  .  .  .  immortality.    Blot  out  that  Gospel,  and 

There  is  nothing  so  noble,  nothing  so  it  is  all  pure  agony  and  misery.    Life  is 

beautiful,  as  the   ministry  of  vigour  to  a  curse,  death  is  a  curse,  all  is  a  curse ; 

weakness,  health  to  sickness,  growth  to  and  there  is   no  hope.     "  But  now  is 

decay,  youth  to  age.     There  is  nothing  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,"  <fec.  (1  Cor. 

that  God  marks  more  earnestly,  nothing  xv.  20-22,  and  55-57  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17). — 

that  will  bear  richer  fruit  in  heaven.  J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.  Abridged  firom 

Let  the  plea  of  grey  hairs  be  all-power-  "  The  Christian  World  Pulpit*** 

The  Triumphant  Faith  of  jln  Aged  Saint. 

(Fmd«  U-24) 

The  tone  of  the  Psalm  changes  re-  Isa.  Hi.  10 ;  liii.  1 ;  Ezek.  it.  7.)    The 

markably.     For  despondency  and  fear  generation   that   has    come  up   in   the 

we  have  cheerfulness  and  hope ;  and  the  place  of  his  own  generation,  which  is 

hymn  closes  with  an  outburst  of  exult-  passing   away,    first   comes   before   his 

ant  praise.     Consider —  mind,  and  then  his  vision  deepens  and 

I.  The  prayer  of  faith.     (Vers.  17,  widens,  taking  in  all  the  coming  genera- 

18.)     Notice —  tions   to   whom  he  would  publish  the 

1.  The  blessing  sought  in  the  prayer,  mighty  deeds  of  God."  He  sought  for 
"Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  grey-  the  continuance  of  the  Divine  presence 
headed,  O  God,  forsake  me  not."  Margin  and  help  that  he  might  still  be  able  to 
— *'  Unto  old  age  and  grey  hairs."  A  edify  bis  fellow-men  and  honour  his 
correct  rendering  is — "  And  even  to  old  God.  (See  these  verses  more  fully 
age  and  grey  hairs,  O  God,  forsake  me  treated  in  two  sketches  given  below.) 
not."  The  Psalmist  seeks  that  the  gra-  II.  The  anticipation  of  faith.  The 
cious  and  helpful  presence  of  God  should  Psalmist  confidently  looks  forward  to — 
be  continued  unto  him,  to  the  very  close  1.  Complete  deliverance  from  severe 
of  a  long  life.  trials,     "  Thou  which  hast  showed  me 

2.  The  ground  from  which  the  prayer  great  and  sore  troubles,  shalt  quicken 
rises.  "  O  God,  Thou  hast  taught  me  me  again,  and  shalt  bring  me  up  again 
from  my  youth  ;  and  hitherto  have  I  from  the  depths  of  the  earth."  Conant : 
declared  Thy  wondrous  works."  In  his  "  Thou,  who  hast  made  us  see  troubles 
prayer  the  Psalmist  is  encouraged  by  great  and  sore,  wilt  again  revive  us,  and 
(1)  God's  doings  for  him  in  the  past.  from  the  abysses  of  the  earth  wilt  bring 
From  his  youth  God  had  instructed  and  us  up  again."  Notice — (1)  The  best  of 
guided  him.  (2)  His  celebration  of  men  may  suffer  severest  trials.  The 
those  doings.  He  had  made  known  to  Psalmist  represents  himself  and  others 
others  the  wondrous  doings  of  God  on  as  dead  and  buried,  or  sinking  in  the 
his  behalf.  deep    abysses    of    the     earth.       Tlieir 

3.  The  reason  by  which  the  prayer  is  troubles  seemed  overwhelming  and  ruin- 
urged.  "  Forsake  me  not,  until  I  have  ous.  (2)  Good  men  in  their  trials  must 
showed  Thy  strength  unto  this  genera-  recognise  the  hand  of  God.  He  had 
tioil,  and  Thy  power  to  every  one  that  caused  them  to  see  those  great  and 
is  to  come."  Margin — "  Thine  arm."  sore  trials.  No  trial  can  befal  us 
*'  The  arm  of  the  Lord  is  the  symbol  of  without  His  permission.  (3)  Good  men 
His  executive  power  and  works.    (Comp.  in  their  trials  may  cherish  an  assurance 

376 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LXZl. 


of  deliverance.  He  is  able  to  bring  even 
the  dead  to  life,  and  to  raise  from  the 
deepest  and  most  dreadful  abyss  all 
who  call  upon  Him.  He  will  not  for- 
sake those  who  trust  in  Him.  The 
trouble  of  the  good  shall  pass  away  like 
clouds,  and  leave  their  heavens  serene 
and  beautiful. 

2.  The  realisation  of  the  Divine  exal- 
tation and  comfort.  "Thou  shalt  in- 
crease my  greatness,  and  comfort  me  on 
every  side."  Hengstenberg :  "And 
shalt  turn  Thyself  and  comfort  me." 
This  is  more  than  complete  deliverance 
from  trial.  It  is  the  assurance  that 
through  trial  the  people  of  God  rise  to 
greater  elevation  and  joy.  "  Sometimes 
God  makes  His  people's  troubles  contri- 
bute to  the  increase  of  their  greatness, 
and  their  sun  shines  the  brighter  for 
having  been  under  a  cloud."  Through 
much  tribulation  lies  the  path  of  the 
good  to  greatness  and  glory.  We  must 
bear  the  bitter  suffering  and  fight  the 
stern  battle ;  and,  by  the  blessing  of 
God,  the  struggle  and  pain  shall  contri- 
bute to  our  strength  and  joy.  God 
will  "  make  us  glad  according  to  the 
days  wherein  He  has  afflicted  us,  and 
the  years  wherein  we  have  seen  evil." 
Such  was  the  confident  anticipation  of 
the  Psalmist. 

III.  The  resolution  of  faith.  David 
declares  his  purpose — 

1.  To  continually  hope  in  God.  "  But 
I  will  hope  continually."  "  Hope,"  says 
Dr.  Punshon,  "  is  a  marvellous  inspira- 
tion, which  every  heart  confesses  in 
some  season  of  extremest  peril.  It  can 
put  nerve  into  the  languid,  and  fleetness 
into  the  feet  of  exhaustion.  Let  the 
slim  and  feathery  palm-grove  be  dimly 
descried,  though  ever  so  remotely,  and 
the  caravan  will  on,  spite  of  the  fatigue 
of  the  traveller  and  the  simoom's  blind- 
ing, to  where,  by  the  fringy  rootlets, 
the  desert  waters  flow.  Let  there  glim- 
mer one  star  through  the  murky  waste 
of  night,  and  though  the  spars  be  shat- 
tered, and  the  sails  be  riven,  and  the 
hurricane  howls  for  its  prey,  the  brave 
sailor  will  be  lashed  to  the  helm,  and 
see  already,  through  the  tempest's  break- 
ing, calm  waters  and  a  spotless  sky. 
Oh  !  who  is  there,  however  hapless  his 


lot  or  forlorn  his  surroundings,  who  is 
beyond  the  influence  of  this  choicest  of 
earth's  comforters — this  faithful  friend 
which  survives  the  flight  of  riches,  and  the 
wreck  of  reputation,  and  break  of  health, 
and  even  the  loss  of  dear  and  cherished 
friends  1 "  The  Psalmist  resolved  that, 
however  painful  his  circumstances  and 
condition,  and  whatever  the  number 
and  power  and  malice  of  his  enemies, 
he  would  hope  in  God.  While  God 
lives,  His  people  have  every  encourage- 
ment to  hope  in  Him, 

2.  To  continually  praise  God.  No- 
tice— (1)  The  object  of  the  Psalmist's 
praise.  "I  will  praise  Thee,  O  my 
God— Thou  Holy  One  of  Israel."  Here 
are  four  points — (a)  The  personality  of 
God.  "Thee,  O  my  God."  (/3)  The 
unity  of  God.  "  One."  "  The  Lord  our 
God  is  one  Lord."  (7)  The  perfection  of 
God.  "Thou  holy  One."  Holiness  in 
man  has  been  well  defined  as  *'  the 
symmetry  of  the  soul ; "  and  by  holiness 
as  attributed  to  God  we  understand  the 
summation  of  His  perfections,  (h)  The 
relation  of  God  to  His  people.  "  O 
my  God,  Thou  Holy  One  of  Israel." 
He  is  in  covenant  relations  with  His 
people.  All  who  trust  in  Him  are 
interested  in  Him  and  related  to  Him. 
(2)  The  subjects  of  His  praise.  These 
are  (a)  The  mighty  deeds  of  God.  "  I 
will  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God." 
Conant :  "  I  will  come  with  the  mighty 
deeds  of  the  Lord  Jehovah."  Hengsten- 
berg: "I  will  come  with  the  deeds  of 
the  Lord."  Alexander ;  "  The  com- 
mon version — *  I  will  go  in  the  strength 
of  the  Lord  God,'  is  at  variance  with 
the  usage  both  of  the  verb  and  noun,  as 
the  former  does  not  mean  to  go  abso- 
lutely, but  either  to  enter  or  to  come  to 
a  particular  place,  expressed  or  under- 
stood. The  ellipsis  here  may  be  sup- 
plied from  Psalm  v.  7,  and  Ixvi.  13,  in 
both  which  places  the  same  verb  de- 
notes the  act  of  coming  to  God's  house 
for  the  purpose  of  solemn  praise,  and  in 
the  second  passage  cited  is  followed  by 
the  same  preposition,  *  I  will  come  into 
Thy  house  with  burnt  off'erings,'  i.e.y  I 
will  bring  them  thither.  This  sense 
agrees  with  the  vow  to  praise  God  in  the 
two  preceding  verses,  and  with  the  pro- 

377 


PSALM  LXXI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


mise  of  commemoration  in  the  other 
clause  of  the  verse.  It  also  enables  us 
to  give  the  noun  its  usual  sense  of  God's 
exploits  or  mighty  deeds"  (see  Ps.  cvi. 
2,  and  Deut.  iii.  24).  God  had  done 
great  things  for  the  poet  and  the  people, 
he  was  confidently  anticipating  that  He 
would  still  achieve  mighty  and  glorious 
deeds  for  them,  and  he  resolves  to  pub- 
licly and  thankfully  celebrate  these 
exploits.  (j8)  The  righteousness  of  God, 
*'  My  mouth  shall  show  forth  Thy 
righteousness.  ...  I  will  make  men- 
tion of  Thy  righteousness,  of  Thine 
only."  He  speaks  of  the  righteousness 
of  God's  doings.  His  deeds  were  as 
just  as  they  were  mighty,  as  equitable 
as  they  were  wonderful.  The  Psalmist 
resolves  to  praise  the  righteousness  only 
of  God :  not  his  own  righteousness,  or 
strength,  or  skill,  but  the  perfect  righte- 
ousness of  the  Lord  his  God.  (y)  The 
salvation  of  God.  "  My  mouth  shall 
show  forth  Thy  salvation  all  the  day ; 
for  I  know  not  the  numbers."  God's 
great  might  is  exerted  for  the  salvation 
of  His  people.  His  saving  acts  are  in- 
numerable. (Comp.  Ps.  xl.  5.)  "  God's 
righteousness  and  His  salvation  are  here 
joined  together;  let  no  man  think  to 
put  them  asunder,  or  expect  salvation 
without  righteousness."  This  is  an  in- 
exhaustible theme  of  praise  to  the  godly 
man.  (5)  The  faithfubiess  of  God.  "I 
will  praise  Thee,  even  Thy  truth,  O 
my  God."  By  the  "  truth  "  we  under- 
stand especially  the  truth  of  the  Divine 
promises.  *'He  is  faithful  that  pro- 
mised." Such  are  the  high  and  fruitful 
topics  which  the  poet  resolved  to  cele- 
brate. (3)  The  reason  of  his  praise. 
This  is  to  a  great  extent  contained  in 
the  object  and  subjects  of  his  praise. 
He  who  is  mighty,  righteous,  faithful, 
and  holy,  and  who  works  for  the  salva- 
tion and  exaltation  and  joy  of  his  people, 
is  worthy  of  all  praise.  But  the  Psalmist 
praises  God  because  He  delivers  him 
from  sore  distresses,  and  from  the  ene- 
mies who  sought  to  kill  him.  Faith 
enables  him  to  realise  his  salvation  as 
though  it  were  already  wrought  out  for 
hirn.     "For   they  are  confounded,  for 


they  are  brought  unto  shame,  that  seek 
my  hurt."  To  the  poet  this  is  so  cer- 
tain that  he  speaks  of  it  as  a  thing 
already  accomplished.  He  praises  God 
for  it.  His  praise  is  the  expression  of 
his  gratitude.  (4)  The  manner  of  his 
praise.  He  resolves  to  praise  God.  (a) 
Publicly  (ver.  16).  "I  will  come"  into 
Thy  house  "with  the  mighty  deeds  of 
the  Lord  Jehovah;  I  will  make  men- 
tion," (fee.  In  the  public  congregation 
the  Psalmist  would  thankfully  recount 
the  glorious  deeds  of  God,  and  celebrate 
His  praise.  (/S)  Songfully.  "Unto 
Thee  will  I  sing."  (See  remarks  on  Ps. 
lix.  16.)  (y)  With  instrumental  accom- 
paniment. "  I  will  praise  Thee  with  the 
psaltery ;  unto  Thee  will  I  sing  with 
the  harp."  (See  remarks  on  Ps.  Ivii.  8.) 
(5)  The  spirit  of  his  praise.  "  My  lips 
shall  greatly  rejoice  when  I  sing  unto 
Thee ;  and  my  soul,  which  Thou  hast 
redeemed."  His  praise  was  not  formal 
and  cold,  but  warm  and  hearty;  not 
merely  with  his  "  lips,"  but  also  with 
his  "soul."  His  spirit  was  exultant. 
To  him  worship  was  an  inspiration  and 
joy.  (6)  The  continuousness  of  his 
praise.  "  My  mouth  shall  show  forth 
Thy  righteousness  and  Thy  salvation  all 

the  day My   tongue  also  shall 

talk  of  Thy  righteousness  all  the  day 
long."  True  praise  is  not  an  occasional 
act,  but  an  abiding  habitude ;  not  the 
service  of  the  lips,  but  the  spirit  of  the 
life.  He  worships  God  truly  who  wor- 
ships Him  constantly. 

Conclusion.  —  How  wonderful  and 
divine  is  the  power  of  true  godliness ! 
It  enables  man  to  triumph  over  the 
infirmities  of  declining  years,  the  sharp 
sorrows  of  life,  and  the  bitter  persecu- 
tions of  mighty  and  malignant  foes.  It 
makes  man  victorious  in  the  very  midst 
of  his  enemies.  It  lifts  him  in  spirit 
above  the  storm  and  the  clouds  into 
serene  and  sunny  regions.  The  true 
Christian  surveying  the  most  adverse 
circumstances  and  the  most  hostile  forces 
can  shout  in  triumph,  "in  all  these  things 
we  are  more  than  conquerors."  Is  this 
spirit — this  trustful,  victorious,  Divine 
spirit — ours  % 


378 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LXZ^ 


An  Old  Man's  Retrospect. 


(  Verses 

t     The     Psalmist's     scholarship. 

David  was  an  instructed  believer,  and 
more  of  the  kind  are  needed.  Converted 
people  should  be  learners.  Some  seem 
to  jump  into  salvation  on  a  sudden  ;  but 
tbey  who  have  not  first  learned  should 
have  the  sense  not  to  teach.  Ritualism 
and  scepticism  would  not  have  spread 
had  there  been  a  wider  difiusion  of  know- 
ledge, for  error  and  ignorance  go  hand 
in  hand.  David  went  to  school  from 
his  youth  ;  he  was  mighty  in  the  Scrip- 
tures as  they  then  existed.  Let  us, 
then,  read  our  Bibles.  In  the  old  days, 
there  was  nothing  the  Romanists  so 
much  dreaded  as  the  Catechism.  Then 
let  the  experienced  be  teachers  of  others. 
As  regarded  David,  the  Lord  taught 
him;  he  was  taught  by  the  prophets, 
and  also  by  Providence.  He  learned 
lessons  in  the  camp  and  in  the  world. 
It  is  a  blessed  thing  when  God  is  our 
teacher,  and  His  school-room  is  large 
enough  for  all.  Further,  David  began 
early.  It  is  necessary  to  be  taught 
early  ;  for  the  sooner  we  come  to  Christ, 
the  less  we  have  to  unlearn.  We  grow 
like  early  planted  trees,  and  have  none 
of  those  horrid  remembrances  which  are 
a  cross  to  many  who  are  reclaimed  late 
in  life.  Hence  the  young  promote  their 
own  happiness  by  entering  the  Church 
early  to  grow  up  in  it.  If  they  would 
preserve  a  bright  eye  and  an  elastic  step, 
they  must  cleave  to  Christ  in  youth. 

II.  The  Believer's  occupation. 
David's  occupation  was  to  declare  God's 
works.  This  was  the  kernel;  all  else 
was  but  the  shell.  Some  appear  scarcely 
to  think  of  this — the  duty  of  acquaint- 
ing others  with  the  blessings  they  them- 
selves have  found.  Is  there  such  a 
thing  as  a  secret  Christian  ?  Who  knows 
of  one  1  "  I  do  !  "  you  say.  Well,  the 
fact  that  you  know  him  is  a  proof  that 
he  ia  not  a  secret  Christian.     Are  such 


17,  18.) 

deserters,  or  are  they  merely  persons  of 
retiring  habits?  That  soldier  was  of 
retiring  habits  who  ran  away  from  the 
field  on  the  day  of  battle.  David,  how- 
ever, proclaimed  God's  works.  Let  us 
have  a  theology  full  of  God  and  not  of 
man.  This  is  the  grandest  theme  one 
can  take  up,  and  it  was  the  Psalmist's 
theme.  Let  them  keep  to  the  atone- 
ment and  all  the  blessed  doctrines  of 
grace.  Bring  out  the  old,  well-tried 
guns  now  that  such  enemies  as  Ritual- 
ism and  Popery  confronted  them.  Note, 
further,  that  David's  style  was  com- 
mendable. He  spoke  positively,  and 
his  object  was  to  win  sinners.  What 
are  we  doing  ?  All  should  do  something ; 
no  man  should  keep  his  gift  to  himself ; 
we  must  not  play  at  being  Christians. 
It  is  a  poor,  miserable  thing  to  be  half- 
and-half.  Some  can  sit  in  a  pew-corner, 
and  when  they  have  heard  a  good  ser- 
mon they  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord  ! "  or 
they  are  passengers  in  the  gospel  coach 
who  can  do  no  more  than  find  fault  with 
the  horses,  coachman,  guard,  and  all 
about  them. 

III.  David's  prayer.  "Forsake  me 
not."  Is  it  not  remarkable  that  so  many 
of  the  people  mentioned  in  the  Bible  as 
having  fallen  into  sin  are  old  people? 
Experienced  coachmen  tell  us  that  the 
Loises  are  more  likely  to  fall  at  the 
bottom  of  a  hill  than  anywhere  else. 
Old  age  may  be  over-confident,  or  it 
may  be  harassed  by  many  fears.  They 
have  need  of  sustaining  grace  to  the 
last ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  God  never 
forsakes  His  old  servants. 

IV.  David's  wish.  He  desired  to 
bear  one  more  testimony  to  his  God. 
The  aged  and  the  weak  show  forth  God's 
strength,  and  they  are  often  the  best 
"  evidences  "  of  the  truth  of  religion. — 
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  From  Twelve  Mealistic 
tSketcIies. 


Comparative  Blessedness  of  the  Christian's  Old  Age. 

(Verse  18.) 
"  Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  grey-  Though  sin  is  often  anticipated  with 


headed,  O  God,  forsake  me  not.'* 


pleasure,  it  is   never   remembered   but 

379 


rSALMLXXI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


with  self-reproach.  Though  duty  is 
often  looked  forward  to  with  trembling, 
it  is  never  looked  back  upon  as  per- 
formed but  with  emotions  of  gladness. 
The  memory  of  a  life  spent  in  wicked- 
ness is  a  garner  of  evil,  ever  pouring  out 
its  hoard  of  bitterness  on  the  soul,  and 
yet  ever  full ;  while  that  of  a  life  devoted 
to  the  service  of  God  is  a  treasure  of 
bliss,  as  abundant  as  the  wants  of  the 
soul,  and  as  enduring  as  its  immortality. 
If  this  be  true — 

I.  The  aged  Christian  must  be 
happy  in  the  contemplation  of  his 
past  conduct  and  influence.  While 
there  is  here  and  there  a  page  of  sorrow  in 
his  history,  it  is  contemplated,  as  a  whole, 
with  gladness.  It  contains  the  record 
of  long  years  of  allegiance  and  service, 
rendered  in  the  spirit  of  obedience  and 
love  to  his  ever  loved  and  glorious 
Master;  of  many  an  earnest  conflict 
with  temptation,  and  of  many  a  victory 
won,  through  grace,  over  its  utmost 
power.  It  contains  the  record  of  many 
a  purpose  which  had  its  origin  in  a  love 
that  embraced  both  God  and  man ;  of 
many  a  scheme  of  usefulness,  &c. 
Happy  the  man  who,  from  amid  the 
feebleness  of  declining  years,  may  look 
back  over  the  pathway  of  such  a  history, 
and  recognise  it  as  his  own  ! 

II.  He  is  happy  in  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  blessings  which  have 
marked  his  history.  The  kindness  of 
his  Heavenly  Father  has  not  only  strewn 
his  path  with  rich  gifts  of  grace  and 
providence,  but  so  constituted  him,  that 
every  present  blessing  sends  forward  its 
light  and  joy  to  the  end  of  his  being. 
If  a  peculiar  bliss  is  mine  to-day,  it  is 
mine  not  to-day  alone,  but  so  long  as 
the  memory  of  to-day  shall  endure. 
The  thoughts  of  the  Christian  in  his  old 
age  are  often  sent  back  over  the  path- 
way of  his  life,  and  made  to  mark  the 
points  at  which  Heaven's  gifts  were  most 
abundant  and  rich.  .  .  .  How  striking, 
when  contrasted  with  the  experience  of 
the  aged  sinner,  a])pears  the  blessedness 
of  the  Christian,  as,  from  amid  the  in- 
firmities of  his  old  age,  he  looks  back 
upon  the  blessings  included  in  his  expe- 
rience of  the  past  I 

III.  He  is  happy  in  the  contempla- 
380 


tion  of  his  life's  history,  because  of 
the  lessons  it  has  served  to  teach. 
Life  is  a  school,  and  experience  a  teacher. 
The  Christian  whose  presence  in  this 
school  has  been  continued  during  a  long 
course  of  years,  cannot  but  be  indebted 
to  its  teacher  for  rich  stores  of  truth  and 
wisdom. 

IV.  The  aged  disciple  is  happy  in 
the  continued  possession  of  his  life's 
chief  good.  Not  so  is  it  with  the  man 
whom  the  grey  hairs  and  the  tottering 
steps  of  age  find  still  in  his  sins.  He 
has  outlived  even  the  meagre  enjoy- 
ments embraced  in  the  experience  of  the 
worldling.  .  .  .  The  aged  disciple  of 
Jesus  has  not  thus  survived  his  life's 
chief  good.  That  which  was  years  ago 
chosen  as  the  chief  portion  of  his  soul  is 
still  the  light  and  joy  of  his  being. 
Though  his  hold  on  earthly  pleasures 
was  long  ago  relinquished,  those  con- 
nected with  the  smiles  of  a  Saviour's 
countenance,  and  the  experience  of  a 
Saviour's  love,  are  his  in  the  fullest 
measure.  Who,  then,  would  not  desire 
the  old  age  of  the  Christian  ] 

V.  The  aged  disciple  is  happy  in 
the  near  prospect  of  realising  his  life's 
brightest  hopes.  In  this  respect  also 
his  experience  is  very  different  from  that 
of  the  aged  transgressor.  He  who  has 
pursued  the  pathway  of  sin  until  he 
stands  with  the  white  locks,  wrinkled 
features,  and  bowed  form  of  an  old  man 
on  the  brink  of  the  grave,  has  survived 
the  death  of  all  his  hopes.  .  .  .  Turn 
your  thoughts  now  to  the  aged  follower 
of  the  Lamb.  The  present,  instead  of 
being  the  darkest  and  saddest  period  in 
his  history,  is  the  brightest  and  happiest. 
He  is  weary  with  his  long  journeying, 
but  happy  in  the  thought  that  the  next 
tottering  step  may  introduce  him  to  a 
house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in 
the  heavens.  Verily  the  old  age  of  the 
Christian,  marked  by  infirmity  and  weak- 
ness though  it  be,  is  a  bright  and  happy 
period  in  his  history.  "  When  I  am  old 
and  grey-headed,  O  God,  forsake  me  not." 

Aged  disciple  of  Jesus  !  you  have 
reason  for  the  profoundest  gratitude  that 
yours  is  the  old  age  of  the  Christian  ! — 
Jesse  Guernsey.  Abridged  from  The 
Frcaclier^  Treasury. 


UOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  psalm  LXXII. 


PSALM    LXXIL 

INTRODUCTION. 

Superscription, — "-4  Psalm,  for  Solomon.**  Margin:  **0f  Solomon.**  Hengstenberg : 
** Solomon  is  named  in  tlie  title  as  the  author  of  the  Psalm.  Attempts  have  been  made,  to  no 
purpose,  to  interpret  T\u)W/  here,  as  in  Ps.  cxxvii.,  in  another  sense.     The  7,  when  it  occurs 

as  in- the  titles,  without  anything  to  limit  its  application,  always  indicates,  as  here,  the  author. 
In  favour  of  the  announcement  in  the  title,  we  have  first  the  remarkably  objective  character  of 
the  Psalm,  common  to  it  with  the  other  writings  of  Solomon,  and  in  striking  contrast  to  that 
flow  of  feeling  which  forms  such  a  marked  feature  in  the  Psalms  of  David.  And,  in  the  second 
place,  there  is  also  the  fact  that  it  is  the  circumstances  of  Solomon's  time  that  form  the  ground- 
work of  the  Psalm." 

We  have  in  the  Psalm  a  picture  of  the  character  and  extent  of  the  sovereignty  of  the 
Messiah.  "Solomon,  when  at  the  height  of  his  own  power,"  says  Canon  Liddon,  "sketches 
a  Superhuman  King,  ruling  an  empire  which  in  its  character  and  in  its  compass  altogether 
transcends  his  own.  The  extremest  boundaries  of  the  Kingdom  of  Israel  melt  away  before  the 
gaze  of  the  Psalmist.  The  new  kingdom  reaches  *  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  flood  unto  the 
world's  end '  (ver.  8).  It  reaches  from  each  frontier  of  the  Promised  Land  to  the  remotest 
regions  of  the  known  world  in  the  opposite  quarter.  From  the  Mediterranean  it  extends  to 
the  ocean  that  washes  the  shores  of  Eastern  Asia  ;  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  utmost  West. 
At  the  feet  of  its  mighty  Monarch,  all  who  are  most  inaccessible  to  the  arms  or  the  influence 
of  Israel  hasten  to  tender  their  voluntary  submission.  The  wild  sons  of  the  desert  (ver.  9),  the 
merchants  of  Tarshish  in  the  then  distant  Spain,  the  islanders  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  Arab 
chiefs,  the  wealthy  Nubians  (ver.  10),  are  foremost  in  proffering  their  homage  and  fealty.  But 
all  kings  are  at  last  to  fall  down  in  submission  before  the  Ruler  of  the  new  kingdom  ;  all 
nations  are  to  do  Him  service  (ver.  11).  His  empire  is  to  be  co-extensive  with  the  world  : 
it  is  also  to  be  co-enduring  with  time  (ver.  17).  His  empire  is  to  be  spiritual;  it  is  to  confer 
peace  on  the  world,  but  by  righteousness  (ver.  3).  The  King  will  Himself  secure  righteou 
judgment  (vers.  2,  4),  salvation  (vers.  4,  13),  deliverance  (ver.  12),  redemption  (ver.  14),  to  His 
subjects.  The  needy,  the  afflicted,  the  friendless,  will  be  the  especial  objects  of  His  tender 
care  (vers.  12,  13).  His  appearance  in  the  world  will  be  like  the  descent  of  *  the  rain  upon 
the  mown  grass'  (ver.  6) ;  the  true  life  of  man  seems  to  have  been  killed  out,  but  it  is  yet 
capable  of  being  restored  by  Him.  He  himself,  it  is  hinted,  will  be  out  of  sight  ;  but  His 
Name  will  endure  for  ever  ;  His  Name  will  *  propagate' ;  and  men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him  to 
the  end  of  time  (ver.  17).  This  King  is  immortal;  He  is  also  all-knowing  and  all-mighty. 
'  Omniscience  alone  can  hear  the  cry  of  every  human  heart ;  Omnipotence  alone  can  bring 
deliverance  to  every  human  sufferer.'" 

Looking  at  the  Psalm  homiletically  we  see  in  it  A  Prayer  for  Kings  (ver.  1),  The  Qhriout 
Reign  of  the  Messiah  (vers.  2,  17),  and  the  Doxology, 

A  Prater  for  Kings. 
(Verse  1.) 

This  brief  prayer  for  the  king  sug-  the   mightiest    sovereign  as  upon   the 

gests —  meanest  subject. 

I.  The  character  of  a  true  king.     It  2.  By  obligations  which  are  special  to 

is    clearly  implied    that    he    should    be  men  of  high  position.      Their  example 

righteous.       "  Give    Thy    righteousness  is    incomparably  more   influential   than 

unto  the  king's  son."     Kings  should  be  that  of  those  who  occupy  less  coiispi- 

righteous  in  hearty  in  aims,  in  actions.  cuous,  or  obscure  positions.    "The  people 

They  are  bound  to  this, —  are  fashioned,"  says  Claudian,  "  accord- 

1.  By  obligations  which  are  common  ing  to  the  example  of  their  king;  and 

to  all   men.      Kings  as   much  as  their  edicts  are  of  less  power  than  the  model 

subjects  are  required  "  to  do  justly,  love  which  his  life  exhibits.'* 

mercy,   and    walk   humbly  with    God."       ...  .    ,  .  ,   t^,^^ « «««r^1o . 

™,      -^f         ,        ,  .  ,    if    1  e  rt    ^       **  A  Sovereign's  great  example  forms  ft  people  ; 

The  eternal  and  immutable  laws  of  God      ^1^^  public  breast  is  noble,  or  is  vile, 
for  moral  beings  are  as  binding  upon      A»  he  inspires  ii.''— Mallet. 

381 


fKALM  LXXn. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Hence  kings  are  under  special  obliga- 
tions to  "wear  the  white  flower  of  a 
blameless  life." 

"  King-becoming  graces 
Are  justice,  verity,  temperance,  stableness, 
Bounty,  perseverance,  mercy,  lowliness. 
Devotion,  patience,  courage,  fortitude." 

— Shakespeare. 

"He's  a  king, 
A  true  right  king,  who  dares  do  aught,  save 

wrong ; 
Fears  nothing  mortal,  but  to  be  unjust ; 
Who  is  not  blown  up  with  the  flatt'ring  puflfs 
Of  spongy  sycophants  ;  who  stands  unmoved. 
Despite  the  jostling  of  opinion; 
Who  can  enjoy  himself,  maugre  the  throng 
That  strive  to  press  the  quiet  out  of  him ; 
Who  sits  upon  Jove's  footstool  as  I  do. 
Adorning,  not  afiecting,  majesty  ; 
Whose  brow  is  wreathed  with  the  silver  crown 
Of  clear  content." — Marston. 

"He  that  ruleth  over  men  must  be 
just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God." 

II.   The  function  of  a  true   king. 

It  is  implied  that  his  business  is  to 
administer  justice.  *'  Give  the  king 
Thy  judgments,  O  God."  The  *'judg~ 
ments"  are  the  legal  decisions,  or  sen- 
tences. The  judgments  of  God  are 
contrasted  with  those  which  the  king 
gives  independently.  "The  essence  of 
all  justice  lies  in  the  conformity  of  the 
decisions  of  the  earthly  judge  to  the 
decisions  of  the  heavenly  Lord  of  Jus- 
tice." Barnes :  "  It  is  one  of  the 
primary  ideas  of  the  character  of  a  king 
that  he  is  the  fountain  of  justice ;  the 
maker  of  the  Jaws ;  the  dispenser  of 
rigl.t  to  all  his  subjects.  The  officers 
of  the  law  administer  justice  under 
him ;  the  last  appeal  is  to  him."  The 
true  administrators  of  justice  are  ''per- 
suaded that  justice  is  God's  own  work, 
and  themselves  His  agents  in  this  busi- 
ness,— the  sentence,  of  right,  God's  own 
verdict,  and  themselves  His  priests  to 
deliver  it."  (Comp.  Deut.  i.  17 ;  2 
Chron.  xix.  6  j  Pro  v.  viii.  15.) 

*' A  monarch  should  be 
Heaven's  true  vicegerent,  whose  superior  soul 
Raised  high  above  the  tyrant's  selfish  poorness. 
Pants  but  for  power  of  doing  good,  rejects 
All  power  of  doing  ill ;  who  makes  no  war 
But  to  revenge  his  people's  wrongs  ;  no  peace 
But  what  secures  their  safety ;  courts  no  fame 
But  from  their  happiness  :  a  parent  he, 
Tlie  public  parent — they  not  slaves,  but  sons." 

— Mallet. 

382 


Or,  as  Tennyson  portrays  him — 

**  Who  reverenced  his  conscience  as  his  king  ; 
Whose  glory  was,  redressing  human  wrong  ; 
Who  spake  no  slander,  no,  nor  listen'd  to  it ; 
Who  loved  one  only,  and  who  clave  to  her." 

"The  king  that  faithfully  judgeth  the 
poor,  his  throne  shall  be  established  for 
ever."  The  kingdom  whose  rulers  are 
not  characterised  by  righteousness,  and 
whose  judges  are  not  just,  must  hasten 
to  its  overthrow. 

III.  The  need  of  a  true  king.  It  is 
implied  in  the  text  that  he  needs — 

1.  Divine  guidance.  "  Give  the  king 
Thy  judgments,  O  God."  If  kings  are  to 
exercise  the  functions  of  their  high  office 
truly  and  wisely,  they  must  be  instructed 
and  strengthened  from  above.  When 
*'the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understand- 
ing, the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 
spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of 
the  Lord"  rests  upon  kings,  their  rule 
shall  be  righteous,  their  throne  secure, 
and  their  subjects  happy.  (Comp.  Isa. 
xi.  2-5.) 

2.  Divine  grace.  *'  Give  Thy  right- 
eousness unto  the  king's  son."  Right- 
eousness is  not  innate  in  kings.  "There 
is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  Right- 
eousness must  come  to  them  as  the  gift 
of  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
and  must  be  sought  and  obtained  by 
faith,  &c.  Very  great  is  the  need  of 
kings  of  the  constant  help  of  God. 
Their  temptations  are  many  and  very 
powerful;  they  stand  in  slippery  places; 
their  exaltation  has  a  tendency  to  un- 
settle their  moral  equilibrium,  &o.  They 
need  the  guidance  and  support  of  the 
Divine  hand. 

IV.  The  duty  of  subjects.  We  may 
make  this  our  prayer  for  our  rulers  : — 
"  Give  the  king  Thy  judgments,  0  God," 
&c.  Every  subject  ought  to  pray  for 
the  blessing  of  God  upon  his  sovereign. 
M.  Henry  :  "  Those  who  would  live 
quiet  and  peaceable  lives  must  pray  for 
kings  and  all  in  authority,  that  God 
would  give  them  His  judgments  and 
righteousness."  Let  us  pray  God  with 
His  favour  to  behold  all  the  rulers  of 
men,  and  so  replenish  them  with  the 
grace  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  may 
alway  incline  to  His  will  and  walk  in 
His  way. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXII, 


The  Glorious  Reign  of  the  Messiah, 


(  Verses 

That  these  splendid  utterances  cannot 
be  applied  merely  to  the  kingdom  of 
Solomon,  or  of  any  of  his  successors, 
must  be  obvious  even  to  the  most  super- 
ficial reader.  That  they  are  prophetic 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  will  also 
be  obvious,  we  think,  to  every  one  who 
thoughtfully  regards  them.     Consider — 

I.  The  blessings  of  His  reign.  Se- 
veral of  these  are  here  specified. 

1.  The  administration  of  justice.  "  He 
shall  judge  Thy  people  with  righteous- 
ness, and  Thy  poor  with  judgment.  He 
shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people.  He 
shall  save  the  children  of  the  needy, 
and  shall  break  in  pieces  the  oppressor," 
(See  remarks  in  the  preceding  sketch 
on  the  function  of  a  true  king.)  Elo- 
quently has  Isaiah  portrayed  the  char- 
acter of  the  Messianic  administration 
(xi.  1-5). 

2.  The  enjoyment  of  peace.  "  The 
mountains  shall  bring  peace  to  the 
people,  and  the  little  hills  by  right- 
eousness." Mountains  and  hills  are 
characteristic  features  of  Palestine.  In 
ancient  times  these  were  terraced  and 
cultivated  as  far  up  as  possible.  In  the 
representation  of  this  peace  by  the 
Psalmist  we  have  three  ideas.  (1)  Pre- 
valence. The  mountains  and  hills  by 
reason  of  their  number  and  prominence 
are  well  fitted  to  express  the  idea  that 
the  land  everywhere  shall  be  full  of 
peace.  There  shall  be  "abundance  of 
peace."  The  war  drum  shall  no  longer 
throb,  and  the  battle  flag  shall  be  for 
ever  furled.  Men  **  shall  beat  their 
swords  into  ploughshares,"  &c.  Strife 
and  bitterness  between  different  classes 
of  society  shall  be  no  more.  Peace  in 
man's  own  being.  Peace  between  man 
and  man.  Peace  between  God  and  man. 
(2)  Reality.  "  Peace  by  righteous- 
ness." The  peace  which  is  not  rooted 
in  righteousness  is  spurious  and  decep- 
tive. True  peace  is  the  product  and 
consequence  of  righteousness.  It  is  so 
in  the  individual.  "  Being  justified  by 
faith  we  have  peace  with  God,"  &c.  It 
la   so   also  in   society  and  in  nations. 


2-17.) 

Christ  is  "  the  Prince  of  Peace,"  because 
He  "  reigns  in  righteousness."  (3)  Per- 
manence.  The  spurious  peace  which  is 
not  rooted  in  righteousness  is  of  short 
duration.  The  true  peace,  which  is 
"by  righteousness,"  shall  last.  Like 
its  Author,  it  is  abiding,  everlasting. 
What  an  unspeakably  precious  boon  is 
this  Divine  peace  ! 

3.  TJie  progress  of  religion  (vers, 
5-7).  We  have  three  conspicuous  fea- 
tures of  true  religion.  (1)  Reverence 
towards  God,  "They  shall  fear  Thee 
as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure, 
throughout  all  generations."  One  of  the 
blessed  effects  of  the  glorious  reign  of  the 
Messiah  is  that  God  will  be  regarded 
by  man  with  the  deepest  reverence. 
And  this  reverence  shall  be  perpetual. 
Generations  of  men  come  and  go — 

**  Like  the  snowfall  in  the  river, 
A  moment  white — then  melts  for  ever." 

But  the  sun  and  moon  remain  and  shine 
through  all  generations.  While  they 
remain,  God  shall  be  reverenced  by 
man.  And  when  they  are  no  more, 
even  for  ever,  shall  He  be  feared.  (2) 
Refreshment  from  God.  "  He  shall  come 
down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass  ; 
as  showers  that  water  the  earth."  A 
beautiful  illustration  of  Divine  influ- 
ences— 

**  As  rain  on  meadows  newly  mown, 
So  shall  He  send  His  influence  down  % 
His  grace  on  fainting  souls  distils, 
Like  heavenly  dew  on  thirsty  hills," — Watts. 

The  showers  that  water  the  earth  tend 
to  produce  life^  beauty,  and  fruit.  In 
this  they  symbolise  the  gracious  influ- 
ences of  the  reign  of  Jesus  Christ. 
(3)  Growth  towards  God.  "In  His 
days  shall  the  righteous  flourish."  As 
the  mown  grass  springs  into  vigorous 
and  beauteous  growth  after  genial  show- 
ers, so  the  righteous  in  His  day  shall 
grow  and  prosper ;  they  shall  bring 
forth  "fruit  unto  holiness."  If  they 
have  been  depressed,  by  His  blessing 
they  shall  be  revived  and  strengthened. 
Their  faith  and  love  and  obedience,  their 

383 


PSALM  LZXir. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


consecration  and  zeal  and  sanctity,  their 
truth  and  tenderness  and  power,  all 
shall  increase.  What  an  inspiring  and 
glorious  prospect  this  is  !  Evil  shall  not 
always  lord  it  over  good,  (fee. 

4.  Beneficent  government.  We  have 
already  made  some  remarks  on  the 
righteousness  of  His  administration,  but 
we  return  to  it,  because  the  Psalmist 
gives  special  prominence  to  His  treat- 
ment of  the  poor  and  the  oppressed. 
Three  characteristics  at  least  of  that 
treatment  he  sets  before  us.  (1)  He 
regards  the  cry  of  the  needy  and  help- 
less. "He  shall  deliver  the  needy 
when  he  crieth  ;  the  poor  also,  and  him 
that  hath  no  helper."  Not  even  the 
most  obscure  or  despised  of  men  shall 
cry  to  Him  in  vain.  (2)  He  champions 
their  cause.  "He  shall  spare  the  poor 
and  needy,  and  shall  save  the  souls  of 
the  needy.  He  shall  redeem  their  soul 
from  deceit  and  violence."  He  will  be- 
friend the  friendless,  will  be  the  Helper 
of  the  helpless,  and  the  Protector  of  the 
defenceless.  "  His  administration  will 
have  special  respect  to  those  who  are 
commonly  overlooked,  and  who  are  ex- 
posed to  oppression  and  wrong."  (3) 
He  prizes  their  life.  "  And  precious 
shall  their  blood  be  in  His  sight."  In 
His  sight  men  are  precious  not  in  pro- 
portion to  their  rank  or  wealth  or 
power,  but  according  to  their  character. 
"The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are 
His,"  and  holds  them  dear  to  Him. 
He  guards  His  subjects  well  because  He 
loves  them  well.  "Christ  is  the  poor 
man's  King." 

5.  Abundant  prosperity.  "There 
shall  be  an  handful  of  corn  in  the  earth 
upon  the  top  of  the  mountains,  the  fruit 
thereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon,  and 
they  of  the  city  shall  flourish  like  grass 
of  the  field."  The  word— H Dip —trans- 
lated ^^ handful"  is  rendered  abund- 
ance by  Conant,  Gesenius,  Hengsten- 
berg,  Moll,  et  al.  Fuerst  gives  as  its 
meaning,  super ahundance.  Abundance 
of  corn  is  the  sign  of  abundant  pros- 
perity. As  the  mountains  are  prominent 
and  picturesque,  so  the  signs  of  the 
prosperity  would  be  conspicuous  and 
beautiful  The  cities  also  shall  be  popu- 
lous and  prosperous.  Beauty,  plenty,  and 

384 


joy,  shall  be  universally  diffused  through- 
out the  dominions  of  the  Messiah.  An 
historical  basis  of  the  ideas  of  prosperity 
presented  in  this  verse  is  found  in  the 
time  of  Solomon,  and  recorded  in  1 
Kings  iv.  20.  (For  further  treatment 
of  verse  16,  see  below.)  Such,  in  brief, 
are  some  of  the  more  prominent  bless- 
ings of  the  reign  of  the  Christ.  Consider — 
IL  The  universality  of  His  reign 
(vers.  8-11). 

1.  He  shall  reign  over  all  classes. 
The  wanderers  of  the  desert  and  the 
kings  of  wealthy  and  famous  cities  shall 
bow  to  the  sway  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Rich  and  poor,  learned  and  illiterate, 
distinguished  and  obscure,  great  and 
small,  men  of  all  ranks  and  conditions, 
shall  loyally  call  Jesus  Lord. 

2.  He  shall  reign  in  all  places.  "  He 
shall  have  dominion  also  from  sea  to  sea, 
and  from  the  river  unto  the  ends  of  the 
earth."  For  an  historical  basis  of  the 
statements  in  verses  8-10,  see  1  Kings 
iv.  21.  Applying  the  words  of  verse  8, 
to  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  we  are 
not,  it  seems  to  us,  to  fix  upon  any  par- 
ticular sea  or  river.  M.  Henry :  "  No 
sea,  no  river,  is  named,  that  it  might, 
by  these  proverbial  expressions,  intimate 
the  universal  monarchy  of  the  Lord 
Jesus."  Hengstenberg  :  "  The  dominion 
of  this  king  extends  from  any  one  sea  to 
any  other  sea,  and  from  any  river  even 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth — it  is  a  kingdom 
of  boundless  extent."  "  All  nations 
shall  serve  Him."    (Comp.  Rev.  xi  15.) 

And  His  dominion  shall  be  as  secure 
as  it  is  wide,  as  real  as  it  is  extensive 
All  His  foes  shall  be  completely  sub- 
dued unto  Him.  "  His  enemies  shall 
lick  the  dust,"  in  token  of  reverence  and 
submission  to  Him. 

Mark  the  reason  of  this  universal  and 
complete  sovereignty.  The  Psalmist 
gives  it  in  verses  12-14.  Perowne : 
"  The  reason  is  given  why  all  kings  and 
nations  should  thus  do  homage  to  Him 
who  sits  on  David's  throne.  He  has 
merited  such  submission  by  the  exercise 
of  every  royal  virtue,  by  the  justice  and 
the  mercy  of  His  sway,  by  His  deep 
sympathy  with,  and  compassion  for,  the 
poor,  by  the  protection  which  He  extends 
to  them  against  the  ministers  of  fraud 


HO  Ml  LET IG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXII. 


and  violence.  It  is  not  that  He  merely 
covers  with  the  shadow  of  His  throne 
all  neighbouring  nations,  and  is  acknow- 
ledged as  their  political  head,  but  that 
the  bright  example  which  He  sets,  the 
majesty  of  righteousness  enthroned  in 
His  person,  compels  all  to  bow  before 
Him." 

III.  The  perpetuity  of  His  reign. 
"  They  shall  fear  Thee  as  long  as  the 
sun  and  moon  endure,  throughout  all 
generations.  .  .  .  His  name  shall  endure 
for  ever ;  His  name  shall  be  continued 
as  long  as  the  sun."  Margin :  *'  Shall 
be  as  a  son  to  continue  his  father's  name 
for  ever."  Conant  ;  "  As  long  as  the 
sun  shall  His  name  flourish."  Moll : 
"  Before  the  sun  let  His  name  sprout." 
The  idea  seems  to  be  that  the  name  of 
the  king  would  be  always  acquiring  fresh 
renown  by  His  new  deeds  on  behalf  of 
His  subjects.  Through  all  the  coming 
generations  of  men  new  glories  shall 
break  forth  for  His  name,  in  which  all 
nations  may  bless  themselves.  The 
reign  of  Jesus  will  be  perpetual.  "  His 
kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and 
His  dominion  is  from  generation  to 
generation."  The  perpetuity  of  His 
reign  is  guaranteed  by — 

1.  IVie  declarations  of  God's  Word 
(Prf.  xlv.  6,  Ixxxix,  36 ;  Isa.  ix.  7  ;  Dan. 
iv.  3  ;  Rev.  xi.  15). 

2.  The  chaiacter  of  His  sovereignty. 
He  rules  in  the  hearts  of  His  subjects, 
by  the  force  of  truth,  righteousness,  and 
love.  The  loyalty  and  service  which 
they  render  to  Him  are  voluntary  and 
joyous. 

IV.  The  praise  of  His  reign.  The 
Psalmist  represents  this  as  presented  to 
the  king  in  various  forms.  It  is  ex- 
pressed by — 

1.  Rendering  homage  to  Him.  "  They 
that  dwell  in  the  wilderness  shall  bow 
before  Him,  and  His  enemies  shall  lick 
the  dust.  Yea,  all  kings  shall  fall  down 
before  Him." 

2.  Rendering  service  to  Him.  "  All 
nations  shall  serve  Him."  His  subjects 
will  praise  Him  not  only  by  forms  and 
expressions  of  homage,  but  by  loyal 
obedience  also.  Their  hearty  submis- 
sion to  Him  will  be  manifest  in  their 
devoted  service. 

2b 


3.  Paying  tribute  to  Him.  "  The 
kings  of  Tarshish  and  of  the  isles  shall 
bring  presents ;  the  kings  of  Sheba  and 
Seba  shall  offer  gifts.  To  Him  shall 
be  given  of  the  gold  of  Sheba."  The 
day  is  surely  coming  when  men  every- 
where shall  gladly  lay  their  best  and 
most  treasured  possessions  at  His  feet. 
Genius,  eloquence,  power,  riches,  shall 
all  be  heartily  rendered  to  Him. 

4.  Ascribing  blessing  to  Him. 
*'  Prayer  also  shall  be  made  for  Him 
continually,  and  daily  shall  He  be 
praised.  And  men  shall  be  blessed 
in  Him :  all  nations  shall  call  Him 
blessed."  The  prayer  is  made  "  not  for 
Him  personally,  but  for  the  success  of 
His  reign — for  the  extension  of  His 
kingdom.  Prayer  made  for  that  is  made 
for  Him^  for  He  is  identified  with  that." 
Instead  of  "  men  shall  be  blessed  in 
Him,"  many  render  :  "  Shall  bless  them- 
selves in  Him ; "  and  interpret  it  as  the 
expression  of  admiration  of  His  blessed- 
ness, and  desire  to  be  blessed  as  He  is. 
Daily  men  praise  Him.  And  the  time 
approaches  when  men  of  every  nation 
shall  constantly  ascribe  to  Him  all 
power,  and  dominion,  and  glory,  and 
blessing ;  their  lives  shall  become  grate- 
ful, adoring,  and  songful ;  from  all 
peoples,  and  from  all  places,  praise  shall 
ascend  to  the  Saviour-King. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  enemies  of 
Christ  submit  themselves  cheerfidly  to 
Him  as  their  King.  Manifestly  it  is 
both  their  duty  and  their  interest  to  do 
so.  2.  Let  His  loyal  subjects  take  en- 
couragement from  the  sure  and  glorious 
prospect  of  His  reign.  The  sin  and 
strife  and  sorrow  of  the  race  will  have 
an  end.  The  kingdom  of  holiness, 
peace,  and  joy  will  be  universal  and 
perpetual.  Here  is  encouragement  to 
work  and  wait,  to  pray  and  hope. 

"  O'er  every  foe  victorious, 

He  on  His  throne  shall  rest: 
From  age  to  age  more  glorioua, 
All  blessing  and  all  blesa'd. 

"  The  tide  of  time  shall  never 
His  covenant  remove: 
His  name  shall  stand  for  ever ; 
That  name  to  us  is — Love." 

— Montgomery. 
385 


f SALM  LXXII. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


Peace  by  Power. 
(Verse  3.) 


"The  mountains  shall  bring  peace." 
The  writer  of  this  Hebrew  ode  finds 
the  peaceful  in  the  grand — rest  in  great- 
ness. Our  doctrine  is,  that  the  quiet  of 
the  human  soul  is  to  he  honestly  founds 
not  in  descending  to  its  lower  or  less- 
forcible  states,  hut  in  the  freedom  of  its 
higJiest  qualities,  and  through  its  stronger 
exercises:  or,  that  Christian  peace  is  an 
attainment  of  the  spiritual  energies,  and 
not  a  mere  acquiescence  in  inferiority. 

When  the  Saviour  speaks  of  the  ulti- 
mate result  of  His  religion  in  the  single 
heart  or  in  the  world,  He  calls  it  Peace  ; 
"  Peace  I  leave  with  you ;  My  peace  I 
give  unto  you."  But  as  soon  as  you 
look  into  the  spirit  and  relations  of  His 
words,  you  see  that  in  this  peace  there 
is  something  quite  peculiar.  He  says, 
"  My  peace."  It  is  a  peace  obtained  by 
the  drops  of  blood  and  the  cross  j  Geth- 
semane  and  Calvary  ;  by  a  life  in  which 
there  was  no  place  to  lay  the  head.  It 
is  not  a  mere  constitutional,  negative, 
nor  any  superficial  peace  :  it  is  not  what 
we  call  pleasure,  nor  a  happy  tempera- 
ment, nor  gratified  sensibilities,  nor 
satiated  appetites.  It  is  something 
deeper  and  stronger.  It  is  an  attain- 
ment ;  it  is  a  victory  ;  it  is  tribulation 
overcome.  It  is  the  mightiest  powers 
of  our  nature  balanced,  reconciled,  and 
harmonised  at  last,  though  we  know  not 
by  what  struggles  and  sufferings,  till,  by 
\he  perfect  sway  of  one  supreme  principle 
of  faith,  there  are  the  equipoise  and 
serenity  that  pass  all  understanding. 
.  The  three  obvious  attributes  of  moun- 
tains are  elevation,  magnitude,  and  per- 
manency. Out  of  these  three  several 
characters  comes  an  influence  of  peace. 
In  just  such  attributes  of  strength,  hu- 
man character,  also,  is  to  find  its  moral 
balance,  its  real  peace,  viz.,  in  its  aspira- 
tion, its  largeness,  its  constancy.  Man 
is  high  with  his  devotional  affections, 
his  prayers ;  wide  with  his  practical 
principles  ;  and  steadfast  with  his  con- 
victions. Or,  he  is  high  with  his  spirit, 
wide  with  his  will,  and  steadfast  with 
his  reason.  With  these  three  properly 
386 


adjusted,  you  will  have  a  general  effect 
of  serenity  ;  because  such  a  man  will 
live  in  a  certain  equipoise  within  him- 
self, centred  and  completed  according 
to  the  grand  designs  of  his  Creator,  as 
a  creature  belonging  both  to  the  world 
and  heaven.  He  reaches  up  into  the 
infinite  mystery  that  broods  like  a  sea 
of  conscious  lire  about  him.  He  reaches 
out,  in  all  liberal  fellowships,  to  man- 
kind, with  a  love  that  cannot  narrow 
into  hatred,  nor  be  fretted  into  war ; 
and  he  rests  firmly  on  eternal  founda- 
tions. And  thus,  on  all  sides — God- 
ward,  and  man-ward,  and  self- ward — so 
far  as  man  can,  he  resides  in  the  secu- 
rities of  a  well- defended  peace. 

Spiritual  serenity,  then,  is  spiritual 
strength.  It  conies  in  by  no  softness 
of  sentiment,  but  by  thorough  work.  It 
comes  by  a  faith  that  emboldens  and 
energises  the  whole  soul,  a  penitence 
that  searches  and  strains  it,  and  often  a 
secret  fight  of  affiictions.  Christianity 
is  a  robust  religion.  It  was  planted  in 
the  world  by  a  race  of  heroes.  ... 

Take  any  one  of  these  three  traits  just 
mentioned  away,  and,  besides  what 
other  ruin  you  make,  you  most  disas- 
trously disturb  the  peace.  .  .  .  On  which- 
ever side  you  enfeeble  man,  you  un- 
balance and  torture  him. 

Proceed  to  some  examples,  in  other 
regions  of  life,  how  peace  depends  on 
power. 

In  literary  expression,  the  effect  of 
pathos  is  finest  in  thinkers  habitually 
severe.  What  saves  sentiment  from 
sentimentality  is  the  feeling  of  a  firm 
intellectual  fibre  through  the  emotion. 

Persons  who  have  been  in  the  strain 
and  peril  of  some  moral  or  civil  revolu- 
tion, wounded  with  real  weapons,  and 
compacted  by  times  of  terror,  if  they 
have  benignant  qualities,  impress  us  in 
that  way  far  more  than  is  possible  for 
men  of  softer  discipline.  Tenderness  is 
doubly  tender  when  we  know  a  rugged 
and  aggressive  temper  has  been  subdued 
to  it  by  that  rule  over  the  spirit  which 
is  mightier  than  the  taking  of  cities. 


HO  MI  LET W  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXII. 


It  is  familiar  how  bereavements,  which 
aie  the  storms  of  the  soul,  prepare  the 
way  for  religious  tranquillity.  Crosses 
bring  calmness.  ...  In  the  solemn  por- 
trait-galleries of  history,  the  serenest 
faces  are  the  saddest — where  peace  has 
not  been  inherited,  but  conquered. 

We  have  this  union  of  power  and  ten- 
derness eminently  in   such  as  Luther ; 


Again,  in  the  great  pacifications  of 
empires,  the  same  rule  prevails.  It 
takes  the  strongest  heads  to  bring  peace. 
Diplomacy  has  to  summon  her  stoutest, 
clearest  -  sighted,  and  farthest  -  sighted 
ministers.  The  most  intrepid  are  most 
pacific.  Magnanimity  makes  no  quar- 
rels. 

Hence  we  come  to  discover  in  what 
order  of  persons  we  are  to  look  for  the 
noblest  charity  and  the  real  consolation. 
We  want  our  consolers  to  be,  not  only 
the  subjects  of  pain,  but  its  conquerors 
through  their  suffering.  The  more  mas- 
culine your  pity,  the  more  it  moves  and 
melts. 

And  when  we  speak  of  comfort,  we 
are  directed  up  to  the  Comforter.  .  .  . 
What  is  the  whole  doctrine  of  that  Spirit, 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  Paul  ? 
They  represent  Him  as  not  only  Com- 
forter, but  also  and  first,  Rebuker,  Re- 
newer,  and  Sanctifier. 

All  our  peace  is  in  God,  who  is  not  only 
the  strongest,  but  Almighty.  "  The  Lord 
will  give  strength  unto  His  people ;  the 
Lord  will  bless  His  people  with  peace." 

Personal  applications. 

\.  Learn  never  to  be  afraid  of  rugged 
and  even  painful  experiences. 


"  Great  souls  snatch  vigour  from  the  stormy 

air, 
While  weaker  natures  suffer  and  despair, 
Grief  not  the  languor  but  the  action  brings, 
And  spreads  the  horizon  but  to  nerve  the 

wings." 

2.  A  rule  for  "  strengthening  the 
brethren."  As  we  would  comfort  one 
another,  we  must  try,  with  the  apostle's 
earnestness,  to  "  endure  hardness  as 
good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ." 

3.  Of  how  sterling  worth  is  a  form  of 
relii^ious  belief  which  holds  fast  the 
stringent  as  well  as  the  soothing  doctrine 
of  Christ's  evangelical  teaching.  The 
order  of  the  universe  is  poised  between 
justice  and  mercy ;  and  it  is  not  kind- 
ness, but  the  bitterest  cruelty,  which 
would  unsettle  that  order,  by  giving  us 
a  Deity  too  doting  to  punish,  and  too 
fond  too  judge. 

4.  Learn  the  way  of  making  our  own 
eternal  life  secure.  The  New  Testa- 
ment speaks  continually  to  us  of  salva- 
tion. By  salvation  Christ  means  such 
safety  as  lies  in  a  sturdy  and  athletic 
power  of  character,  will,  heart,  con- 
science, and  intellect,  got  by  daring  to 
attempt  great  virtues  and  by  incessant 
intrepidity.  He  holds  up  no  lower  stan- 
dard than  to  be  perfect  as  the  Father  in 
heaven  is  perfect.  He  wins  confidence 
by  the  very  immensity  of  His  demands. 

5.  We  disturb  the  true  spiritual  order 
and  invert  God's  plan  for  us,  whenever 
we  go  in  search  of  peace  first,  and  not 
holiness.  "  First  pure,  then  peaceable  :" 
that  is  the  clearly-pronounced  order  and 
everlasting  law  of  a  disciple's  way. — F. 
D.  Huntington^  D.D.  Abridged  from 
Christian  Believing  and  Living, 


The  Gospel  the  Power  of  God. 


(Verse  16.) 


Such  figurative  language  as  that  of 
the  text  is  frequently  employed  to  de- 
scribe the  Gospel  as  a  mere  system  of 
means,  unlikely  to  accomplish  the  pur- 
pose contemplated,  and  yet  as  certain  of 
ultimate  success.  Considering  this  Ian- 
guage  as  referring  to  the  Gospel,  let  us 
notice — 

I.  The  insignificance  of   its   com- 


mencement. In  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the 
waters  issuing  from  the  sanctuary,  it  is 
but  "  a  little  rill,"  which  takes  its  rise 
at  the  south  side  of  the  altar,  just  where 
the  blood  of  the  sacrifices  overflow.  In 
the  vision  of  Nebuchadnezzar  it  is  *'  a 
little  stone,"  cut  out  of  the  mountain 
without  hands.  And  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament we  find  our  Saviour  comparing 

387 


t&ALU  LXXH. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


it  to  "  a  grain  of  mustard  seed ; "  and 
to  "  a  little  leaven  "  hid  in  meal.  In 
our  text  it  is  compared  to  "  a  handful  of 
corn." 

1.  Looh  at  its  commencement  in  the 
world.  It  was  heralded  by  one  who 
had  not  his  abode  in  cities,  who  was  not 
of  the  honourable  of  the  earth,  either  as 
to  wealth  or  learning ;  but  one  of  stern 
and  forbidding  aspect,  &c.  Look  at  its 
Author;  a  poor  carpenter's  son,  belong- 
ing to  the  despised  city  of  Nazareth ; 
and  to  Him,  He  associates  twelve  of  the 
poorest  class  of  society.  Yet  to  these 
twelve  was  committed  the  task  of  evan- 
gelising the  world. 

2.  Look  at  the  fewness  of  its  doctrines. 
The  first  preachers  of  the  Gospel  went 
forth  to  proclaim  a  fact — that  Jesus 
Christ  had  died  for  sinners — and  from 
that  fact  they  drew  various  inferences, 
and  urged  various  duties  upon  men,  and 
with  these,  as  all  that  was  necessary  to 
accomplish  their  purpose,  they  went 
forth. 

3.  Looh  at  its  commencement  in  the 
heart.  How  insignificant  are  some  of 
the  means  made  use  of.  Perhaps  it  is  a 
single  word  dropped  from  the  lips  of  a 
preacher ;  sometimes  it  is  the  sight  of  a 
word  in  the  Bible  ;  sometimes  even  a 
look  is  enough  ;  sometimes  many  are 
awakened  by  merely  seeing  others  in 
concern,  as  in  the  great  revival  at  Kil- 
syth, a  century  ago. 

II.  Its  unlikelihood  of  success. 
"An  handful  of  corn  in  the  earth  on 
the  top  of  the  mountains."  How  un- 
likely, how  impossible,  for  it  to  yield  a 
crop  there.  Yet  such  is  the  figure  em- 
ployed to  represent  the  Gospel  in  the 
world.     This  language  may  point  out — 

1.  The  feebleness  of  its  instrumentality. 
Soil  found  on  the  tops  of  mountains, 
both  from  its  poverty  and  scarcity, 
would  be  a  very  unlikely  instrument  for 
yielding  a  crop  of  corn.  So  they  who 
have  been  employed  by  God  in  diffusing 
the  Gospel  have  not  been  such  instru- 
ments as  were  likely  in  human  estima- 
tion to  accomplish  its  purposes.  "  God 
hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  mighty."  He 
hath  put  the  '*  treasure  in  earthen  ves- 
sels, that  the  excellency  of  the  power 
388 


may  be  of  God."  The  first  preachers  of 
the  cross  were  a  few  fishermen. 

2.  The  difficulties  it  has  to  surmount. 
Corn  sown  on  the  top  of  a  mountain 
would  not  be  likely  to  yield  a  crop,  on 
account  of  the  adverse  influences  it 
would  have  to  encounter.  There  would 
not  only  be  the  unfitness  and  scarcity  of 
the  soil  itself ;  there  would  be  the  want 
of  solar  heat,  its  exposed  situation,  open 
to  every  current  of  air  and  to  all  the 
storms  of  the  sky  ;  and  as  mountains 
are  the  first  to  attract  the  clouds,  th<^ 
teeming  rain  would  likely  wash  down 
both  seed  and  soil  to  the  base  beneath. 
The  Gospel,  in  its  first  promulgation 
among  men,  had  to  encounter  many 
obstacles.  (1)  It  had  to  contend  with 
long-established  forms  of  error,  ...  to 
encounter  systems  of  superstition,  which 
possessed  a  mighty  influence  over  the 
minds  of  their  votaries,  because  they 
had  the  argument  of  antiquity  in  their 
favour,  and  because  they  were  the 
religious  systems  of  their  fathers.  (2) 
It  had  to  encounter  those  errors  in  an 
age  of  great  refinement.  This  was  the 
Augustan  age  of  literature.  It  was  at 
this  time  that  some  of  the  greatest  minds 
that  ever  adorned  our  planet  were  shed- 
ding the  light  of  learning,  philosophy, 
and  poetry  around  them,  much  of  which 
is  resplendent  to  the  present  day.  How 
unlikely  was  the  Gospel  to  make  pro- 
gress in  such  an  age  as  this.  Yet  this 
was  the  period  chosen.  (3)  The  enmity 
of  marHs  nature  is  another  obstacle  which 
would  then  as  now  be  presented  to  the 
progress  of  the  Gospel.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  doctrines  or  duties  of  the  Gospel 
which  is  at  all  congenial  to  man's  fallen 
nature.  Its  truths  are  foolishness  to 
him.  Its  purity  excites  his  enmity. 
(4)  There  is  against  the  Gospel  the  com- 
bined powerful  agency  of  the  mighty  and 
malicious  prince  of  darkness  and  his 
numerous  followers.  This  is  a  subject 
of  frequent  allusion  to  the  early  pro- 
moters of  Christianity. 

III.  Its  glorious  results.  "  The  fruit 
thereof  shall  shake  like  Lebanon,"  &c. 
These  results  are  placed  before  us — 

1.  In  the  fertility  that  attends  it. 
Wherever  the  waters  of  the  Gospel  flow, 
it  turns  the  wilderness  into  a  fruitful 


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LXXII. 


field,  and  makes  the  desert  as  "the 
garden  of  the  Lord."  "  Lovely  tempers, 
fruits  of  grace,"  everywhere  attend  the 
proclamation  of  the  Gospel  of  peace. 

2.  In  the  beauty  that  adorns  it, 
"  Shake  like  Lebanon."  How  beautiful 
the  change  which  the  Gospel  has  effected 
in  every  place  in  which  it  has  been 
introduced.  It  has  been  alike  success- 
ful in  demolishing  callous  systems  of 
philosophy  and  sanguinary  superstition. 
What  are  those  buildings  which  rear 
their  fronts  where  once  Druid  temples 
were  erected  1  They  are  asylums  for 
the  wretched,  the  sick,  the  destitute,  and 
the  dying.  And  to  what  do  we  owe 
the  change  1  To  the  Gospel  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Witness  its  triumphs 


also  in  the  islands  of  the  South  Sea,  in 
Africa,  &c. 

3.  In  the  triumphs  which  it  is  destined 
universally  to  accomplish.  "  They  of 
the  city  shall  flourish  like  grass  of  the 
earth."  Count  the  numbers  of  the 
blades  of  grass  which  are  spread  over 
the  surface  of  this  earth  of  ours:  'ou 
cannot !  Neither  can  you  count  the 
numbers  of  the  future  converts  of  Zion. 
This  language  may  also  point  out  its 
rapid  progress  in  the  latter  day.  Grass 
is  proverbially  speedy  in  its  growth. 
The  triumphs  of  the  Gospel  will  very 
soon  be  equally  rapid.  "  The  earth  shall 
be  made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day,  and  a 
nation  be  born  at  once." — Abridged  from 
One  Hundred  Sketches  of  Sermons, 


Hope  Opened  to  the  World. 
(Verse  17.) 


**  Men  shall  be  blessed  in  Him ;  all 
nations  shall  call  Him  blessed." 

Hope,  with  respect  to  the  world, 
affords  some  comfort  to  us,  when  view- 
ing its  affecting  condition  since  the  fall ; 
and  this  spring  of  consolation  we  have 
opened  to  us  in  God's  word  of  promise. 
"What  a  glorious  time  is  the  Psalmist 
looking  forward  to  here  !     Observe — 

L  The  objects  regarded.  "  Men." 
Not  angels.  While  we  have  abundant 
cause  to  admire  the  grace  of  God  in 
this ;  it  must  obviously  be  looked  upon 
as  bearing  a  striking  impress  of  sove- 
reignty. Men  participated  with  devils 
in  their  guilt ;  yet  not  one  of  the  latter 
is  ever  to  be  blessed  (Heb.  ii.  16;  2 
Pet.  ii.  4 ;  Jude  6). 

XL  The  number  included.  "All 
nations."  How  many  nations  are  there 
in  the  world  that  never  heard  of  Christ  % 
How  many,  that  have  been  deprived  of 
the  Gospel  during  a  long  series  of  ages  ? 
But  this  distinction  among  nations  with 
respect  to  the  means  of  salvation  was 


never  intended  in  the  Divine  mind  to 
continue  always  (Matt.  xxiv.  14;  xxvi. 
13;  Mark  xiv.  9;  xvi.  15).  If  little 
has  been  hitherto  done  for  distant 
countries,  it  must  be  ascribed  to  the 
selfishness  of  men  (Phil.  ii.  21). 

IIL  The  exercise  mentioned.  "  Call 
Him  blessed."  The  worth  of  Christ 
shall  be  universally  sung  ;  none  shall  be 
afraid  to  confess  Him  before  men,  or 
dare  to  offer  any  vain  excuse  for  not 
yielding  allegiance  to  Hini ;  but  from 
every  tribe  under  heaven  soldiers  shall 
hasten  to  His  standard  and  proclaim 
His  honours. 

IV.  The  certainty  expressed.  ''AH 
nations  shall  call  Him  blessed."  This 
certainty  may  be  argued  from  prophetic 
representation  —  from  the  dominion 
given  to  the  Saviour — from  the  facilities 
afforded  in  the  present  day  to  mission- 
ary exertions  —  from  the  desires  and 
expectations  of  the  saints — and  from  the 
Divine  threaten ings  against  the  powers 
of  darkness. — W,  Sleigh, 


DOXOLOGY. 

{Verses  18-20.) 

"Verses  18  and  19  do  not  belong  to  second  book."  This  doxology  is  fuller 
the  Psalm,  but  contain  the  doxology  than  that  which  is  appended  to  Ps.  xli., 
which    forms    the    conclusion    of    the      at  the  close  of  the  first  book. 

389 


MALM  LXIII. 


MOM  I  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


The  historical  remark  which  consti- 
tutes verse  20  is  no  part  either  of  the 
Psalm  or  of  the  doxology.  It  seems  to 
have  been  attached  to  a  collection  of 
the  Psalms  of  David,  as  distinguished 
from  separate  Psalms  of  his.  Hengsten- 
berg  :  "  All  the  Psalms  of  David  in  the 
last  two  books  are  inserted  as  component 
parts  into  the  later  cycles.  The  sub- 
scription at  the  end  of  the  second  book 
must  have  been  designed  to  separate 
the  free  and  the  bound,  the  scattered 
and  the  serial  Psalms  of  David,  from 
each  other.  Analogous  in  some  measure 
is  the  subscription — '  At  an  end  are  the 
speeches  of  Job,'  in  Job  xxxi.  40,  which 
is  not  contradicted  by  the  fact  that  Job 
appears  again  speaking,  in  chaps,  xl. 
and  xlii. ;  it  should  rather  be  regarded 
as  serving  to  give  us  a  right  understand- 
ing of  that  formal  conclusion."  In  this 
doxology  there  are  four  leading  homi- 
letic  points — 

I.  The  comprehensiveness  of  the 
praise.     God  is  praised  because — 

1.  Of  what  He  is  in  Himself, 
**  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God,  and  blessed 
be  His  glorious  name."  Note  the  ideas 
conveyed  by  these  terms.  "  Jehovah" — 
'^the  existing f  i.e..  He  who  has  come 
into  existence  by  nothing  outside  Him- 
self, the  continuing,  permanent,  everlast- 
ing ;  its  antithesis  or  opposite  being  the 
non-real,  the  transitory,  the  nought.^'' — 
Fuerst.  "  God,"  Elohim,  the  Almighty. 
"  His  glorious  name,"  perhaps  referring 
particularly  to  Jehovah.  "  Still  the 
prayer  would  be,  that  all  the  names  by 
which  He  is  known,  all  by  which  He 
has  revealed  Himself,  might  be  regarded 
with  veneration  always  and  every- 
where." 

2.  Of  what  He  is  to  His  people. 
"  The  God  of  Israel."  He  had  entered 
into  covenant  relation  with  them.  (See 
p.  205.) 

3.  Of  what  He  does.  "  Who  only 
doeth  wondrous  things."  (a)  In  crea- 
tion. (/3)  In  providence.  (7)  In  redemp- 
tion. His  wondrous  redemptive  work 
transcends  even  angelic  intelligence. 
**  Which  things  the  angels  desire  to  look 
into." 


**  The  first-boru  sons  of  light 
Desire  in  vain  its  depths  to  see ; 
They  cannot  reach  the  mystery, 

The  length  and  breadth  and  height." 

His  works  are  wondrous  (1)  In  their 
power.  (2)  In  their  wisdom.  (3)  In 
their  kindness.  ''While  we  were  yet 
sinners  Christ  died  for  us."  (4)  In 
their  significance.  "  No  man  can  find 
out  the  work  that  God  maketh  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end."  Therefore, 
"Blessed  be  the  Lord  God,"  &c. 

II.  The  perpetuity  of  the  praise. 
"For  ever." 

**  My  days  of  praise  shall  ne*er  be  past, 
While  life  and  thought  and  being  last, 
Or  immortality  endures." 

He  is  "  the  author  of  eternal  salva- 
tion ; "  He  calls  us  "  to  His  eternal 
glory  ;"  He  promises  an  "  eternal  inheri- 
tance ; "  therefore,  let  His  praise  be 
eternal. 

"But  0  !  eternity's  too  short 
To  utter  all  His  praise." 

III.  The  universality  of  the  praise. 

"  Let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  His 
glory."  (Comp.  Num.  xiv.  21.)  This 
brief  prayer  involves  two  things — 

1.  That  the  whole  earth  may  he  fUed 
with  His  blessing.  "It  is  not  a  little 
favoured  spot  that  the  Psalmist  regards  ; 
it  is  not  an  insulated  portion  of  the 
globe  that  he  would  have  fructified  and 
converted  into  a  paradise.  It  is  not  on 
his  own  garden  or  fields  that  he  wishes 
the  refreshing  showers  only  to  fall ;  but 
with  a  noble,  expansive,  and  generous 
mind,  he  prays  that  the  whole  earth 
may  be  filled  with  God's  glory." 

2.  lliat  the  whole  earth  may  he  filled 
with  His  praise.  "  Let  every  heart,  and 
every  mouth,  and  every  assembly  be 
filled  with  the  high  praises  of  God." 
(See  Mai.  i.  11.) 

IV.  The  intensity  of  the  praise. 
"Amen  and  Amen."    (See  p.  205.) 

"May  kindness,  truth, 
Wisdom,  and  knowledge,  liberty,  and  power. 
Virtue,  and  holiness  o'erspread  all  orbs  ; 

the  world  be  bliss  and  love  ; 
And  heaven  above  be  all  things ;  till  at  last 
The  music  from  all  souls  redeemed  shall  rise, 
Like  a  perpetual  fountain  of  pure  sound, 
Upspringing,  sparkling  in  the  silvery  blue; 
From  round  creation  to  Thy  feet,  0  God !  " 

— P.  J,  Bailey, 


390 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


FSALAl  LXXIi. 


PSALM    LXXIII. 

INTRODUCTION. 

SuperscnpHon. — **  A  Psalm  ofAsaphj"  or,  as  in  the  margin,  *'  for  Asaph.**  See  introduction 
to  Ps.  1. 

Subject. — The  mental  difl&culties  arising  from  the  contemplation  of  the  temporal  prosperity 
of  the  wicked  and  the  adversity  of  the  righteous  under  the  government  of  God,  "  The  Psalm 
is  very  neaily  related  to  the  xxxvii.  and  xlix.,  as  far  as  its  contents  are  concerned.  Amyraldua 
took  quite  a  correct  view  as  to  what  distinguishes  it  from  these  Psalms,  and  forms  its  individual 
physiognomy.  *In  Psalm  xxxvii.  the  prophet  merely  shows  how  believers  ought  to  conduct 
themselves  when  they  perceive  the  prosperity  of  the  ungodly  :  he  himself  did  not  stumble  at 
it.  But  here  Asaph,  though  a  great  and  pious  man,  acknowledges  that  the  providence  of  God 
in  this  respect  did  sometimes  appear  to  him  mysterious,  and  that  he  felt  great  difficulty  in 
justifying  it.  Yea,  from  the  beginning  of  this  Psalm  we  see  how  he  merged  out  of  the  deep 
thoughts  into  which  his  spirit,  agitated  and  vexed  by  doubts,  had  sunk,  until,  in  the  end,  better 
views  obtained  the  ascendancy.  .  .  ,  He  has  adopted  this  method  in  order  that  believers  might 
contemplate,  as  in  a  picture,  the  conflict  to  which  at  times  they  are  exposed,  and  might  see 
what  weapons  they  have  to  seize  against  the  assaults  of  the  flesh.' " — Hengstenherg, 


The  Good  Man's  Confidence  of  God's  Goodness  to  His  People. 

(Verse  1.) 


I.  He  indicates  the  character  of 
God's  people. 

"  Israel,  .  .  .  such  as  are  of  a  clean 
heart."  The  Psalmist  held  that  ''  they 
were  not  all  Israel  which  were  of  Israel ; 
neither  because  they  were  the  seed  of 
Abraham  were  they  all  children."  He 
speaks  not  of  those  who  were  Israelites 
merely  according  to  the  flesh,  but  of 
those  who  in  spirit  and  principle  and 
conduct  were  "  Israelites  indeed."  The 
true  Israelite  was  clean  not  only  cere- 
monially, but  also  spiritually.  So  now 
the  people  of  God  are  not  those  who 
merely  claim  to  be  "  the  elect "  of  God, 
or  those  who  merely  "  profess  and  call 
themselves  Christians,"  or  those  who 
merely  say  unto  Jesus  Christy  "  Lord, 
Lord  ; "  but  those  who  "  do  the  will  of 
the  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  God 
requires  of  His  people  "truth  in  the 
inward  parts." 

1.  MavbS  heart  hy  nature  is  impure. 

2.  God  has  provided  means  for  the 
purification  of  man's  heart.  (Isaiah  i. 
18  ;  Zech.  xiii.  1 ;   1  John  i.  7-9.) 

3.  God  requires  man  to  avail  himself 
of  these  meaiis.  (Isaiah  i.  16  ;  1  Thess. 
iv.  7  ;  Heb.  xii.  14.) 

4.  The  true  people  of  God  are  com- 
plying with  this  requirement. 

II.  He  asserts  God's  special  goodness 
to  His  people. 


"  God  is  good  to  all,  and  His  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  His  works ; "  but 
He  is  especially  good  to  His  own  people. 
This  may  be  seen  in  that, — 1.  He  over* 
rules  all  circumstances  and  events  for 
their  well-being  "  Mercies  and  afflic- 
tions shall  turn  to  their  good  ;  the  most 
poisonous  drugs  shall  be  medicinal ;  the 
most  cross  providence  shall  carry  on  the 
design  of  their  salvation."  "All  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God."  2.  He  guides  and  sustains  them 
in  this  life  (vers.  23,  24).  "  In  the 
cloudy  and  dark  day"  He  leads  them 
wisely  and  safely,  and  when  life's  "  bur- 
den seems  greater  than  their  strength 
can  bear,"  He  makes  His  grace  to  abound 
unto  them.  3.  He  Himself  is  their  ever- 
lasting portion  and  joy  (vers.  25,  26). 
His  presence  breathes  peace  within  them 
even  amidst  outward  agitation  and  con- 
flict, fills  their  heart  with  supernal  music 
even  amidst  the  most  hoarse  and  tumul- 
tuous voices  of  the  world,  and  so  enriches 
their  being  that  they  feel  that  they  have 
all  things  in  Him.  4.  He  will  receive 
them  into  ever-increasing  glory  (ver.  24). 
The  fulness  of  life  and  treasure,  of  joy 
and  blessedness,  which  is  reserved  in 
heaven  for  them,  is  unspeakably  great. 
"  Truly  God  is  good  to  Israel."  This 
Asaph  had  once  doubted,  sadly  and 
painfully  doubted.     Now  he  doubts  it 

Sdl 


PSALM  LXXm. 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


no  longer,  but  asserts  It  with  the  clear 
accent  of  deep  conviction.  He  is  con- 
fident that  God  is  thus  good  to  Israel, — 
1.  Notwithstanding  all  appearances 
tending  to  an  opposite  conclusion  (vers. 
3-14.)  2.  Notwithstanding  Ids  own  dark 
doubts  (vers.  3,  11,  13).  3.  As  may  he 
proved  satisfactorily   to   men  of  sincere 


heart  hy  many  considerations^  e.g.y  (a) 
Our  ignorance  (ver.  22).  We  see  only 
a  small  part  of  His  ways.  (/3)  Tlie 
brevity  of  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
(vers.  18,  19).  (7)  The  vast  superiority 
of  the  portion  of  the  good  man  (vers. 
23-26).  It  is  superior  in  its  nature, 
duration,  &c. 


The  Temporal  Prosperity  of  the  Wicked, 
{Verses  2-\L) 


I.  The  temporal  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  is  sometimes  clearly  manifest. 

1.  In  their  exemption  from  trouble. 
"  They  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  men, 
neither  are  they  plagued  like  other  men." 
It  is  not  unfrequently  the  case  that  men 
who  are  living  selfish  and  sinful  lives 
appear  to  enjoy  complete  immunity  from 
the  sufferings  and  trials  to  which  the 
great  majority  of  men  are  subjected. 
It  almost  seems  as  though  there  had 
been  some  special  interposition  of  Pro- 
vidence in  their  favour,  warding  away 
from  them  "  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to." 
They  are  the  most  ill-deserving,  yet  they 
have  the  best  portion.  To  unaided 
human  reason  this  is  an  inexplicable 
anomaly ;  but  to  the  meek  believer 
"there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness." 
There  are  stones  which  are  so  common 
that  no  lapidary  will  attempt  to  cut  or 
polish  them  into  brilliance  and  beauty. 
There  are  others  which  they  manipulate 
with  fond  care  and  patient  enthusiasm. 
"  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth," 
&c. 

2.  In  the  gratification  of  their  desires, 
"Their  eyes  stand  out  with  fatness; 
they  have  more  than  heart  could  wish." 
Their  luxury  and  self-indulgence  are  so 
great  that  they  are  manifest  in  their 
countenance,  and  especially  in  their  eyes. 
The  face,  that  index  of  the  soul,  pro- 
claims to  all  observers  the  nature  of 
their  portion  and  its  plenteousness. 
They  "  fare  sumptuously  every  day." 
The  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  table 
would  be  a  feast  in  the  eyes  of  many  a 
poor  saint.  "  Their  wishes  are  gratified, 
and  more ;  their  very  greediness  is  ex- 
ceeded ;  they  call  for  water,  and  the 
world  gives  them  milk;   they  ask  for 

392 


hundreds,  and  thousands  are  lavished  at 
their  feet." 

3.  In  the  increase  of  their  possessions. 
They  "  prosper  in  the  world ;  they  in- 
crease in  riches."  They  are  like  the 
rich  man  whose  grounds  brought  forth 
so  plentifully  that  he  had  not  where  to 
bestow  his  fruits  and  goods.  Their 
harvests  are  not  injured  by  blight  or 
mildew  or  storm ;  their  vessels  are  not 
wrecked  at  sea ;  their  business  is  not 
ruined  by  losses  or  the  failures  of  other 
men.  Swiftly  and  surely  "  they  increase 
in  riches."  Such  was  the  temporal 
prosperity  of  the  wicked  which  met 
the  eye,  and  arrested  the  attention, 
and  troubled  the  soul  of  the  Psalmist. 
It  was  unmistakably  great  and  mani- 
fest. 

II.  The  temporal  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  is  sometimes  continued  even 
to  the  very  end  of  life. 

It  might  have  been  thought  that  as 
they  drew  near  to  the  end  of  life  their 
peace  and  pleasure  would  have  been  ex- 
changed for  anxiety  and  pain  ;  and  that 
their  death  would  be  marked  by  remorse 
and  dread.  But  "  there  are  no  bands 
in  their  death ;  but  their  strength  is 
firm."  Their  prosperity  apparently  en- 
dures to  the  very  last  moment  of  their 
life  in  this  world.  They  have  lived  in 
pleasure,  and  they  die  in  peace.  Their 
spiritual  sensibilities  are  so  blunted  that 
death  and  eternity  make  no  impression 
upon  them.  Or  their  hearts  have  be- 
come "  hardened  through  the  deceitful- 
ness  of  sin."  Or  they  delude  themselves 
with  false  hopes,  and  "  believe  a  lie." 

III.  The  temporal  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  has  an  injurious  effect  upon 
their  character. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXXIII. 


1.  It  generates  pride,  "Pride  com- 
passeth  them  about  as  a  chain ;  .  •  . 
they  speak  loftily."  Their  temporal 
prosperity  awoke  in  them  no  feeling  of 
gratitude,  no  humble  sense  of  want  of 
desert ;  but  a  conceited  notion  and  feel- 
ing that  they  were  incomparably  superior 
to  other  men.  When  prosperity  humbles 
us  with  the  feeling  of  our  unworthiness 
it  is  truly  a  blessing  ;  when  it  leads  us 
to  ask,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the 
Lord  for  all  His  benefits  to  me  ] "  it  is 
enriching  our  souls.  But  when  by  rea- 
son of  it  we  are  inflated  with  presumption 
and  pride  it  becomes  to  us  a  great  curse. 
How  vain  and  mistaken  is  pride  of  wealth 
even  in  the  man  of  greatest  possessions  ! 

2.  It  generates  tyranny  and  violence, 
"Violence  cove  re  th  them  as  a  garment; 
.  .  .  they  speak  wickedly  concerning 
oppression."  Their  own  prosperity, 
which  should  have  made  them  generous 
and  kind  to  the  unfortunate,  made  them 
violent  and  tyrannical.  Violence  was 
their  habit ;  they  wore  it  as  a  garment. 
They  oppressed  the  poor,  and,  so  far 
from  feeling  ashamed  of  themselves  for 
so  doing,  or  having  any  misgivings  as  to 
their  conduct,  they  boasted  of  it,  they 
gloried  in  it.  They  were  tyrannical,  and 
paraded  their  tyranny.  They  were  cruel, 
and  exulted  in  their  cruelty.  Such  con- 
duct reveals  the  meanness  and  cowardice 
of  their  nature,  and  stamps  them  as  be- 
longing to  the  basest  and  blackest  of  the 
race  of  evil-doers. 

3.  It  generates  hlasphemy.  "  They 
set  their  mouth  against  the  heavens,  and 
their  tongue  walketh  through  the  earth." 
So  far  are  they  from  acknowledging  God 
as  the  Author  of  their  prosperity  that 
they  speak  against  Him.  They  are  so 
puffed  up  that  they  imagine  themselves 
independent  of  God  and  masters  of  the 
world ;  and  they  blaspheme  His  name. 
Surely  such  sinners — proud,  oppressive, 
violent,  blasphemous  sinners — are  ripen- 
ing for  destruction.  Sure  as  there  is 
justice  in  the  universe,  sooner  or  later  it 
must  smite  them,  unless  they  turn  from 
their  evil  way.  They  are  "  treasuring 
up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath." 
The  temporal  prosperity  of  these  men  is 
not  to  blame  for  their  wickedness.  In 
the  nature  of  prosperity  itseif  there  i« 


nothing  fitted  to  deprave  human  char- 
acter. On  the  other  hand,  it  has  often 
been  the  means  of  great  spiritual  bless- 
ing. Nor  in  granting  such  prosperity 
does  God  design  the  corruption  or  hard- 
ening of  human  hearts.  All  His  designs 
aim  at  human  blessedness.  It  is  the 
depraved  heart  of  man  that  perverts 
the  blessing  of  temporal  prosperity  and 
educes  so  much  evil  from  it.  Sinful 
man  can  pervert  the  bread  of  life  into 
rankest  poison,  and  even  "  turn  the  grace 
of  God  into  lasciviousness." 

IV.  The  temporal  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  is  a  great  trial  to  the  people 
of  God. 

1.  It  generates  painful  doubts  concern- 
ing Him.  As  they  reflect  upon  the 
prosperity  of  these  wicked  men  they 
say,  *'  How  doth  God  know  ?  and  is 
there  knowledge  in  the  most  High?" 
Can  it  be  that  God  sees  all  this  pros- 
perity and  all  this  wickedness,  and  yet 
allows  if?  If  He  knew  these  apparently 
great  anomalies  which  perplex  and  dis- 
tress His  people,  would  He  not  prevent 
them?  It  is  difficult  at  times  for  a 
thoughtful  mind  to  believe  in  the  omni- 
science of  an  Almighty  and  righteous 
and  good  God.  And  the  contemplation 
of  good  men  suffering,  and  outrageously 
wicked  men  triumphing,  frequently  oc- 
casions such  doubt. 

2.  It  generates  doubts  as  to  the  value 
of  religion.  Asaph  felt  that  he  had 
"cleansed  his  heart"  in  vain,  and  "  washed 
his  hands  in  innocency"  in  vain.  It 
seemed  to  him  that  it  was  of  no  use  that 
he  had  striven  after  purity  in  his  inner 
and  outer  life. 

3.  Occasions  great  sorrow  to  them. 
"  His  people  return  hither,  and  waters 
of  a  full  cup  are  wrung  out  to  them." 
They  returned  again  and  again  to  the 
contemplation  of  this  subject,  and  as 
often  as  they  returned  they  would  drink 
deep  draughts  of  sorrow.  The  mysteries 
of  Providence  are  sometimes  painful  to 
believers ;  and  when  faith  is  sorely  tried 
in  any  matter  that  pertains  to  God,  great 
is  the  grief  of  His  people.  Asaph  was  fre- 
quently and  greatly  afflicted.  "  All  the 
day  long  he  was  plagued,  and  chastened 
every  morning  ; "  while  the  proud  rebels 
were  exulting  in  their  prosperity. 

393 


PSALM  LXXIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


4.  Imperils  their  spiritual  safety.  The 
Psalmist  felt  that  his  ''  feet  were  almost 
gone,  his  steps  had  well-nigh  slipped." 
His  faith  almost  failed  hira  in  his  great 
trial ;  unbelief  was  almost  victorious. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  those  who  are 
prospering  temporally  learn  to  grasp  their 
blessings  with  a  grateful  hand,  and  to 
dispense  them  with  a  generous  hand,  lest 


they  become  a  curse  to  them.  2.  Let  the 
proud  sinner  humble  himself  penitently 
before  God  and  sue  for  mercy  ere  it  is  too 
late.  3.  Let  the  per-plexed  saint  learn 
with  patience  to  wait  till  God  explains 
the  mysteries  of  His  government.  "  What 
I  do  thou  knowest  not  now;  but  thou 
shalt  know  hereafter." 


Crises  in  the  Spiritual  Life, 


(  Verse 

Considering  these  crises  as  illustrated 
by  this  of  Asaph's,  we  remark — 

I.  That  they  are  sometimes  occa- 
sioned by  the  providence  of  God.  It 
was  so  in  the  case  before  us.  Nearly 
every  thoughtful  person  has  felt  the 
difficulty  which  perplexed  the  Psalmist. 
So  also  when  useful  and  valued  lives  are 
cut  off  in  the  midst  of  their  days,  while 
hoary-headed  sinners  are  left  cumbering 
the  ground,  or  afflicted  saints  wlio  long 
for  release  are  left  to  linger  here  in  pain; 
— or  when  generous  and  diligently  prose- 
cuted plans  of  usefulness  end  in  apparent 
failure,  while  selfish  and  evil  projects 
succeed,  our  faith  in  the  government  of 
God  is  sorely  shaken.  Ah !  there  are 
times  when  the  working  out  of  the  ar- 
rangements of  Providence  leads  us  to  cry 
out,  "  How  doth  God  know  1 "  &c.  At 
such  times  nothing  seems  real,  every- 
thing eludes  our  grasp,  we  can  obtain 
no  sure  footing,  &c. 

These  crises  of  the  inner  life  are 
sometimes  occasioned  by  temptations  in 
business,  or  in  society,  or  in  solitude ; 
the  temptation  is  real,  has  great  influence 
over  us,  we  are  on  the  point  of  yielding, 
our  "feet  are  almost  gone,"  &c. 

II.  That  they  are  painful  to  the 
soul.  Asaph  tried  to  overcome  his 
doubts  and  fears,  but  his  speculations 
were  all  baffled,  his  reason  was  over- 
matched, and  his  heart  was  pained.  His 
greatest  suffering  was  in  this,  that  he 
was  "  perplexed  in  reference  to  his  God.'' 
To  a  true  man  doubt  as  to  God's  charac- 
ter and  government  is  ever  a  distressing 
thing.  Only  fools  glory  in  doubting, 
criticising,  and  denying  the  great  truths 
which  are  the  stay  of  human  hearts.  He 
who  parades  his  doubts  has  never  expe- 
394 


2.) 

rienced  true  faith,  and  his  doubts  are 
unreal  or  he  could  not  parade  them. 
Such  sham  doubts  never  cause  any 
spiritual  crises.  The  doubts  of  a  living 
soul  are  faith  in  conflict  with  difficulties, 
faith  fighting  against  such  aspects  and 
interpretations  of  life,  and  against  such 
arguments  that  threaten  her  life.  Such 
struggles  of  ffiith  are  always  painful.  To 
the  sincere  soul  to  doubt  God's  wisdom, 
righteousness,  and  love,  is  unspeakable 
anguish. 

III.  That  they  are  surmounted  in 
communion  with  God.  In  drawing  near 
to  God  the  Psalmist  received  such  revela- 
tions as  strengthened  his  faith  and  hope, 
and  such  inspirations  as  gave  calmness 
and  joy  to  his  heart  (verse  17).  In 
fellowship  with  God  mental  difficulties 
vanish,  temptations  lose  their  power, 
spiritual  perils  cease.  "  The  meek  will 
He  guide  in  judgment,"  &c.  "  The 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that 
fear  Him,"  &c.  "  Such  as  are  of  a  clean 
heart"  will  surely  pass  victoriously  from 
the  darkness  and  pain  of  doubt  into  the 
light  and  joy  of  assured  confidence. 

**  Perplext  in  faith,  but  pure  in  deeds, 
At  last  he  beats  his  music  out." 

Take  your  doubts  to  God,  tell  Him  of 
your  temptations,  hide  yourself  in  Him 
in  the  time  of  danger,  and  you  will  come 
out  of  every  trial  and  crisis  of  your  inner 
life  more  than  conqueror. 

Our  subject  urges  the  importance 
of— 

1.  Watchfulness,  lest  we  fall. 

2.  Maintaining  purity  of  heart  and 
righteousness  of  life.  Integrity,  truth- 
fulness, love,  are  ever  right  and  beautiful. 
In  the  densest  mental  darkness  cleave  to 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXIII. 


these  things.  "  If  any  man  will  do  His 
will  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine," 
<kc. 

3.  Seeking  fellowship  with  the  best  and 
highest,  especially  with  God  Himself,    If 


"into  the  sanctuary  of  God"  to  seek 
help,  they  will  prove  blessings  in  disguise. 
If  the  great  trials  of  our  spiritual  life 
are  the  means  of  bringing  us  nearer  to 
the  heart  of  God,  they  will  turn  out  to 


trouble,  and  doubt,  and  pain  send  us      be  our  greatest  blessings 


The  Value  of  Dying  Experiences. 
(Verse  4.) 


The  calm  deaths  of  the  wicked  per- 
plexed the  Psalmist.  They  not  only 
lived  in  pleasure;  they  also  died  with 
ease.  Let  us  consider  The  Value  of 
Dying  Experiences — 

I.  The  calm  death  of  the  wicked  is 
no  proof  of  Divine  support.  Such 
calmness  may  arise  from — 

1.  Unconcern,  Their  spiritual  suscep- 
tibilities may  be  so  blunted,  and  their 
spiritual  faculties  so  enervated,  that  they 
have  no  lively  apprehensions  of  the 
spiritual  and  eternal  state  though  they 
are  so  near  to  it.  "  Conscience  may  be 
cold  and  dead,  so  that  when  the  man 
comes  to  die  he  is  utterly  callous  to  the 
unseen  things  of  God's  other  world,  and 
his  friends  say  that  he  died  like  a  lamb." 
"  Like  brutes  they  live,  like  brutes  they 
die."  Such  a  death  may  be  quiet,  but 
it  is  unspeakably  terrible.  Such  uncon- 
cern is  more  deplorable  than  wild  alarm. 
Think  of  the  man  when  the  unconcern 
is  broken ! 

2.  Hardihood,  "  Careless  persons 
become  case-hardened,  and  continue  pre- 
sumptuously secure  even  to  the  last." 
There  have  been  persons  so  hardened  in 
profanity  and  crime  that  they  have  de- 
termined, to  quote  their  own  words,  "  to 
die  game."  Lord  Byron  asked,  "  '  Shall 
I  sue  for  mercy  ] '  After  a  long  pause 
he  added,  *  Come,  come,  no  weakness, 
let's  be  a  man  to  the  last.'" 

3.  False  and  presumptuous  hopes  in 
Divine  mercy.  We  have  known  persons 
who  have  neglected  God  and  His  service 
all  their  life,  and  who,  when  remonstrat- 
ed with  have  said,  "  God  is  merciful  j 
if  when  we  come  to  die  we  ask  Him  to 
save  us.  He  will  do  so."  And  in  such  a 
state  they  have  died.  But  theirs  was 
not  Christian  faith  or  hope,  but  sinful 
presumption.    And  they  encouraged  the 


presumption  until  they  accepted  the  de- 
lusion as  reality,  and  believed  the  lie  to 
be  true  (Prov.  xi.  7). 

II.  Shrinking  and  fear  on  the  part 
of  the  righteous  as  they  approach 
death  are  no  proof  that  the  divine 
support  is  withdrawn. 

In  the  last  hours,  pain  and  a  sense  of 
the  solemnity  of  the  great  change  may 
be  a  sore  trial  to  the  child  of  God.  Our 
Lord  Himself  as  He  drew  near  to  death 
cried  out  in  mysterious  and  awful  an- 
guish of  spirit.  We  need  not  then  be 
surprised  if  His  humble  followers  cry 
out  as  they  draw  near  to  the  awful 
bourn. — This  point  is  admirably  illus- 
trated in  Christian  and  Hopeful  passing 
through  the  river  of  death,  in  Bunyan's 
Pilgrim! s  Progress. 

III.  The  most  precious  religious 
testimonies  of  the  dying  are  poor 
compared  with  the  testimony  of  a 
useful  and  godly  life. 

I  would  not  in  the  least  undervalue 
the  testimonies  of  dying  men  to  the 
truth  of  Christianity,  or  to  the  faith- 
fulness of  God,  or  to  the  preciousness 
of  Christ.  To  loving  friends  and 
relatives  such  testimonies  are  unspeak- 
ably precious.  Some  of  these  testimonies 
are  held  as  a  sacred  possession  by  the 
Christian  Church  at  large.  (See  an  ex- 
cellent collection  of  them  in  The  Diet. 
of  Illus.  ProsCy  Dickinson.)  But  we 
hold  that  they  are  not  to  be  compared 
with  the  testimony  of  the  life.  What 
are  a  few  dying  words,  however  beau- 
tiful and  precious,  to  years  of  holy  liv- 
ing and  useful  working  1  Moreover,  the 
mental  state  of  the  dying  is  often  affect- 
ed by  the  nature  of  the  disease,  or  by 
the  medicines  administered. 

1.  Learn  to  estimate  Andy  the  worth 
of  death-hed  scenes  and  testimonies.     A 

395 


b 


PSALM  LXXnl. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


quiet  death  is  no  more  a  proof  of  God's  2.  Learn  to  live  devoutly  and  righte- 

favour  than  a  life  of  temporal  prosperity,      ovdy,  because  so  to  live  is  the  will  of  God, 

A  Great  Necessity  of  all  Men  and  a  Great  Mistake  of  some  Men, 


(Verse  13.) 


I.  A  great   necessity  of  all  men. 

Purity  of  heart  and  life.  "  My  heart," 
my  inner  life :  "  my  hands,"  my  outer 
life.  Heart  and  hands  represent  spirit 
and  conduct.  Asaph  had  sincerely 
striven  after  purity  in  both.  His  words 
imply — 

1.  Consciousness  of  impurity  in  heart 
and  life. 

2.  Knowledge  of  a  cleansing  element 
or  influence  (Isa.  i..  18  j  Zech.  xiii.  1 ; 
Heb.  ix.  13,  U;  1  John  i.  7,  9). 


3.  Personal  application  of  this  element 
or  influence.     (Isa.  i.  16;  Rev.  vii.  14.) 

IL  A  great  mistake  of  some  men. 
"  In  vain."  In  this  Asaph  was  mis- 
taken ;  for,  1.  In  itself  purity  is  better 
than  impurity.  2.  The  desire  and  effort 
to  attain  purity  enrich  and  strengthen 
the  soul.  3.  The  i^eward  of  purity  is 
spiritual,  not  material,  and  is  largely 
realised  in  the  jjresent.  4.  The  reward 
of  purity  is  to  a  great  extent  in  the 
future. 


The  Transition  of  a  Troubled  Soul  from  Conflict  to  Victory. 

(Fer^w  15-17.) 


The  passage  of  the  Poet  from  doubt 
to  confidence  as  here  set  before  us  was 
marked  by — 

I.  Thoughtful  consideration  of 
others. 

Asaph  felt  that,  if  he  published  his 
inward  doubts,  and  made  known  the 
dark  suggestions  which  occurred  to  him, 
and  the  painful  experiences  through 
which  he  passed,  he  would  be  acting 
wrongly  towards  God's  people.  All  his 
trouble  he  kept  to  himself,  lest  by 
making  it  known  he  should  injure  the 
children  of  God.  Doubtless  there  are 
times  when  we  may  and  even  ought  to 
speak  of  our  mental  perplexities.  We 
may  speak  of  them  with  a  view  of  obtain- 
ing  help  to  overcome  them.  To  those 
who,  by  reason  of  large  spiritual  expe- 
rience, or  patient  and  devout  study,  or 
eminent  piety,  are  able  to  assist  us  in 
solving  the  enigmas  which  perplex  us, 
we  may  advantageously  speak  of  our 
difficulties  and  doubts.  We  may  speak 
of  them  with  the  view  of  affording  help 
to  others  who  may  be  engaged  in  the  con* 
flict.  If  we  have  overcome  our  difficul- 
ties and  have  entered  into  rest,  the  story 
of  our  battle  and  victory  may  nerve  the 
heart  of  some  brother  who  is  fighting  a 
similar  battle.  If  we  know  such  an 
396 


one  let  us  tell  him  of  the  trial  of  our 
faith,  and  how  we  overcame,  and  "  what 
God  hath  done  for  our  soul."  But  we 
may  not  speak  of  them  to  those  who 
are  strangers  to  such  questionings.  Un- 
told mischief  may  .be  the  result  if  we 
do.  We  have  no  right  to  infect  others 
with  the  doubts  which  distress  us.  And 
without  this  kindly  consideration  of 
others,  which  the  Psalmist  exercised,  we 
shall  not  be  likely  to  attain  the  victory 
over  our  own  doubts.  Let  us  be  ever 
ready  to  speak  wise  and  helpful  words, 
which  may  tend  to  increase  men's  faith 
and  hope ;  but  let  us  bear  our  own  pain 
in  silence  rather  than  obtain  relief  by 
communicating  our  doubts  to  those  who 
are  strangers  to  such  experiences,  and 
thereby  injuring  them  perhaps  irreme- 
diably. 

"  0  thou  that  after  toil  and  storm 

Mayst  seem  to  have  reach'd  a  purer  air. 
Whose  faith  has  centre  everywhere. 
Nor  cares  to  fix  itself  to  form  ; 

"  Leave  thou  thy  sister  when  she  prays, 
Her  early  Heaven,  her  happy  views; 
Nor  thou  with  shadow'd  hiut  confuse 
A  life  that  leads  melodious  days." 

— Tennyson, 

II.   Personal  effort  for  himself. 
According  to  verse  16,  the  Psalmist 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXIII, 


made  earnest  efforts  to  overcome  his 
mental  difficulties,  but  without  success. 
He  looked  at  the  subject  in  many- 
aspects,  he  approached  it  from  various 
directions,  he  considered  carefully  the 
respective  portions  of  it,  he  reasoned 
with  himself  concerning  it;  but  he 
could  not  overcome  his  doubts.  His 
perplexities  remained  in  full  force.  The 
enigma  still  confronted  him,  sphinx-like 
and  distressing.  Human  reason  is  un- 
able to  fully  understand  the  workings 
of  Divine  Providence.  Its  mysteries 
and  seeming  anomalies  arouse  many 
inquiries  to  which  we  are  utterly  unable 
to  give  any  satisfactory  response.  We 
think  to  know  this,  but  it  is  too  painful 
for  us.  Nor  is  this  surprising,  when  we 
consider — 

1.  Our  proneness  to  error.  We  are 
liable  to  err  in  judgment.  Our  moral 
imperfections  prevent  us  from  obtaining 
clear  views  of  spiritual  truth.  At  times 
bodily  suffering  and  mental  distress  lead 
us  to  meditate  almost  exclusively  upon 
the  pain  and  travail  of  life ;  we  close 
our  eyes  to  its  brightness  and  beauty 
and  joy.  In  all  ages  mankind  has  ex- 
hibited an  extraordinary  willingness  to 
"  follow  cunningly-devised  fables  ;  "  and 
even  sincere  truth-seekers  have  often 
wandered  into  strange  districts  of  error 
and  untruth. 

2.  The  vast  disparity  between  the 
student  and  the  subject  of  investigation. 
We  strive  to  comprehend  "  eternal  Pro- 
vidence, and  justify  the  ways  of  God  to 
man ; "  and  "  we  are  but  of  yesterday,  and 
know  nothing,  because  our  days  upon  the 
earth  are  as  a  shadow."  The  great  plan 
of  God's  government  is  so  vast  and  com- 
plicated, it  has  already  been  in  opera- 
tion so  long,  it  is  destined  to  continue 
to  operate  so  long,  and  the  span  of  its 
operations  is  so  wide  that  we  can  only 
see  a  very  small  portion  of  its  working. 
In  our  endeavour  to  interpret  His  way 
and  work  we  are  speedily  baffled  and 
bewildered,  while  He  calmly  carries  for- 
ward the  development  of  His  great 
plans  and  purposes,  leaving  us  to  work 
and  wait  with  patience  the  unfolding 
of  their  significance.  We  see  "  parts  of 
His  waysj  but  how  little  a  portion  is 
heard  of  Him'?      but  the  thunder  of  His 


power  who  can  understand  1 "  "  Where 
wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  foundations 
of  the  earth?  declare  if  thou  hast  un- 
derstanding." "  O  the  depths  of  the 
riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God !  how  unsearchable  are 
His  judgments,  and  His  ways  past  find- 
ing out ! " 

3.  The  Divine  reserve.  Many  things 
are  intentionally  hidden  from  us  by 
God.  *'  Secret  things  belong  unto  the 
Lord  our  God."  *'  Clouds  and  darkness 
are  round  about  Him."  "  His  way  is 
in  the  sea,  and  His  path  in  the  great 
waters,  and  His  footsteps  are  not  known." 
Mystery  is  educational.  It  excites  to 
inquiry  and  investigation.  It  promotes 
humility  and  reverence.  Mystery  is 
merciful.  If  the  secret  things  were 
revealed  to  us  the  knowledge  may  be 
overwhelming.  '*  I  have  yet  many 
things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot 
bear  them  now." 

III.  Approach  unto  God. 

*'  The  Psalmist  goes  here  with  the  feet 
of  his  heart  into  the  sanctuary,  draws 
near  to  God,  and  gets  from  this  clear 
fountain  the  insight  which  natural  rea- 
son could  not  give  him."  He  sought 
fellowship  with  God,  and  in  that  fellow- 
ship he  obtained  the  help  which  he 
needed.  He  entered  the  holy  place  of 
Divine  communion,  and  there  received 
such  intelligence  and  inspiration  as 
brought  confidence  and  peace  to  his 
soul. 

1.  Light  was  imparted  to  him.  The 
sinner's  portion  and  the  saint's  heritage 
appeared  to  him  in  new  and  different 
aspects.  He  saw  the  perils  which  sur- 
round the  wicked,  and  the  fearful  end 
which  awaits  them.  He  saw  also  the 
strong  "  right  hand  "  that  upholds,  the 
infallible  "  counsel "  that  guides,  and  the 
exceeding  '*  glory  "  that  awaits  the  good  ; 
and  he  felt  the  vast  superiority  of  the 
saint's  portion.  God's  revelation  in  pro- 
vidence should  be  studied  in  the  light 
which  proceeds  from  His  revelation  in 
His  Word. 

2.  His  faith  was  increased.  In  com- 
munion with  God  Asaph  saw  clearly 
his  own  insufficiency  and  God's  all-suffi- 
ciency, and  bis  faith  grew  strong.  As 
he  contemplated  the  revelations  of  the 

397 


PSALM  LXXIII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


future  wMch  he  received  in  the  sanc- 
tuary of  God  his  confidence  waxed 
strong  and  triumphant.  Communion 
with  God  imparts  assurance  and  peace 
to  the  soul.  In  His  presence  doubt 
expires. 

3.  His  heart  was  strengthened.  He 
felt  no  longer  pained  and  powerless,  but 
strong  and  joyful.  His  troubled  and 
almost-despairing  wail  has  given  place 
to  a  hymn  of  rest  and  gladness;  for 
"  God  is  the  Rock  of  his  heart,  and  his 
portion  for  ever." 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  those  who  boast 
themselves  in  the  strength  of  their  reason 


learn  how  insufficient  it  is  to  comprehend 
the  ways  of  God. 

2.  Let  the  perplexed  and  troubled 
child  of  God  learn  to  seek  help  in  comr- 
munion  with  his  Father — God. 

3.  Let  us  all  cultivate  a  large  and 
loyal  trust  in  the  providence  of  God, 
He  doeth  all  things  well. 

"  I'm  apt  to  think,  the  man 
That  could  surround  the  sum  of  things,  and  spy 
The  heart  of  God  and  secrets  of  His  empire, 
Would  speak  but  love  j  with  him  the  bright 

result 
Would  change  the  hue  of  intermediate  scenes, 
And  make  one  thing  of  all  theology." 

— Gamhold. 


The  present  Position  and  future  Prospects  of  the  Wicked  as  seen 
BY  THE  Spiritually  Enlightened  Man. 

{Verses  18-20.) 


I.  Their  present  position  is  perilous. 

"  Surely  Thou  didst  set  them  in  slip- 
pery  places."     The    prosperity   of   the 
wicked  is  not  a  stable,  abiding  thing. 
Riches    frequently    "  make   themselves 
wings  ;  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward 
heaven."     All  temporal  prosperity  and 
wealth   must    be   laid    down   at  death. 
When   the   rich   man   '*dieth  he  shall 
carry  nothing  away."     In  the  grave  all 
are  equal.     The  poor  wretch  who  died 
homeless  and  penniless  is  no  poorer  there 
than  "kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth, 
which  built  desolate  places  for  themselves, 
or  princes  that  had  gold  and  tilled  their 
houses  with  silver."  And  even  while  their 
wealth   and  pleasure    continue,  wicked 
men  stand  in  slippery  places ;  no  solid 
rock  supports  them ;  they  have  no  firm 
footing ;  their  very   wealth  may  prove 
the  occasion  of  their  overthrow;   their 
self-indulgence  and  luxury  may  lead  to 
their  utter  and  painful  ruin.       Surely 
their  position  is  not  an   enviable   one. 
Better  far  is  it  to  travel  our  life-journey 
upon  a  rugged  and  thorny  road  so  that 
it  be  safe  and  lead  to  a  blessed  destiny, 
than  to  waik  as  on  velvet  lawns  amid 
the  odours  of  sweetest  flowers,  in  con- 
stant peril,  and  with  certain  and  fearful 
destruction  awaiting  us  in  tlie  end. 

II.      Their    future    prospects    are 
terrible. 

Destruction  lies  before  them  as  their 
398 


portion  in  the  next  world.  In  this  life 
prosperity,  in  the  next  perdition.  In 
this  life  purple  and  fine  linen  and  sump- 
tuous fare ;  in  the  next  the  robe  of  flame, 
and  not  even  a  drop  of  water  to  allay 
their  burning  thirst. 

1.  Their  destruction  will  be  complete. 
**  Thou  castedst  them  down  into  de- 
struction. How  are  they  brought  into 
desolation  as  in  a  moment !  they  are 
utterly  consumed  with  terrors."  Not- 
withstanding their  wealth,  and  pomp, 
and  power,  justice  smites  them  sternly 
and  ruinously.  They  are  "punished 
with  everlasting  destruction  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of 
His  power." 

2.  Their  destruction  will  be  sudden, 
"  In  a  moment."  "  When  they  shall  say, 
peace  and  safety  ;  then  sudden  destruc- 
tion Cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon 
a  woman  with  child,  and  they  shall  not 
escape."  In  the  midst  of  their  prosper- 
ity, when  their  cup  of  pleasure  is  fullest, 
and  their  power  greatest,  and  their  sense 
of  security  most  confirmed,  tbey  are 
smitten  down  into  destruction  and  cast 
into  hell. 

"  They  fall  as  falls  the  oak— 
At  once,  and  blasted  by  the  thunder  stroke." 

3.  Their  destruction  is  effected  by  God. 
"  Thou  castedst  them  down  into  destruc- 
tioD."     Not  by  chance  does  their  ruia 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALM  LXXIIL 


come  upon  them,  but  "as  a  destruction 
from  the  Almighty."  God  comes  forth 
in  judgment  against  them  to  punish  them 
for  their  corruption  and  pride,  their  op- 
pression and  violence,  their  presumption 
and  blasphemy.  There  is  justice  in  the 
universe  ;  under  God's  government  evil- 
doers are  punished.  Though  the  execu- 
tion of  the  sentence  may  be  long  delayed, 
it  will  take  place  in  due  time.  Sinners 
must  either  be  saved  by  God  in  His 
mercy,  or  be  destroyed  by  Him  in  His 
justice. 

4.  Their  destruction  will  make  manifest 
the  unreality  of  their  former  prosperity. 
Ungodly  men  who  have  their  portion  in 
this  life  are  asleep  and  dreaming  as  re- 
gards the  realities  of  the  great  spiritual 
world.  To  them  truth,  righteousness, 
love,  their  own  souls,  and  the  great  God, 
are  very  unreal  and  shadowy.  Their 
temporal  possessions,  pleasures,  and 
powers,  they  regard  as  realities  grand 
and   precious.     But   their  dreams  will 


come  to  an  end.  A  great  awakening  is 
at  hand  for  them.  When  awakened  by 
God  their  estimate  of  things  will  be 
completely  reversed.  What  were  once 
their  realities  will  have  passed  a\^ay 
from  them  as  shadows ;  while  the  grand 
verities  which  once  they  set  aside  as 
myths  and  fables  will  be  clear  to  them 
in  all  their  reality  and  importance. 
They  will  "awake  to  shame  and  ever- 
lasting contempt."  "  As  a  dream  when 
one  avvaketh ;  so,  O  Lord,  in  the  awak- 
ing. Thou  shalt  despise  their  image." 
Who  can  fathom  the  abyss  of  sin  and 
degradation  which  he  has  sounded  whom 
God  despises  1  To  be  despised  by  God 
— how  unutterably  dreadful  I 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  wicked  take 
warning  and  turn  from  their  evil  way. 
The  "Lord  is  good,  and  ready  to  for- 
give, and  plenteous  in  mercy  to  all  them 
that  call  upon"  Him.  2.  Let  the  child 
of  God  never  more  envy  the  wicked  their 
temporal  prosperity. 


The  Life  of  Ungodly  Men  a  Dream. 
{Verse  20.) 


Human  life  on  the  earth  has  been 
compared  to  a  Pilgrimage  (Gen.  xlvii. 
9).— To  a  Race  (1  Cor.  ix.  24).-— To  a 
Battle  (1  Tim.  vi.  12). — To  a  Stewardship 
(Matt.  XXV.  14-30) — and  to  a  Dream, 
as  in  our  text. 

There  is  much  in  the  present  life  of 
every  good  man  that  is  very  dreamlike. 

**  We  are  such  stuff  as  dreams  are  made  of, 
And  our  little  life  is  rounded  by  a  sleep.'* 

In  relation  to  spiritual  and  eternal 
verities  the  impressions  of  earnest  godly 
men  are  but  dim  and  dreamy  as  com- 
pared with  the  verities  themselves. 
But  our  text  represents  the  life  of  un- 
godly men  as  a  dream.  Let  us  notice 
some  points  of  analogy  between  the 
two — 

I.  Unreality.  In  dreams  the  mind 
is  in  a  world  of  illusions,  a  world  of 
fiction.  Such  is  the  life  of  the  wicked, 
who  have  their  portion  in  this  world. 
See  this  in  their  ideas  of  pleasure,  wealth, 
and  usefulness.  How  false  !  See  it 
especially  in  the  things  upon  which  their 


heart  was  set,  as  mentioned  by  Asaph, 
viz.,  temporal  prosperity  and  worldly 
possessions. 

1.  They  are  evanescent.  Wealth, 
rank,  power,  are  often  lost.  They  must 
all  be  laid  down  at  death. 

2.  By  their  very  nature  they  are  not 
permanent  things.  Worldly  power  is 
essentially  a  shifting  thing ;  worldly  rank 
an  adventitious  thing;  material  wealth 
an  unstable  transitory  thing. 

3.  The  only  permanent  realities  to 
spiritual  beings  must  he  spiritual.  Truth, 
righteousness,  love,  •  the  human  soul, 
God,  are  real  and  abiding.  But  men 
call  the  shadows  realities,  &c. 

II.  Brevity.  Dreams  are  very  short. 
In  our  dreams  we  seem  to  live  for  hours, 
days,  weeks,  even  in  a  few  minutes. 
And,  at  the  longest,  how  brief  is  this 
life  of  ours  here  ! 

1.  When  viewed  with  respect  to  the 
work  to  he  done  hy  us  in  it.  Think  of 
the  work  to  be  done  by  us  in  ourselves 
and  for  ourselves,  and  of  the  work  we 
have   to   do   for   others.     Unspeakably 

399 


I>SALM  LXXni. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


momentous  issues  depend  upon  our  life 
in  this  world. 

2.  When  contrasted  with  eternity.  This 
present  life  is  a  mere  "  twinkling  of  an 
eye  "  when  placed  by  the  side  of  eternity. 
Yet  men  live  as  though  it  would  last 
for  ever.  Surely  they  are  dreaming; 
their  life  is  a  dream. 

III.  Termination.  Dreaming  is  not 
a  permanent  state.  Every  dream  has 
its  ending.  So  is  it  with  the  dream 
of  an  ungodly  life.  There  are  two 
awakenings,  one  or  other  of  which 
must  arouse  every  sinful  dreamer  to 
realities. 

1.  Some  aivahe  in  response  to  the  call 
of  Divine  love.  God  says  to  them, 
"Awake  rliou  that  sleepest,"  &c.  They 
hear  and  obey,  and  are  as  it  were 
in  a  new  world.  "  Old  things  have 
passed  away ;  all  things  have  become 
new."  To  them  now  "  life  is  real, 
life  is  earnest."      They  are  converted. 


They  have  awoke  to  reality  and  blessed- 
ness. 

2.  Some  awake  only  when  aroused  hy 
the  thunder  peals  of  judgment.  There  is 
no  refusing  to  listen  to  that  call.  They 
awake  to — 

(a.)  Disappointment.  Their  realities 
have  vanished ;  their  hope  expires  ;  their 
trust  becomes  their  confusion. 

(/3.)  Destitution.  The  things  in  which 
they  rested  all  fail  them  now.  Their 
fancied  wealth  is  all  gone.  Now  they 
know  themselves  to  be  "  wretched,  and 
miserable,  and  poor,"  &c. 

(y.)  Shame  and  Distress.  *'  Thou 
shait  despise  their  image."  Think  of 
"their  end.  .  .  .  Thou  castedst  them 
down  into,"  &c. 

Are  you  awake  ?  Or  are  you  asleep  and 
dreaming  ]  God  calls  to  you,  '*  Awake 
thou  that  sleepest,"  (fee.  "  Awake  to 
righteousness,"  &c.  Listen  and  obey. 
Awake  now. 


The  Attitude  of  a  Yictorious  Soul. 
{Verses  21-28.) 


Having  considered  the  severe  spiritual 
conflict  of  the  Psalmist,  and  the  transi- 
tion from  conflict  to  victory,  and  his 
estimate  of  the  portion  of  the  wicked 
after  he  had  been  spiritually  enlight- 
ened, we  now  proceed  to  notice  the  atti- 
tude of  his  soul  in  victory.  This  was 
marked  by  two  main  features. 

I.  Deep  self-abasement. 

Having  completely  mastered  his  diffi- 
culties and  come  out  of  the  battle  more 
than  conqueror,  we  listen  to  his  voice, 
and  hear  no  tone  of  self-applause,  no 
sound  of  boasting,  but  rather  a  humble 
confession  of  his  fqlly  and  ignorance. 
"  So  foolish  was  I,  and  ignorant :  I  was 
as  a  beast  for  thee."  He  felt  deeply  his 
own  ignorance  and  folly,  especially  in 
this  that  he  had  considered  human  life 
in  relation  to  the  Providence  of  God  as 
a  beast  might  have  done,  and  that  in 
the  presence  of  God.  He  looked  only 
at  the  things  which  are  seen  and  tem- 
poral, at  the  thiiags  of  sense,  like  the 
beasts  that  perish.  The  things  which 
are  unseen  and  eternal,  the  spiritual 
things,  the  things  which  relate  to  a 
4Q0 


future  state,  he  took  no  account  of.  In  the 
light  which  he  has  received  he  sees  how 
grievous  was  his  mistake,  and  humbles 
himself  before  God  on  account  thereof. 
Pride  and  spiritual  enlightenment  are 
incompatible.  They  cannot  co-exist. 
When  we  are  at  a  distance  from  God, 
and  walking  in  darkness,  we  may  con- 
ceitedly criticise  His  ways,  and  rashly 
pronounce  judgment  upon  His  doings. 
But  let  a  man  enter  into  the  sanctuary 
of  God  and  there  commune  with  Him, 
and  his  soul  will  be  humbled,  his  pride 
and  presumption  perish,  and  in  self- 
abasement  he  will  bow  before  God. 
Criticism  now  gives  place  to  worship. 
Presumption  is  changed  into  adoration. 

'*  The  more  Thy  glories  strike  mine  eyes 
The  humbler  I  shall  lie." 

The  victorious  soul  is  profoundly 
humble,  and  cries,  *'Not  unto  us,  not 
unto  us,  but  unto  Thy  name  give  glory." 
It  is  the  revelation  of  the  abounding 
grace  of  God  that  produces  the  deepest 
humility  in  us,  and  the  manifestation  of 
His  glory  that  prostrates  us  in  lowliest 
self-abasement. 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXItt. 


II.  Sublime  Confidence  in  God. 

The  Psalmist  had  a  glorious  assurance 
of— 

1.  The  constant  presence  of  God. 
"  I  am  continually  with  Thee."  He 
says  this  not  as  an  assertion  of  His 
faithfulness  to  God,  but  of  God's  faith- 
fulness to  him,  notwithstanding  his  igno- 
rance, and  folly,  and  unbelief.  Ever- 
more God  besets  us  behind  and  before, 
and  lays  His  hand  upon  us  for  good. 
We  may  wander  from  Him,  but  He 
does  not  abandon  us.  In  our  sorrow 
and  blinded  by  our  tears  we  may  see  in 
Him  nothing  more  than  an  unsym- 
pathetic "gardener,"  but  it  is  He  Him- 
self continually  with  us,  and  waiting  to 
bless  us.  Our  un worthiness  does  not 
drive  Him  away  from  us.  Through  all 
the  dark  wanderings  of  our  doubting 
and  perplexed  souls  He  accompanies  us. 
And  when  we  seek  for  Him,  lo !  He  is 
at  hand  to  help  us,  and  to  "  compass  us 
about  with  songs  of  deliverance." 

2.  The  unfailing  support  of  God. 
"  Thou  hast  holden  me  by  my  right 
hand."  As  for  the  Psalmist,  his  "  feet 
were  almost  gone,  his  steps  had  well- 
nigh  slipped,"  and  he  would  have  fallen 
had  not  God  upbeld  him.  In  the  trying 
journey  when  the  little,  weak  hand  of 
the  child  can  no  longer  retain  its  hold 
upon  the  father,  the  father  feels  the  re- 
laxing grasp,  and  with  his  strong  hand 
holds  the  little,  weak  one,  and  so  leads 
and  supports  the  dear  cLild  in  safety. 
And  so  the  heavenly  Father  supports  us, 
His  weak  and  erring  children.  Blessed 
be  His  name!  "Fear  thou  not;  for  I 
am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed ;  for  I 
am  tby  God  :  I  will  strengthen  thee ; 
yea,  I  will  help  thee  ;  yea,  I  will  uphold 
thee  with,"  &c.  "  When  thou  passest 
through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee," 
&c.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength 
be."  ^\^\iQ  promises  of  His  Holy  Word, 
and  the  experience  of  His  people,  and 
especially  His  own  character^  give  to  us 
most  encouraging  assurance  of  His  un- 
failing support.  He  will  never  forsake 
even  the  most  imperfect  of  His  people. 

3.  Tlie  infallible  guidance  of  God. 
Asaph  had  tried  his  own  counsel,  and 
found  it  folly.  He  had  made  expe- 
riment of  his  own  knowledge,  and  dis- 

20 


covered  it  to  be  ignorance  as  of  a  beast. 
Now,  with  unfaltering  confidence.  He 
turns  to  the  Divine  counsel  for  guid- 
ance. He  is  willing  that  God  should 
determine  His  destiny,  that  He  should 
choose  the  path  by  which  that  destiny 
shall  be  reached,  and  he  is  confident 
that  the  destiny  will  be  a  glorious  one. 
He  who  is  guided  through  life  by  God 
— (1)  Will  never  go  astray.  He  can- 
not err.  "  His  understanding  is  infi- 
nite." He  is  perfectly  acquainted  with 
the  traveller,  and  knows  well  every  step 
of  the  road.  (2)  Will  enjoy  the  highest 
companionship.  "  He  Himself  shall  be 
with  them,  walking  in  the  way,  and  the 
foolish  shall  not  err  therein."  Our 
hearts  burn  within  us  while  He  walks 
with  us  by  the  way,  and  opens  to  us 
the  Scriptures.  This  companionship  is 
— (a)  Enlightening.  (^)  Strengthen- 
ing, (y)  Transforming.  "  We  are 
changed  into  the  same  image."  (3) 
Will  he  conducted  to  Divine  honours. 
"  Afterward  receive  me  to  glory."  Oh, 
that  "  afterwards"  !  What  surprises  of 
joy  and  blessedness  God  has  for  us  in 
the  endless  "  afterwards  "  ! 

4.  The  all-sufficiency  of  God.  Asaph 
cannot  sufficiently  exalt  the  Lord  his 
God.  He  regards  Him  as — (1)  Supe- 
rior to  every  other  good  that  he  possessed 
or  desired.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven, 
but  Thee  %  and  there  is  none  upon  earth 
that  I  desire  beside  Thee."  In  heaven, 
with  all  its  high  and  holy,  its  wise  and 
strong  intelligences,  he  had  no  helper 
and  saviour  but  God.  And  upon  earth 
he  had  found  no  one  who  could  satisfy 
the  necessities  and  longings  of  the  soul 
like  God.  Deep  within  each  one  of  us 
there  is  the  consciousness  of  guilt,  we 
long  for  pardon.  He  alone  has  autho- 
rity to  say  unto  us,  "  Thy  sins  are  for- 
given thee;  go  in  peace."  There  are 
times  when  we  are  oppressed  with  the 
consciousness  of  moral  weakness^  we 
feel  unable  to  live  holily  and  labour  use- 
fully, we  long  for  help.  He  alone  can 
say,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee." 
We  feel  our  mortality,  yet  shrink  from 
death,  we  long  deeply  and  intensely  for 
immortal  and  blessed  lift.  He  alone 
can  say,  "  He  that  liveth  and  believeth 
in  Me  shall  never  die."     Our  hearts  are 

401 


PSALM  LiXin. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAtlY:  PSALMS. 


made  to  love  and  to  be  loved,  we  long 
for  the  love  of  some  perfect  being  who 
will  accept  our  affection  and  reciprocate 
it,  in  whom  we  realise  the  fulfilment  of 
our  highest  ideal  of  excellence,  and  who 
will  abide  with  us  for  ever.  He,  and 
He  alone,  can  satisfy  this  longing.  He 
loves  us  with  an  infinite  love,  He  craves 
our  love.  He  is  the  supremely  Beau- 
tiful, the  All-perfect  One,  and  He  is 
eternal.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
Thee  1, "  (kc.  (2)  Adequate  to  the  soul's 
needs  when  all  other  resources  fail.  "  My 
flesh  and  my  heart  faileth ;  but  God  is 
the  strength,"  &c.  He  looks  onward  to 
the  time  of  his  dissolution,  feels  by  an- 
ticipation the  exhaustion  of  his  physical 
powers,  and  his  heart,  the  seat  of  vitality, 
failing  him,  and  all  human  aids  of  no 
avail,  and  he  is  confident  that  even  then 
he  would  find  in  his  God  all  that  he 
needed.  "  When  other  helpers  fail  and 
comforts  flee,*'  and  our  heart  faints  and 
fails,  He  will  be  *'  the  Rock  of  our 
heart  and  our  portion  for  ever."  His 
resources  are  adequate  to  all  our  needs. 
In  all  the  unknown  possibilities  of  our 


future  no  want  can  occur  to  us  which 
He  will  not  be  able  to  supply.  And 
His  love  is  as  great  as  His  resources. 
Both  are  infinite. 

5.  The  righteousness  of  the  govern- 
ment  of  God  (vers.  27,  28).  Of  this  he 
has  not  now  the  shadow  of  a  doubt. 
Those  who  depart  from  God  depart  from 
life,  and  light,  and  blessedness.  Tiiey 
*'  shall  perish."  God  will  "  destroy 
them."  Those  who  draw  near  to  God 
shall  find  it  good  so  to  do.  In  His  pre- 
sence and  fellowship  there  are  life  and 
"  fulness  of  joy."  Of  all  this  he  is  con- 
fident. He  speaks  with  the  clear  accent 
of  strong  conviction.  He  is  so  assured 
that  all  God's  ways  and  works  are  just 
and  right  that  he  will  declare  them  to 
others.  Draw  near  to  God,  my  brother, 
and  His  smile  will  banish  all  your  dark- 
ness, and  brighten  and  beautify  your  life. 
Heartily  trust  Him,  and  you  will  have 
occasion  joyously  to  praise  Him. 

Conclusion. — 1.  How  gloriously  vic- 
torious are  they  whose  confidence  in  God 
is  strong.  2.  How  blessed  are  they  who 
have  God  for  their  portion. 


The  Good  Man*s  Present,  Past,  and  Future. 
(Verses  23,  24.) 


What  the  Psalmist  says  of  himself  in 
these  words  merits  much  consideration. 
Observe — 

I.  His  present  experience.  "  I  am 
continually  with  Thee."  Every  good 
man  is  with  his  God — in  a  way  of  com- 
munio7i,  in  a  way  of  affection,  in  a  way 
of  delight,  in  a  way  of  desire,  and  in  a 
way  of  service. 

II.  His  retrospective  testimony. 
*'  Thou  hast  holden  me  by  my  right 
hand."  His  experience  has  been  realised 
by  God's  people  in  every  ao;e  ;  from  them, 
therefore,  his  acknowledgment  is  due, 
and  by  them  it  will  be  readily  made. 

III.  His  prospective  consolation. 
This  is  twofold,  and  respects  what  God 


secures  to  him  in  this  life.  How  neces- 
sary is  guidance  considering  our  various 
difficulties  and  dangers.  And  it  is  proper 
always,  from  a  consciousness  that  God 
alone  can  guide  us,  to  ask  of  Him  the 
guidance  of  His  Word,  of  His  Spirit^ 
and  of  His  Providence. 

What  God  secures  to  him  in  the  life  to 
come.  Glory  is  that  to  which  we  may 
look  forward,  as  the  consummation  of 
our  bliss ;  and  in  the  expectation  of 
this,  we  may  rejoice,  even  as  if  we  were 
already  in  possession  of  it. 

Let  us,  then,  be  stirred  up  to  humble 
inquiry,  and  to  devout  adoration. —  W, 
Sleigh. 


Departing  from  God, 

{Verse  27.) 

Distance  from  God.  II.  What  it  leads   to.      Ruin,   da- 

I.  What  it  is.      "  Go  a  whoring  from  struction.     1.   Certain.     "  Thou  hast  de- 

Thee."      Alienation   from   Him — 1.   Of  stroyed."    2.   Complete.    "Perisli, .  .  .  • 

fidelity.     2.  Of  affection.     3.  Of  worship.  destroyed." 
402 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LlXIY. 


Drawing  Nigh  to  God. 


( Verse 

"It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to 
God." 

God   is    not   far   from    any   one    of 
us.     He   is    everywhere    present.     But 
to  draw  near  to  Him  is  to  endeavour  to 
realise  His  presence  with  us,  to  feel  Him* 
near,  to  commune  with  Him. 

I.  How  may  we  draw  near  to  God. 
1.  By  devoutly  reading  His  Word.  2. 
By  meditation  on  Him.  3.  By  prayer 
to  Him.  4.  By  praise  of  Him.  5.  By 
imitating  Him  in  life  and  work. 

II.  When  should  we  draw  near  to 
God.  We  should  at  all  times  live  near 
to  Him.     But  there  are  times  when  we 


28.) 

should  specially  seek  His  helpful  Pre- 
sence. 1.  In  time  of  painful  doubt.  2. 
In  time  of  suffering.  3.  In  time  of 
gladness  we  should  draw  near  to  Him 
with  our  gratitude.  4.  When  entering 
upon  and  toiling  in  difficult  enterprises. 
III.  The  advantages  of  drawing 
near  to  God.  By  so  doing,  1.  Faith  is 
increased.  2.  Suffering  is  removed,  or 
more  grace  is  given  to  the  sufferer,  and 
the  suffering  is  sanctified.  3,  Gladness 
is  hallowed  and  increased.  4.  Wisdom 
and  strength  are  imparted  for  difficult 
duties. 


The  Good  Man's  Access,  Trust,  and  Testimony. 

(Verse  2d>.) 


I.  The  blessedness  of  the  good  man's 
access  to  God. 

II.  The  strength  of  the  good  man's 
trust  in  God* 


III  The  clearness  of  the  good  man's 
testimony  for  God. 

All  doubt  is  gone.  With  confident, 
glad,  and  grateful  heart,  he  longs  to 
"  declare  all  His  works," 


PSALM     LXXiy. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Superscription. — **  A  Maschil  of  Asaph,"  i.e.y  an  Instruction  of  Asaph,  a  Didactic  Song  by 
^saph.     See  introduction  to  Ps.  1. 

"But  here  we  cannot  have  the  least  idea  of  the  authorship  belonging  to  David's  time.  We 
must  not,  however,  on  this  account  convict  the  title  of  a  mistake  :  for  just  in  proportion  as  the 
contents  are  decided!}'  and  manifestly  inconsistent  with  David's  age,  was  it  unlikely  that  tho 
title  would  announce  that  the  Psalm  was  composed  at  that  time.  Asaph  was  the  founder  of  a 
family  of  singers,  who  went  by  the  name  of  the  sons  of  Asaph,  even  in  the  time  of  Isaiah  (Comp. 
2  Chron.  xxxv.  15),  yea,  even  in  the  time  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  (Ez.  ii.  41,  iii.  10  ;  Neh.  vii. 
44,  xi.  22).  That  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  inspired  the  founder,  continued  to  exert  His  influence 
upon  the  members  of  this  family. from  age  to  age,  is  manifest  from  the  example  of  Jehaziel,  one 
of  the  sons  of  Asaph  in  Jehoshaphat's  time,  on  whom  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  came  down  in  the 
midst  of  the  assembly  (2  Chron.  xx.  14).  All  the  sacred  compositions  of  the  members  of  this 
family  were  depignated  songs  of  Asaph,  just  as  in  the  title  of  the  Ixii.  Psalm,  Jeduthun  stands 
for  the  Jeduthunic  choir.  If  the  family  had  not  possessed  a  founder  so  very  famous  in  this 
department,  these  Psalms,  like  those  which  bear  thtj  name  of  tbe  sons  of  Korah,  would  have 
had  inscribed  on  their  titles  '  the  sons  of  Asaph.'  " — Hengstenberg. 

Occasion. — On  this  expositors  are  not  agreed.  Some  think  that  it  was  written  by  Asaph,  in 
David's  time,  with  a  prophetical,  reference  to  the  destruction  by  the  Chaldeans.  Others  look 
upon  it  as  historical,  and  having  reference  to  the  destructions  wrought  at  the  time  of  the  Mac- 
cabees. Others,  who  regard  it  as  historical,  consider  that  it  refers  to  the  Chaldean  destruction. 
The  occasion  cannot  be  determined  certainly ;  but  the  last-named  opinion  seems  to  us  most 
likely  to  be  the  correct  one.  It  was  written  at  a  time  of  great  misery,  the  temple  was  desolated 
and  destroyed,  the  land  was  ravaged,  the  enemies  of  the  Church  triumphed,  and  God  seemed  to 
have  forgotten  or  cast  away  His  people.  The  Psalmist  bewails  their  sad  condition  and  prays 
for  deliverance. 

403 


ySALM    LXXir. 


MOMlLETlC  COMiMMTAllY:  PBALMS. 


The  Suffering  Church  Pouring  out  its  Complaints  unto  God. 

{Verses  1-11.) 


I.  The  description  of  the  Church. 

"  The  sheep  of  Thy  pasture  ;  Thy  con- 
gregation which  Thou  hast  purchased," 
&c.   The  Church  is  here  represented  as — 

1 .  Shepherded  by  God.  We  use  the  word 
"  shepherded,"  because  we  do  not  know  of  ' 
any  other  which  expresses  the  various 
duties  of  the  shepherd  to  his  flock.     That 
Jehovah  is  the  Shepherd  of  His  people 
is  an  idea  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the 
Scriptures.     (Psalms  Ixxx.  1,  xcv.  7,  c. 
3;  Isa.  xl.  11;    Ezek.  xxxiv.   11-16.) 
The  relationship  involves  His  Guidance. 
With  infallible   knowledge  and   tender 
care  He  goeth  before  His  people  through 
all    their  journeyings.     By  the   mystic 
and  majestic  pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and 
of  fire  by  night  He  led  His  people  in 
their   forty  years'  journey  through  the 
wilderness.      And  still    He   leads    His 
people,  though  by  different  means.     He 
guides  us  now  by  the  indications  of  Pro- 
vidence, by  influencing  our  convictions, 
and  by  the  teaching  of  His  Word.     The 
relationship   involves   Protection.     The 
shepherd  had  to  guard  his  flock  against 
the  attacks  of  robbers  and  beasts  of  prey  ; 
and  frequently  displayed  great  faithful- 
ness and  courage  in  so  doing.     In  this 
way  David,  while  a  mere  stripling,  slew 
a  lion  and  a  bear  (1  Sam.  xvii.  34-36). 
So  Jehovah  guards  His  people.     "  As 
the  mountains  are  round  about  Jerusa- 
lem, so    the  Lord  is  round  about  His 
people,"  &c.     The  relationship  involves 
Provision.     It  was  the  duty  of  the  shep- 
herd to  provide  for  his  sheep,  and  when 
one  pasture  was  bare  to  lead  them  to 
another,  or  when  the  herbage  was  defi- 
cient to  cut  down  the  tender  shoots  of 
trees  for  them  to  eat,  and  to  see  that 
they   had    water    to    drink.       In    thus 
providing    for  them    the   shepherd  fre- 
quently underwent  long  and  severe  la- 
bour.    Jehovah  thus  provides  for  "  His 
people,  and  the  sheep  of  His  pasture." 
*'  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd  ;  I  shall  not 
want."    His  provisions  are  varied,  abun- 
dant, exhaustless. 

2.  Redeemed  by  God.     The  Church  is 
Bpoken  of  as    "  purchased  of  old "  by 
404 


God,  and  as  an  inheritance  "redeemed" 
by  Him.  From  Egyptian  bondage  He 
redeemed  them  at  an  immense  cost. 
The  Church  is  an  ancient  possession  of 
the  Lord's.  He  has  the  most  indefeasible 
right  to  it  as  His  inheritance.  It  is  His 
because  He  called  it  into  being.  It  owes 
its  origin  to  Him.  He  has  preserved  it 
in  being,  watching  over  it  in  all  the  vicis- 
situdes of  its  fortune.  Much  of  its  his- 
tory resembles  the  burning  bush — "  the 
bush  burned  with  fire,  and  the  bush  was 
not  consumed,"  and  the  secret  of  its 
mysterious  preservation  must  be  traced 
to  Him.  He  has  redeemed  it.  His 
ancient  people  He  frequently  redeemed 
out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies.  And 
the  Church  to-day  He  has  redeemed  with 
a  nobler.  Diviner  redemption.  "  Ye  were 
not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things, 
as  silver  and  gold  ;  but  with  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ."  He  "gave  Himself 
for  us."  What  a  Self  to  give  !  And 
how  freely  was  He  given  by  both  His 
Father  and  Himself !  How  unspeak- 
ably precious  is  this  redemption  !  How 
complete  and  indisputable  God's  title  to 
an  inheritance  so  redeemed  ! 

3.  Inhabited  by  God.  "  Mount  Zion 
wherein  Thou  hast  dwelt."  The  mys- 
terious Shekinah,  the  symbol  of  God's 
special  presence,  dwelt  in  the  holy  of 
holies.  In  the  Psalms  God  is  repre- 
sented as  both  dwelling  in  His  people, 
and  the  dwelling-place  of  His  people. 
"God  is  in  the  midst  of  her."  "In 
Salem  is  His  tabernacle,  and  His  dwell- 
ing-place in  Zion."  So  in  the  Christian 
Church  God  is  specially  present.  "  Where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  My 
name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them." 
He  dwells  in  His  Church  to  hear  and 
answer  prayer,  to  reveal  His  will,  to  be- 
stow His  grace,  to  make  known  His  sal- 
vation, and  to  manifest  His  glory.  He 
dwells  in  every  hum.ble  and  believing 
heart  as  in  His  temple  by  the  Holy 
Ghost. 

Reflect  how  the  consideration  of  these 
aspects  of  the  Church  in  relation  to  God 
would   affect   His   people.     They   were 


BOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXIV. 


"the  sheep  of  His  pasture,"  yet  they 
were  in  captivity,  and  oppressed  by  their 
enemies,  and  far  away  from  Zion.  How 
could  they  reconcile  these  things  with 
the  guidance,  protection,  and  provision 
of  their  Shepherd  1  They  were  redeemed 
by  Him  at  a  great  cost,  yet  now  they 
were  once  more  in  bondage.  Had  He 
ceased  to  value  the  inheritance  which  He 
had  "purchased  of  old"?  They  were 
inhabited  by  God,  but  now  the  glory  of 
His  presence  has  departed.  Had  He 
then  cast  them  off  for  ever  ?  Thus  there 
have  often  been  times  when  the  position 
and  sufferings  of  the  Church  have  seemed 
utterly  irreconcilable  with  their  most 
fundamental  relations  to  God. 

II.  The  distress  of  the  Church. 

1.  Their  enemies  triumphed  over  them 
and  spread  ruin  around  them.  They  had 
destroyed  everything  in  the  sanctuary, 
had  broken  down  the  carved  work,  had 
burnt  it  with  fire,  and  desecrated  it  to 
the  ground.  The  Jews  gloried  in  their 
temple.  They  spoke  of  it  as  a  "holy 
and  beautiful  house."  It  was  a  costly 
and  magnificent  edifice.  Around  it  were 
gathered  many  precious  and  sacred  mem- 
ories. Its  associations  were  most  inter- 
esting and  treasured.  To  see  it  ruth- 
lessly destroyed  and  profaned  must  bave 
been  a  great  distress  to  them.  The 
Church  in  all  ages  has  had  its  enemies 
who  have  sought  its  destruction.  With 
captious  and  destructive  criticism  men 
seek  to  destroy  the  Church,  by  endea- 
vouring to  overthrow  the  faith  of  her 
members  in  many  precious  truths  in 
which  they  have  rested.  The  Church 
has  had  foes  who  have  persecuted  her 
by  fire  and  sword,  bonds  and  imprison- 
ments, pains  and  penalties.  Different 
are  the  weapons  which  are  used  to-day. 
The  theories  and  arguments  of  cold  in- 
tellectual men — men  often  of  large  heads, 
but  infinitesimally  small  hearts ;  whose 
knowledge  has  "grown  from  more  to 
more,"  but  in  whom  no  reverence  dwells 
— are  the  weapons  by  which  it  is  now 
Bought  to  overthrow  the  Church.  She 
has  spiritual  foes  also.  "  The  gates  of 
hell"  are  arrayed  against  her.  And 
many  in  this  world  by  word  and  deed 
are  foes  to  the  cause  of  God. 

2.   Their  enemies  Uasphemed  the  name 


of  God.    Where  God  had  been  reverently 
worshipped  by  devout  hearts  they  madly 
shouted  their  war  cry,  in  the  temple  they 
had  set  up  their  military  standards,  and 
they  had  reproached  and  blasphemed  the 
name  of  God.     This  was  a  great  grief 
to  the  people  of  God.     And  to  those  of 
them  who  were  faithful  and  pious  the 
grief    would  be  most  deep    and    acute. 
The  godly  heart  is  most  deeply  pained 
in  its  tenderest  part  when  anything  is 
done  by  which  God  is  dishonoured.    And 
this  blasphemy  had  been  long  continued, 
adding  amazement  to  the  grief  of   the 
Psalmist,  and  causing    him  to  inquire, 
"  O  God,  how  long  shall  the  adversary 
reproach?    shall  the   enemy  blaspheme 
Thy  name /or  ever  ?"     (1)  Man  is  free 
to  reproach  and  blaspheme  God  if  he  will. 
We  may  praise  and  adore  Him,  or  revile 
and    curse    Him  if  we  will.     God  has 
made  us  thus  morally  free.     He  allows 
us  the  exercise  of  this  freedom.     (2)  God 
has  long  patience  even  with  the  profanest 
and  most  outrageous  sinners.     For  a  lon» 
season    He  tolerates  even  blasphemers, 
giving  them  time    for  repentance.     He 
waits  to  show  mercy  even  to  the  chief  of 
sinners.     He  wills  not  that  any  should 
perish.     (3)  God's  patience  with  blasphe- 
mers causes  sore  amazement  to  His  people. 
They  cannot  understand  why  He  does  not 
pluck  His  hand  out  of  His  bosom  and 
smite  them.     They  cry,  "  0  God,  how 
long  ]  "    Assuredly,  not  for  ever.    If  the 
wicked    "turn  not.  He  will  whet   His 
sword  j  He  hath  bent  His  bow,  and  made 
it  ready."     But  while  judgment  lingers, 
and  men  continue  to  blaspheme,  the  people 
of  God  are  distressed  by  the  blasphemy, 
and  amazed  at  the  delay  of  judgment. 

3.  The  prophetic  voice  was  silent.  The 
prophetical  office  of  Jeremiah  terminated 
with  the  destruction  of  the  temple.  "  It 
was  assuredly  the  cessation  of  his  office 
that  more  immediately  gave  occasion  to 
the  painful  cry  :  there  is  no  longer  any 
prophet.  This  standing  ruin  of  the  pro- 
phetical class  proclaimed,  even  in  louder 
accents  than  the  non-appearance  of  other 
prophets,  that  God  was  no  longer  Israel's 
King.  It  was  necessary  that  along  with 
the  other  signs  of  the  dominion  of  God, 
this  one  also  should  cease  for  a  lono- 
period  of  time,  that  the  people  might  be 

405 


f SAtM  LXXiy. 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


taught  how  they  had  treated  it,  wherein 
they  had   offended,  and  might,  at   the 
same  time,  be  led  with  tears  of  repent- 
ance to  seek  its  return." — Hengstenherg. 
The  cry  of  the  Psalmist  reminds  me  of 
the  words  of  Saul  to  the  apparition  of 
Samuel,  "  I  am  sore  distressed  ;  for  the 
Philistines    make  war  against  me,  and 
God  is  departed  from  me,  and  answereth 
me  no  more,  neither  by  prophets,  nor  by 
dreams/'     Well  may  he  be  distressed  ! 
Man    cut    off  from  God — severed  from 
the  great  central  Life  and  Light  of  the 
universe — appealing     to     heaven,    and 
being    answered    only  by  stony-hearted 
silence  !       How   appalling  !      God   had 
threatened,    "  Behold,    the    days    come, 
saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I  will  send  a 
famine  in  the   land,"  &c.     (Amos  viii. 
11,  12;    Comp.  Ezek.  vii.   26.)      That 
time  had  come.     "  Her  prophets  fonnd 
no  vision  from  the  Lord."     Distress  had 
come  upon  the  people ;  and  no  prophet's 
voice  was  heard,  either  in  merciful  en- 
couragement, or  faithful  rebuke,  or  stern 
threatening.     They  have  treated  the  pro- 
phetic message  with  scornful  indifference 
at  times,  and  at  times  they  have  cruelly 
persecuted  the  Heaven-sent  messenger ; 
a!id  now  they  cry  for  some  word  from 
heaven,  some  communication  from  the 
Divine,  and  the  only  answer  they  receive 
is  inexorable    silence.     Surely  there    is 
warning  for  us  here.     How  do  we  treat 
the  great  and  precious  privileges  which 
are  granted  unto  us  %     The  Word  of  God, 
do   we  prize  it?     The  opportunities  of 
worship,  are  they  dear  to  us  1     The  in- 
fluence of  the  Holy  Spirit,  do  we  value 
it]  do  we  profit  by  it?     If  we  fail  to 
appreciate  our  spiritual  privileges,  and 
practically  despise  them,  God  may  with- 
draw them  from  us,  and  we  may  awake 
to  a  sense  of  their  value  too  late, 

"  Like  birds  whose  beauties  languish,  half-con- 

ceal'd 
Till  mounted  on  the  wing,  their  glossy  plumes 
Expanded  shine  with  azure,  green,  and  gold  ; 
How    blessings   brighten    as  they    take   their 

flight." — Young. 

Let  us  prize  the  gifts  of  God  while 
we  have  them,  lest  God  should  remove 
them  from  us  for  ever. 

4.  God  in  anger  had  cast  them  of. 
So  they  thought ;  and  it  was  true  that 
406 


their  miseries  came  upon  them  in  conse- 
quence of  their  sins.  God  was  visiting 
them  with  the  rod  of  chastisement  be- 
cause of  their  idolatry,  their  spiritual 
apostasy,  and  rebellion.  Their  Babylo- 
nian enemies  were  unwittingly  the  agents 
of  God  to  punish  them.  But  God  had 
not  cast  them  off  for  ever.  When  they 
turned  unto  Him  in  true  repentance,  He 
turned  unto  them  and  had  mercy  upon 
them.  Yet  at  this  time  they  could  see 
no  sign  of  His  favour.  His  anger  seemed 
to  smoke  against  them.  Such  were 
some  of  the  distresses  of  the  ancient 
Church.  Their  foes  were  triumphant 
and  were  spreading  ruin  on  every  side, 
even  destroying  their  best  treasures  ;  the 
name  of  God  was  blasphemed,  the  pro- 
phetic voice  was  silent,  and  God  seemed 
to  have  abandoned  them.  Their  dis- 
tresses are  a  picture  and  parable  of 
sufferings  which  have  befallen  the 
Church  in  other  ages.  Their  distresses 
were  on  account  of  their  sins.  So  also 
in  subsequent  times,  in  some  instances, 
the  Church  has  been  tried  and  chastened 
by  reason  of  error,  or  unfaithfulness,  or 
lukewarmness.  In  every  time  of  suffer- 
ing let  the  Church  seek  to  ascertain  the 
cause  and  meaning  of  her  suffering  ;  and 
if  it  be  God's  expostulation  with  her  for 
her  sins,  let  her  repent  and  do  her  first 
works,  or  He  will  remove  her  candlestick 
out  of  its  place. 

III.  The  prayers  of  the  distressed 
Church. 

1.  That  God  would  remember  them, 
God  seemed  to  have  forgotten  them. 
They  seemed  to  have  passed  away  from 
His  mind.  He  bestows  no  attention 
upon  them.  They  entreat  Him  to  re- 
member them,  thinking  that,  if  He 
turned  His  attention  to  them  and  saw 
their  miseries,  He  would  surely  deliver 
and  save  them. 

2.  That  God  woidd  interpose  for  them. 
"  Lift  up  thy  footsteps  unto  the  eternal 
ruins."  "  The  Psalmist  speaks  of  eternal 
ruins,  because  the  complete  destruction 
had  cut  off  all  human  hope  of  a  restora- 
tion." Man  could  not  deliver  them. 
Their  only  hope  was  in  God.  They 
piay  Him  to  hasten  His  approach  to 
them.  In  the  day  of  their  distress  they 
have  to  seek  help  from  Him  whom  they 


SOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


l^ALii  LSIIT. 


neglected  in  their  prosperity,  for  He 
alone  can  help  them. 

3.  That  God  would  interpose  for  them 
speedily.  God^s  help  seemed  to  them  long 
delayed.  They  were  weary  of  waiting 
for  His  appearing.  "  O  God,  how  long 
shall  the  adversary  approach  ?  shall  the 
enemy  blaspheme  Thy  name  for  ever  '\ " 
They  longed  to  hear  the  sound  of  tlie 
chariot  wheels  of  their  Deliverer.  They 
knew  not  that  the  waiting  for  His  coming 
was  itself  a  blessing.  Their  sufferings 
made  the  time  seem  long.  Their  anxiety 
made  them  impatient.  But  God  delays 
His  salvation  until  the  captivity  has 
fulfilled  its  mission  to  them,  and  suffering 
has  done  its  work  in  them,  and  waiting 
itself  has  blessed  them. 

There  is  something  very  touching 
and  effective  in  the  form  of  expression 
adopted  by  the  Psalmist  in  addressing 
the  Lord.  *'  The  sheep  of  Thy  pasture. 
Remember  Thy  congregation,  which 
Thou  hast  purchased  of  old;  Thine 
inheritance,  which  Thou  hast  redeemed; 
this  mount  Zion  in  which  Thou  hast 
dwelt."  He  thus  brings  before  Him 
His  interpositions  for  them  in  former 
times,  His  ancient  loving-kindness  for 
them,   His  relation  to  them,   and  His 


having  dwelt  in  Zion.  Thus  he  pleads  not 
their  own  misery  only,  but  His  mercy 
also  ;  not  their  need  only,  but  His  fulness 
and  power  also,  and  their  relation  to 
Him.  Surely  He  will  listen  to  such 
pleadings.  He  will  not  leave  His  sheep 
to  perish,  or  lose  His  ancient  purchase, 
or  suffer  His  inheritance  to  be  entirely 
desolated,  or  leave  His  glorious  dwelling- 
place  a  ruin  for  ever. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  enemies  of 
the  Church  of  God  take  wariiing.  Let 
them  not  interpret  His  silence  as  non- 
existence, or  construe  His  patience  into 
powerlessness.  He  lives,  and  His  arm 
has  lost  none  of  its  ancient  strength. 

2.  Let  those  who  are  richly  blessed  with 
spiritual  privileges  remember  that  they 
involve  corresponding  responsibilities.  Be 
wise,  prize  them,  improve  them,  lest 
they  be  the  occasion  of  greater  condem- 
nation to  you. 

3.  Let  the  favoured  Church  be  warned. 
Be  faithful,  or  God  may  write  **Ichabod'' 
upon  your  temples  and  altars. 

4.  Let  the  suffering  Church  take  en- 
couragement from  Jeer  relationship  to 
Godf  and  from  His  past  interpositions  on 
her  behalf  and  learn  how  to  plead  them 
at  His  throne. 


The  Constructive  and  the  Destructive. 
{Verses  5,  6.) 


Destruction  is  sometimes  a  wise  and 
good  employment.  It  is  wise  and  good 
to  destroy  disease,  error,  evil.  "  For 
this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  mani- 
fested, that  He  might  destroy  the  works 
of  the  devil."  But  destruction  is  inferior 
to  construction. 

I.  The  constructive  is  greater  and 
more  difficult  than  the  destructive. 
An  idiot  might  destroy  St.  Paul's 
Cathedral,  London  ;  but  it  needed  the 
genius  of  Sir  C.  Wren  to  design  it.  A 
child  might  destroy  a  young  oak  sapling ; 
but  the  mightiest  man  cannot  create  a 
daisy.  A  fool  might  unsettle  a  man's 
faith  and  destroy  his  character ;  but  the 
wisest  and  holiest  of  men  cannot  of 
himself  establish  a  man's  faith  and  build 
up  his  character. 


IL  In  the  kingdom  of  the  truth  it 
is  wiser  and  nobler  to  aim  at  building 
up  the  true  than  destroying  the 
false. 

1.  It  is  wiser;  for  you  may  destroy  one 
error  only  to  make  room  for  another.  One 
evil  spirit  is  expelled,  but  "other  spirits 
more  wicked  than  himself"  enter  in  his 
place.  But  he  who  builds  up  the  true 
is  effectually  destroying  old  errors  and 
guarding  against  the  entrance  of  new 
ones. 

2.  It  is  nobler.  In  destroying  even  the 
false  and  bad,  men  are  often  actuated  by 
mean  and  base  motives  and  feelings,  but 
in  aiming  at  edification  in  the  true  and 
good  the  motives  and  feelings  are  noble. 

III.  How  terrible  is  it  to  destroy  the 
true  and  good !     To  destroy  a  noble 

407 


fSALM  LXXIV. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


building,  a  magnificent  city ;  to  destroy 
life,  virtue,  truth,  beauty,  how  heinous 
is  this  I 
IV.  God  is  the  great  constructor  of 


tlie  good.     He  is  ever  engaged  in  over- 
coming error  and  evil  by  building  up 
souls  in  truth  and  grace. 
Let  us  imitate  Him  in  this. 


The  suffering  Church  recounting  the  Doings  of  God  in  the  Past 
AS  AN  Argument  for  His  help  in  the  Present. 

{Verses  12-17.) 


The  poet,  in  calling  to  mind  and  cele- 
brating the  interpositions  of  God  on 
behalf  of  His  people  in  former  times, 
brings  into  prominence  the  Divine 
Sovereignty.  From  that  Sovereignty, 
as  it  had  been  manifested  in  past 
deliverances  and  blessings,  he  drew 
encouragement  for  himself  and  the  peo- 
ple in  their  present  distresses. 

I.  The  history  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  people  reveals  His  universal 
sovereignty. 

1.  He  is  sovereign  over  His  people. 
"  God  is  my  King."  The  people  of  God 
loyally  and  heartily  recognise  His  sove- 
reignty over  them.  He  is  sovereign  over 
all  men ;  but  His  sovereignty  is  not 
acknowledged  by  all  men.  There  are 
those  who  disown  it  and  rebel  against 
it ;  there  are  others  who  meanly  and 
slavishly  submit  to  it  from  base  motives. 
Bat  His  own  people  recognise  its  righte- 
ousness, and  wisdom,  and  goodness,  and 
cordially  own  Him  as  their  King.  To 
them  His  "law  is  holy,  and  His  com- 
mandment holy,  and  just,  and  good." 
He  occupies  the  throne  of  their  affections. 
In  the  hearts  of  His  people  He  is  su- 
preme. They  serve  Him  with  willing 
minds.  They  bow  to  His  authority  with 
loyalty,  and  love,  and  reverence. 

2.  He  is  sovereign  over  His  enemies. 
Expositors  are  pretty  generally  agreed 
that  by  "  the  dragons  "  and  the 
"leviathan"  whose  heads  were  broken 
in  the  waters,  the  poet  intended  lo  set 
forth  the  Egyptians  and  their  Pharaoh 
who  were  destroyed  in  the  Red  Sea. 
God  manifested  His  sovereignty  over 
them  by  destroying  them  for  their 
rebellion  against  Him,  and  for  their 
oppression  of  His  people.  They  would 
not  submit  themselves  to  His  authority, 
so  He  crushed  them  by  His  power.  God 
is  sovereign  over  all  men,  whether  they 

408 


acknowledge  Him  or  not.  The  rebellion 
of  the  wicked  in  no  way  diminishes  His 
right  to  reign,  or  His  power  to  do  all 
His  pleasure.  He  is  King.  "  He  must 
reign  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  under 
His  feet." 

3.  He  is  sovereign  over  nature.  The 
Psalmist  speaks  of  Him  as  dividing  the 
sea,  cleaving  the  fountain  and  flood,  dry- 
ing up  mighty  rivers,  preparing  the  light 
and  the  sun,  setting  all  the  borders  of 
the  earth,  making  summer  and  winter. 
God  is  not  only  the  great  Creator  of 
the  universe,  but  its  Sustainer  also.  We 
discover  in  nature  not  only  wise  and 
beneficent  laws,  but  a  Lawgiver  also. 
We  are  acquainted  with  great  forces, 
and  are  persuaded  that  there  must  be 
some  intelligent  and  almighty  Being 
"who  originated  and  sustains  them.  We 
mark  a  beautiful  order  and  arrangement 
in  nature,  and  regard  them  as  signs  of 
a  Divine  presence  and  power.  He  is 
but  a  superficial  student  of  nature  who 
never  pursues  his  investigations  beyond 
the  discovery  of  mere  laws  and  forces. 
To  the  devout  and  earnest  listener  nature 
is  eloquent  of  God.  God  is  the  sove- 
reign of  nature.  He  controls  her  forces. 
He  regulates  her  operations.  He  pre- 
sides over  all  her  processes.  He  is 
supreme  in  all.  There  is  no  province  of 
His  universe  from  which  He  is  excluded. 
His  sovereignty  is  complete  and  univer- 
sal. He  rules  over  all  nature  and  all  life. 
The  life  of  the  ephemera  sporting  its  little 
hour  in  the  rays  of  the  summer  sun,  and 
the  life  of  the  archangel  standing  in  His 
own  presence,  are  both  subject  to  Him. 

II.  The  History  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  people  reveals  the  benefi- 
cence of  His  sovereignty. 

God  is  a  "  King  worJcing  salvation  in 
the  midst  of  the  earth."  God  is  actively 
engaged   in   every    department   of  His 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


F8ALM   LXXIV. 


universe.  He  is  the  supreme  Worker. 
"My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I 
work."  In  the  operations  of  nature  He 
ceaselessly  works.  In  the  events  of 
history  He  works,  aiding  His  servants, 
restraining  the  wrath  of  His  foes,  direct- 
ing and  controlling  all  things,  so  that 
in  the  end  truth  and  righteousness  and 
love  may  be  triumphant  everywhere. 
And  He  works  in  human  souls,  delivering 
them  from  sin,  and  educating  them  into 
holy  living  and  useful  working.  The 
Psalmist  recognised  the  work  of  God  in 
the  past  history  of  His  people.  He 
had  brought  them  forth  from  Egypt 
with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched 
arm.  He  had  smitten  their  enemies 
with  destruction.  He  had  led  them 
through  the  sea  as  on  dry  land.  He 
had  wrought  for  their  salvation.  It  is 
of  the  very  nature  of  His  sovereignty  to 
work  beneficently.  And  the  salvation 
which  He  works  is  gloriously  complete. 
This  the  Psalmist  indicates  by  the  words, 
"  Working  salvation  in  the  midst  of  the 
earth."  "The  words  denote  the  com- 
prehensive nature  of  the  salvation  :  who- 
ever has  obtained  possession  of  the 
interior  of  a  country  has  got  the  ascen- 
dency over  the  whole  boundaries, — 
whatever  is  done  there  extends  to  the 
whole  circumference "  (Exod.  viii.  22  ; 
Isa.  X.  23).  What  God  undertakes 
He  carries  to  completion.  His  salvation 
is  "  unto  the  uttermost."  He  is  '•'  mighty 
to  save."  Let  us  rejoice  in  God's  sove- 
reignty. "  The  Lord  reigneth  ;  let  the 
earth  rejoice  ;  let  the  multitude  of  isles 
be  glad."  Man  has  sadly  misrepresented 
His  sovereignty.  We  have  contemplated 
with  horror  representations  of  a  Being  of 
unlimited  and  arbitrary  power,  which 
power  is  often  used  to  crush  and  curse 
his  creatures,  a  power  which,  except  in 
the  case  of  a  favourite  few,  works  de- 
struction in  the  midst  of  the  land.  Such 
is  not  the  sovereignty  of  God.  His  rule 
is  a  thing  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  good- 
ness, and  beauty.     He  doeth  all  things 


well.  Under  His  sovereignty  the  race 
is  advancing  not  to  darkness  and  night, 
but  to  the  glad  and  beautiful  morning 
of  eternal  day.  The  beneficence  of  the 
work  of  God  is  seen  by  the  Psalmist 
when  he  looks  at  it  through  the  interven- 
i7ig  years.  While  it  is  yet  in  process 
we  cannot  discover  the  significance  or 
beauty  of  His  work.  While  events  are 
in  progress  they  often  seem  chaotic,  and 
sometimes  even  maleficent.  Wait  until 
the  work  has  advanced  to  a  period,  and 
then  the  design  of  the  great  Worker  will 
be  before  you  a  thing  of  joy  and  beauty. 

III.  The  history  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  people  is  full  of  encourage- 
ment to  them. 

The  poet  recounts  the  doings  of 
Israel's  King  to  encourage  their  hearts 
in  their  time  of  distress.  His  past 
interpositions  are  so  many  reasons  for 
our  placing  our  trust  in  Him  in  every 
time  of  need.  God  is  unchangeable  and 
eternal, — "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to- 
day, and  for  ever."  He  is  unchangeable 
in  power:  what  He  has  done  already 
He  can  do  again.  He  is  unchangeable 
in  purpose.  The  design  and  tendency 
of  His  government  is  to  "  work  salva- 
tion." "  He  is  not  a  man  that  He 
should  lie,  or  the  son  of  man  that  He 
should  repent."  He  is  unchangeable  in 
goodness:  what  He  willed  to  do  in  the 
past  He  will  do  again.  "  He  abideth 
faithful."  So  past  deliverances  and 
blessings  encourage  us  to  plead  with 
Him,  and  to  trust  Him  for  help  in  pre- 
sent distresses.  "  Because  Thou  hast 
been  my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow 
of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice.'* 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the 
beneficence  and  universality  of  the  Divine 
Sovereignty.  God — the  Supremely  Good 
— is  King.  He  rules  in  righteousness, 
wisdom,  and  love.  2.  Let  the  troubled 
heart  take  encouragement  from  God's 
relationship  to  him,  and  past  dealings 
with  him.  He  who  has  led  you  hitherto 
will  never  fail  you  or  forsake  you. 


The  Sovereignty  of  God. 
(Verse  12.) 

In  the  time  of  trouble  to  which  this      agement  from  the  consideration  of  God's 
Fsalm  refers  the  Psalmist  took  encour-      sovereignty.       His     kingship     implies 

409 


rSALM  LXXIV. 


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


autliority.  As  a  Sovereign  He  proclaims 
His  laws  for  the  government  of  His 
subjects.  And  these  laws  involve 
penalties  for  those  who  violate  them, 
and  rewards  for  those  who  obey  and 
honour  them.  God's  kingship  implies 
the  protection  of  His  people.  It  is  the 
duty  of  kings  to  protect  their  subjects 
in  the  enjoyment  of  their  rights.  God 
is  our  shield.  God's  sovereignty  is 
moral.  He  rules  by  reason,  not  by 
force.  The  laws  which  He  prescribes 
are  in  harmony  with  the  laws  of  our 
own  nature.  Thus,  He  has  made  us 
morally  free,  and  His  sovereignty  never 
invades  our  freedom.  He  never  coerces 
man  into  obedience. 

In  the  text  His  sovereignty  is  pre- 
sented in  several  aspects. 

I.  As  loyally  acknowledged.  **  My 
King."  The  sovereignty  of  God  is  uni- 
versal in  its  extent,  but  is  only  partially 
acknowledged.  There  are  those  who 
utterly  deny  it,  and  are  avowed  rebels 
against  His  government.  There  are 
others  who  acknowledge  it  as  slaves.  If 
they  obey  His  rule  at  all,  it  is  because 
they  feel  compelled  to  do  so  by  dread  of 
the  lash.  There  are  others  who  acknow- 
ledge it  as  hirelings.  They  avoid  trans- 
gression lest  they  should  incur  severe 
penalties ;  they  obey  that  they  might 
receive  the  reward  of  obedience.  But 
there  is  no  spontaneity  or  heartiness  in 
their  obedience.  There  are  others  who 
acknowledge  it  heartily  as  loyal  subjects. 
They  recognise  and  admire  the  justice 
and  benevolence  of  His  laws,  and  the 
wisdom  of  their  administration  ;  they 
cordially  acknowledge  His  right  to 
reign  ;  they  venerate  Him  as  their  King 
and  God.  What  is  our  relation  to  this 
government  1  Are  we  rebels  1  slaves  ? 
hirelings  1  or  loyal  subjects  1 

II.  As  of  ancient  date.  *'  Of  old." 
God's  sovereignty  has  existed  from  ever- 
lasting as  regards  Himself.  His  fitness 
for  rule,  His  right  to  rule,  His  purpose 
to  rule,  are  all  eternal  as  Himself.  In 
the  solitude  of  the  awful  eternity  He 
was  supreme.  As  to  His  sovereignty 
over  the  Jews,  by  the  term  "  of  old " 
the  Psalmist  referred  to  the  days  when 
God  brought  His  people  out  of  Egypt 
with    signs,    and    wonders,   and    great 

410 


power.  His  sovereignty  over  them  may 
be  traced  back  to  the  call  of  Abram. 
His  sovereignty  over  us  began  with  the 
beginning  of  our  being,  and  is  coexten- 
sive with  our  being.  Earthly  monarchs 
pride  themselves  upon  the  antiquity  of 
their  dynasties.  Here  is  a  dynasty 
which  no  beginning  knew.  '*  Thy  king- 
dom is  established  of  old ;  Thou  art 
from  everlasting.'' 

III.  As  beneficent  in  operation. 
"  Working  salvation."  God's  sovereignty 
is, — 1.  Operative.  God  works.  **  He 
is  not  sitting  down  in  what  men  call 
everlasting  repose,  calmly  or  indifferently 
marking  the  operations  of  the  universe, 
and  luxuriating  in  a  peace  which  no 
storm  can  invade.  That  is  not  the  kind 
of  God  which  guilty,  weary,  broken- 
hearted man  requires."  He  works  in 
nature,  in  history,  in  redemption.  2. 
Operates  beneficently.  The  King  works 
salvation.  God's  sovereignty  has  been 
grievously  misinterpreted.  Human  no- 
tions of  favouritism  have  been  set  down 
to  God's  sovereignty.  Men  have  formu- 
lated a  doctrine  of  reprobation,  and  have 
had  the  audacity  to  call  it  God's  sove- 
reignty. Most  firmly  do  we  believe  in 
His  sovereignty,  but  we  believe  in  it 
as  "  working  salvation."  Of  the  King 
it  was  predicted,  "  He  is  just  and  having 
salvation.''  God  rules  to  bless.  He 
works  to  save  men,  not  to  destroy  them. 

But  is  it  really  so?  Does  God's 
government  work  beneficently  %  At  this 
time,  as  the  Psalm  indicates.  His  people 
were  in  a  most  desolate  and  afflicted 
state.  Was  the  King  working  for  their 
salvation?  Their  misery  arose  from 
their  sin,  from  their  rebellion  against 
His  government.  At  present  darkness, 
suffering,  and  sorrow  are  here  ;  but  they 
are  here  because  sin  is  here.  God  rules 
to  bless. 

IV.  As  a  plea  for  His  help.  So 
the  Psalmist  uses  it  on  this  occasion. 
He  mentions  what  God  had  done  for 
them  in  olden  time,  and  pleads  that  as 
their  King  He  would  interpose  for  them 
again.  As  their  King, — 1.  He  would 
possess  sovereign  authority.  None  could 
stay  His  hand  or  say  unto  Him,  what 
doest  Thou  ?  He  could  smite  down 
their  foes,  and  set  them  free  and  prosper 


EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


P8ALM  LZXIT. 


them.  2.  He  would  he  faithful  to  His 
sovereign  obligations.  He  would  keep 
His  promises  and  *' respect  the  covenant," 
as  they  entreated  Him  to  do  (ver.  20). 
3.  He  was  immutable.  He  was  the 
same  when  this  Psalm  was  written  as 
when  He  divided  the  Red  Sea.  He 
changes  not.  And  still  He  has  sove- 
reign power  to  save,  and  is  faithful  and 
unchangeable;  and  still  we  may  urge 
His  sovereignty  as  a  reason  why  He 
should  help  us.    A  powerful  reason  it 


is.  It  appeals  to  His  honour,  acknow- 
ledges His  beneficence,  <fec.  This  plea 
may  be  used  by  us, — (1)  As  communitiet 
forming  part  of  His  Church.  When 
any  portion  of  His  Church  languishes, 
or  is  afflicted,  or  is  in  difficulty,  it  may 
plead  with  the  King  for  help.  (2)  As 
individuah  on  our  own  behalf.  In  our 
times  of  perplexity  and  distress  let  us 
go  to  our  King,  and  plead  with  Him  for 
guidance  and  deliveranco. 


God  in  Nature. 
{Verses  16,  17.) 


The  poet  was  neither,  \,  An  atheist. 
He  believed  in  God.  Nor,  2.  A  pan- 
theist. He  believed  in  God  as  distinct 
from  nature.  Nor,  3.  A  mere  natural- 
ist, seeing  nothing  in  nature  higher 
than  order,  and  law,  and  development. 
He  recognised  God  in  nature.  He  re- 
gards God  as — 

I.  The  Creator  of  nature.  "Thou 
hast  prepared  the  light  and  the  sun. 
Thou  hast  set  all  the  borders  of  the 
earth.  Thou  hast  made  summer  and 
winter."  God  being  the  Creator  of 
nature,  nature  is  a  revelation  of  God, 
and  as  such  should  be  studied  by  us. 
He  is  a  superficial  or  partial  student 
who  has  not  advanced  beyond  the  dis- 
covery of  laws.  Nature  reveals  the 
Divine,  1.  Power  in  her  stupendous 
forces.  2.  Unchangeahleness  in  the  re- 
gularity and  order  of  her  revolutions.  3. 
Wisdom  in  her  marvellous  and  beauti- 
ful adaptations  of  means  to  ends.  4. 
Goodness  in  her  ample  provisions  for 
the  needs  of  both  man  and  beast.  5. 
Delight  in  beauty  in  the  countless  forms 
of  loveliness,  sublimity,  and  grandeur 
in  earth  and  sea  and  sky. 


**  These  are  Thy  glorious  works,  Parent  ot 

good, 
Almighty,  Thine  this  universal  frame, 
Thus  wondrous  fair ;  Thyself  how  wondrous 

then ! 
Unspeakable,  who  sitt'st  above  these  heavens 
To  us  invisible,  or  dimly  seen 
In   these   Thy   lowest    works  j    yet    these 

declare 
Thy  goodness  beyond   thought,  and  power 

Divine." — Milton. 

II.  The  Proprietor  of  nature.  "The 
day  is  Thine,  the  night  also  is  Thine." 
He  who  created  has  the  most  indubi- 
table right  to  His  own  creations.  God 
being  Proprietor  of  nature,  it  follows  : 
1.  That  we  are  hut  stewards.  The 
wealthiest  man  cannot  call  an  acre 
absolutely  his  own.  2.  Large  posses- 
sions involve  large  responsibilities.  We 
hold  our  possessions  in  trust  for  Him. 
He  who  holds  most  has  most  accounta- 
bility. 3.  God  will  call  all  men  to  give 
an  account  of  their  stewardship. 

III.  The  Sustainer  of  nature.  The 
boundaries  of  the  earth  remain.  Day 
and  night,  summer  and  winter,  still 
alternate  as  of  old.  God's  sustenance 
of  nature  should  inspire  man  to  trust 
in  Him. 


The  Suffering  Church  Pleading  the  Faithfulness  and  Honour 
OF  God  as  an  Argument  for  His  Interposition. 


(Verses  18-23.) 

The  sorrowful  complaint  of  the  suffer-      adapted     to 
ing   people  of   God   passed   into  a  re-      their  faith, 
hearsal  of  His  former  glorious  doings      passes  into  earnest  pleading  with  God, 
on  their  behalf,   which  was   eminently      such   pleading   that  has   *' power  with 

4U 


inspire     and     strengthen 
And   now   that    rehearsal 


P8ALM  LXXIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


God     and     prevails."       The     Psalmist 
pleads — 

I.  The  attitude  of  their  enemies  to 
Him. 

The  enemies  of  Israel  were  arrayed 
in  avowed  hostility  to  God,  they  blas- 
phemed His  name  daily,  they  rose 
tumultuously  against  Him,  therefore 
His  people  call  upon  Him  to  plead  His 
own  cause  and  subdue  His  foes  and 
theirs. 

1.  Their  enemies  blasphemed  Him. 
"  Remember  this,  the  enemy  hatli  re- 
proached, O  Lord,  and  the  foolish  poople 
have  blasphemed  Thy  name:  remember 
how  the  foolish  man  reproach  eth  Thee 
daily."  What  was  done  against  the 
people  of  God  may  in  an  important 
sense  be  said  to  be  a  reproach  offered  to 
Him.  But  more  than  that  is  meant 
here.  These  cruel  persecutors  were  also 
profane  and  daring  blasphemers.  By 
oppressing  and  reviling  His  people  they 
oflered  insult  and  hurled  reproach  to 
Him.  They  had  also  directly  and 
scandalously  blasphemed  Him.  Yet 
God  forbore  to  smite  them.  No 
lightnings  strike  them.  No  thunders 
alarm  them.  And  His  people  were 
amazed  at  this.  These  blasphemers 
were  foolish  people.  "  The  foolish 
people  have  blasphemed  Thy  name,  .  .  . 
the  foolish  man  reproacheth  Thee  daily." 
Wickedness  is  essential  folly.  The 
sinner  is  a  great  fool.  He  is  so  because 
(1)  He  is  wilfully  pursuing  a  course 
which  is  incompatible  ivith  his  true  well- 
being.  The  conditions  upon  which  alone 
the  noblest  capacities  and  faculties  of 
his  being  can  be  developed  he  rejects 
with  scorn.  The  highest  and  divinest 
joys  of  life  he  is  a  stranger  to.  (2) 
He  is  educating  himself  for  a  dark  and 
miserable  hereafter.  He  is  qualifying 
himself  for  hell — the  hell  of  sinful  habits, 
evil  and  furious  passions,  accusing  and 
tormenting  memories,  and  black  and 
threatening  prospects.  (3)  He  is  con- 
tending against  irresistible  forces.  Truth, 
righteousness,  love  are  against  him,  and 
they  are  eternal  and  must  conquer.  God 
is  against  him.  The  sinner  is  a  worm 
fighting  against  Almightiness.  The 
enemies  of  God,  unless  they  submit  to 
Him,  must  be  crushed.  No  sinners  are 
412 


greater  fools  than  those  who  ridicule 
religion  and  reproach  the  religious.  If 
religion  be  true,  then  the  folly  of  those 
who  ridicule  it  is  utter,  egregious,  and 
ruinous.  If  religion  be  false,  then  it 
becomes  the  duty  of  those  who  have 
made  the  discovery  to  lead  the  religious 
to  truth  and  reality,  and  not  to  treat 
them  with  reproach. 

2.  TJteir  enemies  loudly  opposed  Him. 
"  Forget  not  the  voice  of  Thine  enemies : 
the  tumult  of  those  that  rise  up  against 
Thee  increaseth  continually.'*  The 
wicked  were  clamorous  in  their  fury 
against  Him,  and  for  the  destruction  of 
His  people.  They  were  making  war 
against  Him  with  loud  and  defiant  cries, 
like  the  shouts  of  battle.  They  were 
challenging  God  to  combat. 

3.  All  this  is  urged  by  the  inspired 
poet  as  a  reason  why  God  should  arise 
in  defence  of  His  own  cause  and  that  of 
His  people.  These  enemies  were  doing 
their  utmost  to  tarnish  and  sully  the 
glory  of  His  name;  would  He  submit 
to  that  ?  They  were  openly  aspersing 
His  honour;  would  He  not  appear  iu 
self-vindication  %  Fools  were  loudly 
bidding  Him  defiance ;  would  He  not 
smite  them  with  perpetual  dumbness  1 
If  He  did  not  care  for  the  sufferings  of 
His  peo})le,  was  He  not  jealous  of  His 
own  glory  1  If  He  was  indifferent  as 
to  their  cause,  was  He  also  indifferent 
as  to  His  own  ?  "Arise,  O  God,  plead 
Thine  own  cause,"  and  so  send  us 
deliverance  from  our  enemies,  for  they 
are  Thy  foes.  It  is  well  when  the  suf- 
fering Church  can  plead  for  deliverance 
on  the  ground  that  her  enemies  are  also 
the  enemies  of  God,  and  that  His 
interests  and  hers  are  identical.  It  is 
also  well  when  the  suffering  Church,  in 
strong  assurance  of  the  identity  of  her 
interests  and  God's,  can  wait  with  con- 
fident expectation  and  calm  patience  for 
His  interposition. 

II.  Their  own  relation  to  Him. 

1.  They  were  His  turtle-dove.  "  O 
deliver  not  the  soul  of  thy  turtle-dove 
unto  the  multitude."  By  comparing 
themselves  to  a  turtle-dove  they  plead 
(1)  Their  helplessness.  They  were  weak 
and  utterly  defenceless  against  the 
fierce  host  of  their  foes,  if  His  protec- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  liXXIV. 


tion  were  withdrawn.  This  is  a  plea 
which  moves  the  heart  of  God.  *'  When 
I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong."  (2) 
The  plaintiveness  and  incessancy  of  their 
cry  to  Him,  "  The  turtle  pours  forth 
from  every  garden,  grove,  and  wooded 
hill  its  melancholy  yet  soothing  ditty, 
unceasingly  from  early  dawn  till  sunset. 
It  is  from  its  plaintive  note,  doubtless, 
that  the  Psalmist,  in  pouring  forth  his 
lament  to  God,  compares  himself  to  a 
turtle-dove." — Smith's  Bihle  Diet,  The 
cry  of  God's  defenceless  people  was 
rising  constantly  and  mournfully  to 
Him  for  His  help.  Could  He  close  His 
ear  to  such  appeals  ?  (3)  Their  con- 
stancy to  Him  in  the  future,  '*  From 
its  habit  of  pairing  for  life,  and  its 
fidelity  for  its  mate,  the  turtle  was  a 
symbol  of  purity"  and  faithfulness  of 
affection.  The  suffering  people  could 
not  plead  their  faithfulness  to  Him  in 
the  past.  They  had  wandered  far  from 
Him,  and  often.  "The  turtle  and  the 
crane  and  the  swallow  observe  the  time 
of  their  coming ;  but  My  people  know 
not  the  judgment  of  the  Lord."  But 
henceforth,  as  His  turtle-dove,  they  will 
be  constant  in  their  love  to  Him. 
"Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I  to 
do  any  more  with  idols?"  Let  Him  have 
mercy  upon  them,  and  they  would  never 
forsake  Him  again. 

2.  They  were  the  congregation  of  His 
poor.  God  had  manifested  frequently 
a  special  interest  in  the  poor.  Those 
who  were  specially  needy  were  the 
objects  of  His  special  care.  He  was 
pre-eminently  the  Friend  of  the  father- 
less and  widow,  the  afflicted  and  broken 
in  heart.  He  had  issued  particular 
commands  for  .the  treatment  of  the  poor. 
"I  command  thee,  saying,  Thou  shalt 
open  thine  hand  wide  unto  thy  brother, 
to  thy  poor,  and  to  thy  needy,  in  thy 
land."  Some  of  the  sternest  denuncia- 
tions of  the  prophets  were  directed 
against  those  who  oppressed  the  poor. 
**  God  has  chosen  the  poor  of  this  world.*' 
They  plead  that  they  were  His  poor, 
yet  they  were  sorely  distressed,  and  He 
seemed  as  thougli  He  had  forgotten 
them.  Would  He  forget  them  for  ever  ? 
They  were  His  poor,  they  were  His 
turtle-dove;   would  He  not  appear  on 


behalf  of  His  own  ?  Was  their  night  of 
oppression  to  last  for  ever?  Oh,  when 
would  He  cause  their  day  to  dawn  by 
coming  to  their  help  ] 

3.  They  were  His  covenanted  people. 
"Have  respect  unto  Thy  covenant.'* 
This  is  the  sublimest  and  most  effectual 
plea  of  all.  Circumstances  such  as  they 
were  now  placed  in  had  been  described 
by  God  through  His  servant  Moses,  and 
He  had  said,  "  If  then  their  hearts  be 
humbled,  and  they  then  accept  of  the 
punishment  of  their  iniquity  ;  then  will 
I  remember  My  covenant  with  Jacob, 
and  also  My  covenant  with  Isaac,  and 
also  My  covenant  with  Abraham  will  I 
remember;  and  I  will  remember  the 
land"  (Lev.  xxvi.  33-45).  "God  is 
not  a  man,  that  He  should  lie ;  neither 
the  son  of  man,  that  He  should  repent : 
hath  He  said  it,  and  shall  He  not  do 
it  ]  or  hath  He  spoken,  and  shall  He 
not  make  it  good?"  "My  covenant 
will  I  not  break,  nor  alter  the  thing 
that  is  gone  out  of  My  lips  (Psalm 
Ixxxix.  30-34).  The  appeal  is  made  to 
the  truth  and  faithfulness  of  God.  "  If 
we  believe  not.  He  abideth  faithful : 
He  cannot  deny  Himself."  How  much 
more  will  He  abide  faithful  if  His 
people,  even  in  darkness  and  distress, 
do  believe,  and  plead  His  promises,  and 
urge  Him  to  fulfil  them  !  Certainly,  if 
their  punishment  has  done  its  work  in 
them,  if  they  are  truly  and  sufficiently 
humbled  and  penitent,  Me  will  respect 
His  covenant  by  delivering  them  from 
their  distresses.  But,  if  their  sufferings 
have  not  led  them  to  genuine  and 
thorough  repentance  of  their  sins.  He 
will  respect  His  covenant  by  withhold- 
ing His  help  until  they  turn  to  Him 
with  all  their  heart.  He  cannot  forget 
His  covenant.  His  faithfulness  cannot 
fail.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass 
away,  but  His  words  shall  not  pass 
away." 

Conclusion. — Here  are,  at  least, 
three  lessons  for  suffering  Christians  or 
churches  in  their  pleadings  with  God. 
1.  Let  us  urge  His  mercy  towards  us 
rather  than  the  claims  of  our  miseries 
upon  Him.  Perhaps  our  miseries  are 
all  deserved  2.  Let  us  trust  His  pro- 
mises rather  than  the  force  or  fervour  of 

413 


PSALH  LXXV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


our  petitions.  The  heartiest  prayer  does 
not  merit  any  blessing.  2>.  If  we  have 
broken  our  share  of  the  covenant,  let  us 
he  thankful  that  He  ahideth  faithful,  and 
that  in  His  covenant  provision  is  made 
for  the  pardon  and  restoration  of  trans- 
gressors,    "  Take  with  you  words,  and 


turn  to  the  Lord  :  say  unto  Him,  Take 
away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us  gra- 
ciously :  so  will  we  render  the  calves  of 
our  lips.  ...  I  will  heal  their  back- 
sliding, I  will  love  them  freely :  for 
Mine  anger  is  turned  away  from 
him.'' 


The  Church  a  Turtle- Dove. 


(  Verse 

I.  The  church  of  God  is  like  a  turtle- 
dove. 1.  In  innocence  arid  inojfensive- 
ness.  2.  hi  defencelessness.  We  have 
no  defence,  but  God.  Left  to  our- 
selves, we  are  helpless.  3.  In  purity. 
'*  Purifying  your  hearts  by  faith."  4. 
In  fidelity  of  affection.  (See  Smith's 
Bible  Diet.,  Art.  Turtle-Dove.) 


19.) 

II.  The  church  of  God  is  exposed 
to  enemies. 

III.  The  church  of  od  can  suffer 
no  real  harm  unless  God  should  de- 
liver her  to  her  enemies. 

IV.  The  church  of  God  is  dear  to 
Him,  therefore  He  will  not  abandon 
her.     "  Thy  turtle-dove" 


Hints  for  a  Missionary  Sermon. 
(Verse  20.) 


I.  The  state  of  the  heathen  world. 

I.  Daj'hiess.  Not  without  the  light 
of  nature,  reason,  or  conscience ;  but 
without  the  light  of  revelation.  2. 
Cruelty.  Missionary  records,  and  the 
narratives  of  explorers  afford  sadly  nume- 
rous and  painful  illustrations  of  this. 

II.  The  covenant  of  God  in  relation 
to  the  heathen  world.  That  the  hea- 
then are  included  in  it  is  manifest  from 


promises   of  the 
8-17;  Isa.  xi.  9, 


both  prophecies  and 
Word  (Ps.  ii.  8,  Ixxii. 
et  al.) 

III.  The  duty  of  the  church  in  rela- 
tion to  the  heathen  world.  1.  To 
plead  God's  covenant  on  its  hihalf.  2. 
To  carry  out  the  command  of  God  for 
the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant.  "  Go  ye 
into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gos- 
pel to  every  creature." 


PSALM  LXXY. 

Introduction. 


it 


A 


Superscription. — "  To  the  chief  Musician,  Altaschith ;"  see  introduction  to  Psalm  Ivii. 
Psalm — a  song  of  Asaph  :  "  see  introduction  to  Psalm  Ixxiv. 

"There  are,"  says  Perowne,  "no  clearly  marked  historical  allusions  in  the  Psalm,  It 
seems,  however,  not  improbable,  as  has  been  conjectured  by  many  commentators,  that  it  may 
refer  to  the  time  of  the  Assyrian  invasion,  either  as  celebrating,  or  immediately  anticipating 
the  defeat  of  Sennacherib.  Like  Ps.  xlvi.,  it  bears  some  resemblance  to  the  prophecies  of 
Isaiah  uttered  at  that  time."  It  seems  to  us  that  in  this  Psalm  we  have  the  "thank-prayer" 
of  the  people  in  confident  anticipation  of  victory  over  the;  Assyrians  ;  and,  in  the  following 
Psalm,  we  have  their  exultant  and  grateful  praise  for  the  accomplishment  of  that  victory. 


Israel's  Praise  for  the  Promised  Help  of  God. 

(Verses  1-3.) 


In  the  first  verse,  the  Psalmist  speaks 
as  the  mouth-piece  of  the  people  of 
Israel ;  in  the  second  and  third  verses, 
he  represents  Jehovah  as  addressing 
them.  In  these  verses  we  have — 
414 


I.  Heroic   anticipation  of  victory. 

The  people  are  threatened  by  Senna- 
cherib. His  army  is  near  them  even 
while  they  chant  this  prayer-psalm.  Yet 
they  are  confident  of  ultimate  victory 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


?3ALM  LXXV. 


Around  them  all  was  darkness,  and  to 
the  carnal  eye  no  helper  was  near,  but 
to  the  faith-enlightened  eye  all  around 
them  was  luminous  with  the  near  pre- 
Bence  and  help  of  God.  They  seem  to 
have  attained  this  brave  anticipation  of 
victory  somewhat  in  this  way. 

1 .  By  contemplating  the  wondrous  works 
of  God.  In  former  times  He  had  done 
great  and  wondrous  things  for  them. 
He  had  repeatedly  caused  their  foes  to 
flee  before  them,  utterly  discomfited,  in 
battle.  He  had  done  wondrous  things 
in  nature  on  their  behalf.  And  now  in 
the  day  of  their  distress  the  great  things 
which  He  had  done  for  them  pass  before 
them  clearly  and  impressively,  and  their 
tn)ubled  hearts  grow  calm  and  strong. 

2.  By  co?i7i€cting  the  wondrous  works 
tvhich  He  had  done  for  themivith  promises 
of  wondrous  works  which  He  would  yet  do 
for  them.  He  had  made  to  them  declara- 
tions of  the  stability  of  the  throne  of 
His  servant  David.  He  had  promised 
them  victory  over  their  foes.  Won- 
drous things  He  had  said  He  would  do 
for  them.  They  received  and  inter- 
preted His  promises  in  the  light  of  His 
former  doings  for  them,  and  their  hearts 
grew  calm  and  strong,  and  buoyant 
with  hope. 

3.  By  regarding  these  wondrous  works 
as  sig7is  of  the  Divine  presence.  As 
the  threatened  Jews  contemplated  God's 
wondrous  works,  they  appear  to  have 
felt  Him  near  to  them,  and,  thus  re- 
alising His  presence,  they  confidently 
anticipated  their  release  from  danger, 
and  their  restoration  to  peace  and  secu- 
rity. Mark  the  strength  of  their 
assurance.  The  Assyrians  have  come 
against  them  into  their  own  land ;  there 
are  no  outward  and  visible  signs  of 
deliverance,  yet  so  confident  are  they 
of  the  help  of  God  that  they  pour  out 
their  hearts  in  this  thanksgiving  Psalm. 
Their  anticipation  was  so  vivid  and 
eager  as  to  make  their  deliverance  ap- 
pear to  them  almost  an  accomplished 
thing.  It  reminds  us  of  our  Lord's 
sublime  assurance  of  victory  as  He 
entered  into  the  darkness  and  anguish  of 
His  last  and  fiercest  strife.  He  has  fore- 
warned His  disciples  of  the  trials  and 
persecutions  which  await  them.      And 


now  He  would  encourage  them,  and  He 
says,  "  These  things  I  have  spoken  unto 
you,  that  in  Me  ye  might  have  peace. 
In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation  ;  but 
be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  overcome  the 
world."  There  is  much  of  temptation 
and  grief  and  terrible  battling  imme- 
diately awaiting  Him,  yet  He  regards 
the  victory  as  so  infallibly  sure  that  it 
seems  His  already.  The  faith  is  grand, 
heroic,  which  so  trusts  God's  promise  as 
to  anticipate  the  victory,  as  the  poet 
does  in  this  Psalm. 

II.  Firm  ground  of  confidence.  In 
the  second  and  third  verses  we  under- 
stand the  poet  as  representing  God  as 
the  speaker.  The  translation  of  the 
second  verse  given  in  the  margin,  ap- 
pears to  give  the  correct  idea,  "  When  I 
shall  take  a  set  time  I  will  judge  up- 
rightly ; "  or,  **  For  I  shall  fix  a  time 
when  I  shall  judge  righteously."  Upon 
the  promise  of  God  to  interpose  for 
them,  they  base  their  faith  and  hope  as 
upon  a  sure  foundation. 

1.  In  times  of  the  greatest  distress  He 
is  all-sufficient.  Such  a  time  is  indi- 
cated in  the  third  verse.  ''  The  earth, 
in  consequence  of  the  success  of  the 
conqueror  of  the  world,  is,  as  it  were, 
dissolved,  sunk  back  into  its  ancient 
chaotic  state;  but  the  same  omnipotence 
which  at  that  time  brousjht  its  dissolu- 
tion  to  an  end,  shall  aid  it  now."  In 
the  greatest  calamities,  such  as  a  dis- 
solution of  the  earth,  God  is  calm  and 
unmoved  in  His  own  conscious  suffi- 
ciency and  sovereignty.  When  the 
earth  seems  to  be  reeling  into  ruin  He 
calms  His  people  with  the  assurance, 
"  I  have  adjusted  the  pillars  of  it ;  "  and 
they  know  that  they  are  secure.  Can 
we  conceive  any  distress  which  He  is 
unable  to  cope  with  and  overcome  1  Is 
it  possible  that  any  evil  or  misery  can 
be  so  complicated  as  to  baffle  infinite 
wisdom  ?  Can  there  be  a  calamity  so 
appalling  and  utter  as  to  triumplmntly 
defy  omnipotence  to  remove  or  relieve  it? 

2.  When  He  interposes  He  will  judge 
righteously.  He  will  manifest  no  unfair 
partiality  or  favouritism.  He  sitteth 
upon  the  throne  judging  in  righteousness. 
This  was  an  encouragement  to  His 
menaced  and  imperilled  people.     They 

415 


PSALM  LXXV. 


HO  31 1  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


thought  upon  it,  and  lifted  up  their 
heads,  believing  that  their  redemption 
drew  nigh.  Let  the  oppressed  people 
of  God  take  heart  at  the  remembrance 
of  His  upright  government.  The  Lord 
reigneth  to  smite  down  the  ojtpressor 
and  vindicate  the  oppressed.  He  will 
deliver  the  righteous  out  of  all  their 
troubles,  and  bring  them  out  into  a 
wealthy  place.  Let  the  enemies  of  God 
take  warning.  God  is  supreme.  He  is 
also  righteous.  You  are  opposing  om- 
nipotence, and  must  be  crushed  unless 
you  desist  from  your  insane  conduct. 
"  Because  there  is  wrath,  beware  lest 
He  take  thee  away  with  Mis  stroke,  and 
a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  thee." 

3.  He  will  interpose  in  due  season. 
"  When  I  shall  take  a  set  time  I  w  ill 
judge  uprightly."  "  Our  God,  who 
governs  the  world  by  His  omnipotence 
and  wisdom,  has  appointed  to  all  things 
a  boundary,  and  has  also  fixed  a  time 
and  an  hour  for  His  judgment,  and  when 
this  comes.  He  reveals  His  judgments, 
and  no  man  can  hinder  them.  God 
withholds  His  punishments  for  a  very 
long  time,  but  at  last  it  comes  with  cer- 
tainty, and  makes  no  delay."  Let  the 
much-tried  child  of  God  learn  to  wait 
patiently  and  hopefully  for  His  appear- 
ing. Li  infinite  wisdom  and  love  He 
has  fixed  the  time  when  the  night  of 
your  mourning  shall  be  ended  by  the 
rising  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  with 
healing  in  His  wings.  He  will  not 
come  a  moment  too  soon.  He  will  not 
tarry  one  moment  after  the  due  season. 
At  the  best  time  He  will  come  and  judge 
uprightly. 

Surely  there  is  here  the  firmest  ground 
for  the  strong  confidence  which  the 
Psalmist  expresses  for  the  people.  God 
is  more  than  sufficient  even  to  their 
great  needs,  when  He  interposes  He  will 
judge  righteously,  and  He  wdll  interpose 
in  due  season. 

III.  Devout  utterance  of  praise. 
"  Unto  Thee,  O  God,  do  we  give  thanks, 


do  we  give  thanks."  The  thanksgiving  of 
the  people  was  hearty.  The  Psalm  opens 
with  praise,  and  before  it  closes  it  breaks 
forth  into  praise  again.  The  praise  was 
emphasised,  repeated — "  We  give  thanks, 
we  give  thanks."  Praise  such  as  this, 
for  a  promised  blessing,  in  a  special 
manner  honours  God  by  the  calm,  strong 
trust  in  His  word  which  it  implies.  It 
rises  as  an  acceptable  ofi'ering  unto  Him. 
Such  praise  as  this  also  blesses  those 
who  off'er  it.  It  is  indeed  a  means  of 
grace  unto  them.  By  means  of  it  their 
faith  is  yet  more  increased.  Their  soul 
is  calmed,  enriched,  and  exalted  into 
communion  with  God. 

"When  gratitude  o'ei  flows  the  swelling  heart. 
And  breathes  in  free  and  uneorrupted  praise 
For  benefits  received:  pi-opitious  Heaven 
Takes    such   acknowledgment    as    fragrant 

incense, 
And  doubles  all  its  blessings." 

— George  Lillo, 

Conclusion. — 1.  In  times  of  the 
greatest  calamity  let  us  trust  in  the  Lord, 
and  not  be  afraid.  He  has  adjusted 
the  pillars  of  the  earth.  "  God  is  our  re- 
fuge and  strength,  a  very  present  help  in 
trouble.    Therefore  will  not  we  fear,"  <fec. 

2.  Let  us  learn  to  recognise  God  in 
His  works,  both  in  nature  and  in  grace. 
Let  us  pray  that  our  eyes  may  be  opened 
to  see  Him,  and  our  ears  to  catch  the 
inspiring  accents  of  His  voice. 

3.  Let  us  cultivate  a  grateful  spirit, 
"Nothing  more  detestable,"  said  Au- 
sonius,  "  does  the  earth  produce  than  an 
ungrateful  man." 

'*  I  hate  ingratitude  more  in  a  man 
Than  lying,  vainness,  babbling,  drunkenness, 
Or  any  taint  of  vice,  whose  strong  corruption 
Inhabits  our  frail  blood." — Shakespeare. 

Gratitude  is  well  pleasing  to  God.  It 
also  enriches  man.  The  ungrateful  man 
has  his  blessings  in  his  hand  only ;  the 
grateful  man  has  them  in  his  heart  and 
hand.  He  is  thus  "twice  blessed." 
Let  our  gratitude  rise  to  God  in  psalms 
of  praise,  and  express  itself  amongst 
men  in  kindly  deeds. 


God's  Nearness  to  His  People  a  Reason  for  Praising  Him. 

(Verse  \.) 
I.  There  are  times  when  God  speci-      "Thy  name **  =  Thyself.  God's  wondrous 


ally  manifests  Himself  to  His  p<sople. 
416 


works  led  the  Psalmist  to  feel  that  God 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


t^AtM  LXXV. 


Himself  was  near.  God  specially  mani- 
fests Himself  to  His  people — 

1.  In  deliverances  wrought  for  them. 
Cite  examples. 

2.  In  judgments  inflicted  upon  them. 
Cite  examples.  It  is  our  shame  that 
we  sometimes  fail  to  see  God  in  the 
blessings  which  He  bestows  upon  us. 
He  must  needs  visit  us  in  judgment  ere 
we  feel  Him  near. 

3.  In  revivals  of  His  work.  What 
quickening  of  spiritual  life !  AVhat  in- 
crease of  spiritual  activities !  What 
gracious  conversions !  What  restora- 
tions of  backsliders ! 

**  Thy  noblest  wonders  here  we  view. 
In  souls  renewed  and  sins  forgiven." 

God  is  near  to  many  objectively,  yet  not 
subjectively.  He  is  near  to  them,  yet 
they  do  not  feel  Him  near.  Let  His 
wondrous  works  in  nature,  in  providence, 
and  in  the  human  soul  be  to  us  a  sign, 
an  indication,  of  His  own  presence. 

II.  These  manifestations  should 
awaken    the    praise  of  His    people. 


"  Unto  Thee,  O  God,  do  we  give  thanks, 
do  we  give,"  <fec.  Our  thanksgiving, 
like  that  of  the  people  in  this  Psalm, 
should  be, — 1.  Repeated.  '*We  give 
thanks,  we  give  thanks."  "  Stinted 
gratitude  is  ingratitude.  For  infinite 
goodness  there  should  be  measureless 
thanks."  2.  Hearty.  God  accepts  our 
praise  only  as  it  proceeds  from  the  heart. 
3.  Practical.  The  people  by  the  poet 
express  their  resolve  to  oppose  evil,  and 
favour  righteousness.  We  should  praise 
God  "not  only  with  our  lips,  but  in 
our  lives ;  by  giving  up  ourselves  to  His 
service  and  by  walking  before  Him  in 
holiness  and  righteousness  all  our  days." 
Let  us  cultivate  fervent  gratitude  to 
God,  Gratitude  is  the  duty  of  every 
one.  Let  us  esteem  it  a  privilege. 
*'What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord?" 
(fee.  ''  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul,"  &c. 
"  While  I  live  will  I  praise  the  Lord," 

**  We'll  praise  Him  for  all  that  is  past, 
And  trust  Him  for  all  that's  to  come." 


Aspects  of  the  Divine  Government. 
(  Verses  4-8.) 


In  these  verses  the  Poet  speaks  as  the 
mouth-piece  of  the  people.  "  According 
to  some  expositors,  the  address  of  God 
is  still  continued  in  this  verse  ;  according 
to  others  in  verse  fifth  ;  and  according  to 
others  even  in  verse  sixth.  But  verse 
seventh,  where  God  is  spoken  of  in  the 
third  person,  hangs  together  with  verse 
sixth  by  *  for,'  and  this  verse  again  with 
verse  five  by  *for,'  and  verses  four  and 
five  cannot  be  disjoined  from  each 
other."  Moreover,  "  the  Selah  stands 
at  the  end  of  the  preceding  verse,  and  the 
expression,  *  I  say,'  at  the  beginning  of 
this  one,  indicates  a  change  of  speaker." 
— Hengstenherg. 

The  Divine  government  is  here  re- 
garded— 

I.  As  a  rebuke  to  wicked  oppressors. 

1.  The  wicked  are  admonished  of  the 
folly  of  sin.  "I  said  unto  the  fools. 
Deal  not  foolishly."  Sin  is  folly,  and  he 
who  acts  wickedly  "  deals  foolishly." 
Sin  is  irrational.  All  sound  reasoning 
is  opposed  to  moral  evil.  Conscience 
2d 


condemns  it  as  wrong.  Reason  pro- 
nounces it  to  be  folly.  The  laws  of  God 
in  nature  all  antagonise  it.  The  law  of 
God  as  revealed  in  His  Word  exhibits  it 
as  moral  insanity.  Sin  is  self-injury. 
The  evil-doer  is  working  his  own  ruin ; 
he  is  destroying  himself.  In  this  world 
he  is  foregoing  the  most  exquisite  and 
exalting  joys  for  the  unsatisfying  plea- 
sures of  sin.  In  the  world  to  come 
there  is  for  him  ''  a  fearful  looking  for." 
*'  He  that  pursueth  evil  pursueth  it  to 
his  own  death."  Sinner,  "  Do  thyself 
no  harm,"  ..."  deal  not  foolishly." 

2.  The  proud  are  counselled  to  shun 
insolence.  "I  said  unto  the  wicked, 
Lift  not  up  the  horn.  Lift  not  up,"  <fec. 
The  horn  was  a  symbol  of  power.  And 
the  foes  of  Israel  are  here  exhorted  not 
to  boast  insolently  of  their  power.  Pride 
of  power  is  a  most  absurd  thing.  In 
some  respects,  how  insignificant  is  the 
greatest  of  men !  how  weak  the  most 
powerful  of  men !  God  is  supreme. 
With  what  infinite  ease  can  He  bafi^e 

417 


PSALM  LXXY* 


BOMtLMTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


the  most  cunningly  devised  schemes  of 
man  !  And  the  strength  of  the  mightiest 
is  utter  weakness  before  Him. 

Haughtiness  and  arrogance  ill-become 
any  creature.  To  boast  of  power  is  a 
sure  sign  of  weakness,  and  usually  her- 
alds a  great  fall.  "  Pride  goeth  before 
destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before 
a  fall."  It  was  pride  that  led  to  the 
expulsion  of  Lucifer  from  heaven.  Pride 
ruined  King  Saul.  Pride  brought 
Haman  to  the  gallows.  Pride,  "lifting 
up  of  the  horn,  and  speaking  with  a  stiff 
neck,"  brought  Nebuchadnezzar  from 
his  throne,  expelled  him  from  his  palace, 
drove  him  from  human  society,  and  sent 
him  to  herd  with  the  beasts  of  the  field. 
The  fact  of  the  supremacy  of  the  Divine 
government  should  silence  all  proud 
boasters. 

II.  As  an  encouragement  to  the 
righteous.  "  For  lifting  up,"  ^.e.,  de- 
liverance from  trouble,  safety,  victory, 
"  Cometh  neither  from  the  east,  nor 
from  the  west,  nor  from  the  south,"  &c. 

1.  There  are  times  of  need  when  all 
human  aids  are  unavailing.  Israel  was 
experiencing  such  a  time.  They  looked 
eastward,  westward,  southward,  and 
could  see  no  signs  of  deliverance.  From 
the  north  their  adversary  approached. 
There  was  no  help  for  them  in  man.  If 
they  must  look  to  an  arm  of  flesh  for 
support,  then  their  case  seems  hopeless. 
Reliance  upon  any  human  assistance  is 
utterly  vain.  Their  case  is  too  extreme 
to  be  met  by  any  efforts  of  their  own, 
or  by  any  alliances  which  they  might 
form. 

Their  case  is  surely  a  picture  of  what 
sometimes  happens  to  the  good  man. 
From  one  quarter  the  trouble  comes, 
and  from  all  other  quarters  of  the  earth 
no  help  can  reach  him.  The  experience 
of  each  man  will  afford  examples  of  such 
times — times  when  human  helpers  all 
fail,  when  human  resources  are  utterly 
inadequate  to  our  need,  when  we  look 
around  us  for  encouragement  or  hope, 
but  look  in  vaiu.  May  it  not  be  that 
such  seasons  of  helplessness,  and  extreme 
need,  and  human  inability  are  of  Divine 
arrangement  1  They  certainly  have  the 
divinest  uses.  They  tend  to  teach  us 
our  own  helplessness,  and  the  vanity  of 
41S 


all  human  beings  as  objects  of  trust,  and 
to  lead  us  to  place  our  hope  in  God. 

^.  At  such  times  consider-ation  of  the 
Divine  government  inspires  the  soid  to 
hope  in  God.  ''  God  is  the  judge  :  He 
putteth  down  one,  and  setteth  up 
another."  He  ordereth  human  affairs. 
"  Kingdoms  shift  about  like  clouds, 
obedient  to  His  breath."  And  He  is 
ever  on  the  side  of  truth  and  righteous- 
ness. So  the  threatened  people  of  Israel 
turned  confidently  to  Him  when  all 
other  helpers  failed,  and  all  other  re- 
sources were  inadequate  to  their  need. 
He  could  put  down  their  foes,  as  He 
had  done  in  past  times.  He  could  lift 
them  up  into  safety  and  triumph.  He 
could  defend  their  cause,  and  carry  it  to 
glorious  victory.  And,  therefore,  they 
lifted  up  their  hearts  and  voices  in  glad 
thanksgivings  to  Him.  He  is  ever  the 
hope  of  His  people.  He  "  turneth  the 
shadow  of  death  into  the  morning."  In 
our  extremity,  when  our  strength  is  all 
spent,  and  "  the  collied  night"  surrounds 
us,  and  the  storm  is  loud  and  strong, 
and  progress  is  impossible  to  us.  He 
Cometh  to  us  walking  on  the  boisterous 
and  threatening  waves,  hushes  the  thun- 
derous clamours  into  peace,  quells  our 
craven  fears,  and  brings  us  to  the  desired 
haven.  Courage,  servant  of  God  !  "  The 
Lord  reigneth." 

Ill  As  an  assurance  of  the  punish- 
ment of  the  wicked.  "  For  in  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  there  is  a  cup,  and  the 
wine  is  red,  it  is  full  of  mixture,"  &c. 

1.  The  punishment  of  the  wicked  is 
from  God.  The  cup  is  in  His  hand. 
There  is  a  grave  tendency  in  our  time 
to  a  dangerous  sentimentalism  which 
represents  God  as  pitiful,  compassionate, 
and  forgiving,  and  ignores  His  holiness 
and  justice.  God  is  merciful ;  He  is 
also  righteous.  He  pardons  the  penitent ; 
He  also  punishes  the  persistently  im- 
penitent. There  is  wrath  in  God — 
not  a  stormy,  passionate,  revengeful 
feeling,  as  it  too  often  is  in  man  ;  but  a 
calm,  holy,  fixed  determination  to  punish 
those  who  scorn  His  reproofs,  trample 
under  foot  His  laws,  and  reject  His 
salvation.  God  must  wage  incessant 
war  against  evil.  His  love  burns  with 
unquenchable  fire  against  sin     His  laws 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXV. 


are  all  arrayed  against  it  in  stern  an- 
tagonism. Wisely  and  benevolently  He 
has  so  ordered  His  universe  that  penalty 
shall  ever  follow  transgression.  And  if 
men  persist  in  iniquity,  then  iniquity 
will  be  their  ruin. 

2.  The  punishment  of  the  wiclced  is 

severe.     The  cup  is   "full   of  mixture," 

an   allusion   to   the    custom    of   mixing 

roots  and  spices  with  the  wine  to  increase 

its  intoxicating  power.     What  a  cup  is 

that   which   is   being   prepared   for   the 

wicked !     What    blighted   hopes,   what 

lost    opportunities,    what    ever-accusing 

memories,   what    bitter    self-reproaches, 

what    unutterable    anguish  !      Oh  !    the 

unfathomable  depths  of  misery  involved 

in  the  words — "  Hell  fire  :  where  their 

worm    dieth    not,    and   the   fire   is   not 

quenched."     They  shall  drain  this  cup 

to  the  very  *'  dregs."    The  bitter  draught 

cannot  be  evaded.     No  part  of  it  may 

be  left    undrank.     There  is  no  escape 

from  the  misery  ;  for  the  misery  is  within 

the  guilty  breast. 

**  Me  miserable  !  which  way  shall  I  flee  ? 
Where'er  I  am  is  hell ;  myself  am  hell !  " 

3.  The  punishment  of  the  wicked  is 
without  exception.  '^  All  the  wicked." 
"There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with 
God."     He  is  just  in  His  dealings  with 


all  men.  Favouritism  or  partiality  is 
unknown  to  Him.  The  finally  impeni- 
tent, the  irreciaimably  wicked,  of  all 
lands  and  of  all  ages,  "  shall  drink  of  the 
wine  of  the  wrath  of  God."  "God  will 
render  to  every  man  according  to  his 
deeds  :  .  .  .  unto  them  that  are  con- 
tentious, and  do  not  obey  the  truth,  but 
obey  unrighteousness,  indignation  and 
wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon 
every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,  of  the 
Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile." 

Conclusion. — 1.  Warning  to  the 
wicked.  "  If  man  will  contend  with 
God,  he  cannot  answer  Him  one  of  a 
thousand.  He  is  wise  in  heart  and 
mighty  in  strength  :  who  hath  hardened 
himself  against  Him,  and  hath  pros- 
pered 1 "  2.  Counsel  to  the  wicked. 
"  Repent,  and  turn  from  all  your  trans- 
gressions ;  so  iniquity  shall  not  be  your 
ruin."  3.  Admonition  to  those  in  high 
stations.  Realise  your  dependence. 
"The  most  High  ruleth  in  the  kingdom 
of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever 
He  will."  4.  Encouragement  for  the 
oppressed  righteous.  "  Light  is  sown 
for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the 
upright  in  heart."  "  Though  I  walk  in 
the  midst  of  trouble,  Thou  wilt  revive 
me." 


A  Model  of  Devout  Praise, 

{Verses  9,  10.) 


The  Poet  still  speaks  as  the  mouth- 
piece of  all  the  people  of  Israel.  And, 
feeling  confident  of  deliverance,  declares 
their  resolution  to  praise  God  for  ever, 
to  suppress  the  wicked,  and  to  exalt  the 
righteous.  The  praise  resolved  upon 
here  is  worthy  of  our  imitation,  inas- 
much as  it — 

I.  Loses  sight  of  self  in  devout 
admiration  of  the  character  and 
doings  of  God. 

1.  He  will  praise  God  for  His  doings. 
He  resolves  to  declare  for  ever  the 
wondrous  works  of  God.  God  had 
done  great  things  for  them,  they  were 
confident  that  He  would  again  do  great 
things  for  them,  and  were  determined 
to  "  praise  the  Lord,  declare  His  doings 
among  the  people,  and  make  mention 


that  His  name  is  exalted."  God  has 
done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we 
are  glad.  Shall  not  we  praise  Him  for 
His  mighty  acts  ?  "  Come  and  hear, 
all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I  will  declare 
what  He  hath  done  for  my  soul."  "  He 
inclined  unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry. 
He  brought  me  up  also  out  of  an 
horrible  pit,  out  of  the  n)iry  clay,"  &c. 
Considering  what  God  has  done  for  us, 
especially  in  giving  to  us  Christ  and 
His  salvation,  if  we  were  not  to  praise 
Him,  surely  the  very  stones  would  cry 
out.  The  great  things  He  has  done  for 
us  were  (1)  Undeserved  hy  us.  "  While 
we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us." 

(2)  Unsought  by  us.  We  did  not  seek 
God,  but  He  sought  us  by  Jesus  Christ. 

(3)  Freely  and  heartily  given  hy  God 

419 


HAtMtXXt. 


MOMILMTIC  COMmMTART  '  P^AlMS. 


out  of  His  own  sovereign  love.     "Bless 
the  Lord,  O  my  soul." 

2.  He  will  praise  God  for  His  faith- 
fulness. '*  I  will  sing  praises  to  the 
God  of  Jacob."  God  had  entered  into 
covenant  with  Jacob,  and  that  covenant 
He  had  kept.  Through  all  the  vicis- 
situdes of  their  history,  from  the  time 
of  their  father  Jacob  until  the  time 
when  this  Psalm  was  sung,  God  had 
never  abandoned  them.  They  had  had 
their  seasons  of  darkness  and  trial,  but 
the  Lord  was  their  Friend  and  God  in 
those  seasons,  though  they  saw  Him 
not.  They  praise  the  God  of  their 
fathers,  for  His  faithfulness.  "  For 
the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  His  people, 
neither  will  He  forsake  His  inheritance." 
We,  too,  have  found  Him  a  covenant- 
keeping  God.  We  have  proved  that 
His  promises  are  reliable,  that  He  ever 
abideth  faithful.  With  Him  there  is 
"  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of 
turning."  Shall  we  not  praise  Him  as 
we  recollect  that  we  have  never  trusted 
Him  in  vain"?  and  that  He  is  the  un- 
failing rock  of  our  heart  ? 

3.  He  will  praise  God  ^'for  ever." 
Not  simply  while  His  gracious  inter- 
positions are  recent,  but /or  ever.  Con- 
stant mercies  should  awaken  constant 
gratitude,  and  constant  gratitude  will 
seek  to  express  itself  constantly  in  some 
form  of  praise.  In  some  of  the  old 
monasteries  it  was  a  rule  that  the 
chanting  of  praise  should  never  be 
interrupted,  and  that  one  choir  of 
monks  should  relieve  another  in  the 
sacred  service.  Let  us  learn  a  lesson 
from  this.  "Let  not  thy  praises  be 
transient — a  fit  of  music,  and  then  the 
instrument  hung  by  the  wall  till  another 
gaudy  day  of  some  remarkable  provi- 
dence makes  thee  take  it  down.  God 
comes  not  guest-wise  to  His  saints' 
house,  but  to  dwell  with  them.  David 
took  this  up  for  a  life-work :  *As  long 
as  I  live,  I  will  praise  Thee.'  " 

II.  Evinces  its  reality  by  resolving 
to  imitate  Him.  Anticipating  their 
"  lifting  up  "  the  people  resolve,  through 
the  grace  of  God  and  in  the  strength 


which  He  grants  them,  to  cut  off  all  the 
horns  of  the  wicked,  and  to  exalt  the 
horns   of   the    righteous.      When   they 
were   restored    to   peace   and    security 
they  would  use  their  power  in  putting 
down   wickedness,    and    upholding  and 
honouring    the    righteous.      These    are 
the  very  things  which,  by  anticipation, 
they   have    beheld   God    doing,   and  in 
this  Psalm  have  praised  Him  for  doing. 
They  resolve  that  they  will  imitate  Him 
in  these  things.     It  has  been  well  said 
that,  "  Imitation  is  the  sincerest  praise." 
This  praise  they  here  offer  to  God.     Do 
we   know   by   personal    experience  this 
praise?     Our  praise   of  the  excellences 
of  others  is  a  very  hollow  affair  unless 
we  also  cultivate  those  excellences.    We 
praise  God  for  His  "unspeakable  Gift;" 
are  we  imitating  His  pure  generosity  *? 
We  praise   Jesus  Christ   for  His  great 
self-sacrifice    for   us ;    are    we   denying 
ourselves  in  His  spirit  that  others  might 
be    benefited]     We   bless  God    for  the 
Gospel ;   are  we  exemplifying  the  spirit 
of  the  Gospel  ]    A  certain  Dr.  Whitaker, 
on  reading  the  fifth  chapter  of  Matthew, 
brake  out,  saying,   "  Either  this  is  not 
the  Gospel,  or  we  are  not  of  the  Gospel." 
And  is   it  not  to    be    feared   that    the 
spirit    of   the    Gospel    for    which    men 
praise    God,    and    the    spirit    of    their 
lives,  are  often  widely  different  ?    Let  us 
evince    the   sincerity  of  our    praise    to 
God  by    imitating   Him    in    our   spirit 
and  life.      Let   us   admire  Him,    com- 
mune with  Him,  adore  Him,  until  we 
are  transformed   into  the  same  image. 
Let    us,    like    the     Psalmist,    cultivate 
such  thoroughness  and  fervency  of  praise 
that  we  shall  lose  sight  of  everything 
but    God  and    His  glory.       May    God 
so  fill  the  horizon  of  the  soul  that  we 
may  be  filled  with  admiration  and  praise 
of  Him. 

"God!  God  I  God! 
Thou  fiU'st  our  eyes 
As  were  the  skies 
One  buruing,  boundless  sun  | 
While  creature  mind, 
In  path  confined, 
Passeth  a  spot  thereon. 
Qodl  Oodl  Qodr^F.J.£ailtlf, 


420 


HOMILBTJG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALxM  LXXVl. 


PSALM    LXXVL 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — "  To  the  chief  Musician  on  Neginoth. "    See  Introduction  to  Psalm  liv. 

A  Psalm — a  Song  of  Asaph.  (See  notes  ou  the  authorship  of  Psalm  Ixxiv.)  The  super- 
Bcription  may  be  thus  paraphrased — A  Psalm,  a  Song  of  Asaph,  to  be  delivered  to  the  director 
of  music,  that  he  may  arrauge  for  its  performance  with  the  accompaniment  of  stringed  instru- 
ments. 

Occasion. — There  appear  to  us  very  good  reasons  for  regarding  the  Psalm  as  a  celebration 
of  Israel's  victory  over  theA  ssyrians.  The  preceding  Psalm  sang  the  heroic  anticipation  of 
triumph,  this  one  the  uxultaut  realisation  of  triumph. 

God  the  Champion  of  the  Good. 


The  victorious  army  of  Sennacherib  is 
encamped  before  Jerusalem  threatening 
to  besiege  it  unless  Hezekiah  will  sub- 
mit to  them,  and  admit  them  into  the 
city.  The  invading  army  was  very 
numerous  and  powerful,  and  was  em- 
boldened by  many  and  signal  victories. 
In  his  extremity  Hezekiah  is  strength- 
ened by  the  word  of  the  Lord,  by  the 
mouth  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  and  he 
refuses  to  surrender  to  the  generals  of 
Sennacherib.  Isaiah  declared,  that  "the 
virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  despised 
and  laughed  to  scorn"  the  invaders. 
According  to  His  promise,  God  inter- 
posed on  behal  f  of  His  people,  **  and  on 
the  first  night  of  the  siege,  a  hundred 
fourscore  and  five  thousand,  with  their 
captains  and  generals,  were  destroyed." 
( Vide  2  Chron.  xxxii.  ;  Isa.  xxxvii. ; 
Josephus  Antiq.  x.  1.) 

We  may  profitably  regard  this  chapter 
of  ancient  history  as  an  illustration  of 
God's  Championship  of  His  people.  It 
is  common  to  speak  of  human  life  upon 
earth  as  a  battle.  To  every  man  who 
is  in  any  degree  acquainted  with  the 
meaning  and  importance  of  life  there 
are  difficulties  and  struggles  to  be  en- 
countered. There  is  disorder  to  be 
attacked,  subdued,  made  orderly  and 
rhythmic.  Tiiere  are  ignorance,  stu- 
pidity, brutality,  to  be  encountered  and 
vanquished  by  intelligence,  wisdom,  and 
manliness.  The  truly  good  man,  he 
who,  in  the  strength  of  God,  is  trying 
to  live  holily,  usefully,  and  bravely, 
especially  finds  life  a  battle.  To  him 
there  are  not  only  the  manifest  enemies 
of  ignorance,  vice,  and  crime,  but  subtle, 


spiritual  foes  within  him  and  around 
him.  His  own  soul  is  beleaguered 
by  enemies.  The  cause  of  God  in  the 
world,  too,  is  attacked  by  foes,  as  was 
Jerusalem  by  the  Assyrian  hosts.  We 
are  inadequate  to  contend  with  forces  so 
numerous  and  powerful.  Yet  "  there 
be  more  with  us  than  with  him  :  with 
him  is  an  arm  of  flesh  ;  but  with  us  is 
the  Lord  our  God  to  help  us,  and  to 
fight  our  battles." 

I.  The  enemies  of  the  good  are 
many  and  mighty.  The  Assyrian 
army  was  vast  and  powerful,  and 
had  been  very  victorious.  Tlie  Psal- 
mist speaks  of  them  as  *'  the  stout- 
hearted," .  .  .  "the  men  of  might." 
They  illustrate  the  enemies  of  the  people 
of  God.  *'  Be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and 
in  the  power  of  His  might.  Put  on  the 
whole  armour  of  God,"  <kc.  (Eph.  vi. 
10-13).  Good  men  have  to  contend 
with  Satan.  He  is  the  great  leader  of 
the  antagonism  against  God  and  good- 
ness. He  strives  for  his  own  diabolical 
mastery,  for  the  sovereignty  of  darkness 
and  evil.  In  our  day  the  great  adver- 
sary of  God  and  man  seeks  to  compass 
his  diabolic  ends  not  so  much  by  force 
as  by  fraud.  The  time  was  when  the 
good  had  to  dread  the  "roaring  lion, 
going  about  seeking  whom  he  may  de- 
vour." At  present,  he  is  far  more 
dangerous  when  he  "  is  transformed  into 
an  angel  of  light."  He  works  with  a 
shrewd  cunning,  a  subtle  diplomacy,  and 
by  means  of  politic  disguises.  He  can 
assume  the  self-possession  of  a  man  of 
the  world,  or  the  manners  of  a  gentle- 
man.     He  can  speak  the  language  of 

421 


PSALM  LXXVL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


accomplished  scliolarsliip,  or  of  deep 
iind  patient  thougiit.  Or,  be  can  assume 
the  garb  of  religion,  and  speak  the  lan- 
guage of  piety.  Indirectly  and  by  means 
of  artful  disguises  he  seeks  to  accomplish 
his  fiendish  purpose,  the  utter  deprava- 
tion and  ruin  of  souls.  In  all  scenes 
and  at  all  times  he  steadily  works  to 
accomplish  Lis  object.  By  many  and 
varied  means  he  is  suo-o-estin":  evil  to 
tlie  soul,  and  stimulating  and  impelling 
the  soul  under  false  pretences  to  follow 
that  evil.  A  man  is  lured  to  drunken- 
ness under  the  pretence  of  sociality  and 
good  companionship.  Another  is  snared 
into  the  most  miserable  avarice  under 
the  guise  of  making  provision  for  future 
emergencies,  or  of  practising  a  proper 
economy.  In  this  indirectness  and 
subtlety  of  method  lie  the  great  strength 
of  the  devil ;  and  by  reason  of  these  his 
attacks  are  fraught  with  great  peril  to 
men.  Moreover,  in  his  great  warfare 
against  the  good,  Satan  has  many  allies. 
From  the  revelations  of  the  Bible,  it  is 
clear  to  us  that  there  are  many  angelic 
helpers  of  the  good,  and  that  there  are 
many  fallen  angels  who,  under  their 
great  leader,  oppose  the  good.  There  are 
ranks  and  orders  of  these  fallen  angels  — 
"  principalities,  powers,  the  rulers  of  the 
darkness  of  this  world,  spiritual  hosts 
of  wickedness." 

These  beings  exert  much  influence  in 
suggesting  evil  to  the  mind  and  heart, 
and  in  impelling  the  mind  and  heart  to 
evil.  He  is  but  a  shallow  thinker  that 
ridicules  the  idea  of  malign  spiritual  in- 
fluences acting  upon  us  ;  and  has  studied 
with  but  little  effect  either  the  expe- 
riences of  his  own  heart  or  the  pheno- 
mena of  mind  in  general.     Assuredly 

*'  There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth 
Than  are  dreamt  of  in  his  philosophy." 

Satan  has  allies  also  in  human  society. 
The  good  have  to  contend  against  "  the 
world "  as  well  as  against  the  devil,  or 
against  the  devil  as  he  works  by  human 
agency.  There  are  men  of  splendid  but 
impure  imagination  who  are  corrupting 
souls  by  sensuous  literature.  There  are 
others  of  education  and  mental  power  who 
are  producing  works  which  tend  to  un- 
settle men's  faith  not  only  in  human 
422 


creeds,  but  in  Divine  revelation,  and  even 
in  the  reality  of  truth,  and  righteousness, 
and  love.  Music,  and  many  of  the  so- 
called  refinements  and  arts  of  life  are, 
to  a  great  extent,  made  to  minister  to 
the  senses  rather  than  to  the  soul,  to 
the  appetites  rather  than  to  the  aspira- 
tions of  man's  nature.  And  the  souls 
of  many  seem  steeped  in  worldliness. 
At  the  shrine  of  Mammon  immense  mul- 
titudes are  ever  bowing.  Men  are  sac- 
rificing all  mental  culture  and  progress 
for  gold,  sacrificing  principle  for  gold, 
sometimes  sacrificing  their  soul  for  gold. 
Parents  are  willing  to  immolate  their 
children  upon  the  altar  of  Mammon,  and 
sacrifice  their  daughters  for  gold.  It  is 
not  without  reason  that  we  pray  for  de- 
liverance from  the  snares  and  seductions 
of  ^^  the  world;"  for  they  are  full  of 
peril,  and  they  beset  all  classes  and  con- 
ditions of  men.  The  good  have  also  to 
contend  against  enemies  within  themselves. 
There  are  tendencies  to  evil  in  our  own 
nature.  The  completeness  of  our  moral 
power  is  broken.  "  The  flesh  lusteth 
against  the  spirit."  Passion  is  fre- 
quently arrayed  against  principle.  In- 
clination and  conscience  are  often  at 
variance.  "  To  will  is  present  with  me  ; 
but  how  to  perform  that  which  is  good 
I  find  not."  There  is  that  in  us  which 
responds  to  temptation,  and  gives  to 
temptation  its  power ;  that  in  us  which 
is  attracted  by  evil  in  certain  of  its 
forms  as  steel  is  drawn  by  the  magnet. 
Thus  some  of  the  severest  struggles  are 
fought  in  the  arena '  of  human  souls. 
Here,  then,  are  the  enemies  against 
which  we  have  to  battle,  "  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  "  evil  within  us, 
and  evil  around  us ;  ignorance,  super- 
stition, oppression,  bigotry,  unbelief ,  vice, 
crime,  pain,  disease,  misery,  and  death. 
*'  0  our  God,  we  have  no  might  against 
this  great  company  that  cometh  against 
us,  neither  know  we  what  to  do ;  but 
our  eyes  are  upon  Thee." 

II.  The  Champion  of  the  good  is 
greater  than  all  their  enemies.  The 
Psalmist  represents  God  as  completely 
vanquishing  the  foes  of  Israel.  In  one 
night  one  hundred  and  eighty-five  thou- 
sand of  the  Assyrian  army  were  slain. 
'*  When    God   arose    to    judgment    to 


SOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


fSALM  LXXVI. 


save'*  His  ptopie,  tlie  enemy  was  speedily 
and  utterly  discomtited. 

1.  He  issues  forth  to  battle  from  Zion. 
Zion  is  represented  as  the  dwelling-place 
of  God.  "  In  Judah  is  God  known  : 
His  name  is  great  in  Israel :  in  Salem 
also  is  His  tabernacle,  and  His  dwelling- 
place  in  Zion.''  "  The  Lord  hath  chosen 
Ziun  ;  He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habita- 
tion. This  is  my  rest  for  ever :  here 
will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have  desired  it." 
Sennacherib  had  virtually  challenged 
Jehovah  to  combat.  He  sent  to  the 
Jews,  saying,  "  No  god  of  any  nation  or 
kingdom  was  able  to  deliver  his  people 
out  of  mine  hand,  and  out  of  the  hand 
of  my  fathers ;  how  much  less  shall 
your  God  deliver  you  out  of  mine 
handl"  The  contest  was  "between 
the  gods  as  well  as  the  military  forces 
of  the  two  kingdoms."  The  presump- 
tuous monarch  begins  to  besiege  the 
holy  city.  He  will  capture  the  very 
dwelling-place  of  the  Lord  God  of 
Sabaoth.  God  accepts  the  challenge, 
and  in  the  silence  of  the  night  He 
calmly  goes  forth,  and  with  the  breath 
of  His  nostrils  He  slays  His  foes.  "  The 
stout-hearted  are  spoiled,  they  have  slept 
their  sleep ;  and  none  of  the  men  of 
might  have  found  their  hands."  And 
the  proud  boaster  hastily  retreats,  to 
meet  with  a  speedy  and  ignominious 
death.  Not  in  any  local  Zion  does  God 
now  manifest  His  glory.  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  true  Shekinah,  "  the  brightness  of 
His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His 
person."  God  goes  forth  in  Him  to 
combat  His  foes.  The  great  contro- 
versies of  Christendom  are  concerning 
Him.  The  opposition  to  religion  is  to 
a  great  extent  directed  against  Him. 
His  spirit  and  principles,  His  authority 
to  legislate  for  human  society,  His  right 
to  reign  over  men.  His  claim  of  God- 
hood,  these  are  combated  by  men  to-day. 
All  the  opposition  to  which  His  disciples 
are  subjected  He  regards  as  directed 
against  Himself.  Their  foes  He  holds 
to  be  His  foes.  He  is  the  great  anta- 
gonist of  all  evil.  By  His  Spirit  and 
His  Church  He  wages  war  against  sin, 
suffering,  and  death.  In  proportion  as 
His  people  are  anima'.ed  by  His  Spirit 
and  live  in  His  life  are  they  victorious 


in  conflict.  God  in  Christ  shall  conquer 
all  our  foes.  The  sublime  wisdom  of 
His  teaching,  the  Divine  beauty  of  His 
life,  the  heart-moving,  Godlike  power 
of  His  death  shall  subdue  the  world  unto 
Him.  ''  At  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  shall  bow,"  &c. 

2.  He  issues  forth  to  complete  victory. 
When  God  entered  the  lists  the  vast  and 
valiant  hosts  of  Sennacherib  were  swept 
into  the  silent  sleep  of  death  in  a 
moment.  "  There  brake  He  the  arrows 
of  the  bow,  the  shield,  and  the  sword, 
and  the  battle,"  &c. 

"  Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  summer 

is  green, 
That  host  with  their  banners  at  sunset  were 

seen  : 
Like  the  leaves  of  the  forest  when  autumn 

hath  blown, 
That  host  on  the  morrow  lay  wither'd  and 

strown." 

God  not  only  got  to  Himself  a  com- 
plete victory,  but  His  glory  was  in- 
creased amongst  His  people  and  amongst 
the  heathen  by  reason  of  the  wrath  of 
His  enemies.  He  made  the  wrath  of 
man  to  praise  Him.  The  proud  boast- 
ing of  Sennacherib  and  the  attack  of  his 
mighty  hosts  called  forth  a  conspicuous 
display  of  the  power  and  majesty  of 
God.  His  people  saw  it,  and  celebrated 
His  praises.  The  heathen  saw  it,  and 
"  brought  gifts  unto  the  Lord  to  Jeru- 
salem, and  presents  to  Hezekiah,  king  of 
Judah  :  so  that  He  was  magnified  in  the 
sight  of  all  nations."  Thus  the  Lord 
got  Him  honour  upon  Sennacherib. 
This  is  an  illustration  of  the  victory 
which  He  will  achieve  over  all  His  foes. 
There  are  times  when  we  stand  dismayed 
before  our  enemies.  The  evils  of  our 
own  hearts  are  more  than  a  match  for 
us.  And,  when  we  think  of  the  foes 
that  are  in  the  world,  and  of  the  vast 
influence  of  the  great  leader  of  the  evil 
forces,  we  feel  how  utterly  inadequate 
we  are  to  cope  with  such  tremendous 
powers.  But  the  Captain  of  our  salva- 
tion is  more  than  sufficient  for  us.  He 
will  turn  the  counsel  of  the  enemies  of 
His  people  to  their  own  confusion.  He 
will  give  us  the  victory  over  our  foes. 
**  The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise  Satan 
under  thy  feet  shortly."  '*  We  are  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  hath 

423 


VBATM  LXXYI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


loved  us."  He  will  enable  us  to  draw 
from  our  conflicts  a  strength  and  cour- 
age, a  hatred  of  evil,  and  an  enthusiasm 
for  goodness  which  we  could  not  other- 
wise have  obtained.  He  will  continue 
the  conflict  until  He  is  victorious  over 
every  foe.  He  will  even  overrule  the 
dark  and  malicious  designs  and  workings 
of  Satan  and  his  allies  for  the  promotion 
of  His  glory.  After  all  the  devil  is  but 
the  vassal  of  the  Lord  our  God.  Un- 
wittingly he  is  being  used  to  promote 
the  enthronement  of  the  true  and  good. 
**  Hallelujah,  for  the  Lord  God  omni- 
potent reigneth.'* 

3.  He  achieves  complete  victory  with 
the  utmost  ease.  Whatever  the  *'  angel," 
messenger,  which  the  Lord  sent  against 
the  Assyrian  host  was,  it  is  clear  that 
the  victory  was  achieved  with  the  utmost 
ease.  "  Who  can  stand  in  Thy  sight 
when  once  Thou  art  angry  1 " 

**  For  the  angel  of  death  spread  his  wings  on 

the  blast, 
And  breathed  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he 

passed  ; 
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  wax'd  deadly 

and  chill, 
And  their  hearts  but  once  heav'd,  and  for 

ever  grew  still." 

God  rebukes  His  foes,  and  they  are 
vanquished.  So  in  the  end  He  will 
subdue  His  foes  with  the  most  consum- 
mate ease.  The  foes  of  the  good  exist 
and  are  active,  not  because  He  is  unable 
to  subdue  them,  but  because  for  wise 
and  benevolent  purposes  He  sees  fit  to 
allow  them  to  resist  Him  and  oppose 
His  cause.  But  when  He  arises  to 
judgment  they  will  *'  melt  like  snow  in 
His  glance."  Wherefore  let  the  people 
of  God  take  courage  and  exult  in  their 
Champion. 

IIL  The  Champion  of  the  good 
should  be  duly  honoured. 

1.  His  people  should  pay  their  vows 
to  Him.  "  Vow,  and  pay  unto  the 
Lord  your  God  all  ye  who  are  round 
about  Him."  The  latter  clause  makes 
it  clear  that  this  refers  to  His  people. 
The  twelve  tribes  used  to  pitch  round 
about  the  tabernacle.  And  Jehovah 
was  said  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them. 
The  vows  which  they  had  made  to  Him 
in  the  time  of  their  danger  and  fear, 
they  are  exhorted  to  pay  to  Him  now 
424 


that  deliverance  has  been  wrought  foi 
them.  In  the  conflicts  of  life  men 
frequently  vow  that  if  deliverance  from 
trouble,  or  extrication  from  difficulty, 
or  victory  over  enemies  be  granted  to 
them,  they  will  consecrate  themselves  or 
their  possessions  more  fully  to  God. 
But  these  vows  are  frequently  forgotten 
when  the  peril  is  past.  Thy  vows  are 
registered  in  heaven  by  the  faithful 
God.  Pay  them.  With  shameful  in- 
gratitude thou  hast  far  too  long  left 
them  unpaid,  pay  them  at  once. 

2.  Offerings  of  devotion  should  be 
made  to  Him.  "Bring  presents  unto 
Him  that  ought  to  be  feared."  After 
the  defeat  of  Sennacherib  "many  brought 
gifts  unto  the  Lord  to  Jerusalem,"  and 
"  He  was  magnified  in  the  sight  of  all 
nations."  God  is  worthy  to  receive  the 
homage  of  all  peoples.  The  day  is 
coming  when  men  shall  esteem  it  a  high 
privilege  and  pleasure  to  bring  their 
richest  treasures  as  an  off'ering  to  Him. 

Let  us  bring  presents  to  Him  who 
fighteth  for  us  in  all  our  battles.  Man 
of  wealth,  dedicate  thy  possessions  to 
Him.  Man  of  genius,  lay  thy  genius 
on  the  altar  of  Divine  consecration.  Let 
us  each  give  to  Him  of  our  best  and 
richest  treasures. 

3.  The  glory  of  victory  should  he  as- 
cribed to  Him  alone.  In  the  case  of  the 
Assyrian  hosts  He  alone  encountered 
and  vanquished  them.  "O  sing  unto 
the  Lord  a  new  song ;  for  He  hath  done 
marvellous  things  :  His  right  hand,  and 
His  holy  arm,  hath  gotten  Him  the 
victory."  And  the  praise  and  honour 
were  all  ascribed  to  Him.  In  all  the 
victories  of  His  people  He  is  the  real 
Conqueror.  If  we  come  out  of  tempta- 
tion victorious,  it  is  because  of  the  help 
of  His  grace.  If  in  any  measure  we 
have  been  successful  in  our  conflict  with 
ignorance  and  sin  and  misery,  we  have 
been  so  by  the  power  of  His  might. 
"  Blessed  be  the  Lord  my  rock,  who 
teach  eth  my  hands  to  war,  and  my 
fingers  to  fight." 

"He  makes  the  glorious  victory  mine^ 
And  His  shall  be  the  praise." 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  Church  of 
God    remember    its    obligation,      "Be 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALU  Lxxn. 


strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 
of  His  might,"  &c.  (Eph.  vi.  10-18). 
2.  Let  the  Church  of  God  remember 


its  Champion.     "  Through  God  we  shall 
do  valiantly ;  for  He  shall  tread  down 


our  enemies.' 


God  the  Saviouiv  of  the  Meek. 
(Verse  9.) 


Consider — • 

I.  The  character  of  the  people  of 
God.  "  The  meek."  '*  A  pious,  patient 
one.'' — Faerst's  Lex. 

1.  Meekness  is  not  mere  easiness  of  dis- 
position, or  apathy.  Absence  of  sensi- 
bility, whether  physical,  mental,  or  moral, 
is  neitiier  virtuous  nor  blessed. 

2.  Meekness  is  not  cowardice  or  weak- 
ness. The  truly  meek  man  is  as  brave 
as  he  is  calm,  as  courageous  as  he  is 
patient. 

3.  Meekness  has  a  God-ward  and  a 
man-ward  aspect.  (1)  Its  attitude  to- 
tvards  God  is  that  of  cheerfd  acquiescence 
in  the  appointments  of  His  will  and  the 
arrangernents  of  His  providence.  It  does 
not  criticise,  or  complain,  or  murmur 
because  of  His  doings,  but  is  humble 
and  quiet  before  Him.  (2)  Towards 
many   meekness   manifests   itself  in  pa- 


tiently   hearing    with   the   defects    and 

weaknesses  of  others,  in  willingness  to 
endui'e  insult  and  injury  rather  than 
do  wrong,  and  in  charitably  adopting  the 
most  favourable  construction  on  the  action 
or  course  of  conduct  of  any  one,  when 
two  constructions  are  admissible.  Meek- 
ness is  "  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  over- 
comes evil  with  good." 

II.  The  peril  of  the  people  of  God. 
They  need  some  one  "  to  save  "  them.  1. 
They  have  enemies.  2.  These  enemies 
are  many  and  strong.  3.  They  are 
inadequate  to  cope  with  these  enemies. 

III.  The  Deliverer  of  the  people  of 
God.  God  is  their  vindicator  and  Sav- 
iour. 1.  He  punishes  the  proud  oppres- 
sor. 2.  He  saves  the  oppressed  meek. 
"For  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  for 
the  sighing  of  the  needy,  now  will  I 
arise,  saith  the  Lord." 


God  Glorified  through  Man's  Wrath. 
(Jtrst  10.) 


Our  text  gives  a  special  aspect  of 
Divine  Providence.  Amid  the  confusion 
and  suffering  and  sin  of  the  present 
God  reigns,  so  that  the  issue  is  His 
highest  glory.  The  world  has  not  been 
deserted  by  its  Maker,  although  the 
mode  of  His  continuous  presence  and 
working  is  inexplicable.  But  how  won- 
derful that  man's  freedom  and  responsi- 
bility should  be  inviolate,  while  his 
resistance  is  overcome,  the  fierce  and 
swelling  tide  of  his  passions  controlled, 
and  the  character  of  God  illustrated  and 
glorified.  God's  spiritual  Providence  is 
an  organ  for  bringing  forth  the  largest 
possible  amount  of  happiness  and  good, 
and  for  filling  the  universe  with  pure 
and  lasting  glory.  From  the  first  the 
world  has  been  afflicted  with  sufferings 
and  tumults,  and  the  crimes  which  war 
against  private  and  public  good.    There 


are  times  of  social  and  political  earth- 
quake, when  the  abyss  opens  at  our  feet. 
But  for  the  Divine  Providence  these 
phenomena  must  have  been  more  dis- 
tressing and  terrific.  Through  God's 
continuous  and  universal  presence  and 
acting,  the  misery  springing  from  the 
sin  and  crime  of  men  is  immeasurably 
lessened.  With  this  conviction,  we 
gratefully  say,  "  Surely  the  wrath  of 
man  shall  praise  Thee,"  &c. 

I.  The  wrath  of  man  not  unfre- 
quently  defeats  its  own  aims  and  ac- 
complishes the  Divine  purpose.  The 
cruel  envy  of  Joseph's  brothers,  Pha- 
raoh's crafty  policy  of  imposing  heavier 
and  more  grievous  burdens  on  the  Is- 
raelites, Haman's  ambition  and  his  en- 
mity against  Morel ecai,  illustrate  this. 
Opposite  and  conflicting  interests,  as  it 
seems  to  us,  are  so  balanced,  violence  is 

425 


PSALM  LXXVL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


so  checked,  "  vaulting  ambition "  so 
"  overleaps  itself,"  that  man's  wrath 
brings  into  greater  clearness  and  glory 
the  Divine  power  and  wisdom  and 
goodness. 

II.  The  wrath  of  man  is  sometimes 
the  instrument   of  the   Divine  will. 
Generally  our  sins  become  our  scourge. 
Our  "own  wickedness  corrects"  us,  &c. 
But  specially.     The  sole  object  of  the 
Babylonian  monarch  was  the  gratifica- 
tion of  his  ambition  by  conquest  and 
spoil,   yet  he   was   "  the    rod "  of   God 
(Isa.  X.  5-7).     This  is  frequently  exem- 
plified in   the  conduct  of  the  first  Na- 
poleon— in   our  Chinese  wars,  indefen- 
sible,   yet   introducing  the   Gospel — in 
the  Russian  war,  so  unnecessary  and  so 
barren  in  anticipated  results,  yet  abolish- 
ing   serfdom,    and    preparing   for    the 
emancipation  of  religion  from  a  bigotry 
as  narrow  and  fierce  as  that  of  Borne — 
in  the  Indian  Mutiny,  which  roused  the 
Church  to  acknowledge  India's  claim  on 
her  prayers  and  efforts — in  the  terrible 
conflict  that  raged   in  America,  issuing 
in  the  freedom  of  the  slave,  and,  despite 
appearances,  in  a  higher  and  purer  pub- 
lic opinion  and  nionility — in  the  recent 
Franco-German  war,  tending   to  widen 
civil  and  religious   liberty,  as  it  limits 
and  weakens  the  priestly  power,  every- 
where ;ind  always  the  enemy  of  popular 
rights  and  of  a  free  Gospel.     With  no 
fear  of   God,  in   the  simple  pursuit  of 
their  own  ends,  men  are  the  instruments 
of  the  Divine  Providence. 

III.  Man  in  his  wrath  accomplishes 
the  Divine  will  when  setting  himself 
to  resist  and  frustrate  it.  The  design 
of  God  is  fulfilled  by  direct  attempts  to 
defeat  it  (Acts  iv.  27  and  28,  with  iv. 


10  and  11.)  Persecution  defeats  itself. 
"  Noble  lives  crowned  by  heroic  deaths  " 
are  the  best  arguments  and  defences  of 
any  church.  The  assaults  of  infidelity 
result  in  the  more  triumphant  vindica- 
tion of  the  faith.  Hume  prophesied 
that  Christianity  could  not  survive  the 
nineteenth  century.  Voltaire  impiously 
said  that  one  wise  man  would  undo 
what  twelve  fools  had  accomplished. 
Julian  will  exterminate  the  faith ;  but 
he  and  all  exclaim — "  0  Galilean  !  Thou 
hast  conquered."  "  Surely  the  wrath  of 
man  shall  praise  Thee." 

God  rules  in  wisdom,  righteousness, 
and  love.  The  end  of  His  rule,  the 
triumph  of  purity  and  truth.  The  way 
to  the  end  is  not  traceable  by  us ;  but 
the  fact,  the  end  is  sure. 

Courage^  then.  We  are  not  the  sport 
of  fortune.  It  is  not  a  great  drama  of 
chance  which  is  now  acted.  A  hand 
unseen  is  turning  all  to  a  great  end,  and 
blessed  as  great — the  glory  of  God  in 
the  triumph  of  truth  and  holiness  and 
love,  and  thus  the  complete  and  ever- 
lasting blessedness  of  man. 

For  God  is  not  a  despot,  careless  at 
what  cost  His  purposes  are  realised,  if 
only  He  triumph.  He  is  a  wise  and 
beneficent  Ruler ;  or  rather  a  holy  and 
wise  and  loving  Father,  employing  His 
resources  for  the  good  of  all  His  chil- 
dren, patient  though  they  are  rebellious 
and  foolish,  and  only  at  last,  if  at  last, 
banishing  from  the  home  they  have  for- 
saken and  despised  the  obstinately  per- 
verse. Because  God  is  so  wi.<e  and 
holy  and  gracious,  and  withal  so  nnghty, 
how  hazardous  to  resist  His  will  or  de- 
spise His  grace  ! — W.  Y.,  B.  A. 


Vows    MADE    IN    TrOUBLB. 
{Verse  11.) 


"Vow  and  pay  unto  the  Lord  your 
God,  all  ye  who  are  round  about  Him." 
"  Round  about  Him.  A  description  of 
His  people,  as  the  twelve  tribes  pitched 
round  about  the  tabernacle,  and  the  four 
and  twenty  elders  were  round  about 
God's  throne." — Ainsworth. 

I.  The  great  tendency  of  man  to 
426 


make  religious  vows  in  times  of  danger 
and  trouble.  The  Jews  did  so  when 
the  Assyrians  were  before  Jerusalem. 
Men  are  very  prone  to  do  so. 

1.  This  is  sometimes  evil,  because  it 
indicates  a  disposition  to  bargain  witii 
God.  To  vow  that  we  will  serve  God 
on  condition  that  He  will  deliver  3r  help 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM   LXXVII. 


US  is  wrong.  He  has  an  absolute  claim 
upon  our  possessions  and  upon  ourselves. 
See  the  meanness  and  selfishness  of 
Jacob  as  manifested  in  his  vow  at 
Bethel  (Gen.  xxviii.  20-22). 

2.  This  is  sometimes  good.  When 
trouble  awakens  thought,  and  thought 
leads  to  repentance,  and  the  humble 
spirit  vows  to  honour  and  serve  God, 
such  vows  are  excellent. 

II.  The  great  tendency  of  man  to 
forget  these  vows  when  the  trouble 
and  danger  are  past.  This  is  pro- 
verbial— 

**  When  the  devil  was  sick,  the  devil  a  monk 
would  be  ; 
When  the  devil  was  well,  the  devil  a  monk 
was  he." 

**  Thus  we  say.  The  river  past,  and  God 
forgotten,  to  express  with  how  mournful 
a  frequency  He   whose   assistance  was 


invoked,  it  may  have  been  earnestly, 
in  the  moment  of  peril,  is  remembered 
no  more,  so  soon  as  by  His  help  the 
danger  has  been  surmounted." — Arch- 
bishop Trench. 

1.  Vows  begotten  of  fear  are  not  likely 
to  be  kept  when  the  cause  of  fear  is 
removed.  2.  Vows  begotten  of  penitence 
or  gratitude  will  be  piously  remembered 
and  fulfilled. 

III.  The  great  sin  of  forgetting  or 
failing  to  fulfil  these  vows.  1.  There 
is  ingratitude.  Having  received  the 
benefit  we  ignore  our  obligation  to  the 
Benefactor.  2.  There  is  unfaithfulness. 
Having  promised  we  fail  to  perform 
that  which  we  have  promised.  We  lie 
unto  the  faithful  God.  Brother,  thy 
vows  are  registered  in  heaven.  Pay 
them.  Pay  them  fully,  heartily,  at 
once. 


PSALM    LXXVII. 
Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  chief  Musician,  to  Jeduthun,  a  Psalm  of  Asaph."  Jeduthun  was 
one  of  the  leaders  of  sacred  music  in  David's  time  (1  Chron.  xvi.  41,  42,  2  Chron.  v.  12). 
One  of  the  twenty-four  musical  choirs  left  by  David  bore  the  honorary  title  Jeduthun  or  Jedi- 
thun,  perhaps  from  him,  as  its  founder  (1  Chron.  xxv.) 

A  Psalm  of  Asaph.     See  Introduction  to  Psalm  Ixxiv. 

Occasion.  —  It  is  Udt  known,  nor  have  we  any  means  of  determining  upon  what  occasion  the 
Psalin  was  written.  But,  Perowne  has  well  said  concerning  it,  "  Whenever,  and  by  whomsoever, 
the  Psalm  may  have  been  written,  it  clearly  is  individual,  not  national.  It  utterly  destroys  all 
the  beauty,  all  the  tenderness  and  depth  of  feeling  in  the  opening  portion,  if  we  suppose  that 
the  people  are  introduced  speaking  in  the  first  person.  The  allusions  to  the  national  history 
may  indeed  show  that  the  season  was  a  season  of  national  distress,  and  that  the  sweet  singer 
was  himself  bowed  down  by  the  burden  of  the  time,  and  oppressed  by  woes  which  he  had  no 
power  to  alleviate  ;  but  it  is  his  own  sorrow,  not  the  sorrow  of  others,  under  which  he  sighs, 
and  of  which  he  has  left  the  pathetic  record."  The  Psalm  is  eminently  fitted  to  teach  us  how 
we  may  obtain  comfort  and  peace  even  in  the  severest  distresses. 

Homiletically  the  Psalm  sets  before  us.  First :  The  good  man's  ti'ouble  and  Deliverer^  verses 
1-3.  Second:  The  thoughts  ayid  inquiries  of  a  godly  soul  in  distress,  verses  4-9.  Third:  The 
godly  soul  rising  superior  to  trouble  by  the  devout  contemplation  of  the  works  and  ways  of  God^ 
verses  10-20. 


The  Good  Man's  Trouble  and  Deliverer. 
{Verses  1-3.) 


t  The  Good  man's  trouble.     All 

men  have  some  measure  of  acquaintance 
with  trouble.  It  is  not  given  to  us  to 
travel  through  life  under  unclouded 
skies,  favoured  by  refreshing  breezes, 
amid  enchanting  scenery,  with  delightful 
companionships,  and  upon  a  pleasant 
and  easy  i;oad.     There  are  times  when 


we  have  to  walk  in  loneliness  and  sorrow, 
with  weary  limbs,  and  bleeding  feet, 
and  aching  heart,  beneath  darkened 
skies,  and  amid  pelting  storms.  The 
good  man  has  no  exemption  from  life's 
sorrows  and  trials.  He  is  exposed  to 
physical  trials.  Bodily  pains  and  diseases 
visit  and  try   "the  true-born   child  of 

437 


I8ALM  LXXYIL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


God  "  as  well  as  the  wicked.  He  suffers 
from  social  trials  also.  He  has  disap- 
pointments and  losses  in  business,  he  is 
pained  by  the  inconstancy  and  duplicity 
of  those  whom  he  regarded  as  true,  he 
suffers  by  reason  of  the  afflictions  and 
sorrows  of  those  who  are  dear  to  him, 
and  he  is  sometimes  stricken  with 
anguish  by  the  invasions  of  death  into 
the  home  or  social  circle.  He  also 
experiences  religious  trials.  His  own 
imperfections  and  sins  are  a  source  of 
grief  to  him.  The  contrast  between  the 
ideal  and  the  actual  in  his  own  life  is 
great  and  painful.  He  has  seasons  of 
dark  doubt,  and  sad  misgiving,  and 
distressful  hiding  of  the  face  of  God 
from  him.  Of  such  experiences  the  poet 
sings  in  this  Psalm.  The  compassions 
and  favours,  the  mercies  and  faithful- 
nesses of  God  seemed  ta  be  all  cut  oflf 
from  him.  God  himself  seemed  to  have 
forsaken  him,  cast  him  off.  The  inten- 
sity of  bis  trouble  is  seen  in  that — 

1.  It  was  continuous.  In  the  day  he 
sought  the  Lord  by  reason  of  it,  and  at 
night  his  hand  was  unweariedly  out- 
stretched in  prayers  for  deliverance. 
His  grief  knew  no  intermission.  His 
soul  obtained  no  rest  either  by  night  or 
by  day. 

2.  His  soul  accepted  no  consolation^ — 
"  refused  to  be  comforted."  Some  con- 
solations seemed  inadequate  to  his  need. 
Others  seemed  too  precious  for  one  who 
was  so  unworthy  in  his  own  sight.  And 
so  the  wounded  heart  refused  the  balm 
which  would  have  healed  it. 

3.  The  rememhrance  of  God  was 
painful.  We  do  not  wonder  that  the 
remembrance  of  God  is  painful  to  the 
wicked.  But  that  the  godly  man  should 
find  it  painful  to  direct  his  thoughts  to 
God  is  indeed  strange.  Meditation  on 
God  should  fill  the  soul  of  the  good  man 
with  holiest  music.  Ver}^  sore  must 
have  been  the  trial  of  the  Psalmist  when 
he  was  troubled  at  the  recollection  of 
God. 

4.  Meditation  increased  grief,  "I 
meditated  and  my  spirit  was  over- 
whehned."  Reflection  brought  no  relief 
to  his  soul,  but  seemed  to  sink  him 
deeper  in  the  abyss  of  trouble.  A  very 
sad   state   he  was  in.     He  is  in  deep 

423 


waters,  the  waves  and  billows  go  over 
him,  and  he  is  unable  to  obtain  relief 
or  rest. 

**A11  things  have  rest:  why  should  we  toil 
alone  ? 
We  only  toil,  who  are  the  first  of  things, 
And  make  perpetual  moan  ; 
Still  from  one  sorrow  to  another  thrown  : 
Nor  ever  fold  our  wings, 
And  cease  from  wanderings, 
Nor  steep  our  brows  in  slumber's  holy  balm." 

— Tennyson. 

These  sore  trials  of  godly  men  by  the 
grace  of  God  are  often  the  means  of 
richest  blessings  to  the  soul.  As  the 
darkness  of  night  brings  out  the  glory 
of  the  starry  heavens,  so  in  affliction 
and  trouble  some  most  precious  truths 
shine  forth  with  the  greatest  brilliance. 

*'Thou  canst  not  tell 
How  rich  a  dowry  sorrow  gives  the  soul, 
How  firm  a  faith  and  eagle-sight  of  God." 

— Alford, 

II.  The  Good  man's  Deliverer.     In 

his  trouble  the  Psalmist  betook  himself 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  he  had  recourse 
to  God.  When  trouble  drives  us  nearer 
to  God  it  is  already  a  blessing  to  us. 

1.  His  application  to  God  involved 
faith.  {\)  In  the  accessibility  of  God. 
The  Psalmist  felt  that  he  could  approach 
unto  God,  and  speak  to  Him  in  prayer. 
Trouble  cannot  drive  us  into  any  region 
where  He  is  not.  From  the  deepest 
abyss  of  distress  the  moan  of  suffering, 
the  cry  of  penitence,  or  the  prayer  for 
help,  will  reach  the  ear  and  touch  the 
heart  of  God.  (2)  In  the  sufficiency  of 
God  to  help  those  who  seek  unto  Him, 
The  Psalmist  would  not  have  cried  to 
God  had  he  not  believed  in  His  power 
to  help  him.  Our  God  is  all-sufficient. 
There  are  no  sorrows  that  defy  His 
consolations.  There  are  no  wounds 
which  the  balm  of  Gilead  cannot  heaL 
(3)  In  the  goodness  of  God.  Not- 
withstanding his  declaration  that  he 
"remembered  God  and  was  troubled," 
the  Psalmist  must  have  believed  in  God's 
kindness  and  willingness  to  help  him,  or 
he  would  not  have  carried  his  burden  to 
His  throne.  Though  He  seems  to  hide 
His  face  from  us,  yet  He  is  ever  gracious 
and  kind.  His  name  and  nature  are 
love.  When  trouble  thus  leads  us  to 
draw  closer   to  God,  and  to  cast  our 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXiVrl. 


burden  upon  Him,  it  has  not  visited  us 
in  vain. 

2.  His  application  to  God  was  perse- 
vering  and  earnest.  "  I  cried  unto  God 
with  my  voice,  unto  God  with  my  voice  : 
and  He  gave  ear  unto  me.  In  the  day 
of  my  trouble  I  sought  the  Lord :  my 
hand  is  stretched  out  at  night  unwea- 
ried." The  repetition  of  the  first  verse 
is  emphatic,  presenting  the  idea  of 
earnest  and  fervent  supplication.  The 
"hand  stretched  out  at  night  unwearied" 
in  prayer,  indicates  how  importunate 
and  persevering  were  his  supplications. 
Hearty,  fervent,  importunate  prayers 
are  acceptable  to  God.  Cold,  heartless, 
formal  prayers  He  does  not  regard.  Let 
the  Psalmist's  example  be  imitated  by 
troubled  hearts. 

3.  His  application  to  God  did  not 
lead  to  immediate  relief.  He  says  that 
God  "  gave  ear  unto "  him  j  but  he 
seems  to  have  obtained  no  immediate 
respite  from  his  troubles.  The  Divine 
answer  to  our  supplications  is  sometimes 
the  continuance  of  those  very  trials  or 
afflictions  from  which  we  have  prayed 
to  be  delivered.  The  answer  to  the 
apostle  Paul's  prayer  was  not  the  re- 
moval of  the  thorn  from  the  flesh 
quivering  with  agony,  but,  "  My  grace 
is  suflScient  for  thee."  The  withholding 
or  delaying  of  that  for  which  we  have 
so  importunately  pleaded  may  be  the 
true  and  gracious  answer  to  our  prayers. 
The  blessing  may  be  delayed  that  our 
faith  and  patience  may  thereby  be  in- 


creased, and  that  when  it  comes  to  ua 
it  may  come  richer  and  fuller.  Or  that 
for  which  we  have  asked  may  be  with- 
held, because  Infinite  Wisdom  sees  that 
to  us  it  would  not  be  a  blessing.  Thus 
it  is  that  the  earnest,  importunate 
prayers  of  good  men  are  not  always 
answered  at  once,  and  sometimes  are  not 
answered  at  all  by  granting  the  thing 
desired.  Yet  they  are  always  helpful  to 
the  soul,  and  bring  down  blessings  into 
the  soul  from  God. 

Conclusion. — \.  Learn  the  sacred 
uses  of  trouble.  "  These  light  afflictions, 
which  are  but  for  a  moment,  work,"  &c. 
**  Tribulation  worketh  patience,  and 
patience  experienc*,"  <kc. 

"  The  tears  we  shed  are  not  in  vain  ; 

Nor  worthless  is  the  heavy  strife  ; 
If,  Hke  the  buried  seed  of  grain, 

They  rise  to  renovated  life. 
It  is  through  tears  our  spirits  grow  ; 

*Tis  in  the  tempest  souls  expand. 
If  it  but  teaches  ua  to  go 

To  Him  who  holds  it  in  His  hand. 
Oh,  welcome,  then,  the  stormy  blast! 

Oh,  welcome,  then,  the  ocean's  roar  I 
Ye  only  drive  more  sure  and  fast 

Our  trembling  bark  to  Heaven's  bright 
shore."  —T.  G.  Upham. 

2.  Learn  the  grand  resource  in  trouble. 
"  God  is  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very 
present  help  in  trouble."  a.  He  is  all- 
sufficient,  jS.  He  is  ever  available,  y.  He 
is  ever  gracious.  **  From  the  end  of 
the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  Thee,  when  my 
heart  is  overwhelmed  :  lead  me  to  the 
rock  that  is  higher  than  L" 


Pbater  IN  Trouble, 
(Vertes  1,  2.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  Something  common  to  all  men. 
**  The  day  of  trouble."  "  Man  is  born 
unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward." 
With  so  much  of  sin  in  the  world  sorrow 
and  trouble  are  inevitable. 

II.  A  commendable  example  for  all 
men.  "  I  cried  unto  God,  ....  I 
sought  the  Lord."  1.  Earnestly.  "  I 
cried  with  my  voice,  unto  God  with  my 
voice."  2.  Ferseveringly.  "  My  hand 
is  stretched  out  at  night  unwearied." 
''In  the  day"  and  "in  the  night''  be 


sought  the  Lord.  '*Call  upon  Me  In 
the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver  thee/' 
(fee. 

III.  A  Divine  auditor  of  all  men. 
"  He  gave  ear  unto  me."  Into  the  ear 
of  God  the  cries  of  humanity  are  ever 
entering.  Graciously  He  attends  to  the 
feeblest  whisper  of  His  people. 

IV.  A  great  mistake  of  some  men. 
"My  soul  refused  to  be  comforted." 
Surely  the  Psalmist  erred  in  this.  God 
has  graciously  arranged  our  life  and  cir- 
cumstances so  that  healing  may  come  to 

429 


PSALM  LXXVn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


the  wounded  spirit  in  many  ways. 
Through  the  aspects  and  voices  of 
nature,  through  the  contemplation  of 
His  Providence,  through  His  holy  Word. 
To  refuse  His  consolation  is,  1.  Un- 
grateful to  Him.  2.  Injurious  to  our- 
selves, 
V.  An  experience  which  may  hap- 


pen to  all  men.  To  pray  earnestly 
and  importunately  without  any  im- 
mediate reply  was  the  lot  of  the  poet, 
and  may  be  the  lot  of  all  men.  Let 
us  learn  the  lessons  of  such  an  ex- 
perience. 1.  Calmly  trust  Him.  2. 
Ferseveringly  pray  to  Him,  3.  Patiently 
wait  for  Him, 


Recollections  of  God  Painful  to  the  Wicked. 

{Verse  3.) 


"  I  remembered  God  and  was 
troubled." 

Why  is  the  remembrance  of  God 
pleasant  to  some  of  us  and  painful  to 
others  1  Why  is  it  sometimes  pleasant, 
and  at  other  times  painful,  to  the  same 
individual  ] 

I.  Briefly  state  what  we  mean  by 
remembering  G-od.  We  certainly  mean 
sometbinsf  more  than  a  transient  recol- 
lection  of  the  word  God,  or  of  any 
other  name  by  which  He  is  known.  By 
remembering  God,  the  Psalmist  meant 
recollecting  those  ideas  which  the  term 
God  is  used  by  the  inspired  writers  to 
signify.  An  eternal,  self-existent,  in- 
finitely wise,  just,  and  good  Being,  &c. 

II.  Inquire  why  the  recollection 
of  such  a  being  should  ever  be  pain- 
ful ;  or,  why  any  of  God's  creatures 
should  be  troubled  at  the  remem- 
brance of  Him.  There  is  nothing  in 
the  Divine  character  and  government 
which  necessarily  renders  the  remem- 
brance of  God  productive  of  painful 
emotions.  The  remembrance  of  God  is 
always  delightful  to  holy  angels,  and  to 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 
The  constant  presence  of  God  constitutes 
their  heaven.  The  recollection,  also,  of 
His  existence,  'character,  and  govern- 
ment, is  usually,  though  not  always, 
highly  pleasing  to  all  good  men.  If  any 
are  troubled  by  the  remembrance  of 
God,  the  cause  must  exist  solely  in 
themselves.  Nothing  but  sin  can  ever 
render  the  remembrance  of  God  painful 
to  any  of  His  creatures.  If  our  hearts 
or  consciences  condemn  us,  it  is  impos- 
sible to  remember  Him  without  being 
troubled.  It  will  then  be  painful  to 
remember  that  He  is  our  Creator  and 

430 


Benefactor ;  for  the  remembrance  will 
be  attended  with  a  consciousness  of  base 
ingratitude.  Painful  to  think  of  Him 
as  Lawgiver ;  for  such  thoughts  will 
remind  us  that  we  have  broken  His  law. 
So  also  as  to  His  holiness,  omniscience, 
omnipresence,  power,  &c. 

Nor  is  this  alL  Every  sinner  loves 
sin.  The  only  happiness  with  which 
he  is  acquainted,  consists  in  gratifying 
either  the  desires  of  the  flesh,  the  desires 
of  the  eye,  or  the  pride  of  life.  But  all 
these  are  contrary  to  the  will  of  God, 
He  forbids  the  sinner  to  pursue  them  ; 
He  commands  him  to  deny  himself,  &c. 
He  threatens  all  who  do  not  comply 
with  everlasting  punishment. 

The  more  clearly  the  wicked  perceive 
God's  character  and  their  own,  the  more 
light  is  thrown  into  their  consciences, 
the  more  mercies,  privileges,  and  oppor- 
tunities they  have  enjoyed  and  abused, 
so  much  the  more  they  will  be  troubled 
by  a  remembrance  of  God. 

Application. — 1.  This  subject  affoids 
a  rule  by  which  we  may  try  ourselves, 
and  which  will  assist  us  much  in  dis- 
covering our  real  characters ;  for  the 
moral  character  of  every  intelligent 
creature  corresponds  with  his  habitual 
views  and  feelings  respecting  God.  2. 
How  wretched  is  the  situation  of  im- 
penitent sinners ;  of  those,  who  cannot 
remember  God  without  being  troubled. 
They  cannot  enjoy  real  ha[)piness  in  this 
life,  for  the  world  cannot  afford  it,  and 
they  dare  not  look  up  for  it  to  heaven. 
How  much  more  wretched  must  their 
situation  be  at  death  and  in  eternity  1 
3.  How  great  are  our  obligations  to 
God  for  the  gospel  of  Christ !  Were  it 
not  for  this,  the  remembrance,  and  still 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


F8ALM  LXXYIX. 


more  the  presence  of  God,  would  have 
occasioned  nothing  but  pure,  uiimiiigled 
wretchedness  to  any  human  being.  4, 
Is  sin  alone  the  cause  which  renders  the 
remembrance  of  God  painful  1  Then  let 
all  who   have   embraced   the   terms  of 


reconciliation  offered  by  the  gospel,  all 
who  desire  to  remember  God  without 
being  troubled,  beware  of  sin.  Swear 
an  eternal  war  with  sin  ;  not  only  swear, 
but  maintain  it. — Edward  PaysoUy  D.D., 


abridged. 


The  Thoughts  and  Inquiries  of  a  Godly  Soul  in  Trouble. 

(Verses  4:-^) 


In  our  previous  section  we  had  to  do 
with  the  Psalmist's  trouble  and  his 
application  to  God  by  reason  thereof. 
We  have  now  to  do  with  his  mental 
condition  as  affected  by  his  troubles. 

I.  The  thoughts  of  a  godly  soul  in 
trouble.  In  the  mental  exercises  of  the 
Psalmist  we  notice — 

1.  Reflection  on  the  past  doings  of 
God.  "I  have  considered  the  days  of 
old,  the  years  of  ancient  tisme."  In  his 
distress  the  Psalmist  considered  the 
former  dealings  of  God  with  mankind, 
with  a  view  of  obtaining  relief  from  his 
present  troubles  and  light  in  his  present 
perplexities.  To  us  it  seems  that  a 
study  of  the  Divine  working  in  human 
history  is  calculated  to  inspire  the 
student  with  confidence  in  God,  in  the 
wisdom,  righteousness,  and  goodness  of 
His  rule.  Yet  the  Psalmist  seems  to 
have  obtained  no  help  from  his  con- 
sideration of  the  ancient  doings  of  God. 
The  state  of  his  own  soul  spread  a  black 
pall  over  everything. 

2.  Recollection  of  times  of  trouble  in 
his  own  life^  which  were  also  times  of 
song.  "  I  call  to  remembrance  my  song 
in  the  night."  In  the  Bible  ^^ night" 
is  frequently  used  figuratively,  to  repre- 
sent ignorance,  sin,  suffering,  distress, 
death.  Here  it  is  used  as  the  emblem 
of  distress  and  trouble.  *' Where  is 
God,  my  Maker,  who  giveth  songs  in 
the  night  1 "  The  poet  calls  to  mind 
former  seasons  of  affliction  and  sorrow, 
in  which  he  realised  Divine  comforts, 
and  was  enabled  to  sing  in  the  darkness. 
Yet  he  seems  to  find  no  comfort  for  his 
present  sorrow.  He  can  discover  no 
star  to  relieve  his  present  darkness. 
From  the  recollection  of  experiences  so 
precious  and  helpful  as  God's  mercies  to 
bim  m  former  troubles  he  is  unable  to 


draw  any  consolation.  A  godly  man's 
condition  is  deplorable  indeed  when 
such  experiences  afford  no  help  and 
hope. 

3.  Communion  with  his  own  heart. 
"  I  communed  with  mine  own  heart,  and 
my  spirit  made  diligent  search."  He 
had  recalled  past  experiences  of  his  own, 
he  had  reflected  and  reasoned  upon  the 
work  of  God  in  human  history,  now  he 
will  consult  his  own  heart.  He  has 
tried  to  get  help  by  the  exercise  of  his 
intellect,  and  has  failed  to  do  so,  now 
he  will  seek  help  by  the  exercise  of  his 
better  feelings.  "The  secret,  silent 
teachings  of  the  heart  are  often  our  best 
and  safest  guide."  The  heart  is  "  the 
centre  of  the  spiritual,  thinking,  and 
conceptional  life "  (Fuerst^s  Lex.)-,  and 
man  can  commune  with  his  heart,  can 
contemplate  his  own  spiritual  nature 
and  faculties,  can  examine  his  own 
spiritual  condition,  can  speak  to  his  soul 
and  be  spoken  to  by  his  soul.  Thus  the 
poet  communes  with  his  own  heart. 
But  no  help  does  he  receive.  The 
trouble  seems  to  have  obtained  the  com- 
plete mastery  of  his  entire  nature. 
Intellect  and  heart  are  alike  subdued  by 
it.  Human  history  and  his  own  exjieri- 
ence  are  alike  darkened  by  it.  The 
soul  which  is  swayed  by  grief  sees  all 
things  shrouded  in  gloom  and  sadness. 
To  each  of  us  nature  wears  the  colour 
of  our  spirit.  This  truth  is  finely  ex- 
pressed in  Hamlet.  "  I  have  of  late 
lost  all  my  mirth,  foregone  all  custom  of 
exercise  ;  and,  indeed,  it  goes  so  heavily 
with  my  disposition,  that  this  goodly 
frame,  the  earth,  seems  to  me  a  sterile 
promontory ;  this  most  excellent  canopy, 
the  air,  look  you,  this  brave  o'er-hanging 
firmament,  this  majestical  roof  fretted 
with   golden   fire,   why,    it  appears  no 

431 


FSALMLXXTIL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


other  thing  to  me,  than  a  foul  and  pesti- 
lent congregation  of  vapours.  What  a 
piece  of  work  is  man !  How  noble  in 
reason !  how  infinite  in  faculties !  in 
form  and  moving,  how  express  and 
admirable  !  in  action,  how  like  an  angel ! 
in  apprehension,  how  like  a  god  !  the 
beauty  of  the  world !  the  paragon  of 
animals  !  And  yet,  to  me,  what  is  this 
quintessence  of  dust  ?  Man  delights  not 
me,  nor  woman  neither."  In  a  some- 
what similar  plight  was  the  Psalmist. 
Trouble  had  so  completely  mastered  him 
that  he  could  find  neither  comfort,  help, 
nor  hope  anywhere. 

II.  The  inquiries  of  a  godly  soul  in 
trouble. 

The  Psalmist  makes  several  inquiries, 
which  may  be  classified  thus.  He 
inquires — 

1.  As  to  God/s  mindfulness  of  His 
people.  *'  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for 
ever?"  &c.  "Hath  God  forgotten  to 
be  gracious  1 "  &c.  God  seemed  to  have 
*'  forgotten  to  be  gracious  "  in  His  deal- 
ings with  His  servant,  and  to  have  so 
far  overlooked  him  as  to  lead  to  the 
inquiry,  "Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for 
ever  ] "  It  is  a  sore  aggravation  of  a 
believer's  trials  when  the  Lord  seems  to 
be  unmindful  of  him  in  his  time  of  need. 
How  severe  was  the  smart  of  the  sisters 
of  Bethany,  when  several  days  passed, 
and  their  Friend  and  Lord  came  not 
near  to  them,  although  they  had  sent  to 
tell  Him  of  their  trouble  ! 

2.  As  to  God's  unchangeableness.  In 
past  times  He  had  been  to  His  people  a 
God  of  mercy  and  grace,  supporting  and 
defending  them.  Has  He  changed  in 
this  respect  ?  Is  it  possible  that  God 
can  change]  The  thought  is  "too 
painful  for"  us.  What  misery  and 
desolation  would  supervene  if  God,  the 
supremely  Good,  could  change  !  were  to 
change,  and  be  other  than  He  is  !  The 
Psalmist  seems  to  have  tasted  of  this 
misery  as  he  urged  his  pain-inspired 
inquiries. 

3.  As  to  God's  faithfulness.  "  Doth 
His  promise  fail  for  evermore  1 "  Shall 
the  promise  which  was  made  to,  and 
good  for,  one  generation,  fail  to  the 
next  generation  1  Is  not  the  word  of 
Jehovah    reliable?     The   troubled   soul 

432 


seems  to  find  repose  nowhere.  To  him 
nothing  appears  firm  and  true,  but  sin, 
labour,  and  suffering.  The  shadows 
presented  themselves  as  the  only  rea- 
lities. 

These  inquiries  of  the  troubled  Psal- 
mist reveal  the  depth  and  intensity  of 
his  sufferings.  It  is  extremely  painfuj 
to  doubt  one's  own  salvation  ;  but  who 
shall  depict  the  anguish  of  doubt  as  to 
the  truth  and  faithfulness,  the  right- 
eousness and  goodness  of  God?  These 
inquiries  present  a  hopeful  symptom  of 
the  spiritual  condition  of  the  Psalmist. 
"  It  is  a  wise  thing  thus  to  put  unbelief 
through  the  catechism.  Each  one  of  the 
questions  is  a  dart  aimed  at  the  very 
heart  of  despair." 

III.  Let  us  offer  a  few  Suggestions 
to  a  godly  soul  in  trouble.  In  his 
thoughts  and  inquiries  the  troubled  poet 
seems  much  amazed  and  bewildered. 
Certain  facts  were  painfull}''  real  to  him 
which  sorely  tried  his  faith  in  God,  and 
in  His  relation  to  His  people.  Good 
men  are  often  tried  in  like  manner.  But 
let  us  remember — 

1.  That  there  is  something  radically 
abnormal  in  the  present  state  of  human 
society.  It  is  not  natural  that  under 
the  government  of  an  almighty,  wise, 
and  good  Being,  there  should  be  so 
much  of  suffering,  and  that  sometimes 
the  best  of  men  should  be  the  greatest 
of  sufferers.  Suffering  is  here  because 
sin  is  here.  Find  suffering  and  you  find 
sin,  either  literally  or  consequentially. 
Sin  is  the  unnatural,  the  abnormal 
thing.  "  God  made  man  upright."  He 
is  not  responsible  for  sin.  He  is  rather 
the  great  Antagonist  of  all  evil. 

2.  That  even  godly  men  need  discipline. 
An  educational  process  is  going  forward 
in  this  life.  This  world  is  a  great 
moral  school,  man  is  the  learner,  and 
suffering  is  one  of  the  teachers.  In  the 
case  of  the  good  man  suffering  is  not 
punitive,  but  disciplinary,  educational. 
While  there  are  defect  and  imperfection 
in  us,  we  need  the  discipline  of  the 
Divine  school. 

3.  That  suffering  is  often  the  occasion 
of  richest  blessing.  To  a  true-hearted 
man  doubt  as  to  any  of  the  great 
spiritual   verities   is   a    painful    thing. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  L^XViX. 


But  such  a  man  doubt  almost  (if  not 
quite)  always  conducts  to  a  calmer  faith. 

•*  Time   tells  his   tale  by   shadows,    and   by 

clouds 
The    wind    records    its   progress,    by   dark 

doubts 
The   spirit   swiftening  on   its   heavenward 

courye." — Bailey, 

Tennyson  has  described  such  a  doubter. 

**  He  fought  his  doubts  and  gathered  strength. 
He  would  not  make  his  judgment  blind  ; 
He  faced  the  spectres  of  the  mind, 
And  laid  them:  thus  he  came  at  length 


To  find  a  stronger  faith  his  own; 
And  Power  was  with  him  in  the  night. 
Which  makes  the  darkness  and  the  light. 
And  dwells  not  in  the  light  alone." 

The  Captain  of  our  salvation  was  made 
"  perfect  through  suffering."  And  those 
of  His  followers  in  this  world  who  are 
most  like  Him  are  able  to  say,  "We 
glory  in  tribulations,  knowing  that 
tribulation  worketh  patience,'*  <kc. 

«•  *  Gloly  to  God,— to  God,'  he  saith; 
'Knowledge  by  suff'ring  entereth. 
And  life  is  perfected  by  death.'  " 


The  Godly  Soul  rising  Superior  to  Trouble  by  the  Devout 
Contemplation  of  the  Works  and  Ways  of  God. 

{Verses  10-20.) 


The  mind  and  heart  of  the  poet  are 
growing  calm.  His  agitation  and  dis- 
tress are  yielding  to  the  exercise  of 
reason  and  the  power  of  faith.  He  is 
able  to  reflect  to  some  purpose  now. 

I.  The  troubled  soul's  consideration 
of  the  works  and  ways  of  God.  "  I 
will  remember  the  works  of  the  Lord," 
&c. 

1 .  Recollection  of  the  works  and  ways 
of  God.  How  wonderful  is  the  faculty 
of  memory  !  How  great  is  its  conserva- 
tive power  !  Memory  has  been  defined 
as  "the  treasure  house  of  the  mind, 
wherein  the  monuments  thereof  are 
kept  and  preserved."  Cicero  spoke  of 
it  as  the  '*  thesaurus  omnium  rerum.'* 
By  means  of  it  nothing  in  life  is  lost. 

**  What  wealth  in  memory's  firm  record, 
"WTiich,  should  it  perish,  could  this  world 

recall, 
In  colours  fresh — originally  bright — 
From  the   dark   shadows  of   o'erwhelming 

years." —  Young. 

Memory  makes  the  fleeting  present 
abiding  and  everlasting.  How  wonder- 
ful is  its  reproductive  power  !  A  very 
small  circumstance  will  unlock  and 
throw  wide  open  its  chamber  doors ; 
and  words  and  deeds,  scenes  and  cir- 
cumstances, unthought  of  for  many 
years,  appear  with  startling  vividness 
before  us. 

•*  Slight  withal  may  be  the  things  which  bring 
Back   on    the   heart  the   weight   which  it 
would  fling 
2S 


Aside  for  ever ;  it  may  be  a  sound — 

A  tone  of  music — summer's  eve — or  spring — 

A    flower — the     wind — the     ocean — which 

shall  wound, 
Striking  th'  electric  chain  wherewith  we're 

darkly  bound; 
And  how  and  why  we  know  not,  nor  can 

trace 
Home  to  its  cloud  this  lightning  of  the 

mind, 
But  feel  the  shock  renew'd,  nor  can  efiface 
The  blight  and  blackening  which  it  leaves 

behind. " — Byron. 

The  Psalmist  calls  into  exercise  this 
wondrous  power,  fpr  the  relief  of  his 
troubled  soul.  He  summons  forth  from 
the  treasury  of  memory  some  of  the 
ancient  doings  of  God.  The  marvellous 
works  which  He  had  wrought  on  behalf 
of  His  people  in  former  days  he  makes 
to  live  before  him.  Probably  he  also 
called  to  mind  former  deeds  and  ways 
of  God  in  relation  to  his  own  indivi- 
dual life. 

2.  Reflection  on  the  works  and  ways  of 
God.  "  I  will  meditate  also  of  all  Thy 
work."  Recollection  would  not  have 
profited  the  Psalmist  unless  he  had 
meditated  upon  the  things  which  he 
recollected.  Thought,  meditation,  en- 
ables us  to  realise  the  facts  of  history, 
science,  phih)sophy,  and  theology,  and 
to  appropriate  to  ourselves  their  lessons. 
"  If  I  should  be  asked,"  said  Dr.  Bates, 
"  what  I  think  are  the  best  means  and 
ways  to  advance  the  faculties,  to  make 
the    ordinances    iruitfuli    to    increase 

433 


ITALIC  LtXVlt. 


BOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


grace,  to  enlarge  our  comfort,  and  pro- 
duce holiness,  I  should  answer,  medita- 
tion, meditation,  meditation."  The 
Psalmist  acted  wisely  in  following  up 
his  recollection  by  meditation. 

3.  Speech  concerning  the  works  and 
ways  of  God.  "  Talk  of  Thy  doings." 
With  the  Psalmist  recollection  and  re- 
flection preceded  speech.  Much  of  our 
talk  is  utterly  worthless,  because  the 
talkers  are  not  thinkers.  It  is  especially 
important  in  relation  to  religious  sub- 
jects that  meditation  should  precede 
speech.  The  Psalmist  did  not  reserve 
to  himstlf  the  results  of  his  meditation, 
but  declared  them  to  others.  Others 
were  benefited  by  reason  of  his  recollec- 
tion and  reflection. 

II.  The  troubled  soul's  conclusions 
on  the  works  and  ways  of  God.  Placing 
them  in  the  order  in  which  we  find  them, 
the  conclusions  of  the  Psalmist  on  the 
works  and  ways  of  God  are,  that  they 
are  characterised  by  holiness  (ver.  13), 
strength  (ver.  14),  beneficence  (vers.  15, 
20),  majesty  (vers.  16-18),  and  mystery 
(ver.  19).  Let  us  consider  them,  slightly 
alterinor  their  order. 

1.  God's  works  and  ways  reveal  His 
strength.  "  Thou  art  the  God  that 
doest  wonders  ;  Thou  hast  declared  Thy 
strength  among  the  people."  God  had 
made  known  His  great  power  in  crush- 
ing the  enemies  of  "His  people,  and  de- 
livering them  from  all  their  afflictions. 
No  one  can  meditate  upon  the  works  of 
God  in  nature,  or  upon  His  ways  in 
Providence,  without  being  impressed 
with  His  Almisfhtiness.  "  Thou  hast  a 
mighty  arm ;  strong  is  Thy  hand,  and 
high  is  Thy  right  hand."  The  Almighti- 
ness  of  God  should  be  a  warning  to  evil- 
doers. "  Hast  thou  an  arm  like  God  ?" 
The  Almightiness  of  God  should  be 
an  encouragement  to  His  people.  His 
strong  arm  is  pledged  to  succour  and 
defend  you.     He  is  "  mighty  to  save." 

2.  God^s  works  and  ways  reveal  His 
majesty.  In  verses  16—18  the  Psalmist 
mentions  some  of  the  mighty  works  of 
God  in  a  very  poetical  manner.  The 
imagery  is  both  sublime  and  eff'ective ; 
and  gives  a  deep  impression,  not  only 
of  the  might  of  God  in  these  transac- 
tions, but  also  of  His  majesty.     If  the 

434 


majesty  of  God  is  so  impressive  that  the 
earth  and  the  sea  are  represented  as 
greatly  moved  thereat,  shall  man  remain 
unmoved  at  the  contemplation  thereof? 
Is  there  nothing  in  the  wondrous  works 
and  ways  of  God  to  awaken  the  admi- 
ration and  reverence  of  men? 

3.  God's  works  and  ways  reveal  His 
holiness.  **  0  God,  in  holiness  is  Thy 
way."  His  way  is  often  mysterious ; 
and  can  never  be  comprehended  by  us, 
yet  is  it  ever  right  and  pure.  The 
troubled  Psalmist  when  he  calmly  con- 
sidered the  dealings  of  God  with  men, 
not  in  the  present,  in  which  only  a  very 
small  fragment  is  visible,  but  in  ancient 
time,  was  convinced  that  they  were  all 
in  holiness.  Trembling  and  troubled 
heart,  and  sorely  perplexed  with  insolu- 
ble enigmas,  look  away  and  look  calmly 
to  His  glorious  deeds  of  ancient  date, 
and  thou,  too,  shalt  conclude,  "  Thy 
way,  0  God,  is  in  holiness." 

4.  God^s  works  and  ways  reveal  His 
beneficence.  The  manifestation  of  power 
and  majesty  is  not  sufficient  to  awaken 
trust  and  hope  in  us,  or  to  afford  any 
encouragement  to  the  despondent  and 
sorrowing  heart.  Being  conscious  of  sin 
and  ill-desert  it  is  calculated  to  awaken 
anxiety  and  even  dread.  We  fear  lest 
the  glorious  majesty  should  consume  us, 
and  the  great  might  should  smite  and  de- 
stroy us.  The  revelation  of  the  Divine 
holiness  tends  to  make  manifest  the 
awful  contrast  between  us  and  God  in 
this  respect,  by  showing  the  exceeding 
sinfulneiss  of  our  hearts  and  lives.  The 
troubled  heart  needs  to  know  more  of 
God  than  this  before  it  can  obtain  com- 
fort or  rest.  The  Psalmist  saw  the 
Divine  power  and  majesty  working  bene- 
ficently. The  "  mighty  arm  "  of  God  was 
displayed  in  smiting  down  the  wicked 
oppressor,  and  delivering  the  oppressed 
people.  "  Thou  hast  with  Thine  arm 
redeemed  Thy  people,  the  sons  of  Jacob 
and  Joseph."  He  saw  Omnipotence 
gently  and  patiently  leading  His  people 
through  the  wilderness.  God  is  as  great 
in  mercy  as  He  is  in  majesty.  He  is 
infinite  in  pity  as  well  as  in  power.  He 
is  gracious  as  He  is  great.  He  is  as 
tender  as  He  is  terrible.  Here,  then, 
may  the  troubled  heart  find  peace. 


BOMILMTW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  LXXtli. 


5.  God 's  works  and  ways  are  myste- 
rious. The  Psalmist  had  ascertained 
and  declared  certain  characteristics  of 
the  works  and  ways  of  God.  Might, 
majesty,  holiness,  and  beneficence  he 
had  discovered  therein.  Yet  there  was 
much  that  remained  obscure  and  myste- 
rious. "  Thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  and 
Thy  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  Thy 
footsteps  are  not  known."  There  are 
certain  topics  upon  which  the  Most  High 
maintains  an  inviolable  reserve.  There 
are  certain  regions  into  which  the  eye 
of  the  most  earnest  inquirer  has  never 
penetrated.  "  The  secret  things  belong 
unto  the  Lord  our  God."  Moreover, 
God's  way  is  so  vast  that  we  are  able  to 
perceive  only  a  very  small  portion  of  it. 
His  purposes  and  methods  are  so  com- 
prehensive and  profound  that  we  can 
understand  them  only  very  partially. 
But  this  mystery  was  by  no  means  pain- 


ful to  the  Psalmist.  He  speaks  of  it 
calmly  and  trustfully ;  and  then  speaks 
of  God's  gracious  guidance  of  His  people 
through  the  wilderness.  So  also  to  us 
mysteries  should  not  be  an  occasion  of 
unbelief  or  sorrow,  but  of  patient  trust 
and  hope.  They  should  also  teach  us 
lessons  of  humility  and  reverence.  Our 
own  ignorance  and  inability  to  compre- 
hend the  ways  of  God  should  humble 
us.  "  We  are  but  of  yesterday,  and 
know  nothing,  because  our  days  upon 
earth  are  a  shadow."  While  the  reserve 
of  a  Being  of  such  holiness  and  bene- 
volence should  be  regarded  by  us  with 
reverence.  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are 
round  about  Him  :  righteousness  and 
judgment  are  the  habitation  of  His 
throne."  "  Mysteries !  what  are  they  but 
worlds  at  night  time  speeding  on  with 
swift  wing  to  the  all-revealing  bright- 
ness of  morning  %  ** 


Spiritual  Infirmities. 
{Verse  10.) 


**  I  said.  This  is  my  infirmity.** 

When  a  good  man  is  made  sensible  of 
any  evil  in  his  heart  or  life,  he  is  ready 
to  acknowledge  it,  and  take  shame  to 
himself  on  account  of  it.  "  I  said.  This 
is  my  infirmity."  No  doubt  but  the 
Psalmist  had  often  said  it  to  himself: 
and  such  soliloquies  are  very  becoming 
and  may  be  very  useful.  He  said  it 
also  to  God,  in  a  way  of  humble  confes- 
sion. "  I  acknowledge  my  sin  unto 
Thee,  and  mine  iniquity  have  I  not 
hid,"  <kc.  Probably  he  might  say  it  to 
his  intimate  friends,  whose  piety  and 
sympathy  he  had  often  witnessed  ;  for  we 
are  conmianded  to  confess  our  faults  one 
to  another,  and  to  pray  one  for  another. 

I.  Inquire  into  the  nature  of  that 
infirmity.  By  considering  the  context 
we  may  conclude  that  it  consisted  in 
something  like  the  following — 

1.  A  pr oneness  to  live  too  much  on 
frames  and  feelings.  This  is  common 
among  Christians,  and  hinders  their 
establishment  and  growth  in  grace. 
Those  who  live  on  spiritual  frames  will 
be  like  Reuben  ;  unstable  as  water,  they 
shall  not  exceL    At  one  time  they  are 


raised  to  a  full  assurance  of  faith,  say- 
ing, "My  mountain  stands  strong,  I 
shall  never  be  moved  ;  "  and  at  another 
they  are  sinking  into  the  depths  of 
despondency,  and  saying,  "  Will  the 
Lord  cast  off  for  ever,  and  will  He  be 
favourable  no  more  ?  " 

2.  Forgetfulness  of  past  mercies  is 
another  evil  to  which  good  men  are  sub- 
ject, and  the  natural  consequence  of  this 
is  unthanhfulness. 

3.  Didrust  with  respect  to  future  ap- 
pearances. When  faitli  was  in  exercise 
David  could  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  light 
and  my  salvation  ;  whom  shall  I  fear  ?  " 
&c.  (Ps.  xxvii.  1-3).  But  here  the 
Psalmist  speaks  as  one  that  was  utterly 
forsaken.  "  Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for 
ever  ? "  &c.  (vers.  7-9). 

4.  Befusing  to  he  comforted  in  time  of 
distress  (ver.  2).  Moses  told  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  that  the  Lord  would 
bring  them  out  from  under  the  burdens 
of  the  Egyptians,  and  give  them  the  land 
which  He  had  promised  to  Abraham,  to 
Isaac,  and  to  Jacob  ;  but  they  hearkened 
not  unto  Moses,  for  anguish  of  spirit, 
and  for  cruel  bondage. 

435 


MALM  LXXTIt. 


HOmLETIQ  COMMElfTAttT :  PSALMS. 


5.  Giving  vent  to  distrustful  thoughts 
in  unbecoming  language  too  frequently 
accompanies  despondency. 

II.  The  reasons  why  God  suffers 
such  infirmities  to  attend  His  people 
in  this  life. 

1.  To  promote  humility  and  self- 
dbasement.  As  creatures,  our  insigni- 
ficance should  make  us  humble  ;  but  as 
sinners  we  have  reason  to  be  still  more 
so. 

2.  To  excite  watchfulness.  Those  who 
are  liable  to  so  many  miscarriages  ought 
certainly  to  be  upon  their  guard.  If 
nothing  else  will  preserve  the  Christian 
from  carnal  security,  yet  the  danger  to 
which  he  is  exposed  should  have  that 
efiect.  '*  Let  him  that  thinketh  h« 
standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

3.  To  increase  our  sympathy  and 
compassion  towards  others.  We  are 
made  to  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger 
by  being  strangers  ourselves.  If  others 
are  overcome  by  temptation,  we  may  be 
80  too.  "  Brethren,  if  a  man  be  over- 
taken in  a  fault,"  kc.  (Gal.  vi.  1,  2). 

4.  To  show  the  necessity  of  a  frequent 
application  to  Christy  our  spiritual 
Physician.  If  we  had  no  infirmities, 
we  should  not  want  healing.  "  They 
that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician ; 
but  they  that  are  sick/'    The  value  of 


the  remedy  is  known  by  them  that  feel 
the  disease,  and  the  need  of  a  Saviour 
by  those  who  see  themselves  to  be  lost. 
"  And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advo- 
cate with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous.*' 

5.  To  render  heaven  the  more  desirable. 
The  Psalmist  is  now  free  from  all  his 
infirmities,  and  so  will  every  saint  be 
when  he  gets  to  glory.  The  conflicts 
we  now  have  with  the  enemy,  and  the 
evils  of  our  own  hearts,  will  give  a 
delightful  relish  to  our  happiness  here- 
after, and  heighten  the  triumphs  of  the 
final  victory  (Ps.  xviL  15  ;  2  Cor.  v. 
1-4). 

III.  Conclude  with  a  few  observa- 
tions. 

1.  The  best  of  saints  have  their  in- 
firmities. 

2.  There  is  some  particular  infirmity 
which  every  man  may  call  his  own.  "  I 
kept  myself,''  said  David,  "  from  mine 
iniquity ;  "  that  is,  from  the  sin  which 
most  easily  beset  him. 

3.  It  becomes  us  well  to  know  our 
particular  infirmity^  that  we  may  guard 
against  it ;  for  to  be  without  defence  is 
the  way  to  be  overcome  vrithout  resistance. 

4.  Having  discovered  what  is  our  easily 
besetting  sin,  let  us  bewail  it  before  God, 
and  seek  for  help  against  it, — JS  •••€!• 


Recollection,  Reflection,  and  Declaration. 
{Verses  11,  12.) 


The  Psalmist  in  his  trouble  seeks 
relief  by  recollecting  the  wondrous 
works  of  God,  and  reflecting  and  speak- 
ing thereon. 

L  Recollection.  "  I  will  remember," 
<kc.  The  powers  of  memory  are  two- 
fold. They  are  the  power  of  retention, 
and  the  power  of  reproduction.  By 
virtue  of  the  former,  memory  is  the 
storehouse  of  past  scenes,  circumstances, 
events,  words,  deeds.  By  virtue  of  the 
latter  we  are  enabled  to  reproduce  and 
relive  the  past.  Memory  may  be  re- 
garded in  several  aspects.  1.  As  a 
source  of  pain.  Tennyson  has  beauti- 
fully and  truthfully  said, — 

"  A  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering 

happier  things.*' 

436 


**  Remembrance  wakes  with  all  her  busy  train. 
Swells  at  my  breast,  and  turns  the  past  to 
pain. 


-Ooldsmith. 


•*  Will  no  remorse,  will  no  decay, 

0  Memory  !  soothe  thee  into  peace  f 

When  life  is  ebbing  fast  away, 

Will  not  thy  hungry  vultures  oease  f 

Ah,  no  I  as  weeds  from  fading  free^ 

Noxious  and  rank,  yet  verdantly 

Twine  round  a  ruin'd  tower ; 

So  to  the  heart,  untamed,  will  cling 

The  memory  of  an  evil  thing. 
In  life's  departing  hour  : 

Green  is  the  weed  when  grey  the  wall 

And  thistles  risa  while  turrets  fall." 

— Heraud, 

3.  At  a  source  of  pleasure.  "A 
memory  without  blot  or  contamination,** 
said   Charlotte   BrontS,    "must  be  an 


SOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  LXXVII. 


exquisite    treasure, — an    inexhaustible 
source  of  pure  refreshment." 

•*  The  joys  I  have  possess'd  are  ever  mine; 
Out  of  thy  reach,  behind  eternity, 
Hid  in  the  sacred  treasure  of  the  past. 
But  bless'd  remembrance  brings  them  hourly 
back. ' ' — Dry  den, 

S,  As    an    aid    to  faith.      So    the 

Psalmist  uses  it  in  this  case.  Observe, 
(1)  God's  works  are  wonders. .  What 
marvellous  things  He  is  ever  accomplish- 
ing in  the  material  world  !  What  won- 
ders He  wrought  on  behalf  of  His 
ancient  people  !  How  wonderful  are 
His  doings  now  in  the  experience  of 
His  people, — in  their  conversion,  spiri- 
tual education,  sanctification,  and  glori- 
fication !  Truly,  "  the  bright  glories  of 
His  grace,  beyond  His  other  wonders 
shine."  (2)  God''s  wondrous  works 
should  he  remembered.  Not  to  remember 
them  would  indicate  great  insensateness 
of  mind.  He  who  does  not  remember 
them  overlooks  the  most  glorious  of 
records  ;  and  cannot  be  held  guiltless  of 
ingratitude.  (3)  God's  wondrous  works 
remembered  are  calculated  to  inspire  con- 
fidence. They  reveal  a  Being  who  is 
supremely  trustworthy. 


H  Reflection.  "I  will  meditate," 
&c.  By  means  of  reflection  we  are 
enabled  to  realise  the  facts  recalled  by 
memory,  to  perceive  their  significance 
and  applications  ;  and  the  emotions 
which  naturally  spring  from  the  facts 
remembered  are  excited  by  reflection. 
Recollection  is  of  little  worth  com- 
paratively, unless  accompanied  and  fol- 
lowed by  meditation.  It  was  by  the 
exercise  of  both  these  faculties  that  the 
troubled  heart  of  the  poet  grew  calm 
and  victorious. 

IIL  Declaxation.  "  I  will  talk  of 
Thy  doings."  A  good  man,  having 
passed  through  experiences  similar  to 
those  of  the  Psalmist,  should  talk  of 
God's  doings.  After  his  trouble,  re- 
collection, and  meditation,  his  talk 
would  be — 1.  Intelligent.  He  would 
not  utter  crude  or  rash  statements  con- 
cerning God.  2.  Trust-inspiring.  His 
own  faith  would  grow  stronger  as  he 
recounted  to  others,  <fec.  The  faith  of 
those  who  heard  him  would  also  grow 
as  they  thought  of  his  conflict,  and  how 
he  won  the  victory. 

Conclusion. — Here  is  an  example 
well  worthy  our  imitation.  Recollect^ 
meditate,  and  then  speak. 


The  Wats  op  God. 
{Verse  19.) 


I.  God's  ways  are  vast  in  their  ex- 
tent. **  In  the  sea."  His  ways  are 
related — 1.  I'o  all  ages — past,  present, 
future.  2.  To  all  worlds.  3.  To  all 
events. 

II.  God's  ways  are  profound  in  their 
meaning.  *' In  the  great  waters."  Not 
in  streams  or  rivers,  but  in  the  im- 
measurable, unfathomable  ocean.  His 
ways  are  "too  deep  to  sound  with 
mortal  lines." 

III.  God's  ways  are  mysterious  in 
their  aspect.  "Thy  footsteps  are  not 
known,"     cannot     be     always     traced. 


"  They  are  not  always  known  ;  or 
they  are  not  known  in  all  things  ;  yea, 
they  are  not  altogether  known  in  any- 
thing." 

"The  acknowledgment  of  mystery," 
says  Dr.  Huntington,  "the  frank  con- 
fession that  our  being  is  folded  all  about 
with  the  unknowable,  our  light  fringed 
on  every  side  with  darkness,  our  little 
globe  swimming  in  an  ocean  of  un- 
fathomable designs,  but  God  guiding  it 
on  and  caring  for  every  passenger  soul— «^ 
this  is  an  end  of  the  trying  of  our 
faith." 


God  Leading  His  Peoplb, 
{Verse  20.) 
L  The  Leader  of  the  good.   "  Thou."     power,   for  the  protection  and  support 


The    Leader    possesses — 1.    Unlimited 


of  His  people.     2.  Fer/ect  intelligence, 

437 


fBALM  LXXVltl. 


SOMILSTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


He  knows  His  people  individually  and 
thoroughly.  He  is  perfectly  acquainted 
with  the  way  along  which  they  travel  to 
their  destination.  3.  Solicitotis  regard 
for  each  member  of  the  flock.  He 
tenderly  cares  for  every  one,  and  for 
all. 

II.  The  instruments  by  which  they 
are  led.  *'  By  the  hand  of  Moses  and 
Aaron^  He  still  guides  instrumentally. 
How  ?  1.  By  His  Providence^  pointing 
out  our  way  by  the  indications  of  cir- 
cumstances and  current  events.  2.  By 
His  Word,  with  its  "  Thou  shalt,"  and 
"Thou  shalt  not."  3.  By  His  Spirit 
influencing  our  spirits.  4.  By  the 
counsel  of  His  servants.  The  wise  and 
good  are  here  to  direct  us. 

III.  The  manner  in  which  they  are 
led.  "  Like  a  flock."  We  have  here 
three  ideas.  1.  Particularity,  The 
Eastern  shepherds  have  a  particular 
knowledge  of  each  sheep,  of  its  peculi- 
arities, &c.  And  a  name  for  each  sheep, 
(See  illus.  in  "  The  Land  and  the  Book," 
by  Dr.  Thomson.)  "  He  calleth  his 
own  sheep  by  name."     "  I  am  the  good 


Shepherd,  and  know  My  sheep,  and  am 
known  of  Mine."  2.  Unity.  Though 
the  distinctness  and  individuality  of 
each  one  is  preserved,  yet  they  are  not 
separated.  They  constitute  a  ^'-  flock^ 
"One  flock"  under  "one  Shepherd." 
3.  Leading  as  contradistinguished  from 
driving.  The  Eastern  shepherd  goes 
before  his  flock,  and  so  leads  them. 
"And  when  He  putteth  forth  His  own 
sheep.  He  goeth  before  them,  and  the 
sheep  follow  Him ;  for  they  know  His 
voice.^'  Dr.  Bushnell  briefly,  yet  clearly 
and  suggestively,  states  the  idea — "  He 
does  not  drive  them  on  before  as  a  herd 
of  unwilling  disciples,  but  goes  before 
Himself,  leading  them  into  paths  that 
He  has  trod,  and  dangers  He  has  met, 
and  sacriflces  He  has  borne  Himself, 
calling  them  after  Him,  and  to  be  only 
followers." 

•*  Jesus  still  lead  on 
Till  our  rest  be  won ; 
And  although  the  way  be  cheerless, 
We  will  follow,  calm  and  fearless:       * 
Guide  us  by  Thy  hand 
To  our  Fatherland." 

— Zinzindotf, 


PSALM    LXXVIIL 

Introduction. 

Supericription. — **  MaschU  o/Asaph,"  i.e.,  an  instruction  of  Asaph,  a  didactic  song  by  Asaph. 
The  Psalm  was  probably  written  by  the  celebrated  Asaph  in  the  time  of  David. 

Occasion. — The  Psalm  seems  to  have  been  occasioned  by  the  jealousy  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim, 
by  reason  of  the  position  which  the  tribe  of  Judah  held  under  David.  For  many  years  the 
haughty  and  powerful  tribe  of  Ephraim  was  pre-eminent  amongst  the  tribes.  The  sanctuary 
was  placed  in  Shiloh,  which  is  in  this  tribe.  When  David  selected  Jerusalem  as  the  home  of 
the  sanctuary  and  the  capital  of  the  nation,  "that  haughty  spirit  which  could  brook  no  equal 
or  superior  chafed  against  the  growing  dominion  of  Judah"  (Stanley).  In  this  Psalm  they  are 
taught  that  what  they  regarded  as  a  usurpation  was  in  fact  a  Divine  judgment;  and  the  ten 
tribes  are  warned  not  to  rebel  against  the  Divine  arrangements. 


Man's  Relation  to  the  Law  and  Testimony  of  God. 

(Verses  1-8.) 


The  Psalm  opens  with  a  summons  of 
the  people  to  attention.  The  Poet 
speaks  as  one  who  has  a  right  to  be 
heard  with  respectful  attention,  and  who 
is  about  to  make  statements  which  were 
worthy  of  their  particular  regard.  From 
the  second  verse  it  seems  as  though  the 
Psalmist  regarded  the  historical  facts 
mentioned  in  the  subsequent  part  of  the 
43S 


Psalm  as  illustrations  of  spiritual  facts 
and  relationships.  The  history  of  the 
Israelites  sets  forth  in  clear  light  many 
aspects  of  human  life  and  Divine  pro- 
vidence. Amongst  other  things  it 
strikingly  illustrates — 1.  The  great 
goodness  of  God,  in  His  care  of  His 
people,  *in  His  guidance  of  them,  &c. 
2.   The  abiding  faithfulness  of  God,  in 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


MALM  LXXYltl. 


fulfilling  His  promises  and  threatenings. 
3.  The  sad  tendency  of  human  nature  to 
ingratitude  and  departure  from  God. 
In  this  respect  this  history  is  a  very 
painful  one.  4.  The  inviolable  connection 
hetiveen  sin  and  suffering.  These  and 
other  facts  and  tendencies  of  human 
life  and  the  Divine  government  are  set 
forth  in  striking  and  impressive  aspects 
in  this  history. 

The  section  now  before  us  is  intro- 
ductory to  the  history  recorded  in  the 
Psalm,  and  presents  us  with  some  im- 
portant views  of  Man^s  relation  to  the 
law  and  testimony  of  God. 

I.  Man  has  received  a  knowledge 
of  the  will  and  works  of  God.  The 
Hebrews  were  acquainted  with  the  laws, 
moral  and  ceremonial,  which  God  had 
given  unto  them.  They  also  had  ordi- 
nances of  Divine  institution  which  were 
abiding  testimonies  of  the  character  and 
will  of  God,  and  of  their  relation  to  Him. 
They  were  also  acquainted  with  the 
wonderful  facts  of  their  own  national 
history.  They  had  the  Scriptures, 
Hengstenberg  holds  that  "by  the  testi- 
mony and  the  law  in  verse  5  are  meant 
the  whole  contents  of  the  Pentateuch, 
the  direct  commandments  contained  in 
it,  and  the  deeds  of  the  Lord  which  are 
to  be  considered  as  indirect  command- 
ments." This  Pentateuch,  with  its 
marvellous  history,  its  Divine  legislation, 
and  its  revelations  of  God  and  His  will, 
they  possessed.  They  had  much  know- 
ledge which  they  had  received  by 
tradition.  As  children,  their  souls  had 
been  thrilled  as  they  listened  with  rapt 
attention  to  the  narratives  of  the  won- 
drous and  glorious  works  of  God  on 
behalf  of  their  ancestors.  Their  memo- 
ries were  richly  stored  with  these  glorious 
deeds,  and  Divine  revelations. 

What  a  noble  and  precious  heritage  is 
ours  in  this  respect !  We  have  the  holy 
Word.  Not  sitnply  the  Pentateuch  ;  but 
the  inspired  hymns  of  the  ancient  poets, 
the  wise  instruction  of  men  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  &c.  *'  The  holy  Scrip- 
tures, which  are  able  to  make  men 
wise  unto  salvation  through  faith  which 
is  in  Christ  Jesus."  What  a  rich 
and  blessed  possession  we  have  in  the 
Bible  1 


"  Most  wondrous  book !  bright  candle  of  the 

Lord! 
Star  of  eternity  !  The  only  star 
By  which  the  bark  of  man  can  navigate 
The  sea  of  Hfe,  and  gain  the  coast  of  bliss 
Securely  ;  only  star,  which  rose  on  time, 
And,  on  its  dark  and  troubled  billows,  still 
As  generation,  drifting  swiftly  by. 
Succeeded  generation,  threw  a  raj 
Of  heaven's  own  light,  and  to  the  hills  of 

God— 
The  everlasting  hills — pointed  the  sinner's 

eye."  —Pollock. 

We  have  also  religious  instruction. 
Much  of  the  intellectual  and  spiritual 
wealth  of  the  true  and  good  of  past  ages 
has  been  handed  down  to  us  in  books. 
The  best  utterances  of  the  mind  and 
heart  of  wise  and  holy  men  of  this  age 
are  given  to  us  in  books.  Who  can 
estimate  his  indebtedness  to  literature  ? 
In  our  early  days  the  earnest  and  loving 
teaching  of  Christian  parents  and  Sun- 
day school  teachers  was  ours.  And 
now  we  have  the  instruction,  exhortation, 
and  counsel  of  the  Christian  ministry. 
We  have  received  a  great  and  precious 
knowledge  of  the  Divine  will  and  way. 
The  way  of  salvation  is  clearly  made 
known  unto  us.  "  We  see  Jesus,"  and 
in  Him  God  has  revealed  Himself  to  us. 
**  He  that  hafeh  seen  Me,"  said  Christ, 
**  hath  seen  the  Father." 

II.  Man  should  impart  a  knowledge 
of  the  will  and  works  of  God  to  others. 
The  Israelites  were  distinctly  and  re- 
peatedly commanded  to  impart  religious 
knowledge  to  their  children.  (Vide 
Deut.  iv.  9,  vi.  6  and  7,  and  xi.  19.)  It 
was  a  binding  religious  duty.  To  this 
the  Psalmist  refers  in  the  fifth  verse. 
The  Psalmist's  rosolve  to  communicate 
this  knowledge  to  posterity  has  two 
points  worthy  of  notice.  He  resolves, 
1.  T'o  communicate  a  knowledge  of  His 
wondrous  works.  *'  Showing  to  the  gene- 
ration to  come  His  strength,  and  the 
wonderful  works  that  He  hath  done." 
Their  history  was  peculiarly  rich  in 
marvellous  and  glorious  deeds  which  He 
had  done  on  their  behalf,  and  in  judg- 
ments with  which  He  had  visited  them 
by  reason  of  their  numerous  and  heinous 
sins.  It  was  plenteously  stored  with 
wise  teaching,  and  helpful  encourage- 
ment to  faithfulness,  and  grave  warning 
against  evil.      He   will   impart  to  the 

439 


fSiXM  LXXTm. 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


children  a  knowledge  of  this  remarkable 
history.  He  resolves,  2.  To  communi- 
cate a  knowledge  of  His  wondrous  works 
that  the  generation  to  come  might  praise 
the  Lord.  He  will  narrate  God's  glo- 
rious deeds  of  ancient  date,  not  that 
national  pride  might  be  promoted  there- 
by, but  that  God  might  be  glorified. 
His  was  the  power,  and  His  shall  be 
the  praise.  He  will  show  to  the  chil- 
dren "  the  praises  of  the  Lord." 

We,  too,  are  bound  to  transmit  to 
posterity  the  religious  knowledge  and 
the  spiritual  privileges  that  we  enjoy. 
Our  Lord  lays  down  the  principle  with 
transparent  clearness — "  Freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give." 

"  Heav'n  doth  with  us  as  we  with  torches  do, 
Not  light  them  for  themselves, 
For  if  our  virtues  do  not  go  forth  of  us 
'Twere  all  alike  as  if  we  had  them  not." 

— Shakespeare. 

The  coming  generations  will  need  the 
knowledge  of  God  that  we  possess.  Our 
systems  of  philosophy  and  theology  tliey 
may  do  without,  our  human  creeds  and 
religious  formulae  they  may  in  many 
things  outgrow.  But  our  knowledge  of 
God,  especially  as  revealed  in  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  redemption,  the  genera- 
tions that  are  to  come  will  need.  Nay, 
without  it  they  will  be  undone. 

III.  Man  should  impart  a  know- 
ledge of  the  will  and  works  of  God  to 
others  with  a  noble  aim.  The  object 
of  the  impartation  of  this  knowledge  is 
thus  stated  by  the  Psalmist — "  That  the 
generation  to  come  might  know  them, 
the  children  which  should  be  born,  who 
should  arise  and  declare  them  to  their 
children,"  &c.  (vers.  6-8). 

The  object  then  aimed  at  was — 
1.  That  the  knowledge  might  he  con- 
tinued to  the  race.  We  have  received 
from  our  fathers  great  treasures  of  in- 
formation and  experience,  of  knowledge 
and  wisdom,  and  every  generous  emotion 
and  every  conviction  of  duty  strongly 
urge  us  to  hand  them  down  to  coming 
ages.  If  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  make 
much  addition  to  the  treasures  of  the 
past,  we  can  at  least  with  scrupulous 
fidelity  do  our  share  to  transmit  those 
treasures  undiminished  to  the  coming 
generations. 
440 


2.  That  the  coming  generations  might 
avoid  the  errors  and  sins  of  their  ances- 
tors. **  That  they  might  not  be  as  their 
fathers,  a  stubborn  and  rebellious  gene- 
ration ;  a  generation  that  prepared  not 
their  heart  aright,  and  whose  spirit  was 
not  steadfast  with  God."  The  history  .of 
the  Israelites  abounds  with  painful  illus- 
trations of  the  statements  of  this  verse. 
With  sad  frequency  throughout  their 
journeyings  in  the  wilderness  they  mani- 
fested a  murmuring,  stubborn,  and  rebel- 
lious spirit.  Again  and  again  they  for- 
sook the  Lord  God,  and  worshipped  the 
idols  of  the  idolatrous  nations  around 
them.  Their  history  was  to  be  made 
known  that  their  posterity  might  take 
warning  and  shun  their  errors.  Let  us 
point  out  to  the  generations  to  come  the 
sins  of  past  ages  with  their  consequences, 
that  they  may  avoid  them. 

3.  That  the  coming  generations  might 
he  righteous.  "  That  they  might  keep 
His  commandments."  Let  us  so  teach 
the  law  of  God  to  the  uprising  generation 
that  they  shall  regard  it  as  "  holy,  just, 
and  good,"  a  Divinely  wise  and  benevolent 
thing,  and  shall  loyally  and  heartily  seek 
to  comply  with  its  requirements. 

4.  That  the  coming  generations  might 
he  religious.  "  That  they  might  set 
their  hope  in  God,  and  not  forget  the 
works  of  God."  Two  things  are  aimed 
at  in  this.  (1)  -4  recognition  of  the 
Divine  presence  and  activity.  "  Not  for- 
get the  works  of  God."  God  is  ever 
working  in  the  universe,  in  history,  in 
redemption.  History  should  be  studied 
with  reverence  as  well  as  with  inquisi- 
tiveness,  for  God  has  been  working  in 
it.  Our  life  should  be  lived  holily, 
for  God  is  ever  active  within  us  and 
around  us.  In  imparting  instruction 
let  us  aim  at  the  recogrnition  of  the 
Divine  presence  and  agency  by  the  gene- 
rations to  come — that  the  history,  sci- 
ence, and  philosophy  of  the  future  might 
not  be  materialistic,  atheistic,  but  intel- 
ligent, humble,  reverent.  (2)  A  calm 
trust  in  the  Divine  Being.  *'  Set  their 
hope  in  God,"  i.e.^  *'  place  their  trust 
in  God."  Let  us  endeavour  to  represent 
God  to  our  children  truthfully,  in  His 
Divine  beauty,  in  His  all-sufficiency,  in 
His  perfect  reliableness,   that  so  they 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSAJUf  Lxxvni. 


might  be  attracted  to  Him,  and  be  led 
to  repose  in  Him  with  supreme  and  un- 
faltering trust. 

Here,  then,  we  have  a  graiid  end  in  im- 
parting a  knowledge  of  the  will  and  works 
and  ways  of  God — the  continuation  and 
increase  of  knowledge,  the  avoidance  of 
error  and  sin,  the  promotion  of  Divine 
righteousness  and  religiousness  amongst 
men — in  aword,  the  furtheranceof  human 
progress  in  its  path  towards  perfection. 


The  race  advances,  the  world  makes 
progress.  Christianity  is  spreading  and 
diffusing  widely  its  blessings.  Each 
generation  grows  richer  in  the  highest 
knowledge  and  wisdom  than  its  prede- 
cessor was.  The  time  comes  on  apace 
when  '*  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  sea."  Are  we  each  doing  what 
we  can  to  usher  in  that  time  f 


For  a  Sabbath-School  Anniversary. 
{Verses  2-S.) 


The  text  is  the  preface  or  introduction 
to  the  whole  Psalm. 

It  shows  the  design  of  Asaph  in  its 
composition. 

Its  design  was  the  instruction  of 
children. 

Its  style — parabolic  and  enigmatical. 
Spiritual  truths  hidden  under  narration 
of  facts. 

I.  The  interesting  objects  of  our 
solicitude  mentioned.     Consider — 

1.  The  love  which  welcomes  them.  The 
love  of  mother,  father,  friends. 

2.  The  evils  which  surround  them.  A 
sinful  nature  within.  Evil  example 
without ;  public  house,  theatre,  <fec. 

3.  7^he  possibilities  tvhich  await  them. 
Greatness  in  good  or  in  evil. 

II.  The  sacred  duties  which  we  owe 
to  them. 

First :  They  are  weak  ;  we  must  pro- 
tect them.  Jacob's  children,  and  Esau. 
(Gen.  xxxii.) 


What 


Out 


Second :  They  are  helpless ;  we  must 
provide  for  them. 

Third :  They  are  ignorant ;  we  must 
instruct  them. 

1.  The  nature  of  this  duty. 
must  we  teach  1 

(1)  The  praises  of  the  Loi'd. 
of  the  mouth,"  <fcc.  (Ps.  viii.  2). 

(2)  llie  strength  of  the  Lord. 

(3)  The  wonderful  works  of  the  Lord. 
In  nature,  providence,  grace. 

2.  The  importance  of  this  duty.  The 
docility  and  impressibility  of  children. 

3.  The  way  to  perform  this  duty. 
Parents,  Christians,  example,  precept. 

III.  The  object  which  we  hope  shall 
be  realised. 

1.  The  knowledge  of  truth  shall  be 
perpetuated. 

2.  Our  children  will  put  their  hope  in 
God. 

3.  They  shall  be  better  than  their 
fathers. 

— B.  D.  from  The  Study. 


Our  Relation  to  our  Ancestors  and  Successors. 

(  Verses  3  and  4.) 


Consider — 

I.  Our  great  obligations  to  our 
ancestors.  1.  For  the  Bible.  2.  For  a 
glorious  literature.  How  vast  the  num- 
ber of  books  which  are  characterised  by 
high  and  deep  thinking,  and  pure  and 
reverent  feeling !  3.  For  holy  and 
heroic  examples.  Martyrs,  reformers, 
and  a  great  multitude  of  obscure  yet 
faithful  and  noble  lives.  4.  For  reli- 
gious teaching.     We  are  immeasurably 


indebted  to  those  who  in  the  home,  the 
school,  and  the  church,  have  instructed 
us. 

II.  Our  great  duty  to  our  successors. 
1.  To  hand  down  to  them  intact  the 
heritage  of  religious  intelligence  and 
privilege  which  we  possess.  2.  To  seek  to 
increase  tfiat  heritage.  The  stream  of 
blessing  should  grow  broader  and  deeper. 
3.  To  endeavour  to  lead  them  to  prize 
and  improve  their  heritage.     That  they 

441 


fflALMLXXmi 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


may  not  only  know  His  will,  but  do  it ;  Be  it  ours  to  contribute  something  to 

not  only  know  His  wondrous  works,  but      the  promotion   of  the  progress  of  our 
praise  and  truftt  Him.  race  in  all  that  is  true,  wise,  and  good. 


Moral  Cowardice  and  its  Causes. 


(  Verses 

The  term  "  the  children  of  Ephraim  " 
is  not  used  here  in  contradistinction  to 
the  rest  of  Israel,  but  as  representing 
the  whole,  because  of  the  prominent 
position  of  that  tribe.  **  For  more  than 
four  hundred  years  Ephraim,  with  its 
two  dependent  tribes  of  Manasseh  and 
Benjamin,  exercised  undisputed  pre- 
eminence. Joshua  the  first  conqueror ; 
Gideon  the  greatest  of  the  judges,  whose 
brothers  were  '  as  the  children  of  kings,* 
and  whose  children  all  but  established 
hereditary  monarchy  in  their  own  line  ; 
Saul,  the  first  king — belong  to  one  or 
other  of  these  three  tribes."  The 
haughty  spirit  of  the  tribe  "  could  brook 
no  equal  or  superior,  and  chafed  against 
the  rise  even  of  the  kindred  tribe  of 
Manasseh  in  the  persons  of  Gideon  and 
Jephthah,  and  yet  more  against  the 
growing  dominion  of  Judah  in  David 
and  Solomon,  till  it  threw  off  the  yoke 
altogether,  and  established  an  indepen- 
dent kingdom." — {Stanley). 

It  seems  clear  to  us  that  the  Psalm 
does  not  refer  to  the  disruption  of  the 
kingdom ;  but  that  our  text  refers  to  an 
event  or  series  of  events  during  the 
period  of  the  Judges.  We  propose  to 
regard  the  text  as  an  illustration  of 
Moral  Cowardice  and  its  Causes,  Let 
us  consider — 

I.  The  illustration  of  moral  cowar- 
dice. "  The  children  of  Ephraim,  armed 
and  carrying  bows,  turned  back  in  the 
day  of  battle."  Whether  this  refers  to 
one  specific  battle,  or  to  several  battles, 
or  whether  "the  Ephraimites  are  merely 
compared  to  cowardly  bowmen,"  we  need 
not  attempt  to  decide.  In  either  case 
tl  oy  are  charged  with  cowardice.  The 
greatness  of  this  cowardice  is  apparent 
from  three  facts.  1.  They  ivere  men  of 
might.  Ephraim  was  a  warlike  tribe, 
famed  for  valiant  men.  Joshua  was  of 
this  tribe.  Perhaps  they  are  specially 
named  here  because  of  their  proud, 
442 


9-11.) 

domineering,  boastful  spirit.  2.  They 
were  fully  armed.  They  were  not  sur- 
prised and  attacked  at  a  disadvantage. 
They  were  "  armed  and  carrying  bows." 
Proud,  boastful,  powerful,  and  well 
armed,  yet — 3.  They  refused  to  fight, 
'*  Turned  back  in  the  day  of  battle." 
A  brave  English  drummer  boy  was  taken 
captive  in  some  battle  by  the  French. 
He  was  ordered  to  beat  several  military 
signals,  and  obeyed.  But,  being  com- 
manded to  beat  a  retreat,  he  pertina- 
ciously refused.  He  had  never  beaten 
a  retreat,  and  he  never  would  do  so. 
Unlike  this  heroic  lad,  the  Israelites, 
with  the  strong  and  warlike  tribe  of 
Ephraim,  turned  their  back  to  their  foes 
and  fled.  A  picture  of  what  has  often 
been  the  case  in  our  s[)iritual  history. 
We  have  been  bold  and  courageous  in 
speech,  we  have  been  supplied  with 
weapons  from  the  Divine  armoury,  yet 
we  have  fled  before  our  foes,  have 
weakly  yielded  to  temptation,  and  dis- 
honoured our  uniform  and  our  colours. 

II.  The  causes  of  moral  cowardice. 
"  They  kept  not  the  covenant  of  God, 
and  refused  to  walk  in  His  law,"  &c. 

1.  They  lacked  the  support  of  con- 
science. If  conscience  is  with  us  in 
arduous  and  perilous  enterprises,  it  will 
nerve  the  heart  with  courage  and  fill 
the  arm  with  energy. 

**  What  stronger  breastplate  than  a  heart  un- 
tainted ? 
Thrice  is  he  arm'd  that  hath  his  quarrel  just ; 
And  he  but  naked,  though  lock'd  up  in  steel, 
Whose  conscience  with  injustice  is  corrupted." 

— Shakespeare. 

But  this  "  heart  untainted  "  the  men  of 
Ephraim  had  not.  "  They  kept  not  the 
covenant  of  God,  and  refused  to  walk 
in  His  law."  Conscience  in  them  was 
an  accusing  voice.  And  the  conscious- 
ness of  guilt  "  makes  cowards  of  us  all." 
*'The  wicked  flee  when  no  man  pur 
sueth,"  <fcc. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXVIII. 


'*  Suspicion  always  haunts  the  guilty  mind  ; 
The  thief  doth  fear  each  bush  an  officer." 

— Shakespeare. 

If  in  our  moral  battles  we  would  stand 
before  our  enemies,  w^e  need  a  clear  self- 
approving  conscience.  Without  it  *' every 
noise  appals "  us ;  with  it  we  may  be 
as  "  bold  as  a  lion." 

2.  They  lacked  the  inspiration  to  be 
drawn  from  the  recollection  of  past  inter- 
positions of  God  on  their  behalf.  "They 
forgat  His  works,  and  His  wonders  that 
He  had  showed  them."  When  David 
did  battle  with  Goliath  of  Gath,  he  was 
inspired  and  fortified  by  the  recollection 
of  what  God  had  done  for  him  and  by 
him  in  former  times.  "  The  Lord  that 
delivered  me  out  of  the  paw  of  the  lion, 
and  out  of  the  paw  of  the  bear.  He  will 
deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  this  Philis- 
tine." In  this  spirit  he  met  the  foe, 
and  speedily  the  proud,  gigantic  cham- 
pion of  Philistia  fell  before  the  shepherd 
boy,  who  trusted  in  the  God  who  had 
aided  him  in  the  past.  But  the  glorious 
doings  of  God  on  behalf  of  Israel  were 
shamefully  forgotten  by  them,  and, 
when  they  went  forth  to  battle,  the 
inspiration,  which  they  would  have  had 
if  they  had  remembered  His  works,  was 
missing,  and  they  cowardly  turned  back. 
If  we  would  meet  the  foes  of  the  future 
hopefully  and  courageously  we  need  to 
remember  the  victories  of  the  past  de- 
voutly and  thankfully. 

3.  Thei/  lacked  the  help  of  God.  They 
did  not  seek  Him  whose  covenant  they 
had  violated,  and  whose  law  they  had 
disregarded.    They  could  not  trust  Him 


whose  wondrous  works  on  their  behalf 
they  had  basely  allowed  to  sink  into 
forgetfulness.  And  so  they  went  up  to 
battle  without  the  Lord,  and  returned 
from  battle  dishonoured.  "  0  Lord, 
what  shall  I  say  when  Israel  turneth 
their  backs  upon  their  enemies  ?  And 
the  Lord  said,  Israel  hath  sinned,  and 
they  have  also  transgressed  My  cove- 
nant which  I  commanded  them ;  there- 
fore the  children  of  Israel  could  not 
stand  before  their  enemies,  but  turned 
their  backs  before  their  enemies." 

As  we  contemplate  this  picture,  let 
us  learn  the  lessons  which  it  has  for  us. 
We,  too,  have  enemies  which  are  both 
subtle  and  powerful — Satanic  tempta- 
tion, evil  in  society,  proneness  to  sin  in 
ourselves.  We  must  battle  with  courage 
and  fortitude  against  these  foes,  or  they 
will  vanquish  us,  and  that  means  ruin. 
Complete  and  splendid  armour,  both 
offensive  and  defensive,  is  provided  for 
us  (Eph.  vi.  11-18).  Let  us  gird  it  on. 
And  in  this  holy  war  let  us  go  forth  in 
the  strength  of  God,  and  we  shall  re- 
turn victorious.  It  has  been  well  said 
that,  "  Courage  consists  not  in  blindly 
overlooking  danger,  but  in  seeing  it, 
and  conquering  it."  We  need  moral 
courage ;  and  for  that  we  must  have  an 
approving  conscience,  the  memory  of 
past  victories  won  by  the  help  of  God, 
and  an  unfaltering  trust  in  Him.  With- 
out these,  as  cowards  we  shall  turn 
our  back  to  the  foes.  "  Be  strong  in 
the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His 
might." 


Scenes  from  a  Remarkable  Histort. 
{Verses  12-20.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  a  brief  record 
of  some  of  God's  wonderful  and  gra- 
cious dealings  with  His  people,  and  of 
their  great  sin  against  Him.  On  the 
one  side,  the  portion  of  history  here 
referred  to  is  luminous  with  the  great 
and  beneficent  works  of  the  Lord  ;  on 
the  other  side,  it  is  dark  with  the  basest 
ingratitude,  unbelief,  and  perversity  of 
man.     We  have  here — 

L  A  people  divinely  emancipated. 


By  great  signs  and  wonders  wrought  on 
their  behalf  Jehovah  had  delivered  tliem 
from  the  cruel  oppiession  of  the  Egyp- 
tians. His  hand  was  clearly  manifest — 
1.  In  their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt. 
"  Marvellous  things  did  He  in  the  sight 
of  their  fathers,  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
in  the  field  of  Zoan."  It  was  because 
of  His  blessing  that,  notwithstanding 
their  o])])ressions,  they  increased  and 
multiplied  and  gathered  power  in  Egypt 

443 


PSALM  LXXTtO. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


It  was  because  of  the  wonders  wrought 
by  Him  on  their  behalf,  the  stroke  after 
stroke  of  judgment,  each  one  severer 
than  its  predecessors,  with  which  He 
smote  their  tyrannical  lords,  that  they 
were  at  length  permitted  to  go  forth 
from  the  land  of  bondage. 

2.  In  their'  deliverance  from  their  pur' 
suers  at  the  Bed  Sea.  Narrate  the 
circumstances  of  the  departure  from 
Egypt,  the  encampment  by  the  sea,  the 
pursuit  of  the  Egyptians  after  them,  the 
apparently  desperate  situation  in  which 
they  were  placed,  their  alarm,  murmur- 
ings,  &c.  ;  the  prayer  of  Moses,  the 
answer  of  Jehovah,  <fec.  "  He  divided 
the  sea,  and  caused  them  to  pass  through; 
and  He  made  the  waters  to  stand  as  an 
heap."  '*  Pn  a  sudden,"  writes  the  late 
Dean  Milman,  *' Moses  advances  towards 
the  sea,  extends  his  rod,  and  a  violent 
wind  from  the  east  begins  to  blow.  The 
waters  recede  on  both  sides,  a  way  ap- 
pears ;  at  nightfall,  probably  about  eight 
o'clock,  the  caravan  begins  to  defile 
along  this  awful  pass.  The  wind  con- 
tinued in  the  same  quarter  all  the  night, 
but  immediately  they  had  passed  over, 
and  while  the  Egyptians,  madly  plung- 
ing after  them,  were  in  the  middle  of 
the  passage,  the  wind  as  suddenly  fell, 
the  waters  rushed  back  into  their  bed, 
the  heavy  chariot-wheels  of  the  pursuers 
sank  into  the  sand,  broke  and  overthrew 
the  chariots,  and  in  this  state  of  con- 
fusion the  sea  swept  over  the  whole 
host,  and  overwhelmed  the  king  and  all 
the  flower  of  the  Egyptian  army."  We 
have  in  this  a  triple  wonder  : — (1.)  The 
division  of  the  sea.  This  was  no  ordi- 
nary phenomenon  of  nature,  but  an  ex- 
traordinary manifestation  of  the  presence 
and  power  of  God.  (2.)  The  prepara- 
tion of  the  road.  When  the  waters  were 
divided,  the  bed  of  the  sea  would  not 
have  been  in  a  fit  state  for  the  great 
multitude  to  pass  over,  had  not  Jehovah 
prepared  it  for  their  passage.  (3.)  The 
encouraging  of  the  people  to  pass  through 
the  opening  made  for  them.  Such  an 
unbelieving  and  craven- hearted  crowd  of 
serfs  needed  an  infusion  of  courage  ere 
they  would  have  attempted  to  make 
such  a  passage.  The  Lord  "  caused 
them  to  pass  through."  If  ever  any 
444 


people  were  emancipated  by  God,  the 
Israelites  were  when  they  came  forth 
from  the  land  of  Egypt.  His  hand  was 
manifestly  outstretched  to  subdue  the 
pride  of  the  oppressors,  and  to  rescue 
the  oppressed  from  thraldom. 

II.  A  people  divinely  led.  "  In  the 
daytime  also  He  led  them  with  a  cloud, 
and  all  the  night  with  a  light  of  fire." 
"  The  fiery,  cloudy  pillar  "  went  before 
them  in  all  their  journeyings.  1.  T'hey 
were  led  constantly.  In  the  day  the 
cloud  led  them  onward,  and  at  night 
the  pillar  of  fire  moved  mysteriously 
and  majestically  before  them.  2.  They 
were  led  divinely.  The  guiding  pillar 
was  not  merely  a  sign  to  indicate  their 
way,  but  a  visible  symbol  of  the  presence 
of  God.  He  Himself  guided  them. 
Rightly  understood,  the  cloud  and  the 
fire  were  an  assurance  that  God  was 
with  them  to  lead  them,  to  protect 
them,  to  provide  for  them.  WJiat  a 
proof  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  them  we 
have  in  this  1 

III.  A  people  divinely  provisioned. 
"  He  clave  the  rocks  in  the  wilderness, 
and  gave  them  drink  as  out  of  the  great 
depths,"  (fee.  Upon  two  occasions,  at 
the  command  of  God,  Moses  had  smitten 
a  rock,  and  water  had  flowed  forth  in 
abundance.  (  Vide  Exod.  xvii.  6,  Num. 
XX.  11.)  But  it  was  not  simply  water 
that  God  provided  for  them,  but  food 
and  raiment  also.  **  He  gave  them 
bread  from  heaven  to  eat."  *'  I  havf 
led  you,"  said  Moses,  "forty  years  in 
the  wilderness  :  your  clothes  are  not 
waxen  old  upon  you,  and  thy  shoe  is 
not  waxen  old  upon  thy  foot,"  1.  Their 
supplies  were  abundant.  **  As  out  of 
the  great  depths ;  .  .  .  caused  waters  to 
run  down  like  rivers."  Whatever  God 
gives,  He  gives  abundantly.  His  hand 
is  free  and  bounteous.  And  if  at  any 
time  the  Israelites  suff'ered  from  hunger 
or  thirst  it  was  by  reason  of  their  un- 
belief, or  to  humble  them  and  impress 
them  with  their  dependence  upon  God. 
2.  Their  supplies  were  divine.  An  un- 
riven  rock  was  a  most  unlikely  object 
from  which  to  obtain  water.  Rocks  are 
"not  capable  of  receiving  it  either  from 
the  clouds  above  or  the  springs  be^ 
neath."     Yet,  when  smitten  by  Moses, 


i 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


WALM  LXXVin. 


water  copiously  flowed  from  them. 
Moses  was  but  the  instrument  of  Jeho- 
vah in  this  matter.  Moses  smote  the 
rocks,  but  God  clave  them  and  brought 
forth  streams  from  them.  3.  Their  sup- 
plies are  illustrative  of  ours.  Ours  are 
divine.  **  Every  good  gift  and  every 
perfect  gift  is  from  above,"  &c.  Ours 
are  abundant.  '*  God  giveth  us  richly 
all  things  to  enjoy." 

IV.  A  people  basely  perverse  and 
wicked.  "  And  they  sinned  yet  more 
against  Him,  by  provoking  the  Most 
High  in  the  wilderness,"  <fcc.  (vers. 
17-20).     Notice  here, — 

1.  Divine  signs  leading  to  profane 
curiosity.  The  miracles  which  God  had 
wrought  on  their  behalf  should  have 
impressed  the  Israelites  with  a  deep 
sense  of  the  presence  and  power  of  God; 
and  should  have  been  to  them  signs  of 
His  almightiness,  His  hatred  of  tyranny 
and  oppression,  and  His  interest  in  the 
oppressed  and  afflicted.  But,  with 
amazing  and  saddening  perversity,  they 
regarded  God  with  little  more  of  rever- 
ence than  the  Egyptians  did  their  magi- 
cians and  sorcerers.  They  had  seen  the 
divine  wonders,  but  failed  to  recognise  in 
them  divine  signs.  Having  witnessed 
marvellous  displays  of  His  power,  sinful 
curiosity  is  awakened  within  them,  and 
they  ask,  "  Can  God  furnish  a  table  in 
the  wilderness  1  can  He  give  bread 
also  ? "  ^c.  They  should  have  been 
humble,  reverent,  trustful  ;  they  were 
curious,  profane,  presumptuous. 

2.  Divine  providence  leading  to  a 
desire  for  the  indulgence  of  appetite. 
The  provision  which  God  made  for  them 
seems  to  have  awakened  in  them  neither 
gratitude,  contentment,  nor  faith ;  but 
a  desire  for  the  gratification  of  their 
animal  appetite  by  a  greater  variety  in 
their  diet.  And,  with  awful  audacity 
and  presumption,  they  tempted  God  by 
their  questions  as  to  His  power,  and 
by  their  demands  upon  Him.  They 
"demanded  meat  for  their  lust"  (t^H)<3 

=  here,  the  animal  soul).  It  was  not  a 
desire  for  what  was  necessary,  but  a 
craving  for  variety.  And  this  craving 
was  expressed,  not  as  a  humble  request, 
but  as  an  insolent  demand,  accompanied 


by  profane  questions  as  to  the  limit  of 
the  Divine  power.  This  sin  took  its 
rise  in  the  heart.  There  the  evil  desire 
sprang  up  and  was  fostered  into  strength. 
Then  it  expressed  itself  in  speech.  "  Keep 
thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of 
it  are  the  issues  of  life." 

3.  Divine  goodness  responded  to  hy 
human  distrust  and  ingratitude.  No 
song  of  thankfulness  arises  from  them 
as  they  call  to  mind  the  great  goodness 
of  God  to  them,  but  an  impious  chal- 
lenge to  Him  to  supply  them  with  flesh. 
They  utter  no  holy  declaration  of  confi- 
dence in  Him  as  they  recall  His  won- 
drous works,  but  distrustful,  irreverent 
inquiries. 

As  we  look  upon  this  picture  of  ex- 
treme wickedness,  let  us  remember  that 
it  was  an  utter  perversion  of  the  dealings 
of  God  with  them.  God's  emancipation, 
guidance,  and  provisioning  of  them  were 
both  adapted  and  intended  to  awaken 
within  them  contentment,  trust  in  Him, 
gratitude,  and  reverence  to  Him.  But 
their  own  sinful  hearts  wickedly  per- 
verted the  Divine  relation  to  them 
and  dealings  with  them  in  the  way  we 
have  indicated.  We  have  a  power  by 
which  we  may  make  evil  the  occasion  of 
good.  We  may  gather  patience  out  of 
suffering.  By  means  of  defeat  we  may 
learn  how  to  conquer.  Through  trial 
we  may  grow  in  strength  and  grace. 
But  by  the  abuse  of  this  power  we  may 
pervert  a  means  of  grace  into  an  occa- 
sion of  evil,  out  of  the  Divine  longsuf- 
fering  may  educe  arguments  in  favour 
of  impenitence  and  presumption,  may 
so  treat  God's  richest  blessings  that 
they  shall  become  to  us  a  dire  curse. 

Conclusion. — I.  See  the  terrible  ef- 
fects of  slavery.  These  Israelites  would 
not  have  been  so  utterly  base,  irreligi- 
ous, and  despicable  had  not  their  UKin- 
hood  been  eaten  out  of  them  by  slavery. 
Physical  oppression  had  left  them  mere 
serfs  in  spirit. 

2.  See  the  depravity  of  human  nature. 
In  the  midst  of  the  richest  goodness 
and  the  divinest  signs,  it  remains  un- 
grateful, unbelieving,  impious. 

3.  See  our  need  of  Divine  preservation, 
"  Hold  Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe." 

44d 


PSALM  LXXYm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Divine  Blessings. 

{Verses  15,  16.) 


I.  Divine  blessings  from  unlikely 
sources.  Water  from  solid  rocks. 
Emancipation  of  the  Hebrews  by  means 
of  the  shepherd  Moses.  Redemption 
out  of  Nazareth.  The  Light  of  the 
World  from  a  carpenter's  shop.  Jesus 
Christ  was  "a  root  out  of  dry  ground." 
Most  of  the  apostles  were  "  unlearned 
and  ignorant  men."  Tenderness,  trust, 
triumph  out  of  suffering.  Spiritual 
wealth  out  of  temporal  loss. 

II.  Divine  blessings  in  rich  abun- 
dance. "  As  out  of  the  great  depths, 
.  .  .  like  rivers."  All  pure  blessings 
God  gives  abundantly.  Light,  air,  dew, 
beauty,  &c.,  He  gives  abundantly. 
"  Abundantly  pardon."    "  Plentuous  re- 


demption." "  Peace  as  a  river,  righte- 
ousness as  the  waves  of  the  sea."  "  Make 
all  grace  abound  toward  you,  that  ye, 
always  having  all  sufficiency  in  all 
things,"  tfec. 

III.  A  type  of  the  supreme  blessing. 
1  Cor.  X.  3  and  4.  ''That  Rock  was 
Christ." 

Analogy — 1.  In  the  blessings.  Christ 
gives  "  the  water  of  life."  2.  In  the 
mode  of  ohtainiiig  them.  The  rock 
was  smitten  and  cleft.  Christ  "  was 
wounded,"  &c.  3.  In  the  conditions  of 
bestowal.  "  Freely."  "  Without  money 
and  without  price."  The  river  of  life 
flows  freely  by,  we  have  but  to  stoop 
down  and  drink. 


Human  Sin  and  Divine  Judgment. 
{Verses  2\-^\.) 


In  these  verses  we  see  how  God  re- 
garded the  conduct  described  in  the 
preceding  i)araii:raph,  and  how  He  re- 
sponded to  the  insolent  demands  of  the 
Hebrews.  The  main  teaching  of  this 
portion  of  the  Psalm  may  be  developed 
under  two  main  topics. 

I.  Human  Sin.  We  have  here  the 
Divine  view  of  the  sin  of  the  perverse 
Israelites. 

1.  The  nature  of  their  sin.  Unbelief. 
*'  They  believed  not  in  God,  and  trusted 
not  in  His  salvation."  They  doubted 
either  the  power  or  the  goodness  of 
G()d,  or  both.  He  had  given  to  them 
sigTial  displays  of  His  might  and  ma- 
jesty, yet  they  perversely  questioned  His 
ability  to  provide  for  them.  He  had 
also  given  to  them  gracious  assurances 
that  He  would  guide,  gujird,  and  supply 
them,  yet  they  seem  to  have  doubted 
these  assurances.  Herein  was  their 
great  sin  in  the  sight  of  God.  Unbelief 
is  a  sin  which  directly  dishonours  the 
Divine  beinsj  and  character.  Amonjist 
men  of  honour  it  is  a  great  insult  to 
discredit  the  word  of  another.  But  what 
shall  we  say  of  the  sin  of  discrediting 
the  word  of  Godl  It  is  an  impeach- 
446 


ment  of  His  faithfulness.  Or  a  tacit 
declaration  that  we  doubt  His  ability  to 
fulfil  His  promise.  But  whether  we 
doubt  His  willingness  or  His  ability  to 
keep  His  promises,  His  goodness  or  His 
power,  we  dishonour  Him.  To  this  sin 
the  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness  were  very 
prone.  It  is  lamentably  prevalent  in 
the  present  day.  There  are  many  sin- 
cere Christians  who  are  often  guilty  in 
this  respect.  They  fail  to  believe  God's 
promises,  &c.  In  this  Christian  dis- 
pensation unbelief  towards  Christ  is  the 
damning  sin.  ''  He  that  beiieveth  not 
shall  be  damned." 

2.  The  aggravation  of  their  sin. 
"  Though  He  had  commanded  the  clouds 
from  above,  and  opened  tiie  doors,"  &c. 
(vers.  22-25).  The  aggravation  of  their 
sin  in  distrusting  God  in  the  matter 
of  provision  is  seen  in  that,  (1)  He 
had  hitherto  supplied  them  with  food. 
Though  journeying  in  a  wilderness,  yet 
they  had  not  suffered  from  the  lack  of 
anything.  God  had  provided  for  their 
wants.  He  had  supplied  them  with 
welter  (Exod.  xv.  25,  xvii.  6),  and  quails 
(Exod.  xvi.  13),  and  with  a  regular 
supply  of   manna   (Exod.   xvi.   14-26). 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXXVni. 


(2)  He  had  supplied  them  with  choice 
food.      "  The  corn  of  heaven.     Man  did 
eat  angels'  food."     The  word  translated 
"  angels "  has  been  variously  rendered. 
But  whatever  rendering  be  adopted,  the 
idea  of  rare,  choice  food  is  presented. 
The   Hebrews    in    the   wilderness    were 
not  supplied  with  coarse,  common  fare. 
Their  food  was   delicate   in   its  nature 
and  rich  in  quality,  such  as  is  found  on 
the  tables  of  nobles  or  princes.     Or  it  was 
so  delicious  and  rare  that,  coming  down 
as  it  did  from  heaven,  the  poet  naturally 
speaks  of  it  as  "angels'  food."     (3)  He 
had  supplied  them  with  choice  food  in 
abundance.      "  He    sent   them    meat   to 
the  full."     There  was  no  lack  of  provi- 
sions.    The  supply  was  as  abundant  in 
quantity  as  it  was  rich  in  quality.      (4) 
He  had  supplied  them  with  choice  food 
supernaturally.      The  water  was  drawn 
from  the  rock  miraculously.     Concern- 
ing the  manna,  Dr.  C  E.  Stowe,  writing 
in   Smith's   "Bible  Diet.,"   says,   "The 
manna  of  Scripture  we  regard  as  wholly 
miraculous,    and    not  in  any  respect   a 
product    of    nature."     The    people   had 
not   to   put   forth   any  effort  to  procure 
this  provision,  except  the  mere  gather- 
ing of  it.      It  was  manifestly  the  special 
provision  of  God  for  them.     Yet  "  they 
believed  not  in  God,  and  trusted  not  in 
His  salvation."     On   this  very  question 
of  their  food  supply  they  had  distrusted 
God,  and  insolently  called  into  question 
His  })ower.     While  subsisting  upon  pro- 
visions miraculously   supplied  by  God, 
andwhich  clearly  manifested  His  abound- 
ing goodness,  they  basely  distrust  Him 
and   impiously   propose   to   submit  His 
power  to  tests  of  their  invention.     Much 
of  the  unbelief  of  this  age  is  painfully 
acrorravated  in  its  character.     When  men 
do  not  trust  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  is 
not  their  guilt  the  greater  because  His 
qualifications  ns  such  are  so  ample  and 
convincing — in    His  teaching,  miracles, 
life,  resurrection,    and  in  the  witness  of 
a   great    and   ever-increasing  multitude 
who  have  trusted  Him  and  proved  Him 
all-sufficient  ?     When  men  distrust  the 
providence  of  God  in  their  lives,  is  not 
their  sin   aggravated   by  the   abundant 
evidence    of   the    universality,  wisdom, 
and    beneficence    of    that   providence "? 


When  Christian  men  distrust  the  power, 
or  faithfulness,  or  goodness  of  God, 
does  not  His  gift  of  Christ  to  us  make 
the  sin  of  such  distrust  much  greater  1 
"  He  that  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but 
delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall 
He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things  1  "  The  sin  of  the  Israelites  in 
its  essential  principle  is  deplorably  com- 
mon to  day. 

II.  Divine  judgment.  **  Therefore 
the  Lord  heard  this,  and  was  wroth:  so 
a  fire  was  kindled  against  Jacob,  and 
anger  also  came  up  against  Israel.  He 
caused,"  <fec.  (vers.  26-31).  This  judg- 
ment against  Israel, — 

1.  Reveals  God's  observation  of  mavUs 
life.  *'  The  Lord  heard."  All  human 
speech  is  audible  to  the  Divine  ear. 
During  a  dark  period  in  the  history  of 
the  ancient  church,  the  few  faithful  and 
godly  men  "  spake  often  one  to  ant)ther  : 
and  the  Lord  hearkened.,  and  heard"  &c. 
He  hears  the  voice  of  prayer  and  of 
praise.  Words  of  murmuring,  com- 
plaint, and  unbelief  are  heard  and  regis- 
tered in  heaven.  The  hard  speeches 
and  awful  blasphemies  of  the  wicked 
find  their  way  to  the  ear  of  God.  God 
is  the  great  Auditor  of  human  utter- 
ances.    No  sound  escapes  His  ear. 

2.  Reveals  God  as  affected  by  maris 
life.  He  not  only  hears,  \ivX  feels  also. 
"  The  Lord  heard,  and  was  wroth  :  so  a 
fire  was  kindled  against  Jacob,  and  anger 
also  came  up  against  Israel."  God  is 
affected  by  man's  life.  Our  trudt  and 
praise  of  Him  are  gratifying  to  Him. 
Our  distrust  of  Him  and  our  murmuring 
against  Him  are  grievous  to  Him.  Men 
cannot  tempt  Him,  or  impiously  chal- 
lenge Him  to  display  His  power,  as  did 
the  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness,  without 
provoking  Him  to  anger.  Let  no  one 
deceive  himself  in  this  matter.  There 
is  in  God  a  principle  of  anger  which 
burns  with  unquenchable  fire  against 
evil.  While  God  is  God  His  wrath 
must  burn  against  sin.  Being  good 
and  righteous  He  must  punish  evil  doera 
unless  they  turn  and  repent. 

3.  Reveals  the  punishment  as  growing 
out  of  mavbs  sin.  ( 1 )  In  the  granting 
of  their  own  demands.  "  They  demanded 
meat  for  their  lust."     Theirs  was  not  an 

447 


PSALM  LXXTin, 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


argent  prayer,  which  submits  even  the 
most  eager  desires  to  His  will ;  but  an 
impious  demand  that  God  would  give 
tbem  meat  for  the  gratitication  of  their 
animal  appetite.  God  complied  with 
their  demand,  and  that  which  tiiey  had 
so  eagerly  coveted  proved  a  great  curse 
to  them.  The  flesh  which  they  had  de- 
manded occasioned  their  death.  Let  us 
beware  of  urging  selfish  desires  in  prayer 
to  God.  In  every  petition  that  we  pre- 
sent to  the  throne  of  grace  let  us  copy 
the  example  of  Him  who  in  His  most 
impassioned  prayer  said,  *'  Nevertheless, 
not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  Who 
has  not  become  acquainted  with  instances 
in  which  God  has  granted  the  passionate 
demand  that  has  been  made  to  Him, 
and  the  demander  has  lived  to  rue  the 
day  when  the  demand  was  made  and 
granted  ?  What  seems  to  us  unques- 
tionably desirable  and  good,  may  really 
be  a  thing  of  great  peril  and  evil  to  us. 
The  well-watered  plain  of  Sodom  nearly 
led  to  the  ruin  of  Lot.  That  sick  child 
over  whom  fond  parents  bend  in  anguiah, 
and  whose  life  they  demand  God  to 
spare,  may  perchance  grow  up,  and 
bring  down  their  grey  hairs  with  sorrow 
to  the  grave.  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine 
be  done."  (2)  In  their  gluttony.  When 
they  had  eaten  of  the  quails  which  God 
sent  into  the  camp,  "  and  were  well 
filled ;  they  were  not  estranged  from 
their  lust."  They  had  eaten  as  much, 
or  even  more,  than  their  physical  nature 
required  and  could  appropriate,  yet  they 
would  have  more.  The  drunkard  and  the 
glutton  are  never  satisfied.  And  by  the 
gluttony  with  which  they  devoured  the 
flesh  that  they  had  demanded,  '*  the 
wrath  of  God  came  upon  them,  and 
slew  the  fattest  of  them,  and  smote 
down  the  young  of  Israel." 

*•  Heaven   is   most  just,  and  of  our  pleasant 
vices 
Makes  instruments  to  scourge  us." 

— Shakespeare. 

'*  Whatsoever  a  mau  Boweth  that  ahall 


he  also  reap."  In  the  judgments  of 
God  against  sin  there  is  nothing  arbi- 
trary. A  sinner's  punishment  is  the 
natural  fruit  of  His  sin.  The  hell  of 
every  sinner  is  developed  out  of  his  own 
corrupt  heart.  Let  the  wicked  b© 
warned.  They  are  "  treasuring  up 
wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of 
God." 

4.  Reveals  the  punishment  as  being 
brought  about  by  the  forces  of  nature. 
*'  He  caused  an  east  wind  to  blow  in  the 
heavens  \  and  by  His  power  He  brought 
in  the  south  wind."  By  means  of  a 
south-east  wind,  God  brought  immense 
quantities  of  quails  into  the  camp  of 
Israel.  This  wind  is  so  spoken  of  as  to 
lead  us  to  conclude  that  it  was  miracu- 
lous. By  His  direct  agency,  He  caused 
it  to  blow  from  that  particular  quarter. 
All  the  powers  of  nature  are  under  His 
command.  He  can  employ  them  as  He 
pleases.  The  winds  are  His  couriers, 
carrying  messages  of  judgment  or  of 
mercy  to  men.  Again,  let  the  wicked 
be  warned.  You  are  not  only  preparing 
your  own  punishment,  but  God  may 
command  nature's  forces  to  aid  in  carry- 
ing out  His  judgment  upon  you.  You 
are  gathering  the  materials  for  your  own 
hell-fire,  and  God  may  despatch  the 
lightning-flash  which  shall  kindle  them 
into  a  blaze. 

Conclusion.  —  Let  us  especially 
ponder, — 1.  The  great  evil  of  unbelief. 
It  is  a  reflection  cast  upon  God ;  it 
grieves  Him,  <fec.  2.  The  peril  of  un- 
submissiveness  in  prayer.  "  He  gave 
them  their  request,  but  sent  leanness 
into  their  soul"  3.  The  terribleness  of 
the  Divine  anger.  "  The  wrath  of  the 
Lamb;  the  great  day  of  His  wrath  is 
come ;  and  who  shall  be  able  to  stand?" 
4.  The  certainty  of  Divine  retribution. 
The  only  way  by  which  we  may  escape 
hell  is  by  getting  rid  of  a  sinful  cha- 
racter. "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 


448 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  LXXTIU. 


Man's  Provocation  of  God,  and  God's  Patience  with  Man. 

(Verses  32-41.) 


L  Man's  provocation  of  God. 
'*  They  sinned  still,  and  believed  not 
for  His  wondrous  works."  In  the  verses 
before  us  the  Psalmist  mentions  two  chief 
features  of  their  provocation  of  God. 

1.  Their  persistence  in  evil.  They 
persevered     in     their     unbelief.         All 


have  used  every  means  for  their  salva- 
tion ;  yet  "  for  all  this  they  sinned  still." 
2.  Their  spurious  repentance.  When 
God's  severe  judgments  were  upon 
Israel  they  sought  Him  in  apparent 
humility  and  penitence.  But  their  peni- 
tence was  neither  deep  nor  sincere.    (1.) 


the    wondrous    works   which   they  had  Tlie  confessions  and  promises  which  they 

witnessed  failed    to    quicken    faith    in  made  to  God  were  untrue.     "They  did 

them.    .Notwithstanding  the  many  mira-  flatter  Him  with  their  mouth,  and  they 

cles  which  God  had   wrought  in  their  lied    unto    Him    with    their    tongues, 

sight,    they   still    doubted  His   power.  They   could    not    deceive   Him.       Yet 

Notwithstanding  His  great  and  constant  their  repentance  was  false.    Their  prayers 

kindness   to    them,   they    still  doubted  and  professions  made  in  affliction  were 

His  goodness.     It  was  thus  that  they  not  hearty,  but  were  extorted  by  suffer- 

"  limited  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."    They  ing.     And  the  promises  they  made  to 

regarded  His  willingness  and  ability  to  God  were  not  kept,  but  forgotten  when 

aid  them  as  bounded,     Man's  unbelief  the  pain  and  peril  were  removed.     (2.) 


ever  limits  and  dishonours  God.  They 
also  persevered  in  their  murmuring  and 
rebellious  spirit.  "  How  often  did  they 
rebel  in  the  wilderness,  and  grieve  Him 
in  the  desert*?"  When  any  inconven- 
ience   met    them,   or   any   difficulty   or 


Their  heart  ivas  not  really  turned  to 
God.  *'  Their  heart  was  not  right  with 
Him."  In  true  repentance  the  soul 
turns  from  sin  with  loathing  and  abhor- 
rence, and  seeks  God  with  humility, 
and  faith,  and  prayer.      It  was  not  the 


privation  confronted  them,  they  at  once  sin  that  they  shrank  from,  but  the  pen- 
fell  to  murmuring  against  Moses  and  alties  of  the  sin.  (3.)  Their  life  re- 
against  the  Lord.  Their  mean  and  un-  mained  unchanged.  "  Neither  were  they 
grateful  spirits  were  constantly  turning  stedfast  in  His  covenant."  The  pro- 
to  thoughts  and  feelings  of  rebellion  mises  made  in  affliction  were  speedily 
against  God.     And  this,  notwithstand-  broken.     Addison  says  that  repentance 


ing  all  God's  efforts  to  effect  their  moral 
reformation.  His  mercies  awoke  no 
feeling  of  humility,  gratitude,  or  trust 
in  them  ;  but  were  followed  by  exhibi- 
tions of  selfishness  and  unreasonable 
exaction.  His  judgments  produced  no 
lasting  improvement  in  their  character  ; 
for,  as  soon  as  they  were  removed,  the 
people  returned  to  their  old  courses. 
"  For  all  this  they  sinned  still."  What 
a  correct  representation  is  this  of  many 
sinners  to-day  !  God  has  enriched  them 
with  countless  blessings,  but  His  good- 
ness has  not  led  them  to  repentance. 
He  has  smitten  them  with  the  rod  of 
affliction,  but  they  have  not  turned  in 
penitence  to  Him.  He  has  stripped 
them  of  temporal  prosperity.  He  has 
taken  from  them  the  desire  of  their  eyes 
at  a  stroke,  He  has  shut  them  up  in 
loneliness  and  sorrow  of  heart,  yet  have 
they  not  turned  unto  Him  He  seems  to 
2t 


is  "  the  relinquishment  of  any  practice, 
from  the  conviction  that  it  has  offended 
God.  Sorrow,  fear,  and  anxiety  are 
properly  not  parts,  but  adjuncts  of  re- 
pentance ;  yet  they  are  too  closely  con- 
nected with  it  to  be  easily  separated." 
Shakspeare  defines  it  thus :  "Repentance 
is  heart's  sorrow,  and  a  clear  life  ensu- 
ing." But  the  Israelites  did  not  relin- 
quish their  sinful  practices.  A  "  clear 
life  "  did  not  follow  their  pretended  re- 
pentance. "  He  who  seeks  repentance 
for  the  past,  should  woo  the  angel  virtue 
for  the  future."  But  they  provoked 
God  by  their  frequent  rebellions.  Hia 
heart  was  grieved,  and  pained  by  their 
many  and  heinous  sins  against  Him. 

II.  God's  patience  with  man.  Thii 
was  manifested  in — 

1.  His  judgments  upon  them.  "Their 
days  did  He  consume  in  vanity,  and  their 
years  in  trouble.     He  slew  them.*'    Hi« 

44d 


fSALM  LXXVni. 


HOMlLETtO  OOMMENTAkT:  PSALMS. 


judgments  were  severe,  but  not  so  severe 
as  they  had  deserved.  They  were  not  suffi- 
ciently severe  to  restrain  the  people  from 
returning  to  their  evil  ways.  And  when 
they  cried  unto  him,  or  Moses  entreated 
Him  for  them,  He  withdrew  His  stroke 
away  from  them.  And  as  for  their 
bootless  wanderings  in  the  wilderness  — 
were  such  craven-hearted  creatures  the 
men  to  go  up  against  the  Canaanitcs 
and  conquer  them  1  Retaining,  as  they 
did,  the  spirit  of  slaves,  were  they  fit 
to  be  intrusted  with  freedom  and  inde- 
pendence in  a  land  of  their  own  ?  In 
His  very  judgments  God  manifested  His 
patience  and  mercy,  or,  instead  of  leav- 
ing them  to  live  out  their  life  in  the 
wilderness.  He  would  have  consumed 
them  in  His  anger  when  they  had  pro- 
voked Him  by  their  unbelief,  and  mur- 
murings,  and  rebellion. 

2.  Ilis  mercies  to  them.  "  He  being 
full  of  compassion  forgave  their  iniquity, 
and  destroyed  them  not ;  yea,  many  a 
time  turned  He  His  anger  away,  and 
did  not  stir  up  all  His  wrath."  In 
their  base  rebellions  He  did  not  destroy 
them.  Though  they  had  provoked  Him 
many  times,  yet  many  times  He  turned 
His  anger  away  from  them.  And  when 
He  did  visit  them  in  judgment.  He  did 
not  pour  the  full  flood  of  His  fury  upon 
them.  "  He  did  not  deal  with  them 
after  their  sins,  nor  rew^ard  them  accord- 
ing to  their  iniquities."  "  He  forgave 
their  iniquity."  He  not  only  removed 
the  dark  and  threatening  clouds  of  His 
wrath,  but  He  lifted  upon  them  the 
light  of  His  forgiving  and  favouring 
countenance.  How  graciously  and  com- 
pletely God  forgives!  ''As  far  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  He 
removed  our  transgressions  from  us." 
"  Thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  Thy 


back."  "  Thou  hast  cast  all  their  sins 
into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  "  He  will 
abundantly  pardon."  Thus  graciously 
and  patiently  God  has  dealt  with  us. 

3.  IJis  remembrance  of  them.  "  He 
remembered  that  they  were  but  flesh  ;  a 
wind  that  passeth  away,  and  cometh  not 
again."  He  remembered  their  frailty 
and  corruption.  "  They  were  flesh,"  and 
liable  to  su£fering  and  pain.  "  They 
were  flesh,"  and  exposed  to  temptation, 
and  prone  to  evil;  and,  therefore.  He 
had  long  patience  with  them.  He  spared 
them  when  He  would  otherwise  have 
destroyed  them.  He  had  compassion 
on  them.  He  remembered  their  evan- 
escence.  "  A  wind  that  passeth  away, 
and  cometh  not  again."  "  Life  is  a 
vapour,  that  appeareth  for  a  little  time, 
and  then  vanisheth  away." 

**  How  short  is  human  life  !  the  very  breath 
Which  frames   my  words,   accelerates  my 
death."  — If.  More, 

The  Lord  remembered  this,  and  spared 
them  when  their  sins  loudly  called  for 
their  destruction. 

This  subject  urges  its — 1.  Warning  to 
all  who  have  long  persisted  in  evil.  This 
generation  so  patiently  borne  with,  so 
mercifully  dealt  with,  at  last  found  their 
graves  in  the  wilderness.  Beware  lest 
through  further  persistence  in  evil  your 
life  ends  in  utter  failure  as  regards  all 
that  is  true  and  good.  2.  Encourage- 
ment even  to  themost  sinful  to  seek  the  Lord. 
His  long  patience  with  you  proclaims 
His  willingness  to  pardon  and  save  you. 
Turn  unto  Him  heartily  in  true  repent- 
ance (Isa.  Iv.  6,  7).  3.  Counsel  to  all. 
Let  us  not  frustrate  God's  gracious  deal- 
ings with  us.  By  judgments  and  by 
mercies  He  seeks  to  save  us.  Let  us 
trust  Him,  and  earnestly  enter  into  Hia 
gracious  designs  concerning  us. 


Man  under  Divine  Chastisement. 
{Verses  34-37.) 


I.  Man  under  Divine  chastisement 
Borely  smitten.  "  When  He  slew 
them."  See  the  case  before  us  in  this 
Psalm,  vers.  30  and  3L  Examples  are 
frequently  transpiring.  There  are  some 
who,  like  this  generation  of  Israelites, 
aeem  to  need  stroke  upon  stroke  of  the 
450 


rod 
5.) 


of    God.      (Comp.  Isa.  i.    4   and 


II.  Man  under  Divine  chastisement 
remembering  God.  "  They  remem- 
bered that  God  was  their  rock,  and  the 
Most  High,"  &c.  ^'Reflection  followed 
infliction."     They  remembered  God — 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXXVltt. 


1.  As  their'  Roclc.  Three  ideas  here: 
(1.)  Security.  "  He  shall  dwell  on  high  : 
His  place  of  defence  shall  be  the  muni- 
tions of  rocks. "  (2.)  Stability.  "  A  stone, 
a  tried  stone,  a  precious  corner  stone,  a 
sure  foundation."  (3.)  Shelter.  "  The 
shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary- 
land." 

2.  ^5  their  Redeemer.  He  had  re- 
deemed them  from  the  bondage  of 
Egypt ;  therefore  He  was  able  to  save 
them,  and  worthy  of  their  trust. 

III.  Man  under  Divine  chastisement 
seeking  God.  "  Then  they  sought  Him ; 
and  they  returned  and  inquired,"  &c. 

1.  "  They  returned"  implying  that 
they  had  departed  from  God.  Here  we 
have  the  reason  of  the  chastisement. 

2.  "  They  inquired  early  after  God." 
In  their  prosperity  they  had  forgotten 
God,  in  their  affliction  they  promptly 
inquired  after  Him. 

3.  "  They  sought  Him,"  Aforetime 
they  had  neglected  and  forsaken  Him ; 
now  they  search  for  Him  by  prayers  and 
sacrifices.  How  inexpressibly  mean. 
*'  Like  whipped  curs,  they  licked  their 
Master's  feet." 

IV.  Man  under  Divine  chastise- 
ment offering  to  God  unreal  repent- 
ance. ''  Nevertheless  they  did  flatter 
Him/'  tkc,  vers.  36  and  37.  Repent- 
ance begotten  of  terror  or  sutfering  dies 
when  the  terror  or  suffering  is  removed. 
Their  penitence  was  pretence.     *' Under 


the  pressure  of  heavy  judgments,  the 
loss  of  property,  the  loss  of  friends,  or 
the  failure  of  health,  men  become  serious, 
and  resolve  to  give  attention  to  religion. 
It  is  rarely  that  such  purposes  are 
founded  in  sincerity,  and  that  the  con- 
versions apparently  resulting  from  them 
are  true  conversions."  *'  The  devil  can- 
not be  whipped  out  of  human  nature, 
though  another  devil,  namely  hypocrisy, 
may  be  whipped  into  it."  *'  Good  re- 
solutions called  at  their  hearts  as  men 
do  at  inns  ;  they  tarried  awhile,  and  then 
took  their  leave."  Two  main  features 
of  true  repentance  were  wanting  to  them. 
1.  Change  of  heart.  "  Their  heart  was 
not  right  with  Him."  In  true  repent- 
ance sin  is  regarded  as  the  *'  abominable 
thing,"  and  the  sinner  turns  from  it  to 
God.  But  "  they  would  fain  be  rid  of 
their  sufi'erings,  but  did  not  care  to  be 
rid  of  their  sins." 

2.  Reformation  of  life.  "  Neither 
were  they  steadfast  in  His  covenant." 
The  truly  penitent  turn  "  from  evil  and 
do  good."  They  "  make  haste  and  delay 
not  to  keep  God's  commandments."  But 
the  Israelites  "  sinned  still."  How  awful 
to  offer  to  God  a  mockery  and  a  sham ! 

Conclusion. — 1.  Rememher  the  fate 
of  this  generation  of  the  Israelites,  and 
take  warning.  2.  Consider  the  mercy 
that  sought  to  save  them  both  by  favours 
and  by  judgments,  believe  in  it,  accept  it, 
and  be  saved. 


The  Exercise  of  the  Divine  Mercy. 


{Verses 

I.  In  holding  back  deserved  punish- 
ment. "  He  destroyed  them  not,"  &c. 
Notice — 

1.  Their  sins  against  God  were  very 
heinous.  Ingratitude,  though  His  good- 
ness to  them  was  very  great.  Un- 
belief, though  they  had  much  to  quicken 
and  strengthen  faith.  Rebellion,  though 
God's  rule  over  them  had  been  marked 
by  so  much  patience  and  generosity. 
2.  TJieir  sins  against  God  were  very 
numerous.  "  How  oft  did  they  provoke 
Him  in  the  wilderness,  and  grieve  Him  in 
the  desert."  Many  a  time  turned  He  His 
anger  away."  God's  forbearing  mercy 
was  manifested — (1.)  In   not  injiiciing 


38,  39.) 

the  judgments  threatened  (Deut.  ix. 
13-20;  Num.  xiv.  11-21).  (2.)  In  only 
partially  inflicting  the  judgments  threat- 
ened. As  in  the  case  of  the  judgment 
of  the  fiery  flying  serpents,  and  the  heal- 
ing of  the  diseased  and  dying  by  means  of 
the  brazen  serpent.  And  others.  How 
frequently  when  we  have  sinned  has  God 
graciously  turned  His  anger  away  from  us. 
II.  In  forgiving  great  iniquities. 
How  frequently  God  forgives.  "  Not 
until  seven  times ;  but  until  seventy 
times  seven."  "  He  aboundeth  in  for- 
giveness." How  completely  God  forgives. 
"  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be 

451 


PSALM  IXXVIII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


red  like  crimson,  they  sliall  be  as  wool." 
"  I,  I  am  He  tbat  blotteth  out  thy  trans- 
gressions for  mine  own  sake,  and  will  not 
remember  thy  sins."  He  not  only  re- 
moves His  condemnation  from  us,  but  lifts 
upon  us  the  light  of  His  countenance. 

III.  In  compassionating  human  frail- 
ties. **  He  remembered  that  they  were 
but  flesh,  a  wind," (fee.   He  remembered — 

1.  Man^s  tendmcy  to  sin.  *'  Flesh." 
Our  carnal  appetites  are  depraved.  By 
means  of  the  flesh  the  soul  is  frequently 
tempted  to  eviU 


2.  Mans  exposure  to  suffering.  ^^  Flesh,* 
The  body  is  subject  to  weariness,  infir- 
mity, disease,  pain,  death. 

3.  MavbS  brief  tenure  of  life,  **  A 
wind  that,"  &c.  (1.)  Unsubstantial. 
(2.)  Ever-moving.  (3.)  Never  return- 
ing. 

Conclusion. — In  the  great  mercy  of 
God  to  us,  behold — 

1.  The  grand  support  of  frail  hur 
manity.     (Ps.  ciii.  13-18.) 

2.  The  grand  hope  of  sinful  humanity ^ 
Ter.  38.    (Ps.  ciii.  3,  4,  8-12.) 


Man's  Life  upon  Earth. 


(  Verse 

"He  remembered  that  they  were  but 
flesh,"  (fee. 
I.    The  weakness  of   human  life. 

"  He  remembered  that  they  were  but 
flesh."     Man  is  here  regarded — 

1.  As  having  a  tendency  to  evil.  "  The 
flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit."  Ani- 
mal appetites  are  often  opposed  to 
spiritual  aspirations.  Animal  passions 
to  moral  principles. 

2.  ^5  being  subject  toweakness^afHiction^ 
and  pain.  There  is  much  of  physical 
suffering  in  human  life  upon  earth,  and  the 
mystery  and  pain  of  death  at  the  close. 

II.  The  unsubstantiality  of  human 
life.     *'  Wind." 

**  Life's  but  a  walking  shadow ;  a  poor  player, 
That  struts  and  frets  his  hour  upon  the  stage. 
And  then  is  heard  no  more :  it  is  a  tale 
Told  by  an  idiot,  full  of  sound  and  fury, 
Signifying  nothing. " — Shakespeare. 

Of  the  work  of  the  most  gifted  and 
laborious  of  men  how  little  result  re- 
mains !  Man  himself  passes  away,  leav- 
ing few  traces  behind  him. 

III.  The  impermanence  of  human 
life.     "  Fasseth  away.     This  is  true  of — 

1.  Individuals.  "It  is  appointed 
unto  men  once  to  die." 

2.  Generations.  "One  generation 
passeth  away,  and  another  generation 
cometh." 

"  Fast  to  thedriving  winds  the  marshalled  clouds 
Sweep  discontinuous  o'er  the  ethereal  plain  ! 
Another  still  upon  another  crowds, 
All  hastening  downwards  to  their  native  main. 
Thus  passes  o'er  through  varied  life's  career 
Man's  fleeting  age  ;  the  seaaons  as  they  fly 
Snatch  from  us  in  their  course,  year  after  year, 
Some  sweet  conuectioni  some  endearing  tie. 
452 


39.) 

The  parent,  ever  honoured,  ever  dear, 
Claims  from  the  filial  breast  the  pious  sigh ; 
A  brother's  urn  demands  the  kindred  tear, 
Andgentle  sorrows  gush  from  friendship's  eye. 
To-day  we  frolic  in  the  rosy  bloom 
Of  jocund  youth — the  morrow  knells  us  to 
the  tomb." 

3.  The  race  in  this  world.  The 
human  race  will  not  remain  on  this 
earth  for  ever.  The  earth  as  it  now  is 
will  not  continue  for  ever.  The  great 
drama  shall  be  played  out,  and  the 
theatre  shall  then  be  taken  down. 

IV.  The  irretrievahleness  of  human 
life.  "  Cometh  not  again."  *'  When  a 
few  years  are  come,  then  I  shall  go  the 
way  whence  I  shall  not  return."  Man 
passes  hence  to  "  the  undiscovered 
country,  from  whose  bourn  no  traveller 
returns."  What  an  argument  have  we 
here  for  the  prompt  and  faithful  dis- 
charge of  duty  !  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,  do  with  thy  might ;  for 
there  is  no,"  &c.  *'  I  must  work  the 
works  of  Him  that  sent  me  while,"  <fec 
There  is  no  coming  back  to  correct 
errors  or  to  discharge  neglected  duties, 
&c. 

V.  The  grand  distinction  of  human 
life.  It  is  remembered  by  God.  He  is 
interested  in  it.  1.  He  remembers  our 
frailties  and  sufferings,  and  pities  us, 
2.  Our  weakness,  and  succours  us.  3. 
Our  capabilities,  and  saves  us.  Here  ii 
the  glory  of  human  life.  God  is  con- 
cerned in  it.  He  is  working  in  it  and 
for  it.     Through  Him  man  shall 

"  Re-rise  from  ruin, 
High,  holy,  happy,  stainless  as  a  star. 
Imperishable  as  eternity." 


HOMILETIC  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :  PSA  LMS. 


PSALM  LXXVIll. 


The  Instruments  and  Methods  of  the  Divine  JucaMENTji. 


(  Verses 

In  this  paragraph  the  Psalmist  speaks 
of  the  plagues  with  which  God  visited 
Egypt,  and  by  means  of  \vhich  Pharaoh 
and  his  people  were  humbled,  and  the 
Israelites  were  delivered  from  bondage. 
He  does  not  mention  all  the  plagues, 
and  those  which  he  does  mention  are 
not  named  in  the  order  of  their  oc- 
currence. The  subject  is  introduced 
here  as  affording  another  illustration  of 
the  great  sinfulness  of  the  unbelief  and 
rebelliousness  of  the  Hebrews. 

I.  The  instruments  by  which  Divine 
judgments  are  inflicted. 

1.  He  uses  their  famous  river  as  an 
instrument  of  His  judgments.  With 
tlieni  the  river  was  the  great  means  of 
life,  and  a  thing  in  which  they  boasted 
themselves ;  but  God  turned  all  its 
waters  into  blood.  When  purified  from 
slime,  those  waters  were  most  delicious 
drink ;  but  now  they  are  most  loath- 
some even  to  look  upon.  In  this  case, 
the  great  glory  of  a  people  was  turned 
by  God  into  their  great  curse.  He 
can  make  our  choicest  treasures  His 
instruments  to  scourge  us  for  our 
sins. 

2.  He  uses  some  most  despicable  crea- 
tures  as  instruments  of  His  judgments. 
*' Flies,  frogs,  caterpillars,  locusts."  The 
great  Pharaoh,  with  his  princes  and 
nobles,  were  greatly  afflicted  and  tor- 
mented by  these  insignificant  creatures. 
God  can  make  use  of  the  weakest  and 
meanest  creatures  to  bring  down  the 
pride  of  the  loftiest  princes.  What  they 
are  deficient  in  strength,  He  makes  up 
by  increasing  their  numbers.  Terrible 
plagues  they  were.  No  armour  could 
ward  off  the  flies.  The  frogs  came  in  such 
slioals  as  to  defy  all  repressive  measures. 
While  caterpillars  and  locusts  came  in 
dense  clouds,  devouring  every  green 
thing. 

3.  He  uses  the  elements  of  nature 
as  instruments  of  His  judgrnents. 
"Hail,  frost,  lightnings."  The  laws  and 
forces  of  nature  bow  loyally  to  the  Lord. 
The  God  of  providence  is  the  God  of 
nature  also,  and  when  He  pleases  He 


42-53.) 

can  use  nature^s  elements  and  forces  for 
the  carrying  out  of  His  plans.  In  this 
case,  He  sends  forth  the  hail  as  his 
scourge.  The  frost  is  the  minister  of 
His  wrath.  The  lightnings  are  the 
executioners  of  His  judgments. 

4.  He  uses  angels  as  instruments  of 
His  judgments.  By  the  term  "  evil 
angels  "  we  are  to  understand  not  that 
the  angels  spoken  of  were  themselves 
wicked,  but  angels  who  were  used  by 
God  for  bringing  evil  or  calamity  upon 
the  wicked.  The  reference  is  to  the 
angel,  or  angels,  who  smote  with  death 
all  the  first-born  of  the  Egyptians.  All 
holy  angels  come  and  go  at  God's  com- 
mand. "  Ancrels  that  excel  in  strength, 
do  His  commandments,  hearkening  unto 
the  voice  of  His  word."  He  sends  them 
forth  to  succour  and  deliver  the  right- 
eous, or  to  smite  and  destroy  the  wicked, 
and  they  hasten  to  do  His  bidding. 
Thus  we  see  that  God  can  use  any  and 
all  of  His  creatures  as  instruments  to 
carry  out  His  judgments,  if  He  please 
to  do  so.  He  can  arm  all  nature, — air, 
earth,  fire,  water — to  fight  against  those 
who  refuse  to  submit  to  Him.  He  can 
employ  all  ranks  of  creatures,  from  the 
tiny  insect  of  an  hour  to  the  august 
**  angel  standing  in  the  sun,"  as  mes- 
sengers of  His  wrath.  He  can  arm  the 
universe  to  fight  against  the  wicked. 

II.  The  method  according  to  which 
Divine  judgments  are  inflicted.  Two 
features  of  the  Divine  method  of  ad- 
ministering judgment  stand  prominently 
forth  here. 

1.  Gradualness  in  the  teverity  of  the 
judgments.  Pharaoh  must  suffer,  but 
God  will  spare  him  as  much  as  possible. 
The  sternest  judgments  are  reserved  to 
the  last,  so  that  if  the  proud  monarch 
will  obey  the  commands  of  God  he  may 
escape  their  infliction.  Mark  the  grada- 
tion in  the  severity  of  these  judgments. 
First,  they  suffer  privation  and  annoy- 
ance by  reason  of  the  water  being  turned 
into  blood,  and  the  plague  of  frogs. 
Then  they  suffer  the  irritation  and  the 
severe  pain  of  body  arising  from  the 

453 


FSALM  LXXYin. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


plague  of  flies  and  that  of  boils.  Then 
they  suffer  the  loss  and  disappointment 
of  seeing  the  fruit  of  their  labours  con- 
sumed by  caterpillars  and  locusts.  They 
also  saw  the  trees  of  their  fields  and 
vineyards  destroyed  by  hail,  and  their 
flocks  and  herds  first  afflicted  with  a 
grievous  murrain,  and  afterwards  de- 
stroyed by  hail  and  lightning.  But  still 
God  has  heavier  and  more  terrible  judg- 
ments in  store.  After  every  plague 
there  is  a  pause  in  the  storm  of  the 
Divine  anger  to  ascertain  if  Pharaoh 
will  repent  and  obey  God.  God  has  no 
pleasure  in  smiting  him.  But  when  the 
former  plagues  have  failed  to  produce 
any  lasting  and  salutary  impression  upon 
the  king,  God  prepares  to  inflict  the 
severest  stroke  of  all,  to  *'  cast  upon 
them  the  fierceness  of  His  anger,  wrath, 
and  indignation,  and  trouble,  by  send- 
ing "  His  angels  to  destroy  all  the  first- 
born of  the  land  of  Egypt.  And  in  one 
dread  night  all  tlie  first-born  of  the  land 
were  slain,  "  from  the  first-born  of 
Pharaoh  that  sat  on  his  throne,  unto  the 
first-born  of  the  captive  that  was  in  the 
dungeon ;  and  all  the  first-born  of 
cattle."  The  gradualness  with  which 
God  inflicts  His  judgments  is  a  proof 
that  even  in  w  ratli  He  remembers  mercy. 
It  should  also  act  as  a  warning  to  the 
impenitent  not  to  provoke  God  to  do 
His  worst.  He  has  sharper  swords  in 
His  armoury  than  He  has  as  yet  drawn 
against  you. 

2.  The  exemption  of  the  Israelites 
from  the  Judgments.  When  the  Egyp- 
tians suffered  the  Lord  separated  the 
Israelites  from  them.  From  the  common 
suft'erings  and  trials  of  life  the  people  of 
God  are  not  exempted ;  but  from  the 
judgments  of  God  they  are  exempted. 
When  the  world  was  destroyed  by  the 
flood,  Noah  and  his  family  were  saved. 
Before  the  fiery  deluge  consumed  the 
cities  of  the  plain,  Lot  was  rescued 
from  them.     In  the  terrible  siege  and 


destruction  of  Jerusalem  it  is  not  known 
that  any  Christian  perished.  So  will  it 
be  in  the  final  judgment. 

III.  The  object  for  which  the 
Divine  judgments  are  inflicted.  The 
object  of  the  judgments  inflicted  on 
Egypt  was,  at  least,  threefold — 

1.  The  humbling  of  the  proud  Pharaoh 
and  his  advisers. 

2.  The  emancipation  of  Israel  from 
their  captivity,  &c. 

3.  The  carrying  out  of  His  own  great 
plan.  The  great  plan  of  God,  a  small 
portion  of  which  was  developed  by 
means  of  these  judgments,  stretches  far 
beyond  the  Egyptians  and  the  Israelites. 
It  embraces  all  ages  and  all  peoples. 
The  Hebrews  occupy  a  most  important 
position  in  that  plan.  "  Of  whom  as 
concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came."  God 
makes  all  events  contribute  to  the 
development  of  His  own  wise,  bene- 
volent, and  glorious  purposes. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  manifold 
instruments  of  Divine  judgments  lead  the 
stout-hearted  sinner  to  pause  and  con- 
sider. "  If  He  will  contend  with  him, 
he  cannot  answer  Him  one  of  a  thou- 
sand. He  is  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty 
in  strength  :  who  hath  hardened  him- 
self against  Him  and  hath  prospered  ? " 
2.  Let  the  method  of  Divine  judgments^ 
as  here  exhibited,  strengthen  our  confidence 
in  the  righteousness  and  mercy  of  God. 
He  is  merciful  to  tyrants  such  as 
Pharaoh.  He  is  righteous  and  will  not 
in  judgment  "  destroy  the  righteous 
with  the  wicked."  3.  Let  us  mark  well 
the  assurance  which  this  subject  gives  us 
of  the  certainty  of  the  accomplishment  of 
the  Divine  purposes.  He  has  engines  of 
judgment  wherewith  to  crush  incorrigible 
rebels.  He  controls  all  events  for  the 
furtherance  of  his  own  vast  and  sublime 
designs.  In  the  end  evil  shall  be  en- 
gulfed as  in  ocean's  depths,  and  the 
exultant  praise  of  the  good  shall  resound 
throughout  the  universe. 


The  Withdrawal  of  the  Divine  Presence. 
{Verses  54-64.) 


In  this  portion  of  the  Psalm,  as  in  the 
previous  portions,  we  have  brought  be- 
454 


fore  us  the  sad  sins  of  the  Hebrews,  and 
the  great  goodness  of  God  in  His  deal- 


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


nULM  LXXVIII. 


ings  with  them  both  of  mercy  and  of 
judgment.  We  may  profitably  group 
the  teachings  of  the  paragraph  round 
verses  60  and  61,  as  a  centre,  and  take 
as  our  subject,  The  withdrawal  of  tJie 
Divine  presence.  When  the  Israelites 
had  entered  upon  the  possession  of 
Canaan,  they  set  up  the  tabernacle  at 
Shiloh,  where  it  remained  during  the 
period  of  the  Judges.  During  the  ad- 
ministration of  Eli,  who  was  at  once 
high  priest  and  judge,  the  moral  condi- 
tion of  Israel  grew  extremely  evil.  His 
two  sons,  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  were 
notorious  for  their  wickedness.  "  The 
war  between  the  Philistines  and  Israelites 
broke  out  anew.  A  bloody  battle  was 
fought  at  Aphek,  in  which  the  Israelites 
were  totally  defeated.  They  determined 
to  resort  to  those  means  of  conquest 
which  had  proved  irresistible  under  the 
direction  of  Joshua.  They  sent  to 
Sliiloh  for  the  Ark,  and  the  Ark  was 
brought  forth  from  its  holy  place,  and 
was  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  camp  of 
Israel.  But  the  days  were  gone  when 
the  rivers  dried  up,  and  the  walls  of 
cities  fell  down,  and  the  enemy  fled  at 
once,  before  the  symbol  of  the  presence 
of  Israel's  God.  The  measure  was  un- 
authorised by  the  Divine  command.  .  .  . 
The  Israelites  fought  with  desperate  but 
unavailing  resolution — the  iron  chariots 
of  the  Philistines  triumphed.  Thirty 
thousand  Israelites  perished,  and  the 
Ark  of  God  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
uncircumcised — the  guilty  sons  of  Eli 
were  slain  in  its  defence.  The  aged 
high  priest  sat  by  the  wayside  in  dread- 
ful anxiety  for  the  fate  of  tlie  Ark.  A 
messenger  rushed  in,  bearing  the  sad 
intelligence;  a  wild  cry  ran  through  the 
whole  city ;  the  blind  old  man,  now 
ninety-eight  years  of  age,  fell  from  his 
Beat,  broke  his  neck,  and  died."  {Vide 
1  Sam.  iv.)  After  seven  months  the 
Philistines  sent  back  the  Ark,  which 
was  placed  successively  at  Nob  and  at 
Gibeon,  and  finally  by  David  on  Mount 
Zion.  In  our  text  we  are  taught  that 
it  was  in  consequence  of  the  sins  of  the 
people  that  the  Ark  was  removed  for 
ever  from  Shiloh,  in  the  tribe  of 
Ephraim,  and  was  at  length  placed  upon 
Mount   Zion,    in    the    tribe   of    Judah. 


When  the  Ark  was  removed  by  the 
Philistines  the  Israelites  felt  that  God 
had  abandoned  them,  and  that  their 
independence  and  glory  had  departed 
for  ever. 

I.  The  withdrawal  of  the  Divine 
presence  is  invariably  preceded  by 
many  and  aggravated  sins. 

1.  IVie  sins  of  Israel  were  many. 
They  were  guilty  of  oft-repeated  acts  of 
disobedience.  "  They  kept  not  His  testi- 
monies." As  they  had  tempted  and 
provoked  God  in  the  wilderness,  so  also 
did  they  in  Canaan  under  the  judges. 
They  were  guilty  of  unfaithfulness  to 
God.  They  turned  away  from  God  in 
their  hearts  and  in  their  lives,  no  reli- 
ance was  to  be  placed  upon  them,  they 
were  untrue  even  in  their  most  solemn 
engagements.  As  a  treacherous  bow  in 
the  hands  of  the  archer  fails  of  its  true 
aim  and  may  occasion  disaster,  so  Lad 
they  proved  in  relation  to  God  utterly 
untrustworthy.  They  were  guilty  of 
idolatry.  Imitating  the  idolatrous 
Canaanites,  they  had  erected  altars  on 
high  places,  and  bowed  down  to  graven 
images.  They  committed  spiritual 
adultery,  and  so  moved  God  to  jealousy. 
Can  we  wonder  that  God  withdrew  from 
them  1  That  they,  whom  He  had  chosen 
as  His  own  people,  and  called  to  be  the 
witnesses  to  the  nations  of  His  essential 
unity,  and  blessed  above  all  others, — 
that  they  should  depart  from  Him  unto 
idols  is  surely  a  trumpet-call  for  the 
display  of  His  signal  displeasure. 

2.  The  sins  of  Israel  were  aggravated. 
To  estimate  their  sin  aright  we  must 
view  it  in  the  light  of  His  dealings  with 
them.  Look  at  their  disobedience  in 
the  light  of  His  great  goodness  to  them, 
their  unfaithfulness  in  the  light  of  His 
constant  fidelity,  their  idolatry  in  the 
light  of  His  non-abandonment  of  them 
notwithstanding  their  sins,  and  you  will 
be  able  to  appreciate  the  greatness  of 
their  wickedness  which  led  to  His  with- 
drawal from  their  midst.  "  God  never 
leaves  us  till  we  leave  Him,  never  with- 
draws till  we  have  driven  Him  from  us." 
See  this  in  the  case  of  Saul,  the  king  of 
Israel.  Not  until  he  had  grieved  God 
by  repeated  acts  of  disobedience  did  God 
forsake  him.     See  also  the  case  of  the 

455 


MALMLXXTIU. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


Jews.  Notwithstanding  extreme  provo- 
cation God  continued  to  own  and  bless 
them,  until  they  had  filled  up  the 
measure  of  their  iniquity  by  rejecting 
and  crucifying  Him,  in  the  person  of 
His  Son.  And  even  then  He  rejected 
them  with  unutterable  sorrow  and  bitter 
tears.  Thus  He  deals  now  with 
individuals.  He  does  not  desert  the 
temple  of  the  human  soul  until  He  is 
driven  thence  by  inexpugnable  depravity. 
He  never  says  of  any  one,  *'let  him 
alone,"  unless  he  is  hopelessly  '*  joined 
unto  his  idols."  Thus  He  deals  with 
churches  also.  Persistent  infidelity  to 
duty,  truth,  and  God,  will  cause  Him  to 
depart  from  any  church,  leaving  it  in 
the  darkness  of  error  and  evil  to  sink 
into  dreary  nothingness. 

II.  The  withdrawal  of  the  Divine 
presence  is  invariably  succeeded  by 
many  and  terrible  calamities.  In  the 
case  of  Israel  it  was  followed  by — 

1.  The  loss  of  power  and  honour. 
The  Ark  is  spoken  of  by  the  Psalmist  as 
the  strength  and  glory,  or  ornament  of 
God.  On  many  occasions  it  had  been  a 
defence  and  an  inspiration  to  Israel. 
It  was  the  visible  symbol  of  their  dis- 
tinction and  glory  as  the  chosen  people 
of  God,  among  whom  He  dwelt.  When 
it  was  captured  by  their  enemies,  their 
inspiration  and  fortitude  were  gone,  and 
their  glory  had  suffered  a  dreary  eclipse. 
Let  God  abandon  a  man,  and  all  moral 
power,  all  spiritual  dignity  are  gone.  Let 
Him  withdraw  from  a  church,  and,  what- 
ever else  may  remain,  the  spiritual  life, 
strength,  and  glory  have  all  passed 
away. 

2.  Be/eat  and  slaughter  in  battle.  In 
the  battle  of  Aphek  thirty  thousand 
Israelites  were  slain.  Forsaken  by  God, 
they  could  not  stand  before  their  ene- 
mies. In  our  personal  spiritual  conflicts 
we  are  strong  only  as  we  are  animated 
by  God.  If  He  withdraw  from  us  we 
shall  f  dl  an  easy  victim  to  our  enemies. 
In  the  war  of  the  Church  against  igno- 
rance and  sin  she  is  strong  in  exact  pro- 
portion as  God  is  with  her.  If  He 
desert  her,  though  all  her  arrangements 
and  offices  are  perfect  in  other  respects, 
her  victorious  life  and  power  are  com- 
pletely gone. 

456 


3.    Great   social  mitery,     "The  fire 
consumed  their  young  men,  and  their 
maidens  were  not  given  to  marriage," 
<fec.  The  young  men  were  slain  in  battle* 
The  maidens  were  thus  doomed  to  in- 
voluntary maidenhood.     They  *' were  not 
praised  "  in  the  songs  which  were  usually 
sung  at  marriage  celebrations.     "  Their 
priests  fell  by  the  sword."     The  refer- 
ence  is   to    Hophni  and  Phinehas,  who 
were  sinners  before  the  Lord  exceedingly, 
and  who   were   out   of  place  amid  the 
ferocity   and   carnage    of  a   battle-field. 
When  the  priests  of  God  were  slain  it 
was  regarded  as  a  most  severe  calamity. 
"And  their  widows  made  no  lamenta- 
tions."    Take  one  case  in  point.     When 
the  wife  of  Phinehas  heard  the  issue  of 
the  battle  of  Aphek,  she   "was  seized 
with   the    pains   of   premature   labour ; 
the  women  around  her  endeavoured  to 
console  her  with   the  intelligence  that 
she  had  borne  a  male  child  :  she  paid 
no  attention  to   their  words,  and  only 
uttered  a  passionate  exclamation.     The 
pride  and  exultation  of  maternal  tender- 
ness, the  grief  for  her  father-in-law  and 
her  husband,  were  absorbed  in  a  deeper 
feeling.     She  said.  The  Ark  of  God  is 
taken;  and  she  called  her  child  Ichabod, 
the  glory  is  departed  from  Israel."    Sor- 
rows  for  personal  loss  were  swallowed 
up  by  the  great  sorrow  for  the  national 
loss  and  dishonour.     In  verses  63  and 
64  we  thus  trace  the  outlines  of  a  pic- 
ture of  extreme  social  misery.     Let  God 
withdraw  from  a  people,  and  the  greatest 
social  wretchedness  must  supervene. 

Brothers,  heed  well  the  message  of 
this  subject  to  you  personally.  "  Grieve 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  You  have 
grieved  Him  much  already.  Then  pray 
to  Him  at  once — 

**  Stay,  thou  insulted  Spirit,  stay, 

Though  I  have  done  Thee  such  despite. 
Nor  cast  the  sinner  quite  away, 
Nor  take  Thine  everlasting  flight." 

~G.  Wesley. 

Let  Christian  churches  also  heed  the 
warning  voice.  *'  Trust  ye  not  in  lying 
words  saying,  The  temple  of  the  Lord, 
The  temple  of  the  Lord,  The  temple  of 
the  Lord  are  these.  .  .  .  But  go  ye  now 
into  my  place  which  was  in  Shiloh, 
where  I  set  my  name  at  the  first,  and 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


PSALH  LXZniL 


see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness  not  for  this  people,  neither  lift  up  cry 
of  my  people  Israel."  "Kepent,"  ye  nor  prayer  for  them,  neither  make  in- 
backsliding  churches,  "and  do  your  first  tercession  to  Me;  for  I  will  not  hear 
works,"  or  God  may  say  of  you,  '*  Pray  thee." 


Illustrations  of  the  Sovereignty  of  God. 
(Verses  65-72.) 


In  these  verses  God  in  His  sove- 
reignty is  represented  as — 

I.  Arousing  Himself  to  interpose  in 
human  affairs.  "  Then  the  Lord 
awaked  as  one  out  of  sleep,  like  a 
mighty  man  that  shouteth  by  reason  of 
wine.     And  He  smote,"  (fee.     He  arose, 

1.  To  smite  His  enemies.  He  had 
made  use  of  the  Philistines  to  punish 
His  people  for  their  sins ;  but  they 
were  not  His  servants.  Their  pride  and 
power  were  used  by  Him  for  the  execu- 
tion of  His  purposes,  but  they  wist  not 
what  they  did.  And  now  He  arises  for 
their  confusion.  By  raising  up  and 
sending  forth  against  them  His  servant 
David  He  rebuked  their  insolence, 
curbed  their  power,  and  in  due  time 
drove  them  from  every  portion  of  the 
land  of  Canaan.  Nay,  more,  '*  He  put 
them  to  a  perpetual  reproach  ;  "  for,  as 
Hengstenberg  remarks,  "  The  eternal 
shame  is  in  accordance  with  the  history. 
The  Philistines  went  downward  step  by 
step,  till  they  disappeared  from  the 
scene  altogether." 

2.  To  adjust  the  affairs  of  His  people. 
Though  He  withdrew  from  them  for  a 
season,  He  had  not  cast  them  off  for 
ever.  He  again  conies  to  their  help,  in 
the  manner  indicated  in  the  text,  and 
which  we  shall  shortly  consider.  In  the 
representation  which  the  Psalmist  gives 
of  God  arousing  Himself,  as  a  mighty 
man  refreshed  by  sleep  and  wine,  and 
shouting  for  the  battle,  there  is  much 
that  is  anthropomorphical  and  poetical. 
God  never  sleeps.  His  control  of  human 
afffiirs  is  continuous.  His  sovereign 
purposes  are  ever  being  developed  under 
His  superintendence.  His  activity  is 
incessant.  But  there  are  periods  in 
which  His  hand  is  not  manifest  in 
human  affairs,  in  which  He  seems 
regardless  of  the  interests  of  His  people, 
as  though  He  slept  and  knew  not  the 


state  of  those  affairs.  His  sovereignty 
is  calm,  eternal,  unchangeal)le.  But  its 
continuity  and  immutability  of  opera- 
tion is  not  fully  manifest  to  us.  Thus, 
for  a  time,  He  appeared  to  resign  His 
control  of  the  affairs  of  Israel  and  to 
surrender  them  to  their  enemies.  Now 
that  His  hand  is  again  manifest,  the 
poet  pictures  Him  as  a  mighty  warrior 
arousing  from  slumber  and  shouting 
with  joy  to  do  battle  with  His  foes. 

II.  Rejecting  men  from  the  posses- 
sion of  privileges.  "He  refused  the 
tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and  chose  not  the 
tribe  of  Ephraim."  He  deposed  Eph- 
raim  from  the  priority  and  supremacy 
which  that  tribe  had  hitherto  held.  Why 
did  He  so  ?  This  Psalm  is  a  complete 
answer  to  the  inquiry.  Why,  except 
that  they  were  no  longer  worthy  of 
holding  that  position ;  nay,  that  they 
were  utterly  unworthy.  Our  Lord,  in 
many  instances,  represents  God  as  re- 
jecting men,  and  we  believe  that  in  every 
instance  the  rejection  is  because  of  some 
fatal  flaw  in  the  character  of  the  men 
rejected.  He  delights  not  in  rejecting 
men,  but  in  accepting  them. 

III.  Selecting  men  to  the  posses- 
sion of  privileges  and  the  perform- 
ance of  duties.  "He  chose  the  tribe 
of  Judah,"  (fee. 

1.  He  selected  Judah  to  receive  the 
sanctuary.  Ephraim  had  been  tried,  and 
had  been  found  sadly  wanting.  Now  the 
Lord  will  try  Judah.  So  that  tribe  is 
raised  to  precedence.  Within  its  territory 
on  Mount  Zion  the  sanctuary  was  estab- 
lished, and  the  seat  of  government 
placed  ;  and  from  its  people  King  David 
was  chosen.  And  this  was  in  accordance 
with  God's  sovereign  purposes.  The 
supremacy  of  Judah  had  been  predicted 
by  Jacob  long  before  (Gen.  xlix.  8-10). 
And  from  that  tribe  the  Messiah  was  to 
come  forth,     God  still  selects  men  to  be 

467 


WALM  LXXVIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


the  recipients  of  privileges.  Some  enter 
upon  the  work  of  life  with  countless 
advantages,  while  others  enter  upon  that 
work  burdened  and  straitened  by  reason 
of  disadvantages.  He  still  selects 
nations  to  privileges,  and  honours,  and 
responsibilities, 

2.  He  selected  David  to  become  the 
sovereign.  "He  chose  David  also  His 
servant,  and  took  him  from  the  sheep- 
folds,''  (fee.  Here  is  a  remarkable  ex- 
ample of  Divine  sovereignty.  (1.)  God 
chooses  a  man  of  humble  position  to  fill 
the  most  exalted  position.  *'  He  took 
him  from  the  sheepfolds,"  (fee.  David 
was  not  of  royal  descent,  nor  was  he 
selected  because  of  his  acquaintance  with 
king's  courts,  or  with  the  arts  of  king- 
craft. "  He  was  bred  not  a  scholar,  not 
a  soldier,  but  a  shepherd."  He  was 
chosen  not  for  his  appearance  or  posi- 
tion, but  for  his  ability  and  character. 
"  Man  looketh  on  the  outward  appear- 
ance, but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart." 
(2.)  God  chooses  a  man  of  eminent  fit- 
ness for  the  most  exalted  position.  David 
was  a  man  of  singularly  great  ability. 
He  was  remarkable  for  strength,  courage, 
endurance,  tact,  ruling  faculty,  <fec.  He 
was  distinguished  as  a  shepherd,  warrior, 
musician,  poet,  and  king.  He  was  a 
man  of  approved  faithfulness.  As  a 
shepherd  he  was  no  hireling.  He  had 
risked  his  own  life  to  defend  that  of 
some  members  of  his  flock.  He  seems 
to  have  been  particularly  careful  of 
"  those  that  were  with  young."  Having 
been  faithful  in  his  lowly  sphere,  God 
raised  him  to  the  honours  and  responsi- 
bilities of  the  most  lofty  sphere.  He 
was  a  man  of  noble  character.  He  is 
eminent  for  gentleness,  generosity,  and 
self-sacrifice  ;  he  was  profoundly  religi- 
ous ;  but  for  the  one  black  and  painful 
exception,  he  lived  as  a  man  who  had 
set  God  always  before  him  ;  he  was  a 
•  man  after  God's  own  heart.  Thus  in 
His  sovereignty  God  selected  the  fittest 
instrument  for  the  great  work.  He  can 
use  the  most  incompetent  instrument  for 
the  most  important  task.  But  such  is 
not  His  rule  of  action.  In  calling  men 
to  important  posts.  He  selects  for  each 
post  him  who  is  most  adapted  for  it. 
God's  sovereignty  is  a  thing  of  infinite 
458 


wisdom.  He  does  not  choose  the  most 
ignorant  and  incapable  man  for  the 
greatest  mission  (as  some  men  seem  to 
hold  and  certainly  preach),  but  the 
greatest  and  godliest.  He  can  employ 
the  feeblest  intelligence.  And  He  calls 
the  man  of  scholarship,  and  genius, 
and  heroism,  and  faith,  and  power,  to 
consecrate  himself  thoroughly  to  His 
service. 

IV.  Establishing  a  beneficent  insti- 
tution. **  He  built  His  sanctuary  like 
high,"  (fee.  We  have  here  the  ideas  of 
prominence  and  stability.  "  Palaces  "  is 
supplied  by  the  translators.  The  taber- 
nacle, and  afterwards  the  temple,  was 
the  most  conspicuous  and  important 
thing  in  the  land.  Its  services  appealed 
to  all  that  was  tender,  true,  and  noble 
in  their  nature  ;  its  ministrations  were 
fitted  to  help  them  to  attain  to  strength 
and  beauty  of  character.  Those  insti- 
tutions which  contribute  to  our  right 
spiritual  development  are  of  all  others 
the  most  valuable  and  beneficent.  God 
established  His  sanctuary  there.  It  was 
not  to  be  removed  as  it  was  from  Shiloh. 
It  was  to  be  a  permanent  institution, 
and  permanent  there.  So  it  continued. 
The  tabernacle  gave  place  to  its  magni- 
ficent successor  the  temple,  which  re- 
mained with  varying  fortunes  until  its 
mission  was  accomplished,  and  then  the 
local  Jewish  temple  made  way  for  the 
universal  Christian  Church. 

V.  Resulting  in  human  advantage. 
The  reign  of  the  divinely  elected  king 
was  an  inestimable  benefit  to  Israel. 
*'  He  fed  them  according  to  the  integrity 
of  His  heart ;  and  guided  them  by  the 
skilfulness  of  His  hands."  His  admi- 
nistration was  pure  and  upright,  wise 
and  beneficent.  During  his  reign  the 
kingdom  attained  to  a  rank  among 
nations  and  to  a  height  of  prosperity 
altogether  unknown,  if  not  unimagined, 
hitherto.  In  choosing  a  king  for  them, 
God's  sovereignty  was  the  people's  pros- 
perity. 

From  this  rapid  glance  at  these  illus- 
trations of  the  sovereignty  of  God,  we 
learn — 1.  That  God's  sovereignty  is  not 
capriciously  or  unreasonably  arbitrary^ 
but  a  thing  of  the  highest  reason  and 
wisdom.       2.  God's   sovereignty   is   not 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FSALH  LXXIX. 


weak  and  changefuJ,,  hut  eternally  and 
immutably  great  and'  good.  3.  God's 
sovereignty  is  not  tyrannical,  but  in  per- 
fect accordance  with  man's  entire  moral 
freedom.  4.  God's  sovereignty  is  not 
malevolent  or  maleficent^  hut  benevolent 


and  beneficent  in  the  highest  degree.  In 
one  word,  it  is  the  sovereignty  of  GOD, 
the  supremely  Wise  and  Good.  **  For 
of  Him,  and  through  Him,  and  to  Him, 
are  all  things:  to  whom  be  glory  for 
ever.     Amen." 


The  Calling  op  David. 
{Verses  10,  71.) 


I.  David's  Calling.  Two  questions 
present  themselves.  1.  IIow  was  David's 
shepherd  life  an  unconscious  preparation 
for  his  calling?  and  2.  Hoio  did  the  Divine 
summons,  when  it  came,  fit  him  for  his 
mighty  destiny  ?  Observe — He  was  sent 
back  to  his  flocks.  Nothing  could  train 
hiin  more  perfectly  than  that  waiting. 
Two  great  convictions  awakened  in  him 
then  that  formed  in  him   elements  of 


strength.  (1.)  The  belief  in  a  Divine 
leader  (see  Psalm  xxiii.)  (2.)  The  be- 
lief in  a  Divine  choice. 

II.  Its  modern  lessons.  1.  There  is 
a  Divine  plan  in  every  life.  2.  There  is 
a  Divine  vocation  for  every  man.  3. 
There  is  a  Divine  Shepherd  for  every 
man. — E.  L.  Hull,  in  The  Treasury  of 
David, 


PSALM    LXXIX. 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — "A  Psalm  of  Asaph.'''     See  Introduction  to  Psalm  Ixxiv. 
Occasion.  —  This  Psalm  is  closely  related  to  the  Ixxivth,  and  both  most  probably  refer  to 
the  devastation  and  desecration  wrought  by  the  Chaldeans. 

A  Sorrowful  Complaint,  an  Earnest  Prayer,  and  a  Devout 

Resolution. 


I.  A    sorrowful    complaint.      The 

Psalmist  complains — 

1.  Of  the  devastation  of  Jerusalem, 
and  especially  of  the  desecration  of  the 
temple.  "  O  God,  the  heathen  are  come 
into  Thiiie  inheritance  j  Thy  holy  tem- 
])le  have  they  defiled  ;  they  have  laid 
Jerusalem  on  heaps."  The  reference  is 
to  the  havoc  wrought  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar and  his  army.  The  strongholds 
of  the  city  were  cast  down  ;  the  palace 
of  Solomon,  the  temple  of  God,  with 
all  its  courts,  its  roofs  of  cedar  and  of 
gold,  were  levelled  to  the  earth,  or  com- 
mitted to  the  flames  ;  the  sacred  vessels, 
the  ark  of  the  covenant  itself,  with  the 
cherubim,  were  pillaged  by  profane  hands. 
(See  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  18,  19.)  Great, 
indeed,  must  have  been  the  distress  of 
those  Jews  who  were  religious  and  patri- 
otic.    Their  distress  must  have  been  the 


more  keen  by  reason  of  their  knowledge 
that  the  heathen  could  never  have  laid 
Jerusalem  in  ruins  and  desecrated  the 
temple  of  God,  had  not  the  chosen  people 
themselves  first  desecrated  that  holy  place. 
(See  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14-21.)  Their 
continued  pursuit  of  evil,  notwithstand- 
ing the  earnest  remonstrances  of  God 
by  His  prophets,  led  Him  to  abandon 
them  for  a  time  to  their  foes. 

2.  Of  the  cruelties  inflicted  upon  the 
people  of  God.  "  The  dead  bodies  of 
Thy  servants  have  they  given  to  be  meat 
unto  the  fowls  of  the  heaven,  the  flesh 
of  Thy  saints  unto  the  beasts  of  the 
earth.  Their  blood  have  they  shed  like 
water  round  about  Jerusalem  ;  and  there 
was  none  to  bury  them."  Here  is  a 
picture  of  wide-spread  slaughter  and 
misery.  The  words  of  the  poet  are  a 
graphic  commentary  on  the  brief  state- 

459 


PSALM  LXXIX. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


ment  of  the  inspired  clironicler.  (See 
2  Chron.  xxxvi.  17.)  The  bloodshed 
was  great  and  terrible.  Men  were  slain 
without  compunction,  and  their  con- 
querors hastened  away  with  their  cap- 
tives, leaving  the  dead  bodies  to  be 
devoured  by  wild  beasts  and  birds  of 
prey. 

3.  Of  the  reproaches  cast  upon  the 
people  of  God.  "  We  are  become  a  re- 
proach to  our  neighbours,  a  scorn  and 
derision  to  them  that  are  round  about 
us."  They  were  treated  by  surround- 
ing peoples  as  unworthy  of  respect,  and 
were  derided  by  them  as  a  people  van- 
quished by  their  foes  and  forsaken  by 
their  God.  They  were  conquered,  were 
made  captives,  and  in  their  subjection 
were  despised  and  reproached.  They 
had  great  reason  for  sorrowful  com- 
plaint. Their  sorest  grief  must  have 
sprung  from  their  knowledge  of  the  fact 
that  their  own  sins  caused  their  suffer- 
ings. The  intense  sorrow  of  the  pious 
and  patriotic  amongst  them  may  be 
known  by  considering  the  plaintive 
mournings  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah. 
"  Never  did  city  suffer  a  more  miserable 
fate,  never  was  ruined  city  lamented  in 
language  so  exquisitely  pathetic."  Vide 
The  Lamentations. 

II.  An  earnest  prayer.  The  Psal- 
mist in  his  prayer — 

1.  Manifests  a  consciousness  of  the  sins 
of  the  people.  The  inquiries,  *' Willi 
Thou  be  angry  for  ever?  Shall  Thy 
jealousy  burn  like  fire? "imply  on  the 
part  of  the  inquirer  the  consciousness 
that  there  had  been  liuman  provocations, 
that  there  had  been  a  cause  for  God's 
anger  and  jealousy.  In  the  Scriptures, 
idolatry,  of  which  they  had  been  greatly 
guilty,  is  represented  as  spiritual  adul- 
tery. God  was  not  jealous  without 
reason.  And  their  manifold  sins  had 
aroused  His  anger  against  them.  The 
Psalmist  is  right,  God  was  angry  with 
them  on  account  of  their  sins,  and  their 
conquered  and  captive  and  suffering 
state  was  a  sign  of  His  anger. 

2.  Petitions  God.  for  various  favowrs 
for  His  people.  Here  is  a  prayer  for 
pardon.  "  O  remember  not  against  us 
the  iniquities  of  them  that  were  before 
us:   and   purge  away  our   sins."     The 

460 


effects  of  sin  frequently  descend  from 
one  generation  to  another.  God  de- 
clared Himself  a  "jealous  God,  visiting 
the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the 
children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  gene- 
ration of  them  that  hate  "  Him.  As  a 
matter  of  fact  men  do  suffer  in  many 
ways  from  the  sins  of  their  ancestors. 
Prayer  is  here  offered  that  God  would 
remove  from  them  the  judgment  of 
the  sins  of  them  that  had  gone  before 
them  ;  that  they  might  not  suffer  by 
reason  of  them  any  more.  Prayer  is 
offered  for  the  forgiveness  of  their  own 
sins.  *' Purge  away  our  sins."  Cleanse 
us  from  our  transgressions,  and  from  all 
impurity  of  soul.  It  is  well  when  the 
soul  in  trouble  cries  out  not  for  the 
removal  of  the  suffering  alone,  but  for 
the  removal  of  the  sin  also.  To  those 
who  sincerely  seek  Him,  God  is  ever 
ready  to  grant  pardon  and  purity.  Here 
is  a  prayer  for  speedy  help  and  deliver- 
ance. "  Let  Thy  tender  mercies  speedily 
prevent  us :  for  we  are  brought  very 
low.  Help  us,  0  God  of  our  salvation, 
for  the  glory  of  Thy  name  ;  and  deliver 
us  for  Thy  name's  sake."  As  sinners 
their  hope  is  in  the  mercy  of  God. 
There  is  great  beauty  and  force  in  the 
phrase,  **  tender  mercies."  It  comes 
from  the  religious  heart,  and  appeals  to 
the  heart.  To  the  tender  mercy  of  the 
Lord  His  unworthy  and  afflicted  people 
look  for  help.  The  captive  Jews  were 
beyond  the  aid  of  human  resources.  In 
man  they  could  find  no  adequate  assist- 
ance. So  they  directed  their  prayer  to 
Him  who  is  equal  to  the  utmost  need  of 
His  people,  and  who  if  He  pleased  could 
help  them,  and  deliver  them  from  their 
enemies.  They  prayed  God  to  come 
quickly  to  their  aid ;  that  His  "  tender 
mercies  "  might  "  speedily  prevent "  them. 
Prevent  does  not  signify  hinder,  but 
anticipate.  "  God's  mercy  must  antici- 
pate, ^  come  to  meet,'  man's  necessity." 
They  felt  that  if  God  did  not  speedily 
interpose  for  them  their  utter  ruin  must 
be  the  result.  Their  salvation  depended 
upon  Him,  and  upon  His  prompt  inter- 
position on  their  behalf.  Here  is  a 
prayer  on  behalf  of  the  captive  and  the 
dying.  "  Let  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner 
come   before   Thee;  according   to   the 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXIX. 


greatness  of  Thy  power  preserve  Thou 
those  that  are  u})i)ointed  to  die." 
Whether  the  whole  of  the  people  are 
thus  spoken  of,  or  the  terms  "prisoner" 
and  *'  appointed  to  die  "  are  to  be  taken 
literally,  cannot,  we  think,  be  determined. 
In  either  case  there  is  an  appeal  made 
to  the  Divine  compassion;  that  God 
would  graciously  regard  "  the  sighing 
of  those  that  are  bound."  And  to  the 
Divine  strength  ;  that  He  would  by  the 
greatness  of  His  energy  save  from  death 
those  who  were  appointed  thereunto. 
Here  is  a  prayer  for  judgment.  "  Pour  out 
Thy  wrath  upon  the  heathen  that  have 
not  known  Thee,  and  upon  the  kingdoms 
that  have  not  called  upon  Thy  name. 
Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say, 
Where  is  their  God  1  Let  Him  be  known 
among  the  heathen  in  our  sight  by  the 
revenging  of  the  blood  of  Thy  servants 
which  is  shed.  And  render  unto  our 
neighbours  sevenfold  into  their  bosom, 
wherewith  They  have  reproached  Thee, 
O  Lord."  We  are  by  no  means  sure 
that  the  spirit  expressed  in  these  peti- 
tions is  a  commendable  one.  The  verses 
certainly  require  a  great  deal  of  explana- 
tion when  viewed  in  the  light  of  the 
teachings,  life,  and  death  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Perhaps,  however,  it  is 
illogical  and  unfair  to  view  them  in 
that  light.  If  the  petitions  in  the  text 
are  simply  a  prayer  for  justice,  then  are 
they  right,  and  such  as  may  fitly  be  pre- 
sented at  the  throne  of  grace.  If  the 
strong  desire  was  that  God  would  assert 
His  own  presence  and  power  and  glory 
before  the  heathen  who  said,  "  Where  is 
their  God  1 "  then  the  desire  is  com- 
mendable. The  time  came  when  He 
did  interpose  in  judgment.  "  In  that 
night  was  Belshazzar  the  king  of  the 
Chaldeans  slain.  And  Darius  the  Me- 
dian took  the  kingdom." 

3.  Urges  his  petition  with  powerful 
pleas.  On  two  grounds  the  Psalmist 
urges  his  prayer.  He  pleads  the  great- 
ness and  urgency  of  the  peoples  need. 
"  We  are  brought  very  low."  Their 
affliction  and  helplessness  was  an  appeal 
to  His  pity.  Their  numbers  were 
diminished,  their  condition  was  deplor- 
able;   if  He  did  not  quickly  come  to 


their  aid  they  would  be  utterly  undone. 
He  pleads  the  glory  of  the  Divine  name, 
"  For  the  glory  of  Thy  name  ;  ...  for 
Thy  name's  sake."  The  idea  is,  that 
as  they  were  His  redeemed  people.  His 
professed  people,  His  honour  was  in- 
volved in  the  question  of  their  salvation 
or  their  destruction.  There  is  no  plea 
so  mighty  with  God  as  that  of  His  own 
honour,  when  it  is  sincerely  urged.  If 
He  left  them  to  perish,  the  heathen 
would  say  that  He  could  not  or  would 
not  save  them.  If  He  delivered  them, 
the  mockers  would  be  silenced,  and  His 
name  would  be  feared.  In  ancient  time 
God  had  proclaimed  His  name  to  Moses, 
and  there  is  in  this  plea,  probably,  an 
allusion  to  that  proclamation.  If  so, 
there  is  an  appeal  to  His  faithfulness, 
that  He  would  maintain  that  name. 

III.  A  devout  resolution.  "So we 
Thy  people  and  sheep  of  Thy  pasture 
will  give  Thee  thanks  for  ever  :  we  will 
show  forth  Thy  praise  to  all  generations." 
This  is  the  language  of — 

1.  Confidence.  With  assured  faith 
they  looked  forward  to  the  salvation  of 
God.  They  anticipated  deliverance  and 
blessing. 

2.  Gratitude.  With  thankful  hearts 
they  would  ascribe  unto  Him  the  praise 
and  glory  of  their  redemption.  And 
they  would  transmit  the  story  of  His 
wondrous  doings  on  their  behalf  to 
coming  generations,  that  they  also  might 
praise  Him. 

3.  Service.  It  is  implied  here  that 
they  would  no  more  turn  aside  to  idols 
or  decline  from  His  ways,  but  would 
serve  Him  with  glad  and  grateful 
hearts. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Blessed  are  they 
whoy  having  tasted  that  He  is  gracious, 
have  not  by  sin  exiled  themselves  from 
God's  favour  and  fellowship.  Brethren, 
prize  your  blessedness.  "  Walk  in  the 
light,  as  He  is  in  the  light,"  so  shall 
your  path  be  cheered  by  His  presence 
and  conduct  you  to  His  throne.  2.  Let 
those  who  have  departed  from  God  return 
unto  Him  with  earnest  prayer  and  devout 
resolutioti.  Your  hope  is  in  the  tender 
mercy  of  the  Lord.  (See  Jer.  iii.  12, 
22.) 

461 


rSALM  LXXIX. 


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


Profane  Intruders  in  Sacred  Places. 


( Verse 

"The  holy  land,  the  holy  house,  and  the 
holy  city  were  all  polluted  by  the  uii cir- 
cumcised." We  have  in  this  an  illustra- 
tion of  what  is  taking  place  in  this 
day— 

I.  In  Christian  churches.  The 
Church  is  God's  "  inheritance^^  "  The 
Church  of  God,  which  He  hath  pur- 
chased with  His  own  blood."  The 
Church  is  the  abode  of  God,  His 
"  temple.'*  He  dwells  in  it  by  His 
Spirit.  Desecrating  intruders  have 
entered  into  it.  1.  Ritualism.  Forms, 
ceremonies,  genuflexions,  pictures,  sym- 
bols, instead  of  the  worship  of  God  "in 
spirit  and  in  truth."  Superstition  in- 
stead of  faitb.  Sacraments  instead  of 
the  living,  personal  Saviour.  2.  Ration- 
alism. Human  philosophies  instead  of 
the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Theories  of  self- 
culture  instead  of  the  regenerating  and 
sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
3.  Selfish  religionism.  The  church  is 
desecrated  by  men  who  are  religious 
that  they  might  escape  a  coarse,  mate- 
rialistic Ik II,  and  gain  an  inglorious  and 
vulgar  be; IV en.  Their  spiritual  state  is 
the  very  opposite  of  that  expressed  in 
Xavier's  beautiful  hymn — 

**  My  God,  I  love  Thee,  not  because 
I  hope  for  heaven  thereby  ;  "  &c. 

But  the  spirit  which  should  animate  our 
churches  is  not  that  "  of  fear ;  but  of 
power,  and  of  love,  and  of  a  sound 
mind."  The  Christian  spirit  is  not  self- 
seeking,  but  self-sacriticing. 

II.  In  human  spirits.  The  human 
spirit  is  the  ''  inheritance "  of  God, 
which  He  has  redeemed.  "  Ye  are  not 
your  own  ;  for  ye  are  bought  with  a 
price."  The  human  spirit  is  also  the 
**  temple  "  of  God.  "  Know  ye  not  that 
ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  1 "     What 


1.) 

intruders  have  defiled  and  desecrated 
this  temple  ?  Worldliness,  carnality, 
selfishness,  hatred,  impurity,  have  de- 
filed God's  holy  temple.  The  human 
soul  has  too  often  resembled  a  '^  whited 
sepulchre  "  or  "  a  cage  of  every  unclean 
and  hateful  bird  "  rather  than  the  dwell- 
ing place  of  God.  Even  amongst  reli- 
gious men  there  are  some  in  whose  soul 
a  human  formula  or  creed  has  usurped 
the  place  of  God  j  they  are  theologians, 
not  Christians.  There  are  others  in 
whose  soul  some  ecclesiastical  system  has 
usurped  the  place  of  God  ;  they  are  more 
devoted  to  "  the  church,''  or  to  "  our 
denomination^"  or  to  "owr  body,'  than 
to  the  Lord  of  all. 

These  desecrating  intruders  must  be 
ex[)elled  from  the  Church,  or  they  will 
lay  it  in  ruins.  These  unholy  spirits 
that  have  entered  the  human  soul  nmst 
be  cast  out,  or  that  "temple  of  God" 
will  become  a  "  synagogue  of  Satan." 

On  the  contrast  exhibited  in  this 
verse  and  verse  55  of  the  preceding 
Psalm  a  useful  discourse  might  be  made. 
Subject, — What  God  does  for  man,  and 
what  man  does  for  God.  I.  God  casts 
out  the  heathen  for  His  people.  His 
people  by  their  sins  admit  the  heathen 
to  destroy  His  city.  XL  God  gave  to 
His  people  an  inheritance,  His  people 
suffer  His  inheritance  to  be  invaded 
by  foes.  III.  God  provided  dwelling- 
places  for  His  people.  His  people  defiled 
His  dwelling-place,  and  allowed  others 
to  defile  it  also,  &c.  Or  the  contrast 
might  be  exhibited  thus, — 

I.  God's  faithfulness,  man's  unfaith- 
fulness. 

II.  God's  goodness,  man's  ingratitude. 

III.  God's  conquering  power,  man's 
cowardly  weakness,  &c. 


A  Model  Prayer. 

(Verse  9.) 

I.  The  Person  addressed.     "  0  God  the  God  of  destruction,  but  of  salvation." 

of    our    salvation."      "Our    God,    even  1.  (      i  was  their  only  Saviour.     They 

when  He  is  most  severely  angry,  is  not  were  brought  so  very  low  as  to  be  be- 
462 


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXX. 


yond  the  help  of  all  others.  2.  God 
was  their  sufficient  Saviour.  He  who 
delivered  their  fathers  from  the  Egyp- 
tians could  deliver  them  from  the  Chal- 
deans. 

II.  The  Prayer  offered.  Three  re- 
quests they  make  to  God.  1.  For 
Pardon.  "  Purge  away  our  sins,"  2. 
For  Deliverance.  "  Deliver  us "  from 
our  afflictions,  from  our  enemies.  3. 
For  Assistance.  *' Help  us^'  to  bear  our 
troubles,  to  serve  Thee  in  our  lives. 

III.  The  plea  urged.  *' For  the 
glory  of  Thy  name,  .  .  .  for  Thy  name's 
sake."  Tlie  honour  of  His  name  would 
be  affected  by  His  treatment  of  their 
prayer.  If  He  did  not  deliver  them,  the 
heathen  would  say  that  He  eould  not  or 


would  not  help  them.  If  He  delivered 
them,  the  display  of  His  mercy  would 
excite  admiration,  the  exhibition  of  His 
power  would  beget  awe.  His  name 
would  be  feared.  "  The  choicest  mer- 
cies God's  people  have  are  for  His  name's 
sake :  they  have  pardon  of  sin  for  His 
name's  sake"  (Ps.  xxv.  11;  1  John  ii.  12); 
"  purging  of  sin  for  His  name's  sake ; 
leading  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for 
His  name's  sake"  (Ps.xxiii.  3);  "quicken- 
ing of  their  dead  and  dull  hearts  for  His 
name's  sake"  (Ps.  cxliii.  11).  "Though 
His  people  offend  Him,  yet  He  forsakes 
them  not,  for  His  great  name's  sake." 

Let  us  ask  for  spiritual  blessings  of 
God,  urging  in  faith  this  plea,  and  we 
shall  receive,  and  our  joy  will  be  full. 


The  Afflictions  of  Man  and  the  Help  of  God. 

{Verse  11.) 


The  prisoners  are  those  of  the  He- 
brews who  were  in  bondage  and  sufl'cr- 
ing.  "  Those  that  are  appointed  to  die 
might  apply  to  those  who  were  con- 
demned to  death  ;  or  to  those  who  were 
sick  and  in  danger  of  death  ;  or  to  those 
who  were  prisoners  and  captives,  and 
who  were,  by  their  sufferings,  exposed 
to  death." 


I.  The  afflictions  of  man. 


The 


prisoner,  .  .  .  those  that  are  appointed 
to  die."  To  be  a  prisoner  is  to  be  de- 
prived of  light,  of  liberty,  &c.  How 
many  and  varied  are  the  afflictions  of 
man.  The  sighs  and  cries  of  the  suffer- 
ing are  ever  arising  from  our  world. 

"  Each  new  morn 
New  widows  howl ;   new  orphans  cry ;    new 

sorrows 
Strike  heaven  on  the  face,  that  it  resounds 
Like  syllable  of  dolour." — Shakespeare, 


II.  The  help  of  God.     It  is  His  "to 

proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the 
opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are 
bound."  As  a  helper  He  is — 1.  Quick 
to  hear.  The  sigh  of  a  prisoner  in  the 
dungeon  reaches  His  ear  in  an  instant. 
2.  Strong  to  save.  "  The  greatness  of 
Thy  power."  His  energy  is  more  than 
equal  to  the  extremest  human  need. 
And  His  tenderness  is  as  great  as  His 
strength. 

III.  The  connecting  link  between 
the  two.  Prayer  is  the  means  whereby 
suffering  man  obtains  the  help  of  God. 
Prayer  implies  in  the  suppliant  felt 
need  and  faith  in  God.  To  the  ear  of 
God  a  sigh  may  be  a  devout  and  earnest 
prayer. 

Let  distressed  and  dying  men  direct 
their  sighs  to  God  and  obtain  relief. 


PSALM     LXXX. 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **To  the  chief  Musician  upon  Shoshannim-Eduth.'*  On  **  Shoshannim  ^' 
Bee  Introduction  to  Ps.  xlv.  Probably  "Shoshannim-Eduth"  denotes  *'the  melody  or  air 
*  after  '  or  *  in  the  manner  of  '  which  the  P.salm  was  to  be  sung.  As  the  words  now  stand  they 
signify  *  lilies,  a  testimony,'  and  the  two  are  separated  by  a  large  distinctive  accent.  In  them- 
selves they  have  no  meaning  in  the  present  text,  and  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  probably  a 
fragment  of  the  beginning  of  an  older  Psalm  with  which  the  choir  were  familiar." — Smith's 
Diet,  of  the  Bible. 

463 


PSALM  LXXX. 


ROMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


**  A  Psalm  of  Asaph.'"  See  Introduction  to  Pa.  Ixxiv.  Perowne  :  **As  in  the  case  of 
most  of  the  historical  Psalms,  so  in  the  case  of  this,  it  is  impossible  to  say  with  certainty  at 
what  period  it  was  written.  The  allusions  are  never  sufficiently  definite  to  lead  to  any  positive 
conclusion.  .  .  .  All  that  is  certain  is,  that  the  time  was  a  time  of  great  disaster,  that  the 
nation  was  trampled  down  under  the  foot  of  foreign  invaders.  The  poet  turns  to  God  with  the 
earnest  and  repeated  prayer  for  deliverance,  and  bases  his  appeal  on  the  past." 


The  Divine  Favour  Implored. 
{Verses  1-7.) 


In  these  verses  the  poet  complains  of 
the  sorrowful  condition  of  the  people, 
and  prays  for  salvation  from  God. 
Their  sad  condition  he  regards  as  the 
result  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  favour  of 
God,  and  he  prays  for  their  salvation 
by  the  renewal  of  that  favour.  The 
Psalmist  represents  the  people  as — 

I.  Sorely  needing  God's  favour. 
The  sad  condition  of  the  people  appears 
from — 

1.  The  reproaches  of  their  neighbours, 
"  Thou  makest  us  a  strife  unto  our 
neighbours ;  and  our  enemies  laugh 
among  themselves."  "  The  neighbours 
are  always  the  petty  tribes  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  of  Israel,  who 
continually  availed  themselves  of  those 
occasions  when  Israel  was  oppressed  by 
more  powerful  nations,  to  give  vent  to 
their  hatred."  These  neighbours  stroTe 
among  themselves  as  to  who  should  ob- 
tain most  of  the  spoils  of  Israel,  and  who 
should  be  bitterest  in  their  reproaches 
against  them.  When  a  people  who  have 
occupied  a  position  of  eminence  and 
power  are  derided  by  petty  neighbours 
they  must  have  fallen  very  low,  and 
great  must  be  their  sorrow  as  they 
realise  the  painful  contrast  between  their 
present  and  their  past.  They  who 
"  laugh  among  themselves  "  over  a  fallen 
and  suffering  foe  must  have  sunk  very 
low  in  the  scale  of  humanity.  Yet  their 
jeers  may  torment  the  sufferers  to  whom 
they  are  directed,  may  make  their  bitter 
drink  more  bitter,  and  their  heavy  bur- 
den more  heavy. 

2.  The  rejection  of  their  prayer.  **  O 
Lord  God  of  hosts,  how  long  wilt  Thou 
be  angry  against  the  prayer  of  Thy 
people  1 "  The  marginal  reading  gives 
a  literal  translation,  "  How  long  wilt 
Thou  smoke  against  the  prayer  of  Thy 
people  r'     The  smoke  of  incense  was  a 

464 


symbol  of  prayer  amongst  the  Hebrews. 
"  Let  my  prayer  be  set  forth  before 
Thee  as  incense  ;  and  the  lifting  up  of 
my  hands  as  the  evening  sacrifice." 
According  to  the  teaching  of  their 
Scriptures  the  smoke  of  the  incense  in 
prayer  would  propitiate  God,  and  cause 
the  smoke  of  His  anger  to  cease.  But 
instead  of  this  the  smoke  of  His  anser 
opposes  the  s#noke  of  the  incense  of  their 
prayers.  Such  seems  to  be  the  poeiic 
dress  of  the  idea.  The  idea  itself  is  that 
God  rejected  their  prayer.  If  such  were 
really  the  case  there  must  have  been 
something  wrong  in  their  prayers,  or  in 
the  spirit  in  which  they  presented  them. 
They  must  have  ''  asked  amiss."  (1.) 
There  might  have  been  a  lack  of  fervour 
and  earnestness  in  their  prayers.  God 
does  not  regard  cold,  half-hearted  peti- 
tions. (2.)  Or  they  might  have  suppli- 
cated Him  from  an  impure  or  unworthy 
motive.  (3.)  Or,  while  they  sought  Him 
in  prayer,  they  might  have  cherished  sin 
in  their  hearts.  "  If  I  regard  iniquity 
in  my  heart  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me." 
(4.)  Or,  probably,  God  only  api»eared  as 
though  He  rejected  their  pni)  er.  He 
delayed  His  response  in  order  to  increase 
His  blessing.  By  making  them  wait  He 
would  test  and  increase  their  faith,  and 
the  fervour  of  their  desires,  and  the 
earnestness  of  their  prayers.  But  to 
them  He  seemed  as  though  He  rejected 
their  prayers ;  and  it  was  a  sore  trial  to 
them.  Men  reproached  them,  and  God 
rejected  their  entreaties.  Earth  greeted 
them  with  cruel  persecution  or  scornful 
laughter,  and  heaven  with  stony-hearted 
indifference  or  stern  rejection. 

3.  The  greatness  of  their  sorrow, 
"  Thou  feedest  them  with  the  bread  of 
tears ;  and  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in 
great  measure."  God  dealt  out  sorrows 
to  them  as  though  they  were  their  food 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALM  LZZZ. 


and  drink.  Their  grief  was  intense  and 
constant.  Tears  were  their  daily  purtion. 
All  their  trials  and  sorrows  they  regarded 
as  proceeding  from  God.  *'  Thou  feed- 
est  them  with  the  bread  of  tears." 
"  2I10U  makest  us  a  strife  unto  our 
neighbours,"  <fec.  In  this  they  were 
certainly  right  thus  far,  that  God  had 
allowed  these  miseries  to  befall  them. 
If  He  had  not  directly  brought  them 
upon  them  as  a  chastisement  for  tlieir 
sins,  He  had  withdrawn  the  shield  of 
His  protection  from  them  because  of 
their  sin.  He  had  hidden  His  face  from 
them,  and  they  were  troubled.  He  had 
withdrawn  His  favour,  and  innumerable 
evils  had  compassed  them  about.  Truly 
His  favour  was  sorely  needed  by 
them. 

11.  Earnestly  imploring  God's  fa- 
vour. In  the  prayer  here  recorded  we 
have — 

1.  An  implied  confession  of  sin. 
"  Turn  us  again,  0  God."  They  are 
conscious  of  having  turned  aside  into 
sinful  ways.  In  them  there  had  been 
an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  and  they  had 
departed  from  God,  and  were  now  feel- 
ing the  bitter  result.  They  had  with- 
drawn their  loyalty  from  Him  before 
He  withdrew  His  favour  from  them. 
And  they  humbly  and  repeatedly  pray, 
"  Turn  us  again,  O  God."  When  sin  is 
mourned  over  and  confessed  to  God, 
and  restoration  to  fidelity  and  right- 
eousness is  sought  from  Him,  the  return 
of  His  favour  will  not  tarry  long. 

2.  A  recognition  of  the  gracious  rela- 
tion of  God  to  them.  (1.)  God  is  ad- 
dressed as  their  Shepherd.  This  relation 
is  one  of  great  intimacy  and  tenderness. 
It  involves  His  guidance,  protection, 
and  provision.  (See  Horn.  Com.  on 
Ps.  Ixxiv.  1.)  (2.)  God  is  addressed  as 
dweUiug  between  the  cher'uhim.  The 
allusion  is  to  the  Shecinah,  the  visible 
symbol  of  the  Divine  presence,  which 
was  above  the  mercy -seat  and  between 
the  cherubim.  From  the  mercy-seat 
He  communed  v/ith  man  and  dispensed 
His  favour.  There  He  had  manifested 
Himself  to  the  Hebrews  as  He  had  to 
no  other  people.  In  this  address  to 
Him  they  remind  Him  of  this  special 
favour  shown  to  them,  and  seek  to  en- 

2o 


courage  themselves  thereby.  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  true  Shecinah.  He  is  "  the 
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and 
the  express  image  of  His  person." 

3.  An  earnest  entreaty  for  His  salva- 
tion. "  Give  ear,  shine  forth,  stir  up 
Thy  strength,  and  come  and  save  us. 
Turn  us  again,  0  God,  and  cause  Thy 
face  to  shine;  and  we  shall  be  saved." 
(1.)  They  pray  that  God  would  attend 
to  them.  "  Give  ear."  He  had  seemed 
to  disregard  their  cries  to  Him,  and  even 
to  reject  their  prayers  in  His  anger  ;  and 
they  entreat  Him  to  lend  an  attentive 
ear  to  the  voice  of  their  supplications. 
(2.)  They  pray  that  God  would  arouse 
His  strength  for  their  salvation.  For  a 
time  it  seemed  as  though  His  mighty 
saving  arm  had  slumbered.  They  knew 
how  mightily  that  arm  had  wrought  sal- 
vation for  their  fathers  in  ancient  days, 
and  they  cried,  "  Awake,  awake,  put 
on  strength,  O  arm  of  the  Lord."  (3.) 
They  pray  that  God  would  manifest  His 
favour  to  them  and  so  save  them.  "  Cause 
Thy  face  to  shine  "  is  a  poetical  expres- 
sion of.  Show  Thy  favour.  They  felt 
that  in  His  favour  was  their  salvation. 
At  the  rebuke  of  His  countenance  they 
perished ;  in  the  shining  of  His  coun- 
tenance they  lived  and  rejoiced.  The 
idea  is  poetical  and  beautiful,  and  pro- 
foundly true.  '*  In  His  favour  is  life." 
Only  as  our  being  is  illumined  and 
warmed  by  the  beams  of  His  love  do  we 
live.  His  favour  is  the  life-giving  breath 
of  souls. 

In  conclusion,  Is  this  favour  ours  ? 
Are  we  living  in  the  smile  of  God  ? 
Then,  let  us  never  cause  Him  to  avert 
His  face  from  us.  Let  us  yield  to  the 
mighty  attraction  of  His  love,  and  be 
transformed  into  His  ineffable  beauty. 
But  if  any  have  no  consciousness  of  His 
favour,  no  saving  acquaintance  with 
Him,  let  them  at  once  pray,  *'  Lord, 
lift  Thou  up  the  light  of  Thy  counte- 
nance upon  us."  "  Turn  us  again,  O 
God,  and  cause  Thy  face  to  shine ;  and 
we  shall  be  saved."  "  Believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Rise  through  faith 
in  Him  into  the  conscious  realisation  of 
the  favour  of  God,  and  so  into  the  pos- 
session of  a  life  spiritual,  everlasting, 
blessed,  and  Divine. 

465 


PSALM  LXXX. 


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


The  Shepherd  of  Israel. 


Verse  1.  "  Give  ear,  O  Shepherd  of 
Israel,  Tliou  that  leadest,"  &c.  To  the 
great  majority  of  devout  souls,  next  to 
the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 
the  revelation  of  Him  in  His  various 
offices  and  relationships  is  the  most  pre- 
cious. Here  He  is  set  forth  as  the 
Shepherd  of  His  people. 

I.  The  relation  whicli  He  sustains 
to  His  people.  "  Shepherd.''  Certain 
relationships  He  sustains  to  all  men. 
Creator,  Sustainer,  Sovereign,  Judge. 
Certain  other  relationships  He  sustains 
only  to  those  who  confide  in  Him,  rela- 
tionships which  involve  trust  and  sym- 
pathy. Such  is  that  of  Shepherd. 
"  Shepherd  of  Israel"  not  of  Philistia 
or  Assyria.  He  is  the  Shepherd  now 
of  those  who  know  Him,  trust  Him, 
follow  Him.  Very  intimate  and  tender 
is  the  relation  between  Eastern  shep- 
herds and  their  flocks. 

1.  Each  sheep  is  individually  known. 
"  He  calleth  His  own  sheep  by  name." 

2.  Each  sheep  is  iiidividually  cared 
for.  '^  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with 
his  arm,"  &c. 

3.  Each  sheep  is  individually  pro- 
tected. *'The  good  Shepherd  giveth 
His  life  for  the  sheep." 

4.  Each  sheep  is  individually  provi- 
sioned. "  The  Lord  will  give  grace  and 
glory  :  no  good  will  He  withhold,"  &c. 
And,  in  conjunction  with  this  personal 
knowledge  and  care  of  the  Shepherd  for 
each  individual  member  of  His  flock, 
there  is  uniti/  of  the  whole.  They  con- 
stitute a  flock. 

II.  The  serviee  which  He  renders 
to  His  people.  "  Leadest  Joseph  like 
a  flock."  This  is  only  a  development 
of  the  previous  clause.  The  Eastern 
shepherd  goes  before  his  flock,  and  the 
sheep  follow  him.  The  Lord  leads  His 
people.  By  the  exercise  of  their  reason 
and  conscience  ;  by  the  openings  and 
closings  of  His  providence ;  by  the 
teachings  of  His  holy  Word ;  and  by 
the  action  of  His  holy  Spirit  upon  the 
heart.  He  now  leads  all  who  trust  in 
Him.  Ponder  what  is  involved  in  this. 
466 


L  That  man  is  not  competent  to  ar- 
range  his  own  course  of  life,  "  It  is 
not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his 
steps."  "  Thou  knowest  not  what  a  day 
may  bring  forth." 

2.  That  man  is  not  compelled  to  yield 
to  the  Divine  direction.  The  good  Shep- 
herd does  not  drive  men  before  Him 
as  unwilling  disci[)les,  but  He  goes 
before  them,  leads  them,  leaving  them 
to  follow  Him  or  forsake  Him  as  they 
choose, 

3.  That  the  Divine  direction  of  human 
life  is  exercised  in  the  most  gracious 
manner.  "  I  will  go  before  thee  and 
make  the  crooked  places  straight."  The 
Shepherd  first  encounters  every  difficulty 
or  danger,  then  the  sheep  follow  Him. 
This  Divine  guidance  is  a  fact  to-day, 
a  blessed  reality  which  we  may  each 
prove  by  committing  our  way  unto  the 
Lord. 

III.  The  manifestation  of  Himself 
to  His  people.  *'  Thou  that  dwellest 
between  the  cherubim."  **  Thou  who 
sittest  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim." 
It  has  been  thought  that  the  prayer  for 
help  in  the  first  part  of  the  verse  rests 
upon  the  shepherd  care  of  God,  and  in 
this  part  on  the  omnipotence  of  Him 
who  is  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim, 
and  rulest  over  all.  What  the  symbol 
of  the  Divine  presence  was  to  the  Jews, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  to  us.  He  is 
the  Divine  Representative,  the  Revealer 
of  God.  In  Him  we  meet  with  God, 
and  read  His  character,  and  see  His 
mercy,  and  learn  His  grace.  *'  He  that 
hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father." 
Through  Him  God  dispenses  His  favours. 
"  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in 
My  name  He  will  give  it  you." 

IV.  The  great  Desire  of  His  people 
from  Him.  ' '  Shine  forth. "  * '  Turn  us 
again,  0  God,  and  cause  Thy  face  to 
shine  ;  and  we  shall  be  saved."  "  Their 
own  arm  did  not  save  them,  but  Thy 
right  hand,  and  Thine  arm,  and  the 
light  of  Thy  countenance."  "  Who  will 
show  us  any  good*?  Lord,  lift  Thou  up 
the  light  of  Thy  countenance  upon  us." 


HOMlLBTtC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


rSALM  LXXi. 


The  idea  is  that  in  the  manifestation  of 
God's  favour,  salvation  and  blessing  are 
to  be  found. 

So  is  it  now  and  for  us.     Our  great 


need  is  that  God  in  Christ  would  shine 
forth  unto  us.  To  see  God  in  Christ 
Jesus  is  a  saving,  spiritually  transform- 
ing sight. 


Salvation  in  God's  Smile. 


( Verse 

The  thrice-uttered  prayer,  "  Turn  us 
again,  0  God,"  seems  to  show  that  the 
Hebrews  were  sensible  of  departure  from 
God,  and  desirous  of  being  turned  peni- 
tently to  Him  as  a  means  of  regaining 
His  favour.  There  is,  we  fear,  much 
backsliding  of  heart  in  the  Church  at 
this  time.  What  we  mean  by  backslid- 
ing. The  loss  of  the  intense  conscious- 
ness of  peace  and  joy  which  followed 
conversion,  and  of  the  burning  enthu- 
siasm and  zeal,  which  things  were  then 
irregular  and  spasmodic,  is  not  always 
to  be  resjretted.  If  our  consciousness 
of  peace  and  joy  have  grown  profounder 
and  calmer,  though  less  intense ;  if  our 
enthusiasm  and  zeal  have  grown  into  a 
habit  of  regular,  steady,  and  self-denying 
work  for  God,  there  is  no  matter  for 
regret.  We  do  not  mourn  the  loss  of 
the  sapling  in  the  oak,  or  of  the  little 
child  in  the  man  or  woman.  Such  loss 
is  really  development  and  gain.  But 
there  are  many  signs  of  real  spiritual 
decline  in  many  persons  in  the  great 
Church  of  Christ.  Absorption  in  busi- 
ness has  benumbed  the  zeal  of  many. 
Marriage  and  the  cares  of  domestic  life 
have  taken  the  lofty  aspiration  out  of 
many  others,  and  ended  their  useful- 
ness. Worldly  prosperity  has  injured 
others.  There  are  thousands  in  the 
Church  the  promise  of  whose  early  dis- 
cipleship  remains  unfulfilled.  They  are 
members  of  the  Church  ;  but  the  zeal, 
enthusiasm,  usefulness,  consecration,  and 
joy  of  their  early  Christian  life — where 
are  they  1  Ah,  where  1  To  such  persons 
God  very  often  sends  trouble,  in  some 
form  or  other,  as  His  messenger  to  recall 
them  from  their  backslidings.  Is  He 
so  sending  to  any  of  you  ?  Or  has  He 
80  sent  to  you  1  Then,  be  thankful 
that  He  is  still  seeking  you  ;  and  make 
the  prayer  of  the  text  your  own.  "Turn 
us  again,  O  God,  and  cause  Thy  face  to 
shine,*'  &c. 


3.) 

The  Poet's  idea  of  salvation  and 
its  attainment  is,  that  it  is  a  something 
which  springs  out  of  the  shining  of 
God's  countenance,  and  which  is  to  be 
sought  by  prayer.  **  Cause  Thy  face  to 
shine,  and  we  shall  be  saved.  .  .  .  They 
perish  at  the  rebuke  of  Thy  counte- 
nance." "  In  His  favour  is  life."  Pro- 
bably he  was  thinking  of  the  shining  of 
the  sun.  It  gives  life,  light,  warmth, 
exhilaration.  Its  absence  means  death  ; 
its  presence,  life  and  gladness.  Taking 
this  analogy,  the  view  of  salvation  here 
set  forth  is  that  it  consists  in  the  life  and 
growth  of  the  soul  under  the  favour  of 
God.  It  is  not  mere  deliverance  from 
wrath  or  hell,  as  commonly  understood. 
The  poet's  idea  of  hell  is  given  here — 
"  The  rebuke  of  Thy  countenance."  He 
seeks  salvation  by  seeking  the  blessing 
which  is  exactly  antithetic  to  that  evil, 
*'  The  light  of  Thy  countenance."  All 
spirits  must  sustain  some  relation  to  God. 
Spiritual  existence  in  total  separation 
from  Him  is  an  impossibility.  But 
spirits  are  found  in  various  and  diiOferent 
relations  to  Him.  Some  are  avowedly 
hostile  to  Him.  Devils  are  of  this  class. 
They  are  sustained  by  Him,  but  they 
are  bitterly  antagonistic  to  Him.  Many 
men  too  are  '*  alienated  and  enemies  in 
their  mind  by  wicked  works."  Hostile 
to  Him  actually,  though  not  avowedly. 
In  this  state  all  true  spiritual  growth  is 
impossible.  Others  are  indifferent  to 
Him,  practically  "without  God  in  the 
world,"  and  have  no  desire  to  be  other- 
wise. Such  indifference  involves  indif- 
ference to  their  own  spirit.  There  can 
be  no  true  spiritual  growth  in  such  a 
state.  Others  have  some  sort  of  belief 
in  His  existence,  but  despair  of  obtain- 
ing His  favour.  They  cannot  grow 
spiritually,  for  hope  is  essential  to 
growth.  Others  are  trusting  and  loving 
Him.  They  regard  Him  as  merciful 
and  gracious,  wise  and  beneficent,  strong 

467 


niLMLlZZ. 


HOMILETIC  COMMSNTART:  PSALMS. 


and  kind ;  and  so  they  trust  Him  and 
enjoy  His  favour.  The  position  of  the 
Psalmist  I  take  to  be  this,  that  all 
in  this  state,  or  sustaining  this  attitude 
towards  God,  are  being  saved,  and  that 
by  the  growth  of  their  souls  under  the 
influence  of  God's  favour.  Under  this 
influence,  in  what  would  souls  grow  ? 

1.  In  thoughtfulness.  God  is  in- 
finitely thoughtful.  He  frequently  calls 
upon  men  to  "  consider,"  "  reason,"  be 
"  wise,"  <fec.  Every  soul  that  is  fully 
open  to  His  influence  He  quickens  into 
holy  thoughtfulness. 

2.  In  holy  principles.  Living  in  the 
light  of  God's  countenance,  the  principles 
of  the  Divine  administration  and  con- 
duct become  ours. 

3.  In  spiritual  strength  to  will  and 
do  and  suffer.  The  sense  of  His  loving 
presence  makes  the  will  imperial  in  the 
right,  the  hands  strong  for  holy  doing, 
and  the  heart  calm  and  patient  in  suf- 
fering. 


4.  In  reverence.  "I  have  heard  of 
Thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear ;  but  now 
mine  eye  seeth  Thee.  Wherefore  I 
abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes."     (See  also  Isa.  vi.  1-5.) 

6.  In  spiritual  beauty,  "  The  beauty 
of  the  Lord  our  God  upon  us."  In  one 
word,  under  God's  smile  the  soul  grows 
into  His  image.  According  to  our  in- 
terpretation of  the  text,  that  is  salvation. 
How  philosophic/  How  true/  How 
exalted/  We  may  secure  His  favour 
by  earnest,  persistent  prayer  (see  verses 
3,  7,  19).  Mark  the  cumulation  of 
names.  Such  prayer  is  the  approach 
of  the  soul  to  God.  Apply  the  sub- 
ject— 

1.  To  backsliders.  2.  To  the  unconr 
verted. 

"  The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee : 
the  Lord  make  His  face  shine  upon 
thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee  :  the 
Lord  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee, 
and  give  thee  peace." 


Passages  from  the  History  of  the  Ancient  Church,  with  theib 
Lessons  to  the  Modern  Church. 

(Verses  8-19.) 


Israel  is  here  compared  to  a  vine,  and 
under  this  figure  some  experiences  of 
her  history  are  referred  to.  A  devout 
and  thoughtful  study  of  these  verses 
will  not  fail  in  discovering  teachings 
which  are  applicable  to  us  to-day,  without 
resorting  to  any  fanciful  or  irreverent 
handling  of  the  Book  of  God.  The 
verses  bring  before  us — 

I.  The  Divine  planting  of  the  ancient 
Church.  In  respect  to  the  ancient 
Jewish  Church  the  Lord  is  represented 
here  as — ^- 

1.  Bringing  them  out  of  Egypt. 
"Thou  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of 
Egypt."  Israel  in  Egypt  was  like  a 
vine  in  an  unfavourable  situation,  with 
an  unsuitable  soil  and  an  ungenial  clime. 
If  it  grew  and  bore  fruit  there,  it  was 
not  by  the  aid  of  its  circumstances,  but 
in  despite  of  them.  So  the  Lord  God 
of  hosts  brought  forth  His  people  from 
their  uncongenial  circumstances  and 
surroundings,  like  a  vine  from  an  un- 
friendly soil  and  an  inclement  air. 
468 


2.  Expelling  the  heathen  from  the  pro- 
mised land.  He  had  chosen  that  land 
for  His  own  people,  and  promised  it  to 
their  fathers,  and  He  fulfils  His  promise. 
He  had  long  purposed  to  plant  His  vine 
in  that  goodly  land.  And,  in  order  to 
the  accomplishment  of  His  purpose,  He 
"cast  out  the  heathen."  Seven  nations 
were  rooted  out  to  make  room  for  this 
vine  which  the  Lord  had  chosen. 

3.  Firmly  planting  His  people  in  a 
goodly  situation.  Having  prepared  room 
for  it  by  the  ex2)ulsion  of  the  heathen, 
He  "  planted  it,  and  caused  it  to  take 
deep  root."  In  fertile  soil,  refreshed  by 
"  brooks  of  water,  fountains,  and  depths 
that  spring  out  of  valleys  and  hills," 
beneath  translucent  skies  and  amid 
genial  airs,  He  planted  His  vine,  and 
caused  it  firmly  to  strike  its  roots. 
Thus  the  ancient  Jewish  Church  was 
emancipated  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt, 
enabled  to  conquer  the  Canaanites,  and 
to  take  secure  possession  of  the  land 
which  Qod  had  promised  to  their  fathers, 


SOmILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  LXXZ. 


entirely  by  means  of  His  power.  So 
much  so  that,  with  the  strictest  truth, 
He  may  be  said  to  have  delivered  them 
from  Egypt,  vanquished  their  enemies, 
and  planted  them  in  Canaan.  So  now 
the  Lord  calls  men  out  of  the  moral  Egypt^ 
with  its  bondage  of  evil  habits,  its  de- 
grading fleshly  lusts,  its  oppressive  bur- 
dens of  guilt,  and  its  cruel  task-masters 
of  lordly  passions.  At  His  girdle  hangs 
the  key  which  unlocks  the  doors  of  the 
prison  in  which  the  captives  of  sin  are 
immured.  He  breaks  the  power  of  the 
oppressor.  **  The  Lord  looseth  the  pri- 
soners." He  is  the  great  Emancipator 
from  the  guilt  and  sovereignty  of  evil. 
All  who  listen  to  His  call  and  accept 
His  deliverance,  He  makes  to  rejoice  in 
glad  liberty.  He  not  only  calls  men  out 
of  Egypt,  but  also  plants  in  His  cum 
vineyard  all  those  who  obey  His  call.  In 
what  favourable  circumstances  the  Lord 
has  planted  us  !  How  many  culturing 
agencies  He  is  causing  to  operate  upon 
us  !  What  innumerable  aids  to  growth 
and  development,  strength  and  maturity, 
fruitfulness  and  beauty,  He  is  ever  be- 
stowing upon  us  !  The  Church  of  God 
in  Britain  to-day  is  *'  exalted  to  heaven  " 
with  privileges. 

II.  The  great  progress  of  the  ancient 
Church.  "It  filled  the  land.  The 
hills  were  covered  with  the  shadow  of 
it,  and  the  goodly  cedars  with  its  boughs. 
She  sent  out  her  boughs  unto  the  sea, 
and  her  branches  unto  the  river."  The 
hills  or  mountains  which  were  shadowed 
by  this  vine  were  probably  those  in  the 
extreme  south  of  Canaan.  And  as  the 
vine  when  planted  in  fertile  soil  runs  up 
the  trees  and  covers  them,  so  the  poet 
pictures  this  vine  as  running  up  and 
covering  the  great  cedars  of  Lebanon. 
"  The  sea  "  is  the  Mediterranean,  which 
bounded  the  Promised  Land  on  one 
side;  "the  river"  is  the  Euphrates, 
which  bounded  the  land  on  the  other 
side.  The  whole  is  a  beautiful  picture 
of  the  prosperity  of  the  Hebrews  in  their 
best  days.  During  the  latter  portion  of 
the  reign  of  David,  and  through  almost 
the  whole  of  that  of  Solomon,  they 
occupied  a  proud  position  amongst 
neighbouring  nations;  their  power  was 
recognised  and  respected;    their  pros- 


perity was  great ;  their  wealth  also 
was  great.  So  the  Christian  Church 
has  spread,  and  is  still  spreading.  Its 
institutions  and  literature  are  spreading 
and  growing  in  almost  every  part  of  the 
known  world.  Rank  and  fashion,  wealth 
and  power,  education  and  genius,  are  to 
be  found  in  large  proportions  within  her 
fold.  Her  financial  resources  for  carry- 
ing on  her  work  are  greater  than  they 
ever  were,  and  are  still  increasing.  The 
greatest  institutions  are  overshadowed 
by  her.  Her  roots  seem  to  be  ever 
striking  deeper;  and  her  branches  are 
spreading  and  growing  in  every  direction. 
III.  The  ruinous  failure  of  the 
ancient  Church.  This  vine  rose  to  a 
great  height,  spread  abroad  its  branches 
to  a  great  extent,  was  well  covered  with 
foliage,  so  that  it  cast  a  great  and  deep 
shadow ;  but  not  a  word  is  said  of  its 
fruit.  It  bore  no  fruit.  It  failed  in  its 
chief  end.  Of  what  use  is  a  vine  unless 
it  bring  forth  fruit  ?  If  it  fail  in  that 
it  fails  in  the  main  thing.  And  it  was 
in  the  main  thing  that  the  Hebrews 
failed.  Israel  was  a  fruitless  vine.  As 
their  material  prosperity  increased,  their 
religious  faithfulness  and  zeal  decreased. 
In  the  Holy  Land  idolatry  was  permitted 
by  Solomon.  He  even  allowed  a  part 
of  one  of  the  hills  overlooking  Jeru- 
salem, and  almost  fronting  the  temple 
of  God,  to  be  consecrated  to  obscene 
and  barbarous  deities.  Can  we  wonder 
that  *'  clouds  on  all  sides  gathered  about 
his  declining  day "  1  Is  it  surprising 
that  he  should  *'  bequeath  to  his  heir 
an  insecure  throne,  a  discontented 
people,  formidable  enemies  on  the 
frontiers,"  and  the  probability  of  a 
contested  succession  ?  Let  the  Church 
of  Christ  to-day  take  warning  from  the 
ancient  Jewish  Church.  God  demands 
fruit  of  us,  the  fruit  of  personal  holiness 
and  social  usefulness.  Is  the  Church 
meeting  that  demand  1  Is  she  holy  in 
herself?  Is  she  abolishing  the  dis- 
honesties of  trade  1  Is  her  face  set 
against  human  oppression?  Is  she 
striving  to  purify  the  land  of  the  scan- 
dalous social  corruptions  ?  Is  she  waging 
war  against  drunkenness  and  gluttony  ? 
Is  she  leading  the  lost  to  the  Saviour  1 
O  Church  of  Christ,  examine  thyself! 

469 


fSALMLZZX. 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  PSAlMS. 


IV.  The  mournful  devastation  of 
the  ancient  Church.  "  Why  hast  Thou 
then  broken  down  her  hedges,  so  that 
all  they  that  pass  by  the  way  do  pluck 
her?  The  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth 
waste  it,  and  the  wild  beast  of  the  field 
doth  devour  it.  .  .  .  It  is  burned  with 
fire,  it  is  cut  down ;  they  perish  at  the 
rebuke  of  Thy  countenance."  We  can- 
not determine  what  particular  calamities 
are  referred  to  in  these  verses.  But 
notice — 

1.  God  withdrew  His  defence  from 
them.  He  "  broke  down  her  hedges." 
They  had  lost  their  defence  by  reason  of 
their  sin.  They  had  forsaken  their  Pro- 
tector, and  so  exposed  themselves  to 
their  foes.  They  had  provoked  God  to 
anger,  and  He  had  left  them  like  a  vine- 
yard with  its  fences  demolished,  open  to 
the  foot  of  every  intruder. 

2.  Their  enemies  ravaged  them.  The 
picture  of  the  havoc  and  ruin  wrought 
is  striking  and  powerful.  Their  enemies 
are  represented  as  variousy  fierce^  and 
strong.  *'  They  which  pass  by  the  way, 
the  boar  out  of  the  wood,  and  the  wild 
beast  of  the  field."  They  would  waste 
the  vineyard  in  different  ways,  and  what 
one  failed  to  destroy  would  speedily  be 
ruined  by  the  others.  The  devastation 
is  represented  as  very  great.  They  are 
being  "  plucked,  wasted,  devoured, 
burned,"  and  are  "  perishing."  Alas, 
poor  vineyard  !  Desolation  itself  could 
scarce  be  more  desolate  ;  or  ruin  more 
ruinous.  Their  misery  is  7'epresented 
as  the  result  of  the  displeasure  of  God, 
"  They  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  Thy 
countenance."  Conscience  speaks  here, 
and  speaks  truly.  They  were  powerless 
and  defenceless  before  their  enemies, 
because  they  were  conscious  of  having 
forsaken  their  Almighty  Friend.  The 
consciousness  of  sin  led  them  to  see  a 
frowning  God,  and  emptied  their  spirit 
of  courage  and  their  arm  of  strength. 

3.  They  failed  to  understand  fully  the 
reason  of  their  miseries.  "  Why  hast 
Thou  broken  1 "  <fec.  One  would  have 
thought  that  they  would  not  have 
needed  to  ask  *'  why."  Did  they  think 
that,  having  shown  so  much  favour  to 
this  vine,  and  bestowed  upon  it  so  much 
care,    it    was   strange   that  He    should 

470 


leave  it  exposed  to  destroyers?  But 
that  very  favour  and  that  care  only 
made  its  worthlessness  the  more  mani- 
fest in  bearing  no  fruit.  God's  great 
mercies  to  the  Jews  made  their  sin  and 
rebellion  against  Him  the  more  heinous 
and  aggravated.  Instead  of  asking  God 
why  He  had  left  them  defenceless,  they 
would  have  done  well  to  have  looked 
into  their  own  life  and  conduct,  and 
turned  to  Him  in  sincere  penitence.  Let 
the  Christian  Church  heed  the  vvarning. 
V.  The  earnest  prayer  of  the  an- 
cient Church.     The  poet  prays — 

1.  For  the  Divine  presence  and  favour, 
"  Return,  we  beseech  Thee,  O  God  of 
hosts :  look  down  from  heaven,  and 
behold,  and  visit  this  vine."  That  God 
would  see  and  consider  their  sad  case, 
that  He  would  look  upon  them  with 
favour,  that  He  would  visit  them  in 
mercy,  is  their  appropriate  desire. 

2.  For  the  Divine  protection.  "Guard 
what  Thy  right  hand  hath  planted,  and 
the  branch  that  Thou  madest  strong  for 
Thyself."  This  is  a  prayer  for  the  de- 
fence of  God  that  they  may  not  be 
utterly  and  entirely  destroyed.  The 
petition  refers  to  His  ancient  kindness 
in  their  planting  and  increase,  and  pleads 
their  relation  to  Him.  The  vine  was 
planted  by  Him  and  for  Him,  and  in 
its  misery  and  desolation  the  poet  com- 
mits it  to  Him. 

3.  For  the  Divine  blessing  on  their 
leaders.  *'  Let  Thy  hand  be  upon  the 
man  of  Thy  right  hand,  upon  the  son  of 
man  whom  Thou  madest  strong  for 
Thyself."  The  expositors  differ  in  their 
interpretations  of  this  verse.  Some  see 
with  clearness,  and  assert  with  confi- 
dence, that  there  is  "  an  outlook  to  the 
Messiah  here;"  while  others  are  unable 
to  see  anything  of  the  kind.  "  The 
man  of  Thy  right  hand "  is  the  man 
who  holds  the  place  of  honour.  "  The 
son  of  man,"  we  regard  as  a  poetical 
variation  from  the  term  "  man  "  in  the 
first  clause  of  the  verse.  "Whom  Thou 
hast  made  strong  for  Thyself,"  i.e.,  whom 
Thou  hast  raised  to  power  for  the  carry- 
ing out  of  Thy  purposes.  So  we  regard 
it  as  a  prayer  on  behalf  of  some  leader 
or  leaders  of  the  people,  that  God's 
hand  may  be  upon  him,  or  upon  them. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS.  tSALM  Lxxtt 


for  good;  and  that  through  him,  or  2.  Praise.  "We  will  call  upon  Thy 
them,  He  would  bless  the  afflicted  name."  We  will  worship  Thee  faith- 
people,  fully.     Such  is  their  promise  made  in 

4:.  For  the  Divine  restoration  or  revival.  affliction.       And    we    know    with    how 

"Quicken  us."     Restore  to  us  as  a  peo-  deplorable    a  frequency    such    promises 

pie  vitality  and  power ;  our  languishing  are    forgotten    when    the    affliction    is 

and    dying   cause  do  Thou  revive  and  removed.     Such  was  the  case  repeatedly 

strengthen.     Such  is  the  prayer  of  the  in  the  history  of  the  Jews. 
ancient  Church  in  its  distress.     And  if         Conclusion.  —  1.     Let     individual 

any  portion  of  the  Lord's   vineyard  to-  Christians  and  Christian  churches  take 

day    is    lying  desolate    and    distressed,  heed   to   this  beacon.       As   individuals, 

Christians  will  do  well  to  carry  the  case  "have    we    our    fruit  unto    holiness "1 

to  God  in  prayer,  and  seek  His  inter-  In  the  ancient  Jewish  Church,  we  have 

position  and  salvation.  a    striking    analogue    of    the    planting, 

VI.    The    devout   promise    of    the  privileges,  and  progress  of  the  Christian 

ancient  Church.      The  poet  on  behalf  Church.       Let   us  see   to    it  that    the 

of    the    people    engages     that    if   God  analogy  does  not  become  true  as  regards 

granted   their    requests,    their    conduct  fruitlessness ;  for,  if  it  should,  our  de- 

towards  Him  should  be  marked  by —  fence   will  be    gone,    and   we   shall    be 

1.  Perseverance.     "  So  will  not  we  go  wasted    and   destroyed  by  our  enemies, 

back    from    Thee."       They    had    back-  2.     If  any    have  backslidden  from   the 

slidden  from    His    ways   many    times  ;  ways  of  the  Lord,  let  them  seek  Him  at 

but  now  they  vow  that,  if  God  will  de-  once  in  penitence  and  by  prayer.     *'  Turn 

liver  them  from  their  distresses,   they  us  again,  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  cause  Thy 

will  cleave  with  constancy  to  Him.  face  to  shine  ;  and  we  shall  be  saved/' 


PSALM    LXXXL 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  chief  Musician  upon  Gittith."  Gittith  is  explained  in  several  ways. 
One  interpretation  is  that  it  was  a  musical  instrument  invented  in  Gatli,  or  common  among  the 
Gittites.     Or  it  may  have  been  the  name  of  a  tune  to  which  the  Psalm  is  to  be  sung,  and  which 

originated  from  Gath.  Others  have  derived  the  word  from  D2l  =  a  wine  press,  and  concluded 
that  it  denotes  an  instrument  which  was  used  by  those  accustomed  to  tread  the  wine-vat,  and 
intended  to  accompany  the  songs  of  the  vintage.  Fuerst  in  his  Lexicon  says  it  is  the  **  proper 
name  of  a  musical  body  of  Levites,  who  had  their  chief  seat  in  the  Levitical  city    pDT  i^^." 

**A  Psalm  of  Asaph.''  This  Psalm  appears  to  have  been  composed  by  Asaph,  who  was  the 
contemporary  of  David. 

Occasion. — Tlie  Psalm  seems  to  have  been  composed  for  the  celebration  of  the  Passover. 
"  It  is  well  remarked  by  De  Wette  that  as  the  Hebrews  were  required  to  make  known  to  their 
children  the  design  of  the  ordinance  of  the  Passover  (see  Exod.  xii.  26,  27),  nothing  would  be 
more  natural  than  that  the  sacred  poets  should  take  occasion  from  the  return  of  that  festival  to 
enforce  the  truths  pertaining  to  it  in  songs  composed  for  the  celebration.  Such  seems  to  have 
been  the  design  of  this  Psalm, — reminding  the  people  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  the  past,  and 
recalling  them  from  their  sins  by  a  remembrance  of  His  mercies,  and  by  a  view  of  what  would 
be  the  consequences  of  fully  obeying  His  law." — Barnes. 

Religious  Worship. 
{Verses  1-7.) 

In  these  verses  we  have  an  exhorta-  to  some  thing,  or  being.  If  this  ten- 
tion  to  worship  God.  By  nature  man  dency  of  our  nature  be  misdirected,  its 
is  a  worshipper.  There  is  that  within  exercise  will  be  most  baneful  in  its  in- 
him  which  impels  him  to  render  homage      flueiice  upon  us.     But  if  it  be  rightly 

471 


PSALM  LXXXL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


directed,  its  exercise  will  influence  us 
most  blessedly.  Religious  worship  is 
set  before  us  here, — 

I.  In  its  Object.  "  God  "—the 
Supremely  Good.     The  object  is — 

1.  A  Person.  Not  an  abstraction  of 
the  intellect,  or  a  mental  concept,  a  mere 
idea.  Nor  yet  an  impersonal  influence 
or  force.  Nor  yet  the  absolute  sub- 
stantia underlying  all  phenomena.  But 
a  Divine  Person. 

2.  A  Person  related  to  us.  The  Psal- 
mist does  not  represent  God  as  en- 
throned in  solitary  and  awful  grandeur, 
having  no  interest  in  His  creatunes,  and 
being  inaccessible  to  them.  He  is  "  God 
our  strength,"  **  the  God  of  Jacob,"  who 
regards  the  cry  of  His  troubled  people, 
and  delivers  them.  He  is  deeply  con- 
cerned in  the  welfare  of  His  creatiiTes, 
and  is  ever  actively  engaged  in  promot- 
ing it. 

3.  A  Person  of  supreme  excellence. 
"  God,"  the  Good.  He  is  essentially  and 
infinitely  perfect.  He  is  worthy  of  the 
homage  of  the  noblest  spirits.  There 
are  in  Him  those  properties  which  meet 
our  deepest  and  holiest  cravings.  The 
intellect  craves  truth  ;  and  in  Him  are 
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge. The  conscience  cries  out  for 
rectitude ;  and  in  His  character  and 
administration  He  presents  to  us  the 
example  of  immutable  and  perfect  right- 
eousness, and  by  the  salvation  of  Jesus 
Christ  makes  us  partakers  thereof.  The 
heart  longs  for  perfect  goodness,  for 
some  one  to  love  who  meets  its  ideal  of 
excellence,  who  abideth  faithful,  and 
abideth  evermore ;  and  the  longing  is 
met  by  God  in  Christ.  In  Him  the 
heart  finds  rest.  The  spirit  yearns  for 
some  supernal  and  unfading  beauty 
and  glory,  which  it  may  admire  and 
adore  ;  and  God  answers  the  yearning 
by  revealing  Himself  to  "  the  pure  in 
heart."  Here  is  the  one  sublime  Object 
of  true  worship.  "  God  is  greatly  to  be 
feared  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints,  and  to 
be  had  in  reverence  of  all  them  that  are 
about  Him."  "  Give  unto  the  Lord  the 
glory  due  unto  His  name ;  worship  the 
Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness."  "  Holy, 
holy,  holy,  is  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  : 
the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory." 

472 


II.  In  its  character.  Several  charac- 
teristics of  true  religious  praise  are  here 
indicated. 

\.  It  is  hearty.  "  Sing  aloud,  .  .  . 
make  a  joyful  noise."  It  is  not  mere 
loudness  and  noise  that  are  desired,  but 
a  loud  noise  as  the  natural  expression  of 
a  full  heart.  The  Lord  deliiihts  in  the 
hearty  worship  of  His  people.  The 
psalmody  of  merely  professional  choirs, 
however  perfect  artistically  it  may  be, 
is  obnoxious  to  Him  who  will  be  wor- 
shipped '*  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  If 
there  must  be  deficiency  in  our  psalmody, 
it  is  better  far  that  it  should  be  in  the 
musical  execution  than  in  the  spiritual 
feeling. 

2.  It  is  joyous.  "  Make  a  joyful 
noise."  There  are  seasons  in  life  when 
we  feel  that 

"  Notes  of  sadness 
Best  befit  our  state  forlorn." 

But,  when  we  recall  the  benefits  which 
we  have  received  from  God,  and  the 
great  things  which  He  has  done  for  us, 
songs  of  gladness  should  be  the  true 
expression  of  our  feelings.  We  should 
praise  God  not  with  funeral  dirges,  but 
with  grateful  anthems ;  not  with  plain- 
tive cries,  but  with  cheerful  hearts  and 
joyous  songs. 

3.  It  is  variously  expressed.  "  Take  a 
psalm,  and  bring  hither  the  timbrel,  the 
pleasant  harp,  with  the  psaltery,"  &c. 
The  use  of  both  vocal  and  instrumental 
music  is  here  enjoined.  It  is  an  igno- 
rant prejudice  which  would  exclude  all 
instrumental  music  from  religious  wor- 
ship, a  prejudice  which  is  directly 
opposed  to  much  of  the  teaching  of 
the  inspired  Word  concerning  worship. 
When  instrumental  music  is  an  aid  to 
vocal,  and  when  it  stimulates  or  ex- 
presses religious  emotions,  it  is  not  only 
lawful,  but  eminently  desirable. 

III.  In  its  obligation.  "  This  was 
a  statute  for  Israel,"  &c.  Religious 
worship  is  here  represented  as  a  binding 
duty.  On  what  ground  does  this  obli- 
gation rest?  Why  does  God  require  us 
to  worship  Him  ? 

1.  Because  it  is  right.  The  obliga- 
tion to  praise  God  is  based  upon — (1.) 
What  He  is  in  relation  to  us.      He  is 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


P8ALM  LXXXI. 


our  Creator,  Sustainer,  Sovereign.  (2.) 
What  He  is  in  Himself.  He  is  a  Being 
of  infinite  perfection.  We  are  so  con- 
stituted that  we  ought  to  reverence  that 
which  is  holy,  to  love  that  which  is  kind 
and  good,  to  admire  that  which  is  beau- 
tiful, to  trust  that  which  is  truthful.  God 
is  infinitely  truthful,  beautiful,  good,  and 
holy,  therefore  we  ought  to  trust,  ad- 
mire, love,  and  adore  Him — we  ought 
to  worship  Him.  Or  we  may  argue  the 
obligation  to  worship  God, — 

2.  Because  it  is  needful.  That  neces- 
sity shapes  itself  to  our  mind  in  this 
way.  (1.)  Man  must  worship.  If  he 
wa)rship  not  the  true  God,  he  will  exalt 
some  creature  into  a  god,  or  make  an 
idol  of  wealth,  pleasure,  fame,  (fee.  (2.) 
I'hat  which  man  worships  exercises  the 
mightiest  influence  upon  him.  Worship 
is  a  transforming  thing.  We  become 
like  unto  the  object  of  our  worship. 
Let  a  man  make  power  his  idol,  and  he 
will  grow  into  a  cruel  tyrant.  Let  any 
one  worship  pleasure,  and  his  sensuous 
and  animal  nature  will  be  developed  at 
tije  expense  of  his  moral  and  religious 
nature.  Let  another  make  wealth  his 
god,  and  he  will  shrivel  into  a  wretched 
miser.  Let  a  man  worship  any  fellow- 
creature,  and  he  will  come  to  resemble 
him,  and  it  is  very  probable  that  the 
resemblance  will  be  most  complete  in 
eccentricities  and  imperfections.  (3.) 
The  tvorshi]^  of  God  is  the  only  one  which 
is  conducive  to  human  well-being.  Wor- 
shipping God  our  whole  nature  receives 
harmonious  and  happy  development. 
Adoring  Him  in  Christ  we  "  are  being 
transfigured  into  the  same  image  from 
glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Lord  the 
Spirit."  Our  highest  blessedness  is  in 
the  worship  of  Him  "  who  is  God  over 
all,  blessed  for  ever."  Therefore  the 
Lord  commands  us  to  worship  Him. 

IV.  In  its  incentives.     *'  I  removed 


his  shoulder  from  the  burden :  his 
hands  were  delivered  from  the  pots," 
&c.  The  Psalmist  in  verses  6  and  7 
represents  Jehovah  as  addressing  them, 
and  reminding  them  of  His  goodness  in 
delivering  them  from  Egypt,  with  its 
oppressions  and  distresses.  He  does 
this  as  an  incentive  to  them  to  worship 
God.  God's  goodness  to  us  should 
awaken  our  gratitude  to  Him,  and  gra- 
titude is  one  of  the  chief  elements  of 
worship.  The  remembrance  of  God's 
former  mercies  should  awaken  us  to 
praise  Him  in  thankful  songs ;  while 
the  blessings  that  we  are  constantly  re- 
ceiving should  lead  us  to  live  lives  of 
grateful  praise.  A  correct  estimate  of 
God's  goodness  to  us  and  its  due  im- 
pression upon  our  heart  would  prove  an 
abiding  incitement,  and  ever-increasing 
in  power,  to  move  us  to  worship 
Him. 

Conclusion. — \.  See  these  character- 
istics of  true  worship.  It  must  have 
God  for  its  Object ;  it  should  be  hearty, 
joyous,  and  reverent,  and  it  may  be 
variously  expressed.  2.  Remember  thai 
such  worship  is  a  duty  which  we  owe  to 
God.  Reason,  conscience,  gratitude, 
aspiration,  and  the  holy  Word  all  urge 
the  command,  *'  Thou  shalt  worship  the 
Lord  thy  God."  3.  Let  us  esteem  it  a 
privilege  rather  than  a  duty.  If  through 
Christ  we  are  atoned  unto  God,  and  are 
walking  with  Him,  then  religious  wor- 
ship will  be  the  heaven  of  our  soul.  4. 
Let  us  cultivate  worship  as  the  very  spirit 
of  our  life.  Let  gratitude,  trust,  adora- 
tion, be  an  abiding  spiritual  state  with 
us.     Let  us  seek  to  be  of  those 

**  With  whom  the  melodies  abide 
Of  th'  everlasting  chime  ; 
Who  carry  music  in  their  heart 
Through  dusky  lane  and  wrangling  mart, 
Plying  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet, 
Because  their  secret  souls  a  holy  strain  repeat." 

—Keble. 


The  Solicitude  of  God  for  the  Well-Beino  of  Man. 

(Verset  8-16.) 


We  shall  endeavour  to  expound  this 
section  of  the  Psalm  from  the  13th 
verse,  as  from  a  centre.     In  that  verse 


the  Psalmist,  speaking  as  the  mouth- 
piece of  the  Lord,  expresses  an  intense 
wish  that  Israel  had  followed  the  Divine 

473 


FSALHLXZZI. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


counsel  and  kept  the  Divine  law.  We 
regard  it  as  an  utterance  of  God's  soli- 
citude for  man's  well-being. 

I.  The  solicitude  of  God  for  the 
well-being  of  man  is  very  deep.  "  Oh, 
that  My  people  had  hearkened  unto  Me, 
and  Israel  had  walked  in  My  ways  ! " 
God  in  His  great  love  here  expresses 
His  regret  because  of  the  sin  and  punish- 
ment of  His  people.  He  is  not  an  un- 
feeling, cold,  heartless  Ruler.  He  is 
profoundly  interested  in  those  over 
whom  He  reigns.  Their  holiness  and 
happiness  are  a  great  pleasure  to  Him. 
Their  sin  and  suffering  cause  Him  sor- 
row and  pain.  This  is  not  the  only 
passage  in  which  He  laments  the  dis- 
obedience and  punishment  of  Israel. 
(See  Isa.  xlviii.  18;  Hos.  xi.  8.)  So 
also  our  Lord  mourned,  with  intense 
feeling,  over  the  guilty  and  doomed 
people  of  Jerusalem.  (See  Matt,  xxiii. 
37.)  With  all  the  unfathomable  love  of 
His  nature  God  mourns  over  our  sins 
and  sorrows.  He  is  not  willing  that 
any  of  His  creatures,  created  in  His 
image,  should  perisli.  The  depth  of  His 
solicitude  for  the  good  of  man  is  mani- 
fested by  the  gift  of  His  only-begotten 
Son  for  human  salvation.  *'  He  spared 
not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him 
up  for  us  all." 

II.  The  solicitude  of  God  for  the 
well-being  of  man  has  respect  to  his 
various  needs.  The  Divine  arrange- 
ments concerning  Israel  were  of  such  a 
nature  that,  if  they  had  kept  the  com- 
mands of  the  Lord,  their  peace  would  have 
been  secured,  their  wants  abundantly 
and  choicely  supplied,  and  their  pros- 
perity continued.      God  would  have — 

1.  Subdued  their  enemies.  "  I  should 
soon  have  subdued  their  enemies,  and 
turned  My  hand  against  their  adver- 
saries. The  haters  of  the  Lord  should 
have  submitted  themselves  unto  Him." 
He  would  have  fought  their  battles  and 
vanquished  their  foes ;  for  they  were 
His  foes  also.  If  they  had  been  obe- 
dient to  the  Lord,  He  would  have  con- 
quered their  enemies  quickly.  "  Soon," 
in  a  little  time,  He  would  have  defeated 
them.  They  would  not  have  been  long 
harassed  by  them.  He  would  have 
conquered  their  enemies  completely.  So 
474 


utterly  would  He  have  broken  their 
power,  that  even  those  whose  hearts 
were  still  hostile  to  them  and  to  Him, 
would  come  and  acknowledge  His  supre- 
macy, feeling  themselves  powerless  to 
stand  against  Him.  Let  Christians 
learn  a  lesson  from  this.  Our  spiritual 
enemies  are  many,  subtle,  and  powerful. 
We  are  not  able  to  subdue  them.  But 
if  we  walk  in  the  commandments  and 
ordinances  of  the  Lord,  He  will  speedily 
vanquish  them  for  us.  Our  foes  cannot 
harm  us  if  we  are  in  the  way  of  His 
commandments.  "  Who  is  he  that  will 
harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that 
which  is  good?"  *' The  God  of  peace 
shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet 
shortly."  If  they  had  been  obedient, 
God  would  have — 

2.  Supplied  their  wants.  "  Open  thy 
mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it.  .  .  .  He 
should  have  fed  them  also  with  the 
finest  of  the  wheat ;  and  with  honey  out 
of  the  rock  should  I  have  satisfied  thee." 
The  provisions  here  indicated  are  most 
choice.  "  The  fat  of  the  wheat,"  the 
very  best  food  of  the  land.  And  even 
in  the  hard  and  barren  rocks  the  bees 
should  have  stored  the  finest  honey  for 
them.  The  provisions  here  indicated 
are  most  abundant.  They  were  to  open 
the  mouth  wide,  and  God  promises  to 
fill  it.  He  promises  to  **  satisfy  "  them. 
How  rich  and  abundant  are  the  bless- 
ings which  God  has  provided  for  us  ! 
Very  appropriately  has  Christianity  been 
compared  to  a  great  feast.  Its  bless- 
ings are  various  and  choice — "  Wine  and 
milk;"  pardon,  peace,  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  favour  of  God,  the  hope  of 
heaven,  &c.  Its  blessings  are  abundant 
and  free.  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  "Buy 
wine  and  milk  without  money  and  with- 
out price."  The  riches  of  Christ  are 
•'  unsearchable  riches."  The  treasures 
of  His  grace  are  inexhaustible,  infinite. 

3.  Continued  their  power  and  pros- 
perity. "  Their  time  should  have  en- 
dured for  ever."  Had  they  remained 
faithful  to  God,  their  possession  of 
Canaan  would  have  been  undisturbed, 
their  peace  and  prosperity  would  have 
been  perpetuated.  It  was  their  unbe- 
lief and  disobedience  towards  God  that 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXXI. 


brought  upon  them  all  their  sufferings 
and  sorrows.  Even  so  it  has  ever  been, 
and  in  all  cases.  *'  Righteousness  ex- 
alteth  a  nation."  Persistence  in  evil 
will  overthrow  the  most  ancient  thrones, 
and  ruin  the  most  magnificent  kingdoms. 
Sin  is  the  deadly  enemy  of  the  peace, 
prosperity,  and  power  of  both  indivi- 
duals and  nations.  "  The  righteous  shall 
hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath  clean 
Lands  shall  be  stronger  and  stronger." 
"  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining 
light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto 
the  perfect  day." 

III.  The  solicitude  of  God  for  the 
well-being  of  man  recognises  the  great 
conditions  of  that  well-being.  Two 
great  conditions  of  the  well-being  of 
man  are  mentioned  here — 

1.  Receiving  communications  from 
God.  "  Oh,  that  My  people  had  heark- 
ened unto  Me."  There  can  be  no  true 
growth,  peace,  or  joy  for  man,  except  in 
communication  with  God.  While  priests 
and  prophets  spake  to  the  Jews,  and 
they  gave  heed  to  them,  it  was  well 
with  tiie  nation.  But  when  the  "  people 
would  not  hearken  to  "  the  voice  of  the 
Lord,  dark  clouds  began  to  gather  on  the 
firmament,  and  speedily  heavy  storms  fell 
upon  them.  The  true  well-being  of  man 
can  never  be  secured  except  his  mind 
and  heart  are  in  a  condition  to  receive 
the  light  and  truth  of  God. 

2.  Rendering  obedience  to  God.  "  O 
that  Israel  had  walked  in  My  ways," 
&c.  Human  blessedness  is  ever  depen- 
dent upon  obedience  to  Divine  law. 
**The  law  is  holy,  and  the  command- 
ment is  holy,  and  just,  and  good  ;"  and 
it  is  only  as  man  walks  in  the  way  of 
the  commandments  that  he  can  be  vir- 
tuous, useful,  or  blessed.  The  Jews  had 
disregarded  the  divinely-prescribed  way; 
and,  as  a  result,  their  peace  and  pros- 
perity had  forsaken  them.  Even  the 
unfathomable  sulicitude  of  God  for  our 
well-being  cannot  secure  that  well-being 
except  we  render  to  Him  loyal  obedience. 
(See  Ps,  xix.  7,  8,  11.)  Wouldst  thou 
know  the  secret  of  the  true  blessedness 
of  being  1  Learn  it  in  true-hearted  obe- 
dience to  God.  "  Blessed  are  the  un- 
defiled  in  the  way,  who  walk  in  the  law 
of  the  Lord.    Blessed  are  they  that  keep 


His  testimonies  ;   that  seek  Him  with 

the  whole  heart." 

IV.  The  solicitude  of  God  for  the 
well-being  of  man  is  exercised  in  har- 
mony with  man's  moral  freedom.  He 
commands,  exhorts,  entreats  Israel  to 
that  obedience  upon  which  their  happi- 
ness depended.  He  endeavoured  to 
allure  them  to  righteousness  and  faith- 
fulness by  His  promises.  He  sought  to 
deter  them  from  evil  by  His  threaten- 
ings.  By  both  goodness  and  severity 
He  tried  to  save  them  from  sin  and  ruin. 
When  all  means  failed  to  bless  and  save 
them,  He  pathetically  bewails  their 
obstinacy  in  sin,  and  its  consequences. 
But  He  never  attempts  to  compel  them 
to  yield  obedience  to  Him.  He  respects 
man's  moral  freedom. 

1.  Notwithstanding  the  solicitude  of 
God  for  their  well-being ,  Israel  would  not 
obey  Him.  He  had  commanded  them 
not  to  worship  idols,  but  to  worship 
Him  alone.  And  as  an  incentive  to 
obedience  He  reminded  them  of  the 
wonderful  display  of  His  power  when 
He  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  of  their  obligations  to 
Him  by  reason  of  what  He  had  done  for 
them.  But  they  would  not  obty  Him. 
God  saves  men  with  the  consent  of  their 
will,  not  against  their  will. 

2.  Notwithstanding  the  solicitude  of 
God  for  their  well-being ^  He  left  them  to 
themselves.  When  Israel  proved  incor- 
rigibly depraved,  He  *'  gave  them  up 
unto  their  own  hearts'  lust ;  and  they 
walked  in  their  own  counsels."  They 
would  not  be  governed  by  Him,  so  He 
allowed  them  to  attempt  self-government. 
They  would  not  listen  to  His  voice,  so 
He  ceased  to  speak  to  them.  "  My 
Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man." 
"Ei)hraim  is  joined  to  his  idols;  let 
him  alone."  *'  Grieve  not  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God."  "  Quench  not  the 
Spirit."  No  punishment  is  more  severe 
than  that  of  being  given  up  by  God, 
and  none  is  more  just.  Man  first  aban- 
dons God,  utterly  turns  his  back  upon 
Him,  persistently  disregards  His  voice, 
and  sets  at  nought  His  will,  and  then 
God  leaves  him  to  take  his  own  course. 
"  My  people  would  not  hearken  to  My 
voice ;  and  Israel   would  none   of  Me. 

475 


FSALM  LXXXI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


So  I  gave  them  up  unto  their  own  hearts' 
lust."  He  will  not  coerce  the  will  of  man. 
Conclusion. — 1.  Let  the  solicitude  of 
God  for  our  salvation  encourage  us  to 
trust  in  Him.  2.  Let  the  solicitude  of 
God  for  our  salvation  arouse  the  careless 
to  solicitude  for  themselves.  If  God  is  so 
anxiously  concerned  for  your  well-being, 
it  surely  behoves  you  to  consider  your 


own  state.  3.  Let  us  beware  lest,  not' 
withstanding  the  solicitude  of  God  for 
our  salvation,  we  destroy/  ourselves  hy  our 
self-will.  Our  moral  freedom  is  a  most 
glorious  endowment.  Let  us  not  per- 
vert it  into  a  crushing  curse. 

**  Our  wills  are  ours,  we  know  not  how ; 
Our  wills  are  ours,  to  make  them  Thine." 

— Tennyson, 


Exhortation,  Promise,  and  Encouragement. 


(  Verse 

Illustrations  of  this  metaphor  are 
often  met  with.  Oriental  rulers  have 
been  known  to  put  jewels  into  the  mouth 
of  a  favourite.  God's  blessings  are 
better  than  these.  He  pays  well.  There 
is  another  illustration.  At  an  Eastern 
feast  the  master  will  take  a  piece  of  the 
fattest  part  of  the  meat,  dip  it  in  the 
liquid  fat,  and,  by  way  of  compliment, 
will  put  it  in  the  mouth  of  a  favoured 
guest.  There  is  yet  another  illustration. 
Last  year  I  discovered  suddenly  a  nest 
of  young  birds.  Unable  to  fly,  the  little 
creatures  at  once  mistook  the  intruder  for 
their  mother,  or  their  father,  and  opened 
their  mouths,  until  each  seemed  to  be 
all  mouth.     The  text  contains — 

I.  An  exhortation.  "  Open  thy 
mouth  wide."  What  does  it  mean] 
1.  Labour  after  a  sense  of  need.  The 
birds  feel  a  lack  by  instinct.  Prayer 
with  Christ's  people  should  be  an  in- 
stinct also.  We  need  all  things,  and 
in  ourselves  have  nothing.  Let  us  be- 
come conscious  of  weakness.  We  have 
not  attained  to  a  high  degree  of  grace, 
if  we  think  we  have  done  so.  A  sense 
of  spiritual  wealth  is  a  token  of  poverty. 
We  must  count  ourselves  nothing.  2. 
Open  the  mouth  wide  and  increase  the 
vehemence  of  desire,  so  tliat  "no"  cannot 
be  taken  for  an  answer.  Prayers  speed 
best  which  are  vehement,  not  those 
which  "besiege"  the  throne  of  the 
Almighty,  and  make  one's  flesh  creep  by 
their  irreverence.  Still,  if  we  would 
have  great  things,  we  must  want  them 
terribly,  must  "  hunger  and  thirst  after 
righteousness."  3.  The  way  of  opening 
the  mouth — pray  for  capacity.  In  the 
bird's  nest  where  goes  the  biggest  piece  1 
Into  the  widest  mouth.  It  is  so  with 
476 


10.) 

usj  we  have  difl'erent  capacities.  We 
are  not  straitened  in  God,  but  in  our- 
selves. A  bushel  cannot  be  put  intu  a 
peck.  May  we  become  more  capacious. 
Let  us  seek  after  greater  things.  God 
can  do  more  than  we  ask.  He  that 
craves  spiritual  good  will  have  it — God 
will  be  sure  to  give  it.  It  is  in  His  way 
to  give  great  things.  We  should  not 
ask  trifles,  nor  be  satisfied  with  being 
little  Christians.  Then  we  must  attempt 
great  things.  William  Huntingdon 
prayed  for  a  pair  of  leather  breeches, 
and  he  got  them.  William  Carey  prayed 
for  India.  The  one  was  a  little  thing, 
soon  done  with ;  the  other  is  still  being 
answered. 

IL  A  promise.  "  I  will  fill  it."  It 
is  a  great  God  who  says  it.  God  has  a 
way  of  filling  our  mouths  so  that  they 
are  never  empty.  What  does  He  fill  us 
with  ?  With  prayer,  with  arguments,  a 
sense  of  want,  of  desire.  He  will  give 
all  kinds  of  spiritual  blessing. 

III.  An  encouragement.  It  is  Jeho- 
vah who  speaks.  He  says,  "  I  am  God." 
With  men  ask  little,  and  expect  less; 
with  God  ask  much,  and  expect  more. 
We  cannot  with  our  need  surpass  His 
benevolence.  In  prayer  we  ask  our 
own,  because  we  are  Christ's.  The 
Lord  has  brought  us  from  Egypt.  He 
cannot  do  for  us  again  so  much  as  He 
has  already  done.  Life  in  the  soul  is 
the  master  blessing.  What  cannot  God 
do  who  brought  the  plagues  on  the 
enemies  of  Israel  ?  Who  would  not  ask 
great  things  of  such  a  God  1  He  makes 
a  path  for  His  people.  And  we  have 
been  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb. — G.  H.  Spurgeon,  from  a  report 
in  The  Christian  World, 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXXXIt 


PSALM    LXXXIL 

Introduction. 

Superscription, — **  A  Psalm  of  Asaph."  (See  Introduction  to  Psalm  Ixxlv.) 
Occasion. — We  are  unable  to  determine  upon  what  occasion  the  Psalm  was  written.  It  is 
dear,  however,  that  it  is  addressed  to  wicked  magistrates  or  judges.  It  has  been  called  '*  the 
Judges'  Psalm,  wherein  is  taught  the  duty  of  judges  and  rulers."  The  question  has  arisen 
whether  the  Psalm  is  directed  against  wicked  judges  amongst  the  Jews,  or  whether  we  are  to 
regard  the  Jews  as  the  poor  and  afflicted,  and  their  heathen  enemies  as  the  unjust  judges.  The 
former  appears  to  be  the  correct  opinion.  All  that  is  here  said  of  corrupt  magistrates  may 
frequently  have  been  said  of  the  judges  of  the  Hebrews.  (Comp.  Isa.  i.  17,  23,  26.)  And 
there  are  in  the  Psalm  itself  eouTincing  eTidences  that  it  was  intended  to  apply  to  the  Israelitish 
rulers. 


Aspects  of  Maqistraoy. 


In  this  Psalm  Asaph  sets  magistrates 
and  judges  before  us  in  several  aspects. 

I.  As  occupying  a  distinguished 
position.  He  speaks  of  them  as 
**  gods  "  and  "  sons  of  the  Most  High." 
The  word  Elohim,  "  gods,^'  is  one  of 
the  names  applied  to  the  Supreme 
Being.  It  is  not  like  Jehovah,  a  name 
indicating  essence,  but  a  name  of  office. 
The  word  Elohim  occurs  in  several 
places,  where  it  is  translated  ^^  judges  " 
(Exod.  xxi.  6;  xxii.  8,  9,  28).  This 
name  was  given  to  the  judges  as  repre- 
senting God  in  the  theocracy,  and  as 
judging  in  His  name  and  by  His  autho- 
rity. In  charging  the  judges,  Moses 
distinctly  asserted  that  "  the  judgment 
is  God's."  And  in  seeking  judgment 
from  them  the  people  are  said  to  seek 
it  from  Elohim,  The  office  of  magis- 
trate is  Divine.  God  by  His  servants 
applies  to  them  one  of  His  own  names. 
They  are  appointed  to  administer  judg- 
ment for  Him.  They  represent  Him  in 
His  judicial  relation  to  men.  They  are 
to  be  honoured  because  of  their  office. 
And,  under  the  theocracy,  any  insult 
which  was  offered  to  them  was  regarded 
as  offered  to  God  Himself.  St.  Paul 
says,  "  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained 
of  God.  Whosoever  therefore  resisteth 
the  power,  resisteth  the  ordinance  of 
God  :  and  they  that  resist  shall  receive 
to  themselves  damnation."  The  office 
of  magistrate  and  judge  is  one  of  the 
most  responsible  and  honourable  of  all 
offices,  and  should  be  filled  by  men  of 
keen  and  comprehensive  intelligence 
and  of  unimpeachable  uprightness.    It  is 


an  office,  too,  which  shonld  ever  be  re- 
garded with  respect  and  honour. 

II.  As  observed  by  God.  "God 
standeth  in  the  congregation  of  the 
mighty ;  He  judgeth  among  the  gods." 
Perowne  :  "  God  standeth  in  the  con- 
gregation of  God."  ''  The  congregation 
of  God "  is  the  congregation  of  Israel, 
the  people  of  God,  among  whom  the 
judges  were  called  to  exercise  their  func- 
tions, and  among  whom  He  can  suffer  no 
injustice.  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  the 
exercise  of  magistracy  among  His  people 
was  carried  on  beneath  His  inspection. 

1.  He  is  the  observer  of  all  magisterial 
acts.  He  stands  in  the  congregation  of 
His  people,  mindful  of  their  interests, 
taking  cognisance  of  their  affairs,  noting 
their  oppressions,  and  watching  how 
they  fared  at  the  seat  of  judgment.  In 
all  courts  of  justice  He  is  present,  see- 
ing whether  righteousness  is  enthroned 
there. 

2.  He  is  the  Judge  of  all  magisterial 
acts.  "  He  judgeth  among  the  gods." 
At  His  bar  those  who  have  judged 
others  must  stand  and  be  judged  them- 
selves. It  is  a  solemn  consideration  for 
all  magistrates  and  judges  that  they 
must  appear  at  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ,  and  render  an  account  for  every 
administration  of  the  law  which  they 
have  exercised.  Let  them  ponder  it, 
and  strive  to  discharge  their  important 
duties  uprightly  and  faithfully.  Let  the 
oppressed  remember  it  and  rejoice.  God 
judgeth  in  the  earth.  He  will  ultimately 
correct  all  false  judgments,  and  judge 
righteously  amongst  all  men. 

477 


P8ALU  LXXXn. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


III.  As    called    to    the    highest 

duties.  Judges  are  exhorted  by  the 
poet  to  "judge  the  poor  and  fatherless, 
do  justice  to  the  afflicted  and  needy; 
deliver  the  poor  and  needy,  rid  them  out 
of  the  hand  of  the  wicked."  (Comp. 
Isa.  i.  17.)  The  idea  seems  to  loe  that 
judges  were  to  take  up  the  causes  of 
those  who  were  unable  to  urs-e  them 
themselves,  whether  by  reason  of  orphan- 
hood, poverty,  or  any  other  disability. 
Not  that  they  should  pronounce  verdicts 
in  their  favour  because  they  were  orphans 
or  poor,  but  that  their  poverty  or  orphan- 
hood should  not  be  any  barrier  in  the 
way  of  obtaining  their  rights.  The 
Supreme  Judge  has  ever  warmly  es- 
poused the  cause  of  the  widow,  the  father- 
less, the  poor,  and  the  oppressed.  Hear 
His  Word  on  this  subject.  (See  Exod. 
xxii.  22-24  j  Deut.  x.  17, 18,  xxvii.  19; 
Ps.  Ixviii.  5,  cxlvi.  9.)  Let  magistrates 
remember  that  God  is  the  helper  of  the 
helpless,  the  champion  of  the  cause  of 
the  fatherless,  the  widow,  and  the  needy: 
and  let  them  see  to  it  that  they  atten- 
tively regard  and  justly  deal  with  the 
causes  w^hich  God  has  espoused.  *^  If  a 
poor  man  has  an  honest  cause,  his 
poverty  must  be  no  prejudice  to  his 
cause,  how  great  and  powerful  soever 
tliose  are  that  contend  with  him." 
"  Suffer  not  the  afflicted  to  be  further 
afflicted  by  enduring  injustice,  and  let 
not  the  needy  long  stand  in  need  of  an 
equitable  hearing." 

IV.  As  exhibiting  the  worst  per- 
versity. The  judges  and  magistrates  are 
charged  with  the  gravest  perversion  of 
their  high  office.  The  Psalmist  accuses 
them  of — 

1.  Ignorance,  "They  know  not, 
neither  will  they  understand  ;  they  walk 
on  in  darkness."  They  were  ignorant 
probably  in  two  respects — (1.)  As  re- 
gards the  law.  They  had  not  striven  to 
make  themselves  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  law  which  they  were  ap- 
pointed to  administer.  (2.)  As  regards 
the  facts  of  the  causes  which  were 
brought  before  them.  They  did  not 
patiently  and  thoroughly  investigate  the 
causes  on  which  they  were  called  to 
adjudicate.  Their  ignorance  was  wilful. 
They  did  not  care  to  know  the  law  or 
478 


the  facts.  Their  high  office  had  lost  for 
them  its  sacredness.  The  ruling  motive 
of  their  conduct  was  selfishness  rather 
than  the  desire  to  discharge  their  duties 
intelligently  and  conscientiously.  They 
love  bribes  rather  than  truth  and  right- 
eousness.  They  have  left  ^'  the  paths  of 
uprightness  to  walk  in  the  ways  of 
darkness,"  and  now  "  they  walk  on  in 
darkness."  How  can  such  men  dis- 
charge the  holy  duties  of  their  office 
aright  1  The  Psalmist  accuses  them 
of— 

2.  Injustice.  "  How  long  will  ye 
judge  unjustly  and  accept  the  persons 
of  the  wicked^"  The  injustice  with 
which  the  judges  are  charged  is  that  of 
partiality  or  favouritism.  They  did 
not  deal  with  and  decide  cases  according 
to  their  facts  and  circumstances,  accord- 
ing to  their  merits,  but  according  to 
the  wealth,  or  rank,  or  influence  of  the 
persons  concerned.  Tliey  not  simply 
showed  favour  to  the  rich,  the  ex- 
alted in  rank,  and  the  powerful.  That 
would  have  been  evil.  Partiality  is 
ever  wrong  in  a  judge.  But  they  ac- 
cepted the  persons  of  the  wicked.  They 
showed  favour  to  them  in  their  wicked- 
ness. A  greater  perversion  of  judgment 
is  almost,  if  not  quite,  incoiiceivable. 
As  we  have  seen,  the  office  of  magistrate 
or  judge  is  one  of  the  highest  and  most 
important,  but  when  it  is  perverted,  the 
perversion  is  most  sinful,  aud  the  result 
most  terrible.  The  office  itself  is 
Divine  ;  the  conduct  of  the  men  who 
filled  it  was  diabolic.  And  the  result  of 
this  maladministration  of  justice  was 
extreme  social  disorder,  "  All  the  foun- 
dations oi  the  earth  are  out  of  course." 
The  whole  fabric  of  society  was  shaken, 
and  seemed  to  be  tottering  into  ruin. 
Its  very  foundation  principles  were  dis- 
located. These  corrupt  judges,  instead 
of  promoting  order  and  harmony,  were 
bringing  all  things  into  a  state  of 
anarchy  and  misery. 

V.  As  tending  to  a  great  change. 
"Ye  shall  die  like  men,  and  fall  like  one 
of  the  princes,"     Here  we  have — 

1.  Something  which  is  common  to  all 
men.  These  judges  had  been  spoken  of 
as  "gods,"  but  they  must  submit  to 
death  like  the  poorest  wretch  who  had 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


rSALM  Lxxxn. 


ever  stood  at  their  unrighteous  judg- 
ment bar.  Death  comes  equally  to  us 
all,  and  makes  all  equal  when  it  comes. 
In  that  respect,  the  peer  has  no  advan- 
tage over  the  peasant,  or  the  prince  over 
the  pauper.  "  He  bringeth  the  princes 
to  nothing ;  He  maketh  the  judges  of 
the  e:irth  as  vanity."  "  All  flesh  is  as 
grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the 
flinver  of  grass."  Death  is  the  great 
leveller. 

2.  Something  peculiar  to  men  of  exalted 
'position.  "  Fall  like  one  of  the  princes." 
Some  interpret  this  that  death  would 
be  more  painful  to  them  amid  their 
worldly  power  and  material  luxuries 
than  to  the  poor  amid  their  poverty 
and  hardship.  Their  elevated  position 
would  render  their  fall  the  more  dis- 
tressing. But  the  true  interpretation 
seems  to  be  that  they  should  die  a 
violent  death,  and  be  cut  off  in  the 
midst  of  their  days.  '*  The  expression, 
*  as  one  of  the  princes,'  reminds  them  of 
the  numerous  examples  in  early  times  of 
similar  dignitaries  who  were  removed  by 
the  judgment  of  God.  The  connection 
shows  that  it  is  fallen  princes  that  are 
meant."  Men  holding  high  and  respon- 
sible positions  who  abuse  their  privileges 
and  powers,  are  frequently  cut  down 
by  violence.  "  Bloody  and  deceitful 
men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days." 
How  vain,  then,  is  it  for  men  to  pride 
themselves  upon  their  eminent  positions 
or  sounding  titles  ! 

The  conduct  of  magistrates  and  judges 
is  here  set  forth — 

VI.  As  leading  man  to  cry  for  the 
inauguration  of  the  direct  magistracy 
of  God.  "Arise,  0  God,  judge  the 
earth  :  for  Thou  shalt  inherit  all 
nations." 

1.  This  cry  springs  fi'om  man^s  long- 
ing for  judgment.  In  all  ages  the 
wTonged  and  oppressed  have  lifted  up 
their  hands  to  heaven,  and  implored  the 
interposition  of  God.  Justice  being 
denied  them  here,  they  have  turned 
their  imploring  eyes  to  God  and  cried, 
**  Arise,  0  God,  judge  the  earth." 

2.  This  cry  implies  the  inadequacy  oj 
human  judgment*,     Man  has  failed  to 


rectify  the  wrongs  under  which  the  race 
has  groaned  for  ages.  The  administra- 
tion of  justice  has  often  been  malad- 
ministration, a  disgrace  and  a  curse. 
And,  even  at  its  best,  human  magistracy 
is  not  able  to  rectify  the  disorders,  and 
adjust  the  inequalities  of  this  world. 

3.  This  cry  implies  confidence  in  the 
judgment  of  God.  The  Psalmist  trusted 
the  justice  of  God.  From  the  partiality 
and  corruption  of  human  judges  he  con- 
fidently carried  his  appeal  to  "  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth." 

**  Heaven  is  above  all,  yet ;  there  Bits  a  Judge 
That  no  king  can  corrupt." — Shakespeare, 

The  Psalmist  trusted  the  sovereignty  of 
God.  He  knew  that  all  nations  be- 
longed to  Him.  The  administration  of 
the  affairs  of  the  whole  world  pertained 
to  Him.  And  so  the  Psalmist  appealed 
to  Him,  in  strong  assurance  that  H« 
would  hear  and  respond  to  his  appeal. 
The  grand  hope  of  the  world  is  in  the 
interposition  of  Him  whose  justice  is 
unimpeachable,  and  whose  sovereignty  is 
universal. 

Conclusion.  — 1.  Let  us  he  thankful 
that  in  this  land  and  in  this  age,  as  a 
rule,  justice  is  administered  with  great 
intelligence  and  strict  impartiality.  2. 
Let  unjust  magistrates  and  judges,  and 
all  who  seek  to  gain  or  promote  an  un- 
righteous cause,  he  warned,  "  He 
judgeth  among  the  gods." 

"  In  the  corrupted  currents  of  this  world, 
OfEence's  gilded  hand  may  shove  by  justice  : 
And  oft  'tis  seen,  the  wicked  prize  itself 
Buys  out  the  law.     But  'tis  not  so  above  : 
There  is  no  shuflGling,  there  the  action  lies 
In  its  true  nature ;  and  we  ourselves  com- 

pell'd, 
E'en  to  the  teeth  and  forehead  of  our  faults, 
To  give  in  evidence." — Shakespeare. 

3.  Let  the  oppressed  hehold  their 
hope.  "  He  shall  judge  thy  jieople  with 
righteousness,  and  thy  poor  with  judg- 
ment. He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the 
people,  He  shall  save  the  children  of  the 
needy,  and  shall  break  in  pieces  the 
oppressor."  "Arise,  0  God,  judge  the 
earth;  for  Thou  shalt  inherit  all 
nations." 


479 


FSALU  LXXXm. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


The  Pilgrimage  of  the  Wicked, 

(Verse  5.) 


**  They  walk  on  in  darkness." 

The  life  of  all  men  upon  earth  is  a 
pilgrimage,  a  journey. 

1.  A  journey  constantly  prosecuted. 
Asleep  or  awake,  frivolous  or  earnest, 
sinful  or  holy,  we  are  ever  advancing  on 
this  journey.  2.  A  journey  rapidly 
prosecuted.  "  My  days  are  swifter  than 
a  post ;  they  flee  away,  they  see  no  good. 
They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships ; 
as  the  eagle  that  hasteth  to  the  prey." 
3.  A  journey  irretraceably  prosecuted. 
In  the  walk  of  life  there  is  no  going 
back  to  our  yesterdays.  We  pass  along 
the  way  but  once.  4.  A  journey  of 
great  importance.  There  is  an  end  to 
our  earthly  pilgrimage,  and  the  nature 
of  the  end  is  determined  by  our  conduct 
on  the  journey.  We  are  preparing  our 
future  heaven  or  hell  as  we  tread  the 
path  of  daily  life.  In  this  journey  the 
wicked  "  walk  on  in  darkness."  Their 
pilgrimage  is  characterised  by — 

I.  Privation.  Night  hides  the  beau- 
ties and  sublimities  of  the  landscape. 
They  are  there  even  as  in  the  daytime, 
but  the  darkness  veils  them.  When 
the  darkness  is  very  great  even  the  stars, 
the  peculiar  glory  of  the  night,  are  ob- 
scured. The  siimer  sees  not  the  mor- 
ally sublime  and  beautiful.  The  glory 
of  God  surrounds  him,  but  he  is  in 
darkness,  and  beholds  it  not.  The 
truth  of  God  is  revealed,  but  he  sees  it 


not,  for  he  walks  on  in  darkness.  The 
spiritual  privations  of  the  wicked  are 
many  and  great ;  e.g.,  pardon,  peace,  <fec. 

II.  Folly.  The  wicked  condemn 
themselves  to  these  privations.  "  They 
walk  on  in  darkness, ''  because  they  will 
so  to  do.  Light  is  in  the  world,  but 
they  elect  to  prosecute  their  journey  in 
the  dark.  They  may  walk  in  the  day 
if  they  will,  but  they  prefer  to  walk  at 
night.  The  sinner  excludes  himself  from 
all  the  true  brightness  and  joy  of  life. 
Sin  is  arrant  folly. 

III.  Peril.  "  If  a  man  walk  in  the 
night,  he  stumbleth."  Obstacles  may 
overthrow  him,  he  may  step  over  a 
precipice  and  be  shattered  into  frag- 
ments, hostile  powers  may  approach  un- 
observed and  kill  him.  Faint  images 
these  of  the  moral  perils  which  beset 
the  sinner  in  his  darkened  walk. 

IV.  Criminality.  To  walk  on  in 
moral  darkness  when  we  may  walk  in  the 
light  of  truth  is  sinful.  "  This  is  the 
condemnation,  that  light  is  come  into 
the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather 
than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil." 

V.  Ruinousness.  If  men  persist  in 
walking  in  darkness  they  will,  sooner  or 
later,  stumble  into  hell. 

Sinners,  turn  from  your  dangerous 
course.  While  yet  you  may,  turn  from 
darkness  to  light,  from  sin  to  the 
Saviour,  from  hell  to  heaven. 


PSALM    LXXXIIL 
Intkoduction, 

This  is  the  last  of  the  Psalms  of  Asaph.  If  the  Psalm  refers  to  the  times  of  Jehoshaphat, 
the  author  was  probably  "  Jabaziel,  a  Levite  of  the  sons  of  Asaph,"  upon  whom  "came  the 
Sph'it  of  the  Lord  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation"  (2  Chron.  xx.  14).  In  the  19th  verse  we 
read  that  *'  The  Levites  stood  up  to  praise  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with  a  loud  voice  on  high." 
Probably  this  was  the  Psalm  which  they  sung. 

Occasion. — Hengstenberg  says,  "  There  is  no  room  for  doubt  as  to  the  historical  occasion 
of  the  Psalm.  It  refers  to  the  war  of  Jehoshaphat  against  the  allied  Edomites,  Moabites, 
Ammonites,  and  other  nations,  and  forms  the  earliest  as  to  subject  of  a  series  of  cognate 
Psalms.  While  it  makes  mention  of  the  help  of  God  in  the  midst  of  danger,  the  47th 
Psalm  was  sung,  after  the  discomfiture  of  the  enemy,  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  the  48th, 
at  the  thanksgiving  service  in  the  temple.  This  view  has  been  taken  by  all  commentators, 
except  those  who  have  been  prevented  from  arriving  at  the  truth  by  some  prejudice,  such  as 
that  all  the  Psalms  of  Asaph  were  composed  in  David's  time,  or  that  the  narrative  at  2  Chron. 
XX.  is  not  historically  correct."     Alexander,  Perowne,  and  Spurgeon  hold  the  above  view. 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT ARy  .  PSALMS, 


WUUM  LXXXIIt. 


The  Peril  and  Prater  of  the  Church. 


Amyraldus  writes, — "  The  Psalm  may- 
be applied  now  to  the  enemies  of  the 
Christian  Church,  of  which  Israel  was 
the  type.  The  most  important  and 
formidable  of  these  are  assuredly  sin 
and  SataUf  from  whom  we  most  especi- 
ally long  to  be  deliA^ered."  Regarding 
the  Psalm  thus,  in  the  peril  of  Israel  we 
have  an  illustration  of  the  peril  of  the 
Church  of  Clirist,  and  in  the  prayer  of 
Israel  an  illustration  (in  some  respects) 
of  the  prayer  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

I.  The  peril  of  the  Church.  The 
peril  of  Israel  at  this  time  arose  from 
her  enemies,  who  had  banded  themselves 
together  to  make  war  against  her  and 
destroy  her  power.  Several  things  in 
tlie  disposition  and  conduct  of  the  con- 
federate forces  are  here  mentioned  which 
would  make  their  hostility  formidable. 

1.  Their  hostility  uus  violent.  "For, 
lo,  Thine  enemies  make  a  tumult." 
They  were  loud  and  clamorous  in  their 
opposition  to  Israel,  and  were  rushing 
on  tumuituously  to  accomplish  the  de- 
struction of  the  people  of  God.  There 
have  been  times  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  when  violent  opposition 
has  been  directed  against  her.  In  the 
apostolic  age  how  tumultuous  were  her 
foes  !  And  how  they  raged  in  the  time 
of  the  Roman  emperors  !  Such  enemies 
as  Voltaire  and  Tom  Paine  have  been 
loud  in  their  opposition  to  Christianity. 

2.  Their  hostility  was  confident. 
*'  They  that  hate  Thee  have  lifted  up 
the  head."  In  dismay  or  penitence  the 
head  is  bowed  down ;  in  courage  and 
confidence  it  is  lifted  up.  The  enemies 
of  Israel  proudly  lifted  up  their  heads, 
feeling  assured  of  success.  Their  vast 
numbers,  and  compact  unity,  and  great 
power,  seemed  to  them  to  place  their 
triumph  far  beyond  question.  And  so 
men  have  felt  confident  that  they  could 
destroy  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  have 
published  abroad  their  intention  and 
power  to  do  so,  and  to  do  so  speedily — 
with  what  results  the  existence,  position, 
and  power  of  the  Church  to-day  declare. 

3.  T'heir  hostility  was  crafty.  "They 
have  taken  crafty  counsel  against  Thy 

2h 


people,  and  consulted  against  Thy  hid- 
den ones."  They  were  not  only  strong 
in  power,  but  subtle  in  strategy  also. 
Their  plans  were  matured  with  much 
care  and  cunning.  And  Satan  and  his 
emissaries,  in  seeking  to  destroy  the 
Church  of  our  Lord,  put  forth  all  their 
skill  in  the  formation  of  their  schemes 
of  operation.  The  Church  has  to  con- 
tend against  Satanic  cunning  as  well  as 
against  Satanic  power.  "  Put  on  the 
whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be 
able  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the 
devil."  "  That  old  serpent,  called  the 
devil,  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the 
whole  world."  '*  Satan  himself  is  trans- 
formed into  an  angel  of  light." 

4.  TIteir  hostility  aimed  at  the  utter 
ruin  of  Israel.  "  They  said,  Come,  and 
let  us  cut  them  off  from  being  a  nation, 
that  the  name  of  Israel  may  be  no  more 
in  remembrance."  They  did  not  merely 
aim  at  arresting  the  progress  or  crippling 
the  power  of  Israel.  Nothing  would 
satisfy  them  but  the  utter  destruction 
of  the  chosen  people.  They  seek  to  cut 
off  both  root  and  branch  from  the  face 
of  the  earth,  leaving  of  them  not  even  a 
memorial.  Such  is  the  aim  of  Satan 
and  his  allies  against  the  Christian 
Church.  They  would  banish  all  true 
religion  from  the  world.  Every  Chris- 
tian temple  they  would  pervert  into  a 
"  synagogue  of  Satan  ; "  every  godly 
man  they  would  cut  off;  all  religious 
literature  they  would  destroy.  This 
has  been  attempted  by  means  of  perse- 
cution. But  persecution  purified  and 
strengthened  the  Church.  The  foes  of 
the  Church  are  now  seeking  her  over- 
throw by  corruption  and  error  working 
within.  Ritualism  and  Rationalism  are 
doing  their  part  towards  the  destruction 
of  the  Church.  The  rash  and  hasty 
conclusions  of  scientists,  and  the  con- 
ceited dogmatism  of  the  professors  of 
**  the  higher  criticism,"  are  arrayed 
against  the  Book.  But  the  Book  and 
the  Church  are  unconquerable,  inde- 
structible. "  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not 
prevail  against"  the  Church  of  Christ. 

5.  l^heir  hostility  was  united.    "  They 

481 


FSALH  LXXXm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY'  PSALMS, 


have  consulted  together  with  one  con- 
sent ;  they  are  confederate  against 
Thee."  There  was  unanimity  in  their 
counsels.  Their  mutual  hostilities  they 
laid  in  abeyance,  that  tbey  might  unite 
in  one  irresistible  and  all-conquering 
army.  Tbey  solemnly  covenanted  to- 
gether to  seek  the  destruction  of  the 
Hebrews.  And  there  is  unity  amongst 
the  enemies  of  the  Church  in  the  matter 
of  opposing  her  and  seeking  her  over- 
throw. The  Jews  and  Romans,  hostile 
in  other  respects,  united  against  Christ. 
The  Sanhedrim,  Pilate,  Herod,  and  the 
people  all  united  in  opposition  to  Him. 
"  Of  a  truth  against  Thy  holy  child 
Jesus,  whom  Thou  hast  anointed,  both 
Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the 
Gentiles  and  the  people  of  Israel,  were 
gathered  together."  This  is  an  illus- 
tration of  the  opposition  of  the  world 
and  the  devil  to  the  Church  in  our  own 
day.  Opposed  in  other  things,  the 
unchristian  world  is  united  in  this. 

6.  Their  hostility  was  powerful.  No 
less  than  ten  nations  were  joined  in  this 
confederacy  against  Israel.  "  Edom, 
the  Ishmaelites,  Moab,  the  Hagarenes, 
Gebal,  Anion,  Amalek,  the  Philistines 
with  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre,  Assur 
also."  All  the  nations  bordering  on 
Palestine  had  joined  the  confederacy, 
so  that  the  chosen  people  were  quite 
surrounded  by  enemies.  And  some  of 
these  enemies  were  very  powerful,  so 
that  they  felt  confident  of  complete 
triumph.  And  Israel  turned  to  God 
in  prayer  for  help  as  to  their  only  re- 
source. The  enemies  of  the  Christian 
Church  are  many  and  mighty.  Satan 
is  strong,  subtle,  and  numerously  sup- 
ported. Sin  is  strong.  Many  forms  of 
evil  are  united  against  the  Church.  The 
lusts  of  the  flesh,  drunkenness,  gluttony, 
uncleanness,  the  greed  of  gold,  the 
ruinous  absorption  of  mind  and  heart 
in  temporal  and  material  things,  the 
frivolities  of  fashionable  life,  the 
vices  of  fast  life,  the  assaults  of 
dishonest  scepticism,  the  miserable 
negations  of  atheism,  and  the  corrup- 
tions within  the  Church  itself,  all  tend 
to  its  overthrow.  Yet  the  Church, 
loyally  trusting  in  God,  is  stronger  than 
all  her  foes.  They  may  assault  her,  but 
482 


their  assaults  will  be  like  those  of  the 
tumultuous  waves  which  furiously  dash 
against  a  rock-bound  coast  to  be  hurled 
back  as  if  in  calm  contempt. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  this  statement 
of  their  trouble  and  danger  the  poet 
represents  the  enemies  of  Israel  as  the 
enemies  of  God,  the  confederacy  against 
Israel  as  a  confederacy  against  God,  and 
the  people  of  Israel  as  the  people  of 
God.  Thus  they  identify  their  cause 
and  interest  with  God's.  Their  foes 
hated  the  laws  and  religion  of  God; 
and  in  striking  at  His  people,  they  were 
striking  at  His  kingdom  in  this  world. 
The  strength  of  the  Church  is  in  her 
oneness  with  God.  When  she  is  loyal  to 
Him,  He  saith  to  her  persecutors,  "  Why 
persecutest  thou  Me  ? "  No  weapon  that 
is  formed  against  her  shall  prosper. 

II.  The  prayer  of  the  Church. 
"Keep  not  Thou  silence,  0  God  :  hold 
not  Thy  peace,  and  be  not  still,  O  God. 
.  .  .  Do  unto  them  as  unto  the  Midian- 
ites  ;  as  to  Sisera,  as  to  Jabin,"  &c. 

The  people  here  pray — 

1.  For  the  interposition  of  God, 
"  Keep  not  Thou  silence,  O  God  :  hold 
not  Thy  peace,  and  be  not  still,  0  God." 
There  are  times  when  God  seems  as 
though  He  did  not  observe  the  circum- 
stances and  needs  of  His  people,  or  as 
though  He  were  not  concerned  for  their 
prosperity  or  safety.  He  stands  as  it 
were  aside,  taking  no  part  in  their 
affairs.  His  people  here  pray  that  He 
would  not  thus  treat  them  on  this 
occasion,  but  that  He  would  speak  in 
mighty  deeds,  and  arouse  Himself  for 
their  help  and  defence.  The  prayer  of 
this  verse  is  clearly  an  urgent  one.  The 
brevity  and  rapidity  and  repetition  of 
the  request,  all  indicate  the  imminence 
of  the  need  and  the  earnestness  of  the 
desire.  It  is  well  when  the  Church  in 
her  dangers  betakes  herself  to  the  throne 
of  grace  to  implore  the  help  of  God. 
Not  in  the  wealth  of  her  material  re- 
sources, not  in  the  wisdom  and  eloquence 
of  her  leaders,  not  in  the  patronage  of 
parliaments  and  princes,  but  in  the  pre- 
sence and  power  of  God  in  her  midst,  is 
the  Church's  true  and  sure  defence 
against  her  foes. 

2.  For  the  utter  destruction  of  their 


HOMILETIU  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXXIV. 


foes,  "  Do  unto  them  as  unto  the 
Midianites,  as  to  Sisera,  as  to  Jabin," 
&c.  (verses  9-15).  These  petitions  are 
evidently  for  their  utter  destruction. 
The  confederate  foes  of  Israel  had 
agreed  to  seek  her  utter  ruin,  and  now 
in  her  turn  Israel  pleads  with  God  that 
He  would  terrify,  trouble,  and  com- 
pletely destroy  them.  (On  the  impreca- 
tions (vers.  9-17)  see  our  remarks  on 
Psalm  Ixix.  22-28  ;  and  the  quotation 
from  Perowne  on  pp.  163,  164.)  The 
Church  of  Christ  should  both  pray  and 
work  for  the  destruction  of  her  enemies. 
We  would  destroy  the  wicked  by  de- 
stroying their  wickedness.  We  would 
that  all  sinners  were  exterminated  by 
their  being  regenerated  into  saints.  We 
would  that  all  the  enemies  of  the  Lord 
were  destroyed  by  becoming  loyal  to 
Him. 

3.  For  the  confusion  of  their  foes. 
It  seems  strange  to  pray  for  the  confu- 
sion of  their  foes  after  having  prayed 
for  their  complete  destruction.  Yet 
this  is  done  in  the  Psalm.  "Fill  their 
faces  with  shame  :  let  them  be  con- 
founded and  troubled  for  ever."  The 
prayer  is  that  the  schemes  of  the 
enemies  may  be  thwarted,  their  pur- 
poses defeated,  their  designs  baffled, 
their  plans  all  overturned ;  and  that  with 
shame  and  trouble  their  confederacy  may 
be  broken  up  for  ever.  This  is  a  very 
fitting  prayer  for  the  Christian  Church. 
It  is  both  wise  and  right,  our  duty  and 
interest,  to  pray  that  the  counsels  of  the 
wicked  may  be  frustrated,  the  designs  of 
hell  baffled,  and  all  the  politics  of  the 
enemies  of  the  Church  confounded. 


4.  For  the  submission  of  their  foes  to 
God.  "  That  they  may  seek  Thy  name, 
O  Lord."  The  context  will  not  allow 
us  to  interpret  this  as  a  seeking  of  the 
friendship  and  favour  of  God.  It 
means  simply,  that  they  may  seek  Thee 
in  forced  submission,  being  able  to  hold 
out  no  longer.  But  we  who  have 
learned  of  Christ  may  urge  this  petition 
with  a  much  higher  and  diviner  mean- 
ing. It  is  ours  to  pray  that  the  plans 
of  the  enemies  of  God  and  of  His 
Church  may  be  baffled,  that  so  they 
might  be  led  to  know  and  trust  Him. 
May  their  wicked  plans  be  brought  to 
confusion  that  they  might  be  brought 
to  conversion. 

6.  For  the  glory  of  the  Divine  name. 
"  That  men  may  know  that  Thou,  whose 
name  alone  is  Jehovah,  art  the  Most 
High  over  all  the  earth.*'  The  context 
compels  us  to  regard  the  knowledge  and 
acknowledgment  as  not  voluntary,  but 
forced.  The  prayer  is  that  God  would 
so  display  His  power  against  the  foes  of 
Israel  that  men  would  be  compelled  to 
acknowledge  His  supremacy  in  the  earth. 
So,  but  with  a  fuller  and  higher  mean- 
ing, let  the  Christian  Church  pray  for 
the  universal  diffusion  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  glory  of  God. 

The  subject  preaches  its  own  conclu- 
sion. We  are  surrounded  by  a  host  of 
foes ;  "  we  have  no  might  against  the 
great  company  that  cometh  against  us." 
But  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  with  us. 
Through  Him  we  shall  do  valiantly. 
Onward,  Christian  soldiers,  in  God's 
name ;  and  ye  shall  be  "  more  than 
conquerors  through  Him.** 


PSALM   LXXXIV, 

Introduotiok. 

Superscnption. — **  To  the  chief  Musician  upon  Gittith."    (See  Introduction  to  Ph.  IxxzL) 

**A  Psalm  for  the  sons  of  Korah."     (See  Introduction  to  Ps.  xlii.) 

Occasion. — The  Psalm  was  evidently  composed  when  the  writer  was  exiled  from  the 
sanctuary.  It  was  probably  written  by  David  when  be  was  compelled  to  flee  from  Jerusalem 
by  reason  of  the  rebellion  of  Absalom.  He  laments  this  chiefly  because  it  separated  him  from 
•*  the  courts  of  the  Lord."  Homiletically,  the  Psalm  sets  forth,  The  exile's  longing  for  the 
houBa  of  Gk>d,  vera.  1-4  ;  ReligiouB  progresi,  vera.  5-7  ;  and  The  exile's  prftyer^  ▼•ra.  Ikl2» 


483 


MALM  LXXZIT. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS, 


The  Exile's  Longing  for  the  House  op  God. 

(Verses  1-4.) 


The  Psalmist  was  banished  from  his 
capital  and  from  the  tabernacle  of  the 
Most  High  by  the  wicked  rebellion  of 
his  son  Absalom.  This  exile  must  have 
been  one  of  the  most  painful  experiences 
in  the  life  of  the  royal  bard.  When  he 
left  the  holy  city  he  did  not  conceal  his 
sorrow,  but  "  went  up  by  the  ascent  of 
Olivet,  and  wept  as  he  went  up,  and  had 
his  head  covered,  and  he  went  barefoot : 
and  all  the  people  that  were  with  him 
covered  every  man  his  head,  and  they 
went  up,  weeping  as  they  went  up." 
A  sadly  pathetic  sight  this — the  noble 
king  in  his  old  age  driven  forth  by  the 
rebellion  of  his  own  son  from  the  city 
which  he  had  founded  or  ornamented, 
the  abode,  for  many  years,  of  all  his 
power,  his  glory,  and  his  happiness, 
perhaps  never  more  to  return  to  it. 
But  his  great  and  pious  soul  was  great 
and  pious  then  as  ever.  And  in  his 
exile  his  greatest  grief  arose,  from  the 
fact  that  he  was  sundered  from  the 
worship  of  the  tabernacle  of  God,  and 
his  most  ardent  desire  for  himself  was 
to  return  to  an  enjoyment  of  its  privi- 
leges. The  exiles  longing  for  the  house 
of  God — 

I.  Arose  from  his  love  for  the  house 
of  God.  "  How  beloved  are  Thy  taber- 
nacles, O  Lord  of  hosts !  "  "Amiable  " 
or  lovely  does  not  express  the  meaning 
of  the  word  used  ^y  the  Psalmist ;  but 
dear,  beloved.  The  plural,  "taber- 
nacles," is  used  in  reference  to  the 
divisions  of  the  sanctuary,  each  part 
being  regarded  by  the  poet  as  the  abode 
of  God.  The  tabernacle  was  dear  to 
David.  "  Lord,  I  have  loved  the  habi-' 
tation  of  Thy  house,  and  the  place 
where  Thine  honour  dwelleth."  Every 
godly  soul  loves  the  house  of  God,  and 
delights  in  His  worship.  The  Psalmist 
doubtless  had  excellent  reasons  for  his 
love  to  the  house  of  God.  And  so  have 
we.     We  love  it  because — 

1.  It  is  the  place  of  holy  fellowship. 
In  its  sacred  engagements  the  holiest 
and  bravest  souls  unite.  The  com- 
munion of  saints  in  divine  and  blessed 

484: 


exercises  and  experiences — in  penitence, 
prayer,  praise,  aspiration,  adoration — is 
enjoyed  in  the  sanctuary. 

2.  It  is  the  place  of  social  prayer  and 
praise.  There  the  glad  and  grateful 
heart  pours  out  its  joy  and  thankfulness 
to  Him  in  hymns  of  praise  consecrated 
by  a  thousand  precious  memories.  And 
sincere,  humble,  devout  praise  is  a  fore- 
taste of  heaven.  And  there  the  anxious, 
troubled  spirit  can  cast  its  burden  in 
prayer  upon  the  heart  of  the  loving 
Father,  or  its  sin  upon  the  Saviour,  and 
find  rest. 

3.  It  is  the  place  of  instruction  and 
exhortation.  The  teachings  of  the  living 
and  abiding  Word  of  God  are  here  set 
forth.  The  teachings  of  a  godly  and 
enlightened  ministry  caimot  be  too 
highly  estimated.  And  its  warnings 
and  exhortations  are  often  of  unspeak- 
able importance  and  value. 

4.  It  is  the  place  of  Divine  communion. 
"  There,"  said  the  Lord,  "  I  will  meet 
with  thee,  and  I  will  commune  with 
thee  from  above  the  mercy-seat."  To 
the  godly  soul  the  presence  of  God  ia 
the  great  attraction  in  the  sanctuary. 
When  His  presence  is  blessedly  realised, 
the  grand  object  of  worship  is  attained. 
But  if  His  presence  is  not  realised,  no 
matter  whosoever  or  whatsoever  else 
may  be  present,  the  one  essential  thing 
is  lacking.  "  In  His  presence  is  fulness 
of  joy."  Adoration,  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  His  presence  and  approval,  is 
the  heaven  of  the  soul.  For  all  these 
reasons  the  godly  soul  loves  the  house 
of  God. 

II.  Was  a  longing  for  conscious  fel- 
lowship with  God.  "  My  heart  and 
my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God." 
It  was  not  so  much  the  courts  of  the 
Lord's  house  that  he  longed  for  as  the 
living  God  Himself  Beligious  ordi- 
nances are  lifeless,  useless  things,  mere 
formalities,  if  they  do  not  help  us  con- 
sciously to  realise  the  presence  of  the 
living  God.  The  soul  which  is  alive 
and  healthful  cannot  bear  the  sense  of 
distance  from  God.     He  is  its  life,  its 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


PSALM  LXXXIV. 


health,  its  inspiration,  its  joy,  its  crown, 
its  supreme  and  essential  good  ;  and  in 
His  absence  it  languishes  and  is  cast 
down.  Moreover,  the  Psalmist  ad- 
dresses God  as  One  in  whom  he  con- 
fided and  with  whom  he  was  accustomed 
to  hold  converse — "My  King  and  my 
God."  Though  exiled  from  His  courts 
he  still  loves  the  King.  Though  far 
from  the  tabernacle  he  still  claims  God 
as  his  portion.  The  repeated  ^'m7/"ia 
precious  and  suggestive.  It  shows  his 
holy  intimacy  with,  and  strong  confi- 
dence in,  and  deep  affection  for,  God. 
God  is  all  in  all  to  the  godly  soul. 

III.  Was  the  longing  of  his  entire 
being.  "My  soul  longeth,  .  .  .  my 
heart  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the 
living  God."  The  Psalmist  was  not 
conscious  of  any  thought  or  feeling 
opposed  to  this  strong  desire.  His 
whole  being  concurred  in  it.  He  says 
that  his  "flesh"  even,  which  we  so  fre- 
quently find  lusting  against  the  spirit, 
cried  out  for  God.  All  the  desires  and 
aspirations  of  his  nature  were  for  com- 
munion with  God.  The  whole  man, 
with  every  faculty  and  affection,  thirsted 
for  the  sacred  engagements  and  Divine 
communion  of  the  tabernacles  of  the 
Lord.  The  Psalmist  seems  to  have 
attained  that  state  for  which  the  apostle, 
ages  after,  prayed  on  behalf  of  the  Thes- 
salonians.  "The  very  God  of  peace 
sanctify  you  wholly;  and  your  whole 
spirit  and  soul  and  hodi/  be  preserved 
blameless."  Brethren,  blessed  will  it  be 
for  us  when  our  whole  being  is  thus 
athirst  for  God.  In  response  to  such 
desires  God  will  give  fullest  and  divinest 
satisfactions. 

IV.  Was  a  longing  of  great  inten- 
sity. "  My  soul  longethj  yea,  even 
fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord ;  my 
heart  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the 
living  God."  The  word  translated 
^^ longeth"  by  itself  denotes  an  intense 
desire,  a  pining  after  a  thing.  "  It 
means  literally,"  says  Perowne,  "'hath 
grown  pale,'  as  with  the  intensity  of  the 
feeling."  Then  there  are  the  other 
words.  ^^  Fainteth,"  is  spent,  faileth  of 
strength,  is  exhausted.  "  Crieth  out " 
in  earnest  importunate  desire.  It  would 
be  difiicult  to  express  the  intensity  of 


desire  more  strongly  than  it  is  here  ex- 
pressed. It  was,  in  its  intensity,  that 
kind  of  longing  which  God  never  denies, 
when  it  seeks  for  that  which  is  in  accor- 
dance with  His  will.  In  our  day  the 
evidence  of  such  ardent  desire  for  the 
means  of  grace  is  conspicuous  chiefly  by 
its  absence.  In  religious  seivices  to  a 
painful  extent  the  outward  show  and 
glitter  of  ritualistic  ornament,  or  the  fine 
musical  performances  of  professional 
choirs,  or  the  gifts  of  some  popular 
preacher,  are  the  things  desired  rather 
than  the  presence  and  fellowship  of  God. 
Oh,  for  more  of  the  holy  longing  of 
David  ! 

V.  Led  him  to  extol  the  blessedness 
of  those  who  were  constantly  engaged 
in  God's  house.  To  David  the  lot  of 
the  little  birds  who  had  their  nests  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  tabernacle  seemed 
enviable  as  compared  with  his  own. 
They  in  perfect  safety  could  place  their 
dearest  possession,  their  young,  in  their 
nests  about  the  tabernacles ;  but  he  was 
an  exile  far  away  from  the  tabernacle, 
and  exposed  to  constant  and  great  perils. 
And  as  he  thought  of  the  priests  and 
levites  who  ministered  in  the  sanctuary, 
and  who  were  entirely  devoted  to  its 
sacred  services,  and  had  their  dwelling 
near  to  it,  he  said,  "  Blessed  are  they 
that  dwell  in  Thy  house  :  they  will  be 
still  praising  Thee."  So  David  desired 
to  live  all  his  life  in  conscious  and 
blessed  fellowship  with  God,  to  walk 
with  God  every  day  and  in  all  things, 
and  never  to  be  separated  from  the 
opportunities  of  social  worship.  He 
esteemed  the  life  of  those  who  ministered 
in  the  sanctuary  a  life  of  praise.  And 
it  is  certain  that  a  holy  life,  a  life  of 
communion  with  God,  is  a  life  of  praise. 
Whatever  may  be  its  occupations,  what- 
ever its  circumstances  and  outward 
conditions,  praise  will  be  its  spiritual 
mood.  They  who  have  attained  the 
blessedness  of  the  "  Father's  house " 
above,  have  reached  the  fulness  of  that 
the  foretaste  of  which  David  here  speaks 
of.  They  ^^diveir'  in  God's  house. 
They  are  made  "  pillars  in  the  temple 
of  God,  and  go  no  more  out."  In  that 
high  world  every  place  is  consecrated  by 
the  presence  and  smile  of  God.     There 

485 


/' 


FSALM  Lxzznr. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


all    service   is   blessedness ;  activity  is 
ecstasy  ;  work  is  worship. 

Conclusion. — True  social  worship  is 
indeed  a  precious  and  blessed  thing.  It 
is  now  essentially  a  spiritual  thing,  and 
is  independent  of  any  special  locality, 

"  From  every  place  below  the  skies, 
The  grateful  song,  the  fervent  prayer, 
The  incense  of  the  heart,  may  rise 
To  heaven,  and  &id  acceptance  there." 


Let  us  seek  to  live  a  life  of  communion 
with  God  and  praise  to  Him.  Let  our 
life  be  worship. 

•*  My  will  be  swallowed  up  in  Thee  ; 
Light  in  Thy  light  still  may  I  see, 
Beholding  Thee  with  open  face  ; 
Call'd  the  full  power  of  faith  to  prove, 
Let  all  my  hallow'd  heart  be  love, 
And  all  my  spotless  life  be  praise." 

—a  Wedey, 


Religious  Progress. 
(V^ses  5-7.) 


Religious  progresa  is  here  represent- 
ed— 
L  As  deriving  its  support  from  God. 

"  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  strength  is 
in  Thee.''  Spiritual  life  flows  from 
God.  He  starts  the  soul  in  its  upward 
course.  All  true  religious  progress  may 
be  traced  back  to  Him.  All  spiritual 
vitality  and  strength  come  to  men  by 
reason  of  their  connection  with  Him. 
The  explanation  of  this  is  not  difficult. 
Well-grounded  faith  is  a  st7'engthening 
thing.  "  All  things  are  possible  to  him 
that  believeth."  Columbus  with  invin- 
cible faith  is  mightier  than  mutinous 
crews,  conqueror  of  coward  fears,  and, 
despite  his  frail  vessels  and  opposing 
winds  and  waves,  he  accomplishes  what 
the  world  had  pronounced  impossible. 
In  the  spiritual  life  faith  brings  over  the 
all-sufficiency  of  God  to  replenish  the 
exhausted  moral  powers  of  our  being. 
God  is  the  only  true  ground  and  object 
of  faith.  "  He  that  believeth  on  Him 
shall  not  be  ashamed."  Well-centred 
affection  is  a  strengthening  thing.  There 
are  no  difficulties  which  love  will  not  en- 
counter, no  labours  which  it  cannot 
endure,  no  perils  which  it  cannot  brave. 
Supreme  love  to  God  fills  the  soul  with 
invincible  energy.  Only  as  our  love  is 
fixed  on  Him  shall  we  find  complete 
satisfaction  and  full  spiritual  power. 
Well  assured  hope  is  a  sti^engthening 
thing.  It  has  been  well  said  that  "  Hope 
is  the  companion  of  power,  and  the 
mother  of  success ;  for  whoso  hopes 
strongly  has  within  him  the  gift  of 
miracles."  While  a  man  retains  hope,  how- 
ever adverse  his  circumstances  may  be,  he 
486 


may  yet  conquer.  Hope  imparts  one  of 
the  most  powerful  of  inspirations.  But 
in  the  spiritual  life  God  is  the  only 
object  or  person  in  whom  we  can  safely 
place  our  hope.  In  every  way  the 
strength  of  the  godly  man  is  in  God. 

II.  As  advancing  in  conformitywith 
God's  law.  Hengstenberg's  rendering 
and  interpretation  of  the  last  clause  of 
the  fifth  verse  appears  to  us  to  be  cor- 
rect. '*  In  whose  hearts  are  ways.  The 
second  condition  of  salvation  is,  that  a 
man  has  ways,  made  roads,  in  his  heart. 
By  this  is  designated  zealous,  moral 
effort,  blamelessness,  and  righteousness. 
The  heart  of  man,  in  its  natural  condi- 
tion, appears  like  a  pathless  wilderness, 
full  of  cliffs  and  precipices  ;  and  repent- 
ance is  a  levelling  of  the  roads.  The 
following  passages  are  parallel :  Psalm 
1.  23,  '  whoever  prepares  a  way,  to  him 
will  I  show  the  salvation  of  Gi)d  ; '  Prov. 
xvi.  7  ;  and  Isa.  xl.  3,  4."  Matthew 
Henry,  in  applying  the  words,  also  uses 
them  in  this  sense.  **  If  we  make  God's 
promise  our  strength,  we  must  make 
God's  Word  our  rule,  and  walk  by  it." 
There  can  be  no  true  religious  progress 
except  God's  will  is  our  law  of  life  and 
conduct.  It  is  in  vain  that  we  talk  of 
"  higher  life  "  except  we  are  growing  in 
hearty  recognition  of,  and  loyal  obe- 
dience to,  that  will.  The  soul  that  is 
really  progressing  utters  itself  in  strains 
like  these:  "Make  me  to  understand 
the  way  of  Thy  precepts.  I  will  run 
the  way  of  Thy  commandments,  when 
Thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart.  I  have 
refrained  my  feet  from  every  evil  way, 
that  I  might  keep  Thy  Word.      Thy 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXXlV. 


Word  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  light 
unto  my  path."  True  religious  progress 
is  progress  iu  holiness  of  heart  and  life. 

III.  As  making  unfavourable  cir- 
cumstances conduce  to  its  own  ends. 
"  Who  passing  tli rough  tlie  Valley  of 
Baca  make  it  a  well ;  the  rain  also 
filleth  the  pools."  "  The  Valley  of  Baca  " 
is  the  valley  of  tears  or  of  weeping. 
We  are  by  no  means  certain  that  the 
Psalmist  by  the  phrase  referred  to  any 
particular  locality.  And  if  he  did  it 
is  impossible  now  to  determine  where 
that  valley  was.  The  idea  is  that,  "  As 
the  valley  of  weeping  is  an  image  of 
misery,  the  fountain  is  an  image  of  sal- 
vation." By  their  faith  in  God  and 
fellowship  with  Him  they  transformed 
the  gloomy  and  inhospitable  valley  into 
a  valley  of  refreshment  and  joy.  By 
the  grace  of  God  the  godly  soul  can 
compel  the  unfavourable  circumstances 
of  his  pilgrimage  to  help  him  onward 
in  his  career.  In  the  desert  of  afflic- 
tion the  grace  of  God  opens  up  a  foun- 
tain of  consolation  and  peace,  and  so 
the  affliction  becomes  the  occasion  of 
blessing.     Tennyson  sings  of  one, 

**  Who  breaks  his  birth's  invidious  bar, 

And  grasps  the  skirts  of  happy  chance, 

And  breasts  the  blows  of  circumstance. 

And  grapples  with  his  evil  star  ; " 

and  so  forces  his  way  to  great  eminence 
and  influence.  In  like  manner,  by  the 
blessing  of  God,  the  good  man  by  resist- 
ing temptation  acquires  moral  strength, 
by  means  of  tribulation  he  grows  patient, 
by  means  of  suffering  he  attains  unto 
spiritual  purity,  and  tenderness,  and 
beauty.  "  We  glory  in  tribulations  also ; 
knowing  that,"  &c. 

IV.  As  steadily  advancing.  "  They 
go  from  strength  to  strength."  Pro- 
gress is  a  great  law  of  life.  "  Where 
there  is  life  there  is  growth.  The  law 
is  seen  in  all  creation — in  the  tiny  moss 
upon  the  wall  and  the  lordly  oak  of 
the  forest,  in  the  insect  of  an  hour, 
and  the  beast  of  the  field.  And  the 
Christian  is  enjoined  to  grow  in  grace, 
not  in  wealth,  or  in  power  ;  but  in  that 
appropriation  of  the  revealed  will  of 
God  to  the  heart  that  results  in  satisfy- 
ing, not  some  one  faculty  or  passion  of 
the   soul,  but   the  whole  man."     God 


calls  us  to  move  onward  and  upward. 
"  Leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrines 
of  Christ,  let  us  go  on  unto  perfection.'* 
"  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father 
which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  "  I 
count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended  ; 
but  this  one  thing  I  do,  forgetting  those 
things  which  are  behind,"  <fec.  "  Giving 
all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith  virtue ; 
and  to  virtue  knowledge ;  and  to  know- 
ledge temperance,"  &c.  Let  us  seek  to 
advance  from  strength  to  strength,  from 
strength  of  patience  to  strength  of  hope; 
from  strength  of  hope  to  strength  of 
faith  ;  from  strength  of  faith  to  strength 
of  vision.  Let  us  aim  at  expressing  our 
inner  life  in  the  activities  of  growth  and 
usefulness.  In  our  career  there  must 
be  no  pause.  The  goal  of  yesterday 
must  be  the  starting  point  of  to-day. 
"  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall 
renew  their  strength  ;  they  shall  mount 
up  with  wings  as  eagles,"  <kc. 

V.  As  gloriously  terminating. 
*'  Every  one  of  them  in  Zion  appeareth 
before  God."  Those  who  set  for.th  in 
the  various  companies  on  their  way  to 
Jerusalem  shall  arrive  there  in  safety, 
and  join  in  the  holy  festivities.  None 
shall  perish  on  the  way.  None  shall 
turn  back  without  having  attained  the 
object  in  view.  The  godly  soul  moves 
onward  to  a  glorious  end.  "The  ran- 
somed of  the  Lord  shall  return  and 
come  to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting 
joy  upon  their  heads;"  <kc.  "When 
He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him  ; 
for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is."  Our 
})rogress  leads  onward  right  to  the 
palace  and  throne  and  presence  of  the 
King.  Our  pilgrimage  ends  at  home, 
our  "  Father's  home."  We  have  spoken 
of  our  progress  as  gloriously  terminating 
at  the  heavenly  Zion  ;  but  it  terminates 
only  to  begin  again  under  higher  and 
more  blessed  conditions  and  circum- 
stances. The  progress  of  the  godly 
soul  is  a  never-ending  progress.  When 
millenniums  of  growth  and  glory  have 
been  realised  by  the  ransomed  of  the 
Lord,  they  aspire  to  yet  higher  and 
diviner  things,  crying,  *'  It  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  we  shall  be.*' 

Conclusion. — 1.  Have  we  entered 
upon  this  career  of  progresi  f     Have  we 

487 


PSALM  LXXXIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


started,  and  started  truly  and  well,  in  is  in  God"?  2.  Christian  pilgrimSy  are 
the  religious  life  ?  Know  we  the  you  advancing  ?  "  Let  us  lay  aside 
blessedness  of  "  the  man  whose  strength      every  weight,  and  the  sin,"  &c. 


The  Exile's  Prater, 
(Verses  8-12.) 


I.  The  address  which  is  presented. 
"  0  Lord  God  of  hosts,  hear  my  prayer: 
give  ear,  O  God  of  Jacob.  Behold,  0 
God  our  shield."  In  this  address  the 
Psalmist  reminds  God  of — 

1.  His  sovereign  poiver.  *'  Lord  God 
of  hosts."  "  He  doeth  according  to  His 
will  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and  the  in- 
habitants of  the  earth ;  and  none  can 
stay  His  hand,  or  say  unto  Him,  what 
doest  Thou?" 

2.  His  covenant  relation  to  His  people. 
"  God  of  Jacob."  '*  I  said  not  unto  the 
seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  Me,  in  vain."  He 
has  pledged  His  faithfulness  and  mercy 
to  them  when  they  call  upon  Him. 

3.  His  protecting  care  of  His  people. 
*'  God  our  shield."  "  Fear  not,  Abram  ; 
I  am  thy  shield."  David  could  not  hide 
himself  at  this  time  in  the  secret  of 
God's  tabernacle,  but  he  could  hide 
himself  in  God  Himself. 

II.  The  object  which  is  sought. 
"  Behold,  and  look  upon  the  face  of 
Thine  anointed."  The  "  anointed  "  is 
David  himself,  who  was  anointed,  or  set 
apart,  to  the  office  of  king.  He  pre- 
sents no  petition  except  this,  that  God 
would  look  upon  him,  which  is  a  way 
of  asking  Him  to  grant  His  favour. 
David's  great  desire  was  to  return  to 
the  joys  and  fellowships  of  the  sanctuary, 
there  his  heart  was  fixed,  thither  his 
face  was  directed ;  and,  having  ex- 
pressed his  ardent  affection  for  it,  he 
needed  not  to  specify  his  desires  any 
further  than  he  does  here.  "  Hear  my 
prayer  :  look  upon  the  face  of  Thine 
anointed."  Show  me  Thy  favour  and 
grant  me  the  desire  of  my  heart. 

III.  The  pleas  which  are  urged. 
"For  a  day  in  Thy  courts  is  better 
than  a  thousand.  I  had  rather,"  &c. 
(vers.  10,  11).  The  Psalmist  urges 
in  these  words  three  pleas  why  God 
should  restore  him  to  the  privileges  of 
the  sanctuary — 

488 


1.  His  great  affection  for  the  house  of 
God.  In  his  estiuiation — (1.)  A  little  time 
there  was  preferable  to  a  long  season  else- 
where. "  A  day  in  Thy  courts  is  better 
than  a  thousand  "  elsewhere.  (2.)  The 
lowest  station  there  luas  preferahle  to  the 
highest  elsewJtere.  ''  I  would  rather  sit 
at  the  threshold  in  the  house  of  my 
God,  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of 
wickedness."  Would  not  God  hear  his 
prayer,  and  restore  him  to  the  place  he 
loved  so  well  and  dearly  % 

2.  The  relations  which  God  sustains 
to  His  people.  (1.)  He  is  a  ^^  sun." 
From  Him  His  people  derive  their 
light,  and  strength,  and  joy.  (2.)  He 
is  a  ^^  shield."  From  Him  His  people 
derive  protection  in  time  of  peril.  As 
a  "  shield,"  would  He  not  guard  His 
servant  from  the  dangers  to  which  he 
was  at  this  time  exposed  1  As  a  "  sun," 
would  He  not  grant  to  His  servant  the 
light  and  joy  of  His  presence  in  His 
tabernacle  1, 

3.  The  gifts  which  God  bestows  upon 
His  people.  (1.)  He  gives  ^^  grace." 
In  every  time  of  need  we  may  hear  His 
voice  saying  unto  us,  *'  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee."  "  God  is  able  to 
make  all  grace  abound  toward  you ; 
that  ye,  always  having  all-sufficiency  in 
all  things,"  &c.  (2.)  He  gives  "  glory." 
*'  The  glory  which  Thou  gavest  Me,"  said 
Christ,  '*  I  have  given  them."  The  glory 
of  moral  conquest,  of  spiritual  purity, 
and  of  unfading  hope.  In  a  word,  the 
glory  of  moral  resemblance  to  Christ. 
Glory  in  its  dim  beginning  here,  in  its 
splendid  fulness  hereafter.  (3.)  He 
withholds  no  good.  Nothing  that  will 
really  contribute  to  our  well-being  will 
He  withhold  from  us  if  we  *'  walk  up- 
rightly." Surely  the  God  who  confers 
such  gifts  upon  His  people  would  grant 
unto  David,  His  anointed,  the  desire  of 
his  heart,  in  bringing  him  back  again  to 
thd  courts  and  tabernacles  of  the  Lord. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  lxxxiv. 


IV.  The  sublime  conclusion  of  the 
whole.  "  0  Lord  of  hosts,  blessed  is 
tiie  man  that  trusteth  in  Thee."  This 
blessedness  the  Psalmist  possessed.  In 
the  de})ths  of  his  soul  there  was  a  peace 
which  no  rebellion  in  his  kingdom,  no 
Bin  and  sorrow  in  his  family,  no  banish- 
ment from  the  sanctuary,  could  shake, 
for  it  depended  upon  God  alone.  If  God 
granted  to  him  the  desire  of  his  heart, 
great  would  be  his  delight ;  but  if  He 


should  not  do  so,  still  was  he  blessed, 
for  he  trusted  in  God, — God  was  his 
portion. 

Conclusion. — 1.  In  the  trials  of  life 
what  is  it  we  feel  most  ?  David's 
greatest  trial  was  the  loss  of  his  religi- 
ous privileges.  How  different,  alas  !  is 
the  case  of  many  others !  2.  Is  our 
trust  reposed  in  the  Lord  of  hosts? 
Then,  whatever  our  circumstances  may 
be,  we  are  blessed. 


The  Lobd  God  a  Sun  and  Shield. 
{Verse  11.) 


We  propose  to  glance  at  the  figures^ 

the  facts,  and  the  persons  which  the  text 
presents  to  our  attention. 

I.  The  figures.  "  The  Lord  God  is  a 
sun  and  shield." 

1.  The  sun  dispenses  light.  *' God 
made  two  great  lights :  the  greater 
light  to  rule  the  day,  and  the  lesser 
light  to  rule  the  night."  The  moon, 
which  is  the  lesser  light  here  referred 
to,  derives  her  light  from  the  greater  ; 
and  consequently  the  sun  may  properly 
be  represented  as  the  source  of  light,  so 
far  at  least  as  we  are  concerned.  If 
this  glorious  orb  were  blotted  out  of 
existence,  everything  around  us  would 
be  involved  in  obscurity.  And  what 
would  be  the  state  of  the  human  mind, 
especially  in  relation  to  religious  sub- 
jects, if  it  were  not  for  the  illuminations 
of  "  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  "  %  Alas  ! 
all  would  be  gloom  and  uncertainty. 

2.  The  sun  imparts  life.  During  the 
months  of  winter,  an  immense  number 
of  creatures  either  cease  to  exist,  or 
remain  in  a  state  of  torpidity.  But  in 
the  spring  of  the  year,  when  the  orb  of 
day  begins  to  exert  an  increasing  in- 
fluence, what  a  remarkable  change 
takes  place !  Animals  and  vegetables 
are  alike  the  subject  of  a  revival  ;  and 
the  whole  face  of  nature  is  renewed. 
Equally  remarkable,  and  much  more  im- 
portant, are  the  effects  of  that  Sun  by  the 
warmth  and  energy  of  whose  beams  life  is 
imparted  to  those  who  were  dead  in  sin. 

3.  The  sun  produces  fruitfulness. 
When,  during  a  part  of  the  year,  we 
are  favoured  with    but    little  of    his 


presence,  barrenness  and  sterility  are 
observable  on  every  hand.  But  the 
season  of  promise  returns  at  the  ap- 
pointed time.  The  sun  gradually  rises 
higher,  and  continues  longer  above  the 
horizon.  The  happy  results  are  imme- 
diately perceptible;  and  it  is  not  long 
before  we  are  favoured  with  the  ap- 
pointed weeks  of  harvest.  The  heart  of 
man  may,  with  great  propriety,  be  com- 
pared to  a  soil ;  but,  alas  !  it  is  natu- 
rally hard,  and  dry,  and  barren, — so  far, 
at  least,  as  spiritual  things  are  con- 
cerned. The  good  seed  of  the  kingdom 
may  be  sown  thereon  with  a  liberal 
hand,  but  until  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness shines  upon  it  in  all  His  glory  and 
effulgence,  no  signs  of  fruitfulness  will 
gladden  the  eye. 

The  Psalmist  tells  us  Jehovah  "  is  a 
shieldJ'^  The  shield  is  a  piece  of  defen- 
sive armour  used  by  warriors,  and  at- 
tached to  the  left  arm,  as  a  protection 
against  the  injuries  to  which  they  are 
exposed  from  the  enemy.  We  are, 
therefore,  reminded  that  the  people  of 
God  are  surrounded  by  foes,  with  whom 
it  is  their  duty  to  contend  ;  and  that  in 
the  time  of  conflict,  they  may  look  to 
Him  whose  cause  they  espouse  for  suc- 
cour and  protection.  In  all  ages,  Jeho- 
vah has  been  the  defence  of  His  people; 
consequently,  none  of  the  weapons 
formed  against  them  have  prospered. 

II.  The  facts.  "  The  Lord  will  give 
grace  and  glory,"  (fee. 

1.  *'  The  Lord  will  withhold  no  good 
from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  It  is 
probable  that    the    reference    here    is 

489 


PSALM  LXXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


principally  to  temporal  things  ;  the  com- 
forts and  conveniences  of  life.  They  are 
secured  to  the  believer,  so  far  as  is  con- 
ducive to  his  good,  in  the  covenant  of 
grace.  There  may  also  be  a  reference 
to  afflictions.  He,  who  knows  us  bettei* 
than  we  know  ourselves,  may  see  that 
they  will  be  good  for  us ;  and  if  so, 
they  will  not  be  withheld. 

2.  "  The  Lord  will  give  graced 
Whatever  afflictions  we  have  to  endure 
while  upon  earth,  all  will  be  well  if  this 
promise  be  fulfilled  in  our  experience. 
The  grace  of  God  will  sanctify  both  us 
and  our  afflictions, — us  as  vessels  fitted 
for  the  Master's  use,  and  them  to  the 
advancement  of  our  best  interests.  It 
will  sustain  us  in  the  time  of  trial,  and 
enable  us  quietly  to  submit  to  the  Lord's 
will.  It  will  strengthen  us  in  running 
the  race  that  is  set  before  us.  It  will 
give  us  the  victory  over  every  adversary ; 
and  at  length  hold  out  the  crown  of 
righteousness,  which  fadeth  not  av,'ay. 

3.  "  The  Lord  will  give  glory."  This 
is  the  consummation  of  grace,  and  is 
reserved  for  the  world  to  come.  If 
religion  afforded  its  professors  no  enjoy- 
ment whilst  on  earth,  the  glories  of 
heaven  would  prove  an  ample  reward. 

III.  The  persons.  "Them  that 
walk  uprightly."  Those  walk  uprightly 
who  walk  with  God.  And  who  are  they 
that  walk  with  God  ? 

1.  That  man  does  so,  who,  in  all  his 
engagements,  recognises  the  Divine 
authority,  consults  the  Divine  will,  and 
seeks  the  Divine  blessing. 


2.  That  woman  walks  with  God,  who, 
like  Mary,  has  chosen  the  good  part 
which  can  never  be  taken  from  her ;  and 
delights  to  sit  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  to 
hear  His  words, — who,  like  Martha,  is 
found  diligently  attending  to  household 
duties, — and,  at  the  same  time,  like 
Dorcas,  is  "  full  of  good  works  and 
alms-deeds." 

3.  That  child  walks  with  God,  who, 
like  Samuel,  is  desirous  to  hear  the 
words  of  Divine  wisdom ;  and,  like 
Timothy,  has  acquired  a  knowledge  of 
those  Scriptures  which  are  able  to  make 
him  "wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 

Conclusion. — 1.  If  the  Lord  God 
be  a  sun,  let  my  hearers  pray  that  they 
may  be  enlightened,  quickened,  and 
qualified  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto  holi- 
ness, that  the  end  may  be  everlasting 
life.  2.  If  He  be  a  shield,  let  His  pro- 
tection be  sought  in  every  season  of  con- 
flict and  danger.  3.  If  He  will  with- 
hold no  temporal  good  from  His  people, 
let  them  rely  on  His  paternal  regards. 
4.  If  He  will  give  grace,  let  it  be  ex- 
pected in  every  time  of  need.  5.  If  He 
will  give  glory,  let  it  be  prepared  for 
and  anticipated.  6.  If  those  only  who 
walk  uprightly  have  a  right  to  expect 
this  blessedness,  let  unceasing  solicitude 
be  manifested  that  the  character  may  be 
formed  by  grace  Divine,  so  that  it  may 
be  viewed  with  approbation  by  Him 
who  will  render  to  every  man  accord- 
ing to  his  works. — Tlhe  Young  Minis 
tei^s  Companion. 


PSALM  LXXXV. 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  To  the  chief  Musician/'  See  Introduction  to  Pis.  Ivii.  **  A  Psalm  for 
the  sons  ofKorah."     See  Introduction  to  Ps.  xlii. 

"There  seems,"  says  Perowne,  **  every  reason  to  conclude  that  this  Psalm  was  written 
after  the  return  of  the  exiles  from  the  Babylonish  captivity.  It  opens  with  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  God's  goodness  and  mercy  in  the  national  restoration,  in  terms  which  could  hardly 
apply  to  any  other  event.  But  it  passes  immediately  to  earnest  entreaty  for  deliverance  from 
the  pressure  of  existing  evils,  in  language  which  almost  contradicts  the  previous  acknowledg- 
ment. First,  we  hear  the  grateful  confession,  *  Thou  hast  turned  the  captivity  of  Jacob  ; '  and 
then  we  have  the  prayer,  *  Turn  us,  0  God  of  our  salvation.'  If  the  third  verse  contains  the 
joyful  announcement,  *Thou  hast  withdrawn  all  Thy  wrath,*  &c.,  the  fifth  pleads  as  if  no  such 
assurance  had  been  given  :  *  Wilt  Thou  for  ever  be  angry  with  us  ? '  &c.  The  most  probable 
way  of  explaining  this  conflict  of  opposing  feelings  is  by  referring  the  Psalm  to  the  circum- 
stances mentioned  by  Nehemiah  (chap.  i.  8).  .  .  .  The  126th  Psalm  is  conceived  in  •  aome- 
what  similar  strain." 

490 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


fSAUi  itzxir. 


A  Grateful  Eeoolleotioh. 
{Verses  1-3.) 


I.  Of  national  deliverance.     "  Lord, 

Thou  l}ast  been  favourable  unto  Thy 
land ;  Thou  hast  brought  back  the 
captivity  of  Jacob."  Thus  the  Psalmist 
acknowledges  the  goodness  of  God  in 
the  restoration  of  His  people  from  the 
Babylonish  captivity.  At  the  very  be- 
ginning of  the  Psalm  the  poet  expresses 
the  identity  of  God's  interest  and  theirs. 
**  Thi/  land."  God  had  chosen  this 
land  to  be  the  dwelling-place  of  His 
people.  He  had  driven  out  the  heathen 
from  it,  and  established  His  worship  in 
it.  This  intimacy  of  relation  to  it  is 
named  evidently  with  a  view  of  obtain- 
ing further  manifestations  of  His  favour 
towards  it.  It  is  well  \vhen  we  can 
realise  and  plead  in  our  prayers  the 
identity  of  God's  interest  and  ours. 
When  we  are  devoted  to  His  work,  and 
seek  the  accomplishment  of  His  pur- 
poses, and  aim  at  His  glory,  when  we 
live  for  Him,  we  may  plead  with  Him 
in  our  distresses  that  His  favour  shown 
to  us  will  promote  His  own  cause.  The 
Psalmist  traces  their  deliverance  to  the 
favour  of  God.  All  their  happiness 
and  prosperity  flowed  to  them  from  His 
goodness.  We  may  regard  their  distress 
as  illustrating  the  troubles  into  which 
we  are  brought  by  reason  of  our  unfaith- 
fulness to  God.  Our  backslidings  of 
heart  have  been  many,  and  our  conse- 
quent spiritual  darkness  and  distress 
great,  yet  God  in  His  favour  has  restored 
to  us  the  light  and  help  of  His  counten- 
ance. It  was  a  happy  and  helpful  thing 
for  the  Jews  in  their  present  troubles, 
that  they  were  so  wealthy  in  recollections 
of  great  blessings  from  God  in  past 
times.  Such  recollections  would — 1.  In- 
spire them  with  hope.  2.  Encourage  them 
in 'prayer .      3.  Incite  them  to  effort.' 

II.  Of  the  removal  of  the  Divine 
anger.  "  Thou  hast  taken  away  all  Thy 
wrath  ;  Thou  hast  turned  Thyself  from 
the  fierceness  of  Thine  ani!;er."  The 
captivity  was  regarded  as  a  sign  of  the 
Divine  wrath ;  and  their  restoration  as 
fb  sign  that  that  wrath  no  longer  burned 


against  them.  God  Is  angry  with  His 
people  when  they  sin  against  Him. 
His  wrath  ever  burns  against  sin.  He 
longs  to  save  sinners  from  their  sin. 
Sin  is  the  "  abominable  thing  which  He 
hates."  The  Psalmist  gratefully  recol- 
lects past  seasons  in  which  God  had 
turned  away  His  anger  from  them. 
The  recollection  of  those  seasons  would 
encourage  the  Hebrews  in  pleading 
with  Him  to  remove  His  displeasure 
from  them.  What  He  had  formerly 
done  He  would  probably  do  again. 

III.  Of  the  bestowal  of  forgiveness. 
*'  Thou  hast  forgiven  the  iniquity  of 
Thy  people ;  Thou  hast  covered  all  their 
sin."  Not  only  had  He  removed  His 
anger  from  them,  but  had  forgiven  the 
sin  which  caused  His  anger,  and  restored 
unto  them  His  favour.  The  forgiven 
soul  has  the  assurance  that  God  will  not 
charge  his  sins  against  him.  The  Bible 
is  rich  in  declarations  of  the  readiness 
of  God  to  pardon  all  who  penitently 
seek  Him.  (See  Ps.  cxxx.  4 ;  Isa.  Iv. 
7  ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  8  ;  1  John  i.  9.)  The  ex- 
pressions used  by  the  Psalmist  indicate 
the  completeness  of  God's  forgiveness. 
**Thou  hast  forgiven,"  home  away, 
"  the  sins  of  Thy  people."  There  is 
doubtless  a  reference  to  the  scape-goat 
which  was  sent  out  into  the  wilderness 
bearing  the  sins  of  the  people,  and 
never  more  returned.  "  Thou  hast 
covered  all  their  sin."  It  is  all  hidden 
away.  It  is  all  completely  hidden  away. 
"  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they 
shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they 
be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as 
wool."  *'  Thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins 
behind  Thy  back."  '*  I,  even  I,  am  He 
that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for 
Mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember 
thy  sins."  '*  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their 
sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  The 
recollection  of  God's  former  forgivenesses 
encouraged  the  Psalmist  to  pray  for  His 
forgiving  mercy  at  this  time.  He  ia 
unchangeable.  What  He  has  done  for 
His  penitent  people  in  times  past.   He 

491 


FSALM  LXXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


will  do  for  them  again  if  they  approach 
Him  in  penitence. 

Conclusion. — We  have  grateful  me- 
mories like  these  of  the  Psalmist.  Let 
them  have  their  due  and  proper  effect 
upon  us.  They  should  inspire  us  with — 
1.  Humility.  *'  He  hath  not  dealt  with 
us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  accord- 


ing to  our  iniquities."  What  if  He 
had  ?  What,  but  utter  ruin  ?  2.  Gra- 
titude. "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the 
Lord  for  all  His  benefits  towards  nie  1 " 
3.  Gonjidence,  "  This  God  is  our  God 
for  ever  and  ever :  He  will  be  our  guide 
unto  death." 


An  Earnest  Supplication, 
(Verses  4-7.) 


The  prayer  presented  to  God  in  these 
verses  is  for  His  deliverance  of  His  peo- 
ple from  the  affliction  or  distress  from 
which  tbey  were  suffering  at  this  time. 
The  deliverance  which  is  implored  is 
represented  in  several  aspects;  but  let 
us  notice — 

I.  That  with  a  view  to  their  salva- 
tion the  people  pray  for  repentance. 
*'Turn  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation.'' 
This  petition  indicates  a  right  under- 
standing of  the  state  of  the  case,  and 
augurs  well  for  the  success  of  their 
prayer.  They  had  turned  themselves  to 
folly  and  sin,  and  now  they  pray  that 
God  would  turn  them  from  their  sin, 
and  grant  them  true  repentance.  The 
first  and  chief  thing  for  the  erring  tribes 
of  Israel  was  that  they  might  be  turned 
from  sin  unto  God.  It  would  have  been 
in  vain  if  they  had  prayed  for  the  re- 
moval of  the  Divine  anger  apart  from 
this  change  in  themselves.  The  begin- 
ning of  their  distresses  was  in  themselves, 
and  in  order  to  their  complete  restoration 
there  must  be  a  change  in  themselves. 
This  is  true  as  regards  the  salvation  of 
the  soul.  If  there  is  no  conversion,  no 
turning  of  the  soul  from  sin  unto  God, 
there  is  no  salvation.  The  Psalmist, 
speaking  for  the  people,  asks  God  to  turn 
them.  It  needs  the  power  of  Divine 
grace  to  convert  a  soul.  Salvation  both 
in  its  origin  and  completion  is  the  work 
of  God.  Yet  when  a  soul  turns  to  God 
in  prayer,  and  prays  for  repentance,  it 
is  a  sign  that  its  salvation  has  already 
begun. 

The  deliverance  which  is  implored  is 
represented — 

n.  As  a  cessation  of  God's  anger. 
"  Cause  Thine  anger  toward  us  to  cease, 
493 


Wilt  Thou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever  ? " 
&c.  They  rightly  regarded  their  dis- 
tresses as  a  sign  of  the  Divine  anger 
because  of  their  sins.  And  they  plead 
with  God  that  He  would  remove  that 
anger  from  them.  Mark  with  what 
force  they  plead.  "  Wilt  Thou  be  angry 
with  us  for  ever  ?"  Is  there  no  boun- 
dary to  Thy  wrath?  Is  the  flame  of 
Thy  fury  unquenchable  ?  His  anger  had 
continued  so  long  that  it  almost  seemed 
to  them  as  though  it  would  never  cease. 
"  Wilt  Thou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever  ? " 
It  is  true  that  we  have  sinned  against 
Thee,  and  merited  Thy  displeasure  ;  yet 
we  are  Thy  people,  and  the  sheep  of  Thy 
pasture.  Thus  they  appeal  to  His  com- 
passion towards  His  own,  as  an  argument 
for  the  removal  of  His  wrath.  "  Wilt 
Thou  be  angry  with  us  for  ever  1 "  God 
had  made  Himself  known  to  them  as 
"  The  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious, 
longsuffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness 
and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands, 
forgiving  iniquity,  transgression,  and 
sin  ; "  and  could  He  be  ang)y  with  them 
for  ever'?  The  idea  seems  opposed  to 
His  own  revelation  of  Himself.  And, 
blessed  be  His  name  !  His  anger  ceases 
as  soon  as  any  person  or  any  people  turn 
from  their  evil  ways  in  penitence  to 
Him.  "  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness 
of  Mine  anger,  I  will  not  return  to  de- 
stroy Ephraim  ;  for  I  am  God,  and  not 
man ;  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the 
midst  of  thee." 

III.  As  a  manifestation  of  His 
mercy.  "  Show  us  Thy  mercy,  O 
Lord."  They  sought  salvation  from 
their  troubles  or  calamities  as  a  favour 
from  the  hand  of  God.  They  felt  that 
they  did  not  deserve  it,  could  not  ask 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART:  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXXY. 


for  it  on  any  ground  of  merit,  so  they 
seek  it  as  a  mercy  from  God.     Mercy  is 
the  disposition  whereby  God  is  inclined 
to  succour  those  who  are  in  misery,  and 
to  pardon  those  who  have  offended.     It 
is  to  the  mercy  of  our  God  that  we  look 
for  salvation.     It  is  to  His  mercy  that 
we  are  indebted  for  the  countless  bles- 
sings of  life.     Archbishop  Tillotson  has 
well  said  :  "  Consider  how   many  evils 
and  miseries  that  every  day  we  are  ex- 
posed to,  by  His  preventing  mercy  are 
hindered,  or,  when    they   were   coming 
upon  us,  stopped  or  turned  another  way. 
How  oft  our  punishment  has  He  deferred 
by  His  forbearing  mercy  ;  or,  when  it 
was  necessary  for  our  chastisement,  miti- 
gated  and   made   light !     How   oft    we 
have  been  supported  in  our  afflictions  by 
His  comforting  mercy,  and  visited  with 
the   light   of   His   countenance,   in   the 
exigencies  of  our  soul  and  the  gloomi- 
ness of  despair  I     How  oft  we  have  been 
supplied  by  His  relieving  mercy  in  our 
wants ;  and,  when  there  was  no  hand  to 
succour,  and  no  soul  to  pity  us.  His  arm 
has  been  stretched  out  to  lift  us  from 
the  mire  and  clay,  and,  by  a  providential 
train  of  events,  brought  about  our  suste- 
nance  and   support !     And,   above  all, 
how  daily,    how  hourly,   how  minutely 
we  offend  against  Him  ;  and  yet,  by  the 
power  of  His  pardoning  mercy,  we  are 
still  alive  !     For,  considering  the  multi- 
tude and  heinousness  of  our  provocation, 
*  it  is  of  His  mercy  alone  that  we  are  not 
consumed,  and  because  His  compassions 
fail  not.     Whoso  is  wise  will    ponder 
these  things,  and  he  will  understand  the 
loving  kindness  of  the  Lord.'*' 

IV.  As  a  quickening.  "  Wilt  Thou 
not  revive  us  again  1 "  Their  conditiop 
was  like  that  of  our  world  in  winter 
The  earth  is  cold,  the  winds  are  bleak, 
the  trees  are  bare  and  show  no  signs 
of  life,  the  flowers  are  all  withered  and 
gone,  the  fruits  of  field  and  garden  are 
all  gathered  ;  death  seems  to  reign  on 
all  hands.  But  how  the  scene  changes 
with  the  advent  of  spring.  All  things 
seem  to  burst  into  a  new  life  of  won- 
drous wealth  and  beauty.  The  people 
pray  that  they  in  like  manner  may  be 
quickened  from  their  state  of  desola- 
tion into  a  state  of  life  and  prosperity. 


"  Kevive  us  with  comforts  spoken  to  us, 
revive  us  with  deliverances  wrought  for 
us."  This  prayer  for  revival  is  one 
which  we,  both  as  individuals  and  as 
churches,  need  to  present  frequently  to 
God.     The  petition  implies — 

1.  The  presence  of  life.  Where  there 
is  utter  death  it  is  folly  to  talk  of  re- 
vivaL 

2.  The  decline  of  life.  The  health- 
fulness  and  vigour  have  departed.  Life's 
pulse  beats  feebly. 

3.  The  desire  for  the  renewal  of  the 
freshness  and  power  of  life.  Where  this 
desire  is  strong,  decline  will  soon  be 
superseded  by  growth,  and  barrenness 
be  changed  to  fruitfulness. 

4.  The  conviction  that  God  only  can 
impart  such  renewal.  A  true  revival 
cannot  be  *^got  up  "  by  any  man,  or  any 
number  of  men.  "  0  Lord,  revive  Thy 
work." 

V.  As  a  means  to  their  joy  in  God. 
"  That  Thy  people  may  rejoice  in 
Thee." 

\.  Their  revival  ivoidd  he  a  joy  to 
them.  The  removal  of  their  distress  and 
the  return  of  prosperity  would  make 
glad  their  hearts. 

2.  Their  joy  would  he  in  God.  "  When 
God  changeth  the  cheer  of  His  people, 
their  joy  should  not  be  in  the  gift,  but 
in  the  Giver."  "  If  God  be  the  fountain 
of  all  our  mercies.  He  must  be  the 
centre  of  all  our  joys." 

3.  God  willed  their  joy.  Of  this  they 
were  persuaded,  or  they  would  not  have 
pleaded  for  deliverance  on  this  ground, 
that  it  would  give  them  joy.  God  takes 
pleasure  in  the  joy  of  His  people.  *'  Let 
the  Lord  be  magnified,  which  hath 
pleasure  in  the  prosperity  of  His  ser- 
vant." He  is  eternally  and  infinitely 
blessed,  and  He  delights  in  the  blessed- 
ness of  His  people.  Our  songs  of  glad- 
ness are  more  pleasing  to  His  ear  than 
any  sighs  of  sadness  can  possibly  be. 
(a)  "  There  is  always  joy  in  a  revival 
of  religion.  Nothing  is  so  much  fitted 
to  make  a  people  happy ;  nothing  dif- 
fuses so  much  joy  (comp.  Acts  viii  8). 
(/3)  This  is  particularly  joy  in  God.  It 
is  because  He  comes  near ;  because  He 
manifests  His  mercy ;  because  He  shows 
His  power  and  His  grace." — Barnes 

493 


PSALM  LXXXV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Such,  then,  are  the  aspects  in  which 
their  salvation  is  viewed  in  this  prayer 
to  God. 

Conclusion. — Our  subject  addresses 
itself  to  individuals  and  churches  in 
"which  vitality  has  declined,  and  depres- 
sion exists. 

1.  Here  is  encouragement  for  you. 
Our  God  is  the  "  God  of  our  salvation." 
His  mercy  is  infinite.  His  salvation 
is  "  unto  the  uttermost."  He  is  both 
able  and  willing    to    raise  you   from 


your  low  estate  into  health  and  pros- 
perity. 

2.  Here  is  example  for  pou.  In 
earnest  supplication  take  your  case  unto 
Him.  First  seek  to  be  made  right  your- 
selves, and  then  to  be  made  happy. 
First  pray,  "Turn  us,  0  God  of  our 
salvation,"  and  then,  "  Wilt  Thou  not 
revive  us  again,  that  Thy  people  may 
rejoice  in  Theei"  And  His  salvation 
will  not  tarry,  and  His  joy  will  not  be 
withheld. 


The  Revival  op  RELiaiON, 
(Verse  6.) 


Many  Christians  have  come  to  have  a 

distaste  for  the  word  "  revival "  when 
used  with  reference  to  religious  work. 
There  has  been  so  much  exaggeration, 
so  much  fanatical  excitement,  and  so 
much  transient  profession,  that  I  cannot 
wonder  at  the  revulsion  which  many 
sober-minded  Christians  feel  when  they 
hear  the  very  word  "  revival."  All 
*'  got-up  "  revivals  are  bad.  You  cannot 
organise  a  true  revival  j  you  cannot  treat 
spiritual  influences  as  fixed  quantities. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  have  been 
extraordinary  visitations  of  Divine  in- 
fluence ;  there  have  been  seasons  when 
the  Holy  Ghost  has  made  the  earth- 
quake, the  fire,  the  rending  wind,  and 
the  stormy  tempest  His  ministers,  and 
when  men  have  been  shaken  with  a 
wholesome  fear,  not  knowing  the  way, 
yet  feeling  the  nearness  of  the  Lord. 
There  have  been  great  birthdays  in  the 
Church,  when  prodigals  have  come  back 
to  sonship,  when  shepherds  have  re- 
turned with  recovered  flocks,  and  tlie 
dead  have  risen  to  immortal  life.  There 
have,  too,  been  times  when  the  people 
have  realised  with  special  vividness  the 
personality  and  life-giving  power  of  tha 
Holy  Ghost ;  when  they  have  had  the 
keys  of  interpretation  wherewith  to  un- 
lock the  boundless  treasures  of  the 
Divine  Word ;  when  prayer  was  as  the 
speech  of  love  that  never  wearies ;  when 
the  Sabbath  shed  its  sacred  glory  over 
all  the  days  of  the  week  ;  when  God's 
house  shone  with  heavenly  lustre,  and 
all  life  throbbed  in  joyful  harmony  with 
494 


the  purposes  of  God.  Cannot  sucli 
delights  be  more  permanently  secured! 
At  the  same  time,  we  are  not  constituted 
for  constant  rapture  ;  we  have  to  con- 
tend with  the  deceitfulness  of  the  flesh ; 
we  have  to  fight  and  suffer  upon  the 
earth,  (fee.  Still  there  is  danger  that 
we  may  be  content  with  low  attainments. 
There  is  a  steady  and  penetrating  glow 
of  piety,  there  is  a  fervour  of  love,  there 
is  an  animated  intelligence,  a  zealous 
affection,  a  godly  yearning  for  personal 
progress  and  social  evangelisation,  which, 
when  found  together,  make  up  a  life  of 
delight  in  God,  and  blessed  service  for 
men.  To  promote  this  realisation  I  ask 
your  attention  to  a  few  suggestions. 

I.  As  individual  Christians,  and  as 
churches  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  need  to  he 
very  clear  in  our  doctrinal  foundations. 
Let  us  get  a  distinct  idea  of  the  prin- 
cipal points  in  the  Christian  faith.  Be- 
ginning with  the  doctrine  of  sin,  let  us 
strive  after  God's  view  of  it.  To  Him 
sin  is  infinitely  hateful;  He  cannot 
tolerate  it  with  the  least  deojree  of 
allowance ;  it  troubles  His  otherwise 
perfect  and  happy  universe ;  it  despoils 
human  nature ;  it  is  the  cause  of  death 
and  the  source  of  hell.  To  under-esti- 
mate  the  heinousness  of  sin  is  to  put 
ourselves  out  of  the  line  of  God's  view ; 
to  understand  sin  is  to  understand  re- 
demption. Sin  interprets  the  cross; 
sin  shows  what  is  meant  by  God's  love. 
Have  we,  as  individuals  and  churches, 
lost  the  true  notion  of  sin?  Is  it  no 
longer  infinitely  abominable  to  us?     Is 


HOMILETIG  COMMENT AR Y :  PSALMS,  psalm  mxxv. 


it  toned  down  to  something  almost  indis-  patient  of  everything  that  does  not  bear 

tinguishable  ?     We  cannot  be  right  in  immediately   and    intensely   upon    the 

our  relation  to  Jesus   Christ  until  we  salvation  of  men.  .  .  .  Then  must  we 

regard  sin  with  unutterable  repugnance.  be  made  to  feel  that  the  doctrines  of 

Out  of  a  true  knowledge  of  sin  will  the  Gospel  are  humbling  doctrines  ;  that 

come  a  true  appreciation  of  Jesus  Christ  they  smite  down  our  natural  pride  and 

as  the  Saviour.     I  could   sum   up   my  self-trustfulness;  that  they  kill  before 

creed  in  a  sentence,  yet  that  sentence  they  make  alive ;  that  out  of  our  utter 

contains  more  than  all  the  libraries  in  impoverishment  and    nothingness   they 

the  world :  I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  bring  all  that  is  distinctive  and  enduring 

THE  Son  of  God  !     My  heart  hungers  in  Christian  manhood.  ...  I  am  con- 

for  Him,  my  sin  cries  out  for  His  mercy,  firmed  in  the  opinion  that  we  should 

my  sorrow  yearns  for  His  coming ;  and  devote  ourselves  with  increasing  earnest- 

when  He  does  come  He  speaks  just  the  ness  to  seeking  the  salvation  of  men 

word   that  my  soul  needs;  He  under-  when  I   look  at  the  character  of  our 

stands  me  ;  He  knows  me  altogether  ;  general  congregations.     We  address  the 

He  can  get  down  into  the  low,  dark  pit  public,  not  a  select  few ;  we  speak  to 

into    which   sin    has   thrown    me ;    He  men  whose  whole  time  is  engrossed  in 

draws  me  to  His  cross ;  He  hides  my  worldly  engagements ;  we  speak  to  the 

sins  in  His  sacrifice  ;  He  shows  me  how  poor,  the  unlearned,  the  sorrowing ;  we 

God  can  be  honoured,  yet  the  sinner  address   the   young,    the    careless,    the 

forgiven ;  He  destroys  the    devil,   and  worldly ;  and  to  such  there  is  nothing 

puts  within  me  the  Holy  Ghost ;  He  so  that   can  be  preached  that  will  so  in° 

fills   me  with   life   that   death  has  no  stantly  touch  the  heart  as  the  glorious 

longer  any  terror  with  which  to  affright  Gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  .  .  .  Whilst 

D^e.  there  will  be  this  full  and  bold  procla- 

If  we  lay  firmly  hold  of   these  two  mation  of  evangelical  doctrine  in   the 

points,  viz.,  the  sinfulness  of  sin  and  pulpit,  there  will  be  a  system  of  teaching 

the  work  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  come  proceeding  more  privately.     Some  men 

to  know  what  is  meant  by  what  I  have  have  a  peculiar  gift  in  biblical  teaching, 

ventured    to    call   the  glow   of    piety.  and  those  men  should  be  encouraged  to 

Only  the  liberated  slave  can  know  the  pursue  their  laborious  but  most  neces- 

joy  of  freedom — only  the  recovered  leper  sary  vocation.    The  preacher  and  teacher 

can    appreciate   fully   the    blessing   of  should  be  fellow-labourers.  The  preacher 

health.  ...  Do   we   know   sin   in   its  should  collect  men  into  great  companies, 

essential,  unchangeable  loathsomeness]  arrest  their   attention  by  earnest   and 

Do  we  love  Jesus  Christ  as  the  only,  convincing    statements     of     Christian 

the    Almighty,    and    the    ever-blessed  truth,   and  then  pass  them  on,   so  to 

Saviour  ?    Then,  out  of  this  should  come  speak,  to  the  critical  and  patient  teacher, 

an  intense  fervour  of  piety.     We  should  Thus   the   man    of    God    will    become 

have  strength  here.  thoroughly  furnished;  having  received 

II.  We  must  have  a  public  ministry  deep  instruction,  he  will  be  able  to  give 

which  is  faithful  to  the  spirit  and  de-  a  reason  for  the  faith  and  hope  that  are 

mands  of  Jesus  Christ.     All   Christian  in  him,  and  he  will  be  strong  to  resist 

ministers  are  called  to  be  faithful   to  the   importunities   of    those    who    are 

Jesus  Christ  in  seeking  the  salvation  of  driven  about  by  every  wind  of  doctrine. 

men.  ...  We  must  not  throw  off  the  III.    There   is   one    feature    in   our 

old   words — Kepentance,    Faith,   Salva-  public  Christian  life  which  I  should  like 

tion — and  the  things  that  they  signify  to  see  more  fully  brought  out — I  mean 

must    be    the    very    life-blood    of    our  the  hearing  of  individual  testimony  on 

ministry.     In   any  genuine    revival    of  behalf  of  Jesus  Christ.     By  no  means 

interest  in  Christianity  there  must  be  a  seek  to  supplant  what  is  known  as  the 

revived  interest  in  a  preached  Gospel.  regular    ministry,    but    supplement  it; 

The  sanctuary  will  be  thronged,  and  the  and  at  all  costs  destroy  the  impression 

thronging  listeners  will  be  justly  im-  that  nobody  has  a  good  word  to  say  for 

495 


PSALM  LXXXT. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART:  PSALMS. 


Christianity  except  its  paid  teachers,  say  publicly  what  God  has  done  for  their 
.  .  .  Why  should  not  the  banker,  the  souls  1 — Dr.  Parker,  Abridged  from 
great  merchant,  and  the  eminent  lawyer      The  City  Temple, 


An  Enooubaqing  Anticipation. 
{Verses  8-13.) 


The  Psalmist,  as  the  representative  of 

the  people,  having  reviewed  God's  former 
mercies  to  them,  and  urged  their  prayer 
for  salvation  from  their  present  dis- 
tresses, resolves  to  listen  for  the  Divine 
response  to  their  supplication.  "  I  will 
hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak." 
He  becomes  silent,  that  he  may  hear  the 
voice  of  God.  His  anxiety  and  fervour 
of  prayer  are  stilled,  and  he  seeks  to 
attain  that  state  of  spiritual  attention 
that  shall  catch  the  first  whisper  of  the 
Divine  voice,  and  of  spiritual  receptive- 
ness  that  shall  secure  the  first  instalment 
of  the  Divine  blessing.  Having  spoken 
to  God,  it  becomes  us  to  listen  for  His 
reply.  The  Psalmist  expected  an  answer 
from  God,  and  therefore  he  waited  and 
listened  for  it.  In  this  he  is  at  once  a 
rebuke  and  an  example  to  us.  A  rebuke, 
inasmuch  as  we  have  so  frequently 
off'ered  our  prayer  without  any  real 
thought  of  its  being  answered.  We 
have  not  waited  God's  reply,  because 
we  did  not  expect  Him  to  reply.  An 
example.  When  we  pray  let  our  prayer 
be  real ;  let  us  honour  God  by  our  con- 
fidence, and  then,  like  the  Psalmist,  we 
shall  expect  and  listen  for  His  voice  in 
reply  to  us. 

The  Psalmist  is  confident  that  God 
will  grant  a  favourable  answer  to  their 
prayer.  "  He  will  speak  peace  unto 
His  people."  Thus,  in  general,  does  he 
speak  of  the  response  which  he  expected 
from  God.  God's  reply  would  be  such 
as  would  impart  to  them  outward  peace 
in  deliverance  from  their  troubles,  and 
inward  peace  in  the  communications  of 
His  grace.  And  now  the  Psalmist,  with 
some  particularity,  sets  forth  his  antici- 
pations as  to  God's  answer  to  their 
prayers.     Consider — 

I.  The  blessing  anticipated.  Several 
particulars  are  mentioned  by  the  poet. 

1.   Deliverance  from  their  distresses. 
''His  salvation  is  nigh  them  that  fear 
406 


Him."  His  hand  was  **  nigh  "  to  help 
them ;  and  their  deliverance  would  be 
effected  speedily.  Such  was  the  confi- 
dent anticipation  of  the  distressed  people. 
And  surely  every  tried  and  oppressed 
child  of  God  now  may  feel  equally  con- 
fident that,  in  answer  to  prayer.  He  will 
speedily  appear  bringing  salvation  with 
Him. 

2.  Exaltation  to  honour,  "  That 
glory  may  dwell  in  our  land."  The 
glory  of  the  Divine  presence  and  worship, 
God's  presence  would  be  manifested  in 
their  salvation ;  and,  being  delivered 
from  the  evils  under  which  they  groaned, 
they  would  render  to  Him  a  more  hearty 
and  more  constant  worship.  The  glory 
of  national  prosperity.  ''Our  land  shall 
yield  her  increase."  Husbandry  should 
be  diligently  prosecuted,  and  God's 
blessing  would  come  down  upon  the 
land  in  sun  and  shower ;  and  fruitful 
seasons  and  abundant  harvests  would 
be  the  result.  There  should  be  an  in- 
crease of  worship  and  of  spiritual  pros- 
perity, and  an  increase  of  work  and  of 
material  prosperity.  And  in  their 
spiritual  peace  and  temporal  happi- 
ness, their  glory  as  the  people  of  God 
would  be  manifest,  and  His  glory  as 
the  God  of  His  people  would  be  mani- 
fest also. 

3.  Prevalence  of  moral  excellence. 
"  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together ; 
righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed. 
Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth ; 
and  righteousness  shall  look  down  from 
heaven."  "  This  may  be  understood," 
says  Matthew  Henry,  and  we  think 
correctly,  "  of  the  reformation  of  the 
people  and  of  the  government,  in  the 
administration  of  which  all  those  graces 
should  be  conspicuous  and  commanding. 
The  rulers  and  ruled  shall  all  be  merci- 
ful and  true,  righteous  and  peaceable. 
When  there  is  no  truth  or  mercy  all 
goes  to  ruin  (Isa.  lix.  14,  15 ;  Hos.  iv. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


PSALU  LXXXV. 


1)  ;  but  when  these  meet  in  the  man- 
agement of  all  affairs,  when  these  give 
aim,  when  these  give  law,  when  there 
is  such  plenty  of  truth  that  it  sprouts 
up  like  the  grass  of  the  earth,  and  of 
righteousness  that  it  is  showered  down 
like  rain  from  heaven,  then  things  go 
well.  When  in  every  congress  mercy 
and  truth  meet,  in  every  embrace  right- 
eousness and  peace  kiss,  and  common 
honesty  is  indeed  common,  then  glory 
dwells  in  a  land,  as  the  sin  of  reigning 
dishonesty  is  a  reproach  to  any  people." 
In  support  of  this  interpretation  of  these 
verses  we  remark — (1.)  The  absence  of 
these  moral  qualities  had  often  led  to 
disastrous  results  in  the  history  of  Israel. 
(2.)  The  prevalence  of  these  moral  quali- 
ties would  follow  the  fulfilment  of  their 
petition,  ^^  Turn  us,  0  God  of  our  sal- 
vation." (3.)  The  prevalence  of  these 
moral  qualities  is  conducive  in  a  great 
degree  to  social  and  commercial  pros- 
perity. (4.)  The  prevalence  of  these 
moral  qualities  is  the  securest  bulwark 
and  the  brightest  glory  of  any  nation. 
This  was  indeed  a  bright  and  cheer- 
ing anticipation  of  the  poet  and  the 
people. 

II.  The  character  of  those  for 
whom  the  blessing  is  anticipated. 
Certain  marked  features  in  the  char- 
acter of  the  people  who  should  receive 
this  blessing  are  indicated. 

1.  Consecration  to  God.  "His  people, 
His  saints."  They  were  a  people  called 
of  God,  and  consecrated  to  God.  They 
were  subject  to  His  will,  and  sanctified 
by  His  grace. 

2.  Veneration  of  God.     *'  Them  that 


fear  Him."  "  Salvation  is  far  from  the 
wicked,"  but  it  is  "nigh  them  that" 
regard  God  with  sincere  and  becoming 
reverence. 

3.  Obedience  to  God,  "  Righteous- 
ness shall  go  before  Him,  and  shall  set 
us  in  the  way  of  His  steps."  The  idea 
of  the  last  clause  appears  to  be  that  the 
effect  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  for 
their  salvation  would  be  to  dispose  men 
to  tread  in  His  footsteps,  to  be  imita- 
tors and  followers  of  Him  in  respect  of 
righteousness.  The  blessings  of  salva- 
tion are  for  the  obedient.  "  The  new 
salvation  rests  throughout  upon  the 
foundation  of  the  new  obedience." 
Hence  the  warning,  "  Let  them  not 
turn  again  to  folly  ; "  for  if  they  did, 
their  prosperity  would  vanish,  and  their 
distresses  would  return  again.  The 
same  is  true  of  the  blessings  of  the 
Gospel.  Our  Lord  saves  His  people 
''from,  their  sins,"  not  in  their  sins.  We 
must  walk  "  in  the  way  of  His  steps," 
if  we  would  share  His  blessedness. 

Conclusion. — What  is  the  salvation 
for  which  we  are  looking^  Is  it  deli- 
verance from  a  hell  of  material  torment, 
and  the  enjoyment  of  a  heaven  of  self- 
indulgence  %  Then  the  ideas  of  the 
ancient  Jews  were  more  advanced  and 
spiritual  than  ours.  The  salvation  of  a 
state  is  not  in  its  great  armaments,  or 
its  vast  wealth  ;  but  in  the  prevalence 
of  "  mercy  and  truth,  righteousness  and 
peace."  The  salvation  of  individuals  is 
in  their  conformity  with  the  will  of  God, 
in  reverencing  Him,  in  consecration  to 
Him.  If  these  things  are  realised  in  us, 
great  will  be  our  blessednesii 


The  Speaker^  ths  Listener,  thx  Peace. 
{yerse  8.) 


Let  us  meditate  on  this  verse  under 
the  following  heads : — 

I.  The  listener.  "  I  will  hear,"  says 
the  writer  of  this  Psalm.  He  speaks  as 
a  listener,  as  one  whose  ears  are  open. 
"He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear."  This  is  our  true  attitude  into 
¥rhich  we  come  at  conversion.  God 
said,  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live ; " 
He  "  opened  our  ears  to  hear  as  the 
2l 


learned,"  i.«.,  as   **  one   who  Is  under 

teaching."  So  we  began  to  listen ;  and, 
in  listening,  found  life.  Such  is  to  be 
our  life  ;  a  life  of  listening ;  not  to  man, 
nor  self,  nor  the  world,  but  to  God.  As 
creatures,  listening  is  ()ur  proper  atti- 
tude, much  more  as  sinners.  Let  the 
willing  ear  be  ours.  How  much  we 
lose  by  the  closed  ear ! 

XL  The  Speaker.    "  God  the  Lord ; " 

497 


P8ALM  LXXXVL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


God,  even  Jeliovah.  Other  speakers 
may  win  the  ear  of  the  multitude,  but 
it  is  to  God  the  Lord  that  the  saint 
listens.  His  voice  is  powerful.  Its 
tones  are  penetrating  ;  its  words  attrac- 
tive. God  speaks  as  one  entitled  to  be 
heard,  expecting  to  be  heard.  He  speaks 
with  authority,  waiting  for  our  obedience 
to  the  heavenly  voice.  To  less  than  such 
a  speaker  we  do  not  feel  constrained  to 
listen,  but  to  Him  we  must.  He  speaks, 
we  cannot  but  hear. 

III.  The  message.  "  He  will  speak 
peace  to  His  people."  He  is  the  God 
of  peace ;  "  He  maketh  peace  in  His 
high  places."  Peace  is  the  substance  of 
the  message  that  has  all  along  been 
carried  to  us ;  peace  to  him  that  is  afar 
off,  and  to  him  that  is  nigh ;  peace  in 
heaven  ;  peace  on  earth  ;  peace  between 
man  and  God ;  the  peace  of  pardon, 
the  peace  of  reconciliation  ;  the  peace 
that  passeth  all  understanding — peace 
through  the  blood  of  the  cross,  through 
Him  who  is  our  peace.  It  might  have 
been  wrath,  nay,  ought  to  have  been 
wrath  ;  but  it  is  not  wrath,  only  peace  : 
for  He  is  long-suffering  and  slow  to 
wrath  ;  nay,  God  is  love  ! 

IV.  The  confidence.  The  Psalmist 
knows  what  He  is  to  expect  from  such 
a  God.  Before  the  peace  comes,  he 
knows  that  it  is  coming ;  for  he  knows 
the  God  to  whom  he  is  called  upon  to 
listen.  This  is  the  confidence  which  he 
has  in  Him.  He  does  not  listen  uncer- 
tainly, as  not  knowing  what  will  come 
forth.  He  has  heard  of  this  God  be- 
fore— of  what  He  does  and  speaks — and 
he  opens  his  ear  in  happy  confidence. 
He  is  sure  that  no  wrath  will  come,  only 


love,  only  peace.  This  God  is  the  God 
of  salvation — the  God  who  gave  His 
Son.     Shall  He  not  then  speak  peace  ? 

V.  The  issue.  *'  Let  them  not  re- 
turn to  folly ; "  or,  and  "  they  shall  not 
return  to  folly.''  He  does  not  say,  Let 
them  not  turn  to  folly,  and  then  He  will 
speak  peace  to  them ;  but  He  will  speak 
peace  first,  and  then  they  shall  not  re- 
turn to  folly.  This  is  God's  order  ;  the 
true  and  Divine  order ;  the  reverse  of 
man's.  It  is  not  first  holiness  and  then 
peace,  but  first  peace  and  then  holiness. 
The  root  of  all  holiness  is  peace  with 
God.  Till  the  clouds  are  rolled  away 
and  the  sun  shines  out,  we  cannot  be 
warmed  and  enlightened.  Till  the  frost 
is  gone,  and  the  ice  dissolved,  the  river 
cannot  flow  on  and  water  the  fields. 
Christ  did  not  say,  Go,  and  sin  no  more, 
and  I  will  not  condemn  thee  ;  but, 
"  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee ;  go,  and 
sin  no  more."  .  .  .  The  first  step  to  a 
holy  life  is  being  at  peace  with  God. 
.  .  .  This  great  point  between  us  and 
God  once  settled,  we  are  free  to  devote 
our  undivided  energies  to  the  work  of 
progress  ;  not  till  then. 

A  saint,  then,  is  one  who  has  listened 
to  God  ;  who  has  heard  the  words  of 
peace  from  His  lips ;  who  has  believed 
them ;  who  has  been  reconciled ;  and 
who  knows  that  he  is  so.  Therefore 
he  seeks  to  be  holy.  He  hates  his 
former  folly.  He  does  not  return  to  it. 
He  does  not  make  his  free  pardon  a 
reason  for  returning  to  it. 

Brethren,  be  consistent.  Show  that 
the  peace  you  have  received  is  a  holy 
peace. — R.  Bonar,  D,D,  Abridged 
from  Light  and  Trvih, 


PSALM   LXXXVL 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — **  A  Prayer  of  David."  Although  this  Psalm  is  not  placed  with  the  great 
body  of  David's  Psalms  (1-lxx),  there  is  no  sufl&cient  ground  for  disputing  his  authorship  of  it. 

Occasion. — Barues  says,  **The  occasion  on  which  it  was  composed  is  unknown,  but  it  has 
been  commonly  supposed  that  it  was  written  in  the  time  of  the  persecution  under  Saul."  But 
the  opinion  of  Hengstenberg,  that  it  was  written  during  the  dangers  to  which  David  was  exposed 
by  reason  of  the  rebellion  of  Absalom,  seems  to  us  better  supported  by  the  evidence  which  the 
Psalm  itself  aflfords.  Amid  the  dangers  to  which  he  is  now  exposed,  the  Psalmist  calls  to  mind 
for  his  encouragement  a  remarkable  deliverance  which  God  had  formerly  granted  to  him  (ver. 
13).  May  it  not  have  been  that  the  former  deliverance  was  from  Saul,  and  his  present  danger 
from  Absalom  ?    Still  we  cannot  with  certainty  determine  the  occasion  of  its  composition. 

498 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  LXXXVI. 


The  Goodness  of  God  an  Encouragement  to  seek  Him. 


(  Verses 

The  "Prayer  of  David*'  runs  through 
the  whole  Psalm,  but  as  the  Psalm  is 
too  long  and  suggestive  for  treatment  in 
one  homily,  we  purpose  dividing  it  by 
tlie  grounds  on  which  for  his  encourage- 
ment the  Psalmist  bases  his  prayer.  Let 
us  consider — 

I.  The  petitions  of  the  suppliant. 
The  Psalmist  prays — 

1.  For  audience.  "Bow  down  Thine 
ear,  O  Lord,  hear  me."  The  petition 
seems  to  include — (L)  Divine  condescen- 
sion. Being  sensible  of  his  unworthiness 
of  the  regard  of  God,  he  prays  Him  to 
"  bow  down "  His  ear  to  his  prayer. 
(2.)  Divine  attention.  "  Hear  me."  It 
is  not  a  petition  that  God  would  simply 
hear  the  prayer  of  the  Psalmist,  but  that 
He  would  hear  him  favourably,  that  He 
would  hear  and  bless  him. 

2.  For  protection.  "  Preserve  my 
soul,  .  .  .  save  Thy  servant."  David 
was  at  this  time  exposed  to  danger,  his 
very  life  was  in  peril ;  he  prays  that  God 
would  protect  his  life,  and  deliver  him 
from  his  enemies.  If  God  protect  us 
we  are  invulnerable.  Saul  could  not 
harm  David,  though  he  sought  by  every 
means  in  his  power  to  do  so,  because  the 
Lord  was  his  shield.  And  Absalom  and 
his  rebel  army  were  equally  powerless 
against  him,  because  God  defended  him. 
All  the  hosts  of  hell  with  their  allies 
upon  earth,  even  when  led  by  their 
subtle  and  mighty  prince,  cannot  really 
harm  the  child  of  God  who  has  sought 
the  protection  of  his  Father. 

3.  For  mercy.  "  Be  merciful  unto 
me,  O  Lord."  Implied  in  this  petition 
is  the  conscious  unworthiness  of  the 
suppliant.  David  seeks  the  protection 
and  deliverance  of  God,  not  as  a  right, 
but  as  a  favour.  He  presented  to  God 
not  a  claim,  but  a  humble  supplication. 
He  addressed  himself  not  to  the  Divine 
justice,  but  to  the  Divine  mercy.  "  Be 
gracious  unto  me,  O  God."  In  all  our 
need  it  is  to  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  we 
must  look. 

4.  For  joy,  "Rejoice  the  soul  of 
Thy  servant."  If  God  should  deliver 
His  servant  from  danger  his  heart  would 


1-6.) 

greatly  rejoice.  And  such  were  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  Psalmist  at  this  time 
that  God  only  could  deliver  him  from 
his  foes  and  fill  him  with  gladness. 
Salvation  is  a  joyous  thing.  It  is  the 
Christian's  privilege  to  "  rejoice  in  the 
Lord  alway." 

II.  The  pleas  of  the  suppliant.  The 
Psalmist  pleads — 

1.  His  necessity.  "For  I  am  poor 
and  needy."  Oppression  and  poverty 
are  the  principal  meanings  of  the  words 
used  by  the  Psalmist  in  this  plea.  David 
pleads  that  he  was  bowed  down  by 
trouble,  as  he  asks  God  to  "bow  down " 
and  hear  him,  and  that  he  was  necessi- 
tous, as  he  asks  God  to  help  him.  Or 
we  may  regard  his  plea  in  this  way,  he 
was  "  poor,"  i.e.,  without  supply,  he  was 
"  needy,"  «.f.,  full  of  wants  j  therefore  he 
must  look  away  from  himself,  above 
himself  for  satisfaction.  Man's  necessity 
does  not  give  him  any  claim  upon  God's 
bounty.  But  human  misery  always 
moves  Divine  mercy.  And  when  we 
humbly  and  sincerely  plead  our  poverty 
with  God,  He  will  enrich  us  with  the 
treasures  of  His  grace.  "When  I  am 
weak,  then  am  I  strong." 

2.  His  consecration.  "For  I  am 
holy."  Margin  :  "one  whom  Thou 
favourest."  Hengstenberg :  "  for  I  am 
pious."  Calvin :  "  for  I  am  meek." 
Perowne :  "  one  whom  Thou  lovest." 
He  was  pious,  not  profane.  He  was 
the  "  servant "  of  God.  Twice  he 
pleads  that  fact;  and  as  we  are  sure 
that  he  would  not  plead  "  for  I  am 
holy"  in  any  boastful  or  self-righteous 
spirit,  we  conclude  that  his  consecration 
to  God  is  one  of  his  pleas.  He  was  the 
servant  of  God,  and  therefore  in  asking 
God  to  save  him,  he  was  asking  Him  to 
save  His  own.  If  we  in  the  strength  of 
grace  have  consecrated  ourselves  to  God, 
we  may  plead  that  fact  with  Him  in  our 
prayers.  He  has  never  forsaken  His 
faithful  servants. 

3.  His  confidence.  "  Thy  servant  that 
trusteth  in  Thee."  He  has  pledged 
Himself  to  save  those  who  put  their 
trust   in    Hina.     By  trPHting   Him .  we 

499 


PSALM  LXXXVL 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


really  place  our  salvation  in  His  hands. 
Can  He  fail  1  Is  His  power  inadequate  1 
His  workings  in  nature,  in  human  his- 
tory, and  in  the  conversion  of  souls  pro- 
claim it  as  great  and  wonderful  as  ever. 
Is  His  willingness  diminished  ]  "  The 
mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills 
be  removed  ;  but  My  kindness  shall  not 
depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the 
covenant  of  My  peace  be  removed,  saith 
the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on  thee," 
Our  trust  in  God  is  a  mighty  plea  in 
our  prayers  to  Him. 

4.  His  importunity,  "  I  cry  unto 
Thee  daily."  Margin  :  "  all  the  day,"— 
continually.  His  prayer  was  importu- 
nate. *'  Unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  do  I  lift 
up  my  soul."  These  words  show  that 
his  prayer  was  earnest,  hearty,  sincere. 
He  did  not  merely  lift  up  his  hands 
unto  God,  but  he  lifted  up  his  heart 
also.  Prayers  which  are  characterised 
like  this  by  heartiness,  importunity,  and 
faith,  when  presented  by  God's  devoted 
but  needy  servants,  are  certain  to  result 
in  gracious  replies  from  heaven. 

III.  The  encouragement  of  the 
suppliant.  "  For  Thou,  Lord,  art  good 
and  ready  to  forgive  ;  and  plenteous  in 
mercy  to  all  them  that  call  upon  Thee." 
Here  are — 

L  Goodness  for  man  as  a  dependent 
and  needy  creature.  "  Thou,  Lord,  art 
good."  In  Himself  "  God  is  good." 
He  is  perfect  in  holiness  and  in  grace. 
He  is  also  **  good  to  all,  and  His  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  He 
delights  in  His  works,  and  in  dealing 
bountifully  with  His  creatures.  He, 
the  infinitely  and  ever  blessed  God,  hath 
assured  us  that  "  it  is  more  blessed  to 
give  than  to  receive ; "  and  He  is  the 
infinite  Giver.  Being  and  well-being, 
life  and  joy,  He  gives  abundantly. 
Here  then  is  encouragement  to  seek 
Him  in  prayer  in  every  time  of  need. 


2.  Mercy  for  man  as  a  sinful  creature, 
"  Ready  to  forgive,  and  plenteous  in 
mercy."  '*  Goodness  is  the  disposition 
to  communicate  happiness.  Mercy  is  a 
modification  of  goodness.  Goodness  is 
the  genus,  mercy  the  species.  The 
fruits  of  goodness  are  enjoyed  by  holy 
and  happy  creatures.  The  fruits  of 
mercy,  by  the  guilty  and  miserable, 
Mercy  with  relation  to  an  offender  is  a 
disposition  to  forgive.  Mercy  in  refer- 
ence to  a  sufferer  is  a  disposition  to 
relieve."  Here  then  is  our  encourage- 
ment. We  are  sinful  and  ill-deserving, 
but  He  is  merciful  and  pardons.  We 
are  wretched,  but  He  is  merciful  and 
succours. 

3.  Mercy  in  great  abundance  and 
dispensed  freely.  He  is  "  ready  to  for- 
give, and  plenteous  in  mercy  unto  all 
them  that  call  upon  Him."  "  With  the 
Lord  there  is  mercy,  and  with  Him  is 
plenteous  redemption."  "  He  delighteth 
in  mercy."  Like  Himself  His  mercy  is 
inexhaustible,  infinite.  And  it  is  be- 
stowed freely  "unto  all  them  that  call 
upon  Him."  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  re- 
ceive." Unless  we  are  prepared  to 
receive  the  mercy  of  God  as  a  free  gift, 
we  cannot  receive  it  at  all.  Here  then 
is  encouragement  to  seek  God  in  our 
times  of  need.  His  mercy  is  unspeak- 
ably greater  than  our  sin  and  misery, 
and  He  waits  "  ready "  to  bestow  it 
freely  "  unto  all  them  that  call  upon 
Him." 

Conclusion. — In  the  great  goodness 
and  mercy  of  our  God  there  is  encourage- 
ment for  each  and  for  all  of  us  to  seek 
Him  in  time  of  need.  We  are  poor  and 
needy,  but  the  riches  of  His  grace  are 
unsearchable  and  free.  We  are  sinful 
and  sorrowful,  but  He  is  plenteous  in 
mercy  and  ready  to  forgive.  His  love 
is  infinite. 

In  Him  let  us  trust  and  rejoice. 


Thb  Supbemaot  of  God  an  Encoubagement  to  seek  Him. 

{Verses  6-10.) 

In  that  portion  of  the  Psalm  which  ages  himself  by  the  ability  of  God  to 

we  have  already  considered  the  Psalmist  help  him.      In  that  the  goodness  and 

encouraged  himself  by  the  willingness  mercy  of  God  were  the  ground  of  his 

of  God  to  help  him ;  in  this  he  encour-  prayer   for   deliverance  j    in    this    the 

500 


IWMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


MALM  LXXXTI. 


power  and  glory  of  God  constitute  that 
ground.     Let  us  consider — 

I.  The  supremacy  of  God.  The 
Psalmist  sets  forth  two  aspects  of  thia 
BupreuKicy.  He  represents  God  as 
supreme — 

1.  In  Himself.  "Among  the  gods 
there  is  none  like  unto  Thee,  O  Lord. 
Thou  art  God  alone."  The  Psalmist 
refers  to  the  false  deities  worshipped  by 
the  heathen,  and  lie  says  that  none  of 
them  are  like  Jehovah  in  power  and 
goodness.  In  might  and  majesty,  in 
grace  and  glory,  God  is  supreme.  He 
only  is  God.  It  has  been  well  said  by 
Bishop  Wilkins,  "  If  God  be  an  infi- 
nitely-perfect Being,  it  is  impossible  to 
imagine  two  such  beings  at  the  same 
time,  because  they  must  have  several 
perfections,  or  the  same.  If  the  former, 
neither  of  them  can  be  God,  because 
neither  of  them  has  all  possible  perfec- 
tions. If  they  have  both  equal  perfections, 
neither  of  them  can  be  absolutely  perfect, 
because  it  is  not  so  great  to  have  the 
same  equal  perfections  in  common  with 
another,  as  to  be  superior  to  all  others." 
There  can  be  but  one  Supreme  Being. 

2.  In  His  doings.  "  There  are  no 
works  like  unto  Thy  works.  Thou  art 
great  and  doest  wondrous  things." 
God's  works  in  creation  are  wonderful 
in  the  wisdom  and  power  which  they 
manifest.  And  in  His  providence  there 
had  often  been  remarkable  displays  of 
His  skill  in  making  the  designs  of  the 
enemies  of  His  people  promote  their 
interests,  and  of  His  power  in  over- 
throwing His  foes  and  saving  them  that 
trust  in  Him.  All  His  works  praise 
Him  and  proclaim  His  sole  supremacy. 
But  the  doing  of  God  which  most  en- 
couraged the  Psalmist  was  His  hearing 
of  prayer.  "  Thou  wilt  answer  me."  It 
is  the  great  glory  of  God  that  He  who 
created  the  heavens  and  bringeth  out 
their  host  by  number,  also  regard eth 
the  faint  breathings  of  penitence  and 
the  softest  whispers  of  prayer.  He 
hears  and  attends  to  all  the  prayers  that 
rise  to  Him.  He  is  **  the  proper  object 
of  worship  everywhere  alike,  and  at  all 
times.  This  is  a  thought,"  says  Dr. 
Wardlaw,  "not  less  pregnant  with  in- 
terest than  it  is  with  wonder.     When 


you  are  desirous  to  present  a  petition  in 
person  to  a  fellow-creature,  you  require 
to  leave  your  place,  and  to  find  your 
way  to  the  nearer  or  more  distant  spot 
where  he  is.  But  whatever  request  you 
have  to  present  to  God,  you  need  not 
move  from  the  spot  you  occupy.  Never. 
Wherever  you  chance  to  be  He  is  there. 
This  is  true,  not  of  you  alone,  but  of  all 
alike.  He  listens  to  the  prayers  and 
the  praises  of  His  people  that  are  poured 
into  His  ear  at  the  same  instant,  in 
every  place  and  every  language.  And, 
at  the  same  instant,  too,  He  is  listening 
to  the  songs  of  the  *  ten  thousand  times 
ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thou- 
sands' which  arise  to  Him  around  His 
seraph-circled  throne  in  the  heavens ; 
and  to  the  addresses  which  are  offered 
to  Him  from  all  the  worlds  with  which 
the  fields  of  immensity  are  replenished. 
And  to  all  these  He  bends  His  ear,  with 
the  most  perfect  discrimination,  and  at 
the  same  time  with  the  most  perfect 
ease,  without  the  slightest  approach  to 
anything  like  difficulty  or  effort.  And 
there  is  no  mixing  up  of  one  thing  with 
another  ;  of  any  of  the  particulars  of 
one  case  with  those  of  another.  Each 
case,  in  all  its  details,  is  as  distinctly 
heard  and  recorded  as  if  there  had  been 
no  other  to  which  to  attend."  In  this 
we  have  a  marvellous  exhibition  of  the 
supremacy  of  God. 

II.  The  efifects  of  that  supremacy. 
Two  are  mentioned — 

1.  All  nations  shall  worship  God, 
"  All  nations  whom  Thou  hast  made 
shall  come  and  worship  before  Thee,  O 
Lord;  and  shall  glorify  Thy  name." 
The  nations  of  the  earth  are  represented 
as  created  by  God.  He  "  hath  made  of 
one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to 
dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth."  All 
nations  have  a  common  origin.  God  is 
the  Creator-Father  of  all  men.  Human 
brotherhood  is  a  great  fact,  however  man 
may  disregard  it.  The  king  and  the 
beggar  have  a  common  origin.  The 
oppression  of  one  man  by  another,  or 
one  class  of  men  by  another,  is  a 
crime  in  the  sight  of  the  common 
Maker  of  us  all.  The  nations  shall  all 
come  and  worship  God.  "All  kings 
shall  fall  down  before  Him :  all  nations 

501 


PSALM  LXXXVI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


shall  serve  Him.  .  .  .  All  nations  shall 
call  Him  blessed."  It  is  thought  by 
some  that  the  prediction  of  the  text  was 
partially  fulfilled  in  the  great  number  of 
proselytes  to  the  Jewish  religion  during 
the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon.  But 
its  complete  fulfilment  is  certainly  yet 
in  the  future.  The  triumphs  of  Chris- 
tianity are  spreading.  A  bright  future 
is  before  our  world  and  race.  God  is 
supreme  over  all,  and  the  time  is  coming 
on  npace  when  His  supremacy  shall  be 
loyally  and  enthusiastically  acknow- 
ledged by  all  nations. 

2.  The  troubled  soul  shall  trust  in 
Him.  The  supremacy  of  God  encour- 
aged the  distressed  Psalmist  to  seek 
Him.  Such  will  ever  be  the  effect  of 
that  supremacy  when  it  is  rightly  under- 
stood. God  is  supremely  good,  su- 
premely beneficent,  and,  while  enthroned 
high  over  all  things,  He  stoops  to  listen 
to  the  feeblest  prayer.  He  is  both  able 
and  willing  to  succour  the  distressed, 
and  help  the  needy,  and  comfort  the 
sorrowful. 

' '  His  love  is  as  great  as  His  power. 
And  knows  neither  measure  nor  end." 

There  is  every  encouragement  presented 
to  the  su[)pliant  soul  in  drawing  near  to 
God.     Oh,  ye  impoverished  ones,  come 


and  be  enriched  out  of  His  fulness. 
Burdened  and  anxious  ones,  come  and 
cast  yourselves  with  your  weight  of 
cares  upon  Him  who  careth  for  you. 
Sinful  and  sorrowing  ones,  come  in  faith 
to  God,  and  He  will  forgive  your  sins, 
and  soothe  or  sanctify  all  your  sorrows. 
Conclusion. — 1.  Seeing  that  God  is 
supreme,  let  us  7'everence  Him,  serve 
Him.  *'  Give  unto  the  Lord  the  glory 
due  unto  His  name  ;  worship  the  Lord 
in  the  beauty  of  holiness." 

2.  Seeing  that  He  is  so  compassionate 
to  the  troubled,  let  them  seek  His  help  and 
comfort.  From  the  highest  throne  in 
glory  He  will  listen  to  your  cry  and 
hasten  to  your  help.  "  Casting  all  your 
care  upon  Him,  for  He  careth  for  you." 
"  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble  ;  I 
will  deliver  thee,  and  thou  shalt  glorify 
Me." 

3.  Seeing  that  there  is  so  sure  a  pros- 
pect of  His  universal  worship,  let  us 
rejoice  in  spirit,  and  hopefully  pray  and 
work  for  its  realisation.  *'  The  earth 
shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord,  as  the  w^aters  cover  the  sea.'* 
"  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  be- 
come the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of 
His  Christ ;  and  He  shall  reign  for  ever 
and  ever." 


The  Day  of  Trouble. 
(Verse  7.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  A  period  with  which  all  men  are 
acQLuainted.  "  The  day  of  trouble." 
Trouble  is  a  common  experience  amongst 
men  in  this  world.  We  are  troubled 
by  physical  infirmities,  pains,  and 
diseases  ;  by  perplexities,  cares,  and 
losses  in  business ;  by  the  unfaithful- 
ness of  professed  friends  ;  by  the  be- 
reavements of  death  ;  by  spiritual  dis- 
tresses and  conflicts. 

1.  Tlie  individual  character  of  trouble. 
"  My  trouble."  Our  troubles  often  arise 
partly  from  peculiarities  in  our  circum- 
stances and  temperament  and  disposi- 
tion. The  same  events  very  differently 
affect  different  persons.  The  sorrows  of 
no  two  persons  are  exactly  alike.  "  The 
heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness." 
502 


**  Every    man     must    bear    his    own 

burden." 

2.  The  limited  duration  of  trouble. 
*'  The  day  of  my  trouble."  Through 
the  mercy  of  God  our  troubles  are  short- 
lived. There  is  more  of  gladness  than 
of  gloom  in  the  world.  In  the  case  of 
the  great  majority  of  persons  suffering 
is  the  exception,  not  the  rule  of  life. 
Courage,  troubled  heart,  the  day  of  thy 
trouble  will  soon  be  over,  and  happy 
months  of  peace  shall  be  thine.  Even 
if  the  whole  of  this  earthly  life  were 
dark  and  sad  it  is  but  as  a  day  when 
contrasted  with  the  glad,  and  bright, 
and  endless  future. 

II.  A  resolve  which  all  men  should 
make.  "  I  will  call  upon  Thee."  The 
Psalmist   did   not   stoically  endure  his 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


MALM  LXXXVI. 


distresses.  He  was  keenly  sensible  of 
tlieir  painfulness.  Nor  did  he  impi- 
ously  rebel  against  God  by  reason  of 
them.  That,  not  to  mention  its  sinful- 
ness, would  only  have  made  the  matter 
Worse.  But  by  prayer  he  took  his 
trouble  to  God.  We  should  do  the 
same  with  ours.  And  we  should  do  so 
humbly.  It  may  be  that  our  trouble  is 
a  consequence  of  some  sin  or  sins  of 
ours.  Sin  is  the  fruitful  parent  of  suf- 
fering. Therefore  we  should  call  upon 
God  with  humble  and  penitent  hearts. 
We  should  call  upon  Him  submissively. 
While  our  object  in  seeking  Him  is  to 
obtain  relief  from  trouble,  let  us  leave 
it  to  Him  to  impart  that  relief  as  He 
may  choose.  He  may  relieve  us  by 
removing  the  trouble.  He  may  con- 
tinue the  trouble,  but  relieve  us  by  im- 
parting more  grace  to  us  that  we  may  bear 
it.  '*  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done." 
IIL  A  result  which  all  men  may 
anticipate.  "  Thou  wilt  answer  me." 
The  Psalmist  was  confident  that  God 
would  hear  and  answer  his  prayer.  '*  He 
that  Cometh  to  God  must  believe  that 
He  is,  and  that  He  is  a  rewarder  of  them 
that  diligently  seek  Him."  "  Thou  wilt 
answer  me  " — 


1.  Because  Thou  hast  promised  to  do 
so.  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of 
trouble ;  I  will  deliver  thee."  "  All 
things,  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in 
prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive,"  <fec. 
"  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,"  <fec. 

2.  Because  Thou  hast  done  so.  Jacob 
prayed,  and  God  answered  and  blessed 
him  (Gen.  xxxii.)  Isaiah  and  Hezekiah 
prayed,  and  the  Lord  answered  and  cut 
off  185,000  Assyrians  in  one  night 
(1  Kings  xix. ;  1  Chron.  xxxii.)  "  Elias 
was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as 
we  are,  and  he  prayed  earnestly,"  &c. 
(James  v.  17,  18).  The  early  Christians 
prayed  instantly  and  earnestly,  and  the 
Lord  answered,  and  by  an  angel  deli- 
vered Peter  out  of  prison  (Acts  xii. 
et  al).  What  He  has  done,  He  will  do 
again. 

3.  Because  of  what  Thou  art.  Thou 
art  omniscient,  and  therefore  knowest 
our  need;  omnipotent,  and  therefore 
canst  help  us  ;  "  good,  and  plenteous  in 
mercy,"  and  therefore  wilt  take  pleasure 
in  relieving  us,  &c. 

Trembling  and  troubled  hearts  seek 
the  Lord  in  believing  prayer;  and  He 
will  calm  and  cheer,  soothe  and  streng- 
then you. 


The  Former  Mercies  op  God  an  Encouragembt  to  seek  Him. 


(  Verses 
In  this  division  of  the  Psalm  we  have — 
I.  A  grateful  recollection  of  former 

mercies.  "  Great  is  Thy  mercy  toward 
me ;  and  Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul 
from  the  lowest  hell."  The  word  trans- 
lated ^'helV  is  ''sheol,"  in  the  Greek 
**  HadesJ"  "  Thou  hast  delivered  my 
soul,"  or  life,  "  out  of  deep  sheol,"  is  a 
poetical  way  of  saying  that  God  had 
delivered  the  Psalmist  out  of  extreme 
dangers  or  deep  distresses.  The  allusion 
is  very  probably  to  the  repeated  and 
remarkable  deliverances  vouchsafed  to 
David  in  the  time  when  Saul  persecuted 
him  and  sought  his  life.  Durinor  that 
persecution  there  were  times  when  David 
despaired  of  his  life,  feeling  that  it  was 
vain  to  hope  to  escape  from  the  cunning 
and  strength  that  were  put  forth  against 
him.  Yet  God  had  graciously  and  mar- 
vellously  preserved   him   safely.        He 


11-17.) 
regarded  this  deliverance  as  a  Divine 
^^mercy.*^  He  knew  that  he  had  no 
claim  upon  the  protection  of  God. 
He  felt  that  he  had  not  deserved 
the  great  favours  which  God  had  be- 
stowed upon  him.  The  Christian  may 
use  these  words  in  a  spiritual  sense. 
"  Great  is  Thy  mercy  toward  me ;  and 
Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  the 
lowest  hell."  When  God  in  mercy  saves 
a  soul  He  saves  it  from  sin,  death,  and 
hell.  This  recollection  of  past  mercy 
was  an  encouragement  to  the  Psalmist 
in  his  present  distress.  It  would  keep 
before  his  mind — 1.  God^s  ability  to  de- 
liver him.  He  had  saved  him  in  former 
times,  therefore  He,  the  unchangeable 
One,  could  save  him  now.  2,  God^i 
willingness  to  save  him. 

**  His  love  in  time  past 
Forbids  me  to  think,"  &o. 
503 


PSALM  LXXXVI. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


Memories  like  this  of  the  Psalmist's  are 
amongst  the  most  helpful  and  precious 
of  all  our  possessions. 

II.  An  earnest  prayer  for  deliver- 
ance from  present  danger.  The  great 
object  of  the  prayer  was  that  the  Psalmist 
might  be  delivered  from  the  enemies 
that  were  aiming  at  his  life.  "  0  God, 
the  proud  are  risen  against  me,  and  the 
assemblies  of  violent  men  have  sought 
after  my  soul,  and  have  not  set  Thee 
before  them.  .  .  .  Save  the  son  of  Thine 
handmaid."  The  foes  from  whom  he 
sought  deliverance  were  ^*  proud.^^  They 
were  men  of  haughty  spirit  and  daring 
ambition,  who  would  despise  the  welfare 
or  the  right  of  others  if  they  stood  in 
the  way  of  the  accomplishment  of  their 
projects.  They  were  "  violent^  They 
wrought  out  their  plans  by  force.  They 
were  fierce  and  cruel,  caring  not  what 
violence  they  used  in  accomplishing 
their  ambitious  designs.  They  were 
united.  Hengstenberg  translates — "  The 
band  of  the  violent."  And  Barnes 
says — *'  The  word  assembly  here  means 
merely  that  they  were  banded  together ; 
what  was  done  was  the  result  of  a  con- 
spiracy or  combination."  They  were 
irreligious.  They  had  not  set  God 
before  them.  They  did  not  fear  Him, 
or  respect  His  law.  His  threatenings 
they  despised ;  His  presence  and  obser- 
vation they  disregarded.  What  evils 
might  not  be  expected  from  enemies 
such  as  these  1  From  such  enemies 
David  prays  for  deliverance.  "  Save 
the  son  of  Thine  handmaid."  In  his 
prayer  he  sets  forth  the  desired  deliver- 
ance— 1.  As  a  mercy.  "  O  turn  unto 
me,  and  have  mercy  upon  me."  He 
asks  that  God  would  favourably  regard 
him,  pity  him,  and  relieve  him.  2.  As 
a  communication  of  Divine  power.  "  Give 
Thy  strength  unto  Thy  servant."  He  re- 
garded his  case  as  requiring  nothing  less 
than  the  strength  of  God  to  meet  it. 
And  he  asks  that  he  may  be  enabled  to 
act  as  if  he  were  nerved  with  the  very 
power  of  God.  3.  As  found  in  obedience 
to  the  Divine  will.  '*  Teach  me  Thy 
way,  O  Lord ;  I  will  walk  in  Thy  truth ; 
unite  my  heart  to  fear  Thy  name."  The 
Psalmist  felt  that  if  deliverance  were  to 
come  to  him,  he  must  be  found  in  the  way 
604 


of  the  Divine  precepts,walking  withGod, 
and  serving  Him  with  undivided  heart. 
It  cannot  be  too  earnestly  insisted  upon, 
that,  if  we  would  be  saved,  we  must  be 
found  walking  in  the  way  which  God 
prescribes  for  us.  *'  Narrow  is  the  way 
which  leadeth  unto  life."  Nor  can  we 
insist  too  earnestly  upon  the  necessity 
of  whole-heartedness  in  the  service  of 
God.  "A  double-minded  man  is  un- 
stable in  all  his  ways."  In  the  Chris- 
tian life  and  work  we  need  fixedness  of 
purpose  and  concentration  of  effort  if 
we  would  succeed.  "  Unite  my  heart 
to  fear  Thy  name."  "  This  one  thing  I 
do,"  (fee.  4.  As  calculated  to  produce  a 
favourable  impression.  To  the  Psalmist 
himself  his  deliverance  would  be  a 
"  token  for  good,"  a  clear  and  unmis- 
takable sign  of  the  favour  of  God,  To 
the  enemies  of  the  Psalmist  his  deliver- 
ance would  be  a  rebuke.  By  it  their  pur- 
poses would  be  defeated,  their  schemes 
frustrated,  and  themselves  humbled  and 
shamed.  Thus  David  prays  to  God  for 
deliverance,  and  encourages  himself  in 
so  doing,  by  thinking  of  the  goodness 
and  faithfulness  of  God.  Having  men- 
tioned the  haughtiness  and  violence,  the 
unity  and  irreligiousness  of  his  foes,  he 
says,  "  But  Thou,  O  Lord,  art  a  God 
full  of  compassion,  and  gracious,  long- 
suffering,  and  plenteous  in  mercy  and 
truth."  The  Psalmist  felt  that  he  had 
nothing  but  evil  to  expect  from  his  ene- 
mies. And  from  so  gracious  a  God,  he, 
though  unworthy,  could  expect  nothing 
but  good.  (We  have  already  looked  at 
*'  The  goodness  of  God  as  an  encourage- 
ment to  seek  Him" — vers.  1-6.) 

III.  A  devout  resolution  to  serve 
God.  The  Psalmist  resolves  to  serve 
God — 1.  By  obedience.  "I  will  walk 
in  Thy  truth ; "  i,e.y  I  will  conform  my 
life  to  Thy  will.  The  truth  of  God 
should  not  only  be  held  by  us  as  senti- 
ment, or  doctrine,  or  fact;  but  should 
also  be  practised  by  us.  We  should 
translate  our  creed  into  our  conduct. 
We  should  seek  not  only  to  hold  the 
truth,  but  also  to  live  the  truth ;  not 
only  to  know  the  will  of  God,  but  also 
to  do  His  will.  The  "  doer  of  the  work 
shall  be  blessed  in  his  doing."  2.  By 
worship.     "  I  will  praise  Thee,  O  Lord 


i 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXXTL 


my  God,  with  all  my  heart ;  and  I  will 

glorify  Thy  name  for  evermore."  The 
poet  resolves  to  worship  God  heartily. 
**  With  all  my  heart."  When  God 
united  his  heart  he  would  pour  it  all 
out  in  worship  to  Him.  His  undivided 
affection  and  adoration  he  would  give 
to  God.  Such  hearty  worship  is  accept- 
able unto  God.  He  would  worship  God 
eternally — "  for  evermore."  While  he 
had  any  being  he  would  praise  God. 
In  time  and  through  eternity  he  would 
glorify  Him. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Learn  the  value  of 
sacred  memories.  How  greatly  David 
was  encouraged  by  his  recollections  of 


past  mercies !  Such  memories  should 
be  monitors,  reminding  us  of  our  weak- 
ness, <bc.  Such  memories  should  be 
inspirers,  telling  us  of  Divine  strength, 
goodness,  <fec.  He  who  does  not  use 
wisely  the  memories  of  the  past  is  not 
living  as  he  ought  in  the  present,  and 
is  ill-furnished  for  the  changes  and  trials 
of  the  future.  2.  The  obligations  im- 
posed by  Divine  mercies.  Goodness  calls 
for  gratitude.  New  favours  demand 
new  songs.  Our  obligations  to  God  are 
ever  increasing.  *'  I  will  praise  Thee, 
O  Lord  my  God,  with  all  my  heart; 
and  I  will  glorify  Thy  name  for  ever- 
more." 


The  Divine  Way  for  Mah, 
{Verse  U.) 


I.  The  Divine  way  for  man  indi- 
cated by  God.  '*  Teach  me  Thy  way, 
O  Lord."  \.  There  is  a  Divine  way  in 
which  man  should  walk.  "  Thy  way." 
The  way  prescribed  by  Him  in  His  holy 
Word.  The  way  of  obedience  to  His 
precepts.  The  way  which  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  trod.  2.  God  must  indi- 
cate that  way  to  man.  "  Teach  me." 
"  The  original  meaning  of  the  Hebrew 
word  is  to  point  out,  or  mark  the  way." 
The  way  is  clearly  revealed  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures ;  but  man's  moral  perceptions 
are  not  clear,  his  moral  judgment  is 
warped  by  sin ;  hence  his  need  of  the 
direction  of  God.  He  must  indicate  to 
man  the  true  way  of  human  life. 

II.  The  Divine  way  for  man  trod 
by  man.  *'  I  will  walk  in  Thy  truth." 
It  is  the  way  of  Divine  truth  which 
God  points  out,  and  which  the  Psalmist 
resolves  to  walk  in.  To  walk  in  God's 
truth  implies — 1.  Harmony  with  the 
truth.  "  I'o  walk  in  the  truth  of  God 
signifies  to  be  always  mindful  of  it." 
*'  Walking,  in  the  Scripture,  takes  in 
the  whole  of  our  conversation  or  con- 
duct." The  whole  life  in  accord  with 
the  Divine  mind  and  will.  2.  Progress 
in  the  truth.  The  Psalmist  resolves  to 
walk,  not  to  stand,  in  God's  truth. 
Walking  implies  advancement.  The 
godly  soul  "  follows  on  to  know  the 
Lord."    We  must  advance  in  two  things: 


in  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  in  prac- 
tice of  the  truth. 

III.  The  need  of  integrity  of  heart 
to  tread  the  Divine  way  for  man. 

*'  Unite  my  heart  to  fear  Thy  name." 
We  use  the  word  integrity  in  its  literal 
meaning.  1.  There  is  a  great  tendency 
in  human  nature  to  division  of  heart* 
There  are  many  rival  claimants  for  our 
affections ;  and  the  heart  itself  has  lost 
its  true  centre.  2.  Integrity  of  heart  is 
essential  to  enable  us  to  tread  the  Divine 
way.  "  A  double-minded  man  is  un- 
stable in  all  his  ways."  Unless  we  are 
whole-hearted  we  shall  speedily  wander 
from  the  way,  or  faint  by  the  way. 
God  demands  our  undivided  affection 
and  our  complete  devotion.  Only  by 
hearty  and  concentrated  effort  can  we 
secure  the  prize.  "  One  thing  I  do,  for- 
getting," (fee.  3.  God  alone  can  impart 
to  us  integrity  of  heart  in  the  Divine  way. 
The  bias  of  the  unrenewed  heart  is  averse 
from  Divine  things.  None  but  God 
can  harmonise  our  powers  and  affections 
in  His  service.  He  will  thus  unite 
the  hearts  of  all  who  sincerely  seek 
Him. 

*  *  Let  earth  no  more  my  heart  divide ; 
With  Christ  may  I  be  crucified, 

To  Thee  with  my  whole  soul  aspire  | 
Dead  to  the  world  and  all  its  toy«, 
Its  idle  pomp  and  fading  joys, 

Be  Thou  alone  my  one  desire." 

—0.  Wesley. 
505 


nSALM  Lxxxvn. 


HO  Ml  LET  10  COMMENTARY  :  PSALMS, 


PSALM    LXXXVIL 

Introduction. 

Superscription. — "A  Psalm  or  Song  for  the  sons  of  Korah,"  It  so  far  combines  the  proper- 
ties of  a  religious  Psalm  and  a  patriotic  song  that  either  of  the  names  may  with  propriety  be 
applied  to  it.  ''For  the  sons  of  Korahf"  see  Introduction  to  Psalm  xlii.  The  Psalm  was  either 
composed  by  them,  or  given  to  them  to  sing  in  the  Temple  service. 

Occasion. — Heugstenberg  argues  very  forcibly,  if  not  quite  conclusively,  that  the  occasion 
of  its  composition  was  the  joyful  events  under  Hezekiah, — the  destruction  by  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  of  one  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  Assyrians  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib,  which 
was  before  Jerusalem,  and  the  consequent  deliverance  of  Jerusalem  from  the  siege  and  capture 
threatened  by  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xix. ;  2  Chrou.  xxxii.  1-23). 

The  Glory  of  the  Church  of  God. 


In  this  brief  and  joyous  Psalm,  the 
poet  celebrates  the  praise  of  the  Church 
of  the  Most  High.  In  so  doing,  he 
shows  us  some  of  the  things  in  which 
her  glory  consisted.  The  Church  of 
God  is — 

I.  Glorious  in  her  sanctity.  "His 
foundation  is  in  the  holy  mountains." 
The  sanctity  of  Mount  Zion  consisted  in 
its  being  chosen  by  God  as  the  abode 
of  His  Church  ;  and  the  "  mountains  " 
(plural)  are  said  to  be  "  holy  "  because 
Zion  is  part  of  a  mountain  range.  Zion 
was  holy  as  being  the  dwelling-place  of 
God.  The  Church  of  God  upon  earth  is 
glorious  in  so  far  as  she  is  boly,  and  she 
is  holy  in  so  far  as  God  dwells  in  her. 
*'  A  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  holy  and 
without  blemish."  God  hath  chosen  the 
members  of  His  Church  "that  they 
should  be  holy  aud  without  blame  before 
Him  in  love."  '*  Holiness  is  inward 
glory.  Glory  is  conspicuous  holiness." 
The  Church  i.s  called  to  be  separate  from 
the  world,  lis  members  are  called  to  be 
saints.  Christ  our  great  exemplar  is 
perfectly  holy.  And  His  redemption  is 
from  sin  to  holiness.  "  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from 
all  sin."  "  Being  made  free  from  sin, 
and  become  servants  to  God,  ye  have 
your  fruit  unto  holiness,  aud  the  end 
everlasting  life." 

II.  Glorious  in  her  security.  "  His 
foundation  is  in  the  holy  mountains.  .  .  . 
The  Highest  Himself  shall  establish 
her."  Jerusalem  was  '*a  mountain 
city;  .  .  .  enthroned  as  compared  with 
Jericho  or  Damascus,  Gaza  or  Tyre,  on 

506 


a  mountain  fastness.  In  this  respect,  it 
concentrated  in  itself  the  character  of 
the  whole  country  of  which  it  was  to  be 
the  capital, — the  *  mountain  throne,*  the 

*  mountain  sanctuary  *  of  God.  '  They 
that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  as  Mount 
Zion,  which  may  not  be  removed,  but 
standeth  fast  for  ever.'  *  God  is  in  the 
midst  of  her,  therefore  shall  she  not  be 
removed.'  It  was  emphatically  the  lair 
of  the  lion  of  Judah,  of  'Ariel,'  the 
Lion  of  God.  '  In  Judah  is  God  known ; 
His  name  is  great  in  Israel.  In  Salem 
is  His  leafy  covert,  and  His  rocky  den 
in  Zion.'  .  .  .  *Thou  art  more  glorious 
and  excellent  than  the  mountains  of  the 
robbers.'  And  this  wild  and  fastness- 
like character  of  Jerusalem  was  concen- 
trated yet  again    in  the    fortress,    the 

*  stronghold '  of  Zion.  That  point,  the 
highest  in  the  city,  the  height  which 
most  readily  catches  the  eye  from  every 
quarter,  is  emphatically  the  '  hill  fort,' 
the  *  rocky  hold  '  of  Jerusalem  —  the 
refuge  where  first  the  Jebusite  and  then 
the  Lion  of  God  stood  at  bay  against 
the  hunters." — Stanley.  The  founda- 
tions of  the  holy  city  were  high  and 
firm,  and  on  nearly  every  side  it  was 
guarded  by  the  ancient  mountains.  So 
the  Church  of  God  is  secure.  The  city 
of  Zion  has  gone.  The  Temple  at 
Jerusalem  is  no  more ;  but  the  Church 
of  God,  which  the  Highest  has  estab- 
lished, remains  and  prospers.  The 
Church  is  founded  upon  the  rock  ot 
Divine  truth,  and  all  the  raging  storms 
of  earth  and  hell  cannot  shake  her.  The 
Church  is  guarded  by  God  Himself, 
"  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


PSALM  LXXXVII. 


against  it."  Can  infinite  wisdom  be 
baffled  1  Can  Alniightiness  be  over- 
come 1  Can  the  word  of  the  Unchange- 
able fail  1  Then  the  Church  of  God  is 
inviolably  secure. 

III.  Grlorious  in  being  beloved  by 
God.  "  The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of 
Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of 
Jacob."  When  Sennacherib  and  his 
host  were  encamped  before  the  city,  the 
Lord  suffered  them  not  to  pass  the  gates 
though  "  all  the  rest  of  the  country  viras 
subject  to  their  sway,"  and  while  the 
gates  remained  safe,  the  whole  city  was 
safe.  God  loved  Jacob  much,  but  He 
loved  Zion  more.  He  loves  the  worship 
of  His  people  in  their  homes  much,  but 
He  loves  their  worship  in  His  sanctuary 
more.  "A  father  is  glad  to  see  any 
one  of  his  children,  and  makes  him 
welcome  when  he  visits  him,  but  much 
more  when  they  come  together ;  the 
greatest  feast  is  when  they  all  meet  at 
his  Louse.  The  public  praises  of  the 
Church  are  the  emblem  of  heaven  itself, 
where  all  the  angels  make  but  one  con- 
cert." This  love  of  God  for  His  Church 
should  lead  every  believer — 1.  To  seek 
union  with  the  Church.  2.  To  esteem 
the  worship  of  the  Church  a  solemn  duty 
and  precious  privilege.  3.  To  unite  in 
that  worship  with  deep  humility^  pro- 
found reverence,  and  great  delight.  He 
who  "  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  more 
than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob  "  is  pre- 
sent in  His  Church,  and  is  well  pleased 
to  accept  the  spiritual  worship  of  sincere 
worshippers. 

IV.  Grlorious  in  her  exalted  reputa- 
tion. "  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of 
thee,  O  city  of  God."  Many  glorious 
things  were  spoken  of  Mount  Zion  as  to 
its  situation.  *'  Beautiful  for  situation, 
the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  is  Mount 
Zion,"  &c.  As  being  inhabited  by  God. 
*'  God  is  known  in  her  palaces  for  a 
refuge."  "The  Lord  of  Hosts  is  with 
us ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge." 
As  to  the  diffusion  of  religion  from  it 
(Isa.  ii.  3).  The  city  and  temple  passed 
away,  but  true  religion  has  spread 
widely,  and  is  still  doing  so.  The 
Church  of  God  has  an  exalted  reputa- 
tion— 

L   As  possessing  the   highest   intelli- 


gence. The  revealed  mind  and  will  of 
God  on  the  most  important  of  all  ques- 
tions, as  contained  in  the  Sacred  Writ- 
ings, is  given  into  her  keeping.  **Wo 
have  the  mind  of  Christ." 

2.  -4  s  animated  by  the  Divinest  spirit 
The  true  Church  of  God  is  composed 
only  of  those  who  "have  the  spirit  of 
Christ."  He  came  "not  to  be  ministered 
unto  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life 
a  ransom."  The  spirit  of  self-surrender- 
ing love  actuates  every  member  of  the 
Church  of  God. 

3.  As  engaged  in  the  most  useful  and 
glorious  work.  Its  members,  in  their 
measure,  go  forth  to  seek  and  to  save 
the  lost.  They  labour  to  "  present 
every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus,"  to 
abolish  sin  and  suffering,  to  establish 
holiness  and  joy,  and  to  make  the  moral 
wastes  break  forth  into  beauty  and 
fragrance  and  fruitfulness. 

V.  Glorious  in  her  increase.  This 
increase  is — 

1.  Variously  composed.  "  I  will  make 
mention  of  Rahab  and  Babylon  to  them 
that  know  me  :  behold  Philistia,  and 
Tyre,  with  Ethiopia;  this  was  born 
there."  Some  regard  these  as  the  words 
of  God  Himself,  and  translate,  "  I  an- 
nounce Rahab  and  Babylon  as  those  that 
know  Me,"  (fee.  But  with  either  render- 
ing the  idea  is,  that  converts  to  the 
Church  of  God  would  be  added  from 
those  nations.  Hengstenberg  expresses 
what  we  regard  as  the  true  idea  :  "At 
the  time  when  these  hopes  were  ex- 
pressed, the  number  of  the  members  of 
the  Church  of  God  had  been  very  much 
melted  down.  The  ten  tribes  had 
already  been  led  away  into  captivity, 
and  Judah  remained  alone  in  the  land. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  longing  after 
the  fulfilment  of  the  old  promises  of  a 
posterity  to  Abraham  as  numerous  as 
the  stars  of  heaven  and  the  sand  of  the 
sea,  must  have  been  awakened  with 
peculiar  power,  and  must  have  seized 
with  especial  ardour  upon  everything, 
such  as  the  above-mentioned  events  in 
the  time  of  Hezekiah,  which  furnished 
a  foundation  on  which  such  a  hope 
could  rest,  and  brought  into  view  a 
compensation  for  the  loss  of  Israel  in 
the  coming  in  of  the  heathen."     These 

607 


PSALM  LXXXVXI. 


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  PS  ALMS. 


foreign  nations  are  here  set  forth  as 
actually  incorporated  by  a  new  birth 
into  the  Church,  of  God.  Even  the 
worst  enemies  of  the  Jews,  Egypt  and 
Babylon,  are  regarded  as  citizens  of 
Zion.  God  Himself  acknowledges  and 
registers  them  as  such.  The  grand 
fulfilment  of  this  splendid  hope  is 
found  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  "  Many  shall  come  from 
the  east  and  the  west,  and  from  the 
north  and  the  south,  and  shall  sit  down 
in  the  kingdom  of  God."  They  are 
coming  from  all  nations  into  His  king- 
dom, and  they  shall  continue  to  come 
until  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  loyally 
submit  to  Him. 

2.  Distinguished  in  character,  "  This 
and  that  man  was  born  in  her."  The 
word  translated  mail  is  ti^'^i^  =  avrj^  —  vir, 

a  man  of  eminence.  Men  of  distin- 
guished ability  and  excellence  shall  be 
born  in  tlie  Church.  The  most  illustri- 
ous names  in  the  annals  of  the  world 
are  those  of  men  who  have  been  mem- 
bers of  the  spiritual  Zion.  The  Church 
of  God  has  been,  and  still  is,  the  abode 
of  the  men  most  renowned  for  knowledge 
and  wisdom,  for  patience  and  courage, 
for  tenderness  and  truth,  for  piety  and 
usefulness,  for  independence  and  rever- 
ence. 

3.  Registered  by  God.  "  The  Lord 
shall  count  when  He  writeth  up  the 
people,  that  this  man  was  born  there." 
In  the  great  census  the  Lord  will  clearly 
distino;uish  those  who  were  born  in 
Zion.  The  Divine  registration  is  in- 
fallible.    There  are  no  mistakes  in  it. 


None  but  the  true  citizens  of  Zion  will 
be  found  "  written  in  the  Lamb's  book 
of  life."  And  the  name  of  no  true 
citizen  will  be  omitted. 

VI.  Glorious  in  the  joy  whicli  her 
supplies  produce.  "  As  well  the  singers 
as  the  players  on  instruments :  all  my 
springs  are  in  thee."  This  verse  is 
generally  acknowledged  to  be  a  very 
difficult  one.  Various  interpretations 
of  it  have  been  propounded.  The  idea 
seems  to  us  to  be  that  the  citizens  of 
Zion  rejoice  with  music  and  song  in  the 
fountains  of  refreshment  and  blessing 
which  are  found  in  Zion.  The  streams 
which  make  glad  the  city  of  God  are 
found  there.  How  abundant  and  rich 
and  free  are  the  provisions  which  God 
has  given  to  us  in  His  Church  !  We 
have  there  the  helpful  communion  of 
saints,  the  dispensation  of  the  trea- 
sures of  the  truth  of  God  by  the  Chris- 
tian ministry,  the  exalting  and  sanctify- 
ing and  blessed  exercise  of  worship,  and 
the  participation  in  the  Divine  sacra- 
ments. In  the  work  and  worship  of  the 
Church  of  God  "  with  joy  we  draw 
water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation." 

Conclusion. — L  Are  we  horn  into 
the  Church  of  God  9  Are  we  citizens  of 
the  spiritual  Zion  ?  Are  our  names  in 
the  heavenly  register  1  Registration  in 
the  records  of  the  Church  on  earth  will 
avail  us  nothing,  unless  our  names  "are 
written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life."  2. 
If  we  are  citizens  of  Zion,  let  us  rejoice  in 
the  honour  and  privilege ;  for,  as  such, 
we  are  members  of  tlie  m>ost  glorious 
society. 


Public  Worship  more  Acceptable  to  God  than  Private  Detotion, 

(Verses  \y%) 


Man  has  the  capacity  to  worship  God, 
and  as  God  reveals  Himself  man  is  under 
obligation  to  worship  Him.  To  be  ac- 
ceptable to  God,  this  worship  must  be 
the  tribute  of  free  and  sincere  affection. 
Wherever  such  an  offering  is  made, 
whether  in  the  secret  chamber,  at  the 
family  altar,  or  in  the  public  sanctuary, 
it  is  "  a  spiritual  sacrifice,  holy  and  ac- 
ceptable to  God."  It  also  sends  back 
into  the  heart  of  the  worshipper  that  joy 
508 


and  peace  which  are  unspeakable  and 
full  of  glory.  But  public  worship  is 
more  lovely  in  the  sight  of  God  than 
private  worship. 

I.  Adduce  some  facts  in  the  Divine 
administration  indicative  of  God's 
higher  estimate  of  public  worship. 

L  The  facts  of  the  Divine  institution 
of  public  worship.  The  Sabbath  is 
favourable  for  all  religious  worship. 
But,  when  God  gave  special  ordinances 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


FSALM  LXXXVm 


to  His  ancient  people,  conspicuous 
amongst  them  all  was  this  solemn  in- 
stitution of  public  worship.  Three 
periods  in  the  year  were  assigned  as 
seasons  of  holy  convocation,  <fec.  In 
addition  to  these  more  conspicuous  so- 
lemnities, there  were  the  public  services 
for  the  new  moons,  the  year  of  rest,  and 
the  year  of  jubilee.  Moreover,  each 
day  at  the  Temple  was  the  morning  and 
evening  sacrifice  offered,  (fee.  ...  In  the 
fact  that  God  thus  instituted  public 
worship,  we  read  His  higher  apprecia- 
tion of  it. 

2.  The  fact  that  on  special  occasions 
public  homage  to  God  has  been  specially 
demanded f  indicates  His  high  pleasure  in 
it.  Many  instances  occur  in  the  history 
of  God's  dealings  with  His  people  when 
some  special  interposition  was  followed 
by  as  special  a  requisition  for  the  public 
acknowledgment  of  His  supremacy  and 
authority  as  their  Lord  and  Sovereign.  . . . 
On  occasions  like  these  the  elders  were 
commanded  to  *'  proclaim  a  fast,  to  call 
a  solemn  assembly,"  &c.  So  also  when 
there  had  been  a  special  deliverance 
from  pestilence,  or  famine,  or,  (fee.  ;  or 
when  there  had  been  remarkable  provi- 
dential bounties,  the  whole  nation  was 
called  to  public  thanksgiving,  (fee. 

3.  llie  fact  that  the  ordinance  of 
public  worship  is  perpetuated  under  the 
Christian  dispensation.  The  example  of 
inspired  apostles  and  primitive  saints  is 
left  on  record,  in  relation  to  their  fre- 
quent ''  coming  together  in  one  place  '* 
and  "with  one  accord;"  and  the  solemn 
injunction  given  as  applicable  to  all 
ages  "  not  to  forsake  the  assembling  of 
ourselves  togetlier,"  (fee.  These  facts 
abundantly  indicate  God's  higher  regard 
for  it. 

II.  State  some  reasons  why,  in  the 
nature  of  the  case,  God  should  prefer 
public  to  private  worship. 

1.  Public  worship  is  attended  with 
greater  sacrifices.  That  piety  is  best 
which  will  make  the  greatest  sacrifices. 
That  faith  or  love  is  the  strongest  which 
will  bear  the  greatest  strain.  In  pro 
portion  as  the  sacrifice  of  public  exceeds 
that  of  private  worship  is  the  service  ot 
the  former  more  acceptable  to  God  than 
the  latter.     It  is  a  higher  expression  of 


your  piety.     It  is  a  brighter  test  of  your 
faith  and  love. 

2.  It  exerts  a  more  powerful  and 
extensive  moral  influence.  The  influ- 
ence of  regular  secret  prayer  upon  the 
heart  and  life  of  a  Christian  is  very 
great.  So  also  is  the  influence  of  morn- 
ing and  evening  family  worship.  But, 
in  the  public  courts  of  the  Lord,  there 
are  many  influences  flowing  in  upon  the 
soul,  and  many  emotions  are  there 
awakened,  which  can  never  spring  out 
of  the  devotions  of  the  closet  or  the 
family.  The  sanctuary  is  emphatically 
"  the  house  of  God  and  the  gate  of 
heaven."  The  Christian's  graces  kindle 
anew  in  Christian  communion,  as  the 
coals  glow  with  increasing  light  and 
heat  when  brought  into  contact. 

3.  It  stands  connected  with  the  most 
signal  displays  of  the  power  of  Divine 
truth.  Nowhere  upon  earth  has  this 
two-fold  work  of  the  Spirit,  in  comfort- 
ing the  saint  and  convincing  the  sinner, 
been  so  signally  effected  as  in  connec- 
tion with  the  solemnities  of  public 
worship.  It  is  in  the  house  of  God, 
when  the  quick  and  searching  words  of 
Divine  truth  have  been  applied  with 
wise  discrimination,  and  urged  upon  the 
conscience  with  faithful  and  affectionate 
importunity,  that  the  sinner  has  been 
the  most  thoroughly  arrested  in  his 
course,  and  made  the  most  to  feel  him- 
self alone  with  his  God,  and  most 
vividly  to  anticipate  the  coming  scenes 
of  the  judgment  and  the  awful  issues 
of  the  final  sentence.  Yes,  and  here 
also  the  voice  of  mercy  has  fallen  upon 
the  ear  of  penitential  sorrow,  with  the 
most  melting,  soothing  tenderness,  and 
filled  the  contrite  bosom  with  new  joys 
and  peace,  unknown  in  any  other  place 
but  heaven. 

4.  It  is  the  grand  instrumentality  for 
perpetuating  and  extending  the  Church, 
The  light  of  this  day  of  Christian 
activity  and  benevolence  would  go  out 
in  darkness,  ere  our  generation  had 
passed,  were  the  sanctuary  to  be  de- 
serted, and  all  manif estatior  s  of  devo- 
tion to  be  shut  up  within  the  family 
and  the  closet.  How  direct  is  the 
tendency  to  all  that  is  good  in  the  ordi- 
nances of   public   worship  !     Keep  up 

609 


PSALM  LXXXYII. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  PSALMS. 


this  agency  in  its  purity  and  strength, 
and  civil  and  social  and  religious  bless- 
ings abound;  but,  as  you  abolish  this 
agency,  religion  droops  and  virtue  fails, 
the  dark  passions  of  the  depraved  heart 
rage  unchecked  till  the  judgments  of 
heaven  cut  short  the  rebellion  and  im- 
piety in  hopeless  desolation. 

5.  It  is  most  like  heaven.  The  wor- 
ship of  heaven  is  pure  and  perfect,  and 
also  united  and  public,  devotion.  The 
place  on  earth  the  most  like  to  heaven, 
is  the  house  of  God  on  the  Christian 
Sabbath,  filled  with  sincere  and  humble 


worshippers.     Nowhere  shall  yoa  come 

BO  near  heaven  in  all  its  glory  as  when 
you  enter  the  sacred  courts  of  the  Lord, 
and  mingle  your  prayers  and  praises 
with  His  children,  while  He  bows  His 
ear  to  hearken. 

Inferences. — 1.  All  the  arrange- 
ments for  public  worship  should  he  amply 
and  cheerfully  provided.  2.  A  regular 
attendance  upon  public  worship  is  de- 
manded. 3.  Yield  to  the  influence  and 
instructions  here  imparted. — Rev,  L.  P, 
Hickok,  B.D.  Abridged  from  "  The 
Preachers*  Treasury,** 


Glorious  Things  Spoken  of  the  Chuboh. 

(Vene  3.) 


Here  we  have  an  expressive  testi- 
mony in  favour  of  the  Church.  Let  us 
illustrate  and  improve  the  subject. 

I.  Let  us  illustrate  it.  What  glori- 
ous things  are  spoken  of  her  ?  She  is 
commended — 

1.  As  having  Jehovah  Himself  for  her 
■founder.  She  became  a  city  through 
His  love,  mercy,  wisdom,  and  grace. 

2.  As  having  the  ark  of  His  presence 
dwelling  in  her.  To  the  saints  He 
vouchsafes  most  delightful  displays  of 
His  excellency  and  brightness ;  most 
captivating  views  of  His  glory. 

3.  As  having  the  solemnities  of  His 
worship  performed  there.  In  this  city, 
God  is  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ; 
worshipped  in  the  beauty  of  holiness. 

4.  As  having  His  laws  to  govern  her. 
The  laws  of  God  are  holy,  just,  and 
good  ;  and  all  are  found  in  the  written 
revelation  He  has  given  us. 

5.  As  having  constant  supplies  from 
Him.  The  community  is  a  great  one  ; 
but  they  are  richly  clothed,  well  fed, 
and  kindly  nourished. 


6.  As  having  His  immediate  and  con- 
stant protection.  She  is  surrounded  on 
every  side  by  Him  ;  and,  guarding  her 
night  and  day,  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail  against  her.'* 

II.  Let  us  improve  it.  We  may 
learn — 

1.  In  what  light  we  ought  to  regard 
the  Church.  On  account  of  the  poverty 
of  her  members,  and  the  fewness  of  their 
number,  her  glory  is  scarcely  at  all  seen, 
but,  notwithstanding  her  visible  aspect, 
she  is  yet  most  beautiful,  most  glorious 
(Ps.  1.  2  ;  Isa.  Ix.  18). 

2.  What  reason  for  thankfulness  we 
have  if  we  are  enrolled  her  citizens.  In 
comparison  of  this  all  else  should  be 
esteemed  by  us  as  "  dung  and  dross." 

3.  How  much  we  should  exert  our- 
selves to  advance  her  interests.  In  refer- 
ence to  her,  a  glorious  period  is  pre- 
dicted (Isa.  Ix.  1-14)  ]  and  this  we 
should  long  for  and  help  forward  by  all 
means  within  our  power  to  adopt  (Ibgl 
Ixii.  1,6,  1).'-'W,  Sleigh. 


Begenebatiok. 
{Verse  6.) 


From  these  words  we  may  derive 
some  instructive  and  useful  remarks. 
Let  us  attend  to  the  following — 

I.  It  is  highly  important  to  every 
man  to   be   regenerated.      This   will 


our  Lord  respecting  it  (John  lil  6-7) ; 

the  degeneracy  of  our  nature  (Eph.  ii. 
1) ;  the  nature  and  design  of  the  Gospel 
dispensation ;  the  relation  of  the  present 
to  another  world  ;  the  capacity  of  the 


appear  by  considering  the  language  of      soul   for  enjoyment  or  suffering;   and 
510 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS. 


FftAUf  ULXXTn. 


the  unsuitableness  of  the  character  of  an 
unregenerate  person  for  future  happi- 
ness (Luke  xvi.  24,  25). 

II.  The  present  is  the  only  state  in 
which  this  momentous  change  can  he 
accomplished.  Death  makes  no  change 
of  a  moral  kind  in  man ; — his  probation 
terminates  on  his  leaving  the  present 
world  (2  Cor.  Ti.  2  j  Rev.  xxii.  11), 
and  all  beyond  is  awarded  according  to 
character  (Matt.  xvi.  27  ;  Rev.  xxii.  12). 

III.  Regeneration  is  not  a  fancy  or 
dream,  but  a  reality.  Its  existence  is 
evinced  in  the  phraseolc^  by  which  it 
is  described  (1  John  v.  1 ;  2  Cor.  v. 
17) ;  in  the  accounts  given  of  the  first 
Christians  of  their  having  actually  un- 
dergone a  spiritual  birth  (Rom.  vi. 
11-13  j  Eph.  ii.  4-6);  and  in  the 
present  experience  of  all  believers,  who 
are  themselves  living  witnesses  to  the 
truth  of  this  doctrine  (2  Cor.  v.  17  > 
Col.  iii.  1). 

IV.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  agent 
in  the  regeneration  of  men.  Our  own 
state  and  character  before  the  change 
takes  place,  the  images  used  to  describe 
it,  and  the  positive  declarations  of 
Scripture  if  duly  considered  will  con- 
vince us  of  this  (John  i.  12,  iii  4;  Eph. 
ii.  8-10 ;   1  John  iii.  9). 

V.  Though  the  Spirit  can  do  this 
immediately,  yet  He  generally  does 
it  in  the  use  of  the  means.  Those 
means  are  chiefly  His  written  Word 
(Ps.  cxix.  93;  James  i.  18;  the  min- 
istry of  the  Gospel  (2  Cor.  v.  18-20 ; 
1  Thess.  i.  5);  and  prayer  (Isa.  xlv.  19; 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  37). 


VL  It  is  not  every  one  that  thinks 
he  is  regenerated  that  is  really  so. 
We  are  not  spiritually  born  merely  be* 
cause  we  have  been  baptized,  nor  be- 
cause we  have  correct  views  of  religion, 
nor  because  we  observe  certain  rites,  nor 
yet  because  our  lives  are  reformed.  Re- 
generation is  widely  different  from  these 
things,  and  those  who  rest  satisfied  with 
these  are  mistaking  the  shadow  for  the 
substance. 

VII.  Zion,  or  the  Church,  is  hon- 
oured as  the  birthplace  of  the  saints. 
This  is  that  to  which  our  attention  is 
called  in  the  words  of  our  text.  It  is 
because  of  this,  amongst  the  many  things 
spoken  of  her,  that  she  stands  so  high 
in  the  estimation  of  God  and  man  (Ps. 
cxxxii.  13,  14,  cxxxvii.  6,  6). 

VIII.  The  work  of  regeneration  !is 
made  apparent  by  its  effects  and  evi- 
dences. Such  are — deliverance  from 
sin  (1  John  iii.  9,  v.  18)  ;  victory  over 
the  world  (Rom.  xii.  2  ;  1  John  v.  4,  5); 
spirituality  of  mind  (John  iii.  6  ;  Rom. 
viii.  5,  14)  ;  love  to  the  saints  (1  John 
iv.  7) ;  submission  to  Christ  (John  vi. 
45  ;  1  John  v.  1) ;  true  obedience  (1 
John  ii.  29) ;  and  hope  (1  Pet.  u  3 ;  1 
John  iii.  2,  3). 

And  now,  am  I  myself  the  subject  of 
this  change  ?  Have  I  already  experi- 
enced it  ?  Am  I  born  of  God  1  Am  I 
decidedly  a  new  creature  1  If  my  best 
interests  be  deemed  worthy  of  my  at- 
tention, these  questions  cannot  be  im- 
proper ;  nor  can  I  too  seriously  apply 
them  to  myself. — W,  Sleigh, 


The  Fount  of  Blessikq, 


**  All  my  springs  are  in  Thee." 

Consider — 

I.  What  is  meant  by  the  pronoun 
"Thee."  The  Psalmist  meant  Zion, 
All  his  springs  were  in  Zion.  From  the 
time  of  Constantino  to  the  present  the 
name  Zion  has  been  applied  to  the 
western  hill  on  which  the  city  of  Jeru- 
salem stands.  But  anciently,  and  down 
to  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the 
city  by  Titus,  the  name  Zion  was  ap- 
plied exclusively  to  the  eastern  hill  on 


(Veru  7.) 

which  the  Temple  stood.  So  it  was  in 
Zion  as  being  the  place  on  which  the 
Temple  stood  that  the  Psalmist  found 
his  springs.  In  this  light,  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  Psalm  is  at  once  manifest. 
To  the  devout  Jew  Zion  was  the  abode 
of  joy  and  blessing,  the  place  of  special 
Divine  manifestation,  and  of  special 
communion  with  God,  who  is  repre- 
sented as  dwelling  there  (Ps.  Ixxxi  1, 
cxxxii.  13,  14). 

In  this  Christian  age,  there  is  not  one 

511 


FSALM  LXXXVni. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  PSALMS, 


sacred  place,  for  all  places  are  sacred. 
Not  one  local  mercy-seat,  for  Christ  is 
the  universal  mercy-seat, — the  meeting- 
place  between  God  and  man.  The  Jew 
found  all  his  springs  in  the  Temple, 
because  by  means  of  its  ordinances  he 
realised  the  presence  and  obtained  the 
blessing  of  God.  To  us,  "  Christ  is  the 
true  temple ;  all  our  springs  are  in 
Him,  and  from  Him  all  our  streams 
flow."  But  Christ  is  Himself  the  gift 
of  God  to  us.  So  God  is  the  primal 
fount  of  blessing.  And  tiirough  Christ 
we  rise  to  God,  commune  with  God, 
(fee.  So  all  our  springs  are  in  God. 
We  trace  all  our  blessings  to  the 
heavenly  Father.  *'  Every  good  gift 
and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above," 
&c. 

II.  The  number  and  variety  of  the 
springs  from  which  we  are  drawing. 
How  numerous  are  they  !  The  sun,  the 
atmosphere,  the  earth,  <fec.  ;  society, 
books,  (fee.  ;  many  spiritual  ministries, 
the  communion  of  saints,  religious  wor- 
ship, the  comfort,  and  guidance  and 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  the  example 
and  sympathy  and  sacrifice  of  the 
Saviour,  and  the  great  love  of  our 
Father,  which  is  the  fountain  from 
which  all  other  blessings  flow. 

How  various  also  are  they  /  Varied 
to  suit  the  many  needs  of  our  complex 
nature  in  all  our  various  circumstances 
and  moods.  When  tlie  heart  overruns 
with  joy,  the  joyousness  of  the  ever- 
blessed  God  is  adapted  to  our  need, 
and  so  we  delight  to  approach  Him. 
When  the  heart  is  crushed  with  grief, 
the  tenderness  and  compassion  of  Him 
who  pitieth  as  a  father  and  comforteth 
as  a  mother  are  the  balm  that  heals  us. 

The  number  and  variety  of  our  needs 
are  evidence  of  the  greatness  of  our 
nature.  Only  great  natures  have  great 
requirements,      God  has   made   us  for 


Himself,  and  nothing  less  than  Himself 
can  satisfy  the  cravings  of  our  soul. 

III.  The  blessedness  of  having  all 
our  springs  in  God.  '*  All  my  springs 
are  in  Thee  ; "  then,  they  are  all-sujji- 
cient.  They  will  meet  every  variety  oj 
need.  For  the  perplexed  student,  con- 
scious of  ignorance,  and  crying  for  light, 
there  is  an  inexhaustible  spring  of  know- 
ledge and  guidance.  For  the  worn  and 
wearied  suff"erer,  sighing  for  rest  and 
comfort,  there  are  springs  of  patience 
and  solace,  and  even  joy.  For  the 
Christian,  conscious  of  weakness  and  im- 
perfection, there  are  springs  of  power 
and  inspiration  and  hope.  For  the 
penitent  sinner,  sorrowing  over  a  dark 
past,  mourning  his  sin,  there  are  springs 
of  pardon  and  peace  and  purity. 

These  springs  are  inexhaustible.  They 
are  as  full  and  as  fresh  now  as  ever  they 
were.  Exhaust  t\ie  solar  fires,  exhaust 
the  ocean,  (fee.  But  you  cannot  exhaust 
the  Infinite.  Our  springs  are  all  in 
God,  so  they  cannot  fail ;  in  God,  then, 
they  will  meet  all  our  thirst  for  ever- 
more. 

Our  springs  being  in  God,  we  may 
draw  from  them  liberally  and  joyfully^ 
because  God  is  infinitely  gener^ous.  "He 
giveth  to  all  liberally,  and  upbraideth 
not."  His  generosity  is  as  great  as  His 
resources  :  both  are  infinite  as  Himself. 
He  delights  in  imparting  joy  and  bless- 
ing to  man.  I  rejoice  that  all  my 
springs  are  in  God.  Let  us  learn  to 
practise  more  fully  than  hitherto  these 
two  things  —  1.  Adoring  gratitude  to 
God.  2.  Joyous  trust  in  God.  Come 
what  may,  our  resources  cannot  fail. 

0  God,  the  fount  of  blessing, 

Our  springs  are  all  in  Thee  : 
And  though  life's  cares  are  pressing, 
Weakness  our  soul  possessing, 
Our  prayers  to  Thee  addressing, 
And  looking  for  Thy  blessing, 
We  find  our  springs  in  Th.ee. 


END  OF  VOL.  I. 


512 


INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Absence  from  God,  a  godly  soul  un 

der  a  sense  of  (See  Soul), 
Access,  the  good  man's,  trust,  and  tes- 
timony,   

Activity,   the  beneficent,  of    God    in 

nature, 

is  incessant,        ..... 

omnipresent, 

abundant,  ..... 

joy- inspiring, 

Adullam  Sermon,  an  (See  Sermon), 

Affliction,  praising  God  for  His  great 

kindness  in  (See  Praising), 

praj'^er  the  resource  of  the  godly  in 

(See  Prayer),        .... 

Afflictions,  the,  of  man,  and  the  help  of 

God, 

Aged  saint,  the,  and  his  God, 
Aged,  the  cry  of  the      .... 
the  phenomena  of  human  decay, 
the   reasons  of  this  law  of  physical 

decay, 

the  duties  which  spring  out  of  these 
facts  and  considerations, 

Ages,  dark, 

the  golden  age  of  a  countiy  may  be 
a  dark  age  in  the  estimate  of  the 
saint,       ..... 
the  faults  with  which  a  splendid  civi 

lisation  may  be  chargeable     . 
the  duty  of  the  Christian  patriot 

Alamoth, 

Alive,  buried  (See  Buried), 
Alpha  and  Omega, 
Altar  of  God,  the, 

the  peculiar  nature  of  that  worship 

which  God  has  authorised,     . 
the  emphatic  description  of  the  joy 
which  results  from  it,     . 

Al-taschith 

Ancestors  and  successors,  our  relation 

to  our  (See  Relation), 
Anniversary,  for  a  Sabbath- School, 
Antagonistic  forces, 
describe  the  two  states  of  feelings, 

fear  and  joy,  .... 

these  are  not  incompatible, 

they  are  essential    to    the   security 

and  development  of  the  Christian 


PAGE 


206 
403 

330 
330 
330 
330 
160 

335 

142 

463 
373 
374 
374 

375 

375 
46 


46 

47 

48 

228 

145 

28 

212 

212 

212 

287 

441 

441 

9 

9 
9 


Anticipation,  an  encouraging,      ,        .  496 

the  blessing  anticipated  —  deliver- 
ance from  distresses  ;  exaltation  to 
honour ;  prevalence  of  moral  excel- 
lence,       496 

the  character  of  those  for  whom  the 
blessing  is  anticipated,  is  marked 
by,    consecration   to  God,  venera- 
tion of  God,  obedience  to  God,       .  497 
Anticipation,  the,  of  the  godly  soul,      .  320 
presents  a  triple  contrast, .        .         .320 
a  contrast  of  character,      .        .         .  320 
of  pursuit,  .....  320 

of  destiny,  .         .         .         .         .320 

Antidote,  the  bane  and  the  (See  Bane),      53 
Apologetics    of    childhood,   the      (See 

Childhood), 29 

Appeal,    an   earnest,  and  prayer  (See 

Prayer), 217 

Appealing  to  God,  man,        .        .         -IS 
to    His    righteousness,   faithfulness, 
mercy.     Observe  :  the  blessedness 
and  the  conditions  of  so  doing,       .     13 
Argument  of  experience,  the        .         •319 
the  rejoicing  is  reasonable,  personal, 
real,  restful,  prophetic,  .        .         .319 

Arts,  black, 42 

selfish  men  set  traps  for  the  young 

and  inexperienced,  .        .         .42 

the    world    contrives    traps  for  the 

godly, 42 

Satan  sets  straps  for  us  all.  Let  the 
innocent  put  their  trust  in  God,  and 
Avalk  circumspectly  ;  let  any  who 
are  in  the  snare  of  the  devil  look 
up  to  the  Deliverer ;  let  the  wicked 
be  as>sured  that  God's  eye  is  upon 
them,  and  that  justice  must  over- 
take them, 43 

Asaph,  .         .         .         .        .        .    245,403 

Ascension  of  Christ,  the,      .         .         •  35i 

the  fact  of, 351 

the    triumphs    with    which    it   was 

attended          .....   352 
the  inestimable  benefits  supplied  byit,  352 
Aspects  of  Divine  worship  (See  Wor- 
ship),       335 

Aspects    of    magistracy   (See  Magis- 
tracy),   477 

Aspects  of  piety,  three  (See  Piety),       156 


¥1 


INDBX. 


Aspects  of  the  Divine  goyemment  (See 
Government),      .... 

Assurance,  a  well-founded,  . 
a  commemoration  of  God's  former 
and  glorious  doings ;  the  nature, 
Author,  and  reason  of  these  doings ; 
the  obligation  of  every  generation 
to  transmit  to  posterity  an  account 
of  the  doings  of  God  in  their  day, 
and  to  profit  by  the  experience  of 
those  who  have  gone  before,  . 
a  declaration  of  confidence  in  God, 
which  is  worthy  of  imitation  in  the 
ground  on  which  their  faith  rested, 
the  relationship  which  He  sustained 
to  them,  the  petition  which  they 
present  to  Him,  the  renunciation 
of  other  objects  of  trust,  their  assur- 
ance of  victory,  and  their  praise  of 
God, 

Assyrian  army,  overthrow  of  the, 

Atheism,  practical,        .... 

the  nature,  history,   characteristics, 

and  doom  of, 

Atheism,  the  immorality  of, 
in  its  principle,   origin,   and  conse- 
quences,   

Attitude  of  a  victorious  soul,  the, 
marked  by  deep  self-abasement, 
sublime  confidence  in  God.  The  Psal- 
mist was  assured  of  the  constant 
presence,  the  unfailing  support,  the 
infallible  guidance,  the  all -suffi- 
ciency, and  the  righteousness  of  the 
government  of  God, 

Attitude  of  man  in  a  thunder-storm,  the 
true  (See  Thunder-storm), 

Awful  fallacy,  an  (See  Fallacy), 


VAGI 


213 


213 


214 
231 

40 

40 
52 

52 
400 
400 


401 

136 
251 

53 


Bane  and  the  antidote,  the, 
the  corruption  of  the  race,  universal, 

thorough,  profound,       .         .         .53 
the  Deliverer  of  the  race,  neither  phi- 
losophy,   education,     institutions, 
nor  any  restorative    principle    in 
human  nature,  but  Christ  Jesus,  .     54 

Banquet,  a  royal, 113 

is  provided  in  the  midst  of  conflict,  .   113 
is  promotive  of  abundant  joy,    .        .113 
will  satisfy  all  the  wants  of  a  life- 
time,        113 

is  the  type  and  pledge  of  the  everlast- 
ing feast  in  the  heavenly  banquet- 
ing hall, 1 14 

Barren    lot    of  the  wicked,   the  (See 

Lot), 346 

Beacon,  an  impressive,  .        ,        .  263 

the  moral  portrait  of  a  wicked  man,    263 
remonstrance  with  a  wdcked  man,     .  263 
the  doom  of  a  wicked  man,        .         .  264 
Behaving  as  a  friend  (See  Friend),    .  168 
Benedictions  of  the  good,  the  disposi- 
tions and  (See  Dispositions),      .  172 
Beneficent   activity  of  God  in  nature 

(See  Activity),     .       .       ,        .329 
Besetting  sins  (See  Sins),    .        .        .79 

Beulah, 63 

the  grandeur  of  the  Psalmist's  hope, 


FAOI 

salTation,  and  full,  various,  per- 
petual glories,        .        .        .        .    63 
the  ground  of  his  hope,  Jesus  Christ,    63 
Black  arts  (See  Arts),         .        .        .42 
Blessed  life,  the  (See  Life),         .        .      i 
Blessedness  of  communion  with  God, 

the, 327 

Blessedness  of  the  Christian's  old  age, 

comparative, 379 

he  is  happy  in  the  contemplation  of 

his  past  conduct  and  influence,      .  380 
in  the  contemplation  of  the  blessings 

which  have  marked  his  history,     .  380 
in  the  contemplation  of  his  life's  his- 
tory, because  of  the  lessons  it  has 
served  to  teach,      ....  380 
in  the  continued  possession  of  his 

life's  chief  good,      ....  380 
in  the  near  prospect  of  realising  his 
life's  brightest  hopes,     .        .        .  380 
Blessedness  of  the  compassionate,  the 

(See  Compassionate),  .       .        .  202 

Blessedness  of  the  forgiven,  the,  .        .  148 

declared  as  a  doctrine,       .        .        ,  148 

illustrated  as  a  fact,  .        .        .        .149 

confirmed  by  the  experience  of  the 

godly  in  all  ages,   .        ,        ,        .150 

Blessings,  Divine,         .        •        •        .  446 

from  unlikely  sources,       .        .        .  446 

in  rich  abundance,     ....  446 

a  type  of  the  supreme  blessing,         .  446 

Blessing,  the  Fount  of,  .         .        .511 

Blessing  to  the  race,  Christ  as  the  source 

of  (See  Christ),    .        .        .        ,101 
Bow  in  the  cloud,  the,  .        .        ,        •     75 
the  supremacy  of  God's  government,      75 
the  discriminativeness  of  His  action,     76 
the  tenderness  of  His  methods,  .     76 

the  effectiveness  of  His  aid,       .        .     76 
the  bountifulness  of  His  grace,  .     76 

Burden  and  Sustainer,  man's,  .  .  279 
man  is  burdened,  ....  280 
exhorted  to  cast  his  burden  upon  the 

Lord, 280 

encouraged  to  do  so  by  the  assur- 
ance of  His  support,       .        .        .  280 

Buried  alive, 145 

by  the  malice  of  enemies,         ^ .        .  145 
by  the  neglect  of  contemporaries,      .  145 
by  the  lack  of  opportunities  for  dis- 
tinction,   145 

by  the  failure  of  capacity  for  useful- 
ness,      • 145 

Calling  of  David,  the,  .  .  .  459 
Causeless  hater,  the  (See  Hater),  .  167 
Chain  of  Hfe,  links  in  the  (See  Links),  141 
Challenge  to  religious  hypocrites,  God's 

(See  Hypocrites),        .       .       .  249 
Champion  of  the  good,  God  the,  .        .421 
the  enemies  of  the  good  are  many  and 
mighty,  Satan  and  his  allies,  the 
world,  enemies  within  ourselves,  .  421 
the  Champion  of  the  good  is  greater 
than  all  their  enemies.  He  goes 
forth    to    battle   from   Zion,    to 
complete  victory,  with  the  utmost 
ease,        •       •       •       .       •         4SA 


IKJ>BX. 


^ 


FAOl 

the  Champion  of  the  good  ihould  he 

duly  honoured,  vows   should   he 

paid  to  Him,  offerings  made  to  Him, 

victory  ascribed  to  Him  alone,       .  424 

Character  of  God,  a  welcome  revelation 

of  the, 170 

He  is  unspeakable  in  mercy,     .        ,170 
immutable  in  rectitude,     .        ,        .170 
invites  the  confidence  of  the  soul,     .  171 
is  the  source  of  all  life,      .        .        .171 
is  the  protection  of  the  £;ood  from  the 
artifices  of  the  wicked,  .        .        .171 
Character  of  true  worship  (See  Wor- 
ship),       154 

Character  and  privileges  of  the  godly, 

the  (See  Godly) 323 

Character  and  destiny,  a  terrible,         ,  353 
a  terrible  character,  great  enormity 

and  persistency  in  wickedness,      .  353 
a  terrible  destiny,  destruction,  com- 
plete,  unavoidable,   solemnly  de- 
clared,     353 

Characters,  contrasted,         .        .        .176 
the  wicked  and  the  good  contrasted 

in  their  possessions,  •  .  .176 
in  their  strength,  •  •  •  ,176 
in  their  pei-petuity,  •  •  •  .176 
in  their  integrity,  .  •  •  .177 
in  their  posterity,  .  •  .  .177 
Characteristic  of  a  Divine  revelation, 

the  (See  Revelation),        .        .    48 
Characteristics  of  a  wicked  life,  the  dis- 
tinguishing (See  Wicked),    .        .169 

Chastisement, 20 

the  twofold  character  of  the  Di^^ne ; 
the  one  is  measured,  the  other  is 
overwhelming ;  the  one  destroys, 
the  other  perfects  ;  the  one  is  tem- 
poral, the  other  eternal,  .  .  20 
the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Divine 

clemency, 20 

the  Divine  response  to  the  prayer  of 

penitence, 21 

Chastisement,  the  Divine,  conscience 
awakened  by  a  sense  of,  .  .180 
the  Divine  chastisement  is  greatly 
afflictive  to  men,  makes  them  appre- 
hensive of  the  wrath  of  God,  is  keen 
in  its  penetration  into  their  souls, 
makes  them  morally  loathsome  to 
themselves,  leads  them  to  an  over- 
whelming consciousness  of  sin, 
leads  them  into  grievous  unrest, 
divests  life  of  all  human  joy,  .   180 

the  Divine  chastisement  often  tests 
the  sincerity  and  worth  of  human 
friendship,       .         .        .        .         .181 
caUs  into  requisition  the  self-restraint 

of  the  good, 181 

awakens  the  repentant  soul  to  impor- 
tunate prayer,        ....  182 
Chastisement,  man  under  Divine,        .  450 

sorely  smitten, 450 

remembering  God,     •        •        •        .  450 

seeking  God 451 

offering  to  God  unreal  repentance,  .  451 
Chequered  life,  the  (See  Life),  .  .51 
ChUdhood,  the  apologetics  of,       •        .29 


PAOI 

the  religions  capacity  of  childhood,  .    29 
the  religious  service  of  childhood,     .     30 
Choice  of  our  inheritance,  the,      •        .  234 
distrust  of  self,  .        .        •        •        ,  234 
trust  in  God,      .        .        .        •        .  234 
trust  in  God  rewarded,      .        .        .  235 
Christ  as  th  e  source  of  blessing  to  the  race,  i  o  i 
is  exalted  to  the  highest  dignity,      .  loi 
endowed  with  all  power,    .        ,        ,  loi 
inexhaustible  in  supply,    .        ,        ,  loi 
rejoices  to  communicate,  .        .        .  loi 
Christ,  the  Ascension  of  (See  Ascen- 
sion),      351 

Christ,  the  reign  of,      •        0        •        •      8 
its  sovereignty,  •        •       •        •      8 

authority,  .  t  •  •  •  •  8 
universality,  •  •  •  •  •  8 
irresistibility,     •        •        •        •        •      8 

graciousness, 8 

Christ,  the  utter  overthrow  of  the  ene- 
mies of  (See  Enemies),         .        .  103 
Christ,  victory  for  Christ  and  victory  in,     85 
a  picture  or  Christ's  victory  over  His 
foes,  its  completeness,  rapidity,  \mi- 

versality, 85 

the  saint's  victory  in  Christ,      .        ,     86 
Christianity,  human  nature  in  the  light 

of  Christianity,       .         .        .        .32 
Christianity  recognises  the  intrinsic 

grandeur  of  human  nature,     .         .     3a 
restores  the  lost  grandeur  of  human 
nature,  the  glory  of  human  charac- 
ter, the  fulness  of  human  dominion,    3a 
Church  and  her  Lord,  the,    .        .        .  225 
exhortation  to  the  Church,        .        .  225 
encouragement  to  the  Church,  .        .  225 
the  glory  of  the  Church,    ,        .        .  226 
the  marriage  celebration  of  the  Church,  226 
the  assurances  given  to  the  Lord  of 

the  Church, 226 

Church,  a  tumultuous  world  and  a  tran- 
quil,         228 

the  tumult  of  the  world  is  an  evidence 
of  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  will  one 
day  be  removed,     ....  229 
the  tranquil  Church  is  assured  of  secu- 
rity and  of  refreshment,         .        .  229 
Church,  the  glory  of  the  (See  Glory),    349 
Church,  the  glory  of  the,  a  striking  iUuB- 
tration  of,       ....        .  235 
as  tlie  citv  of  God,     ....  235 
as  exalted  before  men,       .        .        .  236 
as  victorious  over  enemies,        ,        .  236 
Church,  the  glory  of  the,  an  instructive 
illustration  of,         ....  237 
the  triumphs  wrought  for  the  Church 
should  oe  regardtd  as  a  confirma- 
tion of  faith, 237 

an  incentive  to  meditation  on  the  grace 
of  God,   .        .        .        .        .        .238 

a  stimulus  to  praise  God,  .        .        .  238 
a  reason  for  considering  the  security 

and  beauty  of  the  Church,     .        .  238 

an  encouragement  to  triumph  in  God,  239 

Church  a  turtle-dove,  the,     .         .        .  414 

Church,  glorious  things  spoken  of  the,    510 

Church  of  God,  the  glory  of  the,  .  506 

consisted  in  her  sanctity,  •        .        •  506 


viil 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

in  her  security,  .  •  •  •  .  506 
in  being  beloved  by  God,  .  •  ,  507 
in  her  exalted  reputation, .        .        .  507 

in  her  increase, 507 

in  the  joy  which  her  supplies  produce,  508 
Church,  passages  from  the  history  of 
the  ancient,  with  their  lessons  to 
the  modern  Church,       .        ,        .  468 
the  Divine  planting,  •        •        •        •  468 

great  progress, 469 

ruinous  failure,  •        •        •        .  469 

mournful  devastation,        .        .        .  470 

earnest  prayer, 470 

devout  promise  of  the  ancient  Church,  471 
Church,  the  peril  and  prayer  of  the,     .  481 
the    peril  arose  from  her  enemies, 
whose  hostility  was  violent,  confi- 
dent, crafty,  aimed  at  the  utter  ruin 
of  Israel,  united,  and  powerful,     .  481 
the  prayer  was  for  the  interposition 
of  God  ;  the  destruction,  confusion, 
and  submission  of  their  foes  to  God ; 
and  for  the  glory  of  the  Divine 

name, 482 

Church,  the  suffering,  pouring  out  its 

complaints  unto,     ....  404 
the  description  of  the  Church,  it  is 
shepherded  by  God,  redeemed  by 
God,  inhabited  by  God,  .         .  404 

the  distress  of  the  Church ;  their  ene- 
mies triumphed  over  and  spread 
ruin  around  them,  and  blasphemed 
the  name  of  God ;  the  prophetic 
voice  wa%  silo^it ;  God  in  anger  had 
cast  them  off,  ....  405 

the  prayers  of  the  distressed  Church  ; 
that  God  would  remember  them, 
and  interpose  for  them  speedily,  .  406 
Cliurch,  the  suffering,  recounting  the 
doings  of  God  in  the  past  as  an 
argument  for  His  help  in  the  present  408 
the  history  of  God's  dealings  with 
His  people,  reveals  His  universal 

sovereignty, 408 

reveals  the  beneficence  of  His  sove- 
reignty, ......  408 

is  full  of  encouragement  to  them,      .  409 
Church,    the    suffering,    pleading    the 
faithfulness  and  honour  of  God  as 
an  argument  for  His  interposition,    411 
the  attitude  of  their  enemies  to  Him  ; 
that  they  blasphemed  and  loudly 
opposed  Him  is  urged  as  a  reason 
why  He   should   defend   His  own 
cause  and  that  of  His  people  .        •  412 
their  own  relation  to  Him  ;  they  were 
His  turtle-dove,   the  congregation 
of     His     poor.      His     covenanted 
people,    .         .         .         .         .        .412 

Church,    the    triumph    of     the     (See 

Triumph), 347 

Cloud,  the  bow  in  the  (See  Bow),  .     75 

Comfort  to  His  people,  the  knowledge 

of  God  a, 286 

Commendable  resolution,   a  (See  Re- 
solution),       184 

Communion  with  God,  the  blessedness 
01^  •••«••.  2}'^'] 


PAGE 

Compassionate,  the  blessedness  of  the,    202 

he  is  blessed  with  Divine  deliverance,  202 

preservation, 202 

blessing, 202 

reservation, 202 

support  in  affliction,  ....  202 
Compassionate,  the  complaint,  prayer, 

and  confidence  of  the,     .        .         .  203 

he  complains  of  his  enemies,  and  of 
those  whom  he  had  regarded  as  his 
friends, 203 

he  prays  for  mercy,  and  for  restora- 
tion,         204 

he  is  confident  of  the  Divine  favour 

and  support, 204 

Complaint,    a    sorrowful,    an    earnest 

prayer,  and  a  devout  resolution,     .  459 

complaint  of  the  devastation  of  Jeru- 
salem and  the  desecration  of  the 
temple,  of  the  cruelties  inflicted 
and  the  reproaches  cast  upon  the 
people  of  God,         ....  459 

prayer,  manifests  a  consciousness  of 
the  sins  of  the  people,  petitions 
God  for  various  favours,  urges  his 
petitions  with  powerful  pleas,        .  460 

resolution,  the  language  of  confidence, 
gratitude,  service,  ....  461 
Com])laint,  the,  prayer,  and  confidence 
of  the  compassionate    (See  Com- 
passionate), ....  203 
Complaint,  prayer,  and  encouragement,  300 

complaint,  great  calamities  are  com- 
plained of,  these  calamities  are 
regarded  as  signs  of  the  Divine 
displeasure,  the  Divine  displeasure 
is  always  the  result  of  human 
sin, 3C» 

prayer,  for  the  restoration  of  the 
Divine  favour,  and  the  repair  of 
their  calamities,      ....  301 

encouragement,  God  has  given  to  His 
people  glorious  promises,  these  are 
thoroughly  reliable,  should  be 
conspicuously  exhibited  that  men 
may  trust  in  them,  should  inspire 
His  people  with  hope  and  courage 
in  the  time  of  trial,  .  .  .  301 
Complaints  unto  God,  the  suffering 
Church     pouring     out     its      (See 

Church), 404 

Confess  Him,  he  that  knows  God  will,     197 
Confidence,  a  triumphant,     .         .         .  278 

its  nature,  comprehensive,  strong, 
intelligent,      .....  278 

its  grounds,  the  number  and  character 
of   His  enemies,  and  the  ancient 
sovereignty  of  God,         .        .         .  279 
Confidence  in  Jehovah  the  pledge  of 

victory, 97 

confidence  in  Jehovah  fills  the  heart 
with  gladness,         .         .        .        .97 

inspires  with  courage  for  the  conflict     97 

secures  the  exercise  of  His  almighty 
power, 98 

exposes  the  inadequacy  of  the  best 
human  contrivances,        .         .         .98 

turns  apparent  defeat  iato  victory,    .     9^ 


INDEX, 


Ix 


PAGE 

Confidence  in  God,  a  life  of,  .        .  289 

i!;s  grounds,  nature,  and  advantages,  289 
Confidence   of  a  troubled    heart,     the 

(See  Heart),  .        .        .        .307 

Confidence  of  God's  goodness  to   His 
people,  the  good  man's    .         .         .391 
he  indicates  the  character  of  God's 
people,  and  asserts   God's  special 
goodness  to  them,  .         .         .         .391 
Conflict,  prayer  a  preparation  for  (See 

Prayer), 95 

Conflict,  the  glorious,    ....  302 

the  object  of  the  conflict,  .         .        .  302 

the  character  of  the  soldiers,      .         .  302 

the  authority  of  the  Commander,       .  302 

Conqueror,  the  Messiah  as  a  majestic 

(See  Messiah),       ....  222 

Conquest,  full, 81 

the  fulness,  and  the  source  of  the 
Psalmist's  victory,  .         .         .         .81 
Conscience  awakened  by  a  sense  of  the 
Divine    chastisement    (See   CHAS- 
TISEMENT),       180 

Conscience,  informed,  asleep,  aroused,       55 
Constructive  and  the  destructive,  .  407 

Contemplation  of  the  doings  of  God,     .  230 
the  object  contemplated,    .         .         .  230 
the  design  of  the  contemplation,  warn- 
ing of  the  enemies  of  the  Church, 
encouragement  of  the  Church,  in- 
struction of  all,       ....  231 

Contemplation  of  the  works  and  ways 
of    God,     the     godly    soul     rising 
superior  to  trouble  by  the  devout 
(See  Trouble),      ....  433 

Contrasted    characters   (See   Charac- 
ters),    ......  176 

Contrasted  with  the  peaceful  destiny  of 
the  good,  the  temporary  prosperity 
of  the  wicked  as,     .         .        .        .178 

wicked  men  are  often  in  the  posses- 
sion of  great  power,         .         .         .178 
often  experience  unexpected  reverses,   1 79 
the  good  are  happy  in  their  life,  and 
peaceful  in  their  futurity,       .         -179 
Counsels  of  wisdom,  two,      .         .         .147 
love  the  Lord,  urged  by  Reason,  Grati- 
tude, Experience,   ....   147 

be  of  good  courage,     .        .         .        .147 

Courage,  moral, 44 

the  severity  of  the  trial,     .         .         "44 
the  constancy  of  the  tried,  ,         .     44 

the  certainty  of  the  triumph,     .         .     45 
Cowardice  and  its  causes,  moral,  .         .  442 
the  illustration  of  moral  cowardice,  .  442 
the  causes  of  moral  cowardice,  absence 
of   the  support  of  conscience,  the 
inspiration  to  be  drawn  from  past 
interpositions  of  God  on  their  be- 
half, and  the  help  of  God,       .        .  442 

Creation, 28 

deriving  its  glory  from  God,       .        .     28 
revealing  the  glory  of  God,        .         .     29 
awakening  admiration   and  love  in 
the  children  of  God,        .         .         .29 
Crises  in  the  spiritual  life,     .         .         .  394 
are  sometimes  occasioned  by  the  Pro- 
vidence of  God,      ....  394 


PAOE 

are  painful  to  the  soul,      .        .        .  394 
are  surmounted  in  communion  with 

Cod, 394 

Cry  for  help,  a  pathetic  (See  Help),  .  108 
Cry  from   a  soul  in    distress,   a  (See 

Distress), 273 

Cry    of    a    troubled    heart,    the    (See 

Heart), 305 

Cry  of  the  aged,  the  (See  Aged),  .        .  374 
Cry  of  the  righteous  in  extreme  suffer- 
ing, the  (See  Suffering),     .        .  357 

Dark  ages  (See  Ages),  .  .  .46 
David,  the  calling  of,  .  .  .  .  459 
David's  prayer,  ....  258,  261 
David's  prayer  and  vow,        ,        .        .258 

the  petitions, 258 

the  predicated  results  of  a  gracious 

answer, 259 

Day  of  trouble,  the  (See  Trouble),     .  502 

Decided  piety  (See  Piety),   .        .        .  292 

Declaration  of  a  grateful  soul,  the,       .  337 

help  in  trouble  implored  by  man,       .  337 

granted  by  God,         ....  338 

recounted  to  men,       ....  338 

acknowledged  to  God,        .         .         .  338 

Deliverance,  a  song  of,  ...   109 

this  deliverance  was  celebrated   by 

grateful  praise,        .         .         .         .109 
will  be  the  means  of  conferring  bless- 
ing on  all  mankind,        .         .         .110 
will  vindicate  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness to  future  ages,         .         .         .110 
Deliverer,  the  good  man's  trouble  and 

(See  Trouble),      ....  427 
Departing  from  God,     ....  402 
Deposit,  the  great,         ....   143 
Depression,  the  deep,  and  strong  con- 
solation   of    a    godly    soul    (See 

Soul), 208 

De  profundis, 73 

the  Psalmist's  peril,  .        .        .73 

pj-ayer, 73 

preservation,      .        .        ,        ,        ,     73 
Destinies  of  men,  the,  ....       5 

aie  various, 5 

decided  by  their  moral  character  and 

conduct, 5 

as  widely  contrasted  as  their  charac- 
ter, .         .         .        .        .         .       5 

Destinies  of  men,  the  diverse,  manifest- 
ing the  reign  of  God,      .         .         .  297 
the  destiny  of  the  enemies  of  the  good, 
life  protracted  in  misery  and  ending 
in  ruin,   ......   297 

the  destiny  of  the  suffering  good,  a 
life  of  devout  and  hearty  praise  to 
God,        .         .         ...        .298 

the  reign  of  God  manifested  in  these 
diverse  destinies,    ....  299 

Destiny,  a  terrible  character  and  (See 
Character),         .        .       .        .353 

Destruction  of  her  enemies,  the  salva- 
tion of  the  Church  and  the,    .         .  269 
the  Poet  represents  the  destruction  of 
the  wicked   as  utter  and  irrever- 
sible,      r  ....  269 

as  effected  by  God 269 


INDBT, 


PAOB 

as  overtaking  them  when  they  re- 
garded themselves  as  quite  secure,  269 
as  inflicted  because  of  their  hostility 

to  the  people  of  God,      .        .        .  269 
in  former  times  as  an  encouragement 
to  the  good  to  expect  salvation  from 
present  dangers,     ....  269 
Destructive,  the  constructive  and  the,  407 
Devout  longings  (See  Longings),        .  210 
Dignity  of    human    nature,  the    (See 

Nature), 31 

Dispositions  and  benedictions  of  the 
good,  the,        .        .        ,        .        .172 
dispositions,  trust,  joy,  devotion,  rest, 

patience,  meekness,  .  .  .172 
benedictions,  watched  over  by  the 
beneficent  providence  of  God,  privi- 
leged by  the  gratification  of  its  best 
desires,  vindicated  from  the  cal- 
umny and  slander  of  men,  enriched 
by  a  true  ownership  of  the  earth, 
shall  experience  a  sweet  and  afflu- 
ent peace, 173 

Distinction     between     goodness     and 

mercy, 500 

Distress,  a  cry  from  a  soul  in,       .         .  273 
the  cause  of   his  distress,  the  evil 
speeches,  wicked  deeds,  and  deadly 
hatred  of  his  enemies,     .        .         .  273 
the  description  of  his  distress,  great 
mental  anxiety,  deep  pain  of  heart, 
overwhelming  dread,      .         .        .  274 
bis  desire  in  his  distress,  was  natural, 

mistaken,  significant,     .         .         .  274 
iiis  prayer  in  his  distress,  involves 
faith  in  the  accessibleness,  intreati- 
bleness,  and  sufficiency  of  God,     .  275 
Distributed,  sorrow  and  mercy  justly 

(See  Sorrow),  .  .  .  .152 
Divine  blessings  (See  Blessings,)  .  446 
Divine  gentleness  (See  GENTLENESS),  83 
Divine  salvation  (See  SALVATION),  .  71 
Doings  of   God,  contemplation  of  the 

(See  Contemplation),  .        .        .  230 
Doings  of  God  in  the  past,  the  suffering 
Church  recounting  the,  as  an  argu- 
ment for  His  help  in  the  present,     408 
Doings,    the   Lord's,   for   His    servant 

(See  Servant) 192 

Doxology, 205 

blessing  is  ascribed  to  God,  as  a  God 
holding  relations  with  His  people,  205 

eternally, 205 

fervently, 205 

Doxology, 389 

the  comprehensiveness,      •        •        ,  390 

perpetuity, 390 

universality, 390 

intensity  of  the  praise,       •        •        .  390 

Drawing  nigh  to  God,    .        •        ,        ,  403 

Dreadful,  perdition  (See  PERDITION),  .   128 

Dream,  the  life  of  ungodly  men  a,        .  399 

characterised  by^  unreality,       .        .  399 

brevity, 399 

termination, 400 

Earnest  appeal  and  prayer,  an  (See 
Prayer),       .       .       .       ,       .217 


PAGB 

Earnest  supplication,  an  (See  Suppli- 
cation),         492 

Eclipses,  soul, 49 

the  nature  of, 49 

the  cause  of,  to  teach  us  that  God  is 

the  source  of  happiness,  wisdom, 

strength,  life,  .        .        .        .49 

the  duty  of  the  saints  in  these  hours 

of  darkness,  to  wait  in  faith,  prayer, 

and  hope, 50 

Effect,  the,  upon  the  righteous  of  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  the  wicked,  264 
the  righteous  behold,         •        •        ,  264 
are  awed  by,      .        .        •        ,        ,  265 

approve, 265 

are  instructed  by,       ....  265 
flourish  in  the  midst  of,      ,       ' ,        .  265 
worship  God  because  of  His  judg- 
ment upon  the  wicked,  .         .         .  266 
Encouraging    anticipation,     an      (See 

Anticipation),     ....  496 
Encouragement,  complaint,  prayer,  and 

(See  Complaint),  .        .       .  300 

Enemies  of  Christ,  the  utter  overthrow 

of  the, 103 

the  enemies  of  Christ,   are  full  of 

malignity, 103 

will  be  certainly  detected  and  ex- 
posed,      103 

will  be  stricken  with  dismay,    .        .103 
will  be  utterly  overthrown,         .        ,104 
their  overthrow  will  illustrate    the 
supreme  power  of  Jehovah,    .        .   104 
Enemies,  the  godly  man  and  his,  .  282 

the  enemies  of  the  godly  man,  are 
eager,  numerous,  constant,  dis- 
honest,   confederate,    secret,    and 

cruel, 282 

the  prayer  of  the  godly  man  in  the 
midst  of  his  enemies,  contains  a 
comprehensive  petition,  a  powerful 
plea,  and  an  earnest  appeal,  .  .  282 
the  confidence  of  the  godly  man  in 
the  midst  of  his  enemies,  was  re- 
posed in  the  grandest  Object,  exer- 
cised in  the  most  trying  season, 
and  produced  the  sublimest  re- 
sults,       283 

Enough,  sincerity  not,  .        .        .         .129 
Entry  of  the  glorious  king,  the  trium- 
phal (See  KiNG),     .         .        .        .117 
Envy  of  the  good,  the  transient  pro- 
sperity of  the  wicked  unworthy  the 
(See  Prosperity),         .        .       .171 
Evangelical  morality  (See  Morality),    57 

Evil  for  good, 166 

innocence  calumniated,  .  .  .166 
goodwill  repaid  with  bereavement,  .  166 
brotherly    kindness    requited    with 

hatred, 166 

misfortune  met  with  derision,  .  .166 
piety  made  the  subject  of  ribaldry 

and  scorn, 167 

Evil  of  sin,  the  chief  evil,      .         .        .  256 
consists    in    its     being    committed 

against  God, 256 

Evil,  the  programme  of,         .        •        .3 
the  evil  life  in  its  inception,      •        •      3 


INDBX, 


FAOE 

deyelopment, 4 

consummation, 4 

Exemplary  praise  (See  Praise),  .        .291 

Exhortation  of  faith,  the  (See  Faith),  310 

Exhortation,  promise,  and  encourage- 
ment,     .        .        .        .        .        .  476 

Exhortation  to  praise  God,  because  of 
His  government  of  the  world  {See 
Praise), 232 

Exile's  longing  for  the  house  of  Grod, 
the  (See  Longing),        .        .        .  484 

Exile's  prayer,  the  (See  Prayer),        .  488 

Exile,  the  rejoicing  (See  Rejoicing),   .  284 

Experience,  a  painful,  .        .        .        .215 
the  miseries  of  which  they  complain, 
their  rejection  by  God,  their  defeat 
in  battle  and  its  consequent  evils, 
the  reproaches  of  their  enemies,  and 
their  own  shame,    .         .        .        .215 
the  Author  of  their  miseries,      .        .216 
the  instruction  which  their  miseries 
are  fitted  to  afford,         .        .        .217 

Experience  of  a  godly  man,  the  (See 
Man) 339 

Experience,  the  argument  of  (See 
Argument),         .       .        .^      .319 

Experiences,  sad  scenes  and  painful 
(See  Sad), 276 

Experiences,  the  value  of  dying,  .        .  395 
the  calm  death  of  the  wicked  is  no 

proof  of  Divine  support,  .         .  395 

shrinking  and  fear  on  the  part  of  the 
righteous  as  they  approach  death  is 
no  proof  that  the  Divine  support  is 

withdrawn, 395 

the  most  precious  religious  testimon- 
ies of  the  dying  are  poor  compared 
with  the  testimony  of  a  useful  and 
godly  life, 395 

Expostulation, 14 

the  Psalmist  reminds  his  enemies  of 
the  vanity  of  their  opposition  to 

himself, 14 

ho  exhorts  them  to  repentance  and 
piety, 14 

Exposure  and  punishment  of  sin,  the 
(See  Sin),        .       .        .        .        .101 

Extremity  and  asylum  of  the  saints,  the    24 

Extremities  of  the  saints,  the  (See 
Saints) 37 

Fact,  privilege,  and  prospect,  a  great,  326 

Faith  in  God, 59 

personal, 59 

absolute,    ...•••     59 
habitual,    ......    60 

Faith,  the  exhortation  of,     .        .        .310 
the  trust  prohibited,  man,  oppression, 
unlawfully  acquired   wealth,   and 
lawfully  acquired  wealth,       .         .  310 
the  trust  prescribed,  its  nature  and 

f round, 311 
,  the  trial  and  triumph  of,    .        .  308 
the  trial  of  the  good  man's  faith  arose 
from  the  assaults  of  his  enemies. 
Notice  :  their  design,  method,  and 

cowardice, 308 

the  triumph  of  his  faith  is  manifest. 


PAOB 

in  his  realisation  of  the  all-suffi- 
ciency of  God,  in  his  reliance  upon 
Him  alone,  in  his  assurance  of 
safety  and  stability,  and  in  his  rest 

in  God, 309 

Faith  of  an  aged  saint,  the  triumphant,  376 

the  prayer, 376 

the  anticipation,        ....   376 
the  resolution  of  faith,  to  continually 
hope  in  and  praise  God,  .         .  377 

Faithfulness  and  honour  of   God,  the 
suffering  Church  pleading  the,  as 
an  argument  for  His  interposition 
(See  Church),        .       .       ,       .411 
Fallacy,  an  awful,         .        .        .        .251 
to  suppose  that  God  is  altogether  like 

us 251 

Faults,  secret 92 

sins  known  to  ourselves,  but  not  to 

the  world, 92 

sins  known  to  the  world,  but  not  to 

us, 92 

sins  neither  known  to  us  nor  to  the 
world,  but  known  to  God :  recognise 
the  guilt  of  them,  seek  cleansing 

for  them 92 

Favour  implored,  the  Divine,        .        .  464 

people  sorely  needing  God's  favour, 

because  of  the  reproaches  of  tlieir 

neighbours,  the  rejection  of  their 

prayer,  and  the  greatness  of  their 

sorrow, 464 

earnestly  imploring  God's  favour,  with 
an  implied  confession  of  sin,  a  re- 
cognition of  the  gracious  relation 
of  God  to  them,  and  an  earnest  en- 
treaty for  His  salvation,  .  .  465 
Fear,  and  trust  in  God,  times  of  (See 

Trust), 283 

Fearlessness  of  the  good,  the,  .  .  1 29 
springs  from  personal  faith  in  God,  .  129 
strengthened  by  the  remembrance  of 

past  deliverances,   .        .        .        .130 
sufficient  for  the  greatest  emergen- 
cies,         130 

First  Sabbath  in  the  New- Year,  the 

(See  New- Year),  ....  332 
Fitness    of    the  true  worshipper,  the 

moral  (See  Worshipper),  .  .116 
Flock,  the  Divine  Shepherd  and  His 

(See  Shepherd),  i-  .  .  .111 
Folly  of  trusting  in  riches,  the,  .  ,  266 
Foolish  way  of  wealthy  worldlings,  the 

(See  Way), 241 

Forces,   antagonistic    (See    ANTAGON- 
ISTIC)  9 

Forgiven,  the  blessedness  of  the  (See 

Blessedness),       .       .        .       .148 
Forlorn  hopes  (See  Hopes),  .        .        .45 
Formal  and  the  spiritual  in  divine  ser- 
vice, the  (See  Service),        .        .  247 

Forsaken, 105 

and  suffering, 105 

but  not  prayerless,     .        •        •        .  105 

but  trusting  in  God,  .        •        •        .  105 

Fount  of  bless mg,  the,  .        •        •        .5'' 

Friend,  behaving  as  a,  .        .        •        .  168 

implies  kind  consideration,        •        .  l6S 


zil 


INDEX. 


generous  sympathy,  ,         ,        . 

self-denying  service,  .         .         • 

constancy  in  love  and  devotion, 

Full  conquest  (See  Conquest),    . 


PAGE 

.  169 

.  169 

.  169 

.  81 


General  truths,  the  personal  realisa- 
tion of  (See  Truths),     . 
Gentleness,  Divine,       .        ,        .         . 
the  greatness  of  the  good, 
the  gracious  discipline  through  which 
this  greatness  is  realised,  in  our  sin- 
ful state,  in  our  penitential  state, 
in  our  accepted  state, 

Gittith, 

Glorious  conflict,  the  (See  Conflict), 
Glorious  picture,  a,        .         .         . 
Glorious  prospect,  a  (See  Prospect), 
Glorious  things  spoken  ot  the  Church, 
Glory  of  the  Church,  the, 
consists  in   its  being  the  dwelling 

place  of  God,  .... 
transcends  the  utmost  glory  of  the 

world, 

is  seen  in  its  security,        .        . 
in  its  sanctity,    .... 
has  been  strikingly  illustrated, . 
Glory  of    the   Church,   an  instructive 

illustration  of  the  (See  Church), 
Glory  of  the  Church,  a  striking  illus 

tration  of  the  (See  Church), 
Glory  of  the  Church  of  God,  the  (See 

Church),       .        . 
Glory   manifested    in    the    sanctuary, 

God's  power  and     . 
God  afflicting  man,  and  man  submitting 

to  God, 

God  and  His  people  (See  People), 
God  a  refuge,         .... 
God  as  a  man  of  war  (See  WAR), 
God,  departing  from,     . 

drawing  nigh  to,         .         .         , 

faith  in  (See  Faith), 

glorified  through   man's  wrath  (See 

Wrath),        .... 
he  that  knows,  will  confess  Him, 

in  nature, 

the  Creator,        .        ,        ,        . 
Proprietor,  .         .         .         • 

Sustain  er  of  nature,  . 
inspecting  man  (See  INSPECTING), 
jealous  for,  .... 

His  honour  is  bound  up  with  the  con 

duct  of  His  people, 
leading  His  people  (See  Leading), 
man  appealing  to  (See  Appealing), 
our  helper,  .... 

our  salvation  (See  SALVATION), 
realised  by  His  people, 
the  Divine  Being, 
His  relationship  to  us, 
the  blessed  assurance  of  this  relation 

ship, 

recollections  of,  painful  to  the  wicked 

seeking, 

the  Champion  of  the  good  (See  Cham 

PION), 

the  character  of,  a  welcome  revela 
tion  of  (See  Character), 


37 
83 
83 


84 
471 
302 
127 
354 
5^0 
349 

349 

349 
350 
350 
350 

237 

235 
506 

315 

191 

161 

312 

26 

402 

403 
59 

425 
197 
411 
411 
411 
411 
267 

51 

51 

437 
13 
273 
352 
342 
342 
342 

343 
430 
315 

421 
170 


PAOB 

the  Fount  of  blessing,   .   ,   .511 

the  power  of, 312 

the  Protector  and  Avenger  of   the 

oppressed, 36 

the  Saviour  of  the  meek  (See  Meek),  425 
the     Sovereignty    of     (See     Sove- 
reignty),        409 

the  ways  of  (See  Ways),  .  .  .  437 
God's  power  and  glory  manifested  in 

the  sanctuary,  .  .  .  '315 
God's  shield  (See  Shield),  .  .  .82 
Godly  in  affliction,  prayer  the  resource 

of  the  (See  Prayer),  .  .  .142 
Godly,  the  character  and  privileges  of 

the, 323 

a  description  of  character,  righteous- 
ness of  character  and  conduct,        .  323 
a  declaration  of  privilege,  joy,  trust, 
triumph,  .....   324 

Godly  in  this  world,  the  state  of  the 

(See  State), 287 

Good,  evil  for  (See  Evil),     ,        .        .166 

the  chief, 15 

the  grand  question,    .        .         .        .15 
the  true  answer,  the  spirituality,  suf- 
ficiency, and  fruits  of  the  supreme 

blessing, 15 

the  dispositions  and  benedictions  of 

the  (See  Dispositions),         .        .172 
the  fearlessness  of  the   (See  Fear- 
lessness),       129 

man's  access,  trust,  and  testimony, 

the, 403 

man's  present,  past,  and  future,  the,   402 
the  plottings  of  the  wicked  against 

the  (See  Plottings),     .        .        .174 
the  temporal  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
as   contrasted  with    the    peaceful 
destiny  of  the  (See  Contrasted),     178 
Good  things  for  good  people,         .         .     78 
God  deals  with  us  as  we  deal  with 

Him, 78 

as  we  deal  with  one  another,  .  .  79 
Goodness  and  mercy  distinguished,  .  500 
Goodness  of  God  an  encouragement  to 

seek  Him,  the  (See  Seek),     .        .  499 
Goodness   of   God  to   His  people,  the 
good  man's  confidence  of  the  (See 
Confidence),        .       .       .       .391 
Goodness  of  the  Lord,  the,    .        .         .146 
as  a  spectacle  of  surpassing  beauty, .   146 
a  treasury  of  inexhaustible  wealth,  .   146 
a  work  of  infinite  beneficence,  .         .   146 
Gospel  of  the   stars,   the   (See   CREA- 
TION),       28 

Gospel  the  power  of  God,  the,       .         .  387 
the  insignificance  of  its  commence- 
ment,       387 

its  unlikelihood  of  success,         ,        .  388 
its  glorious  results,     ....  388 
Government,  aspects  of  the  Divine,      .  417 
a  rebuke  to  wicked  oppressors,  .  417 

an  encouragement  to  the  righteous,  .  418 
an  assurance  of  the   punishment  of 

the  wicked, 418 

in   its   relation  to   the   nations,   the 

Divine, 35 

is  characterised  by  equity,         •        .    35 


INDEX, 


ziil 


vindicated  with  severity,  . 
survives  all  opposition, 
comprehends  all  nations,  and   shall 
bring  them  all  into  judgment, 
Government  of  the  world,  exhoi  tation 
to  praise  God  because  of  His  (See 

Praise), 

Grateful  recollection,  a  (See  Recollec- 
tion),    . 
Great  deposit,  the, 
Guardian,  the  hunted  life  and  its  Divine 
(See  Life),     . 

Guilty,  not 

when  we  may  plead,  . 
may  rely  on  a  triumphant  acquittal 
when  we  can  justly  do  so, 

Hater,  the  causeless,  . 
his  character,     .... 
his  righteous  doom,   . 

Heart,  the  confidence  of  a  troubled, 
confidence  of  safety  and  stability  in 

God,        .        .        .        . 
arising  out  of  past  experiences, 
expressing  itself  in  prayer,         . 
issuing  in  constant  praise,  . 

Heart,  the  cry  of  a  troubled,  • 
a  painful  experience,  •  • 
a  fervent  prayer,  .  ,  « 
a  cheering  recollection,  •  • 
an  exemplary  resolution,  ,        . 

Heart,  the  instincts  of  the,    . 
the  sense  of  dependence  upon  God, 
craving  for  fellowship  with  God, 
confidence  in  the  eternal  justice  of 

God, 

gratitude  for  the  goodness  of  God, 
joy  in  the  saving  strength  of  God, 
trust  in   the   ultimate  triumph  and 
blessedness  of  God's  people,   . 

Heaven,    the   peerage   of  (See  Peer 

AGE) 

Help,  a  pathetic  cry  for, 
God  is  the  unfailing  source  of  help  in 

time  of  trouble, 
deliverance  is  implored  from  immi 

nent  peril, 

the  cry  for  help  is  emboldened  by  the 

recollection  of  past  deliverances. 

Help  of  God,    Israel's  praise  for  the 

promised  (See  Help),    . 

the  afflictions  of  man  and  the, 

special  need,  special. 

Helper,  God  our,  . 

Hints  for  a  missionary  sermon. 

History    of    human    wickedness,    the 

(See  Wickedness), 
History  of  the  Ancient  Church,  passages 
from  the,  with  their  lessons  to  the 
Modern  (jhurch  (See  CHURCH), 
History,    scenes   from    a    remarkable 
(See  Scenes),         .... 

Hold  of  sin,  the 

sin  takes  hold  of  man  by  its  power, 
by  an  accusing  conscience, 
by  its  evil  consequences,    ,        . 
Holy  war,  the  (See  WAR),    . 
Homily,  a  May,     .        .        •        .        , 


PAGE 

35 
35 


35 


232 

491 
143 

295 
24 
24 

25 

167 
167 
167 
306 

306 
307 
307 
308 

305 
305 
305 
305 
306 

133 
133 
133 

134 
134 
135 

135 

60 
108 

108 

108 

108 

414 
463 
65 
273 
414 

293 


468 

443 
200 
200 
200 
200 
6 
331 


PAGB 

Hope  in  the  saddest  situation,      .        .194 
the  situation  the  Psalmist  was  in,     .   194 
the  devout  exercise  of  his  mind,        .   194 
the  deliverance  he  obtained,      .         .194 
Hope  of  the  righteous  in  extreme  suffer- 
ing, the  (See  Suffering),     .        .  365 
Hope  opened  to  the  world,    .         .         .  389 
Hope,  the  grandeur  and  ground  of  the 

Psalmist's, 63 

Hopes,  forlorn,       .        .         .        .         .45 

of  the  saint  often  appear  forlorn,        .     45 

have  nevertheless  strong  foundations,     46 

are  destined  to  glorious  realisation,  .     46 

House,  love  of  God's,     .         .        .         .128 

House  of  God,  the  exile's  longing  for 

the  (See  Longing),        .        .        .  484 
Human  nature  in  the  light  of  Chris- 
tianity (See  Christianity),  .        .    32 
Human   nature,    the    dignity   of    (See 

Nature),       .       .        '.       .       .31 
Human  perfection  (See  Perfection),  .  302 
Hypocrites,  God's  challenge  to  religious,  249 
religious  hypocrites  proclaiming  God's 

law, 249 

despising  God's  Word,       .        .         .  249 
breaking  God's  laws,  .         .         .  249 

deceiving  themselves  as  to  the  Divine 

character  and  conduct,  .         .         .  250 
interrogated  by  God,  .        .         .250 

convicted  of  their  sins,       .        .         .  250 
warned  by  God,         •        •        •        .  250 


Ignored,  Omniscience, 

Illustration  of  the  glory  of  the  Church, 

an  instructive  (See  Church), 
Illustration  of  the  glory  of  the  Church, 

a  striking  (See  Church), 
Illustrations  of  the  Sovereignty  of  God 

(See  Sovereignty), 
Immorality  of  atheism,  the  (See  Athe- 
ism),      ...... 

Imperfection  of  the  righteous  in  ex- 
treme suffering  (See  Suffering),  . 
imprecations  of  the  Psalmist,    . 
impress  us  with  the  imperfection  of 
the  best  men,  .         .        .         . 

the  gradualness  of  the  education  of 

mankind, 

the  truth  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,    . 
Implored,     the     Divine     favour    (See 

Favour), 

Imprecatory  Psalm,  an, 
views  of  A.  A.  Bonar,  Canon  Perowne, 

and  Dr.  D.  Thomas  on,  . 
Psalm,  an,  .... 

views   of   Professors  Alexander 
Stuart  and  Dr.  Moll  on,  .    362 

Impressive  beacon,  an  (Sec  Beacon), 
Indispensable  prayer  for  every  one,  an 

(See  Prayer), 
Infirmities,  spiritual,     . 
their  nature,       .        .        . 
their  reasons, 
Inheritance  of  the  saints,  the, 
is  Divine,   .... 
secure,         -        .        .        . 
joyful, 
permanent,        •       •        • 


323 
237 
235 
457 

52 

362 
363 

364 

364 
364 

464 
162 

162 
362-364 
and 

364 
263 

255 

435 

435 

436 

62 

62 

62 

62 

63 


XlV^ 


INDEX, 


PAOB 

Inheritance,   the  choice   of   our    (See 

Choice), 234 

Inspecting  man,  God,    ....  267 

God's  profound  interest  in  humanity,  267 

His  searching  scrutiny  of  humanity,  268 

the  supreme  concern  of  humanity,     .  268 

Instincts    of    the     heart,     the      (See 

Heart),         .       .       .       ...  133 

Instruments  and  methods  of  the  Divine 

judgments  (See  Judgments),        .  453 
Intruders  in  sacred  places,  profane,       .  462 
in     Christian    churches,    Ritualism, 

Rationalism,  selfish  religionism,    .  462 
in  human  spirits,  carnality,  worldli- 

ness,  hatred,  &c 462 

Israel,  the  Shepherd  of    (See    Shep- 
herd), 466 

Jealous  for  God  (See  God),  .  .51 
Jehovah,  confidence  in,  the  pledge  of 

victory  (See  Confidence),     .        .    97 

Jehovah,  the  name  of,  .        ,        .        .94 

a  consolation  in  trouhle,     ,         .        .94 

an  inspiring  battle-cry,       .        .         .95 

the  strength  of  the  Militant  Church,      95 

Jehoshaphat,  King  of  Judah,    232,  235-238 

Jerusalem, 506 

Jonath-Elem-Rechokim,        ,         .        .281 
Joy  in  the  Lord  Christ,          ,        .         .152 
because  of  the  beauty  of  His  char- 
acter,       152 

the  splendour  of  His  achievements,  .  153 
the  blessedness  of  His  reign       .         •  I53 
Joy  of  the  heavenly  King,  the,     .         .    99 
arose  from  a  consciousness  of  newly 

achieved  victory,     .         .        .         .99 
was    accelerated    by    possessing    an 

affluence  of  Divine  blessing,  .         .     99 
was  intensified  by  the  assurance  of 
the  permanency  of  His  government,   100 
Joy,   the    Messiah's    reign,    and    (See 

Messiah), 223 

Joys  of  salvation,  the,   ....  259 
the  joy  of  a  sufficient  and  final  an- 
swer to  the  self-upbraidings  of  a 
guilty  soul,     .        .        .        .        .259 
of  a  portion  which  satisfies  the  heart's 

largest  conceptions  and  desires,      .  260 
of  an  answer  to  all  the  difficulties 
and  perplexities  which   beset  the 
spirit  and  the  intellect    in    their 

progress, 260 

of  having  the  key  to  all  the  mysteri- 
ous  ways    of   Providence   in    the 

world, 260 

of  victory  over  death,         .         .         ,  260 
of  living  union  with  God,  with  Christ, 
with  all  living  and  blessed  beings, 

eternally, 260 

Journey,  the  life  of  man  upon  earth  a,  480 
Judah,  the  wilderness  of,  .  .  >  Z^Z 
Judgment,  a  scene  of,    .        .         .        .  245 

the  Judge, 245 

the  principles  upon  which  judgment 

will  be  administered,      .         .         .  245 
the  certainty  of  the  judgment,  .         .  246 
the  terrible  majesty  of  the  Judge  at 
His  appearing,        •        •        •        •  246 


PAOI 

the  persons  to  be  iudged,  .        ,        .  246 
the  witnesses  of  tne  judgment,  .  247 

the  righteousness  of  the  judgment,    .  247 
Judgment,  human  sin  and  Divine  (See 

oiN), 446 

Judgment  of  God  upon  the  wicked,  the 
effect  upon  the  righteous  of  the 
(See  Effect),  ....  264 
Judgments,  the  instruments  and 
methods  of  the  Divine,  and  the 
objects  for  which  they  are  inflicted,  453 
Justice  in  the  court  of  Heaven,  the 
upright  man  pleading  for  (See 
Pleading), 124 

King,   the  joy  of  the  Heavenly  (See 

Joy), 99 

King,  the  triumphal  entry  of  the  glo- 
rious,        ,117 

will  be  into  a  palace  of    enduring 

splendour,       .        .        .        .        .117 
in  the  character  of  a  mighty  con- 
queror,     118 

attended  by  a    brilliant    throng   of 

celestial  hosts,        .        .        .        .118 
the  occasion  of  inexpressible  joy  to 

the  universe, 1 118 

Kings,  a  prayer  for,  .  .  .  .381 
the  character,  function,  and  need  of 

a  true  king, 381 

the  duty  of  subjects,  .        .        .        .  382 
Knowledge  of   God  a  comfort  to  His 

people,  the,  .  .  .  .  .  286 
Knows  God,  he  that,  will  confess  Him,  197 
Korah,  the  sons  of,        ...        .  205 

Law  and  testimony  of  God,  man's  re- 
lation to  the  (See  Relation),        .  438 
Law  of  the  lip,  the  (See  Lip),        ,        .    58 
Law,  the  absolute  perfection  of  the,      .     91 
its  incomparable  excellence  as  con- 
sidered m  itself,      .        .        .        .    91 
in  its  relation  to  those  who  keep  it, 
intellectually,     emotionally,     and 
practically,  it  is  supremely  excel- 
lent,         91 

Law,  the  joy-giving  power  of  the,         .    90 

in  a  complete  moral  life  there  are 

three  stages  in  relation  to  the  law 

of  God,    ...        •        .        .90 

rebellion  against  it,    .        .        •        .90 

submission  to  it,         .        .        •        .     90 

joy  in  it, 9° 

Law,  the  light-giving  power  of  the,      .     89 

the  infallibility  of  the  law,         .        .     89 

the  subjects  of  its  illumination,         .     89 

Law,  the  purifying  power  of  the, .        .     90 

how  the  law  makes  us  pure,      .        .     90 

how   this    purity  is    the    source    of 

strength,  joy,  and  vision,         .        .91 

Law,  the  soul-restoring  power  of  the,     88 

the  attribute  of  the  law,  '*  perfect,"  .     88 

the  efiect  of  the  law,  **  converting  the 

soul," 89 

Leading  His  people,  God,  .  .  .  437 
the  Leader  of  the  good  .  .  .  437 
the  instruments  by  which  they  are  led,  438 
the  manner  in  which  they  are  led,    .  438 


INDEX, 


T7 


PAGE 

Lehazkir,       ......  366 

Life,  a  glimpse  of  a  triumphant,   .        .  27 1 
the  nature  of  the  triumphant  life,  it 
is  characterised  by  faith   in  God, 
and  worship  of  God ,        .         .         .  271 
the  conquering  power  of  the  trium- 
phant life, 272 

Life,  a  glimpse  of  a  troubled,        .        .  270 
the  cause  of,  and  the  comfort  in  the 

trouble, 270 

Life,  crises  in  the  spiritual,  .        .        .  394 
are    sometimes    occasioned    by    the 

Providence  of  God,  .        .        .  394 

are  painful  to  the  soul,       .         .         .  394 
are  surmounted  in  communion  with 

God, 394 

Life,  links  in  the  chain  of  (See  Links),  141 
Life  of  confidence  in  God,  a,  .        .  289 

Life  of  man,    the   loving-kindness   of 
Grod  better  than  the  (See  Loving- 
kindness),     .        .        .        .        .316 
Life  of  man  upon  earth  a  journey,  the,  480 
Life  of    ungodly  men    a   dream,    the 

(See  Dream).         ....  399 
Life,  the  blessed,  .        .        .        .        .       i 
its  secret,  a  right  relation  of  the  will, 
the  affections,  and  the  intelligence 
to  the  law  of  God,  ....      2 
its  security,  manifestation,  perpetuity, 
universality,  ....       2 

Life,  the  chequered,       .        .        .        .51 
the  vicissitudes  of  the  outer  life,  of 

the  inner  life,  .         .         .         .51 

the  aim  of  this  discipline,  .        .        .51 
Life,  the  distinguishing  characteristics 

of  a  wicked  (See  Wicked),    .        .169 
Life,    the    hunted,    and     its     Divine 

guardian, 295 

the  character    and    conduct    of   the 

persecutors, 295 

the  prayer  and  confidence  of  the  per- 
secuted,   296 

Life,  the  light  of 80 

the  Psalmist  recognises  God  as  the 

source  of  his  light 80 

joy, 81 

glory, 81 

Life,  the  Psalm  of,         ,        .        .        .55 
the  question  which  the  Psalmist  pro- 
poses,        55 

the  comprehensive  answer  which  is 

given, 56 

Life  upon  earth,  man's,  .        ,        .  452 

the  weakness,  unsubstantiality,  im- 
permanence,  irretrievableness,  and 
grand  distinction  of  human  life,     .  452 
Light-giving  power  of  the  law,  the  (See 

Law) 89 

Light  of  life,  the  (See  LiFB),  ,        ,     80 

Links  in  the  chain  of  life,      .         .        .141 

prosperity  and  presumption,       ,         ,141 

presumption  and  chastisement,  •  141 

chastisement  and  prayer,   .        ,         ,  141 

prayer  and  deKve ranee,      .         .         ,  142 

deliverance  and  praise,       .        .        ,  142 

Lip,  the  law  of  the,        .        .        ,        .58 

the  nature  of,  the  evil  of,  and  the 

cure  for  slander,      .        .        .        .     58  I 


PAOB 

Little  of  the  righteous  better  than  the 
much  of  the  wicked,  the,         ,        .175 
because  it  is  honestly  gained,     .        .175 
may  be  safely  retained,      .        •        .175 
may  be  tiTily  enjoyed,        •        «        ,176 
will  be  carefully  spent,      •        •        .176 
benevolently  used,     .        .        .        .176 
divinely  blessed,        .        .        .        .176 
Loneliness  of  suffering,  the  (See  Suf- 
fering),          106 

Longing  for  the  house  of    God,    the 

exile's, 484 

arose  from  his  love  for  the  house  of 

God, ,  484 

was  a  longing  for  conscious  fellowship 

with  God, 484 

was  the  longing  of  his  entire  being,  .  485 
a  longing  of  great  intensity,       •        .  485 
led  him  to  extol  the  blessedness  of 
those  who  were  constantly  engaged 
in  God's  house,        ....  485 
Longings,  devout,  .         .         •        .210 

for  vindication  and  deliverance,        .  210 
for  restoration  to  the  tabernacle  of 

God, 211 

Lord,  a  song  to  the  (See  Song),    .        .  140 
Lord  Christ,  joy  in  the  (See  Joy),          .   15a 
Lord,  the  Church  and  her  (See  Church),  225 
Lord,  the  goodness  of  the  (See  Good- 
ness),      146 

Lot  of  the  wicked,  the  barren,      .         .  346 
seen  in  relation  to  the  ordinary  events 

of  this  life, 346 

the  great  needs  of  the  soul,       .        ,  346 

the  great  future,         .        •        •        .  347 

Love  of  God's  house,     .        .        •        .128 

Love,  true, 70 

the  right  object,         •        •        •        .70 
measure,     ......     71 

and  inspiration  of,      .        .         .        .71 

Lovingkindness  of  God  better  than  the 

life  of  man,  the,      ....  316 

life  is  good, 316 

the  lovingkindness  of  God  is  better 
than  life  even  at  its  best,        .        .317 


Magistracy,  aspects  of,      . 

magistrates  and  judges  are  set  before 
us  as  occupying  a  distinguished 
position,  .         .         .        i. 

observed  by  God, 
called  to  the  highest  duties, 
exhibiting  the  worst  perversity, 
tending  to  a  great  change, 
leading  man  to  cry  for  the  inaugura 
tion   of  the   direct   magistracy  of 
God,        ..... 

Mahalath, 

Majorities,  minorities  and,   . 
the  majoi-ity  without  God,  its  great 

ness  and  bitterness, 
the  minority  with  God,  his  conscious 
ness   of  safety,   refuge  in  prayer, 
sublime  peacefulness,  assurance  of 
victory,  and  generous  temper, 
Man  and  his  enemies,  the  godly  (See 

Enemies), 

Man  appealing  to  God  (See  Appealing), 


477 


477 
477 
478 
478 
478 


479 
267 

10 
10 


10 

282 
13 


zvl 


INDEX. 


PAGE 


Man  a  walking  shadow  (See  Shadow), 
Man  in   the    thunderstorm,    the    true 

attitude  of  (See  Thunderstorm), 
Man  pleading  for  justice  in  the  court  of 

Heaven,  the  upright  (See  Plead 

ING), 

Man's  life  upon  earth  (See  Life), 
Man  speaking  to  his  soul  (See  Speak 

ING),    _.  .  .    ^      . 

Man  submitting,  God  afflicting  and 
Man,  the  Divine  way  for  (See  Way), 
Man,  the  experience  of  a  godly,    . 
the  godly  man  is  anxious  to  impart 

his  experience  to  others, 
his  experience  includes  both  penitence 

and  praise 

his  logic, 

his  experience  always  culminates  in 

a  song  of  praise, 

Man,    the   solicitude   of    God   for  the 

well-being  of  (See  Solicitude), 
Man   under  Divine  chastisement  (See 

Chastisement), 
Manifestations  of  Divine  power,  . 
their   sphere,  in  nature,  in  human 

society, 

their  significance,       ... 
their    influence,    they  inspire    awe, 
confidence,  and  joy, 
March  of  the  good,  the  victorious, 
is  opposed  by  enemies, 
marked  by  trials, 
led  on  victoriously,    . 
led  on  to  a  glorious  termination. 
May  Homily,  a,     .        . 
Meditation  and  praise, 
the    subject    and    influence    of   the 
Psalmist's  meditation,    . 
Meek,  God  the  Saviour  of  the, 
the  character,  peril,  and  Deliverer  of 
the  people  of  God,  . 

Memory, 433 

Men  of  the  world,  •        •        . 

their  portion,      .        •        •        . 

their  prosperity, 

the   disadvantages   of  their  lot,  the 

hand  of  God  is  against  them,  they 

have  a  profound  discontent,  they 

soon  part  with   their  inheritance 

for  ever,  .... 

Men  of  the  world  who  have  their  por 

tion  in  this  life, 

must  resign  it  at  death, 

when  they  depart  hence  are  gathered 

to  their  moral  ancestors, 

degrade  their  being,   . 

Men,  the  destinies  of,  .        .         , 

are  various,         .... 

are  decided  by  their  moral  character 

and  conduct,  ..... 

are    as  widely  contrasted    as   their 

character,        ..... 

Mercies  of  God  an  encouragement  to 

seek      Him,     the      formei      (See 

Seek), 

Mercy,  goodness  and,  distinguished,     . 

Mercy  justly  distributed,   sorrow  and 

(See  Sorrow),       ,       ,       ,       . 


188 


136 


124 
452 

208 
191 
505 
339 

339 

339 
340 

340 

473 

450 
328 

328 
329 

329 
343 
344 
344 
344 
345 
331 
299 

299 

425 

425 

436 

68 

68 

68 


68 

243 
243 

244 

244 

5 


503 

500 

152 


PAOB 

Mercy,  the  exercise  of  the  Divine,        .  45 1 
in    holding    back   deserved   punish- 
ment,        41;! 

in  forgiving  great  iniquities,      .  451 

in  compassionating  human  frailties,     452 
Messiah  as  a  majestic  conqueror,  the,  .  222 
the  enterprise  which  He  has  under- 
taken,    ......  222 

the  manner  in  which  He  goes  forth 
to  this  enterprise,    ....  222 

the  reasons  for  which  He  goes  forth 
to  this  enterprise,  ....  223 

the  success  which  He  achieves  in  this 

enterprise, 223 

Messiah-King,  the  praise  of  the,  •        .  220 
the  reasons  why  He  is  praised,  .  220 

the  manner  in  which  He  is  praised,  .  221 
the  excellence  of  this  praise,      ,        ,221 
Messiah's  reign  and  joy,  the         .        .  223 
His  reign,  its  righteousness  and  per- 
petuity, ......  223 

His  joy,      .        .        .        .        .        .224 

Messiah,  the  glorious  reign  of  the  (See 

Reign), 383 

Michtam, 281 

Minorities   and  majorities   (See  Ma- 
jorities),        10 

Missionary  prayer  of  the  Church,  the 

(See  Prayer),  ....  340 
Missionary  sermon,  hints  for  a,  .  .  414 
Mistake  of  some  men,  a  great  necessity 

of  all  men,  and  a  great,  .        .  396 

Mistaken  verdicts,         .         .         .        .11 
the  verdict  of  sense,  popular,  plau- 
sible, confident,      .        .        .        .11 
the  judgment  of  faith,        .         .        .12 
Model  of  devout  praise,  a  (See  Praise),  419 
Model  prayer,  a  (See  Prayer),    .        .  462 
Moral  courage  (See  Courage),    .        .    44 
Moral  cowardice  and  its   causes  (See 

(Cowardice),        ....  442 

Morality,  evangelical,  .        •        •        .57 

its  comprehensiveness,      •        •        .57 

loftiness, 57 

inspiration,         ,        .        •        •        •     5^ 

recompense,        .         .         .        .        •     5^ 

Morality  of  prayer,  the  (See  Prayer),     84 

Morning  prayer  (See  Prayer),     .         .17 

Motive  to   prayer,  the  Providence  of 

God  a, 290 

Mulishness, 151 

thwarts  the  Divine  plan,  .  .  .15' 
debases  the  powers  of  the  soul, .  ^  •  ^5' 
imperils  the  highest  interests  of  being,  151 

Name  of  Jehovah,  the  (See  Jehovah)    94 
Nations,  the  Divine  government  in  its 

relation  to  the  (See  Government),   35 
Nature  and  the  supernatural,        .         .     74 
nature  as  obedient  to  supernatural 

power, .74 

the  executant  of  a  supernatural  will,     74 

ministering  to  supernatural  purpose,      75 

Nature,  God  in  (See  God),    .         .         .411 

Nature  God's  temple  (See  Temple),    .  138 

Nature  in  the   light   of    Christianity, 

human  (See  Christianity),  .  .  32 
Nature  of  sin,  the  self -punishing,         •    27 


JNDBX. 


xvll 


FAQB 

an  dn  !b  the  digging  of  a  pit,   •       .    27 
all  sin  sinks  into  tne  pit  which  it 

digs, 28 

Nature,  the  dignity  of  human,  •  .31 
the  apparent  weakness,  .  •  •Si 
the  essential  greatness,  .  •  •  31 
the  source  of  the  greatness  of  human 

nature, 32 

Natural  theology  (See  Theology),      .    86 
Nearness  to  His  people,  God's,  a  reason 
for  praising  Him,    .        .        .        .  416 
there  are  times  when  God  specially 

manifests  Himself  to  His  people,  .  416 
these  manifestations  should  awaken 
the  praise  of  His  people,        .        .417 
Necessity  of  aU  men,  9   great,  and  a 

freat  mistake  of  some  men,    .        .  396 
and  God's  thought,  man's,  .        .  200 
an  acknowledgment  of  human  need,    200 
an  expression  of  confidence  in  God,     201 
Need,  praverfora  time  of  (See  Prayer)  132 
special  help,  special,  .        .        •65 

Neginah,        ......  304 

Neginoth, 270 

New  Year,  the  first  Sabbath  in  the      .  332 
mark  that  goodness  which  has  crowned 
the  year,  as  to  our  country,   ,        .  332 

our  families, 332 

our  personal  experience,    .        •        #333 

the  universal  Church,        •        •        •  333 

Night  of  repentance,  the,     •        •        .22 

its  darkness,      •        •        •        •        •    22 

duration,    .        •        •        0        •        •    22 
spectres,    ••••••    23 

stars,  ••••••    23 

sunrise, 23 

Not  guilly  (See  Guilty),    ...    34 

Obedience  AND  SACRIFICE,  .  .  195 
Object,  season,  and  hope  of  prayer,  the 

(See  Prayer),  .  .  .  .361 
Offering  to  his  Lord,  the  servant's  (See 

Servant),  .  ,  .  .  .195 
Old  age,  the  comparative  blessedness  of 

the  Christian's  (See  Blessedness),  379 
Old  man's  retrospect,  an  (See  Betro- 

SPECT), 379 

Ome^a,  Alpha  and,  .  .  .  .28 
Onmiscience  ignored,  ....  323 
Oppressed,    God    the    Protector  and 

Avenger  of  the,  .  .  .  '36 
Overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  Christ,  the 

utter  (See  Enemies),     .       .       .103 


Painful  experience,  a  (See  Experi- 
ence),     

Paths,  safe  steps  on  dangerous,     ,        . 
our  need  of  the  Divine  succour,  be- 
cause of  steep  paths,  rough  paths, 
dark  paths,  suppery  paths,    , 
the  sufficiency  01  the  Divine  succour. 
Patience  with  man,  man's  provocation 
of  God  and  God's  (See  Provoca- 
tion),    . 
Peace  by  power,    . 
Peerage  of  heaven,  the, 
their  patent  of  nobility, 
oath  of  fealty,    . 


64 


64 
65 


449 

386 

60 

60 

61 


PAGB 

bond  of  unity, 61 

uncompromising  loyadty,  •        •        •61 

grand  inheritance,     .        •        ,        .62 
Penitent's  Psalm,  the,  •        •        •        •  253 

the  penitent's  confession,  recognises 
the  evil  of  sin,  recesses  the  sin  as 
his  own,  regards  sm  as  hostile  to 
God, 

the  penitent's  prayer,  for  forgiveness 
of  his  sins,  for  cleansing  and  re- 
newal of  his  spirit,  for  restoration 
of  the  joy  of  salvation,  for  preser- 
vation from  sin  and  ruin,        .        , 

the  penitent's  resolution,  to  seek  the 

conversion  of  sinners,  to  worship 

God,        ..••.. 

People,  God  and  His,    .... 

Gods  people  are  the  objects  of  His 

fatherly  regard,      .... 

the  subjects  of  His  holy  discipline,  . 

the  recipients  of  His  redeeming  grace,  162 
People,    good    things   for  good    (See 
Good), 78 


253 


254 


255 
161 

161 
161 


chiefly  concerned 


128 


128 

128 

128 
302 


303 


303 

91 

481 


Perdition,  dreadful, 
the  good  man  is 

about  his  soul, 
knows  that  the  destiny  of  the  soul  is 
settled  at  death,     .... 
recoils  with  horror  from  being  asso- 
ciated in  destiny  with  the  wicked, 
Perfection,  human,       .... 
its  nature,  salvation  from  troubles, 
victory  over  enemies,  possession  of 
promised  privileges, 
its  attainment,  promised  by  God,  pro- 
moted by  prayer,  guaranteed  by 
past  triumphs  and  present  posses- 
sions, demanding  strenuous  effort, 
ascribed  to  God,     .... 
Perfection  of  the  law,  the  absolute  (See 

Law), 

Peril  and  prayer  of  the  Chnrch,  the 

(See  Church), 
Peril,  a  safe  refuge  in  sore  (See  Be- 

FUGE) 287 

Perplexity,  soul, 39 

the  problem,   "Why  standest  Thou 

afar  off,  0 Lord?"  .        .        .        .    39 
the  solution,  has  regard  to  our  per- 
sonal discipline,  the  salvation  of 
the  wicked,  the  ^lory  of  God,        .     40 
Persecution,  prayer  m  (See  Prayer),  367 
Personal  realisation  of  general  truths, 

the, 

the  Psalmist  recognises  his  personal 

fault  and  need,       .... 

appeals  to  God  as  his  personal  Helper, 

vows  his  personal  consecration. 

Picture,  a  glorious,       .... 

the  subject,        .        •        .        •        . 

the  position,       .        •        •        •        . 

the  effect  upon  the  beholders,  • 

Piety,  decided,      ..... 

its  properties  and  advantages,  • 
Piety,  three  aspects  of,  .        •        . 

piety  waiting  on  the  Lord,  •  • 
rejoicing  in  God,  .  •  •  • 
praying  to  God,         •        •        •        • 


37 


37 
37 

37 
127 
127 
127 
127 
292 
292 
156 
156 
157 
157 


xdii 


INDEX. 


made 


of 


Pilgriinage  of  the  wicked,  the 
is  characterised  by  privation, 

folly, 

peril,  .        .        . 
criminality,        .        •        • 
ruinousness,       .        . 
Plain,  the  hidden  ways  of  God 

(See  Ways),  .... 
Pleading  for  justice  in  the  court 
heaven,  the  upright  man, 
David's  appeal  was  made  to  the  right 

judge, 

presented  in  a  proper  spirit, 
supported  by  ample  evidence,   . 
enforced  by  strong  and  impassioned 
arguments,     ...  • 

concludes  with  the  expression  of  un- 
doubting  assurance,        . 
Plottings  of  the  wicked  against  the 
good,  the,       . 
are  wi-athfid,     .        .        • 
cruel,  •        •        •        • 

determined,        ,        •        • 
cowardly,  .        •        • 

self-destructive,         ,        , 
Poriion  in  this  life,  men  of  the  world 

who  have  their  (See  Men),    . 
Position,  the  present,  and  future  pros- 
pects of  the  wicked  as  seen  by  the 
spiritually  enlightened  man, . 
their  present  position  is  perilous, 
their  future  prospects  are  terrible,  de- 
struction complete,  sudden,  effected 
by  God,  making  manifest  the  un- 
reality of  their  former  prosperity. 
Power  and  glory  manifested  in  the  sanc- 
tuary, God's,  .        .        ,        . 
Power,  manifestations  of  Divine  (See 

Manifestations), 
Power  of  God,  the,        .... 
men  do  not  generally  believe  in, 
helps  to  faith  in  God's  power, 
Power    of  God,    the   Gospel  the  (See 

Gospel),        .       .       .       . 
Power  of  the  law,  the  joy-giving  (See 

Law),     .       .       .        .       . 
Power  of  the  law,  the  light-giving  (See 

Law),     .        .        .        .        . 
Power  of  the  law,  the  purifying  (See 

Law), 

Power  of  the  law,  the  soul-restoring 

(See  Law), 

Power,  peace  by, 

Practical  atheism  (See  Atheism),        • 

Praise, 

the  minstrel, 

the  harp, 

the    song,    its    theme,    joyfulness, 
object,  and  occasion,      .        . 
Praise,  a  model  of  devout,    . 
the  praise  resolved  upon  loses  sight 
of  self  in  devout  admiration  of  the 
character  and  doings  of  God, 
evinces  its   reality  by  resolving  to 

imitate  Him, 

Praise,  a  song  of, 

for  what  God  is  in  Himself, 

for  what  He  does  for  His  people. 


PAGB 

,  480 

.  480 

,  480 

480 

480 

480 


121 
124 

124 

125 
126 

127 

127 

174 
174 
174 
17s 
175 
17s 

243 


398 
398 


398 

315 

328 
312 
312 
313 

387 
90 

89 
90 

88 

386 

40 

33 
33 
34 

34 
419 


419 

420 
157 

157 
158 


God, 


PAOB 
.  291 
►  291 
»  291 
.  291 
.  291 
292 


Praise,  exemplary,        ,       , 

in  its  theme,       .        .        •        , 

in  the  spirit  of  its  offerer,  • 

in  its  enthusiasm, 

in  its  sphere,      .        .        ,        , 

in  the  sense  of  its  imperfection. 
Praise  for  the  promised  help  of 

Israel's, •414 

heroic  anticipation  of  victory,    .        .414 

firm  ground  of  confidence,         .        .415 

devout  utterance  of  praise,        ,        .416 
Praise  God,  exhortation  to,  because  of 
His  government  of  the  world,        .  232 

reasons  why  we  should  praise  God, 
because  of  His  majesty  and  power, 
the  universality  of  His  rule,  under 
His  government  the  interests  of  His 
loyal  subjects  are  specially  secured, 
the  holiness  of  His  government, 
the  success  of  His  government,      .  232 

directions  how  we  should  praise  Him, 
enthusiastically,  intelligently,        .  233 
Praise,  meditation  and,  .        .        .  299 

Praise  of  the  Messiah-King,  the  (See 

Messiah), 220 

Praising  God  for  His  great  kindness  in 
affliction, .        .      • .        .        ,        ,  335 

a  great  affliction,  variously  repre- 
sented, permitted  by  God,      .        .  335 

great  kindness  in  great  affliction,  in 
preserving  the  afflicted,  in  the  de- 
sign and  issue  of  the  affliction,       .  336 

praise  for  great    kindness  in  great 

affliction, 337 

Praising  God  for  His  mighty  works,     .  334 

the  reason  of  this  praise,  the  nature, 
constancy,  and  influence  of  His 
works,  and  the  necessity  of  observ- 
ing them,         334 

the  enthusiasm  of  this  praise,  it  is 
offered  heartily,  joj^lly,  openly,  ,  335 

the  universality  of  this  praise,  .        .  335 
Praising  Him,  God's  nearness  to  His 
people  a  reason  for  (See   Near- 
ness),       416 

Prayer,  a  model, 462 

the  Person  addressed,         .       .        .  462 

the  prayer  offered,       ....  463 

the  plea  urged,    .        .        .        .        .  463 
Prayer  a  preparation  for  conflict,  .        .    95 

prayer  should  have  reference  to  future 
emergencies,    .        .        ,        .       .95 

invokes  the  invincible  protection  of 
Jehovah,  .        .        .        .        .        .    96 

should  be  accompanied  with  sacrifice,    96 

is  urgent  to  secure  a  specific  answer 
to  its  petitions,        .        .        .        .96 

is  found  wherever  the  presence  of 
Jehovah  is  manifested,    .        .        .97 
Prayer,  an  earnest  appeal  and,      .       .217 

in  the  appeal  they  assert  that  they 
have  neither  broken  God's  cove- 
nant, nor  lapsed  into  idolatry,  nor 
backslidden  from  God,  they  appeal 
to  His  omniscience  in  proof  of  this, 
they  also  assert  that  they  were 
suffering  sieverely  because  of  their 
attachment  to  Him,       •        .        .217 


INDEX. 


SIX 


PAOB 

in  the  prayer  we  have,  believing  ex- 
postulations, urgent  entreaties,  and 
effective  pleas,        .        .        .        ,218 
Prayer,  and  encouragement,  complaint 

(See  Complaint),  ....  300 
Prayer  and  prediction  of  the  good  man 
concerning  his  wicked  enemies,  the,  321 
prayer  for  preservation  from  wicked 
enemies,    the    description    of   the 
enemies,  the  prayer  of  the  Psalmist,  321 
prediction  of  the  destruction  of  wicked 
enemies,  the  author,  instruments, 
manner  and  effect  of  their  destruc- 
tion,       .        .        .        •        .        .  322 
Prayer  and  vow,  David's,     •        .        .  258 
Prayer,  David's,    ....    258, 261 
Prayer  for  a  time  of  need,     .        .        .132 
characterised  by  deep  humility  and 

earnestness, 132 

Christ-like  trust  in  God's  word,         .  132 
grateful  recognition  of  God's  favour,  132 
steadfast  reliance  upon  God's  faith- 
fulness amidst  the  failure  of  earthly 

comforts, 132 

practical  submission  to  God's  will  as 

the  truest  safety,    ,        ,        .        .133 
encouraging  self-admonition  to  hope 
in  God  for  ever,      ,        ,        .        .133 
Prayer  for  every  one,  an  indispensable,  255 
"Cleanse  me  from  my  sin,"      .        .  255 
the  need  you  have  to  offer  this  prayer,  255 
the  requisites  you  must  possess  to 
present  it  successfully,  .        .        ,  256 
Prayer  for  kings,  a  (See  KiNGS),  .        .381 
Prayer  in  persecution,  ....  367 
the  circumstances  and  condition  of 
the  suppliant,   persecution,  afflic- 
tion, need,      .        .        .        .        .  367 
the  prayer  of  the  suppliant,  the  Being 
to  whom  it  is  addressed,  the  objects 
which  it  seeks  to  attain,  the  ur- 
gency with  which  it  is  presented,  .  367 
Prayer  in  trouble,  ....  429 

something  common  to  all  men,  .  429 

a  commendable  example  for  all  men,  429 
a  Divine  Auditor  of  all  men,  .  ,  429 
a  great  mistake  of  some  men,  .  .  429 
an  experience  which  may  happen  to 

all  men, 430 

Prayer,  invariable  topics  for,        .        .119 
prayer  should  be  addressed  to  Je- 
hovah   119 

should  be  offered  that  our  enemies 
may  have  no  ground  to  taunt  us 
with  the  failure  of  our  trust  in  God,  119 
should  be  offered  for  Divine  guid- 
ance,        120 

for  Divine  mercy,  .  .  •  .120 
Prayer,  morning,  .  .  .  •  .17 
true  prayer  is  personal,  •  •  •  17 
profound  and  passionate,  •  •  •  17 
resolute,     .        .        •        •        •        .18 

obedient 18 

expectant, 18 

Prayer  of  the  Church,  the  missionary,  340 
the  great  object  of  this  prayer,  that 
God  may  be  known  and  worshipped 
by  all  men, 340 


PAOB 

the  means  by  which  the  attainment 

of  this  object  is  sought,  .        .        .341 
the  confidence  in  which  this  prayer 
is  offered, 341 

Prayer,  the  exile's,  ....  488 
the  address  which  is  presented,  .  488 
the  object  which  is  sought,  •  .  488 
the  pleas  which  are  urged,  .  .  488 
the  sublime  conclusion  of  the  whole,  489 

Prayer,  the  morality  of,        .        ,        .     84 


84 

85 

85 

361 

361 


prayer  must  be  offered  in  a  right 

cause, 
in  a  right  spirit, 
at  a  right  time. 
Prayer,  the  object,  season,  and  hope  of, 
the  object  must  be  infinite  in  intelli- 
gence, approachable,  entreatable,  . 
the  season,  when  we  suffer  wrong- 
fully, when  our  need  is  great  and 
greatly  felt,  when  our  desire  for 
spiritual  blessings  is  intense,  while 
the  overtures  of  divine  grace  are 

made  to  us, 

the  great  encouragements,  the  abound- 
ing mercy  and  saving  truth  of  God,  362 
Prayer,  the  providence  of  God  a  motive 
to,   ....... 

Prayer  the  resource  of  the  godly  in 
affliction,         ..... 

springs  from  trust  in   Grod,  as  the 
Almighty  Father,  the  everlasting 

refuge, 

implores  the  highest  blessings, . 
characterised   by  the    noblest  emo- 
tions,     ...... 

followed  by  the  grandest  deliverance. 
Prayer,  the  return  of  (See  Return),  . 
Prayer  to  his  Lord,  the  servant's  (See 

Servant), 

Prayer,  trust  and  (See  Trust),    . 
Prayer,  urgency  in  (See  Urgencjy), 
Preacher  of  wisdom,  the, 
addresses  himself  to  all  peoples, 

to  all  classes, 

duly  considers  his  subject, 
deals  with  difficult  (]^uestions. 


361 


290 
142 


142 
143 

143 
143 
168 

198 
370 
368 
239 
239 
239 
240 
240 


deals  with  them  poetically,  musically,  240 


Precept  and  promise, 

the  duty  enjoined,     .... 

the  promise  with  which  it  is  enforced. 

Prediction  of  the  good  man  concerning 

his  wicked  enemies,  the  prayer  and 

(See  Prayer),       .... 

Presence,  the  withdrawal  of  the  Divine, 

is  invariably  preceded  by  many  and 

aggravated  sins,      .... 
is  invariably  succeeded  by  many  and 

terrible  calamities, 
Present,   past,   and    future,  the   good 

man's, 

Presumptuous  sins  (See  SiNS), 
Privilege,  and  prospect,  a  great  fact,    . 
Privileges  of  the  godly,  the  character 

and  (See  Godly),  .... 
Profane  intruders  in  sacred  places  (See 

Intruders), 

Profundis,  de  (See  De), 
Programme  of  evil,  the  (See  EviL), 


281 
281 
281 


321 
454 

455 
456 

402 

93 
326 

323 

462 

73 

3 


INDEX. 


FAai 

Progress,  religions,        ,        .        •        .  486 
represented  as  deriying  its  snpport 

irom  God,       .         .        .        ,        .  486 
advancing  in   conformity  with  His 
law,        .        .        .        .        .        .  486 

making  unfavourable  circumstances 

conduce  to  its  own  ends,        ,        ,  487 

steadily  advancing,    .        ,        ,        ,  487 

gloriously  terminating,      .        ,        ,  487 

Promise,  precept  and  (See  Precept),  ,  281 

Proprietorship  of  the  world,  the  Divine 

(See  World),         .       .       ,       .114 
Prospect,  a  glorious,      ,  ^      .        .        ,  354 
of  a  time  when  the  Divine  triumphs 

will  be  extensively  witnessed,        .  354 
joyously  celebrated  by  His  people,   .  355 
when  heathen  nations  shall  submit 

themselves  unto  Him,    .        .        ,  356 

when  He  shall  be  universally  praised,  356 

Prospect,  a  great  fact,  privilege,  and,  .  326 

Prosperity  of  the  wicked,  the  temporal,  392 

is  sometimes  clearly  manifest,  .        .  392 

sometimes  continued  even  to  the  very 

end  of  life,      .        .        .        .        .  392 

has  an  injurious  effect  upon  their 

character, 392 

is  a  great  trial  to  the  people  of  God,  393 
Prosperity  of  the  wicked  unworthy  the 
envy  of  the  good,  the  transient,     .  171 
there  is  apparently  much  in  the  pro- 
sperity of  the  wicked  to  excite  the 
fretful  envy  of  the  good,         .^       •  ^71 
it  is  foolish  to  envy  the  prosperity  of 
the  wicked,  because  it  is  only  of 
temporary  duration,        .        ,        .172 
it  is  smful,  because  it  is  contrary  to 

the  command  of  God,     .        .        .172 
it  is  injurious,  because  it  awakens 

the  lower  sentiments  of  the  soul,  ,  172 
it  is  presumptuous,  because  it  is  re- 
bellion against  the  providence  of 

God, 172 

Prosperity  of  Zion  sought,  the,     .        ,  262 
the  importance  of  the  object  sought,   262 
the  grounds  of  encouragement  in  seek- 
ing it, 262 

the  manner  in  which  we  should  seek 

it 262 

Providence  of  God  a  motire  to  prayer, 

the, 290 

Provocation  of  God,  and  Grod's  patience 
with  man,  man's,   ....  449 

man's  provocation  of  God,  by  persist- 
ence in  evil,  and  spurious  repent- 
ance,      ......  449 

God's  patience  with  man,  manifested 
in  His  judgments  upon  Israel,  His 
mercies  to  them,  and  His  remem- 
brance of  them,      ....  449 

Psalm,  an  imprecatory  (See  Impreca- 
tory),      162,  362 

Psalm  of  life,  the  (See  Life),        .        .    55 
Psalm,  the  Penitent's  (See  PENITENT),  253 
Public  worship  more  acceptable  to  God 
than  private  devotion,    .         .         .  508 
adduce  some  facts  in  the  Divine  ad- 
ministration   indicative    of    God's 
higher  estimate  of  public  worship,  508 


PAOB 


state  some  reasons  why,  in  the  nature 
of    the    case,   God    should   prefer 
public  to  private  worship,      •        .  509 
Punishment  of  sin,  the  exposure  and 
(See  Sin) loi 


by   His  people,  God  (See 
the  (See 


Realised 
God), 
Reasonableness  of  worship, 

Worship), 

Reasons,  ultimate,        .... 

why  (jrod  delivers  and  honours  men  ? 

"Because  He   delighted  in  me" 

practical  lessons  suggested  by  this 

truth, 

Recollection,  a  grateful,        ,        , 
of  national  deliverance,     .        . 
of  the  removal  of  the  Divine  anger,  . 
of  the  bestowal  of  forgiveness,  . 
Recollection,    reflection,  and  declara- 
tion,         

recollection,  memory  regarded  as  a 

source  of  pain,  a  source  of  pleasure, 

and  an  aid  to  faith,         .        •        , 

reflection,  *'  I  will  meditate,**  . 

declaration,  would  be  intelligent,  and 

trust-inspiring,        .... 

Recollections  of  God   painful  to  the 

wicked, 

what  we  mean  by  remembering  God,  430 

why  the  recollection  of  such  a  JBeing 

should  ever  be  painful,  . 

Recollections,    the   precious,    present 

trials,  and  glorious  resource  of  an 

aged  saint,      ..... 

recollections,  of  a  life  of  trust  in  God, 

of  a  life  sustained  by  God,     . 
trials,  arose  from  his  enemies,  he  sets 
before  us  their  character,  aim,  and 

method, 

resource,  confidence  in  and  prayer  to 

God, 

Recovery  from  sickness,  thoughts  on 
(See  Sickness),     .... 

Redemption, 

the  subject  of,  "  the  soul,** 

the  price  of,  "  the  precious  blood  of 

Christ,"  .        . 

the  period  of,  in  time  only,        .        • 

Refuge,  God  a, 312 

Refuge  in  sore  peril,  a  safe,         .        .  287 
the  extreme  perils  in  a  good  man's 
life,  arose  from  thebitterreproaches, 
the  fierce  cruelty,  and  the  subtle 
schemes  of  his  enemies, 
the  secure  refuse  from  the  perils  of  a 
good  man's  me,  notice,  the  ground, 
the  expression,  and  the  greatness 
of  his  trust  in  God, 
Refuge,  the  saint's,       • 
earnestly  sought,       • 
graciously  enioyed,  • 
exultingly  acknowledged* 
Regeneration,        •        • 
its  importance,  •        • 
its  season,  .        •        • 
its  reality,  •        t 

its  Agent,  •        •       • 


34a 

154 
77 

77 

78 
491 
491 
491 
491 

436 


436 
437 

437 

430 


430 


371 
371 


371 

372 

139 
243 
243 

243 
243 


287 


288 
130 
130 

131 
131 
510 
510 
5" 
5" 
5" 


INDEX. 


ysrl 


PAGE 

itsmeang,  .        •        •        •        •        •  511 

its  counterfeits, 511 

its  evidences, 511 

Reign    and  joy,    the   Messiah's    (See 

Messiah), 223 

Reign  of  Christ,  the  (See  Christ),      .      8 
Reign  of  God,  the  diverse  destinies  of 
men  manifesting  the  (See  Desti- 
nies),       297 

Reign  of  the  Messiah,  the  glorious,      .  383 

the  blessings  of  His  reign,  the  admi- 
nistration of  justice,  the  enjoyment 
of  peace,  the  progress  of  religion, 
beneficent  government,  abundant 
prosperity,      .        .        .        •       ,.  3^3 

the  universality  of  His  reign,  over  all 
classes  and  in  all  places,         .        •  384 

the  perpetuity  of  His  reign,  guaran- 
teed by  the  declaration  of  God's 
Word,  and  the  character  of  His 
sovereignty,    .         .         .         .        .385 

the  praise  of  His  reign,  expressed  by 
rendering  to  Him  homage,  service, 
tribute,  and  blessing,      .         .        .  385 
Rejoicing  exile,  the,      ....  284 

he  rejoices  in  the  minuteness  of  the 
Divine  knowledge  and  the  tender- 
ness of  the  Divine  regard,      .         ,  284 

in  His  assurance  of  deliverance  from 
his  enemies,  notice,  the  condition, 
promptitude,  and  assurance  of  de- 
liverance,       .....  285 

in  his  triumphant  confidence  in  God,  285 

in  his  delightful  obligations  to  God, 
notice  the  nature  and  reason    of 
these,      ......  285 

Relation  of  God  to  the  saints,  the  (See 

Saints), 19 

Relation  of  God  to  the  wicked,  the  (See 

Wicked), 18 

Relation  to  our  ancestors  and  successors, 
our, 441 

our  great  obligations  to  our  ancestors,  441 

our  great  duty  to  our  successors,        .  441 
Relation  to  the  law  and  testimony  of 
God,  man's,     .        .        .        .        .438 

man  has  received  a  knowledge  of  the 
will  and  works  of  God,  .        .        .  439 

should  impart  a  knowledge  of  the 
will  and  works  of  God  to  others,    .  439 

should  do  this  with  a  noble  aim,  that 
the  knowledge  might  be  continued 
to  the  race,  that  the  coming  genera- 
tions mi»ht  avoid  the  errors  and 
sins  of  their  ancestors,  might  be 
righteous  and  religious,  .  .  .  440 
Religion,  the  revival  of,  .  .  .  494 
Religion,  three  views  of,         .        .        .159 

what  it  is,  personal  faith  in  God,  de- 
votedness  to  God,  communion  with 
God, 159 

what  it  does,  establishes  right  rela- 
tions between  the  soul  and  God, 
efiects  a  moral  transformation  of 
character,  ensures  the  highest  bles- 
sedness of  being,      .         .         .        .159 

what  it  deserves,  earnest  study,  per- 
Bonal  trial,  hearty  commendation,  159 


PAQB 

Religious  progress  (See  Progress),  .  486 
Religious  worship  (See  Worship),  227,  471 
Repentance,  the  night  of  (See  Night),  22 
Resolution,  a  commendable,  .         .184 

a  great  danger  of  sinful  speech,  ,  184 

a  wise  precaution,  to  guard  against 

this  danger, 185 

Resource  and  comfort  in  trouble  (See 

Trouble), 249 

Results  (See  Destinies),      ...      5 

Retribution, 38 

the  pit  of  human  misery  and  ruin  is 
^  digged  by  man,  not  by  God,   .        .     38 
sin  may  be  cleverly  devised  and  exe- 
cuted, but  its  frustration  is  cer- 
tain,       ,        .        .         .        .        .39 
sin  may  long  remain  unpunished,  but 

its  punishment  is  certain,       .         .     39 
the  final  punishment  of  sin  is  over- 
whelming,        39 

Retrospect,  an  old  man's  ,  •  .  379 
the  Psalmist's  scholarship,  •  .  379 
occupation,         .        •        •        •        .379 

prayer, 379 

wish, 379 

Return  of  prayer,  the,   .        •        •        ,168 

prayer  may  return  unheard,       •        .168 

unanswered,       .        .        .        .        .168 

bringing  benedictions,        .        .        .168 

Revelation  of  the  character  of  God,  a 

welcome  (See  Character),   .        .170 
Revelation,    the    characteristics    of   a 

Divine, 48 

the  grand  characteristic,  purity,         .     48 
the  Scriptures  which  profess  to  be  the 
words  of  the  Lord  have  been  tested, 
and    their    divinity    established; 
tested  by  criticism,   science,   and 
experience,      .....    48 
the  consequent  preciousness  of  the 
Sacred  Scriptures,   .        .        ,         .49 
Revival  of  religion,  the,         .         .        .  494 
Riches,  the  folly  of  ti-usting  in,     .        .  266 
Righteous  and  his  little  better  than  the 
wicked  with  his  much,   the   (See 

Little), 175 

Righteous,  the, 177 

the  laud  he  inherits,  •  •  •  .177 
the  wisdom  he  speaks,  •  •  .177 
the  law  he  keeps,  .  •  .  .177 
the  safety  he  enjoys,  ,        ,        .177 

the  condemnation  he  escapes,  .  ,178 
the  exaltation  he  expects,  .        .178 

Rock,  the  sheltering,  ....  306 
Royal  banquet,  a  (See  Banquet),        ,  113 

Sabbath-School  anniversary,  for  a,    .441 
Sacrifices,  material  and  spiritual,  .         .  247 
Sad  scenes  and  painful  experiences,       .  276 
sore  evils  in  the  city,  the  evils  were 
manifold    in    form,    universal    in 
extent,    continuous   in    their    ac- 
tivities, and  painful  in  their  re- 
sults,   276 

base  treachery  in  friendship,  friend- 
ship enjoyed,  violated,  injured  and 
complainmg,   .         .         .         .        .276 
earnest  prayer  in  suffering,         ,        ,  277 


zidi 


INDEX. 


PAOB 

Saint,  an  aged,  the  precious  recollec- 
tions, present  trials,   and  glorious 
resource  of  (See  Kecollections),     371 
Saint  and  his  God,  the  aged,  .        .373 

Saint's  refuge,  the  (See  Refuge),         .  130 
Saints,  the  extremity  and  asylum  of  the,     24 
Saints,  the  extremities  of  the,        .        .     37 
the  depth  of  their  distress,  .         .     37 

the  fulness  of  their  deliverance,  .     37 

the  expression  of  their  gratitude,       .     38 
Saints,    the    inheritance    of    the    (See 

Inheritance),      .       .       .       .62 

Saints,  the  relation  of  God  to  the,         .     19 

He  is  their  Shepherd,         .        .        .19 

shield, 19 

song, 19 

Saint,  the  triumphant  faith  of  an  aged 

(See  Faith), 376 

Salvation,  Divine,  ,        .        •        .71 

the  Psalmist's  confession,  .        •        .71 

his  resolution,     .        ,        ,        •        .     72 

Salvation,  God  our,        ,        .        •        .352 

in  relation  to  life's  burdens,       •        .  352 

to  life's  perils, 352 

to  death, 353 

Salvation,  I  am  thy,  .  .  .  .164 
salvation  is  from  God,  .  .  .164 
implies  death  to  evil  and  life  to  good,  164 
demands  everlasting  gratitude  and 

praise, 165 

Salvation  in  God's  smile,      .        .        .  467 
salvation  consists  in    the    life    and 
growth  of  the  soul  under  the  favour 

of  God, 467 

Salvation  of  the  Church,  and  the  de- 
struction of  her  enemies,  the  (See 
Destruction),      ....  269 
Salvation,  the  great,      .        .        .        .76 

a  great  danger, 77 

a  Divine  deliverer,     .        ,        •        .     77 

a  complete  redemption,      .        ,        .77 

Salvation,  the  joys  of  (See  JOYS),         .  259 

Sanctified  trial  (See  Trial),  .        .        .66 

Satisfaction  of  the  godly  soul,  the,        .  317 

is  found  in  the  provisions  of   God, 

which  are  spiritual,  rich,  abundant,  317 
in  meditation  on  God  :  notice,   the 
nature,  subject,  and  season  of  this 

exercise, 317 

in  the  protection  of  God,  .  .  .318 
in  the  sustentation  of  God,  ,  .318 
in  the  celebration  of  the  praise  of  God,  318 

Satisfaction, 69 

the  nature  of  true,  it  is  spiritual,  com- 
plete, full,  everlasting,   .         .        .69 
the  source  of  true,  the  vision  of  God, 
the  likeness  of  God,        .         .         .69 
Scene  of  judgment,  a  (See  Judgment),  245 
Scenes  from  a  remarkable  history,        .  443 
a  people  divinely  emancipated,  •        ,  443 

divinely  led, 444 

divinely  provisioned,  .         .         .  444 

basely  perverse  and  wicked,  .  .  445 
Secret  faults  (See  Faults),  .  .  .  92 
Seek  Him,  the  former  mercies  of  God 

an  encouragement  to,     .         .        .  503 
a  grateful  recollection  of  former  mer- 
cies,       •••••.  503 


PAOB 

an  earnest  prayer  for  deliverance  from 
present  dangers,     ....  504 

a  devout  resolution  to  serve  God,  by 
obedience  and  worship,  .        .        .  504 
Seek  Him,  the  goodness  of  God  an  en- 
couragement to,      .        .        .        .  499 

the  petitions  of  the  suppliant,  for 
audience,  protection,  mercy,  joy,  .  499 

the  pleas  of,  his  necessity,  consecra- 
tion, confidence,  importunity,        .  499 

the  encouragement  of,  the  goodness 
and  mercy  of  God, ....  500 
Seek  Him,  tlie  supremacy  of  God  an 

encouragement  to, .        .         .         .  500 

the  supremacy  of  God,  in  Himself, 
and  ill  His  doings, ....  501 

the  effects  of   that   supremacy,   all 
nations    shall  worship    Him,    the 
troubled  soul  shall  trust  Him,        .  501 
Seeking  God, 315 

how,    where,    when,    and    why   we 
should  seek  God,    .        .        .        .315 
Sennacherib,   King    of    Assyria,    228-231, 

421-424 
Sermon,  an  AduUam,    .        ,        ,        .160 

the  congregation,        ,        .        ,        .160 

the  preacher, 160 

the  sermon, 160 

Servant,  the  Lord's  doing  for  His,         .  192 

a  sad  situation,  darkness,  distress, 
helplessness, 192 

a  great  salvation,  was  granted  in 
answer  to  prayer,  complete,  joy- 
inspiring,  influential,      .        .        .192 

a  hearty  celebration,  .         .         .193 

Servant's  offering  to  his  Lord,  the         .   195 

obedience  to  God,  he  will  not  offer 
sacrifices  instead  of  obedience,  he 
will  render  the  obedience  which 
God  requires,  he  will  render  it 
heartily,  God  had  disposed  him  to 
do  so 195 

publication  of  the  perfections  of  God, 
what  he  announces,  where  he  makes 
the  announcement,  .        ,        .   196 

Servant's  prayer  to  his  Lord,  the,  .   198 

the  most  assured  confidence  in  God 
is  not  regarded  by  His  servant  as  a 
substitute  for  prayer,      .         .        .198 

a  true  servant  of  God  may  fall  into 
many  sins,      .         .        .        .        .  198 

if  he  do  so,  the  penaltjr  of  his  sin  will 
surely  come  upon  him,  .        .         .   199 

a  servant  of  God  suffering  the  penalty 
of  his  sin  may  seek  deliverance 
from  God, 199 

in  his  prayer  the  servant  of  God  has 
reference  not  to  himself  alone,  but 
to  others  also,  .         .         .        .   199 

the  servant  of  God  in  his  deepest  dis- 
tress confides  in  the  Lord  God,      .  200 
Service,  the  formal  and  the  spiritual  in 

Divine, 247 

the  worthlessness  of   merely  formal 
and  material  sacrifices  in  the  Divine 
service,  because  of  the  infinite  re- 
and    the    spirituality   of 


sources, 
God, 


HI 


INDEX, 


XXllI 


PAGE 

the  worth  of  spiritual  sacrifices  in  the 
Divine  service,  they  are  enjoined 
by  God,  they  secure  His  blessing, 
and  are    a    means   by  which  we 

glorify  Him, 248 

Shadow,  man  a  walking,      ,        ,        ,188 

life  a  journey, 188 

a  journey  prosecuted  falsely,     .         .188 
Sheltering  rock,  the,     ....  306 
Shepherd  and  his  flock,  the  Divine,     .  1 1 1 
the  Divine  Shepherd  supplies  every 

want, Ill 

affords    tranquillising    rest    to    the 

weary, iii 

prepares   the    soul    for   the   loftiest 

service, 112 

provides  protection  and  consolation 
in  the  darkest  peril,        .        .         .112 
Shepherd  of  Israel,  the  .        .        ,  466 

the  relation  which  He  sustains,  .  466 
the  service  which  He  renders,  and,  .  466 
the  manifestation  of  Himself  to  His 

people, 466 

the  great  desire  of  His  people  from 

Him, 466 

Shield,  God's,  .  .  .  .  .  82 
indicates   the  availableness  of   His 

help, 82 

the  many-sidedness  of  His  protecting 

love,        .        .        .        ,        .        .83 

the  invincibility  of  His  strength,       ,    83 

Shield,  the  Lord  God  a  sun  and,  ,        .  489 

the  figures,         .....  489 

the  facts, 489 

the  persons,        •        •        •        •        .  490 

Shoshannim, 220 

Shushan-eduth, 300 

Sickness,  thoughts  on  recovery  from,  .  139 
God's  hand  in  sending  sickness,  .  139 
His  mercy  in  alleviating  it,  .  .139 
His  lovingkindness  in  restoring  from 

it, 139 

Silence  in  trouble  (See  Trouble),        .  182 
Sin  and  Divine  judgment,  human,        .  446 
human  sin,  the  nature  and  aggrava- 
tion of  the  sin  of  the  Israelites,       .  446 
Divine  judgment,  against  Israel  re- 
veals  God's  observation  of  man's 
life,  God  as  affected  by  man's  life, 
punishment  growing  out  of  man's 
sin,  punishment  brought  about  by 
the  forces  of  nature,        .         .         .  447 
Sin,  sorrow  for  (See  SORROW),       .         .21 
Sin,  the  chief  evil  of  (See  Evil),  .        .  256 
Sin,  the  exposure  and  punishment  of,  .   loi 
the  exposure  of  sin  is  inevitable,       .   loi 
will  extend  to  the  inmost  feelings  of 

the  heart, 102 

its  punishment  wiU  be  terrible  and 

complete, 102 

Sin,  the  hold  of  (See  Hold),         .        .  200 
Sin,  the  self- punishing  nature  of  (See 

Nature), 27 

Sins,  besetting, 79 

we  are  all   the  subjects  of  special 

weaknesses  and  temptations,          .     79 
observations  touching  this  particular 
class  of  sins, 80 


PAGE 

Sins,  presumptuous,     •        •        •        '93 
what  they  are 93 

out  of  what  they  arise,      ,        .        •    93 
the  tyranny  which  they  exercise,      .     94 
the  absolute  sin  in  which  they  cul- 
minate,  ..,,,.     94 
Sincerity  not  enough,    .        .        .         .129 
Situation,    hope  in   the  saddest    (See 

Hope), 194 

Slander,  ..•,,,     58 

the  nature  of,     ,        •        »        •        .58 

the  evil  of, 58 

the  cure  for,       .        •        .        ,        .     58 
Slander,         .        .        ,     185,  203,  206,  358 
Smile,  salvation  in  God's  (See  Salva- 
tion),      467 

Solicitude  of  God,  the,  for  the  well-being 

of  man, 473 

is  very  deep, 474 

has  respect  to  his  various  needs,        .  474 
recognises  the  great  conditions  of  his 
well-being,    receiving   communica- 
tions from  and  rendering  obedience 

to  God, 475 

is  exercised  in  harmony  with  man's 
moral  freedom,        ....  475 
Song  of  Deliverance,  a  (See  Deliver- 
ance),     109 

Song  of  loves,  a, 220 

Song  of  praise,  a  (See  PRAISE),     .         .157 
Song  to  the  Lord,  a,       .        .        .        .140 
the  singers.  His  saints,      .        .        .140 
the  song,  its  theme,  spirit,  and  occa- 
sion,         140 

Sorrow  and  mercy  justly  distributed,    .   152 
the  sorrows  of  the  wicked,  many,  self- 
caused,  inevitable, .         .         .         .152 
the  mercy  promised  to  the  righteous, 
mark  their  character  and  blessed- 
ness,         152 

Sorrow  for  sin, 21 

the  necessity  for  such  sorrow,   .        .21 
mistakes  concerning  it,      .         .        .21 
the  efficacy  of  it,         .         .         .         .     22 
Sorrowful    complaint,    a,    an    earnest 
prayer,  and  a  devout  resolution  (See 

Complaint), 459 

Soul,  a  godly,  under  a  sense  of  absence 

from  God, 206 

the  sorrow  of  a  godly  soul,  its  cause, 

aggravation,  and  continuousness,  .  206 
the  desire  of  a  godly  soul,  its  object 

and  intensity,  ....  206 

the  hope  of  a  godly  soul,  whom  he 
hoped  in,  what  he  hoped  for,  where- 
on he  grounded  his  hope,        .         .  207 
Sou],  a  godly,  the  deep  depression  and 

strong  consolation  of,      .        .         .  208 
his  depression,  the  greatness  of  his 
troubles,  their  causes,  their  relation 

to  God, 208 

his  consolation,  in  the  remembrance 
of  God,  in  the  assurance  of  His  con- 
stant mercy,  in  access  to  Him  in 
prayer,  in  anticipation  of  deliver- 
ance from  trouble 209 

Soul  eclipses  (See  Eclipses),        .        .    49 
Soul,  man  speaking  to  his,    ,        ,        .  208 


xxiv 


INDEX. 


PAOB 

self-remonstranoo,      •        •       •        •  208 
self-exhortation,         •        •        •        •  208 

self-encouragement,  ....  208 
Soul  perplexity  (See  PERPLEXITY),  .  39 
Soul,  the  anticipation  of  the  godly  (See 

Anticipation),     ....  320 
Soul,  the  attitude  of  a  victorious  {See 

Attitude), 400 

Soul,    the    declaration    of   a    grateful 

(See  Declaration),      .        .        .337 
Soul,  the  satisfaction  of  the  godly  (See 

Satisfaction),     .       .       .       .317 
Soul,    the    thirst   of   the   godly    (See 

Thirst), 314 

Sovereignty  of  God,  illustrations  of  the,  457 
God  arousing  Himself  to  interpose  in 

human  afmirs,        ....  457 
rejecting  men  from  the  possession  of 

privileges, 457 

selecting  men  to  the  possession  of 
privileges  and  the  performance  of 

duties, 457 

establishing  a  beneficent  institution,  458 
conferring  benefits  on  men,  •  .  458 
Sovereignty  of  God,  the,  .  •  ,  409 
loyally  acknowledged^  .  •  .  410 
of  ancient  date, .  .  •  •  .410 
beneficent  in  operation,  .  •  .410 
a  plea  for  His  help,  ....  410 
Speaker,  the  listener,  the  peace,  the,  .  497 
the  listener,  .  •  .  .  .  497 
the  speaker,  •  .  •  .  .  497 
the  message,  •  •  •  •  .  498 
the  confidence  •        t        t        •        .  498 

the  issue, 498 

Speaking  to  his  soul,  man  (See  Soul),  .  208 
Speech  in  trouble  (See  Trouble),  .  185 
Spiritual  infirmities  (See  Infirmities),  435 
Stars,  the  Gospel  of  the  (See  Creation),  28 
State  of  the  godly  in  this  world,  the,  .  287 
a  divinely  delivered, ....  287 

sustained,  and, 287 

approved  state,  ....  287 

Steps  in   dangerous   paths,  safe  (See 

Paths), 64 

Story  of  a  sufferer,  the,         .        .        .  144 

the  Divine  listener,    ....  144 

the  sad  complaint,     ....  144 

the  relieved  sufferer,  ....  145 

Sufferer,  the  story  of  a  (See  Story),    .  144 

Suffering,  the  cry  of  tiie  righteous  in 

extreme, 357 

a  cry  of  suffering,  the  nature  and 

severity  of  his  sufferings,        .        .  357 
a  cry  of  supplication,  comprising  a 
confession,  petitions,  and  encourage- 
ments,      359 

Suffering,  the  hope  of  the  righteous  in 

extreme, 365 

what  he  hoped  for,     ....  365 

the  ground 365 

the  influence,  and,     ....  366 
the  anticipated  result  of  this  hope,    .  366 
Suffering,     the    imperfection    of     the 

righteous  in  extreme,      .        .         .  362 
consider,  the  imprecations  urged,       .  363 
the  reason  assigned  :  impresses  with, 
the  imperfection  of  the  best  men, 


PAOS 


the  gradualness  of  the  education  of 

mankind,   and   the  truth    of   the 

Sacred  Scriptures, .... 

Suffering,  the  loneliness  of,  . 

oppresses  the  soul  with  a  sense  of 

personal  unworthiness,  . 
throws    the    mind    back    upon    the 
thought  of  the  Divine  care  from 
the  earliest  period  of  life, 
is  embittered  by  the  violence  and 

cruelty  of  relentless  enemies, 
intensifies  the  sense  of  utter  helpless- 
ness and  agony,      .        ,        .        .       _ 
Suggestions  to  a  godly  soul  in  trouble,  432 
Sun  and  shield,  the  Lord  God  a  (See 

Shield), 

Supernatural,  Nature    and    the    (See 

Nature), 

Supplication,  an  earnest, 
with  a  view  to  their  salvation  the 

people  pray  for  repentance,    . 
the  deliverance  which  is  implored  is 
represented  as,  a  cessation  of  God's 

anger, 

a  manifestation  of  His  mercy,   . 

a  quickening, 

a  means  to  their  joy  in  God,  .  .  -r^^ 
Supplication  in  trouble  (See  Trouble),  189 
Supremacy  of  God  an  encouragement 

to  seek  Him,  the  (See  Seek),         .  500 
Survey  of  redemption  work, .        .        .128 


363 
106 

106 


107 
107 
107 


489 

74 
492 

492 


492 
492 

493 
493 


Sustainer,  man's  burden  and  (See 
den),      .        .        . 


Bur- 


279 


Tactics  of  the  tempted,  the, . 
Temple,  nature  God's,  .        . 
built  by  His  hand,      .        • 
hallowed  by  His  presence, 
consecrated  to  His  worship^ 
Tempted,  tactics  of  the         • 
Theology,  natural,         .        . 
the  subject,        .        •        • 
the  characteristics,     •        • 
the  importance, .        .        • 
the  limitation  of  this  revelation. 
Things    for   good   people,    good   (See 

Good), 

Thirst  of  the  godly  soul,  the, 

the  nature, 

the  occasion, 

the  reason  of,     .        •        •        •        . 
the  relation  of  this  thirst  to  the  praise 

of  God, 

Thought,  man's  need  and  God's  (See 

Need), 

Thoughts  and  inquiries  of  a  godly  soul 

in  trouble,  the  (See  Trouble), 
Thoughts  on  recovery  from    sickness 

(See  Sickness),     .       .        .       .    _ 
Three  views  of  religion  (See  Religion),  159 
Thunderstorm,  the  true  attitude  of  man 

in  the, 

to  hear  the  voice  of  God  in, 
to  adore  the  glory  of  God  in, 
to  confide  in  God  as  the  Almighty 
Ruler  of  the  thunderstorm,     . 
Topics    for    prayer,     invariable     ( See 
Prayer), 119 


46 

46 
86 
86 

87 
87 
88 

78 
314 
314 
314 

314 

31S 
200 

431 
139 


136 
136 

137 
137 


INDEX, 


XZT 


PAOB 

Transition  of  a  troubled  soul  from  con- 
flict to  victory,  the,         .        .        .  396 
was  marked  by  thoughtful  considera- 
tion of  others,  ....  396 
personal  etfort  for  himself,         .        .  396 
approach  unto  God,    ....  397 
Trial  and  triumph  of  faith,   the  (See 

Faith 308 

Trial,  sanctified, 66 

drives  us  nearer  Grod,         .        .        .66 
conducts  to  a  higher  spiritual  life,     .    67 
awakens  longings  for  the  heavenly 
and  eternal  life,      ,        .        .        .67 
Triumphant  confidence,  a  (See  Confi- 
dence),   278 

Triumphant  life,  a  glimpse  of  a  (See 

Life), 271 

Triumph  of  the  Church,  the,        .        .  347 
in  its  source,  the  Lord  gives  the  word 
of  command,   of  promise,   and  of 

power, 347 

in  its  completeness,  the  utter  rout  of 
the  foes,  the  gi-eatness  of  the  spoil, 
the  subsequent  prosperity,      .        .  348 
in  its  celebration,        ....  348 
Trouble  and  Deliverer,  the  good  man's,  427 
his  trouble,  was  continuous,  his  soul 
accepted  no    consolation,   the    re- 
membrance of    God  was  painful, 
meditation  increased  grief,  '427 

his  Deliverer,  his  application  to  God 
involved  faith,  was  persevering  and 
earnest,  did  not  lead  to  immediate 

relief, 428 

Trouble  and  the  way  out  of  it,      .         .123 
sin  is  the  prolific  source  of  all  trouble,  123 
trouble  shall  not  be  permitted  to  over- 
whelm the  good,     .        .        .        .123 
prayer  to  God  is  the  infallible  method 
of  deliverance  from  the   greatest 

trouble, 124 

Trouble,  prayer  in  (See  Prayer),         ,  429 

Trouble,  resource  and  comfort  in,         ,  249 

Trouble,  silence  in,        .        .        •        .182 

silence  maintained  in,        .        •        .  182 

increasing  trouble,     ,        ,        .        .183 

growing  insupportable  in  tronble,     .  184 

Trouble,  speech  in,        .        .        .        .185 

the  Psalmist's,  reveals  his  desire  to 

know  the  duration  of  his  life,         .  185 
his  impression  of  the  brevity  of  his 

life, 186 

his  impression  of  the  vanity  of  life,  .  186 
his  impatience  of  life,  .  .  .187 
his  want  of  clear  and  assured  know- 
ledge of  any  life  beyond  the  present,  1 87 
Trouble,  supplication  in,  .  ,  .189 
the  confidence  avowed,  .  •  .189 
the  submission  expressed, .  •  .189 
the  petitions  presented,  ,  .  ,190 
the  pleas  urged,  ....  190 

Trouble,  the  day  of  trouble,  .        .  502 

a   period  with  which  all   men  are 

acquainted, 502 

a  resolve  which  all  men  should  make,  502 
a  result  which  all  men  may  antici- 
pate,         503 

Trouble,  the  godly  soul  rising  superior 


PAOB 

to,  by  the  devout  contemplation  of 
the  works  and  ways  of  God,  .  ,  433 
the  troubled  soul's  consideration  of 
the  works  and  ways  of  God,  recol- 
lection of,  reflection  on,  and  speech 
concerning  the  works  and  ways  of 

^God, 433 

the  troubled  soul's  conclusions  on 
the  works  and  ways  of  God,  God's 
works  and  ways  reveal  His  strength. 
His  majesty,  His  holiness,  His 
beneficence,  and  they  are  mysteri- 
ous,          434 

Trouble,  the  thoughts  and  inquiries  of 
a  godly  soul  in,  .  .  .  .431 
the  thoughts,  reflection  on  the  past 
doings  of  God,  recollection  of  times 
of  trouble  in  his  own  life,  which 
were  also  times  of  song,  commu- 
nion with  his  own  heart,  .  .431 
the  inquiries,  as  to  God's  mindful- 
ness of  His  people,  as  to  His  un- 
changeableness,  as  to  His  faithful- 
ness,         432 

suggestions  to  a  godly  soul  in  trouble,  432 
Trouble,  vows  made  in,  ...  426 
Troubled  life,  a  glimpse  of  a  (See  Life),  270 
True  love  (See  Love),  .  .  .  .70 
Trust  and  prayer,  ....  370 

the  good  man's  trust  was  in  a  Divine 
Person,   sustaining  personal  rela- 
tions to  His  creatures,   who    has 
given  gracious  assurances  of  salva- 
tion to  His  people, ....  370 
the  good  man's  prayer,  for  Divine 
audience,  deliverance,   protection, 
and  vindication,     .        .        .        .  37^ 
Trust  in  God,  times  of  fear  and,   .        .  283 
Trusting  in  riches,  the  folly  of,     .        .  266 
Truths,  the  personal  realisation  of  gene- 
ral (See  Personal),      .       .       .37 
Turtle-dove,  the  Church  a,  .        .        .  414 

Ultimate  reasons  (See  Reasons),     .    77 
Urgency  in  prayer,        ....  368 
implies  a  deep  sense  of  present  and 

immediate  need,     ....  368 
apparent  delay  in  answering  prayer,    368 
strong  faith  in  the  entreatableness  of 
God 369 

Value  of  dying  experiences,  the  (See 
Experiences),      .       .       .       .395 

Verdicts,  mistaken  (See  Mistaken),   .     11 

Victorious  march  of  the  good,  the  (See 
March), 343 

Victory,  confidence  in  Jehovah  a  pledge 
of  (See  Confidence),    .       .     ,  .    97 

Victory  for  Christ  and  victory  in  Christ 
(See  Christ),         ....    85 

Victory,  the  transition  of  a  troubled  soul 
from  conflict  to  (See  Transition),  396 

Views  of  religion,  three  (See  Reli- 
gion),      159 

Vow,  David's  prayer  and,     .        •        .258 

Vows  made  in  trouble,  ,        •        »        •  426 

War,  God  as  a  man  of,        •        •        .16 


xxtI 


nn>sx. 


PAGE 
26 
26 


the  Divine  admonition,     .        , 
amnesty,    ...... 

arsenal,  the  variety,  readiness,  and 
deadly  efficacy  of  His  weapons, 

War,  the  holy 

the  revolt  against  Messiah,  its  extent, 

determination, 

secret  cause,       .        .        ,        •        . 

vanity, 

Way  for  man,  the  Divine,    • 
indicated  by  God,      .... 

trod  by  man, 

the  need  of  integrity  of  heart  to  tread 

it, .  _  _ 

Way  of  wealthy  worldlings,  the  foolish,  241 
the  characteristics  of,  trust  in  their 
wealth,  boasting  in  their  wealth,  . 
feincied  power  to  retain  wealth, 
the  folly  of,   is  seen  in  their  ina- 
bility to  retain  their  wealth,  and 
the   limitation    of   the    power   of 

wealth, 

Way  out  of  trouble,  the  (See  Trouble),  123 
Ways  of  God  made  plain,  the  hidden,     121 
the  character  of  God  is  a  guarantee  of 

infallible  direction, 
the  ways  of  God  are  made  known  to 

the  morally  needy, 
the  deeper  revelations  of  God  are  re 

served  for  the  morally  good,  . 
the  revelation  of  the  hidden  ways  of 
God  is  morally  satisfying, 
Ways  of  God,  the,         .        .        . 
are  vast  in  their  extent,     .        . 
profound  in  their  meaning, 
mysterious  in  their  aspect, 
Well-founded  assurance,  a  (See  ASSUR 

ANCE), 

Wicked  against  the  good,  the  plotting! 

of  the  (See  Plottings), 
Wicked  life,  the  distinguishing  charac 

teristics  of  a 

practical  atheism,       ,        ,        . 
self-adulation,    .... 
verbal  profanity,        .        • 
unwisdom,  .        .        •        • 

cunning  artifices. 
Wicked,  the  pilgrimage  of  the  (See  PiL 

GRIMAGE),        .... 

Wicked,  the  present  position  and  future 
prospects  of  the,  as  seen  by  the  spi 
ritually  enlightened  man  (See  POSI 
TION), 

Wicked,  the  relation  of  God  to  the, 
He  has  no  pleasure  in,       ,        , 
does  not  tolerate,  but,        .        • 
hates  wickedness, 

Wicked,  the  temporal  prosperity  of  the 
(See  Prosperity), 

Wicked,  the  temporal  prosperity  of  the, 
as  contrasted  with  the  peaceful  des 
tiny  of  the  good  (See  Contrasted) 

Wicked,  the  transient  prosperity  of  the 
unworthy  the  envy  of  the  good  (See 
Prosperity),        .... 

Wicked,  with  his  much,  the  righteous 
and  his  little  better  than  the  (See 
Little) 175 


26 
6 
6 
6 
6 

7 

505 
505 
505 

505 


241 
241 


241 


121 
121 
122 

123 

437 
437 
437 
437 

213 

174 

169 
169 
169 
170 
170 
170 

480 


398 
18 

18 

18 

18 

392 


178 


171 


Wickedness,  the  history  of  human, 
wickedness  in  its  root, 
in  its  manifestation,  , 
in  its  full  development, 
in  its  consummation,  , 

as  viewed  in  its  ultimate  aspects, 


FAOB 

293 
293 
293 
293 
294 
295 

Wisdom,  the  preacher  of  (See  Preach- 

^    .  ER), 239 

Wisdom,  two  counsels  of  (See  CouN- 

,  SELS), 147 

Withdrawal  of  the  Divine  presence,  the 

(See  Presence),  .  .  .  .  454 
Work,  survey  of  redemption,  .  .128 
Works,   praising  God  for  His  mighty 

(See  Praising),  ....  334 
World,  a  tumultuous,  and  a  tranquil 

Church, 228 

a  tumultuous  world,  the  tumult  is  an 
evidence  of  the  sin  of  the  world, 
and  will  one  day  be  removed,         .  228 
a  tranq^uil  Church,  an  assurance  of 
security,  and  of  refreshment, .        .  229 
World,  hope  opened  to  the,   .        .        .  389 
World,  men  of  the  (See  Men),       .        .     68 
World,   men   of  the,   who   have  their 

portion  in  this  life  (See  Men),         .  243 
World,  the  Divine  proprietorship  of  the,  114 
is  absolute  and  all-inclusive,      .         .114 
is  based  on  the  act  of  creation,  .        .115 
is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of  its  preser- 
vation,      115 

Worldlings,  the  foolish  way  of  wealthy 

(See  Way) 241 

Worship,  aspects  of  Divine,  .         .        .  325 
worship  in  its  source,  God,  who  grants 
the  opportunity  and  inspires  the 
disposition  to  worship,    .        .        .  325 
in  its  Object,  God,  as  the  hearer  of 
prayer,   the  pardoner  of  sin,    the 
satisfier  of  the  soul,         .        .        .  325 
in  its  nature,  submission  to  the  wiU, 
celebration  of  the  praise,  and  fulfil- 
ment of  our  vows  to  God,       .        ,  325 

in  its  locality 326 

in  its  extent, 326 

in  its  influence, 326 

Worship,   public,    more  acceptable  to 
God    than    private    devotion    (See 

Public), 508 

Worship,  religious,         ....  227 
its  nature,  internal  principles,  external 

manifestations,        .        .        .        .227 
its  ground  and  reason,  **He  is  thy 
Lord,"     .        .        .        .        .        .227 

its  importance, 227 

Worship,  religious,         .        .        .        .471 
in  its  Object,  a  Person  related  to  us, 

of  supreme  excellence,    .        .         .  472 
in  its  character,  hearty,  joyous,  vari- 
ously expressed,      .        .        .        .472 
in  its  obligation,  it  is  right,  and  need- 
ful,   472 

in  its  incentives,         .        .        .        .473 
Worship,  the  character  of  true,     .        .  1 54 
the  worship  of  God  is  the  chief  joy  of 

the  good, 154 

the  highest  duty  of  the  good,     .        .154 
the  noblest  employment  of  the  good,  154 


INDEX  TO  AUTHORS  QUOTED, 


XXVll 


PAOB 

Worship,  the  reasonableness  of  .  .154 
God  IS  to  be  worshipped  because  He 

is  the  God  of  creation,     .        .        .154 

providence, 155 

redemption, 156 

Worshipper,   the  moral  fitness  of  the 

true, 116 

it    is    the    privilege    of     the    true 

worshipper    to   approach    near   to 

God, 116 

the  true  worshipper  must  possess  a 

moral  fitness, 116 

IB  assured  of  the  Divine  benedic- 

tion» 117 


PAGE 

is  the  representative  of  a  distinctive 
and  privileged  class,        .         .        .117 
Wrath,  God  glorified  through  man's,    .  425 

the  wrath  of  man  not  unfrequently  de- 
feats its  own  aims  and  accomplishes 
the  Divine  purpose,         .        .        .  425 

is  sometimes  the  instrument  of  the 
Divine  will, 426 

man  in  his  wrath  accomplishes  the 
Divine  will  when  setting  himself 
to  resist  and  fiustrate  it,         .        .  426 

ZiON,  Mount,         .        .        .     236,  423,  5 1 1 
Zion,  the  prosperity  of,  sought,     .        .  262 


INDEX  TO  AUTHORS  QUOTED. 


Very  brief  quotations  are  not  indicated  in  this  Indeoi, 


iEscHYLUS,  136. 

Alexander,  J.  A.,  12,  55,  59,  105,  362. 
Alford,  Henry,  224,  428. 
Anon.,  262,   281,  283,  286,  289,  290,  292, 
299»  312,  315.  327,  373. 

Bailey,  P.  J.,  390,  420,  433. 
Barnes,  Albert,  369. 
Barzia,  Joseph  de,  27, 

B e,  435. 

Billing,  R.  C.,  261. 
Binnie,  W.,  56. 
Blaikie,  W.  G.,  165. 
Bonar,  A.  A.,  126,  162. 
Bonar,  H.,  497. 
Brown,  J.,  161. 
Brown,  J.  Baldwin,  259,  374, 
Browning,  R.,  122. 
Bryant,  W.  C.,  146. 
Burns,  Jabez,  273,  342. 
Bushnell,  Horace,  197. 
Byron,  Lord,  423,  424,  433. 

Candlish,  Dr.,  150. 

Cowper,  W.,  146,  152,  156,  268,  274. 

D.,  B.,  441. 
Dale,  R.  W.,  246. 
Davenant,  W.,  33. 
Davison,  Francis,  114. 
Douglas,  A.  F.,  312. 
Dryden,  John,  437. 

Emerson,  Ralph,  2$^ 

F B,  258. 


Gambold,  398. 
Goethe,  J.  W.,  121,  153, 
Goldsmith,  Oliver,  277,  4361 
Grant,  Robert,  371. 
Gray,  Thomas,  145. 
Guernsey,  Jesse,  379. 


H- 


>  351. 
Hart,  J.,  215. 
Hemans,  Felicia  D.,  275. 
Hengstenberg,  E.  W.,  313,  348,  403,  507. 
Henry,  Matthew,  193,  204. 
Heraud,  J.  A.,  436. 
Herbert,  George,  339. 
Hickok,  L.  P.,  508. 
"  Homiletic  Quarterly,"  the,  261,  339, 
Hood,  E.  P.,  240. 
Home,  George,  52,  91. 
Hull,  E.  L.,  459. 
Huntington,  F.  D.,  386. 

Keble,  John,  473. 

LiDDON,  H.  P.,  159,  220,  381. 
Lillo,  George,  416. 

M*A.,  243. 

Maclaren,  Alexander,  ill* 

Mallet,  D.,  187,  381,  382. 

Mant,  Bishop,  70. 

Marston,  J.,  382. 

Martin,  S.,  99. 

Melvill,  Henry,  152. 

Milniun,  H.  H.,  455. 

Milton,  John,  136,  141,  148,  185,411. 

Moll,  Carl  B.,  33,  364. 


nviii 


INDEX  TO  AUTHORS  QUOTED, 


Arontgomery,  J.,  385. 
More,  Hannah,  358,  450. 
Murphy,  153,  155,  157,  165. 

Newton,  John,  270. 

One  Hundred  Sketches  op  Sebmons, 

243.  351,  387. 
Osorious,  John,  16. 

Parker,  Joseph,  195,  305,  494. 

Payson,  Edward,  430. 

Perowne,  J.  J.  S.,  i,  5,  46,  49,  94,  105,  114, 

119,  124,  135,  138,  140,  148,  162,  163. 
Phillips,  George,  28,  44,  64,  86,  87. 
PolloK,  Rohert,  184,  439. 
Punshon,  W.  M.,  377. 

R.,  J.,  323- 

Robertson,  F.  W.,  206,  253. 

Ryland,  99. 

Shakspeare,  W.,  17,  169,  185,  277,  382, 
416,  422,  431,  440,  442,  443,  448,  452, 463, 

479. 
Sleigh,  William,  194,  249,  389,  51a 
Smith,  Horace,  138. 

Smith,  John,  255. 
Smith,  Walter,  153. 
Spencer,  John,  15& 


Spurgeon,  C.  H.,  379,  476. 
Stanley,  A.  P.,  236,  50(5. 
Statham,  W.  M.,  319. 
Stockdale,  George,  306. 
Stuart,  Moses,  362. 

Tennyson,  Alfred,  135,  i6S,  38a,  396,  498^ 

433,  436,  487. 
Thomas,  David,  126,  127,  i6a. 
Thomson,  James,  330. 
Thomson,  W.  M.,  236. 
Tipple,  S.  A.,  331. 
Twisleton,  E.  T.  B.,  347. 

Upham,  T.  C,  429. 

W.,  J.,  200. 

Wardlaw,  Ralph,  501. 

Watson,  Richard,  212,  227,  33a, 

Watson,  Thomas,  14. 

Watts,  Isaac,  383. 

Wesley,  Charles,  52,  456,  486,  50$. 

Wordsworth,  William,  51,  125,  145. 

Young,  Edward,  138,  406,  433. 

**  Young  Minister's  Compsmion,"  the,  J5l^ 

489. 
Y.,W.,425. 

Zinzendorf,  N.  L^  438L 


DATE 


OEMCO,  INC.  38- 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  8143 


