!!    !!ll 


:l!l 


,11     I 


Che  Jlnnotated  Bible 


wmea 


Cbe  l^oly  Scriptures  Analysed 
and  nnnotated 


BY 

A.    C.    GAEBELEIN 
Editor  of  "Our  Hope'* 


Uolutnc  TU 

Proverbs  to  Ezekiel 


PUBLICATION  OFFICE  "OUR  HOPE" 

456  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York 

PICKERING  &  INGLIS  CHRISTIAN  WORKERS  DEPOT, 

229  Bothwcll  Street,  170  Elizabeth  Street, 

GLASGOW,  SCOTLAND  SYDNEY,  N.  S.  W. 


Copyright  1921,  by  A.  C.  Gaehelein 


PROVERBS 


The  Book  of  Proverbs 


Introduction 

The  title  of  this  Book  in  the  Hebrev^  Bible  is  "Mishle,"  which  is 
derived  from  the  verb  "Mashal,"  to  rule,  hence  short  sayings  which 
are"  given  to  govern  life  and  conduct.  It  also  has  the  meaning  of 
"resemblance,"  that  is  a  parable.  Many  proverbs  are  concentrated 
parables.  Our  English  word  "proverbs"  comes  from  the  word  "pro- 
verbia"  used  in  the  Latin  translation.  Traditionally  the  authorship 
of  the  v/hole  book  is  attributed  to  Solomon,  but  the  book  itself  does 
not  claim  this,  nor  does  it  sustain  the  Solomonic  authorship  of  the 
entire  collection.  The  major  portion  of  the  book  is  attributed  to 
Solomon  and  there  can  be  no  question  that  he  is  the  author  of  it.  In 
First  Kings  iv:S2  we  read  that  the  great  king  uttered  3,000  proverbs 
in  which  the  wisdom  given  to  him  is  illustrated.  But  the  book  does 
not  contain  this  number  of  proverbs. 

Chapter  xxv  begins  with  the  statement:  "These  are  also  proverbs 
which  the  men  of  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  copied  out."  This  pious 
king  must  have  had  a  great  interest  in  compiling  and  preserving  cer- 
tain portions  of  the  Word  of  God.  According  to  this  statement  in 
Proverbs  he  must  have  commissioned  certain  scribes  to  add  to  the 
previous  collection  of  proverbs  by  Solomon,  other  proverbs,  which  up 
to  that  time  had  remained  uncollected.  Then  in  chapter  xxx  we  find 
the  words  of  Agur  the  sou  of  Jakeh,  and  in  chapter  xxxi  the  words  of 
King   Lemuel. 

From  these  facts  which  appear  in  the  book  it  is  clear  that  the  com- 
position of  the  entire  book  of  Proverbs  cannot  be  attributed  to  Solomon. 
The  book  begins  with  "The  Proverbs  of  Solomon  the  Son  of  David, 
king  of  Israel".  In  the  beginning  of  chapter  x  we  read  again:  "The 
Proverbs  of  Solomon",  It  seems  clear  then  that  in  chapter  i-xxiv 
we  have  the  proverbs  of  Solomon;  chapter  xxv  to  the  end  contains 
also  proverbs  by  the  King,  except  the  last  two  chapters.  In  all  pro- 
bability the  scribes  of  Ilezekiah  who  copied  out  the  proverbs  of  chapter 
xxv-xxix  added  the  last  two  chapters.  What  Criticism  states  that 
"the  later  chapters  of  this  book  point  to  the  second  or  third  century 
before  Christ"  is  only  an  assertion. 

Another  feature  of  this  book  is,  that  numerous  times  a  person  is 
addressed  as  "My  son,"  and  the  personal  pronoun  is  often  used  "thou, 
thee,  thy,"  etc.  The  sections  where  we  find  this  are  chapter  i-ix; 
xix:20;  xxlv:34  and  xsvii;  xxix:27.  Who  then  is  the  person  addressed? 
Does  Solomon  address  some  one  or  is  it  Solomon  himself  who  is  ad- 
dressed? Dr.  J.  W.  Thirtle  in  his  "Old  Testament  Problems"  dis- 
tinguishes  between   proverbs   written   hy   Solomon   and   those   which 


6  THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

were  written /or  him.  All  those  which  are  addressed  to  "My  son,"  and 
in  which  the  personal  pronoun  is  used,  it  is  claimed,  are  given  to  Sol- 
omon by  "wise  men  or  teachers"  and  that  all  these  sententious  sayings 
were  given  to  young  Solomon  by  these  men  to  fit  him  for  rulership. 
But  this  produceth  other  difficulties.  The  proverbs  of  Solomon 
would  in  this  case  be  very  few  in  comparison  with  the  size  of  the  book, 
and  furthermore  we  do  not  know  who  these  wise  men  or  teachers  were 
who  instructed  the  King  and  WTote  such  words  of  wisdom. 

It  seems  to  us  that  there  is  another  way  in  which  these  sections 
containing  the  personal  address,"  My  son,"  may  be  explained.  When 
the  Lord  appeared  unto  Solomon  in  Gibeon,  He  said  unto  him,  "Ask 
what  I  shall  give  thee."  Then  Solomon  asked  for  an  understanding 
heart,  to  discern  between  good  and  bad.  Then  the  Lord  said,  "Lo  I 
have  given  thee  a  wise  and  understanding  heart"  (1  Kings  iii:5,  etc.) 
His  prayer  was  answered.  Then  the  Lord  must  have  spoken  to  him 
by  His  Spirit  and  given  Him  the  instructions  he  needed  as  the  king 
over  His  people  Israel.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  sections 
in  which  the  address  "My  son"  and  the  personal  pronoun  is  used  con- 
tain the  heavenly  instructions  given  to  the  young  king  in  the  begin- 
ning of  his  reign  by  the  Lord  Himself.  One  cannot  be  dogmatic  about 
this,  but  if  such  was  the  case  the  difficulties  disappear.  There  is  no 
need  to  put  these  proverbs  for  Solomon  into  the  mouths  of  unknown 
wise  men.  It  was  the  Lord  who  spoke  to  Solomon,  addressing  him 
thus  and  Solomon  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God  penned  all  these  words. 
But  it  seems  that  the  beginning  of  chapter  iv  contains  a  brief  auto- 
biography of  Solomon  relating  to  his  training.  If  wise  men  or  teachers 
had  spoken  these  words  their  names  would  have  been  mentioned  and 
their  sayings  would  have  appeared  in  a  different  setting,  without 
being  found  in  different  sections  of  the  book. 

As  Dr.  Thirtle  has  pointed  out,  these  sayings,  instructions  given  to 
Solomon,  as  we  take  it  by  the  Lord  in  answer  to  his  prayer  for  an 
understanding  heart,  cover  certain  commands  relating  to  Israel's 
kings,  as  given  in  the  law  of  Moses.  These  commands  we  find  in 
Deut.  xvii:14-20. 

"When  thou  art  come  unto  the  land  which  the  Lord  the  God  giveth 
thee,  and  shalt  possess  it,  and  shalt  dwell  therein,  and  shalt  say,  I  will 
set  a  king  over  me,  like  as  all  the  nations  that  are  about  me;  thou  shalt 
in  any  wise  set  him  king  over  thee,  whom  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose 
one  from  among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set  king  over  thee:  thou  may- 
est  not  set  a  stranger  over  thee,  which  is  not  thy  brother.  But  he  shall 
not  multiply  horses  to  himself,  nor  cause  the  people  to  return  to  Egypt, 
to  the  end  that  he  should  multiply  horses:  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath 
said  unto  you.  Ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  way.  Neither 
shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself,  that  his  heart  turn  not  away: 
neither  shall  he  greatly  multiply  to  himself  silver  and  gold.     And  it 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  7 

shall  be  when  he  sitteth  upon  the  throne  of  his  kingdom,  that  he 
shall  write  him  a  copy  of  this  law  in  a  book  out  of  that  which  is  before 
the  priests  the  Levites:  And  it  shall  be  with  him,  and  he  shall  read 
therein  all  the  days  of  his  life;  that  he  may  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  his 
God,  to  keep  all  the  words  cf  this  law  and  these  statutes,  to  do  them: 
That  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up  above  his  brethren,  and  that  he  turn 
not  aside  from  the  commandment,  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left: 
to  thje  end  that  he  may  prolong  his  days  in  his  kingdom,  he,  and  his 
children,  in  the  midst  of  Israel." 

Now  in  the  sections  of  Proverbs,  pointed  out  above,  in  which  the 
personal  address  is  used,  some  instructions  are  given  which  correspond 
to  the  commandments  relating  to  the  king,  as  found  in  the  passage 
from  Deuteronomy  which  we  have  quoted.  Of  special  interest  are 
the  repeated  warnings  against  the  "strange  woman, "The  strange  woman 
against  which  the  Spirit  of  God  warned  him  in  his  youth,  are  the 
women  of  other  nations.  Gentiles.  The  passage  in  Deuteronomy 
says,  "Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself,  that  his  heart  turn 
not  away."  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  anticipated  the  sad  end  of  the 
great  and  xAse  king  and  therefore  warned  him  against  the  strange 
woman,  under  the  picture  of  the  harlot,  who  ensnares  and  whose  ways 
end  in  death.  But  the  heavenly  wisdom  which  had  instructed  him 
and  warned  was  not  heeded.  It  is  written,  "King  Solomon  loved  many 
strange  women,  together  with  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  women  of  the 
Moabites,  the  Ammonites,  Edomites,  Zidonians,  and  Hittites;  of  the 
nations  concerning  which  the  Lord  said  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
Ye  shall  not  go  in  to  them,  neither  shall  they  come  in  to  you,  for  surely 
they  will  turn  away  your  heart  after  then*  gods.  Solomon  clave  unto 
these  in  love"  (1  Kings  xi.)  Then  followed  his  downfall.  "It  came  to 
pass,  when  Solomon  was  old,  that  his  wives  turned  away  his  heart 
after  other  gods."  Then  he  worshipped  Ashtoreth,  Milcom  and 
Chemosh  and  other  idol  gods.  The  words  of  wisdom  the  Lord  gave 
him,  thus  giving  him  understanding,  were  not  heeded  and  the  allure- 
ments of  the  strange  woman,  of  which  his  inspired  pen  had  warned, 
became  a  moiurnful  fact  in  his  own  history. 

The  literary  form  of  these  proverbs  is  mostly  in  the  form  of  couplets 
or  distichs.  The  two  clauses  of  the  couplet  are  generally  related  to 
each  other  by  what  has  been  termed  parallelism,  according  to  Hebrew 
poetry.     Three  kinds  of  parallelism  have  been  pointed  out. 

1.  Synonymous  Parallelism.  Here  the  second  clause  restates  what 
is  given  in  the  first  clause. 

**Judgments  are  prepared  for  scorners 
And  stripes  for  the  back  of  fools." — Proverbs  xix:29. 

2.  Antithetic  Parallelism.     Here   a   truth   which   is  stated  in  the 


8  TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

first  clause  is  made  stronger  in  the  second  clause  by  contrast  with  an 
opposite  truth. 

"The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth. 
But  the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out." — Proverbs  xiii:9. 

3.  Synthetic  Parallelism.     The  second  clause  develops  the  thought 
of  the  first. 

"The  terror  of  a  king  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion — 
He  that  provoketh  him  to  anger  sinneth  against  his  own  life." — Pro- 
verbs  XX  :2. 


The  Teachings  of  Proverbs 

The  Proverbs,  speaking  generally,  give  moral  teachings  as  to  human 
conduct,  often  giving  the  contrast  between  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked.  But  besides  this  there  is  much  which  goes  deeper.  Many 
of  these  short  sayings  can  be  applied  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  to 
the  Gospel.  There  is  one  portion  which  speaks  definitely  of  the  Son  of 
God,  our  Lord,  who  is  Wisdom.  This  is  found  in  chapter  viii:22-31. 
When  we  read  in  chapter  xiii:7,  "There  is  that  maketh  himself  poor, 
yet  hath  great  wealth,"  we  can  well  think  of  Him  who  was  rich  and 
became  poor  for  our  sake  that  we  by  His  poverty  might  be  rich.  Then 
there  are  verses  which  speak  of  a  friend,  "There  is  a  friend  that  sticketh 
closer  than  a  brother"  (xviii:24).  "A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  is 
born  as  a  brother  for  adversity"  (xvii:17).  Well  do  we  think,  in  reading 
such  and  similar  verses  in  this  book,  of  our  Lord,  who  is  the  friend  of 
sinners.  Proverbs  in  spiritual  instruction  and  application  has  an 
inexhaustible  wealth. 

The  Spirit  of  God  makes  use  of  this  Book  in  quoting  from  it  in  the 
New  Testament:  Chapter  i:16  is  quoted  in  Romans  iii:15;  iii:ll-12 
in  Hebrews  xii:5-6,  also  in  Rev.  liii:19;  iii:34  in  James  iv:6  and  1  Peter 
v:5;  iv:26  in  Hebrews  xii:13;  x:12  in  1  Peter  iv:8;  xi:31  in  1  Peter 
iv:18;   xxv:21-22,  in  Romans  xii:20;  and  xxvi:ll  in  2  Peter  ii:22. 

Proverbs  ought  to  be  studied  by  believers  as  diligently  as  any  other 
portion  of  God's  Holy  Word.  The  prayerful  searcher  will  soon  be 
rewarded  by  many  nuggets  of  divine  truth. 

We  make  another  suggestion  on  the  study  of  this  Book.  Many  of 
the  lessons  given  in  these  proverbs  are  illustrated  by  the  lives  of  the 
godly  and  ungodly  recorded  in  the  Bible.  It  will  prove  a  most  helpful 
occupation  to  fit  the  experiences  of  these  two  classes  as  found  in  the 
Word  of  God  to  many  of  these  proverbs. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 


The  Division  of  Proverbs 

As  already  stated  in  our  introduction  the  Book  of  Proverbs, 
as  a  book,  was  not  in  existence  in  the  days  of  Solomon; 
it  was  completed  through  the  interest,  no  doubt  inspired 
interest,  of  King  Hezekiah.  That  Solomon  wrote  the 
proverbs  as  attributed  to  him  is  beyond  question. 

The  scope  of  this  book  is  quite  simple  for  it  is  clearly 
marked  in  its  contents. 

We  find  seven  sections. 

I.    INSTRUCTIONS  OF  WISDOM  GIVEN  TO  SOLO- 
MON.    Chapters  i-ix. 

11.    THE   PROVERBS    OF   SOLOMON-     Chapters   x- 
xix:19. 

in.    INSTRUCTIONS  GIVEN  TO  SOLOMON.    Chapter 
xix:20-xxiv. 

IV.    THE  PROVERBS  OF  SOLOMON  COLLECTED  BY 
HEZEKIAH.     Chapter  xxv-xxvi. 

V.    INSTRUCTIONS  GIVEN  TO  SOLOMON.    Chapters 
xxvii-xxix. 

VI.    THE  WORDS  OF  AGUR  THE  SON  OF  JAKEH. 

Chapter  xxx. 

VIL    THE  WORDS  OF  KING  LEMUEL  TAUGHT  HIM 
BY  HIS  MOTHER.    Chapter  xxxi. 

It  will  be  seen  at  a  glance  that  instructions  given  to 
Solomon  alternate  with  the  proverbs  of  Solomon,  teaching 
others  as  he  first  had  been  taught.  The  description  of  the 
virtuous  woman  in  the  last  chapter  is  in  the  Hebrew  in  the 
form  of  an  acrostic.  The  twenty-two  letters  of  the  Hebrew 
alphabet  are  found  in  these  verses,  just  like  in  the  alphabetic 
Psalms  and  in  Lamentations. 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

A  detailed  analysis,  as  we  have  made  it  in  other  books, 
cannot  be  fully  made  in  this  collection  of  proverbs.  Most  of 
them  are  detached  and  each  has  a  message  by  itself.  To 
interpret  each  separately,  to  point  out  the  many  spiritual 
lessons,  as  well  as  prophetic  application,  to  show  their 
relation  to  other  portions  of  the  Word  of  God  and  to  explain 
them  by  incidents  taken  from  the  Bible,  would  require 
volumes;  and  even  then  the  spiritual  meaning  would  not  be 
exhausted.  x\ll  vre  can  do  is  to  hint  at  their  meaning  and 
give  some  annotations  which,  under  God,  may  be  helpful 
in  the  closer  study  of  this  book. 

I.   INSTRUCTIONS  OF  WISDOM  GIVEN  TO  SOLOMON 

Chapter  i:8-ix. 
CHAPTER  I. 

1.  The  Introduction.     1-7. 

2.  Warning  against  Evil  Companions  and  Coveteousness.    8-19. 

3.  The  Appeal  of  Wisdom.     20-33. 

1.  The  Introduction:  Verses  1-7.  The  introductory 
words  of  these  verses  present  the  object  of  the  book.  These 
proverbs  V\'ere  given  to  Solomon,  and  contain  instructions  he 
received  from  the  Lord.  They  are  given  to  him  that  he  might 
know  wisdom.  The  word  wisdom  is  the  characteristic  word 
of  this  book  for  it  occurs  in  the  original  language  42  times, 
which  is  6  times  7.  Six  in  Scripture  is  the  human  number, 
while  7  is  the  divine  number.  Wisdom  is  the  first  thing  to 
be  acquired,  and  that  is  followed  by  instruction,  or  admoni- 
tion, to  receive  the  instruction,  the  discipline  of  wisdom. 
The  instructions  are  in  justice,  judgment  and  equity  and 
they  give  subtilty  to  the  simple.  The  word  **subtilty" 
means  prudence;    the  word  "simple"  has  the  meaning  of 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  11 

"guileless.'*  Solomon  was  a  young  man  when  the  Lord 
answered  his  prayer  for  a  wise  and  understanding  heart,  and 
in  these  proverbs  given  to  him  he  received  "knowledge  and 
discretion"  (though tfulness).  Thus  by  the  Word  of  God 
comes  wisdom  and  that  produceth  understanding  and  a  moral 
character  in  the  man  who  trusteth  in  the  Lord  and  is  obedient 
to  Him.  To  hear  marks  the  vnse  man,  and  hearing  will 
increase  learning,  learning  will  give  understanding  so  that 
proverbs  can  be  understood  and  also  the  interpretation. 
The  latter  word  is  only  used  once  more  in  the  Old  Testament. 
It  has  the  meaning  of  "satire."  The  w^ords  of  the  wise  and 
their  dark  sayings  (riddles)  are  the  words  of  the  wise  men  of 
this  world,  the  philosophers.  The  meaning  is  not  that  these 
wise  men  were  the  instructors  of  the  young  monarch,  but 
that  the  divinely  given  proverbs  rightly  understood  would 
protect  him  from  accepting  the  foolish  things  of  human 
wisdom,  of  philosophy.  "This  verse  (6)  intimates  that  the 
aim  of  the  Book  is  to  confer  an  initiation  which  will  make 
the  possessor  free  of  all  the  mysteries  of  the  Wise."* 

Verse  7  contains  the  keynote  to  the  entire  book.  (Seeix:10; 
Eccles.  xii:13;  Job  xxviii:28;  Psalm  cxi:10.)  The  word  "fear" 
means  a  godly  fear,  reverence.  This  fear  of  the  Lord  is 
mentioned  fourteen  times  in  Proverbs.  This  child- 
like reverence,  so  sadly  lacking  among  the  young  of  our 
day,  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge;  there  is  no  true  know- 
ledge apart  from  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  It  means  to  acknow- 
ledge the  Lord,  adore  and  w^orship  Him,  bow  in  faith  to 
His  revelation  and  put  it  above  everything  else.  The  foolish 
despise  wisdom  and  instruction,  they  follow  the  philos- 
ophies of  this  world.  To  acknowledge  the  Lord  to  rever- 
ence and  fear  Him  is  thus  written  over  the  portal  of  the 
house  of  wisdom. 

2.  Warning  against  Evil  Companions  and  Coveteousness: 
Verses  8-19.  The  practical  instructions  begin  with  an 
exhortation  of  obedience  to  the  father  and  mother.  "My 
son"  is  the  address  of  the  Lord  to  Solomon,  who  thus  ack- 


*T.  T.  Perowne. 


n  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

knowledges  him  as  His  child.  Obedience  to  parents  is  not 
only  commanded  in  the  law  dispensation;  it  is  as  prominent 
in  the  dispensation  of  grace,  as  we  learn  from  Ephesians 
vi:l  and  Colossians  iii:20.  One  of  the  marks  of  the  last 
days  among  those  who  profess  Christianity,  who  have 
the  form  of  Godliness  but  have  not  the  power  of  it,  is  "dis- 
obedience to  parents"  (2  Timothy  iii).  Such  disobedience, 
so  prominent  to-day  among  professing  Christians,  is  coupled 
with  disobedience  to  God  and  rejection  of  His  Word.  Much 
of  the  ungodliness  to  day  has  its  source  in  this  disobedience. 
This  is  followed  by  warning  against  wicked  associates, 
those  who  are  lawless  and  desperate  men,  thieves  and 
murderers,  who  pass  through  the  country  greedy  for  gain. 
Solomon  is  exhorted  not  to  walk  in  the  way  with  them. 
The  one  who  fears  the  Lord  walks  in  separation  and  keeps 
away  from  the  paths  of  the  wicked.  Verse  16  is  quoted  by 
Paul  in  the  third  chapter  of  Romans.  There  is  a  striking 
resemblance  of  this  passage  to  Psalm  x  in  which  we  have 
a  description  of  the  wicked,  prophetically  indicating  the 
man  of  sin.     (See  annotations  on  that  Psalm.) 

3.  The  Appeal  of  Wisdom:  Verses  20-33.  Wisdom  now 
speaks  and  wisdom  in  this  first  section  of  Proverbs  is  a 
person,  a  Divine  person.  The  eighth  chapter  gives  us  a 
wonderful  vision  of  that  Person,  the  Son  of  God,  who  is 
the  Wisdom.  First  stands  the  call  of  Wisdom.  The  call 
may  be  answered  or  rejected.  Wisdom  promises  if  the 
call  is  obeyed,  "Behold,  I  will  pour  my  Spirit  unto  you,  I 
will  make  known  my  words  unto  you."  But  if  the  call  is 
refused  the  consequences  will  be  disastrous.  The  appeal 
of  Wisdom  closes  with  a  precious  promise. 

"But  whoso  hearkeneth  unto  me  shall  dwell  safely 
And  shall  be  quiet  from  fear  of   evil." 

This  appeal  of  wisdom,  the  call,  the  promise,  the  refusal 
and  the  calamity  of  the  refusal  to  listen  to  Him  who  speaks 
furnishes  an  excellent  theme  for  preaching  the  Gospel  to 
the  unsaved. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  13 

CHAPTER  II. 

1.  The  Pursuit  of  Wisdom  and  its  Results.     1-9. 

2.  Preservation  from  the    Evil    Man  and   the    Strange    Woman. 

10-19. 

S.     The  Path  of  the  Righteous.     20-22. 

1.  The  Pursuit  of  Wisdom  and  its  Results:  Verses  1-9. 

This  second  chapter  of  Divine  Instructions  begins  with  an 
exhortation  to  pursue  after  wisdom.  The  sayings  of  Wis- 
dom, that  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  must  be  received,  laid  up, 
the  ear  must  incline  to  hear  them,  the  heart  must  be  applied 
to  understanding.  In  verse  3  mention  is  made  of  prayer. 
There  must  be  crying  after  knowledge  and  for  understand- 
ing and  that  must  be  followed  by  seeking  and  searching. 
If  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  then  the  fear  of  the  Lord 
is  one's  portion  as  well  as  the  knowledge  of  God.  These  are 
excellent  instructions  for  the  study  of  the  Word  of  God. 
If  followed  then  the  Lord  will  give  Wisdom  (James  i:5). 
He  layeth  up  sound  Wisdom  for  the  righteous.  He  Him- 
self is  the  Wisdom  and  in  Him  are  laid  up  all  the  treasures 
of  Wisdom  and  knowledge  (Colossians  ii:3).  He  also  is  a 
shield  (the  better  word  for  buckler)  to  them  that  walk  up- 
rightly, and  the  way  of  His  Saints  is  preserved  by  Him. 

2.  Preservation  from  the  Envious  Man  and  the  Strange 
Woman:  Verses  10-19.  When  wisdom  entereth  the  heart 
and  the  soul  rejoiceth  in  true  knowledge,  what  blessed 
consequences  will  follow!  There  is  preservation  and  deliv- 
erance. The  way  of  the  evil  man,  the  proud,  the  ungodly 
and  their  crooked  ways  hold  out  no  attraction  to  those  who 
love  and  seek  wisdom.  Then  for  the  first  time  the  strange 
woman,  the  foreign  woman  is  mentioned.  While  a  pros- 
titute is  meant,  the  warning  to  Solomon  was  to  beware  of 
the  allurement  of  those  who  were  outside  of  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel,  the  heathen  Cannanitish  cults  in  which 
prostitution  played  such  a  prominent  part.  If  we  look  on 
these  instructions  as  given  to  a  young  man,  we  see  the 
temptations  outlined  which  are  peculiar  to  the  young — dis- 
obedience to  parents,  evil  companions  and  the  lust  of  the  flesh. 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

3.  The  Path  of  the  Righteous:  Verses  20-22.    He  who 

ordereth  his  conduct  according  to  Divine  instruction  will 
walk  in  the  way  of  the  good  and  keep  the  paths  of  the  right- 
eous, dwelling  in  the  land  of  promise  while  the  wicked  have 
no  such  hope. 

CHAPTER  in. 

1.  The  Call  and  Promise  of  Wisdom.     1-10. 

2.  Happy  is  the  Man  that  Findeth  Wisdom.     11-20. 

3.  Promise  and  Instruction.     21-35. 

1.  The  Call  and  Promise  of  Wisdom:  Verses  1-10.    The 

call  to  obedience  is  followed  by  promise.  The  promise  is 
like  all  the  promises  to  an  earthly  people  "for  length  of  days 
and  long  life'*.  Here  are  some  blessed  exhortations  loved 
and  cherished  by  all  His  people  (Verses  5-7).  How  happier, 
and  more  fruitful  the  children  of  God  would  be  if  they 
obeyed  constantly  this  instruction:  "In  all  thy  ways  ack- 
nowledge Him  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths." 

2.  Happy  is  the  Man  that  findeth  Wisdom.  Verses  11-20. 
Verses  11-12  are  quoted  in  Hebrews  xii.  The  man  who 
findeth  wisdom,  that  is  who  knows  the  Lord,  is  happy.  If 
we  look  upon  wisdom  as  personified  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
we  can  read  "His  ways  are  pleasantness,  and  all  His  paths 
are  peace.  He  is  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  lay  hold  on  Him, 
and  happy  is  every  one  that  retaineth  Him"  (17-18). 

3.  Promise  and  Instruction.  Verses  21-34.  The  words 
of  the  Lord  kept  are  life  to  the  soul,  grace  to  the  neck;  they 
insure  safety;  they  protect  and  keep  by  day  and  by  night. 
Each  verse  has  a  blessed  meaning.  This  chapter  ends  with 
the  promise  that  the  wise  shall  inherit  glory  while  the  pro- 
motion of  fools  will  be  shame. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  Solomon's  Training.     1-9. 

2.  Hear,  O  my  Son.     Receive  my  Sayings.     10-19, 

3.  My  Son,  Attend  to  my  Words.     20-27. 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  15 

1.  Solomon's  Training:  Verses  1-9.  This  passage  shows 
the  early  training  which  Solomon  received  and  he  passeth 
on  the  instructions.  It  is  said  that  these  verses  formed  a 
model  for  many  Puritan  homes  in  England  and  the  Scot- 
land of  the  covenant.  He  was  the  beloved  one,  his  father's 
true  son.  Note  the  different  exhortation,  about  wisdom: 
Forget  it  not;  forsake  her  not;  love  her;  exalt  her.  Then 
the  promises:  She  shall  preserve  thee;  she  shall  keep  thee; 
she  shall  promote  thee;  she  gives  honor;  an  ornament  of 
grace  for  the  head  and  a  crown  of  glory.  If  we  take  wis- 
dom and  make  it  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  Word, 
what  blessed  food  for  the  soul  w^e  will  enjoy! 

2.  Hear,  O  my  Son.  Receive  my  Sayings:  Verses  10-19. 
Here  we  find  instructions  for  Solomon  and  all  the  godly 
w^ith  the  corresponding  promises.  Then  there  is  the  warn- 
ing concerning  the  path  of  the  wicked  and  a  contrast  be- 
tween the  way  of  the  righteous  and  the  way  of  the  wicked. 

"But  the  way  of  the  righteous  is  as  the  dawn  of  light 
That  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day." 

This  is  a  blessed  statement.  As  soon  as  we  accept  the 
true  wisdom,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  v>  e  enter  upon  a  way 
which  faceth  the  east,  the  sunrise.  The  light  of  the  coming 
dawn  illumines  that  path,  and  at  some  time  the  perfect  day 
will  break  when  all  shadows  flee  away. 

3.  My  Son,  attend  to  my  Words.  Verses  20-27.  Instruc- 
tions to  receive  and  to  obey  the  words  of  wisdom  are  the 
contents  of  this  address.  The  eye  is  never  to  be  taken  off 
from  the  words  of  the  Lord;  they  are  to  be  kept  in  the  midst 
of  the  heart.  How  important  to  listen  to  such  counsel, 
even  for  us,  His  children: 

"Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence; 
For  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life." 

CHAPTER  V. 

1.     Shun  the  Strange  Woman  and  Sinful  Passion.     1-14. 
^.    The  Life  of  Chastity.     15-23. 


16  TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

1.  Shiin  the  Strange  Woman  and  Sinful  Lust.  Verses  1-14. 

It  is  a  warning  against  literal  fornication  and  the  accom- 
panying spiritual  fornication,  turning  away  from  the  wor- 
ship of  Jehovah  and  worshipping  idols.  The  dreadful 
results  of  sinful  lust  are  vividly  described.  How  many  a 
young  man  has  found  out  the  truth  as  given  in  these  words 
in  his  licentious  life. 

"And  thou  mourn  at  thy  latter  end 

When  thy  flesh  and  thy  body  are  consumed." 

Solomon  received  these  repeated  warnings,  yet  after 
great  prosperity  and  honor  came  to  him,  and  his  glory 
spread  in  every  direction,  like  many  a  rich  and  successful 
man  of  today,  these  warnings  were  not  heeded  and  he  had 
to  experience  in  his  own  life  tlie  truths  of  these  words  he 
had  penned  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 

2.  The  Life  of  Chastity.  Verses  15-23.  Here  we  have  a 
sweet  exhortation  and  picture  of  marital  fidelity  and  a 
picture  of  true  love  in  family  life.  How  the  Christian 
family  should  manifest  something  greater  than  this  is 
revealed  in  Ephesians  v. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

1.  The  Surety.     1-5. 

2.  The  Sluggard.     6-11. 

3.  The  Naughty,  Good-for-nothing  Person.     12-19. 

4.  The  Strange  Woman.     20-35. 

1.  The  Surety:  Verses  1-5.  These  are  instructions  con- 
cerning contracts,  in  being  surety  for  a  neighbor  and  the 
danger  connected  with  it. 

2.  The  Sluggard.  Verses  6-11.  The  sluggard  is  com- 
manded to  go  to  the  ant  for  a  lesson.  (See  also  xxx:25.)  The 
ant  is  a  marvellous  little  creature.  That  which  modern 
science  has  found  out  by  close  observation  of  the  life  of 
this  little  insect  is  here  tersely  stated  by  the  words  of  the 
Lord,  the  Creator.  They  swarm  in  the  woods  and  in  the 
fields;  they  work  day  and  night;  they  capture,  train  and 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  17 

nourish  aphides,  which  they  use  as  a  kind  of  slave.  They 
build  vast  and  symmetrical  mounds,  which  they  use  as 
homes  and  barns,  and  which  are,  relatively  to  the  size  of 
the  tiny  builders,  three  times  larger  than  the  Egyptian 
pyramids.  They  march  and  labor  in  unison,  have  their 
own  wars,  nourish  their  sick,  and  ail  is  done  without  a  chief, 
an  overseer  or  a  ruler.  Yet  man  with  a  higher  intelligence 
and  a  higher  work  to  do  can  be  a  sluggard. 

3.  The  Naughty,  Good-for-jxothing  Person.  The  descrip- 
tion of  the  sluggard  is  followed  by  that  of  a  worthless  person. 
It  is  a  son  of  Belial  (the  term  used  in  the  Hebrew)  whose 
picture  is  drawn.  He  is  a  naughty  person,  a  good-for- 
nothing,  a  man  of  iniquity;  he  has  a  lying  mouth.  A 
minute  description  of  his  way  and  work  is  given;  every- 
where he  makes  mischief  and  causeth  division.  But  sud- 
denly there  comes  the  calamity  upon  him.  He  shall  be 
broken  and  that  vvithout  remedy.  Such  is  the  way  of  the 
man  who  despise th  wisdom,  follows  his  old  nature  and 
plunges  ultimately  into  the  outer  darkness.  Finally  there 
will  yet  appear  "the  man  of  sin,'*  that  wicked  one,  in  w^hom 
all  these  evils  will  culminate  and  he  shall  suddenly  be  broken 
without  remedy.  (See  Daniel  xi:45.)  We  do  well  to  read 
carefully  the  six  things  which  the  Lord  hateth  (16-19). 

The  Strange  Woman:  Verses  20-35.  The  words  of  the 
Lord,  the  commandment  and  the  law  as  stated  here,  are 
of  unspeakably  great  importance.  They  are  to  be  in  the 
heart  and  about  the  neck. 

"When  thou  walkest,  it  shall  lead  thee; 
When  thou  sleepest,  it  shall  watch  over  thee; 
And  when  thou  wakest,  it  shall  talk  with  thee." 

They  are  a  lamp  and  a  light;  they  are  the  way  of  life. 
Then  follows  another  description  of  the  evil  woman,  a 
warning  not  to  lust  after  her  beauty  nor  to  be  taken  by 
her  eyelids.  These  oriental  women  painted  their  faces; 
by  plucking  their  eyebrows  they  made  them  almond-shaped. 
Alas!  that  in  the  society  of  the  Twentieth  Century  the 
women  and  girls  of  a  so-called  Christian  civilization  should 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

do  the  same  thing,  and  we  fear,  for  the  same  purpose  as 
the  whorish  woman  described  in  this  chapter. 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

1.  The  Description  of  the  Strange  Woman  continued: 
Verses  1-27.  The  entire  chapter  is  a  continuation  of  the 
strange  woman  and  the  warning  against  her.  The  Word 
and  the  Law  of  the  Lord  will  keep  the  obedient  son  from  her. 
If  Solomon  had  obeyed  the  Word  of  God,  not  to  multiply 
wives  (Deut.  xvii:17)  his  end  would  not  have  been  spent 
in  the  degrading  fellowship  with  the  harlots  of  other  nations. 
The  description  is  very  graphic.  What  the  word  pictures 
is  as  prominent  in  the  great  centers  of  Christendom  as  it 
was  thousands  of  years  ago  in  Babylon  and  Egypt.  And 
so  it  is  still  true: 

"She  hath  cast  down  many  wounded; 
Yea,  many  strong  men  have  been  slain  by  her. 
Her  house  is  the  way  to  hell, 
Going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death." 

But  think  of  Solomon  after  having  received  these  in- 
spired descriptions  and  warnings,  that  he  should  have  been 
forgetful  of  them  all. 

CHAPTER  Vin. 

1.  The  Call  and  Appeal  of  Wisdom.     1-11. 

2.  What  Wisdom  is  and  what  Wisdom  Gives.     12-21. 

3.  Wisdom;  the  Person,  who  He  is.     22-31. 

4.  The  Renewed  Appeal.     32-36. 

1.  The  Call  and  Appeal  of  Wisdom:  Verses  1-lL  This 
is  one  of  the  most  interesting  chapters  in  the  entire  book. 
It  begins  with  a  call  and  appeal  of  wisdom,  much  like  the 
call  and  appeal  of  the  first  chapter.  If  wisdom  calls,  has 
a  voice,  then  wisdom  must  also  be  a  person.  WTio  personi- 
fied wisdom  is  we  learn  most  blessedly  in  this  chapter.  Wis- 
dom calls  to  the  sons  of  men;  wisdom  speaks  of  plain  and 
excellent  things;  she  speaks  the  truth;  her  words  are  the 
words  of  righteousness;  wisdom  is  better  than  rubies. 


TEE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  19 

2.  What  Wisdom  is  and  what  Wisdom  Gives:  Verses  12-21. 

This  section  may  well  be  looked  upon  as  an  introduction 
to  the  sublime  revelation  in  verses  22-31.  Wisdom  is  a 
person  and  what  wisdom  gives,  the  power  wisdom  has, 
makes  it  clear  that  wisdom  is  a  divine  person.  Kings  and 
princes  rule  by  that  person,  as  well  as  the  nobles  and  judges 
of  the  earth.  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  by  this 
wisdom.     And  that  person  says: 

I  love  them  that  love  Me 

And  those  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me. 

This  wisdom  has  riches  and  honor  to  bestow;  has  dur- 
able riches  and  righteousness;  the  fruit  of  it  is  better  than 
fine  gold;  those  that  love  the  wisdom  Vvill  receive  an  inherit- 
ance.    In  the  next  place  we  hear  who  that  person  is. 

3.  Wisdom,  the  Person;  V/ho  Ee  is:  Verses  22-31.  The 
Wisdom  is  the  Son  of  God.  The  personification  of  Wisdom 
is  found  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This 
wonderful  passage  is  a  great  prelude  to  the  incarnation 
and  the  subsequent  redemption  work  of  the  Son  of  God. 
Here  Solomon  beheld  the  highest  of  all;  he  had  a  vision  of 
the  Messiah  of  Israel,  the  Son  of  David,  whose  wisdom, 
peace  and  kingdom  of  peace  and  glory  he  but  faintly  for- 
shadov/ed.  The  critical  school  must  of  course  deny  this 
application  to  our  Lord.  "The  passage  played  a  great 
role  in  subsequent  thought,  for  it  lies  at  the  back  of  much 
of  the  speculation  of  Philo,  and  at  a  subsequent  period  was 
greatly  employed  by  Christian  theologians  in  support  of 
their  doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ  through  their  iden- 
tification of  Wisdom  in  this  passage  with  the  Logos  (the 
Word)  of  the  fourth  Gospel'*  (New  Century  Bible). 

Wisdom  was  possessed  by  the  Lord  in  the  beginning  of 
His  ways,  before  His  works  of  old.  But  that  is  the  begin- 
ning without  a  beginning.  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word; 
and  because  the  Word,  the  Son  of  God,  is  God,  He  like 
God  has  no  beginning.  The  word  "possessed"  has  also 
the  meaning  of  "formed'*.  "This  word  has  been  a  battle- 
ground of  controversy  since  the  days  of  the  Arian  heresy. 


20  TEE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

But  it  is  well  to  remember  that,  all  theological  questions 
apart,  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  word,  whatever 
rendering  of  it  we  adopt,  as  indicating  that  Wisdom  ever 
had  a  beginning,  or  was  ever  properly  speaking  created. 
Wisdom  is  inseparable  from  any  worthy  conception  of 
Him  who  is  **the  only  wise  God"  (1  Tim.  i:17),  and  there- 
fore is  like  Him  "from  everlasting  to  everlasting"  (Perowne). 
Wisdom,  the  Son  of  God,  was  always  Vv  ith  God  from  ever- 
lasting. Before  there  ever  was  anything  created,  before 
the  mountains  were  settled,  or  even  the  earth  had  been 
made.  He  was.  And  when  creation  began  He  was  there. 
He,  the  Son,  was  by  Him,  as  one  brought  up  with  Him. 
From  tjjie  greater  revelation  in  the  New  Testament  we 
learn  that  all  things  were  created  not  only  for  Him,  but 
also  by  Him  (Colossians  i:20).  Wisdom  speaks:  "And  I 
was  continually  His  delight.  Rejoicing  always  before  Him." 
This  can  only  be  true  of  God  the  Son.  And  furthermore 
He  says:  "Rejoicing  in  the  habitable  part  of  his  earth;  and 
my  delight  was  with  the  sons  of  men."  His  delight  was 
so  great,  that  He  laid  by  His  glory,  and  left  His  eternal 
dwelling  place  to  become  man  and  redeem  man  by  the 
death  of  the  cross.* 

4.  The  Renewed  Appeal:  Verses  32-36.  Then  follows 
the  renewed  appeal.  Wisdom  says,  "Whosoever  findeth 
me  findeth  life."  How  true  of  our  Lord;  in  Him  we  find 
and  have  life.     Note  the  two  "Blessed"  in  this  paragraph. 

*"It  is  interesting  to  observe  that  this  glimpse,  this  adumbration 
of  a  great  truth,  which  was  only  to  become  fully  clear  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord,  was  advanced  a  little  in  clearness  and  completeness  by  a 
book  which  is  not  considered  to  be  inspired,  the  so-called  Book  of 
Wisdom,  in  a  passage  which  must  be  quoted:  "For  she  (i.  e..  Wisdom) 
is  a  breath  of  the  power  of  God,  and  a  pure  influence  flowing  from  the 
glory  of  the  Almighty;  therefore  can  no  defiled  thing  fall  into  her.  For 
she  is  the  brightness  of  the  everlasting  light,  the  unspotted  mirror  of 
the  power  of  God  and  the  image  of  His  goodness.  And  being  but  one, 
she  can  do  all  things;  and  remaining  in  herself,  she  raaketh  all  things 
new;  and  in  all  ages  entering  into  holy  souls,  she  maketh  them  friends 
of  God  and  prophets.  For  God  loveth  none  but  him  that  dwelleth 
with  Wisdom.  For  she  is  more  beautiful  than  the  sun,  and  above  all 
the  order  of  stars;  being  compared  with  the  light,  she  is  found  before  it.'*^ 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  21 

CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  The  Invitation  of  Wisdom.     1-12. 

2.  The  Contrast  with  Folly.     13-18. 

1  The  Invitation  of  Wisdom:  Verses  1-12.  The  first 
section  of  Proverbs  cioseth  with  a  contrast  of  Wisdom  and 
Folly,  both  personified.  The  one,  our  Lord,  the  other 
under  the  symbol  of  a  foolish  woman.  Wisdom  sends 
forth  her  invitation,  after  her  house  is  built  and  the  feast 
is  spread.  It  reminds  us  of  the  parable  of  the  great  supper 
(Luke  xiv).  Here  too  is  the  gracious  invitation,  "Come, 
eat  of  my  bread  and  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled.'* 

2  The  Contrast  with  folly:  Verses  13-18.  Folly  too  has 
her  house  and  sitteth  in  the  door  on  a  seat  in  the  high  places 
of  the  city  to  call  to  her  victims.  She  invites  to  the  stolen 
waters,  so  sweet  to  the  natural  man,  to  eat  bread  in  secret 
places,  equally  pleasant.  But  what  is  the  end?  "The 
dead  are  there;  .  .  .  her  guests  are  in  the  depths  of  hell.'* 
The  foolish  woman  is  the  world  with  its  lusts. 

n     THE  PROVERBS  OF  SOLOMON.     Chapter  x-xix:19. 

Beginning  with  the  tenth  chapter  we  have  the  collection 
of  proverbs  given  by  inspiration  through  Solomon.  In 
this  section  the  personal  address,  "My  son,"  and  the  personal 
exhortations  are  missing.  It  will  be  noticed  that  each 
verse  in  this  section  contains  a  proverb,  consisting  each 
of  two  lines,  mostly  of  an  antithetic  character,  except  xix:7, 
w^hich  has  three  lines  instead  of  two  (a  tristich). 

It  is  impossible  to  give  a  detailed  analysis  of  these  chap- 
ters, nor  can  we  take  up  each  proverb  separately  for  med- 
itation. This  must  be  left  to  each  reader.  By  comparing 
Scripture  with  Scripture,  and  a  prayerful  study  of  these 
terse  sayings,  the  heavenly  wisdom  given  in  these  chapters 
can  readily  be  found.  There  is  no  end  to  practical  appli- 
cation. Yet  even  in  these  chapters  a  certain  order  is  main- 
tained. The  contrast  in  each  chapter  is  between  the  Right- 
eous and  the  Wicked,  between  Right  and  Wrong. 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

CHAPTER  X. 
THE  GODLY  AND  THE  UNGODLY  IN  LIFE  AND  CONDUCT. 

The  opening  proverbs  are  concerning  treasures,  earthly- 
substance.  What  an  important  sentence,  * 'Treasures  of 
wickedness  profit  nothing!'*  Throughout  these  proverbs 
there  are  the  warnings  concerning  getting  riches,  or  as  it 
is  expressed  in  a  modern  phrase  "getting  rich  quick'*  (see 
xxviii:20),  and  the  dangers  connected  with  it. 

"These  grave  warnings  of  Wisdom  are  especially  needed  at  the 
present  time  in  England  and  America,  when  the  undisguised  and  the 
unrestrained  pursuit  of  riches  has  become  more  and  more  recognized 
as  the  legitimate  end  of  life,  so  that  few  people  feel  any  shame  in 
admitting  that  this  is  their  aim;  and  the  clear  unimpassioned  state- 
ments of  the  result,  which  always  follows  on  the  unhallowed  passion 
receive  daily  confirmation  from  the  occasional  revelations  of  our 
domestic,  our  commercial  and  our  criminal  life.  He  that  is  greedy 
of  gain,  we  are  told,  troubleth  his  own  house.  An  inheritance  may  be 
gotten  hastily  at  the  beginning,  but  the  end  thereof  shall  not  be 
blessed.  A  faithful  man  shall  abound  with  blessings,  but  he  that 
maketh  haste  to  be  rich  (and  consequently  cannot  by  any  possibility 
be  faithful)  shall  not  be  unpunished.  He  that  hath  an  evil  eye  hasteth 
after  riches,  and  knoweth  not  that  want  shall  come  upon  him.  'Weary 
not  thyself,'  therefore,  it  is  said,  *to  be  rich;'  which,  though  it  may  be 
the  dictate  of  thine  own  wisdom,  is  really  unmixed  folly,  burdened 
with  a  load  of  calamity  for  the  unfortunate  seeker,  for  his  house,  and 
for  all  those  who  are  in  any  way  dependent  upon  him."* 

There  are  also  warnings  against  being  slack,  which  maketh 
poor,  while  the  hand  of  the  diligent,  he  that  is  up  and  doing, 
maketh  rich.  We  find  promises  and  assurance  for  the 
godly  like  these:  "Righteousness  delivereth  from  death  .  .  . 
the  Lord  will  not  suffer  the  righteous,  the  soul  of  the  right- 
eous to  famish  .  .  .  blessings  are  upon  the  head  of  the 
just   .    .   .  the  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed.'* 

The  walk  and  conduct  of  the  two  classes  are  contrasted, 
especially  in  relation  to  the  mouth  and  lips.  The  walk 
of  the  righteous  is  the  sure  walk;  (9)  the  mouth  of  the 
righteous  is  a  well  of  life,  it  is  a  fountain  for  good.    In  this 


*Expositor's  Bible. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  23 

proverb  we  are  reminded  of  John  iv:10  and  vii:38,  the 
believer  indwelt  by  the  Holy  Spirit  welling  forth  waters  of 
life.  While  violence  covers  the  mouth  of  the  wicked  and 
hatred  does  nothing  but  stir  up  strife,  love,  the  true  love 
in  the  heart  of  the  just  covereth  all  transgressions.  (See 
1  Peter  iv:8  and  James  v:20.)  Whoever  has  understanding 
his  lips  speak  T;^dsdom.  In  all  these  proverbs  there  is  some- 
thing to  be  learned  in  a  practical  way  and  many  blessed 
lessons  are  written  here  for  all  who  desire  to  walk  right- 
eously, godly  and  soberly  in  this  evil  age.  Here  is  a  test, 
for  instance,  "He  is  in  the  way  of  life  that  heedeth  cor- 
rection" (17,  corrected  translation).  But  as  soon  as  one 
forsaketh  reproof  he  errs.  How  well  it  would  be  if  children 
of  God  would  daily  consider  verse  19.  "In  the  multitude 
of  words  there  wanteth  not  sin,  but  he  that  refraineth  his 
lips  is  wise.*'  The  fear  of  the  wicked,  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
the  hope  of  the  righteous  and  the  expectations  of  the  wicked 
are  furthermore  contrasted  in  this  chapter. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

THE  CONTRAST  CONTINUED, 

The  continued  contrast  in  this  chapter  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked  contains  many  precious  gems, 
sweet  to  faith  and  wholesome  for  instruction.  In  the 
second  verse  there  is  a  warning  as  to  pride.  Pride  and 
shame  are  vitally  linked  together,  as  is  lowliness  and  wisdom. 
Lowliness  therefore  is  true  wisdom.  A  Rabbinical  comment 
on  this  passage  says,  "Lowly  souls  are  filled  with  wisdom 
as  the  lowly  places  are  filled  with  water."  Again  riches  are 
mentioned.  They  profit  nothing  in  the  day  of  wrath. 
(See  Zephaniah  i.)  But  righteousness  delivereth  from 
death  (verse  4).  What  wisdom  there  is  in  verse  8, 
"The  righteous  is  delivered  out  of  trouble,  but  the  wicked 
cometh  in  his  stead."  Even  so  will  it  be  when  the  Lord 
comes  and  gives  rest  and  deliverance  to  His  own  and  trouble 
and  wrath  to  the  wicked  (2  Thess.  i).  Verse  19  has  been 
rendered : 


24  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

**He  that  is  steadfast  in  righteousness  is  so  unto  life. 
And  he  that  pursueth  evil  doeth  so  unto  his  own  death." 

The  delight  of  the  Lord,  declares  the  next  proverb,  is 
in  the  way  of  the  upright,  who  remain  steadfast  in  right- 
eousness. 

In  verse  30  we  read  that  the  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a 
tree  of  Hfe,  not  the  righteous  is  a  tree  of  life,  but  the  fruit 
of  the  righteous,  which  means  that  he  gives  forth  blessing 
and  life  to  others,  and  that  is  here  expressed  iu  one  sentence, 
*'and  he  that  winneth  souls  is  wise."    (See  Daniel  xii:3.) 

CHAPTER  XII. 
THE  CONTRAST  IN  RELATION  TO  VARIOUS  CONDITIONS. 

In  these  proverbs  we  have  the  righteous  mentioned,  his 
thoughts,  his  words,  his  domestic  relationship,  his  attitude 
toward  animal  creation  (verse  10);  his  diligence;  ail  is  con- 
trasted with  the  wicked  in  these  beautiful  antithetic  ex- 
pressions of  wisdom.  The  thoughts  of  the  righteous  are 
right  (5),  because  his  heart  is  right;  his  vrords  bring  deliver- 
ance (6);  in  speaking  truth  he  showeth  forth  righteousness 
(17);  his  tongue  is  health  (18);  the  lip  which  uttereth  truth 
shall  be  established  for  ever  (19);  he  knows  nothing  of 
lying  lips,  but  dealing  truly  he  is  the  Lord's  delight  (22). 
All  is  summed  up  in  one  statement,  with  which  the  chapter 
close th:  *Tn  the  way  of  righteousness  there  is  life;  in  the 
pathway  thereof  there  is  no  death."  Llappy  are  we  if  we 
know  this  way,  which  is  Christ  Himself,  and  if  we  follow  Him. 
^^erse  21  speaks  of  the  blessing  of  the  righteous,  *  There 
shall  no  evil  happen  to  the  just,"  that  is,  all  things  must 
work  together  for  good. 

CHAPTER  Xm. 
THE  CONTRAST:  ADVANTAGE  AND  DISADVANTAGE. 

The  contrast  in  Proverbs  concerning  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked  is  continued  in  this  chapter,  showing  mostly  the 
advantage  of  the  righteous,  illustrating  a  statement  found 
in  the  prophet  Isaiah:  "Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  that  it  shall 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  25 

be  well  with  him,  for  they  shall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  doings'* 
(Isaiah  iii:10).  Then  the  contrast:  "Woe  unto  the  wicked! 
It  shall  be  ill  with  him,  for  the  reward  of  his  hands  shall  be 
given  him"  (verse  11).  The  righteous  eats  good  by  the 
fruit  of  his  mouth;  the  trangressor  receives  violence. 
There  is  fatness  for  the  soul  of  the  diligent  and  nothing  for 
the  soul  of  the  sluggard.  Righteousness  keepeth;  wicked- 
ness overthrows.  While  the  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth, 
the  lamp  of  the  wicked  shall  be  put  out.  These  are  some 
of  the  contrasts. 

In  verse  7  is  a  statement  which  may  be  applied  to  our 
Lord:  "There  is  that  maketh  himself  poor,  yet  hath  great 
riches."  He  who  has  all  the  riches  made  Himself  poor 
for  our  sake. 

Then  there  is  warning  against  pride.  In  fact  the  pro- 
verbs abound  in  these  warnings.  *'By  pride  cometh  con- 
tention" (verse  10).  To  the  proud  who  refuseth  correction 
cometh  poverty  and  shame  (verse  18). 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
THE  WISE  AND  THE  FOOLISH:  THE  RICH  AND  THE  POOR. 

The  contrast  now  concerns  the  wise  and  the  foolish,  the 
rich  and  the  poor.  Let  us  see  some  of  these  contrasts. 
*Tn  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  a  rod  of  pride,  but  the  lips 
of  the  wise  shall  preserve  them"  (verse  3).  The  foolish 
shoots  forth  his  foolishness  like  a  branch.  Separation 
from  the  foolish  man  is  commanded  in  the  seventh  verse 
The  wise  cannot  have  fellowship  with  the  foolish,  as  the 
believer  is  not  to  be  yoked  to  the  unbeliever.  Fools  make 
a  mock  at  sin  (verse  9).  The  word  "sin"  in  the  original 
means  "trespass  offering."  That  is  exactly  what  the  foolish 
man  does,  including  the  religious  fool;  he  denies  both  sin 
and  the  blessed  provision  God  has  made  to  deliver  from  the 
guilt  and  power  of  sin.  But  among  the  righteous,  says  the 
next  line,  there  is  favor  (acceptance).  Because  the  right- 
eous owns  himself  a  sinner,  judgeth  himself  and  accepts 
God's  redemption  through  the  one  sacrifice. 


26  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

How  true  it  is  "the  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness, 
and  a  stranger  does  not  intermeddle  with  its  joy"  (verse  10). 
We  can  tell  our  troubles  and  sorrows  to  others,  but  the 
bitterness  of  the  heart  cannot  be  revealed,  but  it  is  knoTvn 
to  One  who  is  touched  with  our  sorrows  and  the  bitter- 
ness of  life  through  which  we  pass,  for  He  Himself  passed 
through  it  also. 

Here  is  another  deep  saying,  which  shows  that  behind 
this  wisdom  uttered  by  the  wise  king,  there  is  another  who 
knows  all  what  is  going  on  in  human  life  and  in  the  heart. 
"Even  in  laughter  the  heart  is  sorrowful,  and  the  end  of 
that  mirth  is  heaviness"  (verse  13).  How  often  the  sor- 
rowful, the  downcast  covers  all  with  forced  laughter  and 
no  one  suspects  that  underneath  the  mirth  there  is  heavi- 
ness. This  is  true  of  the  children  of  the  world,  the  foolish 
who  reject  true  wisdom  and  know  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Of  the  poor  and  the  rich  we  read  that  the  poor  is  hated; 
the  rich  has  many  friends  (verse  20).  He  that  oppresseth 
the  poor  reproacheth  His  Maker;  but  he  that  honoreth 
Him  hath  mercy  on  the  poor"  (verse  31).  To  deal  kindly 
with  the  poor  and  the  lowly  is  God-like.  The  righteous 
will  manifest  his  righteousness  in  a  practical  way  by  con- 
sidering the  poor. 

Precious  are  two  other  proverbs  in  this  chapter. 

"In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence; 
And  His  children  shall  have  a  place  of  refuge. 
The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  fountain  of  life. 
To  depart  from  the  snares  of  death" — Verses  26-27. 

CHAPTER  XV. 
THE  BETTER  THINGS. 

One  can  read  through  the  proverbs  recorded  in  this  chap- 
ter and  ask  the  question,  What  are  the  better  things.^ 

A  soft  answer  which  turneth  away  wrath  is  better  than 
grievous  words  (verse  1).  The  tongue  of  the  righteous 
which  useth  knowledge  aright  is  better  than  the  mouth 
of  fools  (verse  2).  Better  is  the  prayer  of  the  upright  than 
the  sacrifice  of  the  wicked   (verse  8).     Better  is  he  that 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  n 

foUoweth  after  righteousness  than  the  way  of  the  wicked, 
for  the  one  the  Lord  dehghts  in,  the  other  is  an  abomination 
(verse  9).  Better  is  the  heart  that  seeketh  knowledge 
than  to  feed  on  foohshness  (verse  14).  Better  is  a  httle 
with  the  fear  of  the  Lord  than  great  treasure  and  trouble 
therewith  (verse  16).  This  fits  many  in  our  own  days. 
Better  is  a  dinner  of  herbs  where  love  is,  than  a  stalled  ox 
and  hatred  therewith  (verse  17).  Better  it  is  to  be  slow 
to  anger  than  wrathful  (verse  18).  Better  is  the  plain  way 
of  the  righteous  than  the  thorny  way  of  the  slothful  (verse 
19).    Better  is  to  hear  reproof  than  to  refuse  it  (verse  32). 

Some  other  deep  sayings  are  found  in  this  chapter.  For 
instance  in  verse  11. 

"Sheol  and  destruction*  are  before  the  Lord, 
How  much  more  then  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men." 

All  is  known  to  the  Lord.  The  unseen  world  as  well  as 
the  future;  all  eternity  is  known  to  Him.  All  is  naked  and 
open  before  Him.  He  knoweth  the  hearts  of  men,  yea 
even  our  thoughts  afar  off,  before  they  ever  pass  through 
oiu-  finite  minds. 

Twice  prayer  is  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  in  verse  8 
and  29.  Not  alone  does  the  Lord  delight  in  the  prayer  of 
the  upright,  but  He  also  heareth  them.  "The  Lord  is  far 
from  the  wicked,  but  He  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  righteous.'* 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  LORD. 

The  name  Jehovah  (Lord)  appears  eleven  times  in  this 
chapter  of  proverbs.  The  Lord  has  the  final  word,  for  to 
man  belong  the  preparations  (or  plans)  of  the  heart;  but 
from  the  Lord  is  the  answer  of  the  tongue.  It  is  the  same 
thought  as  in  our  English  proverb — "Man  proposes — God 
disposes.'*  Man  loves  to  justify  himself,  his  ways  are  clean 
in  his  own  eyes;  but  the  Lord  weigheth  the  spirits;  He  is  the 
judge  of  ways  and  motives.    Our  works  are  to  be  committed 


•Destruction,  Abaddon,  used  in  Revelation  ix:ll. 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

(literal:  rolled  upon)  unto  the  Lord,  then  establishment 
and  blessing  will  follow.  It  is  strange  that  these  three 
verses  were  omitted  in  the  Septuagint  version  of  the 
Old  Testament. 

The  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  Himself,  yea,  even  the 
wicked  for  the  day  of  evil  (verse  4).  Much  error  has  been 
taught  in  connection  with  this  verse.  Some  have  taught 
that  God  made  some  wicked.  It  is  not  said  that  God 
makes  a  man  wicked,  for  "He  made  man  upright"  (Eccles. 
vii:29),  but  being  wicked  by  his  own  choice  he  comes 
under  the  irrevocable  law  which  dooms  him  to  "the  day  of 
evil,"  of  calamity  and  punishment.  By  this,  the  Apostle 
teaches  us,  even  in  its  final  and  most  aw^ul  form,  is  revealed 
not  the  arbitrary  predestination,  but  "the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God"  (Romans  ii:5-ll).* 

The  abomination  to  the  Lord  is  to  be  proud  in  heart. 
Pride,  not  only  pride  as  it  works  out  in  deeds,  but  pride  as 
nourished  in  the  heart,  seen  by  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  alone, 
is  equally  an  abomination  to  Llim.  How  much  there 
is  in  these  days!  The  second  stanza  of  this  proverb 
speaks  of  joining  hand  in  hand,  or  hand  to  hand.  It  is  the 
much  praised  "team-work,"  confederation,  alliance,  etc., 
to  do  a  big  work  and  make  a  big  name.  Much  of  this 
attempt  of  doing  "big  things"  in  the  day  of  "small  things" 
has  its  source  in  the  pride  of  the  natural  man. 

In  the  sixth  proverb  of  this  chapter  we  have  a  Gospel 
text.  The  word  mercy  is  literally  "grace."  The  word 
"purged"  is  the  word  translated  elsewhere  by  "covered" 
or  "atoned."  In  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His  work  is 
revealed  "grace  and  truth"  and  by  His  work  so  blessedly 
finished  on  the  cross  our  inquity  is  covered.  Then  comes 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  which  results  in  departing  from  evil. 

If  a  man  walks  in  righteousness,  in  true  humility,  if  he 
pleaseth  the  Lord,  then  his  enemies  will  be  silenced  and 
not  talk  against  him.     Only  too  often  the  charges  brought 


*Perowne. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  29 

against  the  children  of  God  by  the  enemies  of  truth,  are 
the  result  of  not  walking  in  the  truth. 

Comforting  to  faith  is  the  ninth  verse.  We  may  devise, 
plan,  and  often  worry  as  we  make  our  plans  but  behind  it 
stands  the  Lord  and  in  spite  of  our  failures  and  mistakes 
"He  directeth"  the  steps  of  the  righteous. 

Twice  more  the  name  of  the  Lord  is  given  in  this  chapter. 
"And  whoso  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  happy  is  he'*  (verse  ^0). 
The  only  true  happiness  is  to  know  the  Lord,  to  trust  Him 
and  to  follow  Him.  Inasmuch  as  we  may  increase  in  knowl- 
edge of  Him,  in  confidence  and  in  practical  obedience  our 
happiness  is  an  increasing  happiness.  In  the  last  verse 
we  read  that  the  disposing  of  the  lot  is  of  the  Lord.  The 
lot  was  used  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  mentioned  but 
once  in  the  New  Testament,  preceding  the  day  of  Pente- 
cost (Actsi:26). 

After  the  Holy  Spirit  came  to  guide  and  direct  no  lot  is 
needed  any  longer.  We  pass  over  the  many  other  blessed 
instructions  recorded  in  this  chapter.  Private  meditation 
and  prayer  unlocks  the  many  riches  deposited  in  them. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
DIVERSE  PROVERBS. 

Of  the  twenty-eight  proverbs  found  in  this  chapter  we 
point  out  but  a  few.  "The  fining  pot  is  for  silver  and  the 
furnace  for  gold;  but  the  Lord  trieth  the  hearts'*  (verse  3). 
Man  may  try  silver  and  gold,  but  God  only  the  hearts. 
And  He  tries  the  hearts  by  the  refining  process,  trials  and 
afflictions,  the  process  which  rests  in  His  own  hands.  (See 
Psalm  Ixvi:  10-12;  Mai.  iii:3-4;  1  Peter  i:7.) 

"He  that  covereth  a  transgression  seeketh  love,  but  he 
that  repeateth  a  matter  separateth  very  friends"  (verse  9). 
To  cover  a  transgression  does  not  mean  to  ignore  sin.  How 
he  who  has  sinned  and  is  in  transgression  is  to  be  death  with 
is  given  to  us  in  Galatians  vi:l-5.  To  act  in  the  spirit  of 
love  towards  one  who  has  sinned  is  Christ-like.  To  repeat 
the  matter,  gossip  about  it,  harp  on  the  shortcomings  and 
failure,  is  Satan-like,  for  he  is  the  accuser  of  the  brethren. 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

"A  friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is  born  for 
adversity"  (verse  17).  This  is  beautifully  illustrated  in 
the  case  of  David  and  Jonathan  (1  Sam.  xviii-xx).  And 
the  great  Friend,  the  brother  born  for  adversity,  is  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  lie  loveth  at  all  times;  His  love  is  limitless 
and  timeless.     It  is  the  love  vrhich  passeth  knowledge. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 
PROVERBS  OF  PERSONAL  INSTRUCTION. 

There  is  first  a  warning  against  separation  produced  by 
desire,  that  is  for  gratification  and  pleasure,  and  not  for  a 
righteous  purpose.  Such  a  one  becomes  an  enemy  of  true 
wisdom  and  one  who  inter meddleth  with  all  wisdom.  This 
proverb  finds  a  New  Testament  illustration  in  Alexander 
the  coppersmith,  as  well  as  Hymenaeus  and  Philetus,  and 
Diotrephes  of  whom  John  writes  in  his  epistle.  A  fool 
foams  out  his  own  folly.  This  proverb  in  verse  2  is  illus- 
trated by  many  of  the  critics  of  the  Bible.  They  have  no 
delight  in  true  understanding  but  their  own  hearts  are  laid 
bare  by  their  mad  oppositions  to  God's  Holy  Word. 

The  fool's  mouth,  his  lips,  the  talebearer  (whisperer),  and 
the  slothful  are  the  themes  of  the  proverbs  in  verses  6-9. 
Then  we  read  *'The  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower; 
the  righteous  runneth  into  it  and  is  safe"  (verse  10).  The 
Name  (Ha-Shem,  in  Hebrew)  stands  for  Jehovah  Himself. 
He  is  the  place  of  refuge,  of  shelter,  protection  and  safety 
for  all  who  in  faith  turn  to  Him.  In  Him  is  our  peace  and 
safety.  The  Hebrew  meaning  of  "is  safe"  is  "set  on  high." 
Even  so  if  we  flee  to  Him  and  become  His,  we  are  exalted 
in  Him,  seated  in  Christ  in  heavenly  jjlaces. 

Another  proverb  of  solemn  meaning  is  found  in  verse  12. 
"Before  destruction  the  heart  of  man  is  haughty,  and  before 
honor  is  humility."  Scripture  abounds  in  illustrations  of 
these  two  lines.  The  truth  stated  here  is  still  being  mani- 
fested in  the  lives  of  men  and  women.  The  only  place  of 
safety  for  God's  people  is  the  place  in  the  dust,  the  place 
of  humility. 


THE  BOOK  OF   PROVERBS  31 

"Death  and  Life  are  in  the  power  of  the  tongue;  and  they 
that  love  it  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof"  (verse  21).  The 
Epistle  of  James  (chapter  iii)  speaks  in  the  same  manner  of 
the  power  of  the  tongue  and  its  misuse.  Evil  words  will 
bring  evil  results.  But  the  tongue  speaking  the  words  of 
life  and  love,  as  given  in  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
is  a  power  for  good,  the  power  of  life — and  oh!  what  shall 
the  harvest  be  in  that  day! 

CHAPTER  XIX:1-19. 
FURTHER  PROVERBS  ON  PERSONAL  INSTRUCTION. 

One  may  be  poor,  but  walking  in  integrity,  he  is  far 
ahead  of  him  who  is  perverse  in  his  lips  and  is  a  fool.  Then 
we  find  proverbs  about  fretting  against  the  Lord;  warning 
against  false  witness  and  speaking  lies  and  other  matters. 
We  call  special  attention  to  verse  12. 

"The  King's  wrath  is  as  the  roaring  of  a  lion. 
But  his  favour  is  as  dew  upon  the  grass." 

It  may  be  applied  to  Him  who  is  The  Lamb  of  God  and 
also  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Some  day  He  will 
roar  in  His  displeasure  and  manifest  the  wrath,  so  vrell 
deserved  by  the  world.  But  even  then  His  grace  will  be 
revealed,  for  in  wrath  He  will  remember  mercy,  the  mercy 
promised  to  Israel.  "I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel;  he 
shall  grow  as  the  lily,  and  cast  forth  its  roots  as  Lebanon" 
(Hosea  xiv:5). 

We  then  read  of  a  foolish  son,  a  contentious  wife,  con- 
cerning houses  and  riches,  a  prudent  wife.  There  is  a 
warning  against  slothfulness,  and  exhortation  to  keep  the 
commandments  and  to  pity  the  poor,  for  giving  to  the  poor 
means  lending  to  the  Lord.  The  son  is  to  be  chastened 
as  long  as  their  is  hope  and  a  warning  against  sinful  wrath. 
This  verse  marks  the  end  of  this  section  of  proverbs. 


32  THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

m.    INSTRUCTIONS   GIVEN   TO   SOLOMON.    Chap- 
ter xix:20-xxiv. 

CHAPTER  XIX:20-29. 

Beginning  with  the  t'.ventieth  verse  of  chapter  xix  the 
personal  address  begins  again  and  we  read  repeatedly  the 
phrase  "My  son"  up  to  the  twenty-fifth  chapter.  This 
section  corresponds  therefore  with  the  first  nine  chapters, 
containing  the  instructions  which  Solomon  received  from 
the  Lord  and  which  he  records  in  these  chapters. 

Once  more  there  is  the  call,  like  in  the  opening  chapters, 
to  hear,  to  give  attention.  "Hear  counsel,  and  receive 
instruction,  that  thou  mayest  be  wise  in  thy  latter  end.'* 
The  Lord  knew  beforehand  what  "the  latter  end"  of  Sol- 
omon would  be.  The  wise  man  who  warned  against 
the  fool,  the  backslider,  the  unjust  and  the  man  who  for- 
sakes counsel  and  the  Lord,  himself  illustrates  the 
truths  given  in  these  proverbs  by  turning  away  from  the 
Lord.  Alas!  he  did  not  hear  counsel,  and  therefore  instead 
of  being  wise  in  his  latter  days  he  became  a  fool.  The 
truth  expressed  in  verse  22  was  Solomon's  portion  as  long 
as  the  fear  of  the  Lord  governed  his  conduct.  He  was 
satisfied,  had  peace  and  prosperity;  but  when  he  no  longer 
feared  the  Lord,  evil  came  upon  his  kingdom  and  it  was 
divided.  "V>'Tierefore  the  Lord  said  unto  Solomon,  For- 
asmuch as  this  is  done  of  thee,  and  thou  has  not  kept 
my  covenant  and  my  statutes  which  I  have  commanded 
thee,  I  will  surely  rend  the  kingdom  from  thee,  and  will 
give  it  to  thy  servant"  (1  Kings  xi:ll). 

CHAPTER  XX. 
PROVERBS  AS  TO  PERSONAL  CONDUCT. 

Proverbs  of  warning  and  instructions  as  to  personal  con- 
duct are  found  mostly  in  this  chapter;  a  number  of  them  are 
of  special  interest  if  applied  to  Solomon.  The  first  one  is 
concerning  wine  and  strong  drink.  As  the  use  of  wine 
among  the  people  of  Israel    was    legitimate    the    warning 


THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  33 

is  against  intemperance  (Deut.  xiv:26).  The  Bible  gives 
many  illustrations  of  the  truth  of  this  proverb-warning. 
We  may  think  of  Noah,  Lot,  Nabal,  Ben-hadad,  Bel- 
shazzar  and  others. 

From  all  the  good  things  we  select  the  following.  In 
verse  3  is  instruction  which  makes  for  peace.  It  is  the  fool 
who  meddles  and  thus  produceth  strife,  but  it  is  an  honor 
for  man  to  cease  from  strife.  In  verse  13  we  find  a  warning 
against  self  indulgence.  In  verse  19  the  talebearer  and 
flatterer  is  mentioned.  The  sin  of  flattery  should  be  avoided 
by  all  the  godly  for  it  nourisheth  pride  and  works  nothing 
but  evil. 

"Many  great  and  noble  men  have  been  ruined  by  admiration  and 
popularity,  who  might  have  thriven,  growing  greater  and  nobler,  in 
the  fiercest  and  most  relentless  criticism.  Donatello,  the  great  Floren- 
tine sculptor,  went  at  one  time  of  his  life  to  Padua,  where  he  was 
received  with  the  utmost  enthusiasm,  and  loaded  with  approbation 
and  honors.  But  soon  he  declared  his  intention  of  returning  to  Flor- 
ence, on  the  ground  that  the  sharp  assaults  and  the  cutting  criticisms 
which  always  assailed  him  in  his  native  city  were  much  more  favor- 
able to  his  art  than  the  atmosphere  of  admiration  and  eulogy.  In  this 
way  he  thought  that  he  would  be  stimulated  to  greater  efforts,  and 
ultimately  attain  to  a  surer  reputation." 

Verse  22  gives  another  beautiful  instruction.  "Say  not, 
I  will  recompense  evil;  but  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  He  shall 
save  thee."  To  put  everything  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord, 
to  trust  Him  and  wait  for  His  ov/n  time,  that  is  true  wisdom. 
But  it  is  a  lesson  hard  to  learn.  The  twelfth  chapter  of 
Romans  gives  the  same  instruction.  "Dearly  beloved, 
avenge  not  yourselves,  but  rather  give  place  unto  wrath; 
for  it  is  written,  vengeance  is  mine;  I  will  repay  saith,  the 
Lord."  Also  1  Thess.  v:15:  "See  that  none  render  evil 
for  evil;"  and  1  Peter  iii:9;  "Not  rendering  evil  for  evil, 
or  railing  for  railing."  How  blessed  it  is  to  wait  on  the 
Lord,  to  bide  His  own  time,  and  in  waiting  to  know  that 
He  does  all  things  well.  Thrice  in  this  chapter  the  king 
is  mentioned:  in  verses  2,  26  and  28.  These  verses  may 
be  applied  to  Him,  who  is  greater  than  Solomon,  the  King 
of  kin^s  and  the  Lord  of  lords.    When  He  comes  again  He 


34  TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

will  deal  with  the  lawless  and  with  His  enemies,  but  His 
throne  is  not  only  a  judgment  throne,  but  it  is  also  upheld 
by  mercy. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

PERSONAL  INSTRUCTIONS  AS  TO  LIFE  AND  CONDUCT. 

In  the  proverbs  of  this  chapter  the  Lord  is  mentioned 
five  times.  The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
as  the  rivers  of  water;  He  turneth  it  whithersoever  He  will" 
(verse  1).  The  rivers  of  water  are  "water-courses,"  the 
irrigation  sj^stem  knowTi  to  the  ancients,  opening  and 
shutting  sluices  directed  the  flow  of  the  waters.  Thus  the 
Lord  governs  the  king's  heart  as  He  directs  the  affairs  of 
men.  The  Lord  pondereth  the  hearts  (verse  2).  The 
same  truth  is  stated  in  chapter  xvi:2;  self -justification 
suits  the  natural  man  but  the  Lord  testeth  all  hearts.  How 
well  it  is  to  remember  in  all  our  conduct,  that  truth,  so 
comforting  to  the  believer,  expressed  by  Peter,  "Thou 
knoweth  all  things."  More  acceptable  than  sacrifice  to 
the  Lord,  is  to  do  righteousness  and  judgment  (verse  3). 
This  may  be  compared  with  1  Sam.  xv:22,  Hosea  vi:6; 
Micah  vi:6-8.  The  words  of  our  Lord  in  the  Gospel  of 
Matthew  give  the  same  truth.  "But  go  ye  and  learn  what 
that  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice"  (Matt. 
ix:13).  At  the  close  of  the  chapter  two  additional  state- 
ments are  made  concerning  the  Lord;  "There  is  no  wis- 
dom nor  understanding,  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord" 
(verse  30).  No  matter  how  man  may  plan,  how  cunning 
the  enemy  may  be,  it  v/ill  all  come  to  naught,  for  the  Lord 
is  above  all.  How  well  Eliphaz  the  Temanite  expressed 
this  truth  when  he  said:  "He  disappointeth  the  devices  of 
the  crafty,  so  that  their  hands  cannot  perform  their  enter- 
prise. He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  craftiness;  and  the 
counsel  of  the  forward  is  carried  headlong"  (Job  v:12-13). 
Safety  is  not  by  the  horse  prepared  against  the  day  of 
battle,  nor  by  might  or  by  power,  but  safety  is  of  the  Lord 
(verse  31).    How  well  then  to  look  away  from  man  and 


THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  35 

look  to  the  Lord  and  to  know  in  Him  is  our  safety.  The 
other  proverbs  in  this  chapter  giving  direction  as  to  life 
and  conduct,  warning  against  the  high  look  and  the  proud 
heart,  getting  of  treasures  by  a  lying  tongue,  against  heart- 
lessness  in  refusing  to  hear  the  cry  of  the  poor,  against 
loving  pleasure  and  luxurious  living,  against  coveteous- 
ness  and  other  matters  do  not  need  further  annotations. 

CHAPTER  XXn. 
INSTRUCTIONS  CONTINUED. 

Better  than  great  riches,  better  than  silver  and  gold  is 
a  name  and  loving  favor.  If  a  person  has  riches  and  a  bad 
name  and  is  not  well  thought  of,  he  is  less  honorable  than 
the  poor  man  who  has  a  name  and  good  reputation.  In 
Ecclesiastes,  Solomon  says:  **A  good  name  is  better  than 
precious  ointment"  (Eccles.  vii:l).  The  third  verse  has  a 
wise  message:  "The  prudent  man  foreseeth  the  evil  and 
hideth  himself;  but  the  simple  pass  on,  and  suffer  for  it." 
The  Lord  has  revealed  in  His  Word  the  evil  which  is  in 
store  for  the  sinner  and  the  impenitent.  He  also  has  pre- 
pared a  hiding  place,  an  ark  of  safety,  in  His  Son,  our  Lord. 
The  prudent  belie veth  the  Word  and  fiees  to  the  refuge; 
the  simple,  the  unbelieving,  pass  on  and  suffer  for  it  when 
the  evil  comes.  Humility  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord  has  a 
reward,  while  thorns  and  snares  are  in  the  v/ay  of  the  f  roward. 
sowing  and  reaping  is  found  in  verses  8  and  9.  He  that 
soweth  iniquity  reaps  vanity,  or  calamity;  he  that  has  a 
bountiful  eye,  who  looks  upon  the  poor  and  needy  with 
kindness  and  supplies  their  wants  reaps  blessing. 

In  verse  11  we  read,  *'He  that  loveth  pureness  of  heart, 
for  the  grace  of  his  lips  the  king  shall  be  his  friend."  In 
such,  whose  hearts  are  pure  and  whose  words  are  gracious, 
the  Lord,  the  King,  delights. 

Beginning  with  verse  17  we  find  another  call  to  hear, 
and  to  apply  the  heart  to  His  knowledge:  *'For  it  is  a 
pleasant  thing  if  thou  keep  them  within  thee,  they  sliall 
withal  be  fitted  in  thy  lips.    That  thy  trust  may  be  in  the 


36  TEE   BOOK  OF   PROVERBS 

Lord,  I  have  made  known  to  thee  this  day,  even  to  thee." 
This  is  the  personal  message  to  Solomon  by  the  Lord, 
heeded  by  him  for  many  years  and  finally  disobeyed. 

The  proverb  of  verse  28:  "Remove  not  the  ancient 
landmarks,  which  thy  father  has  set,"  is  a  restatement  of 
Deut.  xix:14.  It  is  repeated  in  chapter  xxiii-10.  In  Job 
xxiv:2  we  read  *'Some  remove  the  landmarks."  These 
landmarks  were  for  Israel  sacred  things,  for  their  possessions 
were  staked  off  according  to  the  Lord's  will;  to  meddle 
with  them  was  a  transgression.  While  Israel,  God's  earthly 
people,  had  landmarks,  God's  heavenly  people  also  has 
landmarks  of  the  heavenly  realm,  the  blessed  doctrines  of 
the  Word  of  God,  which  constitute  the  faith  once  and  for 
all  delivered  unto  the  Saints,  And  how  man  removes 
these  landmarks  in  our  day!  How  true  it  is,  *'Some  remove 
the  landmarks,"  that  which  our  fathers  cherished,  believed 
and  trusted  in.  The  rationalist,  the  ritualist  and  the 
delusionist  does  it  constantly  and  thus  destroys  the  found- 
ation upon  which  everything  rests. 

CHAPTER  XXni. 

INSTRUCTIONS  CONTINUED. 

The  opening  proverbs  of  this  chapter  treat  of  self-res- 
traint in  curbing  the  appetite  and  gives  manners  to  be 
observed  in  the  presence  of  a  superior.  Warnings  against 
riches  and  their  uncertainty  are  contained  in  verses  4  and  5. 
How  well  it  would  be  if  the  great  mass  of  professing  Christ- 
ians, and  some  true  believers  also,  would  consider  this 
instruction:  "Labor  not  to  be  rich."  But  this  exhortation 
as  well  as  the  exhortation  in  1  Timothy  vi:6-10  is  over- 
looked, and  many  who  profess  to  have  their  riches  in  Christ, 
in  the  heavenly  places  and  never  ending  glory,  weary  them- 
selves with  earthly  gain,  and  aim  to  become  wealthy.  But 
riches  have  wings;  they  can  fly  away  swiftly  as  does  the 
eagle  when  he  mounts  heavenward.  This  too  is  mentioned 
in  the  epistle  to  Timothy,  in  which  those  who  are  rich  are 
charged  not  to  be  highminded,  nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches, 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  37 

but  to  be  rich  in  good  works.  The  evil  eye  mentioned  in 
verse  6  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  superstitious  behef  that 
some  person  with  an  evil  eye  can  cast  a  spell  to  harm  others. 
It  means  a  dishonest,  insincere  person,  one  who  is  Pharis- 
aical. While  he  urges  to  eat  and  drink,  puts  on  a  friendly 
front,  in  his  heart  he  entertains  other  thoughts. 

Not  to  envy  sinners  is  commanded  in  verse  17;  one  who 
walks  in  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long  looks  to  their  end, 
though  they  may  prosper  now,  their  prosperity  will  end,  but 
the  expectation  of  him  who  fears  the  Lord  will  not  be  cut  off. 

Beginning  with  verse  22  is  another  call  to  hearken. 
Parents  are  to  be  obeyed.  The  truth  is  to  be  bought  and 
never  to  be  sold,  as  well  as  wisdom,  instruction  and  under- 
standing. There  is  a  price  often  to  be  paid  for  the  posses- 
sion of  the  Truth.  Some  have  suffered  even  unto  death 
to  possess  the  Truth,  and  in  its  defense.  Then  in  verse  26 
is  the  familiar  exhortation,  "My  Son,  give  me  thy  heart, 
and  let  thine  eyes  delight  in  my  ways."  This  w^ord  is  often 
misused  when  applied  to  sinners,  the  unsaved.  It  is  ad- 
dressed to  a  son.  The  Gospel  does  not  come  to  the  sinner 
with  the  exhortation  "Give";  the  sinner  has  nothing  to 
give.  The  Gospel  comes  v/ith  an  offer  and  if  the  offer  of 
free  grace  is  accepted,  the  believing  sinner  becomes  a  child 
of  God,  a  son  of  God  and  an  heir.  Such  a  one  is  to  yield 
his  whole  heart  to  the  Lord,  and  his  eyes  are  to  delight  in  His 
ways.  Thus  Jehovah  spoke  to  Solomon.  The  chapter 
ends  with  proverbs  relating  to  self-indulgence,  the  sin  of 
intemperance  and  all  that  goes  with  it. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

INSTRUCTIONS  CONTINUED. 

In  the  final  instructions  of  this  chapter  we  find  first  a 
description  of  the  evil  men.  Their  heart  studieth  destruc- 
tion; their  lips  talk  mischief.  This  theme  is  repeatedly 
referred  to  in  this  chapter.  In  verse  15  the  evil  man  is 
addressed  not  to  lay  wait  for  the  righteous  and  not  to  spoil 
his  resting  place.     The  Lord  takes  care  of   the  righteous; 


38  TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

he  may  be  overcome  by  misfortunes  seven  times,  yet  will 
he  rise  again.  Different  it  is  with  the  wicked  when  he 
falls  into  mischief.  Yet  there  must  be  no  rejoicing  over 
the  fall  of  the  enemy,  nor  gladness  when  he  stumbleth. 
This  displeaseth  the  Lord.  Still  higher  is  the  command 
of  the  New  Testament,  "Love  your  enemies;.  .  recompense 
no  man  evil  for  evil;  .  .  overcome  evil  with  good.'*  There 
is  to  be  no  fretting  because  of  evil  men  nor  envy  (verses  1 
and  19).  Why  should  the  righteous  be  envious  at  the 
wicked  in  their  prosperity.'*  The  thirty-seventh  Psalm 
enters  more  fully  into  this;  but  here  the  same  answer  is 
given  in  a  terse  way.  The  wicked  have  no  reward;  their 
candle  will  be  put  out.  Their  calamity  riseth  suddenly, 
and  who  knoweth  the  ruin  of  them  both?  which  means 
that  the  Lord  and  the  king,  v/ill  deal  with  the  wicked. 
Another  proverb  of  this  chapter  we  mention:  "If  thou 
faint  in  the  day  of  adversity  thy  strength  is  small"  (verse  10). 
The  hour  of  trial  is  the  hour  which  brings  the  test.  When 
adversity  brings  despondency,  and  even  worse,  murmuring, 
it  is  an  evidence  that  the  heart  does  not  fully  trust  the  Lord. 
The  last  section  of  this  chapter  is  introduced  by  the  state- 
ment, "These  things  also  belong  to  the  wise,"  or  as  it  may 
be  rendered,  "These  also  are  sayings  of  the  wise."  The 
chapter  ends  with  a  vivid  description  of  the  slothful.  His 
field  and  vineyard  bear  witness  to  his  character.  They  are 
grown  over  with  thorns  and  covered  with  nettles  and  the 
stone  wall  is  broken  down.  And  why  all  this.^  "Yet  a  little 
sleep,  a  little  slumber,  a  little  folding  of  the  hands  in  sleep." 
An  illustration  of  this  sluggard  can  be  found  a  thousand 
times  over  again  in  our  own  land. 

IV.    THE  PROVERBS  OF  SOLOMON  COLLECTED  BY 
THE  MEN  OF  HEZEKIAH. 

Chapters  xxv  and  xxvi. 
CHAPTER  XXV. 

Here  begin  the  proverbs  which  the  good  king  Hezekiah, 


THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  39 

under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  added  to  this  book. 
"This  title  is  interesting  as  affording  a  proof  that  a  revival 
of  literary  activity  accompanied  the  revival  of  religion  and 
of  national  prosperity  which  marked  the  reign  of  Hezekiah. 
The  men  of  Hezekiah  were  doubtless  a  body  of  scribes 
engaged  under  the  direction  of  the  king  in  literary  labors." 
Very  fittingly  the  opening  verses  of  this  collected  portion 
of  proverbs  relate  to  the  king.  While  it  is  the  glory  of  God 
to  conceal  a  thing,  the  glory  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a 
matter.  God  has  many  things  concealed  as  to  Himself, 
the  great  universe,  creation  and  His  ways  in  Providence; 
but  kings  should  inquire  diligently  into  the  matters  brought 
before  them  and  search  them  out  in  their  administration 
of  justice.  Some  day  the  great  King  who  is  coming,  the 
King  of  kings,  who  knows  all  the  secrets  of  God  as  well  as 
the  hearts  of  men,  will  search  out  all  things  and  bring  the 
hidden  things  to  light.  When  that  day  comes  the  fifth 
verse  will  see  its  accomplishment. 

"Take  away  the  wicked  from  before  the  king — 
And  His  throne  shall  be  established  in  righteousness." 

When  He  comes  to  establish  His  throne  of  righteousness, 
to  rule  as  the  true  Mechisedek,  the  King  of  Righteousness 
and  of  Peace,  the  wicked  and  evildoers  will  be  taken  away 
in  judgment.  Only  then  can  there  be  a  righteous  govern- 
ment. Verses  6  and  7  remind  us  of  the  parable  of  the  great 
supper  spoken  by  our  Lord  in  Luke  xiv. 

Verses  21  and  22  are  quoted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  (xii:21).  And  that  is  followed  by 
another  saying  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  righteous  man. 
'*The  north  wind  drive th  away  rain;  so  does  an  angry 
countenance,  a  backbiting  tongue."  The  backbiter  does 
the  work  of  Satan  and  the  Lord  hates  the  slandering  tongue 
as  He  hates  the  flattering  tongue.  The  believer  can  show 
an  angry  countenance,  without  sinning,  and  cut  short  the 
pernicious  work  of  the  backbiter  (Ephesians  iv:26).  Verse 
28  gives  a  good  definition  of  true  self-control,  the  rule  over 
one*s  own  spirit. 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

CONCERNING  THE  FOOL  AND  THE  SLUGGARD. 

Eleven  times  we  meet  the  word  fool  in  this  chapter. 
Three  different  words  are  used  in  the  Hebrew  for  fool.  The 
first  is  "Avir*  which  signifies  weakness.  The  second  word 
**Kesir*  occurs  nearly  fifty  times,  means  fat  or  dense.  The 
third  word  is  the  Hebrew  **Nabal,"  which  is  derived 
from  the  verb  to  fade,  or  to  wither;  it  means  a  vulgar,  bad 
man  who  has  given  himself  over  to  wickedness.  The  natural 
man  in  his  condition,  his  darkened  mind,  his  sinfulness 
answers  to  much  that  is  said  about  the  fool  in  this  book. 
As  snow  in  summer  and  rain  at  harvest  time  are  quite 
impossible  in  Palestine,  so  is  honor  for  a  fool.  A  fool  may 
utter  a  curse,  as  they  often  do,  and  wish  something  evil, 
but  being  causeless,  it  wull  not  be  fulfilled.  The  fool  needs 
correction,  the  stripes  for  his  back;  he  deserves  no  answer, 
and  if  he  is  answered  it  must  be  according  to  his  folly.  The 
foolish  questions  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  may  well 
be  considered  here  (Titus  iii:9).  The  tenth  verse  is  doubt- 
ful in  its  translation.  A  better  suggested  rendering  is  the 
following: 

"A  master  workman  formeth  all  himself  aright. 
But  he  that  hireth  a  fool  hireth  a  transgressor." 

That  is,  a  master  does  everything  right;  a  fool  spoils 
everything.  The  eleventh  verse  is  quoted  in  2  Peter  ii:22. 
The  Apostle  applies  it  to  the  outward  professor  of  Christ- 
ianity who  turns  back  to  the  world  after  a  period  of  pro- 
fession and  reformation.  The  true  child  of  God  is  never 
described  as  a  dog,  nor  could  the  other  sentence  in  Peter's 
Epistle  mean  a  true  believer.  "The  sow  that  was  washed 
'  turned  to  her  own  wallowing  in  the  mire."  A  hog  may  be 
washed,  yet  in  spite  of  the  washing  he  is  still  a  hog.  So  a 
wsinner  may  profess  salvation  yet  may  never  have  been  born 
mgain,  and  after  a  brief  period  of  profession  turn  again  to 
his  old  sins  and  habits. 

The  slothful  man,  the  man  that  deceiveth  his  neighbor, 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  41 

the  talebearer,  the  contentious  man,  the  lying  tongue  and 
the  flattering  mouth,  furnish  other  proverbs.  How  true 
it  is  "A  flattering  mouth  worketh  ruin."  Every  godly 
man  and  woman  should  hate  and  avoid  flattery. 

V.    INSTRUCTIONS   GIVEN   TO   SOLOMON. 

Chapters  xxvii-xxix. 

In  the  three  chapters  which  follow  we  find  the  change 
we  have  noticed  before.  These  proverbs  are  addressed  to 
a  person  and  the  phrases  "My  son"  and  the  personal  address, 
"thou,"  "thy"  and  "thyself,"  are  again  used  in  these  chap- 
ters. Like  the  previous  sections,  so  here  we  find  instruc- 
tions which  were  given  to  Solomon. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 
INSTRUCTIONS  AND  WARNINGS. 

The  opening  proverb  warns  against  procrastination.  No 
one  can  be  sure  of  what  the  next  day  may  bring  forth. 
True  wisdom  is  not  to  trust  the  future  day,  for  it  may 
never  come,  nor  are  we  to  dwell  in  the  past.  While  it  is  to- 
day we  must  live  and  act  and  leave  nothing  undone  which 
can  be  done  to-day.  How  true  this  is  of  salvation  which 
is  offered  for  to-day — now  is  the  day  of  salvation.  How 
many  have  been  lost  forever  by  procrastination,  by  thinking 
a  more  convenient  time  would  come.  Well  has  one  said, 
"The  thief  which  cheats  us  of  our  days  and  beggars  us  of 
our  wealth  is  the  specious  thought  that  tomorrow  belongs 
to  us."  The  illusion  is  as  old  as  the  world,  but  is  today  as 
fresh  and  powerful  as  ever.  James  iv:13-14  gives  the 
same  lesson.  In  the  second  verse  we  find  a  warning  as  to 
self-praise.  Self-praise  is  one  of  the  worst  forms  of  pride, 
that  pride  which  another  proverb  states  (xvi:18-19)  "goeth 
before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall." 

"Open  rebuke  is  better  than  secret  love"  and  "faithful 
are  the  wounds  of  a  friend;  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are 
deceitful"  (verses  5-6).   A  wise  man  welcomes  open  criticism 


42  THE   BOOK  OF   PROVERBS 

and  rebuke,  though  such  rebuke  may  wound,  yet  being 
given  by  the  faithfulness  of  a  friend,  it  is  far  better  than 
the  deceitful  kisses  of  a  flattering  enemy.  The  14th  verse 
may  be  linked  with  these  statements.  "lie  that  blesseth 
his  friend  with  a  loud  voice  rising  early  in  the  morning,  it 
shall  be  counted  a  curse  unto  him."  Insincerity  lurks 
behind  such  loud,  pharisaical  protestrations  of  friendship. 

A  great  truth  is  given  in  verse  19:  "As  in  water  face 
answereth  face,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man."  The  still  pool 
of  water  was  man's  first  mirror.  Gazing  in  it  the  face  is 
reflected.  As  truly  as  the  face  seen  in  the  pool  is  like  the 
face  which  the  water  reflects,  so  truly  does  one  man's  heart 
reflect  the  other's.  Though  there  may  be  culture,  education 
and  a  certain  refinement,  underneath  each  human  being 
there  is  the  same  corrupt,  fallen  human  nature. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 
WARNINGS  AND  INSTRUCTIONS  CONTINUED. 

The  wicked  is  a  coward;  the  righteous  man,  because  he 
trusteth  in  the  Lord  and  knov^s  the  Lord  is  on  his  side,  is 
as  bold  as  a  lion.  It  is  the  conscience  which  makes  a  coward 
of  the  wicked  man. 

This  chapter  has  many  sharp  contrasts  and  important 
warnings  and  exhortations.  We  point  out  a  few.  Those  who 
forsake  the  law,  turn  their  backs  upon  the  revelation  of 
God,  refuse  obedience  to  Him,  praise  the  wicked,  they  make 
common  cause  with  them.  Those  xA\o  keep  the  law,  obey 
God's  Word,  are  contenders  for  the  faith  (verse  4).  Evil 
men  are  blind,  but  with  seeking  the  Lord  comes  under- 
standing, the  blind  eyes  are  opened  (verse  5).  A  wise  son 
is  he  Vv^ho  keepeth  the  law;  such  was  Solomon  till  he  plunged 
into  apostasy  and  darkness  (verse  7).  Then  in  the  ninth 
verse  is  another  pithy  saying.  He  "that  turneth  av.ay  his 
ear  from  hearing  the  law,  even  his  prayer  shall  be  abom- 
ination." It  is  the  same  truth  as  stated  in  Psalm  lxvi:18, 
"If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear 
me." 


TEE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  43 

An  important  message  is  contained  in  verse  13.  "He  that 
covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper;  but  whoso  confesseth 
and  forsaketh  them  sliall  have  mercy."  Every  attempt  to 
cover  up  sin  is  a  failure.  Hov/  much  of  this  is  done  today, 
not  merely  the  covering  of  individual  sins,  but  the  denial 
of  sin  itself.  The  modern  theology  useth  much  ingenious 
argumentation  which  tries  to  make  out  of  sin  something 
else;  speaks  of  it  as  a  mere  defect,  as  if  it  were  some  kind 
of  a  taint  in  the  blood,  a  hereditary  and  therefore  unavoid- 
able weakness,  something  for  which  man  is  not  responsible. 
All  these  inventions,  which  sweep  aside  the  declarations 
of  the  infallible  Word  of  God,  are  "covering  up."  No 
mercy  can  there  be  for  those  who  deny  sin  and  sins.  The 
fig  leaves  must  be  torn  away  with  which  man  still  tries  to 
cover  his  nakedness.  There  must  be  confession,  repent- 
ance, self-judgment  and  then  of  course  trust  in  Him  who 
died  for  the  ungodly.  The  next  proverb  (verse  14)  con- 
tains a  beatitude.  "Happy" — or  "Blessed" — "is  the  man 
that  feareth  always."  He  who  has  found  forgiveness  is 
sheltered  by  the  precious  blood,  walks  in  newness  of  life 
and  in  godly  fear  all  the  day  long. 

We  mention  verses  25  and  26 :  "Trust  in  the  Lord  brings 
blessing;  and  he  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool." 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

THE  FINAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 

These  final  instructions  given  in  proverbs  cover  the 
similar  ground  as  those  in  the  previous  chapters.  Wisdom 
shines  out  in  each,  and  the  contents  of  every  proverb  shows 
that  the  author  is  not  Solomon  but  He  who  is  perfect  in 
knowledge.  "He  that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth 
his  neck  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  v\ithout 
remedy."  Scripture  abounds  with  examples  of  cases  of 
hardening  the  neck  and  the  heart,  like  Pharaoh,  Ahab  and 
others.  This  proverb  will  be  finally  proven  to  be  the  truth 
when  an  ungodly  age  will  end  with  judgment  for  those  who 
were  often  reproved  and  continue  in  sin. 


44  TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

Once  more  the  sin  of  flattery  is  mentioned.  "A  man 
that  flattereth  his  neighbor  spreadeth  a  net  for  his  feet" 
(verse  5).  Flattery  is  akin  to  lying  and  can  never  be  right, 
but  is  always  a  mistake,  which  results  in  the  gravest  con- 
sequences. More  servants  of  the  Lord  have  been  spoiled 
by  flattery  than  in  any  other  manner.  It  is  literally,  as 
this  proverb  says,   "spreading  a  net  for  his  feet." 

In  verse  23  we  read,  "A  man's  pride  shall  bring  him  low, 
but  honor  shall  uphold  the  humble  in  spirit."  It  should 
be  connected  with  the  proverb  in  chapter  xxvi:12,  "Seest 
thou  a  man  wise  in  his  own  conceits?  There  is  more  hope  of 
a  fool  than  of  him."  Pride  always  brings  low;  humility 
always  brings  up.  The  highest  place  is  the  lowest  place. 
"The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare;  but  whoso  putteth  his 
trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe"  (verse  25).  The  fear  of 
man  is  born  of  unbelief.  The  Christian  who  fears  man 
shows  clearly  that  he  is  not  looking  to  the  Lord,  but  to  man. 
The  fear  of  man  surely  bringeth  a  snare,  it  leads  to  men 
pleasing  and  men  praising.  And  because  one  seeks  the 
honor  which  comes  from  man  and  not  the  honor  which 
Cometh  from  God  only,  man,  his  approval  or  disapproval, 
is  feared.  The  fear  of  man  is  as  dangerous,  as  subtle  and 
as  un-christianlike  as  flattery,  talebearing,  backbiting, 
whispering  and  the  other  evil  things  mentioned  in  these 
proverbs. 

This  chapter  concludes  the  proverbs  of  Solomon.  As  we 
have  seen,  the  instructions  which  he  received,  first  from  the 
Lord,  and  the  instructions  which  were  given  such  which 
were  for  his  conduct  and  life,  for  guidance  and  direction, 
and  the  proverbs  which  were  revealed  to  him  to  give  to 
others.  We  express  once  more  the  belief  that  every  true 
Christian  should  devote  more  attention  to  these  God- 
given  instructions.  How  much  there  is  in  all  of  them  for 
all  classes  of  believers! 

VI.    THE  WORDS  OF  AGUR  THE  SON  OF  JAKEH. 

Chapter  xxx. 
Some  hold  that  Agur  is  another  name  for  Solomon.    This 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  45 

opinion  is  also  upheld  by  the  Talmud,  which  speaks  of  six 
names  which  belonged  to  the  King:  Solomon,  Jedidiah, 
Koheleth,  Son  of  Jakeh,  Agur  and  Lemuel.  But  this 
opinion  cannot  be  verified,  nor  do  we  know  who  Agur  the 
son  of  Jakeh  was.  The  Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate  have 
translated  the  Hebrew  words  and  formed  a  sentence  out 
of  them.  "Agur"  means  "assembler"  and  Jakeh  has  the 
meaning  of  "pious,"  so  that  some  think  that  Agur  means 
an  unknown  godly  man  who  gathered  these  sayings  and 
they  were  embodied  in  this  book.  We  leave  the  name  as 
it  is,  and  believe  that  Agur,  the  son  of  Jakeh,  is  the  name 
of  the  author  of  this  chapter.  "Whoever  Agur  was,  he 
had  a  certain  marked  individuality;  he  combines  medi- 
tation on  lofty  questions  of  theology  v/ith  a  sound  theory 
of  practical  life.  He  was  able  to  give  valuable  admoni- 
tions about  conduct.  But  his  characteristic  delight  was 
"to  group  together  in  quatrains  visible  illustrations  of  se- 
lected qualities  or  ideas"  (R.  F.  Horton).  The  opening 
verse  also  tells  us  that  he  spoke  to  Ithiel  (God  with  me) 
and  Ucal  (I  shall  be  able).  The  Revised  Version  has  a 
marginal  reading  instead  of  the  two  names  Ithiel  and  Ucal : 
"I  have  wearied  myself,  O  God.  I  have  wearied  myself 
O  God,  and  am  consumed."     We  do  not  adopt  this. 

The  structure  of  the  chapter  itself  is  different  from  the 
other  chapters  in  this  book.  It  begins  v/ith  a  prologue, 
containing  his  confession,  in  which  he  shows  a  spirit  of  deep 
abasement  and  acknowledgment  of  his  own  ignorance 
(verses  2-3). 

This  is  followed  by  five  questions  concerning  creation  and 
the  Creator  and  His  Son  (verse  4). 

The  questions  are  answered  by  God's  revelation.  This 
is  indicated  in  the  next  two  verses  (5  and  6). 

Next  comes  a  prayer  by  Agur  the  son  of  Jakeh  (verses  7-9). 

One  proverb  follows  next  in  the  tenth  verse.  After  that 
come  the  so-called  "quatrains,"  six  groups  of  proverbs  each 
consisting  of  four  things.  Between  the  second  and  third 
group  a  single  proverb  is  inserted  (verse  17)  and  at  the 
close  of  the  chapter  stands  another  proverb. 


46  THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

In  the  prologue  he  takes  the  low  place,  and  in  his  con- 
fession manifests  the  deepest  humility,  with  no  taint  of 
pride,  thus  illustrating  the  true  humility  enjoined  in  the 
proverbs  of  Solomon.  Because  he  confessed  that  he  had 
no  understanding  nor  knowledge  of  the  holy,  the  Lord 
gave  him  all  what  he  lacked. 

The  questions  he  asks  are  concerning  the  Creator.  "Who 
is  He  that  hath  ascended  up  into  heaven  and  descended? 
Who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in  His  fists?  Who  hath 
bound  the  waters  in  a  garment?  Who  hath  established 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth?  What  is  His  Name,  and  what 
is  His  Son's  Name,  if  thou  canst  tell?"  He  knows  there  is 
a  Creator.  He  cannot  question  the  eternal  power  and 
Godhead,  which  alone  can  account  for  this  ordered  uni- 
verse. He  has  not,  like  many  thinkers,  ancient  and  modern, 
dropped  a  plummet  down  the  broad  deep  universe,  and 
cried.  No  God.  He  knows  there  is  a  God;  there  must  be 
an  intelligence  abled  to  conceive,  coupled  with  power  able 
to  release  this  mighty  mechanism.  But  Who  is  it?  What 
is  His  Name  or  His  Son's  Name?  Here  are  the  footsteps 
of  the  Creator;  but  where  is  the  Creator  Himself?"*  By 
searching  God  cannot  be  found  out;  the  fullest  answer  is 
given  in  the  New  Testament.  W^e  are  reminded  of  John 
iii:13.  We  know  Him  who  has  ascended,  because  He 
descended  from  heaven;  Who  is  the  Lord  and  Creator  of 
all,  now  in  God's  presence  as  the  glorified  man,  and  some 
day  He  who  ascended  into  heaven  will  descend  again. 

That  in  the  next  place  the  Word  of  God  is  mentioned, 
that  is  the  written  revelation  of  God,  is  not  without  meaning. 
INIan  needs  this  revelation  to  know  the  Lord,  and  have  the 
question  answered  which  human  speculation  and  scientific 
research  can  never  answer.  On  account  of  the  statement 
*'add  thou  not  unto  His  words"  critics  have  surmised  that 
the  canon  of  the  Old  Testament  must  have  been  completed 
when  this  chapter  was  written.  They  have  put  the  date 
long  after  the  exile.    But  such  a  conclusion  is  unwarranted. 


*Expositor's  Bible. 


THE   BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  47 

God  had  commanded  long  before  that  nothing  should  be 
added  to  His  words  (Deut.  iv:2).  The  prayer  of  Agur  in 
verses  7-9  is  closely  linked  Vy'ith  the  foregoing  verses.  He 
prays  for  deliverance  from  vanity  and  lies,  that  he  may 
have  a  true  and  honest  heart,  so  necessary  for  the  reception, 
of  the  truth  of  God;  then  he  prays  to  have  neither  povertj?- 
nor  riches.  Poverty  might  induce  to  steal  and  take  the 
name  of  God  in  vain,  then  His  Word  would  be  rejected  by 
him;  and  riches  would  mean  the  same,  as  it  might  lead  him 
to  say.  Who  is  the  Lord? 

The  proverb  in  the  form  of  a  command  in  verse  10  is 
isolated  from  the  trend  of  thought  in  this  chapter.  The 
first  quatrain  comes  next  in  verses  11-14.  Four  times 
the  word  generation  is  used,  describing  the  classes  of  people 
frequently  mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapters  of  proverbs. 
Then  follow  four  things  which  are  insatiable.  The  climax 
is  reached  gradually.  The  horseleach  (or  vampire)  has 
two  daughters  by  name  of  "Give."  Even  so  is  the  poor 
heart  of  man;  and  there  are  three  and  four  things  of  the 
same  character;  the  unseen  regions  into  which  disembodied 
spirits  are  going  day  after  day,  year  after  year;  the  barren 
womb;  the  earth  upon  which  rain  descends  yet  is  never 
filled  with  water,  and  the  fourth  thing,  the  fire,  which  never 
saith,  it  is  enough,  which  consumes  till  nothing  is  left. 
These  unsatiable  things  mentioned  are  symbolical  of  the 
condition  of  the  natural  man,  always  taking  in  yet  always, 
restless  and  never  satisfied. 

Then  there  are  four  things  inscrutable:  The  way  of  the 
eagle  in  the  air;  the  way  of  the  serpent  on  a  rock;  the  way 
of  a  ship  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean;  and  the  way  of  a  man 
with  a  maid  (verses  18-20). 

Four  disquieting  things  are  given  in  verses  21-23.  In 
verses  24-28  the  four  little  things,  yet  wise  are  pictured. 
They  are  the  ants,  the  conies,  the  locusts  and  the  lizard 
(not  spider  as  in  the  A.  V.).  Here  are  lesssons  for  man: 
the  sluggard,  the  fool,  the  evil  man,  and  other  characters 
touched  upon  in  proverbs  are  put  to  shame  by  the  sagacity 
of    these    little    things.     Four     graceful     things    conclude 


48  TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS 

these  sayings:  A  lion,  a  greyhound,  an  he-goat  and  a  king, 
against  whom  there  is  no  rising  up.  So  may  the  righteous 
man  act.  Bold  as  a  lion,  swift  as  the  greyhound  to  carry 
out  the  Lord's  will  in  the  Lord's  service,  climbing  the  steeps 
like  the  he-goat,  and  always  victorious  like  a  king  un- 
defeated. We  see  that  these  statements  of  Agur  have  a 
definite  bearing  upon  the  entire  Book  of  Proverbs  inas- 
much as  they  restate  and  illustrate  the  different  characters, 
such  as  the  ungodly,  the  unwise,  the  fool,  the  sluggard, 
the  proud,  the  righteous,  the  godly,  the  humble,  etc.,  men- 
tioned in  the  book.  x\gur's  message  ends  with  a  word  of 
counsel  to  exercise  seK-restraint.    . 

VIL    THE  WORDS  OF  KING  LEMUEL  TAUGHT  HIM 
BY  HIS  MOTHER. 

THfi  VIRTUOUS  WOMAN. 
CHAPTER  XXXI. 

"The  word^  of  King  Lemuel,  the  prophecy  that  his  mother 
taught  him";  this  is  the' superscription  of  this  chapter. 
Who  is  King  Lemuel.'^  No  king  by  that  name  is  known.  We 
do  not  hesitate  in  saying  that  it  is  Solomon.  It  means 
*'unto  God"  one  who  is  devoted  to  the  Lord.  In  all  pro- 
bability Solomon's  mother  called  her  boy  by  this  name, 
and  here  is  the  record  therefore  of  the  instruction  given 
by  Solomon's  mother.  The  wiarning  is  once  more,  and 
that  v^ry  earnestly  (shoVv^n  by  the  thrice  asked  "what.'^" 
What  shairi  say  unto  you?)  against  licentiousness,  against 
wine  and  strong  drink.  The  brief  words  of  the  mother's 
exhortation  end  with  a  request  to  act  righteously  as  king, 
to  stand  up  for  those  who  are  appointed  to  destruction,  to 
plead  the  cause  of  the  poor  and  needy. 

The  final  portion  of  the  book  of  proverbs  is  a  description 
of  the  virtuous  woman.  This  section  is  quite  different 
from  the  rest  of  the  book,  like  many  Psalms  and  the  Lamen- 
tations it  is  alphabetically  arranged.  The  virtuous  woman, 
who  is*  far  more  valuable  than  rubies,  is  described  in  her 


TEE  BOOK  OF  PROVERBS  49 

home  as  a  faithful  wife,  a  painstaking  mother  and  the 
competent  mistress  of  her  household.  There  is  no  need 
to  allegorize  this  description  and  apply  it  to  the  church, 
as  some  have  done.  But  this  virtuous  woman  stands  out  in 
prominent  and  bright  relief — a  relief  against  the  descriptions 
of  "the  strange  woman,"  the  adulteress  so  repeatedly  men- 
tioned in  Proverbs  (ii:16-20;  v:l-23;  vii:xxii:14;  xxiii:27,etc.). 
One  of  the  proverbs  is  expanded  in  this  beautiful  picture 
drawn  by  the  Spirit  of  God:  "Whoso  findeth  a  wife  findeth 
a  good  thing,  and  obtaineth  favor  from  the  Lord."  But 
how  few  of  the  modern  women  reach  this  ideal!  How  few 
among  Christian  women  measure  up  to  it! 

Thus  ends  the  book  of  Proverbs,  the  book  filled  with 
practical  instructions,  warnings;  food  for  thought  and 
meditation  #'  [filled  with  wholesome  counsel,  with  direction 
and  guidance,  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above. 


ECCLESIASTES 


Ecclesiastes 

Introduction. 

The  Book  of  Ecclesiastes  has  difficulties  which  have  puzzled  both 
the  expositor  and  the  reader.  We  do  not  mean  the  question  of  author- 
ship so  much  as  the  contents.  It  has  been  branded  as  pessimism,  and 
not  a  few  have  declared  that  it  is  unworthy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
should  never  have  been  added  to  the  other  books  of  the  Bible.  In 
spite  of  all  these  perplexities  connected  with  the  book  and  hasty 
judgments,  it  has  a  definite  place  in  the  organism  of  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures, and  without  this  book  the  revelation  of  God  would  be  incomplete. 

The  title  the  book  bears  in  our  English  translation  comes  from  the 
Septuagint,  and  is  an  attempted  translation  of  the  Hebrew  word  "Koh- 
eleth",  which  Luther  in  the  German  version  translated  with  "Preacher" 
(Prediger);  it  is  thus  translated  in  the  King  James  version  in  the 
opening  verse  of  the  book — "The  words  of  the  preacher."  But  the 
Hebrew  word  Koheleth  can  hardly  mean  preacher.  It  is  derived 
from  the  verb  "kahal"  which  means  "to  gather"  or  "assemble."  The 
word  "kahal"  has  been  translated  "congregation,"  or  as  the  Greek 
of  the  Septuagint  translates  it  "ecclesia."  Koheleth  is  feminine,  evi- 
dently a  word  specially  provided,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  this 
was  done  to  correspond  to  "Wisdom"  in  Proverbs,  which  is  also  in  the 
feminine  gender  (Prov.  i:20).  Perhaps  the  word  "debater"  comes 
nearest  to  the  meaning  of  the  original.  The  word  Kohleth  is  found 
nowhere  else  in  the  Bible;  but  in  Ecclesiastes  it  occurs  seven  times, 
three  times  in  the  beginning,  once  in  the  middle  and  three  times  at 
the  end  of  the  book. 


The  Authorship  and  Date. 

Both  Jewish  and  Christian  tradition  ascribe  this  book  to  King 
Solomon.  The  book  itself  does  not  leave  us  in  doubt  about  it.  Chap- 
ter i:12-16  is  conclusive.  If  this  is  disputed,  as  it  is  almost  universally 
among  rationalistic  critics,  and  also  by  some  who  are  not  rationalists, 
we  may  well  ask  the  question  who  wrote  Ecclesiastes?  The  higher 
Critic  is  unable  to  give  a  satisfactory  answer.  They  give  the  date  of 
the  book  and  its  composition  about  230-250  B.  C.  The  book  itself 
shows  that  this  is  impossible,  for  the  author  of  it  lived  at  a  time  when 
Israel  had  reached  the  zenith  of  prosperity  and  glory.  That  time  was 
during  Solomon's  reign.  If  Solomon  was  not  the  author,  then  another 
person  living  during  the  reign  of  Solomon  must  have  written  the  book. 
But  everything  shows  that  only  Solomon  could  have  been  the  author 
fit  and  fitted  to  write  this  book. 


54  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

As  already  stated  Jewish  teachers  and  Christian  teachers  give 
decisive  testimony  for  the  Solomonic  authorship.  In  a  Jewish  Com- 
mentary on  Ecclesiastes  (Midrash  Koheleth)  which  was  written  al- 
most 1,200  years  ago,  a  large  number  of  learned  and  ancient  rabbis 
bear  witness  to  the  fact  that  Solomon  is  the  author.  The  Targum,  or 
paraphrase,  on  this  book,  composed  in  the  sixth  century  A.  D.,  with 
many  other  Jewish  commentators,  speaks  of  Solomon  as  the  writer 
of  Ecclesiastes.  Equally  uniform  is  the  testimony  of  the  teachers  of 
the  early  church.  The  critics  fully  acknowledge  this  consensus  of 
Jewish  and  Christian  opinion  and  they  have  an  explanation  for  it. 
They  say  these  scholars  and  commentators  "wanted  the  faculty  of 
historical  criticism,  one  might  almost  say,  of  intellectual  discernment 
of  the  meaning  and  drift  of  a  book  or  individual  passages,  .  .  .  and  that 
they  had  no  material  for  forming  that  opinion  other  than  those  which 
are  in  our  hands  at  the  present  time."*)  We  shall  see  what  the 
"intellectual  discernment"  is,  of  which  critics  constantly  boast,  and 
we  shall  find  that  it  is  but  another  term  for  "infidelity." 

It  was  Luther,  the  gerat  German  reformer  who,  as  far  as  we  know, 
began  first  to  cast  doubt  upon  this  book.  In  his  "Table  Talks"  he 
said;  "Solomon  did  not  write  the  book  himself,  but  it  was  composed 
by  Sirach  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees.  It  is,  as  it  were,  a  Talmud  put 
together  out  of  many  books,  probably  from  the  library  of  Ptolemy 
Euergetes,  King  of  Egypt."  He  was  followed  by  Grotius  in  1644  who 
also  denied  that  Solomon  is  the  author.  "From  that  time  onward," 
says  a  critic,  "the  stream  of  objections  to  the  Solomonic  authorship 
has  flowed  with  an  ever  increasing  volume."  No  doubt  it  is  still  flowing, 
and  that  stream  carries  those  who  trust  themselves  to  it  farther  and 
farther  away  from  childlike  trust  in  God's  Holy  Word." 

Some  of  the  Objections  of  Critics. 

The  main  objection  is  on  linguistic  lines.  Hebraeists  have  pointed 
out  that  there  are  several  scores  of  words  and  forms  in  Ecclesiastes 
which  are  found  only  in  the  post-exilian  books  and  literature;  some 
they  claim  originated  even  later.  Professor  Delitsch  makes  the  bold 
statement,  "If  Ecclesiastes  is  of  Solomonic  origin,  then  there  is  no 
history  of  the  Hebrew  language."  And  another  scholar  states,  "We 
could  as  easily  believe  that  Chaucer  is  the  author  of  Rasselas  as  that 
Solomon  wrote  Ecclesiastes."  But  not  so  hasty,  gentlemen!  There 
is  another  side  to  this  question  of  the  foreign  words  in  this  book,  which, 
after  all  your  objections,  still  is  believed  to  be  Solomon's.  Your 
objection  on  these  linguistic  peculiarities  is  really  an  evidence  for  the 
Solomonic  authorshij)  of  this  book.  The  words  which  are  Aramaic 
(and  Aramaic  belongs  to  the  same  branch  of  languages  as  the  F«»brew 


'Dr.  E.  H.  Plumbtree  in  the  Cambridge  Bible. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  55 

Semitic)  have  been  proven  by  other  scholars  to  be  in  common  use 
among  the  nearby  nations  who  used  the  Chaldean  language.  Solomon 
was  a  scholar  himself.  No  doubt  all  the  available  literature  of  that 
age  and  of  the  surrounding  nations  was  at  his  disposal,  and  he  was 
familiar  with  it.  It  is  said  of  him,  "His  wisdom  excelled  the  children 
of  the  East  country  and  all  the  wisdom  of  Egypt,  for  he  was  wiser  than 
all  men."  That  Solomon  used  Aramaic  words  is  perfectly  logical; 
but  it  would  have  been  strange  if  such  words  had  been  absent  from 
this  book,  with  its  peculiar  character  and  message.  That  Solomon's 
foreign  diplomacy,  as  well  as  marriages  with  foreigners  also  made  him 
familiar  with  Aramaic  words  and  sayings  is  quite  possible.  Then  we 
might  add  that  no  unimpeachable  proof  has  ever  been  given  that  the 
Aramaic  words  and  forms  used  by  Solomon  were  of  later  date  at  all.  At 
any  rate  objections  to  the  date  and  authorship  of  a  Bible  book  on 
purely  philological  evidence  suits  those  perfectly  who  approach  the 
Word  of  God  as  they  approach  any  other  literary  production. 

Another  objection  is  made  on  account  of  the  statement  in  chapter 
i:12,  "I,  the  preacher,  was  king  over  Israel."  It  seems  almost  childish 
that  these  scholars  raise  such  a  point;  it  shows  the  weakness  of  their 
case.  They  declare  that  the  writer  of  the  book  says,  "I,  the  preacher, 
was  king  over  Israel,"  and  that  this  could  not  have  been  written  by 
Solomon,  who  never  ceased  to  be  king.  This  objection  is  foolish. 
It  is  not  at  all  the  question  of  the  fact  that  the  writer  of  the  book 
reigned  as  king,  but  rather  what  was  his  position  at  the  time  when  he 
wrote  the  book.? 

Another  objection  is  the  absence  of  the  name  of  Jehovah  in  this  book. 
It  has  been  said,  "A  book  coming  from  the  Son  of  David  was  hardly 
likely  to  be  characterized,  as  this  is,  by  the  omission  of  the  name 
Jehovah."  This  objection  springs  from  the  deplorable  ignorance  of 
the  critics  concerning  the  message  and  purpose  of  this  book.  The 
omission  of  the  name  of  Jehovah  and  the  use  of  the  name  of  God  as 
Elohim  exclusively  is  a  mark  of  the  genuineness  of  the  book.  We 
shall  refer  to  this  later  when  we  touch  on  the  character  and  message 
of  Ecclesiastes. 

We  mention  but  one  more  of  the  objections.  They  say  "That  the 
book  presents  many  striking  parallelisms  with  that  of  Malachi,  which 
is  confessedly  later  than  the  exile  and  written  under  the  Persian  mon- 
arcy,  probably  390  B.  C." 

This  studied  objection  can  readily  be  answered  by  anybody.  In 
fact  we  have  seen  no  valid  objection  whatever.  Every  one  can  be 
satisfactorily  answered.  A  mature  scholar,  Dean  Milman,  wrote 
many  years  ago:  "I  am  well  aware  that  the  general  voice  of  German 
criticism  assigns  a  later  date  than  that  of  Solomon  to  this  book. 
But  I  am  not  convinced  by  any  arguments  from  internal  evidence 
which  I  have  read." 


56  TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

The  Message  of  Ecclesiastes. 

No  other  book  In  the  whole  Bible  is  so  perplexing,  if  not  confusing 
to  the  average  reader  as  is  Ecclesiastes.  It  is  a  book  filled  with  hope- 
lessness and  despair,  depicting  the  difficulties  and  disappointments 
of  life,  and  the  hollo wness  of  temporal  things;  at  the  same  time  it 
seemingly  sanctions  a  conduct  which  clashes  with  the  standards  of 
holy  living  as  revealed  in  other  portions  of  the  Scriptures.  The  utter 
absence  of  any  praise,  or  expression  of  joy  and  peace,  as  it  is  in  the 
group  of  other  books  to  which  Ecclesiastes  belongs  (Job,  Psalms, 
Proverbs  and  Solomon's  Song)  is  another  striking  characteristic. 

The  problem  is  solved  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  book  itself.  In 
the  first  verse  we  are  introduced  to  the  illustrious  author  of  the  book, 
who  calls  himself  "Koheleth,"  and  "the  son  of  David,  King  in  Jeru- 
salem." This  ought  to  settle  the  question  for  ever.  If  another  man 
wrote  as  the  critics  maintain  centuries  later  and  assumed  that  he  is 
"the  son  of  David  and  King  of  Jerusalem"  he  was  a  fraud.  But  why 
does  Solomon  write?  What  is  the  theme  he  follows?  What  is  the 
object  of  his  debate  or  discourse?  The  next  two  verses  give  the  answer 
to  these  questions  and  the  solution  of  the  problem."  Vanity  of  van- 
ities, saith  Koheleth;  vanity  of  vanities — all  is  vanity.  "What  profit 
hath  a  man  of  all  his  labor  which  he  taketh  under  the  sun?"  Here  are 
two  words  which  arrest  our  attention.  The  first  one  is  "vanity," 
used  five  times  in  the  second  verse.  It  occurs  many  times  through- 
out the  book  and  is  frequently  connected  with  "vexation  of  spirit" 
(literally,  pursuit  of  the  wind).  The  word  "vanity"  means  that 
which  soon  vanishes,  nothingness.  It  is  used  for  the  first  time  by 
Eve  when  she  had  her  second  son,  whom  she  called  "Abel."  So  the 
great  king,  the  wisest  of  men  in  his  discourse  in  which  he  seeks  and 
searches  out  by  wisdom  concerning  all  things  that  are  done  under 
heaven  (verse  13),  and  in  all  his  searching  independent  of  Jehovah's 
revelation,  he  discovers  that  all  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit. 

The  second  word  which  we  notice  is  "under  the  sun."  This  ex- 
pression is  found  twenty-nine  times  in  this  book.  Now  that  which 
is  "under  the  sun"  is  on  the  earth.  There  is,  of  course,  something 
which  is  above  the  sun,  that  is  heaven,  the  heavenly  things.  Eccles- 
iastes then  is  occupied  with  earthly  things  with  what  man  does  apart 
from  God,  that  is  the  natural  man.  The  book  describes  the  things 
under  the  sun,  shows  that  all  what  man  does,  his  pursuits,  his  labors, 
whatever  undertaken  and  all  that  is  connected  with  it,  is  nothing  but 
vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  ever  unsatisfying  and  filled  with  sorrow 
and  perplexity.  The  writer  makes  it  clear  that  in  all  his  searching 
and  description  of  the  things  under  the  sun  he  does  not  depend  on 
divine  revelation,  on  that  which  is  above  the  sun,  but  he  reacheth 
his  results  through  the  light  which  nature  gives;  his  resources  are 
within  himself.     This  is  confirmed  by  the  phrase,  "I  communed  wth 


TEE   BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  57 

my  own  heart,"  which  occurs  seven  times  in  the  book.  The  book 
of  Ecclesiastes  is  therefore  the  book  of  the  natural  man  apart  from 
divine  revelation.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  name  Jehovah  (God's 
name  as  he  enters  in  covenant  relation  with  man)  is  omitted  and 
the  name  of  God  is  only  expressed  by  Elohim,  that  is  His  Name  as 
Creator.  It  shows  what  the  natural  man  is,  the  life  he  lives,  and  the 
world  in  which  he  lives  with  its  fleeting  vanities.  Ecclesiastes  is 
embodied  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  for  one  purpose,  to  show  to  the  nat- 
ural man  the  hollowness  and  vanity  of  all  that  is  under  the  sun,  and 
to' convince  him  thereby  to  seek  and  find  that  which  is  better,  that 
which  is  above  the  sun. 

"It  is  the  experience  of  a  man  who — retaining  his  wisdom,  that  he 
may  judge  of  all — makes  trial  of  everything  under  the  sun  that  should 
be  supposed  capable  of  rendering  men  happy,  through  the  enjoyment 
of  everything  that  human  capacity  can  entertain  as  a  means  of  joy. 
The  effect  of  this  trial  was  the  discovery  that  all  is  vanity  and  vex- 
ation of  spirit;  that  every  effort  to  be  happy  in  possessing  the  earth, 
in  whatever  way  it  may  be,  ends  in  nothing.  There  is  a  canker 
worn  at  the  root.  The  greater  the  capacity  of  enjoyment,  the  deeper 
and  wider  is  the  experience  of  disapointment  and  vexation  of  spirit. 
Pleasure  does  not  satisfy,  and  even  the  idea  of  securing  happiness 
in  this  world  by  an  unusual  degree  of  righteousness  cannot  be  realised. 
Evil  is  there,  and  the  government  of  God  in  such  a  world  as  this  is 
not  in  exercise  to  secure  happiness  to  man  here  below — a  happiness 
drawn  from  things  below  and  resting  on  their  stability."* 

Natural  men,  and  even  infidels,  have  put  a  kind  of  a  seal  upon  the 
character  of  the  book.  The  French  infidel  Renan  praised  it  as  being 
the  only  charming  book  that  a  Jew  had  ever  written,  a  book,  he  added 
that  touched  our  grief  at  every  point,  while  he  saw  in  the  writer  one  who 
ever  posed  but  was  always  natural  and  simple.  Frederick  the  Great, 
equally  infidel,  regarded  it  as  the  most  valuable  book  in  the  whole 
Bible. 

Revelation  and  Inspiration. 

In  the  study  of  this  book  the  important  distinction  between  what 
is  "Revelation"  and  what  is  "Inspiration"  must  not  be  overlooked. 
What  Solomon  sought  out,  the  conclusions  he  reached,  the  things  he 
found  as  he  communed  with  his  own  heart,  all  is  recorded  in  this  book 
by  divine  inspiration.  But  this  inspired  record  is  not  revelation  in 
the  sense,  for  instance,  as  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  It  is  not  divine 
revelation  for  man  to  be  guided  by.  It  is  not  revelation  concerning  that 
which  is  above  the  sun,  nor  the  future.  We  mention  this  because 
those  who  hold  the  evil  doctrines  of  soul-sleep  and  also  annihilation 


*Synopsis. 


58  THE   BOOK  OF   ECCLESIASTES 

turn  to  Ecclesiastes  and  quote  (ix:5-10)  as  being  "the  Word  and  Revel- 
ation of  God"  when  it  is  not. 

The  book  too  directs  to  Christ.  There  is  that  which  is  above  the 
sun,  that  which  is  not  vanishing,  but  abiding.  The  old  creation  de- 
mands a  new  creation  and  that  has  been  made  possible  in  Christ.* 

♦In  "Old  Groans  and  New  Songs"  Mr.  F.  C.  Jennings  unfolds  this 
comparison  between  the  old  and  the  new  in  a  very  precious  way. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  59 


The  Division  of  Ecclesiastes 

It  has  been  charged  "that  the  book  is  very  far  removed 
from  the  character  of  a  systematic  treatise  and  therefore 
does  not  readily  admit  of  a  formal  analysis."  This  verdict 
is  far  from  being  right,  The  analysis  and  division  of  the  book 
depends  on  the  right  viewpoint  concerning  the  contents 
of  it.  As  we  have  stated  in  our  introduction  Ecclesiastes  is 
the  book  of  the  natural  man  searching  out  the  things  under 
the  sun  and  the  conclusions  he  reached.  The  division  of 
the  book  should  be  made  with  this  theme  in  mind. 

After  reading  the  book  carefully  a  number  of  times  one 
finds  that  there  are  two  main  parts.  The  first  six  chapters 
form  the  first  part  and  the  remaining  six  chapters  con- 
stitute the  second  part.  In  the  first  part  the  search  of  the 
wise  man  brings  out  the  fact  what  the  chief  good  is  not,  how 
all  things  under  the  sun  are  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit. 
In  the  second  part  the  search  leads  to  certain  conclusions. 
The  chief  good  is  sought  for  in  wise  conduct  but  in  all  we 
are  still  on  the  ground  of  the  natural  man. 

PART  I.    CHAPTER  I-VI 

I.    THE  PROLOGUE  AND  THE  SEARCH  BEGUN. 

Chapter  i-ii. 

n.    THE  RESULTS  OF  THE  SEARCH.    Chapter  iii-iv. 
in.    EXHORTATIONS  ON  DIFFERENT  VANITIES. 
CONCLUSIONS.    Chapter  v-vi. 

PART  n.    CHAPTER  VH-XH 

I.  THE  GOOD  ADVICE  OF  THE  NATURAL  MAN. 
DISCOURAGEMENT  AND  FAILURE.  Chapter 
vii-ix:12. 

n.  THE  PRAISE  OF  WISDOM  AND  PHILOSOPHY. 
THE  FINAL  WORD  AND  THE  GREAT  CONCLU- 
SION.   Chapter  ix:13-xii. 


60  TEE   BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

Analysis  and  Annotations 

PART  1.  CHAPTER  I-VI 

I.  THE  PROLOGUE  AND  THE  SEARCH  BEGUN. 

Chapter  i-ii. 

CHAPTER  I. 

1.  The  Introduction  and  Prologue.     Verses  1-11. 

2.  The  Seeker;  his  method  and  the  results.     Verses  12-18. 

1.  The  Introduction  and  the  Prologue:  Verses  1-11.    In 

the  general  introduction  we  have  already  referred  to  the 
opening  verses  as  giving  the  information  who  the  author 
is  and  what  is  the  object  of  his  treatise.  So  sure  is  the 
critical  school  that  Solomon  is  not  the  king  mentioned  that 
one  says  "the  fact  that  Solomon  is  not  the  author,  but  is 
introduced  in  a  literary  figure,  has  become  such  an  axiom 
of  the  present  day  interpretation  of  the  book,  that  no 
extended  argument  to  prove  it  is  necessary."  Still  another 
makes  the  following  remarks  as  to  the  date  of  the  book: 
"I  shall  presume  that  we  have  in  this  book,  a  late,  perhaps 
the  very  latest,  portion  of  the  Old  Testament  canon;  and 
that  the  book  was  written,  not  in  the  palmy  days  of  the 
empire  of  Solomon,  but  at  a  time  when  the  Jewish  people, 
once  so  full  of  aspirations  to  universal  empire,  always  so 
intolerant  of  foreign  supremacy,  was  lying  beneath  the  yoke 
of  Persian  or  Syrian  or  Egyptian  kings;  when  the  Holy 
Land  had  become  a  province,  ruled  by  some  Eastern  satrap, 
and  suffering  from  the  rapacity  and  corruption  inherent  at 
all  times  in  such  government"  (Dean  Bradley).  Such 
presumptions  spring  from  ignorance  about  the  message  of  the 
book.  We  shall  find  in  the  text  the  above  assertions  refuted 
and  a  confirmation  likewise  of  the  Solomonic  authorship. 
"Before  following  the  Preacher  in  his  great  quest  it  should 
be  noted  that  he  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  man  who  himself 
belongs  under  the  sun.     Whether  the  word  Koheleth  is 


THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  61 

rendered  "Preacher,"  "Debater"  or  "Assembler"  or  "One 
of  an  Assembly,"  the  whole  tenor  of  the  teaching  proves  it 
is  Wisdom  from  under  the  sun.  Natural  Wisdom,  that  is 
speaking.  The  wisest  of  men  undertakes  to  observe  and 
experiment  with  life  under  the  sun,  in  order  to  find  out  for 
all  men  the  outcome  of  all  his  searchings,  and  then  rehearses 
all  to.  an  assembly  of  his  fellows.  He  is  not  supposed,  to 
know  any  divinely-revealed  wisdom,  or  to  have  heard  of  a 
righteousness  of  faith,  or  of  divine  mercy,  or  of  forgiveness 
of  sins.  He  is  to  make  answer  as  a  natural  man  to  whom  is 
given  the  resources  and  helps  common  to  natural  men,  only 
he  is  wiser  and  richer  than  they,  and  so  must  bring  the 
final  answer  for  all.  And  also  he  is  a  Hebrew  and  knows 
of  the  one  living  and  true  God.  W^hen  he  says  "thou," 
in  advice  or  warning,  it  is  not  so  much  to  some  disciple  or 
"son"  he  is  speaking  as  to  himself,  or  he  is  then  assuming 
a  high  ground,  far  above  "the  maddening  crowd,"  but  it  is 
soon  apparent  how,  in  these  most  exalted  frames  of  the 
pious  and  philosophic  mind,  he  is  still  only  a  natural  man, 
for  he  is  found,  soon  after,  in  the  depth  of  despair  uttering 
his  disgust  and  hate  of  life  and  exclaiming:  "The  whole  is 
vapor  and  a  chasing  of  the  wind."  That  "thou"  is,  after 
all,  a  sign  that  he  is  talking  to  himself,  telling  what  he  and 
all  men  under  the  sun  ought  to  do,  but  utterly  fail  to  do. 

Not  only  does  he  pronounce  the  verdict  of  "Vanity" 
for  all,  but  he  resorts  to  the  same  passing  mirthful  enjoy- 
ment he  commends  to  all;  but  he  would  do  it  all  before 
God.  He  is  indeed  w^iser  and  more  serious  than  other 
men,  only  to  become  more  perplexed  and  sorrowful  than  they- 

On  him  hangs  more  heavily  than  on  other  men 

"...  the  burden  of  the  mystery 
"...  the  heavy  and  the  weary  weight 
"  Of  all  this  unintelligible  world." 

He,  if  any,  can  say,  **I  know  there  is  nothing  better  for 
them."  He  is  king  and  can  lay  the  whole  world  under 
contribution  to  furnish  the  means  for  answer.  "What  can 
the  man  do  who  cometh  after  the  king.'^" 


62  THE   BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

He  repeatedly  says,  "I  have  seen  all  the  works  that  are 
done,"  all  the  "oppressions,"  and  "all  the  labor  that  I 
labored  at."  And  so  he  is  to  speak  for  the  world,  for  the 
race,  for  man,  for  high,  for  low,  wise  and  foolish,  rich  and 
poor,  in  hut  and  hall,  living  and  dying.  And  he  speaks  as 
before  God.  He,  of  all  men,  feels  a  strange  fear,  seeing 
that  somehow  man's  imperfect  vain  life  under  the  sun  is 
mysteriously  related  to  and  controlled  by  the  unalterable 
purpose  and  work  of  God."* 

The  first  note  as  to  vanity  is  found  in  verses  4-11.  There 
is  a  law  of  repetition,  or  circle-movement.  It  works  in  the 
sphere  of  nature  as  well  as  in  human  life.  Generation 
follows  generation;  the  sun  has  his  circle;  the  winds  too 
have  their  currents  in  which  they  blow  from  north  to  south 
and  south  to  north;  the  waters  also  are  subject  to  the  same 
law.  History  repeats  itself,  for  the  thing  that  has  been, 
is  that  which  shall  be  and  that  which  is  done  is  that  which 
shall  be  done.  There  is  then,  no  new  thing  under  the  sun; 
nothing  is  new,  all  is  repetition,  a  monotonous  unchange- 
ableness.  Man  is  in  the  midst  of  it;  he  too  is  subject  to 
this  law.  Everything  then  under  the  sun  is  restless,  unstable 
(except  the  earth  itself,  which  abideth  forever:  verse  4) 
hollow  and  empty,  therefore  all  is  vanity.  Here  is  a  picture 
of  unrest,  weariness,  if  not  melancholy  and  despair. 

2.  The  Seeker;  Eis  Method  and  the  Results:  Verses  12-18. 
On  the  critical  objection  that  Solomon  is  meant  in  verse  12 
see  the  general  introduction.  The  great  king,  filled  with 
wisdom  and  learning,  rich  and  prosperous  as  none  ever  was 
before  him  in  Jerusalem,  nor  after  him,  gives  his  heart  to 
search  out  everything  that  is  done  under  heaven.  \Mien  he 
says:  *T  communed  with  mine  own  heart,"  he  states  the 
method  of  his  search.  He  does  it  by  meditation  and  not 
through  revelation.  He  searches  not  in  the  light  which 
comes  from  above,  but  that  which  comes  from  nature  and 
by  observation.  He  tells  us  a  little  more  of  himself.  "Lo, 
I  am  come  to  great  estate,  and  have  gotten  more  wisdom 


♦Ecclesiastes.      W.  J.  Erdman. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  63 

than  all  they  that  have  been  before  me  in  Jerusalem;  yea, 
my  heart  had  great  experience  of  wisdom  and  knowledge." 
Is  this  language  not  sufficient  to  establish  beyond  the  shadow 
of  the  doubt  that  Solomon  speaks?  And  if  not  Solomon, 
who  was  it  who  dared  to  write  these  words?  And  what  are 
the  given  results  by  the  great  and  wise  king  of  Jerusalem? 
The  result  is  twofold.  "I  have  seen  all  the  works  that 
are  done  under  the  sun;  and  behold  all  is  vanity  and  vexa- 
tion of  spirit" — the  pursuit  of  the  wind,  that  is  chasing  air- 
bubbles.  And  another  conclusion:  "For  in  much  wisdom  is 
much  grief;  and  he  thai  increaseth  knowledge  increase th 
sorrow"  (verse  18).  What  a  verdict  from  such  a  man  as 
Solomon  was.  He  had  all  things  man  can  enjoy;  all  pleasures 
and  honors;  great  possessions,  chariots,  horses,  palaces  and 
a  large  estate  and  he  exclaims  "nothing  but  travail!" 
— "Nothing  but  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit!"  It  all 
leaves  me  empty;  it  does  not  satisfy. 

But  he  had  given  himself  to  wisdom.  He  possessed  unusual 
wisdom.  The  king  was  what  we  would  term  today  a  great 
scientist.  He  excelled  in  wisdom  all  the  children  of  the 
East  country.  Proverbial  in  his  days  was  "the  wisdom  of 
Egypt";  yet  his  wisdom  was  greater.  His  fame  was  in 
all  nations  round  about.  Philosophy  and  poetry  were  his 
great  achievements.  "And  he  spake  of  trees,  from  the  cedar 
tree  that  is  in  Lebanon  even  unto  the  hyssop  that  springeth 
out  of  the  wall;  he  spake  also  of  beasts,  and  of  fowl,  and  of 
creeping  things  and  of  fishes"  (1  Kings  iv:29,  etc.).  He  was 
a  great  botanist,  an  ornithologist  and  zoologist.  He 
traced  God's  wonders  in  nature,  that  which  the  natural 
man  can  so  easily  do.  But  w^hat  about  all  this  wisdom? 
Did  it  satisfy  his  soul?  We  listen  to  his  answer:  "I  perceived 
that  this  also  is  vexation  of  spirit."  The  more  knowledge 
the  more  sorrow.    Alas!  how  true  it  all  is! 

But  there  is  something  else  which  satisfies?  Is  there 
a  higher  wisdom  and  knowledge?  There  is,  but  in  the  book 
of  the  natural  man  it  is  unrevealed.  That  which  satisfies, 
which  is  not  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  is  that  which  is 
above  the  sun,  and  not  under  it.     From  above  the  sun  He 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

came,  who  is  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  Son  of  God.  He  has 
come  and  gone,  but  brought  to  the  poor  thirsting  and  hungry 
heart  of  man  the  true  knowledge.  He  who  died  for  our  sins 
and  is  now  back  above  the  sun,  is  He  *'in  whom  are  hid  all 
the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knov/ledge"  (Col.  ii).  That 
which  alone  can  satisfy  is  Christ. 

THE  RESULTS  OF  THE  SEARCH  AND  DIFFERENT  VANITIES. 
CHAPTER  n. 

1.  His  personal  Experience.     Verses  1-11. 

2.  Various  Vanities  and  a  Conclusion.     Verses  12-26. 

1.  His   Personal   Experience:    Verses    1-11.    Here   we 

find  first  of  all  the  king's  personal  experience.  He  experi- 
mented, so  to  speak,  with  that  which  is  the  possession  of 
the  natural  man,  a  fallen  nature.  In  that  nature  are  found 
three  things:  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes  and 
the  pride  of  life.  We  can  trace  these  three  things  in  the 
opening  verses.  The  lust  of  the  flesh  in  verses  1-3;  the 
lust  of  the  eyes  in  verses  4-6,  and  the  pride  of  life  in  verses 
7-8.  He  said  in  his  heart,  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee: 
that  is,  I  will  try  now  to  satisfy  thee,  that  is  myself,  my 
heart.  He  said  to  himself,  "enjoy  pleasure."  He  laughed 
and  had  mirth;  he  tried  wine,  laid  hold  on  folly.  Then 
he  made  great  works,  built  houses,  planted  vineyards,  laid 
out  beautiful  oriental  gardens  with  fruit  trees,  all  kinds  of 
shrubbery,  w^ith  pools  of  water,  springs  and  waterfalls — 
all  so  pleasing  to  the  eye — the  lust  of  the  eyes.  To  all  this 
he  added  servants  and  maidens,  wdth  great  possessions. 
He  gathered  silver  and  gold  and  treasures  such  which  only 
kings  could  obtain,  gifts,  probably  from  other  monarchs, 
perhaps  those  which  the  Queen  of  Sheba  brought.  He  also 
paid  attention  to  music,  had  men  singers,  women  singers 
and  an  orchestra.  Then,  self-satisfied,  he  leans  back  and 
says,  "So  I  was  great  and  increased  more  than  all  that  were 
before  me  in  Jerusalem;  also  my  wisdom  remained  with  me" 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  65 

(verse  9).  Who  can  doubt  even  for  a  moment  that  all 
this  could  mean  any  other  person  but  Solomon;  none  but 
he  could  speak  thus.  But  to  make  sure,  he  did  not  leave 
a  single  desire  unsatisfied,  for  "whatsoever  mine  eyes  de- 
sired I  kept  not  from  them,  I  withheld  not  my  heart  from 
any  joy."  Well,  he  had  tried  everything,  every  pleasure, 
everything  that  is  beautiful  to  the  eye;  he  was  surrounded 
with  every  comfort,  had  all  honor  and  glory,  was  wealthy 
and  esteemed.  Does  he  then  sing  and  in  a  blessed  peace 
of  mind  is  he  content  and  satisfied?  Far  from  it.  "Then — 
then" — when  he  had  done  all  these  things  and  had  every 
desire  fulfilled — *'then  I  looked  on  all  the  works  that  my 
hands  had  wrought,  and  on  the  labor  that  I  had  labored 
to  do;  and,  behold,  all  was  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit; 
and  there  was  no  profit  under  the  sun."  It  is  a  groan 
instead  of  a  song.  But  that  sounds  pessimistic.  It  is  the 
pessimism  into  which  sin  has  put  man.  Whatever  man 
does  and  seeks  in  satisfying  that  old  nature,  whatever  his 
pursuits,  his  labors  and  his  achievements  in  life,  if  it  is 
that  and  nothing  else,  in  the  end  it  is  nothing  but  vanity 
and  a  chasing  of  the  wind. 

Thank  God!  there  is  One  who  can  still  the  hunger  and 
thirst  of  the  soul,  who  graciously  invites,  "If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink." 

2.  Various  Vanities  and  a  Conclusion:  Verses  12-26. 
He  now  turns  in  search  for  happiness  in  another  direction. 
The  old,  old  question,  "Is  life  worth  living?"  after  all  he 
had  stated  must  be  answered  negatively — if  all  is  vanity 
and  vexation  of  spirit  and  there  is  no  profit  under  the  sun, 
in  anything  man  enjoys,  labors  for  and  obtains,  then  life  is 
not  worth  living.  He  had  been  disappointed  in  his  search, 
but  now  he  turns  to  something  more  ideal  and  not  material- 
istic as  the  former  things.  "Then  I  saw  that  wisdom  excelleth 
folly,  as  far  as  light  excelleth  darkness."  He  turns  phil- 
osopher, but  it  is  of  no  avail,  for  it  leads  in  the  same  road 
and  ends  with  the  same  groan — vanity  and  vexation  of 
spirit.  While  wisdom  is  superior  to  folly  as  far  as  light  is 
superior  to  darkness,  yet  wisdom  cannot  help  man,  cannot 


66  TEE   BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

give  him  peace  nor  give  him  happiness.  There  is  one  event 
which  happens  to  the  wise  men  and  to  the  fool:  that  event 
is  death.  As  it  happeneth  to  the  fool,  so  it  happeneth  unto 
me.  WTiat  then  was  the  good  that  I  was  more  wise?  He 
at  once  concludes  "this  also  is  vanity."  Death,  according 
to  the  conception  of  the  natural  man,  apart  from  revelation, 
plunges  the  wise  man  and  the  fool  into  oblivion,  **there  is 
no  rememberance  of  the  wise  more  than  of  the  fool  for  ever; 
seeing  that  which  now  is  in  the  days  to  come  shall  all  be 
forgotten  and  how  dieth  the  wise  man  as  the  fool?"  (verse  16). 
Such  is  the  reasoning  of  the  natural  man.  By  revelation 
we  know  that  there  is  rememberance.  But  it  leads  Koheleth, 
the  king,  almost  to  despair.  He  hates  life.  If  the  pursuit 
of  pleasures,  the  lust  of  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life  left  me 
empty,  and  were  found  out  to  be  nothing  but  vexation  of 
spirit,  so  that  life  is  not  ^s'orth  living,  equally  so,  he  finds 
out,  that  wisdom  in  itself  and  its  possession  brings  the 
same  results — vanity  of  spirit — I  hated  life!  Then  he  speaks 
of  labor  done.  He  has  labored  to  leave  it  all  to  the  one 
who  comes  after  him,  and  he  may  be  a  fool  and  not  a  wise 
man.  Or  he  may  have  labored  wisely  and  it  is  left  all  to 
one  who  never  did  anything,  a  sluggard.  All  he  brands  as 
vanity  and  ends  by  saying,  "For  v/hat  hath  a  man  of  all 
his  labors,  and  of  the  vexation  of  his  heart  wherein  he  hath 
labored  under  the  sun?  For  ail  liis  days  are  sorrows,  and 
his  travail  grief;  yea  his  heart  taketh  no  rest  in  the  night. 
This  is  also  vanity." 

The  conclusion  reached  is  that,  apart  from  God,  man  has 
no  capacity  to  enjoy  his  labor.  Verse  25  has  been  met- 
rically rendered  as  follovrs: 

"The  good  is  not  in  man  that  he  should  eat  and  drink 
And  find  his  soul's  enjoyment  in  his  toil; 
This,  too,  I  saw  is  only  from  the  hands  of  God." 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  67 

n.    FURTHER  RESULTS  OF  THE  SEARCH. 

Chapter  iii-iv. 

CHAPTER  m. 
THE  RESULTS  OF  THE  SEARCH. 

1.  The  Times  of  Man  Under  the  Sun.     Verses  1-11. 

2.  What  then  is  the  Good? 

3.  Concerning  Judgment  and  the  Future.     Verses  16-22. 

1.  The  Times  of  Man  Under  the  Sun:  Verses  1-11.  There 
is  a  time  for  everything.  Twenty-eight  "times"  are  men- 
tioned, beginning  with  the  time  of  birth  and  ending  with 
the  time  for  peace.  Everything  has  a  fixed  time:  Life- 
Death;  Seeding-Harvesting;  Kilhng-Healing;  Breaking-down 
Building-up;  Weeping-Laughing;  Mourning-Dancing,  etc. 
These  are  the  times  of  the  entire  race;  that  is  what  human 
Hfe  is.  All  moves  and  changes;  all  appears  unto  him  profit- 
less. "What  profit  hath  he  that  worketh  in  that  wherein 
he  laboreth?  W^hat  is  the  gain  of  it,  to  be  born  and  to  die, 
to  plant  and  to  pull  up,  to  weep  and  to  laugh,  to  mourn  and 
to  dance,  to  get  and  to  lose,  to  love  and  to  hate?  But  he 
advanced  a  step.  He  recognizeth  that  all  this  travail 
must  be  of  God,  who  has  produced  these  never  ceasing 
changes,  so  that  men's  hearts  might  be  exercised  thereby." 
"I  have  seen  the  travail  which  God  has  given  to  the  sons 
of  men  to  be  exercised  in  it.'*  Yea,  there  is  something 
which  is  in  man.  '  "God  hath  set  the  world  in  their  heart," 
the  correct  rendering  is,  "God  hath  set  eternity  in  their 
heart"  (verse  11).  Man  has  the  sense  of  the  infinite  in 
his  heart. 

All  that  time  offers,  all  these  changes  cannot  satisfy,  nor 
can  man  with  eternity  in  his  heart  find  out  the  truth  about 
it  by  himself.     He  may  feel  but  cannot  understand. 

2.  Vfhat  Then  is  the  Good?  Verses  12-15.  What  then 
is  the  good?  To  what  can  man  in  such  condition,  with 
such  constant  changes,  and  with  an  unsatisfied  feeling  of 
the  infinite  in  his  heart  resort  to?    The  searcher   gives  his 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

results.  Let  man  rejoice  and  do  good  in  his  life.  Let  him 
eat  and  drink  and  enjoy  the  food  of  all  his  labor.  But  let 
him  also  do  so  fearing  God  in  view  of  God's  judgment,  for 
*'God  requireth  that  which  is  past."  This  is  about  as  far 
as  the  natural  man  can  see. 

3.  Concerning  Judgment  and  the  Future:  Verses  16-22. 
The  thought  of  judgment  expressed  in  verse  15  is  now  more 
fully  taken  up.     It  seems  as  if  a  ray  of  light  now  breaks  in. 
There  must  be  from  the  side  of  God  judgment.     Under  the 
sun  he  saw  in  the  place  of  judgment  wickedness,  and  in  the 
place  of  righteousness,  wickedness  was  there  also.     Then 
he  said  in  his  heart,  *'God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked."     He  draws  the  conclusion   that  the  present  in- 
justice must  be  dealt  with  by  God.     But  here  he  stops 
short.     He  may  surmise,  but  certainty  he  has  not.     Instead 
of  advancing  in  his  searchings  as  a  natural  man  he  comes 
back  to  his  old  wail  of  vanity.     "I  said  in  mine  heart,  it 
is  because  of  the  sons  of  men  that  God  may  prove  them,  and 
that  they  may  see  they  themselves  are  but  as  beasts.     For 
that  w^hich  befalleth  the  sons  of  men  befalleth  beasts;  even 
one  thing  befalleth  them:  as  the  one  dieth  so  dieth  the  other; 
yea,  they  have  all  one  breath;  and  man  hath  no  pre-emin- 
ence above  the  beasts:  for  all  is  vanity."     It  shows  that 
as  far  as  life  beyond  the  present  is  concerned  all  is  darkness 
for  man.     He  may  have  "eternity  set  in  his  heart",  but 
he  has  no  light.     Death  comes  alike  to  man  and  beast; 
they  die  and  are  gone,  hence  the  conclusion,  "man  hath 
no  pre-eminence  above  the  beast."     But  man  has,  as  the 
revelation  of  God  teacheth.     But  here  we  do  not  listen  to 
God's  revelation  but  to  the  searchings   and  observations 
of  man  only.     The  natural  man    knows,   "all"   men   and 
beasts  "go  to  one  place,  all  are  of  the  dust,  and  all  turn  to 
dust  again."     Then  there  is  just  a  faint  suggestion  of  some- 
thing which  might  be  beyond  the  grave.     The  correct  ren- 
dering of  verse  21  is,  "Who  knoweth  whether  the  spirit  of 
man  goeth  upward,  and  the  spirit  of  the  beast  goeth  down- 
ward to  the  earth.''"     Man  and  beast  share  the  same  being, 
draw  breath  in  the  same  way,  spring  from  the  dust,  return 


THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  69 

to  the  dust,  but  who  can  give  assurance  that  the  spirit  of 
man  really  goeth  upward?  Who  knoweth  if  this  is  really- 
true?  Who  has  come  back  and  told  us  the  truth  about  it? 
Who  knoweth?  Such  is  still  the  cry  of  the  natural  man  with 
all  his  boasted  discoveries  and  research.  Finally  he  reach- 
eth  the  same  goal  as  Koheleth — all  is  vanity.  Oh!  blessed 
truth  as  given  by  revelation  and  above  all  in  the  person  of 
our  Lord  and  His  precious  Gospel!  Man  indeed  has  the 
pre-eminence  and  is  not  like  the  beast  that  perisheth. 
Redeemed  by  Him  who  became  man,  to  die  for  our  sins, 
not  only  the  spirit  of  the  redeemed  goeth  upward  but  in 
its  time  the  body  will  leave  the  dust  and  be  changed  like 
unto  the  glorious  body  of  Him,  who  as  glorified  man  sits 
at  the  right  hand  of  God. 

Returning  to  the  wise  king  with  his  search,  in  view  of  all 
this,  which  he  has  brought  forth  in  this  chapter  he  gives 
his  counsel  as  to  what  man  is  to  do  under  these  harassing 
circumstances.  "Wherefore  I  perceive  that  there  is  nothing 
better  than  that  a  man  (the  natural  man)  should  rejoice  in  his 
own  works,  for  that  is  his  portion;  for  who  shall  bring  him 
to  see  what  shall  be  after  him?"  (See  also  vi:13.) 

CHAPTER  IV. 
OBSERVATIONS  OF  DIFFERENT  WRONGS. 

1.  Concerning  Oppressions.     Verses  1-3. 

2.  Concerning  Envy  of  Fools  and  the  Rich.     Verses  4-7. 
S.     Concerning  the  Miser.     Verses  7  12. 

4.     Concerning  Popularity.     Verses  13-16. 

1.  Concerning  Oppressions:  Verses  1-3.  He  observes 
that  the  world  is  filled  with  oppressions.  This  connects 
with  the  statement  made  in  the  previous  chapter,  (verse  16). 
Criticism  declares  in  connection  with  this  passage  that  it 
could  not  have  been  written  by  Solomon,  nor  does  it,  they 
claim,  describe  the  conditions  of  the  people  Israel  during  the 
reign  of  the  king.  One  commentator  asks,  *'Can  this  bitter 
experience  be  drawn,  I  asked  in  passing,  from  the  golden 


70  THE  BOOK  OF   ECCLESIASTES 

days  of  Solomon,  from  the  high  noon  of  Hebrew  prosperity, 
as  sketched  in  the  Book  of  Kings?"  They  apply  it  to  the 
days  of  the  Ptolemies.  But  Solomon  does  not  say  that 
the  oppressions  were  in  Jerusalem  at  all.  He  says  that  he 
saw  "all  the  oppressions  that  ar^;  done  under  the  sun." 
As  the  great  king  was  in  touch  with  other  nations  he  knew 
what  oppression,  poverty,  tears  and  sorrow  are  in  the 
v/orld,  and  that  the  oppressed,  the  grief  stricken,  the  down- 
trodden, have  no  comforter.  It  is  so  still,  "under  the  sun." 
Oppression  and  all  that  goes  with  it  is  still  the  history  of 
part  of  the  race  and  will  be  as  long  as  sin  reigns.  Injustice 
and  unredressed  wrongs  have  been  the  order  for  almost 
six  thousand  years.  So  deep  is  his  sorrow  over  these  con- 
ditions that  he  declares  it  would  have  been  better  for  both 
the  living  and  the  dead  if  they  had  never  existed  at  all. 

2.  Concerning  Envy  of  Fools  and  the  Rich:  Verses  4-7. 
In  continuing  his  observations  he  mentions  the  successful 
man,  the  man  who  has  made  life  worth  living.  But  success 
breeds  envy.  It  makes  his  life  bitter.  Instead  of  being 
loved  the  successful  man  is  hated;  what  else  then  is  it  but 
vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit!  But  now  another  extreme. 
It  is  the  sluggard,  the  lazy  man,  the  fool  who  eats  his  own 
flesh.  But  here  is  the  best  human  wisdom  can  suggest. 
Avoiding  both  extremes,  he  declares,  "Better  is  an  handful 
with  quietness,  than  two  handsful  with  labor  and  vexation 
of  spirit." 

3.  Concerning  the  Miser:  Verses  7-12.  Another  vanity 
is  observed.  Some  are  misers,  heaping  up  riches  and  treas- 
ures untold.  He  has  no  relations,  no  children,  no  brother; 
even  companionship  and  friendship  are  unknown  to  him.  He 
lives  his  solitary  life.  His  ambition  is  to  labor  and  gather 
riches,  but  his  eyes  are  never  satisfied  with  riches;  he  wants 
more  and  more  all  the  time.  This  also  is  vanity  and  is  a 
sore  travail. 

4.  Concerning  Popularity:  Verses  13-16.  Popularity  is 
another  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  No  lot  is  abiding. 
Upon  the  throne  sits  an  old  and  foolish  king.  He  is  de- 
throned and  is  replaced  by  a  youth  out  of  prison. 


THE   BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  71 

III.    EXHORTATIONS  ON  DIFFERENT  VANITIES. 

Conclusions — Chapter  v-vi. 

CHAPTER  V. 

EXHORTATIONS 

1.  Concerning  Worship  and  Vows.     Verses  1-7. 

2.  Concerning  Extortions.     Verses  8-9. 

3.  The  Vanities  of  Wealth.     Verses  10-17. 

4.  The  Conclusion.     Verses  18-20. 

1.  Concerning   Worship   and   Vows:   Verses    1-7.    The 

writer,  King  Solomon,  seems  to  have  been  exhausted  in  his 
descriptions  as  to  the  things  imder  the  sun.  He  pauseth 
and  turns  to  something  different.  He  meditates  on  wor- 
ship, that  man  aims  to  get  in  touch  v/ith  the  unseen  God. 
"He  seems  to  turn  to  hiniseK  again  and  communes  with  his 
heart  on  the  loftier  heights  of  what  proves  to  be,  after  all, 
but  natural  religiousness,  and  which  cannot  save  him  from 
the  depths  of  unbelief,  ignorance  and  despair,  in  which  he 
is  soon  hopelessly  floundering.  Mindful  of  man's  jaunty 
liberalism  and  enslaving  superstitions,  rash  vows  and  wordy 
prayers,  shallow  reverence  and  dreamy  worship — dreamy 
and  unreal  because  full  of  entreating  vanities  and  worldly 
business,  the  speaker  earnestly  exhorts  the  multitude  going 
to  the  house  of  God  to  have  few  words  and  slow  and  solemn 
steps  in  their  worship  and  vows;  but  even  then  he  does  so 
like  a  natural  man  himself,  knowing  only  of  a  God  far  away, 
who  is  looking  upon  the  sinful  on  earth  with  cold  judicial  eye, 
ready  to  destroy  the  work  of  man  in  wrath."*  The  natural 
man  may  feel  God,  fear  Him  with  a  slavish  fear,  make  an 
attempt  to  worship  Him  and  do  something,  yet  he  does 
not  know  God  nor  can  he  know  Him  by  himself.  Christen- 
dom, even  to-day,  bears  witness  to  the  worship  of  the 
natural  man.  Yet  this  natural  religion,  which  recognizeth 
the  existence  of  a  Creator,  speaks  of  Him  as  the  All-wise, 
the  Omnipotent  and  the  Eternal,   makes  an  attempt  to 

♦Ecclesiastes  by  W.  J.  Erdman. 


7£  TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

worship  in  a  house  by  ceremonies  and  ritual,  or  that  which 
takes  on  a  more  Hberal  form,  does  not  meet  the  needs  of  man. 
God  is  still  in  heaven  and  man  on  earth  (verse  2),  and  a 
vast  distance  between — an  unbridged  gulf.  To  bring  man 
to  God,  to  give  him  peace  and  assurance,  to  deliver  him  from 
fear,  revelation  is  needed  that  which  is  "above  the  sun." 
The  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  provision. 

2.  Concerning  Extortions:  Verses  8-9.  Once  more 
he  calls  attention  to  oppression,  the  extortions  so  common 
"under  the  sun,"  and  he  shows  that  One  higher  than  they 
will  some  day  judge  them,  for  He  has  regard  for  the  poor 
and  the  oppressed. 

3.  The  Vanities  of  Wealth:  Verses  10-17.  He  speaks 
now  of  wealth  and  of  earthly  prosperity.  Silver  does  not 
satisfy,  nor  is  he  that  loveth  abundance  satisfied  with  the 
increase.  It  is  vanity.  Earthly  happiness  in  the  things 
under  the  sun  is  a  vain  hope.  The  reasons  why  riches,  and 
what  goes  along  with  them,  cannot  give  true  enjoyment 
have  been  searched  out  by  the  wise  king  and  the  results  of 
his  observations  are  given  in  these  verses.  "As  he  came 
forth  from  his  mother's  womb  naked  so  shall  he  go  again  as  he 
came,  and  shall  take  nothing  for  his  labor,  which  he  may 
carry  away  in  his  hand  .  ,  .  and  what  profit  hath  he  that 
he  laboreth  for  the  wind.^"  (See  1  Timothy  vi:7). 

4.  The  Conclusion:  Verses  18-20.  What  then  has  he 
seen  and  learned  in  observing  all  these  vanities?  He  draws 
the  conclusion  that  it  is  good  and  comely  for  one  to  eat 
and  to  drink,  and  then  to  enjoy  to  fullest  extent  the  good 
which  he  has  obtained  all  the  days  of  his  life,  the  life  and 
length  of  days  given  him  by  the  Creator.  And  if  God  has 
given  him  riches  and  wealth  and  the  capacity  to  enjoy  it, 
then  he  ought  to  take  his  portion  and  rejoice  in  his  labor. 
Such  a  spirit  of  enjoyment  will  make  him  forget  the  evil 
in  his  day;  it  will  carry  him  over  the  disagreeable  things  of 
life.  "For  he  shall  not  much  remember  the  days  of  his  life, 
because  God  answereth  him  in  the  joy  of  his  heart."  The 
latter  phrase  means  that  God  Himself  corresponds  to  his 
joy,  for  real  enjoyment  is  a  God-acknowledging  spirit. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  73 

CHAPTER  Vir 

DISHEARTENING  CONTRADICTIONS. 

1.  Riches — Inability  to  enjoy  them.     Verses  1-2. 

2.  Having  All — Yet  no  Fill  of  the  Soul.     Verses  3-9. 

3.  The  Sad  Ending  Wail.     Verses  10-12. 

1.  Riches  and  Inability  to  Enjoy  Them:  Verses  1-2.   The 

first  evil  which  the  wise  searcher  as  a  discouraging  contra- 
diction is,  that  God  giveth  a  man  riches,  wealth,  and  honor 
so  that  he  does  not  lack  in  anything  whatever.  But  God 
does  not  give  him  the  power  to  enjoy  it,  a  stranger  instead 
eats  thereof.  This  makes  impossible  what  he  stated  in  the 
closing  verses  of  the  preceding  chapter.  The  cherished 
desires  of  man  has  found  no  fulfilment.  And  if  he  has  seen  this 
evil,  so  do  we  still  see  it  also.  Where  then  is  *'the  good 
and  comely"  of  chapter  v:18.?  This  is  vanity  and  it  is  an 
evil  disease,  he  confesseth. 

2.  Having  All— Yet  No  Fill  of  the  Soul:  Verses  3-9.  But 
here  is  more  of  life's  bitterness.  If  one  should  beget  a 
hundred  children  and  live  to  a  very  ripe  old  age,  so  old  he 
becomes  that  it  seems  as  if  there  is  to  be  no  burial  for  him 
at  all,  yet  his  soul  is  not  filled  with  good — what  then.?  "I 
say  that  an  untimely  birth  is  better  than  he;  for  it  cometh 
in  vanity  and  departeth  in  darkness,  and  the  name  there- 
of is  covered  with  darkness;  moreover  it  has  not  seen  the 
sun  nor  known  it;  this  hath  rest  rather  than  the  other:  yea, 
though  he  live  a  thousand  years  twice  told,  and  yet  enjoy 
no  good;  do  not  all  go  to  one  place?"  It  is  a  sad,  sorrowful 
picture,  yet  every  word  of  it  is  true  as  to  man's  existence. 
With  all  his  long  life  and  all  it  brings,  riches  and  power,  his 
soul  has  not  the  fill  it  needs,  that  which  satisfies.  His  life 
ends  at  last  and  then  there  is  the  one  place — the  region  of 
the  unknown,  the  Sheol,  where  they  all  go.  And  about 
that  one  place  there  is  no  light;  it  is  felt  existence  after 
death  but  of  what  nature?  All  is  darkness!  Better,  far 
better  off,  is  the  untimely  birth. 

In  verse  7  he  comes  back  again  to  the  labor  that  man 


74  TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

does.  It  is  for  the  mouth,  yet  it  does  not  satisfy — 
the  appetite  is  not  filled.  The  hunger  returns,  and 
man  must  labor  to  satisfy  it  and  yet  it  is  never  filled. 
The  fool  and  the  wise  make  the  same  experience.  The 
wise  has  no  advantage'  over  the  fool;  and  the  poor  man 
who  has  something  to  eat  in  sight  is  far  better  off  than 
the  rich,  whose  desires  wander,  seeking  that  which  gratifies. 
Vanity  and  Vexation  of  spirit!  We  may  all  sum  it  up  in 
a  brief  sentence:  Man  under  the  sun,  whatever  he  does, 
all  his  labors,  all  his  riches,  all  his  seeking  for  good,  all  his 
achievements  cannot  satisfy  him,  it  cannot  givef  that  which 
the  soul  of  man  craves  and  needs.  Nor  can  it  ever  be 
discovered  by  the  searcher,  the  wise  man,  the  philosopher, 
the  scientist.  What  man  needs  is  not  anything,  "under 
the  sun"  but  that  which  is  "from  above  the  sun." 

4.  The  Sad  Ending  Wail:  Verses  10-13.  Who  knoweth 
what  is  good  for  man  in  this  life  that  is — what  is  it  that  can 
satisfy  the  heart  and  soul  of  man?  He  spendeth  all  the 
days  of  his  vain  life  as  a  shadow.  For  who  can  tell  a  man 
what  shall  be  after  him  under  the  sun.  It  is  the  wail  of 
darkness  and  despair.  \Mio  knoweth  .^^  Not  the  natural 
man.  But  the  question  which  man  cannot  answer,  God 
has  graciously,  blessedly  and  eternally  answered  in  His 
Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  With  Peter  we  too  cry  out, 
"Lord  to  whom  shall  we  go?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal 
life"  (John  vi:68). 

PARin.    CHAPTER  vii:xii. 

I.    THE   GOOD    ADVICE   OF   THE   NATURAL   MAN. 
DISCOURAGEMENT  AND  FAILURE. 

Chapter  vii-ix:12. 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

1.  The  Better  Things.     Verses  1-14. 

2.  The   Anomalies,     Verses  15-18. 

3      The  Strength  of  Wisdom,  yet  None  Perfect.     Verses  19-22. 
4.      The  Worst  Thing  He  Found.      Verses  23-29. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  75 

1.  The  Better  Things:  Verses  1-14.  All  had  been  tested 
by  the  royal  searcher;  all  was  found  out  to  be  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit.  Darkness,  discouragement,  uncertainty 
and  despair  were  the  results.  The  good,  that  which  is 
right  and  comely  for  men,  supposedly,  found  had  also 
turned  unto  vapor,  empty  and  hollow  like  the  rest.  He 
starts  now  in  a  new  direction;  he  turns  moralist  and  phil- 
osophizeth  on  the  better  things.  He  climbs  high  with  his 
reason  and  deductions.  He  had  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  life  is  not  worth  living.  Having  riches,  possession  of 
everything,  w^ere  found  out  nothing  but  vanity.  Perhaps 
being  good,  having  the  better  things  morally,  and  doing 
good,  will  satisfy  the  heart  in  "which  is  set  eternity,"  the 
soul  of  man.  And  so  he  makes  his  observations  in  seven 
comparisons. 

A  good  name;  better  than  precious  ointment;  the  day  of 
death  better  than  the  day  of  birth;  the  house  of  mourning 
is  better  than  the  house  of  feasting;  sorrow  is  better  than 
laughter;  the  rebuke  of  the  wise  better  than  he  songs  of 
fools;  the  end  of  a  thing  better  than  the  beginning;  the 
patient  in  spirit  better  than  the  proud  in  spirit.  He  has 
used  his  highest  power  of  reasoning  in  reaching  these  con- 
clusions, similar  to  the  conclusions  of  other  wise  men,  moral- 
ists and  philosophers  among  the  pagans.  The  different 
"sacred  writings"  of  other  nations,  the  Greek,  Roman, 
Persian,  Hindu,  Chinese,  etc.,  poetry  and  ethics  as  well  as 
philosophies  of  all  these  nations  give  a  definite  proof  that 
Ecclesiastes  is  the  book  of  the  natural  man,  that  reason 
speaks  and  not  revelation.  For  these  "sacred  writings" 
and  philosophies  are  on  the  same  line  as  our  book.  But 
does  this  satisfy?  Can  man  thereby  attain  perfection? 
His  heart  has  passions  which  man  cannot  control.  Oppres- 
sion makes  a  wise  man  mad  (verse  7) ;  anger  is  in  his  bosom 
(verse  9).  Again  he  mentions  wisdom.  It  is  a  good  thing, 
just  as  good  as  an  inheritance;  it  profits  to  see  the  sun,  but 
not  above  the  sun.  Wisdom  and  wealth  are  both  good  as 
a  defense;  both  give  life,  animate  the  person  who  possess 
them,  give  a  certain  amount  of  enjoyment.     But  can  both 


76  TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

wisdom  and  wealth  give  a  solution  of  man's  problem?  Who 
can  make  that  straight  which  God  hath  made  crooked? 
His  ways  are  mysterious,  unsolvable  as  far  as  man  is  con- 
cerned; man  cannot  solve  the  providential  dealings  of  God. 
Prosperity  is  followed  by  adversity  and  adversity  by  pros- 
perity; He  sets  one  over  against  the  other.  But  who  by 
his  reason,  by  his  wisdom,  can  find  out  what  God  will  do 
in  the  future,  what  His  dealings  will  be?  In  the  very  read- 
ing of  all  these  statements  one  feels  like  walking  in  a  dense 
fog.  Some  statements  are  beclouded  so  that  it  is  difficult  to 
ascertain  the  correct  meaning  what  the  searcher  is  really 
aiming  at.  Perhaps  this  is  the  case  to  teach  the  lesson  how 
man,  with  his  finite  reason  searching  for  light,  apart  from 
revelation,  wanders  in  darkness  and  ends  in  confusion. 

2.  Anomalies:  Verses  15-18.  Prosperity  and  adversity, 
controlled  by  a  higher  power;  how  are  they  meted  out? 
No  one  knows  when  they  come;  they  come  to  the  righteous 
and  to  the  wicked.  He  has  seen  the  righteous  perish  in 
his  righteousness  and  the  wicked  prolongs  his  days  in 
his  wickedness.  How  does  the  natural  man,  the  philos- 
opher, meet  this  difficulty?  He  answereth  it  by  what  is 
called  "common  sense.'*  "Be  not  righteous  overmuch, 
neither  make  thyself  overwise;  why  should  thou  destroy 
thyself."  Do  not  overdo  it,  strike  a  happy  medium;  avoid 
any  kind  of  excess;  be  not  too  self-righteous  for  you  might  be- 
come puffed  up  and  then  you  destroy  yourself.  Here  is  more 
"common  sense"  of  the  natural  man.  Be  not  overmuch 
Vv'icked,  neither  be  thou  foolish;  why  shouldst  thou  die 
before  thy  time?  Enjoy  yourself,  but  avoid  too  much 
wickedness;  have  a  good  time  but  avoid  excesses.  Not 
too  much  righteousness  and  not  too  much  wickedness;  just  a 
happy  middle  way;  such  a  way,  thinks  the  natural  man,  is 
not  compatible  with  the  fear  of  God. 

3.  The  Strength  of  Wisdom;  Yet  None  Perfect:  Verse 
18-22.  Wisdom  is  strength.  He  had  tried  wisdom;  he 
tells  us  what  he  proved  by  wisdom.  But  the  wise  man 
makes  a  wise  confession:  "I  said  I  will  be  wise;  but  it  was 
far  from  me."     He  owns  his  ignorance.     Everything  has 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  77 

left  him  unsatisfied.  He  cannot  find  out  by  wisdom 
that  which  is  far  off  and  exceeding  deep.  All  is  imper- 
fection. * 'There  is  not  a  just  man  on  the  earth,  that  doeth 
good,  and  sinneth  not"  (verse  20). 

4.  The  Worst  Thing  He  Found:  Verse  25-29.  Again 
he  applies  his  heart  to  know,  to  search  and  to  go  to  the 
root  of  the  matter — to  know  the  wickedness  of  folly,  even 
of  foolishness  and  madness.  And  what  does  he  find?  "I 
find  more  bitter  than  death  the  woman  whose  heart  is 
snares  and  nets,  and  her  hands  as  bands."  He  speaks  here 
as  a  Hebrew  with  the  knowledge  at  least  of  what  happened 
to  man.  God  hath  made  man  upright,  but  they  have 
sought  out  many  inventions.  And  woman  was  deceived 
by  the  serpent  and  her  heart  is  often  a  snare  and  a  net  and 
her  hands  drag  down  into  the  vile  things  of  the  flesh.  Here, 
at  least,  is  an  acknowledgment  that  sin  is  in  the  world  and 
has  corrupted  the  old  creation,  but  what  about  the  remedy.'^ 
He  knows  nothing  of  that,  for  the  new  creation  which  lifts 
man  out  of  the  condition  where  sin  has  put  him  is  the  sub- 
ject of  the  revelation  of  God. 

CHAPTER  Vni. 

1.  Prudence  Before  Kings.     Verses  1-10. 

2.  Of  the  Righteous  and  the  Wicked.     Verses  11-13. 

3.  The  Conclusion.     Verses  14-17. 

1.  Prudence  Before  Kings:  Verses  1-10.  What  else 
had  he  seen.^  What  were  his  further  discoveries.?  He  is 
still  ardent  in  praising  wisdom,  though  he  had  confessed 
*'that  it  was  far  from  him."  Wisdom  makes  the  face  to 
shine  and  the  boldness  of  the  face  becomes  changed.  He 
cautions  as  to  the  governmental  powers  in  the  world,  urges 
prudence  and  submission.  He  is  a  keen  observer.  But 
nothing  can  deliver  from  the  power  of  the  grave.  The 
tyrannic  ruler  ruleth  over  another  to  his  own  hurt,  but  the 
power  of  the  tyrant  does  not  deliver  him  from  the  power 
of  the  grave  and  he  is  soon  forgotten. 

2.  Of  the  Righteous  and  the  Wicked:  Verses  11-13. 
But  here  is  a  true  statement,  which  the  natural  man  dis- 


78  TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

covers  by  observation,  for  instance,  in  reading  the  pages 
of  history.  "Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not 
speedily  executed,  therefore  the  hearts  of  the  sons  of  men 
is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil."  Evil  will  be  punished;  man 
knows  that  by  experience.  And  he  knows  *'that  it  shall 
be  well  with  them  that  fear  God,  which  fear  before  Him. 
But  it  shall  not  be  well  with  the  wicked,  neither  shall  he 
prolong  his  days  which  are  as  a  shadow,  because  he  feareth 
not  God.  But  what  about  his  former  saying,  *'Be  not 
righteous  overmuch — be  not  overmuch  wicked. f^"  He 
is  in  perplexity.  But  his  reason,  which  has  approved  of 
**fearing  God,"  by  which  he  knows  that  it  shall  be  well  on 
earth  with  the  righteous,  is  now  staggered,  when  he  sees  just 
men  unto  whom  it  happeneth  according  to  the  work  of  the 
wicked,  and  wicked  men  to  whom  it  happeneth  according 
to  the  work  of  the  righteous.  Nothing  but  contradictions! 
Like  a  shipwrecked  man  who  strikes  out  amidst  the  raging 
waves  to  reach  the  land,  and  is  constantly  thrown  back  by 
the  waves  he  tries  to  master,  with  all  his  wisdom,  his  search- 
ing, his  conclusions  and  nice  sayings,  he  is  thrown  back, 
and  once  more  he  cries  his  "vanity." 

3.  The  Conclusion:  Verses  15-17.  He  is  at  the  end  of 
his  wit.  He  moralized,  spoke  of  things  better;  made  his 
observations  and  gave  exhortations;  a  measure  of  light  he 
has  to  judge  certain  things,  but  the  darkness  is  too  over- 
whelming. His  boasted  wisdom  has  left  him  stranded 
completely.  What  then  shall  he  say?  In  spite  of  the 
higher  tone  he  assumed,  he  is  back  at  his  old  conclusion, 
only  more  emphatic  than  before:  "Then  I  commended 
mirth,  because  a  man  hath  no  better  thing  under  the  sun 
than  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to  be  merry;  for  that  shall 
abide  with  him  of  his  labor  the  days  of  his  life,  which  God 
giveth  him  under  the  sun."  Enjoy  life!  There  is  no 
better  thing!  Thank  God  through  revelation  we  know 
"the  better  part,"  that  which  satisfies  and  which  abides. 
Then  comes  the  confession  of  utter  helplessness  in  verse  17. 
A  man,  the  natural  man,  cannot  find  out,  he  is  not  able  to 
find  out  anything. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  79 

CHAPTER  IX. 
Verses  1-12. 

1.  The  Common  Fate.     Verses  1-6. 

2.  Make  the  Best  of  Life.     Verses  7-10. 

3.  The  Great  Uncertainty.     Verses  11-12. 

1.  The  Common  Fate:  Verses  1-6.  Here  is  another 
conelusion.  The  righteous  and  the  wise  with  their  works 
are  in  the  hands  of  God.  One  event  is  in  store  for  all,  for 
the  righteous,  the  wicked,  the  good,  the  clean,  the  unclean, 
the  one  who  sacrificeth  and  the  one  who  sacrificeth  not — 
the  grave  is  the  one  common  goal.  In  that  goal  there  is 
the  end  of  all  human  toil  and  ambition.  But  even  with 
this  knowledge  that  all  go  one  way,  and  the  certainty  of  it, 
man  does  not  reckon  with  it  at  all;  "the  heart  of  the  sons 
of  men  is  full  of  evil,  and  madness  is  in  their  hearts  while 
they  live."  They  live  on  v/ith  madness  in  the  heart;  then 
comes  death.  Surely  reason,  dark  reason,  says  "a  living 
dog  is  better  than  a  dead  lion";  the  dead  lion  has  nothing 
left  of  all  his  majestic  awe,  but  if  man  is  alive,  though  he  be 
as  a  dog,  it  is  the  better  thing.  Surely  everything  here  is 
pessimism  gone  to  seed.  And  what  in  this  darkening 
perplexity  does  the  searcher  have  to  say  about  the  dead.'^ 
"The  dead  know  not  anything,  neither  have  they  any  more 
reward;  for  the  memory  of  them  is  forgotten"  (verse  5). 
And  again,  "There  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge, 
nor  wisdom  in  the  grave  (Sheol)  whither  thou  goest."  But 
is  this  the  truth?  Is  this  a  doctrine  of  the  faith  delivered 
unto  the  Saints .^^  Is  this  the  revelation  of  God?  A  thou- 
sand times,  No!  It  is  the  verdict  which  the  natural  man, 
pagan  or  infidel  philosopher,  pronounceth.  But  revelation, 
the  life  and  immortality  brought  to  light  by  the  Gospel, 
tells  us  something  entirely  different.  Yet  these  sentences 
penned  when  the  searcher  finds  himself  in  the  most  despair- 
ing condition,  are  used  by  men  and  women,  who  claim  to  be 
Christians,  to  prove  the  abominable  doctrines  of  "soul- 
sleep,"  that  after  death  the  soul  plunges  into  a  state  of 
unconsciousness,    and    that    the    wicked    are    annihilated. 


80  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

Christian  doctrine?     NO!     but  paganism,  and  a  denial  of 
the  revelation  from  above  the  sun. 

2.  Make  the  Best  of  Life:  Verses  7-10.  Therefore, 
because  "death  ends  it  all,"  that  unbelievable  conclusion 
of  the  natural  man,  make  the  best  of  life.  Feast  well  and 
enjoy  your  wine,  be  sure  and  let  the  wine  of  earthly  joys 
make  your  heart  merry.  Dress  spotlessly  in  the  heights 
of  fashion;  be  well  groomed;  put  ointment  on  your  head. 
Have  a  good  time  with  your  wife;  enter  into  everything 
energetically — for  a  little  while  longer  and  you  reach  the 
common  fate.  Is  this  also  "revelation"  for  faith  to  follow, 
or  is  there  something  better  from  above  the  sun?  The 
New  Testament  ansvv^ers  blessedly  this  question. 

3.  The  Great  Uncertainty:  Verses  11-12.  He  returns — 
to  speak  another  word.  Even  this  is  not  satisfying.  A  man 
knoweth  not  his  time,  "As  the  fishes  that  are  taken  in  an 
evil  net,  and  as  the  birds  that  are  caught  in  the  snare,  so 
are  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time,  when  it  falleth 
suddenly  upon  them." 

n.    PRAISE  OF  WISDOM  AND  PHILOSOPHY.    THE 
FINAL  WORD  AND  THE  GREAT  CONCLUSION. 

Chapter  ix-13:xii. 

CHAPTER  IX. 
Verses  13-18. 

Before  he  had  declared  that  wisdom  is  strength.  He 
comes  back  to  this  statement  and  gives  an  illustration  of  it. 
He  is  in  a  calmer  mood,  but  what  does  his  meditation  amount 
to?     Only  to  show  that  this  also  is  vanity. 

CHAPTER  X. 

This  chapter  contains  a  series  of  proverbs,  expressing  the 
wisdom  and  prudence  of  the  natural  man.  Here  are  a 
number  of  observations  and  all  show  that  there  is  a  practical 
value  in  wisdom  and  that  it  has  certain  advantages.   These 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  81 

maxims  are  of  a  different  kind  than  the  proverbs  in  the  pre- 
ceding book.  There  we  are  face  to  face  with  the  wisdom 
which  is  from  above,  here  it  is  the  wisdom  of  man.  The 
name  of  the  Lord  is  not  mentioned  once.  Similar  phil- 
osophic utterances  can  be  traced  in  the  literature  of  other 
ancient  nations.     They  need  no  detail  annotations. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

1.  Proverbs  Concerning  Man's  Work.     Verses  1-6. 

2.  The  Vanity  of  Life.     Verses  7-10. 

1.  Proverbs  Concerning  Man's  Work:  Verses  1-6.  These 
continued  proverbs  concern  the  work  of  man  and  begin 
with  exhortations  to  charity  and  are  followed  by  the  wise 
acknowledgment  that  no  one  knows  the  works  of  God,  who 
is  the  maker  of  all.  All  this  knowledge  is  within  the  compass 
of  the  natural  man. 

2.  The  Vanity  of  Life:  Verses  7-10.  After  these  phil- 
osophic proverbs  he  comes  back  to  his  former  finding — 
vanity.  So  to  speak  he  sums  up  life  in  one  verse,  "Truly 
the  light  is  sweet  and  a  pleasant  thing  it  is  for  the  eyes  to  be- 
hold the  sun.'*  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  life.  A  different 
strain  from  his  despondency,  when  life  seemed  not  worth 
living.  Alas!  there  is  another  "but."  "But  if  a  man  live 
many  years,  and  rejoice  in  them  all;  yet  let  him  remember 
the  days  of  darkness;  for  they  shall  be  many.  All  that 
Cometh  is  vanity."  Yes,  let  him  enjoy  himself  in  the 
present,  but  there  is  "a  dead  fly  in  the  ointment"  (x:l). 
There  is  looming  up  the  dark  future;  days  of  darkness  are 
coming  for  him — it  is  the  grave,  and  human  reason,  phil- 
osophy, science  nor  anything  else  can  bring  light  into  this 
baffling  darkness.  "All  that  cometh  is  vanity!"  Thank 
God,  through  revelation  we  know  that  those  who  believe 
His  revelation,  and  believe  on  Him,  whom  God  has  sent, 
who  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  who  conquered  death 
and  the  grave — for  such,  "all  that  cometh  is  glory!" 

Is  it  sarcasm  that  follows?  He  calls  upon  the  young 
man  to  rejoice  in  his  youth.     Have  a  good  time!    Walk  in 


82  TEE   BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES 

the  ways  of  thine  heart,  that  heart  out  of  which  nothing 
but  evil  can  come,  and  in  the  sight,  not  of  the  all-seeing  eye 
of  God,  but  of  thine  eyes.  Do  as  you  like!  Follow  my 
previous  advice — be  not  righteous  overmuch;  be  not  too 
wicked;  follow  the  middle  road  and  enjoy  yourself.  Then 
comes  a  weighty  sentence,  *'but  know  thou  that  for  all 
these  things  God  shall  bring  thee  to  judgment."  But  is 
not  this  revelation?  Can  the  reason  of  man  discover  that 
such  will  be  the  case.^  Reason  does  know  the  law  in  nature 
"that  whatsoever  a  man  sows  that  he  shall  also  reap.'* 
Reason  beholds  this  law  vv^orking  not  only  in  nature,  which 
teaches  man  many  things,  but  also  in  history,  so  that  the 
philosopher  can  say,  "the  history  of  the  world  is  the  judg- 
ment of  the  world." 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

1.  Youth  and  Old  Age.     Verses  1-8. 

2.  The  Concluding  Epilogue     Verses  9-14. 

1.  Youth  and  Old  Age:  Verses  1-8.  Childhood  and  youth 
are  vanity!  That  is  the  concluding  sentence  of  the  previous 
chapter.  The  vanities  of  life,  the  doom  and  darkness  of 
the  grave  are  uppermost  in  his  mind,  and  the  final  word  he 
speaks,  ere  he  closeth  with  his  epilogue,  is  the  same  with 
which  he  began  his  search,  the  search  which  brought  out 
so  many  things,  yet  nothing  in  reality — as  in  the  beginning 
of  the  book,  so  now  he  cries  out,  "Vanity  of  vanities,  saith 
the  preacher,  all  is  vanity"  (verse  8).  He  has  come  back 
in  all  his  reasonings  to  the  place  from  which  he  started. 

Once  more  he  speaks  of  youth  and  exhorts,  "Remember 
now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  This  advice  is 
given  in  connection  with  the  thought  expressed  in  chapter 
xi:9,  "God  vv^ill  bring  thee  into  judgment."  Yet  the  nat- 
ural man  cannot  obey  this  command.  He  then  points  to 
that  which  is  inevitable.  The  balmy  days  of  youth  and 
energy  will  be  followed  by  years  in  which  man  says,  "I  have 
no  pleasure  in  them,"  the  days  of  old  age.  Then  death 
stalks  in  and  the  dust  returns  to  the  earth  as  it  v/as  and  the 


TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES  83 

spirit  to  God  who  gave  it  (verse  7).  The  description  of  the 
approach  of  old  age  is  extremely  beautiful.  Clouds  begin 
to  cast  a  shadow  over  the  spirit;  sorrows  multiply,  one 
comes  after  the  other  like  "clouds  return  after  rain."  The 
keepers  of  the  house  (the  hands)  tremble  with  weakness, 
and  the  strong  men  (the  knees)  become  f^^eble.  But  a  few 
of  the  grinders  (the  teeth)  are  left  and  those  that  look  out 
of  the  windows  (the  eyes)  are  darkened.  Then  the  doors 
are  shut  in  the  streets,  the  ears  become  dull  and  can  no 
longer  hear  the  familiar  sound  of  the  grinding  at  the  mill; 
he  is  troubled  with  sleeplessness  and  no  longer  enjoys 
pleasure.  He  is  troubled  with  fears.  His  hair  becomes 
snow-white  like  the  almond  tree  in  bloom  and  the  least 
thing  becomes  a  heavy  burden;  the  appetite  is  gone.  Age 
has  come  and  man  is  ready  to  go  to  his  "age-long  home.'* 
The  silver  cord  is  snapped  (the  spinal  column) ,  the  golden 
bowl  is  broken  (the  brain),  the  pitcher  is  broken  at  the 
fountain  (the  heart),  and  the  wheel  broken  at  the  cistern 
(the  blood  and  its  circulation).  But  if  he  speaks  of  an  age- 
long home,  what  is  that  hom^e?  And  he  speaks  now  of  the 
spirit  returning  to  God,  but  what  does  '^^  mean?  There  is 
no  answer,  no  light  on  these  questions,  for  the  natural  man, 
even  at  his  best,  and  in  highest  wisdom,  cannot  find  the 
truth  for  himself  about  that  "home"  nor  what  it  means — 
the  spirit  return  to  God.   And  thus  he  ends,  "All  is  vanity." 

But  if  we  turn  to  the  Gospel,  the  Gospel  of  God,  the 
Gospel  of  His  Son  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Gospel  which 
is  from  above  the  sun,  which  reaches  down  to  lost  man  under 
the  sun,  that  blessed  Gospel  lifts  man  higher  and  higher, 
till  redeemed,  saved  by  grace,  washed  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  he  reaches  the  place  above  the  sun,  the  Father's 
house  with  its  many  mansions,  the  eternal  home  of  the 
Saints  of  God. 

The  final  great  conclusion  remains.  He  reaches  the  high- 
water  mark  of  his  reasoning  v/isdom.  Let  us  hear  the 
conclusion  of  the  whole  matter:  "Fear  God  and  keep  His 
commandments,  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man.  For 
God   shall   bring  every   work   unto  judgment   with   every 


84  TEE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTE8 

hidden  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil.'* 
This  is  great  wisdom,  but  does  it  help  man?  Does  it  bring 
comfort  to  his  soul?  Does  it  carry  with  it  that  which  satis- 
fies his  heart?  God  is  in  heaven  and  man  on  the  earth,  he 
said  before.  There  is  an  immeasurable  distance  between. 
And  this  masterly  conclusion  of  the  royal  searcher  still 
leaves  God  and  man  apart,  with  not  even  the  faintest 
glimmer  of  light.  Man  is  a  sinner;  hov/  can  his  sins  be  for- 
given? How  can  man,  with  a  sinful  heart,  *'obey  command- 
ments?" What  about  that  judgment  of  every  hidden  thing? 
Alas!  no  answer;  and  man,  struggling  man,  lost,  sinful  man, 
face  to  face  with  that  which  the  highest  natural  wisdom 
can  produce,  must  quake  and  tremble. 

Hence  Ecclesiastes  is  the  way-preparer  for  the  Gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Like  every  other  Old  Testament  book  it 
points  and  leads  to  Christ,  in  whom  all  problems  are  solved, 
all  questions  answered,  in  whom  the  old  creation  ends  and 
the  new  begins. 


THE  SONG  OF  SONGS 


The  Song  of  Songs 

Introduction. 

The  Song  of  Solomon,  as  this  book  is  called  in  the  St.  James  Version, 
is  the  third  book  of  which  Solomon  is  the  author,  preceded  by  Proverbs 
and.Ecclesiastes.  In  the  Hebrew  Bible  it  occupies  a  different  place. 
It  is  found  there  in  the  section  called  "Kethubim,"  the  Hagiographic 
division.  It  belongs  to  the  so-called  "Megilloth"  or  rolls  and  is  placed 
first  among  them — Song  of  Solomon,  Ruth,  Lamentations,  Ecclesiastes 
and  Esther.  In  the  synagogual  service  it  has  been  appointed  to  be 
read  on  the  eighth  day  of  Passover,  the  feast  of  redemption.  This  is 
suggestive,  for,  as  we  shall  see,  this  Song  is  a  love-song,  expressing  the 
love  of  Messiah  for  His  people. 

A  better  title  for  this  book  is  "the  Song  of  Songs."  It  corresponds 
to  the  Hebrew  beginning  of  the  book  in  Hebrew — Shir  Ea-shirim.  It 
is  called  "Song  of  Songs"  in  the  Septuagint  (Asma  Asmaton)  and  also 
in  the  Vulgate  (Canticum  Canticorum).  This  title  expresses  most 
fully  the  spiritual  meaning  of  this  little  book. 

Needless  to  say,  that  this  beautiful  song  has  suffered  much  from 
the  hands  of  the  men  who  claim  to  be  critics  of  the  Word  of  God.  We 
do  not  care  to  repeat  the  charges  v/hich  have  been  made  against  this 
Song  as  being  sensuous,  if  not  immoral,  in  its  suggestions.  Such  is 
the  verdict  of  the  natural  man,  who,  by  such  criticism,  reveals  the 
state  of  his  own  heart. 

The  Solomonic  authorship  has  likewise  been  attacked,  and  it  is 
claimed  that  the  book  was  written  long  after  Solomon's  day.  Well- 
hausen,  the  German  critic,  declares  that  "the  most  original  of  the 
Hagiographic  writings  is  the  song  of  Solomon;  the  names  and  things 
which  occur  in  it  assign  it  clearly  to  the  second  half  of  the  Persian 
period.  We  see  from  it  that  the  Law  had  not  yet  forbidden  love- 
poetry  to  the  Jews,  and  had  not  made  the  enjoyment  of  life  impossi- 
ble." Nearly  all  the  other  critics  have  placed  the  date  after  the  exile. 
The  objections  against  the  composition  of  the  book  in  Solomon's 
period  are  mostly  on  account  of  a  few  words,  which  critics  think  were 
unknown  to  the  people  during  Solomon's  reign.  What  we  have  stated 
on  these  philological  objections  in  the  introduction  to  Ecclesiastes 
holds  good  in  the  case  of  this  book  also.  While  Wellhausen  and  others 
have  denied  the  Solomonic  authorship  and  date,  other  scholars  have 
declared  that  the  song  itself  has  all  the  marks  of  Solomon.  Among 
these  marks  Professor  Delitzsch  mentions  "the  familiarity  with  nature, 
the  fulness  and  extent  of  the  book's  geography  and  artistic  references, 
the  mention  of  so  many  exotic  plants  and  foreign  things,  particularly 
of  such  objects  of  luxury  as  the  Egyptian  horses." 


88  TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

Neither  the  Jews  nor  the  early  church  doubted  the  authenticity  of 
Solomon's  Song.  It  formed  part  of  the  Hebrew  Canonical  Scriptures 
from  very  ancient  times,  and  there  is  no  valid  reason  why  it  should 
be  rejected  or  the  Solomonic  authorship  be  denied. 

Another  question  which  has  been  raised  is  as  to  the  unity  of  the 
contents.  Inasmuch  as  different  voices  are  heard  speaking  in  this 
little  book,  and  it  being  composed  of  dialogues  as  well  as  monologues, 
some  critics  claim  that  the  book  is  not  a  unity,  but  rather  a  collection 
of  love  poems,  similar  to  those  written  by  Burns  and  Heine.  One 
critic  (Budde)  endeavors  to  prove  that  the  book  is  a  collection  of  folk- 
songs sung  at  weddings,  which  some  unknown  hand  collected.  But 
the  unity  of  the  book  in  tone  and  it  language  disposes  of  this  theory, 
nor  is  there  any  ground  to  call  it,  as  some  have  done,  a  Hebrew  drama. 

The  Story  of  the  Song. 

It  is  the  story  of  the  love  of  King  Solomon  for  vShulamith,  the  bride, 
who  by  turns  is  a  vine-dressar,  shepherdess,  midnight  inquirer,  etc., 
while  the  king  is  described  in  all  bis  beaut;/,  as  the  beloved  one. 
In  this  way  the  Jewish  interpreters  as  well  as  the  vast  majority  of 
Christian  commentators  have  understood  the  story  of  the  song. 

But  there  is  also  a  different  explanation  of  the  story,  the  so-called 
"literalist."  It  v/as  first  proposed  by  an  expositor  by  name  of  Jacobi 
in  1771,  and  v.'as  later  adopted  by  Herder,  Umbreit,  the  critic  Ewald, 
the  French  infidel  Renan  and  others.  In  England  it  found  an  able 
defender  in  Dr.  Glnsburg.  Briefly  stated  this  literalist  explanation  is 
as  follows: 

There  lived  fomewliere  at  Shulem  a  widowed  mother,  several  sons 
and  a  beauti[iil  daughter.  They  were  farmers.  One  day  while  the 
damsel  tended  the  flocks,  while  resting  under  an  apple  tree,  she  met  a 
beautiful  young  shepherd  to  whom  she  was  later  espoused.  One 
morning  this  youth  invited  her  to  accompany  him  into  the  field,  but 
as  her  brothers  v,-ere  anxious  for  her  reputation  they  sent  her  away 
to  take  care  of  the  vineyards.  She  then  requested  him  to  meet  her 
in  the  evening,  and,  as  he  did  not  keep  his  appointment,  and  fearing 
that  he  might  have  had  an  accident,  she  searched  for  him  and  found 
him.  One  day  she  met  accidentally  King  Solomon,  who  happened  to 
be  on  a  summer  visit  to  that  neighborhood.  Enraptured  by  the  beauty 
of  the  damsel,  the  king  took  her  to  his  royal  tent,  and  tliere,  assisted 
by  court  ladies,  endeavored  with  alluring  flatteries  and  promises,  to 
gain  her  affections,  but  without  effect.  Released  from  the  presence 
of  the  king,  the  girl  sought  her  beloved  shepherd.  But  the  king  took 
her  with  him  to  Jerusalem  in  great  pomp,  in  the  hope  of  dazzling  her 
with  his  splendor;  but  neither  did  this  prevail,  for  while  even  there 
she  told  her  beloved  shepherd,  who  had  followed  her  to  the  city,  that 
she  was  anxious  to  be  with  him. 


TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS  89 

The  shepherd,  on  hearing  this,  praised  her  constancy,  and  such  a 
mutual  demonstration  of  their  love  took  place,  that  several  of  the 
court  ladies  were  greatly  affected  by  it.  The  king  was  still  determined 
to  win  her  affections  and  watched  for  a  favorable  opportunity,  and 
with  flatteries  and  allurements,  surpassing  all  former  ones,  tried  to 
obtain  his  purpose.  He  promised  to  give  her  the  highest  rank,  if  she 
would  comply  with  his  wishes,  but  she  refused,  declaring  that  her 
affections  were  pledged  to  another.  The  king  then  was  obliged  to 
dismiss  her,  and  the  shepherdess  with  her  beloved  returned  to  her 
native  place. 

There  are  at  least  three  reasons  why  this  view  must  be  rejected. 
In  the  first  place,  it  makes  havoc  with  the  order  of  the  book.  The  text 
must  be  cut  up,  and  a  veritable  "grasshopper-method,"  jumping  from 
one  place  and  chapter  to  another,  must  be  employed  in  order  to  put 
such  a  story  together.  In  the  second  place,  it  is  contrary  to  all  the 
Jewish  and  Christian  interpretation  of  the  past;  they  all  must  be 
branded  as  erroneous  if  this  literalist  explanation  is  the  true  one.  And 
finally  it  makes  of  King  Solomon,  who  as  King  of  Peace,  and  in  the 
glory  of  his  kingdom,  is  a  type  of  Christ,  the  Messiah,  a  vile  tempter, 
who  tries  his  utmost  to  seduce  the  shepherdess. 

We  therefore  believe  that  it  is  the  story  of  Solomon's  love  for  his 
bride,  the  Shulamith,  as  believed  by  the  vast  majority  of  Jewish  and 
Christian  expositors. 

The  Allegorical  Meaning. 

That  this  song  has  a  deep,  mystical  and  spiritual  meaning  has  always 
been  recognized.  The  Jews  have  looked  upon  it  in  this  light  and  some 
orthodox  Jews  forbade  it  to  be  read  till  a  person  had  reached  the 
thirtieth  year.  It  has  been  called  by  them  "the  Holy  of  Holies."  Jew- 
ish interpretation  has  rightly  explained  this  love-song  as  typifying 
the  love  of  Jehovah  for  his  people  Israel  and  His  union  with  His 
people.  We  believe  this  is  the  correct  interpretation,  only  it  is  not 
Israel,  the  v/hole  nation,  but  rather  the  godly  remnant.  The  Song 
of  Songs  shows  forth  the  affections  which  the  King- Messiah  creates 
in  the  heart  of  this  remnant  at  the  time  of  the  re-establishment  of  their 
relationship  with  Himself,  when  once  more  they  enter  into  that  blessed 
relationship,  which  has  been  severed  for  such  a  long  time.  Here,  then, 
is  a  blessed  revelation  in  a  mystical  form  of  Christ's  devoted  love  for 
the  remnant  of  His  people  and  Jerusalem,  and  the  heart  response  which 
comes  from  that  remnant. 

The  Larger  Application. 

This  interpretation  does  not  exclude  another  and  larger  application 
to  Christ  and  the  Church.     Such  an  application  is  fully  warranted 


90  THE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

by  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament.  While  the  Messiah  lovea 
the  remnant  of  His  people  Israel,  whose  love  and  heart  devotion  He 
will  animate  in  the  future,  when  they  are  taken  back  into  His  favor. 
He  also  loved  the  church  and  gave  Himself  for  it.  Both  Israel's  union 
with  the  Messiah,  the  Lord  God,  and  the  greater  union  of  the  Church 
and  Christ,  are  typified  in  both  Testaments  by  the  marriage  relation. 
The  following  passages  will  demonstrate  this  fully:  Isa.  liv:5,  lxii:5; 
Jer.  iii:l;  Ezek.  xvi,  xxiii  and  many  others;  in  the  New  Testament: 
Matt.  ix:15,  xxii:3,  xxv:l;  John  iii:29;  2  Cor.  xi:2;  Eph.  v:23,  32;  Rev. 
xix:7,  xxii:17. 

The  teaching  of  some  that  only  Israel  is  the  Bride  of  Christ  must 
be  rejected.  It  is  true  that  the  church,  as  the  body  and  bride  of 
Christ,  is  unrevealed  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  it  is  anticipated,  and 
we  have  a  perfect  right  therefore  to  apply  the  precious  statements  in 
this  song  of  love  to  ourselves. 

This  has  been  done  in  the  past.  The  history  of  the  application  to 
the  church  is  of  much  interest.     We  touch  upon  it  briefly. 

Hippolytus  (225  A.D.)  was  the  first  commentator  of  Solomon's 
Song  and  he  states  that  the  primary  application  is  to  Israel  and  next 
to  the  church.  Origen  developed  this  application  to  the  church  and 
her  union  with  Christ  more  fully.  After  him  the  identification  of  the 
bridegroom  and  the  bride  with  Christ  and  the  church  became  the  pre- 
dominant one.  Athanasius,  Gregory  of  Nyssa  and  Jerome  followed 
more  or  less  the  interpretation  and  application  made  by  Origen. 
Jerome's  view  was  that  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom  were  Christ 
and  the  church,  or  Christ  and  the  soul.  Augustine  agreed  with  him 
also,  but  restricted  the  meaning  to  the  union  of  Christ  and  the  church. 

Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  a  great  expositor  of  the  Word  of  God, 
gave  the  Song  a  more  literal  explanation.  Chrysostom,  Theodoret 
and  nearly  all  the  great  exegetes  of  the  early  church  teach  that  the 
Song  typifies  the  love  of  Christ  for  His  church. 

In  the  Middle  Ages  the  mystical  school  made  great  use  of  this  portion 
of  the  W^ord  of  God.  Thus  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  preached  not  less 
than  eighty  sermons  on  the  first  two  chapters.  To  mention  all  the 
expositors  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  more  recent  ones  would  fill  pages. 

The  critical  school  has  broken  away  completely  from  the  spiritual 
application  to  Christ  and  the  church.  "The  admixture  of  this  carnal 
imagery,"  says  Dr.  Harper  in  the  Cambridge  Bible,  "with  the  more 
spiritual  passion  of  the  bride  and  her  lover  has  grown  repulsive  to  us 
as  it  could  not  be  formerly." 

The  Division  of  the  Song. 

Different  divisions  of  this  song  have  been  made;  none  appears  to  be 
satisfactory.  We  believe  the  best  way  to  study  the  Song  of  Songs 
is  to  take  it  up  verse  by  verse  without  attempting  a  detailed  division 
and  analysis. 


TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS  91 


Annotations 


SONG  OF  SONGS. 

In-  studying  this  Love  Song  the  primary  application  to 
the  remnant  of  Israel  must  not  be  lost  sight  of.  It  is  to  be 
kept  in  mind  that  we  are  on  Jewish  ground  and  that  the 
perfect  assurance  of  that  perfect  love,  which  we  know  as 
members  of  His  body,  is  lacking.  The  deeper  spiritual 
applications  which  the  individual  believer  may  make  in 
heart  communion  with  the  Lord,  must  be  left  to  each  person. 
In  a  certain  sense  we  are  here  in  the  "Holiest"  of  all,  for 
love-communion  with  our  Saviour-Lord  is  the  most  precious 
thing.  It  produces  that  worship  and  adoration  which  is  so 
acceptable  in  His  sight,  the  worship  in  the  Spirit.  Our 
annotations  will  therefore  be  more  of  a  general  nature,  but, 
we  trust,  under  God,  helpful  to  a  deeper  study  of  the  Book. 

CHAPTER  I. 

The  Bride  speaks  first.  She  is  occupied  with  the  Beloved 
One.  What  He  is,  and  all  his  kindness  and  loveliness  have 
produced  in  her  heart  the  love  and  admiration  she  expresses. 
The  first  rapturous  outburst  is,  "Let  Him  kiss  me  with  the 
kisses  of  His  mouth;  for  thy  love  is  better  than  wine."  She 
does  not  mention  the  Beloved  by  name;  for  her  there  is 
but  One,  beautifully  illustrated  by  Mary  when  she  came 
to  the  sepulchre  and  seeking  Him  said  to  the  one  she  sup- 
posed to  be  the  gardener,  "If  thou  hast  borne  Him  hence." 
The  kiss  expresseth  reconciliation  (Luke  xv:SO),  it  is  the 
token  of  peace,  and  above  all,  of  afi'ection.  Thus  the  rem- 
nant of  Israel  will  long  for  Him,  for  reconciliation,  peace, 
and  His  affections.  But  true  believers,  the  members  of 
Himself,  know  in  fullest  assurance  their  reconciliation  in 
Him;  that  He  is  Peace  and  enjoy  His  affection.  His  love 
is  better  than  wine.     Wine  is  the  symbol  of  earthly  joys 


92  TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

and  pleasures;  far  better  than  anything  under  the  sun  is 
His  love. 

In  verse  3  His  worthy  Name  is  described  as  "ointment 
poured  forth."  It  is  because  of  all  He  is  and  all  He  gives. 
Well  do  we  sing,  "How  sweet  the  Name  of  Jesus  sounds 
in  a  believer's  ear."  The  passage  reminds  us  of  Mark  xiv:5. 
For  all  who  know  Him  His  Name  is  the  Name  above  every 
other  name.  But  while  we  know  His  Name  in  all  its  pre- 
ciousness,  His  own  people  Israel,  the  godly  among  them, 
will  know  Him  likewise  in  the  future.  The  virgins  men- 
tioned here,  loving  Him,  are  those  separated  ones  in  Israel 
who  refuse  to  fall  in  line  with  the  antichristian  delusion 
of  the  great  tribulation.  We  find  them  mentioned  in  Rev. 
xiv:l-5. 

The  bride  desires  to  be  drawn  by  Him  and  knows  that 
if  He  draws  all  will  run  after  Him.  Then  the  King  appears 
and  brings  her  into  His  chambers,  typifying  full  communion 
of  love.  Joy  and  rejoicing  are  the  results.  Verses  5-6  is 
the  bride's  confession.  She  confesseth  she  is  black,  which 
does  not  denote  at  all,  as  some  have  taken  it,  that  she  was 
an  Ethiopian.  It  means  sunburnt,  as  she  declares,  "Look 
not  upon  me  because  I  am  black,  because  the  sun  has  looked 
upon  me."  She  passed  through  the  scorching  heat  of  afflic- 
tion and  sorrow,  yet  she  is  comely  (Ezek.  xvi:10);  through 
His  mercy  and  kindness  not  forsaken.  The  daughters  of 
Jerusalem  the  bride  addresses  are  those  of  the  nation,  who 
do  not  yet  share  her  knowledge  of  the  Beloved,  the  Messiah. 
Israel  had  been  called  to  be  "the  keeper  of  the  vineyards," 
that  is,  the  keeper  of  nations  and  to  be  a  blessing  to  them; 
but  she  had  failed;  not  even  her  own  vineyard  did  she  keep. 
It  is  her  confession  to  Him  whom  she  now  knows  and  longs 
for. 

And  she  wants  to  belong  to  Him  only,  and  be  with  Him 
where  He  is.  She  seeks  shelter  in  the  place  where  He  makes 
His  flock  to  rest  at  noon;  for  her  soul  loves  Him.  For  her 
He  is  become  the  shepherd  of  Israel,  who  has  found  His 
sheep  (Isa.  xlix:10;  Ezek.  xxxiv:13-15).  And  if  the  rem- 
nant of  Israel  thus  longs  for  Him  and  His  precious  fellow- 


TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS  93 

ship,  how  much  more  should  we.  His  heavenly  people,  love 
Him  and  be  attached  to  Him  only!  Then  He  speaks  in 
verse  8.  Because  of  her  confession  He  calls  her  the  fairest 
among  women.  She  is  to  go  forth  "by  the  footsteps  of  the 
flock."  What  He  says  of  her,  what  she  is.  He  Himself  has 
produced  in  her  and  for  her.  The  horses  imply  energy  and 
swiftness  (same  as  in  the  New  Testament);  the  ornaments 
the  gifts  of  His  love  (Ezek.  xviill).  Interesting  is  verse  11, 
*'We  will  make  bead-rows  of  gold  wdth  studs  of  silver."  The 
Jews  believe  that  both  God  and  the  Messiah  are  Kings. 
"We"  denotes  the  Father  and  the  Son;  the  bead-rows  of 
gold  and  studs  of  silver  denote  the  royal  and  the  nuptial 
crown  for  the  bride  (Esther  ii:17;  Ezek.  xvi:12).  Thus 
Messiah  Vv^ill  crown  His  faithful  ones  in  Israel,  while  His 
church  will  be  crowned  in  glory. 

Then  the  bride  speaks  again  of  her  affections  in  the  rest 
of  the  chapter.  While  the  bridegroom  calls  her  fair,  she  in 
return  cries  out,  "Behold,  Thou  art  fair,  my  Beloved,  yea, 
pleasant." 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  voice  of  the  bride  is  heard  again  in  the  opening  verses 
of  this  chapter;  some  understand  it  as  meaning  the  Messiah 
speaking  of  Himself  as  the  Rose  and  the  Lily  of  the  valley, 
but  it  is  rather  the  bride.  She  is  in  her  purity  and  separa- 
tion like  the  lily  among  thorns,  among  the  apostates  of 
the  nation  during  the  end  of  the  Jewish  age.  Of  the  IMes- 
siah  she  speaks  as  the  apple-tree.  She  has  no  fruit  of  her- 
self, but  rests  under  Him  as  the  blessed  fruit-bearer.  Under 
Him  she  finds  her  shelter,  while  He  protects  her  and  she 
can  enjoy  His  fruit  under  His  shadow.  There  she,  and  all 
true  believers  have  rapture  and  rest  and  enjoy  His  fruit, 
which  is  sweet  to  the  taste.  The  Bridegroom  has  brought 
her  to  His  own  place.  She  is  in  the  house  of  wine  (the  better 
translation,  instead  of,  banquetting  house).  Unlimited 
joy  and  gladness  are  now  her  portion;  the  banner  of  love 
is  over  her;  while  she  revels  in  His  love,  and  He,  too,  rests 
in  His  love,  for  all  His  gracious  purposes  towards  the  godly 


94  TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

remnant  of  Israel  are  accomplished.  The  spiritual  applica- 
tion to  the  church  is  easily  made.  In  verse  7  she  charges 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  not  to  disturb  in  any  way  the 
love-relations  she  enjoys,  till  He  please,  till  the  rest  of  the 
daughters  of  Jerusalem,  too,  shall  know  Him,  according  to 
His  own  purpose.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  several  times 
the  phrase,  "I  charge  you  daughters  of  Jerusalem"  is  found 
in  this  song.  Each  time  it  is  foliov/ed  by  His  coming.  Here 
we  read,  "The  voice  of  my  Beloved!  Behold  He  cometh!" 
It  is  His  coming  as  Messiah  revealing  Himself  to  the  bride. 
In  chapter  iii:6  He  comes  as  King  Messiah;  His  Name  is 
revealed  as  Solomon,  the  Prince  of  Peace.  Then  once  more 
the  same  phrase,  *T  charge  you,  O  daughters  of  Jerusalem," 
is  found  in  chapter  viii:4-5,  and  here  the  bride  is  coming 
out  of  the  wilderness  with  Him,  leaning  on  her  Beloved, 
not  the  supposed  shepherd  lover,  but  King  Messiah. 

The  rest  of  this  chapter  bears  witness  to  the  correctness 
of  the  Jewish  interpretation.  All  shows  that  it  refers  to  the 
time  when  the  remnant  of  Israel  knows  Him  and  is  enjoy- 
ing the  blessings  and  the  glories  promised  imto  them.  The 
winter  is  past,  the  time  of  death  and  coldness;  the  rain  is 
over,  spring-time  is  at  hand.  The  morning  without  clouds 
is  breaking!  Flowers  appear;  the  birds  begin  their  song; 
the  cooing  of  the  bird  of  love,  the  turtle  dove,  is  heard. 
Furthermore,  the  fig  tree  putteth  forth  her  green  figs  (the 
national  fruit-bearing  of  the  once  cursed  fig  tree);  the 
vines,  too,  begin  to  give  the  tender  grapes.  Who  cannot 
see  in  the  imagery  of  all  these  statements  that  millennial 
times  are  about  to  begin!  Then  there  is  His  call  to  her, 
"Arise,  my  love,  my  fair  one,  and  come  away."  Be  wholly 
for  me!  He  calls  her  "my  dove."  She  is  in  the  clefts  of  the 
rock,  and  He  Himself  is  that  rock,  where  His  people  are 
hidden  away  and  find  shelter.  He  longs  for  her  and  she 
longs  for  Him.  His  eyes  are  upon  her.  His  beloved  bride, 
and  her  eyes  upon  Kim.  Joyfully  the  bride  cries  out,  as 
the  assurance  of  His  great  love  stirs  her  soul,  "My  Beloved 
is  mine  and  I  am  His."  Yet  the  fullness  has  not  yet  come. 
It  is  all  still  in  blessed  anticipation  of  the  time  of  fullest 


THE  SONG  OF  SONGS  95 

manifestation — "until  the  day  davm  and  the  shadows  flee 
away."  Turn  my  Beloved,  she  calls  to  Him,  "Be  Thou 
like  a  gazelle  or  a  young  hart,"  swift  in  Thy  coming,  upon 
the  mountains  of  Bether,  the  mountains  of  spices  and  frank- 
incense, when  the  time  of  worship  begins. 

CHAPTER  m. 

The  scene  changes.  The  bride  is  now  alone  and  in  the 
darkness  of  the  night.  She  is  seeking  her  Beloved  and  is 
unable  to  find  Him.  Her  heart  is  filled  with  the  same  love 
she  exhibits  in  the  previous  chapter,  but  the  joy  and  com- 
fort she  lacks.  We  see  her  walking  through  the  streets 
and  in  the  broadv>^ays,  looking  for  Him  whom  her  soul 
loveth;  she  sought  Him  but  found  Him  not;  Then  the 
watchmen  of  the  night  which  pass  through  the  street  came 
across  the  seeking  one  and  she  eagerly  inquires,  "Have  ye 
see  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth.^"  They  have  no  answer  for 
her;  probably  they  knew  not  what  she  meant.  No  sooner 
had  she  passed  them  by,  when  she  found  Him.  All  this  is 
prophetic,  as  it  reveals  the  soul  exercise  of  that  godly  rem- 
nant of  Israel  during  the  night  of  tribulation.  There  is  no 
need  of  giving  a  meaning  to  every  detail. 

As  already  stated.  His  coming  described  in  verses  6-11 
is  His  coming  as  King  Messiah.  In  the  last  verse  we  have 
the  key.  "Go  forth,  daughters  of  Zion,  and  behold  King 
Solomon,  with  the  crown  wherewith  His  mother  crowned 
Him,  in  the  day  of  His  espousals,  and  in  the  day  of  the  glad- 
ness of  His  heart,"  His  mother  is  Israel.  Israel  gave  birth 
to  Him  according  to  the  flesh,  as  it  is  also  seen  in  the  great 
vision  of  the  Apocalypse  (Rev.  xii).  In  that  day  w^hen  He 
comes  up  from  the  wilderness,  like  pillars  of  smoke,  in  the 
Shekinah  cloud,  when  He  comes  the  mighty  victor,  yet  the 
true  Solomon,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who  speaks  peace  to 
the  nations,  His  mother  Israel  will  crown  Him  Lord  of  all. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  King,  the  Bridegroom  speaks  of  her,  who  is  "perfect 
through  His  comeliness  put  upon  her"  (Ezek.  xvi:14).    He 


96  TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

tells  out  all  she  is  in  His  sight  and  loving  estimation.  He 
has  called  her  from  the  lions'  den,  from  the  mountains  of 
the  leopards  (verse  8);  she  has  passed  through  the  fires  of 
persecution  and  tribulation  and  now  His  heart  expresses 
His  delight  in  her.  There  are  eight  descriptions  of  her 
beauty.  He  tells  her,  * 'Behold  thou  art  fair,  my  love,  be- 
hold thou  art  fair."  And  after  the  description  of  the  beauty 
He  beholds  in  her,  whom  He  has  brought  out  of  the  wilder- 
ness and  out  of  the  lions*  den.  He  says,  *'Thou  art  all  fair, 
my  love;  and  there  is  no  spot  in  thee."  He  assures  her  of 
His  delight  in  her.  It  is  all  His  own  workmanship;  she 
has  not  made  herself  fair  without  a  spot.  His  grace  and 
power  have  accomplished  it  for  her.  And  what  is  true  of 
the  bride-remnant  of  Israel  is  also  true  of  the  church.  In 
Him  we  have  our  completeness  and  perfection;  His  own 
comehness  and  glory  is  bestowed  upon  us.  The  happy  day 
is  coming  for  Him  and  for  us  when  He  will  present  the 
church  to  Himself,  "a  glorious  church,  not  having  spot, 
or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  but  that  it  should  be  holy 
and  without  blemish"  (Eph.  v:27). 

In  verses  12-15  we  have  a  beautiful  description  of  the 
garden,  the  land  of  Israel  in  which  His  beloved  is  now 
planted  once  more.  Here  are  found  the  precious  fruits,  as 
well  as  the  spikenard  and  all  the  trees  of  frankincense.  There 
is  the  fountain,  the  well  of  living  waters;  this  as  well  as  the 
north  wind  and  the  south  wind,  typifies  the  Holy  Spirit. 
And  she  invites  Him  to  come  to  His  garden.  "Let  my  be- 
loved come  into  His  garden  and  eat  its  precious  fruit." 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  bridegroom  answers  the  invitation  extended  to  Him 
when  the  bride  had  said,  "Let  my  Beloved  come  into  His 
(not  her)  garden."  He  says,  "I  am  come  into  my  garden, 
my  sister,  my  spouse."  She  is  both  sister  and  spouse. 
When  He  speaks  of  her  as  sister,  He  owns  the  national  re- 
lationship. In  Matthew  xii:46-50  He  disowned  that  rela- 
tionship, because  they  rejected  the  offer  of  the  kingdom, 
but  now  it  is  re-established  and  the  godly  portion  of  Israel 


THE  SONG  OF  SONGS  97 

becomes  the  spouse.  In  His  garden,  the  product  of  His 
love  and  His  death,  He  finds  now  Kis  enjoyment,  His  joy 
and  His  satisfaction.  He  invites  others  to  come  and  par- 
take. "Eat,  O  friends;  drink,  yea,  drink  abundantly,  beloved 
ones.*' 

But  there  is  no  response  here  from  the  side  of  the  bride. 
She  exhibits  slothfulness.  He  is  seen  now  standing  outside; 
His' head  is  filled  with  the  night  dew  and  standing  at  the 
door  He  knocks  (See  Rev.  iii:20).  The  comment  on  this 
difficult  portion  of  the  Song,  as  given  in  the  Synopsis  of  the 
Bible,  is  especially  helpful. 

"Alas,  what  hearts  are  ours!  We  turn  again  to  ourselves 
as  soon  as  we  are  comforted  by  the  testimony  of  the  Lord's 
love.  The  Bridegroom's  sensitive  and  righteous  heart  acts 
upon  her  word,  and  He  retires  from  one  who  does  not  listen 
to  His  voice.  She  arises  to  learn  her  own  folly,  and  the  just 
delicacy,  with  respect  to  herself,  of  His  ways  whom  she  had 
slighted.  How  often,  alas!  do  we  act  in  the  same  manner 
with  regard  to  the  voice  of  His  Spirit  and  the  manifesta- 
tions of  His  love!  What  a  dreadful  loss,  but,  through  grace, 
what  a  lesson!  She  is  chastised  by  those  who  watch  for 
the  peace  of  Jerusalem.  What  had  she  to  do  in  the  streets 
at  night,  she  whom  the  Bridegroom  had  sought  at  home? 
And  now  her  very  affection  exposes  her  to  reproof,  the 
expression  of  its  energy  placing  her  in  a  position  that  proved 
she  had  slighted  her  Beloved.  If  we  are  not  in  the  peaceful 
enjoyment  of  the  love  of  Christ,  where  He  meets  with  us 
in  grace,  the  very  strength  of  our  affection  and  our  self- 
condemnation  causes  us  to  exhibit  this  affection  out  of  its 
place,  in  a  certain  sense,  and  bring  us  into  connection  with 
those  who  judge  our  position.  It  was  right  discipline  for  a 
watchman  to  use  towards  a  woman  who  was  wandering 
without,  whatever  might  be  the  cause.  Testimonies  of  her 
affection  to  her  Beloved  at  home,  the  love  of  her  own  heart, 
do  not  concern  the  watchman.  Affection  may  exist;  but 
he  has  to  do  with  order  and  a  becoming  walk.  Nevertheless 
her  affection  was  real  and  led  to  an  ardent  expression  of  all 
that  her  Beloved  was  to  her — an  expression  addressed  to 


98  THE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

others,  who  ought  to  understand  her;  not  to  the  watchman, 
but  to  her  own  comi)anions.  But  if  sloth  had  prevented 
her  receiving  Him  in  the  visitations  of  His  love,  her  heart, 
now  disciplined  by  the  watchman  and  turned  again  to  her 
Beloved,  overflowing  with  His  praises,  being  taught  of  God, 
knows  where  to  find  Kim." 

The  w^ords  recorded  in  verse  9  are  no  doubt  addressed  to 
the  bride  by  the  rest  of  the  nation.  How  beautiful  is  her 
answer!  She  speaks  of  Him  as  "the  chief  est  among  ten 
thousand."  Here  is  symbolical  language.  White  tells  us 
of  His  holiness;  ruddy  reminds  us  of  His  love,  so  fully  ex- 
pressed in  the  shedding  of  His  blood.  His  cheeks  were  once 
smitten;  Grace  is  in  His  lips;  the  belly  speaks  of  His  bowels 
of  mercy;  His  eyes  are  the  eyes  of  love;  the  gold  is  the 
symbol  of  His  Deity;  the  hair  is  the  symbol  of  His  perfect 
humanity.  After  giving  ten  features  of  His  beauty,  she  has 
exhausted  herself  and  in  exstacy  cries  out,  as  thousands 
upon  thousands  in  every  generation  have  done,  "Yea,  He 
is  altogether  lovely  .  .  .  this  is  my  friend."  Blessed  are 
all  who  can  repeat  these  words  and  who  can  say,  "This  is 
my  friend." 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  description  of  her  Beloved  was  addressed  to  the 
daughters  of  Jerusalem.  Their  answer  is  recorded  in  the 
beginning  of  this  chapter.  Her  outburst  of  praise,  her  glow- 
ing testimony  of  Him,  created  the  desire  in  the  hearts  of 
others  to  become  His.  "Whither  is  thy  Beloved  gone?  .  .  . 
We  will  seek  Him  with  thee."  The  Bride  answers  and  then 
in  words  of  precious  assurance  she  declares,  "I  am  my  Be- 
loved's and  my  Beloved  is  mine." 

Then  the  Bridegroom  speaks  in  loving  praise  of  her.  He 
speaks  of  that  which  she  is  for  Him.  He  owns  that  remnant 
as  "the  only  one"  of  her  mother  (the  nation  Israel).  Nor 
is  she  alone  His  dove,  but  she  is  fair  as  the  moon  and  clear 
as  the  sun;  glory  covers  her  and  she  is  like  an  army  with 
banners  displayed. 


THE  SONG  OF  SONGS  99 

He  went  down  into  the  garden,  to  look  at  the  verdure  of 
the  valley,  to  see  if  His  vine  budded,  and  suddenly,  before 
He  is  aware,  His  love  makes  Him  like  Ammi-nadib,  which 
means  the  chariots  of  my  willing  people  (Psalm  cx:3). 
He  leads  them  forth  in  triumph  and  in  glory. 

CHAPTER  Vn. 

The  rapturous  outburst  in  praise  of  the  bride,  the  saved 
and  glorified  remnant  of  Israel,  with  which  this  chapter 
begins,  must  not  be  put  into  the  lips  of  the  bridegroom, 
the  Messiah-King.  It  is  the  praise  of  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem,  who  now  recognize  her  as  the  beloved  of  the 
King.  Her  highest  confession  is  found  in  this  chapter.  He 
begins  to  speak  of  her  with  verse  6,  "How  fair  and  pleasant 
art  thou,  my  love,  in  delights.'*  She  answers  His  expressions 
of  love.  "I  am  my  Beloved's,  and  His  desire  is  toward  me." 
This  is  the  highest — to  know  she  possesseth  Him  and  that 
His  heart's  delight  is  in  her.  This,  too,  is  our  happy  knowl- 
edge. We  know  He  belongs  to  us;  we  are  Christ's  and  in 
us  He  has,  and  finds,  His  delight.  Blessed  is  the  scene 
with  which  this  chapter  closes.  He  calls  on  her  to  go  forth 
with  Him  into  the  fields,  to  go  to  the  vineyards,  to  see  the 
budding  and  blossoming,  the  blooming  pomegranates,  the 
choice  fruits  new  and  eld,  ail  laid  up  for  the  beloved. 

This  takes  us  into  millennial  times.  It  will  be  the  time 
of  fruit  bearing  and  glory  for  Him  in  the  fields,  in  the  vine- 
yards, among  all  the  nations  of  the  world.  "For  as  the  earth 
bringeth  forth  her  bud,  and  as  the  garden  causeth  things 
that  are  sown  in  it  to  spring  forth;  so  the  Lord  God  will 
cause  righteousness  and  praise  to  spring  forth  before  all 
the  nations"  (Isa.  lxi:ll).  "Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the 
earth,  and  righteousness  shall  look  down  from  heaven.  Yea, 
the  Lord  shall  give  that  Vvdiich  is  good  and  our  land  shall 
yield  her  increase"  (Psa.  Ixxxvill,  12). 

Israel  restored  in  feliovvship  with  the  King  will  share  in 
the  fullest  sense  these  coming  blessings  and  glory. 


100  TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  last  chapter  of  the  song  is  a  review  of  the  whole.  There 
is  unquestionably  a  recapitulation  of  the  entire  book.  The 
bride's  desires  are  once  more  given  to  be  loved  and  caressed 
by  Him.  For  the  last  time  we  have  the  charge  to  the  daugh- 
ters of  Jerusalem  and  once  more  the  coming  is  announced. 
*'Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness  leaning 
upon  her  Beloved.'^"  She  returns  with  Him.  The  Beloved 
is  mentioned  seven  times  in  the  book.  There  is  the  voice 
of  the  Beloved  (ii:8);  the  call  of  the  Beloved  (ii:10);  claim- 
ing the  Beloved  (ii:16);  opening  the  Beloved  (v:5);  prais- 
ing the  Beloved  (v:9-16);  leaning  on  the  Beloved  (viii:5) 
and  longing  for  the  Beloved  (viii:14). 

Here  again  the  apple  tree  is  found.  (Seeii:3.)  It  is  Christ. 
There  the  Lord  awoke  her  and  manifested  Himself  to  her." 
From  Christ  alone  she  derives  her  life.  Thus  only  can  Israel 
give  birth  to  this  remnant,  which,  at  Jerusalem,  shall  become 
the  earthly  bride  of  the  great  King,  which  desires  to  be,  and 
shall  be,  as  a  seal  upon  His  heart,  according  to  the  power 
of  a  love  that  is  strong  as  death,  that  spares  nothing  and 
yields  nothing."  The  little  sister  of  verse  8  has  been  in- 
terpreted as  meaning  Ephraim,  the  ten  tribes,  who  will  then 
also  come  into  remembrance  and  blessing.  Solomon's  vine- 
yards at  Baal-hamon  (master  of  multitudes)  points  clearly 
to  the  converted  nations  in  the  millennium  and  then  His 
own  vineyard.     Israel  is  mentioned  in  verse  12. 

The  Song  of  Songs  ends  with  a  prayer,  "Haste  my  Beloved, 
and  be  Thou  like  a  gazelle  or  a  young  hart  upon  the  moun- 
tain of  spices."  Thus  the  remnant  of  Israel  will  plead  in 
the  future,  that  He  may  come  and  be  manifested  in  His 
glory;  but  the  bride  of  Christ,  the  Church,  prays,  "Even 
so.  Come  Lord  Jesus." 

In  conclusion,  we  mention  the  attempt  made  by  some, 
to  trace  in  this  Song  of  Songs  the  entire  history  of  the 
church.  We  give  the  divisions  made  for  those  who  desire 
to  examine  this  interpretation.  John  the  Baptist's  Ministry 
is  claimed  to  be  covered  by  chapters  ii :8-iii:5.    The  Ministry 


TEE  SONG  OF  SONGS  101 

of  the  Lord  Jesus  on  earth  Is  traced  in  chapters  iil:6-v:l. 
From  the  agony  in  Gethsemane  to  the  conversion  of  Samaria 
is  thought  to  be  in  chapters  v:2-viii:5.  Then  chapter  viii:5- 
14  is  said  to  be  a  picture  of  the  times  when  the  Gentiles 
were  first  called  to  the  Revelation  and  the  Coming  of  the 
Lord. 

We  think  the  safest  interpretation  is  that  which  holds 
closely  to  the  Jewish  meaning,  as  we  have  done  in  these  brief 
annotations. 


ISAIAH 


The  Prophet  Isaiah 

Introduction. 

The  opening  verse  of  this  great  Book  gives  us  information  concerning 
the  prophet  Isaiah  and  the  period  covered  by  his  official  ministry. 
"The  vision  of  Isaiah  the  son  of  Amoz,  which  he  saw  concerning  Judah 
and  Jerusalem,  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah, 
Kiiigs  of  Judah."  Of  his  personal  history  we  know  but  little.  Jewish 
tradition  claims  that  he  was  related  to  King  Uzziah.  That  he  must 
have  come  from  a  prominent  family  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact 
that  he  had  ready  access  into  the  presence  of  the  Kings  of  Judah,  Ahaz 
and  Hezekiah,  and  probably  also  the  others.  That  he  was  married 
we  learn  from  the  book.  He  had  two  sons  which  bore  prophetic 
names.  The  one  was  Shear-Jashub  ("a  remnant  shall  return"),  pro- 
phetically indicating  that  God  would  leave  a  remnant  of  His  people. 
The  second  son  was  Maher-shalal-hash-baz,  which  means  "hasting  to 
the  spoil,  hurrying  to  the  prey,"  prophetic  of  the  coming  and  threat- 
ening invasion  of  Assyria. 

Nothing  else  is  said  of  his  personal  history  in  the  book  which  bears 
his  name  nor  do  we  find  anything  about  his  death.  There  is  a  trust- 
worthy tradition  that  he  lived  during  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  also 
that  he  suffered  martyrdom,  because  he  reproved  the  vices  and  idol- 
atries rampant  during  the  reign  of  that  wicked  king.  This  tradition 
says  that  the  mode  of  his  death  was  by  being  sawn  asunder,  (See  Heb- 
rews xi:37  which,  in  case  this  tradition  is  true,  would  apply  to  Isaiah.) 
Josephus,  the  great  Jewish  historian,  speaks  of  the  cruel  persecutions 
under  the  reign  of  Manasseh  in  the  following  words:  "He  barbarously 
slew  all  the  righteous  men  that  were  among  the  Hebrews;  nor  would 
he  spare  the  prophets,  for  he  every  day  slew  some  of  them,  till  Jeru- 
salem was  overflowed  with  blood." 

The  Times  of  Isaiah. 

Isaiah  lived  during  the  eighth  century  before  Christ.  This  is  fully 
confirmed  by  the  chronology  of  the  kings  of  Judah  mentioned  in  the 
first  verse  of  the  book.  To  understand  fully  the  prophecies  which  he 
made  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,  a  good  knowledge  of  the  times  in  which 
he  lived  and  acted  as  Jehovah's  mouthpiece  is  eminently  necessary. 
We  shall  enter  into  it  a  little  more  fully  to  help  the  student  of  this  book. 

Isaiah  must  have  lived  to  a  very  old  age,  for  it  is  quite  certain  that 
for  fully  seventy  years  he  exercised  his  God-given  office.  Two  hundred 
and  forty  years  before  Isaiah  the  kingdom  of  Israel  had  been  divided, 
after  Solomon's  apostasy.  The  glcry  had  departed  from  both  the 
kingdom  of  Israel  or  Samaria  (also  called  Ephraim),  and  the  kingdom 


106  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH 

of  Judah.  Both  had  been  greatly  affected  by  civil  wars  and  conflicb 
with  other  nations.  The  kingdom  of  Israel  sunk  deeper  and  deeper, 
ruled  over  by  a  number  of  depraved  kings,  who  plunged  the  people 
into  the  grossest  idolatries  with  the  accompanying  immoralities,  so 
that  God's  righteous  judgment  fell  upon  it  first.  During  the  prophetic 
ministry  of  our  prophet  the  judgment  fell  on  the  ten  tribe  kingdom  of 
Israel.  About  the  year  736  B.  C,  Tiglath-Pileser,  the  Assyrian  king, 
had  killed  Rezin,  the  king  of  Damascus,  with  whom  Pekah  the  king  of 
Samaria  had  made  an  alliance.  Tiglath-Pileser  then  invaded  the 
northern  kingdom  of  larael,  took  many  cities  in  Gilead  and  Galilee 
and  carried  the  inhabitants  into  his  own  country.  (See  2  Kings  xvi:5-9; 
Amos  i:5,  etc.)  This  was  the  first  captivity  of  Israel.  The  rest  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Samaria,  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  were  carried 
away  by  the  successor  of  Tiglath-Pileser,  that  is  Shalamaneser.  (Read 
about  this  in  2  Kings  xvii:3-18  1  Chronicles  v:26,  and  Hosea  xiii:16.) 
Now,  Isaiah's  home  was  in  Jerusalem,  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of 
Judah,  and  he  witnessed  from  there  the  calamity  which  had  come  upon 
the  ten  tribes. 

Isaiah  began  his  ministry  under  the  reign  of  Uzziab.  He  was  a 
good  king,  a  worshipper  of  the  Lord,  yet  he  did  not  remove  the  places 
of  idolatrous  worship.  Ke  had  a  sad  end  (2  Kings  xv:l-5).  He  is  also 
called  Azariah.  Chapter  vi  in  Isaiah  tells  us  that  he  had  his  great 
vision  in  the  year  when  this  king  died  of  leprosy. 

The  son  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  reigned  in  his  stead.  He  did  not  trouble 
himself  about  the  high  places  and  the  idolatrous  groves,  and  the  con- 
dition of  the  nation  was  that  of  corruption  (2  Kings  xv:32-36).  He 
built  cities,  castles  and  towns;  he  prepared  for  war  in  time  of  peace. 
The  ancient  Assyria  had  seen  its  end  with  Sardanapulus  and  in  its  place 
arose  the  tv/o  kingdoms  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia.  Babylonia  soon 
took  the  lead  and  Assyria  v/as  joined  to  the  Chaldean  monarchy.  The 
dissolution  of  the  great  Assyrian  monarchy  took  place  during  the 
reign  of  Jotham,  yet  we  have  not  evidence  that  Isaiah  uttered  a  defi- 
nite prophecy  during  the  reign  of  Jotham.  He  probably  did,  but  we 
cannot    locate  it  in  the  book. 

Then  came  Ahaz,  the  twelfth  king  of  Judah.  He  was  an  ungodly 
ruler  and  his  reign  was  marked  by  disaster.  (See  2  Chronicles  xxviii; 
2  Kings  xvi.)  In  idolatry  such  as  burning  incense  in  the  valley  of 
Hinnom,  and  burning  his  children  in  the  fire  of  idol  worship,  he  was  as 
wicked,  or  almost  so,  as  his  grandson  Manasseh.  As  a  punishment 
the  Lord  sent  the  kings  of  Syria  and  Samaria  against  him.  In  one  day 
Pekah  the  king  of  Syria  killed  a  large  number  of  Jews  and  took  200,000 
captive.  They  were  only  saved  from  deportation  by  the  intercession  of 
the  prophet  Obed.  The  full  record  of  this  is  found  in  2  Chronicles 
xxviii.  Then  Ahaz  trembled  before  this  strong  alliance  and  resolved 
in  calling  in  the  aid  of  the  Assyrian. 


THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  107 

It  was  at  that  time  that  prophet  and  king  met  at  the  waterworks  as 
recorded  in  chapter  vii.  The  prophet  assured  the  wicked  monarch 
that  Jerusalem  had  nothing  to  fear  from  Syria  and  Samaria,  that  Jeho- 
vah would  protect  Jerusalem.  He  urged  Ahaz  to  ask  a  sign,  which  he 
refused  to  do.  Then  the  Lord  gave  him  a  sign,  that  of  the  virgin  who 
should  conceive  and  bring  forth  a  son  and  call  his  name  Emmanuel. 
It  is  a  prediction  concerning  the  virgin  birth  of  Israel's  Redeemer- 
King,  the  Son  of  God.  The  thought  is  this;  How  can  Jerusalem  and 
Judah  perish  as  long  as  He,  the  Messiah,  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord, 
has  not  come.'*  Isaiah  also  told  the  king  that  the  menace  then  threat- 
ening would  be  speedily  removed,  but  that  his  alliance  with  the  Assyr- 
ian would  bring  disaster.  But  Ahaz,  though  he  saw  the  fulfillment 
of  the  prophecy  concerning  the  kings  of  Syria  and  Samaria,  did  not 
heed  the  warning.  When  an  invasion  of  the  Edomites  and  Philistines 
threatened  (2  Chronicles  xxviii:17,  etc.),  he  turned  again  to  his  old  ally, 
the  king  of  Assyria.  He  made  him  costly  presents.  Tiglath-Pileser, 
as  already  stated  above,  conquered  the  kings  of  Syria  and  Samaria. 
Ahaz  visited  his  heathen  friend  and  ally  in  Damascus,  and  when  he 
saw  there  a  beautiful  altar,  he  sent  a  model  of  it  to  Urijah,  the  priest, 
in  Jerusalem,  who  constructed  one  like  it,  and  afterward  Ahaz  used  it 
to  commit  idolatry  and  all  the  abominations  which  go  with  it.  (See  2 
Kings  xvi.)  But  the  prophecy  about  disaster  through  the  Assyrian 
king  was  not  fulfilled  during  the  lifetime  of  this  wicked  king.  It  came 
with  Sennacherib's  invasion  during  the  reign  of  the  next  king  Hezekiah. 
He  invaded  the  land  but  could  not  touch  Jerusalem. 

Hezekiah,  the  son  of  Ahaz,  '<vas  the  very  opposite  to  his  wicked  father. 
He  v/as  one  of  the  most  godly  kings  which  occupied  the  throne  of 
David.  He  started  in  with  overturning  the  altars  of  idolatry  and  cut- 
ting down  the  groves  v/here  his  predecessors  had  permitted  the  wicked 
religious  ceremonies  of  heathendom.  Then  the  temple  was  renovated. 
He  also  destroyed  the  brazen  serpent  which  Moses  long  ago  had  made, 
and  which  had  been  preserved  as  an  object  of  idolatry,  much  as  ritual- 
istic Christiandom  worships  the  literal  cross  of  wood  or  metal.  He 
restored  furthermore  the  observance  of  Passover.  After  his  successful 
war  with  the  Philistines,  he  decided  to  cast  off  the  yoke  of  the  Assyr- 
ian by  not  paying  the  tribute  which  his  father  Ahaz  had  promised 
to  pay.  Then  Sennacherib  advanced  with  a  large  army  and  spread 
ruin  in  every  direction.  Hezekiah  fortified  Jerusalem  and  prepared 
for  a  siege  (2  Chronicles  xxxii:l-8).  Then  he  sent  ambassadors  to  the 
Assyrian  and  sued  for  peace.  Sennacherib  demanded  a  large  sum  of 
money  and  gave  him  assurance  that  the  army  would  be  withdrawn. 
(2  Kings  xviii:13-15).  Hezekiah  agreed  and  stripped  even  the  temple 
of  its  treasures  to  pay  the  vast  sum.  Then  Sennacherib  went  down  to 
Egypt  but  was  defeated  by  Tirhaka,  king  of  Ethiopia.  Maddened  by 
the    defeat    he    approached    Jerusalem    again,    and    sent    messengers 


108  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH 

from  Lachish  and  demanded  its  surrender.  Hezekiah  then  spread 
the  whole  matter  before  the  Lord,  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  received 
the  answer  that  the  city  was  safe.  Isaiah's  ministry  in  all  this  is  found 
in  the  historical  portion  of  his  book.  "When  Sennacherib  dared  to 
advance  towards  the  city,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  slew  185,000  of  his  men 
in  one  night.  It  must  be  remembered  that  a  large  portion  of  the  pro- 
phecies of  Isaiah  up  to  chapter  xxvix  are  occupied  with  these  events, 
and  can  only  be  rightly  understood  in  the  light  of  the  history  of  Judah 
of  that  period. 

Concerning  the  Authorship  of  Isaiah. 

We  have  stated  before  that  according  to  Jewish  tradition  Isaiah 
perished  by  the  hands  of  wicked  men  in  being  sawn  asunder.  Equally 
wicked  men  have  "sawn  him  asunder"  in  a  different  way.  We  mean 
the  so-called  "Higher  or  Destructive  Critics."  Did  Isaiah  really 
write  this  Book?  Could  it  be  the  work  of  one  man?  Are  there  not 
evidences  of  a  composite  authorship?  These  and  other  questions  have 
been  raised,  and  their  answers  given  by  men  whose  boast  is  of  superior 
scholarship,  of  greater  knowledge  than  the  knowledge  of  the  past  gener- 
ations; men  who  blasphemously  assert  that  their  finite  brains  have 
absorbed  more  knowledge  in  these  matters  than  the  infinite  Lord  of 
Glory,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  possessed  in  the  days  of  His  dwelling 
on   earth. 

For  some  2,500  years  no  one  ever  thought  of  even  suggesting  that 
Isaiah  did  not  write  the  book  which  bears  his  name.  The  criticism 
of  this  book  and  the  denial  of  this  great  prophet  being  the  sole  author 
of  it  is  a  very  modern  thing.  It  started  with  a  man  by  name  of  Koppe, 
who  attacked,  in  1780,  the  genuiness  of  chapter  1.  He  was  followed  by 
another  theologian  who  expressed  doubt  as  the  Isaiah  being  the  author 
of  chapters  xl-lxvi,  generally  called  the  second  part  of  Isaiah.  Rosen- 
mueller,  the  notorious  Eichorn,  the  Hebraist  Gesenius,  Ewald  and 
others  took  a  hand  in  it  in  sawing  Isaiah  asunder,  each  questioning 
certain  portions  of  the  book.  The  great  Leipzig  professor,  Franz 
Delitzsch,  also  joined  the  band  of  "scientific  butchers,"  and  declared 
that  the  second  part  of  Isaiah  is  of  post-exilic  authorship.  This  was 
done  by  him  in  1889,  and  after  this  with  the  year  1890  a  veritable  flood 
of  criticism  set  in,  led,  by  Canon  Driver,  George  Adam  Smith,  Duhm, 
Stade,  Hackman,  Cornill,  Cheyne  and  many  others.  Their  infidel 
discoveries  have  been  readily  accepted  in  this  country  and  are  now 
being  taught  in  Methodist  colleges,  in  the  Union  Theological  Seminary 
of  New  York,  the  Chicago  University,  in  Baptist,  Presbyterian  and 
other  denominational  institutions.  But  let  it  be  said  that  there  are  also 
scholars  just  as  mature  as  these  critics  who  stand  up  for  the  Isaiahan 
authorship  of  the  whole  book.     We  mention  Stier,  Weber,  Strachey, 


THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  109 

Naegelsbach,  Barnes,  Bodenkamp,    Cobb,  Benjamin  Douglass,  Green, 
Thirtle,  and  many  others. 

The  critics  have  invented  a  Deutero-Isaiah,  that  is  a  second  Isaiah, 
who  should  have  written  the  second  part.  Then  another  set  of  "schol- 
ars" with  their  scientific  microscope  discovered  that  this  Deutero- 
Isaiah  could  not  have  written  everything  of  this  second  part;  that 
there  was  a  third,  or  Trito-Isaiah,  who  wrote  chapter  Iv-lxvi.  They  also 
found  out  with  their  scholarship  that  parts  were  written  in  Babylon, 
and  other  parts  in  Palestine.  They  are  still  at  it,  "sawing  Isaiah  as- 
under." To  mention  their  methods,  their  hair-splittings,  their  phil- 
ological objections  and  their  claims  would  fill  pages,  and  we  would, 
if  we  were  to  follow  it,  oblige  our  readers  to  examine  the  inventions  of 
the  natural,  darkened  heart  of  man,  which  does  not  believe  in  God. 
There  are  1,292  verses  in  the  book  of  Isaiah.  Out  of  these  the  ultra 
critics  allow  262  verses  to  be  genuine  and  the  rest,  1,030  verses,  are 
rejected  by  them. 

We  repeat  here  what  we  say  in  the  studies  in  Isaiah  at  the  close 
of  our  analysis  and  annotations. 

But  what  does  all  this  mean?  It  is  a  denial  of  what  is  written  in  the 
first  verse  of  this  book  "The  vision  of  Isaiah,  the  son  of  Amoz,  which 
he  saw  concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham, 
Ahaz  and  Hezekiah."  And  if  several  men  wrote  this  book,  if  part  was 
written  during  the  Babylonian  capitivity  and  other  parts  added  after 
the  capitivity,  then  this  statement  with  which  the  book  begins  is  untrue. 
This  first  verse  assures  us  that  the  book  is  a  whole,  that  all  we  find  in 
it  is  the  vision  of  one  man.  To  deny  this  breaks  down  the  truthful- 
ness of  the  book  and  reduces  it  to  the  level  of  common  literature.  This 
is  what  the  critics  have  done.  But  the  book  of  Isaiah  is  quoted  in  the 
New  Testament.  The  Jews  always  believed  this  book  to  have  been 
written  by  Isaiah.  They  held  this  belief  when  our  Lord  was  on  the 
earth.  He  Himself  read  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth  from  chapter  Ixi, 
which  the  critics  deny  to  be  the  writing  of  Isaiah.  Quotations  from 
Isaiah  are  frequently  found  in  different  parts  of  the  New  Testament. 
Twenty-one  times  we  read  of  Isaiah  and  his  words  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. The  phrases  used  are  the  following:  "Spoken  by  the  Prophet 
Esaias;"  "Fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias;"  "Well  did  Esaias 
Prophesy;"  "In  the  Book  of  the  Words  of  Esaias;"  "As  said  the  Pro- 
phet;" "These  things  said  Esaias;"  "Well  spake  the  Holy  Spirit  by 
Esias;"  "Esaias  also  saith;"  "Esaias  saith."  This  is  evidence  enough 
that  the  Lord  and  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  Evangelists  and  the 
Apostle  Paul  set  their  seal  to  this  uncontradicted  and  unanimous 
belief  that  Isaiah  wrote  this  book.  The  critics  by  their  methods  im- 
peach the  testimony  of  the  Lord  Himself  or  charge  the  infallible  Lord 
of  Glory  to  have  been  limited  in  Ills  knowledge  and  that  He  acquiesced 


no  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH 

in  the  current  traditional  belief  of  the  Jewish  people,  knowing  better 
Himself. 

All  the  arguments  of  the  critics  are  disproven  by  the  book  itself. 
One  only  needs  to  study  this  book  and  the  careful  study  will  bring  out 
the  unanswerable  fact  of  the  unity  of  the  book  of  Isaiah.  Only  one 
person  could  have  written  such  a  book  and  that  person  did  not  write 
it  by  himself,  but  was  the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah.  This  is  the  con- 
clusion of  an  intelligent  and  spiritual  study  of  the  book  itself.  The 
silly  and  arbitrary  restrictions  the  critics  make,  that  Isaiah  could  not 
have  written  certain  passages,  because  it  was  beyond  his  horizon,  or 
that  he  could  not  have  mentioned  Cyrus,  the  Persian  king,  by  name, 
over  150  years  before  he  was  born,  springs  from  the  subtle  infidelity 
which  is  at  the  bottom  of  the  destructive  criticism,  which  denies  the 
supernatural  altogether. 

The  Message  of  Isaiah. 

The  name  Isaiah  means  "Jehovah  saves" or  "Jehovah  is  salvation."  He 
has  well  been  called  the  evangelical  prophet.  There  are  more  direct  quo- 
tations as  well  as  indirect  allusions  to  this  great  book  in  the  N.  T.  than 
from  any  other  prophetic  book.  Josephus  relates  that  Cryus,  the  Persian 
king,  was  greatly  moved  by  the  reading  of  the  book  of  Isaiah,  one  of 
the  evidences,  that  Isaiah  v/as  not  compiled  after  the  exile.  In  the 
passage  where  Josephus  speaks  of  the  edict  issued  by  Cryus  permitting 
the  Jews  to  return,  he  says:  "This  was  known  to  Cyrus  by  his  reading 
the  book  which  Isaiah  left  behind  him  of  his  prophecies;  for  this  prophet 
has  said  that  God  had  spoken  thus  to  him  in  a  secret  vision,  'My  will 
is  that  Cyrus,  whom  I  have  appointed  to  be  king  over  many  and  great 
nations,  send  back  my  people  to  their  own  land,  and  build  my  temple.* 
This  was  foretold  by  Isaiah  140  years  before  the  temple  was  demolished. 
Accordingly,  when  Cyrus  read  this  and  admired  the  divine  power,  an 
earnest  desire  and  ambition  came  upon  him  to  fulfill  what  was  so 
written."  The  early  church  held  Isaiah  in  great  esteem  and  recog- 
nized its  great  message.  When  Augustine  had  been  converted  he 
asked  Ambrose  which  book  he  would  advise  him  to  study  first.  Ambrose 
told  him,  "The  prophesies  of  Isaiah."  All  the  great  men  of  God,  the 
instruments  of  the  Spirit  of  God  like  Luther,  Calvin,  Knox  and  ethers 
acknowledged  the  greatness  of  this  book  and  its  message. 

What  Peter  says  as  to  the  contents  of  the  writings  of  the  Prophets 
of  God  is  more  true  of  Isaiah  than  of  any  of  the  other  prophetic  books 
except  the  Psalms.  "The  Suffering  of  Christ  and  the  Glory  that 
should  follow."  Isaiah's  message  reveals  the  Redeemer  and  King  of 
Israel.  He  is  the  "Holy  One  of  Israel"  mentioned  by  this  title  twenty- 
five  times.  The  Redeemer  of  Israel  is  Jehovah  the  Creator.  He 
announced  His  virgin  birth,  the  child  to  be  born  of  the  virgin,  the  son 
given,  and  reveals  the  titles  of  that  Son  (ix:6).     He  describes  Him  in 


THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  111 

His  lowliness.  His  tenderness.  His  miracles,  as  the  servant  of  Jehovah, 
and  above  all  as  the  sin-bearer  in  that  wonderful  fifty-third  chapter. 
But  how  much  more  Isaiah  was  permitted  to  reveal  of  His  glory!  He 
pictures  in  prophetic  vision  that  kingdom  which  is  yet  to  come,  and 
which  will  come  with  the  return  of  our  Saviour-Lord.  The  details  of 
His  coming.  His  glory  and  His  kingdom  are  unfolded  in  the  special 
lecture  on  this  subject  which  the  reader  finds  with  the  other  lectures 
at  the  close  of  the  annotations. 

Another  great  message  are  the  predictions  of  future  glories  for  and 
blessings  for  Israel,  Jerusalem  and  the  nations.  These  have  been 
grouped  by  us  in  the  third  lecture  on  Isaiah  under  the  following  heads: 
(1)  Israel's  Restoration  to  their  Land,  (2)  Israel's  Spiritual  Blessings, 
(3)  The  Blessings  for  the  Land,  (4)  The  Future  of  Jerusalem,  (5)  The 
Future  Blessings  of  the  Nations,  (6)  The  Blessings  for  all  Creation. 


112  TEE  PROPHET  ISAIAH 


The  Division  and  Scope  of  Isaiah 


The  Book  is  an  organic  whole  which  proves  that  it  can 
never  be  the  piecemeal  work  of  a  number  of  men  who  as- 
sumed the  name  of  Isaiah.  That  the  language  of  the 
second  part  differs  so  much  from  the  style  of  the  first  is  no 
argument  against  the  unity  of  the  book  at  all.  The  style 
changes  according  to  the  character  of  the  prophecy.  "His 
style  is  suited  to  the  subject  and  changeth  with  it.  In  his 
denunciations  and  threatenings,  he  is  earnest  and  vehement; 
in  his  consolations,  he  is  mild  and  insinuating.  He  so  lives 
in  the  events  he  describes  that  the  future  becomes  to  him  as 
the  past  and  present"  (Hengstenberg).  If  we  believe  that 
Isaiah  was  but  the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah,  that  he  wrote 
under  the  guidance  and  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  He 
moved  him  and  put  the  words  into  his  pen,  all  difficulties 
disappear.  But  as  we  have  already  stated  the  scope  of  the 
book  is  conclusive  evidence  of  both,  the  inspiration  of  the 
book  and  its  Isaiahic  authorship. 

There  are  two  great  sections  first  of  all.  The  one,  chapters 
iixxxv,  contains  the  earlier  prophecies.  Chapter  xl-lxvi  the 
later  prophecies.  Between  these  two  portions  is  a  historical 
parenthesis  contained  in  chapters  xxxvi-xxxix. 

In  the  earlier  prophecies  judgments  are  announced  upon 
Jerusalem,  Judah  and  upon  nations,  while  blessings  of  the 
future  are  also  given,  but  they  take  a  secondary  place.  In 
the  later  prophecies  v/e  likewise  read  of  judgments  but  the 
major  portion  reveals  the  glories  and  blessings  of  the  future. 

In  the  earlier  prophecies  the  Assyrian  invasion  as  it  took 
place  is  announced,  giving  at  the  same  time  a  prophetic 
forecast  of  a  future  invasion  from  the  north  in  the  time  of 
the  end.  In  the  later  prophecies  the  Assyrian  is  no  longer 
mentioned.  The  Babylonian  captivity  announced  in  the 
thirty-ninth  chapter  is  seen  by  the  prophet  as  past  and  he 
predicts  the  return  and  beyond  that  the  return  of  the  rem- 


TEE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  113 

nant  from  the  greater  dispersion  and  the  final  glory  of  the 
kingdom  with  the  coming  of  the  King. 

We  shall  now  give  the  scope  and  division  of  these  books. 

I.    THE  EARLIER  PROPHECIES. 

1.  Chapter  i-xii.    Prophecies  under  the  Reign  of  Uzziah, 

Jotham  and  Ahaz. 

2.  Chapters  xiii-xxvii.    The   Judgment  of  the  Nations 

and  the  Future  Day  of  Jehovah. 

3.  Chapters    xxviii-xxxv.     The    Six    Woes.     Judgment 

Ruins  and  Restoration  Glories. 

Each  section  of  the  earlier  prophecies  foretells  great 
judgments  but  each  section  ends  with  the  vision  of  a  re- 
gathered  and  restored  people. 

THE    HISTORICAL    PARENTHESIS. 

Chapters    xxxvi-xxxix. 

IL    THE  LATER  PROPHECIES. 

Chapter  xl-lxvi. 

1.  Chapters  xl-xlviii.    In  Babylon.  Deliverance  Promised 

through  Cyrus. 

2.  Chapters    xlix-lvii.    The    Servant    of    Jehovah;    His 

Suffering  and  His  Glory. 

3.  Chapters  Iviii-lxvi.     Jewish  History  in  the  Endtime; 

The  Glory  of  Israel  and  of  the  Coming  Age. 

Each  section  begins  with  a  chapter  which  is  the  key  to 
the  whole  section.  Each  concludes  with  a  description  of 
the  two  classes  which  compose  the  nation  especially  in  the 
last  days,  and  that  there  is  no  peace  for  the  wicked  but 
punishment. 


114  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

The  reader  will  find  that  every  chapter  has  been  analyzed 
as  to  its  contents.  We  have  not  made  copious  annotations, 
because  the  three  lectures  on  the  Book  of  Isaiah  as  found 
at  the  close  of  the  analysis  cover  the  contents  of  this  book 
in  such  a  manner  that  detailed  annotations  for  a  study  of 
the  book  can  be  omitted.  We  suggest  that  all  who  desire 
to  study  this  great  prophecy  in  a  closer  way  read  carefully 
the  introduction,  and  after  that  the  three  lectures  on 
**The  Scope  of  Isaiah,"  "The  Messianic  Predictions" 
and  ''Future  Glories  and  Blessings."  These  lectures  should 
be  carefully  studied  and  every  passage  should  be  looked  up. 
After  this  has  been  done,  take  up  the  book  section  by  section 
and  follow  the  analysis  we  give  and  consult  the  lectures 
whenever  needed. 

I.    THE  EARLIER  PROPHECIES. 

Chapters  viii  :i-xxxv. 

I.    CHAPTER  viii:  i-xii.    PROPHECIES  UNDER  THE  REIGN  OF 
UZZIAH,  JOTHAM  AND  AHAZ. 

Chapter  I. 

The  Title  of  the  Book  and  Contents.     Verse  1. 

The  Moral  and  Religious  Decline  of  the  Nations.     Verses  2-15. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  115 

Jehovah's  Exhortation  and  Appeal.    Verses  16-20. 
The  Result  of  Obstinate  Refusal.    Verses  21-24 
The  Promise  of  Restoration.    Verses  25-31. 

The  promised  restoration  of  Jerusalem  is  still  future. 
The  "afterward"  when  the  earthly  Jerusalem  is  to  be 
called  ''The  City  of  Righteousness"  refers  to  the  Second 
Coming  of  Christ.  Compare  with  Jeremiah  xxxiii:  14-26. 

Chapter  II.    Zion's  Future  Glory  and  the  Day  of 
Jehovah. 

The  Glories  in  the  Latter  Days.    Verses  1-4. 
Exhortation  to  Walk  in  the  Light.    Verse  5. 
The  Corruption  of  the  People.    Verses  6-9. 
The  Day  of  Jehovah.    Verses  10-22. 

The  vision  of  verses  1-4  is  altogether  future.  When 
Israel  is  converted  and  in  possession  of  the  land,  when 
once  more  a  house  of  Jehovah  will  stand  in  Israel's  land, 
then  this  great  prediction  will  be  fulfilled.  Compare 
with  Micah  iv:l-5.  The  Day  of  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  is 
the  day  of  His  visible  manifestation  to  deal  with  the 
earth  in  judgment.  Compare  with  Isaiah  xxiv,  etc., 
Zephaniah  i. 

Chapter  III.  Judgments  upon  the  rulers  and  the  daugh- 
ters of  Zion. 

The  Judgment  Against  the  Rulers.    Verses  1-7. 

Jerusalem's  sad  Condition.    Verses  8-9. 

Jehovah's  Message.    Verses  10-15. 

The  Worldliness  of  the  Daughters  of  Zion.    Verses  16-23. 

Their  Humiliation  in  Judgment.    Verses  24;  iv:l. 

This  chapter  describes  the  corrupt  conditions  among 
the  professing  people  of  God  in  Isaiah's  day.  A  similar 
corruption  and  worldliness  prevailing  in  our  age  de- 
mands divine  judgment. 

Chapter  IV.   Zion's  future  Cleansing  and  Glory. 

Israel  Regathered  and  Cleansed.    Verses  2-4. 
Jehovah's  Visible  Glory  Revealed.    Verses  5-6. 

The  Branch  of  the  Lord  (Jehovah)  is  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  After  judgment  has  been  executed  cleansing  is 
promised  and  Glory  is  established  on  Mount  Zion. 


116  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

Chapter  V.    The  Song  of  the  Vineyard  and  the  Six 

Woes. 

The  Song  of  the  Vineyard.    Jehovah's  Lament.    Verses  1-4. 

The  Judgment  Upon  the  Vineyard.    Verses  5-7. 

The  Wild  Grapes.     Verses  8-23. 

First  Woe  Against  Covetousness.     Verses  8-10. 

Second  Woe  Against  Fleshy  Lusts.     Verses  11-17. 

Third  Woe  Against  Mockers.    Verses  18-19. 

Fourth  Woe  Against  Moral  Insensibility.     Verse  20. 

Fifth  Woe  Against  Conceit.    Verse  21. 

Sixth  Woe  Against  Lawlessness.    Verses  22-23. 

Jehovah's  Anger.     The  Invader  Announced.    Verses  24-30. 

Compare  the  song  of  the  Vineyard  with  Matthew 
xxi:  33-44.  The  wild  grapes  of  Israel  fully  correspond 
to  the  wild  grapes  of  nominal  Christendom.  "If  God 
spared  not  the  natural  branches,  take  heed  lest  He  also 
spare  not  thee."     (Rom.  xi:21.) 

Chapter  VI.    The  Prophet's  Vision  and  New  Commis- 
sion. 

The  Time  of  the  Vision.    Verse  1. 

Jehovah  of  Hosts.    Verses  2-4. 

The  Prophet's  Woe.     Verse  5. 

The  Cleansing.    Verses  6-7. 

"Here  Am  I.     Send  Me."    Verse  8. 

The  New  Commission.     Verses  9-10. 

The  Limitation  of  the  Judgment.    Verses  11-13. 

Note  the  eight  steps:  vision,  conversion,  self -judg- 
ment, cleansing,  self-surrender,  communion,  commis- 
sion, intercession.  This  vision  is  the  glory  of  Christ 
(John  xii:41).  The  fulfilment  of  the  hardening  judg- 
ment of  the  nation,  the  blinding  of  their  eyes  did  not 
set  in  completely  in  Isaiah's  day.  Study  carefully 
Matt,  xiii:  14-15;  John  xii:39-41;  Acts  xxviii  :25-27. 

However,  Israel's  blindness  is  not  permanent. 

Chapter  VII.    The  Prophet  before  King  Ahaz. 

The  King  in  Trouble.    Verses  1-2. 
Isaiah  Sent  and  His  Message.     Verses  3-9. 
A  Sign  Offered  and  Refused.    Verses  10-12. 
The  Sign:    The  Virgin  Birth.    Verses  13-16. 
The  Advent  of  the  Assyrian.    Verses  17-25. 


THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  117 

Study  carefully  the  historic  setting  of  this  chapter  and 
2  Chronicles  xxviii:l-27.  See  lecture  on  "Messianic  Pre- 
dictions." In  verse  14  the  virgin  birth  of  Christ  is  an- 
nounced. Much  of  the  controversy  is  around  the  word 
"virgin"  (almah),  which  the  critics  declare  does  not  mean 
a  virgin,  but  a  young  married  woman.  However,  they 
err.  In  Genesis  xxiv:43,  Exod.  ii:8,  Psalm  lxviii:21. 
Song  of  Sol.  i:3,  etc.,  the  same  word  is  used,  and  it 
means  "virgin"  in  these  and  other  passages.  The  Septua- 
gint,a  Greek  translation  of  the  Old  Testament  made 
some  300  years  B.  C,  translates  the  Hebrew  "almah" 
with  **pardenos,"  the  Greek  for  virgin.  Matthew  i:22 
confirms  this  Messianic  prediction. 

Chapter    VIII.        Jehovah's    Word    through  Isaiah.    The 
Assyrian  announced. 

The     Divine     Instruction     and     Maher-shalal-hash-baz.     Verses 

1-4. 
The  Assyrian  to  Come.     Verses  5-8. 
The  Answer  of  Faith.     Verses  9-10. 
A  Word  to  the  Faithful  Remnant.     Verses  11-20. 
The  Coming  Great  Distress.     Verses  21-22. 

The  names  are  significant.  Isaiah  heard  the  word 
*'Maher-shalal-hash-baz,"  and  then  is  told  to  call  his  new- 
born son  by  this  name.  The  name  means  "Swift  for  spoil, 
hasty  for  prey."  Isaiah's  other  son  was  named  "Shear 
Jashub,"  which  means  "a  remnant  shall  return."  The 
names  of  the  sure  witnesses  are  equally  full  of  meaning. 
Urijah  (Jehovah  is  light),  Zechariah  (Jehovah  remembers), 
Jeberechiah  (Blessed  of  Jehovah). 

Verses  14  and  15  are  deeply  interesting.  It  is  the  rejec- 
tion of  Immanuel,  Christ.  Compare  with  chapter  xxviii:16 
and  read  the  following  passages:  Luke  ii:34,  xx:18;  Matthew 
xxi:44;  Rom.  ix:32,  33;  1  Pet.  ii:8. 

Also  note  the  quotation  of  verse  18  in  Hebrews  ii:13. 
The  great  distress  is  a  description  of  what  awaits  apostate 
Israel. 


118  THE   PROPHET,   ISAIAH, 

Chapter  IX.    The  Message  of  Hope  concerning  Israel's 
future.    The  impending  judgments. 

The  Messiah,  His  Name,  His  Rule,  His  Kingdom.    Verses 

1-7. 
Judgment  Upon  Israel.    Verses  8-12. 
The  Impenitent  Nation.     Verses  13-17. 
The  Wrath  of  Jehovah.    Verses  18-21. 
Unrighteous  Judges  and  Three  Questions.    X:l-4. 

Matthew  iv:12-16  quotes  the  opening  verses  of  this 
chapter.  This  applies  to  His  double  advent.  The  first 
and  second  coming  of  the  Lord  are  wonderfully  blended 
together  in  verses  6-7.  The  nation  in  impenitence  and 
God's  wrath  against  them  has  had  its  past  and  present 
fulfilment.  It  is  not  yet  exhausted.  It  looks  forward 
to  the  coming  day  of  wrath. 

Chapter  X.    The  Assyrian;  his  invasion  of  ImmanueFs 
land;  his  end. 

The  first  four  verses  belong  to  the  preceding  chapter. 

A  Description  of  the  Assyrian  Enemy.     Verses  5-11. 

The  Overthrow  of  His  Army  Announced.    Verses  12-15. 

The  Punishment.    Verses  16-19. 

The  Return  of  the  Remnant.    Verses  20-23. 

The  Faithful  Remnant  Comforted.    Verses  24-27. 

The  Assyrians  March  Against  Jerusalem.    Verses  28-32. 

Jehovah's  Intervention.     Verses  33-34. 

This  is  an  interesting  and  important  chapter.  The 
Assyrian  enemy  was  used  by  God  to  punish  his  people. 
In  chapters  vii  and  viii  his  comings  was  announced.  In 
this  chapter  we  read  a  fuller  description  of  this  great 
troubler  and  how  he  invaded  the  land  of  Israel.  God 
addresses  him  as  the  rod  He  uses  in  anger  against  His 
people.  While  all  this  had  a  past  fulfilment  a  similar 
invasion  of  the  land  of  Palestine  will  be  enacted  before 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  close  and  the  King  of  Kings 
appears.  The  Assyrian  of  the  end  time  comes  from  the 
North ;  therefore  he  is  called  in  Daniel's  prophecy  "the 
King  of  the  North."  Antiochus  Epiphanes  is  a  type  of 
this  final  outward  foe  of  Israel.    Study  carefully  with 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  119 

this  chapter  Is.  xiv:24-25;  Is.  xxx:31-33;  Micah  v!l-7; 
Daniel  viii:23-26;  xi:40-45;  Psalm  lxxiv:l-10;  Psalm 
Ixxxix.  Jehovah  shall  suddenly  make  an  end  of  him. 
Verses  33-34  compare  with  Daniel  xi  :45. 

Chapter  XI.    The  Coming  King  and  His  Kingdom. 

The  King:    Who  He  is.    What  He  Will  do.    Verses  1-5. 
The  Peace  and  Blessing  He  brings.     Verses  6-10. 
The  Gathering  of  Scattered  Israel.    Verses  11-16. 

It  is  a  great  vision  of  the  future  which  this  chapter 
unfolds.  The  critics  deny  that  the  blessed  Person  men- 
tioned in  the  opening  verses  is  our  Lord  Jesus.  They 
think  Hezekiah  or  Josiah  is  meant.  2  Thess.  ii  :8  shows 
that  it  is  our  Lord.  Link  verses  1-5  with  chapter 
ix:6-7.  Again  His  coming  in  humiliation  and  His  com- 
ing in  exaltation  are  here  interwoven.  We  behold  His 
reign  in  righteousness.  Verses  6-10  need  not  to  be 
spiritualized,  as  it  is  so  often  done.  Romans  tells  us 
(viii:  18-23)  that  a  literal  groaning  creation,  travailing 
together  in  pain  until  now,  will  be  delivered  of  its 
groans  and  curses.  The  hour  of  deliverance  strikes 
with  the  "manifestation  of  the  Sons  of  God."  How- 
ever, this  manifestation  does  not  take  place  till  the 
Lord  is  manifested  the  second  time.  In  the  coming 
Kingdom  to  be  established  on  earth  and  ruled  over  by 
the  King  from  above,  creation  will  be  put  back  into  its 
original  condition. 

Israel's  regathering  will  be  from  a  worldwide  disper- 
sion. It  will  be  "the  second  time."  It  does  not  and 
cannot  mean  the  return  from  Babylon,  but  the  return 
from  their  present  exile  of  almost  2,000  years. 

Chapter  XII.    Israel's  Salvation  Hymn. 

When  Israel  Will  Sing.    Verse  1. 
What  Israel  Will  Sing.    Verses  2-3. 
To  Whom  Israel  Will  Sing.    Verses  4-5. 
The  Holy  One  in  the  Midst.    Verse  6. 

It  is  Israel's  future  song  of  Praise  for  salvation. 
Read  in  this  light  what  a  wonderful  meaning  this  little 


120  THE   PROPHET,  ISAIAH, 

chapter  has.  The  song  will  be  sung  by  the  delivered 
and  blessed  remnant  "in  that  day."  In  what  day? 
When  the  Lord  arises  to  judge;  when  He  is  manifested 
in  His  Glory;  when  He  brings  back  the  captivity  of  His 
people. 

Section  2. 

The  Judgment  of  the  Nations  and  the  fu- 
ture day  of  Jehovah  (Chapters  xni-xxvn). 

Chapter  XIII.    The  Burden  of  Babylon. 

Jehovah's  Call  to  the  Judgment  of  Babylon.    Verses  1-5. 
The  Day  of  Jehovah.    When  Babylon  Falls.    Verses  6-16. 
Babylon  Overthrown. 

The  great  judgments  announced  in  this  part  of  Isaiah 
were  only  partially  fulfilled  in  the  past.  The  great 
Babylon  which  came  into  existence  as  the  mistress  of 
the  world  after  this  prophecy  had  been  given,  fell  by  the 
Medes  (verse  17  and  Daniel  v).  The  judgment  of  this 
Babylon  is  meant  here  first.  But  the  Babylon  of  the 
past  is  the  type  of  a  Babylon  of  the  future,  another 
mistress  of  the  ecclesiastical  and  commercial  world.  It 
is  yet  to  appear  in  its  final  form  (Rev.  xvii  and  xviii). 
Its  fall  comes  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  This  great  day  is 
described  in  verses  6-16  in  this  chapter. 

Chapter  XIV.    Israel's  Restoration  and  blessing  after 
Babylon  is  faUen.    The  Burden  of  Philistia. 

Israel's  Restoration  and  Exaltation.    Verses  1-2. 

The  Proverb  Against  the  King  of  Babylon.    Verses  3-11. 

The  Triumph  Over  Lucifer.     (Satan.)     Verses  12-20. 

Babylon's  Destruction.     Verses  21-23. 

The  Assyrian  Broken.    Verses  24-27. 

The  Burden  of  Philistia.    Verses  28-32. 

When  the  last  great  Babylon  is  overthrown  the  Lord 
will  remember  His  people  and  Jerusalem  in  mercy.  He 
will  then  set  His  people  in  rest  in  their  own  land.  The 
King  of  Babylon  here  in  this  chapter  is  not  Nebuchad- 


THE   PROPHET,   ISAIAH,  121 

nezzar,  nor  his  grandson  Belshazzar,  but  tlie  final  great 
King  of  Babylon.  It  is  the  little  horn  of  Daniel  vii. 
The  great  political  head  of  the  restored  Roman  empire. 
Behind  this  final  King  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
looms  up  Satan,  who  energized  that  wicked  and  false 
king.  The  description  of  him  who  was  "Lucifer,"  the 
light-bearer,  and  his  fall  is  of  deep  interest. 

Chapter  XV.    The  Burden  of  Moab. 

The  Destruction  Announced.    Verses  1-9. 

Chapter  XVI.    The  Burden  of  Moab  continued. 

God's  Call  to  Moab  to  Repent.    Verses  1-5. 
Moab's  Pride  and  Judgment.    Verses  6-14. 

The  XV  and  xvi  chapters  form  one  prophecy.  Moab's 
land  bordered  on  the  land  of  Israel.  The  historical 
facts  concerning  Moab  may  be  studied  and  followed 
through  the  following  passages:  1  Sam.  xiv:47;  2  Sam. 
viii:2;  2  Kings  i:l;  iii:4;  2  Chronicles  xx;  2  Kings 
xiii  :20 ;  xiv  :25.  Moab's  sin  and  judgment  are  frequent- 
ly mentioned  by  the  Prophets.  See  Amos  ii:l-3.  A 
great  past  judgment  of  Moab's  is  described  in  xv:l-16. 
The  call  in  chapter  xvi:l  to  send  a  lamb  has  nothing 
to  do  with  Him  who  is  "the  lamb  of  God."  The  ex- 
hortation becomes  clear  by  reading  2  Sam.  viii:2  and  2 
King^  iii:4,  5.  Christ,  however,  is  in  view  in  verse  5, 
chapter  xvi.  A  remnant  of  Moab  is  to  be  left  and  in 
the  time  of  the  end  we  find  Moab  mentioned  again. 
Read  Isaiah  xi:14  and  Daniel  xi:41.  The  final  ruin  of 
Moab  is  described  in  Isaiah  xxv:  10-12. 

Chapter  XVII.    The  Burden  of  Damascus  and  Judg- 
ment upon  Ephraim. 

Damascus  to  be  a  Huinous  Heap.    Verses  1-3. 
Judgment  Upon  Ephraim.    Verses  4-11. 
Woe  to  the  Enemies  of  Israel.    Verses  12-14. 

Damascus  was  the  ancient  city  of  Syria,  mentioned 
for  the  first  time  in  Gen.  xv.    Syria  and  Ephraim  had 


122  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 

made  common  cause  against  the  house  of  David. 
Tiglath-pileser,  King  of  Assyria,  executed  the  judg- 
ment upon  Damascus  and  made  of  it  a  ruinous  heap. 
But  the  judgment  is  also  future.  And  the  enemies  of 
Israel,  which  trouble  His  people,  will  be  troubled  "in 
that  day."  It  is  a  solemn  word  with  which  this  chap- 
ter closes,  "This  is  the  portion  of  them  that  spoil  us, 
and  the  lot  of  them  that  rob  us." 

Chapter  XVIII.    When  Israel  WiU  be  Brought  Back. 

The  Land  beyond  the  Rivers  of  Ethiopia.    Verse  1. 
The  Ambassadors  Sent.    Verse  2. 
The  Trumpet  Blown;  Jehovah's  Message!.    Verses  3-6. 
Israel  Retored  to  Mount  Zion.    Verse  7. 

An  interesting  prophecy  concerning  a  nation  of  great 
power,  which  will  be  used  in  the  bringing  back  of  God's 
ancient  people. 

Chapter  XIX.    The  Burden  of  Egypt. 

The  Judgment  Announced.    Verses  1-15. 

Egypt  Blest  v/ith  Israel  in  the  Last  Days.    Verses  16-25. 

Eg5T)t  has  passed  through  many  judgments.  Hun- 
dreds of  years  after  the  divine  predictions  had  been 
given  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was  accomplished.  The 
final  judgment  upon  Egypt  comes  in  that  day  when  the 
Lord  appears  in  visible  glory.  Egypt  will  come,  like 
other  nations,  to  the  front  once  more  at  the  close  of  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles.  But  mercy  is  also  in  store  for 
Egypt.  Egypt  will  be  called  "His  people."  When  the 
Lord  smites  Egypt  that  land  will  return  to  Him.  It 
will  then  be  lifted  out  of  the  dust  and  receive  a  place 
of  blessing  only  second  to  that  which  Israel  will  enjoy. 

Chapter  XX.    The  Near-Punishment  of  Egypt  by  As- 
syria, 

Isaiah  Walks  Naked  and  Barefooted.    Verses  1-2. 

The  Meaning  of  His  Action. 

Egypt  Punished  by  Assyria.    Verses  3-6. 


THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH.  123 

A  strong  party  in  Jerusalem  looked  to  Egypt  for  help 
from  the  threatening  Assyrian  invasion.  This  proph- 
ecy shows  the  utter  hopelessness  of  expecting  help 
from  Egypt.  The  victory  of  Assyria  over  Egypt  is 
predicted. 

Chapter  XXL   The  Burdens  of  the  Desert  of  the  Sea; 
of  Dumah  and  Arabia. 

The  Burden  of  the  Desert  of  the  Sea  (Babylon).    Verses 

1-10. 
The  Burden  of  Dumah.    Verses  11-12. 
The  Burden  Upon  Arabia.    Verses  13-17. 

The  fall  of  Babylon  is  predicted,  for  Media  is  men- 
tioned. This  event  was  over  two  centuries  in  the  fu- 
ture. Isaiah  beholds  the  Persian  hosts  advancing. 
Such  is  prophecy,  "history  written  in  advance." 

Chapter  XXII.    The  Burden  of  the  Valley  of  Vision 
(Jerusalem). 

Jerusalem's  Deplorable  State.    Verses  1-4. 

The  Invading  Armies.    Verses  5-7. 

The  Siege  and  the  Calamity.    Verses  8-14. 

Shebna.     Verses  15-19. 

Eliakim.    Verses  20-25. 

This  is  another  intensely  interesting  prophecy.  Jeru- 
salem has  passed  through  many  sieges  and  at  last  in 
part  the  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled.  But  there  is  an- 
other siege  of  Jerusalem  impending.  It  will  come 
after  the  message  of  the  fall  of  the  final  Babylon.  See 
Zechariah  xiv.  Still  more  interesting  are  Shebna  and 
Eliakim,  mentioned  in  this  chapter.  Shebna,  the  proud 
one,  is  the  usurper,  the  type  of  the  Antichrist.  Eliakim 
is  the  type  of  Christ,  He  whose  right  it  is  to  reign.  It 
is  Christ  displacing  Antichrist,  which  is  seen  in  verses 
15-25.    Compare  xx:22  with  Rev.  iii:7. 

Chapter  XXIII.    The  Burden  of  Tyre. 

Tyre^s  Great  Disaster.    Verses  1-5. 

The  Complete  Overthrow.     Verses  6-14. 

Tyre's  Future  Restoration  and  Degradation.    Verses  15-18. 


124  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

Tyre  typifies  the  commercial  expansion  and  glory  of 
the  world.  Behind  this  commercial  glory  stands  Satan, 
the  god  of  this  age.  Read  Ezekiel  xxviii:  11-19.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar carried  out  judgment  upon  Tyre  (Ex.  xxix: 
17-18).  A  revival  of  Tyre  is  also  predicted.  We  call 
attention  to  a  statement  in  the  beautiful  Forty-fifth 
Psalm,  a  millennial  Psalm.  When  the  King  appears, 
surrounded  by  His  own,  ''the  daughter  of  Tyre  shall  be 
there  with  a  gift"  (Ps.  xlv:12).  It  is  what  is  indicated 
in  Isaiah's  vision,  "And  her  merchandise  and  her  hire 
shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord." 

Chapter  XXIV.    The  Day  of  Jehovah. 

Jehovah  Dealing  with  the  Earth.    Verse  1. 

All  Classes  Affected.    Verse  2. 

The  Desolations  Described.    Verses  3-12. 

The  Jewish  Remnant  During  the  Trouble.    Verses  18-20. 

The  Punishment  of  the   High   Ones  and   Kings.     Verses 

21-22. 
Jehovah's  Reign  in  Mount  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  Verse  23. 
A  marvellous  chapter.  Not  a  word  of  it  has  ever 
been  fulfilled.  The  great  day  of  Jehovah  is  that  day  of 
which  Isaiah  speaks  in  chapter  ii,  Zephaniah  in  chapter 
i,  Zechariah  in  chapters  xii-xiv  and  every  other  prophet. 
It  is  the  day  of  2  Thess.  i:7-10. 

Notice  that  chapters  xxiv-xxvii  are  a  continuous 
prophecy.  To  break  them  into  chapters  has  been  a 
mistake.  Study  the  phrase  "in  that  day."  Find  what 
Jehovah  will  do  in  the  day  of  His  manifestation.  He 
will  judge  and  He  will  bless.  Singing  begins  in  that 
day. 

The  high  ones  in  verse  21  are  the  wicked  spirits  in 
the  heavenly  places   (Ephesians  vi).     The  Kings  on 
earth  are  the  Kings  mentioned  in  Psalm  ii  and  Rev. 
xix:19.      Their  visitation  after  many  days  will  be  a 
visitation  of  judgment  and  not  of  blessing. 
Chapter  XXV.    Israel's  Praise  and  the  Blessings  of  the 
Kingdom. 
The  Praise  of  the  Delivered  Nation.    Verses  1-5. 
The  Blessing  for  All  Nations  During  the  Kingdom,    Verses 
6-8. 


THE   PROPHET]   ISAIAH.  125 

Israel  Rejoicing  After  Waiting.    Verse  9. 

Moab  and  Israel's  Enemies  Judged.    Verses  10-12. 

In  the  foreground  of  this  chapter  stands  another 
hymn  of  praise,  which  redeemed  Israel  will  sing  in 
"that  day."  Jehovah  has  done  wonderful  things  for 
His  people.  Compare  with  chapter  xii:5;  Psalm  xlvi: 
8-9,  etc. 

The  blessings  for  all  nations  are  described  in  verses 
6-8.  The  mountain  is  Zion.  Isaiah  iv:5-6.  Psalm 
cxxxii:  13-14.  From  there  the  streams  of  blessing  will 
gush  forth.  Then  "all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  re- 
member, and  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  all  the  kindreds 
of  the  nations  shall  worship  before  thee"  (Ps.  xxii:27). 
Darkness  will  be  removed  and  all  tears  wiped  away. 
All  this  does  not  relate  to  the  eternal  state,  but  to  con- 
ditions on  the  earth. 

Chapter  XXVI.    Judah's  Glory  Song. 

Pra^'se  for  Jehovah's  Faithfulness  and  Mercies.    Verses  1-6. 
The  Experiences  of  Waiting  During  the  Night.  Verses  7-11. 
The  Assurance  of  Peace  and  Deliverance.    Verses  12-18. 
Assurance  of  Restoration  and  Preservation.    Verses  19-21. 

We  call  attention  to  verses  12-21.  Annihilationists 
base  upon  these  words  the  evil  doctrine  that  the  wicked 
are  not  raised,  but  destroyed.  The  fact,  however,  is 
that  verses  13  and  14  do  not  teach  a  physical  resurrec- 
tion. The  teaching  is  that  the  lordship  of  other  nations 
over  Israel  is  forever  gone.  No  other  lords  will  ever 
rise  again  to  domineer  over  Israel. 

Death  and  resurrection  are  often  used  in  the  Old 
Testament  as  symbols  of  Israel's  national  death  and 
national  resurrection.  See  Hosea  vi:2;  Ezek.  xxxvii; 
Dan.  xii:2  and  verse  19  of  the  present  chapter. 

Chapter  XXVII.    Israel's  Enemies  Overthrown  and  the 
Great  Restoration. 

Assyria,  Babylon  and  Egypt  Punished.    Verse  1. 
What  Jehovah  Has  Done  and  Will  Do.    Verses  2-11. 


126  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 

The  Vineyard  Established. 

The  Glorious  Consummation.    Verses  12-13. 

This  is  a  fitting  finale  to  the  second  section  of  this 
book.  Israel's  chief  enemies  are  indicated  by  the  levia- 
than, the  serpent  and  the  dragon.  Behind  them  stands 
the  serpent  and  the  dragon,  Satan.  When  these  ene- 
mies are  overthrown  and  Satan  is  bound  then  "Israel 
shall  blossom  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world 
with  fruit." 

The  last  word  tells  of  Israel's  literal  regathering 
under  the  blowing  of  the  trumpet  (Matt.  xxiv:31)  and 
their  future  worship  in  Jerusalem.  The  ending  of  the 
first  and  second  sections  are  alike.  They  reveal  Israel's 
future  glory  and  blessing. 

Section  3.    Chapters  XXVni-XXXV. 

The  Six  Woes  of  the  Prophet*   Judgment 
Ruins  and  Restoration  Glories  to  Come* 

Chapter  XXVIII.     The  First  Woe.     The  Message  of 
Assurance. 

Ephraim  Addressed.    Verses  1-6. 

Jerusalem  Equally  Corrupt  and  Guilty.    Verses  7-8. 

The  Prophet  Mocked.     Verses  9-10. 

The  Prophet's  Answer.    Verses  11-13. 

Their  Covenant  with  Death.    Verses  14-15. 

The  Message  of  Assurance.    Verses  16-22. 

How  Jehovah  Judges.    Verses  23'.29. 

The  first  woe  is  directed  against  the  ten  tribes,  Eph- 
raim. The  judgment  is  that  which  fell  upon  them 
through  the  invasion  of  Sennacherib.  Yet  glory  is 
also  in  store  for  the  scattered,  so-called,  lost  tribes.  A 
remnant  will  return.    Verse  5  describes  this  glory. 

The  prophecy  here  and  in  the  subsequent  chapters 
was  not  by  any  means  fulfilled  when  the  Assyrian 
came  into  Israel's  land.  Its  greater  fulfilment  is  in  the 
future,  when  the  Assyrian  once  more  invades  Israel's 
land.     See  chapter  x.     The  covenant  with  death  and 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  127 

agreement  with  hell  (verse  15)  must  be  compared  with 
Daniel  ix:27.  It  is  the  time  when  the  apostate  Jewish 
nation  enters  into  a  covenant  with  the  coming  prince 
and  worships  Antichrist.  This  verse  and  the  message 
from  the  Lord  in  verses  16-22  are  deeply  interesting. 

Chapter  XXIX.    The  Second  Woe  Against  Ariel  and 
the  Third  Woe. 

The  Fall  of  Ariel  (Jerusalem)  Predicted.    Verses  1-4. 

Their  Enemies  Dealt  with  by  Jehovah.    Verses  5-8. 

The  People's  Condition:  Blinded  and  Religious  Formalists. 

Verses  9-14. 
The  Third  Woe.    Verses  15-16. 

In  that  Day.  Joy  and  Blessing  for  the  Meek;  Iniquity 
Punished.  Verses  17-24. 
Ariel  means  "the  lion  of  God."  It  is  one  of  the 
names  of  Jerusalem.  A  great  siege  of  Jerusalem  is 
predicted.  Neither  Sennacherib's  invasion  nor  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  accomplished  this 
prophecy.  At  the  end  of  this  age  the  King  of  the 
North  (Assyrian)  and  confederate  nations  with  him 
will  besiege  Jerusalem.  Of  this  the  chapter  gives  us 
the  history.  Sennacherib's  army  is  a  type  of  the  King 
of  the  North.  Read  again  chapter  x  and  study  with 
this  chapter  before  us  Zech.  xii-xiv;  Micah.  iv:ll; 
v:4-15,  and  especially  the  last  part  of  Daniel  xi.  After 
that  last  siege  of  Jerusalem  "that  day"  will  bring 
blessing  for  the  faithful  and  punishment  for  the 
wicked. 

Chapter  XXX.   The  Fourth  Woe  Against  Alliance  With 

Egypt. 
The  Alliance  and  Its  Failure.    Verses  1-7. 
The  Written  Table  Against  the  Rebellious  People.    Versfes 

8-14. 
Jehovah's  Word  of  Encouragement.    Verses  15-17. 
The  Nation  Blest  and  Restored.    Verses  18-21. 
Idolatry  Ceases;  the  Land  Restored.    Verses  22-26. 
The  Accomplishment  by  the  Coming  of  the  Lord.    Verses 
27-33. 
While  this  chapter  had  a  significance,  like  all  these 


128  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

prophetic  utterances,  for  the  people  in  Isaiah's  day,  its 
complete  revelation  can  only  be  grasped  in  the  light  of 
what  is  yet  to  come.  The  Jewish  people  have  never 
yet  possessed  the  blessings  of  verses  18-20.  These  will 
come  as  a  result  of  the  Second  Coming  of  Christ.  See 
verse  30. 

Chapter  XXXL    The  Fifth  Woe  Against  Them  That 
Go  Down  to  Egypt. 

The  Egyptian  Alliance  Condemned  Again.    Verses  1-3. 
Jehovah  Promises  to  Deliver  Jerusalem.    Verses  4-9. 

All  looks  forward  towards  the  future.  It  is  Jerusa- 
lem's glorious  future.  The  Lord  will  deliver  it ;  He  will 
preserve  it  (verse  5). 

Chapter  XXXII.    The  Coming  King  and  His  Kingdom. 

The  King  and  His  Rule.    Verses  1-8. 

The  Careless  Women  Addressed.    Verses  9-12. 

The  Judgment  of  the  Land  and  the  City.    Verses  13-14. 

The  Hope  of  the  Future.    Verses  15-20. 

The  connection  with  the  previous  chapter  is  obvious. 
In  chapter  xxxi:4-9  the  coming  of  the  Lord  for  the  de- 
liverance of  His  people  and  the  punishment  of  their 
enemies  is  predicted.  "So  shall  the  Lord  of  Hosts  come 
down  to  fight  Mount  Zion  and  the  hill  thereof." 
And  now  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  xxxii  the  coming 
King  and  His  righteous  reign  is  revealed.  The  King 
is  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  "a  hiding  place  from  the  wind 
and  a  cover  from  the  tempest." 

Verses  13-14  describe  once  more  the  judgment  which 
rested  upon  the  land  and  the  city.  But  it  is  not  per- 
manent. "Until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  us  from  on 
high."  This  great  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  connected 
with  the  restoration  of  Israel's  land  has  not  yet  taken 
place.    It  comes  in  that  day.    Read  Joel  ii. 

Chapter  XXXIII.    Sixth  Woe  Against  the  Assyrian  and 
What  is  to  Follow. 

The  Judgment  Announced.    Verse  1. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  1£9 

The  Prayer  of  the  Faithful  Remnant.    Verses  2-6. 
The  Judgment  Executed.    Verses  7-13. 
The  Judge  in  the  Midst  of  Zion.    Verses  14-16. 
The  King  Beheld  in  His  Beauty.     Verses  17-23. 
Healing  and  Forgiveness  the  Result  of  the  Coming  of  the 
King.    Verse  24. 

This  is  the  last  mention  which  is  made  of  the  As- 
syrian apart  from  the  historical  chapters.  Here  again 
the  judgment  of  the  final  Assj^rian  is  in  view.  V/hen 
the  Lord  arises  and  is  exalted  the  judgment  of  the  last 
great  enemy  of  Israel  will  be  executed.  This  judgment 
scene  is  described  in  verses  9-13.  The  prayer  of  the 
faithful  remnant  is  recorded  in  verses  2-G.  The  rem- 
nant is  that  portion  of  the  nation  which  holds  to  Je- 
hovah and  His  Word  in  the  last  days.  Their  prayer 
will  be  answered  by  the  King,  whom  they  shall  see  in 
His  Beauty.  What  Zion  will  be  then  and  what  the  Lord 
will  be  to  His  earthly  people  is  seen  in  the  rest  of  the 
chapter. 

Chapter  XXXIV.    The  Day  of  Jehovah. 

Addressed  to  the  World;  Jews  and  Gentiles  Involved.  Verse 

1. 
The  Shaking  of  the  Earth  and  the  Heavens.     Verses  2-9. 
The  Day  of  Vengeance.    Verses  8-17. 

This  is  one  of  the  darkest  chapters  in  the  Bible.  A 
worldwide  judgment  is  described  such  as  has  never 
taken  place  in  the  history  of  the  world.  The  indigna- 
tion of  the  Lord  is  then  upon  all  nations  and  upon  their 
armies.  Like  chapter  xxiv,  it  tells  of  the  great  judg- 
ments to  come. 

Chapter  XXXV.     Restoration  Glory.     The  Kingdom. 

Creation  Blest  and  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  Revealed.    Verses 

1-2. 
The    Spiritual   and   Material   Blessings   of   the    Kingdom. 

Verses  3-9. 
The  Return  of  the  Ransomed  of  the  Lord.    Verse  10. 

What  follows  the  great  judgments  of  the  Day  of  Jq- 


130  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

4iovah,  when  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  revealed  from 
heaven  in  flaming  fire,  is  now  brought  forward  in  this 
final  chapter  of  the  first  great  part  of  Isaiah's  vision. 
The  unscriptural  view,  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in 
judgment  means  the  complete  end  of  the  world,  is 
once  more  answered.  After  judgment  ruin  comes 
restoration  glory.  What  that  glory  is  we  find  in  this 
chapter.  Read  it  carefully  and  also  the  "Studies  in 
Isaiah"  which  follow  this  analysis.  The  last  verse 
shows  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  returning  to  Zion,  de- 
livered from  sorrow  and  sighing,  filled  with  joy  and 
singing  salvation  songs.  It  is  the  bringing  back  to 
their  own  land  of  a  delivered  people. 

A  brief  word  of  review.  Each  section  of  Part  I — 
Chapters  i-xxxv — ^foretells  great  judgments.  Judg- 
ments upon  Jerusalem,  the  Land  of  Judah,  the  nations, 
the  whole  world.  These  visions  were  not  at  all  fulfilled 
in  the  past  judgments.  The  day  of  the  Lord  ("in  that 
day"  ba  yom  hahu,  a  phrase  so  often  used  by  Isaiah) 
will  bring  these  threatened  judgments.  But  there  are 
the  predictions  of  restoration  and  blessing,  which 
always  follow  that  day.  Each  of  the  three  sections  end 
with  the  vision  of  a  regathered  and  restored  people, 
brought  back  to  their  land.  The  scope  is  perfect  be- 
cause it  is  divine. 

The  Historical  Parenthesis. 

Chapters  XXXVI-XXXIX. 

The  center  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  a  brief  but  deeply 
interesting  historical  account  of  events  during  the  reign 
of  King  Hezekiah.  His  name  is  mentioned  not  less  than 
thirty-one  times  in  these  chapters.  His  great  v/orks  in 
reformation  and  otherwise  are  recorded  in  2  Kings 
xviii:4-7,  2  Chron.  xxix-xxx:5-22,  2  Kings  xx:20.  From 
Proverbs  xxv:l  we  learn  that  he  was  a  great  lover  of 
the  Word  of  God,  for  he  had  it  copied,  perhaps  by  many 
scribes.    He  was  25  years  old  when  he  ascended  the 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  131 

throne  and  reigned  29  years,  727-699  B.  C.  No  doubt 
he  was  one  of  the  greatest  Kings  of  Judah. 

The  events  recorded  in  these  chapters  are  not  put  to- 
gether chronologically.  The  King's  sickness,  prayer 
and  recovery  occurred  before  the  attempts  of  Senna- 
cherib to  take  Jerusalem  and  the  subsequent  complete 
overthrow  of  the  Assyrian  hosts.  This  arrangement 
has  its  meaning.  These  historical  chapters  are  de- 
signed for  an  appendix  to  the  earlier  prophecies  (i- 
xxxv)  and  for  an  introduction  to  the  later  prophecies 
(xl-lxvi) .  The  Assyrian  enemy  is  repeatedly  predicted 
in  the  earlier  prophecies.  Indeed  he  is  seen  as  the 
enemy  of  God's  people,  the  rod  of  God's  anger  to  punish 
His  disobedient  people.  How  the  Assyrian  came  and 
the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  the  camp  is  therefore  put 
first,  because  it  is  related  to  the  first  prophecies  of 
Isaiah.  In  connection  with  Hezekiah's  pride  in  chapter 
xxxix  the  future  Babylonian  captivity  is  announced. 
The  later  prophecies  look  upon  the  people  as  in  Babylon, 
assuring  the  remnant  of  restoration,  not  alone  from 
the  dispersion  in  Babylon  but  the  future  great  restora- 
tion, the  regathering  from  all  countries. 

We  give  a  brief  analysis  of  these  four  chapters  and 
leave  it  to  the  reader  to  gather  up  the  blessed  lessons 
of  confidence  in  God,  dependence  upon  Him,  of  prayer, 
as  well  as  others,  in  which  these  chapters  abound. 

Chapter  XXXVI.   The  Threatening  Enemy. 

The  Assyrian  Invasion.    Verses  1-3. 

Rabshakeh's  Mockery.     Verses  4-10. 

Eliakim,  Shebna  and  Joah's  Request.    Verse  11. 

Rabshakeh's   Address   in   Hebrev/   Defying   God.     Verses 

12-20. 
The  Silence  of  the  People.    Verse  21. 
The  Terror  of  Eliakim,  Shebna  and  Joah.    Verse  22. 

Chapter  XXXVII.    Hezekiah  m  the  House  of  the  Lord. 
Sennacherib's  Second  Attempt. 

Hezekiah's  Humiliation.    Isaiah  Sent  for.    Verses  1-5, 
The  Message  from  the  Prophet.    Verses  6-7. 


132  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

Rabshakeh's  Letter.    Verses  8-13. 
Hezekiah's  Prayer.    Verses  14-20. 
The  Prayer  Answered.    Verses  21-35. 
The  Army  of  Sennacherib  Judged.    Verse  36. 
The  Judgment  Upon  Sennacherib.    Verse  38. 


Chapter  XXXVIII.    Hezekiah's  Sickness  and  Healing. 

Isaiah's  Startling  Message.    Verse  1. 

Hezekiah's  Prayer.     Verses  2-3. 

The  Prayer  Heard  and  the  Sign.    Verses  4-8. 

The  King's  Sorrow  and  Jey,  a  Psalm  of  Praise.     Verses 

9-20. 
The  Remedy  for  the  Recovery.    Verses  21-22. 

The  Message  of  approaching  death  startled  the  King 
because  at  that  time  he  had  no  son.  If  he  had  died 
what  then  would  have  become  of  the  Messianic  hope 
through  the  house  of  David.  Beautiful  it  is  to  hear  the 
Lord  say  through  Isaiah,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God 
of  David,  thy  father."  Before  that  Isaiah  gave  him 
the  message  "For  I  will  defend  this  city  to  save  it  for 
Mine  own  sake  and  for  My  servant  David's  sake." 

Chapter  XXXIX.    Hezekiah's  Self  Exaltation. 

The  Ambassadors  of  Merodach-baladan.    Verse  1. 

Hezekiah's  Boasting.    Verse  2. 

Isaiah's  Inquiry.     Verses  3-4. 

The  Babylonian  Captivity  Announced.    Verses  5-7. 

Hezekiah's  Submission  and  Comfort.    Verse  8. 

The  prediction  of  Isaiah  of  the  Babylonian  captivity, 
fulfilled  through  King  Nebuchadnezzar  about  100 
years  after  these  words  were  spoken,  is  startling.  The 
reader  will  bear  in  mind  that  the  Assyrian  was  not  yet 
overcome,  for  the  sickness  and  self  exaltation  of  Heze- 
kiah  preceded  the  judgment  of  Sennacherib's  army. 
The  Assyrian  and  not  Babylon  was  the  threatening 
enemy.  God's  Spirit  alone  could  enable  him  to  make 
such  a  prediction. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  133 

PART  11.    CHAPTERS  XL-LXVI. 

The  Later  Prophecies  of  Comfort  and 
Glory. 

Like  the  first  part  this  second  part  of  Isaiah  has 
three  sections.  The  three  sections  of  the  first  part  re- 
vealed the  judgments  to  come  upon  the  Jewish  people, 
Jerusalem,  the  nations  and  the  earth.  The  three  sec- 
tions of  the  second  part  reveal  the  great  blessings  in 
store  for  the  people  of  Israel,  Jerusalem,  the  nations 
and  the  earth,  after  the  judgments  are  passed.  These 
sections  give  the  past,  present,  and  the  future  his- 
tory of  the  Jewish  people. 

In  the  first  section  (xl-xlviii)  they  are  seen  propheti- 
cally in  Babylon,  but  about  to  be  delivered  and  brought 
back  to  the  land.  Cyrus  is  predicted  as  the  chosen 
instrument.  However,  this  section  looks  also  beyond 
the  return  of  the  remnant  from  Babylon.  Their  pres- 
ent dispersion  and  coming  restoration  is  predicted  as 
well.  In  the  second  section  (xlix-lvii)  we  find  this 
period  of  their  history  more  fully  brought  forward. 
In  this  section  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is  more  fully 
revealed.  He  came  to  His  own  and  they  received  Him 
not.  They  hid  their  faces  from  Him  and  esteemed 
Him  not.  In  consequence  of  this  rejection  Israel  is  not 
gathered  (xlix:5),  while  those  who  are  afar  off,  the 
Gentiles  and  the  isles  of  the  sea,  hear  of  the  salvation 
of  God.  It  is  the  present  age  which  can  be  traced  in 
this  section.  Israel  not  gathered  and  the  rejected  One 
is  given  for  a  light  to  the  nations.  The  great  central 
figure  in  this  section  is  the  suffering  servant  of 
Jehovah  (chap.  liii). 

In  the  third  section  we  discover  their  future  history. 
Here  we  see  Him,  who  suffered,  as  the  victorious  King. 
A  remnant  is  seen  back  in  the  land  and  the  Glories 
and  Blessings  of  the  future  burst  forth  in  marvelous 
splendor. 


134  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 

Section  I.    Chapter  XL-XLVIIL 

In  Babylon.   Deliverance  Promised  through 

Cyrus. 

Babylon  is  only  Mentioned  in  this  Section. 

Chapter  XL.    The  Opening  Message.    Key  and  Intro- 
duction to  this  Section. 

Comfort  for  His  People.    Verse  1. 

The  Voice  in  the  Wilderness.    Verses  3-5. 

The     Prophet's  Message.     Verses  6-8. 

The  Message  to  Zion.     Verses  9-11. 

The  Supremacy  of  Jehovah.    Verses  12-26. 

Comfort  for  Jacob  and  Israel.    Verses  27-31, 

The  first  verses  of  this  chapter  are  the  key  and  intro- 
duction to  the  entire  section.  The  Lord  now  speaks  in 
comfort  to  Jerusalem  and  announces  the  pardoning  of 
her  iniquity  and  that  in  blessing  she  will  receive  double 
for  her  sins.  In  verses  3-11  the  first  and  second  Com- 
ing of  Christ  are  again  blended  together.  John  the 
Baptist  was  that  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness  (John 
i:23).  Not  in  Matthew  but  in  Luke  Isaiah  xl:3-5  is 
quoted  with  the  exception  of  verse  5.  In  its  place  the 
Holy  Spirit  saith,  "And  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation 
of  God."  The  Glory  of  the  Lord  will  be  revealed  with 
the  second  Advent.  When  that  Glory  appears  Israel 
is  saved,  in  the  meantime  the  salvation  of  God  is 
offered  to  the  Gentiles.  Jehovah  speaks  in  this  chapter 
of  Himself  and  the  evidences  that  He  is  God.  This  is 
the  peculiar  feature  of  the  entire  section.  All  is  spoken 
to  encourage  the  faith  of  His  people.  Blessed  lessons 
we  find  here.  Verses  27-31,  however,  will  only  be  fully 
realized  in  the  future  kingdom. 

Chapter  XLI.    Jehovah's  Challenge. 

The  Address  to  the  Islands  and  the  Peoples.     Verse  1. 
Jehovah's  Question.  Cyrus  and  his  Ways  Predicted.  Verses 
2-4. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  135 

Nations  Troubled  on  Account  of  Cyrus.    Verses  5-7. 

Israel  as  Jehovah's  Servant.     Verse  8. 

The  Message  of  Comfort  and  Assurance  of  Restoration. 

Verses  9-20. 
Jehovah's  Second  Challenge.    He  Alone  can  Declare  Things 

to  Come.     Verses  21-24. 
The  Future  Things  Revealed.     Verses  25-29. 

Cyrus  is  here  mentioned  for  the  first  time,  though 
not  yet  by  name.  He  is  in  view  in  verses  2-3  and  25. 
His  work  as  a  mighty  conqueror  is  outlined  and  the 
consternation  of  the  surrounding  nations  on  account 
of  it  is  described.  Verses  18-20  go  beyond  the  times 
of  Cyrus.  They  can  only  be  fulfilled  when  He  who  is 
greater  than  Cyrus  will  appear. 

Chapter  XLII.    The  True  Servant  of  Jehovah. 

The  Servant  of  Jehovah  and  His  Mission.     Verses  1-4. 
His  Future  Work  Among  the  Nations.    Verses  5-9. 
The  Future  Song  of  Redemption  Glory.    Verses  10-13. 
Jehovah's  Manifestation  in  Power.     Verses  14-17. 
The  Address  of  Exhortation  to  the  Deaf  and  Blind  Nation. 
Verses  18-25. 

Matthew's  Gospel  (xii:20)  tells  us  that  this  servant 
is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Mark  the  different  phases 
of  His  character  and  work  while  on  earth  and  His 
future  work  when  He  appears  again.  The  song  of 
redemption  glory  will  be  sung  only  when  He  is  mani- 
fested. Israel  is  seen  as  a  people  robbed  and  spoiled. 
None  saith  "Restore."    This  is  their  present  condition. 

Chapter  XLIII.      Jehovah  Speaks  in  Comfort  to  His 

People. 

What  Jehovah  is  and  Will  be  to  Israel.    Verses  1-7. 
Second  Address  to  the  Blind  and  Deaf  People.    Verses  8-13. 
Jehovah  Deals  with  Their  Enemies.     Verses  14-17. 
Blessed  Things  to   Come.     They   Shall   Show   Forth  My 

Praise.    Verses  18-21. 
Jehovah's  Loving  Appeal  and  Promise  to  Remember  Their 

Sins  no  More.    Verses  22-28. 

Chapters  xliii-xlv  must  be  studied  together.  Jehovah 


136  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

speaks  in  these  chapters  as  nowhere  else  in  the  pro- 
phetic Word.  Note  the  many  declarations  Jehovah 
makes.  *1  have  redeemed  thee/'  "I  will  be  with  thee," 
"I  have  loved  thee/'  *'I  have  made  Him/'  *1  am  the 
Lord/'  "I  will  make  a  way  in  the  wilderness."  All 
God's  people  can  lay  claim  to  these  blessed  words  of 
promise  and  assurance.  Ultimately  Israel  will  possess 
and  enjoy  these  great  blessings. 

Chapter  XLIV.     Jehovah  Continues  to  Speak. 

Spiritual  Blessings  Promised  by  the  Gift  of  the  Spirit. 

Verses  1-5. 
Jehovah  the  First  and  the  Last.    Verses  6-8. 
Idolatry  Rebuked.     Verses  9-20. 
Remember!  Return!  Sing!     Verses  21-23. 
The  Faithful  Jehovah,  the  Redeemer.    Verses  24-27. 
Cyrus  Named.    Verse  28. 

The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  upon  Israel's  seed 
promised  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  has  not  yet 
taken  place.  Compare  with  chapter  xxxii:15  and  lix: 
21.  Verses  21-23  look  forward  to  the  coming  age  of 
blessing.  Then  Israel  will  be  "Jehovah's  servant"  on 
the  earth ;  then  their  transgressions  will  be  blotted  out. 
Then  the  heavens,  the  earth,  the  mountains  and  the 
trees  will  break  forth  in  singing.  In  verse  28  Cyrus 
is  mentioned  by  name.  This  great  Persian  King  was 
then  in  the  distant  future  an  unborn  being.  Jehovah 
knew  him  and  named  him  through  Isaiah.  He  calls 
him  "my  shepherd"  and  predicts  his  work.  Josephus 
declares  that  when  Cyrus  found  his  name  in  the  Book 
of  Isaiah,  written  220  years  before,  an  earnest  desire 
laid  hold  upon  him  to  fulfil  what  was  written. 

Chapter  XLV.     The  Word  of  Jehovah  to  Cyrus,  to 
Israel  and  to  the  Ends  of  the  Earth. 

Thus  Saith  Jehovah  to  Cyrus.    Verses  1-13. 
Thus  Saith  Jehovah:  Israel  Shall  be  Saved.    Verses  14-17. 
Thus  Saith  Jehovah  to  the  Ends  of  the  Earth:   Every  Knee 
to  Bow.    Verses  18-25. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  137 

Cyrus  is  called  in  this  chapter  God's  anointed  (Mes- 
siah). Jehovah  called  him  by  name,  but  it  was  for 
the  sake  of  Israel.  But  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind  that 
Cyrus,  God's  instrument,  called  and  prepared  to  make 
the  restoration  of  a  remnant  possible,  is  likewise  a 
type  of  Christ,  through  whom  alone  the  promises  of 
God  to  the  nation  can  be  accomplished. 

Note  the  statements  ''Israel  shall  be  saved  in 
Jehovah  with  an  everlasting  salvation"  (verse  17). 
"All  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  be  saved''  (verse  22). 
Then  idolatry  will  be  rebuked  (xliv:9-20).  But  notice 
the  order.  First  Israel  must  know  salvation  and  as 
a  result  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  look  and  be  saved. 
The  most  precious  Gospel  truths  found  here  are  well 
known. 

Chapter  XLVI.    Babylon  is  to  FaU. 

The  Babylonian  Idols  Carried  by  Beasts.    Verses  1-2. 

How  Jehovah  Carries  His  People.    Verses  3-4. 

The  Divine  Reproach.    Verses  5-7. 

A  Ravenous  Bird  (Cyrus)  to  Come  from  the  East.    Verses 

8-11. 
Salvation  in  Zion.    Verses  12-13. 

The  opening  verses  are  comforting.  The  helpless- 
ness of  the  Babylonian  idols  is  described.  They  have  to 
be  carried.  They  cannot  deliver  out  of  captivity,  for 
they  themselves  have  gone  into  captivity.  But 
Jehovah  carries  His  people  from  birth  to  old  age.  The 
last  verse  takes  us  beyond  the  fall  of  the  Babylon  of 
the  past.  When  the  final  Babylon  described  in  Revela- 
tion is  accomplished  then  it  will  be  true  *1  will  place 
salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel  my  glory." 

Chapter  XLVII.    A  Description  of  the  Fall  of  Babylon. 

Babylon's  Degradation  Announced.    Verses  1-3. 
Israel  Acknowledges  the  Redeemer.    Verse  4. 
Retribution  for  Babylon.     Verses  5-7. 
The  Destruction  Swift  and  Sure.    Verses  8-15. 

In  chapter  xiv  a  similar  description  of  Babylon  and 


138  T'HE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

the  fall  of  the  King  of  Babylon  is  recorded.    All  has 
its  meaning  for  the  future. 

Chapter  XLVIII.    The  Divine  Restatement  Concerning 
His  People,  Their  Condition  and  Future. 

Their  Condition  and  Jehovah's  Predictions.    Verses  1-8. 

Jehovah  Acts  for  His  Name's  Sake.     Verses  9-11. 

"I  am  He."    Verses  12-16. 

Israel's  Future  Blessing.    Verses  17-21. 

No  Peace  for  the  Wicked.  Verse  22. 
This  chapter  touches  once  more  upon  the  different 
phases  of  Jehovah's  messages  from  chapters  xl-xlvii. 
Israel's  apostate  condition,  Jehovah's  sovereign  grace 
and  mercy  towards  them,  Cyrus  (verses  14-15),  the 
blessings  of  the  future  for  a  converted  remnant  of 
His  people,  are  all  mentioned  again.  Solemn  is  the 
declaration  that  whatever  Jehovah  does,  whatever 
comfort  and  peace  He  bestows,  however  grand  and 
glorious  the  blessings  of  the  future  are,  the  wicked 
are  forever  excluded.  There  is  no  peace  unto  the 
wicked. 

This  chapter  closes  the  first  section  of  the  second 
part  of  Isaiah.  Babylon,  Cyrus  and  Jehovah's  Majesty 
and  Glory,  revealed  in  predicting  future  things,  the 
helplessness  of  idols  and  Jehovah's  mercy  and  power 
manifested  in  the  restoration  and  blessing  of  His 
people  are  the  leading  features  of  this  section. 

Section  2.    Chapters  XLIX-LVII. 

The  Servant  of  Jehovah,  His  Suffering  and 
His  Glory. 

Israel  Rejects  the  Redeemer.     They  are  Dispersed  Among 
the  Gentiles.    The  Ends  of  the  Earth  Hear  the  Salvation 
of  God. 
Chapter  XLIX.     The  Key  and  Introduction  to  this 
Section.  The  Servant  of  Jehovah  and  His  Mission. 
The  Servant  Speaks  of  Himself.    Verses  1-3. 
He  Complains  of  Failure.    Verse  4. 


THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH,  139 

Jehovah's  Answer  to  Him.     Verses  5-13. 
Zion  Speaks.     Verse  14. 
Jehovah's  Answer.     Verses  15-26. 

This  entire  chapter  is  the  key  to  the  whole  section. 
The  Servant  of  Jehovah,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  stands 
in  the  foreground.  He  is  seen  as  the  rejected  One,  who 
complains  that  He  has  labored  in  vain.  The  ultimate 
result  of  His  Work  is  prophetically  described.  In  the 
opening  verses  He  speaks  of  His  call.  To  bring  Jacob 
to  God  is  why  He  appeared  in  the  midst  of  His  own. 
But  Israel  is  not  gathered,  for  they  rejected  Him  (verse 
5) .  The  nation  abhorreth  Him.  Israel's  gathering  was 
not  accomplished  at  the  first  advent.  The  nation  was 
set  aside.  By  their  fall  salvation  came  to  the  Gentiles. 
This  is  fully  revealed  in  verses  6-7.  In  verses  8-13 
we  find  the  future  work  of  Christ  as  King.  When  it 
is  accomplished  the  heavens  will  sing  and  the  earth 
will  be  joyful.  Zion's  present  complaint  (verse  14)  is 
answered  by  promises  of  restoration. 

Chapter  L.    The  Servant  Speaks  of  His  Determination 
and  Suffering. 

Verses  1-3  Belong  to  the  Preceding  Chapter. 
The  Cause  of  Zion's  Present  Desolation.    Verses  1-3. 
The  Servant's  Self  Witness.    Verse  4. 
His  Obedience  and  His  Suffering.     Verses  5-6. 
His  Victorious  Triumph.    Verses  7-9. 

The  Two  Classes:     Those  Who  Fear  Him  and  Those  Who 
Reject  Him.    Verses  10-11. 

The  Suffering  One  is  speaking.  Little  comment  is 
needed  on  this  chapter  if  the  reader  will  use  the  above 
Key. 

Chapter  LI.    Jehovah  Encourages  His  Faithful  People, 
the  Remnant  of  Israel. 

The  Call  to  Remember  Abraham.    Verses  1-2. 
Zion  to  be  Comforted.    Verse  3. 


140  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

His  Righteousness  Near;  His  Arm  to  Judge  the  People. 

Verses  4-6. 
Fear  ye  Not.    Verses  7-8. 
The  Prayer  of  Faith.     Verses  9-11. 
Jehovah  Answers.    Verses  12-16. 
The  Suffering  of  the  Nation  to  End.    Verses  17-23. 

The  Lord  speaks  to  His  faithful  people.  He  reminds 
them  of  Abraham  and  the  covenant.  He  assures  them 
that  the  wilderness  of  Zion  shall  become  like  Eden, 
like  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Judgment  shall  overtake 
the  earth.  It  is  beautiful  to  see  how  the  faithful  pray 
in  faith  after  this  message  from  Jehovah  (verses  9- 
11),  and  how  Jehovah  answers  them  (verses  12-16). 

Chapter  LIL    Zion  Awakening  and  the  Coming  of  the 

Lord. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  chapter  lii:l-12  is  detached  from 
chapter  li  and  that  the  last  3  verses  of  chapter  lii  are 
detached  from  the  chapter  which  follows.  The  correct 
division  is  chapter  li-lii-12;  chapter  lii:13-liii:12. 

Zion  Called  to  Awake.     Verses  1-5. 

"In  That  Day"  Behold  it  is  I.    Verse  6. 

The  Results  of  the  Return  of  Jehovah.    Verses  7-12. 

The  Servant's  Suffering  and  Glory.    Verses  13-15. 

The  last  paragraph  of  chapter  li  gives  the  divine 
declaration  that  the  suffering  and  affliction  of  Israel 
is  to  end.  "Behold  I  have  taken  out  of  thine  hand  the 
cup  of  trembling,  even  the  dregs  of  the  cup  of  my  fury ; 
thou  shalt  no  m.ore  drink  it  again"  (li:22).  Now  Zion 
assured  of  the  end  of  suffering  is  called  upon  to  awaken 
and  put  on  beautiful  garments.  She  is  to  arise  from 
the  dust.  Such  is  the  glorious  future  of  Jerusalem. 
Verses  7-12  reveal  the  blessed  results  of  the  Coming  of 
the  Lord.  Then  it  shall  be  said,  "Thy  God  reigneth.'^ 
Then  and  not  before  "all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall 
see  the  salvation  of  our  God"  (v.  10). 

Verses  13-15  connect  with  chapter  1.  Chapter  li-lii: 
12  is  parenthetical. 


TEE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  141 

Chapter  LIII.    The  Sinbearer  and  His  Victory. 

The  Marred  Visage  and  His  Exaltation.     Hi  :1 3-15. 

His  Life  and  His  Rejection  by  the  Nation.     liii:l-3. 

The  Work    of    the    Sinbearer;    Smitten,    Afflicted    and    Bruised. 

Verses  4-6. 
His  Submission  and  His  Deliverance.     Verses  7-9. 
His  Glorious  Reward.     Verses  10-12. 

In  "Messianic  Predictions,'*  at  the  close  the  reader  will 
find  hints  on  this  great  chapter.  We  do  not  repeat  them 
here.  The  New  Testament  fully  bears  witness  to  this 
great  vision  of  the  Cross  of  Christ,  the  vicarious  suffering 
of  the  Son  of  God  and  its  blessed  results.  To  reject  them 
as  meaning  Christ  and  His  work  of  atonement  is  equivalent 
to  the  rejection  of  the  revelation  of  the  New  Testament 
and  especially  the  rejection  of  the  Person  of  our  Lord. 
The  chapter  is  one  of  the  greatest  in  this  book.  After  the 
53d  chaptef  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  is  no  longer  mentioned. 
He  is  seen  in  the  next  section  as  the  King  coming  with 
power  and  executing  the  judgments  of  God. 

Chapter  LFV.    Israel  Called  to  Sing. 

The  Blessings  of  Restoration.     Verses  1-6. 

Mercy  Bestowed.     Verses  7-10. 

The  Earthly  Glory  of  Jerusalem.     Verses  11-14. 

Jehovah  Keeps  and  Defends  His  People.     Verses  15-17. 

After  the  cross  the  singing.  What  singing  there  will  be 
in  the  earth  when  at  last  "they  will  look  upon  Him,  whom 
they  have  pierced."  Israel  will  some  day  know  the  full 
meaning  of  Isaiah  liii,  and  when  He  is  owned  at  last  the 
Glories  and  Blessings  of  Restoration  will,  through  infinite 
Grace,  be  bestowed  upon  them.  Enlargement  and  faith- 
fulness will  be  the  results.  The  shame  of  Israel's  youth 
and  long  widowhood  is  ended.  The  forsaking  is  ended. 
Everlasting  kindness  will  be  their  happy  portion.  The 
fear  and  sorrow  of  Israel  are  ended  because  "He  hath 
poured  out  His  soul  unto  death," 


142  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

Chapter  LV.     Salvation's  Offer  and  Provision. 

The  Invitation  to  Everyone  and  the  Promise.    Verses  1-2. 

The  Sure  Mercies  of  David.    Verses  3-5. 

The  Exhortation  to  Seek  and  to  Forsake.    Verses  6-7. 

God's  Thoughts  and  God's  Ways.    Verses  8-11. 

The  Joy,  Peace  and  Glory  of  the  Future.    Verses  12-13. 

The  scope  and  application  of  this  chapter  must  not 
be  limited.  While  Israel  eventually  v^ill  break  forth  in 
singing  as  the  result  of  believing  on  Him,  whom  they 
once  despised,  the  invitation  to  a  free  and  full  salva- 
tion goes  forth  to  every  one.  It  is  the  great  Gospel 
invitation  in  this  Book.  But  the  national  promises  to 
Israel  are  in  evidence  in  verses  3-5.  And  when  Israel 
is  redeemed  the  invitation  to  salvation  will  go  forth  as 
never  before.  Now  individuals  are  saved.  Then 
nations  will  be  brought  into  the  kingdom.  "Nations 
that  knew  not  thee  shall  come  unto  thee  because  of 
the  Lord  thy  God,  and  for  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  for 
He  Hath  glorified  thee." 


Chapter  LVI.    Salvation  Enjoyed  by  the  Strangers  and 

Eunuchs. 

Strangers  and  Servants  Joined  unto  the  Lord  to  Serve  Him 
and  to  Love  the  Name  of  the  Lord.    Verses  1-8. 

The  first  eight  verses  of  this  chapter  stand  by  them- 
selves. Strangers  to  the  Commonv/ealth  of  Israel  and 
Eunuchs  are  gathered  in.  It  is  the  result  of  the 
gracious  invitation  of  the  preceding  chapter  and  that 
again  is  the  result  of  the  work  of  the  Servant  of 
Jehovah  and  His  vicarious  suffering.  While  these 
verses  look  forward  to  the  Kingdom  we  have  in  them 
a  hint  of  what  God  does  now  in  gathering  strangers. 
The  gathering  of  the  others  in  verse  eight  can  only 
take  place  when  the  outcasts  of  Israel  are  brought  in. 

Chapter  lvi:9-lvii:14,  must  be  read  continuously. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  143 

Chapter  LVII.    The  Condition  of  the  Apostate  Nation. 
The  Two  Classes. 

The  Condition  of  the  Shepherds  of  Israel.    Lvi:9-12. 
Dumb  Dogs,  Loving  Slumber,  Greedy  Dogs,  etc. 
Apostate  Israel.     Lvii:l-14. 
The  Two  Classes.     Verses  15-21. 

The  final  chapter  of  this  second  section  corresponds 
to  the  last  chapter  of  the  first  section  (xlviii).  The 
sad  condition  of  the  people  Israel  is  pictured.  This 
is  their  national  apostasy  throughout  this  age,  while 
strangers  are  joined  to  the  Lord  and  the  church  is 
gathered.  The  worst  is  yet  to  come.  Lvii:9  looks  for- 
ward to  the  great  apostasy  during  the  great  tribula- 
tion. The  King  is  the  Antichrist,  who  takes  his  seat 
in  the  temple  and  claims  worship  (2  Thess.  ii).  They 
worship  him,  the  masterpiece  of  Satan,  and  thus  they 
debase  themselves  unto  hell. 

Gracious  is  the  promise  to  the  feeble  remnant,  those 
who  are  contrite  and  humble.  *'I  have  seen  his  ways 
and  will  heal  him.  I  will  lead  him  also  and  restore 
comforts  unto  him  and  to  his  mourners."  Peace  is 
promised  to  him  that  is  afar  off  (Gentiles)  and  to  him 
that  is  near  (Israel).  It  will  be  fully  realized  in  the 
Kingdom.  "But  the  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  sea, 
when  it  cannot  rest,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and 
dirt.  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked." 
It  is  the  same  solemn  declaration  which  stands  last  in 
chapter  xlviii.  Comfort  and  peace  for  all,  except  for 
the  wicked.  It  is  a  complete  answer  to  the  heresy  of 
the  present  day,  which  claims  that  all  Israel,  including 
the  wicked  dead,  will  be  saved  and  have  a  share  in  the 
Kingdom  of  Peace. 


144  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

Section  3.    Chapters  LVIII-LXVI. 

Jewish  History  in  the  Endtime:  their  Future 
Glory  and  the  Glory  of  the  Coming  Age. 

This  third  and  last  section  of  the  vision  of  Isaiah  can  only  be 
understood  and  appreciated  if  it  is  studied  in  the  light  of  other 
prophecies  which  predict  the  final  events  with  which  the  times 
of  the  Gentiles  close.  That  period  consists  of  7  years,  the  last 
3^/^  being  the  great  tribulation.  According  to  these  predictions 
a  part  of  the  Jewish  nation  will  be  back  in  their  land.  These 
returned  Jews  will  consist  of  two  classes,  a  faithful  remnant 
who  own  their  condition,  trust  in  Jehovah  and  in  the  national 
promises,  and  an  unbelieving  mass.  The  latter  will  be  the  large 
majority  and  hate  their  own  brethren.  In  their  unbelief  they 
will  build  another  temple  and  eventually  will  accept  the  false 
Messiah,  the  Anti-christ.  The  struggles  and  troubles  of  the 
endtime  can  easily  be  traced  in  this  last  section.  The  faithful 
remnant,  their  fears  and  hopes,  their  sufferings  and  prayers  are 
written  here,  as  well  as  their  deliverance  through  the  Coming 
of  the  King,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  prophetic  descriptions 
of  the  future  of  Jerusalem,  the  land  of  Israel,  the  restored  na- 
tion, the  spiritual  blessings  and  the  glories  in  store  for  this 
earth  are  the  most  .magnificent  in  the  entire  book. 

Chapter  LVIII.  Key  and  Introduction  to  this  Section. 
The  Condition  of  the  People.  Repentance  and 
the  Blessings  to  follow. 

The  Prophet's  Commission.    Verse  1. 

The  Transgression  and  Sins  of  Jacob  Uncovered.    Verses 
2-5. 

The  Divine  Eequirements.    Verses  6-7. 

What  Jehovah  Promises.  Verses  8-14. 
Once  more  the  Prophet  is  commissioned  to  cry  and 
this  time  to  call  the  people  to  repentance.  Such  will  be 
the  case  during  the  time  of  the  end.  The  first  advent 
of  the  Lord  was  heralded  by  John  the  Baptist,  who 
called  the  nation  to  repentance.  The  second  advent 
will  be  preceded  by  another  call  to  repentance.  It  is 
before  us  in  this  chapter.    See  also  Malachi  iv:5-6. 

In  verses  9-14  we  have  all  the  great  future  blessings 
of  the  converted  remnant  of  Israel  described.  It  is  the 
entire  section  in  embryo. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  145 

Chapter  LIX.     Apostasy  and  Confession.     Jehovah's 
Intervention  and  the  Coming  of  the  Redeemer. 

The  Deplorable  Condition  of  the  People.    Verses  1-8. 

The  Confession.    Verses  9-15. 

Jehovah's  Intervention.    Verses  16-19. 

The  Coming  of  the  Redeemer.    Verses  20-21. 

The  corruption  of  the  people  during  the  endtime  is 
first  described.  But  Grace  is  at  work  and  a  part  of  the 
people  confess  their  sins.  They  confess  that  they  are 
in  darkness,  that  they  are  blind,  that  they  stumble  and 
are  like  dead  men.  They  confess  that  salvation  is  far 
from  them.  They  confess  their  lying,  their  departure 
from  God  and  their  revolt.  It  is  their  future  repent- 
ance. Then  Jehovah  sees  and  intervenes.  He  answers 
the  confession  in  Person.  He  comes  to  repay  the 
adversaries.  He  comes  in  mighty  judgment  power. 
As  a  result  they  will  fear  His  name.  The  Redeemer 
then  comes  to  Zion  and  appears  for  the  salvation  of 
them  that  turn  from  transgression.  Compare  this 
with  Rom.  xi:25-20. 

Chapter  LX.    The  Glory  Chapter.    The  Morning  of  a 
New  Age  and  its  Blessings. 

The  Light  and  Glory  Has  Come.    Verse  1. 
The  Darkness  Before  the  Morning.    Verse  2. 
The  Conversion  of  the  Gentiles.    Verse  3. 
The  Dispersed  Brought  Home.     Verse  4. 
The  Conversion  of  the  World.    Verses  5-9. 
Jerusalem  Restored  and  Glorified.    Verses  10-16. 
The   Theocratic   Kingdom   Established;    its   Material   and 
Spiritual  Glories.    Verses  17-21. 

A  small  volume  might  be  written  on  this  Glory  Chap- 
ter. The  reader  will  note  how  all  stands  connected 
with  chapter  Iviii  and  lix.  First  the  call  to  repentance, 
then  the  uncovering  of  Jacob's  transgression,  their 
confession,  the  answer  of  Jehovah  by  His  personal 
manifestation.  He  deals  with  His  adversaries  and 
appears  as  Redeemer  in  Zion.  Then  the  Glory  light 
breaks  forth.    It  is  the  dawn  of  the  morning.    That 


146  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

morning  was  preceded  by  gross  darkness — universal 
apostasy  and  corruption.  After  the  Glory  has  broken 
forth  the  Kingdom  age  begins.  The  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles  v^ill  take  place  and  Jerusalem  will  be  indeed 
the  city  of  a  great  King.  Then  at  last  all  the  people 
will  be  righteous.  How  strange  that  Christendom 
should  ignore  these  majestic  predictions  and  their 
divine  order. 

Chapter  LXi.    The  King,  Jehovah's  Messenger.     His 
People  and  their  Salvation  Song. 

Jehovah's  Messenger  and  His  Work.    Verses  1-5. 

His  People  a  Kingdom  of  Priests  and  Their  Work.    Verses 

5-9. 
The  Salvation  Song.     Verse  10. 
The  Blessings  of  the  Whole  Earth.    Verse  11. 

Luke  iv  tells  us  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  applied 
the  opening  verses  to  Himself.  The  destructive  criti- 
cism denies  both  the  Isaiah  authorship  of  this  chapter 
and  its  messianic  application.  The  satanic  origin  of 
this  kind  of  criticism  is  here  fully  exposed.  But  our 
Lord  did  not  quote  the  whole  of  verse  2.  He  only  read 
up  to  "the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord."  This  sentence 
marks  the  work  He  did  in  His  first  advent.  The  day 
of  vengeance  is  introduced  by  His  second  advent.  The 
results  of  His  second  coming  are  described  in  the 
verses  which  follow.  Then  Israel  will  be  the  Kingdom 
of  Priests  and  a  holy  nation  (Exod.  xix).  They  will 
sing  the  song  of  salvation  (verse  10).  Righteousness 
and  praise  will  follow. 

Chapter  LXII.  Zion's  Glory. 

He  Will  Not  Rest.    Verse  1. 

The  New  Names.    Verses  2-5. 

The  Intercession  and  the  Answer.     Verses  6-9. 

The  Accomplishment  at  Hand.     Verses  10-12. 

The  intercession  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  is 
that  of  Christ.  He  will  not  rest  till  He  has  accom- 
plished His  purpose  in  His  earthly  people  and  in  Zion^ 


THE  PROPHET,  ISAIAH,  147 

When  it  is  accomplished  Gentiles  and  Kings  will  wit- 
ness it.  Zion  then  shall  be  called  by  a  new  name. 
The  forsaken  one  will  not  longer  be  forsaken ;  the  deso- 
lation of  the  land  will  cease.  She  shall  be  called  Hephzi- 
bah  (My  delight  in  her) ;  the  land  will  be  Beulah 
(Married).  All  points  to  the  glorious  consummation 
of  the  Kingdom,  and  other  watchmen  intercede  and 
give  Him  no  rest  till  He  establish  and  make  Jerusalem 
a  praise  in  the  earth.  Faithful  Jews,  men  of  prayer 
will  during  the  great  tribulation  call  on  God  to  make 
good  His  Word  and  fulfil  His  promises.  May  God's 
people  even  now  plead  and  intercede  for  the  hastening 
of  all  His  purposes.  "Behold,  thy  salvation  cometh, 
behold  his  reward  is  with  Him  and  His  work  before 
Him."    Note  the  results  of  His  Coming  in  verse  12. 

Chapter  LXIII.    The  Executor  of  the  Day  of 
Vengeance. 

The  Glorious  Appearing.    Verse  1. 
The  Day  of  Vengeance.    Verses  2-6. 

Rev.  xix:ll-21  corresponds  to  this  marvelous 
description  of  the  coming  King.  Before  in  this  section 
we  read  of  the  day  of  vengeance,  the  Lord's  interven- 
tion in  behalf  of  His  people  and  the  overthrow  of  their 
enemies.  The  Day  of  Vengeance  is  now  beheld  by  the 
Prophet.  The  acceptable  year  is  closed  and  judgment 
sweeps  the  earth.  Often  this  chapter  is  quoted  as 
meaning  the  salvation  work  of  Christ.  It  has  nothing 
to  do  with  that.  It  is  His  judgment  work.  It  is  unfor- 
tunate that  the  Ixiii  chapter  is  not  ended  in  our  Bibles 
with  the  sixth  verse.  Verses  7-19  belong  to  chapter 
Ixiv. 

Chapter   LXIII-7-19-LXIV.     The   Great   Intercessory 

Prayer. 

Jehovah's  Loving  Kindness  and  Power  in  the  Past  Remem- 
bered.   Verses  7-14. 
Their  Deepest  Need.    Verse  15. 
The  Cry  of  Faith,  Thou  Art  our  Father.    Verse  16. 


148  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

The  Increasing  Plea.    Verses  17-19. 

The  Prayer  for  Jehovah's  Manifestation.     Lxiv:l-4. 

Confession  and  Humiliation.    Verses  5-7. 

The  Cry  for  Mercy  and  Help.    Verses  8-12. 

This  is  one  of  the  greatest  prayers  in  the  Bible.  The 
Prophet  no  doubt  prayed  it  first  of  all,  and  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  through  him.  But  its  full  meaning  will  be 
reached  when  the  faithful  remnant  of  Israel  in  the  end- 
time  cries  for  help  and  deliverance  during  the  great 
tribulation.  When  Daniel  discovered  that  the  end  of 
the  Babylonian  captivity  was  at  hand,  he  uttered  a 
great  prayer  (Daniel  ix).  The  same  beautiful  spirit 
of  a  contrite  heart,  confession  of  sin,  trust  in  Jehovah, 
pleading  for  Jerusalem  and  expectation  of  deliverance, 
which  characterizes  Daniel's  prayer  is  seen  in  this 
great  prayer.  Many  of  the  prayers  in  the  Book  of 
Psalms  are  the  prayers  of  the  remnant  suffering  in  the 
land  before  the  second  advent. 

The  remaining  two  chapters  contain  the  answer  to 
this  prayer. 

Chapter  LXV.    Jehovah's  Answer.    The  Rebellious  and 
their  Judgment.    The  Faithful  and  their  Blessings. 

The  Divine  Rebuke  to  the  Apostates.     Verses  1-8. 

The  Elect  Seed.     Verses  9-10. 

The  Judgment  of  the  Apostates.    Verses  11-12. 

The  Blessings   of  Jehovah's   Servants   and   the   Contrast. 

Verses  13-16. 
The  Glories  and  Blessings  of  the  Future.     Verses  17-25. 

The  first  eight  verses  give  a  description  of  the  ini- 
quities practised  by  apostate  Israel.  Judgment  will 
overtake  them  in  the  day  of  vengeance.  Then  the 
blessings  of  Jehovah's  true  servant  (the  remnant)  are 
declared.  They  shall  eat,  drink,  rejoice  and  be  blessed. 
All  is  contrasted  with  the  wicked  who  have  forsaken 
the  Lord.  A  marvelous  revelation  concerning  the 
future  is  given  in  verses  17-25.  When  v/ill  all  this  be 
accomplished?  It  begins  with  the  day  of  Jehovah; 
that  day  of  the  Lord  is  one  thousand  years.    At  the 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  149 

close  of  it  the  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  will  be 
created.  Then,  ^vhen  eternal  ages  begin  the  complete 
fulfilment  is  reached.  But  the  blessings  of  the  Millen- 
nium are  also  before  us.  Jerusalem  is  created  a  place 
of  rejoicing  and  His  people,  the  people  of  the  Kingdom, 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  obedient  to  the  laws  of  the  King- 
dom, will  enjoy  the  material  blessings  here  predicted. 
And  groaning  creation  is  seen  once  more  delivered. 

Chapter  LXVI.    The  Finale.    The  Two  Classes.    The 
Prophecy  of  Isaiah  in  a  Retrospect. 

The  Apostates  and  Their  Wicked  Worship.    Verses  1-4. 

The  Remnant  Suffering  and  Encouraged.    Verse  5. 

The  Sudden  Manifestation  of  the  Lord.    Verse  6. 

The  Nation's  Rebirth.    Verse  7-9. 

Jerusalem's  Supremacy  and  Glory.    Verses  10-14. 

The  Warning  of  Judgment.    Verses  15-18. 

The  Regathering  After  Judgment.     Verses  19-21. 

The  Blessings  for  the  Righteous.    Verses  22-23. 

The  Destiny  of  the  Wicked.    Verse  24. 

This  great  chapter  is  the  fitting  conclusion  of  the 
Prophecy  of  Isaiah.  The  leading  predictions  contained 
in  Isaiah  concerning  the  future  are  once  m^ore  restated. 
The  opening  verses  have  mystified  many  readers  of 
this  book.  The  apostate  part  of  the  Jewish  nation,  re- 
stored in  unbelief  (a  restoration  now  going  on),  erect 
a  temple  once  more  and  resume  their  ancient  worship. 
This  worship  v/ithout  faith  in  Jehovah  is  an  abomina- 
tion before  Him.  It  were  as  if  they  offered  swine's 
blood.  Their  coming  judgment  is  announced  in  verse 
4.  The  pious  remnant,  the  praying  remnant  is  seen 
once  more.  They  tremble  at  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 
The  unbelievers  in  their  own  nation  hate  them.  They 
are  mocked  because  they  expect  Jehovah's  interven- 
tion from  above.  "Let  the  Lord  be  glorified" — they 
say  in  ridicule  (verse  5).  Then  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  takes  place.  This  is  described  in  the  sixth  verse. 
The  nation's  rebirth,  the  supremacy  and  glory  of  Jeru- 
salem, additional  warnings,  the  gathering  of  the  people 


150  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

into  the  Kingdom,  the  blessedness  of  the  righteous 
and  the  destiny  of  Jehovah's  enemies  conclude  the 
chapter  and  the  book. 

The  reader  will  have  noticed  that  each  section  of  the 
Second  Part  begins  with  a  chapter  which  is  the  key 
and  introduction  to  the  section.  Each  concludes  with 
a  description  of  the  two  classes  which  compose  the 
nation  in  the  last  days  and  emphasizes  the  fact  that 
for  the  wicked  there  is  no  peace,  but  punishment. 
Each  section  reveals  a  Person.  The  first  section  Cyrus, 
under  whom  the  remnant  returned  from  Babylon ;  the 
second,  the  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah;  the  third, 
the  King  of  Glory  to  execute  vengeance  and  deliver 
His  people.  May  He  give  us  to  see  these  wonderful 
things  to  come.  May  the  vision  of  the  future  be  the 
inspiration  of  our  lives. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  151 


THREE  STUDIES  IN  ISAIAH. 


The  Scope  of  Isaiah. 

It  is  a  great  book  which  bears  the  name  of  Isaiah.  The  scope 
of  the  book  and  the  contents  are  of  indescribable  grandeur.  The 
more  it  is  read,  the  more  its  majestic  greatness  takes  hold  of 
the  heart  and  mind  of  the  reader.  The  revelations  and  predic- 
tions it  contains  are  the  foundations  of  our  faith.  They  unfold 
the  future  of  Israel,  describe  the  glories  of  the  kingdom  to  come 
and  the  blessings  in  store  for  this  earth.  Isaiah  is  the  Prophet 
of  the  future.  The  supernatural  origin  of  the  writings  of  this 
noble  Prophet  is  in  evidence  throughout  the  entire  book. 

The  Work  of  the  Critics.  Perhaps  no  other  book  has  been 
of  late  years  so  much  attacked  by  the  destructive  critics  as 
the  book  of  Isaiah.  This  in  itself  is  an  evidence  of  its  genuine- 
ness and  inspiration.  Satan  through  his  instruments  attacks 
especially  those  parts  of  God's  Word  where  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  revealed  the  Person  of  our  Lord,  His  work  and  His  coming 
Kingdom.  It  is  the  first  move  towards  the  rejection  of  the 
Person  of  Christ.  In  reading  some  of  the  critical  works  on 
Isaiah  one  is  reminded  of  a  dissecting  room.  These  critics  follow 
the  tactics  of  the  Jewish  King  Jehoiakim.  He  took  the  pen- 
knife and  cut  the  scroll  upon  which  God's  message  through 
Jeremiah  was  written.  I  wonder  if  archaeologists  will  some  day 
find  that  penknife.  If  so  it  ought  to  be  presented  as  a  precious 
relic  to  the  school  of  the  destructive  critics  who  might  build  a 
shrine  for  it  in  some  of  their  institutions. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  follow  the  history  of  this  criticism. 
We  fear,  however  it  would  not  be  very  edifying  to  us  who  are 
believers  in  the  inspiration  of  this  book.  What  the  critics  have 
especially  attacked  is  the  authorship.  They  tell  us  that  the  book 
of  Isaiah  is  of  a  composite  origin.  Isaiah  did  not  write  the 
entire  book  which  bears  his  name.  For  about  2500  years  no  one 
ever  thought  of  even  suggesting  that  Isaiah  did  not  write  the 
book.  Then  they  invented  an  unknown  person  who  is  called  the 
Deutero-Isaiah,  i.  e.,  a  second  Isaiah,  who  is  said  to  have  v/ritten 
the  sublime  chapters  40-66.    With  this  they  did  not  stop.    They 


152  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

found  out  that  this  Deutero-Isaiah  only  wrote  chapters  40-55  and 
a  Trito-Isaiah  wrote  the  greater  part  of  chapters  55-66.  With 
their  supposed  learning  they  discovered  that  some  of  these 
chapters  were  written  in  Babylon  and  others  in  Palestine.  Some 
of  the  most  radical  critics  have  even  gone  beyond  this. 

To  give  the  result  of  the  work  of  the  critics,  men  like  George 
Adams  Smith,  Canon  Driver  and  A.  B.  Davidson,  declare  that 
out  of  the  66  chapters,  which  compose  the  book  of  Isaiah  forty- 
four  were  not  written  by  Isaiah.  Others  cut  out  more  than  that 
so  that  actually  they  claim  out  of  the  1292  verses  found  in  the 
book  of  Isaiah  only  260  were  penned  by  the  Prophet. 

But  what  does  all  this  mean  ?  It  is  a  denial  of  what  is  writ- 
ten in  the  first  verse  of  this  book.  "The  vision  of  Isaiah,  the 
son  of  Amoz,  which  he  saw  concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  in 
the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah."  And  if  several 
men  wrote  this  book,  if  part  was  written  during  the  Babylonian 
captivity  and  other  parts  added  after  the  captivity,  then  this 
statement  with  which  the  book  begins  is  untrue.  This  first  verse 
assures  us  that  the  book  is  a  whole,  that  all  we  find  in  it  is  the 
vision  of  one  man.  To  deny  this  breaks  down  the  truthfulness 
of  the  book  and  reduces  it  to  the  level  of  common  literature. 
This  is  what  the  critics  have  done.  But  the  book  of  Isaiah  is 
quoted  in  the  New  Testament.  The  Jews  always  believed  this 
book  to  have  been  written  by  Isaiah.  They  held  this  belief  when 
our  Lord  was  on  the  earth.  He  Himself  read  in  the  synagogue 
of  Nazareth  f?:om  chapter  61,  v/hich  the  critics  deny  to  be  the 
writing  of  Isaiah.  Quotations  from  Isaiah  are  frequently  found 
in  different  parts  of  the  New  Testament.  Twenty-one  times  we 
read  of  Isaiah  and  his  words  in  the  New  Testament.  The 
phrases  used  are  the  following:  "Spoken  by  the  Prophet  Esa- 
ias";  "Fulfilled  which  was  spoken  by  Esaias";  "Well  did  Esaias 
Prophesy";  "In  the  Book  of  the  Words  of  Esaias";  "As  said  the 
Prophet  Esaias";  "The  saying  of  Esaias  the  Prophet";  "These 
things  said  Esaias";  "V/eil  spake  the  Holy  Spirit  by  Esaias"; 
"Esaias  also  saith";  "Esaias  saith."  This  is  evidence  enough 
that  the  Lord  and  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  Evangelists  and 
the  Apostle  Paul  set  their  seal  to  this  uncontradicted  and  un- 
animous belief  that  Isaiah  wrote  this  book.  The  critics  by  their 
m-ethods  impeach  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  Himself  or  charr:c 
the  infallible  Lord  of  Glory  to  have  been  limited  in  His  knowl- 
edge and  that  He  acquiesced  in  the  current  traditional  belief  of 
the  Jewish  people,  knowing  better  Himself. 

All  the  arguments  of  the  critics  are  disproven  by  the  book 
itself.    One  only  needs  to  study  this  book  and  the  careful  study 


THE   PROPHET   ISaIAH.  153 

will  bring  out  the  unanswerable  fact  of  the  unity  of  the  Book 
of  Isaiah.  Only  one  person  could  have  written  such  a  book  and 
that  person  did  not  write  it  by  himself,  but  was  the  mouthpiece 
of  Jehovah.  This  is  the  conclusion  of  an  intelligent  and  spiritual 
study  of  the  book  itself.  The  silly  and  arbitrary  restrictions  the 
critics  make,  that  Isaiah  could  not  have  written  certain  passages, 
because  it  was  beyond  his  horizon,  or  that  he  could  not  have 
mentioned  Cyrus,  the  Persian  king,  by  name,  over  150  years  be- 
fore he  was  born,  springs  from  the  subtle  infidelity  which  is  at 
the  bottom  of  the  destructive  criticism,  which  denies  the  super- 
natural altogether. 

The  Scope  of  Isaiah.  Turning  to  the  book  we  find  that  there 
are  two  great  parts: 

1.  Chapters  I-XXXV.    The  earlier  Prophecies. 
Chapters  XXXVI-XXXIX.    Historical  Parenthesis. 

2.  Chapters  XL-LXVI.    The  later  Prophecies. 

In  the  first  part  we  find  that  Isaiah  witnessed  against  the 
moral  and  religious  conditions  of  the  people.  Judgments  are 
announced  upon  Jerusalem,  Judah  and  upon  the  nations.  Judg- 
ments to  come  are  the  leading  features  in  the  first  35  chapters. 
The  blessings  of  the  future  after  the  execution  of  these  judg- 
ments are  also  revealed,  but  they  take  a  secondary  place.  We 
see  in  the  first  part  the  gathering  of  the  stormclouds,  we  hear 
the  rolling  thunders  of  divine  judgment,  and  in  the  distance  the 
calm  and  sunshine  after  the  storm.  The  second  part  is  intro- 
duced with  the  words  of  comfort,  "Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye,  my 
people."  While  we  read  also  of  judgments  in  this  part  the  great 
revelation  of  the  later  prophecies  of  Isaiah  is  the  restoration 
which  is  in  store  for  Jerusalem  and  the  great  blessings  which 
the  nations  and  the  earth  will  receive  when  Jerusalem  has  been 
restored  and  her  people  redeemed. 

In  the  first  part  the  Assyrian  is  announced  to  come  against 
Jerusalem.  The  Assyrian  invasion  stands  in  the  foreground. 
This  Assyrian  enemy  however  is  the  prophetic  type  of  another 
external  foe,  who  appears  in  the  endtime.  Then  the  deliverance 
of  Jerusalem  is  announced  and  the  Assyrian  completely  over- 
thrown. In  the  second  part  the  Assyrian  enemy  is  no  longer 
mentioned.  From  this  we  conclude  that  these  chapters  were 
written  after  the  Assyrian  period.  Israel's  restoration  from 
Babylon  and  from  the  greater  dispersion  which  has  lasted  so 
long  is  predicted  in  the  second  part.    The  wonderful  results  of 


154  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

this  restoration  are  here  revealed.  These  two  parts  are  there- 
fore inseparable.  The  Isaiah  who  wrote  of  judgments  is  the 
Isaiah  who  makes  known  the  blessings.  The  entire  book  gives 
the  history  of  Israel,  past,  present  and  future.  Both  parts 
reveal  Him  who  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  the  Redeemer.  His 
incarnation,  His  obedience  as  God's  servant,  His  rejection.  His 
suffering  and  death.  His  second  coming  and  Kingdom  rule  are 
progressively  revealed  from  Chapters  i-lxvi. 

The  Division  of  the  First  Part.  If  we  omit  Chapters  xxxvi- 
xxxix,  which  are  historical,  we  find  that  the  main  divisions  of 
the  first  part  are  three. 

First  Division,  Chapters  I-XII.  In  this  division  we  find  first 
Israel's  sin  and  apostacy;  their  hardening;  God's  judgment 
upon  them.  This  is  followed  by  a  vision  concerning  the  future, 
ii:l-5.  Six  woes  are  pronounced  in  Chapter  V  upon  the  apostate 
nation.  We  find  the  birth  of  the  Redeemer  announced.  His 
Person,  His  work  and  His  future  glory  are  indicated.  The 
Assyrian  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time;  his  pride  and  overthrow 
are  pictured.  The  section  closes  with  a  vision  of  the  future. 
The  second  coming  of  Christ,  the  restoration  of  the  people  Israel 
and  what  will  come  in  blessing  to  the  Gentiles  and  to  creation 
is  predicted.  It  closes  with  a  beautiful  song  of  praise,  which 
redeemed  Israel  will  sing  in  that  day.  Attention  has  often  been 
called  to  the  fact  that  the  opening  verses  and  chapters  of  a  book 
give  the  key  for  the  whole  book.  The  first  tv/elve  chapters  of 
Isaiah  contain  the  whole  book  of  Isaiah  in  embryo. 

Second  Division,  Chapters  XIII-XXVII.  Here  we  find  first 
the  judgments  upon  different  nations  announced.  Babylon's 
judgment  stands  in  the  foreground.  When  that  final  judgment 
falls  upon  Babylon  and  its  king,  Israel  will  fi.nd  mercy  and  in 
a  triumphant  utterance  celebrate  the  fall  of  the  King  of  Baby- 
lon. All  this  has  a  meaning  for  the  future.  Then  judgments 
are  announced  against  other  nations.  Palestina,  Moab,  Damas- 
cus, Ethiopia,  Egypt,  Elam,  Arabia  and  Tyre  are  mentioned. 
Eleven  chapters,  xiii-xxiii,  are  taken  up  with  those  judgments, 
which  were  only  partially  fulfilled  in  the  past. 

With  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  the  subject  of  judgment  is 
continued.  Chapters  xxiv-xxvii  contain  a  great  prophecy.  The 
judgment  announced  is  the  coming  judgment  for  this  world  when 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  appears  the  second  time.  All  classes  are 
affected  by  it  and  the  high  ones  that  are  on  high  (Satan  and 
his  angels)  and  the  kings  on  earth  are  involved  in  it.  This 
portion  ends  with  several  songs  of  praise.     The  remnant  of 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  155 

Israel  praises  Jehovah  for  deliverance  and  for  His  mercy  to 
Jerusalem.  Then  there  is  a  prophecy  concerning  the  blessings 
of  the  future,  when  the  Lord  in  connection  with  the  blessing 
bestowed  upon  Israel  will  make  a  feast  of  fat  things  for  all 
people.  The  last  verse  of  this  section  announces  once  more  the 
regathering  of  His  scattered  people  to  bring  them  back  to 
Jerusalem.  The  great  trumpet  mentioned  in  xxvii:13  is  the 
same  of  which  the  Lord  speaks  in  Matthew  xxiv:31,  only  our 
Lord  tells  us  in  addition  that  the  angels  will  be  used  in  this 
service. 

Third  Division,  Chapters  XXVIII-XXXV.  In  this  section  we 
find  first  six  woes.  The  first  section  also  contained  six  woes. 
The  first  woe  is  against  Ephraim.  Then  follows  the  v^oe  against 
Ariel  (Jerusalem)  that  distress  is  to  come  upon  this  city.  Bles- 
sing is  promised  after  this  visitation.  Then  there  is  a  third  woe 
against  those  who  seek  to  hide  their  counsel  from  the  Lord 
and  their  works  are  in  the  dark.  The  fourth  woe  is  upon  those 
who  enter  into  an  unholy  alliance  with  Egypt,  seek  help  there 
instead  of  the  Lord.  The  fifth  woe  is  directed  against  those  who 
trust  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  in  horses  and  chariots.  The  sixth 
woe  is  against  the  Assyrian  destroyer.  But  alongside  of  these 
woes  we  find  the  promises  of  blessing  to  Israel  in  the  future. 
A  king  is  to  reign  in  righteousness.  The  work  of  righteousness 
is  to  be  peace.  Jerusalem  and  Israel's  land  is  to  be  desolate  till 
the  Spirit  be  poured  out  from  on  high,  then  the  wilderness  shall 
be  a  fruitful  field  (xxxii:13-20).  The  34th  chapter  is  a  great 
prophecy  of  the  future  day  of  the  Lord  when  His  indignation  will 
be  upon  all  nations  and  when  His  fury  will  be  poured  out  upon 
all  their  armies.  It  is  the  day  of  the  Lord's  vengeance  and  the 
year  of  recompenses  for  the  controversy  of  Zion  (verse  8).  The 
last  chapter  in  this  section,  chapter  xxxv,  shows  again  the  future 
blessings  for  Israel  and  for  the  earth  and  the  return  of  His 
people  to  Zion.  And  they  come  with  singing.  "And  the  ran- 
somed of  the  Lord  shall  return,  and  come  t©  Zion  with  songs 
and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads;  they  shall  obtain  joy  and 
gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away." 

We  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  these  three  great  sections 
follow  the  same  course  and  end  in  the  same  way.  The  ending 
of  each  section  reveals  the  restoration  of  Israel,  the  singing  of 
the  redeemed  people  and  the  blessing  which  will  result  from 
a  restored  and  blest  Israel  for  the  nations  and  for  the  earth. 

In  dividing  the  earlier  prophecies  of  Isaiah  into  three  sections 
we  have  not  considered  Chapters  xxxvi-xxxix.  These  chap- 
ters are  of  a  historical  character.    Hezekiah's  experience  with 


156  THE   PROPHET,   ISAIAH, 

the  Assyrian  invasion,  Hezekiah^s  prayer,  the  Prophet's  message 
to  the  King,  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  army,  the  King's 
sickness  and  recovery  and  his  fall  into  pride,  are  the  contents 
of  these  four  chapters.  They  may  be  looked  upon  as  an  ap- 
pendix to  the  first  part  of  Isaiah's  vision  and  the  preface  to  the 
second  part.  The  Assyrian  and  his  destruction  is  the  culmina- 
tion of  the  first  part;  the  prediction  of  Isaiah  concerning  the 
Babylonian  captivity  (Chapter  xxxix:6-7)  opena  the  way  for  the 
later  prophecies. 

The  Division  of  the  Second  Part.  In  these  later  prophecies 
we  find  likewise  three  great  sections.  However  the  character 
of  the  predictions  found  in  the  second  part  differs  much  from 
the  earlier  prophecies*  The  historical  settings  so  prominent  in 
the  first  part  are  entirely  absent  in  the  second.  We  briefly  hint 
at  the  structure  and  contents  of  these  three  divisions. 

The  First  Division,  Chapters  XL-XLVIII.  This  section  be- 
gins with  the  message  of  comfort  to  Jerusalem.  The  first  two 
verses  of  the  fortieth  chapter  are  the  keynotes  of  the  great 
symphony  of  Israel's  future  blessing  and  glory,  which  gradually 
breaks  forth  in  this  part,  swelling  higher  and  higher.  "Com- 
fort ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God.  Speak  ye 
comfortably  to  Jerusalem  (literally:  to  the  heart  of  Jerusalem) 
and  cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her 
iniquity  is  pardoned;  for  she  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hand 
double  for  all  her  sins."  Throughout  these  later  prophecies  we 
find  the  comfort  in  store  for  His  people,  that  their  wanderings 
will  end  in  restoration,  their  enemies  will  be  conquered  and  their 
sins  pardoned.  Should  it  surprise  anyone  that  the  language 
employed  in  these  great  messages  differs  very  much  from  the 
language  of  the  first  and  earlier  prophecies? 

We  find  in  this  opening  section  a  great  deal  of  the  majesty 
and  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel.  A  contrast  is  made  between  Is- 
rael's God  and  the  idols  of  the  nations.  The  one  great  proof 
brought  forward  is  that  the  God  of  Israel  has  the  power  to 
predict  future  events.  Read  Chapter  xli:21-25.  All  this  is 
spoken  to  encourage  the  faithful  remnant  of  Israel  to  trust  in 
Jehovah.  In  view  of  the  Babylonian  captivity,  which  Isaiah  had 
announced  this  is  of  special  meaning.  Again  and  again  Jehovah 
speaks  in  these  chapters  of  Himself  and  His  power  to  forgive, 
to  save  and  to  deliver.  "I  am  He — the  first  and  the  last — I 
even  I  am  the  Lord;  and  besides  me  there  is  no  saviour — I  am 
the  Lord  your  Holy  One,  the  creator  of  Israel  your  king — 
there  is  no  God  beside  me — a  just  God  and  a  Saviour";  these  are 
a  few  of  the  direct  utterances  of  Jehovah  through  Isaiah  in 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  157 

this  section.  Jehovah  has  the  power  to  save  and  to  deliver  His 
people. 

Here  we  read  of  "the  servant  of  Jehovah."  It  has  a  twofold 
meaning.  The  redeemed  remnant  of  Israel  is  spoken  of  as 
the  servant  of  the  Lord.  This  is  what  Israel  will  be  in  the 
future.  But  this  title  as  used  in  the  opening  verses  of  Chapter 
xlii  refers  to  Christ. 

The  people  of  Israel  are  prophetically  seen  in  this  section  in 
Babylon  but  about  to  be  delivered  from  Babylon.  The  great 
deliverer  Cyrus,  whom  God  called,  is  named  in  this  portion  of 
the  book.  The  Lord  who  speaks  of  His  power  to  tell  the  fu- 
ture things  manifests  this  power  in  naming  an  unborn  being  and 
telling  beforehand  what  his  work  was  to  be.  Cyrus  and  his 
mission  are  recorded  over  150  years  before  this  Persian  king 
was  born  and  the  record  is  found  in  Chapter  xliv:24 — xlv:25. 
Cyrus  is  called  "the  Anointed" — "my  shepherd" — "whose  right 
hand  Jehovah  upholdeth" — "who  performs  all  Jehovah's  pleas- 
ure." He  is  likewise  called  "a  ravenous  bird  from  the  east" 
(xlviill).  The  return  from  Babylon  is  predicted  to  take  place 
through  the  instrumentality  of  this  king.  But  a  greater  restora- 
tion through  a  greater  anointed  One,  the  Redeemer  of  Israel, 
is  promised  in  these  chapters.  The  end  of  the  section  looks 
forward  to  that  great  coming  restoration.  The  last  verse  de- 
clares "there  is  no  peace,  saith  the  Lord,  unto  the  wicked." 

The  Second  Division,  Chapters  XLIX-LVII.  This  section 
brings  the  servant  of  Jehovah  prominently  before  us.  It  is  no 
longer  the  redeemed  Israel,  nor  Cyrus,  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
comes  fully  into  view.  The  opening  verses  of  Chapter  xlix  with 
which  this  division  begins  are  again  the  keynote  to  the  entire 
section.  The  Servant  of  the  Lord  is  here  called  Israel,  for  He 
is  the  true  Israel.  In  Him  God  is  glorified.  He  Himself  breaks 
out  in  the  mournful  complaint.  "I  have  labored  in  vain,  I  have 
spent  my  strength  for  naught."  He  is  called  to  bring  Jacob  to 
God,  yet  Israel  is  not  gathered.  But  the  Gentiles  hear  of  Him, 
whom  Israel  refuses.  "I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the 
Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the 
earth."  All  is  indicated  in  these  verses  what  the  Servant  of  the 
Lord  would  do.  His  people,  the  nation,  would  despise  Him  and 
Israel  would  not  be  regathered  at  once  but  the  Gentiles  were  to 
hear  of  Him.  In  chapter  1:4-11  we  read  again  of  Him.  Here  His 
suffering  is  mentioned  more  fully.  "I  gave  my  back  to  the 
smiters  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair;  I  hid 
not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting"  (1:6).  The  last  tiriie  this 
Servant,  the  Christ,  is  mentioned  by  Isaiah  is  in  Chapter  liii. 


158  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

Here  we  find  the  marvellous  portrait  of  Him  who  suffered,  died 
as  the  sinbearer  and  of  His  exaltation.  After  the  sublime  Fifty- 
third  Chapter  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  is  not  mentioned  again. 
This  section  also  speaks  of  what  is  in  store  for  Israel  when 
at  last  they  believe  in  Him  whom  they  once  despised.  The  most 
glorious  promises  follow  the  Fifty-third  Chapter.  The  Fifty- 
fourth  Chapter  has  never  yet  seen  its  fulfilment  and  can  only 
be  fulfilled  when  the  remnant  of  Israel  bows  before  the  One, 
whom  they  once  despised.  These  chapters  of  this  section  look 
forward  to  their  future  blessing.  The  last  verse  of  the  second 
division  is  the  same  as  the  last  verse  of  the  first  division,  "There 
is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked." 

The  Third  Division,  Chapters  LVIII-LXVI.  This  is  the  great 
Finale  of  Isaiah's  symphony  of  Israel's  coming  restoration  and 
redemption.  It  is  the  most  majestic  and  sublime  portion  of  the 
book.  Here  the  remnant  of  Israel  takes  a  more  leading  part. 
While  in  the  previous  chapters  of  these  prophecies  we  hear 
promises  of  restoration  in  this  concluding  division  we  see  a 
small  and  feeble  remnant  actually  back  in  the  land.  It  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  small  remnant  which  returned  from 
Babylon.  It  is  a  remnant  of  believing  Jews  brought  back  to  the 
land  and  suffering  in  the  midst  of  the  great  tribulation  which 
precedes  the  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Lord  and  the  literal 
fulfilment  of  the  promises  of  blessing  for  Jerusalem.  We  have 
a  record  of  their  soul  exercise,  their  troubles  and  their  prayers 
in  Chapter  lxiii:7 — lxiv:12.  In  Chapter  lxiv:l  they  pray  for  the 
coming  of  the  Lord.  And  that  coming  in  great  power  and  glory 
is  described  in  this  division.  The  Redeemer  comes  to  Zion 
and  He  comes  bringing  the  day  of  vengeance  for  all  His  enemies 
(Chapter  lix:20;  lxiii:l-6).  But  who  is  able  to  expound  the 
glorious  things  which  are  spoken  of  Jerusalem  and  the  future 
of  His  redeemed  people?  Beginning  with  the  Sixtieth  Chapter 
we  find  an  almost  unbroken  prediction  of  what  is  to  be  in  the 
day  when  the  Redeemer  comes  to  Zion,  what  it  will  mean  for  His 
earthly  people,  for  Jerusalem,  for  the  nations  and  for  all  crea- 
tion. This  section  is  closely  linked  with  certain  predictions  in 
the  earlier  prophecies;  in  fact,  these  closing  chapters  are  ex- 
pansions of  the  former  vision  of  Isaiah  as  found  in  Chapters 
ii:l-5;  xi-xii,  and  others.  The  last  chapter  is  a  resume  of  the 
great  events  predicted  before.  Here  once  more  we  read  of  the 
sudden  manifestation  of  the  Lord  from  heaven,  the  deliverance 
of  the  remnant  of  His  people,  the  peace  like  a  river  for  Jerusa- 
lem, the  bringing  back  of  the  scattered  sheep  of  Israel,  the  fiery 
judgments  of  the  Lord  and  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  The 
last  verse  reveals  the  judgment  upon  the  wicked.    Their  worm 


THE   PROPHET^   ISAIAH,  159 

shall  not  die;  their  fire  shall  not  be  quenched.  This  fully  cor- 
responds with  the  ending  of  the  two  previous  divisions,  when 
the  Lord  saith,  "there  is  no  peace  for  the  wicked." 

The  same  order  of  revelation  prevails  in  the  second  part  of 
Isaiah  as  in  the  first.  We  have  seen  how  every  division  in  the 
first  part  closed  with  predictions  of  blessing  for  Israel,  their 
restoration  and  the  glory  of  Jerusalem  as  well  as  the  blessings 
which  the  whole  earth  will  receive  when  that  has  come  to  pass. 
The  same  revelation  is  contained  on  a  larger  scale  in  the  second 
part.  The  same  order  of  events  is  maintained.  And  how  solemn 
it  is  that  each  division  of  the  later  prophecies  of  Isaiah  in  the 
second  part  of  his  book  closes  with  the  declaration  of  the  punish- 
ment, yea,  the  eternal  punishment  of  the  wicked.  There  is  no 
peace  for  the  wicked.  Their  worm  dies  not;  their  fire  is  not 
quenched.  Evil  teachers  claim  there  is  a  restitution  of  all  things 
including  the  wicked  dead.  Isaiah  in  his  vision  makes  known 
what  that  promised  restitution  of  all  things  is.  The  restoration 
cf  Israel;  the  restoration  of  Israel's  land;  the  restoration  of 
Jerusalem;  peace  for  this  earth;  deliverance  for  groaning  crea- 
tion— all  these  he  reveals.  But  solemnly  God  has  said,  "There 
is  no  peace  for  the  wicked." 

The  great  unity  of  the  book  of  Isaiah  proves  that  he  wrote 
the  entire  book.  The  arrangement  and  contents  tell  us  that  it  is 
not  the  work  of  mau,  but  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 


Messianic  Pfedictions  in  Isaiah# 

It  would  be  of  much  interest  and  profit  if  we  could  take  up 
each  division  of  this  great  prophetic  book  and  study  some  of 
its  revelations.  This  we  cannot  do.  But  we  shall  point  out  two 
great  topics  which  are  progressively  revealed  in  the  vision  of 
Isaiah.  We  shall  study  first  the  messianic  unfoldings  in  this 
book,  and  then  the  great  coming  events,  such  as  Israel's  future 
blessings  in  the  earth  and  the  blessings  of  the  Kingdom  to  come. 

Of  all  the  Prophets  Isaiah  saw  the  most  about  Christ.  Only 
the  Book  of  Psalms  contains  a  larger  number  of  messianic  pre- 
dictions. Every  glory  of  our  Lord  and  every  phase  of  His  life 
on  earth  was  beheld  by  this  great  man  of  God.  His  incarnation, 
His  growing  up  in  Nazareth,  His  public  ministry.  His  message 
to  the  people.  His  rejection  by  the  nation.  His  sufferings,  the 
shame  and  the  cross,  His  death  with  its  meaning,  His  resur- 
rection, His  ascension,  His  glorious  exaltation  and  future  mani- 


160  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

festation  as  well  as  His  work  as  Prophet,  Priest  and  King,  are 
all  found  in  this  book.  We  shall  point  out  some  of  these  great 
predictions  and  the  connection  in  which  we  find  them. 

The  Redeemer  promised  is  Jehovah  Himself.  That  the  Mes- 
siah is  Jehovah  Himself,  who  appears  on  earth  in  the  midst  of 
His  people,  God  manifested  in  the  flesh,  is  seen  in  this  entire 
book.  The  call  of  Isaiah  to  the  prophetic  office  was  in  a  great 
vision  in  which  he  saw  Jehovah  and  His  glory  (Chapter  vi). 
Whom  he  beheld  is  explained  in  the  Gospel  of  John,  the  Gospel 
which  tells  us  so  fully  of  the  essential  Deity  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
"These  things  said  Esaias  when  he  saw  His  glory  and  spake 
of  Him"  (John  xii:41).  He  who  was  on  the  earth  and  whom 
His  own  received  not  is  the  One  whose  glory  Isaiah  saw  in  the 
Temple  vision. 

He  is  called  throughout  Isaiah  "the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 
Twenty-five  times  this  title  of  the  Lord,  who  deals  in  judgment 
and  in  mercy  v/ith  His  people,  is  found  in  Isaiah.  Read  v:4; 
v:19-24;  x:20;  xii:6;  xvii:7;  xxix:19;  xxx:ll,  12,  15;  xxxi:l; 
xxxvii:23;  xli:14,  16,  20;  xliii:3,  14;  xlv:ll;  xlvii:4;  xlviii:17; 
xlix:7;  liv:5;  lv:5;  lx:9,  14.  This  phrase  is  found  in  only  six 
other  passages  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  Holy  One  of  Israel 
is  Jehovah;  He  is  the  Redeemer  of  His  people.  "Our  Redeemer, 
Jehovah  of  hosts  is  his  name,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel"  (xlvii:4), 
"Thus  saith  Jehovah,  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel" 
(xlviii:17).  This  Holy  One  is  the  Creator.  "The  Holy  One 
hath  created  it"  (xli:20).  He  hath  stretched  the  heavens  and 
laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth  (li:13).  He  appeared  as  the 
Holy  One  in  their  midst  and  they  knew  Him  not  but  despised 
Him.  In  chapter  1:2-9  He  is  beheld  as  the  One  who  clothes 
the  heavens  and  who  gives  His  back  to  the  smiters.  In  chapter 
xlix:7  the  Redeemer,  Jehovah,  the  Holy  One,  is  seen  as  despised 
and  abhorred  by  the  nation.  At  his  Second  Coming  Isaiah 
predicts  Israel  shall  discover  that  the  rejected  and  despised 
One  is  Jehovah.  "Therefore  my  people  shall  know  my  Name, 
therefore  they  shall  know  that  I  am  He"  (lii:6).  The  words 
"I  am  He"  (Ani  Hu)  is  a  Divine  Name  and  our  Lord  used  it 
when  he  said  to  the  woman  at  the  well  "I  am"  and  to  the  com- 
pany in  the  garden  Gethsemane. 

In  chapter  vii  and  viii  His  name  is  revealed  as  "Immanuel," 
God  with  us.  Throughout  Isaiah's  vision  the  Redeemer,  the 
Anointed  One  who  is  rejected  by  the  nation,  who  suffers  and 
dies,  who  comes  again  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  is 
Jehovah. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  161 

His  Incarnation.  The  first  messianic  prediction  in  Isaiah  re- 
lates to  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.  We  find  it  in  chapter 
vii:14.  As  it  is  well  known  its  messianic  character  is  denied  by- 
Jews  and  by  the  higher  critics.  The  virgin  birth  is  clearly 
predicted  in  these  familiar  words  by  Isaiah  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  first  chapter  of  the  New  Testament  tells  us  of  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  words  spoken  by  the  Lord  through  Isaiah.  In  the 
first  chapter  of  Luke  the  full  announcement  of  the  birth  of  Im- 
manuel  by  the  virgin  is  made  by  Gabriel  to  Mary.  The  rejection 
of  this  first  great  prophecy  of  the  incarnation  means  the  re- 
jection of  the  incarnation  itself. 

Such  alas!  has  been  the  case.  We  do  not  attempt  to  enter 
into  the  objections  which  are  made  against  Isaiah  vii:14.  Not 
one  of  them  has  any  foundation.  The  authority  of  the  New 
Testament  is  sufficient  to  any  believer. 

The  historic  setting,  however,  is  interesting  and  solves  the 
problem  why  Isaiah  received  just  this  message  at  that  time. 
Ahaz  was  threatened  by  King  Fekah  of  Israel  and  by  Eezin 
of  Damascus,  because  he  refused  to  make  common  cause  with 
them  against  Assyria.  He  preferred  the  friendship  of  Assyria. 
When  it  became  known  that  these  two  kings  were  planning  an 
attack  upon  Jerusalem,  Ahaz  and  the  whole  city  were  terror 
stricken.  He  decided  at  once  to  send  to  Assyria  for  help.  How 
he  sent  messengers  with  valuable  gifts  to  Tiglath-Piieser  and 
called  himself  his  servant  and  his  son,  is  written  in  2  Kings 
xvi:7-8. 

Isaiah  was  then  told  by  God  to  meet  Ahaz  at  the  waterworks 
of  Jerusalem  and  to  take  his  son  Shear-Jashub  along.  The 
meaning  of  this  name  is  "the  remnant  shall  return."  In  his 
interview  with  the  King  the  Prophet  exhorts  him  to  be  true  to 
Jehovah  and  that  the  house  of  David  has  nothing  to  fear.  If 
he  accepted  the  divinely  given  message  he  would  be  quiet  and 
delivered  of  his  fear  and  faint-heartedness.  Then  God  offers 
Ahaz  a  sign,  either  in  the  depth  or  in  the  heights  above.  But  the 
unbelieving  King  refused  the  offer.  His  wicked  heart  dreaded 
the  consequences  of  such  a  sign.  He  did  not  want  to  be  near  to 
God  and  get  a  sign  that  God  was  near  to  him.  He  felt  that 
in  such  a  case  he  would  have  to  abandon  what  God  condemns 
and  give  up  the  alliance  with  the  Assyrian.  Then  God  gives 
the  sign.  It  is  the  sign  of  the  birth  of  the  Messiah.  The 
Deliverer  is  first  announced  in  the  Bible  as  being  the  seed  of 
the  woman;  then  as  coming  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  from  Isaac 
and  Jacob;  then  of  Judah  and  finally  that  He  should  be  of  the 
house  of  David.  Here  the  prediction  is  narrowed  down  to  the 
fact  that  He  should  be  born  of  a  virgin,  necessarily  of  the 


162  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

house  of  David.  Ahaz  the  King  of  Judah  feared  for  Jerusalem 
and  the  royal  line.  He  had  no  cause  to  fear  for  God  promised 
David  a  son  to  come  from  his  loins,  He  whom  King  David  ad- 
dressed as  his  Lord,  the  root  and  offspring  of  David.  The  house 
of  David  was  perfectly  secure.  Thus  the  unbelief  of  Ahaz  was 
made  the  occasion  for  this  great  prediction.  Christ  to  be  born 
of  the  virgin  and  yet  "God  manifested  in  the  flesh." 

In  chapter  ix:6  the  incarnation  is  announced  once  more  and 
in  the  prophetic  vision  it  is  seen  as  already  accomplished,  "For 
unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given."  The  child  is 
the  Son  of  the  virgin  and  He  is  God's  unspeakable  gift,  the  Son. 
As  Man  born  of  the  woman  He  will  have  the  government  upon 
His  shoulder  and  possess  the  throne  of  David.  This  looks  for- 
ward to  His  Second  Coming.  The  Son  given  is  the  Wonder- 
ful, Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the 
Prince  of  Peace.  His  Humanity  and  Deity  are  here  blended  to- 
gether. 

His  Life  and  Ministry  on  Earth.  The  leading  features  of  this 
blessed  life  and  service  on  earth  are  revealed  in  Isaiah.  We  call 
attention  to  a  few  of  the  more  prominent  predictions. 

His  lowliness.  He  who  was  rich  became  poor  for  our  sake. 
This  poverty  seems  to  be  indicated  in  Isaiah  vii:15,  "butter  and 
honey  shall  he  eat."  His  lowliness  is  more  fully  predicted  in 
liii:2,  "For  He  shall  grow  up  before  Him  as  a  tender  plant,  and 
as  a  root  out  of  the  dry  ground;  He  hath  no  form  and  come- 
liness; and  when  we  shall  see  Him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we 
should  desire  Him." 

The  Servant  of  the  Lord.  As  such  He  is  filled  with  the 
Spirit.  "And  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Him,  the  Spirit  of 
wisdom  and  understanding,  the  Spirit  of  counsel  and  might,  the 
Spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord"  (xi:2).  "Be- 
hold my  servant  whom  I  uphold,  mine  elect  in  whom  my  soul 
delighteth;  I  have  put  my  Spirit  upon  Him"  (xlii:l).  His 
method  is  seen;  He  is  unostentatious  in  His  service.  "He  shall 
not  cry,  nor  lift  up,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the 
street"  (xlii:2-3).  His  loving  tenderness.  "A  bruised  seed  shall 
He  not  break  and  the  smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench;  He 
shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth"  (xlii:4).  These  words 
are  applied  to  Him  in  the  New  Testament  (Matthew  xii:  18-20). 
His  obedience  we  find  predicted  in  chapter  1:5:  "The  Lord  hath 
opened  mine  ear,  and  I  was  not  rebellious,  neither  turned  away 
back.  His  message  is  given  likewise.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
God  is  upon  me;  because  the  Lord  hftth  anointed  me  to  prrteaeh 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  163 

good  tidings  unto  the  meek;  He  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the 
broken-hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the 
opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound,  to  proclaim  the 
acceptable  year  of  the  Lord"  (lxi:l-2).  It  is  a  well  known  fact 
that  our  Lord  read  these  words  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth 
and  pronounced  them  fulfilled.  He  also  gives  us  a  very  im- 
portant hint  in  reading  this  prediction.  He  stopped  short  in 
reading  this  passage.  The  rest  belongs  to  His  Second  Coming. 
The  First  and  Second  Coming  of  Christ  are  repeatedly  blended 
together. 

As  servant  of  the  Lord  He  brings  light.  "The  people  that 
walked  in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light;  they  that  dwell  in 
the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death  upon  them  hath  the  light 
shined"  (Matthew  iv:  15-16). 

His  miracles  are  also  touched  upon.  In  chapter  xxxv  we  read: 
"Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened  and  the  ears  of  the 
deaf  shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as 
an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing."  When  He  appeared 
in  the  midst  of  His  people  He  did  these  miracles  to  prove  to 
the  nation  that  He  had  the  power  of  the  Kingdom  in  His  hands; 
however  Isaiah  xxxv  looks  forward  to  the  Kingdom,  which  is 
yet  to  come. 

His  rejection  by  the  people  Israel.  This  rejection  was  pre* 
dieted  by  Isaiah.  As  already  quoted  in  chapter  xlix:7.  He  is 
seen  as  despised  and  abhorred  by  the  nation,  so  that  He  mourn- 
fully complains,  "I  have  labored  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my 
strength  for  nought."  On  account  of  this  rejection  "Israel  is 
not  gathered"  (verse  5).  More  fully  is  this  rejection  of  the 
Servant  of  the  Lord  seen  in  the  great  liii  chapter.  "He  is 
despised  and  rejected  of  men;  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted 
with  grief;  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  Him;  He 
was  despised  and  we  esteemed  Him  not." 

His  Mission  to  the  Gentiles.  While  Israel  is  predicted  to 
reject  this  servant,  the  Gentiles  are  to  see  His  light  and  rejoice 
in  His  salvation.  It  is  true  most  of  these  predictions  await  His 
future  work,  when  He  comes  again  and  the  Gentiles  will  be 
given  to  Him  for  an  inheritance,  but  they  also  imply  what  is 
now  in  force.  "I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in  righteousness, 
and  will  hold  thine  hand  and  keep  thee,  and  give  thee  for  a 
covenant  of  the  people,  for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles"  (xlii:6-7). 
"It  is  a  light  thing  that  thou  shouldest  be  my  servant  to  raise 
up  the  tribes  of  Jacob  and  to  restore  the  desolations  of  Israel 
Iftiat  tiiou  mayest  be  my  salvation  1k>  the  end  of  the  earth" 


164  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

(xlix:6).  Through  Him  Gentiles  are  saved  now  and  when  He 
comes  again  even  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  know  Him  and  He 
will  reign  over  the  Gentiles.  Unto  Him  every  knee  must  bow 
and  every  tongue  shall  swear  (xlv:23). 

The  Sufferings  of  Christ.  It  was  given  to  Isaiah  to  behold 
700  years  before  the  Son  of  God  appeared  on  earth  an  almost 
complete  picture  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  their  vicarious 
character.  How  the  obedient  servant  was  to  be  treated  by  men 
is  for  the  first  time  mentioned  in  chapter  1:7:  "I  gave  my  back 
to  the  smiters  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair, 
I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting."  But  the  great 
revelation  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  is  found  in  the  famous 
fifty-third  chapter.  It  is  the  culmination  of  the  second  part  of 
Isaiah.  The  center  of  the  chapter  is  "brought  as  a  Lamb  to 
the  slaughter."  The  most  ancient  as  well  as  reliable  Jewish 
expositors  apply  the  chapter  to  Messiah.  The  great  expositors 
of  the  church  in  the  past  have  all  read  the  story  of  the  Cross 
of  Christ  in  this  chapter.  The  New  Testament  repeatedly  quotes 
Isaiah  liii  and  knows  no  other  fulfilment  than  in  Him,  who  was 
the  man  of  sorrows. 

The  Spirit-filled  Evangelist  Philip  heard  the  Eunuch  reading 
from  this  chapter  and  then  opened  his  mouth  and  preached 
Jesus  unto  him.  The  infidel  Jews  have  invented  a  theory  which 
teaches  that  the  nation's  sufferings  are  described  and  not  the 
Messiah's.  This  wicked  denial  the  destructive  critics  have  fully 
indorsed. 

The  last  three  verses  of  chapter  lii  belong  to  the  liii  chapter. 
If  we  count  them  to  the  great  chapter  we  find  five  progressive 
parts:  1.  The  Servant — His  suffering  and  His  exaltation,  so 
that  nations  are  astonished  at  him  and  Kings  shut  their  mouths. 
It  is  the  keynote  of  the  prediction  that  follows  (lii:13-15).  2. 
His  life  and  His  rejection  by  the  nation  (lii:  1-3).  3.  His  suf- 
ferings; smitten,  afflicted,  wounded  and  bruised  (verses  4-6).  4. 
His  submission  and  His  deliverance  (verses  7-9).  5.  His  glorious 
Reward  (verses  10-12). 

But  what  is  all  contained  in  this  matchless  chapter!  We  have 
in  it  a  description  of  the  Servant,  the  vicarious  sufferer,  the 
triumphant  victor  as  nowhere  else.  Twelve  great  statements  are 
made  concerning  His  work  on  the  Cross:  1.  He  hath  borne  our 
griefs.  2.  Carried  our  sorrows.  3.  He  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions.  4.  Bruised  for  our  iniquities.  5.  The  chastise- 
ment of  our  peace  was  upon  Him.  6.  With  His  stripes  we  are 
healed.  7.  The  Lord  has  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all. 
8.  For  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  He  smitten.    9.  Made 


THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH.  165 

His  soul  an  offering  for  sin.  10.  He  shall  bear  their  iniquities. 
11.  He  bears  the  sin  of  many.  12.  Made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors. 

His  holy,  spotless  character  is  revealed.  As  a  lamb  He  suf- 
fered in  patience.  He  had  done  no  violence  nor  was  deceit  in 
His  mouth.  He  suffered  and  died  for  others.  He  suffered  for 
His  people  (John  xi:50-51).  It  was  God  who  smote  Him,  the 
Lord  who  bruised  Him,  who  put  Him  to  grief.  There  is  in  the 
whole. Bible  no  grander  unfolding  of  John  iii:16  than  this  great 
chapter.  Whoever  rejects  Isaiah's  vision  of  the  Sinbearer,  re- 
jects the  Gospel  and  denies  the  atoning  work  of  the  cross. 

We  also  behold  His  Grave,  we  see  Him  risen  in  this  chapter, 
exalted,  interceding,  justifying  many,  having  a  seed,  an  offspring 
as  the  last  Adam,  securing  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  dividing 
the  spoil  with  the  great.  Ah!  who  can  tell  out  the  majestic 
grandeur  of  this  great  peak  in  God's  revelation!  After  this 
great  vision,  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  is  not  mentioned  again, 
nor  His  sufferings.  The  Glory  side  comes  more  fully  in  view  in 
chapters  54-66.  And  it  will  be  fully  realized  when  Israel  has 
confessed  Him,  whom  they  once  rejected. 

The  Predictions  of  Glory.     The   Second   Coming   of   Christ. 

More  numerous  and  richer  are  the  messianic  predictions,  which 
reveal  His  exaltation  and  the  fact  of  His  glorious  Second  com- 
ing. 

Isaiah  beheld  His  personal,  visible  and  glorious  coming,  not 
as  the  sufferer  but  as  the  King.  He  saw  Him  coming  in  majesty 
and  Glory.  His  Glory  is  seen  in  these  visions  as  covering  Jerusa- 
lem and  the  land  and  eventually  the  whole  earth.  He  comes  to 
Zion  to  redeem  His  people  and  deliver  them  out  of  the  hands  of 
their  enemies.  He  comes  to  overthrow  the  wicked  one  and  to 
execute  the  judgments  of  God  on  the  earth.  He  comes  to 
establish  peace  and  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people  and  rule 
as  King  over  the  nations.  We  can  call  attention  to  a  very  few 
of  the  many  predictions  from  different  chapters;  our  remaining 
study  will  bring  this  great  theme  more  fully  to  our  view. 

"He  shall  judge  among  the  nations  and  shall  rebuke  many 
people;  and  they  shall  beat  their  swords  into  plowshares  and 
their  spears  into  pruninghooks;  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword 
against  nation,  neither  shall  they  learn  war  any  more"  (ii:4). 
This  is  the  program  of  God.  Peace  on  earth  will  thus  be  ac- 
complished. It  follows  His  visible  manifestation.  He  appears 
in  the  Glory  of  His  majesty  and  will  alone  be  exalted  in  that  day 
(ii:10, 11).  His  Glory  will  cover  Jerusalem  (iv:5).  "With  Right- 
eousness shall  He  judge  the  poor  and  reprove  with  equity  for 


166  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

the  meek  in  the  earth;  and  He  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the 
rod  of  His  mouth  and  with  the  breath  of  His  lips  shall  He  slay 
the  wicked"  (xi:4).  "The  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea"  (verse  9).  "Cry  out 
and  shout,  thou  inhabitant  of  Zion;  for  great  is  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee"  (xii:6).  "I  will  punish  the  world 
for  their  evil  and  the  wicked  for  their  iniquity"  (xiiiill). 
"Therefore  I  will  shake  the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  remove 
out  of  her  place  in  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  in  the 
day  of  His  fierce  anger"  (xiii:13).  "The  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
reign  in  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  and  before  his  ancients 
gloriously"  (xxiv:23).  "And  it  shall  be  said  in  that  day,  Lo  this 
is  our  God,  we  have  waited  for  Him  and  He  v/ill  save  us;  this 
is  the  Lord  we  have  waited  for  Him,  we  will  be  glad  and  rejoice 
in  His  salvation"  (xxv:9).  "The  Lord  cometh  out  of  His  place 
to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  earth  for  their  iniquity"  (xxvi:21). 
"Behold  a  King  shall  reign  in  righteousness"  (xxxiiil).  "And 
the  Glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed  and  all  flesh  shall  see 
it  together"  (xl:5).  "And  the  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion,  and 
unto  them  that  turn  from  transgression  in  Jacob,  saith  the 
Lord"  (lix:20).  "Arise,  shine  for  thy  light  is  come  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee"  (lx:l), 

"Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments 
from  Bozrah?  this  that  is  glorious  in  his  apparel,  traveling  in 
the  greatness  of  his  strength?  I  that  speak  in  righteousness, 
mighty  to  save.  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel,  and 
thy  garments  like  him  that  treadeth  in  the  winefat?  I  have 
trodden  the  wine-press  alone;  and  of  the  people  there  was  none 
with  me :  for  I  will  tread  them  in  mine  anger,  and  trample  them 
in  my  fury;  and  their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my  gar- 
ments, and  I  v/ill  stain  all  my  raiment.  For  the  day  of  venge- 
ance is  in  mine  heart,  and  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come. 
And  I  looked,  and  there  was  none  to  help;  and  I  wondered  that 
there  was  none  to  uphold:  therefore  mine  own  arm  brought 
salvation  unto  ms;  and  my  fury,  it  upheld  me.  And  I  will  tread 
down  the  people  in  mine  anger,  and  make  them  drunk  in  my 
fury,  and  I  will  bring  down  their  strength  to  the  earth" 
(lxiii:l-6). 

"For  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire,  and  with  his  char- 
iots like  a  whirlwind,  to  render  his  anger  with  fury,  and  his 
rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.  For  by  fire,  and  by  his  sword,  will 
the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh:  and  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
many.  For  I  know  their  works  and  their  thoughts;  it  shall  come, 
that  I  will  gather  all  nations  and  tongues;  and  they  shall  come, 
and  see  my  glory.    And  I  will  set  a  sign  among  them,  and  I  will 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  167 

send  those  that  escape  of  them  unto  the  nations,  to  Tarshish, 
Pul,  and  Lud,  that  draw  the  bow,  to  Tubal  and  Javan,  to  the 
isles  afar  off,  that  have  not  heard  my  fame,  neither  have  seen 
my  glory;  and  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among  the  Gentiles" 
(lxvi:15-16;   18-19). 

These  are  a  few  of  Isaiah's  predictions  concerning  the  future 
Glory  of  our  Lord  and  the  work  of  judgment  and  mercy  He 
will  execute.  May  it  be  our  delight  to  meditate  on  these  great 
prophetic  unfoldings  of  the  Person  and  the  glorious  work  of 
our  Lord,  till  some  day  we  shall  be  face  to  face  with  Himself 
and  through  Grace  become  partakers  of  His  Glory. 


Future  Glories  and  BIessidgs# 

The  Book  of  Isaiah  abounds  in  great  predictions  of  Glories  and 
Blessings  in  store  for  this  earth  and  its  inhabitants.  Not  one  of 
these  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  past,  nor  are  they  now  in  process 
of  fulfilment.  They  must  therefore  be  fulfilled  in  the  future.  To 
this  we  might  add  that  not  one  of  these  great  predictions  can  be 
fulfilled  till  the  predicted  judgments  have  taken  place. 

Isaiah  uses  some  45  times  the  phrase  "in  that  day."  He  uses 
these  words  almost  exclusively  in  the  earlier  prophecies  con- 
tained in  chapters  i-xxxv.  This  day  is  the  day  when  Jehovah  is 
manifested  and  when  He  deals  in  judgment  with  the  earth.  We 
give  a  few  of  the  more  prominent  passages  in  which  that  day 
is  mentioned  (Chapter  ii:  10-22).  Here  the  day  is  described  as 
bringing  the  exaltation  of  the  Lord  and  the  utter  casting  down 
of  all  that  is  lofty  and  high  (Chapter  xiii:9-13).  These  words 
tell  us  that  it  is  the  day  in  which  the  world  will  be  punished  for 
its  wickedness  and  that  heaven  and  earth  will  be  shaken  (Chap- 
ter xxiv) .  In  this  great  judgment  chapter  we  read  that  aU  clas- 
ses will  be  affected  by  it,  the  earth  will  reel  to  and  fro  like  a 
drunkard  and  be  removed  like  a  cottage.  Then  the  Kings  on 
earth  will  be  punished.  The  high  ones  on  high,  the  wicked  spirits 
in  the  heavenlies,  will  be  shut  up  in  prison.  This  gi-eat  day 
Isaiah  beheld  is  the  day  "when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed 
from  heaven  with  His  mighty  angels  in  flaming  fire  taking 
vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the 
Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Such  a  day  has  not  yet  been. 
It  will  surely  come.  Never  before  have  things  been  so  ripe  for 
that  day  as  they  are  now. 

Whatever  we  find  in  future  Glories  and  Blessings  in  Isaiah  is 
always  in  connection  with  that  day.    The  Glories  and  Blessings 


168  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

do  not  precede  that  day,  but  the  day  precedes  the  Glories  and 
Blessings  promised.  Therefore  we  say  the  fulfilment  of  these 
great  predictions  has  not  been  in  the  past,  they  are  not  now 
being  fulfilled  and  they  cannot  be  fulfilled  till  the  storm  clouds 
of  Divine  judgment  have  swept  over  this  earth  and  the  Lord  has 
been  manifested. 

The  great  majority  of  Christians  hold  the  unscriptural  view 
that  in  the  church  and  through  the  church  the  visions  of  Isaiah 
are  fulfilled  in  a  spiritual  way.  But  they  forget  the  great  day 
in  Isaiah  and  the  fact  stated  that  the  Glories  and  Blessings  pre- 
dicted follow  that  day. 

What  then  are  these  predicted  Glories  and  Blessings?  We  find 
that  the  larger  number  of  them  belong  to  the  people  Israel.  We 
look  at  these  first. 

The  Future  Blessings  of  Israel.  This  wonderful  people  has  a 
wonderful  future.  God  has  not  cast  them  away  and  to  them  still 
belong  the  promises  and  the  Glory.  Israel  is  set  aside  through- 
out this  present  age  and  judicially  blinded.  Isaiah  had  to  an- 
nounce this  fact.  We  find  that  in  the  vision  which  called  him 
into  the  prophetic  office  the  message  was  given  to  him  that  the 
nation  should  not  hear  and  that  their  eyes  should  be  blinded. 
The  consummation  of  this  predicted  blindness  came  after  they 
had  rejected  Christ.  We  find  these  words  of  Isaiah  (vi:10) 
quoted  three  times  in  the  New  Testament.  In  Matthew  xxiii: IS- 
IS. Israel  had  then  rejected  Him  and  He  began  to  teach  the 
mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  parables.  In  John  xii:40 
when  the  Lord  was  about  to  suffer  and  to  die.  In  Acts  xxviii:27 
at  the  close  of  the  Book  of  Acts  after  the  Gospel  had  been 
preached  to  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit  come  down  from  heaven. 
They  rejected  it  and  the  last  statement  of  the  Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles,  who  loved  his  people  so  well,  is  a  significant  one,  "the 
salvation  of  God  is  sent  unto  the  Gentiles  and  they  will  hear  it." 
Since  then  the  message  Isaiah  received  has  been  fully  carried 
out.  They  are  judicially  blinded  and  scattered  among  the  na- 
tions. Their  land  is  desolate.  Their  city  is  trodden  down  by  the 
Gentiles.  Their  sufferings  and  woes  have  been  indescribable. 
God  has  hidden  His  face  from  them  and  in  His  wrath  He  has 
forsaken  them. 

But  Isaiah's  vision  tells  us  likewise  that  this  condition  is  not 
to  be  permanent.  The  curse  will  be  changed  into  blessing  and 
they  will  receive  double  for  all  their  sin. 

Their  Restoration  to  the  Land.  They  will  be  brought  back  to 
the  land.  In  chapter  xi:10-12  we  find  one  of  these  unfulfilled 
predictions  of  Israel's  restoration.    It  has  been  taught  that  these 


THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,  169 

words  were  fulfilled  in  the  return  of  the  remnant  from  Babylon. 
Notice,  however,  that  it  saith  "and  gather  together  the  dispersed 
of  Judah  from  the  four  corners  of  the  earth."  It  speaks  of  a 
gathering  from  a  world-wide  dispersion,  not  from  the  Babylonian 
captivity.  It  includes  the  islands  of  the  sea  and  it  is  distinctly 
stated  that  the  Lord  shall  set  His  hand  again  the  second  time  to 
recover  the  remnant  of  His  people.  The  entire  chapter  shows 
that  it  is  a  future  thing. 

In  .Chapter  xiv:l-2  is  another  unfulfilled  prediction.  "For  the 
Lord  will  have  mercy  on  Jacob  and  will  yet  choose  Israel,  and  set 
them  in  their  own  land."  The  nations  are  mentioned  as  helping 
them  to  return.  This  fact  is  indicated  elsewhere  in  Isaiah 
(Chapters  xviii:2,  lxvi:20).  This  regathering  is  stated  in 
xxvii:13.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  the  great 
trumpet  shall  be  blown  and  they  shall  come  which  were  ready  to 
perish  in  the  land  of  Assyria,  and  the  outcasts  in  the  land  of 
Egypt  and  shall  worship  the  Lord  in  the  holy  mount  of  Jerusa- 
lem." Also  read  xxxvilO;  xliii:5-6;  xlix:10-12.  All  the  great 
predictions  in  the  later  prophecies  concerning  Israel's  glorious 
state  in  the  land  make  such  a  regathering  necessary. 

The  Spiritual  Blessings.  The  calling  of  Israel  as  a  nation  is 
stated  in  Exodus  xix:5-6.  "Now  therefore  if  ye  will  obey  my 
voice,  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar 
treasure  unto  me,  above  all  people,  for  all  the  earth  is  mine. 
And  ye  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests  and  a  holy  nation." 
Up  to  now  this  has  never  been;  yet  God's  gifts  and  calling  are 
without  repentance.  The  day  is  coming  when  the  Lord  in  His 
infinite  Grace  will  bestow  upon  the  remnant  of  His  people  such 
spiritual  blessings,  that  they  will  be  healed  of  all  their  back- 
slidings  and  become  a  holy  nation  and  a  kingdom  of  priests  in 
the  earth. 

This  is  beautifully  revealed  in  that  first  song  of  redemption 
in  Chapter  xii.  Closely  connected  with  their  regathering  pre- 
dicted in  the  preceding  chapter  is  their  grateful  expression  for 
the  spiritual  blessings  they  received.  His  anger  is  turned  away, 
comfort  has  come  at  last.  They  sing  and  praise  for  Jehovah 
has  done  excellent  things.  Then  the  Lord  gives  them  rest  from 
their  sorrows,  fear  and  hard  bondage  (xiv:3).  The  songs  of 
redemption  in  Chapters  xxv-xxvi  celebrate  the  same  blessings. 
The  forgiveness  of  their  sins  is  promised  in  Chapter  xxxiii:24, 
"the  people  that  dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity." 
"I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  mine 
own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins"  (xliii:25).  "I  have 
blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  transgressions,  and,  as  a  cloud. 


170  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 

thy  sins  return  unto  me,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee"  (xliv:22). 
This  is  followed  by  a  song.  "I  will  bring  near  my  righteousness; 
it  shall  not  be  far  off,  and  my  salvation  shall  not  tarry  and  I 
will  place  salvation  for  Israel  my  glory"  (xlvi;13).  Read  also 
.liv:6-10.  Then  the  Spirit  of  God  will  be  poured  out  upon  them. 
This  is  promised  in  Chapter  xxxii:15.  The  promise  is  connected 
with  their  restoration  to  the  land.  The  same  promise  is  found 
in  Chapter  lix:20-21.  First  the  Redeemer  comes  to  Zion  and  the 
Spirit  is  promised  unto  Israel  and  Israel's  seed.  These  great 
future  blessings  are  especially  revealed  in  Chapters  Ixi  and  Ixii. 
"But  ye  shall  be  named  the  Priests  of  the  Lord,  men  shall  call 
you  the  ministers  of  our  God."  Thus  their  priestly  calling 
among  the  nations  will  be  realized.  But  when?  After  the  day 
of  vengeance,  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord  (verse  2).  The 
same  blessings  are  stated  in  verses  7  and  10.  Then  they  shall  be 
called  "the  holy  people,"  "the  redeemed  of  the  Lord"  (lxii:12). 
In  one  day  the  new  birth  of  the  nation  will  take  place  (lxvi;8). 
But  let  us  understand  that  these  blessings  are  not  for  the 
apostate  portion  of  the  nation.  Millennial  Dawnism,  as  well  as 
others,  claims  that  all  Israel  will  receive  these  blessings,  not 
alone  the  wicked  element  which  sides  with  the  man  of  sin  and 
worships  him,  but  also  all  the  past  generations  who  died  in 
their  sins  will  be  raised  up  and  brought  back  to  the  land  and 
possess  these  things.  No  such  teaching  is  found  in  the  Word. 
Ezekiel  xxxvii,  the  vision  of  the  raising  up  of  the  dry  bones,  has 
nothing  to  do  with  a  physical  resurrection;  it  is  a  type  of  their 
national  restoration.  Ezekiel  xx:38  makes  it  clear  that  the 
rebels,  the  apostates,  will  have  no  share  in  these  blessings. 
These  will  not  enter  into  the  land  saith  the  Lord.  Two  parts 
of  the  people  will  be  cut  off  and  die  and  the  third  part  only 
shall  be  brought  through  the  fire. 

The  Blessings  for  IsraeFs  Land.  The  land  of  Israel,  Palestine, 
is  called  by  Isaiah  "Immanuel's  land"  (viii:  ).  Desolation  has 
come  upon  it  on  account  of  the  transgressions  of  the  people.  It 
is  now  an  unfruitful  land,  a  land  of  wastes  and  ruins.  But  there 
is  a  glorious  future  for  ImmanueFs  land  and  He  who  lived  His 
blessed  life  in  that  land,  where  He  shed  His  blood  and  died,  will 
also  make  it  a  glorious  land.  We  can  only  link  a  few  passages 
together  where  this  is  promised.  Read  xxx;23-26;  lx:17-22; 
lxi:4;  lxii:4-5;  lxiv:21-24. 

The  Future  of  Jerusalem.  Jerusalem,  still  trodden  down  by 
the  Gentiles,  has  a  glorious  future.  It  will  become  the  great 
capital  of  the  Kingdom,  which  will  cover  the  whole  earth.  In 
Chapter  i  Isaiah  speaks  of  Jerusalem  as  a  harlot    and    that 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,  171 

murderers  dwell  in  it.  This  is  true  now  and  blood  guiltiness 
rests  upon  it.  But  afterward,  Isaiah  announces,  "thou  shalt  be 
called  the  City  of  Righteousness,  the  faithful  city."  That  will  be 
after  the  Lord  has  come.  Then  "out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the 
law  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem"  (ii:3).  The  Holy 
One  of  Israel  will  make  His  dwelling  place  there  and  cover  it 
with  his  Glory  (iv:2-6;  xi:9-10;  xii:6;  xxiv:23).  Then  they  will 
rejoice  on  account  of  it.  "In  that  day  shall  this  song  be  sung  in 
the  land  of  Judah;  we  have  a  strong  city;  salvation  will  God 
appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks"  (xxvi;l).  xxxiii:20-21  shows 
another  picture  of  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  Also  liv:  11-14;  Jeru- 
salem will  be  a  praise  in  the  earth  (lxii:7).  "But  be  glad  and 
rejoice  forever  in  that  which  I  create;  for  behold  I  create  Jeru- 
salem a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy.  And  I  will  rejoice  in 
Jerusalem  and  joy  in  my  people,  and  the  voice  of  weeping  shall 
no  more  be  heard  in  her,  nor  the  voice  of  crying"  (Ixv:  18-19). 
What  a  beautiful  word  this  is!  His  people  rejoice  in  Him  and 
He  rejoices  in  them.  Jerusalem  has  become  at  last  the  place  of 
joy  and  peace  and  Jerusalem  is  His  joy.  Then  He  will  fully 
have  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied.  Once  more  Jeru- 
salem is  mentioned  in  the  last  chapter.  "Rejoice  ye  with  Jeru- 
salem, and  be  glad  v/ith  her,  all  ye  that  love  her,  rejoice  for 
joy  with  her,  all  ye  that  mourn  for  her"  (lxvi:10).  The  nations 
redeemed  will  rejoice.  But  we  may  well  think  of  the  joy  of  the 
glorified  Saints,  including  all  the  Saints,  both  the  Old  Testa- 
ment and  New  Testament  Saints.  They  all  loved  Jerusalem. 
We  love  Jerusalem,  and  when  He  rejoices  in  the  accomplishment 
of  His  purposes  we  shall  rejoice  with  Him.  His  joy  will  be  our 
joy  in  Glory. 

The  Future  Blessings  of  the  Nations.  Closely  linked  with 
these  great  future  blessings  and  glories  for  Israel  His  people 
are  the  blessings  of  the  Gentiles.  The  many  predictions  which 
concern  the  Gentiles  cannot  be  fulfilled  till  Israel  and  Jerusalem 
have  entered  into  their  blessing.  The  conversion  of  the  world 
is  nowhere  taught  to  take  place  in  this  present  age  through  the 
church,  but  it  is  always  found  in  connection  with  converted 
Israel.  This  is  an  important  principle.  The  day  of  the  Lord  will 
bring  great  judgments  for  the  Gentile  world.  When  these  judg- 
ments are  in  the  earth  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn 
righteousness  (Chapter  xxvi:9).  The  Lord  will  deal  in  great 
and  world-wide  judgments  with  the  Gentiles,  especially  with 
those  which  had  the  light  and  turned  from  the  light.  But  there 
will  be  Gentiles  who  turn  to  God  during  these  great  judgments 
and  believe  the  testimony,  the  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  preached 


172  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH, 

at  that  time  (Matthew  xxiv:14).  What  are  the  blessings 
promised  to  these  nations?  We  touch  upon  a  few.  In  Chapter 
ii:2-4  we  find  one  of  the  most  comprehensive.  The  nations  will 
go  up  to  that  house  of  the  Lord,  which  is  yet  to  be  built  and 
which  will  be,  according  to  another  prophecy,  a  house  of  prayer 
for  all  nations.  This  great  prediction  is  sadly  spiritualized.  It 
is  applied  to  the  church;  and  the  fulfilment  was,  it  is  claimed, 
when  the  Lord  selected  the  twelve  Apostles  on  a  mountain.  It 
has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  church  nor  with  the  church 
age.  When  Jerusalem  has  been  restored,  the  nations  which  are 
left  will  go  there  to  worship.  Then  war  will  end  and  not  before. 
This  is  God's  peace  program.  In  xi:9-10  we  read  that  the  earth 
will  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  the  Gentiles 
will  seek  Him.  The  great  things,  which  He  hath  done,  will  be 
known  in  all  the  earth  (xii:5).  Greater  still  is  the  vision  of 
Chapter  xxv:6-8.  A  feast  of  fat  things  will  be  made.  Now 
God  has  spread  the  Gospel  feast  and  invites  all  to  come.  "Come, 
for  all  things  are  now  ready."  But  the  invitation  to  this  feast 
v/ill  soon  end.  Then  conies  "the  supper  of  the  great  God,"  a 
fearful  judgment  to  which  the  fowls  of  heaven  are  invited  (Rev. 
xix:16-18).  This  is  followed  by  the  feast  of  all  peoples.  The 
veil  which  is  now  over  the  heathen  nations  will  be  destroyed 
and  all  tears  will  be  wiped  away;  the  tears  of  sickness,  the 
tears  of  want,  the  tears  of  affliction,  the  tears  of  sorrow.  The 
gathering  of  the  nations  will  be  to  Israel;  they  will  be  joined 
to  them  and  thus  the  Kingdom  will  extend  over  the  whole  earth. 
"Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about  and  behold,  all  these  gather 
themselves  together  and  come  to  thee"  (xlix:18).  World  con- 
version, the  multitude  of  nations  brought  to  the  Knowledge  of 
God  (not  into  the  church)  is  beautifully  predicted  in  Chapter 
Ix.  First  we  see  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  shining  forth;  this  is 
His  Second  Coming.  But  in  what  state  does  He  find  the  earth? 
"Behold,  darkness  shall  cover  the  earth  and  gross  darkness  the 
people."  This  is  the  apostasy,  the  moral  and  spiritual  darkness 
the  Lord  will  find  on  the  earth.  It  v/ill  soon  be  changed  by  His 
glorious  appearing.  The  Gentiles  will  then  be  brought  to  that 
light. 

"And  the  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the 
brightness  of  thy  rising.  Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about,  and 
see;  all  they  gather  themselves  together,  they  come  to  thee: 
thy  sons  shall  come  from  far,  and  thy  daughters  shall  be  nursed 
at  thy  side.  Then  thou  shalt  see,  and  flow  together,  and  thine 
heart  shall  fear,  and  be  enlarged;  because  the  abundance  of  the 
sea  shall  be  converted  unto  thee,  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles  shall 
come  unto  thee.     The  multitude  of  camels  shall  cover  thee,  the 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  173 

I  dromedaries  of  Midian  and  Ephah;  all  they  from  Sheba'  shall 
come:  they  shall  bring  gold  and  incense;  and  they  shall  show 
forth  the  praises  of  the  Lord.  All  the  flocks  of  Kedar  shall  be 
gathered  together  unto  thee,  the  rams  of  Nebaioth  shall  minister 
unto  thee:  they  shall  come  up  with  acceptance  on  m.ine  altar, 
and  will  glorify  the  house  of  my  glory.  Who  are  these  that  fly 
as  a  cloud,  and  as  the  doves  to  their  windows  ?  Surely  the  isles 
shall  wait  for  me,  and  the  ships  of  Tarshish  first,  to  bring  thy 
sons  from  far,  their  silver  and  their  gold  with  them,  unto  the 
name  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  be- 
cause he  hath  glorified  thee.  And  the  sons  of  strangers  shall 
build  up  thy  walls,  and  their  kings  shall  minister  unto  thee;  for 
in  my  wrath  I  smote  thee,  but  in  my  favor  have  I  had  mercy 
on  thee.  Therefore  thy  gates  shall  be  open  continually;  they 
shall  not  be  shut  day  nor  night;  that  men  mxay  bring  unto  thee 
the  forces  of  the  Gentiles,  and  that  their  kings  may  he  brought. 
,For  the  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish; 
yea,  thos^  nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted"  (lx:3-12). 

This  is  the  vision  of  the  Kingdom  to  come.  That  coming  age, 
introduced  by  the  visible  and  glorious  Coming  of  Christ,  will 
mean  the  end  of  idolatry  and  the  worshipping  of  the  Lord.  "All 
flesh  shall  come  to  worship  before  me,  saith  Jehovah"  (lxvi:23). 

The  Blessings  for  all  Creation.  In  Romans  viii  we  read  of  the 
future  and  complete  deliverance  of  groaning  creation.  It  will 
come  with  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  That  mani- 
festation takes  place  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  again. 
He  who  created  all  things  and  whose  creation  was  marred  by 
sin;  He  who  came  into  His  creation  and  died  for  the  creature's 
sin,  will  in  that  coming  day  deliver  creation  from  its  curse.  The 
blessings  of  a  delivered  creation  were  beheld  by  Isaiah. 

"The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard 
shall  lie  down  with  the  kid;  and  the  calf  and  the  young  lion  and 
the  fatling  together;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them.  And 
the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed;  their  young  ones  shall  lie  down 
together:  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And  the 
sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned 
child  shall  put  his  hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den"  (xi:6-8). 

Also  read  Chapter  lxv:25.  Only  the  serpent  will  continue  to 
crawl  in  the  dust  as  an  abiding  witness  of  Satan  and  sin;  also 
as  a  warning,  for  after  the  Kingdom  age  Satan  will  be  loosed  for 
a  little  season  (Rev.  xx:7). 

All  waits  for  the  coming  of  these  great  blessings  and  glories. 
We  insist  again  that  they  cannot  come  till  "that  day"  of  Isaiah's 
vision  has  appeared.    It  will  surely  come,  though  it  has  tarried 


174  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 

long.  Judgment  ends  the  present  age  and  Blessings  for  Israel, 
the  nations  and  all  creation  are  the  characteristics  of  the  age  to 
come.  The  church  and  her  heavenly  destiny  was  not  seen  by 
Isaiah.  In  the  New  Testament  we  read  exclusively  of  the  church, 
how  it  began  and  how  it  will  suddenly  end.  When  the  predicted 
judgments  smite  the  earth  the  true  church  is  gathered  home 
and  is  in  His  presence.  Her  destiny  is  not  in  an  earthly  King- 
dom, an  earthly  Jerusalem,  but  with  the  King,  the  Lord  of  Glory 
in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  The  destiny  of  the  church  is  not  to 
be  ruled  over  in  the  Kingdom,  but  to  rule  over  the  Kingdom. 
May  God's  Spirit  give  unto  us  the  power  to  enjoy  these  great 
revelations  and  rejoice  in  them  even  before  they  are  ac- 
complished. 


THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  175 

THE  ACTORS  OF  THE  PERIOD  OF  ISAIAH, 

Chronologically  Arranged. 

Before  Christ. 

765.  Isaiah  bom. 

789-740.     Uzziah. 

784-745.     Jeroboam  II. 
.  745-727.     Tiglath-pileser  III. 

740.  The  Call  of  Isaiah's  Vision,  Chapter  VI. 

740-736.     Jotham. 

738.  Arpad,  Calno,  Carchemish  and  Damascus  taken 

by  Tiglath-pileser  III. 

745-737.     Menahem. 

737-736.     Pekahiah. 

736-730.     Pekah. 

736-727.     Ahaz. 

734.  Syro-Ephraimitic  war;   Gaza  captured    by    Tig- 

lath-pileser III;  Galilee  carried  captive  to  As- 
syria. 

732.  Damascus  taken  by  Tiglath-pileser  III. 

730-722.     Hoshea. 

727-699.     Hezekiah. 

727-722.     Shalmaneser  IV. 

722.  Fall  of  Samaria;  end  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel. 

722-705.     Sargon  II. 

721-709.     Babylonia  under  Merodach-Baladan. 

720.  Battle   of   Karkar;    Sargon   II    conquers   Arpad, 

Hammath  and  Damascus.    Battle  of  Raphia. 

717.  Sargon  II  conquers  the  Hittites,  takes  Carche* 

mish,  their  capital. 

714.  Hezekiah's  sickness. 

712.  Merodach-Baladan  sent  messengers  to  Hezekiah. 

711.  Siege  of  Ashdod  by  Sargon  II. 

709.  Merodach-Baladan    driven    from    Babylonia    by 

Sargon  II. 

705-681.     Sennacherib. 

703.  Merodach-Baladan  again  king  over  Babylonia. 

701.  Siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Sennacherib;  Judah,  Moab, 

Edom,  Amnion  and  Philistia  made  to  pay  tribute. 
Tirhakah  (afterwards  "king  of  Ethiopia")  head 
of  the  Egyptian  army  under  Shabaka> 

699-$4-3.     Manasseh,  king  of  Judah.    Tradition  claims  that 
under  Manaseeh,  Isaiah  suffered  martyrdom. 


JEREMIAH 


The  Prophet  Jeremiah 

Introduction. 

This  Book  starts  with  information  concerning  the  person  of  Jeremiah, 
the-  time  when  he  was  called  to  the  office  of  a  prophet,  and  the  period 
of  time  during  which  he  exercised  his  ministry. 

Jeremiah  means  "exalted  of  the  Lord,"  or,  **established  by  the 
Lord."  He  was  the  son  of  Hilkiah.  Some  have  indentified  the  father 
of  Jeremiah  with  the  high-priest  Hilkiah,  who  was  such  a  power  in 
Josiah's  great  reformation  work.  This  is  incorrect.  The  high-priest 
Hilkiah  was  of  the  line  of  Eleazar,  as  recorded  in  1  Chronicles  vi:4,  13. 
The  father  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  was,  we  read  in  the  first  verse  of 
this  book»  of  the  priests  that  were  in  Anathoth;  the  priests  who 
lived  there  were  of  the  line  of  Ithamar.  (See  1  Kings  ii:26;  1  Chronicles 
xxiv:3,  6.)  Anathoth,  the  home  of  Jeremiah,  was  in  Benjamin,  about 
three  miles  northeast  of  Jerusalem. 

The  first  time  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  to  young  Jeremiah,  for 
he  was  but  a  child,  was  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  King  Josiah,  or  just 
a  year  after  the  eventful  reformation  accomplished  by  that  good  man. 
We  know  but  little  of  the  activity  of  the  prophet  during  the  subsequent 
reign  of  Josiah.  Only  one  message  is  timed  "in  the  days  of  Josiah 
the  King"  (iii:6).  In  the  history  of  that  illustrious  King  of  Judah 
we  read  nothing  of  Jeremiah,  with  the  exception  of  the  brief  statement, 
"and  Jeremiah  lamented  for  Josiah"  (2  Chron.  xxxv:25).  It  seems 
that  the  third  verse  gives  the  period  covering  the  larger  part  of  the 
ministry  of  this  prophet.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him  "also 
in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim,  the  son  of  Josiah,  king  of  Judah,  unto  the 
end  of  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah,  the  son  of  Josiah,  the  king  of 
Judah,  unto  the  carrying  away  of  Jerusalem  captive  in  the  fifth  month." 

The  boob  which  bears  this  prophet's  name  abounds  in  personal 
allusions.  In  fact  no  other  prophet  in  his  character,  in  the  exercise 
of  his  soul,  and  in  his  experience  is  so  fully  portrayed  as  Jeremiah; 
not  even  Ezekiel  and  Daniel  whom,  with  Habakkuk  and  Zephaniah, 
were  his  contemporaries.  The  study  of  this  great  man  of  God  is  deeply 
interesting. 

He  has  been  called  "the  weeping  prophet"  and  is  generally  known 
by  that  name.  No  other  prophet  wept  like  Jeremiah.  That  outburst 
in  his  lamentations,  "For  these  things  I  weep;  mine  eye,  mine  eye, 
runneth  down  with  water"  (i:16)  shows  how  tender  hearted  he  was, 
and  how  his  tears  flowed  freely.  But  he  was  something  else  beside 
the  weeping  prophet.  He  was  a  man  of  great  courage,  with  the  boldnes*' 


180  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

of  a  lion.  In  the  presence  of  His  Lord  he  was  prostrate  and  broken, 
one  who  trembled  at  His  Word,  filled  with  godly  fear.  He  was  a  man 
of  prayer  and  faith  in  the  Lord  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  his 
great  commission. 

His  Life  of  Service  and  Suflfering. 

His  lot  was  one  of  great  solitude;  he  was  divinely  commanded  to 
remain  unmarried  (xvi:2).  He  was  forbidden  to  enter  the  house  of 
joy  and  feasting  (xvi:8).  Reproach  and  derision  was  his  daily  portion 
(xx:8).  He  was  betrayed  by  his  own  kindred  (xii:6),  and  his  fellow 
citizens  at  Anathoth  wanted  to  kill  him  (xi:21).  Then,  in  the  first  part 
of  his  book,  we  read  of  the  inner  struggles  he  had,  the  spiritual  con- 
flict, when  everybody  was  against  him.  In  the  bitterness  of  his  spirit 
he  spoke  of  himself  as  "a  man  of  contention  to  the  whole  earth"  (xv.lO). 
He  even  doubted  whether  his  whole  work  was  not  a  delusion  and  a  lie 
(xx:7),  and  like  Job  he  cursed  the  day  of  his  birth  (xx:14).  When  the 
Chaldeans  came  to  the  front  and  Jeremiah  heard  from  the  Lord  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  was  called  as  His  servant  to  receive  the  dominion 
from  His  hands  (xxxvii:6),  Jeremiah  urged  submission.  This  stamped 
him  as  a  traitor.  False  prophets  appeared  who  contradicted  him  with 
their  false  messages;  he  committed  his  cause  to  the  Lord.  On  one 
occasion  when  the  temple  courts  were  filled  with  thousands  of  wor- 
shippers, he  appeared  and  uttered  the  message  that  Jerusalem  would 
be  a  curse,  that  the  temple  should  share  the  fate  of  the  tabernacle  at 
Shiloh  (xxvi:6).  Then  the  great  conflict  began.  The  priests,  the 
false  prophets  and  the  people  demanded  his  death  (xxvi:8).  The  Lord 
graciously  protected  him  through  chosen  instruments.  Still  greater 
were  his  sufferings  under  Zedekiah.  His  struggles  with  the  false 
prophets  continued;  they  called  him  a  madman  (xxix:28),  and  urged 
his  imprisonment.  He  then  appeared  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  with 
bonds  and  yokes  upon  his  neck  (xxvii:2),  showing  the  coming  fate 
of  Judah.  A  false  prophet  broke  the  offensive  symbol  and  gave  a 
lying  message  that  the  Chaldeans  should  be  destroyed  within  two  years. 
Then  the  Egyptian  army  approached,  and  the  Chaldeans  hastened 
away;  it  created  a  dangerous  condition  for  Jeremiah.  He  sought  to 
escape  to  his  home  town  Anathoth;  it  was  discovered,  and  he  was 
charged  with  falling  to  the  Chaldeans  as  others  did  (xxxvii:14).  In 
spite  of  his  denial,  he  was  thrown  into  a  dungeon.  Later  he  was  thrown 
into  the  prison  pit  by  the  princes  to  die  there.  From  that  horrible 
fate  he  was  again  mercifully  delivered.  When  the  city  fell,  Nebuchad- 
nezzar protected  his  person  (xxxix:ll),  and  after  being  carried  away  with 
other  captives  as  far  as  Ramah,  he  set  him  free.  It  was  left  to  him 
whether  he  would  go  to  Babylon  to  live  under  the  special  protection 
of    the    king,  or    remain    in  the  land    with  the  governor  Gedaliah. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  181 

He  chose  the  latter.  But  Gedaliah  was  murdered  by  Ishmael  and  his 
associates.  Then  the  people  forced  him  to  emigrate  with  them  to 
Egypt.  The  last  glimpse  of  the  prophet's  life  we  have  of  him  is  in 
Tehpanes,  uttering  there  a  final  protest  and  a  great  message. 
Nothing  is  known  of  the  details  of  his  death. 

"He  is  preeminently  the  man  that  hath  seen  afflictions  (Lam.  iii;l). 
He  witnessed  the  departure  one  by  one,  of  all  his  hopes  of  national 
reformation  and  deliverance.  He  is  forced  to  appear  as  a  prophet  of 
evil,  dashing  to  the  ground  the  false  hopes  with  which  the  people 
were  deluded.  Other  prophets,  Samuel,  Elisha,  Isaiah,  had  been  sent 
to  arouse  the  people  to  resistance.  He  has  been  brought  to  the  con- 
clusion, bitter  as  it  is,  that  the  only  safety  for  his  people  lies  in  their 
acceptance  of  that  which  they  think  is  the  worst  evil,  that  brings 
on  him  the  charge  of  treachery.  If  it  were  not  for  his  trust  in  the  God 
of  Israel,  for  his  hope  of  a  better  future  to  be  brought  out  of  all  this 
chaos  and  darkness,  his  heart  would  fail  within  him.  But  that  vision 
is  clear  and  bright,  and  it  gives  to  him,  almost  as  fully  as  to  Isaiah, 
the  character  of  a  prophet  of  Glory.  He  is  not  merely  an  Israelite 
looking  forward  to  a  national  restoration.  In  the  midst  of  all  the 
woes  he  utters  against  the  nearby  nations,  he  has  hopes  and  promises 
for  them  also.  In  that  stormy  sunset  of  prophecy,  he  beholds,  in  spirit, 
the  dawn  of  a  brighter  day.  He  sees  that,  if  there  is  any  hope  of  salva- 
tion for  his  people,  it  cannot  be  by  a  return  to  the  old  system  and  the 
old  ordinances,  divine  though  they  had  once  been.  There  must  be  a 
Nev/  Covenant.  That  word,  destined  to  be  so  full  of  power  for  after 
ages,  appears  first  in  his  prophecies.  The  relations  between  the  people 
and  the  Lord  of  Israel,  between  mankind  and  God,  must  rest,  not  on 
on  an  outward  law,  with  its  requirements  of  obedience,  but  on  an 
inward  fellowship  with  Him  and  the  consciousness  of  entire  dependence. 
For  all  this  the  prophet  saw  clearly  there  must  be  a  personal  center. 
The  Kingdom  of  God  could  not  be  manifested  but  through  a  perfect 
righteous  man,  ruling  over  men  on  earth.  They  gather  round  the  person 
of  Christ,  the  Jehovah  Zdidkenu — the  Lord  our  Righteousness,  the 
Son  of  David,  Israel's  coming  king." 


The  Authorship  of  Jeremiah. 

The  book  begins  with  "The  words  of  Jeremiah,"  and  it  closes  with 
chapter  li:64  with  the  statement, "thus  far  are  the  words  of  Jeremiah." 
The  final  chapter  is  an  addition  of  a  historial  character.  That  Jeremiah 
must  be  the  author  of  the  greater  part  of  the  book  is  proven  by  the 
many  personal  references  which  only  the  prophet  himself  could  have 
written.  No  other  prophet  was  so  frequently  commanded  to  write  as 
Jeremiah  was.  "Write  thee  all  the  words  that  I  have  spoken  unto  thee  in 
a  book"  (xxx:2),    "Take  thee  the  roll  of  a  book  and  write  therein  all 


182  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

the  words  that  I  have  spoken"  (xxxvi:2).  Then  Baruch  witnessed 
that  he  wrote  all  these  words  which  came  from  Jeremiah's  lips  in  a 
book  (xxxvi:17);  and  when  the  roll  was  burned  the  Lord  said,  "Take 
thee  again  another  roll,  and  write  in  it  all  the  former  words  that  were 
in  the  first  roll"  (xxxvi:28).  "So  Jeremiah  wrote  in  a  book"  (li:GO). 
Who  are  the  men  who  try  to  make  us  believe  that  Jeremiah  did  not 
write  these  words?  Baruch,  his  secretary,  who  took  the  dictations 
from  the  lips  of  the  prophet  (xxxvi:27)  may  have  arranged,  under 
the  direction  of  Jeremiah,  the  different  prophecies.  The  language 
used  is  the  language  of  his  time  and  is  tinged  with  Aramaic.  The  style 
does  not  compare  with  that  of  Isaiah. 

There  are,  of  course,  many  difficulties  in  connection  with  the  text. 
For  instance,  the  Greek  Version  (the  Septuagint)  differs  more  widely 
from  the  Hebrew  than  that  of  any  other  portion  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Numerous  passages  like  vii:l-2,  xvii:l-4,  xxxiii:14-26,  etc.,  are  omitted 
in  the  Greek  version.  Inasmuch  as  the  Hebrew  is  the  oldest  and  the 
Septuagint  was  made  from  the  Hebrew,  the  latter  is  the  correct  text. 
The  critical  school  has  made  much  out  of  these  apparent  difficulties 
and  the  disorder  and  unchronological  character  of  the  book.  Therefore 
Jeremiah  has  suffered  just  as  much  in  the  dissecting  room  of  the  destruc- 
tive critics  as  Isaiah  and  Moses.  Thus  Peake  in  his  commentary  on 
Jeremiah  uses  nine  symbolic  letters  to  show  which  is  which. 

J.  Which  stands  for  prophecies  of  which  Jeremiah  is  most  likely 
the  author.  S.  This  stands  for  certain  supplementers.  JS.  This  stands 
for  the  words  of  Jeremiah  worked  over  by  a  supplementer;  nobody 
knows  who  he  was.  B.  This  means  Baruch  and  his  production.  BS. 
This  means  that  Baruch's  words  were  supplemented  by  some  more 
unknown  supplementers.  R.  This  stands  for  Redactor,  whoever  he 
was.  7.  Here  we  have  an  unknov/n  author  who,  according  to  the 
critics  wrote  chapter  x:l-16.  K.  Here  is  another  unknown  gentleman, 
the  author  of  xvii:19.,  etc.    E,  This  letter  denotes  extracts  from  2  Kings. 

It  is  of  little  interest  to  quote  the  ramblings  of  Duhm,  Ryssell, 
Hitizig,  Renan  and  others  about  the  authorship  and  compliation  of 
Jeremiah.  Not  one  of  these  scholars  agree.  They  have  theories 
but  no  certainties.  How  simple  it  is  to  believe  the  beginning  and  the 
end  of  this  book,  that  here  are  "the  words  of  Jeremiah."  And  though 
King  Jehoiakim  tried  to  destroy  these  words,  they  still  live  and  they 
will  live  on  in  our  days,  in  spite  of  the  successors  of  the  wicked  king, 
the  professors  of  apostasy,  who  are  trying  to  give  Christendom  an 
abridged  Bible. 

That  the  book  appears  disjointed  and  is  unchronological  is  no  argu- 
ment against  its  authenticity.  The  Companion  Bible  gives  the  follow- 
ing: "The  prophecies  of  Jeremiah  do  not  profess  to  be  given  in  chrono- 
logical order;  nor  is  there  any  reason  why  they  should  be  so  given. 
Why,  we  ask,  should  modern  critics  first  assume  that  they  ought  to  be, 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  183 

and  then  condemn  them  because  they  are  not?  It  is  the  historical 
portions,  which  concern  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah  that  are  chiefly 
so  affected;  and  who  was  Jehoiakim  that  his  history  should  be  of  any 
importance?  Was  it  not  he  who  cut  up  the  Word  of  the  Lord  with  a 
penknife  and  cast  it  into  the  fire?  Why  should  not  his  history  be  cut 
up?  Zedekiah  rejected  the  same  Word  of  Jehovah.  Why  should 
his  history  be  respected?" 

The  Message  of  Jeremiah. 

His  message  is  first  a  message  which  charges  the  people  with  having 
forsaken  Jehovah.  The  sins  of  the  people  are  uncovered,  especially  the 
sins  of  false  worship  and  idolatry.  Connected  with  this  are  the  appeals 
to  return  unto  the  Lord  with  the  promises  of  the  mercy  of  Jehovah. 
The  impenitent  condition  of  the  people  is  foreseen  and  judgment  is 
announced.  Then  follow  the  messages  which  make  known  Jehovah's 
determination  to  punish  Jerusalem,  and  further  announcement  of  the 
impending  judgment.  But  while  Jeremiah  gave  the  messages  of  warn- 
ing of  the  coming  disaster  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  conquest,  he  also  re- 
ceived prophecies  concerning  the  future.  Thus  in  chapter  xxiii  we 
find  a  great  prophecy  of  restoration.  He  speaks  of  the  days  v/hen  the 
righteous  Branch,  the  King,  is  to  reign,  when  Judah  will  be  saved  and 
Israel  dwell  safely.  Who  that  King  is,  every  believer  knows.  His  name 
is  "Jehovah  our  Righteousness."  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Greater 
still  is  the  great  prophecy  contained  in  chapters  xxx-xxxi.  Here  we 
find  the  prophecy  of  the  New  Covenant  to  be  made  with  the  house  of 
Judah  and  the  house  of  Israel.  Chapter  xxxiii  contains  another 
prophetic  restoration  message.  Chapters  xlvi-li  contain  prophecies 
against  Gentile  nations. 

The  personal  experience  and  the  sufferings  of  this  prophet  are  of  a 
typical  character,  like  the  experiences  and  sufferings  of  other  men  of 
God  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  following  passages  make  Jeremiah 
a  type  of  Christ:  Chapter  xi:19,  xiii:17,  xx:7  (last  sentence),  xx:10, 
xxvi:ll,  15;  Lamentations  i:12,  iii:14. 


184  TEE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH 


The  Divisions  of  Jeremiah 

We  have  already  referred  in  the  introduction  to  the  charge 
made  by  the  critics  that  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  is  unchrono- 
logical  and  lacks  proper  arrangement.  Says  one  critic, 
"as  the  book  now  stands,  there  is  nothing  but  the  wildest 
confusion,  a  preposterous  jumbling  together  of  prophecies 
of  different  dates."  Attempts  have  therefore  been  made 
to  reconstruct  the  book  on  a  chronological  basis,  but  none 
of  these  are  satisfactory.  On  the  other  hand,  some  able 
scholars  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  possess  the 
book  substantially  in  the  same  state  as  that  in  which  it 
left  the  hands  of  the  prophet  and  his  secretary  Baruch. 
We  believe  this  is  correct.  If  Jeremiah  was  guided  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  v/riting  and  dictating  his  great  messages,  he 
wrote  them  down  just  as  the  Spirit  wanted  to  have  them 
written  down.  If  some  things  appear  disjointed,  or  out  of 
the  chronological  order,  there  must  be  some  wise  purpose 
in  it.  We  shall  discover  this  as  we  proceed  with  the  analysis 
and  in  our  annotations. 

To  enjoy  fully  the  book  of  Jeremiah  a  good  knowledge  of 
the  historical  setting  is  eminently  necessary.  We  have 
given  many  references  in  the  annotations  which  will  help 
in  this  direction. 

We  call  attention  first  to  the  two  main  divisions  of  the 
book.  The  first  constitutes  the  greater  part  of  the  book, 
from  chapters  i-xlv.  This  portion  has  the  full  ministry  of 
the  prophet  during  the  reign  of  Josiah,  the  brief  reign  of 
Jehoahaz  (Shallum;  see  chapters  xxii:i0-12);  the  reign  of 
Jehoiakim,  Jehoiakin  (Coniah)  and  the  reign  of  Zedekiah. 
The  second  division  contains  the  prophecies  against  Gentile 
nations,  that  is  chapters  xlvi-li.  The  last  chapter  is  an 
appendix  corresponding  in  its  history  to  2  Kings  xxv.  Some 
have  looked  upon  this  appendix  as  the  introduction  to  the 
"Lamentations." 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  185 

The  prophecies  historically  according  to  the  reign  of 
Josiah,  Jehoahaz,  Jehoiakim,  Jehoiakin  and  Zedekiah  may 
be  arranged  as  follows: 

Under  the  Reign  of  Josiah.    The  call  of  Jeremiah  and  prob- 
ably the  greater  part  of  chapters  i-vi. 

UkcIct  the  Reign  of  Jehoahaz.     The  prophecy  contained  in 
chapters  xxii:10-12. 

Under  the  Reign  of  Jehoiakim.    Chapters  vii-xx,  xxv-xxvi, 
xxxv-xxxvi,  xlvi:l-12,  xlvii,  xlix. 

Under  the  Reign  of  Jehoiakin  (Coniah;  Jeconiah).  Chapters 
xxii  and  xxiii. 

Under  the  Reign  of  Zedekiah.     Chapters  xxi,  xxiv,  xxvii, 
xxviii,  xxix,  xxx-xxxiv,  xxxvii-xliv,  xlvi:  13-28;  1  and  li. 
We  make  the  following  divisions  for  the  study  of  this  book : 

I.    TEE  PROPHET'S  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE.    THE 

NATION'S  IMPENITENCE.     THE  JUDGMENT 
ANNOUNCED.    Chapters  i-xiii. 

II.  THE  PROPHET'S  MINISTRY  BEFORE  THE  FALL 
OF  JERUSALEM.  THE  PROPHECIES  OF 
JUDGMENT  AND  RESTORATION.  THE  PER- 
SONAL  HISTORY  OF  JEREMIAH.  HIS  FAITH- 
FULNESS AND  HIS  SUFFERING.  Chapters 
xiv-xxxix. 

III.  AFTER  THE  FALL  OF  JERUSALEM.    Chapters  xl- 

xlv. 

IV.  THE  PROPHECIES  CONCERNING  THE  GENTILE 

NATIONS.    Chapters  xlvi-li. 

V.    THE  HISTORICAL  APPENDIX.    Chapter  Hi. 
The  different  subdivisions  will  appear  in  the  analysis. 


186  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

I.     THE    CALL    TO    REPENTANCE.     THE    IMPENI- 
TENCE OF  THE  PEOPLE.    THE  JUDGMENT 
ANNOUNCED. 

Chapter  i-xiii. 

THE  CALL  OF  THE  PROPHET 

CHAPTER  L 

1.  The  Introduction.     1-3. 

2.  The  Divine  Call.     4-10. 

3.  The  Renewed  Call  and  the  First  Visions.     11-19. 

1.  The  Introduction:  Verses  1-3.  The  first  three  verses 
introduce  us  to  the  person  of  the  prophet,  to  the  time  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him,  and  to  the  sphere  of  his 
ministry.  Jeremiah's  father,  Hilkiah,  was  a  priest  of  the 
line  of  Itliamar;  his  home  was  Anathoth  of  Benjamin.  (See 
general  introduction.) 

2.  The  Divine  Call:  Verses  4-10.  "Then  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  came  unto  me"  (verse  4).  The  prophet  is  the 
writer  who  tells  us  how  he  was  called  into  the  office  of  a 
prophet.  A  sovereign,  ominscient  and  omnipotent  Lord 
speaks  to  and  informs  the  young  Jeremiah  that  He 
knew  him,  that  his  call  was  prenatal.  He  had  been  chosen 
and  set  apart  for  the  specific  work  which  he  now  was  to 
undertake.  (See  Isa.  xlixil;  Gal.  1:15,  16.)  What  comfort 
this  assuring  knowledge  must  have  been  to  the  prophet  in 
his  trying  ministry,  in  the  persecutions  which  were  his  por- 
tion and  the  suffering  he  passed  through!  The  Lord  had 
called  him,  the  Lord  knew  all  that  would  take  place,  and  He 
had  the  power  to  sustain  him.  And  He  is  the  same  Lord 
today,  and  Jeremiah's  comfort  is  still  the  comfort  of  His 
trusting  people. 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  187 

Jeremiah  expresses  at  once  his  fear.  Like  Moses  (Exod. 
iv:10),  he  manifests  self -distrust.  He  was  but  a  child,  not 
in  the  sense  of  a  mere  child,  but  a  youth.  The  Septuagint 
translates  it,  "I  am  too  young."  After  that  the  Lord  en- 
couraged him  by  the  promise  of  His  presence,  "I  am  with 
thee  to  deliver  thee."  Then  He  touched  his  mouth  and 
said,  *'Behold,  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth."  He 
was  the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah,  Who  commissioned  him  to 
fulfill  a  ministry  over  nations  and  kingdoms,  to  announce 
the  overthrow  of  them  by  the  judgments  of  the  Lord. 

3.  The  Renewed  Call  and  the  First  Visions:  Verse  11:19. 
Some  think  that  this  renewed  call  came  in  the  beginning 
of  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim.  There  is  nothing  in  the  text  to 
indicate  this.  The  first  vision  is  that  of  the  rod  of  the  al- 
mond tree.  The  Hebrew  word  for  almond  is  ''Shakad," 
which  means  to  watch,  to  wake  early.  It  is  the  first  tree 
which  shows  the  return  of  Spring.  It  denotes  the  early 
fulfilment  of  the  judgment  purposes  of  the  Lord.  The  vision 
of  the  seething  pot  toward  the  North  denotes  the  coming 
invasion  by  the  kingdom  of  the  North,  that  is,  the  Baby- 
lonians under  Nebuchadnezzar.  Then  follows  the  renewed 
commission  with  a  threat  in  case  of  disobedience;  if  his  fear- 
fulness  would  lead  him  to  abandon  the  commission.  More 
than  that,  the  Lord,  knowing  the  fears  of  the  servant  He 
had  called  and  separated,  encouraged  him  and  once  more 
promised  him,  *T  am  with  thee  saith  the  Lord,  to  deliver 
thee." 

EXPOSTULATION  AND  IMPEACHMENT. 
CHAPTER  II-III:5. 

1.  His  Love  and  Kindness  to  Jerusalem.     1-3. 

2.  The  Unfaithful  People.     4-11. 

S.  The  Two  Evils  and  the  Results.     12-18. 

4.  Impeachment.     19-30. 

5.  Expostulation.     31-37. 

6.  Jehovah  Waiting  to  Show  Mercy.     Chapter  iii:l-5. 

1.  His  Love  and  Kindness  Towards  Jerusalem:  Verses 

1-3.    The  first  message  Jeremiah  received  begins  with  re- 


188  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

minding  Jerusalem  of  the  kindness  Jehovah  bestowed  upon 
the  nation  in  her  youth,  and  how  she  went  after  Him  in  the 
wilderness.  He  had  separated  Israel  to  belong  to  Him,  to 
be  a  holy  nation,  the  first  fruits  of  His  increase,  which 
probably  means  that  other  nations  should  through  Israel 
be  called  to  know  Him.  He  was  their  protector  and  those 
who  tried  to  devour  them  would  be  held  guilty. 

2.  The  Unfaithful  People:  Verses  4-11.  After  Jehovah 
had  called  to  the  remembrance  of  the  people  the  days  of 
her  youth.  He  reproves  them  for  their  unfaithfulness.  This 
is  the  opening  chapter  of  the  roll  which  Jehudi  read  in  the 
presence  of  Jehoiakim,  which  he  threw  into  the  fire 
after  he  had  mutilated  it  with  his  penknife  (chapter  xxxvi:23). 
The  remonstrance  starts  with  a  pathetic  question:  "What 
iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  Me,  that  they  are  gone 
far  from  Me,  and  have  walked  after  vanity,  and  are  become 
vain?"  Was  there  anything  unrighteous  in  Him:  had  He 
dealt  in  a  treacherous  way?  Was  the  fault  in  Jehovah  that 
they  had  left  Him?  They  had  not  thought  on  His  faith- 
fulness as  He  had  led  them  out  of  Egypt,  through  the  desert 
and  the  shadows  of  death.  It  was  forgotten  by  them,  and 
when  Jehovah  brought  them  to  the  land  of  promise  they 
had  defiled  the  land.  Priests,  pastors  and  prophets  had 
apostatized.  Thus  Jehovah  states  His  case  to  plead  with 
them  and  their  children.  Their  folly  and  ingratitude  was 
worse  than  that  of  heathen  nations.  Such  was  the  failure 
of  the  favored  nation.  The  failure  of  Christendom  is  even 
greater  when  we  think  of  the  greater  manifestation  of  God's 
love  in  the  gift  of  His  Son,  and  the  greater  blessing  and 
deliverance. 

3.  The  Two  Evils  and  the  Result:  Verses  12-18.  The 
two  evils  are,  forsaking  Jehovah,  the  fountain  of  living 
waters,  and  the  hewing  for  themselves  cisterns,  broken 
cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water.  Jehovah  was  the  store- 
house of  the  living  waters,  put  at  the  disposal  of  His  people 
without  money  and  without  price.  But  instead  of  confess- 
ing, "All  my  springs  are  in  Thee,"  they  had  left  Him,  the 
source  of  life  and  comfort;  and  turned  to  broken  cisterns  of 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  180 

their  own  invention,  as  well  as  to  the  idols  and  worshipped 
them.  It  is  so  among  the  professing  people  of  God  in  this 
dispensation;  the  two  evils  are  present  with  us  also.  The 
result  for  Israel  was  enslavement.  The  young  lions  came 
(the  Assyrian  invasion)  and  made  the  land  waste.  Noph 
(Memphis)  and  Tahpanhes  (Daphnae),  that  is,  Egypt,  did 
the  same.  It  came  as  the  fruit  of  having  forsaken  the 
fountain  of  living  water. 

4.  Impeachmesit:  Verses  19-30.  The  impeachment  be- 
gins with  the  solemn  statement:  "Know  therefore  and  see 
that  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  bitter,  that  thou  hast  forsaken 
Jehovah  Thy  God,  and  that  my  fear  is  not  in  Thee,  saith 
the  Lord  God  of  hosts."  They  had  broken  the  covenant 
and  played  the  harlot.  The  noble  vine  He  had  planted  had 
degenerated.  Their  iniquity  was  marked  before  the  Lord, 
and  nothing  that  they  did  could  remove  the  stain  (verse 
22).  Yet  they  denied  their  guilt  of  going  after  idols.  And 
when  the  Lord  tells  them,  "withhold  thy  foot  from  being 
unshod,"  that  is,  running  so  much  after  strange  gods,  so 
that  the  feet  become  unshod,  by  Vvearing  out  the  sandals, 
they  boldly  declared,  "There  is  no  hope;  no,  for  I  have 
loved  strangers,  and  after  them  will  I  go."  Their  backs 
and  their  faces  were  turned  from  Jehovah.  But  when  the 
time  of  ti'ouble  comes,  they  will  say,  "Arise,  save  us."  But 
could  or  would  the  false  gods  they  had  made  respond  and 
save  them?  Some  day  a  remnant  of  that  nation  will  turn 
to  the  Lord  and  cry,  "Arise,  save  us,"  and  Re  will  answer. 

5.  Expostulation:  Verses  31-37.  Israel's  conduct  was 
incomprehensible.  Once  more  it  is  the  "Why"  of  Jehovah. 
^Vhat  had  He  done  that  they  should  turn  away  from  Him? 
Can  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments,  or  a  bride  her  attire? 
Yet  His  people  had  forgotten  Him,  who  had  loved  and 
adorned  them,  days  without  number.  He  will  plead  with 
them  because  they  said,  I  have  not  sinned. 

6.  Jehovah  Waiting  to  Show  Mercy.  Chapter  iii:l-5. 
Here  is  the  first  time  the  gracious  invitation  is  given,  "Re- 
turn again  to  Me,  saith  the  Lord."    And  how  many  times 


190  THE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

after,  the  Lord  pleads  in  the  riches  of  His  mercy  for  His 
people  to  return  unto  Him  and  offers  them  forgiveness. 

THE  CALL  TO  REPENTANCE  AND  JUDGMENT  ANNOUNCED. 

CHAPTERS  in:6:VL 

Chapter  lU. 

1.  The   Contrast   between   Backslidden  Israel  and  Treacherous 

Judah.     6-10. 

2.  The  Call  to  Return  and  the  Promised  Glory.     12-18. 

3.  The  Future  True  Repentance  Predicted  and  Anticipated.  19-25. 

1.  The  Contrast  Between  Backslidden  Israel  and  Treach- 
erous Judah:  Verses  6-11.  The  message  which  begins 
with  the  sixth  verse  was  given  to  Jeremiah  during  the  reign 
of  Josiah.  There  is  then,  first  of  all,  a  contrast  between 
Israel  (the  ten  tribes)  and  her  sister  Judah.  (Compare  with 
Ezekiel  xxiii.)  The  house  of  Israel,  the  northern  kingdom 
was  judged  first  by  the  Lord.  She  played  the  harlot;  after 
she  had  done  so,  the  Lord  said,  "Turn  thou  to  Me."  She 
refused,  and  her  treacherous  sister  the  house  of  Judah  saw 
it.  And  when  the  Lord  dealt  with  the  house  of  Israel  in 
judgment  and  they  were  carried  away,  Judah  did  not  fear 
but  played  the  harlot.  The  tenth  verse  proves  conclusively 
that  the  reformation  under  Josiah  was  not  a  true  spiritual 
revival:  "And  yet  for  all  this  her  treacherous  sister  Judah 
hath  not  returned  unto  Me  with  her  whole  heart,  but 
feignedly,  saith  the  Lord." 

2.  The  Call  to  Return  and  the  Promised  Glory:  Verses 
12-18.  Here  is  a  message  to  be  proclaimed  toward  the 
North,  calling  on  backsliding  Israel  to  return.  He  promises 
mercy  to  them.  One  hundred  years  before,  the  house  of 
Israel  had  gone  northward  as  captives.  The  Lord  knew 
where  they  dwelt  and  sent  them  this  message  of  mercy.  He 
knows  today  where  the  house  of  Israel  is,  the  ten  tribes, 
and  at  some  future  time  the  gracious  offer  given  here  will 
be  consummated  in  their  return.  These  verses  are  prophetic. 
They  speak  of  the  time  when  the  chosen  people  will  return. 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  191 

Then  Jerusalem  will  be  called  "the  throne  of  the  Lord." 
Israel  will  be  converted.  All  the  nations  will  be  gathered 
unto  the  Name  of  Jehovah;  the  house  of  Judah  with  the 
house  of  Israel  will  be  reunited.  That  will  be  when  the 
King  our  ever  blessed  Lord  comes  back. 

3.  The  Futxire  True  Repentance  Predicted  and  Antici- 
pated: Verses  19-25.  What  the  future  true  repentance  of 
the  people  will  be  is  here  predicted  and  anticipated.  There 
will  be  w^eeping  and  supplications.  They  will  acknowledge 
that  true  salvation  is  in  the  Lord.  They  will  confess  their 
sins  and  their  disobedience. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  True  Repentance  and  What  It  Means.     1-4. 

2.  The  Alarm  Sounded:  Judgment  Comes.     5-13. 

3.  The  Doom  of  the  Rebellious  People.     14-22. 

4.  The  Desolation  of  Israel's  Land  through  Judgment.     23-31. 

1.  True  Repentance  and  What  it  Means:  Verses  i:4.    A 

return  must  be  a  return  unto  Him,  Jehovah;  anything  less 
is  insufficient.  Their  abominations  must  be  judged  and  put 
away.  Every  return  of  backsliders  must  be  in  the  same  way — 
a  true  return  to  the  Lord  with  confession  of  sin,  self-judg- 
ment, and  abandonment  of  evil.  The  circumsicion  of  the 
heart  means  regeneration.  (See  chapter  xxxi:31-34,  and 
Ezek.  lxxxvi:26). 

2.  The  Alarm  Sounded:  Judgment  Comes:  Verses  5-13. 
This  is  the  first  definite  announcement  of  the  coming  judg- 
ment from  the  North,  which  Jeremiah  had  seen  in  the  vision 
of  the  boiling  pot  toward  the  North  (chapter  i).  The  lion 
who  comes,  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles,  who  makes  the 
land  desolate,  is  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of  Babylon.  It 
is  a  very  vivid  description  of  the  approaching  judgment. 
Verse  10  means  not  that  Jeremiah  is  reproaching  the  Lord 
for  having  deceived  the  people.  Jeremiah  did  not  preach 
peace,  but  the  false  prophets  did.  They  came  and  spoke  in 
the  name  of  Jehovah,   that  there  should   be  peace;  and 


192  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

Jehovah  permitted  as  a  judgment  these  prophets,  and  the 
message  of  these  prophets.     And  thus  they  were   deceived. 

3.  The  Doom  of  the  Rebellious  People:  Verses  14-22. 
The  doom  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah  is  sealed;  there  can  be 
no  escape.  Their  ways  and  their  doings  brought  all  upon 
them.  And  when  Jeremiah  hears  it  from  the  lips  of  the 
Lord,  he  breaks  out  in  a  lament:  "]My  bowels,  My  bowels! 
I  am  pained  at  my  very  heart.  My  heart  maketh  a  noise 
in  me;  I  cannot  hold  my  peace,  because  thou  hast  heard, 
O  my  soul,  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  the  alarm  of  war." 

4.  The  Desolation  of  Israel's  Land  through  Judgment: 
Verses  23-31.  Then  the  Prophet  has  a  vision  of  what  will 
happen  to  the  land  of  Israel,  when  the  judgment  threatened 
above  has  passed  over  it.  The  unscriptural  invention  and 
Vv'icked  teachings  of  Seventh  Day  Adventism  applies  this 
passage  to  the  whole  earth  and  teaches  that  when  the 
Lord  comes  the  whole  earth  will  be  laid  waste.  Like  Isaiah 
xxiv,  only  Israel's  land  is  in  view.  It  must  be  not  over- 
looked that  the  Lord  said:  "The  whole  land  shall  be  deso- 
late; yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end."    This  is  Israel's  hope. 

CHAPTER  V. 

1.  The  Apostate  Conditions  of  Jerusalem.     1-9. 

2.  The  Impending  Judgment.     10-18. 

3.  Sowing  and  Reaping.     19-29. 

4.  The  Horrible  Thing.     30-31. 

I.  The  Apostate  Conditions  of  Jerusalem:  Verses  1-9. 

So  degenerate  had  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  become 
that  the  Lord  promised  if  but  one  man  could  be  found  in 
the  city  who  executed  judgment  and  sought  the  truth.  He 
would  pardon  Jerusalem.  It  was  a  general  apostasy. 
A  similar  apostasy  is  predicted  for  the  end  of  our  age. 
"Nevertheless  when  the  Son  of  Man  cometh  shall  He 
find  the  faith  on  the  earth?  "They  were  foolish,  saith  the 
Lord;  they  broke  the  yoke  and  burst  the  bonds;  they  have 
refused  to  return.  They  were  as  fed  horses  in  the  morning; 
every  one  neighed  after  his  neighbor's  wife."     Shall  I  not 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  193 

visit  these  things,  saith  the  Lord;  and  shall  not  my  soul  be 
avenged  on  such  a  nation  as  this?" 

2.  The  Impending  Judgment:  Verses  10-18.  The  judg- 
ment messages  had  not  been  believed  by  the  people  (verse 
12).  What  the  invader  from  the  North  will  do  to  Israel  is 
described  in  verses  15-17.  Again  the  promise  is  given,  "I 
will  not  make  a  full  end  with  you."  The  Lord  keeps  in  the 
midst  of  His  people  a  remnant. 

3.  Sowing  and  Reaping:  Verses  19-29.  Theu*  sowing  was 
bringing  a  harvest.  They  asked,  "Wherefore  doeth  the 
Lord  our  God  all  these  things  unto  us?"  He  answers  them 
that  they  had  sown  their  evil  seed  in  forsaking  the  Lord  and 
serving  strange  gods;  the  harvest  wotdd  be  serving  strangers 
in  a  strange  land.  The  good  things  promised  had  been 
turned  away  by  their  sins  and  iniquities.  The  question  of 
verse  9  is  repeated  in  verse  29.  And  what  was  true  of  that 
generation,  is  true  of  this  present  age  also.  The  seed  which 
is  being  sown  is  Bible  rejection,  the  rejection  of  the  Gospel 
of  Christ,  the  seed  of  apostasy,  will  bring  a  harvest  of  judg- 
ment as  it  did  with  Israel. 

4.  The  Horrible  Thing:  Verses  30-31.  False  prophets, 
false  priests  and  the  people  were  satisfied  with  it.  How  is  it 
going  to  be  in  the  end?  Both  prophets  and  priests  were  in 
league  agamst  the  prophet  of  God.  They  misled  the  people; 
they  were  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing.  It  is  not  unlike 
the  religious  conditions  in  Christendom  today. 

CHAPTER  VL 

1.  The  Call  to  the  Children  of  Benjamin.     1-8. 

2.  Corruption  and  the  Deserved  Judgment.     9-26. 

3.  The  Prophet  Addressed.     27-30. 

1.  The  Call  to  the  Children  of  Benjamin:  Verses  1-8. 

The  children  of  Benjamin  are  exhorted  to  flee  for  safety 
on  account  of  the  evil  from  the  North.  There  were  probably 
among  the  Benjamites  God-fearing  men.  Those  who  heeded 
the  call  fled  and  escaped.  It  is  a  warning  message  which 
follows:  "Be  thou  instructed,   O  Jerusalem,   let  my  soul 


194  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

depart  from  thee;  lest  I  make  thee  desolate,  a  land  not  in- 
habited."   But  they  heeded  it  not. 

2.  Corruption    and    deserved    Judgment:  Verses    9-26. 

They  did  not  hear  because  they  had  uncircumcised  ears, 
neither  had  they  delight  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  How 
true  this  is  today  of  the  great  mass  of  professing  Christians! 
The  Lord  will  now  no  longer  restrain  His  fury;  He  will  pour 
it  out  upon  them.  Coveteousness,  the  love  of  money,  as 
it  is  in  our  day,  was  the  controlling  passion.  Prophet  and 
priest  dealt  falsely;  their  one  message,  like  the  one  message 
of  the  prophet  and  priest  today,  was  Peace,  Peace,  when 
there  was  no  peace.  Then  once  more  the  judgment  from 
the  North  is  announced  (verses  18-26). 

3.  The  Prophet  Addressed:  Verses  27-30.  In  the  final 
paragraph  of  this  chapter  the  Lord  speaks  intimately  to  the 
prophet.  He  is  encouraged  and  strengthened.  He  is  set  as 
a  tower  and  as  a  fortress.  V^hat  a  position  of  honor!  May 
we  consider  it  as  we  are  as  His  believing  people  surrounded 
by  the  flood  of  apostasy;  that  we,  too,  are  called  to  be  a 
tower  and  a  fortress. 

THE  PROPHET'S  TEMPLE  ADDRESS. 

CHilPTERS  VII-IX. 

Chapter   VII. 

1.  Amend  your  V/ays  and  your  Doings.     1-15. 

2.  No  Prayer-answer  to  be  Expected.     16-20. 

3.  Sacrifices  Rejected;   Obedience  Demanded.     21-28. 

4.  Jerusalem's  Rejection.     29-34. 

1.  Amend  Your  Ways  and  Your  Doings:  Verses  1-15. 

We  call  this  next  address  of  the  prophet  "the  Temple  ad- 
dress," because  he  was  commanded  to  stand  in  the  gate  of 
the  Lord's  house.  There  he  stood,  a  solitary  figure,  and 
said:  *llear  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  all  ye  of  Judah,  that 
enter  in  at  these  gates  to  worship  Jehovah."  Their  worship 
was  but  external.  They  trusted  in  the  Temple  of  the  Lord, 
as  if  with  the  house  itself  some  kind  of  a  blessing  wag  conr 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  195 

nected  and  the  house  would  shield  them  from  disaster. 
Micah  gives  the  same  delusion  of  the  apostate  people:  **Yet 
will  they  lean  upon  the  Lord,  and  say,  Is  not  the  Lord  among 
us?  no  evil  can  come  upon  us"  (Micah  iii:ll).  Such  a  false 
trust  in  ordinances  and  outward  worship  is  only  too  evident 
in  Christendom  also.  The  masses  of  unsaved  people  with 
their  religious  observances  think  it  is  a  protection  and 
insures  the  Lord's  help  and  blessing.  They  trusted  in  lying 
words.  They  were  thieves,  murderers,  adulterers,  perjurers 
and  idolators,  and  they  thought  if  they  go  to  the  house  of 
the  Lord  they  would  be  delivered  from  these  abominations. 
The  Lord  calls  upon  them  to  amend  their  ways  and  their 
doings,  to  work  a  better  righteousness.  They  had  made  His 
house  a  den  of  robbers.  This  verse  (verse  11)  was  quoted 
by  our  Lord  in  Matt.  xxi:13.  He  tells  them  of  the  fate 
of  Shiloh  when  it  was  overthrowTi  on  account  of  the  wicked- 
ness of  Israel;  such  would  be  the  fate  of  the  Temple  (Psa. 
lxxviii:60).  They  would  be  cast  out  as  the  whole  seed  of 
Ephraim  had  been  cast  out. 

2.  No  Prayer-Answer  to  be  Expected  s  Verses  16-20. 
The  Lord  told  the  Prophet  that  no  prayer  of  intercession 
would  be  answered.  *T  will  not  hear  thee."  What  a  word 
this  is,  coming  from  Him,  who  had  told  Israel  to  cry  unto 
Him  and  He  would  answer.  They  had  provoked  Him  by 
making  cakes  to  the  queen  of  heaven.  They  had  fallen  in 
with  the  worship  of  a  female  idol,  so  prevalent  among  the 
idolatrous  nations  which  surrounded  them,  like  the  Phoeni- 
cians, the  Assyrians,  the  Egyptians  and  the  Babylonians. 
The  Babylonian  Venus,  Ishtar,  was  called  by  them  the  queen 
of  heaven.  The  Assyrian  called  her  Beltis,  the  female  form 
of  Baal;  they  placed  in  sculpture  a  star  over  her  head  and 
called  her  "the  mistress  of  the  heavens."  The  Phoenicians 
worshipped  this  "queen  of  heaven"  under  the  name  of  Ash- 
toreth  or  Astarte.  This  wicked  worship,  with  which  all 
kinds  of  immoral  ceremonies  were  connected,  had  been 
adopted  by  the  Jews.  The  women  made  cakes  to  present 
to  this  goddess.  Jewish  tradition  tells  us  that  the  image  of 
the  idol  was  stamped  on  each  cake.    This  worship  of  "tie 


196  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

queen  of  heaven"  is  perpetuated  in  the  mystical  Babylon, 
Rome,  the  great  whore  and  mother  of  harlots  (Rev.  xvii). 
Mary  is  called  by  Romanists  "the  queen  of  heaven"  and 
"mistress  of  the  heavens."  It  can  be  proven  that  Mariolatry 
is  but  the  continuation  of  the  Babylonish  worship  of  the 
goddess  they  called  "queen  of  heaven."  If  the  Lord  was 
provoked  to  anger  because  the  women  of  Israel  brought 
cakes  to  this  queen  of  heaven,  how  much  more  is  He  pro- 
voked to  anger  with  the  idolatries  of  Papal  Rome.f^ 

3.  Sacrifices  Rejected;  Obedience  Demanded:  Verses 
21-28.  He  brands  their  sacrifices  as  worthless.  He  gave  no 
command  concerning  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  in  the 
day  He  brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  Destructive  critics 
have  built  upon  this  verse  (22)  a  puerile  argument  to  prove 
that  the  law  of  sacrifices  was  not  given  by  Moses,  but  intro- 
duced many  centuries  later.  When  the  Lord  first  led  them 
out  of  Egypt,  He  gave  them  no  laws  as  to  sacrifices,  but 
asked  obedience.  They  barkened  not;  nor  did  they  in 
Jeremiah's  day.  It  is  a  nation  that  obeyeth  not  the  voice 
of  the  Lord,  nor  receiveth  correction. 

4.  Jerusalem's  Rejection:  Verses  29-34.  The  hair  was 
cut  off  as  a  sign  of  mourning  (Job  i:20).  Jerusalem  is  to 
lament  in  the  high  places.  They  have  defiled  His  house. 
On  the  heights  of  Tophet,  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom, 
they  had  burned  their  children  as  a  sacrifice  to  Moloch 
(2  Kings  xxiii:10).  The  days  were  now  to  come  when  the 
same  place  should  become  the  place  of  slaughter.  The  car- 
casses of  the  people  should  then  be  meat  for  the  beasts  of 
the  earth;  they  should  lie  there  unburied.  Such  was  to  be 
Jerusalem's  rejection  and  judgment. 

CHAPTER  Vin. 

1.  The  Horrors  of  the  Invasion.     1-3. 

2.  Hardened  Hearts  and  Retribution.     4-12. 

3.  Utter  Destruction  Threatened.     13-17. 

4.  The  Prophet's  Lamentation.     18-22. 

1.  The  Horrors  of  the  Invasion:  Verses  1-3.   These  verses 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  197 

must  not  be  detached  from  the  preceding  chapter.  The 
division  of  chapters  is  often  unfortunate  in  this  book.  The  in- 
vaders from  the  North  would  even  have  digged  out  the  bones 
of  the  dead.  Kings,  priests,  prophets  and  people  who  had 
worshipped  the  sun,  the  moon  and  the  stars  should  be 
exposed  and  spread  out  before  the  sun  and  moon,  remain 
unburied  and  become  dung.  We  doubt  not  that  all  this 
was  literally  done  during  the  Chaldean  invasion. 

2.  Hardened  Hearts  and  Retribution:  Verses  4-12.  They 
did  not  repent  of  their  wickedness.  Theirs  was  a  perpetual 
backsliding.  The  stork  knows  his  appointed  time;  the 
turtle,  the  crane  and  the  swallow  observe  the  time  of  their 
coming,  but  they  had  hardened  their  hearts  in  such  a  manner 
that  they  knew  not  the  judgment  of  the  Lord.  Hence  the 
retribution  (9-12). 

3.  Utter  Destruction  Threatened:  Verses  13-17.  The 
thirteenth  verse  shows  the  desolation  which  will  fall  upon 
the  land  when  the  Lord  arises.  The  words  of  verses  14- 
16  were  spoken  by  the  prophet  and  not  by  the  impenitent 
people  as  some  take  it.    The  16th  verse  is  extremely  vivid. 

4.  The  Prophet's  Lamentation:  Verses  18-22.  His  heart 
was  faint  in  him.  He  is  overwhelmed  with  sorrow.  The 
harvest  was  passed,  the  summer  gone  and  they  were  not 
saved.     It  is  a  mournful  outburst. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  The  Prophet's  Complaint  and  Jehovah's  Answer.     1-9. 

2.  The  Cause  of  Desolation  and  Destruction.     10-16. 

3.  The  Call  for  the  Mourning  and  Wailing  Women.     17-22. 

4.  Glorying  in  the  Lord  in  View  of  Judgment.     23-26. 

1.  The  Prophet's  Complaint  and  Jehovah's  Answer: 
Verses  1-9.  Here  again  is  a  deplorable  break.  The  open- 
ing verses  of  this  chapter  belong  to  the  preceding  one.  The 
Prophet  still  speaks.  He  is  overwhelmed  with  sorrow;  his 
eyes  are  fountains  of  tears.  He  weeps  day  and  night  over 
the  slain.  He  wishes  himself  away  in  some  wilderness, 
to  be  alone  and  separated  from  the  adulterous  generation. 


198  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

Then  follows  a  description  of  the  moral  corruption  of  the 
people.  The  Lord  answered  him  and  once  more  asks  the 
question:  "Shall  not  I  visit  them  for  these  things?  saith 
the  Lord;  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation 
as  this?"     (See  chapter  v:9,  29.) 

2.  The  Cause  of  Desolation  and  Destruction:  Verses  10- 

16.  Jerusalem  will  be  heaps,  ruins  and  a  den  of  dragons. 
The  cities  of  Judah  will  be  desolate.  But  why  is  it  like  this? 
Because  they  forsook  His  law,  obeyed  not  His  voice,  and 
practised  idolatries.  Therefore  their  portion  would  be 
wormwood  and  gall.  They  would  be  scattered  among  the 
nations. 

3.  The  Call  to  the  Mourning  and  Wailing  Women:  Verses 
17-22.  The  time  of  wailing  and  mourning  is  at  hand.  "For 
death  is  come  up  into  our  windows,  and  is  entered  into  our 
palaces,  to  cut  off  the  children  from  without  and  the  young 
men  from  the  street.'*  Pestilence  was  to  sweep  over  them 
and  enter  into  their  habitations.  Hence  the  call  to  the  pro- 
fessional wailers  to  sing  the  mournful  dirges  of  death.  These 
wailing  women  are  also  called  "wise  w^omen,"  for  they 
dabbled  in  magical,  occult  thmgs,  in  familiar  spu-its  and  in 
soothsaying. 

4.  Gloryiag  in  the  Lord  in  View  of  Judgment:  Verses 
23-26.  The  days  were  coming  when  judgment  w^ould  strike 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  for  the  uncircumcised  Gentiles  and  for 
Israel,  uncircumcised  in  heart.  In  view  of  these  days  of 
judgment  the  prophet  exhorts  to  stop  their  boasts  in  wis- 
dom, in  might  and  in  riches,  for  all  availeth  nothing.  "But 
let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  Me,  that  he  understandeth 
and  knoweth  Me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving 
kindness,  judgment  and  righteousness,  in  the  earth,  for  in 
these  things  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord."  May  we  also  glory 
in  Him  and  not  in  the  things  of  the  dust,  the  temporal,  the 
passing  things,  which  are  but  for  a  moment!  Let  us  re- 
member "The  Coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh." 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  199 

THE  VANITY  OF  IDOLS. 

CHAPTER   X. 

1.  Be  not  Dismayed  at  the  Sigr.s  of  Heaven.     1-5. 

2.  The  Contrast:  The  Vanity  of  Idols  and  the  Lord,  the  King 

of  Nations.     6-18. 
3      The  Aflaiction  of  the  Prophet  and  His  Prayer.     19-25. 

1.  Be  Not  Dismayed  at  the  Signs  of  Heaven:  Verses  1-5. 
The  heathen  paid  attention  to  the  signs  of  heaven,  such  as 
ecHpses,  comets,  meteoric  showers,  etc.  They  were  dis- 
mayed at  these  things.  All  they  did,  their  customs  and  ob- 
servances in  connection  with  idol  worship,  was  nothing  but 
vanity. 

2.  The  Contrast:  The  Vanity  of  Idols  and  the  Lord,  the 
King  of  Nations:  Verses  6-18.  Idols  are  nothing,  but  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel  is  all.  He  is  the  King  of  Nations,  Who 
rules  over  all.  He  is  the  true  God,  the  living  God,  the  ever- 
lasting King.  At  His  wrath  the  earth  trembles  and  the 
nations  shall  not  be  able  to  abide  His  indignation.  He 
made  the  earth  by  His  power;  He  established  the  world  by 
wisdom;  He  stretched  out  the  heavens  by  His  discretion. 
But  what  is  man?    Brutish  in  his  knowledge. 

3.  The  Affliction  of  the  Prophet  and  His  Prayer:  Verses 
19-25.  Here  we  see  how  Jeremiah  identified  himself  with 
the  aflQictions  and  sorrows  of  Jerusalem.  In  his  prayer  he 
pleads  that  the  judgment  might  be  only  for  correction 
and  not  for  a  complete  and  perpetual  consummation.  *'0 
Lord  correct  me,  but  with  judgment;  not  in  thine  anger, 
lest  thou  bring  me  to  nothing."  He  calls  for  judgment  upon 
the  nations.  Well  m.ay  ^\'e  see  in  pleading  Jeremiah,  the 
weeping  prophet,  who  is  afflicted  in  Jerusalem's  affliction, 
who  identified  himself  with  his  people,  a  type  and  picture 
of  Him  who  is  greater  than  Jeremiah. 


200  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

THE  BROKEN  COVENANT.    THE  PLOT  AGAINST  JEREMIAH. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

1.  The  Broken  Covenant.     1-17. 

2.  The  Plot  Revealed  and  Jehovah's  Answer.     18-23. 

1.  The  Broken  Covenant:  Verses  1-17.  Jehovah  had 
made  a  covenant  with  His  people.  He  tells  the  prophet 
about  it  and  the  responsibility  which  was  connected  with 
that  covenant.  They  were  to  obey  His  voice.  Then  should 
they  be  His  people  and  He  their  God.  And  of  this  covenant 
it  was  wTitten,  * 'Cursed  be  the  man  that  obeyeth  not  the 
words  of  this  covenant."  The  prophet  answered  the  Lord: 
*'So  be  it  Lord"  (Amen).  Then  he  is  commanded  to  pro- 
claim this  covenant  and  tell  the  people  that  they  had  broken 
the  covenant.  They  had  followed  the  evil  example  of  their 
fathers.  They  had  burned  incense  to  the  idol  gods.  There- 
fore the  prophet  again  is  told  not  to  pray  for  this  adulterous 
generation,"  for  I  will  not  hear  them  in  the  time  they  cry 
unto  Me  in  their  trouble."  Yet  the  Lord  in  spite  of  it  all 
still  calls  them  "My  Beloved,"  though  she  had  broken  the 
covenant  and  worked  lewdness.  Verse  16  is  used  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  in  Romans  xi,  the  chapter  which  begins  with 
the  assurance  that  God  has  not  cast  away  His  people.  The 
branches  of  the  green  olive  tree  are  broken.  Yet  there 
is  hope;  they  are  still  beloved  for  the  Father's  sake. 

2.  The  Plot  Revealed  and  Jehovah's  Answer:  Verses 
18-23.  The  Lord  revealed  unto  him  their  doings.  He  was 
ignorant  of  it,  like  a  lamb  or  an  ox  brought  to  the  slaughter. 
They  wanted  to  cut  him  off  from  the  land  of  the  living. 
He  calls  for  vengeance  upon  them,  which  is  in  full  keeping 
with  the  law  dispensation*  and  God's  righteous  government. 

*Righteousness  characterises  the  saint  as  well  as  love,  and  has 
its  place  where  there  are  adversaries  to  that  love  and  to  the  blessing 
of  the  loved  people.  It  is  the  Spirit  of  prophecy,  not  the,  gospel,  no 
doubt,  because  prophecy  is  connected  with  the  government  of  God, 
not  with  His  present  dealings  in  sovereign  grace.  Hence  in  the  Revela- 
tion vengeance  is  called  for  by  the  saints. — Synopsis. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  201 

The  men  of  Anathoth  had  intimidated  him  by  saying,  "Proph- 
esy not  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  thou  die  not  by  our 
hand."  The  Lord  answers  him  that  their  young  men  should 
die  by  the  sword,  and  their  sons  and  daughters  by  famine. 
No  reronant  of  them  should  be  left. 

THE   PROPHET'S   PRAYER;    THE   HOUSE    FORSAKEN,    YET 
COMPASSION. 

CHAPTER  Xn. 

1.  The  Prophet's  Prayer.     1-6. 

2.  The  House  Forsaken;   Yet  Compassion.     7-17. 

1.  The  Prophet's  Prayer:  Verses  1-6.  In  his  outburst 
of  grief  and  in  great  mental  perplexity  Jeremiah  states  the 
old  question,  why  does  the  righteous  man  suffer,  why  does 
the  wicked  prosper?  And  then  the  prayer  for  His  inter- 
vention. Such  will  be  again  the  case  with  the  godly  rem- 
nant in  the  end  of  this  present  age.  They  will  suffer  and  be 
persecuted  as  godly  Jeremiah  was  and  pray  as  Jeremiah 
prayed:  *Tull  them  out  like  sheep  for  the  slaughter,  and 
prepare  them  for  the  day  of  slaughter."  The  imprecatory 
psalms  are  of  the  same  prophetic  meaning.  Jehovah's 
answer  tells  him  that  greater  trials  were  in  store  for  him 
(verses  5,  6). 

2.  The  House  Forsaken;  Yet  Compassion:  Verses  7-17. 

The  house  is  to  be  forsaken.  The  dearly  beloved  is  to  be 
given  into  the  hands  of  the  enemies.  The  sword  of  the  Lord 
would  now  devour  them.  But  there  is  the  warning  to  the 
nations  who  touch  His  inheritance.  He  will  deal  with  them 
in  judgment  as  He  dealt  with  Judah.  Then  we  find  the 
promise,  *T  will  return  and  have  compassion  on  them." 
This  is  still  future.  The  compassion  for  Israel  comes  in  the 
day  of  His  return. 


202  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

SIGNS,  WARNINGS  AND  EXHORTATIONS. 

CHAPTER  Xm. 

1.  The  Linen  Girdle  and  the  Filled  Bottles.     1-14. 

2.  Hear  and  Give  Glory.     15-21. 

3.  The  Justice  of  the  Judgment.     22-27. 

1.  The  Linen  Girdle  and  the  Filled  Bottles:  Verses  1-14. 
The  prophet  enacts  a  sign,  that  of  the  linen  girdle.  After 
he  had  put  on  the  girdle,  he  was  told  to  hide  it  in  a  hole  of 
the  rock  on  the  Euphrates.  After  many  days,  he  was  com- 
manded to  dig  for  the  girdle.  It  was  found  marred  and 
profitable  for  nothing.  Was  this  only  a  vision,  or  did  the 
prophet  actually  make  the  long  journey  to  the  Euphrates 
and  then  repeat  it  after  many  days?  The  latter  is  quite 
improbable,  nor  can  the  command  be  called  a  vision.  The 
question  is  v»hat  river  is  meant,  the  river  Euphrates  or 
another  river  by  a  similar  name?  The  Hebrew  word  for 
Euphrates  is  ''Perath,''  and  the  word  river  is  generally  added 
to  this  word.  In  the  text  here  it  is  missing.  Now,  three 
miles  north  of  Anathoth  there  was  a  small  river  by  the 
name  of  ^'Parak''*  (Josh.  xviii:23).  It  probably  means  this 
place  to  which  the  prophet  w^as  commanded  to  go.  Both 
words  in  the  Hebrew  spring  from  the  same  root. 

The  meaning  of  this  symbolical  action  is  explained.  A 
girdle  belonged  to  the  priest.  Israel  was  called  to  be  the 
priestly  nation.  As  a  girdle  cleaveth  to  the  loins  of  a  man, 
so  the  Lord  had  chosen  Israel  to  cleave  unto  Him,  "that 
they  might  be  unto  Me  for  a  people,"  and  for  a  name  and 
for  a  glory.  And  as  the  girdle  had  become  marred  and 
profitable  for  nothing,  so  even  would  their  pride,  that  in 
which  they  gloried  as  the  chosen  people,  be  marred. 

The  bottles  filled  with  wine,  dashed  one  against  the 
other,  is  the  symbol  of  their  sin-intoxication  and  their 
destruction. 

2.  Hear  and  Give  Glory:  Verses  15-21.  How  patient 
and  merciful  is  Jehovah!  He  interrupts  His  judgment 
message  by  calling  on  the  people,  whom  He  still  loves,  to 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  203 

give  ear  and  to  give  glory  to  Jehovah.  It  is  the  utterance 
of  the  Prophet,  the  outpouring  of  His  love  towards  His 
people.  The  prophet  addresses  the  king  and  the  queen: 
"Humble  yourselves."  x\nd  then  his  heart  seems  to  break 
in  anticipation  of  their  obstinacy."  But  if  ye  will  not  hear, 
my  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  places  on  account  of  your  pride; 
and  mine  eye  shall  weep  sore,  and  run  down  with  tears, 
because  the  Lord's  flock  is  carried  away  captive." 

3.  The  Justice  of  the  Judgment:  Verses  22-27.  Where- 
fore? they  asked.  And  He  answers,  **For  the  greatness  of 
thine  iniquity  .  .  .  because  thou  hast  forgotten  Me  and 
trusted  in  falsehood."  Woe  unto  thee,  Jerusalem!  wilt  thou 
not  be  made  clean .f^  T\lien  shall  it  be?  But  could  they  do 
it  themselves?  "Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the 
leopard  his  spots?  Then  may  ye  also  do  good,  that  are 
accustomed  to  evil."  The  new  heart  is  needed  (Ezek.  xxxvi) ; 
the  new  birth  of  Vvhich  the  Lord  spoke  to  the  teacher  in 
Israel. 


II.  THE  PROPHET'S  MINISTRY  BEFORE  THE  FALL 
OF  JERUSALEM.    THE  PROPHECIES  OF  JUDG- 
MENT AND  RESTORATION.    THE  PERSONAL 
HISTORY  OF  JEREMIAH.     HIS  FAITH- 
FULNESS AND  HIS  SUFFERING 

Chapters  xiv-xxxix 

THE  GREAT  DROUGHT.  THE  SWORD,  THE  FAMINE  AND  THE 
PESTILENCE.     THE   PROPHET'S  DEEP   SOUL-EXERCISE. 

CHAPTERS  XIV- XV. 

Chapter  XIV. 

1.  The  Description  of  the  Drought.     1-6. 

2.  The  Prophet's  Priestly  Intercession.     7-9. 

3.  The  Answer.     10-18. 

4.  The  Renewed  Prayer.     19-22. 

1.  The  Description  of  the  Drought:  Verses  1-6.     The 


204  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

vivid  description  of  the  great  drought  is  given  in  these  verses. 
The  little  ones  sent  forth  for  water  returned  empty  handed. 
It  is  the  picture  of  distress. 

2.  The  Prophet's  Priestly  Intercession:  Verses  7-9.  And 
now  the  prophet's  voice  as  intercessor  is  heard.  Like  Daniel 
(chapter  ix) ,  in  his  great  prayer  Jeremiah  acknowledges  the 
nation's  sin  as  his  owti.  But  he  trusts  in  the  Lord  and  knows 
that  He  is  "the  hope  of  Israel,"  the  Saviour.  Blessed  state- 
ments of  faith  v/hich  came  from  His  lips:  *Thou,  O  Lord, 
art  in  the  midst  of  us — we  are  called  by  Thy  Name — leave 
us  not"  (verse  9)!  The  Saviour  and  hope  of  Israel  has  surely 
not  given  up  His  people,  though  judgment  had  to  do  its  work. 

3.  The  Answer:  Verses  10-18.  They  wandered  away 
from  Him,  saith  the  Lord  in  answering  Jeremiah.  Their 
iniquities  will  be  remembered  and  their  sins  visited.  This 
is  the  demand  of  a  righteous  God.  He  is  not  going  to  hear 
their  cry;  the  sword  the  famine  and  the  pestilence  will  con- 
sume them.  Jeremiah  tells  the  Lord  about  the  message  of 
the  false  prophets.  They  had  promised  peace,  just  as  the 
false  teachers  in  Christendom  do  today.  But  they  proph- 
esied lies  in  His  name;  He  had  not  sent  them,  nor  com- 
manded them  nor  had  He  spoken  to  them. 

4.  The  Renewed  Prayer:  Verses  19-22.  What  soul  stir- 
ring petitions  these  are!  It  is  not  the  impenitent  nation 
which  speaks,  but  the  prophet  is  pleading  in  the  place  of 
the  people  and  for  them. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

1.  The  Answer.     1-9. 

2.  The  Prophet's  Grief  and  Sorrow;  Jehovah*s  Answer.     10-21. 

1.  The  Answer:  Verses  1-9.  The  preceding  prayer  is 
now  answered  and  the  Lord  tells  Jeremiah  that  if  Moses 
and  Samuel,  these  two  great  men  of  intercessory  prayer, 
were  pleading,  judgment  would  not  be  averted.  AVhat  is  in 
store  for  those  who  are  appointed  to  death,  for  the  sword, 
for  the  famine,  for  captivity,  will  be  accomplished.  There 
is  no  escape.    They  will  be  removed  among  all  kingdoms 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  205 

on  account  of  Manasseh's  great  sin  (2  Kings  xxi:ll-15). 
The  terrors  of  judgment  are  described  in  verses  7-9.  Their 
children  will  be  taken;  widows  increase;  the  mother  of 
seven  children  faints,  because  they  are  all  taken  from  her. 

2.  The  Prophet's  Grief  and  Sorrow;  Jehovah's  Answer: 
Verses  10-21.  Jeremiah  is  overwhelmed.  He  pronounces  a 
"Woe"  upon  himself  and  declares  that  his  mother  has  given 
birth  to  one  who  is  a  man  of  strife,  of  contention  to  the 
whole  land.  He  has  faithfully  discharged  his  duty;  he  loved 
his  people  and  they  hated  him  beyond  measure.  Every 
one  cursed  him,  as  if  he  were  a  wicked  man.  What  anguish 
of  soul  this  implies!  But  then  the  Lord  was  near  to  cheer 
and  comfort  him,  as  He  is  near  to  us  when  we  are  in  sorrow 
and  all  is  dark  and  we  are  in  despair.  It  would  be  well 
with  him  and  v/ith  those,  who,  like  Jeremiah,  trust  the  Lord. 
But  the  remnant,  too,  would  suffer  with  the  nation's 
portion  (13-14).  This  brings  out  another  prayer  from 
Jeremiah's  heart.  He  pleads  for  revenge  upon  his  adver- 
saries and  then  prays,  "Take  me  not  away  in  Thy  long- 
suffering,  know  that  for  Thy  sake  I  have  suffered  re- 
buke." But  while  he  prayed  he  also  used  the  Word  of  God. 
"Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them."  He  fed  on 
the  bread  of  life.  The  word  was  unto  him  the  joy  and  re- 
joicing of  his  heart.  He  knew  from  the  Word  that  he  was 
called  by  His  Name.  And  we  also  can  turn  to  the  Word 
and  feed  on  it.  But  how  few  can  say,  "Thy  Word  is  the  joy 
and  rejoicing  of  my  heart?"  That  Word  on  which  Jere- 
miah fed,  which  filled  his  sorrowful  heart,  led  him  to  sepa- 
ration. It  will  lead  us  also  to  separation  in  the  evil  day  of 
departure  from  God  and  the  threatening  judgment.  He 
sat  alone;  He  refused  to  have  anything  to  do  with  the 
assembly  of  mockers,  those  who  denied  His  Word  and  His 
Name,  who  listened  to  the  false  prophets  with  their  false 
message.  Verse  18  must  be  interpreted  in  the  sense  that 
Jeremiah  speaks  as  representing  the  godly  remnant  of  Israel. 
There  was  such  a  remnant  then  in  the  midst  of  the  wicked 
mass,  there  will  be  such  a  remnant  again  in  the  future,  dur- 
ing the  great  tribulation,  or,  as  Jeremiah  calls  that  time. 


206  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

'The  time  of  Jacob's  trouble."  They  suffer  in  the  trials 
and  judgments;  they  are  fearful,  yet  trusting.  Jeremiah  is 
representative  of  this  remnant.  The  answer  the  Lord  gives 
in  verses  19-21  must  be  explained  in  the  same  light.  Verse 
21  will  find  its  final  fulfillment  of  the  future  remnant  when 
the  Lord  returns  and  redeems  them  from  the  hand  of  the 
wicked  and  the  hand  of  the  terrible,  the  two  beasts  of 
Revelation  xiii. 

THE     COMING     CALAMITIES:      RESTORATION     PROMISED. 
RUIN  IMMINENT  ON  ACCOUNT  OF  JUDAH'S  SIN.  CON- 
CERNING THE  SABBATH.    Chapters  XVI-XVn. 

CHAPTER   XVI. 

1.  The  Coming  Calamities.     1-13. 

2.  The  Coming  Days  of  Restoration  and  Blessing.     14-21. 

1.  The  Coming  Calamities:  Verses  1-13.  In  view  of  the 
coming  calamities  Jeremiah  is  bidden  to  remain  unmarried 
and  not  to  raise  a  family.  The  verses  which  describe  the 
coming  calamities  need  no  further  annotations. 

2.  The  Coming  Restoration  and  Blessing:  Verses  14-21. 
The  great  dispersion  was  announced  by  the  Lord  in  the 
preceding  verse:  "Therefore  will  I  cast  you  out  of  this  land, 
into  a  land  that  ye  know  not,  neither  ye  nor  your  fathers; 
and  there  ye  shall  serve  other  gods  day  and  night;  where 
I  will  not  show  you  favor."  But  is  this  to  last  forever?  Is 
this  dispersion  permanent?  Will  they  always  be  homeless 
wanderers?  The  next  verse  gives  the  answer:  *T  will  bring 
them  again  into  their  land  that  I  gave  unto  their  fathers." 
They  will  be  brought  back  from  the  land  of  the  north  and 
from  all  lands  where  they  had  been  driven.  It  will  be  a 
greater  deliverance  than  the  deliverance  out  of  Egypt. 
Critics  have  found  fault  with  these  verses:  "They  are  out 
of  place  here,  but  whether  inserted  by  accident,  or  whether 
to  modify  the  painful  impression  of  the  prophecy  of  judg- 
ment in  which  they  are  inserted,  we  cannot  say"  (Prof.  A. 
S.  Peake).  They  are  not  out  of  place^  nor  inserted  by  some 
unknown  hand.    The  Lord  declares  His  gracious  purposes 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  207 

which  will  yet  be  accomplished.  That  these  verses  were 
not  fulfilled  in  the  return  of  the  small  remnant  from  Baby- 
lon is  obvious.  They  will  be  fulfilled  in  the  future,  when  the 
house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah  will  be  re-established 
in  the  land.  Then  the  so-called  "lost  tribes"  v/ill  be  found 
again  by  Him  for  whom  they  were  never  lost,  "For  mine 
eyes  are  upon  all  their  ways,  they  are  not  hid  from  my  face 
neither  is  their  iniquity  hid  from  mine  eyes."  He  will  send 
fishers  and  hunters  to  bring  them  forth.  It  is  the  same  of 
which  our  Lord  speaks  in  Matt.  xxiv:Sl.  The  elect  of  whom 
the  Lord  speaks  are  not  a  spiritual  Israel,  but  the  elect 
nation  Israel.  Then  the  voice  of  the  prophet  is  heard  in 
verse  19  with  a  blessed  prophetic  declaration:  "The  Gen- 
tiles shall  come  unto  Thee  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and 
shall  say,  Surely  our  fathers  have  inherited  lies,  vanity  and 
things  Vv^herein  there  is  no  profit."  It  denotes  the  conversion 
of  the  world,  which  in  prophecy  never  precedes  the  restora- 
tion of  Israel,  but  always  follovv's  that  great  coming  event. 
(See  Rom.  xi:12,  15;  Acts  xv:14-17.) 

CHAPTER  XVn. 

1.  Judah's  Sin.     1-4. 

2.  The  Curse  and  the  Blessing.     5-11. 

3.  The  Worship  of  Jeremiah.     12-18. 

4.  Concerning  the  Sabbath.     19-27. 

1.  Judah's  Sin :  Verses  1-4,  The  sin  of  Judah  was  idola- 
try, engraven  v*dth  a  pen  of  iron,  the  point  of  a  diamond, 
upon  their  heart  (from  vrhence  it  proceeded)  and  the  horns 
of  their  altars.  They  had  destroyed  but  a  few  years  before 
the  asherim  (translated  groves,  a  kind  of  sacred  post),  and 
now  their  children  turned  back  to  the  abominable  heathen 
cults.    His  anger  and  judgment  must  now  be  their  portion. 

2.  The  Curse  and  the  Blessing:  Verses  5-11.  A  curse  is 
pronounced  upon  him  who  trusteth  in  man,  who  departeth 
from  the  Lord.  For  such  a  one  there  is  no  hope;  he  shall 
not  see  good;  he  must  be  an  outcast,  like  the  heath  in  the 
desert.    And  such  is  the  iiatural  condition  of  man,  his  heart 


208  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

is  departed  from  the  Lord,  he  trusteth  in  himself,  making 
flesh  his  arm  to  defend  and  to  uphold.  But  blessing  is  for 
the  man  who  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  whose  hope  the  Lord  is. 
Verse  8  contains  the  same  truth  as  Psalm  i:3.  It  is  a  de- 
scription of  the  God-fearing  in  Israel,  who  knew  the  Lord, 
trusted  and  hoped  in  Him.  He  had  called  them  to  this  place 
of  blessing;  He  had  encouraged  them  to  trust  in  Him;  He 
had  manifested  His  glory  and  His  power  in  their  midst.  But 
they  turned  away  from  Him,  they  leaned  not  on  Him,  but 
on  the  arm  of  flesh,  on  Egypt.  The  heart  is  the  source  of 
it,  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately  wicked.  The 
question,  "Who  can  know  it?"  is  answered,  "I  the  Lord 
search  the  heart."  He  has  sounded  the  depths  of  it  and  in 
His  omnniscience  knew  the  shameful  history  of  Israel,  and 
all  their  backsliding.  So  He  knew  and  knows  what  we  are, 
yet  in  Sovereign  Love  and  Grace  He  has  loved  us  and  bears 
with  His  own. 

3.  The  Worship  of  Jeremiah :  Verse  12-18.  The  worship  of 
the  prophet  stands  here  also  for  the  worship  and  soul  exer- 
cise of  the  godly  remnant  of  the  Lord's  people.  The  sanc- 
tuary of  the  godly  is  the  glorious  high  throne,  that  throne 
w^hich  w^e  know  as  the  throne  of  Grace.  In  verse  14  there 
is  expressed  by  the  prophet  in  behalf  of  the  God-fearing 
the  need  of  His  salvation.  They  mocked  the  prophet,  *'Where 
is  the  Word  of  the  Lord?  Let  it  come."  So  they  will  hate 
the  remnant  of  the  future  (Isa.  lxvi:5).  And  we  know  the 
prediction  in  Peter's  second  Epistle  (2  Peter  iii).  Verse  18 
corresponds  to  the  imprecatory  psalms.  What  Jeremiah 
prays,  was  fulfilled  upon  that  evil  generation;  and  some  day 
the  imprecatory  psalms  will  be  fulfilled  when  the  Lord  deals 
again  in  judgment  with  the  nation. 

4.  Concerning  the  Sabbath:  Verses  19-27.  Kuenen  and 
other  critics  deny  the  Jeremianic  authorship  of  this  passage. 
It  is  not  out  of  keeping  with  the  message  of  the  Prophet. 
The  Sabbath  of  which  he  is  commanded  to  speak  is  the 
standard  of  Israel's  spiritual  condition,  for  it  is  the  weekly 
reminder  of  Israel's  covenant  relation  with  Jehovah.  If 
they  neglected  the  Divine  command,  as  they  alwaysdid 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  209 

in  their  departure  from  the  Lord,  it  was  the  outward  evi- 
dence that  they  had  broken  the  covenant?  If  they  really 
returned  to  the  Lord  they  would  show  it  by  keeping  the 
solemn  Sabbaths  and  the  Lord  would  bless  them.  But  they 
obeyed  not.  This  passage  as  well  as  others  is  used  by  the 
pernicious  Seventh  Day  Adventistic  Cult,  which  denies 
grace  and  turns  back  to  the  law.  But  the  Sabbath  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  church,  nor  has  the  church  anything 
to  do  with  the  Sabbath.  The  Sabbath  is  an  institution  of 
the  law  in  connection  with  Israel.  The  great  documents 
addressed  to  the  church,  the  Epistles,  never  mention  the 
Sabbath  once,  nor  is  there  anywhere  in  the  Epistles  an 
exhortation  to  keep  the  Sabbath. 

THE  POTTER  AND  THE  CLAY. 
CHAPTER  XVIII. 

1.  In  the  Potter's  House  and  the  Message.     1-17. 

2.  The  Plot  against  the  Prophet  and  His  Prayer.     18-23. 

1.  In  the  Potter's  House  and  the  Message:  Verses  1-17. 
He  was  commanded  to  go  to  the  house  of  a  potter  and  watch 
his  work.  The  vessel  Jeremiah  sees  fashioned  out  of  clay 
is  marred;  it  did  not  turn  out  well.  Then  the  clay  was  taken 
up  again  and  made  in  another  vessel  as  it  seemed  good  to 
the  potter  to  make  it. 

Then  came  the  message:  "O  house  of  Israel,  cannot  I  do 
with  you  as  this  potter.^  saith  the  Lord.  Behold  as  the  clay 
is  in  the  potter's  hand,  so  are  ye  in  my  hand,  O  house  of 
Israel."  If  the  creature  of  the  dust  can  do  as  he  pleases 
with  the  clay,  how  much  more  the  Sovereign  God.  The  Holy 
Spirit  evidently  uses  this  in  Romans  ix:20-32. 

If  a  nation  is  threatened  with  destruction  and  that  nation 
turns  to  the  Lord,  He  will  repent  of  the  evil  pronounced 
upon  them.  This  is  fully  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Jonah's 
prediction,  God  given  as  it  was,  of  Nineveh's  overthrow^ 
Nineveh  repented  and  the  judgment  was  not  executed  upon 
that  generation.  But  if  the  Lord  has  promised  a  nation 
good  and  that  nation  does  evil  in  His  sight,  He  will  repent 


210  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

of  the  good  He  had  promised  unto  them.  Thus  the  potter's 
action  is  used  to  convey  a  great  lesson,  the  lesson  of  God's 
sovereignty,  to  do  as  He  pleaseth,  yet  always  in  perfect 
righteousness.  If  Israel  had  owned  then  the  sin  and  guilt 
and  turned  to  the  Lord,  He  would  have  acted  in  sovereign 
grace  towards  them.  Their  answer  was:  "There  is  no  hope; 
but  we  will  walk  after  our  own  devices,  and  we  will  every 
one  do  the  imaginations  of  his  evil  heart."  What  depravity 
and  wicked  boldness  these  words  reveal!  They  refused  to 
believe  the  message  of  the  Lord.  They  pushed  aside  the 
hand  which  would  snatch  them  out  of  the  fire.  They 
acknowledged  the  evil  heart  and  deliberately  declared  to 
continue  in  wicked  defiance  of  Jehovah.  And  is  it  any 
better  in  professing  Christendom  today?  The  answer  of 
the  Lord,  an  answer  of  kindness  and  long  suffering  follows. 
2.  The  Plot  Against  the  Prophet  and  His  Prayer:  Verses 
18-23.  They  arose  in  rebellion  against  the  messenger  of 
Jehovah.  They  hated  him.  They  would  smite  him  vvith 
the  tongue,  malign  him,  bring  false  accusations  against 
him.  But  the  man  of  God  does  not  take  up  their  contentions. 
Like  Hezekiah  when  the  enemy  reviled  him,  Jeremiah  turned 
to  the  Lord.  He  tells  the  Lord  all  about  it.  Then  he  prays 
for  judgment  to  fall  upon  them.  Here  once  more  we  must 
look  upon  these  words  prophetically.  Such  expressions 
as  used  by  the  prophet  here  will,  during  the  great  tribulation, 
come  from  the  lips  of  the  remnant  of  Israel,  who  suffer  from 
their  enemies  and  who  righteously  call  for  heaven's  ven- 
geance, which  will  fall  upon  these  enemies  when  Jehovah, 
our  Lord,  is  manifested  in  glory. 

THE  BROKEN  BOTTLE;   PASHUR:    JEREMIAH'S  PERPLEXITY 
AND  COMPLAINT.     Chapters  XIX-XX. 

CHAPTER   XIX. 

1.  The  Broken  Bottle  and  the  Message.     1-13. 

2.  The   Fate    Announced   in   the    Court   of   the   Lord's   House. 

14-15. 

1.  The  Broken  Bottle  and  the  Message:  Verses  1-13. 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  211 

He  was  to  get  a  potter's  earthen  bottle  accompanied  by- 
elders  and  priests,  and  go  to  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom. 
There  he  should  proclaim  the  words  Jehovah  would  breath 
into  him.  The  message  is  another  judgment  message  and 
needs  no  further  comment.  In  Tophet,  the  valley  of  Hin- 
nom, they  had  worked  their  abominations,  burnt  their  sons 
with  fire.  Now  it  should  become  the  valley  of  slaughter, 
so  that  their  carcasses  should  be  eaten  by  the  fowls  and  wild 
beasts.  He  would  cause  them  to  eat  the  flesh  of  their  loved 
ones.  It  was  fulfilled  during  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  (Lam. 
iv:10).  Then  he  broke  the  bottle  as  a  sign  that  thus  the 
people  and  the  city  should  be  broken. 

2.  The  Fate  Announced  in  the  Court  of  the  Lord's  House: 
Verses  14-15.  When  the  prophet  returned  from  the  valley 
of  Hinnom  he  took  his  place  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house 
and  declared  the  fate  of  the  city. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  Pashur  and  Jeremiah.     1-6. 

2.  Jeremiah's  Great  Perplexity  and  Complaint.     7-18. 

I.  Pashur  and  Jeremiah :  Verses  1-6.  A  great  scene  now 
follows  the  message  in  connection  with  the  broken  bottle. 
The  great  Pashur,  the  chief  governor  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  had  heard  of  the  message.  He  smites  Jeremiah  and 
puts  him  in  the  stocks,  which  must  have  been  some  form  of 
cruel  torture  by  which  the  victim  was  rendered  helpless, 
besides  being  exposed  to  the  vulgarity  of  the  people  who 
passed  by  and  would  taunt  him.  In  this  position  Jeremiah 
remained  all  night  before  the  high  gate  of  Benjamin,  i' In 
the  morning  he  was  released.  He  then  speaks  as  only  an 
inspired  prophet  can  speak.  His  name  Pashur  (which  means 
"most  noble")  should  now  be  "Magor-missabib,"  which 
means  "terror  on  every  side."  The  awful  fate  of  Pashur 
and  his  own  is  predicted.  He  is  dumb;  perhaps  even  then 
terror  stricken  as  he  looks  into  the  flashing  eyes  of  the  man 
of  God  and  listens  to  the  fiery  words. 


212  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

2.  Jeremiah's  Great  Perplexity  and  Complaint:  Verses 
7-18.  What  follows  now  is  a  most  passionate  outburst, 
revealing  an  unspeakable  emotion  of  the  soul,  as  perhaps 
nowhere  else  in  the  prophetic  Scriptures.  Even  critics 
acknowledge  this  as  "one  of  the  most  powerful  and  impres- 
sive passages  in  the  whole  of  the  prophetic  literature,  a 
passage  which  takes  us,  as  no  other,  not  only  into  the  depths 
of  the  prophet's  soul,  but  into  the  secrets  of  his  prophetic 
consciousness."  "Lord,"  he  cries,  "Thou  hast  deceived  me, 
and  I  was  deceived."  The  Revised  Version  has  translated 
it,  "Thou  hast  persuaded  me,"  but  that  is  not  correct.  He 
acknowledges  himself  deceived,  or  enticed.  He  is  troubled 
with  doubt.  He  speaks  of  his  great  trials.  He  is  a  laughing 
stock — he  is  a  reproach  and  a  derision  all  the  day.  He  tried  to 
stop  mentioning  Him  and  not  to  speak  any  more  in  His  name; 
he  tried  to  turn  back  upon  his  commission.  But  then  the 
fire  burned  within  him;  his  conscience  became  as  a  burn- 
ing fire.  He  had  heard  defaming;  his  best  friends  had  said 
"We  will  denounce  him."  They  thought  of  taking  revenge  on 
him. 

But  suddenly  faith  is  victorious.  He  must  have  remem- 
bered the  words  of  the  Lord  in  connection  with  his  commis- 
sion, "For  I  am  with  thee  saith  the  Lord,  to  deliver  thee" 
(chapter  i).  And  so  he  cries  out,  "The  Lord  is  with  me." 
He  prays  to  see  His  vengeance  on  his  enemies,  for  unto  Him 
he  had  revealed  His  cause.  And  then  the  singing!  "Sing 
unto  the  Lord,  praise  ye  the  Lord;  for  He  has  delivered  the 
soul  of  the  needy  from  the  hand  of  the  evil-doers."  Such 
is  the  experience  of  the  godly  remnant  in  fears  and  doubts, 
troubled  on  all  sides,  fleeing  to  Jehovah,  till  the  singing  times 
come,  when  He  appears  for  their  deliverance  and  the  Halle- 
lujahs will  sweep  the  earth  and  the  heavens. 

But  his  grief  overwhelms  him.  Perhaps  he  thought  again 
of  all  the  sneers  and  mockeries,  of  all  the  harsh  words,  the 
unfaithful  friends  and  the  physical  pain  he  endured.  He  is 
occupied  with  himself  and  the  soul  struggle  begins  anew 
and  culminates  in  a  near  collapse.  He  curses,  as  Job  did, 
the  day  in  which  he  was  born. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  213 

THE  PROPHETIC  WARNING. 
CHAPTER  XXI. 

1.  Zedekiah's  Inquiry.     1-2. 

2.  Jehovah's  Answer  through  Jeremiah.     3-18. 

1.  Zedekiah's  Inquiry:  Verses  1-2.  It  has  been  said  that 
this  chapter  is  historically  misplaced  and  therefore  must  be 
considered  an  evidence  of  the  composite  authorship  of  this 
book.  The  Spirit  of  God  for  some  reason  unknown  to  us 
has  put  it  in  this  place.  Zedekiah  sent  unto  Jeremiah 
Pashur  (a  different  one  from  the  Pashur  in  the  preceding 
chapter)  to  inquire  as  to  Nebuchadrezzar,  the  king  of  Baby- 
lon. This  is  of  course  Nebuchadnezzar.  The  form  of  his 
name  found  in  Jeremiah  is  derived  more  correctly  from  the 
Babylonian,  which  is  "Nabukudurri-usur."  Here  the  great 
king  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in  Jeremiah.  The  wicked 
Zedekiah  may  have  remembered  God's  dealing  with  Heze- 
kiah  when  the  Lord  annihilated  the  army  of  Sennacherib, 
the  Assyrian.  Then  Zedekiah  said :  'Terad venture  the  Lord 
will  deal  with  us  according  to  all  His  wondrous  works,  that 
he  may  go  up  from  us.'* 

2.  Jehovah's  Answer  Through  Jeremiah:  Verses  3-18. 

Zedekiah  (whose  name  was  Mattaniah),  the  ungodly  king, 
who  had  been  made  king  by  Nebuchadrezzar  after  he  had 
carried  away  captives  from  Jerusalem,  heard  a  message  of 
judgment  from  Jeremiah.  The  Babylonian  King's  army 
was  again  before  the  city,  because  Zedekiah  had  revolted 
and  broken  his  agreement  with  the  king.  Plow  could  Zede- 
kiah even  imagine  that  a  righteous  Lord  had  a  message  of 
peace  for  him?  The  Lord  Himself  will  now  fight  against 
Jerusalem  and  its  wicked  king.  The  enemy  will  do  the  ap- 
pointed judgment  work;  "he  shall  smite  them  with  the  edge 
of  the  sword;  he  shall  not  spare  them,  neither  have  pity, 
nor  have  mercy."  The  king  is  to  be  taken  captive.  Then 
he  addresses  the  people  and  the  house  of  David  in  no  un- 
certain words,  which  need  no  further  comment. 


214  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

CONCERNING  THE  KINGS  OF  JUDAH.    Chapter  XXn-XXm:8. 
CHAPTER  XXII. 

1.  The  Message  in  the  House  of  the  King  of  Judah.     1-9. 

2.  Touching  Shallum,  the  King  of  Judah.     11-12. 

3.  Concerning  Jehoiakim  and  his  Fate.     13-19. 

4.  Concerning  Coniah  and  his  Fate.     20-30. 

1.  The  Message  in  the  House  of  the  King  of  Judah: 
Verses  1-10.  What  a  figure  Jeremiah  was  as  he  stood,  obedi- 
ent to  the  Divine  command,  before  the  royal  palace  to 
deliver  his  God-given  message!  The  door  of  mercy  still  is 
open.  Let  them  execute  judgment,  let  them  stop  oppress- 
ing the  stranger,  the  widows  and  orphans,  let  them  shed  no 
longer  innocent  blood,  then  the  house  of  David  shall  prosper. 
If  not,  the  house  shall  become  a  desolation.  The  nations 
astonished  at  the  destruction  and  overthrow  of  the  city 
will  hear  the  answer  that  it  is  "because  they  have  forsaken 
the  covenant  of  the  Lord  their  God  and  worshipped  other 
gods  and  served  them.'* 

2.  Touching  Shallum  the  King  of  Judah:  Verses  11-12. 
He  is  also  called  Jehoahaz  (1  Chron.  iii:15;  2  Kings  xxiii:30, 
32).  He  was  carried  away  by  Pharaoh-Necho  into  Egypt; 
he  will  return. 

3.  Concerning  Jehoiakim  and  His  Fate:  Verses  13-19. 
This  wicked  king  and  his  evil  doings  are  described  in  these 
verses.  He  was  a  cruel  despot,  who  built  his  palaces  by 
forced  labor;  covetousness,  shedding  of  innocent  blood,  op- 
pression and  violence  characterized  his  reign.  Then  his 
ignominous  burial,  the  burial  of  an  ass,  is  predicted.  It 
means  that  an  ass  has  no  burial  and  so  Jehoiakim  would  have 
no  burial;  he  is  the  only  king  of  Judah  whose  burial  is  not 
recorded.  It  may  be  possible  that  Jeremiah  added  these 
words  by  Divine  command,  after  this  king  had  cut  the  roll 
to  pieces  and  burned  it  in  the  fire  (Jer.  xxxvi).  The  prophet 
WTote  the  same  words  contained  in  the  roll  (all  these  chap- 
ters beginning  with  chapter  ii  constitute  the  roll  the  king 
burned),  and  many  others  were  added.  Most  likely  because 
he  had  done  that  wicked  work  in  cutting  the  Word  of  God 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  215 

to  pieces  and  casting  it  into  the  fire,  this  special  shameful 
end  was  announced.  Beware  you  cutters  of  the  Bible,  you 
mutilators  of  the  Word  of  God,  your  end,  too,  will  be  an 
ignominious  end! 

4.  Concerning    Coniali    and    His    Fate:  Verses    20-30. 

Coniah,  also  called  Jehoiachin,  Joiakim  and  Joachim,  after 
a  brief  reign  of  a  few  months  had  been  carried  away  to 
Babylon  to  die  there.  Then  the  prophet's  voice  breaks  in 
with  a  mighty  appeal,  *'0  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  w^ord 
of  the  Lord."  Every  true  believer  feels  like  shouting  these 
words  in  the  present  days  of  departure  from  God  and  re- 
jection of  His  Word.  Then  there  is  a  prediction  as  to  Jeco- 
niah,  **Write  ye  this  man  childless,  a  man  that  shall  not 
prosper  in  his  days;  for  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  prosper, 
sitting  upon  the  throne  of  David  and  ruling  any  more  in 
Judah.'*  A  curse  was  thus  pronounced  upon  the  house  of 
David  in  the  line  of  Solomon.  But  there  was  still  the  line 
of  Nathan  the  son  of  David.  Messiah,  the  son  of  David, 
could  therefore  not  spring  from  the  line  of  Solomon;  he 
must  come  from  the  line  of  Nathan.  Joseph,  the  husband 
of  the  Virgin  Mary  of  Nazareth  was  a  son  of  David  through 
the  line  of  Solom.on,  the  disinherited  line;  but  Mary  of 
Nazareth  was  a  daughter  of  David  through  the  line  of 
Nathan. 

CHAPTER  XXIII  ;l-8. 

1.  The  False  Shepherds.     1-4. 

2.  The  True  Shepherd.     5-8. 

1.  The  False  Shepherds:  Verses  1-4.  The  word  pastors 
means  shepherds.  Ezekiel  received  a  larger  message  about 
these  false  shepherds,  the  hirelings  who  did  not  feed  the 
flock.  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  See  annotations  of  this  chapter.)  The 
scattered  remnant  of  the  Lord's  flock  (not  the  church,  but 
the  remnant  of  Israel)  will  yet  be  gathered  out  of  all  coun- 
tries, be  fruitful  and  increase,  no  longer  fearful,  dismayed 
or  in  want.  It  is  a  prophecy  concerning  the  time  when  the 
Shepherd  of  Israel,  their  King  as  well,  is  manifested. 


216  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

2.  The  True  Shepherd:  Verses  5-8.  A  great  Messianic 
prophecy  follows.  "The  righteous  Branch,"  the  Son  of 
David,  whose  name  is  "The  Lord  our  Righteousness" 
(Jehovah  Zidkenu)  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  King 
who  will  reign  and  prosper,  executing  judgment  and  justice 
in  the  earth.  The  prophecy  is  unfulfilled.  He  came  as  the 
Son  of  David,  the  promised  King.  He  offered  that  kingdom 
to  Israel;  they  rejected  Him.  But  He  is  coming  again,  and 
in  that  day  of  glory  this  great  prediction  will  be  accom- 
plished. His  people  Israel  will  be  saved  (Rom.  xi:25-27). 
Their  wonderful  restoration  from  the  North  and  from  aU 
the  countries  will  then  take  place. 

CONDEMNATION    OF   THE   FALSE   PROPHETS.      THE   TWO 
BASKETS  OF  FIGS.     Chapters  XXIII  :9-XXIV. 

CHAPTER  XXIII  :9.40. 

1.  Jeremiah's  Lament  on  Account  of  the  False  Prophets.     9-14. 

2.  The  Condemnation  of  these  Prophets.     15-32. 

3.  Forgotten  and  Forsaken.     33-40. 

1.  Jeremiah's  Lament  on  Accoimt  of  the  False  Prophets: 
Verses  9-14.  The  Prophet  is  overwhelmed  because  of  the 
wicked  prophets,  because  in  the  Lord's  house  wickedness 
was  found.  The  false  prophets  of  Samaria  had  led  the  people 
into  idolatry  and  the  prophets  of  Judah  were  guilty  of  all 
kinds  of  immoralities.  Like  priests,  like  people;  they  all 
became  unto  the  Lord  as  Sodom,  and  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  like  Gomorrah. 

2.  The  Condemnation  of  the  Prophets:  Verses  15-32. 
They  will  be  fed  with  wormwood  and  will  have  to  drink  gall. 
On  account  of  their  false  message  of  peace  (verses  17,  18), 
the  whirlwind  of  divine  judgment  will  fall  upon  them  and 
upon  the  head  of  the  wicked.  They  prophesied  lies  in  the 
name  of  Jehovah;  they  were  prophets  of  the  deceit  of  their 
own  heart.  They  tried  to  make  the  people  forget  the  Name 
of  Jehovah.  Such  is  today  still  the  work  of  apostate  teach- 
ers, who  speak  out  of  the  deceit  of  their  hearts,  who  prophesy 
lies  and  who  aim  at  the  Name  which  is  above  every  Name. 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  217 

How  different  is  the  Yv^ord  of  the  Lord,  from  the  idle  dreams 
of  these  false  prophets.  *'Is  not  My  Word  like  as  a  fire? 
saith  the  Lord;  and  like  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock 
in  pieces?"  (verse  29).  Three  times  the  Lord  declares  He 
is  against  these  prophets  (verses  30-32). 

3.  Forgotten  and  Forsaken:  Verses  33-40.  If  they  ask 
the  question,  "What  is  the  burden  of  the  Lord?"  the  answer 
is  to  be,  "I  will  cast  you  oSF.'*  The  burden,  or  word  of  the 
Lord  is  not  to  be  mentioned  again  to  them.  They  will  be 
utterly  forgotten  and  forsaken,  with  everlasting  reproach 
and  perpetual  shame  upon  them. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

1.  The  Vision  of  the  Two  Baskets  of  Figs.     1-3. 

2.  The  Vision  Interpreted.     4-10. 

1.  The  vision  of  the  Two  Baskets  of  Figs:  Verses  1-3. 
Jeconiah,  with  the  choicest  of  the  nation,  had  been  carried 
away  into  captivity.  A  large  portion  remained,  and  were 
not  taken  awaj^  and  these  attributed  their  escape  from 
exile  to  some  goodness  in  them.  At  that  time  the  prophet 
had  a  vision.  He  saw  set  before  the  temple  two  baskets  of 
figs.  The  one  basket  was  filled  with  good  figs,  the  second 
basket  with  bad  figs. 

2.  The  Vision  Interpreted:  Verses  4-10.  The  good  figs 
are  symbolical  of  those  who  were  carried  away  into  cap- 
ti^'ity.  They  were  sent  away  for  their  good.  He  promises 
them  good  things.  They  are  going  to  return;  He  is  going 
to  build  them;  He  will  plant  them.  More  than  that.  He 
will  give  them  a  heart  to  know  that  He  is  the  Lord.  For 
they  shall  return  unto  Me  with  their  whole  heart.  They 
are  never  to  be  plucked  up.  This  prophecy  evidently  goes 
beyond  the  return  cf  the  small  remnant  from  Babylon,  yet 
partially  at  least  it  was  fulfilled.  The  bad  figs  are  those  who 
remained  v/ith  Zedekiah  in  Jerusalem,  but  they  also  should 
be  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  "to  be  a  re- 
proach, a  proverb,  a  taunt  and  a  curse," 


218  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

THE  SEVENTY  YEARS'  CAPTIVITY  AND  THE  JUDGMENT  OF 
THE  NATIONS. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

1.  The  Retrospect.     1-7. 

2.  The  Seventy  Year  Captivity  Announced.     8-11. 

3.  The  Punishment  of  Babylon  and  its  King.     12-14. 

4.  The  Wine-Cup  of  Fury  for  the  Nations.     15-29. 

5.  The  Day  of  the  Lord  and  Wrath  of  God.     30-38. 

1.  The  Retrospect:  Verses  1-7.  The  prophet  in  the 
fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  addresses  the  people  of  Judah  and 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  The  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim 
was  also  the  first  year  of  Nebuchadrezzar.  In  this  eventful 
year  the  battle  of  Carchemish  was  fought  and  Nebucha- 
drezzar defeated  Egypt.  The  supremacy  of  Babylon  had 
been  insured.  At  this  critical  time  the  prophet  gives  a 
restrospect  of  his  ministry  among  them.  From  the  thir- 
teenth year  of  Josiah  he  had  spoken  to  them,  but  they  had 
not  heard.  The  Lord  sent  other  servants,  too,  but  they  did 
not  hear.  He  puts  before  them  their  stubbornness  and  how 
they  provoked  the  Lord  to  anger. 

2.  The  Seventy  Years  Captivity  Announced:  Verses  8-11. 
And  now  the  solemn  verdict  is  announced.  The  Northern 
power  is  coming  against  this  land,  headed  by  King  Nebucha- 
drezzar, who  is  here  called  for  the  first  time  by  the  Lord, 
"My  servant."  All  mirth  and  joy  will  be  taken  from  them; 
the  whole  land  shall  be  a  desolation,  and  they  shall  serve 
the  king  of  Babylon  for  seventy  years. 

3.  The  Punishment  of  Babylon  and  its  King:  Verses  12- 
14.  When  the  seventy  years  are  ended  the  Babylonian 
nation  and  its  king  (Belshazar)  would  be  punished  for  their 
iniquity.  All  that  is  written  in  this  book  of  Jeremiah,  con- 
cerning Babylon  is  to  be  accomplished  (including  the  final 
desolation).  Daniel  in  Babylon,  when  he  read  the  Book  of 
Jeremiah,  dwelt  perhaps  on  this  passage,  and  turned  to  the 
Lord  in  that  remarkable  prayer  recorded  in  the  ninth  chap- 
ter of  the  book  which  bears  his  name. 

4.  The  Wine-cup  of  Fury  for  the  Nations:  Verses  15-29. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  219 

While  the  Lord  thus  judged  Jerusalem,  should  the  other 
nations  go  unpunished?  And  He  answers,  *'Ye  shall  not 
be  unpunished,  for  I  will  call  for  a  sword  upon  all  the  in- 
habitants of  the  earth,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts'*  (verse  29). 
This  prophecy  is  most  remarkable.  It  predicts  a  world  war. 
All  nations  shall  drink  and  be  moved  and  be  mad  because 
of  the  sword.  It  includes  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
which 'are  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  (verse  26).  Have  we 
not  seen  something  like  this  during  the  past,  most  horrible 
war  of  history?  And  may  this  not  be  the  prelude  to  the 
day  of  the  Lord,  when  these  nations  will  have  to  face  the 
Judge  and  judgment? 

5.  The  Day  of  the  Lord  and  the  Wrath  of  God:  Verses 
30-38.  The  Yom  Jehovah,  the  day  of  the  Lord,  is  now  an- 
nounced by  the  prophet.  It  is  that  great  future  day  ushered 
in  by  the  visible  and  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Lord. 
All  the  prophets  speak  of  that  day  as  the  day  of  consum- 
mation and  glory.  It  is  equally  prominent  in  the  New  Tes- 
tament (Matt.  xxiv:30;  2  Thess.  i:7-10;  2  Peter  iii:7-10; 
Rev.  xix:ll-21,  etc.).  Jeremiah  beholds  Him  coming  from 
above,  with  a  shout,  not  the  shout  with  which  He  calls  His 
own  together  (1  Thess.  iv:17),  but  the  shout  of  judging 
wrath.  He  will  plead  with  all  flesh.  The  slain  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  many.  The  howling  of  the  shepherds,  the  false 
leaders,  because  their  end  is  come,  concludes  this  great 
vision. 

THREATENED  WITH  DEATH  AND  HIS  DELIVERANCE. 
CHAPTER   XXVI. 

1.  The  Temple  like  Shiloh;   Jerusalem  to  be  a  Curse.     1-7. 

2.  Threatened  with  Death.     8-11. 

3.  Jeremiah's  Defense.     12-15. 

4.  History  Remembered;   the  Prophet's  Deliverance.     16-24. 

1.  The  Temple  Like  Shiloh;  Jerusalem  to  be  a  Curse: 
Verses  1-7.  We  are  now  taken  back  to  the  beginning  of 
the  reign  of  Jehoiakim.  (Compare  with  chapter  vii).    The 


220  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

Lord  still  waits  in  patience  for  their  repentance.  With  holy 
boldness  the  prophet  stands  in  a  place  where  the  worship- 
pers pass  to  enter  the  temple  and  announces  the  message. 
The  temple  is  to  be  like  Shiloh,  that  is  forsaken  (Psa. 
Ixxviii:60).    Jerusalem  is  to  be  a  curse. 

2.  Threatened  with  Death:  Verses  8-11.  Then  he  was 
arrested  for  his  faithfulness  and  threatened  with  death, 
**Thou  shalt  surely  die."  The  priests  and  the  prophets 
were  his  accusers  before  the  princes.  How  often  this  has 
been  repeated  in  the  history  of  God's  true  witnesses!  Dur- 
ing pagan  Rome  as  well  as  papal  Rome,  the  false  priests 
and  false  prophets  hated  and  despised  God*s  witnesses  and 
persecuted  them.    It  is  so  in  our  times. 

3.  Jeremiah's  Defease:  Verses  12-15.  He  makes  his 
defense  in  a  few  dignified  words.  He  tells  them  he  is  Je- 
hovah's messenger.  He  tells  them  that  he  is  in  their  hands, 
but  warns  them  if  they  kill  him  they  shed  innocent  blood. 
This  courage  was  born  of  faith.  He  knows  that  he  is  in  His 
hands. 

4.  History  Remembered;  the  Prophet's  Deliverance: 
Verses  16-24.  The  princes  and  people  were  deeply  impressed 
and  declared  that  he  was  not  worthy  of  death.  This  en- 
couraged certain  elders  to  speak,  in  whose  heart  some  fear 
seems  to  have  been  left.  They  remembered  the  prophet 
Micah,  the  contemporary  of  Isaiah,  who  spoke  similar  words  in 
the  days  of  Hezekiah  (Micah  iii  :12) .  Hezekiah  did  not  have 
Micah  killed.  They  warned  against  so  rash  a  deed.  They 
also  mentioned  the  case  of  the  prophet  Urijah,  who  had  also 
prophesied,  as  Jeremiah  did.  He  had  fled  to  Egypt,  but  was 
brought  back;  then  Jehoiakim  killed  him.  We  do  not  know 
why  his  case  is  mentioned  in  this  connection,  unless  it  is  to 
show  the  difference  between  good  Hezekiah  and  wicked 
Jehoiakim.  Then  Ahikam,  the  father  of  Gedaliah,  who  was 
governor  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  stood  by  him,  and  he  was 
delivered. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  221 

THE  OPTIMISM  OF  THE  FALSE  PROPHETS  CONTRADICTED 
AND  REBUKED.    Chapters  XXVII-XXVUI. 

CHAPTER  XXVIL 

1.  The  Call  of  Nebuchadnezzar  to  be  the  Servant  of  God.     1-11. 

2.  The  Call  to  Submit  and  to  Serve  the  King  of  Babylon.     12-22 

1.  The  Call  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as  the  Servant  of  God: 
Verses  1-11.  It  was  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  reign  of 
Zedekiah  (Jehoiakim  in  verse  1  is  a  clerical  error,  see  verse 
3  and  12)  that  Jeremiah  is  commanded  to  make  bonds  and 
yokes  to  put  them  on  his  neck;  then  he  was  to  send  them 
to  the  surrounding  nations  by  the  ambassadors  at  the  court 
of  Zedekiah.  The  verses  which  follow  are  of  much  impor- 
tance and  interest.  God  speaks  as  creator,  and  in  His 
sovereignty  He  appoints  Nebuchadnezzar  as  head  over  the 
nations  and  over  the  beasts  of  the  field  also  over  the  fowls 
of  heaven  (see  Dan.  ii:38),  not  permanently,  but  for  a  time. 
God  appointed  a  new  form  of  government,  because  Jerusa- 
lem had  failed,  and  the  theocratic  government  as  vested  in 
the  house  of  David  was  to  pass  away.  An  imperial  head 
is  chosen  by  the  Lord  from  among  the  Gentiles.  He  consti- 
tutes Nebuchadnezzar  His  servant;  with  him  and  his  rule 
begin  the  times  of  the  Gentiles.  He  is  the  golden  head  in 
the  dream-image  he  saw,  which  young  Daniel  interpreted 
by  Divine  revelation.  The  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  fully 
revealed  in  Daniel's  great  prophecies.  The  predicted  end 
of  these  times  are  not  passed  into  history;  we  are  still  living 
in  the  times  of  the  Gentiles.  They  end  Vv'^ith  the  second, 
visible  coming  of  Christ,  when  Gentile  v/orld-dominion,  as 
it  started  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  will  end,  and  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  begins.* 

*"This  fact — that  God  has  committed  power  in  this  worM  to  a  man 
is  very  remarkable.  In  the  case  of  Israel,  man  had  been  tried  on 
the  ground  of  obedience  to  God,  and  had  not  been  able  to  possess  the 
blessing  that  should  have  resulted  from  it.  Now  God  abandons  this 
direct  government  of  the  world  (while  still  the  sovereign  Lord  above); 
and,  casting  off  Israel  whom  He  had  chosen  out  from  the  nations, 
grouping  the  latter  around  the  elect  people  and  His  own  throne  in 
latter  around  the  elect  people  and  His  own  throne  in  Israel,  He  subjects 


222  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

Whoever  refuses  now  the  new  governmental  order  will 
be  punished  by  the  Lord;  the  nations  that  put  their  neck 
under  the  yoke  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  to  serve  him,  will  remain 
in  their  land. 

2.  The  Call  to  Submit  and  to  Serve  the  King  of  Babylon: 
Verses  12-22.  He  speaks  to  the  king  and  to  the  priests 
and  calls  them  to  submit  to  the  new  government  established 
with  Nebuchadnezzar.  He  urges  them  not  to  believe  the 
lying  prophets  v/ith  their  false,  optimistic  message,  who 
promised  smooth  things.  Every  message  they  uttered, 
contradicted  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  the  same  in  Christen- 
dom today.  The  rationalistic  critics  have  a  message  of 
unscriptural  optimism  concerning  the  conditions  of  this  age, 
which  contradicts  everything  made  known  in  the  prophetic 
Word.  Part  of  the  vessels  from  the  temple  had  been  car- 
ried away.  The  false  prophets  said  that  these  vessels  would 
shortly  be  returned.  The  Lord  dispels  this  lying  message, 
for  He  reveals  through  His  prophet  that  the  remaining  vessels 
shall  also  be  taken  to  Babylon. 

CHAPTER   XXVIIL 

1.  Hananiah,  the  False  Prophet.     1-11. 

2.  The  Judgment  of  Hananiah.     12-17. 

I.  Hananiah,  the  False  Prophet:  Verses  1-11.     One  of 

these  lying  prophets  became  very  bold,  and  declared  that 
he  had  a  message  from  the  Lord  that  the  yoke  of  the  Baby- 
lonian king  was  to  be  broken,  and  that  within  two  years 
the  tMnple  vessels  would  be  brought  back.  Jeremiah  said 
**Amen" — let  it  be  so!  But  he  knew  it  could  not  be  so,  for 
the  Lord  had  spoken  to  him;  he  gives  a  test.  Then  Han- 
aniah became  still  more  arrogant.  Jeremiah  had  about  his 
neck  the  yoke  (chapter  xxvii:l).  Hananiah  took  it  off  and 
broke  it  and  declared  again  that  within  two  years  the  yoke 

the  world  to  one  head,  and  committing  power  unto  man,  He  places 
him  under  a  new  trial,  to  prove  whether  he  will  own  the  God  who  gave 
him  power,  and  make  those  happy  who  are  subjected  to  him,  when 
he  can  do  whatever  he  will  in  this  world." 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  223 

of  Nechuchadnezzar  should  be  broken.  What  applause  he 
must  have  earned  from  the  unbelieving  masses  about  him! 
2.  The  Judgment  of  Hananiah:  Verses  12-17.  Instead 
of  yokes  of  wood  there  should  be  yokes  of  iron,  the  prophet 
tells  Hananiah.  He  exposes  him  as  a  deceiver  whom  the 
Lord  had  not  sent,  and  announces  his  fate,  that  he  should 
die  this  same  year.  He  died  in  the  seventh  month  of  the 
same  year. 

JEREMIAH'S  LETTER  TO  THE  EXILES. 
CHAPTER   XXIX. 

1.  Jeremiah's  Letter.     1-23. 

2.  Concerning  Shemaiah  and  his  False  Prophecies.     24-23. 

1.  Jeremiah's  Letter:  Verses  1-23.  King  Zedekiah  sent 
Elasah  and  Gemariah  on  a  diplomatic  mission  to  King 
Nebuchadnezzar.  Jeremiah  used  ^the  occasion  to  send 
a  letter  by  them  to  the  exiles.  The  letter  first  of  all  makes 
it  clear  that  their  stay  in  Babylon  will  not  be  transitory. 
They  are  to  settle  down,  build  homes,  marry,  rear  families, 
take  wives  for  their  sons  and  husbands  for  their  daughters. 
They  were  to  seek  the  peace  of  Babylon,  for  Babylon's  peace 
would  mean  their  own  peace.  The  latter  injunction  has 
often  been  forgotten  by  the  Jews  during  the  past  1900  years, 
since  their  great  dispersion;  often  have  they  fomented  strife 
among  the  nations  where  they  are  strangers. 

The  false  prophets  had  predicted  a  speedy  return.  Some 
of  these  false  prophets  had  gone  with  them  to  Babylon  and 
were  present  in  the  prison  camp  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Chebar.  We  read  in  Ezekiel  xi:3  that  they  ridiculed  the 
Divine  command  and  gave  wicked  council.  They  felt  them- 
selves secure.  Ezekiel  continued  the  message  of  Jeremiah. 
(See  annotations  in  Ezekiel.)  Once  more  the  seventy  years 
are  mentioned  and  what  is  to  take  place  after  they  have 
expired.  "For  I  know  the  thoughts  that  I  think  toward 
you,  saith  the  Lord,  thoughts  of  peace  and  not  evil,  to  give 
you  an  expected  end."     He   promises    an  answer  to  their 


224  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

cry,  and  if  they  seek  Him,  He  will  be  found.  How  gracious 
and  merciful  He  is  towards  His  own!  In  His  own  time  all 
His  gracious  purposes  will  be  fully  accomplished  in  that 
nation,  as  they  were  partially  accomplished  in  the  return 
of  a  remnant  after  the  exile.  Verse  14  speaks  of  the  larger 
return  "gathered  out  from  all  the  nations."  But  those  who 
persistently  continued  in  disobedience,  who  listened  to  the 
false  prophets  will  suffer  the  predicted  fate;  for  such  there 
will  be  no  deliverance.  Two  of  the  false  prophets  are  men- 
tioned hy  name,  Ahab  and  Zedekiah  (not  the  king).  Be- 
sides being  false  prophets,  they  were  adulterers  and  whore- 
mongers. King  Nebuchadnezzar  roasted  them  in  the  fire 
(22-23). 

2.  Concerning  Sbemiah  and  His  false  Prophecies:  Verses 
24-32.  Shemaiah,  a  Nehelamite,  which  means  "the 
dreamer,"  was  also  in  Babylon,  and  when  the  captives  re- 
ceived the  letter  from  Jeremiah,  he  answered  the  letter. 
The  letter  was  received  by  a  certain  Zephaniah,  of  whom  he 
inquired,  "VvTiy  hast  thou  not  reproved  Jeremiah  of  Ana- 
thoth,  which  maketh  himself  a  prophet  to  you?"  When 
Zephaniah  received  this  letter  he  read  it  to  Jeremiah.  The 
Lord  exposes  the  Nehelamite  as  a  deceiver,  and  his  judg- 
ment is  announced. 

THE  GLORIOUS  FUTURE  OF  THE  NATION.    Chapter  XXX-XXXI 
CHAPTER  XXX. 

1.  The  Time  of  Jacob's  Trouble.     1-11. 

2.  Zion's  Desperate  Condition  and  the  Promise  of  Deliverance. 

12-17. 
S.     Restoration  and  Glory.     18-24. 

1.  The  Time  of  Jacob's  Trouble:  Verses   1-11.     The 

critics  have  made  havoc  with  this  great  prophecy.  De 
Wette,  Hitzig,  and  other  rationalists,  claim  to  have  discov- 
ered that  this  chapter,  and  those  which  follow,  are  the  work 
of  the  spurious  "second  Isaiah."  These  critics,  with  their 
present  day  echoes  in  difiPerent  colleges,  reject  these  chapters 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  225 

as  not  being  Jeremianic.  They  are  totally  wrong.  This  great 
prophecy,  which  begins  with  the  thirtieth  chapter,  is  quite 
in  order  after  all  these  judgment  messages,  announcing  the 
doom  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  nation.  What  then  about  the 
future,  that  future  which  all  their  fathers  had  cherished, 
the  promises  which  rested  upon  the  covenant  Jehovah  made 
with  David .f*  Was  now  everything  to  be  plotted  out  and 
no  national  hope  left?  The  last  siege  of  Jerusalem  was  in 
progress;  soon  all  the  threatened  judgments  would  pass 
fully  into  history.  How  perfectly  in  order  is  it  that  now 
should  be  given  a  message  of  the  glorious  future  of  the 
nation. 

Jeremiah  is  commanded  to  write  in  a  book  all  the  words 
Jehovah  had  spoken;  quite  sufficient  evidence  that  Jere- 
miah is  the  author  and  that  this  book  is  not  a  patchwork 
of  different  supplementers,  redactors  and  compilers. 

The  first  promise  in  verse  three  is  concerning  the  coming 
days  in  which  the  people  Israel  and  Judah  will  return  to 
their  God-given  land  to  possess  it.  Has  this  promise  been 
fulfilled?  Expositors  generally  say  that  it  was  fulfilled  in 
the  return  from  the  captivity.  But  this  is  not  so.  Here 
is  a  promised  return  not  only  of  the  house  of  Judah,  but  a 
return  of  the  ten  tribes  also.  This  has  never  taken  place. 
In  spite  of  the  "British-Israel"  hallucination,  every  sane 
Bible  reader  realizes  that  the  house  of  Israel  is  still  scat- 
tered among  the  nations.  This  restoration  promise  will  be 
accomplished  in  the  future  Then  we  hear  what  will  pre- 
cede that  restoration.  It  will  be  a  time  of  great  trouble, 
even  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble  (Matt,  xxiv;  Mark  xiii), 
the  great  tribulation  revealed  in  other  portions  of  the  pro- 
phetic Word,  notably  in  Daniel  and  Revelation.  When  that 
time  comes  * 'Jacob  will  be  saved  out  of  it."  The  yoke  of 
the  last  Gentile  world-power  (the  revived  Roman  Empire, 
the  ten-horned  Beast  of  Dan.  vii  and  Rev.  xiii)  will  then  be 
broken  (verse  8)  and  they  will  serve  the  true  David,  David's 
Lord  and  David's  Son,  our  Lord  (verse  9).  Then  follows 
the  message  of  comfort.  How  well  history  has  confirmed 
this  one  sentence  of  verse  11 :  *  Though  I  make  a  full  end  of 


226  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

all  nations  whither  I  have  scattered  thee,  yet  will  I  not 
make  a  full  end  of  thee." 

2.  Zion's  desperate  Condition  and  the  Promise  of  De- 
liverance: Verses  12-17.  Here  is  a  reminder  of  Zion's 
desperate  condition  and  shameful  history  and  how  He  had 
to  chastise  His  people  and  wound  them  with  the  wound  of 
an  enemy.  Such  is  still  their  lot  and  will  be  down  to  the 
end  of  this  age,  a  people  scattered  and  afflicted,  devoured 
and  spoiled  by  the  nations.  But  when  the  time  comes,  the 
time  of  mercy  for  Zion,  her  enemies  will  be  dealt  with.  In 
arrogant  unbelief,  these  nations,  so  called  "Christian  na- 
tions,'* said  "Zion  is  an  Outcast" — "whom  no  man  seeketh 
after"  (verse  17);  but  the  Lord  says,  "I  w^ill  restore  health 
unto  thee,  and  I  will  heal  thee  of  thy  w^ounds." 

3.  Restoration  and  Glory:  Verses  18-24.  The  City  then 
will  be  built  again.  The  voices  of  praise  and  joy  will  be 
heard  once  more.  He  will  glorify  and  increase  them.  He 
will  be  their  God  and  they  shall  be  His  people.  The  whirl- 
wind v>-ill  strike  "the  head  of  the  wicked,"  the  wicked  false 
king,  the  false  Messiah,  Antichrist.  The  next  chapter  is  the 
continuation  of  this  great  prophecy. 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 

1.  The  Home-going  of  the  Nation.     1-9. 

2.  The  Joy  of  Salvation.     10-14. 

8.  The  Preceding  Tribulation,  Sorrow  and  Repentance.     15-21' 

4.  Assurance.     22-26. 

5.  The  New  Covenant.     27-34. 

6.  The  Everlasting  Nation.     35-40. 

1.  The  Home-going  of  the  Nation:  Verses  1-9.  Sovereign 
grace  will  bring  them  back  and  give  them  the  songs  of  sal- 
vation. It  is  true  of  Israel  "I  -have  loved  thee  with  an 
everlasting  love,  therefore  with  loving  kindness  have  I 
drawn  thee";  it  is  equally  true  of  us.  What  day  of  joy  it 
will  be  when  they  go  back  home  once  more,  never  to  leave 
the  old  homeland  again!  Then  the  watchmen  on  mount 
Ephraim  cry,  "Arise  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion  unto  tlie 


TEE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH  227 

Lord  our  God."    Can  there  be  anything  more  touchmg  and 
beautiful  than  verses  8-9? 

2.  The  Joy  of  Salvation:  Verses  10-14.  The  nations  are 
addressed.  Oh!  that  the  great  nations  of  today  might  have 
an  ear  to  hear  this  message,  "He  that  scattered  Israel  will 
gather  him,  and  keep  him  as  a  shepherd  does  his  flock." 
His  promises  made  to  Israel  will  not  fail.  The  nations 
should  understand,  as  they  do  not,  that  Israel  will  yet 
become  the  head  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  What 
singing  that  will  be  in  that  day  of  which  the  prophet  speaks 
(verse  12).  What  rejoicing  after  their  sorrow!  What  full- 
ness will  be  theirs! 

3.  The  Preceding  Tribulation,  Sorrow  and  Repentance* 
Verses  15-21.  Rachel  weeping  for  her  children  (verse  15) 
is  quoted  in  Matthew  ii  in  connection  with  the  killing  of  the 
boys  in  Bethlehem.  It  has  also  a  future  fulfillment,  when 
once  more  Satan  will  manifest  his  power  as  the  murderer 
during  the  tribulation.  But  the  promise,  "They  shall  come 
again  from  the  land  of  the  enemy"  and  "Thy  children  shall 
come  again  to  their  own  border,"  clearly  shows  that  cap- 
tivity is  likewise  meant  from  which  Rachel's  children  (Joseph 
and  Benjamin,  i.e.,  Ephraim)  shall  return  after  the  final 
tribulation  and  weeping.  Physical  resurrection  is  not  in 
view  here.  Therefore,  the  next  verse  speaks  of  Ephraim 
moaning  and  in  repentance.  Then  God's  gracious  answer 
"Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son? — I  will  surely  have  mercy  upon 
him." 

4.  Assurance.  Verses  22-26.  Backsliding  Israel  is  ex- 
horted and  the  assurance  is  given,  "A  woman  shall  compass 
a  man."  It  refers  to  Israel  as  the  woman,  the  timid,  weak, 
forsaken  one,  who  now  will  compass  a  man:  that  is  have 
power  given  unto  her  to  become  the  ruler.  (Some  have  tran- 
slated this  difficult  passage,  "The  woman  shall  be  turned  into 
a  man") .    Then  follows  the  promise  of  assurance. 

5.  The  New  Covenant.  Verses  27-^.  In  the  preceeding 
verse  we  read  that  Jeremiah  avv  oke,  so  that  this  message 


228  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

must  have  come  to  him  in  a  vision  by  night,  and  sv.eet  was 
his  sleep.  How  refreshing  must  have  been  to  his  troubled 
soul  this  wonderful  prophecy!  The  great  prediction  in 
these  verses  is  the  one  concerning  the  New  Covenant.  This 
covenant  is  not  made  with  Gentiles,  nor  even  with  the 
church  as  so  often  erroneously  stated.  It  is  the  new  covenant 
to  be  made  with  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah. 
This  is  fully  confirmed  in  the  Epistle  to  Hebrews  (Hebrews 
viii:8-13) .  The  old  covenant  is  the  law-covenant,  which  the 
Lord  did  not  make  with  Gentiles,  but  with  Israel  exclusively. 
The  new  covenant  is  of  grace.  The  ground  of  this  new  cov- 
enant is  the  sacrificial  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  His 
blood,  as  v/e  learn  from  His  own  words  when  He  instituted 
the  supper.  He  died  for  that  nation,  and  therefore  all  Israel 
will  yet  receive  the  promised  blessing  of  this  new  covenant. 
This  prophecy  is  therefore  stiil  unfulfilled,  for  Israel  does  not 
enjoy  this  new  covenant  now.  In  the  meantime,  while 
Israel  has  not  yet  the  blessings  of  this  new  covenant,  Gentiles, 
who  by  nature  are  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel 
and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise,  believing  in 
Christ,  possess  the  blessings  of  this  new  covenant  to  the  full. 
In  that  coming  day  of  Israel's  return,  the  nation,  Israel  and 
Judah,  will  be  born  again,  know  the  Lord,  and  their  sins  will 
be  remembered  no  more. 

6.  The  Everlasting  Nation.  Verses  35-40.  This  Word  of 
Jehovah  is  a  complete  answer  to  those  in  Christendom  who 
think  that  God  has  cast  away  Israel,  that  they  are  no  longer 
the  chosen  people.  The  Lord  makes  a  condition,  *Tf  heaven 
above  can  be  measured,  and  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
searched  out  beneath,  I  will  also  cast  off  all  the  seed  of  Israel 
for  all  they  have  done  saith  the  Lord."  Neither  has  heaven 
been  measured,  neither  has  the  depth  of  the  earth  been 
searched  out,  nor  will  this  ever  be  accomplished.  WTiat 
a  faithful  covenant  keeping  God  He  is!  Verses  38-40  have 
never  been  fulfilled  in  the  past. 


TEE   PROPHET  JEREMIAH  229 

JEREMIAH  IN  PRISON.     NEW  MESSAGE  OF  RESTORATION 
AND  BLESSING.     Chapters  XXXII-XXXIU. 

CHAPTER   XXXII. 

1.  Shut  up  in  the  Court  of  the  Prison.     1-5. 

2.  The  Revelation  of  the  Lord  Concerning  HanameeL     6-15. 

3.  The  Prophet's  Prayer.     16-25. 
.4.  Jehovah's  Answer.     26-44. 

1.  Shut  up  in  the  Court  of  the  Prison.   Verses  1-5.   The 

siege  of  Jerusalem  began  in  the  ninth  year  of  Zedekiah's 
reign.  It  was  in  the  tenth  year,  a  year  later  (xxxix:!)  that 
we  find  Jeremiah  in  prison.  In  order  to  understand  this  im- 
prisonment chapter,  xxxvii  11-21  must  be  consulted.  He 
was  first  thrown  as  a  prisoner  into  the  house  of  Jonathan  the 
scribe.  It  was  a  dungeon,  perhaps  some  underground  place. 
He  was  consigned  there.  It  was  a  horrible  place,  for  Jeremiah 
was  afraid  he  might  die  there  (xxxvii  :20).  Zedekiah  seems 
to  have  been  somewhat  favorably  inclined  towards  him.  He 
asked  him  secretly  to  his  palace  and  after  Jeremiah  told  the 
king,  in  answer  to  his  question  about  a  word  from  the  Lord, 
that  the  king  should  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  king  of 
Babylon,  Zedekiah  on  his  request  released  him  from  the  dun- 
geon and  put  him  into  the  court  of  the  prison,  and  was  kept 
by  the  king's  order  from  starvation  (xxxvii  :21).  Here,  in 
our  chapter,  is  the  full  text  of  his  faithful  message;  had  it  been 
less  faithful  he  might  have  been  released. 

2.  The  Revelation  of  the  Lord  concerning  Hi&nameel. 
Verses  6-15.  The  coming  of  his  cousin  v/ith  the  request  to 
buy  his  field  in  Anathoth  is  divinely  announced.  The  right  of 
redemption  was  Jeremiah's.  (See  Leviticus  xxv:25.)  Hana- 
meel  came,  and  Jeremiah,  realizing  that  it  was  of  the  Lord, 
bought  the  field,  paying  for  it  seventeen  shekels  of  silver. 
The  sale  was  legally  transacted  and  executed;  there  being 
two  rolls,  one  sealed,  the  other  open.  It  was  all  delivered 
to  Baruch,  the  faithful  secretary  of  the  prophet,  mentioned 
here  for  the  first  time.  He  was  instructed  to  put  all  in  an 
earthen  vessel.  By  his  action  the  prophet  proved  his  simple 
faith  in  the  promised  return. 


230  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

3.  The  Prophet's  Prayer:  Verses  16-25.  What  a  beau- 
tiful prayer  it  is  which  came  from  the  Hps  of  the  prisoner! 
Re  acknowledges  first  of  all,  as  we  all  do  in  believing  prayer 
the  power  of  God,  that  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for 
the  Lord.  Then  he  speaks  of  the  loving  kindness  and  right- 
eousness of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  mentions  the  past  history 
of  the  nation.  WTiat  the  Lord  had  predicted  against  the 
city  and  the  nation  had  been  done;  the  city  was  given  to  the 
Chaldeans.  "What  Thou  hast  spoken  is  come  to  pass;  and 
behold  Thou  seest  it."  He  then  mentions  the  fact  that  the 
Lord  had  told  him  to  buy  that  field.  Then  the  prayer  is 
interrupted,  like  Daniel's  prayer. 

4.  Jehovah's  Answer:  Verses  26-44.  The  answer  the 
Lord  gave  to  praying  Jeremiah  is  twofold.  Jeremiah  had 
said  in  faith,  "There  is  nothing  too  hard  for  the  Lord." 
The  Lord  answered  him,  "Behold,  I  am  the  Lord,  the  God 
of  all  flesh;  is  there  anything  too  hard  for  Me?"  Then  He 
announces  first  of  all  the  fate  of  the  doomed  city  (verses 
28-35).  After  this  comes  once  more  the  message  of  comfort 
and  peace  looking  forward  to  that  blessed  future  when  Israel 
is  gathered  out  of  all  countries,  brought  back  to  the  land — 
when  they  shall  be  His  people  (verses  36-44). 

CHAPTER  XXXra. 

1.  The  Call  to  Pray  and  Jerusalem's  Overthrow.     1-5. 

2.  Future  Blessing  and  Glory.     6-14. 

8.     The  Branch  of  Righteousness;  Jerusalem's  new  Name.     15-18. 
4.     Jehovah's  Faithfulness.     19-26. 

1.  The  Call  to  Pray  and  Jerusalem's  Overthrow:  Verses 

1-5.  Jeremiah  is  still  in  prison,  as  we  learn  from  the  first 
verse.  The  siege  of  Jerusalem  is  on.  Then  the  Lord  said, 
"Call  unto  Me,  and  I  will  answer  thee,  and  show  thee  great 
and  mighty  things,  which  thou  knowest  not."  Wliat  an 
offer  and  what  an  assurance!  Then  the  Lord  speaks  of  the 
great  and  mighty  things,  announcing  first  the  overthrow  of 
Jerusalem.  The  demolished  houses  of  Jerusalem  are  com- 
iig  to  be  used  in  the  defence  to  serve  against  the  mounds 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  231 

and  the  sword.     There  will  be  great  slaughter.     (The  He- 
brew text  of  verses  4  and  5  has  many  difficulties). 

2.  Future  Blessings  and  Glory:  Verses  8-14.  The  next 
great  and  mighty  things  revealed  are  the  future  blessings 
and  glory.  Health  and  cure,  abundance  of  peace  and  truth, 
a  complete  return  from  the  captivity  of  both  Judah  and 
Israel,  cleansing  from  all  their  iniquity,  complete  forgive- 
ness, all  are  promised;  and  let  it  be  remembered  none  of  these 
promises  has  been  realized.  Verses  9-13  also  concern  the 
future  restoration  of  the  land  and  the  city.  WTiat  a  day  is 
yet  to  come  when  "the  voice  of  joy,  and  the  voice  of  glad- 
ness, the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice  of  the  bride, 
the  voice  of  them  that  shall  say.  Praise  the  Lord  of  Hosts" 
is  heard,  when  Zion  sings  her  beautiful  redemption  songs. 
"Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  perform 
that  good  thing  which  I  have  promised  unto  the  house  of 
Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah."  The  delay  may  be  long  and 
still  deferred  according  to  His  eternal  purposes;  but  at  the 
appointed  time  these  days  will  surely  come. 

3.  The  Branch  of  Righteousness:  Jerusalem's  New  Name: 
Verses  15-18.  "In  those  days"  in  the  coming  days,  the 
days  of  blessing  and  glory,  when  Christ  comes  the  second 
time.  He,  the  Branch  of  Righteousness  will  occupy  the  throne 
of  His  father  David.  (See  Luke  i  :32.)  Then  salvation  for  His 
people  will  have  come,  and  the  city  will  receive  a  new  name, 
the  name  of  Him  whose  glory  covers  it,  "the  Lord  our 
Righteousness."  Likewise  will  the  Temple  worship  be 
restored.  (See  annotations  on  Ezekiel's  millennial  temple.) 

4.  Jehovah's  Faithfulness:  Verses  19-26.  This  is  similar 
to  xxxi:35,  etc.  His  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance. 
The  Davidic  Covenant  stands.  He  does  not  cast  away  His 
people. 

JEREMIAH  WARNS  ZEDEEIAH. 
CHAPTER  XXXIV  :l-7. 

The  besieging  army  was  before  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
when  the  prophet  is  commanded  to  go  to  the  king  and  tell 


232  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

him  that  the  city  will  soon  be  burned.  He  announced  also 
Zedekiah's  fate.  He  could  not  escape,  but  would  be  de- 
livered into  the  hands  of  the  king  of  Babylon.  He  would 
see  Nebuchadnezzar  eye  to  eye,  speak  with  him  mouth  to 
mouth,  and  then  be  taken  to  Babylon.  Ezekiel  said,  "He 
should  not  see  Babylon"  (Ezek.  xii:13).  Both  statements 
are  true.  He  saw  the  king  as  a  prisoner  at  Riblah  and  there 
his  eyes  were  put  out  (2  Kings  xxv:6,  7),  and  then  he  was 
taken  away  to  Babylon.  Yet  he  was  not  to  die  by  the  sword, 
but  in  peace.  And  Jeremiah  discharged  faithfully  his 
message. 

THE  MESSAGE  OF  CONDEMNATION. 
CHAPTER  XXXIV  :8-22. 

The  king  had  made  a  covenant  that  all  Hebrew  slaves 
should  be  released  (Exod.  xxi:l-6;  Deut.  xv:12-18).  The 
princes  and  people  agreed,  but  afterwards  broke  the  cove- 
nant. The  message  of  condemnation  tells  them,  since  they 
had  done  this,  that  the  Lord  will  set  them  free  to  fall  a  prey 
to  the  sword,  the  pestilence  and  famine.  The  text  explains 
itself. 

THE  FAITHFUL  RECHABITES  AND  THE  UNFAITHFUL  JEWS. 
CHAPTER   XXXV. 

1.  The  Command  Concerning  the  Rechabites.     1-11. 

2.  The  Lesson  for  the  Jews.     12-19. 

The  Rechabites  were  Kenites  and  were  numbered  with 
the  children  of  Israel  (1  Chron.  ii  :55).  During  the  reign  of 
Jehoiakim  the  incident  of  this  chapter  happened.  The 
critics  may  rave  against  the  "unchronological"  construction 
of  Jeremiah  jumping  from  one  period  into  another,  but  here 
we  see  the  guiding  hand  of  the  Spirit  in  the  arrangement  of 
these  events.  It  is  perfectly  in  order  that  this  should  come 
next  to  the  chapter  which  relates  the  broken  covenant.  A 
careful  reading  and  study  of  this  chapter  will  bring  out  the 
lesson  of  their  faithfulness  to  their  father's  command,  and 
the  unfaithfulness  of  the  Jews  to  God's  command. 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  233 

THE  INDESTRUCTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORD  OF  GOD. 
CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

1.  The  Writing  of  the  Roll.     1-4. 

2.  The  Reading  of  the  Roll.     4-20. 

3.  The  King  Cuts  and  Burns  the  Roll.     21-28. 

4.  The  Indestructibility  of  the  Word  of  God.     27-S2. 

1.  The  Writing  of  the  Roll:  Verses  1-4.  Once  more  we 
are  taken  back  to  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim.  Jeremiah 
is  now  commanded  to  commit  all  the  words  Jehovah  had 
spoken  to  him  to  writing.  It  was  for  the  purpose  that  the 
people  might  hear  of  all  the  evil  and  that  they  might  yet  con- 
sider it  and  turn  to  the  Lord  to  be  forgiven.  How  gracious 
and  merciful  He  is!  He  then  dictated  all  the  words  to  Baruch, 
who  wrote  them  down.  But  asks  a  critic,  how  could  he 
remember  all  he  had  spoken?  The  same  Spirit  who  com- 
municated the  messages  to  him,  re-communicated  them  to 
the  prophet. 

2.  The  Reading  of  the  Roll :  Verses  4-20.  Jeremiah  was 
"shut  in,"  which,  however,  does  not  mean  that  he  was  a 
prisoner  (see  verse  19);  it  probably  means  that  he  was  not 
permitted  to  enter  the  Lord's  house  on  account  of  some 
ceremonial  impurity.  So  he  sent  Baruch,  his  amanuensis, 
to  read  the  scroll  to  the  people  on  the  fasting  day,  and  when 
all  the  people  had  come  together  Baruch  read  the  roll  at 
the  entry  of  the  new  gate.  Michaiah,  one  of  the  sons  of 
Gemariah,  was  deeply  moved  by  what  he  had  heard,  went 
to  the  place  where  the  princes  sat  in  counsel  and  told  them 
what  he  had  heard  from  Baruch's  lips.  Baruch  was  then 
commanded  to  appear  before  the  princes  to  read  the  roll 
to  them.  What  they  heard  frightened  them.  They  declared 
they  would  tell  the  king. 

3.  The  King  Cuts  and  Burns  the  Roll:  Verses  21-26.  The 
king  sent  for  the  roll.  The  king  listened  to  but  a  few 
of  the  leaves.  Then,  energized  by  the  devil,  he  pulled  out 
his  penknife,  cut  the  roll,  and,  to  make  sure  that  the 
roll  would  be  destroyed,  he  cast  it  into  the  open  fire,  and 
with  keen  satisfaction  he  watched  till  the  roll  was  consumed. 


234  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

Elnathan,  Delaiah  and  Gemariah,  tried  to  keep  him  from 
doing  this  evil  deed,  but  he  refused  to  listen  to  them.  These 
three  had  at  least  some  reverence  for  the  Word  of  God, 
and  therefore  the  Holy  Spirit  records  their  names.  The  king 
was  not  satisfied  with  this.  His  satanic  anger  was  so  aroused 
that  he  wanted  to  have  Baruch  and  Jeremiah  apprehended. 
Like  the  mad  king  Saul,  he  probably  thought  of  killing  them 
both.    But  the  Lord  hid  them. 

What  Jehoiakim  did,  has  been  done  over  and  over  again. 
It  is  being  done  today  as  never  before  in  the  history  of 
Christendom.  It  is  being  done  by  the  destructive  critics, 
in  colleges  and  universities;  it  is  done  by  the  men  who  have 
produced  the  Shorter  New  Testament  and  the  Shorter  Old 
Testament^  by  those  who  advocate  an  abridged  Bible,  by 
others  who,  like  the  English  writer  Wells,  vrant  a  new  Bible. 
The  same  povrer  of  darkness  is  behind  all  these  wicked 
p.ttempts  to^  mutilate  the  Word  of  God.  Jehoiakim's 
Tv'ork  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  these  Twentieth  Cen- 
tury infidels,  because  these  aim  at  the  most  precious,  the 
most  blessed  revelation  of  God,  the  doctrine  of  Christ. 
Their  condemnation  will  be  far  greater  than  that  of  the 
Jevv'ish  King. 

4.  Indestmctibility  of  the  Word  of  God:    Verses  27-32. 

But  did  the  King  destroy  the  Word  of  God.'*  One  might  just 
as  well  speak  of  destroying  God  Himself.  Neither  God  nor 
His  Word  can  ever  be  affected  by  the  efforts  of  men  inspired 
by  the  enemy  of  the  Truth  of  God.  The  Word  of  God  en- 
dureth  forever.  It  is,  like  God,  eternal.  How  the  Bibles 
have  been  burned  a  thousand  times  over  again!  In  pagan 
Rome  and  papal  Rome  Satan  has  raged  against  the  Bible. 
His  Word  lives  on.  And  noT>^  the  devil,  camouflaged  as  an 
angel  of  light,  in  the  guise  of  ''devout  scholarship'*  and 
"reverent  criticism"  tries  it  again.  His  Word  lives  on! 
Emperors  and  popes,  philosophers  and  infidels  v/ho  attacked 
the  Bible  are  gone;  the  Bible  is  still  with  us.  Jeremiah  is 
told  to  take  another  roll.  Once  more  the  Lord  dictates  the 
same  v»^ords  to  him,  and  Jeremiah  again  dictates  them  to 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  235 

Baruch,    *Vith   many  like  Vv^ords,"   including  a  judgment 
message  of  the  miserable  end  of  the  wicked  king. 

JEREMIAH    AND    ZEDEKIAH.    THE    FALL  OF  JERUSALEM! 
Chapters  XXXVII-XXXIX. 
CHAPTER   XXXVn. 
•1.     Jeremiah's  Warning.     1-10. 
2.     Jeremiah's  Arrest.     11-21. 

1.  Jeremiah's  Waming:  Verses  1-10.  To  understand 
more  fully  these  chapters  it  must  be  remembered  that  the 
besieging  army  before  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  was  temporarily 
withdrawn,  because  an  Egyptian  army  had  appeared  against 
it.  This  was  no  doubt  an  occasion  for  the  false  prophets 
to  preach  their  false  hope,  so  that  the  people  were  deceived. 
Once  more  Zedekiah  sent  to  the  prophet  a  deputation  (see 
chapter  xxi:l)  after  Nebuchadnezzar  had  made  him  king. 
The  occasion  was  on  account  of  the  withdrawal  of  the 
Chaldean  army  (verse  5).  They  thought  that  it  was  surely 
a  good  sign  and  expected  a  favorable  message.  The  false 
hope  with  w^hich  they  were  deceiving  themselves  was  swept 
av/ay  by  the  Word  of  Jehovah  as  it  came  to  the  prophet 
(verses  7-10).  There  was  no  hope  and  after  Zedekiah  had 
rebelled  (see  our  annotations  on  2  Kings),  the  king  of  Baby- 
lon came  and  burnt  the  city  with  fire. 

2.  Jeremiah's  Arrest:  Verses  11-21.  When  the  Chal- 
dean army  had  left,  Jeremiah  went  forth  to  go  to  his  home- 
town Anathoth,  for  what  is  not  revealed.  He  may  have 
gone  to  claim  his  portion  which  belonged  to  him  as  priest. 
When,  in  the  gate  of  Benjamin  a  captain  arrested  him,  charg- 
ing the  prophet  with  desertion,  he  denied  the  charge.  Such 
a  charge  could  easily  be  made  on  account  of  Jeremiah's 
former  exhortation  to  submit  to  the  Chaldeans.  He  is  put 
in  prison  in  the  house  of  Jonathan  the  scribe;  but  later  the 
dungeon  is  changed  to  the  court  of  the  prison.  (See  the  an- 
notations to  chapter  xxxii:2.) 

We  give  a  diagram  which  illustrates  the  chronology  of  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  and  the  fall  of  the  city. 


236 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 


I.    The  Siege  begun  in  the  ninth  year. 
xxxixrl  I  I  I   Siege  begun. 

!xxxiv:10        I  I   Manumission    of    slaves 

II.  The  Siege  raised  temporarily  in  the  ninth  or  tenth  year. 
xxxvii:3-10=  =xxi:l-7  Jeremiah     consulted     by- 

deputies  from  the  king. 
xxxiv:8-22  Re-enthralment  of  slaves. 

xxxvii:ll-16  Jeremiah  seized,  and  im- 

prisoned   in    Jonathan' 
house. 


III.  The  Siege  renewed  in  the  ninth  or  tenth  year. 


xxxvii -.17-21 


xxxviii:l-3  = 


xxxviii:4-6 
xxxviii:7-13 


xxxviii:  14-28 


xxxix:l-14 


=  xxxii:l-5  1  Jeremiah  brought  in  tenth 

=  xxxiv:l-7J  year  to  be  secretly  con- 

sulted by  the  king:  put 
afterwards  in  court  of 
guard. 

xxxii  :6-44  Field  bought  by  Jeremiah. 

xxxiii:l-26  Further  prophecy  in  court 

of  guard. 
=  xxi:8-10         Jeremiah    advises    people 
to  desert  to  Chaldeans. 
Jeremiah     put     in     miry 

dungeon. 
Jeremiah  restored  by 
Ebed-melech  to  court  of 
guard. 
Jeremiah  consulted  by 
king  in  third  entry  of 
Temple:  remanded  to 
court  of  guard. 

IV.    The  Siege  ended  in  the  eleventh  year. 

City  taken  and  destroyed. 


CHAPTER   XXXVIII. 

I 

1.  Jeremiah  in  the  Dungeon  and  his  Rescue.     1-13. 

2.  Jeremiah  with  Zedekiah;  his  Last  Appeal.     14-28. 

1.  Jeremiah  in  the  Dungeon  and  His  Rescue:  Verses 
1-13.  Jeremiah  is  next  accused  of  high  treason.  The  charge 
is  based  on  his  message,  given  to  him  by  the  Lord:  "He  that 
goeth  forth  to  the  Chaldeans  shall  live."  Like  the  conscien- 
tious objectors  during  the  past  war,  they  accused  him  of 
being  unpatriotic.  *'This  man  seeketh  not  the  welfare  of 
this  people,  but  the  hurt."  They  demand  his  life.  In  the 
sixth  verse  we  see  him  in  a  deep  dungeon,  into  which  he 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  237 

was  put  by  means  of  ropes.  And  Jeremiah  sank  into  the 
vile  mire.  This  reminds  us  of  Him,  our  blessed  Lord,  who 
was  also  accused  by  false  witnesses,  and  who  went  Himself 
into  the  horrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay,  into  the  deepest 
suffering  and  the  jaws  of  death,  to  take  us  out  of  the  dun- 
geon, where  sin  has  put  us.  The  wicked  princes  evidently 
meant  to  leave  Jeremiah  in  that  dungeon  to  suffer  a  horrible 
death. 

But  the  servant  of  the  Lord  was  not  in  the  hands  of  the 
princes,  but  in  the  hands  of  his  Master.  God  chooses  for  the 
deliverer  a  slave,  an  Ethiopian,  Ebed-melech  (servant  of 
the  king).  The  heart  of  this  Ethiopian  eunuch  was  touched 
with  pity.  He  goes  to  the  king,  who  seems  to  have  been 
ignorant  about  w^hat  had  been  done  to  Jeremiah  and  tells 
him  that  Jeremiah  is  likely  to  starve  to  death  in  the  filthy 
hole  where  they  had  put  him.  The  king  commands  the 
eunuch  to  act  at  once  with  thirty  men  to  deliver  Jeremiah. 
With  w^hat  tenderness,  to  spare  the  man  of  God  ail  needless 
pain,  Ebed-melech  carried  out  the  king's  wish  (verse  12)! 

2.  Jeremiah  with  Zedeldah;  His  Last  Appeal:  Verses 
14-28.  This  is  a  great  dramatic  scene.  Zedekiah  sends 
once  more  for  Jeremiah.  We  suppose  the  filth  of  the  dun- 
geon was  still  clinging  to  the  prophet's  garments.  The  king 
wants  to  know  something.  "Hide  nothing  from  me,"  he 
demands.  He  may  rest  assured  that  the  prophet  of  holy 
courage  hides  nothing.  But  Jeremiah  asks  two  questions: 
''Wilt  thou  not  surely  put  me  to  death .^  And  if  I  give  thee 
counsel,  wilt  thou  not  hearken  unto  me?"  The  first  question 
the  king  answers :  "I  will  not  put  thee  to  death."  The  second 
question  he  leaves  unanswered.  His  heart  was  hardened 
like  Pharoah's  heart. 

He  gives  him  once  more  the  message  of  Jehovah :  Go  forth 
to  the  King  of  Babylon,  acknowledge  his  authority,  believe 
in  My  Word  and  thou  shalt  live  and  thine  house;  then 
Jerusalem  will  not  be  burned.  But  if  not,  then  you  cannot 
escape  and  the  doom  of  the  city  is  sealed.  The  king  shrinks 
from  such  a  surrender.  Terrors  of  an  imaginary  kind  seize 
hold  on  him.    He  fears  the  Babylonian  king  will  deliver  him 


238  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

into  the  hands  of  the  Jews  who  had  deserted  already,  and 
that  they  would  mock  him  and  ill-treat  him.  Jeremiah  pleads 
once  more.  It  is  his  final  appeal:  "Obey,  I  beseech  thee, 
the  voice  of  the  Lord."  But  the  king  refuses.  The  final 
request  he  made  of  Jeremiah  but  reveals  his  miserable  char- 
acter. The  last  interview  has  ended.  Jeremiah  remains  in 
the  prison  and  was  there  when  Jerusalem  was  taken. 

CHAPTER   XXXIX. 

1.  The  Fall  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Fate  of  Zedekiah.     1-9. 

2.  Nebuchadnezzar's  Kindness  to  Jeremiah.     10-14. 
8.     Ebed-melech's  Reward.     15-18. 

1.  The  Fall  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Fate  of  Zedekiah: 
Verses  1-9.  The  Word  of  God  comes  true;  the  prophecy 
of  Jeremiah  is  vindicated!  The  mighty  army  of  Nebuchad- 
nezzar returned  to  the  city;  for  many  months  the  siege  goes 
on  under  indescribable  suffering.  How  horrible  it  must 
have  been!  Then  the  city  fell  and  the  victors  rushed  in; 
the  work  of  slaughter  and  burning  began.  According  to 
Jewish  tradition  it  was  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  month  Ab, 
On  the  same  date  in  the  year  70  of  our  era,  the  city  was  de- 
stroyed again  and  the  temple  burned,  announced  some  forty 
years  before  by  one  greater  than  Jeremiah,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Ever  since,  Jerusalem  has  been  trodden  down  by 
the  Gentiles  and  is  so  still.  The  prophetic  Word  tells  us 
of  a  final  great  tribulation  which  will  sweep  over  the  land, 
and  the  restored,  unbelieving  nation,  and  once  more  armies 
will  gather  before  the  city. 

Zedekiah  tried  to  escape  with  his  men  of  war,  but  is  cap- 
tured. Cruelly  his  boys  are  slaughtered  in  his  sight — the 
last  thing  his  eyes  beheld,  for  immediately  after  his  eyes 
were  put  out.  Bound  with  chains  he  is  led  to  Babylon.  All 
the  houses  of  Jerusalem  go  up  in  flames;  the  walls  are 
demolished  and  the  remnant  of  the  people  are  carried  away 
prisoners.  (See  the  Appendix  chapter  lii:4-l 6.)  The  poorest 
are  permitted  to  remain  and  were  treated  mercifully.  God  re- 
members the  poor  and  they  are  spared.    For  all  we  know, 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  239 

these  poor  people,  who  had  nothing,  were  the  godly,  those 
who  wept  over  the  conditions  and  who  cried  to  God  for  help. 
Their  prayer,  the  prayer  of  the  needy,  was  answered. 

2.  Nebuchadnezzar's  Kindness  to  Jeremiah:  Verses 
1-14.  And  if  the  poor  were  remembered,  the  prophet  was 
likewise  treated  with  great  kindness.  The  Babylonian  king 
commanded:  "Take  him,  and  look  well  to  him,  and  do 
him  no  harm;  but  do  unto  him  even  as  he  shall  say  unto 
thee."  Nebuzar-adan  found  the  great  man  of  God  in  the 
prison.  The  princes  had  to  come  and  take  him  from  the 
prison  house  of  humiliation,  ^^^lat  an  exaltation!  He 
dwelt  among  the  people.  He  cast  his  lot  with  the  poor,  who 
had  nothing.  We  doubt  not  Nebuchadnezzar  knew  much 
of  the  history  we  have  follov^red,  that  which  transpired  in 
Jerusalem  during  the  siege.  Perhaps  he  even  knew  the 
great  messages  concerning  himself.  But  it  was  the  Lord 
who  made  him  act  as  he  did.  His  loving  eye  v/as  open  above 
His  servant,  who  had  served  so  faithfully. 

3.  Ebed-melech's  Reward:  Verses  15-18.  And  now  the 
deliverer  of  Jeremiah,  the  Ethiopian  eunuch,  receives  his 
reward.  This  message  was  previously  given  before  the  city 
fell  into  the  hands  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  when  Jeremiah  was 
still  in  prison.  It  is  put  here  into  this  place  for  a  very 
definite  purpose,  v/hich  once  more  answers  the  puerile 
charges  of  the  critics. 

It  is  when  judgment  comes  that  the  faithful  are  rewarded. 
This  is  the  lesson.  While  the  ungodly  fell  and  were  carried 
away,  the  poor  remained  and  were  spared;  Jeremiah  is 
well  treated,  and  Ebed-melech  receives  his  reward.  So  will 
it  be  when  the  Lord  comes. 

III.    AFTER  THE  FALL  OF  JERUSALEM 
CHAPTERS  XL-XLV. 
THE  TREACHERY  IN  THE  LAND  AND  THE  FLIGHT  TO  EGYPT. 

CHAPTER   XL-XLI. 

1.  Jeremiah's  Choice.     1-0. 

2.  Gedaliah  and  Ishmael's  Deed.     7-xIi:3. 

8.    Ishmael's  Further  Atrocities  and  Retreat.     xli:4-18. 


240  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

1.  Jeremiah's  Choice:  Verses  1-6.  The  opening  para- 
graph of  this  chapter  tells  us  of  the  choice  which  was  given 
to  Jeremiah.  He  was  loosed  from  the  prisoner's  chains  and 
told  by  the  captain  of  the  guard  "If  it  seems  good  unto 
thee  to  come  with  me  into  Babylon,  come  and  I  will  look 
well  unto  thee,  but  if  it  seem  ill  unto  thee  to  come  with  me 
to  Babylon,  forbear;  behold  all  the  land  is  before  thee, 
whither  it  seemth  good  and  convenient  for  thee  to  go,  thither 
go.'*    Jeremiah  decided  to  stay  with  his  people  in  the  land. 

2.  Gedaliah  and  IshmaeFs  Deed:  Verses  7-xli:3.     The 

history  of  this  section  is  as  follows :  Gedaliah  had  been  made 
governor  by  the  victorious  king.  When  the  captains  heard 
it  they  came  to  him  at  Mizpah  and  Gedaliah  exhorted  them 
to  loyalty  to  the  Chaldeans.  Then  Gedaliah  is  warned  that 
Baalis,  the  king  of  Ammon,  has  sent  Ishmael  to  assassinate 
him,  but  Gedaliah  refuses  to  believe  the  report.  Then 
Johanan  declares  himself  ready  to  kill  Ishmael,  so  that  the 
dreadful  results  of  the  murder  of  the  governor  Gedaliah 
might  be  averted.  Gedaliah  thinks  it  is  all  slander  and  for- 
bids it.  In  the  seventh  month  Ishmael,  with  ten  men,  who 
are  being  entertained  by  Gedaliah,  murders  him  and  all 
the  Jews  and  Chaldeans,  who  are  present.  It  is  a  horrible 
story. 

3.  IshmaeFs  Further  Atrocities  and  Retreat:  Verses 
xli:4-18.  The  next  day  Ishmael  met  eighty  men  who  came 
from  the  north;  he  invited  them  to  come  to  Gedaliah,  who 
was  dead  in  his  house.  When  they  came  to  the  place  he 
slew  them,  except  ten  men,  who  offered  to  reveal  to  him 
hidden  treasures  of  food.  Then  he  carried  off  all  the  rest 
of  the  people  who  were  left  in  INIizpah,  to  go  to  the  land  of 
Ammon.  When  Johanan  and  the  captains  heard  of  what 
Ishmael  had  done,  they  pursued  him  unto  Gibeon,  but 
Ishmael  with  eight  men  escaped  to  the  Ammonites.  Johanan 
took  those  whom  they  had  rescued  out  of  the  clutches  of  the 
monster  Ishmael,  and,  fearing  the  Chaldeans,  purposed  to 
go  to  Egypt. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  241 

CHAPTER  XLII. 

1.  Jeremiah,  the  Intercessor.     1-6. 

2.  The  Answer  from  Jehovah.     7-22. 

1.  Jeremiah,  the  Intercessor:  Verses  1-6.  The  remnant, 
the  few  who  were  left  after  the  terrible  happenings  recorded 
in  the  preceding  chapter  were  now  cast  upon  the  Lord  and 
besought  the  prophet  to  pray  for  them-:**That  the  Lord  thy 
God  may  show  us  the  way  wherein  we  may  walk,  and  the 
thing  that  we  may  do."  They  believed  in  Jeremiah  as  a 
man  of  God.  He  promises  to  do  so,  and  when  the  answer 
comes  he  will  not  keep  back  anything. 

2.  The  Answer  From  Jehovah :  Verses  7-22.  The  answer 
came  ten  days  later.  Then  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
Jeremiah.  If  he  had  spoken  of  himself,  sat  down  and 
thought  out  by  himself  what  they  were  to  do  now  he  would 
have  waited  ten  days.  But  it  was  not  his  counsel,  not  his 
opinion  or  advice;  the  Lord's  answer  to  the  Divine 
counsel  is  that  they  should  abide  in  the  land  and  that  the 
King  of  Babylon  v/ould  not  hinder  them  in  any  way.  Then 
the  Lord  would  plant  them  and  built  them  up.  The  Lord 
promises  them  mercies  and  salvation.  But  if  they  went 
down  to  Egypt,  the  Lord's  anger  would  be  upon  them  and 
judgment  would  overtake  them. 

In  their  hearts  they  had  a  desire  to  go  to  Egypt.  He  who 
is  the  searcher  of  hearts  knew  all  about  it.  They  used  deceit, 
and  now  the  Lord,  knowing  that  they  would  not  obey, 
announced  through  the  prophet  that  they  should  die  by 
the  sword,  the  famine  and  the  pestilence. 

CHAPTER   XLin. 

1.  The  Rebellion  against  Jeremiah.     1-7. 

2.  Jeremiah's  Prediction  about  the  Conquest  of  Egypt.     8-13. 

1.  Rebellion  Against  Jeremiah:  Verses  1-7.  No  sooner 
had  Jeremiah  finished  communicating  the  Divine  answer, 
but  the  captains  and  the  proud  men  denounced  him.  They 
charged  him  that  he  spoke  falsely,  that  all  he  had  said  was 


242  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

at  the  instigation  of  Baruch,  that  both  were  traitors.  Then 
the  leaders  did  not  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  to  dwell  in 
the  land;  they  took  the  remnant  of  Judah  (verse  5  is  ex- 
plained by  chapter  xl:ll-12)  all  the  people,  including  Jere- 
miah and  Baruch,  to  lead  them  down  to  Eg^pt,  and  finally 
they  settled  in  Tahpanhes  (Daphne),  which  was  in  the  north- 
eastern part,  on  the  road  out  of  Egypt  to  Palestine. 

2.  Jeremiah's  Prediction  About  the  Conquest  of  Egypt: 
Verses  8-13.  Then  Jeremiah  v/as  commanded  by  the  Lord 
to  take  great  stones  and  bury  them  at  the  entry  of  Pharaoh's 
house  in  Taphanhes,  so  that  all  the  men  of  Judah  could  be 
witnesses  of  it.  In  1886  the  Egyptologist,  Professor  Petrie, 
excavated  at  Taphanhes  a  brick  pavement  before  a  kind  of 
a  palace,  which  probably  v/as  the  place  where  Jeremiah  hid 
the  stones.  The  ruin  was  Kasr  el  Bint  Jehudi,  which  means, 
"the  palace  of  the  daughter  of  Judah,"  the  place  evidently 
assigned  to  the  daughters  of  Zedekiah.  (See  verse  6.)  The 
word  brick-kiln  means  a  pavement  of  bricks.  Then,  after 
having  buried  the  stones,  he  announced  that  Nebuchad- 
rezzar would  come  and  set  his  throne  there  also,  that  he 
would  conquer  Egypt,  smite  it  and  burn  the  idol  temples 
there.  Such  an  invasion  took  place  about  568  B.C.,  when 
the  Egyptian  King  Amasis  was  defeated.  The  pillars  men- 
tioned in  verse  13  are  obelisks,  and  Beth-Shemesh  means 
"the  house  of  the  Sun.'*  (Heliopolis  or  On.) 

CHAPTER   XLIV. 

1.  The  Message  to  the  Jews.     1-10. 

2.  Their  Punishment.     11-14. 

8.     Worshipping  the  Queen  of  Heaven.     15-19. 

4.     Jehovah's  Answer.     20-28. 

6.     The  Sign :  Pharaoh-Hophra's  Defeat.     29-30. 

1.  The  Message  to  the  Jews:  Verses  1-10.  The  message 
is  concerning  all  the  Jews  who  were  now  dwelling  in  Egypt. 
Besides  being  in  Taphanhes,  they  were  also  in  Noph  (Mem- 
phis) and  in  Pathros,  which  was  in  the  upper  Egypt.  Not 
long  ago  ancient  papyri  in  Aramaic  were  discovered  which 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  243 

show  that  there  was  a  Jewish  colony  in  that  part  of  Egypt. 
Jeremiah  reminds  them  in  his  message  how  God  had  dealt 
with  Jerusalem  and  Judah  on  account  of  their  idolatries, 
though  He  had  sent  prophets  to  warn  them.  And  now  they 
were  doing  the  same  thing  in  Egypt."  You  too  bring  now 
utter  ruin  upon  youselves  and  all  your  own." 

2.  Their  Punishment:  Verses  11-14.  This  announces 
their  coming  punishment.  Behold  I  will  set  my  face  against 
you  for  evil,  and  to  cut  off  all  Israel.  They  are  to  be  punished 
as  Jerusalem  was. 

3.  Worshipping  the  Queen  of  Heaven:  Verses  15-19. 
What  heart-hardness  to  say  to  the  Man  of  God,  *'We  will 
not  hearken."  They  intended  to  perform  their  vows  to 
worship  "the  Queen  of  Heaven."  All,  they  said,  was,  it  was 
well  with  us  when  we  worshipped  the  Queen  of  Heaven  in  the 
homeland.  The  women  seem  to  have  been  concerned 
mostly  in  this,  but  they  did  so  with  the  knowledge  and  the 
consent  of  their  husbands.  See  about  the  Queen  of  Heaven 
and  the  worship,  chapter  vii  and  the  annotations  there. 
They  claimed  that  all  the  disaster  which  had  come  on  them 
was  the  result  of  abandoning  their  evil  practices.  What 
defiance  and  wickedness,  the  fruit  of  their  unbeliev- 
ing hearts!  Still  greater  is  the  defiance  and  wickedness  of 
today,  when  the  Cross  and  the  Gospel  of  Christ  are  deliber- 
ately rejected. 

4.  Jehovah's  Answer:  Verses  20-28.  The  answer  is 
plain  enough,  and  they  heard  what  their  fate  would  be  for 
their  deliberate  unbelief  and  disobedience.  These  are  solemn 
words,  and  the  Lord  said,  "They  shall  know  whose  Word 
shall  stand.  Mine  or  theirs."  God*s  Word  will  always  stand, 
and  so  will  those  who  stand  by  the  Word  of  God  and  put 
their  trust  in  it. 

5.  The  Sign:  Pharaoh -Hophra's  Defeat:  Verses  29-30. 
He  gives  them  a  sign  that  such  will  be  the  case.  Hophra 
is  to  be  given  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  This  happened 
a  few  years  before  Nebuchadrezzar  defeated  Amasis,  who 
had  succeeded  Hophra. 


244  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

This  is  the  shortest  chapter  and  contains  a  special  message 
to  Baruch,  the  companion  and  secretary  of  the  prophet 
Jeremiah.  It  must  be  noticed  that  this  did  not  take  place 
in  Egypt,  where  now  the  prophet  and  his  friend  sojourned, 
but  it  was  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim.  Baruch  had 
just  finished  writing  the  words  which  Jeremiah  dictated. 
It  was  no  doubt  a  strenuous  task,  and  when  Baruch  laid 
down  his  pen,  the  work  having  been  finished,  the  Lord  sent 
him  a  special  message,  showing  that  He  had  not  forgotten 
the  faithful  scribe.  He,  too,  was  deeply  exercised  over  the 
existing  conditions;  he  shared  the  grief  and  sorrow  of  the 
prophet.  But  there  must  have  been  a  measure  of  disappoint- 
ment in  Baruch's  heart.  Had  he  expected  some  special 
recognition?  Was  he  seeking  something  for  himself,  ex- 
pecting great  things?  Had  he  planned  and  was  he  lifted  up 
with  some  high  ambition?  It  would  seem  that  such  was 
the  case,  for  He  who  knows  the  thoughts  of  His  creatures 
from  afar  said  to  him:  "And  seeketh  thou  great  things  for 
thyself?  Seek  them  not."  It  is  the  very  heart  of  the  old 
nature  to  seek  great  things,  to  be  ambitious  for  earthly  pos- 
sessions and  honors,  to  please  oneself.  God's  people  need 
to  watch  against  this  more  than  against  anything  else.  It 
is  the  very  crime  of  the  devil,  pride  (1  Tim.  iii:6).  Every 
high  ambition  must  be  dethroned;  the  only  ambition  worthy 
of  a  child  of  God  is  to  please  Him,  who  lived  on  earth,  never 
pleasing  Himself,  who  made  of  Himself  no  reputation.  How 
it  ought  to  ring  in  our  hearts  daily:  "Seeketh  thou  great 
thing?  Seek  them  not.'*  Seek  not  recognition  in  this  poor 
age;  wait  for  His  day.  And  Baruch  is  assured  of  God's 
protection  and  care. 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  245 

IV.  THE  PROPHECIES  CONCERNING  THE  GENTILE  NATIONS. 

CHAPTERS  XLVI-LI. 

CONCERNING  EGYPT. 

CHAPTER  XLVI. 

1.  Prophecy  about  Pharaoh-Necho.     1-12, 

2.  Nebuchadnezzar's  Invasion  of  Egypt.     13-26. 

3.  A  Message  of  Comfort.     27-28. 

1.  Prophecy  About  Pharaoh  Necho:  Verses  1-12.  This 
Pharaoh  made  an  attempt  to  invade  the  territory  of  the 
King  of  Babylon,  but  was  defeated  by  Nebuchadrezzar  in 
a  battle  on  the  river  Euphrates  at  Carchemish.  This  proph- 
ecy was  given  about  eighteen  years  before  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem.     All  was  literally  fulfilled. 

2.  Nebuchadrezzar's  Invasion  of  Egypt:  Verses  13-26. 
This  was  given  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  when  the  remnant 
had  gone  to  Egypt.  (See  chapters  xliii  and  xliv.)  This  also 
was  fulfilled.  Verse  26  promises  a  future  restoration  of 
Egypt.  Compare  this  with  Isaiah's  prophecy  (chapter 
xix:19-25). 

3.  A  Message  of  Comfort:  Verses  27-28.  This  blessed 
message  of  comfort  also  awaits  its  final  great  fulfillment  in 
the  coming  days  of  promised  blessing  for  Jacob's  seed. 

CONCERNING  THE  PHILISTINES. 
CHAPTER   XLVII. 

This  brief  chapter  is  concerning  the  inhabitants  of  the 
borderland  of  Canaan,  called  Philistia.  This  announced 
judgment  was  fulfilled  a  short  time  after  it  was  spoken  by 
the  prophet. 

CONCERNING  MOAB. 
CHAPTER   XLVm. 

1.  The  Overthrow  of  Moab.     1-10. 

2.  The  Humiliation  of  Moab.     11-19. 

3.  Reaping  What  They  Sowed.     20-28. 

4.  Destroyed  on  Account  of  its  Pride.     29-47. 


246  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

With  these  divisions  the  chapter  may  be  studied  in  detail. 
Moab  was  of  incestuous  offspring  (Gen.  xix:37).  Israel  is 
now  exhorted  to  flee  and  save  itself  because  Moab  is  to 
be  destroyed.  Moab's  national  deity  was  Chemosh,  who 
was  also  worshipped  by  the  sister  nation,  the  Ammonites. 
Chemosh  was  probably  the  same  as  Moloch.  He  is  now  to 
go  forth  into  captivity  with  his  priests  and  princes.  On  verse 
10  critics  say:  *'This  bloodthirsty  verse  is  surely  not  Jere- 
miah's.'* But  they  forget  that  the  whole  prophecy  is  in- 
troduced with,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  and  the  critic's  knife, 
which  cuts  out  certain  verses  from  this  chapter,  mutilates 
the  Word  of  God.  There  is  no  valid  reason  to  brand  this 
and  other  verses  as  the  work  of  some  supplementer. 

The  chief  places  of  Moab  are  mentioned.  "The  horn  of 
Moab  (horn  the  emblem  of  power)  is  cut  off  and  his  arm  is 
broken,  saith  the  Lord."  And  why  this  judgment?  "For 
he  has  magnified  himself  against  the  Lord."  They  were 
filled  with  pride,  yea,  they  were  exceedingly  proud.  The 
Lord  speaks  of  it  thus:  "His  loftiness  and  his  arrogancy  and 
his  pride  and  his  haughtiness  of  heart."  How  God  de- 
tests pride!  In  both  Testaments  it  is  marked  out  as  the 
great  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  Filled  with  pride 
and  haughtiness,  they  derided  Israel,  God's  people;  when- 
ever Israel  was  mentioned  "they  skipped  for  joy"  (verse 
27).  Of  verses  28  and  29,  critics  declare  that  they  are  mostly 
derived  from  Isaiah  xv  and  xvi.  These  two  chapters  con- 
tain a  similar  prophecy  about  Moab,  but  these  utterances  by 
Jeremiah  are  not  copied  from  Isaiah,  but  are  a  divine  repeti- 
tion of  the  coming  judgment  of  that  people.  "Woe  be  unto 
thee  Moab!  the  people  of  Chemosh  perisheth!  for  thy  sons 
are  taken  captives,  and  thy  daughters  captive."  This  is 
the  final  word  in  this  predicted  judgment  of  Moab.  And 
thus  Moab  was  broken. 

The  last  verse  speaks  of  a  territorial  restoration  of  Moab, 
not  of  a  restitution  of  that  wicked  generation,  as  some  teach. 
We  do  not  know  where  a  remnant  of  Moab  is  today,  to 
possess  in  millennial  times  their  former  land;  nor  do  we 
know  how  the  Lord  is  going  to  accomplish  it.    But  we  know 


TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  247 

He  will  fulfill  His  ov/n  Word  and  we  do  not  need  to  invent 
some  scheme  of  how  it  will  be  done. 


CONCERNING    AMMON,    EDOM,    DAMASKUS,    KEDAR    AND 

ELAM. 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

1.  Concerning  the  Ammonites.     1-6. 

2.  Concerning  Edom.     7-22. 

S.     Concerning  Damaskus.     23-27. 

4.  Concerning  Kedar  and  Hazor.     28-33. 

5.  Against  Elam.     84-39. 

Ammon  was  the  younger  brother  of  Moab,  and,  like  the 
Moabites,  the  Ammonites  %vere  a  wicked  people,  though  they 
had  no  cities  like  Moab,  but  Vvcre  restless  wanderers;  they 
were  also  the  enemies  of  Israel.  The  predicted  judgment  has 
come.  Where  is  Ammon  today?  In  what  tribe  or  nation 
is  a  remnant  preserved?  Only  the  Ominscient  One  knows. 
But  their  captivity,  like  that  of  Moab,  will  be  brought  back 
again  in  the  days  when  Israel  becomes  the  head  of  the 
nations. 

Edom,  springing  from  Esau,  was  the  most  outspoken 
enemy  of  Israel.  In  our  annotations  on  the  prophecy  of 
Obadiah  we  return  to  this  chapter.  Their  complete  judg- 
ment is  here  announced.  *'For,  lo,  I  will  make  thee  small 
among  the  nations  and  despised  among  men.  Thy  terrible- 
ness  has  deceived  thee  and  the  pride  of  thine  heart,  O  thou 
that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  that  boldest  the  height 
of  the  hill.  Though  thou  shouldest  make  thy  nest  as  high 
as  the  eagle,  I  will  bring  thee  down  from  thence,  saith  the 
Lord'*  (15-16).  Here  at  least  the  critics  concede  that  this 
is  a  true  description  of  the  dwelling  places  of  Edom  of  old. 
**Its  capital,  Petra,  lay  in  an  amphitheater  of  mountains, 
accessible  only  through  a  narrow  gorge,  called  the  Sihy  wind- 
ing in  with  precipitous  sides  from  the  west;  and  the  moun- 
tain sides  round  Petra,  and  the  ravines  about  it,  contain 
innumerable  rock-hewn  cavities,   some  being  tombs,   but 


248  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  J 

others  dwellings  in  which  the  ancient  inhabitants  lived'* 
(Canon  Driver).  No  restoration  for  Edom  is  promised. 
Damaskus's  anguish  and  sorrow  is  predicted  next,  followed 
by  a  prophecy  concerning  various  Arabian  tribes;  Kedar 
and  Hazor  are  to  be  smitten.  The  final  prediction  is  as  to 
Elam.  Elam  was  east  of  South  Babylonia  and  the  lower 
Tigris,  later  known  as  Susians.  This  prophecy  was  given 
at  the  beginning  of  Zedekiah's  reign.  Elam  became  an  ally 
of  the  Persian  kingdom.  Here  her  overthrow  is  foretold 
as  well  as  her  restoration  "in  the  latter  days." 

BABYLON. 
CHAPTER  L-LI. 

These  two  final  chapters  contain  a  great  prophecy  con- 
cerning Babylon,  her  overthrow  and  doom.  The  fifty-first 
chapter  closes  with  the  statement  "thus  far  are  the  words 
of  Jeremiah."  There  is  a  direct  statement  that  Jeremiah 
wrote  all  these  words.  We  find  it  at  the  close  of  chapter 
li:59-64.  "Jeremiah  wrote  in  a  book  all  the  evil  that  should 
come  upon  Babylon,  even  all  these  words  that  are  written 
against  Babylon."  It  would  be  a  brazen  infidelity  which 
says  Jeremiah  did  not  v/rite  all  these  words.  Yet  the  almost 
universally  accepted  view  of  the  critics  is  that  these  chap- 
ters cannot  be  the  work  of  Jeremiah.  The  German  infidel. 
Professor  Eichhorn,  the  man  who  coined  the  phrase  "higher 
criticism,"  started  this  denial;  Kuenen,  Budde  and  others 
have  followed  in  his  steps.  Others  have  modified  this  rad- 
ical view  and  concede  the  possibility  that  Jeremiah  may 
have  been  the  author  of  these  two  chapters.  No  believer 
in  the  Word  of  God  can  have  a  moment's  doubt  as  to  this 
question. 

An  analysis  of  these  two  chapters  would  be  difficult  to 
make.  We  therefore  point  out  some  of  the  leading  parts 
of  this  great  utterance.  The  prophecy  covers  both  the 
doom  of  Babylon  as  it  has  been  and  the  doom  of  another, 
the  mystical  Babylon,  so  prominent  in  the  last  book  of  the 
Bible,  in  which  also  two  chapters  are  devoted  to  Babylon. 


THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH  249 

Some  hold  that  the  literal  Babylon  is  meant  in  Revelation; 
that  the  city  in  Mesopotamia  must  be  rebuilt;  that  it  will 
finally  become  the  one  great  world  center  domineering  the 
religious,  commercial  and  political  affairs  of  all  the 
world,  and  that  when  this  has  taken  place  Jeremiah's  proph- 
ecy will  be  fulfilled.  A  careful  examination  of  this  theory 
will. show  that  it  is  untenable.  It  would  mean  that  all  the 
great  world-centers  of  today  must  be  wiped  out  first,  and 
London,  New  York,  and  others  would  have  to  yield  their 
supremacy  to  the  restored  Babylon.  The  chapters  in  Reve- 
lation show  us  clearly  that  a  Babylon  of  a  mystical  nature 
is  meant,  which  in  spirit,  in  worldly  glory  and  corruption 
corresponds  to  the  ancient  Babylon.  This  mystical  Baby- 
lon is  Rome.  This  has  been  the  interpretation  of  the  chap- 
ters of  Revelation  from  the  earliest  times  and  is  still  main- 
tained, with  a  few  exceptions,  by  all  sound  and  spiritual 
expositors  of  the  Word  of  God. 

The  message  begins  with  the  command  to  publish  among 
the  nations  the  conquest  of  Babylon,  that  Bel  (lord)  is  put 
to  shame  and  that  Merodach  (the  chief  god  of  Babylon, 
known  as  Marduk  in  Babylonian  inscriptions)  is  dismayed. 
The  gods  of  Babylon  are  put  to  confusion  on  account  of  the 
fall  of  the  city.  The  disaster  comes  from  the  north  (Medo 
Persia,  the  conqueror  of  Babylon.  See  Dan.  vii).  Verses 
4-7  predict  the  return  of  the  nation  thoroughly  penitent. 
That  the  return  of  a  small  remnant  after  the  defeat  of 
Babylon  does  not  exhaust  this  prophecy  is  obvious.  The 
return  promised  here  comes  in  the  day  when  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles  are  over,  when  Babylon  and  the  Babylon  spirit 
will  pass  away,  when  all  false  gods  fall  and  the  Lord  is 
exalted  in  that  day.  Then  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel  will  be 
found  and  gathered  again.  The  invasion  under  Cyrus  is 
described  in  verses  9-10.  The  fall  of  the  Babylon  in  Rev- 
elation is  not  brought  about  by  an  invasion  such  as  is 
described  here,  but  by  the  ten  horns  of  the  beast,  the  re- 
vived Roman  empire  (Rev.  lxvii:16;  Dan.  vii).  Verse  13 
announces  the  complete  overthrow  of  the  city,  to  become 
the    hindermost  of  the  nations,  a  wilderness,  a  dry   land 


250  TEE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

and  a  desert.  This  ruin  was  not  at  once  carried  out,  but 
gradually  ancient  Babylon  became  all  that.  The  ruins  of 
this  once  powerful  city  have  been  located  north  of  Hilla,  a 
town  of  about  25,000  inhabitants.  Koldewey,  of  the  German 
Orient  Society,  laid  bare  by  excavation  many  of  the  ruins, 
shov/ing  that  the  city  covered  twelve  square  miles;  great 
streets  and  canals,  and  the  ruins  of  the  Marduk  temple  have 
been  found.  These  ruins  can  never  be  rebuilt.  (See  Isa. 
xlvii.)  There  is  nothing  which  indicates  that  this  once 
glorious  city  is  to  have  a  revival  and  then  be  destroyed  once 
more  and  remain  a  wilderness  after  its  destruction  at  some 
future  time. 

In  her  fall  Babylon  only  reaped  what  she  had  sown.  *Tor 
it  is  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord;  take  vengeance  upon  her; 
as  she  hath,  do  unto  her"  (verse  15).  The  same  verdict  is 
pronounced  upon  the  Babylon  of  the  end  time,  when  Rome 
will  once  more  have  supremacy,  Vvhen  the  present  day 
Babylon-spirit  will  concentrate  in  a  great  world  federation. 
"Reward  her  even  as  she  rewarded  you,  and  double  unto  her 
double  according  to  her  works;  in  the  cup  vrhich  she  hath 
filled  fill  to  her  double"  (Rev.  xviii:6).  The  nations  Vv^ll 
then  drink  of  the  cup  of  God's  UTath  and  judgment  as  the 
literal  Babylon  did.  Coupled  with  these  judgment  predic- 
tions are  the  future  blessings  of  Israel.  \Mien  the  Lord 
overthrows  the  final  Babylon,  as  seen  ir\  the  book  of  Revela- 
tion, when  the  great  whore  is  judged  and  her  seat,  Rome, 
in  Italy,  goes  up  in  smoke,  then  Israel's  day  of  glory  and 
blessing  breaks.  "In  those  days,  and  in  that  time,  saith 
Jehovah,  the  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for,  and  there 
shall  be  none;  and  the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be 
found;  for  I  will  pardon  them  whom  I  leave  as  a  remnant" 
(verse  20;  see  chapter  xxxi:34;  Micah  vii:18,  and  Rom. 
xi -.25-28).  After  still  more  predictions  concerning  the  fall 
and  doom  of  Babylon  (verses  21-32),  we  find  another  proph- 
ecy of  comfort.  When  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  end  with 
the  complete  dethronement  of  Babylon  in  its  mystical  mean- 
ing as  pictured  in  Revelation,  the  Redeemer  of  Irsael  will 
arise  to  plead  the  cause  of  His  people  Israel.    The  fiftieth 


THE   PROPHET  JEREIIIAH  251 

chapter  ends  with  an  additional  description  of  the  desolation 
of  Babylon. 

The  fifty-first  chapter  is  a  continued  prophecy  of  the 
doom  and  utter  desolation  of  the  proud  mistress  of  the 
nations.  Much  here  connects  with  Rev.  xviii.  The  rem- 
nant of  Israel  is  addressed  in  verses  5  and  6.  Compare  with 
I*..et.  xviii  :4.  It  is  the  same  command  to  flee  Babylon,  a 
:  linciple  which  is  in  force  today  as  regards  the  true  church 
r.nd  her  separation  from  ecclesiastical  evil.  The  golden  cup 
mentioned  in  verse  7  is  also  mentioned  in  Revelation  in 
chapter  xvii:4,  in  the  description  of  papal  Rome  and  her 
evil  abominations.  In  the  rest  of  the  chapter  God's  deal- 
ing in  judgment  is  wonderfully  told  out,  prophetic  of  that 
coming  day  when  the  Lord  will  deal  with  the  world  in  judg- 
ment. This  must  be  the  reason  why  such  an  extended 
prophecy  is  given.  It  all  goes  beyond  the  judgment  of  the 
literal  Babylon.  We  call  attention  to  the  last  verses  of 
this  long  chapter.  TVe  read  there  that  the  prophet,  after 
he  wrote  down  all  these  words  against  Babylon,  gave  the 
book  to  Seraiah,  chief  chamberlain  of  Zedekiah.  This  was 
before  the  fall  of  Jerusalem.  Seraiah  was  evidently  the 
brother  of  Baruch  (chapter  xxxii:12).  While  Jeremiah  knew 
the  significant  position  that  Babylonia,  and  especially  King 
Nebuchadnezzar,  had  been  given  by  the  sovereign  Lord,  on 
account  of  which  he  urged  submission  to  the  Chaldeans;  he 
also  knew  even  then,  before  Jerusalem  fell,  of  Babylon's 
fall  and  doom.  Seraiah  went  to  Babylon  and  he  was  to 
read  the  roll  there,  probably  not  in  public,  but  in  private. 
After  reading,  he  was  to  speak  certain  w^ords  (verse  62), 
then  bind  a  stone  to  the  roll  and  cast  it  into  the  Euphrates. 
When  the  roll  was  sinking  he  was  to  say,  "Thus  shall  Baby- 
lon sink  and  shall  not  rise  again."  In  our  New  Testament 
book  of  prophecy  we  read:  "And  a  mighty  angel  took  up 
a  stone  like  a  great  millstone,  and  cast  it  into  the  sea,  say- 
ing, Thus  with  violence  that  great  city  Babylon  be  thrown 
down,  and  shall  be  found  no  more"  (Rev.  xviii :21).  That 
great  predicted  end  of  all  God-defiance    and   opposition, 


252  THE  PROPHET  JEREMIAH 

typified  by  Babylon  and  its  past  glory,  will  surely  come. 
Jeremiah  uttered  his  last  word. 

The  last  chapter  of  Jeremiah  is  not  from  his  pen;  some 
other  inspired  writer  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  add 
the  history  of  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  and  the  fate  of  the 
people. 

The  substance  of  this  appendix  is  found  is  2  Kings  xxiv: 
18-20  and  xxv:l-21,  27-30.  The  reader  will  find  in  the 
second  book  of  Kings  our  annotations  on  this  history.  But 
why  is  it  added  here  once  more?  Evidently  to  show  how 
literally  the  judgment  predictions  and  divine  warnings  given 
through  Jeremiah  were  fulfilled.  For  a  time  the  false  proph- 
ets had  their  way;  their  lying  messages,  their  words  of  de- 
lusion and  false  hope  were  listened  to  and  believed.  The 
lot  of  the  prophet  of  God  was  a  lonely  lot;  he  was  rejected 
and  he  suffered.  Yea,  often  the  weeping  prophet  was  dis- 
couraged and  filled  with  gloom.  But  the  time  came  when 
he  was  vindicated  and  God's  Word  was  vindicated,  while 
the  false  prophets  were  found  out  to  be  liars  and  deceivers. 

In  our  own  day  we  have  the  false  prophets  still  wdth  us, 
men  and  women,  who  deny  the  truth  and  teach  error.  They 
speak  of  world  improvement,  world  betterment,  and  world 
conquest.  What  God  has  spoken  concerning  "wrath  and 
judgment  to  come"  is  set  aside.  Those  who  preach  and 
teach  according  to  the  infallible  Word  of  God,  who  see  no 
better  world,  no  universal  righteousness  and  peace,  are 
branded  as  pessimists.  The  "day  of  the  Lord"  and  the 
"coming  of  the  Lord"  are  sneered  at.  But  as  the  Word  of 
God  spoken  by  Jeremiah  was  vindicated,  so  the  Word  of 
God  will  be  vindicated  again,  till  all  the  enemies  of  the  writ- 
ten Word,  the  Bible,  and  the  living  Word,  Christ,  are  si- 
lenced forever. 


LAMENTATIONS 


Lamentations 

INTRODUCTION 

In  the  Hebrew  Bible,  the  small  book  which  follows  in  our  English 
Bible  the  book  of  Jeremiah,  is  placed  in  the  portion  which  is  called 
"Kethubim"  (the  writings).  It  is  one  of  the  five,  so  called  "Megilloth." 
The  Septuagint  translation  begins  with  a  brief  paragraph  which  is 
not  found  in  our  version:  "It  came  to  pass  that,  after  Israel  was  taken 
captive  and  Jerusalem  was  made  desolate,  Jeremiah  sat  weeping  and 
lamented  with  this  lamentation  over  Jerusalem,  and  said  .  .  .  ;"  then 
the  first  chapter  begins.  The  Vulgate  (Latin)  translation  has  adopted 
this  statement  and  also  the  Arabic  version. 

There  can  be  no  question  that  Jeremiah  is  the  inspired  author  of 
these  outbursts  of  grief,  as  well  as  confession  of  sin  and  dependence 
on  Jehovah.  Yet  this  has  not  only  been  seriously  questioned,  but 
positively  denied.  Critics  claim  that  probably  chapters  ii  and  iv  must 
have  been  written  by  an  eye-witness  of  Judah's  conquest;  they  deny 
that  it  was  Jeremiah  and  think  it  must  have  been  one  of  the  exiles. 
The  claim  is  made  because  it  appears  to  them  that  these  two  chapters 
lean  strongly  on  Ezekiel  and  parts,  they  say,  must  have  been  copied 
after  Ezekiel's  writings.  The  other  chapters,  they  say,  are  much  later. 
Critics  like  Budde  and  Cheyne  put  the  third  chapter  in  the  pre-Mac- 
cabean  period  towards  the  end  of  the  third  century.  All  is  nothing 
but  guesswork,  which  is  proved  by  the  different  theories  of  these 
scholars,  which  clash  with  each  other.  To  show  the  superficial  method 
of  these  men  we  shall  give  a  few  of  the  star  arguments  against  the 
Jeremianic  authorship  of  Lamentations.  They  say  that  iv:17  could 
hardly  have  been  written  by  Jeremiah  because  the  writer  includes 
himself  with  those  who  had  expected  help  from  Egypt.  But  the  critic 
does  not  see  that  the  prophet  identifies  himself  with  the  nation, 
as  Daniel  did.  Then,  again,  they  object  to  iv:20,  because  it  speaks 
of  Zedekiah  in  such  a  way  as  Jeremiah  would  never  have  spoken  of  him. 
But  how  do  they  know?  Zedekiah  was  still  the  Lord's  Anointed,  even 
as  David  recognized  down  to  the  sad  end  of  Saul,  the  king  as  the  Lord's 
Anointed.  Instead  of  being  an  argument  against  the  authorship  of 
Jeremiah,  it  is  one  for  it. 

Then  these  "literary"  critics  claim  that  the  smooth  and  beautiful 
style  cannot  be  Jeremiah's.  "The  whole  stjde  of  these  poems,  though 
exquisitely  beautiful  and  touching,  and  studded  with  the  thoughts  of 
the  great  prophet,  is  absolutely  different  to  anything  we  find  in  the 
long  roll  of  Jeremiah's  great  work.  It  is  too  artificial,  too  much  studied, 
too  elaborately  worked  out"   (A.  B.  Davidson).     If  A.   B.   Davidson 


256  LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH 

and  other  critics  had  just  a  little  faith  in  Divine  inspiration  they  would 
not  write  such  puerile  criticism.  As  if  the  Spirit  of  God  could  not  change 
the  style  and  manner  of  the  writings  of  one  of  His  chosen  instruments! 

The  Lamentations  are  correctly  divided  into  five  chapters  in  a  very 
remarkable  way.  Chapters  i  and  ii  consist  each  of  twenty-two  verses 
of  three  lines  each.  All  is  written  in  a  certain  meter.  Each  verse  begins 
in  both  chapters  with  the  successive  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet. 
They  are  acrostics.  The  third  chapter  has  instead  of  22  verses,  66 
verses,  that  is,  3  x  22.  The  first  three  verses  of  this  chapter  begin  each 
with  the  first  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet;  the  next  three  with  the 
second  letter,  so  that  in  these  66  verses  the  Hebrew  alphabet  is  again 
followed.  The  fourth  chapter  is  also  arranged  in  the  same  manner, 
acrostically,  each  of  the  22  verses  begin  with  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew 
alphabet.  The  last  chapter  shows  no  such  arrangement.  We  doubt 
not  that  in  all  this  there  may  be  a  hidden,  a  deeper  meaning,  which  no 
Saint  of  God  has  yet  discovered. 

The  message  of  this  book  is  extremely  precious.  It  is  a  pity  that 
so  few  of  God's  people  have  ever  paid  a  closer  attention  to  this  book. 
Here  is  indeed  a  great  mine  of  comfort  and  spiritual  instruction  which 
will  prove  very  wholesome  to  all  those  who  walk  with  God. 

When  Israel  suffered  in  Egypt  the  Lord  said:  "I  have  surely  seen 
the  affliction  of  my  people"  (Exod.  iii:7).  Lamentations  shows  the 
same  blessed  fact,  that  Jehovah  has  a  loving  and  deep  interest  in  the 
afflictions  of  His  people  through  which  they  pass  on  account  of  their 
sins.  He  who  had  to  chastise  His  people  is  nevertheless  moved  with 
compassion  in  their  behalf.  Yea,  in  their  affliction  He  Himself  is 
afflicted  and  He  yearns  over  them.  The  feelings,  deep  emotions  of  sor- 
row and  humiliation,  expressed  by  the  mouthpiece  of  Jehovah,  Jere- 
miah, were  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  in  the  heart  of  the  prophet. 

"There  is  nothing  more  affecting  than  the  sentiments  produced  in 
the  heart  by  the  conviction  that  the  subject  ot  affliction  is  beloved  of 
God,  that  He  loves  that  which  He  is  obliged  to  smite,  and  is  obliged 
to  smite  that  which  He  loves.  The  prophet,  while  laying  open  the 
affliction  of  Jerusalem,  acknowledges  that  the  sin  of  the  people  had 
caused  it.  Could  that  diminish  the  sorrow  of  his  heart?  If  on  the  one 
hand  it  was  a  consolation,  on  the  other  it  humbled  and  made  him  hide 
his  face.  The  pride  of  the  enemy,  and  their  joy  in  seeing  the  affliction 
of  the  beloved  of  God,  give  occasion  to  sue  for  compassion  on  behalf 
of  the  afflicted,  and  judgment  on  the  malice  of  the  enemy."* 

Prophetically  we  may  look  upon  these  lamentations  as  embodying 
the  soul-exercise  of  the  godly  remnant  of  God's  earthly  people  passing 
in  a  future  day  through  the  great  tribulation.  That  beautiful  prayer 
found  in  the  last  chapter  will  then  be  answered,  "renew  our  days  of 


*Synopsis. 


LAMENTATIONS   OF  JEREMIAH  ^257 

old"  and  all  the  glorious  promises  given  to  Israel  will  then  be  fulfilled. 
No  further  division  of  this  book  is  needed;  the  division  into  five 
chapters  is  perfect. 

JERUSALEM'S  GREAT  DESOLATION  AND  THE  SORROW  OP 
fflS  PEOPLE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

The  chapter  begins  with  an  outburst  of  grief  over  Jerusa- 
lem's desolation.  Once  she  was  a  populous  city;  now  she 
is  solitary.  Once  she  was  great  among  the  nations,  like  a 
princess  among  provinces,  and  now  she  is  widowed.  Then 
in  the  next  verse  v/e  hear  her  weeping;  she  weeps  all  night 
long;  none  is  there  to  comfort  her;  her  friends  have  turned 
against  her,  they  have  become  her  enemies.  She  was  dis- 
obedient to  her  Lord,  she  rejected  His  Word,  she  gave  up 
her  holy  place  as  His  separated  people  and  now  "she  find- 
eth  no  rest."  The  Lord's  hand  is  upon  her  for  the  multi- 
tude of  her  transgressions.  The  hopeful  note  we  find  in 
verses  8-11.  Here  is  confession  of  her  guilt  and  shame; 
here  is  humiliation  and  appeal  to  the  Lord  on  account  of 
the  enemy.  "See,  O  Lord,  and  behold;  for  I  am  become 
vile."  Such  humiliation  and  self-judgment  is  pleasing  in 
the  Lord's  sight. 

In  verse  12  Jerusalem  speaks:  "Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all 
ye  that  pass  by?  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow 
like  unto  My  sorrow,  which  is  done  unto  me,  wherewith 
the  Lord  hath  ajfflicted  me  in  the  day  of  His  fierce  anger.'* 
The  passer-by  who  beholds  the  ruins  of  Zion  is  asked  to 
look  upon  the  desolations  and  then  to  consider  that  the 
Lord  in  His  righteous  anger  smote  her,  who  is  still  His 
beloved.  Well  may  we  think  of  Him,  who  had  to  say,  "See 
if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  My  sorrow,"  who  was 
smitten  and  afflicted,  upon  whom  Jehovah's  rod  rested, 
over  whose  blessed  head  all  the  waves  and  billows  of  Divine 
judgment-wrath  rolled.  He  who  is  the  Beloved,  the  Son  of 
God,  our  Lord.  Again  the  prophet  breaks  out  in  weeping, 
"His  eye  runneth  down  with  water."    He  is  deeply  affected 


258  LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH 

over  the  desolation  and  judgment  which  has  taken  place. 
But  a  greater  One,  greater  than  Jeremiah,  stood  centuries 
after  before  the  same  city,  brought  back  from  the  ruin  of 
Jeremiah's  time.  And  as  He  beheld  that  city  He  wept, 
because  His  ominiscient  eye  beheld  a  still  more  appalling 
judgment  for  city  and  nation. 

Forsaken,  uncomforted,  distressed,  humiliated,  sighing 
and  crying,  owning  her  rebellion,  vindicating  Jehovah  and 
His  righteousness,  Jerusalem  sits  in  the  dust,  * 'abroad  the 
sword  bereaveth,  at  home  there  is  death." 

WHAT  THE  LORD  HAS  DONE. 
CHAPTER  n. 

The  great  catastrophe  continues  in  vivid  description 
throughout  this  chapter  also.  Not  an  enemy  has  done  it, 
not  Nebuchadrezzar  and  his  Chaldean  hordes,  but  the  Lord 
is  the  executor  of  all.  The  beauty  of  Israel  He  cast  down; 
He  swallowed  up  the  habitations  of  Jacob;  He  burned 
against  Jacob  like  a  flame;  He  bent  His  bow  like  an  enemy; 
He  poured  out  His  fury  like  fire;  He  was  as  an  enemy. 
These  are  a  few  of  the  many  expressions  with  which  the 
righteousness  of  the  Lord  in  judging  His  people  is  acknowl- 
edged. 

And  what  a  great  description  of  Jerusalem  and  her  in- 
habitants we  read  in  verses  8-16.  Gates  broken  down;  king 
and  princes  among  the  Gentiles;  law  abandoned;  no  more 
visions!  Elders  en  the  ground  in  sackcloth  and  ashes; 
virgins  hanging  their  heads;  children  and  sucklings  swooning 
in  the  streets — and  all  that  pass  by  clap  their  hands,  hiss, 
and  wag  their  head  at  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem. 

"The  Lord  hath  done  what  He  had  devised;  He  hath 
fulfilled  the  Word  that  He  had  commanded  in  the  days  of 
old."  Oh!  that  the  people  today  would  hear  and  believe  that 
God  will  yet  fulfill  other  judgment  messages  and  deal  with 
the  world  on  account  of  its  s'n.  The  chapter  ends  with  a 
prayer. 


LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH  259 

THE  PROPHET'S  SUFFERING  AND  DISTRESS. 
CHAPTER  KL 

This  chapter  is  intensely  personal.  None  but  Jeremiah 
could  have  written  these  wonderful  expressions  of  sorrow, 
the  sorrows  of  the  people  of  God  into  which  he  entered  so 
fully,  in  such  a  way  that  they  become  his  own.  He  shared 
all  -their  afflictions,  bore  them  himself  and  then  was  hated 
by  them.  It  was  the  Spirit  of  Christ  who  created  these 
feelings  in  the  heart  of  the  prophet.  In  reading  these  words 
of  deep  distress  and  the  words  of  faith  and  waiting  for  Him, 
we  must  look  beyond  Jeremiah  and  see  a  picture  of  our  Lord, 
*'the  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,"  His  sor- 
row and  His  afflictions,  the  emotions  of  His  holy  soul,  as 
well  as  the  experiences  and  soul  exercise  of  the  believing 
remnant  of  Israel  in  days  to  come. 

The  prophet  speaks  of  himself  as  one  who  is  smitten  by 
the  rod  of  God's  wrath,  the  man  that  hath  seen  affliction. 
He  had  not  deserved  that  wrath;  the  wrath  and  afiiiction 
have  come  upon  a  sinful  people,  but  he  identifies  himself 
with  them.  What  must  have  been  the  suffering  and  the 
affliction  of  our  Lord  when  He,  at  the  close  of  His  blessed 
life,  suffered  and  died  the  death  of  the  cross!  The  rod  of 
righteousness  fell  on  Him.  More  than  Jeremiah  did,  He 
tasted  that  wrath,  when  He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made  sin 
for  us.  "He  (God)  hath  bent  His  bow,  and  set  Me  as  a  mark 
for  the  arrow.  He  hath  caused  the  arrows  of  His  quiver 
to  enter  into  my  reins.  I  was  a  derision  to  all  my  people 
and  their  song  all  the  day"  (verses  12-14).  He  speaks  of 
"the  wormwood  and  the  gall"  (verse  19);  of  the  "smitten 
cheek  filled  with  reproach"  (verse  30). 

Through  such  suffering  Jeremiah  passed  as  well  as  the 
godly  of  all  ages,  as  well  as  those  in  the  future.  Jeremiah's 
affliction  but  faintly  foreshadows  the  afflictions  of  the 
afflicted  One.  But  while  Jeremiah  suffered  with  Jerusalem 
and  for  Jerusalem,  he  was  not  destitute  of  comfort.  He 
knew  the  Lord  and  He  sustained  him  in  his  affliction.  How 
beautifully  he  speaks  of  the  mercies  of  the  Lord,  of  His 


260  LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH 

compassions  which  never  fail,  of  the  greatness  of  His  faith- 
fulness (verses  22,  23).  Such  is  the  comfort  still  of  all  those 
who  know  the  Lord;  it  is  the  song  in  the  night:  *'The  Lord 
is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul;  therefore  will  I  hope  in  Him. 
The  Lord  is  good  unto  them  that  wait  for  Him,  to  the  soul 
that  seeketh  Him."  All  His  Saints  speak  thus  when  they 
feel  the  chastening  hand  of  the  Lord.  He  has  full  confi- 
dence in  the  Lord  and  knows  "He  doth  not  afflict  willingly," 
and  that  *'the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever."  And  again, 
"though  He  cause  grief,  yet  will  He  have  compassion  accord- 
ing to  the  multitude  of  His  mercies." 

Beginning  with  verse  40,  a  real  return  is  described.  There 
is  self-examination:  "Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways  and 
turn  again  to  the  Lord."  This  is  followed  by  prayer:  "Let 
us  lift  up  our  hearts  with  our  hands  unto  God  in  the  heavens." 
Then  comes  confession:  "We  have  transgressed  and  have 
rebelled;  Thou  hast  not  pardoned."  It  describes  prophet- 
ically the  repentance  of  a  Jewish  renmant  v*^hen  this  present 
age  ends  and  the  Lord  is  about  to  be  manifested  in  visible 
glory.  Jeremiah's  lament  over  Jerusalem's  condition  and 
the  nation's  state  is  once  more  recorded  in  verses  45-47. 
"Thou  hast  made  us  an  off  scouring  and  refuse  in  the  midst 
of  the  people.  All  our  enemies  have  opened  their  mouths 
against  us.  Fear  and  snare  is  come  upon  us,  desolation  and 
destruction."  Such  will  also  be  the  complaint  of  the  suf- 
fering remnant.  This  chapter  ends  with  an  imprecatory 
prayer."  Render  unto  them  a  recompense,  O  Lord,  accord- 
ing to  the  works  of  their  hands.  Give  them  sorrow  of  heart, 
thy  curse  unto  them.  Persecute  and  destroy  them  in  anger 
from  under  the  heavens  of  the  Lord."  It  is  like  the  impre- 
catory prayers  in  the  Psalms,  prayers  which  will  be  prayed 
when  the  godly  in  Israel  suffer  under  their  enemies  in  the 
great  tribulation. 

THE  DEPARTED  GLORY  AND  THE  CUP  OF  SHAME. 
CHAPTER  IV. 

This  new  lament  begins  with  a  description  of  the  former 


LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH  261 

glory  of  Zion  and  its  present  wretchedness;  the  glory  is 
departed : 

How  is  the  gold  become  dim!     The  most  pure  gold  changed! 

The  stones  of  the  sanctuary  are  poured  forth  at  the  top  of  every  street. 

The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  just  like  fine  gold — 

How  are  they  now  esteemed  like  earthern  pitchers,  the  work  of  the 

potters'  hands! 
Even  the  jackals  draw  out  the  breast,  giving  suck  to  their  young — 
The  daughter  of  my  people  is  become  cruel,  like  the  ostriches  in  the 

wilderness. 
The  tongue  of  the  sucking  child  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth  for 

thirst. 
The  young  children  ask  bread,  no  man  breaketh  it  unto  them. 
They  that  did  feel  delicately  are  desolate  in  the  streets. 
They  that  were  brought  up  in  scarlet  embrace  dunghills. 

What  degradation  and  shame!  The  Lord  had  called 
Zion  to  be  like  the  pure  gold,  precious  and  glorious.  In  his 
beautiful  parable,  Ezekiel  speaks  thus  of  Jerusalem's  glory : 
"Thus  wast  thou  decked  with  gold  and  silver;  and  thy  rai- 
ment was  of  fine  linen  and  silk  and  broidered  work;  thou 
didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,  and  oil;  and  thou  wast 
exceeding  beautiful,  and  thou  didst  prosper  in  a  kingdom'* 
(Ezekiel  xvi:13).  The  gold  is  become  dim,  the  pure  gold 
changed.  Instead  of  the  linen  and  silk  there  is  sackcloth 
and  ashes;  instead  of  the  flour,  the  honey,  and  the  oil,  there 
is  want  and  famine.  When  the  golden-glory  departed  from 
Zion,  then  the  Lord  revealed  that  Nebuchadnezzar  is  "the 
head  of  gold,"  the  starting  point  of  the  times  of  the  Gentiles. 
The  glory  had  departed  and  Zion  had  to  drink  of  shame  and 
want  to  the  full  on  account  of  her  sins  (verse  6) .  And  what 
a  contrast  now  between  what  the  Nazarites  and  nobles  of 
the  nation  were  once  and  what  they  are  now.  They  were 
purer  than  snow,  whiter  than  milk;  and  now  they  are 
blacker  than  coal.  They  were  ruddy  in  body;  and  now 
their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  bones.  What  a  horrible  trans- 
formation sin  had  wrought!  Sin  is  a  robber;  sin  brings  its 
wages.  It  robs  of  glory  and  gives  nothing  but  suffering, 
shame  and  death.  All  that  God  had  spoken  long  ago,  the 
very  curses  generation  after  generation  had  read  in  the  book 


262  LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH 

of  the  law  (Deut.  xxviii  :56,  57;  Lev.  xxvi:29),  had  come 
upon  them.  The  kings  of  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the 
world,  knew  that  Jerusalem  was  unconquerable, for  the  Lord 
of  all  the  earth  was  Zion's  King  and  Lord.  What  no  earthly- 
power  could  have  done,  to  enter  Jerusalem  and  spoil  the 
city,  the  Lord  had  done,  "on  account  of  the  sons  of  her 
prophets,  the  iniquities  of  her  priests,  that  have  shed  the 
blood  of  the  just  in  the  midst  of  her."  Jerusalem  was  built 
again.  Once  more  after  the  seventy  years  the  city  was  re- 
stored, the  temple  rebuilt.  Then  the  Just  One  came,  the 
Messiah  of  David,  the  Lord  of  Glory.  They  shed  the  blood 
of  the  Just  One,  and  now,  as  verse  13  says,  "They  wander 
about  blind." 

And  Edom!  She  had  rejoiced  at  Zion's  overthrow,  even 
as  Gentiles  have  despised  Israel.  But  there  is  judgment 
in  store  for  the  nations,  mercy  for  Israel,  when  the  punish- 
ment is  accomplished.  "He  will  no  more  carry  thee  away 
into  captivity." 

THE  PRAYER  OF  HOPE. 
CHAPTER  V. 

The  lamentations  end  with  a  prayer:  "Remember,  O 
Lord,  what  is  come  upon  us;  consider  and  behold  our  re- 
proach." It  is  the  prayer  of  confession  and  of  hope,  which 
reaches  the  heart  of  the  God  of  Israel.  The  prophets,  in 
behalf  of  the  nation,  pours  out  his  confession :  "The  crown 
is  fallen  from  our  head;  woe  unto  us  that  we  have  sinned." 
And  there  is  hope  in  the  Lord  who  remaineth,  whose  throne 
is  from  generation  to  generation.  The  prayer,  "Turn  thou 
us  unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned;  renew  our 
days  as  of  old"  (verse  21)  will  some  day  be  blessedly  an- 
swered. The  eightieth  Psalm  contains  the  same  prayer  a 
number  of  times,  and  there  He  is  mentioned  who  will  yet 
save  His  people  Israel  from  their  sins.  "Let  Thy  hand  be 
upon  the  Man  of  thy  right  hand,  upon  the  Son  of  Man  Whom 
Thou  madest  strong  for  Thyself.  So  will  not  we  go  back 
from  Thee;  quicken  us  and  we  will  call  on  Thy  Name. 


LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH  263 

Turn  us  again  O  Lord  God  of  hosts,  cause  Thy  face  to  shine, 
and  we  shall  be  saved." 

"The  prophet  now  presents  in  this  chapter  the  whole 
affliction  of  the  people  to  God,  as  an  object  of  compassion  and 
mercy.  This  is  an  onward  step  in  the  path  of  these  deep 
exercises  of  heart.  He  is  at  peace  with  God;  he  is  in  His 
presence;  it  is  no  longer  a  heart  struggling  with  inward 
misery.  All  is  confessed  before  Jehovah,  who  is  faithful  to 
His  people,  so  that  he  can  call  on  God  to  consider  the  afflic- 
tion in  order  that  He  may  remember  His  suffering  people 
according  to  the  greatness  of  His  compassions.  For  Jehovah 
changes  not  (chapter  v:19-21).  The  sense  of  the  affliction 
remains  in  full,  but  God  is  brought  in,  and  everything  hav- 
ing been  recalled  and  judged  before  Him,  all  that  had  hap- 
pened being  cleared  up  to  the  heart,  Jeremiah  can  rest  in 
the  proper  and  eternal  relations  between  God  and  His  be- 
loved people;  and,  shutting  himseK  into  his  direct  relations 
with  his  God,  he  avails  himself  of  His  goodness,  as  being  in 
those  relations,  to  find  in  the  affliction  of  the  beloved  people 
an  opportunity  for  calling  His  attention  to  them.  This  is 
the  true  position  of  faith — that  which  it  attains  as  the  result 
of  its  exercises  before  God  at  the  sight  of  the  affliction  of  His 
people  (an  affliction  so  much  the  deeper  from  its  being 
caused  by  sin). 

"This  Book  of  Lamentations  is  remarkable  because  we  see 
in  it  the  expression  of  the  thoughts  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that 
is,  those  produced  in  persons  under  His  influence,  the  vessels 
of  His  testimony,  when  God  was  forced  to  set  aside  that 
which  He  had  established  in  the  world  as  His  own.  There 
is  nothing  similar  in  the  whole  circle  of  the  revelations  and 
of  the  affections  of  God.  He  says  himself.  How  could  He 
treat  them  as  Admah  and  Zeboim.?  Christ  went  through 
it  in  its  fullest  extent.  But  He  went  through  it  in  His  own 
perfection  with  God.  He  acted  thus  with  regard  to  Jerusa- 
lem, and  wept  over  it.  But  here  man  is  found  to  have  lost 
the  hope  of  God  interposing  on  His  people's  behalf.  God 
would  not  abandon  a  man  who  was  one  of  this  people,  who 
loved  them,  who  understood  that  God  loved  them,  that  they 


264  LAMENTATIONS  OF  JEREMIAH 

were  the  object  of  His  affection.  lie  was  one  of  them.  How 
could  he  bear  the  idea  that  God  had  cast  them  off?  No  doubt 
God  would  re-establish  them.  But  in  the  place  where  God 
had  set  them,  all  hope  was  lost  forever.  In  the  Lord's  own 
presence  it  is  never  lost.  If  is  in  view  of  this  that  all  these 
exercises  of  heart  are  gone  through,  until  the  heart  can  fully 
enter  into  the  mind  and  affections  of  God  Himself.  Indeed, 
this  is  always  true 

"The  Spirit  gives  us  here  a  picture  of  all  these  exercises. 
How  gracious!  To  see  the  Spirit  of  God  enter  into  all  these 
details,  not  only  of  the  ways  of  God,  but  of  that  also  which 
passes  through  a  heart  in  which  the  judgment  of  God  is  felt 
by  grace,  until  all  is  set  right  in  the  presence  of  God  Himself. 
Inspiration  gives  us  not  only  the  perfect  thoughts  of  God, 
and  Christ  the  perfection  of  man  before  God,  but  also  all 
the  exercises  produced  in  our  poor  hearts,  when  the  perfect 
Spirit  acts  in  them,  so  far  as  these  thoughts,  all  mingled  as 
they  are,  refer  in  the  main  to  God,  or  are  produced  by  Him. 
So  truly  cares  He  for  us!  He  hearkens  to  our  sighs,  although 
much  of  imperfection  and  of  that  which  belongs  to  our  own 
heart  is  mixed  with  them.  It  is  this  that  we  see  in  the  Book 
of  Lamentations,  in  the  Psalms,  and  elsewhere,  and  abund- 
antly, though  in  another  manner,  in  the  New  Testament."* 

•Synopsis. 


EZEKIEL 


The  Prophet  Ezekiel 

INTRODUCTION. 

From  the  opening  verses  of  of  the  Book  we  learn  that  Ezekiel  was  the 
son  of  Buzi,  the  priest,  and  belonged  consequently  to  the  much  honored 
Zadok  family.  That  he  knev/  the  nobility  of  Jerusalem  well  and  was 
intimate  with  them  may  be  indirectly  learned  from  the  eleventh  chap- 
ter. Rabbinical  tradition  makes  Buzi  (which  means  "contempt")  a 
son  of  Jeremiah.  There  is  no  evidence  for  this.  Eleven  years  before 
the  complete  ruin  of  the  city  and  the  temple  by  the  King  of  Babylon, 
Ezekiel  was  carried  away  into  the  captivity.  This  deportation  is 
recorded  in  2  Kings  xxiv:14.  Before  Ezekiel  with  the  princes  and  the 
mighty  men  were  taken  into  captivity,  others  had  been  removed  to 
Babylon,  notably  Daniel  and  his  three  companions.  Ezekiel  must 
have  known  Daniel  personally.  His  name  is  found  three  times  in  this 
book  (chapters  xiv:14,20,  xxviii:3). 

Ezekiel  was  not  a  youth,  as  generally  supposed,  when  he  was  de- 
ported to  Babylon,  for  the  matured  character  of  a  priest  which  appears 
in  his  writings  and  his  full  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  temple 
service  render  such  a  supposition  highly  improbable.  Jewish  tradi- 
tion declares  that  he  exercised  already  the  prophetic  office  before  he 
was  carried  away. 

The  name  Ezekiel  means  "strengthened  by  God."  It  has  been  stated 
by  some  that  this  is  not  the  original  name  of  the  prophet,  but  his 
official  title,  which  he  adopted  on  account  of  his  ministry  among  the 
people.  Very  interesting  on  this  controverted  point  is  the  statement 
of  a  rabbinical  comment.  The  declaration  is  made  that  the  prophets 
of  God  received  their  significant  names,  so  closely  linked  with  and 
expressive  of  the  character  of  their  messages,  from  above,  and  not 
according  to  the  will  of  their  earthly  parents.  God  called  them  to 
their  work  and  had  them  named  accordingly  before  they  ever  entered 
upon  their  offices  as  prophets.  We  believe  this  may  be  correct,  espe- 
cially in  view  of  Jeremiah  i:5. 

Where  He  Ministered. 

The  place  where  we  find  Ezekiel  is  the  river  Chebar.  This  river  is 
now  known  by  the  name  Kabour.  It  emptied  into  the  Euphrates  north 
of  Babylon  and  was  also  called  Nar  -  Kabari,  the  great  canal.  Here 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  started  a  colony  of  captives.  In  chapter  iii:15, 
the  name  of  the  place  is  given;  it  was  at  Tel-abib.  In  this  settlement 
the  prophet  seems  to  have  lived.     Two  passages  in  the  book  tell  us 


268  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

that  he  had  his  own  house  (iii:24,  viii:l).  We  also  know  that  he  was 
married  (xxiv:16-18).  The  death  of  his  wife  is  the  only  event  he 
mentions  of  his  personal  history,  and  that  would  probably  have  not 
been  recorded  if  it  were  not  connected  with  his  prophetic  oflSce.  The 
prophecies  he  uttered  among  the  captives  are  carefully  dated.  The 
first  date  is  found  in  chapter  i:l-2. 

Ezekiel  and  Jeremiah. 

Ezekiel's  great  prophetic  ministry  is  closely  connected  with  that  of 
Jeremiah.  When  Ezekiel  had  his  first  great  vision  on  the  banks  of 
the  river  Chebar,  Jeremiah  had  already  been  a  prophet  for  thirty-five 
years.  Only  a  few  years  more  remained  for  this  great  man  of  God, 
That  Ezekiel  must  have  been  acquainted  with  Jeremiah  and  his  mes- 
sages of  warning  and  exhortation  is  more  than  likely.  Yet  it  is  strange 
there  is  not  a  single  reference  to  Jeremiah  in  the  entire  book  of  Ezekiel. 
It  is  strange  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  messages  of  these  two  men 
have  so  much  in  common.  Critics  make  the  assertion  that  Ezekiel 
as  a  prophet  was  moulded  by  the  teaching  of  Jeremiah.  Kuenen  claims 
that  Ezekiel  must  have  been  for  many  years  the  close  student  of  Jere- 
miah's writings.  Before  Ezekiel  proceeded  to  write  his  own  prophecies, 
his  mind,  it  is  claimed,  had  become  so  saturated  with  the  ideas  and 
language  of  Jeremiah  that  every  part  of  his  book  betrays  the  influence 
of  his  predecessor.  This  view  would  make  Ezekiel  an  enthusiastic 
admirer  and  copyist  of  Jeremiah.  But  in  the  book  of  Ezekiel  the 
phrases  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God" — "The  Word  of  the  Lord  came 
unto  me" — occur  over  and  over  again.  The  words  he  spoke,  the  mighty 
messages  he  delivered,  were  not  produced  by  the  influence  of  Jeremiah 
nor  by  his  example,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Other  critics  have  even 
done  greater  dishonor  to  this  chosen  instrument  of  the  Lord  and  to  the 
Word  he  preached.  We  quote  from  The  New  Cerdury  Bible:  "It  would 
appear  that  there  runs  through  all  the  prophet's  activities,  at  least 
in  the  earlier  period,  a  strain  of  mental  abnormality — perhaps  of  actual 
malady.  By  some  writers  this  has  been  supposed  to  be  a  form  of 
catalepsy.  Probably  Ezekiel  was  no  more  a  cataleptic  than  Paul;  with 
equal  probability  he  was  what  would  now  be  called  a  'psychical  sub- 
ject,' and  as  such  liable  to  trances — and  perhaps  a  clairvoyant."  Such 
are  the  ridiculous  things  invented  by  men,  who  claim  scholarship,  and 
whose  aim  is  to  deny  the  supernatural  origin  of  the  words  and  the  visions 
of  the  prophets  of  God. 

The  fact  is  that  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  were  called  by  Jehovah  to 
specific  ministries.  In  their  characters  and  natural  temperaments  they 
differed  greatly.  Jeremiah,  assuming,  as  a  very  young  man,  his  pro- 
phetic office  during  the  reign  of  Josiah,  was  called  to  deliver  the  mes- 
sages of  the  awful  judgments  which  were  to  come  upon  Jerusalem  and 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 


had  to  witness  these  in  their  execution.  He  was  an  extremely  kind, 
gentle,  and  tender-hearted  man.  Jeremiah  is  the  prophet  of  a  dying 
nation;  the  agony  of  Judah's  prolonged  death  struggle  is  reproduced 
with  tenfold  intensity  in  the  inward  conflict  which  rends  the  heart  of 
the  prophet.  Ezekiel  was  of  a  different  temperament.  The  deep  soul 
exercise  we  find  so  often  in  Jeremiah,  his  tender,  loving  sympathies, 
are  almost  entirely  absent  in  Ezekiel.  He  lacked  the  emotional  char- 
acter of  Jeremiah.  He  was  a  man  of  great  energy  and  vigor;  he  was 
stern-  and  had  a  deep  sense  of  his  human  responsibility.  Both  prophets 
uncover  the  corrupt  conditions  of  Judah  and  condemn  them.  The 
condemnations  in  Ezekiel  are  far  more  severe  than  those  in  Jeremiah. 
The  style  of  Ezekiel  is  also  different  from  that  employed  by  his  con- 
temporary.    . 

In  all  this  he  differs  from  Jeremiah;  and  more  so  in  the  jreater  and 
more  complete  visions  concerning  the  future. 


His  Ministry 

There  is  an  evident  connection  between  the  communication  which 
Jeremiah  sent  from  Jerusalem  unto  the  captives  in  Babylon  and  the 
beginning  of  Ezekiel's  ministry.  The  letter  of  Jeremiah  is  found  in 
chapter  xxix  of  the  B^ok  of  Jeremiah.  It  is  an  interesting  document. 
It  seems  to  have  been  occasioned  by  a  number  of  false  prophets  v/ho 
had  appeared  among  the  captives,  and  who  encouraged  the  rebellious 
and  disobedient  spirit  which  prevailed  among  the  exiles.  They  proph- 
esied falsely,  led  the  people  away,  and  awakened  the  delusive  hope 
of  an  early  return  from  the  captivity.  While  Jeremiah  continued  to 
minister  to  the  feeble  fev/  and  the  poor,  who  were  left  behind,  Ezekiel 
was  engaged  among  the  captives  and  contended  against  these  false 
prophets  and  against  the  false  hopes  of  the  people  who  gave  no  evi- 
dences of  repentance.  Inasmuch  as  Jerusalem  had  not  yet  been  com- 
pletely destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  captives,  who  had  listened 
to  the  false  prophets,  expected  a  spee.dy  return  to  their  own  land.  To 
dispel  this  false  hope  Jeremiah  had  sent  them  the  message,  "For  thus 
saith  the  Lord,  that  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished  at  Babylon 
I  will  visit  you,  and  perform  my  good  word  toward  you,  in  causing 
you  to  return  to  this  place"  (Jer.  xxix:10).  Ezekiel  then  labored  also 
to  dispel  this  false  hope  preached  by  the  prophets,  whom  the  Lord 
had  not  sent.  By  his  stern  and  solemn  words,  by  divinely  commanded 
actions  and  symbols,  he  had  to  deliver  the  message  that  there  was  no 
hope  for  Jerusalem.  When  the  catastrophe  came  at  last,  his  ministry 
changed.  He  comforts  the  disappointed  and  heartbroken  people  and 
delivers  his  great  restoration  messages. 

This  great  prophet  had  to  do  certain  divinely  commanded  things 
in  ths  presence  of  the  people  who  were  living  in  deception  after  having 


270  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

listened  to  the  false  prophets.  In  chapter  iii:24-26  he  had  to  shut  him- 
self up,  bind  himself,  and  then  he  was  made  dumb.  Then  he  was  com- 
manded to  lie  upon  his  right  side  and  upon  his  left  for  430  days 
(chapter  iv:4-8).  In  chapter  iv:9  he  had  to  eat  unclean  bread.  Then 
he  had  to  shave  his  head  and  beard  (chapter  v:l);  to  carry  a  captive's 
baggage  (chapter  xxii:3-7);  when  his  wife  died,  he  was  not  to  mourn 
(chapter  xxiv:15-20);  and  again  he  lost  his  speech  (chapter  xxiv:27). 
The  key  to  all  this  is  found  in  chapter  xxiv:24. 

The  visions  of  glory  Ezekiel  had  belong  to  some  of  the  greatest 
recorded  in  the  Word  of  God.  Much  in  the  beginning  of  the  book 
reminds  of  the  last  book  of  the  Bible,  the  Revelation.  We  mention 
a  few  passages  to  be  compared:  Ezekiel  i  with  Rev.  iv  and  v.  Ezekiel 
iii:3  with  Rev.  x:10.  Ezekiel  viii:3  with  Rev.  xiii:14,  15.  Ezekiel  ix 
with  Rev.  vii.  Ezekiel  x  with  Rev.  viii:l-5.  The  critics  declare  upon 
this  striking  correspondency  that  "much  of  the  imagery  of  Revelation 
is  borrowed  from  Ezekiel." 

THE  DIVISIONS  OF  THE  BOOK. 

A  careful  reading  of  the  Book  of  Ezekiel  shows,  in  the 
first  place,  that  the  Prophet  received  messages  and  saw 
visions  before  the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  after 
that  catastrophe  had  taken  place  in  fulfillment  of  his  inspired 
predictions,  he  received  other  prophecies.  The  predictions 
preceding  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  are  the  predictions  of  the 
judgment  to  fall  upon  the  city  and  upon  Gentile  nations, 
the  enemies  of  Israel.  The  predictions  Ezekiel  received 
after  the  city  had  been  destroyed  are  the  predictions  of 
blessing  and  glory  for  Israel  and  Jerusalem  in  the  future. 
The  first  part  of  the  book  has  found  a  fulfillment  in  the 
destruction  of  the  city  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  The  second 
part  is  awaiting  its  fulfillment  at  the  close  of  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles,  when  Israel  will  be  regathered,  restored  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  returns  to  another  temple,  which  Ezekiel 
beheld  in  a  magnificent  vision.  All  will  be  accomplished 
when  the  Lord  returns  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  His  people, 
so  that  the  name  of  the  city  will  be  "Jehovah-Shammah" 
— "the  Lord  is  there"  (chapter  xlviii:35).  These  two  main 
divisions  are  clearly  marked  in  the  book  itself.  In  chapter 
xxxiii:21,  after  the  Prophet  had  received  a  renewed  call  as 
watchman,  we  read:  "And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  twelfth 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  271 

year  of  our  captivity,  in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  fifth  day 
of  the  month,  that  one  that  had  escaped  out  of  Jerusalem 
came  unto  me,  saying,  The  city  is  smitten."  This  deter- 
mines the  two  parts. 

I.     PREDICTIONS  BEFORE  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF 
JERUSALEM.     (Chapters  i-xxxii.) 

n.     PREDICTIONS  AFTER  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF 
JERUSALEM.     (Chapters  xxxiii-xlviii.) 

To  show  the  perfect  and  orderly  arrangement  of  the 
whole  Book  of  Ezekiel  we  shall  give  a  complete  analysis. 

I.     PREDICTIONS  BEFORE  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF 
JERUSALEM. 

Chapters  i-xxxii. 

Section  A.    Judgment  Predictions  Ccncerning  Jerusalem. 

Chapters  i-xxjr. 

1.  The  Vision  of  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  and  the  Call  of  the 
Prophet  (i-iii:14). 

2.  The  Judgment  announced.  Four  signs  and  their  mean- 
ing. The  two  messages.  {"The  Word  of  the  Lord  came  unto 
me"  (chapters  vi  and  vii;  chapters  iii:15-vii:27). 

3.  Visions  in  relation  io  Jerusalem  {chapters  viii-xi). 

Si..     The  vision  of  abomination  in  the  Temple.     Chapter  viii. 

b.  The  vision  of  the  man  clothed  in  linen  with  the  inkhorn.  Chap- 
ter ix. 

c.  The  vision  of  the  coals  of  fire.     Chapter  x. 

d.  The  vision  concerning  the  leaders.  The  Glory  departs.  Chap- 
ter xi. 

4.  Signs y  Messages  and  Parables  {chapters  xii-xix). 

a.  Signs  given  through  the  Prophet.     Chapter  xii:l-20. 

b.  The  Message  concerning  a  speedy  judgment.     Chapter  xii:21-2S. 

c.  The  Message  against  false  prophets  and  prophetesses.  Chapter 
xiii. 

d.  The  Message  against  the  idolatrous  elders.     Chapter  xiv. 

e.  The  Parable  of  the  Vine  given  to  the  fire.     Chapter  xv. 


272  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

{.  The  Parable  of  the  abandoned  child  and  Jerusalem's  harlotry. 
Chapter  xvi. 

g.  The  Parable  and  Riddle  of  the  two  eagles  and  the  vine.  Chapter 
xvii. 

h.  The  Message  concerning  the  righteous  judgments  of  God.  Chap- 
ter xviii. 

i.      The  Lamentations  for  the  Princes  of  Israel.     Chapter  xix. 

5.  Further  and  Final  Predictions  concerning  the  Judgment 
of  Jerusalem  (chapter  xx-xxiv) . 

a.  Jehovah  rehearses  His  mercies  bestowed  upon  Israel.  Chap- 
ter XX. 

b.  The  impending  Judgment  announced.     Chapter  xxi. 

c.  Jerusalem's  sins  and  whoredoms.     Chapter  xxii-xxiii. 

d.  The  Parable  of  the  boiling  pot.     The  last  word.     Chapter  xxiv. 

Section  B.    Predictions  of  Judgments  against  the  Nations. 
Chapters  xxv-xxxii. 

1.  Against  Ammon,  Moab,  Edom  and  the  Philistines 
(chapter  xxv). 

2.  Against  Tyrus  and  Zidon  (chapters  xxvi-xxviii) . 

3.  Against  Egypt  (chapters  xxix-xxxii). 

n.     PREDICTIONS  AFTER  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF 
JERUSALEM. 

Chapters  xxxiii-xlviii. 
Section  A.  The  Watchman  and  the  Shepherds.  Chapters  xxxiii-xxxiv. 

1.  The  reneioed  call  of  Ezekiel  as  Watchman  (chapter 
xxxiii  :l-20), 

2.  EzeldeVs  mouth  opened  after  Jerusalem's  fall  (chapter 
a:a:xm:21-33). 

3.  Message  against  the  Shepherds  of  Israel  (chapter  xxxiv: 
1-19). 

4.  The  true  Shepherd  and  Restoration  promised  (chapter 
xxxiv  :20-^G). 

Section  B.    Judgment  Announced  Against  Mount  Seir  and  Israel's 
Final  Restoration  Promised.    Chapters  xxxv-xxxvi. 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  273 

1.  The  Message  against  Seir  and  Idumea  {chapter  xxxv). 

2.  The  Message  of  Comfort  for  Israel  (chapter  xxxvi). 

Section  C.    The  Future  Blessings  of  Israel.    The  Nation  Regathered. 
Their  Enemies  Overthrown.    The  Millennial  Temple. 

Chapters  xxxvii-xlviii. 

1.  The  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bones.     Judah  and  Israel  re- 
united  (chapter  xxxvii). 

2.  The  last  enemies,  Gog  and  Magog,  and  their  destruction 
(chapters  xxxviii-xxxix) . 

3.  The  Millennial  Temple  and  its  Worship;   the  division 
of  the  Land  (chapters  xl-xlviii). 


274  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

I.    PREDICTIONS  BEFORE  THE  FALL  OF 
JERUSALEM. 

Chapters  i-xxxii. 
A.  Judgment  Predictions  Concerning  Jerusalem. 

Chapter  i-xxiv. 

I.    THE  VISION  OF  GLORY  AND  THE  CALL  OF  THE  PROPHET. 
CHAPTER  I-m:14. 

1.  The  Introduction.     1-5. 

2.  The  Vision  of  Glory.     4-28. 

3.  Ezekiel's  Call  and  Commission.     ii:l-8. 

4.  The  Roll  Eaten;  the  Repeated  Commission.     ii:9-iii:14. 

I.  The  Introduction:  Verses  1-3.  The  introductory  words 
give  us  the  time  when  Ezekiel  was  among  the  captives  by 
the  river  Chebar.  Four  things  are  mentioned  by  Ezekiel, 
who  is  evidently  the  author  of  this  book,  for  he  uses  the 
personal  pronoun — the  heavens  were  opened — he  saw  visions 
of  God — the  Word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him — the  hand 
of  the  Lord  was  upon  him.  Ezekiel  is  the  only  prophet  in 
the  Old  Testament  of  whom  it  is  said  that  he  saw  the  heavens 
opened.  Four  times  the  New  Testament  mentions  opened 
heavens  (Matt.  iiiilG;  John  i:51;  Rev.  iv:l;  xix:ll).  He 
then  saw  the  visions  of  God  concerning  His  governmental 
dealings  with  His  people  Israel.  Then  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  also  upon  him  when  the  Word  of  the  Lord  had  come 
unto  him.  Notice  the  order:  An  opened  heaven,  a  vision, 
the  call,  and  enablement  by  the  power  of  God.  Such  is 
still  the  order  for  the  servants  of  the  Lord.  The  phrase, 
*'The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  him,"  or  came  upon  me, 
is  found  seven  times  in  Ezeliie],  in  chapters  r.S,  iii:14  aid 
22,  viii:l,  xxxiii:22,  xxxvii:!,  xl:I. 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  275 

2.  The  Vision  of  Glory:  Verses  4-28.  Then  he  had  his 
great  and  wonderful  vision,  which  is  repeatedly  mentioned 
in  his  book.  We  find  it  mentioned  again  in  chapters  x  and 
xi,  where  it  is  seen  departing  from  Jerusalem.  Its  return  is 
promised  in  connection  with  the  great  millennial  temple 
after  the  Lord's  Return  (chapter  xliii).  The  vision  is  the 
vision  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  (i:28).  The  vision  comes 
from  the  North,  for  a  storm  cloud  of  divine  indignation  from 
the  North  (Babylon)  was  to  burst  over  the  house  of  Judah. 
The  whirlwind,  the  cloud,  and  the  fire  Ezekiel  beheld  are 
symbols  of  glory,  the  divine  presence  and  judgment.  (See 
Psa.  xviii:8-13;  Hab.  iii;  Jer.  iv:12-13).  The  vision  then 
indicated  the  presence  of  the  God  of  Israel  and  His  glory, 
ready  to  deal  in  judgment  with  His  apostate  people.  The 
living  creatures  are  the  same  as  mentioned  and  seen  in 
Rev.  iv:6-9.  They  are  the  cherubim,  not  fictitious  crea- 
tures or  symbols,  but  real  beings.  Their  position  is  in 
connection  with  the  throne.  But  upon  the  throne  there 
was  one  who  had  the  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  a  man. 
And  this  man  was  enshrouded  in  glory,  with  the  rainbow 
about  him.  All  this  shows  forth  the  Glory  of  Him  who 
is  God's  vision,  glory  and  presence,  the  Son  of  God.  It 
anticipates  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  His  exaltation  upon 
the  throne,  government  and  judgment  resting  in  His 
hands,  v/ho  is  now  the  Man  in  the  glory.  While  the 
cherubim  with  their  fourfold  faces  also  symbolize  the 
Lord  Jesus,  here  in  this  vision  they  are  seen  in  connection 
with  judgment.  It  is  the  same  in  Revelation  (Rev.  vi,  xv:7). 
And  then  the  wheels  and  their  work.  In  them  was  the  spirit 
of  these  great  creatures;  the  rims  of  the  wheels  (not  rings) 
were  full  of  eyes.  There  was  an  orderly  movement  of  these 
wheels.  The  wheels  are  on  the  chariot  upon  which  rested 
the  throne  of  God.  They  show  forth  and  symbolize  the 
purposes  of  God  in  the  execution  of  His  inerrant  govern- 
mental dealings  on  earth.  God  controls  it  all,  and  His 
Spirit  directs  every  movement.  Much  that  is  ridiculous 
has  been  written  on  this,  and  some  would-be  expositors 
claim  that  Ezekiel  beheld  an  aeroplane. 


276  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

"Intelligence,  strength,  stability  and  swiftness  in  judg- 
ment, and,  withal,  the  movement  of  the  whole  course  of 
earthly  events,  depended  on  the  throne.  This  living  energy 
animated  the  whole.  The  cherubic  supporters  of  the  throne, 
full  of  eyes  themselves,  moved  by  it;  the  vrheels  of  God's 
government  moved  by  the  same  spirit,  and  went  straight 
forward.  All  was  subservient  to  the  will  and  purpose  of 
Him  who  sat  on  the  throne  judging  right.  Majesty,  govern- 
ment and  providence  united  to  form  the  throne  of  His  glory. 
But  all  the  instruments  of  His  glory  were  below  the  firma- 
ment; He  whom  they  glorified  was  above.*'* 

3.  Ezekiei's  Commission.  Call  and  Commission.  Chap- 
ter ii:l-8.  We  see  Ezekiel  prostrate  upon  his  face.  Then 
a  voice  spoke,  not  the  voice  of  a  cherubim;  while  in  Revela- 
tion the  cherubim  speak,  in  Ezekiel  they  are  silent.  Jehovah 
addressed  Ezekiel  as  Son  of  man;  the  title  which  is  found 
exactly  one  hundred  times  in  this  book.  Daniel  only  besides 
Ezekiel  is  called  by  this  name.  Our  Lord  called  Himself 
by  that  name  and  used  it  in  connection  with  His  suffer- 
ing, exaltation,  glory,  and  coming  again.  Ezekiel,  too, 
passed  through  much  suffering,  passing  symbolically  through 
sufferings  which  the  nation  at  large  was  to  undergo.  He 
is,  therefore,  in  a  measure  a  type  of  the  Messiah,  who  took 
Israel's  sin  and  shame  upon  Himself. 

The  Word  which  spoke  was  followed  by  the  Spirit — "and 
the  Spirit  entered  into  me  when  He  spoke  unto  me."  Thus 
the  Word  and  the  Spirit  are  always  connected.  Then 
Ezekiel  received  his  commission.  He  is  sent  to  an  impudent 
and  hard-hearted  people.  His  message  is  to  begin  with: 
"Thus  saith  Jehovah-God."  The  sender  is  the  Lord;  the 
message  is  from  Him.  Then  the  sender  gives  also  assurance 
and  encouragement. 

4.  The  Roll  Eaten;  the  Repeated  Commission;  Chapters 
ii:9-iii:14.  Compare  the  roll  here  with  Zech.  v:l— !•;  with 
the  one  of  Rev.  v,  which  the  Lamb  receives  and  opens,  and 
the  little  roll  in  Rev.  x:  9, 10.  These  rolls  have  the  same  mean- 


*Synopsis. 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  277 

ing,  namely,  the  Word  itself,  the  message  of  tribulation  and 
judgment,  which  is  written  therein. 

The  Yv^ord  must  be  received  and  eaten,  that  is  the  spiritual 
lesson.  Ezekiel  obeyed.  It  was  self-surrender  and  though 
the  message  was  a  hard  message,  yet  it  was  sweet  unto 
him.  Compare  with  Jer.  xv:16.  Ezekiel  was  to  speak  the 
words  of  the  Lord  unto  them;  and  the  sender  predicts 
failure.  "The  house  of  Israel  will  not  hearken  unto  thee, 
for  they  will  not  hearken  unto  me.  It  was  to  make  no  dif- 
ference to  the  prophet.  His  commission  was  to  speak 
Jehovah's  words.  Then  Cherubim  and  wheels  are  in  mo- 
tion. He  is  lifted  up  and  Jehovah's  hand  is  strong  upon 
him. 

n.    THE  JUDGMENT  ANNOUNCED.    THE  FOUR  SIGNS  AND 
THEIR  MEANING.    THE  TWO  MESSAGES. 

CHAPTER  ni:15-Vn:27. 

This  section  extends  from  chapter  iii:15  to  the  close  of  the  seventh 
chapter.  The  prophet  is  told  of  his  great  responsibility  as  watchman, 
and  has  to  enact  four  signs.  Two  solemn  messages  close  this  section. 
The  first  message  predicts  that  the  sword  is  to  come  upon  the  land 
and  disperse  them;  the  second  message  predicts  the  end. 

1.  The  New  Charge  and  Ezekiel's  New  Experience.     Chapter 

iii:15-27. 

2.  The  Sign  of  the  Tile.     Chapter  iv:l-3. 

3.  The  Sign  of  the  Prophet's  Physical  Position.     Verses  4-8. 

4.  The  Sign  of  the  Famine  and  the  Defiled  Bread.     Verses  9-13 

5.  The  Sign  of  the  Shaving  of  Head  and  Face.     Chapter  v:l-4. 

6.  The  Message  of  Denunciation.     Verses  5-17. 

7.  The  First  Judgment  Message:  I  Will   Bring  a  Sword  Upon 

You.     Chapter  vi. 

8.  The  Second  Judgment  Message:  The  End  is  at  Hand.     Chap- 

ter vii. 

1.  The  New  Charge  and  Ezekiel's  New  Experience: 
Chapter  iii:15-27.  He  had  been  transported  by  the  power 
of  God  from  the  river  Chebar  to  Tel-abib,  where  a  number 
of  captives  dwelt.  He  sat  for  seven  days  in  their  presence 
without  opening  his  lips.    (See  Job  ii;13.)    The  silence  of 


C73  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

Ezekiel  was  broken  by  the  Lord,  who  spoke  to  him  and  gave 
him  a  new  charge,  that  of  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of 
Israel.  His  duty  was  to  be  twofold:  First,  to  hear  the  Word 
of  the  Lord  from  His  own  lips,  and  then  to  give  the  warning. 
It  is  a  solemn  message  and  charge,  making  known  to  the 
prophet  his  great  responsibility. 

The  passage,  as  well  as  the  corresponding  one  in  chapter 
xxxiii:l-20,  has  been  often  used  in  the  defence  of  what  is 
termed  "falling  from  Grace," — that  a  true  believer,  who  is 
saved  by  Grace,  may  by  sinning  become  unsaved  again  and 
then  perish  in  his  sins  like  the  wicked.  The  words  "fallen 
from  Grace"  are  found  only  once  in  the  Bible,  that  is  in 
Gal.  v:4.  The  context  shows  what  they  mean.  If  a  believer 
goes  to  the  law  to  be  justified  before  God,  if  he  tries  by  his 
own  works,  and  by  ordinances,  to  be  righteous  before  God, 
he  abandons^the  ground  of  Grace.  The  dispensation  in  which 
we  live  is  the  dispensation  of  Grace;  Grace  reigns  through 
righteousness  unto  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
(Rom.  v:21).  The  message  delivered  by  God  to  Ezekiel 
is  in  fullest  keeping  with  the  character  of  the  lavv^-covenant, 
though  Grace  is  also  manifested  in  it.  Righteousness  has 
not  the  same  meaning  here  as  in  the  New  Testament.  We  are 
constituted  righteous  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  now  not 
the  question  of  doing  righteous  deeds  in  order  to  be  saved 
and  live.  We  are  saved  by  Grace  through  faith.  "Now  to 
him  that  worketh  is  the  reward  not  reckoned  as  of  grace 
but  as  of  debt.  But  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth 
on  Him,  who  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  reckoned  for 
righteousness"  (Rom.  iv:4).  And  he  who  is  justified  by 
faith  has  peace  with  God.  The  true  believer  may  sin,  but 
he  does  not  deliberately  practice  and  live  in  sin,  for  "he  that 
is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit  (practice)  sin"  (1  John 
iii  :9) .  If  he  falls  in  sin,  a  gracious  provision  is  m^ade.  We  have 
an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous, 
and  therefore  we  can  confess  our  sins;  forgiveness  and  cleans- 
ing follow  according  to  the  divine  promise  (1  John  i:9,  ii:l-2). 

Then  he  was  commanded  to  go  into  the  plain,  where  he 
again  beheld  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  fell  on  his  face.  After 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  279 

that,  he  was  shut  up  in  his  house;  they  were  to  put  bands 
upon  him  and  bind  him.  He  was  not  to  go  among  the  cap- 
tives, and  God  made  him  dumb  (verses  'iS-^Qt).  Yet  this 
dumbness  was  not  complete  or  constant.  Finally  it  ceased 
altogether.  That  was  after  Jerusalem  had  fallen  (chapter 
xxxiii:21-22).  The  dumbness  was  a  sign  to  the  nation — the 
sign  of  God's  displeasure  and  the  coming  judgment  upon 
Jerusalem  (chapter  xxiv:27). 

2.  The  Sign  of  the  Tile:  Chapter  iv:l-3.  The  word  tile 
means  "brick."  They  were  used  by  the  Babylonians  to 
preserve  their  records,  and  many  have  been  found  marked 
Tvith  building  plans,  etc.  The  sign  of  the  tile  foretells  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  and  Jehovah's  opposition  against  the  city. 

3.  The  Sign  of  the  Prophet's  Physical  Position:  Verses 
AS.  While  in  the  preceding  sign  Jehovah's  action  against 
Jerusalem  was  pictured,  in  this  new  sign  a  portrayal  is  given 
of  the  punishment  Vv^hich  should  come  upon  the  inhabitants 
of  the  city.  In  his  own  person  Ezekiel  had  to  experience 
the  great  degradation  and  judgment  which  was  to  fail  upon 
air  the  people.  The  critical  school  has  invented  ail  kinds 
of  theories  to  explain,  or  rather  to  explain  away,  the  divine 
command  given  to  the  prophet.  They  say  that  probably 
Ezekiel  suffered  from  some  form  of  epilepsy  or  catalepsy ;  they 
also  point  out  the  physical  impossibility  for  a  man  to  lie 
continuously  for  390  days  on  his  left  side.  But  it  says  no- 
where that  the  Prophet  should  be  in  that  position  day  and 
night  during  these  allotted  days.  The  390  and  40  days  are 
symbolical.  They  mean  years,  giving  us  a  total  of  430  years. 
This  reminds  us  of  Exod.  xii:40-41,  where  the  sojourning 
of  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt  is  given  as  430  years. 

But  the  390  years  apply  more  specifically  to  Israel,  the 
period  of  imfaithfulness  of  the  ten  tribes,  beginning  with 
Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xi:31).  The  40  years  describe  the  un- 
faithfulness of  the  house  of  Judah.  The  captives  were  re- 
minded by  the  Prophet's  position  of  the  shameful  history 
of  their  long  apostasy.  But  more  than  that.  The  Lord  said 
to  Ezekiel:  'T  have  laid  upon  thee  the  years  of  their  in- 
iquity ...  so  shalt  thou  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  house  of 


280  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

Israel."    The  sign,  therefore,  pictured  the  actual  punishment 
which  was  now  to  fall  upon  the  nation. 

4.  The  Sign  of  the  Famine  and  the  Defiled  Bread:  Verses 
9-13.  Both  the  sign  of  the  famine  and  the  bread  baked  in 
an  unclean  manner  predict  the  horrors  of  famine  in  connec- 
tion with  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and  how  the  people  in  the 
subsequent  captivity  among  the  Gentiles  should  live  in 
defilement. 

5.  The  Sign  of  Shaving  the  Head  and  Face:  Chapter 
v:l-4.  The  sharp  knife  is  the  symbol  of  the  King  of  Baby- 
lon. (See  Isa.  vii:20.)  He  was  God's  instrument  in  the  exe- 
cution of  His  wrath;  the  people  are  represented  by  the  hair. 
The  third  part  of  the  hair  burned  with  fire  pictures  the  fate 
of  a  part  of  the  people  during  the  siege.  The  pestilence  and 
the  famine  were  also  to  consume  them.  Only  a  few  in  num- 
ber, a  small  remnant,  were  to  be  preserved,  as  indicated 
when  Ezekiel  took  a  few  hairs  and  bound  them  in  his  skirt. 

6.  The  Message  of  Denunciation:  Verses  5-17.  These 
solemn  v^^ords  should  be  carefully  read.  In  connection  v/ith 
them  there  ought  to  be  read  Jeremiah's  lamentations,  for 
Jeremiah's  outburst  of  sorrow  shows  the  literal  fulfillment  of 
this  message.  (See  Verse  10  and  compare  with  Lamentations 
iv:10.) 

7.  The  First  Judgment  Blessage:  The  Sword:  Chapter 
vi.  The  mountains  of  Israel  are  mentioned  first,  because 
they  were  the  places  where  the  people  practiced  idolatry; 
they  were  the  high  places  so  often  mentioned  in  the  historical 
books.  (Read  Lev.  xxvi:30-33.)  Hundreds  of  years  before, 
Moses  wrote  these  words;  and  now  they  were  all  to  be  ful- 
filled. But  the  Lord  also  promised  that  a  remnant  should 
be  left.  That  remnant  would  acknowledge  the  evil  they 
had  done.  "They  shall  loathe  themselves  for  the  evils  which 
they  have  committed  in  all  their  abominations."  The  words 
*'because  I  am  broken  with  their  whorish  heart"  mean,  liter- 
ally translated,  "When  I  shall  have  broken  their  whorish 
heart  which  has  departed  from  Me."  No  judgment  which 
has  ever  come  upon  Israel  made  a  complete  end  of  the 
nation.     A  remnant  always  remained  and  returned  to  the 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  281 

Lord.  (See  Rom.  xi:5.)  During  the  greatest  and  longest 
judgment  which  has  come  upon  that  nation,  their  world- 
wide dispersion  during  this  present  age,  there  is  also  a  rem- 
nant still  among  them.  When  the  Lord  resumes  His  dealings 
with  them  during  the  last  seven  years  of  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles,  with  which  our  age  closes,  a  remnant  from  among 
them  will  turn  to  Him  and  be  saved.  That  remnant  will 
be  carried  through  the  judgments  of  the  great  tribulation 
and  receive  the  promised  kingdom. 

8.  The  Second  Judgment  Message.  The  End  is  at  Hand : 
Chapter  vii.  This  chapter  closes  the  first  great  message  of 
Ezekiel.  This  great  judgment  message  is  written  in  beauti- 
ful language,  which,  in  the  authorized  version,  is  marred  by 
numerous,  incorrect  renderings.  The  reader  will  find  a  re- 
liable metrical  translation  in  our  larger  commentary  on 
Ezekiel. 

First,  the  end  is  announced  to  come  upon  the  entire  land; 
it  could  no  longer  be  averted. 

There  is  another  day  coming  in  which  the  Lord  will  deal 
in  fearful  judgments  with  this  earth.  Now  is  the  day  of 
salvation  in  which  God  speaks  in  love  through  His  Son. 
When  wickedness  and  apostasy  has  reached  its  climax,  the 
day  of  salvation  will  end  and  "the  day  of  vengeance  of  our 
God"  will  begin.  Then  He  will  speak  in  His  wrath  and  vex 
them  in  His  sore  displeasure  (Psa.  ii:5).  Then  will  they  say 
to  the  mountains  and  rocks,  "Fall  on  us  and  hide  us  from  the 
face  of  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath 
of  the  Lamb ;  for  the  great  day  of  His  wrath  is  come ;  and  who 
shall  be  able  to  stand?"  (Rev.  vi:16-17).  God's  judgments 
for  the  future  are  as  sure  as  were  His  judgments  in  the  past. 
There  is  a  set  time,  the  day  of  the  Lord,  when  He,  to  whom 
the  Father  has  given  all  judgments,  will  tread  "the  winepress 
of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of  God,  the  Almighty"  (Rev. 
xix:15). 

Then  follows  a  solemn  description  of  the  doom  of  Jerusa- 
lem and  the  reasons  why  such  a  judgment  is  executed. 


282  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

m.    VISIONS   IN   RELATION    TO    JERUSALEM. 

CHAPTERS  Vra-XI. 

1.  The  Vision  of  Abomination  in  the  Temple.     Chapter  viii. 

2.  Th?    Vision   of   the   Linen-Clothed   Man   with   the   Inkhorn. 

Chapter  ix. 
S.     The  Vision  of  the  Coals  of  Fire.     Chapter  x. 
4.     The   Vision   Concerning  the   Leaders.     The   Glory   Departs. 

Chapter  xi. 

1.  The  Vision  of  Abomination  in  the  Temple:  Chapter 
viii.  This  vision  shows  the  abomination  which  prevailed  in 
the  Temple  of  Jehoah. 

In  the  visions  of  God,  Ezekiel  is  brought  to  the  door  of 
the  inner  gate  that  looks  to  the  north.  Here  was  the 
image  of  jealousy,  which  provoketh  to  jealousy.  Some 
have  taken  this  and  the  following  visions  to  be  retrospective. 
It  has  been  said,  "It  was  as  if  he  were  translated  back  to 
Jerusalem,  and  to  the  time  when  these  things  were  occur- 
ring." Such  is  the  view  of  some  critics;  however,  it  is  un- 
tenable. These  visions  would  lose  their  meaning  if  the  pro- 
phet seemed  to  be  translated  back  to  Jerusalem  and  to  the 
time  when  these  abominations  had  happened  in  Israel's  past 
history.  Later  we  find  the  names  of  persons  given,  whom 
he  saw.  They  certainly  were  living  persons  known  to 
the  prophet  Ezekiel  and  his  contemporaries.  One  of  them 
died  while  Ezekiel  prophesied  (xi:13). 

What  was  the  image  of  jealousy  which  provoketh  to 
jealousy?  It  was  an  idol.  The  word  is  used  in  Deut.  iv:16, 
where  it  is  translated  "graven  image."  It  is  also  found  in 
2  Chron.  xxxiii:7,  15,  where  it  refers  to  the  idol,  which 
Manasseh  had  made  and  put  up  in  the  temple. 

After  Manasseh's  idolatry  came  Josiah*s  great  reforma- 
tion. After  his  death,  Judah  plunged  into  greater  wicked- 
ness under  the  reign  of  wicked  kings,  and  a  revival  of  idolatry 
followed  once  more.  Such  a  WTath-provoking  idol  was  beheld 
by  the  prophet.  This  image  they  worshipped.  "Son  of 
man,  seest  thou  what  they  do?"    They  must  have  lain  pros- 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  283 

trate  before  that  idol.  And  yet  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel 
was  still  there. 

That  there  will  be  a  similar  scene  enacted  in  a  future 
temple,  during  the  great  tribulation,  is  well  known  to  all 
students  of  prophecy.  (See  2  Thess.  ii  and  Rev.  xiii.) 

The  Prophet  saw  creeping  things  and  beasts  worshipped; 
the  elders  and  the  people  were  practising  Egyptian  idolatry 
of  the  most  degrading  kind.  Jaazaniah,  the  son  of  Shaphan, 
is  especially  mentioned.  Shaphan  was  the  scribe,  who  re- 
ceived from  the  high  priest,  Hilkiah,  the  book  of  the  law,  and 
read  it  before  King  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxii:8-ll;  Jer.  xxxix:14). 
The  son  of  this  God-fearing  scribe  was  the  leader  of  the 
idolators.  And  these  idol  worshippers,  each  in  his  chamber 
of  imagery  (probably  individual  cells),  said:  *'The  Lord  seeth 
us  not;  the  Lord  has  forsaken  the  earth."  They  denied 
His  omniscience  and  omnipresence.  The  apostasy  in  Christ- 
endom is  going  the  same  road. 

The  women  wept  for  Tammuz,  the  Babylonian  "Dumuzi," 
the  god  of  spring,  who  dies,  and  revives  each  year.  It  was 
a  vile,  obscene  cult,  for  with  the  worship  of  Tammuz  were 
connected  immoral,  licentious  ceremonies.  Sun-worship  was 
the  crown  of  all  these  abominations.  (See  verses  16-18). 

2.  The  Vision  of  the  Linen-clothed  Man  with  the  Inkhorn. 
Chapter  ix.  The  six  men  mentioned  are  angels,  into  whose 
hands  the  city  is  given.  Angels  are  used  in  judgments  past 
and  future.  (See  Matt.  xiii:41;  xvi:27;  2  Thess.  i:7-8). 
Angels  are  likewise  prominently  mentioned  in  the  Book  of 
Revelation.  There  is  a  striking  correspondency  between 
this  chapter  and  Revelation  vii:l-3.  Those  who  sigh  and 
weep  constitute  the  remnant  which  have  no  sympathy  with 
the  abominations.  They  are  marked  for  preservation. 
Thus  a  remnant  was  then  kept.  Well  may  we  remember 
that  now,  in  the  professing  church,  in  the  midst  of  the  apos- 
tasy, there  is  also  a  faithful  remnant  who  sigh  and  cry  and 
who  have  the  special  promise  of  the  Lord  (Rev.  iii:10). 

The  word  "mark"  in  the  Hebrew  is  "Tav,"  the  last  letter  in 
the  Hebrew  alphabet.  Its  literal  meaning  is  "cross."  This 
letter  "T"  was  a  cross  in  the  older  Hebrew  script  as  well  as 


284  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

in  the  Phoenician  and  Samaritan.  The  Egyptians  also  used 
a  cross  in  their  language,  with  them  it  was  a  sign  of  life. 
Ancient  Jewish  tradition  gives  the  information  that  the 
blood  sprinkled  in  Egypt  on  the  doorpost  (Exod.  xii  :23)  was 
in  the  form  of  a  cross.  All  this  is  interesting.  To  this  we 
may  add  that  in  Gen.  iv:15,  the  mark  set  upon  Cain,  an 
entirely  different  word  is  used. 
Then  the  command  was  literally  executed. 

3.  The  Vision  of  the  Coals  of  Fire:  Chapter  x.     Once 

more  the  Glory  vision  appears.  The  linen  clothed  man 
who  had  done  the  marking  in  the  previous  chapter  is  now 
executing  judgment.  Who  is  He?  Evidently  more  than  an 
angel.  That  he  is  a  supernatural  being  is  clear.  He  held 
the  place  of  pre-eminence  among  the  other  angels  (chapter 
ix  :2-4) .  This  angel  is  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  the  same  who 
appeared  to  the  Patriarchs,  to  Moses,  Joshua,  Gideon, 
Manoah,  and  to  others.  It  is  the  Son  of  God  in  the  garb 
of  an  angel.  In  the  same  form  he  also  appeared  to  Daniel 
on  the  banks  of  the  river  Hiddekel.  *'Then  I  lifted  up 
mine  eyes,  and  looked,  and  behold  a  certain  man  clothed  in 
linen,  whose  loins  were  girded  with  fine  gold  of  Uphaz.  His 
body  also  was  like  the  beryl,  and  his  face  as  the  appearance 
of  lightning,  and  his  eyes  as  lamps  of  fire,  and  his  arms  and 
his  feet  like  in  color  to  polished  brass,  and  the  voice  of 
his  words  like  the  voice  of  a  multitude"  (Dan.  x:5-Q).  Here 
we  have  a  complete  description  of  the  same  person  whom 
Ezekiel  saw  taking  the  coals  of  fire  and  scattering  them 
over  Jerusalem.  Judgment  upon  the  guilty  city  came  from 
His  hands. 

When  we  turn  to  the  Book  of  Revelation,  we  find  a  similar 
scene  which  has  not  yet  been  enacted.  A  careful  comparison 
of  this  scene  here  with  Rev.  viii:3-5  is  suggested.  This  angel 
who  presents  the  prayers  before  the  throne  and  who  casts 
the  judgment  fires  on  the  earth  is  the  same  who  received 
the  seven  sealed  Book  (Rev.  v:l).  It  is  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Then  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  departed  from  the  threshold 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  285 

of  the  temple;  over  its  portals  "Ichabod"   (the  glory  is 
departed)  was  now  to  be  written. 

4.  The  Vision  Concerning  the  Leaders.  The  Glory  De- 
parts: Chapter  xi.  The  priests  and  the  leaders  of  the  nation 
were  steeped  in  wickedness,  defied  God  and  the  judgments 
His  prophets  had  announced.  They  devised  mischief  (or  in- 
iquity) and  gave  wicked  counsel.  Their  wicked  counsel 
consisted  in  disobedience  against  Jehovah  and  His  Word. 
In  regard  to  the  judgment  they  said,  "It  is  not  the  time  to 
build  houses;  this  is  the  cauldron  and  we  are  the  flesh.'* 
They  knew  of  Jeremiah's  letter  which  he  had  sent  to  the 
elders  who  were  carried  away  captives.  In  that  letter, 
Jeremiah,  believing  God's  Word  concerning  the  long  dura- 
tion of  the  captivity,  gave  the  advice,  '*Build  ye  houses  and 
dwell  in  them"  (Jer.  xxix).  They  ridiculed  that  divinely 
given  advice.  They  still  thought  themselves  safe  in  Jerusa- 
lem. The  phrase  "this  is  the  cauldron"  means  the  city  of 
Jerusalem;  and  we  are  the  "flesh"  themselves.  As  the  flesh 
in  the  cauldron  is  preserved  from  the  fire  by  the  cauldron 
itself,  so  they  felt  themselves  secure  in  the  doomed  city. 
That  these  wicked  leaders  were  still  in  the  city  shows  that 
the  judgment  in  chapter  ix  was  not  a  complete  judgment. 
It  began  at  the  sanctuary,  and  the  wicked  worshippers 
Ezekiel  saw  in  his  vision  were  smitten  first  of  all,  while  the 
man  with  the  inkhorn  marked  the  entire  remnant  for  pres- 
ervation. Then  the  Spirit  fell  upon  Ezekiel  and  he  uttered 
Jehovah's  message. 

The  message  of  judgment  is  followed  by  a  message  of 
jMercy.  Verses  14-21  are  yet  to  be  fulfilled  in  that  nation. 
The  final  departure  of  the  visible  Glory  of  the  Lord  con- 
cludes this  chapter.  It  held  its  ascension  from  the  Mount 
of  Olives.  From  the  same  place.  He  who  is  the  Lord  of 
Glory  and  reveals  the  Glory  of  the  Lord,  went  back  to  the 
Father.  And  when  He  returns  "His  feet  shall  stand  upon 
the  Mount  of  Olives"  (Zech.  xiv).  It  will  be  at  that  blessed 
time  when  Israel  and  Jerusalem  will  behold  the  return  of 
the  Glory,  which  Ezekiel  beheld  departing  from  city  and 
temple. 


286  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

IV.    SIGNS,  MESSAGES  AND  PARABLES. 

CHAPTERS   Xn-XIX. 

1.  Signs  Given  Through  the  Prophet.     Chapter  xii:l-20. 

2.  The  Message  of  Speedy  Judgment.     21-28. 

3.  The  Message  Against  False  Prophets  and  Prophetess.     Chap- 

ter xiii. 

4.  The  Message  Against  the  Elders.     Chapter  xiv. 

5.  The  Parable  of  the  Vine  Given  to  the  Fire.     Chapter  xv. 

6.  The  Parable  of  the  Abandoned  Child  and  Israel's  Whoredom. 

Chapter  xvi. 

7.  The  Parable  of  the  Riddle  of  the  Two  Eagles  and  the  Vine. 

Chapter  xvii. 

8.  The  Message  of  the  Righteous  judgments  of  God.     Chapter 

xviii. 

9.  The  Lamentations  for  the  Princes  of  Israel.     Chapter  xix. 

With  the  twelfth  chapter  a  new  section  of  this  book 
begins,  ending  with  chapter  xix. 

1.  Signs  Given  Through  the  Prophet:  Chapter  xii:l-20. 
They  were  a  rebelHous  house  and  the  Prophet  is  told  to  do 
something,  that  they  might  consider.  He  was  to  attire 
himself  like  one  who  goes  on  a  journey  with  sandals  on  his 
feet,  a  staff  in  his  hand,  a  burden  on  his  shoulder.  He  was 
told  to  move  from  place  to  place.  The  meaning  of  all  this 
is  explained  in  verses  8-16.  The  prince  in  Jerusalem  is 
Zedekiah.  His  attempt  to  flee  from  Jerusalem,  and  his  fate 
of  having  his  eyes  put  out  by  the  King  of  Babylon,  his  cap- 
tivity and  death  are  here  clearly  predicted.  The  following 
passages  must  be  read  and  studied  in  connection  with  this 
chapter  (Jer.  xxxix:4,  lii:10-ll;  2  Kings  xxv:l-7). 

2.  The  Message  of  Speedy  Judgment:  Verses  21-28. 
The  false  prophets  had  preached  a  false  hope,  "The  days  are 
prolonged  and  every  vision  faileth."  God  had  announced 
another  message.  Had  they  believed  what  God  had  spoken, 
that  judgment  was  imminent,  they  would  have  surely  re- 
pented and  turned  unto  the  Lord.  Unbelief  was  responsible 
for  their  condition;  in  this  they  were  sustained  by  lying 
prophets.    And  the  Lord  answered  these  false  prophets.     He 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  287 

changed  the  lying  message  and  told  them  "the  days  are  at 
hand" — the  effect  of  every  vision.  All  false  visions, 
divinations  and  hopes  were  to  cease.  His  Word  is  now  to 
be  done. 

3.  The  Message  Against  False  Prophets  and  Prophetesses: 
Chapter  xiii.  And  now  the  Lord  speaks  through  Ezekiel 
about  the  false  prophets  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  They 
prophesied  out  of  their  own  hearts;  or  as  it  might  be  ren- 
dered, "Who  prophesy  from  their  own  mind  without  hav- 
ing seen."  Such  they  were  and  such  are  the  false  teachers 
of  this  present  age  (2  Peter  ii  :l-2) .  Of  such  our  Lord  warned : 
"Bevv'are  of  false  prophets,  v.hich  come  to  you  is  sheep's 
clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves"  (Matt. 
vii:5).  Every  man  who  prophesies  out  of  his  own  heart, 
who  utters  his  own  mind,  whose  preaching  and  teaching  is 
not  according  to  the  oracles  of  God,  is  a  false  prophet,  a  blind 
leader  of  the  blind.  Like  false  prophets  in  Israel  the  false 
teachers  in  Christendom  are  the  cause  of  the  spiritual  con- 
dition of  the  professing  people  of  God.  Of  all  such  it  is 
true  what  the  Lord  said  through  Ezekiel:  "They  have  seen 
vanity  and  lying  divination,  saying,  "The  Lordsaith,  and  the 
Lord  has  not  sent  them."  They  are  self -called  and  self -sent. 
Behind  them  stands  the  father  of  lies  (1  Kings  xxii:  19-2 3; 
1  Tim.  iv:l).  Next  we  find  in  verses  8-16  their  condemna- 
tion and  punishment.  But  there  Vv  ere  also  false  women 
prophets;  they  practised  occultism. 

All  this  is  also  done  in  the  very  midst  of  Christendom  in 
the  tvv^entieth  century.  Women  prophets,  the  most  subtle 
instruments  of  Satan,  are  plentiful  in  these  days.  The  fact 
has  often  been  pointed  out  that  the  prominent  leaders  in 
the  evil  cidts  of  the  last  days  are  women.  There  has  been 
a  strange  modern-day  revival  of  occult  practices  upon  Chris- 
tian ground.  Spiritualism,  Theosophy,  and  Christian  Sci- 
ence belong  to  this  class.  All  three  started  with  women. 
Spiritualism  with  its  mediums,  fortune-tellers  and  necro- 
mancers is  almost  entirely  in  the  hands  of  women,  who  claim 
to  be  religious  leaders.  The  same  is  true  of  Theosophy, 
with  its  Hindu  philosophy,  and  occultism,  surrounded  with 


288  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

an  air  of  unholy  mysticism.  Christian  Science  is  closely 
related  to  these  two  cults.  Its  founder  practised  for  a  time 
the  calling  of  a  medium. 

Significant  is  the  description  of  their  evil  testimony  as 
given  in  verse  22. 

4.  The  Message  Against  the  Elders:  Chapter  xiv.  These 
inquiring  elders,  with  wickedness  in  their  hearts,  give  another 
illustration  of  the  depth  of  degradation  in  which  the  people 
had  sunken.  He  who  searches  the  hearts  knew  what  was  in 
them.  They  came  with  pious,  religious  pretensions.  It 
sounded  well  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  and  seek  the  prophet- 
priest  for  that  purpose  Their  hearts  were  full  of  evil.  While 
their  lips  spoke  of  asking  the  Lord,  their  hearts  were  full  of 
idolatry.  They  liked  idolatry.  Their  hearts  were  in  it  and 
this  stupmbling-block  of  their  inquity  they  had  put  before 
their  faces,  which  means  they  openly  defied  the  Lord  God 
of  Israel  by  their  doings.  "Should  I  be  inquired  of  at  all 
by  them?'*  To  seek  the  Lord  and  inquire  of  Him  in  such  a 
condition  reveals  a  brazen  spirit  and  the  deepest  depravity. 
Yet  this  also  belongs  to  the  conditions  in  which  the  pro- 
fessing people  of  God  are  when  judgment  overtakes  them. 

Verses  12-23  contain  an  additional  judgment  message. 
The  threatened  judgment  cannot  be  averted;  it  is  unavoid- 
able. Famine  is  to  come  and  the  noisome  beasts,  symbol- 
ical of  Gentile  world  powers,  as  Daniel  beheld  them  in  his 
vision  (Dan.  vii).  The  judgment  message  closes  again  with 
a  message  of  mercy  and  comfort  for  the  remnant. 

5.  The  Parable  of  the  Vine  Given  to  the  Fire:  Chapter  xv. 
This  is  the  first  of  three  parables  to  demonstrate  still  fur- 
ther the  delusion  of  their  false  hope  that  deliverance  would 
come.  The  vine  is  a  type  of  Israel  (Psa.  lxxx:8-12.  See 
also  Isa.  v:l-6  and  Hosea  x:l.)  The  vine  is  only  good  for 
one  thing,  which  is  the  bearing  of  fruit;  apart  from  this 
it  is  worthless.  The  wood  cannot  be  used  for  anything  what- 
ever. It  is  good  for  nothing  but  burning.  Nebuchadnezzar 
carried  out  this  sentence  (2  Kings  xxv:9).  It  reminds  us 
also  of  the  parable  of  the  vine  our  Lord  spoke,  in  which, 
speaking  of  the  unfruitful  branch,  He  said,  "Men  gather 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  289 

them  and  cast  them  into  the  fire,  and  they  are  burned" 
(John  XV :6).  Some  apply  this  also  to  Israel;  it  means  the 
professing  believer,  who  professes  to  be  a  branch  in  the 
true  vine. 

6.  The  Parable  of  the  Abandoned  Child  and  Jemsalem's 
Whoredom:  Chapter  xvi.  This  chapter  consists  of  four 
sections:  1.  The  Parable  of  the  abandoned  child.  2.  Jeru- 
salem's idolatries  and  moral  degradation  (verses  15-34). 
3.  The  Doom  of  Jerusalem  and  the  promise  of  Restoration 
(verses  35-59) .    4.  The  covenant  remembered  (verses  60-63) . 

The  parable  of  the  abandoned  child,  and  what  the  gra- 
cious Lord  did  for  the  little  one  is  a  most  beautiful  demon- 
stration of  what  He  had  done  in  His  sovereign  love  and  grace 
for  Jerusalem.  It  must  be  read  first  with  this  in  mind.  But 
this  sv/eet  parable  illustrates  also,  as  fev/  other  portions  in 
the  Old  Testament  do,  the  grace  which  the  Lord  bestows 
upon  the  believer  in  the  Gospel.  Thy  father  an  Amorite 
and  thy  mother  a  Hittite  reminds  us  of  vvhat  is  true  of  all 
men,  so  tersely  expressed  in  David's  confession,  "Behold 
I  was  shapen  in  iniquity  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive 
me"  (Psa.  li:5).  Like  the  child  pictured  in  the  parable, 
we  are  lost,  perishing  in  the  field  (the  world).  What  could 
that  perishing  child  do  to  save  itself?  Even  so  we  cannot 
do  anything  to  save  ourselves.  The  Lord  passing  by  had 
compassion  and  spoke  His  Y/ord  of  power — Live.  He  came 
from  heaven  to  this  earth,  into  the  field  to  seek  and  save 
Vvhat  is  lost.  He  found  man  in  the  vile  and  helpless  con- 
dition so  aptly  pictured  by  the  miserable  child.  And  more 
than  that.  He  died  to  save  man.  He  gave  His  life  so  that 
we  might  live.  The  first  thing  He  does  for  the  believing 
sinner  is  to  give  him  life.  VvTien  the  spiritual  dead  hear 
His  voice  they  live.  The  washing  with  water,  the  anointing 
with  oil  (type  of  the  Holy  Spirit),  the  announcement  "thou 
becamest  mine,"  as  well  as  the  clothing,  the  beautifying  and 
the  crowning,  all  illustrates  what  His  marvelous  grace  does 
for  the  trusting,  believing  sinner.  It  is  all  grace  from  start 
to  finish,  from  the  impartation  of  life  in  the  new  birth  to 
the  crowning  in  glory. 


290  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

Upon  this  beautiful  background  of  Jehovah's  love  and 
mercy,  there  is  written  next  the  dark  picture  of  Jerusalem's 
whoredom's,  symbolical  of  her  wicked  idolatries.  It  started 
all  with  pride  (verse  15).  Jerusalem  did  not  acknowledge 
the  giver.  Instead  of  worshipping  Him,  they  established 
the  high  places  and  conformed  to  all  the  wicked  Canaanitish 
practices.  Verses  15-34  give  the  depth  of  Jerusalem's 
apostasy. 

Then  the  Lord  addresseth  her  whom  He  loved,  and  who 
had  turned  away  from  Him  as  a  harlot.  Her  doom  and 
judgment  is  announced  which  once  more  is  followed  by  the 
promise  of  mercy  and  restoration.  The  restoration  of  Sodom 
and  her  daughters  has  puzzled  many.  It  has  been  used 
by  Universalists,  Russellites,  Restorationists,  teachers  of 
Reconciliationism  and  other  errorists  to  back  up  their 
inventions  of  a  second  chance  of  the  wicked  dead,  or 
the  ultimate  salvation  of  the  entire  race.  The  restoration 
promises  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  restoration  of  the 
wicked  dead.  They  are  promises  of  national  restoration. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  look  in  the  Old  Testament  for  any  doctrines 
concerning  the  future  state.  Three  facts  will  show  this  error 
of  making  the  Old  Testament  teach  the  restoration  of  the 
wicked. 

7.  The  Old  Testament  is  not  that  part  of  the  divine  Reve- 
lation where  teachings  and  doctrines  about  the  future  state  are 
given. 

This  is  a  most  important  fact.  The  Old  Testament  shows 
man  as  upon  the  earth,  on  this  side  of  death,  and  not  beyond 
death.  The  future  of  Israel  on  the  earth,  their  supremacy 
and  destiny  of  glory  amidst  the  nations  of  the  earth,  the 
judgments  of  God  in  the  earth,  as  well  as  the  future  blessings 
for  the  nations  inhabiting  the  earth  during  the  coming  age, 
are  all  clearly  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  state 
after  death,  that  which  is  beyond  this  life,  is  shrouded  in 
mystery  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  That  great 
judgment,  the  great  white  throne  judgment,  is  nowhere 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament,  nor  do  we  read  a  word 
there  of  *'the  second  death.'*    Resurrection  of  the  dead,  no 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  291 

doubt,  was  known  to  individual  saints  of  Old  Testament 
times;  the  Spirit  of  God  revealed  it  to  their  hearts,  but  as 
a  doctrine,  resurrection  is  not  found  in  the  Old  Testament. 
In  Psalm  xvi  is  revealed  the  hope  of  resurrection  of  the  body, 
and  there  is  a  prophecy  of  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord. 

//.  Should  we  find  anything  in  the  Old  Testament  concern- 
ing the  future  state,  the  state  of  the  righteous  and  the  unright- 
eous after  death,  such  a  hint  or  statement  can  only  he  rightly 
understood  and  interpreted  by  the  great  doctrine  concerning  the 
future  state  as  revealed  in  the  New  Testament, 

By  this,  of  course,  we  do  not  say  that  the  Old  Testament 
needs  correction  by  the  revelation  of  the  New,  nor  do  we 
say  that  the  Old  is  inferior  to  the  New;  all  is  the  Word  of 
God.  However,  as  the  Old  Testament  does  not  show  man's 
condition  after  death,  any  passage  which  appears  to  relate 
to  such  a  condition  must  be  interpreted  by  the  full  light  as 
given  in  the  New  Testament. 

///.  //  such  passages  as  Ezekiel  xvi:53  and  E^ekiel 
xxxvii:l-14!,  etc.,  teach  the  restitution  of  the  wicked  by  resurrec- 
tion for  another  chance,  we  must  then  find  such  a  doctrine  of  the 
restoration  most  clearly  and  fully  revealed  as  one  of  the  great 
doctrines  of  the  New  Testament. 

In  vain,  however,  do  we  look  in  the  New  Testament  for 
such  a  restoration — second  probation  doctrine.  Such  a  doc- 
trine is  not  even  hinted  at  in  the  New.  However,  the  New 
Testament  gives  the  fullest  revelation  concerning  resurrec- 
tion and  the  future  state.  It  tells  us  that  there  is  indeed 
a  resurrection  of  the  body  for  every  human  being.  This 
revelation  of  resurrection  as  contained  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment leaves  no  room  whatever  for  the  Sodomites  and  all 
the  wicked  idolatrous  Israelites  to  be  raised  up  for  another 
chance.  Out  Lord,  in  John  v:29,  reveals  a  twofold  resur- 
rection, a  resurrection  unto  life  and  a  resurrection  unto 
damnation.  The  human  race,  those  who  have  died,  are 
therefore  in  resurrection  divided  into  two  classes;  they 
must  come  forth  either  unto  life  or  unto  danmation:  there 
is  no  middle  class.  Later  the  New  Testament  teaches  a 
first  resurrection,  an  out-resurrectaon  froBi  the  dead.     Only 


292  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL^ 

those  who  have  believed  and  died  in  Christ  will  have  a  ^hare 
in  this  resurrection.  Both  Old  and  New  Testament  saints 
belong  to  it,  but  none  have  a  part  in  it  v^ho  died  in  their  sins. 
The  rest  of  the  dead,  meaning  of  course,  the  wicked  dead,  are 
not  raised  up  till  after  the  thousand  years.  This  is  a  second 
resurrection,  and  this  takes  place  not  when  the  Lord  comes  the 
second  time,  but  after  His  millennial  reign  (Rev.  xx).  The 
subjects  of  this  second  resurrection  appear  before  the  great 
white  throne  and  are  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  Now,  these 
teachers  claim  that  the  return  of  Sodom  and  Samaria  to 
their  former  estate  means  their  resurrection  for  another 
chance  when  the  Lord  comes.  But,  as  these  departed,  wicked 
people  are  wicked  still,  how  can  they  have  part  in  the  first 
resurrection  when  the  Lord  comes,  which  is  the  resurrection 
of  the  righteous? 

They  surely  cannot  belong  to  this  resurrection.  And  there 
is  nowhere  in  the  New  Testament  a  word  about  another 
special  resurrection  in  which  all  the  wicked  are  raised  from 
the  dead  for  another  chance.  After  the  resurrection  of  the 
righteous  dead  there  is  but  one  more  resurrection,  the  resur- 
rection of  the  wicked  unto  damnation.  In  the  light  of  these 
facts  the  flimsy  theory  built  upon  misapplied  texts  of  the 
Old  Testament,  texts  which  relate  to  national  restoration 
and  blessing,  breaks  down  completely.  And  now,  having 
seen  what  the  statements  in  this  chapter  of  Ezekiel  do 
not  mean,  let  us  see  what  is  their  meaning.  While  these 
statements  cannot  mean  the  resurrection  of  individuals, 
they  mean  a  national  restoration.  There  is  promised  in 
many  passages  of  the  Old  Testament  a  national  restoration 
of  Israel.  The  ten  tribes  are  to  be  brought  back  to  their 
former  possessions.  Historically  they  have  been  lost.  But 
they  are  not  lost  to  God.  He  knows  where  they  are.  He 
has  kept  track  of  them,  and  in  His  own  time  He  will  make 
good  the  promises  of  their  restoration  and  will  bring  back 
the  remnants  of  the  house  of  Israel,  now  scattered  still  among 
the  nations.  The  Jews  will  also  be  restored  to  their  terri- 
tory. Repeatedly  this  national  restoration  of  the  aacient 
people  is  promised  under  the  picture  of  a  resurrection.    But 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  293 

to  other  nations  there  is  also  promised  such  a  national  res- 
toration in  the  days  to  come,  when  the  Lord  comes  and 
begins  His  Kingdom  reign  over  the  earth.  Such  a  national 
revival  is  beyond  a  doubt  promised  for  a  future  day  to  Moab, 
Ammon,  Assyria  and  Egypt.  Edom  and  Babylon,  however, 
are  doomed  as  nations  and  no  revival  whatever  is  promised 
to  them. 

We  do  not  know,  of  course,  how  God  will  accomplish  these 
promises  of  restoration  and  national  revivals,  and  how  He 
will  gather  the  remnants  of  these  former  nations  from  the 
great  sea  of  nations.  We  can  leave  this  and  other  difficulties 
with  Him  who  will  see  to  the  fulfillment  of  all  these  things. 

7.  The  Parable  of  the  Two  Eagles,  the  Cedar  and  the 
Vine:  Chapter  xvii.  The  great  eagle  mentioned  first  is 
Nebuchadnezzar.  (See  Jer.  xlviii:40  and  xlix:22).  He  came 
to  Lebanon  and  took  the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar,  the 
symbol  of  the  house  of  David,  which  was  conquered  by  this 
eagle.  Nebuchadnezzar  made  the  youngest  son  of  Josiah 
king  over  Judah  and  called  him  Zedekiah.  This  action  is 
described  in  verse  5.  The  other  great  eagle  is  Hophra,  the 
king  of  Egypt.  To  him  Zedekiah  turned  for  help.  The  in- 
terpretation and  application  of  this  parable  is  given  in 
verses  11-21.  The  following  passages  should  be  read  as 
helpful  to  the  understanding  of  these  verses:  2  Chron. 
xxxvi:13;  Jer.  xxvii:l-2,  xxxvii:5-7,  lii:ll. 

Israel's  hope  and  Israel's  future  come  once  more  into 
view  in  verses  22-24.  The  cedar  is  the  royal  house  of  David. 
God  in  His  sovereignty  promises  to  take  "of  its  young  shoots 
a  tender  one  and  I  will  plant  it  upon  a  high  and  eminent 
mountain."  This  tender  one  is  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of 
David.  It  is  the  same  promise  as  given  in  the  Prophet 
Isaiah.  "And  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem 
of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots"  (Isa. 
xi:l).  "For  He  shall  grow  up  before  him  as  a  tender  plant 
and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground"  (Isa.  liii:2).  The  high 
and  emment  mountain  typifies  Mount  Zion,  and  the  King- 
dom of  IViessiah  is  pictured  in  the  closing  verses  of  the 
chapter.     The  high  tree  which  is  brought  low,  the  green 


294  TEE   PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

tree  which  is  dried  up,  is  the  symbol  of  Gentile  world-power. 
The  low  tree  which  is  exalted  and  the  dry  tree  which  is 
made  to  flourish  stands  for  the  restoration  of  the  Kingdom 
to  Israel  when  the  Son  of  David,  our  Lord,  comes  again. 
Then  the  high  tree  will  be  cut  down  and  the  now  flourish- 
ing Gentile  dominion  will  dry  up;  Israel  the  low  tree  will 
be  exalted,  and  the  long,  dry  and  barren  nation  will  bring 
its  blessed  fruit. 

8.  The  Message  of  the  Righteous  Judgments  of  God: 
Chapter  xviii.  In  verses  1-4,  we  find  the  false  accusation 
against  God  and  the  Divine  answer,  and  this  is  followed  in 
verses  5-9  by  the  conditions  of  life,  *'The  soul  that  sinneth, 
it  shall  die'*  (verse  4).  But  the  conditions  to  have  life  and 
to  be  just  cannot  be  fulfilled  by  sinful  man;  nor  is  in  these 
verses  "eternal  life"  in  view;  these  are  not  conditions  to 
secure  "eternal  life,"  but  to  escape  physical  death  in  the  an- 
nounced judgment.  The  conditions  which  bring  death  are 
given  in  verses  10-13.  The  son  does  not  die  for  his  father's 
sins,  as  they  thought  in  their  wrong  reasonings  (verses  14- 
02)'  All  their  accusations  that  the  Lord  is  unjust  are 
completely  answered  in  the  final  paragraph  of  this  message 
(verses  21-32). 

9.  The  Lamentations  for  the  Princes  of  Israel:  Chapter 
xix.  This  lamentation  has  two  sections.  The  lamentations 
for  the  princes  come  first  (i:9),and  that  is  followed  by  the 
lamentation  for  the  land  of  Judah  (10-14). 

The  princes  are  Jehoahaz  and  Jehoiachin.  King  Jehoahaz 
was  carried  away  captive  into  Egypt  (2  Kings  xxiii:33);  his 
fate  is  lamented  in  verses  1-4.  King  Jehoiachin  was  taken 
to  Babylon  and  he  is  lamented  in  verses  5-9.  In  the  lamen- 
tation for  the  land  of  Judah  the  vine  is  once  more  mentioned. 
The  vine  is  burned,  the  fruit  devoured  and  there  is  no  scepter 
in  Judah. 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  295 

V.    FURTHER  AND  FINAL  PREDICTIONS  CONCERNING  THE 
JUDGMENT  OF  JERUSALEM. 

CHAPTERS  XX-XXIV. 

1.  Jehovah  Rehearses  His  Mercies  Bestowed  Upon  Israel.  Chap- 

ter XX. 

2,  The  Impending  Judgment  Announced.     Chapter  xxi. 
8.     Jerusalem's  Sins  and  Whoredom.     Chapters  xxii-xxiii. 

4.     The  Parable  of  the  Boiling  Pot.     The  Last  Word.     Chapter 
xxiv. 

1.  Jehovah  Rehearses  His  Mercies  Bestowed  Upon 
Israel:  Chapter  xx.  The  chapter  contains  a  Divine  retros- 
pect and  an  arraignment  of  the  people  for  their  national 
sins.  The  following  division  will  greatly  assist  in  an  analyt- 
ical study  of  this  chapter.  Verses  1-9  describes  the  nation's 
sins  in  Egypt.  Verses  10-17  give  the  history  of  the  first 
generation  which  came  out  of  Egypt.  It  is  a  wonderful 
condensed  rehearsal  of  all  they  were  and  what  the  Lord  had 
done  for  them.  The  record  of  the  second  generation  is  con- 
tained in  verses  18-26.  This  is  followed  by  a  description 
of  their  unfaithfulness  and  sins  in  the  land  (verses  27-32). 
Judgment  then  is  announced  and  a  future  restoration  prom- 
ised. Verses  40-44  are  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  The  fire  of  judg- 
ment to  sweep  over  the  south  field  (Judah)  is  announced 
in  the  final  paragraph  (verses  45-49). 

2.  The  Announcement  of  the  Impending  Judgment: 
Chapter  xxi.  A  solemn  message  is  given  to  the  prophet: 
* 'Behold  I  am  against  thee,  and  will  draw  forth  my  sword 
out  of  its  sheath,  and  will  cut  off  from  thee  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked."  It  was  to  be  a  widespread  judgment,  against 
all  flesh.  Ezekiel  was  commanded  to  sigh  with  bitterness 
before  their -eyes  and  was  to  tell  them  the  cause  of  his  grief 
(verses  1-7).  The  sharpening  of  the  sword  of  judgment  is 
given  in  verses  8-17.  It  was  hanging  over  their  heads,  ready 
to  strike  at  any  moment.  The  question  is  asked,  "Should 
we  then  make  mirth?"  Is  this  the  time  of  mirth,  worldly 
pleasures  and  enjoyment?  Not  for  the  faithful  in  Israel. 
Nor  is  the  present  solemn  time  a  time  of  mirth  for  those  who 


296  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

know  the  signs  of  the  times  and  what  God  has  revealed 
concerning  things  to  come. 

The  King  of  Babylon  and  his  divination  is  vividly  pic- 
tured in  verses  18-24.  The  Babylonians  used  different  kinds 
of  enchantments,  etc.,  to  ascertain  what  they  should  do. 
The  king  stands  at  the  cross-roads.  Shall  he  go  to  Rabbath 
or  against  Jerusalem?  Ke  used  arrows  and  put  on  one  the 
name  of  "Rabbath"  of  the  Ammonites;  on  the  other  "Jerusa- 
lem." Then  he  shook  them  to  and  fro  (correct  rendering — 
"he  made  his  arrows  bright").  In  verse  22,  we  see  the 
result  o"  this  divination.  He  has  in  his  hands  the  arrow 
with  "Jerusalem"  on  it. 

The  Wicked  Prince  and  the  Coming  One  are  seen  in  verses 
25-27.  Here  Christ  and  Antichrist  are  contrasted.  There 
can  be  no  question  that  Zedekiah  is  first  of  all  in  view  as 
the  profane  wicked  prince  of  Israel.  But  the  prophecy  looks 
far  beyond  Zedekiah.  It  is  the  coming  wicked  prince,  the 
one  who  comes  in  his  own  name,  the  final  Antichrist,  the 
false  Messiah,  or,  as  he  is  also  called  in  Revelation,  the  false 
prophet.  That  verse  25  refers  to  the  time  of  the  end,  is  seen  by 
the  words,  "in  the  time  of  the  iniquity  of  the  end"  (correct 
translation.  The  same  phrase  appears  in  Dan.  xi  :35-39,  "the 
time  of  the  end,"  and  the  person  described  in  that  passage 
is  the  Antichrist,  the  wicked  prince.  It  is  the  time  of  the 
future  great  tribulation  "when  the  transgressors  are  come 
to  the  full"  (Dan.  viii:23).  This  false  Christ  will  claim 
priestly  and  kingly  honors.  He  is  the  beast  out  of  the  earth, 
(Rev.  xiii)  having  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  but  speaking  as  a 
dragon.  The  two  horns  represent  the  priesthood  and  the 
kingship  he  assumes.  And  this,  we  learn  from  verse  26,  is 
the  character  of  the  wicked  prince  of  Israel  of  whom  Ezekiel 
speaks.  Again,  we  must  correct  the  faulty  translation  of 
the  authorized  version:  "Remove  the  mitre  and  take  off 
the  crown";  the  word  "diadem"  is  mitre,  the  head-dress  of 
the  high-priest  (Exod.  xxvii:4).  He  wears  the  mitre  of  the 
priest  and  the  crown  of  the  king.  He  is  Satan's  final  coun- 
terfeit (like  the  pope)  of  the  Priest-King.  In  verse  27,  the 
overturning  times  are  mentioned.     Thrice  it  is  stated,  "I 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  297 

will  overturn."    Even  so  will  it  be  at  the  time  of  the  end 
until  He  comes  whose  right  it  is. 

Verses  28-32  give  the  announcement  of  judgment  upon 
the  Ammonites. 

3.  Jerusalem's  Sins  and  Whoredoms:  Chapters  xxii- 
xxiii.  Before  the  sharpened  sword  of  justice  and  retribution 
does  its  dreadful  work,  the  Lord  imcovers  the  guilt  and 
vileness  of  the  city  and  lays  bare  the  corruption  of  her 
prophets,  priest,  and  princes,  as  well  as  of  the  people.  The 
violence  and  abomination  of  Jerusalem  are  revealed  in 
verses  1-16;  the  smelting  furnace  in  verses  17-23  is  the 
symbol  of  Jehovah's  fiery  indignation  against  Jerusalem 
and  its  inhabitants.  The  corruption  of  the  prophets,  priests, 
and  princes  is  fully  uncovered  in  the  closing  section  of  chap- 
ter xxii  (verses  23-31). 

In  chapter  xxiii  Samaria  and  Jerusalem  are  called  two 
sisters,  Aholah  and  Aholibah,  in  their  ungodly  relation  with 
Assyria  and  Chaldea.  Aholah  means  '*her  tent."  Aholibah, 
"my  tent  is  in  her."  The  latter  denotes  the  fact  that  the 
true  sanctuary  was  in  Judah.  The  sins  and  vileness  of  both 
are  portrayed  throughout  this  long  chapter,  as  well  as  the 
deserved  punishment. 

4.  The  Parable  of  the  Boiling  Pot  and  the  Last  Word: 
Chapter  xxiv.  The  exact  date  is  given  by  the  prophet.  It 
was  the  tenth  day  of  the  tenth  month  in  the  ninth  year. 
What  happened  also  on  that  date  we  fiind  recorded  in  2  Kings 
XXV  :1:  "And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  ninth  year  of  his  reign 
in  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month,  that 
Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,  came,  he  and  all  his 
host,  against  Jerusalem,  and  pitched  against  it;  and  they 
built  forts  against  it  round  about."  How  did  Ezekiel  know 
about  all  this?  It  was  the  Lord  who  gave  him  this  informa- 
tion and  led  him  to  record  the  date.  This  is  the  statement 
of  the  second  verse:  "Son  of  man,  write  thee  the  name  of 
the  day,  even  of  this  selfsame  day,  the  King  of  Babylon  set 
himself  against  Jerusalem  this  same  day."  What  does  Higher 
Criticism  have  to  say  to  this?  We  quote  a  recent  commenta- 
tor: "These  verses  (2)  forces  on  us  in  the  clearest  fashion  the 


298  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

dilemma — either  Ezekiel  was  a  deliberate  deceiver  or  he 
was  possessed  of  some  kind  of  a  second  sight!"  What  about 
divine  revelation?  This  the  "learned" (?)  men  refuse  to 
think  even  possible.  The  boiling  pot  announced  is  the  sym- 
bol of  Jerusalem. 

Verses  15-18  announce  the  death  of  EzekieFs  wife,  and 
he  is  commanded  not  to  mourn  or  weep;  all  the  customary 
signs  of  grief  are  forbidden  him.  While  he  faithfully  de- 
livered the  Message  in  the  morning,  even  his  wife  was  taken 
from  his  side.  Death  had  dissolved  the  marriage  union  and 
taken  from  the  prophet  the  beloved  wife.  Even  so  the  re- 
lationship between  Jehovah  and  Jerusalem  was  now  com- 
pletely to  be  severed.  The  question  of  the  people  and  the 
answer  is  found  in  verses  19-27.  Read  verses  26-27  and 
compare  with  chapter  xxxiii:21,  22. 

B.    PREDICTIONS  OF  JUDGMENTS  AGAINST  THE  NATIONS. 
CHAPTERS   XXV-XXXn. 

1.  Prophecies  Concerning  Ammon,  Moab,  Edom,  and  the  Philis- 

tines.    XXV. 

2.  Concerning  Tyrus.     Chapter  xxvi. 

3.  The  Glory  of  Tyrus  and  Her  Fall.     Chapter  xxvii. 

4.  The  Prince  of  Tyrus.     Chapter  xxviii. 

6.     Concerning  Egypt.     Chapters  xxix  and  xxx. 

6.  Pharaoh's  Greatness  and  His  Overthrow.     Chapter  xxxi. 

7.  Lamentations  and  the  Great  Funeral  Dirge.     Chapter  xxxii. 

1.  Prophecies  Concerning  Ammon,  Moab,  Edom,  and  the 
Philistines:  Chapter  xxv.  The  eight  chapters  as  analyzed 
above  are  on  prophecies  concerning  nations  which  were  in 
touch  with  Israel.  These  predictions  concern  seven  nations, 
and  these  are  divided  into  four  and  three.  The  first  four 
were  the  immediate  neighbors  of  Israel.  The  first  message 
concerns  the  Ammonites  (verses  1-7).  Both  Ammon  and 
Moab  had  a  racial  connection  with  Israel  and  were  the  in- 
cestous offspring  of  Lot  (Gen.  xxxvii:37-38).  They  were 
in  constant  conflict  with  Israel.     Their  evil  character  is 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  299 

revealed  in  this  message?  Moab  is  mentioned  next  (verses 
8-11).  We  give  several  passages  which  may  be  consulted 
about  Moab  and  the  character  of  the  people  (Jer.  xlviii:29; 
Isa.  xvi:6).  There  is  promised  for  both  Ammon  and  Moab 
a  national  restoration  in  the  latter  days,  that  is,  when  the 
Lord  comes  (Jer.  xlviii:47,  xlix:6).  Let  us  remember  that 
these  nations  were  proud  in  the  extreme.  And  these  judg- 
ments upon  proud,  self-exalting,  God-forgetting  nations, 
are  not  confined  to  the  past.  They  will  be  repeated  in  the 
future  when  He  will  judge  the  nations. 

Verses  12-14  concern  Edom.  The  descendants  of  Esau, 
Edom,  were  closer  to  Israel  than  Ammon  and  Moab.  Edom*s 
deeds  were  more  prominently  against  the  people  of  God, 
more  wicked  and  defiant,  than  the  others.  Israel  was  espe- 
cially commanded  not  to  abhor  an  Edomite  (Deut.  xxiii:7). 
Amos  shows  the  sin  of  Edom  (Amos  i:ll).  So  does  Obadiah 
(verses  3-4).  The  cruel  Herods,  the  types  of  the  man  of 
sin,  were  Edomites.  The  judgment  upon  Edom  is  to  be 
executed  by  Israel.  This  is  to  take  place  in  a  future  day. 
(See  Obadiah,  verses  17-21  and  Amos  ix:ll-12.)  The  final 
paragraph  is  concerning  the  Philistines  (verses  15-17).  The 
Philistines  dwelt  on  a  narrow  strip  on  the  seashore  and  were 
the  long  continued  enemies  of  the  people  Israel.  Jeremiah 
speaks  of  them  (chapter  cxlvii).  See  also  Amos  i:6-9,  Joel 
iii:4;  Isa.  xix:29-32.  The  vengeance  of  the  Lord  fell  upon 
the  coast  of  Palestina,  the  Philistines,  and  they  experienced 
the  fury  of  the  Lord.  He  dealt  with  them  who  had  corrupted 
His  people.  And  so  God  will  deal  in  due  time  with  all  His 
enemies. 

2.  Concerning  Tyrus:  Chapter  xxvi.  A  lengthy  prophecy 
concerning  Tyrus  is  found  in  this  and  in  the  chapters  which 
follow.  These  great  predictions  have  found  a  startling  ful- 
filment. History  confirms  all  that  Ezekiel  spoke  should 
come  to  pass.  In  verses  1-14  we  have  the  overthrow  of  the 
powerful  city  predicted. 

The  City  of  Tyrus  (which  means  rock)  was  partly  built 
upon  an  island  off  the  mainland  in  the  Mediterranean  Sea. 
It  was  an  ancient  Phoenician  city  and  is  mentioned  in  Scrip- 


300  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

ture  for  the  first  time  in  Joshua  xix:29,  where  it  is  called 
"The  strong  city."  It  had  a  wonderful  commerce,  a  descrip- 
tion of  w^hich  in  its  variety,  we  find  in  the  twenty-seventh 
chapter.  It  was  inhabited  by  seafaring  men,  and  the 
prophet  Isaiah  describes  this  wealthy  and  influential  city 
as  "the  crowning  city,  whose  merchants  are  princes,  whose 
traffickers  are  the  honorable  of  the  earth"  (Isa.  xxiii:8). 
We  read  in  the  next  chapter  hov>^  Syria,  Persia,  Egypt, 
Spain,  Greece  and  every  quarter  of  the  ancient  world  laid 
their  choicest  and  most  precious  things  at  the  feet  of  Tyre, 
who  sat  enthroned  on  ivory,  covered  with  blue  and  purple, 
from  the  isles  of  Elishah.  Ker  beauty  was  perfect  (Ezek. 
xxvii:ll).  During  the  reign  of  David  and  Solomon,  Tyre 
came  into  great  prominence,  playing  an  important  role  in 
the  commercial,  political  and  religious  history  of  Israel. 
Hiram,  King  of  Tyrus,  sent  cedar  trees  to  Jerusalem,  as  well 
as  workmen,  who  built  David  a  house  (2  Sam.  v:ll).  How 
Tyrus  aided  in  the  construction  of  the  temple  and  the  palace 
under  Solomon's  reign,  may  be  learned  by  consulting  the 
following  passages;  1  Kingsv:l-12,  vii:13-14;  1  Chron.  xiv:l, 
2  Chron.  ii:S,  11.  Wlien  the  ships  of  Solomon  sailed  away 
to  Ophir,  "Hiram  sent  in  the  navy  his  servants,  ship-men 
that  had  knowledge  of  the  sea,  with  the  servants  of  Solomon, 
and  they  came  to  Ophir,  and  fetched  from  thence  gold,  four 
hundred  and  twenty  talents,  and  brought  it  to  King  Solo- 
mon" (1  Kings  ix:27-28).  She  sinned  against  Jerusalem  and 
the  people  of  God.  Joel  and  Amos,  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah 
mention  her  and  her  well  deserved  judgment  (Joel  iii:4-6; 
Amos  i:9-10;  Isa.  xxiii;  Jer.  xlvii:4). 

In  the  third  verse  of  our  chapter,  we  read  the  divine  an- 
nouncement of  Tyre's  fate:  "Behold   I  am   against  three, 

0  Tyrus,  and  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  against 
thee,  as  the  sea  causes  its  waves  to  come  up.  And  they 
shall  destroy  the  walls  of  Tyrus,  and  break  do-vvn  her  towers; 

1  will  also  scrape  her  dust  from  her,  and  make  her  like  the 
top  of  a  rock."  It  was  to  become  a  place  for  the  spreading 
of  nets  and  a  spoil  to  the  nations.  This  great  judgment 
was  not  all  at  once  carried  out.    Nebuchadnezzar  came  first 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  301 

against  her  as  predicted  in  verses  7-11.  He  besieged 
Tyre  on  the  mainland  and  after  thirteen  years  took  the 
city;  while  that  part  of  Tyrus  which  was  built  upon  the 
island  in  the  sea,  protected  by  the  fleet  of  Tyrus,  escaped. 
Then  came  for  her  seventy  years  when  she  was  forgotten, 
as  predicted  by  Isaiah  (xxiii:15).  After  these  years  had 
passed  Tyrus  saw  a  startling  revival.  The  island  city  became 
more  powerful  and  wicked  than  before;  *'she  committed 
fornication  with  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth"  (Isa.  xxiii:17).  The  continental  Tyrus, 
however,  remained  in  ruins. 

Centuries  passed  and  it  seemed  as  if  Ezekiel's  prophecy 
concerning  Tyre*s  complete  overthrow  would  remain  un- 
fulfilled. It  was  about  240  years  after  when  the  literal  ful- 
filment of  this  prophecy  was  accomplished.  Alexander  the 
Great  came  against  the  city  built  on  the  island.  After  seven 
months  the  city  was  taken  by  means  of  a  mole,  by  which 
the  forces  of  Alexander  could  enter  the  city.  In  construct- 
ing this  mole,  Alexander  made  use  of  the  ruins  of  the  old 
city.  The  stones,  timber  and  the  very  dust  of  the  destroyed 
city  was  laid  into  the  sea  to  erect  the  causeway  which  accom- 
plished the  utter  ruin  of  the  wealthy  city.  And  thus  Ezek- 
iel's  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  "And  they  shall  lay  thy  stones 
and  thy  timber  and  thy  dust  in  the  midst  of  the  water.'* 
The  complete  end  of  Tyrus  had  come.  "And  thou  shalt  be 
no  more,  though  thou  be  sought  for,  yet  shalt  thou  never 
be  found  again"  (verse  21).  So  completely  was  the  work 
done  by  Alexander,  depositing  the  debris  of  the  ruins  of 
Tyrus  on  the  mainland  into  the  sea,  that  its  exact  site  will 
remain  undeterminable.  And  x\lexander  the  Great  fulfilled 
still  another  prophecy.  Before  he  came  on  his  mission,  di- 
rected by  God,  to  make  an  end  of  the  proud  and  wicked  city, 
Zechariah,  the  great  post-exilic  prophet,  had  once  more 
announced  the  fate  of  Tyrus.  "x\nd  Tyrus,"  said  the  Lord 
through  Zechariah,  "did  build  herself  a  stronghold,  and 
heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  fine  gold  as  the  ruin  of 
the  sheets."  This  was  after  Nebuchadnezzar  had  destroyed 
the  Tyrus  on  the  mainland  and  she  became  the  great  island 


302  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

city.  "Thus,"  said  Zechariah,  "behold,  the  Lord  will  cast 
her  out,  and  He  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea,  and  she 
shall  be  devoured  with  fire'  (Zech.  ix:3-4).  Alexander  did 
this:  he  laid  proud  Tyrus  in  ashes.  What  an  evidence  that 
all  these  words  are  Divine! 

The  effect  of  the  fall  of  Tyrus  and  a  lamentation  over  that 
fall  are  revealed  in  verses  15-21.  There  i?  a  description  of 
the  descent  of  Tyrus  into  the  pit  (verses  19-20).  The  last 
sentence  of  verse  20,  "And  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of 
the  living,"  means  the  coming  glory  of  the  earthly  Zion, 
the  glory  in  store  for  Israel. 

3.  The  Glory  of  Tyrus  and  Her  Fall:  Chapter  xxvii. 
Verses  1-25  give  an  interesting  description  of  the  world-wide 
commerce  and  glory  of  this  proud  world  city.  "Sic  transit 
gloria  mundi,"thus  passeth  the  glory  of  the  world!  Of  the 
proud  and  wicked  mistress  of  the  sea  nothing  but  ruins 
remain  and  her  very  site  is  no  longer  known.  TVTiat  her 
past  glory  was  is  made  known  by  the  prophet,  yet  Ezekiel 
never  had  been  to  that  city,  nor  did  he  have  any  knowledge 
of  her  grandeur,  her  great  wealth  and  far  reaching  com- 
merce.   God  revealed  all  unto  him. 

The  description  of  her  great  commerce  reminds  us  of  that 
coming  world-system  as  described  in  the  last  Book  of  the 
Bible,  the  Revelation.  Babylon  the  Great  will  be  both  an 
ecclesiastical  and  commercial  w^orld  center.  Her  commerce  is 
just  like  the  commerce  of  Tyrus  (Rev.  xviii:12-13).  The 
fall  of  Tyrus  is  fully  given  in  verses  26-30. 

The  description  of  Tyrus  as  a  ship  as  given  in  the  first  part 
of  this  chapter  is  here  maintained.  Tyrus  is  to  be  ship- 
wrecked. The  east  wind  is  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  came 
against  the  proud  city  to  accomplish  part  of  her  ruin;  and 
Alexander  the  Great,  as  we  saw  in  our  previous  study,  com- 
pleted the  work.  A  comparison  with  Revelation  x\'iii  will 
bring  out  the  striking  correspondency.  AVhen  finally  Baby- 
lon the  great  falls,  that  coming  religious-commercial  world- 
system,  with  Rome  as  a  center,  her  fall  and  desolation,  will 
surely  be  greater  than  the  fall  of  Tyrus.  For  this  aU  is 
rapidly  preparing. 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  303 

4.  The  Prince  of  Tyrus:  Chapter  xxviii.  The  prince  of 
Tyrus,  or,  as  he  is  also  called,  the  King,  was,  according  to 
the  Jevv^sh  historian  Josephus,  Ithobalus,  known  in  the 
Phoenician  annals  as  Ithobaal  II.  He  was  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  pride  and  wealth  of  Tyrus;  the  terrible  pride  of 
the  city  headed  up  in  him.  His  heart  was  so  lifted  up  that 
he  claimed  to  be  a  god  and  that  he  occupied  the  very  seat  of 
God.*  He  boasted  of  greater  wisdom  than  the  wisdom  of 
Daniel.  He  is  a  type  of  the  final  Antichrist,  the  man  of  sin. 
Behind  the  wicked  prince  and  king,  there  is  seen  another 
power,  Satan.  Satan  was  the  power  behind  the  throne  of 
the  Tyrian  King,  as  Satan  is  still  the  god  of  this  age,  who 
controls  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  Inasmuch,  then,  as 
Tyrus  is  a  type  of  the  commercial  glory  of  the  world,  its 
wealth  and  pride,  foreshadowing  the  final  great  world-city 
or  world-system,  Babylon,  the  ruler  of  Tyrus,  spoken  of  as 
Prince,  foreshadows  the  Antichrist;  while  as  King,  Satan 
himself  stands  behind  him  as  the  dominereing  power.  The 
descriptions  given  of  Satan  as  an  unfallen  being  show  that 
he  was  originally  a  marvelous  being,  full  of  wisdom  and 
perfect  in  beauty.  From  Jude's  epistle,  we  learn  that  even 
Michael  still  recognized  in  him  the  grandeur  of  his  unfallen 
past,  and  did  not  bring  a  railing  accusation  against  him  (Jude 
verses  8-10).  He  was  in  Eden,  the  garden  of  God,  and  every 
precious  stone  was  his  covering.  It  is  a  description  of  Satan's 
original  place  and  of  his  great  beauty.  Furthermore,  he  was 
the  anointed  cherub  that  covereth;  the  Lord  had  set  him 
to  be  this.  As  the  anointed,  divinely  chosen  cherub  he  held 
an  exalted  position  in  connection  with  the  government  of 
the  throne  of  God.  Everything  shows  that  this  majestic 
creature  possessed  a  place  of  great  dignity,  being  "upon  the 
holy  mountain  of  God,"  walking  up  and  down  in  the  midst 
of  the  stones  of  fire,  he  was  ever  present  and  moving  about 
in  the  fiery  glory  of  a  holy  and  righteous  God.  "Thou  was 
perfect  in  thy  ways  from  the  day  that  thou  wast  created  till 
unrighteousness  was  found  in  thee." 

In  verses  20-20  the  judgment  upon  Zidon,  some  twenty 
miles  norlii  of  Tyrus,  is  predicted.    For  some  years  Zidon 


304  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

was  even  more  prominent  than  Tyrus.  She  was  burnt  after 
a  revolt  against  Artaxerxes  Ochus  in  351  B.C.,  but  later 
rebuilt. 

5.  Concerning  Egypt:  Chapters  xxix  and  xxx.  First 
Egypt's  desolation  is  announced  (verses  1-12).  The  King 
of  Egypt  addressed  in  this  prophecy  was  Pharaoh-Hophra, 
called  in  Greek,  Apries.  He  was  the  grandson  of  Pharaoh- 
Necho,  who  defeated  King  Josiah  at  Meggido  (2  Chron. 
xxxv:20-27).  King  Zedekiah  of  Judah  expected  help  and 
relief  from  Pharaoh-Hophra,  when  Jerusalem  was  besieged. 
The  Egyptian  army  under  Hophra  advanced  through 
Phoenicia  and  forced  the  Chaldeans  to  raise  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem  (Jer.  xxxv:5-7).  But  the  relief  was  only  tem- 
porary, for  the  Egyptian  army  had  to  retire.  The  prophet 
Jeremiah  announced  also  the  doom  of  Hophra,  associating 
it  with  Zedekiah's  doom:  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold  I 
will  give  Pharaoh-Kophra,  King  of  Egypt,  into  the  hands  of 
his  enemies,  and  into  the  hand  of  them  that  seek  his  life; 
as  I  gave  Zedekiah,  King  of  Judah,  into  the  hand  of  Nebuc- 
chadnezzar.  King  of  Babylon,  his  enemy,  and  that  sought 
his  life"  (Jer.  xliv:30). 

But  have  these  predictions  been  fulfilled?  Did  Egypt 
pass  through  a  period  of  forty  years'  desolation  and  did  a 
restoration  take  place  after  the  forty  years?  Critics  claim 
that  these  predictions  were  never  literally  fulfilled  and  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  did  not  invade  Egypt  during  the  reign  of 
Hophra.  They  point  to  the  historical  evidence  that  Amasis 
followed  Hophra  as  King  of  Egypt,  and  under  his  reign 
Egypt  was  in  a  very  flourishing  condition.  The  historian, 
Herodotus,  gives  this  information,  and  it  is  fully  confirmed 
by  Egyptian  records  on  monuments.  But  did  the  prophet 
Ezekiel  predict  that  Egypt  should  be  invaded  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar during  the  reign  of  Pharaoh-Hophra?  His  predictions 
of  disaster  for  Israel  by  trusting  in  Egypt  had  been  used  by 
the  Assyrian  officer  in  addressing  Hezekiah:  "Now,  behold, 
thou  trustcst  upon  the  staff  of  this  bruised  reed,  upon  Egypt, 
on  which,  if  a  man  lean,  it  will  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce 
it;  so  is  Pharaoh,  King  of  Egypt,  unto  all  that  trust  on 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  305 

him"  (2  Kings  xviii:21).  And  so  it  was.  Egypt  gave  no 
help  to  Israel  and  only  wounded  them  grievously,  as  a  staff 
which  breaks  under  the  weight  of  him  who  leaneth  upon  it 
breaks  and  pierces  the  hand.  Whenever  God's  people  turn 
to  Egypt  (the  type  of  the  world)  for  help,  and  form  ungodly 
alliances,  they  do  so  to  their  own  hurt  and  shame. 

Verses  13-16  predict  a  future  restoration  of  Egypt.  Isaiah 
also  shows  its  future  history,  both  in  judgment  and  in  bless- 
ing (chapter  xix).  Yet  the  prediction  of  Ezekiel  that  Egypt 
after  the  forty  years  should  be  restored  and  be  the  basest 
of  all  kingdoms  and  shall  have  no  more  rule,  but  be  in  a 
diminished  condition,  excludes  the  appL cation  of  this  proph- 
ecy to  the  coming  Millennium.  Egypt  had  such  a  period 
of  forty  years'  devastation,  though  the  exact  history  of  it 
may  not  be  known  to  us.  Prophecy  is  not  learned  by  his- 
torical events,  but  history  is  revealed  in  prophecy.  We 
believe  prophecies,  not  because  history  has  measured  up  to 
them,  but  we  believe  them  because  they  are  the  inerrant 
Word  of  God.  After  Egypt's  sorrowful  forty  years'  experi- 
ence and  dispersion,  this  proud  country  went  into  a  steady 
decline,  and  the  Word  of  God  was  literally  fulfilled  when  it 
became  the  basest  of  kingdoms,  so  that  Israel  put  confidence 
no  longer  in  Egypt.  After  Nebuchadnezzar's  raid,  Egypt 
declined  and  sank  lower  still  under  the  Persians  and  the 
Ptolemies,  until  she  became  the  granary  of  Rome.  And  this 
degradation  has  continued  throughout  the  centuries  of  this 
age,  so  that  Egypt  is  literally  the  basest  of  the  kingdoms. 
That  she  will  play  her  part  in  the  future  at  the  close  of  our 
age  we  learn  from  Daniel's  prophecy  (Dan.  xi:36-45).  Egypt 
will  rise  into  prominence  ere  long  in  connection  with  the 
present-day  world  conflict. 

Then  follows  another  prediction,  the  conquest  of  Egypt  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,  the  King  of  Babylon  (verses  12-21).  This 
also  was  literally  fulfilled.  In  chapter  xxx  we  find  first  a 
prophecy  as  to  the  desolation  of  Egypt  and  her  Allies  (verses 
1-13). 

The  prophet's  first  utterance  is  concerning  the  day, 
**Howl  ye!    Alas  for  the  day!    For  the  day  is  near,  even  the 


306  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  a  cloudy  day;  it  shall  be  the  time 
of  the  Gentiles."  What  day  is  this?  Other  prophets  men- 
tion the  day  of  Jehovah  as  a  day  of  judgment  and  wrath 
when  the  Lord  will  deal  in  His  righteousness  with  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  (See  Isa.  ii,  xiii:6,  9;  Joel  i:15,  ii:l,  11,  iii:14; 
Amos  v:18,  20;  Obad.  xv;  Zeph.  i:7,  14;  Zech.  xiv:l,  etc.) 
This  day  in  its  final  meaning  is  the  day  on  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  will  be  visibly  revealed  from  heaven.  It  is 
mentioned  in  the  New  Testament  in  1  Thess.  v:2;  2  Thess. 
ii:2  (where  "day  of  Christ"  should  be  rendered  "day  of  the 
Lord")  and  2  Peter  iii:10.  This  day  v/ill  bring  "man's  day" 
to  a  close  and  usher  in  a  new  age,  when  righteousness  shall 
reign  as  grace  reigns  now.  This  day  of  coming  judgment  of 
all  nations  is  seen  also  here  in  a  prophetic  perspective.  All 
previous  judgments  of  nations  as  announced  by  God's 
prophet's,  nations  which  sinned  against  Israel  the  chosen 
people,  foreshadow  the  one  great  day,  when  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles  end  in  the  revealed  manner  (Dan.  ii:34,  vii:10- 
14).  What  came  upon  Egypt  in  tlie  past  through  divine 
judgment  will  happen  to  the  Gentile  nations  in  the  future 
at  the  close  of  our  age,  "when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  re- 
vealed from  heaven  with  His  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  fire, 
taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that 
obey  not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (2  Thess. 
i:7-8).  Ever  since  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  began  with 
Nebuchadnezzar  the  divinely  appointed  head  (Jer.  xxvii:4- 
8),  this  day  of  the  Lord  has  been  drawing  near,  till  now,  with 
the  stupendous  present-day  events,  we  can  see  this  day 
rapidly  approaching. 

Two  weeks  after  the  lamentations  over  Pharaoh,  the 
prophet  uttered  this  solemn  and  most  impressive  elegy  over 
the  multitude  of  Egypt  and  the  heathen  nations  who  have 
gone  into  sheol.  It  has  been  called  a  weird  Dantesque 
funeral  march  over  the  whole  heathen  world;  but  it  is  more 
than  that.  We  look  here  into  sheol  and  see  the  nations 
gathered  there,  stripped  of  their  glory,  in  deepest  abasement 
and  shame.  Their  bodies  are  in  the  pit,  the  grave,  and  their 
souls   in   sheol,   the  unseen   regions.     God's  patience  was 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  307 

exhausted  with  them,  the  measure  of  their  wickedness 
became  full;  then  judgments  swept  them  off  the  earth  and 
they  passed  away  and  descended  into  sheol.  And  what 
irony  there  is  connected  with  it!  "Whom  does  thou  surpass 
in  beauty?  Go  Aovnx  and  be  thou  laid  with  the  uncircum- 
cised."  And  as  the  King  came  there  with  his  multitudes, 
whom  did  they  find  there?  Asshur,  that  is  Assyria,  is  men- 
tioned first:  "Asshur  is  there  and  all  her  company."  She 
was  a  cruel,  pitiless,  destructive  power,  and  now  she,  who 
once  caused  "terror  in  the  land  of  the  living,"  is  helpless, 
with  all  her  power  gone  in  the  unseen  world.  Elam,  Meshech, 
Tubal,  Edom,  the  princes  of  the  North  and  the  Zidonians 
are  named  as  being  in  existence  there.  Once  great  powers, 
but  now  cut  off,  they  lie  with  the  uncircumcised  in  weak- 
ness and  disgrace.  While  in  chapter  xxxi:16  the  dead  and 
gone  nations  were  comforted  over  Pharaoh  who  descended 
into  sheol;  in  this  passage  Pharaoh,  who  sees  these  nations, 
now  is  himself  comforted  as  he  discovers  his  former  enemies 
there. 

A  similar  statement  about  sheol  as  a  place  of  departed 
nations,  who  are  nevertheless  conscious,  is  found  in  the 
book  of  Isaiah.  There  the  King  of  Babylon  is  seen  in  his 
descent  into  sheol.  "Sheol  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee 
to  meet  thee  at  thy  coming;  it  stirreth  up  the  dead  for  thee, 
all  the  chief tians  of  the  earth;  it  hath  raised  up  from  their 
thrones  all  the  Kings  of  the  nations.  All  they  shall  speak 
and  say  unto  thee,  Art  thou  also  become  weak  as  we?  Art 
thou  become  like  unto  us?  Thy  pomps  are  brought  down  to 
the  grave,  and  the  noise  of  thy  viols,  the  worm  is  spread 
under  thee,  and  the  worms  over  thee?"  (Is.  xiv:9-ll). 
Solemn  words  these  are  behind  which  stands  the  undeniable 
truth  of  a  conscious  and  eternal  existence  of  the  human  race. 
But  only  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  give  the  full  light 
upon  the  future  state. 

The  destruction  of  the  principal  cities  of  Egypt  is  an- 
nounced in  verses  13-19.  All  has  been  literally  fulfilled. 
Noph  is  Memphis,  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  Ptah  and  Apis. 
The  city  "No"  is  Thebes,  the  ancient  capital  of  Egypt, 


308  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

called  by  the  Greeks  "Diospolis,"  the  city  of  Jupiter.  Her 
ruins  bear  witness  of  the  past,  indescribable  splendor.  The 
great  temple  of  Carnac  stood  there.  The  other  places  men- 
tioned are  Sin,  which  is  Pelusium,  now  completely  bm-ied 
in  sand.  Aven  is  Heliopolis,  the  center  once  of  sun-worship; 
Fi-beseth  is  Bubastis,  where  the  sacred  cats  were  mummied, 
likewise  a  desolation  now.  Theaphnehes  or  Daphnis  also 
passed  through  judgment.  WhsX  a  remarkable  fulfillment 
of  what  the  Lord  had  announced  through  His  prophet!  May 
we  here  be  reminded  in  our  solemn  times  that  the  same  om- 
niscient Lord,  who  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning,  has 
spoken  concerning  this  age,  now  closing  in  its  predicted 
apostasy.  Nations  today  steeped  in  bloodshed;  nations 
filled  with  covetousness  and  hatred;  an  apostate  professing 
Christendom  and  the  indifierent  masses  have  written  over 
against  them  the  judgment- wrath  of  the  coming  King.  And 
He  who  fulfilled  the  words  spoken  through  Ezekiel  will  also 
fulfill  every  other  prediction  uttered  by  His  holy  prophets 
and  apostles. 

The  chapter  closes  V/ith  a  prophetic  description  of  the 
work  of  King  Nebuchadnezzar,  whom  God  used  to  execute 
Kis  righteous  judgments. 

6.  Pharaoh's  Greatness  and  Ris  Overthrow:  Chapter 
xxxi.  Pharaoh's  greatness  is  described  in  the  first  part  of 
the  chapter  (verses  1-9).  He  is  compared  to  the  Assyrian, 
once  so  powerful  and  proud.  The  fall  and  desolation  of  the 
proud  monarch  under  the  picture  of  a  tree  follows  in  verses 
10-14.  The  overthrow  of  Egypt  and  the  resulting  conster- 
nation among  the  nations  is  predicted  in  the  last  section  of 
this  chapter  (verses  15-18). 

7.  Lamentations  and  the  Great  Funeral  Dirge:  Chapter 

xxxii.  The  lamentation  over  Pharaoh  is  contained  in  verses 
1-10,  followed  by  the  final  announcement  of  the  sword  of 
the  King  of  Babylon,  Nebuchadnezzar,  in  verses  11-16.  The 
most  interesting  part  in  this  last  chapter  of  these  great 
predictions  of  national  judgments  is  the  funeral  dirge  and  the 
unveiling  of  the  unseen  world  (verses  17-32). 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  309 

n.     PREDICTIONS  AFTER  THE  DESTRUCTION  OF 

JERUSALEM 

Chapters  xxxiii-xlvili. 

A.  THE  WATCHMAN:  THE  FALSE  SHEPHERDS  AND  THE 
TRUE  SHEPHERD. 

CHAPTERS  XXXm  AND  XXXIV. 

1.  The  Renewed  Call  of  Ezekiel  as  Watchman.     Chapter  xxxiii: 

1-20. 

2.  Ezekiel's  Mouth  Opened  After  Jerusalem's  Fall  is  Announced. 

Chapter  xxxiii  :21-33. 

3.  Message  Against  the  Shepherds  of  Israel.     Chapter  xxxiv:l-19. 

4.  The  True  Shepherd  and  Restoration  Promised.     xxxiv:20-26. 

1.  The  Renewed  Call  of  Ezekiel  as  Watchman:  Chapter 
xxxiii  :l-20.  The  commission  of  Ezekiel  as  watchman  cor- 
responds to  the  same  call  in  chapter  iii:16-21.  In  verses  10- 
20  the  prophet  announces  certain  principles  of  Divine 
justice. 

The  exiles  knew  that  the  just  wrath  of  God  rested  upon 
them  as  a  nation  and  that  their  sins  were  unforgiven.  There- 
fore they  asked,  "If  our  transgressions  and  sins  be  upon 
us,  and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we  then  live.'^" 
They  also  accused  the  Lord  of  inconsistency  by  saying, 
"the  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal"  (verse  20;  see  also 
xviii:25,  29).  The  answer  Jehovah  sends  them  makes  known 
the  principles  on  which  He  will  deal  with  them  individually 
as  a  just  God.  "O  ye  house  of  Israel,  I  will  judge  you  every 
one  after  his  ways."  Judgment  rested  upon  them  as  a 
nation,  but  the  individual  still  could  turn  to  the  Lord  in 
repentance.  What  a  wonderful  declaration  it  is  which  is 
recorded  in  verse  11!  "Say  unto  them,  as  I  live,  saith 
the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked; 
but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live;  turn  ye, 
turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways;  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of 
Israel.'^'*  What  compassion  and  mercy!  As  it  was  a  day 
of  judgment  which  had  come  upon  them,  true  repentance 
was  the  needed  thing.    A  past  righteousness  could  not  shield 


310  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL] 

them  from  the  judgment  if  sin  had  been  committed.  "As 
for  the  v/ickedness  of  the  wicked,  he  shall  not  fall  thereby 
in  the  day  that  he  turneth  from  his  v/ickedness."  The  wicked 
confessing  and  forsaking  his  sin  would  find  mercy  and  for- 
giveness, while  those  who  were  impenitent  would  surely  die 
and  not  live.  "None  of  his  sins  that  he  hath  committed 
shall  be  mentioned  unto  him;  he  hath  done  that  which  is 
lawful  and  right;  he  shall  surely  live."  And  this  gracious 
promise  was  given  in  anticipation  of  the  work  of  the  cross, 
the  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  by  which  God's 
righteousness  is  declared  in  passing  thus  over  sins  of  Old 
Testament  believers  who  turned  to  God  (Rom.  iii:25).  The 
principles  of  Divine  justice  are  summed  up  in  verses  18  and 
19:  "When  the  righteous  turneth  from  his  righteousness, 
and  committeth  iniquity,  he  shall  even  die  thereby.  But 
if  the  wicked  turn  from  his  wickedness,  and  do  that  which 
is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  live  thereby."  Needless  to  say, 
all  this  must  be  viewed  as  under  the  law-covenant.  But 
then-  complaint  that  the  v/ay  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal  was 
wrong;  it  was  their  way  which  was  not  equal.  They  were 
to  be  judged  each  according  to  what  he  had  done. 

2.  Ezekiel's  Mouth  Opened  After  Jerusalem's  Fall  is 
Announced:  Chapter  xxxiii:21-33.  In  chapter  xxiv:27,  the 
promise  had  been  given  to  Ezekiel  that  when  the  one  who 
escaped  from  Jerusalem  when  it  fell,  arrived,  the  prophet 
should  no  longer  be  dumb.  This  dumbness  evidently  does 
not  mean  that  he  was  continually  silent,  without  uttering 
a  word,  for  he  prophesied  what  is  written  in  chapters  xxv- 
xxxii.  He  was  to  be  dumb  concerning  Israel;  the  interven- 
ing chapters,  before  the  messenger  came,  concern  other 
nations.  And  now  that  promised  messenger  arrived  and 
his  mouth  was  opened  again  to  prophesy  about  Israel.  The 
first  message  is  one  of  rebuke,  describing  their  condition. 
-  ^3.  Message  Against  the  False  Shepherds  of  Israel:  Chap- 
ler  xxxiv:l-19.  The  shepherds  of  Israel  were  the  kings  and 
princes  and  all  who  had  authority  over  them.  The  prophet 
Jeremiah  had  received  a  similar  message  (Jer.  xxiii:l-2). 
These  shepherds  of  Israel  were  responsible  for  the  deplorable 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  311 

condition  of  tlie  flock.  Utterly  selfish,  they  cared  not  for 
the  sheep  of  Eis  pasture;  they  feared  not  God  not  did  they 
have  a  heart  for  God's  people.  The  flock  was  scattered  and 
spoiled. 

Such  was  the  sad  condition  of  the  people  Israel.  And 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  in  their  midst  to  seek  the  lost 
sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,  He  found  them  as  sheep  without 
a  shepherd,  and  He  had  compassion  upon  them  (Mark 
vi:34).  But  they  rejected  Him  and  the  Shepherd  was 
smitten.  Zechariah's  prophecy  was  fulfilled:  "Awake,  O 
sword,  against  my  Shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is 
my  fellow,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Smite  the  shepherd  and 
the  sheep  shall  be  scattered,  and  I  will  turn  mine  hand  upon 
the  little  ones"  (Zech.  xiii:7).  The  false  shepherds,  the 
Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees,  were  a  curse  to  the  people, 
and  the  leaders  were  against  the  Shepherd.  They  delivered 
Him  into  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  And  now  for  nearly 
2,000  years  the  sheep  have  been  scattered  and  peeled, 
wandering  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  (Luke  xxi:24). 
"WTiat  is  their  hope  and  coming  blessing  we  learn  from  this 
great  prophecy.* 

In  verses  7-10,  judgment  is  pronounced  upon  these  false 
shepherds,  and  after  that  the  Lord  announces  the  deliver- 
ance of  His  flock  (verses  11-19). 

"Behold,  I  myself,  even  I,  will  search  for  my  sheep  and 
will  seek  them  out."  Jehovah  arises  in  behalf  of  His  scat- 
tered sheep.  He  will  Himself  exercise  the  office  of  a  true 
shepherd,  seeking  out  His  flock.  The  cloudy  and  dark 
day  (the  times  of  the  Gentiles)  is  gone  and  another  morning 
breaks,  the  morning  for  which  His  people  have  waited  so 
long.  What  He  will  do  at  that  time  for  His  scattered  sheep 
is  now  fully  proclaimed.  *T  will  bring  them  out  from  the 
people,  and  gather  them  from  the  countries,  and  will  bring 


*What  is  said  in  this  chapter  of  the  false  shepherds  who  ill- treated 
the  flock  of  God,  His  ancient  people,  may  also  be  applied  to  the  false 
shepherds,  the  hirelings  in  the  professing  church.  See  Acts  xx:28-35 
and  1  Peter  v;2-3. 


812  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

them  to  their  own  land,  and  feed  them  upon  the  mountains 
of  Israel  by  the  rivers,  and  in  all  the  inhabited  places  of 
the  country.  I  will  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  and  upon 
the  high  mountains  of  Israel  shall  their  fold  be;  there  shall 
they  lie  down  in  a  good  fold,  and  in  a  fat  pasture  shall  they 
feed  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel.  I  will  feed  my  flock, 
and  I  will  cause  them  to  lie  down,  saith  the  Lord."  And 
all  this  has  not  yet  come  to  pass.  Some  apply  these  words 
to  the  restoration  of  a  remnant  from  the  Babylonian  cap- 
tivity and  see  no  future  fulfillment  of  these  promises.  It  is 
evident  that  the  returning  remnant  did  not  possess  these 
blessings.  Others  make  a  spiritual  application  and  claim 
that  it  means  the  church  and  the  blessing  which  Gentiles 
will  receive  as  the  sheep  of  Christ.  This  is  the  common  path 
which  most  commentators  follow.  It  needs  no  lengthy  refuta- 
tion, for  neither  Ezekiel,  nor  the  other  prophets  know  nothing 
of  the  church  and  the  "other  sheep,"  Gentiles  saved  by  grace 
and  with  believing  Jews  constituting  the  one  flock  (John 
x:16;  Ephes.  iii-1-6).  This  is  unrevealed  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. These  gracious  words  of  promise  have  not  yet  been 
fulfilled,  nor  will  they  be  fulfilled  as  long  as  the  church,  the 
body  of  Christ  is  being  gathered  out  from  all  nations.  All 
must  wait  till  God's  purpose  in  this  age  is  accomplished. 
When  the  church  is  complete  as  to  its  elect  number,  when 
the  Lord  has  come  for  His  saints  and  the  true  church  has 
passed  from  earth  into  glory,  then  will  the  Lord  turn  in 
mercy  to  His  people  Israel  and  these  promises  given  by 
Ezekiel  will  be  fulfilled. 

4.  The  true  Shepherd  and  Eestomlion  Promised:  Chap- 
ter xxxiv:20-26.  Some  have  applied  this  to  Zerubbabel,  the 
head  of  Judah  at  the  return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity; 
this  is  done  by  those  who  deny  a  future  restoration  of  Israel. 
Others  take  these  words  in  a  strictly  literal  sense  and  teach 
that  David  the  King  will  become  the  head  of  the  nation 
once  more,  and  raised,  from  the  dead,  will  be  the  one  shepherd 
over  His  people.  It  is  not  David,  but  He  who  is  according 
to  the  flesh  the  Son  of  David  and  David's  Lord  as  well. 
The  one  Shepherd  can  only  be  the  Messiah.     Numerous 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  313 

passages  show  that  David's  name  is  used  in  a  typical  sense. 
Jeremiah  announced,  "They  shall  serve  the  Lord  their  God, 
and  David  their  King,  whom  I  will  raise  up  unto  them" 
(Jer.  sxx:10).  Here  David  stands  typically  for  Christ, 
the  Messiah  of  Israel,  for  He  is  raised  up  unto  them  when 
Jacob's  trouble  is  ended  (verses  1-7).  Of  Him  Jeremiah 
speaks  more  fully  in  chapter  xxiii  :5-6:  "Behold,  the  days 
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto  David  a  right- 
eous Branch,  and  a  King  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  shall 
execute  judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth.  In  His  days 
Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell  safely;  and  this 
is  the  name  whereby  He  shall  be  called,  the  Lord  our  Right- 
eousness." The  two,  Judah  and  Israel,  will  be  reunited  by 
the  one  Shepherd.  The  Messiah  of  Israel  is  also  mentioned 
by  Hosea  as  David:  "Afterward  shall  the  children  of  Israel 
return,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God  and  David  their  King, 
and  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  His  goodness  in  the  latter  days" 
(Hosea  iii:5).  Isaiah  speaks  of  the  sure  mercies  of  David, 
and  adds,  "Behold  I  have  given  Him  for  a  witness  to  the 
people,  a  leader  (prince)  and  commander  to  the  people." 
It  is  therefore  not  David,  raised  from  the  dead,  but  the 
Prince  of  Peace,  who  v/as  here  once  to  seek  the  lost  sheep 
of  the  house  of  Israel  and  who  comes  again  to  save  the 
remnant  of  His  people  Israel  and  to  receive  the  Throne  of 
David  (Isa.  ix:6-7) 

WTien  the  Lord  is  doing  all  that  is  promised  here  and  the 
remnant  has  accepted  the  long  rejected  Messiah-King,  a 
covenant  of  peace  and  blessing  will  follow.  "And  I  will 
make  with  them  a  covenant  of  peace,  and  will  cause  the 
evil  beasts  to  cease  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  dwell 
safely  in  the  wilderness  and  sleep  in  the  woods.  Peace 
will  come  to  the  land  and  to  the  whole  earth  with  His 
Coming.  The  evil  beasts,  the  Gentile  world  powers  (Dan. 
vii)  will  no  longer  devastate  the  land.  All  will  be  peace  and 
safety,  so  that  they  can  sleep  peacefully  in  the  woods.  "There 
shall  be  showers  of  blessing"  (verse  26).  How  often  a 
hymn  is  sung  based  upon  this  promise; 


314  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

"There  shall  be  showers  of  blessing. 
This  is  the  promise  of  love." 

But  how  few  who  sing  it  know  that  the  promise  belongs 
first  of  all  to  Israel.  When  the  Lord  comes,  the  showers  of 
blessing  will  be  poured  forth  upon  His  people  and  upon  all 
nations.  It  will  be  "the  times  of  refreshing"  (Acts  iii:20). 
Verses  27  and  28  give  a  brief  description  of  the  millennial 
Kingdom.  Groaning  creation  will  then  be  delivered  and 
the  wild  beasts  will  have  their  natures  changed  (compare 
verse  28  with  Isa.  xi:6-9  and  Rom.  viii:19-22).  There  is  no 
need  to  speculr^te  on  the  meaning  of  "the  plant  of  renown,'* 
which  will  be  raised  up.  It  is  none  other  than  He,  who,  as 
to  His  humiliation,  is  described  as  "a  tender  plant"  and  "as 
a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground"  (Isa.  liii:2).  But  now  He  appears 
in  all  His  glory,  and  becomes  the  plant  of  renown.  Their 
shame  and  suffering  will  then  be  over.  He  will  be  their 
God  and  they  will  be  His  people. 

B.     JUDGMENT  ANNOUNCED  AND  ISRAEL'S  FINAL 

RESTORATION  PROMISED. 

CHAPTERS   XXXV  AND  XXXVI. 

1.  The  Message  Against  Mount  Seir  and  Idumea.     Chapter  xxxv' 

2.  The  Message  of  Comfort  to  Israel.     Chapter  xxxvi. 

I.  The  Message  Against  Mount  Seir  and  Idumea:  Chap- 
ter xxxv.  This  is  another  judgment  message,  which  is 
closely  related  to  the  coming  restoration  of  Israel.  When  the 
Lord  is  merciful  to  His  people  and  bestows  upon  them  the 
promised  blessings,  He  will  also  deal  with  their  enemies  in 
judgment.  Edom  was  the  most  bitter  enemy  of  Israel,  their 
blood-relation.  The  judgment  threatened  here  was  exe- 
cuted upon  Edom;  but  it  has  a  prophetic  meaning  of  the 
judgment  which  is  in  store  for  the  enemies  of  God's  people 
when  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  end  and  God  arises  in  behalf 
of  His  suffering  and  persecuted  people. 

Then,  in  verses  14-15,  we  hear  of  the  time  of  rejoicing 
which  will  come  for  His  people  when  their  enemies  are 
judged  (Deut.  xxxii:43). 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  315 

2.  The  Message  of  Comfort  to  Israel:  Chapter  ssxvi. 

With  this  chapter  the  great  prophetic  utterances  of  Ezekiel 
begin  concerning  the  future  restoration  and  blessing  of 
Israel.  From  here  on  to  the  end  of  the  book,  all  is  still  un- 
fulfilled, nor  can  it  be  fulfilled  until  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
comes  again  and  is  enthroned  as  King.  The  first  seven 
verses  announce  once  more  the  future  judgment  of  Israel's 
enemies.  Then  comes  the  promised  return  to  the  land 
(verses  8-15) .  The  mountains  of  Israel,  barren  so  long,  shall 
be  inhabited  again.  Israel's  past  sins  and  chastisement  are 
reviewed  in  verses  16-20,  and  then  comes  that  great  message 
of  restoration  and  blessing  through  grace  in  that  day  when 
their  once  rejected  King  returns  and  they  bow  before  Him. 
The  characteristic  words  in  verses  23-28  are  the  words  "I 
will  do."  It  is  the  word  of  sovereign  grace.  Eighteen  times 
Jehovah  says  what  He  will  do.  They  are  the  "I  wills"  of 
Israel's  Hope  and  coming  Glory. 

He  will  gather  them  from  among  the  nations  and  all 
coimtries  and  bring  them  back  to  their  own  land.  Only  a 
superficial  expositor  can  speak  of  a  fulfillment  when  they 
returned  from  Babylon.  But  even  if  this  were  so,  though  it 
is  not,  the  verses  which  follow  have  never  been  fulfilled  in 
the  past.  The  cleansing  of  the  nation  is  next  promised:  *T 
will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you  and  ye  shall  be  clean." 
It  refers  us  to  the  water  mixed  with  the  ashes  of  the  red-heifer, 
w^hich  was  sprinkled  with  a  hyssop  on  the  unclean,  typifying 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ  in  its  cleansing  power  (Heb.  ix: 
13-14,  x:22).  Thus,  when  the  people  of  Israel  believe  on 
Him  and  look  upon  Him  whom  they  pierced  (Zech.  xiiilO), 
they  will  be  cleansed.  *Tn  that  day  there  shall  be  a  foun- 
tain opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  to  the  inliabitants  of 
Jerusalem  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness"  (Zech.  xiii:l).  Then 
follov/s  the  promise  of  the  new  birth  of  Israel.  "A  new 
heart  will  I  also  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within 
you."  The  stony  heart  is  to  be  taken  away  and  they  will 
receive  a  heart  of  flesh.  Our  Lord  had  this  passage  in  mind 
when  He  talked  with  Nicodemus  about  the  new  birth. 
Nicodemus,  the  teacher  in  Israel,  was  ignorant  of  the  fact 


316  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL, 

that  this  new  birth  for  Israel  is  necessary  in  order  to  be  in 
that  coming  kingdom  and  to  receive  its  blessings.  Therefore 
the  Lord  said  to  him,  "If  I  have  told  you  earthly  things 
(about  Israel  and  the  new  birth  as  the  way  into  the  kingdom) 
and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe  if  I  tell  you  of 
heavenly  things?"  (the  heavenly  blessings  which  follow  His 
sacrificial  death). 

C.  THE  FUTURE  BLESSINGS  OF  ISRAEL.    THE  NATION  RE- 
GATHERED:  THEIR  ENEMIES  OVERTHROWN.     THE 
MILLENNUL  TEMPLE  AND  THE  DIVISION  OF 
THE  LAND. 

CHAPTERS  xxxvn-xLvm. 

1.  The  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bones.     Judah  and  Israel  Re-united. 

Chapter  xxxvii. 

2.  Gog  and  Magog  and  Their  Destruction.     Chapters  xxxviii- 

xxxix. 

3.  The  Millennial  Temple  and  its  Worship.    The  Division  of  the 

Land.     Chapters  xl-xlvii. 

1.  The  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bones.  Judah  and  Israel: 
Reunited:  Chapter  xxxvii.  The  future  restoration  of  Israel, 
both  nationally  and  spiritually,  is  now  shown  to  the  prophet 
in  a  vision.  What  these  dry  bones  represent  and  what  their 
revival  mean,  is  explained  by  the  Lord  Himself.  It  may  be 
used  in  application  in  different  ways,  to  illustrate  certain 
truths,  but  the  true  and  only  interpretation  is  the  one  which 
is  given  by  the  Lord  in  verses  11-14.  But  there  is  an  erron- 
eous interpretation  of  a  serious  nature  which  is  widely 
taught  and  believed  among  many  Christians.  Because 
"graves"  are  mentioned,  beside  the  dry  bones  and  their 
resurrection,  it  is  being  taught  that  the  vision  means  physical 
resurrection.  Systems,  like  Millennial  Da\\Tiism  alias  Inter- 
national Bible  Student  Association  and  others,  which  teach 
the  so-called  larger  hope,  a  second  chance  for  the  impenitent 
dead,  the  restitution  of  the  lost,  teach  that  all  the  Israelites 
who  have  died  in  their  sins  will  be  brought  out  of  their 
graves  and  then  be  saved.  They  use  this  vision  to  confirm 
this  invention.    An  advocate  of  this  theory  declared  that  all 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  317 

the  Christ-hating  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  who  lived  when 
our  Lord  was  on  earth  would  be  raised  up  when  He  comes 
and  then  believe  on  Him.  Matthew  xxiii:39  was  used  by 
him  as  an  argument.  These  restitution  teachers  also  teach 
that  inasmuch  as  Israel  will  have  a  second  chance  when 
they  are  raised  from  the  dead,  the  Gentile  dead  will  share 
also  in  the  same.  It  needs  no  argument  to  refute  this.  The 
Word  of  God  teaches  a  twofold  resurrection:  A  first  resur- 
rection and  a  second  resurrection,  a  resurrection  of  the  just 
and  a  resurrection  of  the  unjust  (John  v:28-29).  Accord- 
ing to  the  above  theory,  there  would  have  to  be  a  third 
resurrection,  a  resurrection  for  a  second  chance  and  ultimate 
salvation  of  those  who  died  in  their  sins.  Of  such  a  resur- 
rection the  Bible  knows  nothing. 

In  this  vision  of  the  dry  bones,  physical  resurrection  is 
used  as  a  type  of  the  national  restoration  of  Israel.  It  is 
used  in  the  same  way  in  Daniel  xii:2.  In  that  passage  the 
sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  is  symbolical  of  their  national 
condition.  And  when  their  national  sleep  ends  there  will 
be  an  awakening.  When  we  read  here  in  Ezekiel  of  graves, 
it  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  literal  graves;  the  graves 
are  symbolical  of  the  nation  as  being  buried  among  the 
Gentiles.  If  these  dry  bones  meant  the  physical  dead  of 
the  nation,  how  could  it  be  explained  that  they  speak  and 
say,  "Our  bones  are  dried  up,  and  our  hope  is  lost?"  The 
same  figure  of  speech  is  used  in  the  New  Testament.  Of 
the  prodigal  it  is  said,  "For  this  my  son  was  dead,  and  is 
alive  again"  (Luke  xv:24).  Yet  he  was  not  physically  dead, 
nor  was  he  made  alive  physically.  Therefore,  this  vision 
has  nothing  whatever  to  do  v.  ith  a  physical  resurrection. 
The  late  Dr.  Bullinger,  whose  erroneous  suggestions  have 
led  astray  some,  also  taught  that  the  vision  of  the  dry 
bones  includes  resurrection  as  well  as  restoration. 

Equally  bad  is  that  spiritualizing  method  which  takes  a 
vision  like  this,  as  well  as  the  hundreds  of  promises  of  a 
coming  restoration,  and  applies  it  all  to  the  church,  ignoring 
totally  the  claims  of  Israel  and  their  promised  future  of 
glory.    This  is  the  general  trend  of  commentators. 


318  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

Verses  15-28  predict  the  reunion  of  Judah  and  Israel 
with  one  King  over  them.  That  King  is  our  Lord.  Then 
the  angelic  message  given  to  the  Virgin  when  the  coming 
incarnation  was  announced  will  be  fulfilled:  "The  Lord  God 
shall  give  unto  Him  the  throne  of  His  Father  David,  and 
He  shall  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  forever  and  of  His 
Kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end"  (Luke  i:36-37). 

2.  Gog  and  Magog  and  Their  Destruction:  Chapters 
xxxviii  and  xxxix.  There  will  be  at  that  time  of  restoration 
a  great  and  final  invasion  of  the  land  of  Israel.  Gog  and 
Magog  will  invade  the  land  "that  is  brought  back  from 
the  sword,  and  is  gathered  out  of  many  people."  The 
invaders  come  "against  the  mountains  of  Israel  which  have 
always  been  waste;  but  it  is  brought  forth  out  of  the  na- 
tions, and  they  shall  dwell  safely,  all  of  them."  In  verse 
11,  the  evil  purpose  of  the  invader  is  made  known.  From 
all  this  we  learn  that  the  invasion  takes  place  at  the  time 
when  the  Lord  has  brought  back  His  people  and  resumed 
His  relationship  with  the  remnant  of  Israel. 

The  invasion  will  happen  some  time  after  the  beastly 
empire  with  its  beasthead,  the  revived  Roman  empire,  in 
its  final  ten  kingdom  form  and  the  clay,  with  the  little 
horn  as  leader  (Dan.  vii;  Rev.  xiii:l-10)  and  the  false  pro- 
phet, the  personal  Antichrist  (Rev.  xiii:ll,etc.)  have  been  dealt 
with  in  judgment  (Rev.  xix:19-20).  The  stone  out  of  heaven 
has  then  fallen  upon  the  feet  of  the  great  dream  image 
of  Nebuchadnezzar;  and  as  far  as  the  Western  confederated 
world  power  is  concerned,  it  is  now  ended.  But  other  na- 
tions gather  now  for  an  assault.  It  is  a  Northern  confed- 
eracy which  sweeps  southward  to  invade  the  land,  as  Anti- 
ochus  Epiphanes  did  in  the  past,  as  well  as  the  Assyrian 
in  the  days  of  Isaiah.  These  final  invading  hosts,  under  the 
leadership  of  a  powerful  king,  come  like  a  storm,  and  like 
a  cloud  to  cover  the  land. 

But  who  are  they.'^ 

The  leader  is  the  Prince  of  Rosh  (not  as  the  authorized 
version  has  it  "the  chief  prince")  of  Meshech  and  Tubal. 
This  prince  is  the  head  of  the  confederacy,  and  with  him 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  319 

allied  are  Persia,  Cush,  Phut,  Gomer  and  Togormah.  They 
come  out  of  the  north,  or,  as  it  is  in  Hebrews,  "out  of  the 
uttermost  north"  (verse  15).  Inasmuch  as  the  Prince  of 
Rosh  is  addressed  in  verse  3  as  Gog,  we  take  it  that  Gog 
is  the  name  given  to  this  prince  and  leader  of  these  nations. 
His  dwelling  place  is  in  the  land  of  Magog.  We  know  from 
Genesis  x:2,  that  Magog  was  the  second  son  of  Japheth. 
Gomer,  Tubal  and  Meshech  were  also  sons  of  Japheth; 
Togormah  was  a  grandson  of  Japheth,  being  the  third  son 
of  Gomer.  Magog's  land  was  located  in  what  is  called 
today  the  Caucasus  and  the  adjoining  steppes.  And  the 
three,  Rosh,  Meshech,  and  Tubal  were  called  by  the  ancients 
Scythians.  They  roamed  as  nomads  in  the  country  around 
and  north  of  the  Black  and  the  Caspian  Seas,  and  were 
known  as  the  wildest  barbarians.  We  learn  from  this  that 
the  invading  forces,  which  fall  into  Israel's  land  in  the  future, 
v/hen  Israel  has  been  regathered,  come  from  a  territory  north 
of  Palestine  which  today  is  in  the  hands  of  Russia.  And 
here  we  call  attention  to  the  prince,  this  northern  leader, 
or  king,  who  is  the  head  of  all  these  nations.  He  is  the  prince 
of  Rosh.  Careful  research  has  established  the  fact  that  the 
progenitor  of  Rosh  was  Tiraz  (Gen.  x:2),  and  that  Rosh  is 
Russia.  All  students  of  Prophecy  are  agreed  that  this  is 
the  correct  meaning  of  Rosh.  The  prince  of  Rosh,  means, 
therefore,  the  prince  or  king  of  the  Russian  empire.  But  he 
also  is  in  control  of  Mechech  and  Tubal,  which  are  repro- 
duced in  the  modern  Moscow  and  Tobolsk.  Russia,  we 
may  well  conclude  from  this,  will  furnish  the  man  who  will 
lead  this  confederacy  of  nations.  We  write  this  at  a  time 
when  Russia  is  passing  through  horrors  upon  horrors.  A 
revolution  changed  the  autocratic  government  into  a  de- 
mocracy, and  that  gave  way  to  anarchy,  produced  by 
Satanic  powers.  From  what  is  written  in  this  chapter, 
we  learn  that  Russia  will  ultimately  return  to  the  old 
regime,  and  will  once  more  become  a  monarchy  to 
fulfill  her  final  destiny  as  made  known  in  this  sublime 
prophecy.  Well  known  it  is  that  Russia  has  been  in  the 
past  the  most  pronounced  and  bitterest  enemy  of  the  Jev/  sh 


320  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

people.  TMiat  she  passes  through  today  is  but  a  fulfillment 
of  what  the  Lord  has  spoken:  *'  I  will  curse  them  that  curse 
thee."  Today,  the  Jews  in  Russia  may  have  bright  hopes  of 
getting  their  rights  and  complete  emancipation  at  last.  For 
a  time  this  may  come  to  pass,  but  ultimately  Russia  will 
turn  against  them;  and,  like  Pharaoh  did,  when  Israel  had 
left  his  domain,  so  this  coming  King  of  the  North,  the  prince 
of  Rosh,  when  Israel  is  back  in  the  land,  will  turn  against 
them. 

With  him  come  the  other  nations.  Persia,  which  is  even 
now  in  part  occupied  by  Russia,  will  finally  be  a  vassal  to 
this  prince  of  Rosh.  Ethiopia  and  Phut  are  also  in  this 
confederacy.  There  also  is  Gomer  and  all  its  bands.  Gomer, 
says  Delitsch,  "is  most  probably  the  tribe  of  the  Cimmerians, 
who  dwell,  according  to  Herodotus,  on  the  Maeotis,  in  the 
Taurian  Chersonesus,  and  from  whom  are  descended  the 
Cumri  or  Cymry  in  Wales  and  Britain,  whose  relation  to 
the  Germanic  Cimbri  is  still  in  obscurity."  Valuable 
information  is  given  in  the  Talmud;  Gomer  is  there  stated 
to  be  the  Germani,  the  Germans.  That  the  descendants 
of  the  Gomer  moved  northv/ard  and  established  themselves 
in  parts  of  Germany  seems  to  be  an  established  fact.  All 
this  is  of  much  interest.  Germany  did  not  belong  to  the 
Roman  empire,  at  least  the  greater  part  of  Germany  was 
never  conquered  by  Rome.  She  wdll  therefore  not  partici- 
pate in  the  Western  confederacy.  Will  she  then  become 
united  to  Russia  and  march  under  the  prince  of  Rosh  into 
the  land  of  Israel?  We  cannot  be  sure  about  all  these  things. 
This,  however,  we  know,  that  a  powerful  confederacy  of 
nations,  under  the  leadership  of  the  prince  of  Rosh,  Meshech 
and  Tubal,  will  come  up  against  Immanuel's  land,  when 
Israel  has  been  restored  and  dwells  safely. 

The  judgment  and  destruction  of  the  invading  hosts  are 
vividly  pictured  in  the  thirty-fourth  to  thirty-ninth  chapters 
as  well  as  their  burial.  Compare  verses  17-20  with  Rev. 
xix:17-18;  though  the  great  supper  in  Revelation  and 
Jehovah's  sacrifice  here  in   Ezekiel  are  not   identical,  yet 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  321 

both  are  judgments.  The  final  paragraphs  of  this  chapter 
(verses  21-29)  give  the  promise  of  glory. 

The  last  verse  contains  an  important  statement.  The 
Lord  says  that  He  hides  His  face  no  more  from  them.  This 
in  itself  shows  that  all  this  is  not  yet  here;  for  still  He  hides 
His  face  from  them.  The  hiding  of  His  face  from  them  will 
be  no  more  when  His  Spirit  is  poured  upon  them.  *T  have 
poured  out  my  Spirit  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  saith  the 
Lord  God."  There  comes  then  a  time  when  the  house  of 
Israel,  the  literal  descendants  of  Abraham,  will  receive  an 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Such  is  also  the  message 
of  Joel,  in  which  restoration  and  spiritual  blessing,  through 
the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  are  blended  together  (Joel  ii). 
We  call  attention  to  another  passage  which  should  be  linked 
with  the  statement  in  this  chapter.  Isaiah  xxxii:13-18 
is  a  very  striking  prophecy.  There  is  an  announcement  made 
first  of  all  concerning  the  judgment  which  is  to  fall  upon 
Israel's  land.  "Upon  the  land  of  my  people  shall  come 
up  thorns  and  briers;  yea,  upon  all  the  houses  of  joy  in 
the  joyous  city,"  etc.  But  this  is  not  to  last  forever.  An 
"until"  follows.  **Until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  us  from 
on  high."  This  is  the  same  future  outpouring  of  the  Spirit 
of  Gdd.  Up  to  now  it  has  not  been.  The  Holy  Spirit  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost  came  to  form  the  body  of  Christ; 
but  this  outpouring  in  connection  with  Israel  has  another 
significance.* 

3.  The  Millennial  Temple  and  its  Worship,  and  the  Divi- 
sion of  the  Land:  Chapters  xl-xlviii.  The  final  nine  chap- 
ters of  this  book  form  the  climax  of  the  great  prophecies  of 
Ezekiel;  they  belong  to  the  most  difficult  in  the  entire 
prophetic  Word.  Once  more  the  hand  of  the  Lord  rests 
upon  the  seer  and  in  the  visions  of  God  he  is  brought  into 
the  land  of  Israel.  In  the  very  beginning  of  this  grand 
finale  we  learn  therefore  that  the  visions  concern  the  land 
of  Israel.    Let  us  remember,  that  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem 


*The  hodge-podge  teachings  of  the  Pentecostal  movement  apply  all 
tiiese  promises  to  the  church. 


Sm  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

had  been  announced  to  Ezekiel  (chapter  xxxiii:21),  his 
prophetic  utterances  and  visions  concern  the  future  when 
Israel  is  to  be  regathered  and  restored  to  the  land.  The 
previous  two  chapters  dealt  with  the  last  invasion  of  the 
land  of  Israel  and  the  complete  overthrow  of  Gog  and  its 
hordes.  The  vision  contained  in  this  last  section  follows 
after  Israel's  final  deliverance.  So  much  is  clear  as  to  the 
time  when  the  prophecies  of  these  eight  chapters  will  be 
accomplished.  They  have  not  been  fulfilled  in  the  past, 
certainly  not  in  the  remnant  which  returned  under  Zeru- 
babbel  and  Ezra.  Nor  have  these  prophecies  been  fulfilled 
since  then.  All  is  future.  Only  when  the  I^rd  has  gathered 
Judah  and  Israel,  when  He  has  established  His  glorious 
Kingdom  in  their  midst  and  delivered  His  people  and  the 
land  from  the  last  invader,  will  this  last  vision  of  Ezekiel 
become  history. 

This  disposes  then  at  once  of  the  different  modes  of  inter- 
pretation employed  by  so  many  expositors  of  this  book. 
These  are  the  following: 

1.  The  theory  of  interpretation  which  looks  upon  the 
vision  of  these  chapters  as  fulfilled  in  the  return  of  the 
remnant  from  Babylon.  One  of  the  expositors  who  follows 
this  line  stated  that  these  visions  are  "an  ideal  representation 
of  the  Jewish  state  about  to  be  restored  after  the  captivity." 
It  does  nor  need  much  argument  to  show  that  this  mode  of 
interpretation  is  erroneous.  The  temple  which  the  remnant 
built  does  in  no  way  whatever  correspond  with  the  magni- 
ficent structure  which  Ezekiel  beheld  in  his  vision.  The 
fact  is,  if  this  temple  is  a  literal  building  (as  it  assuredly  is) 
it  has  never  yet  been  erected.  Furthermore,  it  is  distinctly 
stated  that  the  glory  of  the  Lord  returned  to  the  temple 
and  made  His  dwelling  place  there,  the  same  glory  which 
Ezekiel  had  seen  departing  from  the  temple  and  from 
Jerusalem.  But  the  glory  did  not  return  to  the  second 
temple.  No  glory  cloud  filled  that  house.  And  furthermore 
no  high  priest  is  mentioned  in  the  worship  of  the  temple 
Ezekiel  describes,  but  the  Jews  after  their  return  from 
Babylon  had  high  priests  again.    Nor  can   the  stream  of 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  323 

healing  waters  flowing  from  the  temple  as  seen  by  Ezekiel 
be  in  any  way  applied  to  the  restoration  from  the  Babylonian 
captivity.  Expositors  who  follow  this  mode  of  interpreta- 
tion claim  that  all  has  been  fulfilled  and  that  there  is  nothing? 
in  store  for  Israel  in  the  future.  It  is  the  most  superficial 
method  and  totally  wrong. 

2.  Another  interpretation  claims  that  the  whole  vision 
sprang  from  the  imagination  of  the  prophet.  That  it  is  all 
an  ideal  description  of  something  which  the  expositor 
himself  is  unable  to  define.  This  mode  of  interpretation 
needs  no  further  mention  and  answer. 

3.  The  third  interpretation  of  these  chapters  is  the  alle- 
gorical, which  spiritualizes  everything,  and  claims  that  the 
Christian  church,  its  earthly  glory  and  blessing,  is  symbol- 
ically described  by  the  prophet.  This  is  the  weakest  of  all 
and  yet  the  most  accepted.  But  this  theory  gives  no  exposi- 
tion of  the  text,  is  vague  and  abounds  in  fanciful  applications, 
while  the  greater  part  of  this  vision  is  left  unexplained  even 
in  its  allegorical  meaning,  for  it  evidently  has  no  such 
meaning  at  all.* 

The  true  interpretation  is  the  literal  one  which  looks  upon 
these  chapters  as  a  prophecy  yet  unfulfilled  and  to  be 
fulfilled  when  Israel  has  been  restored  by  the  Shepherd  and 
when  His  glory  is  once  more  manifested  in  the  midst  of  His 
people.  The  great  building  seen  in  his  prophetic  vision  will 
then  come  into  existence  and  all  will  be  accomplished. 

But  while  we  are  sure  of  the  strictly  future  fulfillment  of 
this  final  vision,  the  many  details  which  abound  in  these 
chapters  can  hardly  be  fully  interpreted  as  to  their  meaning. 
Much  is  obscure.     That  all  has  a  deeper  meaning  we  do 


*What  strange  applications  have  been  made  of  this  vision!  We  quote 
from  the  "New  Century  Bible,"  which  says  concerning  this  temple:  "Its 
details  shed  a  light  nowhere  else  vouchsafed  to  us  upon  the  ideals  of 
Hebrew  art,  influenced  perhaps,  by  Babylonian  masterpieces,  yet 
entirely  national  and  Puritan;  and  they  embody  in  material  form 
Ezekiel's  sober  but  intense  conception  of  religion,  as  completely  as 
the  Gothic  cathedrals  translate  into  concrete  and  abiding  stone  and 
marble  the  soaring  visions  of  mediaeval  Christianity. "(!) 


324  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

not  doubt;  and  here  and  there  we  shall  offer  suggestions, 
but  many  things  we  shall  have  to  pass  over.  Before  we  turn 
to  the  text  and  open  up  the  contents  of  these  chapters,  a 
telescopic  view  of  the  whole  section  is  in  order  and  will  be 
helpful  in  our  further  studies. 

As  it  will  be  impossible  to  give  a  detailed  explanation  of 
this  future  temple  we  give  an  analysis  of  these  chapters. 
Our  larger  work  on  Ezekiel  will  be  found  helpful  in  a  better 
understanding  of  this  portion  of  this  book. 

I.    The  Description  of  the  Temple.    Chapters  xl-xlii. 

Chapter  xl. 

1.  The  Introduction.     Verses  1-4. 

2.  The  Gate  toward  the  East.     Verses  5-16. 

3.  The  Outer  Court.      Verses  17-27. 

4.  The  Inner  Court.     Verses  28-37. 

5.  The  Tables  for  the  Offerings  and  the  Chambers  for  the  Inner 

Court.     Verses  38-47. 

6.  The  Porch  of  the  House.     Verses  48-49. 

Chapter  xli. 

1.  The  Holy  Place.     Verses  1-2. 

2.  The  Most  Holy.     Verses  3-4. 

3.  The  Side  Chambers.     Verses  5-11. 

4.  The  Hinder  Buildings  and  the  Measurement.     Verses  12-14. 
6.  Description  of  the  Interior  of  the  Temple.     Verses  15-26. 

Chapter  xlii. 

1.  The  Priest's  Chambers  in  the  Inner  Court.     Verses  1-14. 

2.  The  Final  Measurements.     Verses  15-20. 

n.     The  Temple  Worship.    Chapters  xliii-xlvi. 

Chapter  xliii. 

1.  The  Return  of  the   Glory   of  the   Lord  and   Filling  the   House. 

Verses  1-9. 

2.  The  Address  to  the  Nation.     Verses  10-12. 

3.  The  Dimensions  of  the  Altar.     Verses  13-17. 

4.  The  Offerings  to  be  Bought.     Verses  18-27. 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  325 

Chapter  xliv. 

1.  The  Outward  Eastern  Gate  for  the  Prince.     Verses  1-3. 

2.  The  Charge  concerning  the  Strangers  and  the  Rebellious  Tribes. 

Verses  4-14. 

3.  The  Charge  concerning  the  Priests,  the  Sons  of  Zadok.     Verses 

15-27. 

4.  The  Inheritance  of  the  Priests.     Verses  28-31. 

Chapter  xlv. 

1.  The  Portions  of  the  Priests,  the  Levites,  of  the  whole  House  of 

Israel,  and  the  Prince.     Verses  1-8, 

2.  Concerning  the  Prince.     Verses  9-17, 

3.  The  Feast  of  Passover  and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Verses  18-25. 

Chapter  xlvi, 

1.  The  Worship  of  the  Prince.     Verses  1-8. 

2.  Further  Instruction  as  to  Worship.     Verses  9-15. 

3.  Concerning  the  Prince,  his  Sons  and  his  Servants.     Verses  16-18. 

4.  A  Final  Description  of  places  in  the  Temple.     Verses  19-24. 

III.  The  Vision  Concerning  the  Land.  Chapters  xlvii- 
xlviii. 

Chapter  xlvii. 

1.  The  Waters  of  Healing  from  the  Temple.     Verses  1-12. 

2.  Borders  of  the  Land.     Verses  13-21. 

3.  Concerning  the  Stranger  in  the  Land.     Verses  22-23. 

Chapter  xlviii. 

1.  The  Portion  of  the  Seven  Tribes.     Verses  1-7. 

2.  The  Oblation  for  the  Sanctuary,  for  the  City,  and  for  the  Prince. 

Verses  8-29. 

3.  The  Gates  of  the  City  and  its  new  Name.     Verses  30-35. 

Without  entering  into  the  measurements,  the  architecture, 
and  other  features  of  this  great  Temple,  v,  e  point  out  a  few 
things  which  are  important.  First,  as  to  the  contents  of  the 
interior  of  this  Temple.  The  words  "silver  and  gold"  are 
not  mentioned  once  in  Ezekiel  xl-xlviii.  Silver  typifies  grace 
in  redemption,  being  the  ransom  money.  Gold  typifies 
divine  righteousness.  Both  are  absent  in  the  millennial 
temple,  for  what  the  silver  and  gold  foreshadows  is  now 
realized  in  His  redeemed  earthly  people.     The  heavenly 


326  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

Jerusalem  has  gold  in  it,  but  silver  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
description  of  the  city  in  Revelation  xxi. 

The  chief  ornaments  in  this  temple  are  cherubim  and  palm 
trees;  they  were  along  the  wall  of  the  temple.  So  it  was  in 
the  temple  of  Solomon.  "And  he  carved  all  the  walls  of  the 
house  round  about  with  carved  figures  of  cherubim  and  palm 
trees  and  open  flowers  within  and  without"  (1  Kings  vi:29). 

A  palm  tree  was  between  cherub  and  cherub.  As  stated  in 
the  previous  chapter,  palms  are  the  emblems  of  victory  and 
remind  us  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  They  were  seen  high 
above  on  the  posts.  Cherubim  speak  of  the  presence  of  the 
Lord,  who  enters  this  house  and  is  worshipped  here.  But 
the  cherubim  here  have  only  two  faces  and  not  four  as  in  the 
opening  vision  of  this  book  (chapter  i:10-12).  As  often 
stated,  these  celestial  beings  tell  out  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in 
His  personal  glory.  The  lion,  His  kingly  glory;  the  face  of  a 
man.  His  true  humanity;  the  face  of  an  ox,  His  servant  char- 
acter; and  the  face  of  an  eagle,  His  heavenly  origin  and 
destiny.  Son  of  God.  It  is  not  without  meaning  that  the 
face  of  a  man  and  the  face  of  a  young  lion  are  seen  on  these 
cherubim  and  each  face  looks  upon  a  palm  tree.  Its  sym- 
bolical meaning  is  obvious.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  come 
again  and  visited  the  earth  and  the  temple  and  appeared 
as  the  glorified  Man  and  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  His 
is  the  victory  and  the  glory.  Wlien  at  last  this  temple  stands 
in  Israel's  land,  and  its  meaning  and  measurements,  as  v*ell 
as  other  details,  are  fully  known  and  understood,  it  will  be 
known  then  that  His  blessed  work,  victory  and  person  are 
symbolically  seen  throughout  this  house. 

In  the  forty-third  chapter  we  read  of  the  returning  Glory. 
The  Glory  will  fill  this  house. 

We  must  notice  here  especially,  that  the  vision  the  prophet 
beheld  was  "according  to  the  appearance  of  the  vision" 
he  saw  before  the  destruction  of  the  city;  "the  visions  were 
like  the  visions,"  which  he  saw  "by  the  river  Chebar." 
This  points  back  to  the  first  chapter,  when  first  by  the  river 
Chebar  the  heavens  were  opened  to  Ezekiel  the  priest,  and 
he  saw  visions  of  God.    At  the  close  of  that  chapter,  we  read 


THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  327 

after  the  recorded  vision,  "This  was  the  appearance  of  the 
likeness  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  The  same  vision  of  glory 
appeared  again  to  him  when  Ezekiel  had  left  the  river 
Chebar  and  gone  into  the  plain  (iii:22-23).  Then  he  had 
v^^itnessed  the  gradual  and  solemn  departure  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord.  **Then  the  glory  of  the  Lord  departed  from 
off  the  threshold  of  the  house,  and  stood  over  the  cherubim. 
And  the  cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings,  and  mounted  up 
from  the  earth  in  my  sight  .  .  .  They  stood  at  the 
door  of  the  east  gate  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  glory 
of  the  God  of  Israel  was  over  them  above"  (x:18-19).  Then 
finally  the  Shekinah  went  up  and  disappeared.  "And  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  went  up  from  the  midst  of  the  city  and 
stood  upon  the  mountain  which  is  on  the  east  side  of  the  city" 
(xi:22). 

The  similarity  of  the  departure  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
from  the  temple  before  its  destruction  by  Nebuchadnezzar 
and  its  future  return  to  the  temple  of  Ezekiel's  vision  is 
most  interesting.  It  is  the  same  glory  which  departed, 
which  returns;  it  is  the  same  Lord,  who  resumes  relationship 
with  His  earthly  people.  The  withdrawal  of  the  visible 
glory  of  the  Lord  meant  the  departure  of  His  gracious 
presence  from  among  His  people,  which  was  followed  by, 
judgment.  The  return  of  the  visible  glory  means  the  return 
of  His  gracious  presence  among  them,  and  that  the  judg- 
ment, which  has  lasted  so  long,  is  forever  gone.  The  de- 
parture of  the  glory  was  through  the  east  gate  and  was 
finally  seen  upon  the  mountain  at  the  east  side  of  the  city; 
the  return  is  from  the  way  of  the  east,  and  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  enters  through  the  east  gate.  But  it  is  not  only  a 
visible  glory,  but  the  Lord  Himself  is  in  the  Shekinah, 
Ezekiel  beheld  above  the  firmament  and  the  cherubim, 
^when  he  saw  the  glory  of  the  Lord  at  the  river  Chebar,  he 
^heard  His  voice.  And  here  also  His  voice  is  mentioned 
"like  the  sound  of  many  waters."  From  verses  6  and  7,  we 
ilearn,  that  after  the  glory  had  entered  the  house,  the  Lord 
addressed  the  prophet  out  of  the  house. 

The  Lord  Himself  in  all  His  glory  is  manifested  and  enters 


328  THE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

the  temple,  the  place  of  His  rest  and  glory.  The  cherubim 
will  be  seen  in  person,  and  from  the  New  Testament  we  learn 
that  angels  will  be  with  Him  also.  His  glory  Vvill  then  cover 
Israel's  land  and  the  earth.  "His  glory  covered  the  heavens, 
and  the  earth  was  full  of  His  praise.  And  His  brightness  was 
as  the  light;  He  had  bright  beams  out  of  His  side*  and  there 
was  the  hiding  of  His  power.'*  This  is  how  Habakkuk 
describes  the  same  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
and  the  coming  of  the  Lord  of  glory.  (See  Isa.  xl:5,  lviii:8, 
lx:l-2,  lxvi:18).  Isaiah's  great  vision  may  be  viewed  as 
foreshadowing  this  manifestation  of  His  glory.  He  saw  the 
Lord  sitting  upon  a  throne  and  His  train  filled  the  temple. 
The  seraphim  cried  one  unto  another,  and  said,  Holy,  holy, 
holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  His  glory. 
And  as  the  prophet  was  cleansed  and  his  iniquity  taken 
away,  and  as  he  became  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  vi),  so 
the  nation  Israel  will  be  cleansed  and  forgiven  and  become 
the  messenger  of  Jehovah,  f 

\Mien  the  Spirit  had  transported  the  prophet  into  the 
inner  court  of  the  temple,  he  discovered  that  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  filled  the  house.  We  repeat  it,  no  such  thing 
happened  when  the  returned  Jewish  remnant  had  entered 
the  temple.  When  the  old  men,  who  had  seen  the  Solomonic 
temple  and  knew  of  its  glory,  beheld  the  foundation  of  the 
second  temple,  they  wept  (Ezra  iii:12).  When  the  house 
w^as  dedicated,  no  glory  returned,  no  cloud  was  seen,  no  She- 
kinah  filled  the  house.  Nor  is  it  a  spiritual  glory,  the  glory 
of  the  church,  as  so  many  seem  to  believe. 

But  Haggai,  who  with  Zechariah  prophesied  during  the  re- 
building of  the  temple,  uttered  a  significant  prophecy  while 
that  second  house  was  building — a  prophecy  which  must 
be  linked  with  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  returning  glory:  "For 
thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts:  yet  once  it  is  a  little  while, 


•Marginal  reading. 

fSuch  an  application  seems  warranted  in  view  of  the  message  Ezekiel 
received  from  the  Lord  to  the  people  (verses  6-12). 


TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL  329 

and  I  will  shake  the  heavens,  and  the  earth,  and  the  sea, 
and  the  dry  land.  And  I  will  shake  all  nations,  and  the 
Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come,  and  I  will  fill  this  house  with 
glory'*  (Haggai  ii:6-7).  This  was  not  the  house  they  were 
building.  It  is  a  future  house,  a  future  temple.  That 
house  will  be  built  when  the  heavens  and  the  earth  are 
being  shaken,  when  all  nations  shake,  and  when  the  Desire 
of  all  nations,  the  King  of  glory,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  our 
Lord  comes.   Then  this  house  will  be  filled  with  glory. 

It  will  be  a  visible  glory.  It  v/ill  be  a  permanent  glory. 
He  will  now  dwell  gloriously  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of 
Israel  (verse  7).  This  visible  glory  will  be  seen  over  Jeru- 
salem, like  as  it  was  of  old,  a  cloud  by  day  and  a  shining, 
flaming  fire  by  night.  "And  Jehovah  will  create  over  every 
dwelling  place  of  Mount  Zion,  and  over  its  convocations  a 
cloud  by  day  and  a  smoke  and  the  brightness  of  a  flame 
of  fire  by  night,  for  over  all  the  glory  shall  be  a  covering" 
(Isa.  iv:5). 

Another  acknowledged  difficulty  is  the  one  concerning 
the  restored  sacrifices  and  ordinances. 

But  what  do  these  ordinances  mean?  Here  are  priests 
again  standing  before  an  altar,  bringing  bloody  sacrifices, 
burnt  offerings,  sin  offerings  and  peace  offerings.  Is  this  to 
be  taken  literally  also?  Some  expositors  have  stated  that 
all  this  had  a  meaning  in  the  past  and  could  only  be  true  in 
connection  with  the  second  temple.  Others  attempt  to  read 
into  it  a  spiritual  meaning.  All,  or  nearly  all  commentators, 
think  it  inconceivable  that  such  sacrifices  could  ever  be 
brought  again  in  a  future  temple.  Those  expositors  who 
combat  the  premillennial  coming  of  the  Lord  and  the  literal 
restoration  of  Israel,  consider  the  supposed  impossibility  of 
a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this  part  of  Ezekiel's  visions, 
the  collapse  of  the  premillennial  argument. 

Sacrifices  of  bulls  and  goats  were  brought  by  Israel  in  their 
past  history;  the  Lord  commanded  His  people  to  do  this. 
Every  Christian  knows  that  these  sacrifices  foreshadowed 
the  work  of  Christ,  His  great  sacrifice  on  the  Cross.  In 
themselves  these  sacrifices  Israel  brought  could  not  take 


330  TEE  PROPHET  EZEKIEL 

away  sins,  nor  give  rest  to  the  conscience,  nor  could  they 
make  the  worshipper  perfect.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
demonstrates  this  fully. 

All  these  sacrifices  had  a  prospective  character,  looking 
forward  to  the  work  of  the  Cross.  And  when  the  Lamb 
of  God  died,  when  His  blessed  lips  uttered  the  never-to-be- 
forgotten  words,  "It  is  finished,"  and  God's  hand  rent  the  veil 
from  top  to  bottom,  the  prospective  character  of  these 
sacrifices  was  forever  ended.  The  new  and  living  way  into 
God's  presence,  into  the  Holiest,  had  been  made  by  His 
blood.  During  this  age  Israel  has  no  temple,  and  all  their 
Levitical  ordinances  can  no  longer  be  practised  by  them. 
As  Hosea  declared,  they  are  without  a  sacrifice  (Hos.  iii:4). 

God,  during  this  age,  our  present  age,  which  began  with 
the  rejection  of  Christ  by  Israel  and  ends  with  His  Return, 
is  gathering  a  heavenly  people,  the  church.  The  church 
has  for  its  worship  no  earthly  place,  no  temple,  but  worships 
in  spirit  and  in  truth,  in  a  heavenly  sanctuary.  There  are 
no  sacrifices,  priests,  altars,  in  connection  with  the  true 
church,  the  body  of  Christ.  Christ  is  all.  He  is  the  sac- 
rifice, the  priest  and  the  altar.  That  the  enemy  has  pro- 
duced upon  Christian  ground  a  ritualism  which  is  aped 
after  the  Jewish  system  and  which  denies  as  such  the  Gospel 
and  Christianity,  is  well  known.  They  have  invented  altars, 
and  sacrifices,  and  priests.  This  is  the  Judaizing  of  the 
church,  "the  other  Gospel  which  is  not  another,"  upon 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  pronounced  the  curse  of  God 
(Gal.  1).  The  day  is  coming  when  the  Lord  will  deal  in 
judgment  with  the  apostate  church  which  denies  His  Son 
and  His  work,  while  His  true  church  will  be  taken  to  the 
place  which  He  has  prepared. 

After  the  prophecy  of  the  division  of  the  land,  comes  the 
majestic  ending,  the  last  message  this  man  of  God  uttered: 
"And  the  name  of  that  city  from  that  day  shall  be  'Jehovah 
Shammah,*  the  Lord  is  there."  It  is  a  fitting  finale  to  this 
great  Book.  In  its  beginning,  we  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
departing.  Throughout  the  pages  of  the  Book  Vve  read  of 
Israel's  rebellion,  Jerusalem's  judgments,  the  nation's  dis- 


THE    PROPHET  EZEKIEL  331 

obedience  and  rejection.  Then  follow  the  messages  of  Hope 
— Israel's  conversion,  the  regathering  of  the  twelve  tribes, 
the  final  conflict,  the  returning  glory  of  the  Lord;  and  from 
that  day  the  name  of  the  city  will  be  Jehovah  Shammah. 
Because  He  has  manifested  His  gracious  presence  in  the  midst 
of  His  people  a,nd  established  His  throne,  blessed  His  people 
with  all  the  spiritual  and  national  blessings  promised  by 
His  holy  prophets,  destroyed  all  their  enemies,  and  covered 
all  with  His  visible  glory  once  more,  therefore  the  city  will 
have  the  name  * 'Jehovah  is  there."  What  a  glory  it  will 
be  for  Him.  The  city  through  which  He  once  walked  with 
weary  feet,  the  Son  of  God  garbed  in  servant's  form,  the 
city  through  which  He  was  dragged,  when  the  cross  was 
laid  upon  His  shoulders,  the  city  which  cast  Him  out,  the 
city  outside  of  which  He  endured  the  cross  and  despised  the 
shame — that  same  city  will  be  made  in  that  day  the  glory 
spot  of  the  earth. 


DATE   DUE 

' 

1 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A 

WELLESLEY  COLLEGE  LIBRARY 

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIHIIIIIIIII 


3  5002  03127  3373 

BS  491  .  G3  1913  4 

Gaebeleln^  Arno  Cle-menB, 
1861-1945. 


The  anno-tB-ted  Bible 


i 


