Google



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I





1


^^^^^^^H



THE ELEMENTS



OV



MOKAL SCIENCE.



BT

J. L. DAGG, D.D.,

LATB PKBSIDBNT OF MKKOIB UNIYBKSITT, OA.



NEW YORK:
SHELDON & COMPANY.

FEILADELFHIA: J. B. UPPINCOTT ti Oa



186



0- ^^. L. S^(c>




I. L. DAOa,




PREFACE.



In the " Manual of Theology/' recently pub-
lished, the externals of religion are discussed only
so far as they relate to ceremonies and church
order. To render that work a complete system
of divinity, a supplement is needed on Christian
Morals. But, in the ordinary course of instruc-
tion, moral philosophy is introduced among the
studies of college, and receives the attention of
students who never enter a theological school.
In agreement with this usage, it has appeared to
me better, instead of adding a supplement to the
Manual, to prepare a separate work on morals,
and adapt it to general use.

In writing the following pages, I have been

much indebted to " The Elements of Moral Sci-

(3)



lY PBKFAOE.

ence/' by Dr. Wayland, which is a work of high
and deserved reputation. Soon after its publica-
tion in 1835, it became extensively introduced
into the schools and colleges throughout the
country ; and has been justly esteemed the best
text-book extant on the subject. But, with all
its excellence, it has imperfections, which twenty-
four years of critical examination have sufl&ced
to discover. It omits some useful subjects ; som6
of its reasonings are obscure and inconclusive ;
and in the following discussions some of its im-
portant doctrines are controverted, in both theo-
retical and practical ethics. A work of the same
general character, but not liable to the same
objections, has long been desired by many who
are engaged in the instruction of youth ; and the
present volume is an humble attempt to supply
the want.

A true system of ethics must necessarily refer
to the Bible, the highest standard of morals. I
have felt pleasure in making frequent quotations
from the sacred volume; and have generally
affixed a reference to the chapter and verse, with



PRKFAOK. y

the hope that the student may be induced to
read the passages in their connection, and by
this means acquire increased familiarity with
the lively oracles of God. The knowledge and
love of the inspked writings furnish the only
means on which parents and teachers may rely,
for producing in the young the grace of a pure
morality.



1*



CONTENTS.



TAGM

Definition 13

CHAPTER L

Moral Qualitt 13

Sec. 1. In Actions 13

" 2. In Intentions . 17

" 3. In Desires 22

*' 4. Nature of the Moral Quality 26

CHAPTER IL

MoBAL Obligation 29

Sec. 1. Theories Examined 30

** 2. The True Doctrine 42

CHAPTER nL

MoBAL Facttltt 49

Sec. 1. Its Existence 49

« 2. Its Offices 55

" 3. Its Authority 67

" 4. Its ImproYement . . 72

CHAPTER IV.

ViBTinB , . 79

Seo. 1. In General 79

" 2. In Imperfect Beings . 80

(7)



• ••



Vm CONTENTS.

' TAQU

8bo. 3. Relation to Habit 83

" 4. Relation to Happiness 85

** 5. Insufficiency of Conscience to prodace Perfect Yirtue . 91

Causes 91

Consequences 94

CHAPTER V.

EVOWLBDGB OF DXTTT ••••••... 97

Sec. 1. Moral Law 97

*' 2. Connection of Morality with Religion . • • .101

** 3. Natural Religion 103

Its Mode of Teaching 103

Extent of its Teaching Ill

Its Insufficiency 112

*' 4. Revelation .115

Its Relation to Natural Religion .... 115

The Two Testaments 119

'' 5. Knowledge made effectual by Diyine Influence . • 125

CHAPTER VL

General Rules of Conduct . 130

CHAPTER Vn.

Duties to God • ... 135

Sec. 1. LoTC and Reverence 135

** 2. Obedience 140

** 8. Gratitude 142

** 4. Trust 145

" 5. Repentance 146

** 6. Resignation .•....••. 147

'* 7. Habit of Devotion 148

« 8. Prayer 161

Its Nature 151

Ite Obligation 154

Its Utility .157

'' 9. Observance of the Sabbath ....•• 164



OONTBFXB.
CHAPTER TUL



Sao. 1. lUshta IM

ClauUeaCioD of BigbU ITS

•• 3. JnitiiM ITl

'■ 3. Kighu of Proper^ 17(

Proof ITS

How uquirod ITT

HawTioUMd 1T8

•• i. SsUer and Bayer IN

« 6. TBmporarj'Craniferof Kjht 18S

Umry 18*

« t. Sorrioe and Agency IBS

" T. Idjdi7 to ChanwUr IW

" 8. Iqjni; to Sepatatioa ....■■■ IM

Eril 8nnni*ing 1«

EvUSpttkiDg IM

Confide Btiai CommunicatioD . . • .200

ConiiTial DcfauutiDn 100

Libel 101

" 9. InjnatiM to Brute >03

OHAPIEB IX.

Duma or BanaTOLBROi ,...•••- SOB

Sac. I. ObligatioD SOS

" !. Unle aOS

" 3. Pb78i<ial BeoeEaaCion 308

« 4. InUUectnal BenefaotlaD 311

" i. Moral Benebation 314

" t. For^reneu of Injorlel .,,.•.■ 317

CEAPTBR X.

DOtllB or TlBAOITT 231

Sao. 1. Obligatioa of Tecaait; Ml

" I Promiael 214

" 3. ContrHta 330

« 4. OaOu 12T



X CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XI.

FAGS

Social Dutiss in General ........ 234

Simple Society 236

CHAPTER Xn.

Familt Duties 239

Seo. 1* Marriage ••....... 239

Chastity . 242

Polygamy , 244

Divorce 247

Incest . . . « 248

** 2. Duties of Husbands 251

" 3. Duties of Wives 253

** 4. Duties of Parents 255

« 5. Duties of ChUdren 261

CHAPTER Xin.

Public Duties 265

Sec. I. Public Spirit 265

« 2. Professional Duties 266

Preacher .266

Physician 269

Lawyer 273

Teacher 277

" 3. Civil Society 278

" 4. Civil Government 283

Should be just 285

« 5. Liberty 287

Religious Liberty 289

Liberty of Speech, and of the Press . . . 293

" 6. Duties of Civil Officers 295

« 7. Duties of Citizens 297

** 8. Political Oppression 300

Right of Revolution 301



CONTENTS. Xi
GHAPTEB XIV.

TAQX

Duties to Self . 303

Sec. 1. Care of Health 303

Drankenness 305

" 2. Industry and Fmgali^ 308

" 3. Self-defence 309

CHAPTER XV.

Powers of Civil Gotebnkent 320

Ssa 1. Modes of Restraint 320

** 2. Imprisonment 321

« 3. Capital Punishment 322

" 4. War 328

" 6. Slavery 338

May be necessary 338

Who must judge 342

Relation of Master 342

Duty to Slaves 361

" 6. Abolitionism 365

Aim and Tendency •••••. 365

Benevolent Aspect •••••• 368

Mistake 371



MORAL SCIENCE.



DEFINITION.

Ethics, Moral Science, or Moral Philosophy, is
the science which teaches men their duty. It is called
Moral Philosophy y because it employs similar reasoning
to that which is used in other departments of phi-
losophy.



CHAPTER I.
MORAL QUALITY.

section I. IN ACTIONS.

In teaching men their duty, moral philosophy finds
it necessary to investigate the moral quality of human
actions. Some actions are right ; others wrong. Right
and wrong are called moral qualities. In ascribing these
qualities to actions, all men concur. This agreement
of all men does not make out a mathematical demon-
stration that the moral quality exists in actions : but it
is such a demonstration as the nature of the case
admits, and such as we ought to be satisfied with. We
2 (13)



14 MORAL QUALITY.

have no higher demonstration that the sun is bright, or
that the vegetable world is clothed in green.

The science investigates the moral quality of human
actions.

Action is sometimes predicated of inanimate bodies.
It is a law of physical philosophy, that, to every
action of one body upon another, there is an equal and
contrary reaction. We speak also of chemical action
and chemical agents.

But in all the action of matter, whether in masses
or particles, no one either imagines that he finds the
moral quality or suspects its existence. Between the
movements of a stone and of the human body there may
be an agreement in direction, distance, and velocity ;
but there can be none with respect to moral quality.
The movement of th^ human body may be in violation
of moral obligation : but the stone cannot violate moral
law, and no one ever charges it with crime. We never
attribute the moral quality to any action which does not
proceed from mind.

Brutes have minds which manifest their existence
and qualities in various modes of action ; but we never
regard a brute as a moral agent. We may be pleased
with its acts; but we are conscious that the pleasure
which we feel is not moral approbation. It may do us
harm, and, to prevent a repetition of the harm, we may
intimidate it with blows ; but we never charge it with
crime, or punish it as a criminal. Between the acts of
a brute, and those of a moral agent, there may be an
agreement in many respects ; but not in respect of moral
quality. A brute may kill its offspring, and a father
may murder his child; but the contemplation of the
father's crime excites in our minds a moral disgust and
loathing which no one feels towards the brute.

Why are brutes not moral agents ? They have in-



IN ACTIONS. 15

telligence displaying itself, sometimes to our surprise
and admiration, in the selection and employment of
suitable means for the accomplishment of their pur-
poses. If mere intelligence created moral obligation,
the fox and the elephant would be moral agents to the
extent of their sagacity. Brutes have desires and
aversions as well as men ; and their bodies act under
mental influence, as human muscles move under the in-
fluence of volition. But something more than intelli-
gence and will is necessary to constitute moral agency.
What is that something ?

We are conscious of moral approbation and disappro-
bation in the contemplation of virtues and crimes ; but
we never imagine that these emotions are felt by a
brute. We feel remorse for crimes committed; but
no one suspects that pain of this kind ever tortures
a brute, even though it may have destroyed its off-
spring. We feel ourselves impelled to certain actions
by a sen3e of moral obligation; but no one supposes
that brutes ever act under such impulse. In all ages
and nations a belief has prevailed that there is a God ;
and that there is a moral government exercised over
men by which their actions are rewarded or punished ;
but no one conceives that this belief has ever found
place for a single moment in the mind of any one of
the innumerable brute animals that have inhabited the
earth. We are conscious of a moral constitution in
our minds, adapting them to moral government, and we
attribute the like constitution to the minds of our fellow-
men ; but we never attribute it to the minds of brutes.
If we could believe that some one brute were endowed
with a mind of moral constitution, we should regard
that brute as a moral agent, and call his actions right
or wrong. It is, therefore, in the moral constitution
of the human mind that the foundation is laid for human



16 MORAL QUALITT.

responsibility. It is this which makes man a moral
agent, and a proper subject of moral government.

When a child has performed some act which in other
persons would be criminal, we may excuse him on the
plea that he knows no better : and a child may excuse
a brute on the same plea ; but a philosopher sees a wide
distinction between the two cases. The brute is not
only without the knowledge necessary to accountability,
but without any capacity for receiving it. The child
may be taught that the act is criminal ; but the brute
cannot be taught to make moral distinctions.

If it be asked, what is a moral action ? the answer
is, an action which is either right or wrong. If it be
asked, by whom may a moral action be performed 7 the
answer is, by an agent capable of distinguishing between
right and wrong.

The moral quality belongs to human conduct through-
out its whole course ; and may be detected in omissions
to act, as well as in positive actions.

As moral agents, we are bound to employ the active
powers with which we are endowed, in doing good. We
are not at liberty to waste our days in idleness ; and to
neglect any opportunity of doing good is to do wrong.
Hence moralists enumerate sins of omission, as well as
sins of commission. In the latter we do what God
forbids ; in the former we neglect to do what he com-
mands. In reviewing our actions and judging of their
criminality, it is not enough to estimate the amount of
positive injury which we have inflicted. Every oppor-
tunity of serving God or benefiting men ought to be
taken into the account ; and if we have suflfered any
opportunity to pass unimproved, the failure stands
justly chargeable against us. What a fearful reckon-
ing, then, awaits us at the last day ! We must give
account not only for every idle word, but also for every



IN ACTIONS. 17

idle moment in which we have failed to fulfil our moral
obligations.

Our actions are complex, and we cannot affirm that
every part of them contains in itself the moral element.
We may extend the hand to inflict an injurious blow
on a fellow-man ; or we may extend it to avert an in-
jurious blow aimed at him by another. The mere
extension of the hand in these cases has no other
moral quality than that which it derives from the com-
plex action of which it is a part; that is, it has no
moral quality in itself. Actions which do not contain
the moral element in themselves, are called indifferent.
Though performed by a moral agent, we cannot affirm
that such an action is either right or wrong ; but moral
agents are responsible for every such action, because
it ought to be performed to some good purpose. Hence
moral obligation extends over every deed, as well as
every moment of life ; and this is clearly the doctrine
of the Holy Scriptures : " Whether ye eat, or drink,
or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God."^

Though intelligence and will are not sufficient of
themselves to constitute a moral agent, they are never-
theless necessary to moral action. The action of a
machine is not moral, because a machine acts without
intelligence and volition. Moral actions proceed from
mind and not from mere matter ; and to understand the
morality of actions we must view them in connection
with the mind in which they originate. This connec-
tion will be traced in the following section.

SECTION II. IN INTENTIONS.

We sometimes intend acts which we never perform ;
and, at other times, perform acts which we never in-

* 1 Cor. X. 31.
2*



18 MORAL QUALITT.

tended. In these cases the moral quality exists in the
intention, and not in the outward action. The nature
and propriety of this distinction may be easily illus-
trated.

A father sees a wild beast about to leap on his child ;
and, in attempting to shoot the ferocious animal, the
bursting of hid gun kills the child. Is this father
guilty of murder? The unanimous* verdict of mankind
will acquit him. Why? Because the killing of the
child was not intended.

An assassin stabs with intent to kill ; but, failing to
apply to his dagger the force necessary to take life, he
merely opens an internal abscess, and, by this means,
prolongs the life which it was his purpose to destroy.
How is the morality of his deed to be estimated ? Not
by the good which he eflfects, but by the evil which he
intended. No one doubts that the Searcher of hearts
holds him guilty of murder.

In the cases which have been supposed, the result
of the action is entirely diflFerent from the intention of
the agent. In other cases which may frequently occur,
the result and the intention agree in part and differ in
part. A man who labors to extricate a whole family
from their burning habitation, may succeed in saving a
part of them only. A man who aims to take the life
of a neighbor whom he hates, may fail of effecting his
full intent, but may inflict lasting injury to his person.
In all such cases, the measure of the morality is found
in the intention, and not in the partial effect produced.
If the kindness of a friend does not confer on us all
the benefit which he designed, our gratitude to him is
measured, not by the good actually received, but by the
good intended.

In every case which can be supposed, we may observe
that we estimate the morality of an action by the in-



IN INTENTIONS. 19

tention of the agent. If his purpose is exactly accom-
plished, it is a matter of indifference whether we make
up our judgment from the intention or from the result ;
but whenever these differ from each other, we always
make the intention the ground of our judgment.
Hence, by the common consent of mankind, the moral
quality of an action resides in the intention.

Intention implies an exercise of the will. If we act
from compulsion, the action is not intended by us, and
is not properly our own. Moral agency must be volun-
tary agency.

Intention implies an exercise of intellect. We dis-
tinguish between actions which are intended and actions
which are accidental ; and the necessity for this dis-
tinction arises from the absence of perfect intelligence
in the agent. To a being of perfect intelligence, no
accidents can happen ; and to a being acting without
intelligence, everything happens as by accident. Hence,
intelligence is necessary to intention, and therefore to
moral agency. It is necessary, for the additional
reason, that an agent destitute of intelligence, must be
incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong.

A moral agent is bound to exercise the intelligence
which he possesses. At this point his responsibility
may extend beyond the limits of his intention. For an
act intended, he is responsible ; and the morality of
that act exists in the intention.

But accidental actions also have their responsibility,
when they arise from criminal carelessness in the agent.
He who throws a stone into a crowd, may destroy life
without intending it ; but he is justly chargeable with
the consequences which he ought to have foreseen.

The distinction between sins of omission and of com-
mission, is applicable to intentions, as well as to overt
actions. It is not enough that we intend no evil to our



20 MOBAL QUALITY.

fellow-mcn. If we pass our lives in self-indulgence,
indifferent to the interests and well-being of others, we
are guilty of wrong ; and that wrong becomes greatly
aggravated if our self-indulgence produces mischief to
others. The seducer seeks his own gratification, with-
out intending mischief to the victim of his seduction ;
but he is held responsible by the verdict of mankind
for the ruin of reputation and happiness which ensues :
and this responsibility he must meet at the last tri-
bunal.

The doctrine that the moral quality of an action
resides in the intention of the agent, is liable to be
misapplied through an ambiguity in the use of the word
intention. Besides the outward action, in the perform-
ance of which the body is concerned, we may distinguish
in the operations of the mind concerning it — 1. The
conception of the act; 2. The resolution to perform
it ; and 3. The purpose for which it is performed. The
last of th^se is frequently called the intention; and the
doctrine has been maintained, that the moral quality
of the action resides in it ; that is, in the intention with
which the action is performed. The argument in sup-
port of this opinion, may be stated thus : —

Argument. — The moral quality does not belong to
the external act ; for the same external act may be pre-
formed by two men, while its moral character is, in the
two cases, entirely dissimilar. Nor does it belong to
the conception, nor to the resolution to carry that con-
ception into effect ; for these can have no other character
than that of the action itself. It must, then, reside in
the intention.

This argument is fallacious, because the principle

assumed at the outset, that << the moral quality does not

belong to the external act," is not universally true.

It cannot be true of any but indifferent actions. If A.

gives money to relieve a family in distress, and B. gives



IN INTENTIONS. 21

money to procure the murder of a friend, the act of
giving money derives its moral quality from the inten-
tion with which it is performed, because it has no moral
quality in itself. But if A. steals money to relieve a
family in distress, and B. steals money to procure the
murder of a friend, the act of stealing money does not
derive its moral quality from the intention with which
it is done, because it has a moral quality of its own.
Its criminality is greatly aggravated when it is per-
formed with murderous intent ; but it does not become
virtuous when performed with benevolent design. The
doctrine that the end sanctifies the means, is inconsist-
ent with sound morality; yet this doctrine is clearly
deducible from the argument.

Should an attempt be made to sustain the argument
by alleging, that wheii it denies the existence of moral
quality in the external act, it contemplates that act
merely as so much muscular motion, in which, considered
in itself, there can be neither virtue nor vice, — we admit
the premise in this interpretation of it, but we main-
tain that the inference which the argument draws from
it is not in this case legitimate, namely, that the con-
ception of the act and the resolution to perform it,
"can have no other character than that of the act
itself." The conception and resolution belong to the
mind, and the premise, that moral quality does not
belong to matter, will not furnish ground for the conclu-
sion, that moral quality does not belong to mind.

In the analysis of an act, the purpose for which it is
performed is not properly an element of the act con-
sidered in itself. The purpose respects the end to be
accomplished, and belongs to the accomplishment of that
end as an ulterior action. The act of giving money is
complete in itself, whether performed with benevolent
or murderous intention, and the purpose for which it is



22 MORAL QUALITT.

performed, is properly an element in the virtuous or
criminal action to which the other is made subservient.
The doctrine which we are examining, pushes the moral
quality out of the particular act which we analyze, and
refers it to an ulterior action. If we pursue it, and
attempt the analysis of this ulterior action, the doctrine
meets us again, and pushes the moral quality into some-
thing which is still beyond. Thus it proceeds from link
to link along the chain of means and ends, until it has
pushed the moral quality out of all human action.

To aflSrm that the resolution to perform a moral action
has no moral quality in it, is to contradict the common
sense of mankind. The resolution to perform is the
intention to perform ; and we have seen that the inten-
tion to perform possesses the moral quality, even when
the act is never consummated.

The distinction between the intention to do an act
and the intention with which it is done, must be care-
fully observed, lest we misapply the doctrine that the
moral quality resides in the intention.

The moral quality of an action, which is right or
wrong, resides in the intention of the agent, that is, in
his intention to do the act. For actions, which are in
themselves indiflFerent, the agent is held responsible
according to the intention with which they are done.
This intention, which is merely a concomitant of the
indifferent action, is an element of the ulterior action.
It is the intention of doing that action^ and contains its
moral quality.

SECTION III. IN DESIRES.

We have seen that the moral quality may be found
in the intention of an agent, even when that intention
is never executed ; and that it is not in the outward
act considered apart from the intention. In every case



IN DESIRES. 23

right and wrong are, properly speaking, qualities of
mental and not of material actions.

When we have ascertained that the moral quality
resides in the mind, and have detected its existence in
the intentions, the inquiry is suggested whether it exists
also in other aflFections or operations of the mind.

What a man intends to accomplish he desires . to
accomplish. Intention is commonly the result of deli-
beration. During the deliberation, conflicting desires
struggle withinfor predominance ; and by their conflict
the mind is held in suspense. When the decision has
been made, and an action has been resolved on, that
action is prompted by the prevailing desire which, in
its victory over the rest, assumes the form of intention.
In this form we have seen that it contains the moral
quality. But is this quality confined to the desires
which prevail ?

If a man intends murder, but fails of his purpose
because his weapon disappoints him, we hold him guilty
of the murder intended. If, in approaching his in-
tended victim, he finds him armed for self-defence, and
abandons his purpose merely through fear of losing
his own life, he is still guilty of murder. But let us
suppose that, when the desire of taking life was urging
him, he foresaw the risk with which the gratification
of this desire would be attended, and feared to attempt
the deed ; is the desire of murder innocent because the
desire of self-preservation prevailed over it? No one
so judges. We attribute moral quality to desire, as
well as to intention ; and in this we have the concur-
rence of the Holy Scriptures. The tenth command-
ment, "Thou shalt not covet,'* forbids wrong desire,
and does not wait until the desire has ripened into the
intention of seizing by violence the thing desired ; but
it takes cognisance of the desire at its very origin, and



24 MOBAL QUALITY.

finds the moral quality in it, even when unattended with
any hope of gratification. ' The lusts which are so much
condemned in the inspired Word are evil desires in
which sinful actions originate. " When lust hath con-
ceived, it bringeth forth sin.'*^ "From whence come
wars and fightings among you ? Come they not hence,
even of your lusts that war in your members ? Ye lust,
and have not; ye kill, and desire to have."*

Men are prone, in judging themselves, to examine
their external actions only; or, at most, their fully
formed intentions. With this partial self-examination,
Paul for a time was satisfied, and thought himself
blameless : but when the commandment came, searching
the depths of his heart, his judgment respecting him-
self was completely changed. The process of discovery
he has described in these words : — " I had not known
sin, but by the law, for I had not known lust, except
the law had said. Thou shalt not covet. ''^

By the light of the holy law, shining into his heart,
he saw the moral quality of sinful desire, and learned
his depravity. The teachings of moral philosophy on
this point coincide perfectly with those of revelation.

Desires are wrong, when their objects are unlawful.
Such are the objects enumerated in the tenth command-
ment : " Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house,
thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man
servant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his ass,
nor anything that is thy neighbor's."* It is unlawful
to possess the things belonging to our neighbor ; and,
therefore, it is unlawful to desire them. So it is in
every case, where the objects of desire are unlawful.

Desire is wrong, when the degree of it is inordinate.
We ought to desire the favor and enjoyment of God

^ James i. 15. 'James iv. 1, 2. 'Rom. vii. 7. *Ex. xx. 17.



IN DESIRES. 25

above everything else. The pious man, in the holiest
breathings of his soul, can exclaim, <(Whom have
I in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon earth
that I desire besides thee."^ To this supremo desire
after 'God, every other desire should be subordi-
nated. But men are lovers of pleasure, more than
lovers of God ; and it is not necessary that the plea-
sure should be unlawful, to render the inordinate desire
sinful. In order to perfect rectitude, every action
must conform perfectly to the rule of right ; and so
must, also, every desire, in respect both of its object
and of its intensity. Who that duly considers this,
can reject the doctrine of human depravity, or deny
that the heart of man is desperately wicked ?

The mere conception of an action does not contain
the moral quality. The mind of Jesus, when tempted
by Satan, had a conception of the sinful deeds which
the tempter proposed ; but this conception was without
sin. No desire to commit a siflful act, or enjoy a sin-
ful indulgence, ever found a momentary residence in
his soul. But in a corrupt mind, the conception of sin-
ful deeds is attended with unholy desires, which enter-
tain the conception, and use it unlawfully. In the
secret chambers of the soul the imagination feasts on
forbidden indulgence, and perpetrates deeds unfit for
human eyes. But God sees them, and will bring them
into judgment. In these dark caverns of thought men
learn to be villains, and practise their deeds of atrocity
before they acquire hardihood to act out, in the view
of mankind, the wickedness to which they have secretly
trained themselves. Let every one who would avoid
sin, purify his imagination.



» Ps. Ixiiii. 25.
3



26 MORAL QUALITY.



SECTION IV. NATURE OF THE MORAL

QUALITY.

When we inquire into the nature of the moral
quality, it is important to distinguish between the
quality itself, and our notions respecting it. Metaphy-
sicians have been perplexed with the question, How do
we obtain a knowledge of the external world ? Ordi-
nary men, who have never heard of this question,
firmly believe that a world exists around them, and
inquire into the nature and operations of surrounding
objects, with as much success as if they had fully de-
cided this puzzling question of mental science. Of
like character is the question. Whence do we derive
our notion of the moral quality ? Men who have never
thought of this inquiry, meet, examine, and decide
questions of duty, without any reference to it ; and, for
aught that appears, the system of moral science might
be complete, if this question respecting the operations
of the mind were for ever undecided. Moral philosophy
investigates- the nature of the moral quality ; but our
notion respecting the quality, is a subject which falls
properly under the examination of the mental phi-
losopher.

The investigations of natural philosophy would be
greatly hindered, if they were directed, not to the
objects around us, but to our notions respecting them.
If driven from the world without us to the world within
us, the science would be involved in darkness, and its
deductions respecting the relations of physical sub-
stances and events would abound with error. The rela-
tions of our notions are not identical with the relations
of the things known. A spark produces an explosion ;
but our knowledge of a spark does not produce our
knowledge of an explosion. A similar liability to error



NATURE OP THE MORAL QUALITY. 27

attends the methods of investigation which have some-
times been adopted in moral philosophy. The relations
between oar mental conceptions of moral things, have
been mistaken for relations between the things them-
selves ; and conclusions respecting the latter have been
drawn from premises which respect the former.

Our first notions of right and wrong, and of moral
obligation, are derived from consciousness; but the
things themselves exist apart from all our notions
respecting them. So the planetary world and all its
movements would exist, if there were no astronomers
to observe these movements, and investigate the laws
by which they are governed. In this objective view we
must answer the inquiry respecting the nature of the
moral quality.

Our minds are so constituted that we are conscious
of approving some actions and disapproving others. The
approved actions we call right; and the disapproved
wrong.

Though we derive our elementary moral ideas from
consciousness, it is nevertheless true, that consciousness
does not give us a perfect knowledge oiF right and wrong.
We sometimes approve what subsequent reflection con-
vinces us is wrong ; and we thus learn that the distinc-
tion between right and wrong is independent of our
feelings. The foundation of the distinction will be
examined in the chapter on Moral Obligation. The
existence of moral obligation being admitted, the mean-
ing of the terms right and wrong becomes determined,
and the nature of the moral quality may be contem-
plated as an objective reality.

An action is right, when it fulfils the obligations of the
agent; and wrong, when it violates them. In this state-
ment the action is contemplated apart from the moral
approbation or disapprobation which it erxcites in our



28 MORAL QUALITY.

minds. What has been said of actions is equally true
of intentions and desires. They are all right or wrong
as they agree or disagree with the obligations of the
agent. The moral quality in every case consists in
agreement or disagreement with moral obligation.



CHAPTER 11.
MORAL OBLIGATION.

Moral obligation is expressed in common language
by the words ought and duty. To say that we ought to
tell the truth, or that it is our duty to tell the truth, is
to say that we are under moral obligation to tell the
truth. Such words as ought and duty are found in all
languages; and therefore the men who speak these
languages have the ideas which the words express;
since, were it otherwise, the words would be as unmean-
ing as the names of colors are to men born blind. As
men of all languages have the idea of moral obligation,
either moral obligation exists or nature deceives all man-
kind.

Our inquiry into the nature of the moral quality,
brought us to the conclusion, that an action is right
when it conforms to the obligations of the agent, and
wrong when it violates them. To pursue our investiga-
tions, we must next inquire into the nature and ground
of moral obligation. Moral obligation and the distinc-
tion between right and wrong have an intimate connec-
tion with each other ; but if we stop at the present stage
of our investigation, it will not be clear whether an
action is right because it is obligatory, or is obligatory
because it is right ; and the nature both of rectitude and
obligation will be very imperfectly understood.

Respecting the nature and ground of moral obliga-
tion, and of the distinction between right and wrong,
various theories have been advanced, which it will be
useful to examine.

3* (29)



30 MORAL OBLIGATION.

SECTION I. THEORIES EXAMINED.

Theory 1. Nature impels every man to seek his own
happiness, and the innate tendency demonstrates that
happiness is the end of his being. Hence self-love,
which prompts each man to seek his own happiness, is
the proper motive of human conduct. The desire of
present pleasure may be gratified at the expense of our
future good ; and hence self-love, which seeks our happi-
ness on the whole, may forbid the present gratification.
This restraint on appetites and passions which call for
present indulgence, is moral obligation. He who so acts
as to promote his own happiness in the highest degree,
acts virtuously, and deserves praise. In estimating our
happiness on the whole, we must take our future immor-
tality into the account ; and in obeying God, or doing good
to men, the proper motive of our actions, is the desire
of future happiness. In human society individuals are
so related to each other, and so dependent on each other,
that each one in seeking his own happiness, is compelled
to promote the happiness of others. Hence self-love
requires the exercise of the social affections, and obtains
pleasure from the exercise. Moreover, some actions are
reviewed with pleasurable self-approbation, and others
with painful remorse; and self-love takes the conse-
quences of actions into the account, in determining what
actions are right. If every individual would diligently
and wisely seek his own happiness, the highest happiness
of each would be attained, and the aggregate of happi-
ness in the world would be the greatest possible. Hence
self-love tends to the general good.

If we would learn the proper end of man's being,
and the proper motive of his actions, from the ten-
dencies observable in his nature, we ought to draw our
knowledge, not from a single tendency, but from his
entire nature. The theory under consideration fixes on
the single tendency to the seeking of happiness; and
from this draws all its conclusions. But there are
other tendencies which equally claim our consideration'.



THEORIES EXAMINED. 31

and which must be taken into the account if we would
judge correctly concerning the end for which man
exists, and to the accomplishment of which his actions
should be directed. He who sympathizes with a friend
in affliction does not sympathize for the sake of his own
happiness. The mother who denies herself every com-
fort, that she may watch at the cradle of her sick
infant, and who weeps with broken heart when death
has taken it from her, does not watch and weep for the
sake of her own happiness. When we review a past
action with remorse, we do not make the review, or
indulge the painful emotion which it produces, for the
sake of our own happiness. If happiness is the only
end of man, why do sympathy, maternal affection, and
remorse give pain ; or why is the human heart capable
of these affections ?

To satisfy the tendencies of our nature, and to gra-
tify our desire of pleasure, are things which every care-
ful observer may readily learn to distinguish. The
appetite for food is a natural tendency on which life
depends. The benevolence of the Creator has made
the satisfying of this tendency a source of pleasure.
We may satisfy the demands of appetite by eating food
which gives very little pleasure to the taste ; and we
may eat for the sake of pleasure when the demands of
appetite have ceased. Our happiness is the aggregate
of our pleasures ; but if our good, or the end for which
we exist, be the satisfaction of all the tendencies in
our nature, it is clear that happiness is only a part of
that good. Hence the theory errs in reasoning from a
part as if it were the whole.

When two tendencies of our nature come into con-
flict with each other, how shall it be decided which of
them is under moral obligation to yield ? Ought the
mother to satisfy the demands of maternal affection by



32 MORAL OBLIGATION.

painful attendance on her sick infant ; or ought she to
neglect it for the pleasure of a banquet ? There is in
human nature a tendency to decide this question, as
every mother will decide it, who is not without natural
affection; and this tendency the theory overlooks.
The moral judgments of mankind are not formed by
its rule. It assumes that the desire of happiness, on
the whole, ought to prevail over the desire of present
gratification ; but the assumption is arbitrary, if we
judge merely from a comparison of the two impulses.
The assumption chances to be right in this case : but
because self-love ought to control the desire of present
gratification, it does not follow that it ought to govern
every other impulse and tendency of our nature.

We know that hunger tends to personal good, by
driving men to obtain sustenance for the body ; and we
know, with equal certainty, that there are impulses in
our nature which tend to the good of others. We are
formed for society ; and we have tendencies manifestly
directed to the good of society. Our philosophy is
false to nature when it assumes that every man ought
to live for himself. The theory, therefore, errs : first,
in making all good consist in happiness ; and secondly,
in making the good which every individual ought to
seek personal.

The theory contradicts the moral judgments of man-
kind. All the world reprobate the man who seeks to
promote his own happiness by cruelty, fraud, and false-
hood : but the theory justifies him. It may indeed
admit that he adopts an unwise method to promote his
happiness, because it will fail to attain the end which
he seeks : but what the theory condemns, is, not the
motive, but the mistaken judgment. The selfish motivB
it justifies; and the cruelty, fraud, and falsehood it
would justify, if these could promote the man's happi-



THEORIES EXAMINED. 33

ness: but the moral judgments of mankind decide
against the theory.

If it be said that conscience will not permit us to be
happy in the practice of cruelty, falsehood, and fraud,
and that self-love, aware of this, avoids these practices
so inconsistent with our internal peace, it is clearly
admitted that conscience is a higher principle of our
nature, to the decisions of which our self-love is com-
pelled to yield.

The doctrine that the happiness of all beings is best
promoted, when each seeks directly to promote his own,
is fallacious. If the happiness of each grew up entirely
from within himself, it might be that the aggregate of
happiness would be greatest when each cultivated
exclusively the nearest spot ; but our enjoyments come
in great measure from without; and, in dividing the
means of enjoyment, the theory justifies every man in
seizing the most that he can. It puts every indi-
vidual in conflict with every other ; and makes war the
natural state of society. A universe of beings at war
each with every other, and a universe of beings who
love each other as they love themselves — in which of
these shall we look for the greatest amount of happi-
ness ? To secure the greatest happiness of a whole life,
the impulse which seeks the highest enjoyment of each
moment, needs restraint ; and equally to secure the
highest happiness of the world, the impulse which seeks
the highest happiness of each individual, must be in
subjection. The theory admits the former necessity,
but overiooks the latter.

Since supreme self-love does not obtain the approba-
tion of men, much less can it secure the favor of God.
A man may pray, " Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his;" but the
mere desire of future happiness, however intense and



34 MORAL OBLIGATION.

active, will not suffice. God is not obeyed by morality

which proceeds from no higher motive.

Theory 2. — The perception of external things is fre-
quently followed by vivid feelings in the perceiving
mind, which are called emotions — such as sorrow, hope,
fear, desire, aversion, &c. These emotions are not
qualities of the external object ; and they give us no
other knowledge of it, than that it is capable, when per-
ceived, of exciting the mental emotion. By conscious-
ness, we have knowledge of our emotions, and are able
to classify them. One class, distinct from all others,
consists of approbation in the view of right actions, and
disapprobation in the view of wrong actions. These
emotions give us our only notion of the moral quality in
actions. As sugar is sweet, because of the peculiar
sensation which it produces, so actions are right, because
of the peculiar emotion which they excite.

The error of this theory is, that it regards the
moral quality as merely relative to the mind in which
it excites approbation or disapprobation. To determine
whether sugar is sweet, we do not employ a process of
reasoning, or apply chemical tests ; but we judge by
the taste — and from the taste there is no appeal. But
in judging of the moral quality, men reason, and com-
pare the action with some rule of duty, some concep-
tion which their minds entertain of moral obligation in
general, and of the agent*s obligation in particular.
As all men proceed thus, when they carefully investi-
gate the moral quality of actions, we have the common-
sense verdict of all men against the opinion, that the
moral quality is merely relative to the moral taste of
each individual.

If morality is dependent on the moral taste of each
individual, it can have no fixed principles ; and it would
be possible for right and wrong wholly to interchange
places, in systems of morality adapted to different beings,
just as food is delicious to some animals, which is loath-



THEORIES EXAMINED. 35

some to others. It would be possible for a race of crea-
tures to exist, among whom lying, fraud, cruelty, and
blasphemy would be eminent virtues ; and their oppo-
sites, detestable vices. Important differences of opinion
respecting the morality of actions, actually exist among
men; and, according to the theory, each opinion is
equally good. What one man approves, another disap-
proves ; and the judgment of each is correct, because
it conforms to the proper standard, the peculiar taste
of each.

Men are generally agreed that sugar is sweet, and
wormwood bitter ; but if any individual should so differ
from the rest of mankind, as to think otherwise, he
would be left to his peculiarity undisturbed. But if
some individual in human society should think it right
to steal and commit murder, public opinion and the
laws would judge of his conduct, not by his peculiar
moral taste, but by fixed principles which they recog-
nise.

Improvement and deterioration in virtue, are uni-
versally admitted to be possible. The moral taste of
some men becomes greatly refined : they discriminate
between right and wrong with greater promptness and
accuracy ; and learn to correct erroneous judgments
previously formed. On the other hand, some men be-
come so hardened in vice, as to be almost incapable of
moral feeling. But, according to the theory, in all this
progress, whether upward or downward, the standard
of right varies with the state of the mind, and rises or
falls with the ascent or descent of the individual. The
virtuous man does not really become more virtuous;
and the moral judgment which he has changed, was
right before it was changed — and is now equally right,
though it has been reversed. The vicious man, in like
paanner, does not become really more vicious, if his



36 MORAL OBLIGATION.

moral taste lowers with his downward progress; and
when he ceases to disapprove vice, he becomes per-
fectly virtuous.

Theory 3. — The moral quality is an elementary pro-
perty which the mind intuitively perceives in actions,
as the eye sees colors. Being elementary, it cannot be
reduced to other more general properties, and cannot be
defined except by describing the circumstances in which
it may be observed. The color green may be pleasant
and useful to the eyes, but pleasure and utility are not
greenness itself. So the moral quality of a good action
may excite the pleasurable emotion of approbation, and
may otherwise promote happiness, but these efiects do
not constitute the quality itself, or adequately describe
it. If asked what green is, we tell the inquirer where
he may see it, and our labor of instruction is ended. If
asked what moral rectitude is, we refer the inquirer to
the actions which contain the quality. He may there
see it for himself, and be as fully assured of its existence
as he is that the colors exist which his eyes behold ; but
except by direct intuition, the knowledge of it is impos-
sible.

The advocates of this theory difier among themselves,

with respect to the mental faculty by which the moral

quality is immediately perceived. Some suppose that

it is perceived by an intuitive act of reason ; others,

that it is perceived by a peculiar sense which they call

the moral sense. To the latter opinion it has been

objected, that it makes the moral quality relative to the

sense, and therefore involves all the difficulties and

absurdities chargeable on the last theory; but this

objection is not necessarily applicable. Our senses give

us what knowledge we possess of absolute as well as of

relative properties in external objects; and it will not

follow, if we obtain our knowledge of the moral quality

by a sense, that the quality itself is merely relative to

that sense. We shall therefore understand the present



THEORIES EXAMINED. 87

theory to admit fully the absolute existence of the moral
quality.

An objection fatal to the theory is, that it allows no
place for reasoning in the ascertainment of duty. Per-
plexing cases of conscience often cost us laborious
study ; controversies respecting right give occasion for
tedious litigations ; the discussions of courts and legis-
latures to determine the right, call forth the utmost
efforts of the ablest logicians ; and volumes have been
written on law and moral science ; but all this is a use-
less waste of mental energy if the moral quality is
immediately perceived by intuition. Such labor is never
employed to convince ourselves or others, that grass is
green; or to settle a controversy on the question
whether it is green or blue. Moreover, if moral know-
ledge is by intuition, ignorant and savage men possess
it, and may decide moral problems with as much readi-
ness and success as the learned and civilized ; and high
moral cultivation is impossible. A doctrine which
renders improvement in moral science impossible, and
annihilates the science itself, must be rejected.

An opinion bearing some analogy to the theory under
consideration, supposes that intellect discovers to us our
various relations to other beings ; that the moral sense
intuitively perceives the obligations corresponding to
these relations ; and that intellect again comes in to
determine what actions are necessary to fulfil the obli-
gations. But this opinion subverts the essential part
of the theory, by denying that the moral quality is
intuitively perceived in the actions. Under the erring
guidance of reason, we may attempt to fulfil an obligation
by a wrong action, whifti therefore appears to us right ;
and hence the moral quality is not intuitively perceived.
Moreover, if reason should err in the discovery of our
relations, the obligations which we perceive are not

4



38 MORAL OBLIGATION.

those which really exist, and the actions which fulfil them
are not our true duty. Furthermore, the mere know-
ledge of our relation to an individual is not all that is
necessary to determine our obligations to him. Paul
teaches children to obey their parents, not merely
because of the relation subsisting between them, but
because it is "well pleasing unto the Lord."* And he
exhorts servants to obey their masters, not merely
because of the relation, but " that the name of God and
his doctrine be not blasphemed.*'^ We act under ever-
abiding relations to the universe of beings, and from
every action consequences may emanate of boundless
influence. All the relations and consequences must be
in full view, in order to a perfect knowledge of our
obligations. How little, then, of this knowledge is
obtained by mere intuition !

Theory 4. — Virtue tends to universal happiness ; and
the agent is virtuous who intentionally promotes uni-
versal happiness. Between two courses of conduct, we
are under moral obligation always to choose that which
will conduce most to universal good ; and hence general
utility is the foundation of moral obligation.

This theory has much to recommend it. No one will

deny that virtue tends to produce universal happiness ;

or that in general this tendency of an action determines

it to be virtuous. The Scriptures declare that "love is

the fulfilling of the law;**^ and that "God is love."'*

These declarations of inspired truth appear to teach,

that all the moral obligations of men, and all the moral

perfections of God, may be comprehended in the single

word love. The advocates of this theory, beautiful for

its simplicity, maintain that Gpd*s justice is merely a

modification of his benevolence ; and that the punish-



' Col. iii. 20. =» 1 Tim. vi. 1. » Rom. xiii. 10. * I John iv. 8.



THEORIES EXAMINED. 89

ment of the wicked produces a greater amount of happi-
ness in the universe than could exist if they were per-
mitted to escape the penalty due to their crimes.

But the theory is incapable of being proved. It
cannot be demonstrated that happiness is the only ulti-
mate good. In discussing Theory 1, it was shown that the
happiness of an individual is not his only good ; and we
may argue from analogy, that, contemplating the whole
creation collectively as one being, its happiness is not its
only good. Every man who is compelled to choose between
duty and enjoyment, opposes the will of God if he does
not prefer holiness to happiness ; and if all creation
could make the choice whether to be holy or happy, we
cannot doubt which choice would accord with the will
of God. God himself is perfectly holy, and perfectly
happy ; but it is his holiness rather than his happiness
which renders him the proper object of adoration. The
worshipping hosts of heaven cry "Holy! holy! holy!
is the Lord !**^ but it nowhere appears that they con-
template his happiness as his supreme excellence. Since
the happiness of God, so far from being the only good
of his nature, is not even its chief good, we may infer
that he did not create the universe chiefly for the pro-
duction of happiness. His love has for its object the
well-being rather than the happiness of his creatures;
and of like character is the love to which all the moral
obligations of men may be reduced. The ultimate good
for which God created the world, and to which all virtue
tends, is the glory of God, rather than the greatest
amount of happiness.^



^Isa. vi. 3.

'It has been objected to this theory, that if actions were right
because productive of the greatest amount of happiness, the con-
ception of right would, in our minds, be attended by the concep-



40 MORAL OBLIGATION.

Theory 6. — ^Virtue tends to produce universal good-
will. Our actions are right, when, in performing them,
we have the sympathy and approbation of mankind.
We may, in any case, safely determine our course of
conduct, by inquiring what an impartial spectator would
approve.

In our examination of Theory 2, it was shown that
the moral sentiment in the breast of an individual, is
not the foundation of his moral obligation ; much less
can it be the foundation of obligation to other men.
Hence, the moral sentiment of all men cannot be the
foundation of all men's moral obligation. Nor is it
even an infallible rule by which to judge of any man's
duty. The general approbation of mankind is a better
rule than an individual's own moral feelings ; but there
may be occasions when a man of stern virtue is obliged



tion of the greatest amount of happiness as its invariable antece-
dent : and this, it is alleged, is not true, since we do not teach men
what actions are right, by showing that they will produce the
greatest amount of happiness ; and therefore the ideas of the two
things have not such a connection in the mind that one of them
must be an invariable antecedent of the other. But this objection
is invalid. It erroneously assumes that the relation between
objects of thought, and the relation between our conceptions of
ihem, must be identical. The fallacy of this assumption may he
easily illustrated. It may be true that a body is heavy because it
contains lead ; but we may conceive that it is heavy, and may con-
vince another that it is heavy, without directing any thought to the
presence of the metal.

Other objections to the theory have been founded on the mis-
taken supposition that its advocates suppose right and productive-
ness of happiness to be co-extensive qualities. But the moral
quality resides in the intention ; and the production of happiness
cannot be virtuous unless it be intentional. Productiveness of
happiness is considered the genus, virtue the species, and interir
tian the specific difference.



THEORIES EXAMINED. 41

to outbrave the censure of the world, and heroically do
what is right, in the face of public reprobation.

The rule which the theory proposes, is impracticable.
We have no means of ascertaining the moral sentiments
of mankind, on every question of duty which calls for
decision. These moral sentiments are not uniform ;
and how to find, among them all, the proper rule of con-
duct, is an insuperable difficulty. We are advised to
imagine what an impartial spectator would approve;
but the imagination, after all, is our own, and the rule
which it gives, proceeds from our own mind.

Theory 6. — The universal good to which virtue
tends, is impersonal, and consists in the fitness of things,
or universal order. The idea of it is not obtained by
observation or reflection, but by intuitive reason, like
the ideas of space and time ; and, like these, is not kept
in the mind by memory, but arises spontaneously when-
ever we have need of it. It mingles with our mental
operations, like the ideas of space and time, even when
we have no thought of its presence ; and it is a present
rule of moral judgment to all men, when a moral judg-
ment needs to be formed. Moral good is the tendency
of actions to promote this universal good; and, in
judging of their tendency, reason operates in processes
of deduction or induction ; but it conceives of the ulti-
mate good itself by immediate intuition.

Universal order includes geometrical order, which
has respect to space ; historical order, which has respect
to time ; philosophical order, which has respect to the
relation of cause and effect ; and how many other kinds
of order, I know not. Now, if every act which does
not tend to universal order, is morally wrong, the agent
is criminal, whose movements are ungra^ful, untimely,
or not wisely directed to the accomplishment of his pur-
pose. But every man distinguishes ungracefulness,
unseasonableness, and unskilfulness from criminality.

4*



42 MORAL OBLIGATION.

How do men's minds make the distinction ? If intai-
tive reason immediately separates the moral department
from every other department of universal order, it
must have an immediate perception of the moral quality
which distinguishes this department ; and, then, all the
difficulties attend the theory, which were brought to
view in our examination of Theory 3. But if we attri-
bute our discrimination to anything other than intuitive
reason, we abandon the present theory.

The rule by which it is affirmed that we form our
moral judgments, is one which the mind can at best
conceive with great dimness and indefiniteness ; and it
is, therefore, not such a rule as men need for their
direction in the duties of life. The ideas of time and
space are attended with no obscurity or indefiniteness ;
and no man asks what they are — but what is universal
order ? Of space and time, the child and the savage
have as clear conceptions as the philosopher; but a
clear conception of universal order — who possesses it ?
If intuitive reason pours a bright light wherever else
it shines, but sheds on virtue's path only a dim and
uncertain ray, it cannot be that immortal and respon-
sible man is left to its guidance.

SECTION II. THE TRUE DOCTRINE.

Of the six theories which we have examined, the
first three suppose that each individual mind has, within
itself, all the means necessary for solving the problem
that has engaged our attention. The last three sup-
pose it necessary to look beyond the individual mind,
and contemplate the subject in its relation to the uni-
verse. The fourth theory corresponds to the first, in
making happiness the end of virtue ; but it substitutes
the happiness of the universe for that of the individual.
The fifth corresponds to the second, in making moral



THE TRUE DOCTRINE. 43

approbation the end of right actions ; but for the moral
approbation of the agent himself, it substitutes that of
mankind. The sixth corresponds to the third, in sup-
posing the end to be an impersonal good intuitively
perceived : but the third finds that good in each right
action ; and the sixth finds it in a general end to which
all right actions have direction and tendency.

Our examination of these theories, in each one of
which are some elements of truth, suggests the follow-
ing observations: —

I. Virtue tends to produce happiness, both individual
and universal ; it deserves the approbation of the agent
himself, and of all other persons ; and it is itself a good,
and tends to universal good. All these propositions are
elements of truth, which are found in the several
theories, and which ought to be preserved as parts of
the true ethical system.

II. The means of solving the moral problem cannot
be found in any single human mind. In attempting to
find it there, the first three theories fail. Each human
mind furnishes data sufficient to demonstrate that moral
distinction and moral obligation exist ; but not sufficient
for a thorough knowledge of their nature and founda-
tion. When philosophy asks for a solution of the diffi-
cult problem, each mind answers, It is not in me ; and
points outward to some external source of information.

III. The created universe does not furnish data suffi-
cient for a complete solution of the problem. It con-
tains abundant proof everywhere that moral govern-
ment exists ; but it can exhibit that government only
partially and obscurely. When philosophy calls for the
solution which it seeks, every mind answers, It is not in
mCy and points outward ; and, therefore, by the united
testimony of all created minds, it is external to all :
and where then can it be found ?



44 MORAL OBLiaATION.

One Being, too often overlooked by men, even by
philosophic men, exists in the universe, to whom moral
distinction and moral obligation are so related, that
they are inexplicable, if the relation is unheeded.
Philosophy travels through all created existence, and
seeks in vain for a solution of her problem. When
exhausted and despairing, religion meets her, and leads
her to the throne of God, the moral governor of the
universe, and the source and standard of moral perfec-
tion. Here philosophy, transformed into intelligent
piety, learns the solution which she has so anxiously
and laboriously sought. Here, on the mount of God,
elevated above the mists and darkness in which she
wandered, she sees the mysterious subject in the clear
light of day.

Even in physics, and much more in morals, philo-
sophy needs the aid of religion. The student of nature
finds orders of sequence in the changes which he ob-
serves; and, having classified these, calls the several
classes laws of nature ; but on what these laws are
founded, or who enacted them, his dim-sighted philo-
sophy does not discover. To nature, and the laws of
nature, he attributes the generation and growth of
animals and plants, and all the wonderful phenomena
which pass under his view. But when religion has
poured her bright light on his intellectual vision, he
perceives that nature is God operating, and the laws of
nature are the modes in which he works. So the moral
philosopher, who leaves God out of his system, ascribes
moral distinction and moral obligation to nature, or
some other abstraction, such as fitness or universal
order; but when he admits God into his system, his
abstractions are transformed into a living agent and
actual operations.

The fourth theory supposes the end of virtue to be



THB TRUE DOOTRINB. 45

the happiness of the universe. This theory is incom-
plete without God. In God more happiness exists than
in all the universe besides ; and if virtue tends to uni-
versal happiness, its direction must be toward God.
That it should seek to give pleasure to men, and be
indifferent whether God is pleased or offended, cannot
be supposed. There is a sense in which the happiness
of God is incapable of increase or diminution ; but
there is also a sense in which it is declared, that,
because of men's great wickedness, << It repented the
Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved
him at his heart. "^ We may be justified in affirming,
that, if iniquity were to prevail universally, God would
be as miserable as he is now happy. It must be, there-
fore, that virtue seeks to please God. Moreover, this
theory needs an omniscient being to decide for us what
actions tend to promote universal happiness.

The fifth theory, also, is incomplete without God.
It needs an impartial spectator to judge for each man
what is right, or worthy of approbation ; and no im-
partial spectator, of infallible judgment, can be found,
except God. . He alone has the perfect knowledge of
good and evil ; and philosophy aspires to be as God, if
she claims the power to discriminate between them,
without respect to his judgment.

The sixth theory supposes the end of virtue to be
universal order. Universal order must include order in
things created and uncreated. Nothing is uncreated
but God: yet he is more than all created things to-
gether. Universal order must, therefore, include the
perfections of God, and the relation of all created
things to him, as well as their relation to each other.

* Gen. vi. 6.



46 MORAL OBLIGATION.

It is hence manifest, that the sixth theory is wholly in-
complete without God.

IV. Moral obligation is founded on the will of Grod.
To understand this subject clearly, we must carefully
distinguish between the sense of moral obligation in
our minds, and the objective reality which exists inde-
pendently of our mental conceptions and feelings.
The moral government of God is an objective reality,
which includes all that we know of moral obligation as
an objective reality; and the moral government of God
is founded on his will. His right to govern is founded
on his nature ; but the government itself is founded on
his will.

God exercises a natural government over the mate-
rial world. This government is founded on his will, so
that, at his will, all the changes of nature take place.
It would be a manifest absurdity to attribute the natural
government of the world to fitness or order. Equally
absurd is it, and even more absurd, to ascribe moral
government, or the moral obligation which it includes, to
any such abstraction. Moral government is directed to
moral beings, and, being confined to moral beings at its
termination, it would be unfit that it should proceed
from any other than a moral being. It operates on the
will of the governed, and proceeds from the will of the
governor.

In acting as the moral governor of the world, God is
not subject to any superior power. He owes no subjec-
tion to any being, real or imaginary, but does whatever
he pleases, and none can stay his hand, or say to him,
What doest thou ? He is subject to no such abstrac-
tion as necessity, fitness, or order. If these terms
denote anything not existing in his nature, they can
have no existence that is not dependent on his will, and
therefore subject to him.



THE TRUE DOCTRINE. 47

The distinction between right and wrong is founded
on the nature of God. We find moral obligation ope-
rating on the will of man ; and here, taking hold of
the clue, we follow it up to the will of God ; and here
the clue stops: but we trace moral quality further.
Were moral distinction founded on his will, his own per-
fections would be without moral excellence, since these
do not originate in his will ; and were it so, cruelty,
fraud, falsehood, and hatred of God would have been
virtues, if God had so willed ; and to say that God has
a right to govern the world, would be to use language
without meaning ; for there could be no right or wrong
antecedent to the will of the governor.

We cannot trace moral distinction to anything beyond
the nature of God. When, in tracing the succession
of cause and effect, we have gone backward along the
line, until we have arrived at God, the first cause, our
minds are prone to continue the search, and find a cause
for God's existence. Indulging this propensity, we
sometimes say that God is self-existent. If this means
that his existence is the cause of itself, it must equally
mean that his existence is the effect of itself: but the
idea that God's existence is an effect of anything, the
mind rejects. We sometimes say that he exists neces-'
sarily ; but what do these words signify ? God's eternal
existence has always rendered his non-existence impos-
sible ; for it is impossible for anything to be and not to
be at the same time. But if our philosophy looks be-
hind the existence of God to discover some cause neces-
sitating his being, it searches for that which cannot be
found. As natural philosophy traces the line of cause
and effect to the existence of God, so moral philosophy
traces moral quality to the perfections of God; and
here both are compelled to stop.



48 MOBAL QUALITY.

An their origin in God, we contemplate moral quality
as prior to moral obligation ; but, at their termination
in man, the order is reversed. Moral obligation directly
binds his will to the will of God; and the right or
wrong of his actions follows, being determined by his
obligations.



CHAPTER III.
MORAL FACULTY.



SECTION I. ITS EXISTENCE.

That peculiarity in the constitution of our minds,
by which they are qualified to exercise moral approba-
tion and disapprobation, and to feel moral obligation, is
called the Moral Faculty, or Conscience. The exist-
ence of the faculty is demonstrated by our conscious-
ness of its operations ; for whatever the mind does, it
must have a faculty for doing. Whether these opera-
tions proceed from a single faculty, distinct from all
other faculties, is a separate question : but some faculty
for producing these effects must be supposed.

The question whether the mental phenomena attri-
buted to conscience are to be referred to a distinct
faculty of the mind, belongs properly to mental science ;
but its intimate connection with the subject of morals
renders a notice of it proper in this place.

In the use of the term Faculty the student should be
on his guard, lest he conceive the mind, like the body,
divisible into parts. We distinguish between the eye
and the faculty of seeing. The eye, as a corporeal
organ, is a part of the human body ; but the faculty
of seeing, as appertaining to the mind, is not a part of
the mind; for it is a doctrine of mental philosophy
that the mind is one and indivisible. In seeing, hear-
ing, smelling, &c., different organs of the body are em-
ployed : and we are prone to conceive of the mind as
6 (49)



50 MORAL FACULTY.

organized in a manner somewhat similar, and possess-
ing a distinct organ for each distinct class of its opera-
tions. Such conceptions are inconsistent with the
immateriality and indivisibility of the mind. A faculty
of the mind is merely its capability of acting, or being
affected, in some particular manner ; and the distinction
between its faculties arises from the classification of its
operations and affections. If the classes are multiplied
the faculties are multiplied; and vice versa. Hence
the inquiry, whether conscience is a single faculty, or
a combination of faculties, may be resolved into this :
May all the operations and affections of mind which are
attributed to conscience be arranged in one class of the
mental phenomena ? In moral philosophy the question
is of little importance ; and in mental science it is a
question of mere classification.

Conscience has been defined " that faculty by which
we discern the moral quality of actions, and by which
we are capable of certain affections in respect to this
quality."^ The discernment of the quality is here dis-
tinguished from the affection subsequently arising in the
mind : and if the two should be referred to distinct facul-
ties, the facts will not be thereby altered, or their bear-
ing on moral science changed. The view of a landscape
is attended with pleasure ; but we refer the seeing of
the objects to one faculty, and the emotion of pleasure
which accompanies it to another. If we, in like manner,
refer the discernment of the moral quality to one
faculty, and the affection which subsequently arises, to
another, both the faculties are included in the import
of the term conscience, as this term is commonly em-
ployed by writers on the subject.

But some writers have maintained that the term con-

^ Way land.



ITS EXI8TENCB. 51

science ought to be restricted to those mental discern-
ments and affections which respect our own actions only,
and in this way distinguish between conscience and the
moral faculty, assigning to the latter the cognisance of
all moral actions, by whomsoever performed. Perhaps
the etymology of the term conscience justifies this dis-
tinction; but writers have not carefully observed it.
The faculty of discerning the moral quality in our own
actions, and the faculty of discerning the moral quality
in the actions of others, though language may give
different names, do not require to be enumerated in
science as two distinct faculties.

Some objections to the doctrine that men are en-
dowed with a moral faculty need to be considered.

Objection 1. — Men's notions of right and wrong are
the result of education, and differ according to the
opinions and usages of the nation to which they belong.
In one country parents destroy their children without
remorse, or offer them in sacrifice to the gods with re-
ligious devotion. In another, such practices shock all
the moral feelings. In one country, a son, in the ex-
ercise of filial piety, lights the funeral pile which is to
consume his widowed mother with the lifeless corpse of
her deceased husband. In another, the same son would
have spent his own life in arduous toil to sustain and
comfort his mother in her bereavement. If conscience
were a natural endowment, the moral sense would every-
where take the same view of actions, as the eyes of men
everywhere give like perceptions of external objects.

It is not a sufficient answer to this objection, that the
moral quality of actions resides in the intention, and
that parents who destroy their children, and children
who destroy their parents, perform these acts with good
intentions. The father may kill his child to save it from
the evil to come ; and the mother may throw her infant
into the Ganges, or burn it to Moloch, that an offended



52 MORAL FACITLTY.

deity may be propitiated, and calamity averted. A son
may assist to destroy his mother, that the sorrows of
her widowhood may be terminated, and the fidelity and
strength of her conjugal love honorably demonstrated.
But these considerations respect the intention with
which the deeds are done ; and therefore do not contain
the moral quality proper to the acts themselves. Why
are the deeds themselves viewed so dififerently, that the
moral sense in one country discovers in them a moral
quality of blackest atrocity ; and, in another, perceives
in them nothing dark or repulsive ?

Nor is it an answer to the objection, that the father
who destroys his child imagines that the life of his
infant is as much at his disposal as the life of the lamb
which he kills for food or sacrifice. How comes it that
he so mistakes his rights and obligations, if conscience
within is the voice of God, teaching men their duty ?

The true answer to the objection will be found in its
inapplicability to the subject. Its argument may correct
a mistake concerning the ofiice of conscience, but does
not disprove its existence. Conscience does not, imme-
diately on discovering the relation of a father to his
child, pronounce, as with the voice of God, all the
duties arising from this relation. It does not, imme-
diately on contemplating an action, perceive its moral
quality, without any labor of investigation, as the eye
distinguishes between red and green. Conscience is
not infallible. Its decisions, like those of the intellect,
may be erroneous ; but the existence of neither con-
science nor intellect can be disproved by its liability to
err.

The objection proves diversity, not absence of con-
science. If parents destroy children, and children
their parents, with good intent, their misguided con-
sciences approve the good intent, and show that, how-



ITS EXISTENCE. 53

ever blindly and wickedly they act, they are still moral
beings. The objection cannot prevail, unless all sense
of moral distinction were absent from intelligent human
minds.

Corruption of morals in heathen countries, accompa-
nies corruption of religion. When men forsook the
worship of the true God, they did not lose all sense of
religious obligation, but multiplied for themselves
abominable deities, whom they worshipped with weari-
some labor and costly sacrifices. Religious obligation
is the highest species of moral obligation; and the
acknowledgment of it, by the most corrupt and degraded
of our race, demonstrates that man, however low he
may fall, cannot cease to be a moral being.

Another consideration on this subject ought not to
be overlooked. Though the decisions of the human
conscience vary much in different circumstances, there
is a limit to the variety. In what age or nation have
acts of disinterested benevolence been disapproved ?
Where has it ever been thought right, to requite kind-
ness with intentional unkindness ? However widely the
moral sentiments of men may diverge, there appears to
be a radical principle in which they all agree, and from
which they proceed. The corruption of moral senti-
ment is among the evidences of our depravity, and
forms a part of it. It exhibits the law written in the
heart — defaced and obscured in various degrees. But,
however defaced, it still exists in every heart; and,
however obscured, some portions of it are still legible.

Objection 2.— If an innate faculty of the mind de-
termines the obligations arising from our various rela-
tions, and gives an original law for the government of
our actions, there must be in the mind an innate know-
ledge of all our relations through life. This no one will
maintain.
5*



54 MORAL FACULTY.

The moral faculty is natural to man, and belongs
to the original constitution of the mind ; but, like other
faculties with which it may be compared, it does not
come into exercise till a proper occasion for its exercise
occurs. Memory is a natural and original faculty of
the mind ; but it does not act until we have something
to remember. The mind has a faculty for comparing
things with each other ; but it does not compare things
before it has knowledge of them. We are born with a
faculty for reasoning; but we do not bring iAo the
world minds already filled with syllogisms, and expert
in all the deductions of logic. Nature gives us eyes ;
but they remain useless till light falls upon them. The
light finds the eye already adapted to receive and
transmit it, and the mind already adapted to receive
the visual sensation. To this innate susceptibility we
are indebted for all the knowledge obtained by means
of vision. The knowledge is not innate, but the faculty
of obtaining it belongs to the natural constitution of
man. So the moral faculty is natural to man, though
its decisions and impulses do not date back earlier than
the occasions which draw them forth.

When the Scripture speaks of " the law written in
the heart,' '^ it uses figurative language, which does not,
by fair interpretation, denote a perfect code of law
adapted to all the possible relations of life ; much less
does it a£Srm the existence of such a code at the time
of birth. It refers to men in active life, " their con-
science bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another ;" and it
aflSrms that they are so far "a law unto themselves"
as to be "without excuse."^



* Rom. ii. 15. * Rom. i. 20.



ITS OFFICES. 66

Objection 3. — ^A moral faculty, if it exists, is after
all useless. If men choose to disobey its law and endure
the remorse which it inflicts, it has no means of enforc-
ing its authority.

With equal plausibility it may be argued, that the
faculty of seeing is useless. If men choose to shut
their eyes and endure all the consequences of wilful
blindness, the seeing faculty has no means of over-
coming their obstinacy. Eyes are not useless to man-
kind, because some men may refuse to see with theirs;
and conscience is not useless to mankind, because some
men foolishly and wickedly disregard its admonitions.

SECTION II. ITS OFFICES.

In taking cognisance of "human actions, the mind
discerns their moral quality, and feels certain affections
with respect to it. If the discernment and the feeling
belong to the same faculty, they must be referred to
distinct offices of that faculty, A further division of
these offices may be made with reference to a diversity
in the moral affections, arising from a diversity of the
relations and circumstances in which the moral quality
may be contemplated.

1. Conscience discerns the moral quality of actions.

Because of its discerning office, conscience has been
called the moral sense ; but, though some analogy may
be traced between its operations and those of the senses
which give us the knowledge of material objects, it
differs from them essentially in the mode of operation.
The senses give their testimony directly, and produce
uniformity of belief among mankind with respect to
the nature and properties of external objects. The
discriminations of conscience are judgments formed by
comparing actions with some assumed standard of right.
This is at least commonly true with respect to the moral



56 MORAL FACULTY.

discernments of adult men. The standard of right,
according to which they judge, differs in different ages
and countries, and with different individuals of the same
age and country; and hence arises that diversity in
the decisions of conscience, which some have used as
an argument against the existence of the faculty.

In classifying mental phenomena, and referring them
to different faculties of the mind, it is a question of
diflSculty, whether the discriminations of conscience are
not purely intellectual. The same intellect which studies
mathematics studies moral philosophy ; and it is difficult
to say why all the deductions and conclusions of the
latter science might not be successfully made by a mind
totally incapable of moral emotion, if supplied with the
proper data for its reasonings. Every one is conscious
that he exercises his intellect, often with intense solici-
tude, in his endeavors to find out what is right and what
is wrong. If all this mental labor, with the decision in
which it terminates, must be referred to some one men-
tal faculty, it is difficult to determine whether it belongs
to the domain of conscience or that of reason. This
difficulty is best disposed of by denying that the facul-
ties of the mind have separate dominions, like the
sovereigns of earth exercising authority within their
respective boundaries.

2. Conscience impels us to observe the moral quality,
and to search for it when not at once discovered.

Some qualities of material objects awaken but little
attention, because they produce but little sensation,
either pleasurable or painful ; but those qualities which
give much pleasure or pain do not pass unnoticed. So
human actions may have properties which our minds
suffer to pass unobserved; but their natural constitution
is such that we cannot be indifferent to the moral
quality. To be indifferent to it, is to be past feeling,



ITS OFFICES. 57

or to have the conscience seared as with a hot iron ;
and it is therefore an unnatural state of the mind. Con-
science, in its proper exercise, not merely sits in judg-
ment on cases officially submitted, but brings the cases
to trial, and presses their investigation.

The impulsion to search for the moral quality when
not at once discoverable, though less operative with
respect to the actions of others, is strongly felt in the
self-examinations of the conscientious man. He searches
his actions thoroughly ; and when not successful to the
satisfaction of the internal impulse by which he is moved,
he prays, <' Search me, God, and know my heart;
try me, and know my thoughts. And see if there be
any wicked way in me.*'^ If some persons are less
scrutinizing in their self-examination, it is because they
give less heed to the impulses of conscience, or have
weakened these impulses by sinful habits.

3. Conscience approves or disapproves actions
according to the moral quality discovered in them, and
reviews our own actions with self-approbation or remorse
according as they are judged to be right or wrong.

We are all conscious of feeling approbation or dis-
approbation in contemplating moral actions. No other
testimony to the existence of these emotions can be
given, than that of consciousness; and no other is
needed. We have no better proof that we think, that
we remember, that we reason. On the same testimony
we learn the character of these emotions, and become
assured that they differ from all other affections of the
mind. All attempts to demonstrate by processes of
reasoning, that they are not modifications of some other
mental affection, amount to nothing. Either the truth
does not come out legitimately in our conclusion, or it



* Ps. ozxxix. 23-4.



68 MORAL FACULTY.

must be assumed in the premises ; for the conclusion
cannot contain more than is contained in the premises.
It is easy to deceive ourselves in such matters, by
assuming unwittingly the thing to be proved. But con-
sciousness furnishes the proof which is needed on this
point ; for every one knows that the feeling of remorse
which arises in reviewing his own guilty deeds, differs
from every other pain of which his nature is suscepti-
ble.

We may class approbation among our pleasurable,
and disapprobation among our painful emotions. The
pleasure or pain which attends them in their feebler
exercises may pass unnoticed, but we become sensible
of it when the emotions are called forth in their full
strength. So we are distinctly sensible of the pleasure
which the emotion of beauty produces when we contem-
plate an enchanting landscape, a well-arranged and
richly-furnished flower-garden, or a painting of extra-
ordinary merit; but we view the ordinary scenes of
nature with no other than the unobserved pleasure of
mental tranquillity. We pronounce virtue lovely, and
dwell on the contemplation of it with delight. We
pronounce vice odious, and turn away from it with ab-
horrence. If we are shut up with vice in constant view,
either our consciences lose their sensibility, or our pain
becomes intense. Lot, in Sodom, was vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked ; and a pious mother
has often been made completely wretched by the wicked-
ness of a profligate son whom she cannot forget. Such
is the tendency of sin to produce pain in its virtuous
beholder, that the ever-blessed God is represented as
unable to look upon it. « Thou art of purer eyes than
to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity.'' ^ He

1 Hab. i. 13.



ITS OFFICES. 59

is compelled to turn away from beholding evil, lest the
view of it should disturb the perfect happiness which
he enjoys. What an awful prospect is before the
workers of iniquity ! To be shut up for ever with wicked
men and devils, is of itself enough, while immortal con-
science lives, in full strength, to render existence in-
tolerable.

Not only do the moral emotions give pleasure or pain
to him who feels them, but they incline him to give
pleasure or pain to the agent whose actions awaken
them. • In approving, we feel that he deserves reward ;
in disapproving, we feel that he deserves punishment.
To some extent, this sense of his desert involves a
desire to reward or punish him ourselves. Restrained,
by regard to higher authority, from taking vengeance
in our own hands, we approve the government which
inflicts pain on the agent of wickedness ; and, in this
way, conscience calls for a moral government in the
universe, to render t<J every man according to his deeds.

Let us observe that the reward or punishment which
conscience calls for, affects the agent, not his actions.
We speak of approving or disapproving an action, but
the object of the approbation or disapprobation is in
reality the agent. To him we award the praise or
blame due to his action, and on him we wish the reward
or punishment to fall. This precisely accords with the
doctrine before advanced, that the moral quality of an
action resides in the intention of the agent.

The operation of conscience in the individual mem-
bers of human society constitutes, by its united influ-
ence, the moral sentiment of the community. Though
wickedness has overspread the earth,- and introduced
innumerable woes, God has been pleased, by the moral
faculty in the human breast, to restrain its power, and
render human life and human society tolerable. Public



60 MORAL FACULTY.

sentiment frowns on vice when interfering with public
happiness, and the agent of wickedness feels that man-
kind are against him. Public disapprobation of crime
so far includes a desire to punish it, that men have
sometimes, under its sudden impulse, taken vengeance
into their own hands, without waiting for the slow pro-
cess of law. In the ordinary course of procedure, it is
left for law to punish the criminal ; and so far,, law is
the conscience of the community : but public moral sen-
timent condemns innumerable acts which the laws of
men do not punish, and, in so doing, calls for a moral
government of perfect administration.

The pleasure which arises from moral approbation
attends the exercises of piety. The good man approves
the character of God, as displayed in his works, and de-
lights in contemplating it. This holy pleasure which
he enjoys on earth is a foretaste of the higher pleasure
which awaits him in heaven. There the character of
God will be more abundantly unfolded to his view, and
the pleasure of approbation will ripen into full bliss in
the perfect knowledge of God.

Our moral emotions find occasion for strong exercise
in the review of our own actions. Conscience impels
us to this review, and then rewards or punishes us with
self-approbation or remorse. The virtuous man, in his
consciousness of innocence, feels peace within. If slan-
dered and condemned by others, the testimony of his
own conscience sustains him, and he is satisfied and
happy in himself. The guilty man, on the other hand,
feels a torment within which nothing can efiectually
assuage. The world may smile on him, and his cup of
sensual pleasure may be filled with delights, but remorse
tortures his bosom and preys on his spirits. The secret
anguish attends him everywhere, and is a foretaste of
the misery that awaits him in the future world.



ITS OFFIOBS. 61

Conscience not only inflicts its own tortures on the
guilty man, but it produces a dread of punishment from
others. He feels that mankind are against him, and
that God is against him. The workings of conscience
within may be unheeded, or they may be in part sup-
pressed by vicious passions, or prevented by obduracy
or ignorance — but the sense of deserving punishment,
he cannot wholly eradicate from his breast. Hence his
fears. Guilt makes him a coward. However bold he
may have been in the commission of crime, he becomes
tame and cowardly in the apprehension of punishment.
He suspects danger from every quarter, and starts with
terror when no evil approaches. « The wicked flee
when no man pursueth.'' ^

Moreover, conscience often becomes an informant
against the transgressor. He has a secret in his breast
which he is unable to keep. He cannot act as if it
were not there. It requires incessant vigilance to
guard every word and action, so that nothing shall fur-
nish a clue to its detection. His timidity induces him
to suspect that he is suspected, and he is therefore un-
able to act the part of conscious innocence. In addition
to all this, the sense of his just desert tends to make
him submissive ; and so far prepares him for confession,
that his vigilance is abated, and, at an unguarded mo-
ment, the secret is disclosed.

4. Conscience impels us to do what is right, and
avoid what is wrong.

This impulse of conscience is prospective, and finds
a place in the deliberations of the mind previous to
action. Frequently it comes into conflict with strong
passion or vehement desire, and then the power of the
impulse is manifested in its highest degree. The

* Prov. xxviii. 1.
6



62 MORAL PAOULTY.

struggle which ensues is often as much as the mind can
bear. But when a criminal deed has been resolved on,
conscience may be hushed into silence until the deed
has been consummated. It seems to sleep — but it
sleeps to awake again, and punish the slighting of its
admonitions with pangs of remorse. In this procedure
it acts as God's vicegerent in the human breast. The
wicked may learn from its mode of action that, though
God may leave them at quiet when they have rejected
his authority, and fixed their hearts on a course of
transgression, yet he will at length arise against them
in judgment and terrible retribution. "These things
hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thyself, but I will
reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver."^

This prospective impulse of conscience directs the
life of the good man. Paul claimed to have acted
under its influence when he said, " I have lived in all
good conscience until this day."^ The conduct which
conscience previously commands, it subsequently ap-
proves; and the first ministers of Christianity must
have obeyed its prospective impulse, when they could
afterwards say, " Our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the world." ^ Neither
the teachings of revelation, nor the influences of the
Holy Spirit, dispense with the exercises of the human
conscience ; but, on the contrary, illuminate its judg-
ments and quicken its impulses.

We are so constituted that a large part of our plea-

1 Ps. 1. 21-22. » Acts xxiii. 1. > 2 Cor. i. 12.



ITS OFFICES. 63

sure is experienced in action. Even the bliss of
heaven does not consist in mere passive enjoyment, but
its inhabitants serve God day and night.^ Hence, the
impulse of conscience to the performance of good ac-
tions greatly promotes human happiness. It is an
inlet of pleasure to the soul during our abode on earth,
and through it a. stream of delight will flow into our
beatified spirits for ever. Both on earth and in heaven
it is true, that in keeping God's commandments there is
great reward ;^ and our mental constitution exhibits an
adaptedness, not only to the service which religion
requires, but also to the felicity which religion promises.

The investigations of this section assist us to answer
such questions as the following :

Question I. — For what purpose is it that, in our
mental constitution, moral feeling is superadded to
moral discernment?

Feeling is necessary to induce action. We may
know the way which leads to an object, but, if we feel
no desire to reach that object, we remain stationary, or
move in some other direction. The clearest percep-
tions of right and wrong, if unaccompanied with feeling,
would leave us inactive. It was necessary for the well-
being of all who may be affected by our conduct, that
we should be under the influence of some power impel-
ling us to virtuous actions ; and that power is found in
the moral feelings with which we are endowed.

But "Why is a specific feeling necessary for this pur-
pose ? Could not man have been placed under a system
of government, with rewards and punishments set
before him, and be left to the hope of reward and fear
of punishment as motives to obedience?^ If these

*Rev. vii. 15. 'Ps. xix. 11.

' Daley's definition of virtue appears to admit not only the pos-



64 MORAL FACULTY.

feelings of hope and fear may secure obedience, what
need is there that feelings of a distinct class denomi-
nated moral, should be superadded? This question
may be answered by considering other cases in some
respects analogous. We are constituted with a love of
life, which might lead us to take the food necessary to
preserve life. Why is the feeling of hunger super-
added ? Again, the love of life might lead us to flee
from threatening dangers. Why is the emotion of fear
superadded ? In these cases, specific feelings, hunger
and fear, are necessary to secure the desired effect with
promptness and certainty. If men were left to take
food, when the slow deductions of reason, acting under
the influence of love of lif6, call them to the necessary
work, the preservation of life would be left in great in-
security. If men were left to reason and the love of
life to guardHhem from danger, without the emotion of
fear, the watchfulness, caution, and activity now dis-
played in avoiding or escaping danger, would be, to a
great extent, unknown. In like manner, the fear or
hope of a distant future retribution, is not a suflScient
impulse to virtuous action. Reason and the love of
happiness would operate too slowly. We need an im-
pulse, which, like that of hunger and fear, operates
promptly and directly to its specific object; and this
impulse is provided in the moral feelings with which we
are endowed.

A further reason for the superaddition of moral feel-
ing appears to be, to render man a moral and account-
able creature. It must, I think, be admitted, that there
is no natural impossibility to prevent the government

sibility, but the actual existence, of such a constitution of the
human mind. ** Virtue is the doing good to mankind in obedience
to the will of God, and for the sake of everlasting happiness.''



ITS OFFICES. 65

of God from being extended over a race of rational
beings, capable of hope and fear, but not endowed with
moral feeling ; yet it does not appear that this would
be moral government. As far as we know, the posses-
sion of moral feeling is a test by which it may be
determined whether a creature was designed for moral
government. It is this, which, above everything else,
distinguishes man from brutes.

Question II. — Do moral discernment and moral
feeling always accompany each other ?

In the progress of depravity, men sometimes become
past feeling, having their consciences seared as with a
hot iron ; but they are not thereby rendered ignorant
of the distinction between right and wrong. The
moral discernment remains, after the moral feelings are
extinct, or blunted. On the other hand, it would be
difficult to show that onr first moral feelings are
attended with a distinct conception of right and wrong.
Infants, and the young of irrational animals, manifest
the emotioiTof fear, before they have had experience
of danger. As this instinctive emotion operates, with-
out any distinct conception of danger, so it may be that
our first moral feeling may be unattended with any dis-
tinct conception of right and wrong. Allowing the
cases which have been mentioned to be exceptions, it
will still remain the general rule, that moral discern-
ment and moral feeling accompany each other. Our
consciousness testifies that we approve what we per-
ceive to be right, and perceive to be right what we
approve.

Question III. — What is the relation between moral
discernment and moral feeling ?

Do we approve an action because we perceive it to
be right ; or do we know that it' is right, because it has
produced in us the feeling of approbation ?
6*



66 MORAL FACULTY.

Our feelings are often controlled by our judgment.
The first view of an object may excite fear; and a sub-
sequent examination of that object may entirely banish
our fear, by convincing us that we have no reason to
apprehend danger. In like manner, a child may feel
strong emotions of disapprobation on seeing the picture
of Abraham offering up Isaac ; but when he learns that
this act was performed in obedience to Divine com-
mand, and that it is right to obey God, this feeling is
changed into approbation. The last feeling is clearly
an effect of a moral judgment preceding ; but we can-
not safely affirm the same concerning the feeling of dis-
approbation with which the action was first regarded.
In one case, we see the standard for trying the action
set up, the action compared with it, and the judgment
brought in, before the moral feeling exists ; but we do
not see these in the other case. Before all instruction
the mind appears to be a law to itself ; and we have
reason to conclude, that a feeling of approbation im-
mediately arises on seeing a benevolent action, and a
feeling of disapprobation on seeing an intention of
doing harm. By this law of moral instinct, the moral
character of actions is at first tried ; and we learn to
consider them as right or wrong. From this our first
knowledge of the meaning of the terms right and
wrong^ is derived. In this case, therefore, the moral
feeling is first in order, and not consequent on any pre-
ceding moral judgment.

In the view we have taken of this subject, it may be
remarked, that the instinctive moral feelings recognise
only the elementary principles of morality. This
accounts for the general agreement of nations in the
fundamental principles of morals, while they differ so
widely in their judgnJent as to the moral character of
many actions. While some support their aged parents.



ITS AUTHORITY. 67

and others think it right to put them to death, they all
regard benevolent actions with approbation. In these
moral feelings, the likeness of Deity appears in which
man was created, surviving even the ruins of the fall.

SECTION III. ITS AUTHORITY.

The authority of conscience may be considered, 1,
with respect to other impulses which move to action ;
and 2, with respect to the authority of God.

I. By the constitution of the human mind, conscience
is made the supreme director of our conduct, and in-
vested with authority to control all other impulses to
action.

The other impulses to action may be conveniently
divided into two classes : those which tend to present
gratification only, and those which have respect to our
general good. To the first class belong appetites and
passions ; all the particular impulses of the second class
may be included under the name self-love. Appetites
and passions call for present gratification, however
momentary, regardless of all consequences to ourselves
or others. Self-love aims at our good on the whole,
taking the future as well as the present into the account ;
but, if no higher impulse controls its direction, it aims
at the good of the individual, disregarding the welfare
of all others. All these impulses need to be governed
by a higher impulse that the general good may be pro-
moted. In order that man may be adapted to society,
as well as for other purposes of his existence, an im-
pulse is fixed in the constitution of his mind, with
authority to control appetite, passion, and self-love,
and promote the general good. This authoritative im-
pulse is conscience.

The supreme authority of conscience does not imply
that it is endowed with overpowering strength. Other



68 MORAL FACULTY.

impulses may be stronger, and may prevail: but the
impulse of conscience is not the less authoritative on
that account. The authority of parents may be
resisted by disobedient children ; and even the authority
of God may be rejected and contemned by sinful men;
but in neither case does the authority cease because it
fails to produce the proper effect. The impulses which
ought to be subordinate to conscience may be in rebel*
lion, and may exercise governing power ; but conscience is
the rightful sovereign over all the active powers of man.

Conscience is the only impulse which possesses
authority in the moral sense of the term« We may
speak of obeying other impulses, as we say that mat-
ter obeys the law of nature; but no other impulse
binds with moral obligation, unless conscience lends its
authority. As intelligent beings, our minds are so con-
stituted that self-love holds a higher rank among our
impulses than appetite or passion. Irrational animals
may yield themselves up to present gratification ; and
men who do so become assimilated to brutes ; but intel-
ligence, without the aid of a moral faculty, will prefer
the good of the whole life to a momentary gratification.
Self-love may control the lower propensities and teach
a temperate use of present enjoyment, and a prudent
regard to future good ; but the government of self-love
is natural, not moral ; and temperance and prudence,
as exercised in obedience to its dictates, are merely
natural virtues : men may practise them, who disobey
all the monitions of conscience, and regard not either
God or man.

The authority of conscience extends over our appe-
tites and passions, and its chief service in relation to
them is to restrain their indulgence. But it also finds
at all times proper scope for its exercise, in approving
present gratification when not unlawful. It is not



ITS AUTHORITY. 69

beyond its oflSce to teach that God " giveth us richly
all things to enjoy ;''^ and that, within due limits, to
enjoy is to obey.

Conscience authoritatively establishes the subordina-
tion of our lower propensities to self-love.^ It requires,
with the force of moral obligation, that men should
forego present gratification for the sake of future and
greater good ; and thus converts temperance and pru-
dence into moral virtues, when practised in obedience
to its authority. It stamps its disapprobation on beastly
indulgence ; and moves the scorn and contempt of man-
kind against the fool who sacrifices the happiness of
his whole life, and even of the next hour, to a present
momentary sensual gratification.

The authority of conscience extends over self-love,
and it is in this chiefly that its supremacy appears.

It is not true, as some have maintained, that all
virtuous feeling is a modification of self-love. On the
contrary, the virtuous impulse and the impulse of self-
love move in opposite directions ; the former tending to
the diffusion of happiness, and the latter to its absorp-
tion. We have seen that all nations, however they may
differ from each other in their moral sentiments, agree
in approving intentional acts of disinterested benevo-
lence. All consciences approve the outward flow of the
• affections ; and we may infer that the primary impulse
of conscience is in this direction ; and therefore anta-
gonistic to the impulse of self-love. In this the
morality of conscience agrees with that of revelation.
The Bible does not command that our affections should
tend inwardly and concentrate on self; but that they
should move outwardly toward God and our neighbor.
The Author of the Bible is the Author of this impulse

1 7 Tim. vi. 17.



rO MORAL FACULTY.

in the human mind, which operates as a primary ele-
ment in our moral nature, and continues to operate even
where the moral sentiments and practices of men are
most corrupt.

The proof that conscience is, by the constitution of
the human mind, clothed with supreme authority, may
be satisfactorily drawn from the operations of a single
mind ; but it is made complete and irresistible by the
concurrent moral judgments of mankind. All agree in
their approbation of him who obeys the impulse of con-
science in opposition to all opposing impulses. The
glutton, who indulges his appetite to the ruin of his
health and hapj)ine9s, and the miser, who, obeying the
promptings of self-love, seeks his own interest, blind to
the interests of all around him, are condemned by the
unanimous verdict of society : but all men honor the
man who steadily and firmly obeys the impulse of con-
science, in opposition to the temptations of pleasure,
power, and wealth. The praises of such men are cele-
brated by poets and historians ; and an immortality of
renown is awarded to them by the common voice of suc-
ceeding generations.

II. The authority of conscience is subordinate to the
authority of God,

The supremacy which we have attributed to con-
science is not absolute, but relative to the other im-
pulses of the mind. It is invested with this supremacy
by the appointment of God.

The constitution of the human mind proceeds from
God*s creating power. He gives the mind its faculties,
and determines the proper order of their operation. If
conscience rules in the human breast by original right,
it must rule by divine appointment ; and therefore by
authority derived from God.

That conscience rules by the will of God, may be
argued from the beneficial tendency of obedience to its



ITS AUTHORITY. 71

authority. Virtue promotes happiness according to the
order of things which God has established ; and virtae
implies obedience to conscience. Hence all the benefits
resulting from virtue, express the approbation with
which the Author of nature regards obedience to con-
science. They testify that it rules by his will.

Revelation proves that conscience bears rule by the
will of God. We have seen that Paul, and the other
ministers of Christ who were his fellow-laborers,
obeyed the impulse of conscience, and rejoiced in its
approving testimony. The supremacy of conscience
was inculcated by them as a doctrine of their religion.
Weakness of conscience was sometimes exhibited in
abstinence from meat, and the avoiding of things
accounted unclean. In such cases the conscience of
the individual was made a rule which he could not
innocently violate : << He that doubteth is damned if he
eat."^ « To him that esteeraeth anything to be unclean,
to him it is unclean."^ However innocent the action
might be in itself, the agent was not innocent if he vio-
lated the authority of conscience. The supremacy of
conscience is therefore a doctrine of Christianity.

We have proved that conscience rules by the appoint-
ment of God, and that God will not hold him guiltless
who violates its authority. The fact that it rules by
God's appointment, implies its subordination to God.
Though a weak and erring conscience cannot be inno-
cently disobeyed, yet, because of its liability to weak-
ness and error, there is necessity to examine its deci-
sions, and correct them by reference to higher authority.
Disobedience to conscience is always wrong; but he
who obeys conscience is not always in the right. Men
are responsible for the state of their conscience, when

1 Rom. xiv. 23. « Rom. xiv. 14.



72 MORAL FAOULTT.

they neglect the means afforded t6em for its improYO-
ment. Paul thought that he did God service^ when
he persecuted the saints ; but when his conscience
became enlightened he considered his conduct highly
criminal. ^ It is clear, therefore, that conscience may
be in error ; and that, in this case, obedience to it is
not virtue.

SECTION IV. ITS IMPROVEMENT.

•

The moral faculty is susceptible of improvement. It
is not a foreign substance deposited in the mind, un*
affected by its growth ; — a literal tablet of law written
in the heart, remaining always the same. But it is the
mind itself in one class 6f its operations, and it is
therefore susceptible of improvement like all other
powers of the mind. The Scriptures speak of weak con-
sciences ; of defiled consciences ; but weak consciences
may be strengthened, and defiled consciences may be
purified. A progress of improvement in the moral
faculty is as possible as in the understanding, the mem
ory, the taste, or the reasoning faculty.

In its susceptibility of improvement, the moral faculty
differs from the instincts of brutes. These are the same
in every individual of a species ; and are as operative
m the beginning of life as in old age. The hen hatches
and trains her first brood with as much skill as the last ;
and the hen of this generation is no wiser than her
parent hen before the flood. Man's progressiveness is
an argument for the soul's immortality ; and the pro-
gressiveness of the moral faculty connects our moral
character with the immortality which we have in pros-
pect.

The improvement of the moral faculty is one of our

^ John xvi. 2 ; Acts xxvi. 9, 11. ^1 Tim. i. 13 ; 1 Cor. xv. 9



ITS IMPBOVEMSNT. 78

most important duties. Our moral nature is that which
chiefly distinguishes us from brutes, and gives us the
elevated position which we hold among God's creatures.
The cultivation of the intellectual powers is important
for the interests of the individual, and of society.
Hence the schools multiplied through the land are a
blessing to our age and country ; and the years of toil
spent in them as we advance to manhood, are a profita-^
ble discipline, preparing us to act our part at mature
years. But the cultivation of the moral powers greatly
transcends in importance. Without this, all our intel-
lectual strength and acquisitions may be a curse to our-
selves and to mankind. He who cultivates his under-
standipg, and neglects his moral faculty, though men
should esteem him wise, is a fool in God's sight ; and
eternity will demonstrate his folly.

The cultivation of the moral faculty is a religious
duty. It is enjoined in the divine command, << Keep
thy heart with ail diligence ;"^ and it cannot be per-
formed aright, unless performed with reference to the
authority of God. The moral faculty in its highest
exercise is the religious faculty ; and if it is not made
subservient to religion, the grand purpose of the endow-
ment is not attained. The religious obligation to << grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ,"^ binds us to cultivate all our moral
powers, and use them to the glory of God. He who
aims to improve them with some other end in view, is
misdirecting the best energies of his nature ; and what-
ever else he may attain, he cannot secure the favor of
God.

The means of improving the moral faculty may be
advantageously considered, with a distinct reference to
its several offices.

» Prov. iv. 23. » 2 Pet iu. 18.

7



74 MORAL FAOULTT.

1. The discriminating power of conscience may be
improved, by a diligent study of God's will, in the
various methods in which it is made known to us. The
voice of conscience within is one mode in which God
speaks to us ; and, therefore, its language should be
heeded. The same voice speaks in the breasts of other
men ; and their moral judgments may assist us to cor-
rect our own. The law written in the heart by the
finger of the Creator, has been defaced and obscured ;
and, to obtain a knowledge of the original writing, it is
better to examine the mutilated copies of it found in
many hearts, than to rely on one of these mutilated
copies exclusively. But the voice of God, in his works
and in his word, makes known his will with more clear-
ness and certainty. God overrules the sequences of
nature ; and we may often learn what actions are in
accordance with his will, by observing their tendencies
and results. But the clearest revelation of his will, is
in his holy word ; and by the study of this, above every
other means, we may become wise to distinguish be-
tween right and wrong.

The means of moral cultivation may be applied in
parental instruction. The wise man has said, " Train
up a child in the way he should go ; and when he is old,
he will not depart from it."^ Those children who are
under the care of wise and pious parents, enjoy ad-
vantages for moral improvement which are above all
price. The best models of virtue ought to be carefully
studied ; such as are exhibited in the lives of men emi-
nent for their virtue, and especially in the life and
character of Jesus Christ. Moral essays may be read,
and systems of moral science may be studied, to great
advantage. But the best light to assist our moral dis-

* Prov. xxii. 6.



ITS IMPROVEMEKT. 76

criminations, is obtained from the word and Spirit of
God. If we take his word for our guide, and humbly
pray fo;r the aid of the Holy Spirit in the study of it,
we may confidently hope to be led in the right way.

The study of moral distinctions is not all that we
need. No one becomes a skilful musician, by the mere'
study of musical science ; but long and laborious prac-
tice is requisite. So the promptness of moral discrimi-
nation, which is needed in the active business of life,
cannot be acquired but by practice. We should accus-
tom ourselves to moral investigations, until we acquire
facility in making them, and until our moral vision, like
a practised eye, can distinguish readily and clearly,
what, to the less practised, is covered with obscurity.

2. The tendency to form moral judgments may be
promoted or checked by habit.

Actions may be contemplated with admiration, be-
cause of their skill, their daring, or their laborious and
patient perseverance. In our admiration of these
qualities, we may wholly overlook the moral quality
which the actions contain ; and, if we frequently esti-
mate actions by some other than their moral quality,
we shall form a habit of doing so. This will render us
less observant of that highest quality, on which, more
than any other, the true worth of actions depends. On
the other hand, if we allow no lustre which may attend
an action, so to dazzle our eyes as to blind us to its
moral quality, we shall acquire the habit of estimating
actions by a moral standard. This habit is necessary
to virtue. The keenest moral discernment will avail
nothing, if it is not used ; as good eyes do not profit,
if they are kept closed. If we would be virtuous, we
should accustom ourselves to ask concerning every
action, 1% it right f Whatever profit or pleasure it
may yield, and whatever admiration of gaping beholders



76 IfOBAL FAOULTT.

it may excite, we Bhoold instantly and finnly estimate
its worth by its moral quality.

8. Our moral sensibility may be increased or lessened
by habit.

In our first contact with vice, we are perhaps shocked
with its odiousness ; but, if we allow ourselves to become
familiar with it, our aversion subsides, and, in the lan-
guage of Pope, << we first endure, then pity, then em-
brace." This tendency of habit to blunt the moral
sensibility may be illustrated by innumerable examples.
The first oath startles him who utters it, the first lie is
pronounced with trembling tongue, and the first theft
is committed with trepidation — but repetition inspires
courage, and hardens the heart. Thus the stripling,
who first transgressed with hesitation and fear, becomes
a monster of vice, sinning without remorse.

On the other hand, moral sensibility is increased by
virtuous habit. Self-approbation, in its earliest exer-
cise, is attended with pleasure ; but, as we make pro-
gress in virtue, the pleasure becomes greatly enhanced.
Unlike the pleasures of sense, it never cloys. The
self-approving mind enjoys a continual feast, and with
a constantly-increasing relish. This tendency of virtue
to quicken our sensibility to moral pleasure, renders
immortality unspeakably attractive to the good man.
He rejoices to know that the pure and perennial fountain
of delight, which is now springing up in his breast, will
rise, and continue to rise, to life eternal.

4. The impulse to virtuous action may be strength-
ened or weakened by habit.

If we yield to the impulses of appetite, passion, and
self-love, these impulses acquire strength. The ine-
briate, when he first tasted the intoxicating cup, was
free from its enslaving power — ^but he is free no longer.
Habit has bound him in chains, and delivered him up,



IT8 IMPROVEHBNT. 77

body and soul, to the merciless tyrant. The miser at
first felt but little love for the dime which he first
hoarded, bat the habit of gain has given overpowering
strength to the avaricious propensity which now rules
in his breast with resistless sway. While these im-
pulses gain strength by indulgence, the impulse to
virtue grows weak by neglect. At first it presented a
barrier, but the fence has been gradually thrown down,
until the unlawful propensities roam at large in the
soul, and hold undisputed possession. Such is the
progress of vice.

The process of virtue, though in the opposite direc-
tion, is made in a similar manner. The impulse to
virtue becomes strengthened by successful conflict with
the lower propensities. Every victory increases its
power, and weakens the opposing forces, until progress
in the right way becomes easy. They who travel in
this road go on from strength to strength, and difficul-
ties and opposition retire before them. Happy are
they who gain this victory, having crucified the fiesh
with its affections and lusts.

The extent to which the moral faculty may be im-
proved is indefinite. The intellect of man roams
abroad through the universe, and finds no boundary to
the increase of knowledge. Equally boundless is the
prospect which opens before the moral faculty. The
possibility of progress in virtue has no limit. Habit
strengthens the impulse to virtuous actions, increases
the moral sensibility, and promotes the tendency to
form moral judgments. As the good man makes pro-
gress in virtue, his eye is more fixed on its beauty, his
heart is more ravished with its charms, and his feet
move in the delightful road with accelerated speed.
It becomes his meat and drink to do good; and, in
7*



78 MORAL FAOULTT.

fulfilling the will of Ood, he enjoys heaven begun on
earth.

Alike interminable is the dark prospect before the
transgressor. The virtuous impulse, habitually resisted,
ceases to operate, until he becomes lost to virtue.
Even in the present life, some, as we have reason to
believe, are given up to hardness of heart, and are
therefore beyond hope. In these, the indulged propen-
sities have the mastery of the soul ; and often, like the
foul spirits which possessed the ancient demoniacs, rend
it with keen anguish. These propensities find some
indulgence in the present life, and therefore present
misery is not complete ; but at death they will be sepa-
rated for ever from the objects of their craving. What
then will be left? The pleasure arising from self-
approbation has gone, even in the present life, and
remorse and foreboding horror fill the breast. Some-
times, indeed, remorse sleeps, because the moral sensi-
bility has become benumbed. But conscience is im-
mortal, and, in the future world, will be found to be
the worm that dieth not, preying for ever on the vitals
of the lost. Even before death, the stupefied con-
science sometimes awakes, and begins its work of tor-
ture. In the chamber of the dying sinner, the excla-
mation has been heard : " Oh, the insuiOFerable pangs
of hell and damnation!" Such outbursts from the
world of woe sometimes meet the wicked, as the door
of their eternal prison opens to receive them.



CHAPTER IV.
VIRTUE.



SECTION I. IN GENERA L.

VlKTUB, or moral rectitude, is conformity to moral
obligation. Some persons restrict the use of the term
to such actions as are beneficial to men, and distinguish
it from piety or duty to God ; but the use of it for all
duty, both to God and men, has the authority of good
writers. Nor does its signification include external
acts only ; for we speak of virtuous affections, as well
as virtuous actions.

Our moral obligations are founded on the authority
of God, the moral governor of the universe ; and hence,
his commandment or expressed will is the rule of obli-
gation. Affections and actions are virtuous, which con-
form to the will of God. He commands that we should
love God with all the heart, and our neighbor as our-
selves. This law is the proper standard of virtuous
affections ; and such actions are virtuous as flow from
these affections.

Love cannot be exercised toward an object of which
we have no knowledge. The virtuous mind enlarges
the sphere of its affections, as its knowledge increases.
The relations which we bear to our neighbors are
various; and the virtuous affection prompts to various
courses of action, corresponding to these several rela-
5 (79)



80 VIBTUB.

tions. In the progress of life, onr relations multiply ;
and the field for virtaoos action accordingly enlarges.
As knowledge extends to beings before unknown, the
heart finds new objects to love ; and, as new relations
are discovered, the expanding love prompts to new
methods of doing good. Hence, our progress in virtue
is as illimitable as our progress in knowledge.

We have before seen that the moral faculty is capable
of indefinite improvement ; and we have now discovered
that the scope for virtue is perpetually enlarging, with
the increase of knowledge, and the multiplication of
our relations. The exercise of virtue becomes increas-
ingly easy and delightful ; and the opportunities for its
exercise are indefinitely multiplying.

SEOTION II. IN IMPERFECT BBINeS.

Wb enter on life without knowledge ; but we have
faculties for acquiring it, which are brought into exer-
cise from the commencement of our being. We find
ourselves surrounded by other beings, to whom we sus-
tain such relations, that we cannot exist without them,
nor act or think, but with reference to them. We are
at first incapable of comprehending these relations;
but we acquire knowledge of them as our minds expand ;
and this progress of knowledge continues during life.

Our relations to other beings furnish occasions for
the exercise of the moral faculty, so far as they become
known. Hence, moral obligation increases as our
knowledge increases. The services which are due to
mankind from persons of mature years, children are
incapable of rendering. They neither comprehend
their relations to others, nor understand the modes of
doing good in these several relations. Imperfection of
knowledge, in both these respects, limits their obliga-
tions.



IN IMPSBFEOT BEINGS. 81

But the limit of obligation is not determined by the
actual knowledge which we possess, if greater know-
ledge were possible, and we have failed to attain it
through criminal negligence. We are under obligation
to employ all our powers in doing good. We are bound
to use the intellect aright, as well as the hands ; and
if we have failed to use it for the accomplishment of
the greatest possible good, we are so far blame-worthy.
Hence, our obligations are determined, not by the
actual knowledge which we possess, but by that which
we might have attained, if our minds had been intent
on doing good above everything else.

Our moral judgments are dependent on our know-
ledge ; and therefore imperfection of knowledge neces-
sarily produces imperfection of conscience. But fur-
ther imperfection of conscience may arise from other
causes. As we fail to attain knowledge, through a
defect in the virtuous impulse which moves to intellec-
tual exercise, so, through a like defect in the virtuous
impulse, we fail to use aright the imperfect knowledge
which we have acquired. We do not study the moral
quality of actions with requisite solicitude ; and there-
fore it is imperfectly discovered. The moral quality
discovered does not affect our moral sensibility as it
ought, because that sensibility is imperfect. Hence the
quickness and intenseness of our moral approbation or
disapprobation, are not proportionate even to our imper-
fect discovery of the moral quality. And lastly, the
moral impulse to do right, exhibits a still further defect ;
for we often see and approve the right, and follow the
wrong.

In imperfect beings, the virtuous impulse operates
defectively in all the ways which have been mentioned ;
and at the same time, the impulse of appetite, passion,
and self-love operate with their full power. These gain



82 VIBTUB.

Strength by habit, and the virtnous impulse becomes less
and less able to resist them. Every surrender irhioh it
makes, prepares it to yield afterwards with less conflict;
and this is «^the course of this world/' in which men
fulfil <<the desires of the flesh and of the mind,"^ and
yield themselves up the slaves of sin.

The deficiency of our virtue cannot be correctly
estimated by our consciousness of it. The imperfection
of knowledge, the imperfect discernment of the moral
quality, and the imperfect sensibility of the moral
faculty, all combine to prevent or lessen our conviction
of wrong. Hence many imagine themselves to be vir-
tuous who would start up with alarm at a discovery of
their true character. This was Paul's experience : «<I
was alive without the law once ; but when the command-
ment came, sin revived, and I died." ^

So far as the means of knowledge and improvement
in virtue are within our reach, we are responsible for
the right use of them. For all the knowledge which
we would have attained, and for all the virtuous habits
which we would have acquired, if every impulse to vir-
tue had been perfect from the origin of our being, we
are now responsible. By this rule we must measure
our present obligations ; and by this mode of compu-
tation we may learn the alarming truth, that our guilt
is accumulating perpetually, and with accelerated
speed. Every past failure renders us less able to
fulfil the next requirement, and makes the next failure
greater.

An imperfect being may be conscious of his moral
condition ; and may, with penitence for past failures,
make efibrts at reformation. But his penitence and
reformation are present duties ; and, being the result

* Eph. ii. 2, 3. " Rom. vii. 9.



RELATION TO HABIT. 88

of imperfect conviction, are not equal to the measure
of present obligation. Hence, instead of supplying the
defect, their imperfection adds to the amount of the
failure. Such is the condition of fallen man. No peni-
tence or efforts at reformation can restore him to per-
fect virtue ; much less can they make amends for his
past disobedience to the authority of God. In* this
hopeless condition the gospel of Christ finds him, and
offers him the only possible salvation.

SECTION III. RELATION TO HABIT.

The power of habit to produce facility of action is
truly wonderful. The child, about the close of his first
year, totters over the carpet, and puts one foot before
the other with hesitating and laborious effort. The
power of habit transforms him, after a time, into a play-
ful boy, running and leaping with speed, grace, and
fearless thoughtlessness. When the organs of speech
begin their action, sounds are formed with diflSculty ;
and some of the consonants are not properly uttered,
until months have passed in frequent and painstaking
effort. But a few years of practice converts this fal-
tering learner of simple sounds, into a fluent speaker,
at whose will the organs of speech move with rapidity
and accuracy, and pour forth words with the copi-
ousness and rapidity of a torrent, and with the precision
of new coin from the mint.

Habit not only gives the mind that command over
the muscles of the body, which is exemplified in running,
and speaking, and in all the arts and business of life ;
but it also greatly facilitates operations which are purely
mental. Long processes of profound reasoning are
rendered possible by habit ; and habit enables the
mind, which once reasoned out its little deductions with
the slowness and hesitation of the tottering infant in its



84 VIRTUE.

first steps, to hasten to its Gonclasioiis with lightning
speed.

In a large part of human actions, men could not take
time for long deliberation, without losing the oppor-
tunity for acting ; but the want of time is made up by
the facility which the power of habit produces. In the
ordinary course of life, we commonly act from habit,
with very little thought. No man who walks a mile,
thinks on the way which foot he shall next advance,
and which muscle he shall next put in motion. So our
moral decisions are, for the most part, made under the
influence of habit with very little thought.

But are men responsible who move on thoughtlessly
under the influence of habit ? If habit destroyed re-
sponsibility, invincible habits of vice would render a
man perfectly blameless ; or, in other words, consum-
mated vice would be pure virtue. Men are responsible
for their habits, and all their consequences ; and hence,
the formation of virtuous habits is an important part
of human duty. We should study and act with a con-
stant reference to self-improvement in this particular.
Every duty should be performed, not merely for the
sake of the good which it may efiect to others, but also
for the sake of its benefit to ourselves, in strengthening
and establishing the habit of virtue.. In some cases,
this last consideration is alone a sufficient motive for
action. When a beggar asks alms, we may sometimes
doubt whether by giving we shall supply real want, or
reward a false pretence ; but, having no means at hand
for settling this question, we decide to give for our
own sakes, to strengthen the habit of benevolence.

Habits of thought should be guarded, as well as
habits of action. Trains of thought may not startle us,
unless we see them approaching to some wrong action,
but it does not follow that they are harmless. Licen-



RELATION TO HAPPINESS. 85

tions imagination and unlawful desire may be strength-
ened by the power of habit, while all their movements
are strictly confined within the mental domain ; and the
paths in which they move may become a trodden high-
way, overspreading and hardening the heart. K we
would be virtuous, we must keep our hearts with all
diligence.

SBOTION lY. RELATION TO HAPPINESS.

We are so constituted as to derive pleasure from sur-
rounding objects. Our senses are inlets through which
pleasure flows in upon us from the commencement of
our being. The food which nature provides for the
sustenance of the infant gives pleasure to the sense of
taste. The warmth of the mother^e bosom, and the
soft touch of her breast, give pleasure to the sense of
feeling. In a short time the other senses derive plea-
sure from beautiful colors, melodious sounds, and fra-
grant odors. The world is a great storehouse of
pleasure, and the young sentient being enters it with
capacities precisely adapted to enjoy the rich and
boundless variety which the Creator's bounty has
provided.

Although all the senses find appropriate objects to
gratify them, the stream of gratification is not flowing
into every sense incessantly. The infant does not need
to receive the mother's milk without intermission, and,
by a wbe arrangement, the. pleasure of receiving it
ceases at the proper point of time ; but subsequently,
by another wise arrangement, a desire arises, preparing
for another supply of the delicious nectar, and enhanc-
ing the pleasure which the draught aflbrds. This
desire operates before the infant's mind is capable of
conceiving the object desired. But as the mental
faculties are developed and brought into exercise, con-
8



N



86 VIRTUES.

ceptions of agreeable objects awaken desire, which
prompts to efforts for obtaining gratification, and in-
creases the gratification when obtained. Few of our
pleasures come upon us unexpectedly, and therefore
the chief part of our enjoyment consists in the gratifi-
cation of desire.

Desire itself becomes a source of enjoyment, when
accompanied with a hope of attaining the object desired*
The mind forms a conception, not only of the object
itself, but also of the pleasure which it will yield us ;
and this pleasure becomes associated, in the imagina-
tion, with every step of our progress in acquiring it.
Hence, it often happens that the pleasure of anticipa-
tion is greater than that which is derived from the
actual possession of the object desired.

Our minds are capable of entertaining innumerable
forms of desire, besides those which have immediate
respect to sensual gratification. Among these may be
enumerated the desire of society, of knowledge, of
power, of wealth, and of fame. These desires move us
to action. The very action of our mental and corporeal
powers seems to be productive of pleasure ; but the
pleasure is greatly increased by the co-operating inflii-^
ence of desire, which in some way attends every move-
ment.

The proof is abundant that God designed to make
provision for human happiness. He created all the
objects around us, and created within us the suscepti-
bilities adapted to derive pleasure from them ; and he
has so established our connection with them, that the
enjoyment comes on us necessarily. We cannot live
and move without it. It is, therefore, manifestly the
will of God that we should derive pleasure from the
objects which he has created capable of affording it.
That any object can give us pleasure is a sufficient



RELATION TO HAPPINESS. 87

reason for using it, unless there is some reason to the
contrary. If one course of action will yield more plea-
sure than another, we do right to prefer it, unless some
reason to the contrary requires a dijQTerent decision.

Experience teaches men that it is unwise to give
themselves up without restraint to the pleasures of the
present moment. Present indulgence unfits, in many
cases, for future enjoyment. He who eats to. excess
impairs his health, and renders himself unfit, not only
for many other enjoyments of life, but even for the
pleasures of the table. Innumerable cases occur in
which a prudent regard for our own happiness requires
abstinence from present indulgence. It is, therefore,
manifestly the will of God that there should be a limit
to the indulgence of present gratification. Happiness
is continual pleasure ; and, to attain the highest degree
of it, we must not seek the highest gratification of any
one moment, disregarding every other moment of life.
The happiness of life is the sum of enjoyment through-
out its whole duration, and prudence, teaches us to' have
respect to the whole.

In the experience of life, many occasions occur for
choosing, not only between pleasures of like kind at
different moments, but also between pleasures of un-
like kind at the same moment. I may spend an hour
at a^ banquet, or I may prefer to enjoy for that hour
the society of a valued friend. I may seize an
opportunity to indulge my desire of wealth by taking
advantage of my neighbor, or I may prefer the pleasure
of an approving conscience. In making the choice in
such cases, a regard even to the present moment will
often be sufficient to determine in favor of virtue, but
the weight in virtue's scale becomes greatly increased
when the future is included with the present. The
banquet will yield me no lasting advantage, but the



88 VIRTUE.

prudent counsel of my valued friend may benefit me
greatly through all future life. The dishonest gain
which I have an opportunity to make, (An at the most
increase a little my store of uncertain riches ; but an
approving consciencCi free from the enduring pangs of
biting remorse, is a richer source of pleasure than
mines of gold. A prudent regard for our own happi-
ness is sufficient to give a decided preference to virtue
above vice.

We have seen that he who seeks his happiness by
aiming at the highest possible gratification of eadi
moment, fails of his object. God's arrangements inter-
pose an obstacle, and forbid that happiness should be
sought in this way. In like manner, he who intently
pursues his own happiness, regardless of the happiness
of others, fails to attain his object. Here another
obstacle is presented. K I existed alone in the uni-
verse, connected in no manner with any other being, I
might find no obstacle to the direct pursuit of my own
hapj^iness ; but God has placed me in society, and fixed
me in such relations to himself and my fellow-creatures,
that I am obliged to have regard to the interests of
others. If I seek my own happiness exclusively, I
cannot succeed. I enter into conflict with the interests
of all others ; and, with the universe against me, and
God against me, success is impossible. God's arrange-
ments make happiness the reward, not of him who pur-
sues happiness, but of him who pursues virtue. Virtue
tends to the happiness of society; and man, formed for
society, is required to seek the good of the whole. He
who seeks bis own good, apart from that of all others,
and he who seeks the gratification of the present mo-
ment, apart from that of every other moment of life,
are alike foolishly opposing the plans of God, and at-
tempting impossibilities.



BfiLATION TO HAPPINESS. 89

We have seen that we cannot attain happiness by
being engrossed in the direct pursuit of it. This point
may be rendered clearer by a further inquiry into the
nature of our impulses.

I. No mere impulse, however strong, can insure
gratification.

Appetite seeks present gratification, but it does not
give capacity for it. The susceptibility of gratification
is distinct from the appetite which impels to it. We
can conceive of an animal fitted to receive food with
pleasure, as the earth drinks the shower when it comes,
but having no memory of past, and no desire for future
gratification. On the other hand, we can conceive of
an animal tortured with hunger, but incapable of dc
riving pleasure from food when obtained. Since the
impulse may exist without the susceptibility of gratifi-
cation, the presence of the impulse is not of itself suffi-
cient to insure gratification.

Self-love impels to the pursuit of happiness, but it
does not contain in itself the susceptibility of happiness.
The prudence which it brings into exercise, selects the
enjoyments to be preferred, but does not create them.
We can imagine an earnest longing for happiness, with
an inability to enjoy it :^ and such cases are not wholly
imaginary. Few persons are so happy as never to ex-
perience this state of mind ; and, in some of melancholy
disposition, it is almost habitual. We see, therefore,
that the impulse to seek happiness gives not the suscep-
tibility of enjoying it.

II. The lower impulses best attain their own object,
when they act in subordination to the higher.

Appetite impels to present gratification; but the

highest gratification is not obtained by the continued

excitement and indulgence of the appetite. The

laborer eats his food with keener relish than the glut-

8*



90 VIRTUE.

ton. The glutton, by devoting himself to the pleasure
of eating, not only unfits himself for other enjoyments,
but actually enjoys the pleasures of the table less than
he does who subjects the impulse of appetite to the
higher impulse of self-love — ^that is, to the control of
prudence.

In like manner, the impulse of self-love best attains
the happiness at which it aims, by acting in subordina-
tion to the higher impulse of conscience. This is
exemplified in such cases as the following: —

1. A man may obey self-love in opposition to con-
science. In this case his action is vicious, and must be
followed, sooner or later, with the evil consequences of
s^ice. According to the divine arrangements, vice has

an inevitable tendency to produce misery ; and he who
acts viciously under the impulse of self-love, must
endure this misery. On the other hand, the gratifica-
tion at which self-love aims, is uncertain. They who
most eagerly pursue happiness, frequently find disap-
pointment in the progress, and vexation of spirit at the
end of their course.

2. A man may, in obedience to self-love, perform the
acts which conscience requires. In this case his act is,
in form, virtuous ; but, not being performed in obedi-
ence to conscience, it cannot yield the pleasure of con-
scious virtue. This course, therefore, does not secure
the highest happiness. If it escapes the penalty of
vice from the external arrangements of Providence, it
does not obtain within the breast the moral rewards of
virtue, and will not obtain the final Approbation of the
Great Judge, and the reward of everlasting happiness.

3. A man may subject his lower impulses to the im-
pulse of conscience, and do what is right, because it is
right. In this case he secures the external advantages
of virtue, its present internal rewards, and the future



KBLATION TO HAPPINESS. 91

reward which God has promised. This is the highest
happiness possible. Self-love can aim at nothing
higher ; and hence, self-love best attains its object when
it yields the supremacy to conscience.

The subordination of the lower impulses is necessary
to the moral health of the soul. When the appetites
and passions burst through the r^estraints of prudence,
and when self-love rejects the authority of conscience,
the soul is diseased.. The disorder gathers strength
from the power of habit. Some diseases of the body
have a tendency to effect their own cure, and to fortify
the system against the possibility of their return ; but
the disease of the soul ever tends to wax worse and
worse. Its progress, like that of bodily disease, is ever
attended with pain, and its fatal termination is death
eternal. We need a remedy which nature cannot
afford ; and a physician whose knowledge extends infi-
nitely beyond the boundaries of our moral science.

From the preceding discussions, the following rules
of conduct may be deduced :- —

1. It is right to seek the highest gratification of the
present moment, when no higher obligation forbids.

2. A prudent regard for our own happiness ought to
control the gratification of the present moment, and to
direct our conduct, when no higher obligation opposes.

8. The pursuit of individual happiness should be
conducted in subordination to the general good ; and
such actions as promote the general good, are to be
accounted virtuous, when we have no express command
of God to regulate our conduct.

SECTION V. INSUFFICIENCY OF CONSCIENCE
TO PRODUCE PERFECT VIRTUE.

CauseB.
The lower impulses of our minds are not in subjeo-



92 VIRTUB.

tion to conscience, as they ought to be. In this fact,
and in the crimes which proceed from k, the deprayitj
of mankind appears. When the first man came forth
in moral symmetry and beauty from the creating hand
of God, all the powers of his mind were in due subjeo*
tion to conscience ; but a rebellion has taken place, and
the lower propensities have cast off the allegianoe due
to the presiding impulse, and now frequently tread it
under foot. Every man has a consciousness that his
breast is not the perpetual abode of that peace and
order which belong to perfect virtue ; and hence, from
the testimony of universal consciousness, man is a
fallen and depraved being. It is a deeply interesting
inquiry, whether conscience has sufficient power to
regain its lost dominion, and restore the order of per-
fect virtue. Its insufficiency for the accomplishment
of this, appears in two important particulars.

I. Conscience fails because of defect in the strength
of its impulse.

In a perfectly virtuous mind, the impulses are so
adjusted as to operate in harmony; but depravity has
introduced disorder into the movements of the human
mind. The impulse of conscience has been weakened,
and the lower impulses have acquired disproportional
strength. Habit increases the strength of the powers
which are most used ; and hence, the lower propensi-
ties gather strength faster than conscience; and the
departure from the proper adjustment, is constantly
increasing. To subdue the unduly increased power of
the lower impulses, conscience needs a strength beyond
what it would have acquired, had it maintained its
authority, and kept them under control. But its
strength has increased less than if it had continued to
exercise its proper authority. It has, therefore, more
work to accomplish, with less strength for accomplishing



INSUFFIOIENOY OF OONSOIBNOB. 98

it. The advantage in the struggle is against it ; and
this advantage in favor of the lower propensities, the
power of habit is perpetually increasing. The disorder
which sin has introduced into our mental powers, tends
to spread ; and conscience has not power to expel it.
Hence, every man who understands his moral condition,
may well adopt the language of Paul — << I am carnal,
sold under sin. * * * Q wretched man that I am !
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death ?" ^

II. Conscience fails through defect of knowledge.

The impulse of conscience is never contrary to our
moral judgment. If there is a primary impulse of
conscience, antecedent to the exercise of moral judg-
ment, it consists in an elementary benevolent affection,
which is not directed to any definite result until our
relations to other beings begin to be understood. It is
then directed in its exercise by moral judgment, formed
on the knowledge of these relations. Hence, moral
judgment, if not necessary to the existence of the
moral impulse, is necessary to its exercise; and moral
judgment cannot be formed without knowledge.

The perfectly virtuous mind acts under an impulse to
regard the moral quality of actions above every other
quality, and to estimate the knowledge of duty more
highly than all other knowledge. This impulse directs
the intellectual powers to acquire, from all possible
sources, such knowledge as is needed to determine what
is right. The same virtuous impulse causes all the
knowledge thus acquired, to be employed in forming
moral judgments ; and directs the subsequent actions in
perfect conformity with these moral judgments. In the
depraved mind, the connection at every link in this
chain of sequences is weakened. The impulse to vir-

» Rom. vii. 14, 24.



94 VIRTUE.

tuous action, though it takes the direction pointed oat
by the moral judgment, does not move with the proper
momentum. The moral judgment is formed sluggishly
and negligently, without the proper use of all the
knowledge actually possessed. And the amount of
knowledge actually possessed is less than that which was
possible, and which ought to have been acquired. Con-
science cannot do its^^work without knowledge ; and it
must fail, when the knowledge is defective, and when
even this defective knowledge is not duly employed.

Con9equence9,

The failure of conscience to control the lower pro*
pensities yields to these the government of the soul ;
and men, instead of fulfilling their moral obligations
according to the will o£ God, fulfil the desires of the
flesh and of the mind. These propensities have their
power strengthened by habit, and their dominion be-
comes firmly established. Habit tends to produce a
fixed state. The longer men continue in the way of
transgression, the more hopeless their moral state
becomes. So the Scriptures teach : « Can the Ethio-
pian change his skin, or the leopard his spots ? Then
may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil."^

But why has our benevolent Creator given such fatal
power to habit ? Why do the sins of youth and man-
hood bind in chains the aged transgressor, and render
him a hopeless captive ? We are admonished by this
arrangement in the constitution of the human mind,
that the present life is a state of probation. Here only
is change of moral character possible, and here we see
a constant tendency to fixedness of state, and are per-
petually warned that the time within which change can

^ Jer. xiii. 23.



INSUFFICIENCY OF CONSCIENCE, 96

take place is rapidly passing away. Youth is a period
of probation for manhood, manhood is a period of pro-
bation for old age : and youth, manhood, and old age,
all constitute the probation for eternity. That this
probation may terminate happily, the power of habit
should be gained over to virtue's side. If youth be
devoted to virtue, it will prepare for a virtuous and
useful manhood — the hoary head will become a crown
of glory — and the whole life will be ended with an
assured hope of receiving, in the life to come, a crown
of never-fading lustre.

The law of our mental constitution which gives habit
its power, while it teaches that we are in a state of
probation, assures us that we ^are under the moral
government of God, rewarding or punishing us accord-
ing to our works. We reap, even in the present life,
according to what we sow. The practice of virtujB
gives virtuous habits, with all their beneficial effects ;
the practice of vice gives vicious habits, with all their
baneful effects. If habit binds the sinner in chains,
his guilt has been accumulating while habit has been
gaining its power ; and not until his cup of iniquity is
full, does he pass the limit of probation.

In a sinner's progress, his conscience does not testify
fully either to the deterioration of his moral character,
or the accumulation of his guilt. His moral judgment
fails through want of knowledge, or through neglect to
use properly the knowledge yrhich he possesses. Hence
he is not conscious of his true condition. Conscience
is not only weakened and defiled, but it also becomes
benumbed, or, in the language of Scripture, << seared
with a hot iron."^ A growing insensibility of con-

» 1 Tim. iv. 2.



96 VIRTUE. X

science is an alarming symptom of moral disease, a pre-
cursor of eternal death.

Conscience not only testifies to our moral character,
but it also rewards and punishes. It rewards with self-
approbation, and punishes with remorse. But the
sinner's conscience fails, not only in its testimony, but
also in its retribution. It does not punish with remorse
equal to the measure of his guilt ; and sometimes, when
the guilt is most aggravated, remorse seems to sleep
most profoundly. But God never sleeps, and naturid
religion and revelation testify that his judgments slumber
not. In the course of nature, the consequences of crime
follow regardless of the sinner's insensibility. Men
may, in heathen lands, Jbe ignorant that idolatry, poly-
gamy, and infanticide, are crimes; but the natural
consequences of these evils appear in their effects on
society. God teaches what is right and wrong, whether
men will learn or not ; and he gives assurance that his
moral government is not hindered by man's ignorance
or perverseness. In his final judgment, it will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for those who
sin under the light of the gospel ; but all may learn,
from his dispensations in the present life, that his justice
is inflexible, and that the present retributions of con-
science, while they warn us of the judgment to come,
do not determine its character, or indicate its terrible
severity. The most intolerable anguish that conscience
ever inflicts, in the present life, is a drop from the cup
of God's displeasure. Who will estimate the full mea-
sure of suffering, when the most guilty shall be made to
drink the whole cup of divine wrath ?



CHAPTER V.
KNOWLEDGE OF DUTY.



SECTION I. MORAL LAW.

Moral law is a proposition, or series of propositions,
defining men's obligations. It is therefore a rule by
which duty may be known.

The term law properly belongs to the department of
morals ; but in a transferred sense, it is used in physi-
cal science. The difference of its signification in the
two uses of it, deserves to be considered.

The term denotes primarily the command of a
governor, promulgated in language, as a rule of conduct
for those whom he governs. It is a form of words pre-
scribing the duty of the governed. Moral obligation
may exist when not expressed in words ; but moral law
is properly an expression of this obligation, in language
either spoken or written. But the term is frequently
applied to obligation that is not so expressed. So Paul
speaks of the moral obligation felt by the Gentiles as a
law in their hearts ; yet, even in this case, he calls it a
"law written."^ Though not literally expressed in
words, it is conceived to be so expressed, and written
out as the laws of kings were written on tablets for the
observance of their subjects. Moral law is properly
the will of God, expressed in language, or conceived to

^ Rom. ii. 15.
9 (97)



98 KNOWLBDGB OP DUTY,

be so expressed, for the government of intelligent
creatures. Physical law governs unintelligent matter ;
and it is the will of 6od, not expressed in language
for the observance of rational and moral agents, but
executed by himself in his providential government of
the world.

Physical law is an established order of sequence in
physical events ; thus, it is a physical law, or law of
nature, that water, if exposed to a high degree of heat,
will be convefted into steam.^

The order of sequence denoted by physical law, is
established and invariable. Water is not sometimes
converted by high heat into steam, and at other times
into ice ; nor does it require a different degree of heat
at different times to effect the change. Nature's laws
are uniform ; and all physical agents obey them per-
fectly. But moral agents often violate moral law ; and
hence an important distinction between moral and physi-
cal law appears, in that one is violable, and the other
inviolable.

We cannot preserve the analogy between moral and
physical law, by referring moral law to the order of
sequence between a moral action and its consequences.
Moral law is a rule, not for regulating the consequence
of an action, but for regulating the action itself; and

^ All physical law refers to sequence, and never to mere mode
of existence. The law that a body at rest will continue at rest,
unless compelled by some force to change its state, may appear to
be an exception. It does not, however, refer to the mere mode of
existence, but to the continuance of that mode. A simple state-
ment, that the body i* at rest, will suffice to describe its mode of
existence, but it will not express a law of nature. For the latter
purpose the words " will continue" are needed ; and these denote
sequence when the mode of existence continues the same, as much
as if it underwent a change.



MORAL LAW. 99

the observance or violation of it is complete as soon as
the action is performed, and before the consequence
follows. The consequences of moral actions follow these
actions by divine appointment, as physical effects follow
their causes; and are, in the established course of
things, inevitable. *A man who commits crime has no
more reason to expect exemption from its consequences,
than one who thrusts his hand into the fire, to expect
exemption from burning. If moral law denoted the
order of sequence between actions and their conse-
quences, none but God could violate it ; since he only
can change the order of nature which he has estab-
lished.

Moral and physical law are not different species of
one genus denoted by the general term law ; and
hence, any attempt to ascertain what moral law is from
the use of the term law, in physics, will be liable to
mislead. The term law properly belongs to morals,
and has in morals its proper signification. In physics
it is used in a transferred sense, and strict identity of
meaning in the two different uses of it cannot be safely
assumed.

Natural philosophy aims to ascertain the laws of
nature by classifying its phenomena and observing
their order of sequence. But moral philosophy does
not ascertain what moral law is, by classifying human
actions and their consequences. It views these actions
in their relation to God and the moral government
which he exercises over the world. The consequences
of actions follow by divine appointment, and a know-
ledge of them may assist us in ascertaining the will of
God; but his will binds us irrespective of those conse-
quences; and the investigations of moral philosophy
are incomplete until every available means of learning
what the will of God is has been duly employed.



100 KNOWLBDGB OP DUTY.

Moral science does not teach men their duty, by
directing what particular act shall be performed at
each moment of life. A master may, in the morning,
command his servant what to do at each hour of the
day ; and the servant may, almost without the exercise
of reason, execute the appointed tadks in their chrono-
logical order. If there were a science which prescribed
men's duties in this manner, so that they could be
known at the proper time by the mere exercise of
memory, that science would not be a branch of philo*
sophy. But moral science establishes general principles
for the regulation of men's conduct, and requires an
exercise of reason, in order to apply those principles
for determining what is duty in the various circum-
stances which arise. So natural philosophy ascertains
the laws of nature, and foretells by them what effects
given causes will produce. It does not foretell these
effects chronologically, as independent events; but it
arrives at a knowledge of them by a process of reason-
ing, in which the laws of nature and the operating
causes are the data, from which the conclusions are
drawn. By a similar process, moral science teaches
men their duty. It first establishes general principles
according to which men ought to act; and from these
it infers the actions which are proper in given circum-
stances.

The general principles of duty which moral science
discovers and applies, are called Moral Law. As the
investigations of natural philosophy determine what
are the laws of nature, so the investigations of moral
philosophy determine what is moral law. A knowledge
of nature's laws is necessary, that we may avoid danger
from natural causes, or use natural agents for our
benefit; and a knowledge of moral law is necessary,
that we may determine our duty, and secure the bene-



MOBALITY AND RELIGION. 101

fits of virtue. . The knowledge of duty cannot be scien-
tifically acquired, otherwise than by the study and
application of the general principles which constitute
moral law, and hence moral science is a branch ofc
philosophy.

SECTION II. CONNECTION OF MORALITY

WITHRELIGION.

We receive from consciousness our first notions of
right and wrong, and of moral obligation; and from
the same source we learn, that our knowledge of those
subjects is imperfect. Everyman's experience testifies
that his own reflections have often corrected his moral
judgments and feelings ; and every one whose educa-
tion has been wisely directed, is conscious of having
received improvement in his moral powers. The past
progress teaches the possibility of future advancement,
and proves that the highest standard of morals is not
in ourselves.

Our moral judgments and feelings may be greatly
improved by intercourse with our fellow-men. The
order and happiness of society are greatly dependent
on good morals ; and in every society we may observe
the progress and result of an experiment, detbrmining
what is right, and demonstrating its beneficial tendency.
Our parents teach us what is right ; and the obligation
of doing right is enforced by their authority. From
the home of our childhood, where domestic happiness
has illustrated the beneficial tendency of virtue, we
go abroad into society, and find another experiment on
a larger scale. The general sentiments of mankind,
and the laws of civil government, assist further to
establish the distinction of right and wrong, and to
determine the boundary between them. Here, also, on
a larger scale, we see illustrated the beneficial tendency
9*



102 KNOWLIDOl Of DUTY.

of right, and the pernicious tendency of. wrong; and
here our sense of moral obligation becomes strength-
ened by the popular disapprobation and the dyil penal-
ties which are awarded to crime.

In all this progress of moral improyement, we are
convinced at every step that the highest possible attain-
ment has not been made. The experiments of human
society are incomplete, and the decisions of popular
judgment, human legislatures, and civil courts, are all
fallible. We want infallible decisions. We want aa
unerring judge. Here religion comes to our aid and
directs us to G^d, the infinitely wise, and to the perfect
moral government which he has instituted over all
creatures. He possesses the perfect knowledge of
good and evil; and only from the decisions of his
infinite mind, can a perfect system of morals be
learned.

After wo have contemplated God, the Supreme
Ruler, and the boundless moral government which he
exercises over the universe, if we return to our first
conceptions of right and wrong and moral obligation,
we may observe that God is the beginning as well as
the ending of our morality. The first elements of our
moral knowledge are derived from our mental constitu-
tion, which proceeded from his creating hand. We
learn our first lesson in moral science from God our
Creator. The impulsion which our opening minds first
felt was the beginning of his moral government over
us. Right and wrong, and moral obligation, have no
existence apart from God; and the terms have no
intelligible meaning, if interpreted without reference
to his moral government.

In the view which has been taken, we perceive that
there is a necessary connection between morality and
religion. We may as well seek for a universe without



NATURAL BSLIGIOH. 103

a Oody as for a system of morality without religion.
The moral obligation which our opening minds feel, at
the first discoyery of our relation to beings aroond as,
attends us throughout life, and is felt at every new dis-
covery in the extent or closeness of our relations. It
binds us while under the parental roof, and when we go
abroad into the world. It binds us in our relation to
earthly fathers, and in the relation which we sustain to
our Father in heaven. It binds us to earthly benefac-
tors, and it cannot buT bind us to the giver of every
good. A morality which affects only our inferior rela-
tions, and does not extend to those which are of highest
importance, is without system, without completeness,
without just claim to our regard. As true morality
begins with God, so it ends with God ; and morality,
in its relation to God, is nothing different from religion.
Every moral duty fails to be properly performed, if not
performed in obedience to God; and every service
rendered to him, is a religious duty.

Religion implies love to God, and the attendant
affections found in the sanctified heart. It has an
external form, consisting of duties positive and moral.
Positive duties are those for which no other reason can
be given, than the will of God made known by express
precept of revelation. Moral duties are those for which
reasons may be assigned, derived from other manifesta-
tions of the divine will. The chief concern of moral
philosophy is with the duties of the latter class. To
these the name morality especially applies.

SECTION III. NATURAL RELIGION.

Its Mode of Teaching,

The world abounds with adaptations. The eye is
adapted to light, and light exists, reflected to the eye
from every object, and deriving supply from the distant



104 KNOWLBDOB OF DUTY.

sun, and the more distant stars. The ear is adapted to
sound; and sounds float on every breeze, and come,
freighted with intelligence, from the lips of all with
whom we converse. The mind is capable of knowledge ;
and boundless science is at hand to fill up this capacity.
It is endowed with social affections; and these find
occasion for exercise, in the ever present and ever press-
ing claims of society, which, without our choosing, sur-
rounds us from the cradle. Everywhere throughout
nature adaptations are discoverable, in such number
and variety, that life might be spent in their contempla-
tion.

As intelligent and voluntary beings, it is in our power
to act according to nature, or contrary to nature. We
may use our eyes for seeing; or we may close them
against the light, or deprive ourselves of the use of them
for ever, by putting them out. We may hear with our
ears ; or we may close them against the intelligence of
speech, and the melody of song. A mother may act
without natural affection towards her babe ; and a man
who might bless society by deeds of benevolence, may
wage war against it, with fire-brands, arrows and
death.

Men who act against nature, suffer penalties for so
doing. He who puts out his eyes, loses innumerable
enjoyments, and exposes himself to danger from the
flood, the fire, and the precipice. He who closes his
ears against sound, not only loses the pleasure of
melody and harmony, but shuts out warnings which are
necessary for his safety, and instructions which are
necessary for his success and happiness. The mother
who neglects her babe, will suffer self-reproach and
remorse ; or, if too hardened for this, will bring on her-
self the execration of mankind. She loses the inde-
scribable pleasure which a virtuous mother feels in the



NATURAL RELIGION. 105

care and training of her children; and the benefits
which such a mother enjoys, in the respect and appro-
bation of the community. The villain who is at war
with the interests of society, carries a goading con-
science in his breast, which deprives him of peace ; and
he feels that his own interests are in jeopardy. Society
is against him. He knows that even his accomplices in
guilt are not to be trusted.

Our condition in life, as intelligent and voluntary
beings, is manifestly one of subjection to government.
We cannot control the arrangements of nature; but
must submit to be controlled by them. The pleasures
and pains which result from our actions, are so many
rewards and punishments, in view of which we are
obliged to act. We are moral, as well as intelligent and
voluntary ; and as moral beings, we feel the obligation
under which we act, to be moral. We feel,, not only
that we mustj but that we ought. Such is the constitu-
tion of our minds, that we are compelled to regard the
government under which we find ourselves, as moral.
If, in ignorance of God, we ascribe the administration
of the government to something which we call nature,
our feeling of moral obligation still invests the govern-
ment, in its relation to us, with a moral character.

In the adaptations of nature, provision is made for
human happiness. As intelligent, voluntary, and moral
beings, we are bound so to act, in view of these adapta-
tions, as to promote human happiness. If we do not,
we oppose the government under which we find ourselves
placed, and incur the penalties which it inflicts with a
sense of deserving them. We are bound so to use our
eyes and ears as to promote our own happiness. The
mother is bound to exercise maternal affection for the
happiness of her child ; and every member of society
is bound to promote the happiness of society. The



106 KNOWLBDGB OF DUTY.

voice of nature without and within, commands this ; and
the obligation to obey is enforced by rewards and pun-
ishments, in the external pleasures and pains which
actions produce according to the course of nature ; and
in the internal pleasures and pains of an approving or
condemning conscience.

We are bound to seek our own happiness, in subordi-
nation to the happiness of society. The- impulse of
self-love directs to the former; the impulse of con-
science to the latter ; and we have seen that the im-
pulse of conscience is the most authoritative. The
course of nature around us teaches us the same lessons as
the voice of conscience within. The happiness of the
individual is involved in that of society, and cannot be
secured alone ; but the very attempt defeats itself. We
learn, therefore, that the moral government under which
we are placed, requires an outflow of the affections to
the members of society around us ; and such actions,
corresponding to these affections, as tend to the happi-
ness of society. This obligation binds us when our
knowledge of society is small ; and it extends as our
knowledge enlarges. It binds us, at the outset of life,
to the household to which we belong. It binds us after-
wards to the neighborhood, the country, and the whole
family of man. And when we have learned that we
are members of a universal society, consisting of God
the Creator, and the innumerable creatures that he has
made, the obligation expands with the increase of
knowledge, and requires the affections to flow forth to
this great family.

The voice of nature proclaims the existence of God.
« The invisible things of him from the creation of the
world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.'**

1 Rom. i. 20.



NATURAL RELIGION. 107

The adaptations of nature display intelligence, and
must have proceeded from an intelligent author. Effects
which are manifestly the result of wise design, are pro-
duced by causes in which the design does not exist.
These causes are the effects of other causes equally
incapable of the design. We may trace all the sequences
of nature backward, to find, in some cause along the -
line of succession, the designing intelligence which is
displayed in the admirable contrivances that every-
where meet our eyes in nature's works, but at no point
in the line can we possibly find it. None of nature's
causes now operating possess it, and the past were not
more intelligent than the present. These contrivances
must be referred to an intelligent mind, by which all
the sequences of nature have been ordered. The
sequences are connected with the moral government
under which we find ourselves placed, and which, there-
fore, must be referred to the same intelligent mind.
The government, as administered in the present world,
is imperfect. In general it rewards virtue, and pun-
ishes vice, but it fails to effect a perfect retribution in
innumerable cases. Virtue is often oppressed and suf-
fering in the present life, while vice is prosperous.
This can be accounted for only on the supposition that
there is a future retribution, in which the administration
of justice will be perfected. So much of the adminis-
tration is seen in the present life, as to assure us that
a wise and just government exists ; and so manifestly
imperfect is the part of it which we see in the present
life, that we are compelled to regard it as but the
beginning, and to expect the completion of it hereafter.
Thus nature teaches that there is a God, wise and just,
who has ordered all the sequences of cause and effect,
and who exercises a moral government over the world.



108 KNOWLEDGE OF DUTY,

imperfect in its present administration, but to be per-
fected in another life.

When, in the enlargement of its knowledge, the mind
attains to the conception of God and his universal do-
minion, the moral faculties, which began their develop-
ment at the domestic hearth, find boundless scope for
their exercise. The outflowing affection, which con-
science then demanded, has opportunity for illimitable
expansion ; and the same moral obligation which then
required love to the household, now requires love to the
universal family, and, in the highest degree, to the great
Father of all. The morality which nature teaches,
when its scope is so enlarged as to include God and
his universal dominion, becomes what is called natural
religion.

The principle that our own happiness should be made
subordinate to the happiness of society, pervades natural
religion. It regards us as members of a universal
society, over which God presides, and it requires us to
act our part in harmony with the arrangements which
God has established. It requires our outflowing affec-
tion to be fixed supremely on God, the greatest and
best of beings. It would be our duty to increase his
happiness, were this possible ; but, since we cannot add
to the fulness of his blessedness, we are bound to delight
in it, to approve the scheme of things in which he
delights, and to co-operate with all our powers in his
wise and benevolent designs. As the mother that ne-
glects her babe, and the son that does not reverence
his father, act contrary to nature, so does he act
contrary to nature who disobeys God, and refuses to
conduct himself in harmony with the arrangements
of his government.

Natural religion requires us to seek the happiness of
our fellow-creatures associated with us as members of



NATURAL RELiaiON. 109

the universal society. Although we cannot affirm that
the production of happiness was the design with which
God created the world, we have sufficient proof that it
accords with his design. While contrivances adapted
to the general diffusion of happiness are visible every-
where in the arrangements of nature, we act contrary
to nature if we do not co-operate with the benevolent
design in which these contrivances originated. Natural
religion requires the exercise of such affections as tend
to promote the happiness of all, and the performance
of such actions as correspond with these affections.

In applying this rule, to determine the moral quality
of any particular action, we ought to consider what
would be the effect on the happiness of society, if that
mode of action were universal. Sometimes a reason

•

may exist for a peculiar mode of action, when the cir-
cumstances are peculiar. The general rule of duty is,
to adopt that mode of acting, which, if universally
adopted, would promote the happiness of societjn K
the circumstances are peculiar, it is our duty to adopt
that mode of acting which would, if universally adopted
in such circumstances, promote the general good.

To exemplify the rule, let us inquire into the moral
quality of revenge. As an affection of the mind, does
revenge aim at the general good? It seeks personal
gratification at the expense of a neighbor's happiness,
and is, therefore, wrong. As put forth into action,
what would be the effect on society if revenge were uni-
versal ? If every injury were followed by revenge,
blow would succeed to blow, until one of the parties
became unable to continue the strife. The obligation
to take vengeance would then pass to some friend or
relative, whose duty it would be to espouse the quarrel.
By this process the peace of a whole community would
be destroyed ; and the final effect would be a desolating

10



110 KNOWLEDGE OF DUTY.

war. A practical illustration of this may be found in
the history of the North American Indians. Among
them revenge was thought to be a virtue ; and, in con-
sequence, the tribes were found by the Europeans who
first visited the country, embroiled in exterminating
wars.

Let us, for another example, inquire into the moral
quality of drunkenness. From its mischievous effects
on the happiness of individuals, and of society, we
know that it is criminal ; but this criminality is not dis-
coverable in any antecedent mental affection, if viewed
apart from a knowledge of the evil consequences result-
ing. If alcohol were as harmless as water, we might
drink it innocently; but our knowledge of its effects
warns us against the use of it. The criminality con-
sists in disregarding the warning which nature gives us.

In learning duty from natural religion, caution is
needed, lest we make unauthorized conclusions. Al-
though human suffering may, in a general view of
it, be ascribed to sin, it cannot be affirmed of each par-
ticular pain that it is the penalty for a particular crime.
No one will refer the pain of pleurisy to a particular
crime which the sufferer has committed. Much suffer-
ing results from imprudence, when there is no special
criminality; and much from the imprudence or crimi-
nality of other persons, over whose conduct the sufferers
had no power. It is our duty, as intelligent beings, to
study the sequences of nature ; and, so far as they can
be brought under our control, to give them such direc-
tion as will promote happiness. Natural religion holds
us responsible for the consequences of our voluntary
actions, when these consequences could be foreknown.
In some cases, present pain is inflicted for the sake of
greater future good which it will accomplish ; as when
a physician applies a blaster to cure disease, or a sur



NATURAL RELIGION. Ill

geon amputates a limb to save life. In such cases, if
nature's sequences have been duly studied by the agent,
the benevolence of his intention determines the moral
character of the action.

JExtent of its Teaching,

If we include in the teachings of natural religion all
the knowledge of morals which may be derived from
studying the order of nature, we shall find that it is an
abundant source of moral instruction.

1. Natural religion confirms the primary impulse of
conscience.

The elementary benevolent affection to which con-
science impels, and which conscience approves, tends to
the production of happiness. Natural religion teaches
that this accords with the will of Crod, manifested in
the benevolent contrivances with which his works
abound. The instinctive affection of a mother for her
offspring operates, and is approved by conscience, before
any judgment is formed of its beneficial tendency.
Natural religion confirms this decision of conscience, by
showing how greatly society is indebted to this maternal
instinct for its happiness and its very existence.

2. Natural religion directs the form which ^e mental
affection shall assume when it is put forth into action.

The elementary affection cannot go abroad, without
knowledge of things around us. It cannot be directed
to other beings, until their existence is known; and
cannot act on them without knowledge of the effects
which actions will produce. For this knowledge con-
science is indebted to natural religion. This opens the
channel in which the affection shall flow ; or, rather, it
points out the channel which God has opened. Con-
science has no original knowledge of human relations,
or of the modes in which human happiness may be



1



112 KNOWLBDGB OP DUTY.

affected ; but natural religion gives knowledge of the
modes in which conscience must act ; and, without this
knowledge, it cannot act to any definite result.

Persons who have not considered the subject, are
not aware how much we are indebted to natural religion
for our knowledge of duty. With every movement of
the hand, or foot, or tongue, if the happiness of a
fellow-creature may be affected by it, some obligation
is connected. It is the office of conscience to make us
feel this obligation; but natural religion must teach
how to fulfil it. All nature is a vast volume spread
out before us, from which we may learn our duty ; and
natural religion teaches us so to read this volume, as to
learn from it what is the will of God by which our
actions should be regulated.

3. Natural religion presents strong motives to duty«
The man who disregards the goadings of conscience,
is often deterred from the commission of crime by the
external penalties which he must incur. To these,
natural religion points; and she teaches to consider
these God's penalties for sin, and indications of his
displeasure. She teaches that all the sequences of
nature are arrangements of God's wisdom, and are
connected with the administration of his moral govern-
ment ; that this government extends beyond the present
life; and that the penalties which he inflicts in this
world, are only the beginning of his righteous retribu-
tion. With such instructions natural religion lifts up
its warning voice to deter from crime.

Its Insufficiency.

The possession of conscience renders us moral and
accountable beings. It binds us to the exercise of
right affections, but does not bind to any particular
mode of action, until natural religion has added its



NATURAL RELIGION* 118

teachings. Natural religion, therefore, renders men
inexcusable, if they do not improve all the advantages
which it oflFers for attaining to perfect virtue ; but it is
insufficient to restore fallen man to perfect virtue.

I. The insufficiency of natural religion has been
demonstrated by fair experiment.

God has been pleased to leave a large part of the
human race to the mere light of nature. The result
has been that they have sunk deeper and deeper in
vice, and wandered farther and farther from God.
Heathen nations have admitted their own degeneracy,
and have talked of a golden age long past, in which
men conversed with the gods, and walked in the ways
of virtue. Political institutions, which in their origin
were found sufficient to restrain from grosser vices,
grow old and decay; and the barriers which they
present, become too feeble to resist the lawless passions
of men. Religion becomes more and more degraded.
The corrupt imaginations of men form deities who are
monsters of vice, and invent abominable rites for their
worship. To whatever part of the heathen world we
may go, we shall find such a state of society as will
sadly demonstrate the insufficiency of natural religion.

It cannot be alleged that the experiment has failed,
for want of intelligence in the people. In ancient
Greece and Rome, a high degree of intelligence existed.
Many of the arts were carried to a degree of perfec-
tion which has never since been surpassed. Sages
appeared, whose wisdom, was admired by the multitude,
and many philosophers taught lessons of morality to
their disciples. But with all these advantages, the
nations were grossly idolatrous and vicious. The
lessons of morality wrought no reform, and the very
teachers were slaves to the prevalent corruption. Here
10*



114 ENOWLEDGB OF BUTT.

natural religion enjoyed a fair opportunity, and here
its insufficiency was fully demonstrated.

II. Natural religion is defdctive in its mode of
teaching.

Natural religion teaches by experience. We cannot
know the effect of an action on human happiness, until
it has been tried ; and frequently a long course of trial
is necessary. Sometimes, to give a complete demon*-
stration, the experiment needs to be made on a broad
scale, affecting the manners and prosperity of entire
nations. This mode of instruction is too slow for
depraved man, whose appetites and passions are clamor^
ous for immediate gratification. He acts under their
impulse, and the habit of vice is formed before these
instructions can avail.

The instructions of natural religion are not suffi*
ciently impressive, to arrest men who are going head-
long in a course of vice. It draws its motives from
things unseen and future, and the knowledge of these
is obtained by processes of reasoning through which
they are but dimly discovered. On the other hand,
the objects which tempt to present gratification, are
directly at hand, and distinctly perceived by the
senses. The indulgence of the present moment is
often determined on, at the risk of future happiness in
this world ; and much more is happiness in the life to
come risked, for the sake of continued enjoyment in
this life.

Nature itself teaches that another mode of instruc-
tion is necessary. Children learn much from experi-
ence ; but parental affection does not leave them wholly
to this means of obtaining knowledge. Language is
employed as a vehicle of instruction, and the know-
ledge which the parent has acquired is transfused into
the mind of the child, to aid his imperfect experience.



REVELATION. 115

Such aid natnre has taught men to expect from the
Ibenevolent Father of all. The idea of revelation from
the gods, found entrance into heathen minds; and
heathen lawgivers, availing themselves of it, pretended
to give their laws for the government of the people by
instruction from the gods. Men, groaning under the
miseries which idolatry and vice had brought on them,
have longed for some revelation from heaven, to teach
them the way to happiness.

A revelation has been granted to mankind, and this
fact proves further the insufficiency of natural religion.
In. the inscrutable wisdom of God, it was withheld
until the insufficiency of natural religion was fully de-
monstrated; and it then introduced a new mode of
teaching adapted to the wants of mankind. ((After
that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preach-
ing, to save them that believe."^ We learn from this
revelation, that even in primeval innocence the parents
of our race were not left wholly tp natural religion,
but had their Maker's will further made known to
them by express command. Much more do we, their
fallen sons, need clear instruction directly from
heaven; and, when granted, we ought to receive it
with overflowing gratitude, and prize it as our richest
treasure.

SECTION IV. REVELATION.

It% Relation to Natural Religion.

The Bible is a revelation from God, supplying the
defects of natural religion. It was given by inspiration
of God, and is, therefore, to be received as God's word
addressed' to men, and an infallible directory in all

» 1 Cor. i. 21.



116 KNOWLBDaB OF DUTY.

things of which it treats. The proof that the Bible is
the word of God may be studied in works on the etir
dences of Christianity. A single argument of great
force in support of this truth may be drawn from the
harmony of the Bible with natural religion, and the
adaptedness of its doctrines to supply the defects of
nature's teachings, and to develop and perfect the moral
powers of man.

1. The revelation made in the Bible presupposes and
confirms the teachings of natural religion.

The Bible opens with the declaration, " In the begin-
ning God created the heavens and the earth." The
existence of God is presupposed. The narrative pro-
ceeds as if this were an admitted and familiar truth.
The attributes of God, so far as they may be learned
from our best study of nature, are all taught with
clearness in the >^lume of inspiration. The distinction
of right and wrong, the moral government of God, the
immortality of the soul, and the retributions of the
future world, truths which nature teaches with obscurity,
are brought forth into clear light iy the Bible. The
obligation of directing our affections outward, and fix-
ing them on God Jind our fellow-creatures, is taught by
express precepts.

Since God speaks to us in nature, if the Bible con-
tradicted the teachings of nature, there would be evi-
dence that they have not proceeded from the same
author. But nature and the Bible, so far as they speak
on the same subject, always speak in perfect harmony.
Moreover, the Bible expressly refers to the teachings
of nature, and establishes their authority. Paul asks,
" Doth not even nature itself teach ?''^ and Job directs,
"Ask the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the

^ 1 Cor. xi. 14.



RBVELATION. 117

fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee/'^ David
describes the office of natural religion in these words :
«< The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firma-
ment showeth his handywork ; day unto day uttereth
speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge."^
And he indicates the connection and harmony of reve-
lation, with the teachings of nature, by adding, << The
law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul : the tes-
timony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.'*^

2. The Bible reveals clearly what natural religion
teaches obscurely ; and reveals many important truths
which nature cannot teach.

Natural religion teaches us to look through the works
of creation and providence with the eye of the under-
standing, and see God as he appears behind them ; but
revelation brings him forth openly, and presents him
addressing our external eyes and ears in his holy word.
Nature teaches the immortality of the soul by obscure
processes of reasoning ; bu( the Bible brings life and
immortality to light. Nature rather suspects and fears,
than believes and knows, that there will be a future
retribution; but the Bible shows us the Judge, the
great white throne, the opened books, and the assembled
multitude. We learn our duty from nature by slow
deductions and long observations ; but the Bible brings
us at once to the base of Sinai to hear God's commands,
or directs us to read them as inscribed by his finger on
the tables of stone.

Nature may teach that man is a depraved creature,
but it cannot direct to any remedy for his depravity —
any means of healing for his moral disease. It may
teach that man is guilty, and under the condemnation
of God ; but it cannot assure the anxious soul that there

1 Job xii. 7. « Ps. xix. 1, 2. » Ps. xix. 7.



118 KKOWLBDGB OF DUTT.

is forgiveness with God ; and cannot utter in his ears-
the proclamation of peace. It cannot say, «< Deliver
him from going down to the pit: I have found a
ransom."^ Natural religion may exhibit the mocal
governor of the universe, with the flaming sword of
justice in his hand ; but of God in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself, it knows nothing, and can teach
nothing.

3. The Bible presents motives to virtue far more
powerful than those of natural religion.

Natural religion moves men by rewards and punish-
ments, which appear distant and uncertain. In the
present life, virtue is often afflicted, and vice prosperous;
and, therefore, motives drawn merely from the present
life, operate doubtfully and feebly ; and natural religion
cannot look into the world to come with clear and unob-
structed vision, but sees through a glass darkly. The-
Bible places the Judge at the door, and gives men a
deeply impressive knowledge of his terrors. It teaches,
moreover, that there is no hope of escape to those who
continue in transgression ; for « God shall bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing ;"^ and
rocks and mountains will not be able to hide the sinner
from his omniscient eye.

The Bible presents a most powerful motive, of which
natural religion knows nothing. It leads men to the
cross of Christ, and exhibits to them the love of God
in the gift of his Son ; the love of Christ in giving his
life a ransom ; the demerit of sin in his unparalleled
suflferings ; and the grace which has provided salvation
at a sacrifice so immense. Here the heart feels an
impulse beyond all the powers of nature. " The love
of Christ constraineth us.**^ "The goodness of God

* Job. xxxiii. 24. ' Eccl. xii. 14. • 2 Cor. v. 14.



BBVBLATION. 119

leadeth thee to repentance."^ Hearts, which the
thunders of Sinai could not shake, have been moved
by the groans of Calvary. If the moral power of the
cross fails, no motive can be effectual.

The Two Testaments.

The Bible consists of two parts. The Old Testa-
ment contains the revelations made to Moses and suc-
ceeding prophets nntil the time of Christ, and pre-
served in writing by the Hebrew nation. The New
Testament contains the revelations made by the imme-
diate followers of Christ, and transmitted in writing
by Christians of the ages following. The Old Testa-
ment was written in the Hebrew language ; the New
Testament in Greek.

In the first ages of the world, the art of alphabetic
writing was unknown ; and revelations from Xrod to
individuals were perpetuated by oral tradition. The
longevity of the patriarchs rendered this mode of trans-
mission less uncertain, than it would now be, since the
length of human life has been diminished. The art of
alphabetic writing was introduced about the time of
Moses ; and was immediately employed to give a stable
form to revelation. If this art was not itself a revela-
tion from God, as some have supposed, it was intro-
duced, by a wise ordering of Providence, at the very
time when it was needed, for the great purpose of giv-
ing permanence to the revelations, designed for the
benefit of mankind through all time ; and Moses was
commanded to use it for this purpose.

The first five books of the inspired volume were
written chiefly by Moses, and are called the Pentateuch.
They contain an account of the creation, and a brief



^ Rom. ii. 4.



120 KNOWLBDQB OF DUTY.

history of the worlds to the death of Moses, so far
it was appropriate to the design of a revelation from
God.

This first part of the Holy Scriptures records the
fall of our first parents ; the great wickedness of their
descendants ; their destruction by the flood on account
of their sins ; and the separation of Abraham's family
from the rest of mankind, for the establishment of a
pure religion. Among the descendants of Abraham, a
society was organized for the worship of God, called
the Congregation of the Lord. For their use God insti-
tuted numerous ceremonies of religious worship ; and to
them he committed his written revelation. This reve-
lation contains a code of laws, consisting of moral, cere-
monial, and judicial precepts. The moral law is chiefly
contained in the decalogue or ten commandments, which
were delivered audibly by the voice of God from Sinai,
and were engraven by the finger of God on two tables
of stone. The ceremonial law prescribed the rites of
religious worship, which were to be observed until the
time of Christ, and which prefigured a better dispensa-
tion of religion then to be introduced. This law was
given to the Israelites as a worshipping congregation.
The judicial law was given to them as a nation, and
served as their civil code. It was never designed to be
obligatory on other nations, except so far as the princi-
ples of justice embodied in it are applicable to their
circumstances.

The remalhing books of the Old Testament consist
chiefly of historical, devotional, and prophetical writ-
ings, which were of great use to the pious Hebrews,
and are profitable to men of all nations, who study them
with a desire to know and do the will of God.

The system of moral law revealed in the Old Testa-
ment, leaves men under condemnation for their trans-



REVELATION. 121

gressions, and exposed to the wrath of Ood. Intima-
tions were given in these ancient Scriptures, that God
had designs of mercy for our fallen race ; but the clear
revelation of his gracious purpose was reserved for the
dispensation which began with the coming of Christ,
and which is made known to us in the Scriptures of the
New Testament. From these we learn that the wisdom
of God has devised a method of salvation by grace,
adapted to the condition of fallen man. Justification
is granted to all who repent of sin, and believe in Christ.
To them, the obedience and death of Christ are reck-
oned, as if they had personally obeyed the law, and
suffered its penalty. Christ is to them the end of the
law for righteousness, and in him they have the promise
of eternal life.

The general distinction between the Old Testament
and the New is, that the former was a dispensation of
law, and the latter is a dispensation of grace. <« The
law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ."^ Yet the Old Testament made sufficient
revelation of grace, to guide the saints of that dispen-
sation to heaven ; and the New Testament, on the other
hand, sheds much additional light on the path of duty.
It confirms those precepts of the former dispensation,
which were adapted to general use ; and, adopting the
same principles of morality on which they were founded,
unfolds them more clearly, and gives them a wider appli-
cation.

The Bible is a rule of duty. In the words of Paul,
" All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.*' ^

» John i. 17. ' 2 Tim. iii, 16, 17.

11



122 KNOWLEDGE OF DUTT.

All the teachings of revelation may be considered a
source of instruction in righteousness^ and used as a
directory in good works. The inspired volume addresses
the understanding ; but the effect of its truth extends
further, sanctifying the heart, and producing Externally
the fruits of holy obedience. It teaches duty in respect
of both internal affections and external conduct ; and
none of its instructions are properly received, if they
fail to produce holiness of heart and life.

The Bible doctrine concerning God, and his works
of creation and providence, is adapted to increase our
love to him, and our delight in the manifestations of his
perfections. In its doctrine concerning the fall and
present state of man, we may learn our depravity and
condemnation,, and may find incitements to deep, heart-
felt repentance toward God. The doctrine concerning
Christ, presents him as our < Mediator and Saviour, and
calls forth the exercise of faith in him. The doctrine
concerning the Holy Spirit, leads to constant prayer for
his influences, and a constant committing of ourselves
to his guidance. The doctrine concerning the grace of
God in our salvation, draws forth our gratitude for the
unspeakable benefits bestowed. And the doctrine con-
cerning the future world, leads us to resist the tempta-
tions of the present, and to prepare with diligence,
watchfulness, and sobriety, for the eternal world to
which we are fast hastening.

The devotional portion of the Scriptures is of great
utility in the cultivation of pious feeling. The book of
Psalms especially has been found by good men an inval-
uable aid in the duties of both public and private
worship. We may draw near to God with the pious
breathings expressed in these sacred odes, and experi-
ence delight in holding communion with the Father of



REYBLATION. 123

our spirits. The elevating influence of this intercourse
mih heaven, will tend to preserve us from sinking under
the burdens of life ; or becoming immersed in worldly
cares and pursuits.

The historical parts of the Bible unite with the pro-
phetical, in furnishing proof of its divine origin. The
miracles which it records, and which are as indubitably
attested as any facts of history, affix to its revelations
the seal of omnipotence, and give firm foundation to
our faith. In the sacred history, we have illustrious
examples for our imitation, in the lives of pious men,
and especially in the life of Jesus Christ. We have,
moreover, a record of God's dealings with men, good
and bad, unfolding the principles of his moral govern-
ment, and teaching us how to conduct in order to
secure his favor. The history of the labors and
sufferings by which Christianity was propagated, give
important instruction to ministers of the gospel, and to
all who desire to be useful in extending the true reli-
gion.

The prophetical portions of the Bible furnish proof
of its divine origin, by means of their fulfilment ; and
they serve in this way to increase our faith. They open
to our view the designs of mercy yet to be accomplished ;
and thereby encourage the exercise of hope, and stimu-
late our efforts in the cause of Christ, with assured
confidence that our labor will not be in vain. These
Scripture prophecies are moreover interspersed with
commands, exhortations, and warnings, which are
greatly useful to direct us in the way of duty, and
further our progress.

Besides the general instructions in duty to be ob-
tained from' the Holy Scriptures, there are express
commands binding to the exercise of particular affec-
tions, and the performance of particular actions. Two



124 KNOWLBDaB OF DUTY.

precepts are given, on which we are taught that all the
law depends : << Then shalt love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart/' and <«Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself." The two tables of stone given to Moses at
Sinai contained expansions of these two precepts. The
duty of love to God was spread out into four command-
ments written on the first table, and requiring that we
shall have no other god than Jehovah — ^that we shall
not worship images — that we shall not take the Lord's
name in vain — and that we shall remember the Sabbath.
The duty of love to our neighbor is expanded into six
commandments, which were written on the second table,
and which require that we shall honor our parents —
that we shall not kill — that we shall not commit adul-
tery — that we shall not steal — that we shall not bear
false witness — and that we shall not covet. The ten
commandments which have been referred to, were given
to the Israelites, and formed a part of God's covenant
with them as his peculiar people ; but they were given
to them as men, and are adapted to the relations which
men of all nations and ages bear to God and one an-
other, and they are therefore obligatory on all men.
In writing to the Romans,^ Paul quotes several of these
precepts, and recognises the authority and obligation
of the law which contained them ; and in writing to the
Ephesians,^ he quotes the fifth precept, and urges its
obligation as. one of the commandments. These epistles
were written after the abrogation of the old covenant,
and were addressed to Gentiles. We have proof, there-
fore, that the ten commandments are now binding on
men of all nations.

The Scriptures are so given as not to supersede, but
to require and encourage the exercise of our intellectual

* Rom. xiii. 8, 10. « Eph. vi. 2, 3.



DIYINB INFLUENCE. 125

and moral powers. Though their instructions are
clearer than those of natural religion, they nevertheless
require to be studied, and the duty of studying them is
enforced by divine command.^ We are not to hold
ourselves bound to do everything that has ever been
commanded to any one. Abraham was commanded to
sacrifice his son, and the Israelites were commanded to
destroy the ancient inhabitants of Palestine ; but we are
not bound to sacrifice our sons, or to destroy the present
inhabitants of the holy land. On the other hand, we
are not to hold ourselves at liberty to disregard all
commands not expressly addressed to us, for no man
on earth can find a command in Scripture addressed to
him by name. But commands are addressed to men in
particular relations, and these bind men who sustain
the same relations. Other commands are addressed to
men as men, and these bind all men. Some commands
were given for special reasons, and these bind in cases
to which the reasons are appUcable. Any one who will
study the Scriptures with a sincere desire to know his
duty can scarcely fail to learn it. Men err on this
point by neglecting the careful study of God's word,
or by studying it to find out justifications or excuses
for doing what they prefer, rather than directions for
doing that which is pleasing to God. They err also by
directing their inquiries to outward acts exclusively,
overlooking repentance, faith, love, and other affections
of the heart, which are duties of greater importance, in
the sight of God, than any external service.

SECTION v. KNOWLEDGE MADE EFFECTUAL

BY DIVINE INFLUENCE.

In the preceding discussions we have seen the insuf-
ficiency of conscience and natural religion. Does reve-

* John V. 39.
11*



%



so^Iy wS. xitt Aefieci* «f camaaemet and njitaral
rriigirm, ami affgti all dfce aai tibaK is Bccessuy in order
i»c£cnSK fiilLeAaEaft a pcsrEect TiitBe ?

1. Tbe rcvda&ua Bade in tke Old Tftaiaent 4raB
fTivcd. b J £ur CAfciiMil y 1» be mnSdcBt.

Pkeikiatt » tke iafiraiABCtiam «f Ike gOBpti dispensar
tifXL. dfee BecesBECT of ks fgaroiot was dcBonstrmted
Vt two emiiBiaiiii Oie «f tkeae was made in the



; tke ocker was Bade m tke nation of Israel,
frmtketiBeefMoKstotkecoBi^of Christ. The
Coagr^atmi of tke Loid ma institnted with diyinely-
presoibed rites of rdgiovs wonhqi. God entered
into a qwcial eorcnant with tbcniy and eramnitted to
them hb word of rerdaliony in which his will was
dearl J made known. Prophete were aoit to them from
time to time, with ssch farther oommnnications from
hearen as their circumstances required. AH God's
dealings with them manifested his special care, and
reminded them perpetnallj of their accountability to
him. They had the adrantage <«mach CTery way,
chiefly becaose that nnto them were committed the
oracles of God ;" ^ and they were not left, like the sur-
roonding heathen nations, to the obscure light of natjpral
religion. But all these advantages were, on trial,
proved to be insufficient. The people abused their
high privileges, rejected the authority of God, killed
the prophets whom he sent, and crucified the Messiah
raised up for their deliverance. God himself declared
the experiment to be a failure, found fault with the
covenant, abolished it, and instituted the new covenant
of the gospel dispensation. In the wisdom of God, the
abolished dispensation was preparatory to the new,
and demonstrated the necessity of a better covenant.



^ Rom. iii. 2.



DIVINB INFLUBNCB. 127

established on better promises ; a covenant in Which the
law would not be given in external revelation only, but
would be written in the heart, so as effectually to keep
the people in the service of God.^

2. The New Testament does not claim, for the mere
letter of its revelation, superior efficacy to that of the
Old Testament.

Paul declares the gospel to be the power of God unto
salvation;^ but he teaches also that the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, which Timothy had studied from
his youth, were able to make wise unto salvation.^
David ascribed a saving efficacy to the imperfect reve-
lation which existed in his day. « The law of the Lord
is perfect, converting the soul."* In contrasting the
former dispensation with the present, Paul accounts for
the inefficacy of the Old Testament, not from the infe-
riority of its revelation, but from the fact that the
people read Moses with a veil on their hearts.^ The
ministration of the letter left the law, engraven on
stone, a mere external revelation ; and the word of the
New Testament is as unprofitable as that of the Old,
unless it enters the heart, and dwells there in its sanc-
tifying power.

3. The saving efficacy of revelation is attributed in
the Bible to the accompanying influence of the Holy
Spirit.

The New Testament clearly teaches this doctrine.
<< Neither is he that planteth anything, neither he that
watereth ; but God that giveth the increase."® "Whose
heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the
things," kcJ " My preaching was in demonstration
of the Spirit."® "Not in word only, but in power

» Heb. viii. 6-13. «Rom.i. 16. » 2 Tim. iii. 15. *Ps. xix. 7.
» 2 Cor. iii. 15. • 1 Cor. iii. 7. ^ Acts xvi. 14. » 1 Cor. ii. 4.



128 KNOWLEDOB OF DUTY.

and the Holy Ghost." ^ "The letter killeth, but the
Spirit giveth life."^ Even under the Old Testament,
the saints understood and felt the necessity of the
Spirit's influence. Wherefore David prayed earnestly,
"Take not thy Holy Spirit from me."^ Numerous
passages of the Old Testament speak of God's bestowing
of the Holy Spirit, for the sanctification and salvation
of his people ; and a prophecy of Joel foretold the won-
derful outpouring of the Holy Spirit, which, on the day
of Pentecost, gave efficacy to the preaching of the
apostles.^ Christians, with one accord, pray for the
Holy Spirit to render the preaching ^f the gospel
effectual ; and the whole tenor of their devotions, both
public and private, recognises the necessity of his
influence.

4. The original defect in the impulse of conscience
renders the influence of the Holy Spirit necessary.

If the original impulse of conscience were sufficiently
strong to control our lower impulses, and if we obeyed
it throughout life, we should live in perfect virtue.
The discoveries of natural and revealed religion would
be welcomed, and all our powers would be given to the
service of God. But we begin life with an advantage
in favor of the lower impulses, and this advantage the
power of habit is ever increasing. Conscience cannot
of itself regain its lost dominion, and natural religion
cannot give it the needed aid. The Old Testament
tried its power without success, and the New Testament
acknowledges its impotence, if not accompanied with
the power of the Holy Spirit. The original defect in
the impulse of conscience leaves men under the dominion
of the lower propensities, that is, renders them carnal ;
and, to remedy this defect, they need a change which

1 1 These, i. 5. « 2 Cor. iii. 6. » Ps. li. 11. * Acts ii. 16.



DIVINE INFLUENCE. 129

is appropriately called new birth, new creation, reno-
vation, regeneration. To effect this change, divine
power is needed ; and it is accordingly ascribed to the
Spirit of God.

Natural religion can give no assurance of divine for-
giveness. The Old Testament taught that there is
forgiveness with God,^ and obscurely exhibited, in its
sacrifices, the redemption by Christ through which for-
giveness is bestowed. The New Testament opens the
way of salvation clearly, and gives full assurance of
pardon to all who seek it by faith in the atoning sacri-
fice of Christ. Natural religion can teach the need of
internal sanctification, but it cannot discover any suffi-
cient means for effecting it. The Old Testament
obscurely taught the doctrine of sanctification by the
renewing power of the Holy Spirit, but the New Testa-
ment reveals this doctrine fully, and teaches us on what
power to rely for effecting this great change within us.
The New Testament reveals God the Son, and God the
Holy Spirit, working for man and in man the great sal-
vation which he needs, and gives assurance of this salva-
tion to every penitent believer. The New Testament
revelation connects moral science with gospel theology,
and perfects the system. As there cannot be pure
morality without religion, so there cannot be a perfect
system of moral science without theology. A system
of moral science which has no place for the sanctifying
influence of the Holy Spirit, should be classed with the
inefficacious systems of ethics taught by heathen phi-
losophers, and should not satisfy the Christian student.

^ Ps. cxxz. 4.



CHAPTER VI.
GENERAL RULES OF CONDUCT.



The following rules of conduct may be deduced
from the foregoing discussions.

RULE I. STUDY THOROUGHLY THE LAWS

OF PURE MORALITY.

We spend years of laborious study, that we may
learn how to speak and write in the best manner. We
toil for this purpose at grammars and lexicons, and
wear out our eyes in reading authors of classic ele-
gance. All this is done that wo may speak and write
well; but how much more important it is, that we
should act well ! We learn arithmetic and book-keep-
ing to render ourselves good accountants, and we study
political economy, that we may apply our accountant
skill to the acquisition of wealth ; but what wealth is
of so much value as the inestimable treasure of an
unsullied character, the priceless gem of a pure con-
science ! We study the rules of politeness, that we may
pass in society with ease and grace ; but men of polished*
and fascinating manners, with corrupt hearts, are
whited sepulchres, beautiful indeed without, but within
full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness. They
are loathsome and pestilential. We should not desire
to be like them, but should labor to acquire the grace
of genuine virtue, the fascination of uncounterfeited
benevolence.

Let us study morality in books and in men ; in the

(130)



BULE II. 131

-written and unwritten lives of those whose virtues
have adorned society, in the approbation and homage
of mankind for genuine goodness ; but, above all, in
the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make us
"thoroughly furnished unto every good work.'* Let
us study morality with more intense interest than any-
thing else. Let us study it for the management of the
heart, the tongue, the hands, the feet, the eyes, the ears.
Let us study it in the daily business of life, in the family,
in retirement, and on our knees : so study it, that it
shall become our most familiar science, and that the
fluency and propriety with which we speak, shall not
exceed the promptness and correctness with which we
determine how to act.

RULE II. IN DELIBERATING ON AN ACTION,
INQUIRE CHIEFLY INTO ITS MORAL

QUALITY.

The Great Teacher asked, "What is a man profited
if ho shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul ?"^
This inquiry should be before us, whenever we are
deliberating how to act, and the proper answer to it
should govern all our decisions. Every wrong action
tends to corrupt the character and ruin the soul. No
evil can befall us so great as to do wrong, and no
benefit arising from an evil act, can countervail the
mischief and damage accruing. We ought, therefore,
in deliberating on the performance of any act, to
inquire with chief solicitude, not whether it will secure
pleasure, honor, or wealth, but whether it is right.
This question, first in importance, should be first in the
order of time. We should ask it before the temptation
has excited the imagination and biassed the judgment.

* Matt. xvi. 26.



132 GENERAL RULES OF CONDUCT.

We should firmly disregard every other inquiry, until
this question has been thoroughly investigated, and
fully and finally decided.

RULE III. ALWAYS ACT CONSCIENTIOUSLY.

Never do what conscience /orSicZ*. If we slight its
admonitions, they will become less urgent, less loud,
until its voice will at length be unheard. A little
indulgence may be proposed, and appetite, passion, or
self-love may plead that it is a little thing ; but it is
never a little thing to wound the conscience. Drive
not this faithful friend to cease his remonstrance, for
his silence is the token of perdition.

Never decline to do what enlightened conscience
commands. The road of virtue is sometimes up a
rugged ascent; but we must not hesitate to climb it.
We should pursue duty at every expense, and at every
hazard. He who hesitates to-day, may stand still to-
morrow, and go backward the day following. If we
would be virtuous, truly and decidedly virtuous, we
must cultivate the habit of attending promptly to every
suggestion "of the internal monitor ; and no dangers,
fears, or enticements, should cause us to deviate in the
slightest degree from the onward path, or abate the
speed of our progress.

Avoid action, if conscience is in doubt. Even those
whose ability to form correct moral judgments is great-
est, are sometimes in doubt. No one should do any-
thing, the propriety of which he doubts, unless he still
more doubts the propriety of delay. Every one should
seek to prepare himself for the prompt decision of
cases which do not admit deliberation, and errors of
haste are often the result of previous deliberate negli-
gence.



RULE IV. 133



RULE IV. PRACTISE FREQUENT, STRICT,
AND IMPARTIAL SELF-EXAMINATION.

Our present life is preparatory for that which is to
come ; and every day of life prepares for those which
follow it. The experience of yesterday fits ns for the
duties of to-morrow; and we should study it for this
end. Have we done right? We should mark the
pleasure which self-approbation brings, and resolve to
persevere in the right. Have we done wrong? We
should submit patiently to the pain of remorse, and
penitently resolve to do so no more. We should dili-
gently search into the causes of our error, and deter-
mine to watch against the temptations by which we
have been overcome. If others have sufiered by our
wrong, our penitence is never complete, until we have
resolved to make restitution. Above all, it is never
complete, until we have contemplated our sin as com-
mitted against God, and humbled ourselves before him
on account of it. In this manner, the penitent king
of Israel confessed to God, "Against thee, thee only,
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.'* ^

Our self-examination should be so frequent, as to
become habitual; so strict, as to permit no thought,
word, or action, to escape its watchful scrutiny; and
so impartial, that we can invite the search of the om-
niscient Judge. To assist our impartiality, we may
often avail ourselves of complaints and accusations
made against us by enemies ; or the rebukes of faithful
friends, whose censures ought to be far more acceptable
to our ears, than the voice of flattery.



» Ps. li. 4.
12



134 GENERAL RULES OP CONDUCT.

RULE V. THESE RULES SHOULD BE OBSERVED
IN THE FEAR OF GOD, WITH HUMBLE TRUST
IN CHRIST, AND PRAYERFUL DEPENDENCE
ON THE HOLY SPIRIT,

Religion is the perfection of morality, and the
truth and excellence of the Christian religion are
demonstrated, by the perfect adaptedness of its doc-
trines to develop and perfect the moral powers of
man. To estimate the human mind aright, we must
contemplate its moral powers, in their susceptibility
of indefinite development, and in their relation to the
moral government of God, and the retributions of
eternity. These subjects must be viewed in the light
which the Gospel of Christ sheds on them. Moral
philosophy has performed its best office, when it has
brought us to the feet of Christ, to receive his instruc-
tions, to obey his commands, and to trust in his blood
and righteousness.



CHAPTER VII.
DUTIES TO GOD.



SECTION I. LOVE AND RBYERENGE.

The chief of all duties is thus commanded : « Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.*' ^
Natural religion leads us to the knowledge of this duty,
through a long process of reasoning ; but in revelation,
God issues his command directly, and in terms which
all may understand. Some difficulty may arise in
defining repentance, faith, and other exercises of the
mind ; but no one needs to be told what love is. Some
minds are capable of stronger afiections than others ;
and this precept, allowing for the diversity, measures
the extent of the obligation by the extent of the
capacity. The precept accommodates itself to persons
of feeble mind, and spreads its obligation over the most
powerful intellects. To love with all the heart, is the
simple comprehensive requirement adapted to every
case.

The object of our supreme love is near at hand.
Our eyes do not see his spiritual essence; but it is
equally true, that they do not see the minds with which
we hold familiar intercourse in social relations, and
toward which our warm affections flow. The father and
mother whom we love, are not the mere outward forms



^ Deut. vi. 5.

(135)



13(5 DUTIES TO GOD.

T?liich our eyes see, but the invisible minds that care
for us, and love us. Though the minds themselves are
unseen, their love and tender care are incessantly
manifested in words and actions, which could originate
in nothing but parental affection. We have as thorough
conviction that the minds of our parents exist, and are
filled with affection for us, as we could have if their
minds and their affections were visible or tangible things.
So we may have thorough conviction that God exists,
and that he is infinitely benevolent, though our eyes
have never seen his essence, and our hands have never
felt the throbbings of his kind heart. Hence, the
invisibility of God is no obstacle to the exercise of our
love to him. He may be seen in every object that we
behold ; perceived in every movement of nature ; and
felt in every enjoyment of life. The heavens, the
earth, the mountains, the vales, the forests, and the
grassy plains, are all full of the Deity. The rising 3un,
the fanning breeze, and the flowing stream, are moved
by his hand, and guided by his unseen mind. His
kindness supplies our food, and raiment, and health,
and the blessings of every passing hour. If, seeing all
these manifestations of God, and receiving all these
blessings from him, we live without love to him, we are
wholly inexcusable. The brutes that perish may live
in disregard of God ; but for intelligent, moral crea-
tures so to live, is highly criminal, and must be highly
offensive to their Maker. If earthly parents would be
grieved by the continued indifference and neglect of
the children whom they love and provide for, much
more must our heavenly Father be grieved and offended,
if we meet him at every turn of life, arid take from his
hand every good that we enjoy, without acknowledging
his presence and goodness, and giving him the affec-
tions of our hearts.



LOVB AND REVERENCE. 137

We are under obligation to delight in the happiness
of Grod. Isaac loved savory meat,^ for the sake of the
gratification which it afforded him : and such love may
be innocently exercised toward material objects ; but
virtuous love cannot be exercised towards sentient
objects, without regard to their pleasure or happiness.
Virtuous love tends to diffuse happiness, where it can
be increased, and to delight in it, where it already
exists. God's happiness is incapable of increase ; but,
if we love him, we delight in contemplating his blessed-
ness, and the incessant flow of it into the creatures who
are deriving enjoyment from his inexhaustible fulness.
The heart that does not delight in the Lord, would dry
up this fountain of good, which supplies every stream
of happiness on earth, and all the bliss of heaven.

We are under obligation to delight in the attributes
of God. God is not a mere fountain of happiness,
supplying the universe with enjoyment. When he
created man in his image, he made him not sentient
merely, but also intelligent and moral. Being endowed
with such a nature, we ought to understand and approve
the character of God. We cannot love with all the
heart, if the intellectual and moral powers are not
brought into exercise ; but this cannot be, if his char-
acter is such that the streams of happiness flowing from
him are wild torrents, rushing without guidance and
control. We are formed capable of understanding, to
some extent, those attributes of the divine nature which
regulate every outflow from its fulness ; and we cannot
love God as he requires, without approving and delight-
ing in these attributes. We must rejoice that God
reigns, and that justice and judgment are the habitation
of his throne. We must approve the principles of his

* Gen. xxvii. 4.
12*



138 DUTIES TO eoD.

moral government, and desire its perpetuity and uni-
versal prevalence. We must from the heart pray,
"Thy kingdom come.**

We are under obligation to delight in the execution
of God's will. « He doeth according to his will in the
army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
earth.'* ^ He " worketh all things after the counsel of
his own will."^ God's will accords with the perfections
of his nature ; and these are displayed when his will
is executed. It is impossible to delight in his perfec-
tions, without delighting in the execution of his will.
He who loves God with all the heart, prays with all the
heart, « Thy will be done."

Love, exercised towards equals and dependants, may
assume the form of familiar fondness ; but, as exercised
towards the infinite God, it assumes the form which is
appropriately denoted by the word reverence. A sense
of God's great superiority mingles with the emotion of
love ; producing humility in the contemplation of our-
selves, and reverence in the contemplation of God. We
may revere fellow-men, whom we acknowledge to be
our superiors. Respect is paid to men of age, men of
power, men of purity. But if hoary hairs entitle men
to reverence, much more is reverence due to the Ancient
of Days, who existed ages of ages before any creature
was brought into being. If reverence is due to mighty
kings, who rule over large empires, and command the
movements of vast armies ; much more is it due to the
King of kings, who governs the universe, at whose com-
mand the heavenly hosts fly in swift obedience, and
whose will all the forces of nature obey. If we revere
holy men, clothed with vestments of spotless purity;
much more should we, with the angels who worship near

1 Dan. iv. 35. " Eph. i. 11.



LOVB AND RByBRENCB. 189

the throne, how in profound reverence, and, vailing
our faces, cry, "Holy! holy! holy! is the Lord of
hosts !"i

The reverence which has been described, is frequently
denoted in the Scriptures by the term fear: « The fear
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." ^ « Fear God,
and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty
of man." ^ There is a fear which is inconsistent with love.
Of this it is said, "Perfect love casteth out fear;
because fear hath torment."* This servile fear is con-
sistent with the greatest depravity; for, "the devils
believe and tremble."^ But the fear of God which the
Holy Scriptures command, is filial reverence, a rever-
ence, similar to that which a dutiful son feels towards a
father whom he delights to honor and obey. This fear
of God produces adoration, and is indispensably neces-
sary in all acceptable worship and service. It is hence
properly called the "beginning of wisdom."

The religion of the heathen is not founded on love
and reverence for their deities. Indeed the deities whom
they worship are not worthy of love and reverence, the
heathens themselves being judges. The gods have been
created by the depraved imaginations of men, and even
heathen morality has reprobated the characters and
actions attributed to them. But long before the heathen
poets sung of their gods, the true God commanded the
lore and reverence of his creatures; and a religion
founded on this requirement, difiers from all other
religions in the world, and contains internal proof that
it is the true religion. It is a fact which infidelity can-
not deny, that the precept requiring supreme love to
God, is found in the oldest book in the world. As there

* Isaiah vi. 3. * Prov. ix. 10. » Ecc. xii. 13. * 1 John iv. 18.
^ James ii. 19.



140 DUTIES TO GOD,

found, it claims to have come from heaven. What other
origin could it have had ? Any one who will attentively
and honestly pursue this single inquiry, may find in it
alone satisfactory proof that the Bible is what it claims
to be, the book of God.

SECTION II. OBEDIENCE.

«

Supreme love to God implies delight in the execu-
tion of his will. It is not enough that God himself
does his own pleasure in heaven and earth ; and that
virtuous creatures are executing his will ; but, if we
love him supremely, we cannot be satisfied to be inactive.
We must co-operate with God and his virtuous creatures,
in doing what pleases him. We cdnnot delight in his
happiness, without desiring to do that which gives him
pleasure ; and we cannot delight in his perfections, with-
out desiring to do that which accords with these perfec-
tions.

The powers with which God has endowed us, are
adapted to action; and it was his design that they
should be employed in action. He made them, and pre-
serves them, and has a perfect and absolute right of
property in them. He has the highest right to command
their services ; and we are bound, under the strongest
obligation possible, to employ them in his service. He
has a perfect right to assign us our place in his domin-
ions, and to prescribe our duties ; and we are under the
strongest possible obligation, to take the assigned place,
and perform the prescribed duties, in the exercise of
supreme love to him. Such obedience is rendered by
the inhabitants of heaven, and makes heaven a place
of order and bliss. We ought to pray, « Thy will be
done in earth, as it is in heaven;*'^ and, if we act in



1 Matt. vi. 10.



OBBDIBNOB. 141

harmony with this prayer, our powers will be employed
in doing the will of God, and our obedience will harmo-
nize with that which prevails in the high and holy
place.

Our obedience should be from the heart. Jesus said,
c«My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
finish his work."^ And to do the will of God ought to
be our highest enjoyment. It is not enough that we
perform, with reluctance, or cold indifference, the out-
ward acts which God requires. If we do not delight in
the service, the Searcher of hearts sees through the
outward form, and abhors the service to which the heart
is not given. God is not deceived. Splendid services
are a mockery; and costly oblations a cheat. God
requires the heart ; and without it, no service can be
acceptable in his sight.

Our obedience should be perpetual. One day in
seven has been specially consecrated to the worship and
service of God ; but every day, every hour, every mo-
ment, belongs to him, and should be spent in accordance
with his will. In the sanctuary, in the closet, and in
the daily secular pursuits of life, God is present with
us, and worthy of our supreme love ; and, whether we
eat or drink, or whatever we do, we should act under a
sense of obligation to him, and with a view to his appro-
bation. Our constant inquiry should be, " Lord, what
wilt thou have me to do?"^ And in every concern of
life, in our general plans, and in our particular actions,
we fail in duty, if we cannot refer everything to the
will of God, and act with a sincere desire to please him
in all things.

Our obedience should be universal. If love to God
reigns in the heart, every affection, every thought,

* John iv. 34. * Acts ix. 6.



142 DUTIES TO GOD.

every imaginatioD, will be in subjection to the divine
will. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
will speak words well pleasing to God. Every act, in
which any member of the body is employed, will be
directed with pure intent to the fulfilment of God*s will.
If God requires some arduous service, the whole man,
body and spirit, will be given up to this service without
reserve ; and if God commands the tithing of mint, the
smallness of the service will never be made a plea for
disobedience. Whether God commands to govern an
empire, or to give a piece of bread to a sufiering
Lazarus, it will be our delight to obey.

Our obedience should be unhesitating. When Paul
was called into the service of the Christian ministry,
he conferred not with flesh and blood.^ The like
promptness should appear in all our obedience. If
appetite and passion should urge delay, for the sake of
present gratification, our firm purpose should be undis-
turbed by their clamor. We must learn to crucify the
flesh with its afi'ections and lusts. If self-love should
urge that the loss of comfort, health, or life, is too
great a sacrifice to be made for the sake of pleasing
God, we must deny self, and remember that we are not
our own. No enticements, however strong, no threats,
however formidable, should cause a moment's delay in
executing the will of God.

SECTION III. GRATITUDE.

We love and honor good and great men, from whom
we have received no personal kindness. On the same
principle, we ought to love and reverence God, apart
from all consideration of the benefits received from
him. But a strong additional incentive to love is fur-

^ Gal. i. 16.



GRATITUDE. 148

nished by the blessings which he confers on ns ; and in
view of these, love assumes the form of gratitude.

Gratitude implies a sense of intended kindness.
The fire that warms us, does us a kindness ; but we are
not grateful to it, because it warms without intention.
But God's favors are intentionally bestowed. They
come from his benevolence ; and are, therefore, adapted
to awaken gratitude in our hearts.

God has surrounded us with objects adapted to give
pleasure to our senses, and has so constituted us that
we are capable of receiving this pleasure. Much of it
comes in our way without being sought, and meets us
in the path of life which we are obliged to tread. The
food which we must eat in order to sustain life is made
sweet to the taste. The light by which our steps must
be guided is made pleasant to the eyes. Every sense
is made an inlet of pleasure not necessary to our being,
but contributing much to our happiness. These enjoy-
ments pour in upon us at every opening, and from every
quarter ; and they are manifestly the result of contri-
vance, proceeding from the all-creating Mind. For
these benefits incessantly received, our hearts should
send forth incessantly a return of gratitude to Him from
whose bounty they flow.

God has made the intellectual powers with which he
has endowed us, sources of enjoyment. Apart from
the necessity or utility of knowledge, we have pleasure
in possessing it, and pleasure in acquiring it. We
commence our pleasurable lessons at the beginning of
life ; and, throughout its course, the objects ^hich sur-
round us, stimulate and gratify our inquisitiveness.
And the provision for intellectual enjoyment is not
confined to tte present life. Knowledge in the present
life is but in part. Beyond death, nfew fields of dis-
covery are opened to the immortal spirit ; new powers



144 DUTIES TO GOD.

will be given for exploring them ; and the exercise of
these powers, in the boundless pursuit of knowledge,
will be adapted to give new and eternally-accumulating
happiness.

God has made us capable of pleasure from the exer-
cise of virtue — a pleasure the richest and noblest that
we can enjoy, and nearest akin to the blessedness of
God. An opportunity for exercising virtue, and there-
fore for enjoying this pleasure, he has given at every
moment of life, and in every relation that we bear. By
the mental constitution with which he has endowed us,
this pleasure will, if we continue to make progress in
virtue, increase with every step of our advancement,
until we reach the felicity of the upper world, and it'
will there continue to accumulate through our immortal
existence.

God has made us capable of deriving enjoyment from
society ; and he has given opportunity for this enjoy-
ment by placing us in the midst of society from the
commencement of life. Much of our knowledge is
derived from society, and in society we find the chief
occasions for the exercise of virtue. Hence our intel-
lectual, moral, and social pleasures, become intimately
blended. This union of pleasures continues through
the life of a good man, and he dies with the assured
hope of finding it again beyond the grave. There he
will be introduced into the society of the pure and
blest. There he will be for ever with the Lord, and
will find in his presence fulness of joy.

The very exercise of gratitude gives pleasure ; and
all these blessings so rich in the present gift, and so
surpassingly rich in the future prospect, call forth its
exercise in every mind which is not lost to virtue.
How like the brute does that man live, who, amidst the
profusion of enjoyments which God pours upon him,



TBUST. 146

cherishes no gratitude in his heart to the benevolent
Author from whom they come ! Ingratitude is despised
among men ; how offensiye must it be in the sight of the
holy God, to whom all sin is hateful !

SECTION IV. TRUST.

It is our duty, not only to thank God for past and
present blessings, but to trust him for future supply in
every time of need. The experience of every hour
reminds us of Our absolute dependence on God. We
are unable to sustain ourselves in being, or to control
the operations of things around us, and compel them to
yield us needed good. Our inability gives constant
occasion for trust in God ; and trust in him is com-
manded in «the word of God by express precept, and
encouraged by numerous promises of divine blessing.

The attributes of God are a firm foundation for our
trust. The needy apply for relief to persons of known
benevolence, who have the power to grant the needed
aid ; and the confidence of success is greater or less,
according to the estimated benevolence and power of
those to whom the application is made. God is infinite
in benevolence and power, and is therefore infinitely
worthy of all our confidence. The needy apply for
relief to persons who have not invited them ; but God
has invited us to come to him for the supply of every
want, and to cast all our care on him. His past kind-
ness is a sufficient assurance that his invitation and
promise have not been given to deceive us, and we have
the highest additional assurance in his truth. God
cannot lie. His word of promise is more to be relied
on than the laws of nature. These may be changed.
Heaven and earth may pass away, but the word of the
Lord endureth for ever ; and what he has said he will
certainly perform. To charge a fellow-man with want
13



148 I»riIK5 TO GOD.

of trvKk, is esuemti one of the highest insults that we
can offer hia. If ve dismist the Termdty of God, he
hears the rerj langmage of our hearts, and cannot be
indifferoit to its imp<»t ; for •^ he that belieyeth not God
hath made him a liar." ^

To tmst (jod with the cares of this life, requires a
firm persnasion that all the affurs of life are under his
management. It requires, moreorer, a firm purpose to
obey him in afl things ; since the benefits conferred by
hb orerruling proridence are made blessings to the
obedient only. His threatenings desenre to be believed,
as well as his promises ; and if we sin against him, we
have reason to expect his wrath, instead of his blessing.
But if our trust in him is accompanied with a firm pur-
pose to obey him, and a firm persuasion ^hat all the
events of life are under his* control, we can enjoy un-
dbturbed peace and tranquillity amidst the turmoil of
life, and the whirl of human changes. With the same
temper of mind, relying on the promises of his grace
through Jesus Christ, we may contemplate death calmly,
and rejoice in the hope of eternal life.

SECTION V. REPENTANCE.

Were we free from sin, it would be our duty to
render to God the love, obedience, gratitude, and trust,
which have been described in the preceding sections.
But the fact that we are sinners, gives occasion for a
duty of which holy beings are incapable — the duty of
repentance.

According to the moral judgment of mankind, he
who has done wrong to his neighbor, is bound to regret
the wrong, and make amends for it. This obligation
is greatly increased, if the individual wronged is a

* 1 John V. 10.



BBSIGNATIOV. 147

friend and benefactor. The same principle of morals
requires repentance for sins committed against God.
We cannot, in oar own persons, make amends for oar
sins against him ; bat we can accept with gratefal joy
the satisfaction for sin which his goodness has provided,
in the death of Christ. All this we are bound to do.
Repentance was not commanded in the decalogue —
because the decalogue addresses men as men ; but the
gospel addresses men as sinners ; and, therefore, in the
gospel, God <<commandeth all men eyerywhere to re-
pent."^ And the Scriptures recognise the additional
obligation derived from the goodness of Gt>d towards
us. "The goodness of God leadeth thee to repent-
ance."^

He who, when charged by a fellow-man with having
committed an offence against him, declares that he is
not sorry for it, virtually repeats the offence. God
accuses us of our sins daily, by the voice of conscience
within us, by his judgments which are abroad in the
earth, and by the word which he has given us from
heaven. If, in the face of these accusations, we remain
impenitent, he understands the silent utterance of the
heart, as if it proclaimed abroad, in spite of his mani-
fested displeasure, that we are not sorry for having
offended him. What an aggravation of our guilt!
How fearful is the condition of the impenitent ! How
just the denunciation, « Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.'**

SECTION VI. RESIGNATION.

He who sincerely repents of sin, condemns himself
for having committed it, and acknowledges that he
deserves punishment. He is, therefore, prepared to
receive, without murmuring, those inflictions from the



* Acts xvii. 30. * Rom. ii. 4. ' Luka "lvvI. ^»



148 DUTIES TO GOD.

hand of God, which he regards as the punishment of
his sins. In this spirit of submission, the penitent
man endures the afflictions of life, and rejoices, if he
may account them fatherly chastisements for his offences
against infinite goodness, graciously intended and
wisely adapted to promote his holiness.

Pious submission in present suffering, is always
accompanied with resignation in the prospect of future
calamities. The good man reviews God*s past mercies
with overflowing gratitude, and asks, « Shall we receive
good at the hand of Ood, and shall we not receive
evin**^ He trusts in God, not only when the sky is
clear, and the sunshine of prosperity enlightens his
path, but also when clouds and darkness obscure his
way, and the gathering tempest howls over his head.
He remembers that God rules in every storm ; and God
is his refuge and strength in every trouble. Without
a tear, he is able to resign all into his heavenly Father's
hand ; and he sees no cause for fear, << though the earth
be removed, and though the mountains be carried into
the midst of the sea.'*^ Were the universe in convul-
sions, in God's hands he is safe.

SECTION VII. HABIT OF DEVOTION.

Our thoughts, feelings, and actions are, to a very-
great extent, determined by previously-acquired habit.
Through the power of habit, the thoughts, feelings, and
actions of to-day, affect us to-morrow, and throughout
our immortal existence. We are responsible for the
habits which we form, and, because of their immense
influence, our responsibility with respect to them is
inconceivably great.

Our highest duties relate to God. Devotion consists



Job ii. 10. • Ps. xlvi. 2.



HABIT OF DEVOTION. 149

in love, reverence, gratitude, repentance, trust, and
resignation ; and the habit of devotion is the habit of
exercising these affections. Since devotion is our highest
duty, our responsibility to form a habit of devotion, is
the highest of which we are capable.

Our opportunities for forming the habit of devotion,
correspond to the greatness of our responsibility respect-
ing it. They are more than we can number, greater
than we can estimate. A contemplation of them will
assist us to judge of the responsibility which they bring
with them, and under which we are obliged to act at
every moment of life.

1. Every object in creation is adapted to give exer-
cise to devotion.

The heathen had gods presiding over almost every
department of nature, as the hills, the vales, the moun-
tains, forests, and the streams. We must not imitate them
in this idolatry ; but we may learn from it a profitable
lesson. In every object of nature, we may see the true
God, the maker of all things ; and every object which
we behold, should awaken thoughts of him, with feel-
ings of devotion. The universe is a temple, filled with
the presence and glory of the Deity ; and man is placed
in this temple, and endowed with the faculties necessary
to render religious homage to the Creator. Everything
in this vast temple displays the Deity. The quivering
leaf at our window tells us that God is near at hand ;
and the star which twinkles in the blue heavens tells
us that God exercises his power and wisdom in the
remote regions of space. All his works praise him ;
and the right contemplation of them must fill our
hearts with devotion. If our eyes are not blind to the
glory of God which all nature displays, and if our ears
are not deaf to his praise with which all nature is vocal,

13*



150 DUTIBSTO aoD.

we shall join in the aniversal homage with habitual
devotion.

2. All the changes in the aniverse are operations of
God's hand, and give occasion for devotion.

God governs the world which he created, and con-
trols all its movements. Not a sparrow falls to the
ground without him. The pious man recognises his
hand in every event, feels him in the earthquake, hears
him in the thunder, sees him in the lightning, and per-
ceives him equally in all the gentle movements of nature.
The sun in his course, and the seasons as they revolve,
tell him of God. The ceaseless changes which every
passing moment brings under his observation, call on
him to remember God, who directs them, working all
after the counsel of his will.

3. We to whom God has given the Bible, enjoy the
best means possible for cultivating the habit of devo-
tion.

In ancient times God spoke to favored individuals to
whom he made known his will. His revelation assumed
an abiding form, when it was committed to writing ; and
it has been completed by the addition of the New Tes-
tament. The entire volume is now in our hands ; and,
in the perusal of it, we have the privilege of learning
all that is necessary to our duty and happiness. In this
word God speaks directly to us ; and makes himself
clearly known. This book unfolds the counsels of infi-
nite wisdom and grace, exhibits the character of God
in the most attractive light, and presents the strongest
incentives to devotion. With it as our constant com-
panion, we can desire no better means for cultivating
the habit of devotion.

For the proper use of all the advantages which God
has given us, he holds us responsible ; but we do not use
them aright, unless we make each an occasion for the
exercise of devotion. If the opportunities, when pre-



PBATEB. lol

sented, are treated with neglect, the habit of neglect
-will be formed. If we fail to see God in the objects
of nature, and become engrossed in the exclusive con-
templation of visible things, we shall become habitaallj
undevout in the grand temple of the Creator. If we
fail to recognise the divine hand in the changes of
things, and limit oar thoughts to the second causes
which are concerned in these changes, we shall habitu-
ally live without God in the world. If we neglect the
Holy Scriptures, or peruse them for any other purpose
than that of spiritual improvement, we shall acquire
the habit of treating with contempt our adorable Sove-
reign and benevolent Father, addressing us from the
skies. We cannot be stationary. The habits which
we are incessantly forming, if they do not bring us
into nearer approach to God, are driving us from him,
and preparing us for eternal banishment from his
presence.

Our duty to God does not consist in the devotion of
the heart only, but includes outward acts of obedience :
and such is the connection between devotion and obedi-
ence, that neither can exist alone, and each promotes
the other. If we would cultivate the feeling of com-
passion for the poor, we must exercise it in outward
acts for their rfilief. The sentimental compassion
which exhibits itself in tears without alms, is practical
cruelty, and hardens the heart. In like manner, all
religious feeling which is not accompanied with external
obedience, is false piety, which mocks God, and ruins
the soul.

SECTION VIII. PRAYER.

Its Nature.

Prater is the expression of desire or devotional
feeling, in language addressed to God.



152 DUTIBS TO GOD.

A prominent part of prayer is petition. This is the
expression of desire. We desire to obtain some good,
and we desire to obtain it from God. We express this
desire in a form of words, in which we ask God to
bestow the good desired. So needy are we, and so
dependent on God, that in every approach to him we
have occasion to ask some supply of our wants, some
grace to help in time of need, and therefore petition
may be considered a necessary part of prayer. So
Paul appears to have regarded it: "In every thing, by
prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known unto God."^

In prayer, the various feelings of devotion find utter-
ance in language. Love and reverence are expressed
in blessing and adoring the great object of our worship.
Gratitude is poured forth in words of thanksgiving, as
we count over the favors received. Repentance is
expressed in confessing our sins with all their aggrava-
tions, and imploring pardon through Jesus Christ.
Trust and resignation appear in the surrender of our-
selves into God's hand, to be delivered from evil, and
supplied with daily bread.

Prayer must express the desires and devotional feel-
ings of the heart. A form of words which proceeds not
from the heart, is not prayer. Saul of Tarsus had
been a devout Pharisee, and had often repeated forms
of prayer; but when he became converted by the
grace of God, all his former devotions were accounted
nothing, and the Searcher of hearts now said concern-
ing him, "Behold, he prayeth.*'^ It is vain for men to
draw nigh to God with the mouth, and honor him with
the lips, while the heart is far from him. Such offer-
ing of mere words, however elegant in style, or impres-

1 Phill. iv. 6. » Acts ix. 11.



PBATEB. 153

sive in the mode of utterance, Crod does not account
prayer.

Prayer must be expressed in language. Desires and
devotional feelings do not constitute prayer while unex-
pressed in words. They may be a fulfilment of duty,
so far as they go ; but they do not fulfil the duty of
prayer. For this, expression in words is necessary. It
is not requisite that the words be pronounced in loud
outcries, such as the worshippers of Baal used at Carmel.
Prayer may be made, as in the case of Hannah, by the
movement of the lips,^ when no sound is heard ; but the
very movement of the lips is made with reference to
words, in which the silent worshipper presents his sup-
plications to him who hears in secret.

The language of prayer must be addressed to God.
Prayer recognises the existence of God, and his ability
to hear, and to grant the petitions which we offer. In
the retirement of the closet, we realize that the Omni-
present God is with us, and we feel assured that he
hears and understands the suppressed whispers in which
we make our supplications. Prayer acknowledges all
the perfections of God. The devotional feelings which
it expresses, are dependent on a knowledge of these
perfections. Prayer, therefore, is an act of religious
worship, in which the suppliant pays divine honor to him
before whom he bows in humble devotion.

While prayer is an act of religious worship, it is also
the familiar and confiding intercourse of a child with
an affectionate parent. The pious man addresses God
as his father. The reverence and trust which he
expresses in his prayer, are filial. Such is the conde-
scending grace of the infinite God, that we are invited
to come with boldness to the throne of grace, that we

» 1 Sam. i. 13.



154 DUTIES TO GOD.

may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need;^ and, to encourage this filial boldness, we are
assured that, ^< Like as a father pitieth his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him," * and « If ye then,
being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your chil-
dren, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven
give good things to them that ask him."^ In accord-
ance with these assurances of Ood's condescension and
love, we have been taught in the Holy Scriptures to
pray to him as a father : << Our Father who art in
heaven."

It9 Obligation.

Duty to God requires the exercise of holy desires
and devotional affections. Does it also require that
these be expressed in the language of prayer ? This
cannot be necessary for God's information, since he
knows the thoughts of the heart perfectly, though
unexpressed in language. But our conduct towards
God, is to be estimated by its tendency rather than its
actual effect. Rebellion against him tends to dethrone
him ; and its guilt is to be estimated by this tendency,
not by any actual effect which the rebellion of finite
creatures can produce, towards subverting the govern-
ment of the infinite God. In like manner, our obliga-
tion to pray is to be determined, not by any informa-
tion given to God, or any benefit conferred on him, but
by the tendency of the act, and the disposition which
it evinces. We are bound to act, as if God needed to
be informed respecting the desires and feelings of our
hearts ; and the Holy Scriptures so describe the duty
of prayer : " In every thing, by prayer and supplication,
let your requests he made known unto God.***

1 Heb. iv. 16. « Pa. ciii. 13. » Mat. vii. 11. * Phil. iv. 6.



PRATER. 155

Our minds are so constituted, that they seek inter-
course with other minds. The social tendency of our
nature brings us into companionship with other intelli-
gent beings, and impels us to hold intercourse with
them. Our moral nature gives an additional impulse in
the same direction. The obligation to love other beings
requires intercourse with them. We cannot continue to
love, without an effort to hold intercourse with the beings
beloved, if intercourse is possible. Our chief medium
of intercourse is language. By this we make known
our thoughts to our fellow-men, and learn their thoughts
in return. Love to God impels us to seek intercourse
with him ; and since language is our chief medium of
intellectual intercourse, we obey the promptings of love,
when we adopt it as the medium of communing with
the Father of our spirits.

Intercourse with Ood is possible. Our imaginations
sometimes personify fields and groves ; and we address
them with language, as if they were intelligent beings.
But we need no such exercise of imagination, when we
address God in the language of prayer. Faith realizes
his presence. His ear is open to hear ; and our inter-
course with him by language, is as real as if we were
addressing a venerated earthly friend, visible before
our eyes, and listening to our words.

Prayer has always made a part in religious service.
The heathens offer prayers to their gods. In the Bible,
the worship of God in the earliest times is thus de-
scribed : <( Then began men to call upon the name of
the Lord.*'^ Throughout the Old Testament, prayer
was a prominent part of the worship rendered to Jeho-
vah; and his temple was called a "house of prayer."^
In the New Testament we learn that the disciples of



* Gen. iv. -26. ^ Isa. Ivi. 7.



166 DUTIES TO GOD.

Christ « continued with one accord in prayer and sup-
plication;"^ and everywhere throughout its pages,
prayer appears to have constituted an indispensable
part of the service to God which the Christian religion
enjoins.

In accommodation to our mode of holding intercourse
with one another, God has made known his will to us
by language. In the Bible he speaks to us in the lan-
guage of men ; and in prayer we use the language of
men in speaking to God. We adopt the same medium
of intercourse that he has chosen. We slight his con-
descension and kindness, if we neglect to use it for the
purpose of holding intercourse with him.

God is pleased that our love and confidence should
be expressed in words, as well as in acts of obedience.
He is pleased when we perform acts which exhibit the
right disposition of heart ; and, for the same reason, he
is pleased when this disposition is exhibited in accept-
able words. Words of afiection from a dutiful child,
are pleasing to an earthly parent ; and God condescend-
ingly accepts from us such tokens of love as it accords
with our nature to render ; and he is justly offended if
we withhold them.

In the Holy Scriptures, wicked men are described
by their neglect of prayer; and, on the other hand,
men of prayer are approved as righteous, and the favor-
ites of heaven. In such incidental ways the duty and
acceptableness of prayer are taught. Moreover, prayer
is, in various passages of Scripture, expressly com-
manded : « Take with you words, and turn to the Lord ;
say unto him," 2 &c. ; " Pray without ceasing."^

Prayer may be offered by several persons jointly.
In this case, one of them utters the prayer in an
audible voice, and the rest silently unite with their

* Acts i. 14. » Hosea xiv. 2. « 1 Thess. v. 17.



PBAYBB. 157

hearts in the service. The special promise made by
Christ, when two agree ^ in their petitions, shows that
union in prayer is specially acceptable to God.

The obligation of parents to bring up their children
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, requires
that they be taught the duty of prayer. This should
be done by example, as well as precept; and hence,
family worship is an important duty. The neglect of
this duty, by the heads of families, is criminal, and
exposes them and their households to the displeasure
of God : according to the denunciation of the prophet,
« Pour out thy fury upon the families that call not on
thy name." ^

Churches are societies organized for the worship of
God. Prayer is an indispensable part of divine wor-
ship ; and must, therefore, constitute a part of all
acceptable church-service. It is clear, from the Holy
Scnptures, that the first churches of Christ were accus-
tomed to unite in public prayer ; and the blessing of
God on our religious assemblies cannot be expected, if
this part of the public service is not performed with
united heartfelt devotion.

It9 Utility.

By the benevolent arrangements of God, all the
service which he requires, is made profitable to those
who render it ; and prayer, therefore, as a duty which
he has commanded, must have its utility. An inquiry
into this utility will further demonstrate our obligation
to pray, and give strong encouragement to the perform-
ance of the duty.

The expression of our desires and devotional feelings
in the language of prayer, tends greatly to strengthen

» Matt xviii. 19. « Jer. x. 25.

14



158 DUTIES TO GOD.

them. In seeking suitable words, and in giving them
utterance, our thoughts must be engaged on the sub-
jects of our address to God. We deliberately contem-
plate the good which we ask, the necessity which urges
us to ask, our un worthiness of it, and the power and
grace to which we appeal in presenting our petition.
In offering thanksgiving, we deliberately count over the
mercies which we have received, and our thoughts dweU
on the value of the benefits, and on all the circum-
stances adapted to excite our gratitude for their bestow*
ment. In expressing penitence, our thoughts neces-
sarily dwell on our sins and their aggravations ; and in
imploring forgiveness, they are directed to the sacrifice
of Christ, through which forgiveness is to be obtained;
and we find a heart-moving power in contemplation of
his sufferings. In offering adoration, we survey the
divine perfections ; and the view increases our love and
reverence. These, and all other holy affections, our
converse with God stimulates and strengthens. Prayer,
therefore, tends greatly to promote holiness ; and this
benefit far excels in value all others which it is possible
for us to receive.

Prayer gives constant exercise to self-examination.
We express the desires and feelings of the heart to the
Searcher of hearts, and we are therefore compelled to
examine these desires and feelings with jealous and
impartial scrutiny. God knows whether we come before
him with sincerity, and we fear to dissemble in his
presence. While we open our hearts before him, and
tell him what is there, we are compelled to look our-
selves at what we describe ; and therefore prayer en-
larges our self-knowledge. This is a highly-important
benefit.

Family prayer is of inestimable value to those who
have been trained under its influence. The sons and



PBATBB. 159

daughters who are accustomed to bow with their parents
at the family altar, receive impressions which nothing
can obliterate. Parents may die ; and the associates
of early days may all be scattered. Years may be
passed in the cares of life ; and the habitation may be
removed to a far distant land. But, over intervening
years and intervening space, the thoughts return to the
scenes of family devotion, when the father and mother,
now in heaven, brought the objects of their parental
love before the Lord, and implored his blessing on them
for time and eternity. These scenes are hallowed in
the memory; and children, trained in the midst of
them, generally exhibit, in future life, the character
which such training tends to produce. They imitate
the piety of the parents whose memory they revere,
and gratefully trace back their multiplied blessings
received from God, to those prayers which commended
them to Ood from early childhood.

The utility of prayer offered in the public assemblies
of God's people, has been abundantly demonstrated.
The devotion of those who unite in the prayer is in-
creased, and the united petition brings down blessings
from God. In answer to prayer, the Holy Spirit was
poured out on the day of Pentecost ; and in answer to
prayer, all the conquests of the gospel from that day
have been achieved. Paul requested the prayers of
the churches that his ministry might be attended with
success ; ^ and the spread and power of the gospel, in
all ages and countries, has been greatly dependent on
the fervent, effectual prayers of God's people.

An objection to the efficacy of prayer has been drawn
from the unchangeableness of God. He is of one mind,
and none can turn him; how then can o.ur petitions

* Eph. vi. 18, 19.



160 DUTIES TO GOD.

effect any change in his purpose ? Will they procure
any blessing which it was not previously his design to
bestow, and which therefore would have been granted,
though unasked ?

This objection mistakes the nature of the connection
between the purpose of God, and the order of sequences
which it establishes. The purpose does not determine
the future existence of any event, in disregard of its
relation to appointed antecedents. It has its place,
according to the purpose of God, in an established
order of sequences ; and the unchangeableness of the
purpose does not more effectually determine that an
event shall happen, than that it shall happen in its
proper order of sequence. It does not determine that
a crop shall be reaped, whether it be sown or not ; that
a man shall live, whether he eat, or obstinately refuse
food ; or that, men shall be rewarded and punished for
moral actions, whether the actions have been performed
or not. God bestows many of his blessings in answer
to prayer ; and, since prayer is the appointed ante-
cedent of their being bestowed, it is as necessary in
order to their bestowment as any physical cause is
necessary to the production of its proper effect. To
expect these blessings without prayer, is as irrational
as to expect a crop without sowing the seed.

God's unchangeableness establishes the necessity of
prayer. In ancient times he bestowed blessings in
answer to' prayer ; and very many examples are left on
record, for our encouragement in the performance of
the duty. He declared to his ancient people that it
was his pleasure to be inquired of by the house of Israel
for the blessings which they needed.^ In later times
he said: "Ye have not, because ye ask not.'*^ If at



* Ezek. xxxvi. 37. ' James iv. 2.



PRAYER* 161

the present time his blessings may be equally expected,
whether asked or unasked, God has changed his plan.
His unchangeableness, therefore, establishes the neces-
sity of prayer.

The promises made to prayer assure us of its efficacy.
" Ask, and ye shall receive." ^ " If ye, then, being evil,
know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit
to them that ask him."^ We may be unable to see
clearly the harmony of this promise with the unchange-
ableness of God's purpose, but we may be assured that
God has no attribute which can prevent the fulfilment
of his promise. In this matter, it is wise to take God
at his word ; and to act like dutiful children, who, in
things beyond their comprehension, commit themselves
to the guidance of their parents.

Our faith is liable, in some cases, to be perplexed
with the apprehension that answer to prayer is impos-
sible without a miracle. We pray earnestly that a sick
friend may be restored to health ; and yet the disease
may be such that recovery is impossible, without an
interposition of Providence which shall change the
established course of nature. If we have no right to
expect a miracle, how can we, in such cases, exercise
firm faith in the efficacy of prayer ?

Prayer is an expression of the desires and feelings
of the heart ; and, to be acceptable to God, the desires
and feelings must be in accordance with his will. The
wicked hate God, and an expression of their hatred
cannot be pleasing to him. They say to him, " Depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways."^ Such expression of desire cannot constitute
acceptable prayer. Feelings of pure devotion, and



» John xvi. 24. * Luke xi. 13. » Job xxi. 14.

14*



162 DUTIES TO GOD.

desires fully conformed to the will of God, should
supply the matter of prayer. If we desire our sick
friend to be restored, more than we desire the will of
God to be done, we fail in the spirit of our petition.
Christ did not so pray, when he said, <' Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me : nevertheless, not as
I will, but as thou wilt."^ Every petition which the
Holy Spirit indites in the heart of a pious man, exhibits
like submission, « because he maketh intercession for the
saints according to the will of God."^ The will of
God is made known in many gracious promises of his
word. These we are authorized to plead before him,
with full assurance that our prayer will be heard. But
faith requires a promise of God to rest on ; and, if
God has not promised to restore our sick friend, we
cannot pray for his restoration in faith, otherwise than
by complete submission to the divine will. God has
promised to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him ;
but he has not promised to suspend the laws of nature
at our request. For spiritual blessings, the most imports
ant that we can crave, we are authorized to pray in
the confidence of faith ; but God requires our natural
desires and affections to be brought into subjection to
his will. Miracles have been wrought in answer to
the prayer of faith; but unless God authorizes the
expectation of a miracle, we cannot pray in faith that
one may be wrought. Faith may stand up firmly oh
every promise of God ; but where his will has not been
made known, it is the proper oflSce of faith to lie sub-
missively at the great Sovereign's feet.

God*s providence overrules the sequences of physical
events, in wisely arranged harmony with his moral
government. In the ordinary course of things, moral

* Matt. xxvi. 39. * Rom. viii. 27.



PRA4(EB. 163

actions are followed by consequences which indicate the
approbation or disapprobation of the great Ruler.
Sometimes, he manifests his approbation of virtue, or
disapprobation of vice, by what are called special provi-
dences. These are not properly miracles, but extra-
ordinary events resulting from natural causes ; and so
arranged, that they occur at precisely the proper time
to proclaim, in the ears of men, that there is verily a
God who judgeth in the earth. We become familiar
with the ordinary providences of God, as with the tick-
ing of the pendulum in the movements of a clock ; and
we forget that they proceed from wise contrivance and
design ; but special providences, occurring at the pre-
cise time to signify the will of heaven, like the striking
of the clock at the precise time to indicate the hour of
the day, arrest our attention, and deeply impress on
our minds the conviction, that the Architect of the
universe has determined the coincidence for our admo-
nition. The maker of a clock may put his hand to the
machine to repair it when necessary, or regulate its
motion or wind it up ; but an application of his hand
is not required to make it strike the passing hour. So
God may interpose by miracle in the movements of
nature, when a miracle is necessary ; but his provi-
dence, by its ordinary and extraordinary movements,
in which no miracle occurs, is adapted by his wisdom
to harmonize with his moral government, and teach
men his will. God has answered prayer by miracle,
when miraculous interposition was necessary; but in
general, the eflScacy of prayer has not required a de-
parture from the established methods of his providence.
In the ordinary course of things, the benefits of prayer
are apparent, and pious men have often obtained
answers to their petitions, by special providences so
marked, that they have been constrained to accept them
gratefully, as granted at their supplication.



164 DUTIESkTO GOD.



SECTION IX. OBSERVANCE OP THE SABBATH.

The fourth commandment requires the separation of
one day in seven for rest from ordinary toil. " Re-
member the sabbath-day, to keep it holy. Six days
shalt thou labor, and do all thy work : but the seventh
day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou
shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor
thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates :
For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, aifd rested the seventh
day ; wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath-day, and
hallowed it." 1

The word "sabbath" signifies re9U The necessity
of rest to animal nature, is provided for in part by the
regular return of night ; but even our days must not be
wholly devoted to toil. Facts which have been learned
by attentive observation, appear to justify the belief
that laboring animals, which are allowed to rest one
day in seven, live longer, and in the end perform more
service, than those which are required to work every
day without intermission. For this, or for some other
reason known to God, he has chosen to require that
irrational animals shall enjoy the rest of the Holy Day,
as well as man.

But the appointment of the Sabbath was with a
higher end in view than the mere relief of animal
nature. It is to be kept "holy," and is called "the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God." The work prohibited
is called " thy work ;" and hence, work may be per-
formed on this day for God. It is his day, and should
be employed in his worship and service.

1 Ex. XX. 8-12.



OBSEBYANCS OF THE SABBATH« 165

The Sabbath-day is especiallj appropriate for the
public worship of Grod. It was commanded bv Moses
to be <<an holy convocation;"^ and Christ sanctioned
the use of the Sabbath for public worship, bj meeting
on that day with the Jews in the synagogue, and taking
a part in the services. If we neglect public worship
on the Sabbath, we shall fail to attain a most important
end of the institution.

The Sabbath should be used for the reading and
study of God's word, for imparting and receiving reli-
gious instruction, for meditation and prayer, for family
religion, and for works of mercy. The Jews super-
stitiously objected to Christ's healing on the Sabbath ;
but he taught, that mercy to animals in leading them to
water, and mercy to men, in relieving their afflictions,
were suitable services for the holy day. ^

Works of necessity are admissible on the Sabbath.
We may relieve our own animal wants, as we relieve
those of others. We may meet necessities which the
providence of God imposes on us, and regard the act
as performed in his service ; but when we obey neces-
sities of our own creating, we are doing our own work,
and therefore violating the Lord's Sabbath.

Mental labor for mere pleasure or secular benefit, is
prohibited. We are forbidden to find our own pleasure,
as well as to do our own works. ^ The reading of books
for amusement is inconsistent with the sanctity of the
day ; and all other employments which have pleasure
only in view.

The obligation to observe the Sabbath extends to
servants ; and masters are criminal who require service
of them in violation of the commandment. They
should be taught their duty in respect of the holy day,
and aided and encouraged in the performance of it.

* Lev. xxiii. 3. * Luke xiii. 15, 16. ' Isa. Iviii. 13.



CHAPTER VIII.
DUTIES OF RECIPROCITY.



SECTION I. BIGHTS.

Thus far we have used the word right as an adjective,
to denote a quality of moral action. Bat there is also
a substantive use of it, derived from the former. It is
right for a father to chastise his disobedient son ; and
we may express this truth thus : a father has a right
to chastise his disobedient son. It is right for a man
to receive obedience from his children ; or to possess
the estate which he has inherited from his ancestors ;
or to claim the house which he has bought with his
money. In all these cases, we may vary the phrase-
ology, and say, a man has a right to receive, to possess,
to claim, &c. ; or we may omit these infinitive verbs,
and say more briefly, a man has a right to obedience
from his children ; to the estate inherited from his
ancestors ; and to the house which he has bought with
his money.

Though it is often a matter of indifference whether
we say. It is right for hinij or Se has a right j yet these
phrases have not perfect identity of meaning. We
express a man's obligation when we say, " It is right
for him to pay his debts ;*' but the sentence, «' He has
a right to pay his debts,*' does not convey this sense,
and cannot be appropriately used, unless we conceive
the payment of debts a privilege of which a man may

(166)



BiaHTS. 167

be deprived. In both eases right is opposed to terong :
in the first, to wrong done by the individual himself;
in the second, to wrong done by others, who deprive
him of what they ought to permit him to enjoy. The
latter mode of speaking, therefore, marks the moral
obligation, not of the individual himself, but of others
with respect to him. Hence, a man's rights are the
enjoyments, or means of enjoyment, which all persons
are under moral obligation to allow him to use at his
pleasure.

Rights are exclusive. According to the definition
just given, a man cannot have a right to anything, if
another may rightfully deprive him of its enjoyment ;
and, therefore, his right must exclude any right of the
other to the same thing.

When right is used as an adjective, it signifies con-
formity to the moral obligations of the agent ; but when
used as a noun, right and obligation have not the same
boundary, if both refer to the same individual. Though
I have a right to travel on foot, I am not under obliga-
tion, but may prefer to ride. To make the boundaries
identical, the right must be referred to one person, and
the obligation to all other persons. Thus, I have a
right to travel on foot, and all other persons are under
obligation not to hinder me from the exercise of this
right. There may be common rights : for example,
one man has as much right as another to warm in the
sunbeams, or bathe in the ocean. But the right of
each one excludes the right of all others to interfere.

The rule of right, in any application of the term, is
the will of God. We are so formed as to need air for
breathing, and light for seeing; and since God has
supplied us with air and light, we know it to be his will
that we should use them. We have therefore a right
to them. On the same principle, we have a right to



168 DUTIES OF RECIPROCITY.

the productions of the ground for food ; and if natural
religion cannot establish our right to the flesh of ani-
mals for food, revelation establishes it beyond question.
God has given us all things richly to enjoy; and every
individual has a right to enjoy them, under such limit-
ations as the will of God may determine.

Man is formed for society, and it is manifestly the
will of God that he should live in society. Hence
arises a necessity, in many cases, for dividing the means
of enjoyment. Light and air are so abundant, that no
conflict of claim for them can exist ; but food, clothing,
and many other good things, are more or less dependent
on the labor of man, and need to be distributed by rule*
This rule is the will of God. He has not distributed
the means of enjoyment equally to all. Some are rich,
and others poor. Some have their abode in wealthy
places, where blessings abound ; others are born and
die where want and wretchedness prevail. Some have
strength of intellectual and corporeal faculties ; others
are weak in mind and body. Some have habitual
health ; others are diseased from the cradle to the
grave. God has distributed to every one as he has
pleased ; and has not left it entirely to the will or judg-
ment of men, to divide among themselves the gifts of
his providence. Yet the distribution is in part de-
pendent on human agency, and one man may wrong-
fully appropriate to himself what another ought to
enjoy. In this conflict of human claims, we need a
rule for determining the rights of each individual.

Have all men equal rights ? The doctrine has been
maintained that, however diversified the conditions of
men, the rights of all are equal. In what sense is this
doctrine true? «

A man with but one eye, has as much right to it, as
a more favored man has to both of his ; and to put out



RIGHTS. 169

his one eye, would be as great an injury, as to put out
the two eyes of the other. Their rights are equal in
one respect, and unequal in another. The distinction
needs to be expressed in suitable language ; and I know
none more suitable, than to say, that their rights are
equal in sacredness, but unequal in extent. The right
to the one eye is as perfect and exclusive, as the right
to the two eyes ; and should be as sacredly guarded
from all infringement ; and yet it is true, that one man
has a right to two eyes, and the other a right to but
one. Any attempt to equalize the extent of their rights,
by giving to the one-eyed man some control over one
of the other man's eyes, would be a foolish and unavail-
ing opposition to the manifested will of Divine Provi-
dence.

The use of our eyes is a natural right ; and the exam-
ple just adduced demonstrates, that even natural rights
admit diversity of extent. Were there but one man on
earth, he would have a right to use his eyes in the pro-
curing of food ; and also a right to use for food any of
the earth's productions, which are adapted to gratify
his appetite and nourish his body. His right to the
use of these, would be in as manifest accordance with
the will of God, as the use of the eyes which God has
given him. But God has placed a multitude of human
beings on the earth, all of whom need support ; and it
is manifestly his will that the productions of the ground
should be divided among them. Some rule of division
becomes necessary ; and this rule, whatever it may be,
distinguishes the social rights of man from his solitudal
rights.

If one man has a natural right to pluck and eat the

fruit of a tree which the Lord God has planted, another

has the same right ; but, in establishing a rule of divi-

sion, there would be an obvious fitness in giving to each

15



170 DUTIBS OP RBCIPROCITT.

man the use of the fruit which he had plucked, and
withholding from him the use of that which had been
plucked by the other. If each has a natural right to
the animals of the forest for food, each has a social
right to those animals only which he himself has caught,
and is bound to refrain from using those taken by the
other. The labor of the parties is the ground on which
this division of rights is established. On the same
principle, as society improves, one man acquires a right
to the fruit of a tree which he has planted and culti-
vated, to the animals which he has tamed, to the house
which he has built, and to the ground which he has sub-
dued and enclosed. Other rules of division are after-
wards introduced ; and all these reject the supposition,
that the social rights of all men are equal in extent.

But social rights, however different in extent, are
equal in sacred ness. The poor man who possesses but
one ewe lamb, has as much right to it, as his rich neigh-
bor who abounds in flocks and herds ; and to take from
him his one lamb, is a crime as great, and as offensive
to God, as to take away the entire possessions of the
other. It is the will of God, that we should have the
poor always with us, that whensoever we will we may
do them good. If all distinction of property were
abolished, opportunity for kindness to the poor, a virtue
highly commended in the word of God, would be lost ;
the eighth commandment, Thou shalt not steal, would be
rendered useless ; and the wise regulation of natural
and revealed religion, He that will not work shall not
eat, would be discarded. According to the manifest will
of God, the rights of property are unequal in extent ;
but God teaches the equal sacredness of the poor man's
rights, and denounces judgments on those who defraud
the poor, or withhold the wages of the hireling.

Besides the distinction of rich and poor, there are



Bianxs. 171

other distinctions in human society, attended witif diver-
sity in the extent of rights. When our first parents
were banished from Eden, they went forth into the wide
world, the only two human beings on earth, with rights
of unequal extent. To one appertained the rights of
the husband ; to the other, the rights of the wife. When
sons were bom to them, a new distinction of rights
arose ; the parents had theirs, and the children others
differing in extent. All this diversity was according to
the will of Ood, who commanded the wife to be in sub*
jection to her husband, and gave to the parents author-
ity over their children. Any theory which makes the
rights of husband, wife, parent, and child, all equal in
extent, opposes the will of God, and the order and
happiness of domestic society.

The first form of civil government appears to have
been patriarchal. The diversity of rank and authority
in the family, was extended to the wider society of the
tribe or nation. God, who established the distinctions
in the family, has sanctioned those in the nation. " The
powers that be are ordained of God."^ Children are
required to obey their parents in the Lord, ^ and because
it is well pleasing unto the Lord^ and the same conside-
rations are urged on subjects to induce obedience to
their rulers. « Submit yourselves to every ordinance
of man/(W the Lord's sake: whether it be to the king,
as supreme ; or unto governors, as unto them that are
sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well.'** Parents may exer-
cise authority over their children unwisely and cruelly ;
and rulers may tyrannize over their subjects. They
who suffer under such government, whether from
parents or civil rulers, are bound to submit to the evil,

» Rom. xiii. 1. « Bph. vi. 1. » Col. iii. 20. * 1 Pet. u. 13.



172 DUTIES OP BBCIPROCITY.

as brought on them by Providence for their trial, just
as they submit to poverty, disease, and other evils
incident to human life.

The relations of the family, and of civil government,
are so extensive as to affect mankind generally. All
men from the days of Adam and Eve, have sustained
the relation of child ; and a large part of them, that
of parent. The world is divided into nations, and men
are among the governing or the governed. But there
are other relations of less extent, as that of the master
and the servant, which have the sanction of Ood. He
commands servants to obey their masters in singleness
of heart, as unta Christ',^ and he commands masters
how to exercise their authority.

God's providence determines the very great diversity
of condition in human society; and the inequality in
the extent of their rights, which necessarily results
from this diversity of condition, is according to his
will, and designed for the general good ; but amidst all
this diversity, the rights of all men are equally sacred.
The cruelty of a father may violate the rights of his
son, the tyranny of a king may violate the rights of
his subject, and the oppression of a master may violate
the rights of his servant. In all these cases, God
holds to account those whom he has invested with
authority, and will be the avenger of the weak and
dependent. It has appeared good to the wisdom that
arranged the moral government of the world, that, in
this state of probation, some men shall be under the
authority and in the power of others ; but a fearful
reckoning awaits those who abuse that authority and
power to the injury of their fellow-men. God does
not require that all distinctions of rank and authority

* Eph. vi. 5.



BIGHTS. 173

should be abolished ; but he requires that the rights of
all should be held sacred.

Acts of reciprocity do not change the extent of
rights, or disturb the inequality between them. If a
rich man buys a horse from a poor man, and gives him
a fair equivalent for it, the rights of the parties are
just as extensive and just as unequal as they were
before the transaction. If a fair equivalent is not
given, the rights of the poor man are rendered less
extensive, and are so far violated. The law of recip-
rocity forbids this encroachment on his rights, but does
not require that the extent of his rights should be
increased.

The Holy Scriptures bind us to respect the sacred-
ness of other men's rights, by the well-known precepts :
"Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.'*^ "All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them.**^ These precepts do not bind
to an equal division of rights, whether natural or ac-
quired ; but they require us to avoid encroachment on
the rights of another, with as much care as if our own
rights were concerned. We must put ourselves in his
stead; and in all our dealings with him, respect his
rights, guarding them as sacredly as our own. If the
precepts inculcate any duty beyond this, it belongs to
the department of benevolence, not of reciprocity.

Classification of Rights.

Rights are alienable^ when they can be transferred
to another ; inalienable, when they cannot. The right
to a house, or a horse, may be transferred by sale or
gift ; but the right of private judgment, in matters of
religion, cannot be transferred : hence, the former right

» Lev. xix. 18. * Matt. vii. 12.

15*



174 DUTIES OP BBOIPROCITY.

is called alienable; the latter, inalienable. Those rights
are inalienable, the relinquishment of which wonld in-
volve a violation of duty.

Rights are perfect^ when they may be enforced ; im-
perfecty when they may not. Rights founded on reci-
procity, and well defined by contract or otherwise,
become cognisable by human law, and are called perfe^it.
But the right of a beggar to alms cannot be enforced,
because it is founded on benevolence, not on recipro-
city ; and the right of a benefactor to gratitude cannot
be enforced, because the obligation cannot be measured
by human law. The latter rights are therefore im-
perfect.

Natural rights, as opposed to socialy are those which
appertain to man in a state of solitude ; as opposed to
adventitious^ they are those which do not depend on
accidental circumstances ; as opposed to acquired^ they
are those which are not obtained by labor, purchase,
inheritance, or gift ; as opposed to legal, they are those
which perfect justice would accord to each individual,
and which the laws fail, through human imperfection,
to define with exactness. When it is said that men, in
the establishment of civil government, relinquish some
of their natural rights to obtain protection for the rest,
the phrase natural rights appears to import the rights
that would belong to men in a perfectly virtuous society,
which would need no government. Man is by nature
formed for society; and it is, therefore, inaccurate to
consider those rights only natural, which appertain to
a state of solitude ; but it is a matter of minor import-
ance how the term is applied, if it be well defined, and
be used in a uniform sense throughout each process of
reasoning in which it may be employed.



BIGHT OF PSOPEBTT. 175

SECTION II. JUSTICE.

Justice is the disposition to give to every one his
proper share of the enjoyments which God has provided
for men, or it is the conduct which corresponds to this
disposition.

Justice is divided into distributive and commutative.

Distributive justice belongs to government, and is
concerned in dividing out to the several members of
society their proper extent of rights, and also in subse-
quently varying that extent by rewards or punishments.

Commutative justice is fair dealing in the exchange
of commodities. When two parties transfer rights to
each other, the exchange is just, if the rights trans-
ferred are equal. Hence, commutative justice makes
no change in the extent of rights.

The duties of reciprocity refer to commutative justice,
and are violated by the wrong-doing which lessens the
extent of any one's rights, or impairs his enjoyment
of them.

section III. RIGHT OF PROPERTY.

Proof.

All right of property is founded on the will of the
Creator. We, and all that we can claim, belong to
God ; and we have, therefore, no right to anything in
exclusion of his right: but it is his will that, of the
various good things which he bestows, while some are
the common property of all, others are distributed
among them so that each may claim and use his own,
to the exclusion of all other persons. That this is the
will of God, may be proved by natural religion and by
revelation.

Natural religion proves that God designed men to



176 DVTII8 OT BICIPBOOITT.

haTO property. The distinction of mine and thine is
expressed in every language ^ and the most uncultivated
nations have use for terms to express it, because the
idea is common to all men. At a very early age, chil-
dren begin to claim things as their own, and show a
sense of being wronged, if deprived of them. The
advantages resulting to society from the division of
property among individuals, are obvious. Were all
things common to the industrious and the idle, the
careful and the improvident, labor would cease for want
of reward; nothing would be accumulated for future
use, and want and suffering would become universal.
In countries where the right of property is but par-
tially respected, the evils which have been enumerated
have prevailed. When the right of property is ren-
dered insecure by civil war, or by despotic power, in-
dustry languishes, and the arts of life are neglected.
On the. other hand, those nations enjoy the highest
prosperity and happiness where the laws give security
to the owners of property. These facts suflSce to de-
monstrate that the right of property has the sanction
of God, and ought to be respected by men.

Revelation gives further assurance that the right of
property accords with the will of God. The command-
ment " Thou shalt not steal,** would be unmeaning, if
all men had equal right to everything. By giving this
commandment, God has taken the right of property
under his guardianship. The duty of giving to the
poor is everywhere enforced in the Holy Scriptures,
with frequent and abundant promises of divine reward ;
but this duty would be impossible, if the division of
property, and the distinction between rich and poor, did
not exist. Extortion, a crime which the Bible repro-
bates, would also be impossible, if everything which the



BIGHT OF PBOPBRTY. 177

oppressor's hand could grasp, were his own by unques-
tionable right.

How acquired.

Our right to everything that we enjoy, is derived
from the gift of God. He benevolently provides for
our wants ; and, beyond our wants, opens to us sources
of pleasure. What he gives, we have a right to enjoy,
under such restrictions as his will ordains. Other crea-
tures, equally the objects of his care, have a right to
share his bounty with us ; and, in distributing the good
which he has provided, social regulations, determining
the right of property, become necessary.

Men in society acquire a right to what is the fruit
of their labor. The house which an individual has
built, is, of right, his own ; and he has a right to in-
habit it, to the exclusion of his neighbor. In like
manner, he has a right to the wild animals or fish which
he has caught for food ; to the produce of the ground
which he has cultivated ; and to the fruit of the tree
which he has planted. In the origin of society, the
occupancy of lands, for the purpose of cultivating them,
gives a right to them — which ceases when they cease to
be occupied ; but in a more advanced state of society,
regulations are established, giving permanent right to
lands. Such regulations are needed to induce a careful
cultivation of the earth, and to multiply its productions
to an extent equal to the wants of its inhabitants.
Divine sanction was given to it, in the settlement of
the Hebrew tribes in the land of Canaan.

A right to property may be acquired by ezchang^^ or
by gift. He who has produced a quantity of corn by
cultivating the ground, may exchange a part of it for
animals which a hunter has taken in the chase ; or he
may give a part to a poor neighbor, to gratify his own



178 DUTIBS OW BBCIPBOCITY.

benevolent desire. The rights so acquired, whether by
exchange or by gift, are as much in accordance with
God's will, and deserve to be held as sacred, as those
which are acquired by labor, or the direct gift of Pro-
vidence.

The right of property may be acquired by willy or by
inheritance, A right to use property as one chooses,
implies, not only a right to give it during life, but also
to bequeath it at death to whomsoever he pleases.
When an individual dies, without disposing of his pro-
perty by willj the regulations of society transfer it by
inheritance to his children, or other near relatives.

A species of right to property is acquired by posses-
sion. The right is not absolute ; but merely exclusive
of all who have not a better right. If the fact that
one man has obtained possession of a house by fraud,
gave right to another to drive him out by force, a third
might, with equal justice, dispossess the second ; and
similar changes might proceed without end. To guard
against such mutations, society wisely admits the im-
perfect right of possession ; and in some cases, after a
lapse of time, makes it permanent and complete.

Sow violated.

The right of property is violated when the property
is taken without the consent of the owner duly obtained.
Of this violation there are several species.

The right of property is violated when property is
taken without the knowledge of the owner. This is
theft. The thief may come in the darkness of night,
or may enter the house in the absence of the family, or
may take goods from the merchant's counter, while he
is busy with other customers. In all such cases every
man's moral judgment condemns the deed. It is no
justification that the amount taken is small, that the



BIGHT OF PBOPEBTT. 179

owner will not miss it, that he has an abundance left,
that the thief needs it more than the owner, or that the
thief has never consented to the unequal distribution
of property which prevails in society. With such pleas
dishonest men may strive to appease their consciences
and harden themselves in crime ; but God's command,
<< Thou shalt not steal," is sufficient to set aside all such
pleas. Some persons manifest less tenderness of con-
science in taking what belongs to the public, on the
ground that they are a part of the public. But other
persons also are a part of the public, and the consent
of all is necessary to justify the deed. He who cheats
the revenue, or the post-office, or the turnpike, is as
guilty as he who steals from an individual.

In general theft is not to be determined by the value
of what is taken. To steal a dime is as truly a dis-
honest act as to steal a dollar. But there may be cases
in which the smallness of the amount will, in peculiar
circumstances, justify the presumption of the owner's
consent, though not formally obtained. If, in an
emergency, I desire to borrow a post-office stamp from
an intimate friend, and find him out of his office, my
conscience would not charge me with dishonesty for
presuming on his consent that I may take a stamp from
his desk : but I could not honestly take a thousand
dollars from his drawer on a like presumption. On the
same principle I may take an apple from my friend's
orchard, when I cannot take away his crop of apples
without his formal consent. The truly conscientious
man will never act on presumed consent, if there can
be a possible doubt whether the owner would grant it
if present.

The right of property is violated when property is
taken by force. This is robbery. He commits robbery
who forcibly takes from a traveller his coat or his purse.



180 DUTIES OF RBOIPBOCITT.

The case is substantially the same if he obtains a deli-
very of the purse by putting the traveller in fear.
Consent violently obtained, is not consent, and the
crime of robbery is aggravated by the threat of
violence.

The right of property is violated, when the owner's
consent to part with it is unduly obtained. This is
fraud or cheating. Cases of this kind are of frequent
occurrence. A counterfeit note is passed as if it were
genuine ; a diseased horse is sold or exchanged as if he
were sound ; damaged goods are sold as if undamaged.
In such cases consent is obtained dishonestly. The
modes are innumerable, in which consent to part with
money or other property, may be obtained unjustifiably.
The beggar may obtain it by a false tale of wants or
Bufferings ; the seller of corn may obtain it, by induc-
ing a false belief of approaching scarcity ; the druggist
may obtain it, by exciting the fears or faith of one to
whom he offers his nostrum. Commercial honesty is so
frequently and so readily violated, that a careful study
of its requirements is necessary to every one who par-
ticipates in the ordinary transactions of trade.

The use of false weights and measures is another
mode in which the right of property may be violated.
This iniquity is frequently reprobated in the Holy
Scriptures. ^

SECTION IV. SELLER AND BUYER.

It is often inconvenient for those who need an article
of merchandise, to obtain it directly from the manufac-
turer or producer. A class of persons, intermediate
between the producer and the consumer, render impor-
tant benefits to society, by keeping for sale such articles



^ ProY. xi. 1, XX. 10 ; Amos yiii. 5.



BBLLEB AND BUTER. 181

as are generally needed in the community. These per-
sons employ capital and skill in their business, and are
entitled to fair remuneration for the service which they
render to the public, if rendered in conformity to the
laws of commercial justice.

He who offers to sell, ought to be content with the
market price. If the article has risen in value, while
it has been in his possession, he is entitled to the bene-
fit of the rise ; and if it has fallen, he has no right to
keep up the price that he may make his usual profit.
A part of his^skill in business, consists in judging of
the probable changes which will take place in the value
of commodities ; and, as he has the benefit of his skill
when they rise in value, he ought to suffer the loss
which accrues from the failure of his skill in the other
case.

He who opens a store for the sale of articles is bound
to sell them, if the market price be offered. If he
keeps back his article with the expectation of a higher
price, he deceives the public, and does not fulfil the
expectations which he has created. He invites cus-
tomers who desire the articles he deals in, and virtually
promises to supply them to the best of his ability. This
promise he violates, if he refuses to sell. He is not
bound, however, to sell articles which do not belong to
his professed business. The china merchant is bound
to sell his china ; but not the store-house in which he
keeps it.

He who sells, is bound to sell a good article, and if
he knows it to be damaged, he is bound to inform the
buyer. A part of the skill for which he is remunerated,
consists in selecting good articles ; and, if he failn in
his selection, he ought not to permit the buyer to pay
for the failure. Sales at auction form an exception to
this rule, because the auctioneer does not profess to ex-
16



182 DUTIES 07 RBCIPROOITT.

ercisc skill in judging and selecting the articles which
ha Hclls.

He ivho sellH, is under no obligation to judge whether
the buyer needs the article which he offers. If he gives
good advice on this point, it is an act of benevolence to
which he is not bound by mere justice. If he purposely
misleads the buyer, that he may get sale for his article,
he is guilty of fraud.

Some one may plead, that, since these rules are not
generally observed, he would be unable to compete in
business with others, if he observed them^trictly. This
plea cannot be admitted. No man has a right to be dis-
honest for any consideration. If necessity would justify
want of strict integrity, it might be made a plea for
any other immorality. But, even on the score of
gain, the plea is untenable. Artifice may gain tempo-
rary advantage ; but, in the end, honesty is the best
policy.

The buyer is under similar obligations. He should
be willing to give the market value of the article which
he buys ; and, if this price yields a profit to the seller,
he ought to desire no abatement on this account, for
the profit is the just remuneration for the capital and
skill which the seller has employed. To wish this re-
muneration relinquished, is virtually to wish the seller
to serve for nothing.

The buyer has no right to use any artifice, to induce
the seller to part with his property below its true value.
The circulation of reports by which the value of certain
articles in market becomes lessened, is a dishonest
stratagem to which buyers sometimes resort. The
excitement of groundless fears in the seller's mind, to
make him lessen the price of his property, is unjustifi-
able. In general, all efforts to deceive the seller as to
the true value of his property, are dishonest. Such



TEMPORARY TRANSFER OF RIGHT. 188

dishonesty was practised in the days of Solomon. « It
is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer ; but when he
is gone his way, then he boasteth."^

A bargain is completed, when the consent of both
parties has been expressed. Custom, or the necessity
of the case, or the stipulations of the contract, may
allow time for the delivery of the property ; but, in
general, all the risk of its durability, or of its depreci-
ation in value, is, from the time of the contract, trans-
ferred to the new proprietor.

f

SECTION V. TEMPORARY TRANSFER OF RIGHT,

In some cases, the right of property is transferred
for a time, with the understanding that, at the end of
the time, it shall revert to the former proprietor.
Thus, a horse may be hired for a day, or a house rented
for a year. In such cases, due care is to be taken of
the property by him who receives it in possession ; no
other use is to be made of it than that which the con-
tract provided for ; it is to be returned at the end of
the stipulated time ; and the stipulated remuneration
for its use is to be paid.

The proper remuneration for the temporary use of
property, depends on its value, and the risk to which
it is exposed. Its value is so much capital invested ;
and, since capital is profitable to the owner, no one has
a right to use the capital of another, without equitable
remuneration. The laws have undertaken to fix the
proper estimate for the temporary use of capital, by
establishing a rate of interest for money loaned. But
the risk which attends the temporary use of property,
is too various to be determined by law. The mere risk
is sometimes taken by insurance companies, who derive

* Prov. XX. 14.



184 DUTIES OF BEOIPBOCIIT.

no benefit from the capital invested. Insurance from
fire, from loss at sea, &c., must be estimated according
to the nature of the case. He who rents a house,
should pay for the use of so much capital as is invested
in its value, for the diminution in value which it will
suffer from his use of it, and for the risk of fire while
he occupies it. Since the contract determines the
amount of rent to be paid, it must also determine the
use to be made of the property, and the risk to which
it is to be exposed. He who rents a house as a dwell-
ing-place for a family, and afterwards uses it as a stable
for horses, or as a place for experiments with gun-
powder, violates his contract, and is guilty of dishonesty.
He who lets out property for temporary use, is bound,
like him who sells, to furnish a good article ; or, if it
be defective, to make known the defects before the
contract is completed. He who hires out a horse for a
service to which he is unfitted by disease or untract-
ableness, and he who lets out a house with leaky roof
or smoky chimneys, without making the defects known,
are guilty of fraud.

Usury,

The term usury is employed in the Holy Scriptures to
denote the compensation allowed for the use of money ;
but this is now generally expressed by the term in-
terestj and the name usury is applied exclusively to a
rate of interest exceeding that which is established by
law. Hence, usury is a crime against the law.

The propriety of establishing a rate of interest by
law is questionable. The value of capital is fluctuat-
ing ; and when it rises high, conscientious men will not
lend its use in the form of money, but prefer to in-
vest it in houses which may be let out at a high rent
without violating the law, or to dispose of it in some
other manner in which it will bring them a large



SBBYICB AND AGENCY. 185

return. The consequence is, that the lending of money
becomes confined to those who are willing to violate
the law; and, from the absence of competition, they
are enabled to obtain a far higher rate of interest than
could be obtained, if there were no law prohibiting
nstiry. The eflFect of the prohibition, therefore, is, to
give a premium to those who are willing to violate
the law, and to put it in their power to oppress all who
are compelled to borrow.

The considerations which have been presented, are
not sufficient to justify a citizen in violating the law
prohibiting usury. The law is not against the law of
God, and therefore ought to be obeyed, until it has been
repealed. But the subject demands the attention of
legislators, who would probably advance the general
good, by allowing the interest on money loaned, like
the rent of a house, to be determined by contract. The
law might still fix a rate of interest to be allowed, in
the absence of a contract, just as it disposes of the pro-
perty of those who die without a will.

SECTION VI. SERVICE AND AGENCY.

In barter or sale, one material commodity is ex-
changed for another ; but cases occur, in which money
or other property is given in exchange for service ; as
when a laborer is hired to perform a day's work, or a
physician is employed to attend a case of sickness.

The master or employer of a hired servant is bound
to give a fair compensation for the service rendered,
and to pay the wages punctually. The Scriptures pro-
claim the displeasure of God against those who oppress
the hireling, and withhold his wages. The servant is
bound on his part to render, to the best of his ability,
the kind and amount of service which he has stipulated
to perform ; and to be content with his wages.
16*



186 DUTIES 07 BSOIPBOCITT.

When an individual is employed to serve another, hj
transacting business for him with a third party, the
employee is denominated agent^ and the employer prtii-
cipal. The acts of the agent bind the principal, so far
as he confines himself to the proper business of his
agency ; but no further. If a clerk in a store receives
money for his employer, and appropriates it to his own
use, the employer must suffer the loss ; but if a cus-
tomer should pay money to the merchant's coachman,
the customer is bound to run the risk of loss, because
the coachman is not an authorized agent for the receiv-
ing of money.

If an individual fraudulently claims to be the agent
of one who has not appointed him, the third party who
accredits him, must suffer any loss which may accrue
from his too credulous confidence. The fact that an
agent has been appointed, is sometimes made known by
public announcement, and sometimes by written creden-
tials given to the agent. It has also been held, that
if the principal has in any one case acknowledged him-
self bound by the acts of the agent, he continues to
bo bound in all similar cases, till he has given notice to
the contrary.

The agent is bound to serve his principal to the best
of his ability, according to the nature and design of the
service for which he is employed. He is bound, in
simple agency, to obey precisely the instructions of the
principal. But there arc cases in which this obligation
becomes modified. In professional agency, as when
physicians or lawyers are employed in the proper busi-
ness of their profession, they are not equally bound to
obey instructions. They are employed because of their
superior skill ; and this skill should be exerted for the
benefit of the employer, according to their own judg-
ment. A physician has no right to give, at the desire



INJUBT TO CHASAOTEB. 187

of his patient, drugs that will poison him. A lawyer
has no right, because his client desires it, to manage a
suit in a manner which will render it unsuccessful. Pro-
fessional men are bound to regard, not only the inter-
ests of the employer, but also their own reputation ;
and, if they cannot faithfully exercise their professional
skill, they ought to relinquish the case.

Legislators are professional agents, employed to
make laws, because of their supposed qualifications for
this service. They are, therefore, not under obligation
to make bad laws at the desire of their constituents.
Whether they are bound to resign, rather than disobey
the instructions of their constituents, is a question on
which different opinions have been maintained. Where
the Constitution of the country prescribes an election
for a term of years, and makes no provision by which
the electors may recall the agent whom they have chosen
and duly appointed, it is by no means clear that he is
bound to retire from office at their request.

SECTION VII. INJURY TO CHARACTER.

A man's character is the assemblage of his qualities,
intellectual, social, and moral ; and these constitute his
essential wealth. Bank and condition of life, and all
external possessions, are merely accidental, and, though
present to-day, may be absent to-morrow. Such are
the changes observed in the history of human life, that
the lot of each individual has been imagined to be de-
termined by a blind and fickle goddess, called Fortune ;
and the instability of her gifts has been represented by
the revolution of a wheel, which elevates at one moment
to the height of prosperity, and depresses at the next
to the depths of adversity. Revelation pronounces all
external riches uncertain,^ and describes them as making



1 1 Tim. vi. 17.



188 DUTIES OF BEOIPROCITT.

themselves wings, and flying awaj;^ and bids us seek
durable riches.^ When, in the fluctuations of human
affairs, a man's fortunes become shipwrecked, and all
external good is hopelessly lost, if he possesses within
himself those qualities which constitute true worth, he
is rich in his poverty. Nor is this all. Death strips
man of all external good. Power, rank, riches, what-
ever of these fortune may have given, if it chances to
continue through life, is certainly lost at death. " We
brought nothing into this world, and it is certain that
we can carry nothing out.**^ But he who has the in-
ternal wealth of a pure character, and is rich toward
God, will bear his wealth with him when he leaves the
world behind him, and all that is so attractive and so
highly prized in this life of empty show and delusive
hopes.

Wealth of character is not kept in strong boxes,
where thieves may break through and steal. No one
can take it from us without our consent ; but it is not,
therefore, out of danger. Our first parents were be-
guiled into sin, and lost the purity and innocence which
constituted their essential worth, rather than their pos-
session of Eden, and their dominion over all the crea-
tures of earth. In the history of fallen ipan it has been
found everywhere true, that evil communications cor-
rupt good manners. Men have been tempters of their
fellow-men, and are but too successful auxiliaries in
this service to the grand tempter of the human race.
The thief who takes away property by stealth, and the
robber who takes it by violence, can do but little harm.
Even the slanderer, who robs men of reputation, cannot
deprive them of virtue and a pure conscience. But he
who robs me of these, makes me poor indeed. My

* Prov. xxiii. 5. « Prov. viii. 18 ; Matt. vi. 19. » 1 Tim. vL 7.



INJURY TO CHARACTER. 189

self-approbation, my conscious worth, my peace of mind,
my assurance of God's approbation, are all gone ; and
what have I left but poverty most abject, and wretched-
ness most complete ?

The criminality of seducing men from virtue is darkly
and impressively exhibited in the Holy Scriptures.
Jeroboam is presented as odious and execrable, because
he "made Israel to sin."^ The Pharisees are con-
demned because they compass sea and land to make one
proselyte, who, when made, was two-fold more the child
of hell than themselves.^ The terrible woe pronounced
on Babylon was for corrupting the nations.^ God has
placed men in such relations to one another, that the
tendencies of virtue and vice are displayed in their
effects on society. As he who converts a sinner from
the error of his ways saves a soul from death, so he who
seduces a fellow-creature from virtue, entangles him in
the snare of the devil, and delivers him over to destruc-
tion; and as the former has the approbation of God
and all good beings, the latter deserves universal exe-
cration, and will receive the curse of the Almighty.

The thief who steals at midnight, is rewarded for his
nocturnal vigilance and cautious intrusion by the gain
which he acquires ; and the robber who stops the tra-
veller on the highway, is rewarded for his adventurous
boldness by the purse of gold which he bears off; but
he who robs another of innocence, has, in general, no
such reward. The love of doing mischief prompted
Satan to enter the garden of Paradise ; and tempters
in human form are often instigated by the same love of
destroying. Fiends in human form, they find a hellish
joy in the ruin of virtue and happiness. Other se-
ducers of innocence plunge their victims into crime

» 1 Kings xvi. 26. « Matt, xxiii. 15. » Roy. xix. 2, 3.



190 DUTIES OF BECIPBOOITY.

and misery for the sake of some momentary gratifica-
tion, or of some trifling gain. They cannot, like the
thief and robber, transfer to themselves the wealth of
which they deprive those whom they reduce to poverty
and wretchedness. They cannot become innocent, by
robbing others of their innocence. But they bring
accumulated guilt and damnation on themselves ; while,
for some trifling enjoyment at most, they bring guilt
and damnation on others. What curse of omnipotent
wrath can be too dreadful for crime so atrocious ? Yet
such crime stalks abroad in human society, and meets
us with bold front at the corner of every street.

The art of the destroyer no one should desire either
to teach or to learn, except to detect and counteract
his mischievous designs. In pure virtue, conscience,
governed itself by the will of God, governs all the im-
pulses of the mind.

The methods of seducing from virtue, consist in — 1.
Weakening the restraints of conscience ; 2. Increasing
the strength of unlawful desire ; and 3. Facilitating
actual transgression.

1. Weakening the Restraints of Conscience.

Men are found in human society, and even women
also, who teach that the distinction between virtue and
vice is arbitrary, and opposed to the enjoyments of life.
The highest good, in their ethics, consists in the grati-
fication of every desire. The Bible is discarded ; the
apprehensions of retribution in a future world are
derided ; and the truths and motives of religion are
treated with sneer and contempt. Books are published,
and public lectures delivered, which oppose the claims
of virtue and religion ; and many who do not aspire to
be authors, or public lecturers, exert their influence in
a more private way, to loosen the restraints of moral



INJURY TO OHABAOTER. 191

obligation. Against all such influence, whether pub«
licly or privately exerted, all who love the peace and
order of society, and who desire their own happiness,
or the happiness of those whom they love, should guard
with watchful care. Especially does it become the
young, and those on whom the guardianship of the
young devolves, to exercise this caution. When the
restraints of moral obligation begin to be loosened, and
when the youthful mind begins to feel itself free from
the bonds which have confined and checked it, the
beginning of destruction has arrived, and the brink of
the precipice has been reached. Young man, young
woman, retreat in time, or a fall into irretrievable ruin
awaits you.

The power of conscience may be weakened indirectly,
by inducing persons to act from motives which ought
not to govern their conduct. Conscience ought to rule
supreme over all other impulses to action. We act
viciously, if we are moved by some other impulse to the
neglect of conscience ; and when we induce others to
act in this manner, our influence over them is of inju-
rious effect. It tends to impair the power of con-
science, and injure the moral character. Some men,
who pride themselves on their knowledge of mankind,
use their knowledge to manage others, by approaching
them on the weak side, and appealing to some passion
or prejudice, which will move to such action as suits
the purpose of the designing master mind. Thus
demagogues and party-leaders govern the multitude ;
and, while they obtain their ends, do moral injury to
the willing victims of their cunning. Even in religion,
such demagogues are found; and, like Satan trans-
formed into an angel of light, they excite unholy zeal
for external forms, or barren orthodoxy, and deceive
their followers with the persuasion that it is super-



192 DUTIES OF BBOIPROOITY.

eminent zeal for God. Another case in which religions
leaders exert an injurious influence, occurs in the
appeals which agents of benevolent societies sometimes
address to men's vanity, to draw forth their contribu-
tions. What they give may be to a good object ; and
the gift would be an oflFering acceptable to God, if it pro-
ceeded from pure benevolence. But God searches the
heart, understands the motive, and abhors the polluted
sacrifice ; so that, while the agent is pleased, and the
deluded contributor is pleased, God is offended. Such
agents may increase the funds of the societies that send
them, but they pollute the fountainif of Qhristian
benevolence, from which they seek to draw their
supplies.

2. Exciting unlawful desires.

Some desires are lawful, when duly subordinated to
conscience, and others are in their very nature unlaw-
ful. We are forbidden to covet our neighbor's house,
wife, man'-servant, maid-servant, ox, or ass, or anything
that is his. The prohibited desire is unlawful in its
very lowest degree ; and he who indulges it in himself,
or excites it in others, sins against God.

The chief means of exciting unlawful desire consists
in operating on the imagination. The object of desire
must be conceived in the mind ; and a skilful hand may
so picture it to the imagination as to kindle desire,
when it ought to excite loathing. It is thus that
painting, fiction, and poetry, adorn pollution with
splendid attire, and fascinate the young to their de-
struction. Through the enchantment produced, they
convey moral poison into the unsuspecting heart of
innocence, and the very elements of character are cor-
rupted before danger is apprehended. If the man who
kindles a fire in a city, to the destruction of its dwell-



INJURY TO CHARACTER. 198

lugs, deserves punishment, much more does he deserve
it who publishes, and sends forth through the commu-
nity, corrupting books and prints, that kindle the fires
of unholy passion in thousands of minds, and make con-
flagration of virtue and innocence.

3. Facilitating actual Transgression,

When the restraints of conscience have been thrown
off, and unlawful desires excited in the breast, nothing
is needed to produce actual transgression, but the pre-
senting of opportunity. This the seducers of innocence
effect in various methods.

The young man who has learned to scorn the counsels
of pious parents, finds himself in the society of those
who promise to show him the world. He commits him-
self to their guidance, full of curiosity, and .panting for
enjoyments beyond the narrow limits within which
parental care has hitherto confined him. He is taught
that it is manly to take a social glass, and the sparkling
wine is presented to his lips, till he acquires a fondness
for the intoxicating draught, and perhaps becomes ulti-
mately a hopeless victim of drunkenness. Other sensual
gratifications he learns to be within his reach, and, led
on by his new companions, he visits the house which
"is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of
death." ^ Perhaps at some watering-place, where he
has recently arrived, the inexperienced youth meets
with one of nearly his own age, who seems by accident
to fall in his way, and, with insinuating politeness, offers
to conduct him thi^ough the curiosities of the place.
He is at length brought into the gambling saloon ; and,
not suspecting that his polite companion is an appointed
agent to decoy into this den of robbers, he accepts his

^ Prov. vii. 27.
17



194 DUTIES OP RBCIPROCITY.

invitation to become a partner with him in an adven-
ture. He begins the game, and is at first permitted to
win, until his consent to proceed has been fully gained,
and the game is at last concluded, with the loss of his
money, and an entrance into a life of profligacy.

Happily, the young of the female sex are exposed to
fewer temptations : but the serpent lies in their path
also. What methods are employed to entice them from
virtue, it would be unavailing to unfold. Their only
safety is found in avoiding the very beginnings of evil.
If young females trifle with conscience, and permit their
imaginations to become familiar with scenes of forbidden
pleasure, they owe it to the general respect for female
virtue, rather than to their own purity, and to the good
providence of God, rather than to their own prudence,
that they are not ensnared in the coils of the destroyer.

SECTION VIII. INJURY TO REPUTATION.

A MAN*S reputation is the opinion of others concern-
ing him. The terms character and reputation are often
used as if synonymous : but character signifies what a
man is ; and reputation^ what he is thought to be. A
man of bad character may, by a mistake of society,
possess a good reputation ; and a man of good character
may, by the suspicions of the evil-minded, and the mis-
representations of the calumnious, be without reputation.
The Son of God consented to dwell amidst a people of
unclean lips ; and, by exposing himself to their calumny,
"made himself of no reputation :*'^ yet it cannot bo
said that he was without character. ,

Reputation is ordinarily the natural and necessary
result of a man's actions ; and, like the proceeds of
labor in other cases, belongs to him by a right which is



1 Phil. ii. 7.



INJUET TO EBPUTATION. 195

as sacred as any other right, and ought to be free from
violation. He who, by industry and good management,
has acquired property, has, at the same time, gained a
reputation for industry and good management, which
may be to him the means of procuring future employ-
ment, and may thus be far more valuable than the
property acquired. The robber who steals his property
commits a flagrant wrong ; but the slanderer who de-
stroys his reputation, does far greater mischief, and
deserves far greater punishment : and the criminality is
the more atrocious, because the deed is perpetrated
without the temptation of gain. The slanderer may
gratify his hatred, or envy, or love of talking, by de-
stroying his neighbor's reputation, but he impoverishes
his neighbor without enriching himself.

^vil Surmising.

Reputation is the opinion of the community; and
since I am one of the community, my opinion concern-
ing my neighbor, is a part of his reputation. If I think
less of him than I ought, I so far do wrong to his repu-
tation. Hence we do wrong to others, when we judge
them too unfavorably ; and the wrong is not confined
to them, but rebounds on ourselves. The habit of judg-
ing unfavorably, hardens the heart against the social
affections and sympathies, on which our happy inter-
course with others greatly depends. It is directly
opposed to the charity which « thinketh no evil;"^ and
tends inevitably to cut us off from the sympathies and
affections of others, and the approbation of heaven.
" Judge not, that ye be not judged ; for with what judg-
ment ye judge, ye shall be judged ; and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.*' ^

^ 1 Cor. ziii. 5. ' Matt. yii. 1, 2.



196 DI3IIBS 09 BEOIPBOOITT«

Love to our neighbor will incline us to admit his
sincerity, and attribute to him no other motives than
those from which he professes to act. We resent the
wrong, if others ascribe to us motives which we disclaim ;
and we ought, therefore, to avoid such judgment of
others. Some men earn a reputation for insincerity, to
which they are justly entitled, and there is no neces-
sity that we should be blind to their true character ;
but there is no merit in being the first to suspect the
evil designs of others. Some persons pride themselves
on their deep insight into human character ; and when
some unlovely feature, before unsuspected, has been
disclosed, they are ready to exclaim, I told you bo ; but
they do not inform us how many times they have sus-
pected evil which never existed. They are perhaps
deceived as often as the less suspicious ; but if they are
not, it is better to be deceived sometimes, than to cul-
tivate in ourselves the habit of thinking evil ; to keep
the mind in perpetual disquiet, with the apprehension
of suffering wrong from all who approach us ; and to
banish all confidence from the intercourse of human
society. To deal with honest men as if they were rogues,
is a maxim which savors of the wisdom from beneath,
rather than of that which cometh from above. The
peace and happiness of human society depend much on
the cultivation of love and mutual confidence ; and it is
better that men should be surprised and shocked by
occasional abuse of confidence, than that they should be
perpetually prepared for it by sleepless suspicion.

Much of the strife which disturbs society, originates
in evil surmising. An injurious suspicion once enter-
tained, cannot be concealed without great diflSculty. If
not expressed in words, it produces a cautiousness in
action, by which the other party is led to suspect and
resent its existence. Mutual suspicion being engen-



INJUET TO BBPUTATION. 197

dered, a fire is kindled within, which refuses to be
smothered. If you would avoid strife and rage, check
the very beginnings of evil surmising.

Since the most virtuous have imperfections, it is un-
just, because of one failure, to judge the whole char-
acter corrupt. Peter denied his Master ; but he not-
withstanding loved and honored him, and suffered
martyrdom in his cause. We ought not to judge a man
destitute of any particular virtue, because he fails to
exercise it in some one instance ; and if it should be
proved that he is totally destitute of a particular vir-
tue, we ought not thence to conclude, that he is destitute
of all virtue. Even the truly pious may have a sin that
does easily beset them;^ and those who have not
renounced all for Christ, may, like the young ruler
whom Jesus loved,^ possess traits of character worthy to
be loved and admired.

We should be careful not to suffer our estimate of
others to be determined by their regard for us. " Sin-
ners love those that love them ;" ^ but righteous judgment
is not founded on considerations so selfish. If a man.
has treated me unkindly, it does not follow that he is a
bad man. Unkindness to me is not worse than unkind-
ness to any other person ; and if we strike from our
list of friends all who have ever treated any one amiss,
we shall have few names remaining. If we detect with
keen perception, and decry with bold vociferation, the
faults of our enemies or opponents, while we are blind
to the faults of our friends, and those of our party ; we
do not judge according to righteousness. We should
school ourselves to estimate every man, not by his bear-
ing toward us, but by his true character.



1 Heb. xii. 1. » Mark x. 21. » Luke vi. 32.

17*



198 DUTIES 09 BEOIPROOITY.

JEvil Speaking,

Few persons have their reputation so fully established
as to be wholly beyond the reach of detraction ; and
few persons are so contemptible as to be wholly unable
to injure the reputation of a neighbor. The tongue,
therefore, needs to be restrained. An inspired writer
has taught the necessity of this in the following im-
pressive language: <(Even so, the tongue is a little
member, and boasteth great things. Behold how great
a matter a little fire kindleth ! And the tongue is a
fire, a world of iniquity : so is the tongue among our
members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth
on fire the course of nature ; and it is set on fire of
hell. For every kind of beasts and of birds, and of
serpents, and of things in the sea is, tamed, and hath
been tamed of mankind : but the tongue can no man
tame; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison."^

We do wrong to the reputation of a neighbor if, in
the hearing of any third party, we charge him with
crime, either falsely or unnecessarily. Too many think
themselves justifiable in speaking what they please
against others, so long as they say nothing but what
they believe to be true. They surmise evil, and their
superior sagacity discerns so many confirmations of
their suspicion, that they take it at length for indubita-
ble truth : or they may have heard the thing reported
by some one, whose authority, though it might be ques-
tioned in other cases, they readily admit in this. They
believe, because they are willing to believe, and what
they believe they affirm. Now, if the thing reported,
though believed, be not known to be true, he who
reports it is guilty of lying : but, if it be known to be
true, yet, if he reports it unnecessarily, he is guilty of
slander.

* James iii. 5, 6, 7.



INJURY TO REPUTATION. 199

Objection. — The truth can wrong no one. He may
have greater reputation than he deserves, and the truth
may lessen it, but it cannot make it less than it ought
to be, and therefore it cannot inflict wrong.

This objection assumes that every one who reports
his neighbor's faults, has a right to sit in judgment on
his reputation, and contract it whenever it extends too
far. But why have I more right to diminish my neigh-
bor's reputation, than to diminish his field, if he has
placed his fence outside of the true boundary ? If he
has enclosed my grounds, I have a right to claim that
his field shall be so far diminished as to leave me in the
uninterrupted enjoyment of what rightfully belongs to
me. So if my rights are afiected by the extent of his
reputation, I may claim what is my own, though his
reputation should sufier loss. The possession of pro-
perty, even when unjustly acquired, gives a right to
exclude any one who has no better right. On the same
principle the possession of reputation should exclude all
encroachment, when not required by the rights of
others. Hence we have no right to lessen the reputa-
tion of our neighbor, unless it becomes necessary in the
fulfilment of our own duty. If we do it to gratify our
hatred, or pride of superiority, or love of talking, we
are guilty of slander.

Duty to a third party may require the giving of
information against a neighbor. If I know that he is
plotting to burn the house, or seduce the daughter of
another, my duty requires that I should give so much
information, as may be necessary to secure protection
against the meditated injury*; but it does not require
that I should tell all I know, or all I suspect, concern-
ing the author of the criminal design. Duty to society
may require us to inform when the laws have been
violated. He, who, in neglect of duty, conceals the



200 DUTIBS OF BBCIPROCITY.

crimes or criminal designs of others, makes himself an
accomplice in their guilt.

Confidential Communication.

Much slander is covered under the injunction of
secrecy. Communications are seldom confidential unless
they contain some statement which, if divulged, might
bring the author into trouble; and, therefore, the in-
junction of secrecy often proceeds from cowardice,
rather than conscientiousness. If I, from a sense of
duty, communicate information to an individual, which
he needs, but which it would be wrong to spread before
the public, it is then my duty to require secrecy. But
in too many cases, confidential communications do not
proceed from a sense of duty, and are as useless to
him who receives, as to him who makes them. The
receiver has but little reason to feel flattered by the
confidence which burdens him with an unprofitable and
troublesome secret, criminally committed to his keeping.

Convivial Defamation,

Tea-table gossip is proverbially an entertainment of
slander ; and it is to be lamented, that this species of
entertainment is not confined to parties of the idle and
light-minded. Men of gravity too frequently lay aside
their seriousness, and provoke merriment by dissecting
the character of an absent individual. Some wit of
the company holds up his foibles to ridicule, and all
enjoy a rich repast, which would be sadly interrupted,
if the subject of their merriment should unexpectedly
appear among them. But if all that was said in his
absence proceeded from pure brotherly love, why is not
his arrival welcomed, that he may share in the feast of
love and flow of soul5 The merriment ceases, because
all understand that no one desires to be the subject of



INJUET TO REPUTATION. 201

such conviyial defamation ; and, therefore, all who do
to others as they would have others do to them, will
hold the reputation of the absent too sacred to make
it a subject of sport.

If the utterance^ of the tongue in the ordinary
intercourse of society be carefully examined, any one
who has not considered the subject, will be surprised
to discover how much is said that may be justly styled
slander. Why cannot topics of conversation be found,
worthy of rational and immortal minds? Let the
young acquire useful knowledge, and cultivate a deli-
cate respect for the reputation of the absent ; and they
will then feel it a degradation^ to associate with those
who are incapable of higher enjoyment than the feast
of scandal.

Libel.

Written or printed slander is styled libeh In this
form, it has greater permanence ; and, if sent forth
with the multiplying power of the press, may fly with
increased velocity, and operate with more extended
injury. The strife of political parties gives frequent
occasion for this species of crime, against which all
have great need to guard, who edit political newspapers,
or write for them in times of party excitement. But
the most unsuitable place for libel, is the column of a
religious newspaper. The cause of him who, when he
was reviled, reviled not again, is grossly dishonored,
when newspapers, professedly devoted to the dissemi-
nation of pure and undefiled religion, are polluted with
slanderous publications, in which religious partisans
assail the reputation of each other. On this abuse of
the press, the God of truth and holiness frowns ; and
the effects of it on vital godliness, are blasting and
destruction.



202 BUTIES OF RBOIPBOCITY.



SBCTION IX. INJUSTICE TO BRUTES.

Though brutes are not moral beings, God has pro-
vided enjoyments for them ; and men are under moral
obligation not to intercept his bounty. Hence, brutes
have rights, and may be treated with injustice.

God has given man dominion over brutes, and
authority to use them for food. He may command
their services, when he can make them labor for him ;
and he may put them to death, when he needs their
bodies for meat, or when they dispute with him the pos-
session of the earth, or disturb his peaceful occupancy
of it. But God has given him no right to treat brutes
with cruelty. Beasts used for labor, ought to be fed,
and otherwise provided for ; and those which are killed
for food, ought to be put to death with as little pain as
possible. We have no right to harm wild animals which
we do not need for food, and which do not incommode
us ; or to put any animal to pain, whether wild or tame,
for the mere purpose of sport.

The obligation to treat brutes with kindness, is taught
in the Holy Scriptures, which declare that *< a righteous
man regardeth the life of his beast." ^ Brutes are
sentient, as well as men ; and no one whose heart is not
cruel, can take pleasure in putting them to torture.
He who tortures flies for amusement, is preparing him-
self, if he should obtain power over human lives, to
sacrifice them to his fiendish pleasure, and to derive
higher enjoyment from the sport, according to the
higher nature of his victims.

1 Prov. xii. 10.



CHAPTER IX.
DUTIES OF BENEVOLENCE.



SBCTION I. OBLIGATION.

The means of enjoyment which the bountiful Creator
has provided for mankind, he has chosen to distribute
unequally; and this inequality furnishes occasion for
the exercise of benevolence. The duties of reciprocity,
considered in the last chapter, make no change in the
inequality of distribution. If a rich man buys a horse
Trom his poor neighbor, and pays the exact value in
3orn or money, the inequality of their wealth is not
affected by the exchange ; but if he gives the corn or
money without receiving an equivalent, he performs
an act of benevolence, which brings the amount of
their possessions nearer to equality by lessening the
abundance of his wealth, and increasing the scanty
supplies of the other. Such acts of benevolence it is
the will of God that all men should perform, according
to the means which he has granted them, and the wants
which he gives them opportunity to relieve.

1. The obligation of benevolence is enforced by con-
science. Selfish as the human heart is, it is not wholly
devoid of sympathy and benevolent affections. Con-
science restrains our selfishness, and reproves if we
withhold what is due to others ; but conscience never
opposes benevolent affections, or upbraids us for their
exercbe. On the contrary, some of our highest moral



204 DUTIES OF BENEVOLENCE.

pleasures result from acts of kindness to others ; and
men who practise benevolence, have always found the
words of Christ verified in their experience — " It is
more blessed to give than to receive/'^ Nor is the con-
science of the benevolent man the only witness that
testifies to the excellence of the virtue. Even selfish
men admire and approve the conduct which they are
unable to imitate ; and though such men as the philan-
thropic Howard are exceedingly rare, the men who can
fail to admire their virtues, are equally rare. However
diverse the moral sentiments of mankind may be on
other points, all men approve benevolence.

2. The state of human society calls for ^he exercise
of benevolence. Everywhere we see widows and orphans
to be relieved, sick to be visited, hungry to be fed, and
naked to be clothed ; or, if cases of extreme want and
suffering do not obtrude themselves on our notice,, we
need not search far or long to find those whose hearts
may be gladdened by our kindness. This constitution
of human society calls for benevolence, and gives oppor-
tunity for its exercise. Were all so happy that no drop
could be added to their cup of enjoyment, the call for
benevolence would not, as now, assail us from every
quarter. God could have distributed the means of
enjoyment equally, and have filled every cup to the
brim ; but, though he delights in the happiness of his
creatures, he delights in virtue more, and chooses to
give opportunity for its exercise. The Book of his
providence teaches the lesson on every page, that he
requires us to be benevolent.

Lest we should be slow to learn our duty from the
wants of others, our Creator has made us liable to
wants ourselves. Every one knows that his lot is not

^ Acts zx. 35.



BULB. 205

beyond the reach of suffering, and that an occasion may
possibly arise in which he may need the sympathy and
aid of others. Even self-love presses on us the obliga-
tion to relieve the sufferings of others ; and, though it
cannot supply the proper motives for the performance
of the duty, it can teach us the folly of neglecting it.

3. The Holy Scriptures clearly teach the duty of
benevolence. Everywhere throughout the sacred volume,
the duty of giving to the poor, and relieving the suf-
fering, is enforced by the authority of God ; and his
approbation of benevolence is declared with promises
of blessing, and his wrath is denounced against the cruel
and oppressive.

4. The duty of benevolence is taught by divine ex-
ample. God is good to all ; and, without benevolence,
we cannot be the children of our Father in heaven.
The experience of every moment furnishes proof of
God's incessant kindness to us ; and, if we admire and
love the Author of our mercies, we shall take pleasure
in imitating his benevolence. Grateful for his bless-
ings received, we shall rejoice to dispense blessings to
others.

The goodness of God in creation and providence, is
an example which nature presents for our imitation ;
but the Holy Scriptures direct our minds to the higher
example of his goodness, in the redemption of sinners
by Jesus Christ. From the love of God in the gift of
his Son, and from the love of Christ in dying for our
salvation, the Scriptures infer our obligation to love
our fellow-men, and to be willing even to lay down our
lives for our brethren. \

^ SECTION II. RULB.

The duties of reciprocity may be defined with preci-
sion. For everything received, they req[uire an equiv-

18



206 DUTIES OF BENEVOLENCE.

alent to be given ; and the value of the commodities
exchanged, may be determined by the current estimates
of buyers and sellers. But a rule equally determinate
cannot be prescribed for acts of benevolence. Much is
left to individual choice, according to the words of
Christ : " Ye have the poor with you always, and when-
soever ye willy ye may do them good.*'^ The precise
time and the precise amount of our benevolence, are
not definitely commanded ; but there are considerations
which may assist us in determining our duty.

1. The exercise of benevolent desire ought to be un-
circumscribed and unintermitted. Its first proper ob-
jects are those nearest to us, members of the same
family. Beyond this circle, it extends to the neighbor-
hood, and to the whole country, and to all mankind.
Though it may embrace kindred and friends first, it
must not be confined to these, but must extend to
strangers, and even to enemies. Christ said, « Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despite-
fuUy use you, and persecute you.**^ Our acts of bene-
volence are necessarily limited according to our ability;
but our benevolent desires may flow wide as the world.
Acts of benevolence cannot be without intermission;
but the flow of benevolent desire ought to be as water
from a perennial fountain. Like a pent-up stream
seeking vent, it should be ready to burst forth int9
action, whenever opportunity occurs.

2. Our obligation to perform acts of benevolence,
must be determined according to our means. The
father of a family is not bound to give to the children
of his neighbor, the food which his own children need
for their sustenance. Benevolence does not require

1 Mark xiv. 7. * Matt. v. 44.



BULB. 207

me to give to a beggar the bread, without which I shall
myself die of hunger. But such extreme cases seldom
occur; and men are seldom in danger of exhausting
their means by doing good to others. But they too
commonly confine their benevolence within limits which
leave to themselves the undisturbed enjoyment, not
only of the necessaries and comforts, but also of the
luxuries to which they may have been accustomed.
Such benevolence does not deserve the name. We
have not approached the limit of our obligation, if we
have not found some self-denial necessary. We have
the example of Christ proposed for our imitation, who,
though he was rich, for our sakes became poor, that
we through his poverty might be rich,^ and the Re-
deemer commended the liberality of the poor widow,
who gave «all that she had, even all her living***^ If
these divine instructions do not bind us to give away
our wealth till it is literally exhausted, they certainly
bind us to consider it the Lord's, and ourselves his
stewards, appointed to use at his will, what he has in-
trusted to our hands. With this sense of responsibility
to God, as proprietor of all things, deeply fixed in our
hearts, and with the knowledge that he loveth a cheer-
ful giver,^ we can scarcely err in the disposal of what
he has committed to our stewardship.

3. Our obligation to perform acts of benevolence
must be determined according to the wants which
Providence gives us opportunity to supply. There are
years of plenty, as well as of famine ; and in seasons
of abundance, the benevolent man is justified in laying
by in store for the time to come. When but few wants
call for relief, he may give but little ; but as his store
accumulates, he should remember that the Lord per-

■ III.

1 2 Cor. viii. 9. * Mark xii. 44. » 2 Cor, ix. 7.



208 DUTIES OF BEVEVOLBNOB.

mits its increase, for some approaching time of need ;
and he should hold it in readiness for the fatore
demand. But that benevolence is spurious, which
neglects a present opportunity of doing good, under the
plea of providing for future necessity. It distrusts
God's providence, and violates his command.

4. Our acts of benevolence should vary in kind,
according to the nature of the wants which call for
relief. Wants may be physical, intellectual, or moral ;
and, in every case, the relief to be afforded must cor-
respond to the nature of the want. If a man is
hungry, give him food ; if he is naked, give him cloth-
ing. But supplies of food and clothing for the mortal
body, cannot enrich the immortal mind. If a man is
sick, we may perform towards his suffering body, acts
of kindness like those of the compassionate Samaritan;^
but such kindness is ineffectual to reach the malady of
sin that preys on the soul. True benevolence will
seek, by all appropriate means, to instruct the igno-
rant, and reform the vicious. Here it finds its highest
and noblest sphere of action. The establishment of
schools to teach the young, who would otherwise grow
up without the means of instruction; and the sending
forth of mission aries to preach the gospel to the
heathen, who would otherwise perish for lack of know-
ledge ; are acts of benevolence pleasing to God, and
full of blessing to mankind.

SECTION III. PHYSICAL BENEFACTION.

When men suffer hunger because they will not earn
bread, and cold because they are too indolent to provide
clothing and habitation for themselves; benevolence
does not require that we should give them permanent

^ Luke z. 33-36.



PHTSIOAL BENEFACTION. 209

relief. It is better that they should be left to suffer.
God has ordained that he who will not work shall not
eat;^ and we do wrong to oppose this wise arrange-
ment of his providence. Physical want is a less evil
than indolent or vicious habits ; and if God designs it
to be a cure for these, we ought not to contravene his
discipline. True benevolence requires that we permit
the remedy which he applies to take effect. Temporary
and partial relief ought to be given, even to the indo-
lent, in cases of extreme want and suffering ; but care
Bhould be taken not to encourage their idleness.

Frequently the poor suffer, not because they are un-
willing to labor, but because they cannot find employ-
ment. In this case we ought to give present relief by
supplying the wants which now oppress them ; and, if
possible, place them in circumstances in which they can
provide for themselves. This is far more benevolent
than to support them in idleness. Though labor has
been inflicted on man as a curse for disobedience, God's
goodness has converted it into a blessing ; and all, if
possible, ought to enjoy the benefit.

Public charity is unwisely directed, when it supports
paupers in idleness, who are able to labor. Besides the
evil of being without employment, they acquire a habit
of dependence, inconsistent with self-respect, and in its
tendency degrading and demoralizing. Another evil
of the plan is, that the supply excites no gratitude in
the heart of the recipient. He learns to claim it as a
right ; perhaps murmurs at its scantiness, or complains
of some injustice in the manner of its distribution. All
benefactions to the poor, ought, if possible, to be so dis-
pensed, as to cultivate in them the ennobling virtue of
gratitude, and a spirit of manly self-reliance.

* 2 Thess. iii. 10.
18*



210 DUTIES OF BENEVOLENCE.

When paupers are maintained in idleness, they have
no opportunity to enjoy the pleasure of doing good.
They receive what barely supplies their wants ; and in
appropriating it habitually to themselves, the spirit of
selfishness is cherished. The pauper is greatly elevated,
when he is placed in circumstances in which he can
sustain himself, and feel his independence; but he is
exalted to a blissful eminence, if he can become the
benefactor of others, and enjoy the luxury of giving.

Charity should be rendered to the sick and the aged^
without exacting service from them in retm-n ; and it
ought to be rendered cheerfully, and without upbraid-
ing. It may be, that they would not now be dependent,
if, in better days, they had been as industrious and frur
gal as they ought to have been ; but it is now too late
to remedy the indolence and improvidence which may
have caused their present poverty. If, on the plea that
they deserve to suffer, we decline to relieve the wants
that oppress them, we fail in benevolence, and do^^injury
to our own moral character. We may allude to their past
conduct, if we can, by judicious comments on it, promote
their moral good ; but we may not substitute upbraidings
for alms, and wound the spirit instead of relieving the
body.

The bestowing of charity blesses him who gives, as
well as him who receives. It is, in general, better that
it be dispensed in person, than by proxy; because
better opportunity is given for the cultivation of benevo-
lent feeling in the giver. The sight of the misery to
be relieved, and the personal converse with the suffer-
ing, deepen the sense of our obligation ; and it enhances
the pleasure of the benevolence, to see with our own
eyes the relief which it yields. He who contents him-
self to relieve the poor and suffering, not by visiting
them in their affliction, but by contributing to some



INTELLECTUAL BENEFACTION. 211

public fund for charity, loses much of the benefit which
he might derive from his beneficence. In the last day
the Judge will say, " I was sick, and ye visited me.** ^
We are not informed that he will say, I was sick, and
ye sent unto me. To send relief to the suffering is well ;
but to visit and relieve is better, and will be specially
honored by the approving notice of the Great Judge.

The benevolent man derives greater benefit from his
charity, when it is dispensed in secret. Ghrist*s rule
for alms-giving is, << Let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand doeth.**^ Alms given to be seen of man,
may gratify the love of applause, but cannot have the
approbation of an enlightened conscience, and will not
receive reward from our Father in heaven. He who
desires to free his heart from the influence of unworthy
motives, will prefer, when it is practicable, to bestow
his alms when there is no witness but God. He may
have much pleasure in relieving the sufferer ; but his
highest pleasure flows from a sense of the divine appro-
bation ; and he enjoys this the more, because it is undis-
turbed by the desire or hope of human applause.

BBCTION IV. INTELLECTUAL BENEFACTION.

The improvement of the intellect is an important
benefit, which it is often in our power to confer on
others. Knowledge is the food of the mind ; without
which it remains dwarfish and imbecile. To give know-
ledge is a more noble benefaction than to give bread ;
as the mind is more noble than the body. It has the
further advantage, that it is enduring. The bread
which is consumed to-day, cannot be eaten again to-
morrow ; but knowledge acquired, is a continual feast.
The stores laid up in childhood and youth, supply our

^ Matt. zxv. 36. ' Matt. vi. 3.



212 DUTIES OF BBNBVOLENOB.

mature years, and continue, without diminution, through
old age, furnishing a perpetual banquet, and imparting
vigor and activity to the mind. This intellectual im-
provement fits men to occupy a higher station in society;
and is, in general, far more valuable than mere physical
strength towards the earning of bread. It is, moreover,
capable of indefinite propagation. The bread that We
eat perishes ; and we are compelled to lay aside from
our bread-corn, however much we may desire it for pre-
sent enjoyment, a sufficient quantity to sow for a future
crop. But the knowledge on which one mind feeds,
instead of being consumed and lost, may be scattered
into a thousand other minds ; and in each one may be
seed producing a future crop, capable of supplying
intellectual nourishment, and means for further propa-
gation. These considerations invite the benefactors of
mankind to direct their efforts to a higher end than the
mere supply of physical wants.

In conferring intellectual benefit, there is not the
same danger of encouraging idleness, that attends the
giving of alms to the poor. This danger might exist in
its full force, if we could pour knowledge into the mind,
as the sun pours its light into the eye : but knowledge
cannot be acquired by a merely passive recipient. It
must, in the most favorable circumstances, be obtained by
labor. To give a favorable opportunity of laboring for
it, is a wise benevolence — similar to that which gives
employment to the poor, by which they may earn bread.
Moreover, the aid afforded for the acquisition of know-
ledge, is usually limited from necessity to a short period
of early life ; and the beneficiary knows that the time
of receiving the benefit cannot last. He is, therefore,
in little danger of relying on it for future subsistence ;
but, if worthy of the favor conferred, he will feel the
obligation to improve, with all possible diligence, the



INTELLECTUAL BENEFACTION. 213

short opportunity which it affords to fit himself for those
efforts on which the usefulness and happiness of his
whole life depend.

Some cases occur, in which genius presses through
every obstacle, and, by its own unaided strength, comes
forth into distinction. But every mind is not fitted for
such efforts ; nor is it necessary that every mind should
be subjected to such trial of its strength. Thousands
live in ignorance, and die unknown, who would have
been distinguished ornaments to society, if friendly aid
had been afforded at the moment that their genius,
having explored the little field of knowledge within its
own observation, sighed and labored to extend its
research, but at length yielded to invincible necessity.
Let those whose benevolence inclines them to give bread
to the famishing, search also for such despairing genius,
and impart to it the intellectual aliment which it craves,
and which is needed to sustain and develop the powers
that may glorify God, and bless mankind.

In bestowing intellectual benefits, it is often best to
act by proxy. Many are able to give the means for
obtaining instruction, who are not qualified to gfve the
instruction itself. Hence the establishment of schools,
the furnishing of them with libraries and scientific appa-
ratus, and the contributing of funds for enabling the
poor to avail themselves of these advantages, otherwise
inaccessible and useless to them, are benefactions worthy
of enlightened philanthropy. They may sometimes,
like the blessings of Providence, be received by the
ungrateful, or abused to vicious purposes; but the
charity in which they originate, resembles the divine
benevolence from which the blessings of Providence
flow.

Funds for the support of public schools have some-
times failed to produce their proper benefits, not be-



214 DUTIES OF BEHEVOLMCS«

caufie gratuitoos education is injorioas to the yonng,
lut because the funds hare been badly managed, or tiM
schools badly conducted, or because parents hare not
rightly appreciated the advantages brought within their
reach. When schools are established by law, the
windom of legislators should seek to guard, as much as
possible, against these causes of failure*

SECTION v. MOKAL BENEFACTION.

Sin is the greatest of all evils; and to deliver from
it is the greatcHt benefit that it is possible to confer*
Though a man should enjoy all the blessings which
wealth can procure, and though his mind be enriched
with all the treasures of literature and science, yet he
cannot be happy if his heart be under the dominion of
vicious pasnions. The wicked man is the enemy of
God, the enemy of mankind, and the enemy of himself*
His life on earth, whatever may be its seeming plea-
sureH, in a vain pursuit of happinesB, which always
retires as he approachcH, and, when it appears within
hiH reach, alwayH eludcM his grasp. But the pleasures
of the prcMcnt life, though very vanity, are his only
good ; for, in the world to come, his only portion is
everlaKting woe. Hence, to save a man from his sins,
and their terrible conBcqucnces, is a benefaction far
greater than to relieve all his physical wants, or to
bcHtow the highest possible cultivation on his intellectual
powers.

Wicked men are a cnrHc to human society. Every
one of them i» a centre of moral pestilence, infecting
the community with plague and death. To reform a
viciouM man in to render a source of malignant influence
healthful, and to confer a rich benefit on society. It
ij^ a work of benevolence, not to the wicked man only



MORAL BENEFACTION. 215'

who is its immediate object, but to the world in which
he dwells.

A wicked man perverts the noble nature that God
has given him, and dishonors the Author of his being.
He is in rebellion against his Sovereign, and at war
with the best interests of the universe. To reform such
an one is a service to God, tending to establish his
boundless and everlasting dominion. God requires this
service, and promises to reward it with distinguished
honor. " They that be wise shall shine as the bright-
ness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars forever and ever."^

The duty of laboring for the deliverance of men from
sin, is recommended by the example of Christ. He
came into the world to save his people from their sins.^
To this work his whole mediation was directed ; and,
in the accomplishment of it, he gave his life a sacrifice.
His apostles labored and suffered in the same cause,
and willingly exposed themselves to every danger, and
suffered every privation, that they might save men from
sin. They esteemed no other service which it was pos-
sible for them to render, so acceptable to God, or so
beneficial to mankind ; and we must agree with them in
this estimate, if our judgments are enlightened by the
wisdom from above.

The means to be employed for the moral reformation
of the wicked, are :

1. Moral and religious instruction. — Men need to be
taught their relation to God and his moral government,
that they may fully comprehend the nature and extent
of their moral obligations. It is important that they
should understand the beneficial tendency and effects
of virtue, and the destructive influence of vice for time

1 Dan. xii. 3. « Matt. i. 21.



216 DUTIES OF BEVETOLEirCS.

and eternity. Atx>re all, tbej should be made ae-
quainted with the gonpel, which unfolds 6od*s scheme
of salration by Jesos Christ, and which God has ap-
pointed to be the means of moral reform to mankind ;
for ^Mt pleased God by the foolishness of preaching
to save them that beliere/' ^ These means of religious
instruction should be sent to the nations that are in tiM
darkness of heathenism; and should be applied to men
of every age, but especially to the young, whose minds
are not yet under the full control of sinful habits*

2. Affectionate Entreaty. — A cold inculcation of
moral and religious truth, is not all that is needed for
the moral benefit of men; nor is it all that duty
requires. The apostles of Christ besought men to be
reconciled to God;^ and Jesus Christ wept over im*
penitent Jerusalem, and expressed his compassion for
the wicked inhabitants in language of exquisite tender-
ness.^ The condition of the wicked ought to excite
our pity ; and we cannot better exhibit our compassion*
ate regard for them, than by affectionate exhortation to
forsake sin, and flee from the wrath to come.

3. Holff Example. — The wicked ought to be contem-
plated with mingled emotions of benevolence and alK
horrence: benevolence for their persons; abhorrence
for their crimes. No proof that we abhor their crimes
can be so effectual as a careful avoidance of them.
Without this, our instructions and exhortations will be
unavailing. If the truths and motives by which we
seek to operate on them, fail to produce the proper
effect on our own conduct, we shall be accounted insin-
cere and hypocritical, when we urge them on others.
Our bad example will more than nullify all the good
words which our lips may utter. It will tend to make



» 1 Cor. L 21. » 2 CJor. v. 20. » Matt xxUL 37.



FORGIVENESS OP INJURIES. 217

men believe that all our instructions and exhortations,
addressed to them for their reformation, are unworthy
of their regard. Our benevolence may induce us to
follow the example of Christ, in seeking and saving the
lost ; but, though he ate and drank with publicans and
sinners, he was, in moral purity, separate from sinners.
Let us, if we would go about doing good as he did, imi-
tate his purity, as well as his benevolence. Then will
our actions speak to the heads and hearts of men a
language which they cannot fail to understand, and the
influence of which they will not find it easy to resist.

SECTION VI. FORGIVENESS OF INJURIES.

The noblest and loveliest form of benevolence appears
in the forgiveness of injuries. The Jewish interpreters
of the Mosaic law maintained that we ought to love our
neighbors, and hate our enemies; but Christ rejected
their interpretation of the sacred code, and taught that
it is our duty to love our enemies, to bless them that
curse us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us,
and persecute us.^ The New Testament very clearly
teaches the obligation to forgive, and forbids us to in-
dulge the hope of obtaining forgiveness from God, if we
do not forgive those that trespass against us. ^ A for-
giving spirit, therefore, is essential to the Christian
character.

The obligation to forgive is enforced by the divine
example. We are exhorted to be kind and tender-
hearted, and forgiving one another as God for Christ's
sake hath forgiven us.^ The divine forgiveness extends
to enemies : " For scarcely for a righteous man will one
die ; yet peradventure for a good man some would even
dare to die. But God commendeth his love toward us,
in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.



» Matt V. 43, 44. > Mark xi. 26. » Eph. iv. 32.

19



218 DUTIES OF BENEVOLEKOB.

* * * For if when we were enemies, we were recon-
ciled," &c.^ Hence, if we would be the children of our
Father in heaven, we must forgive our enemies. And,
if we possess the spirit of Christ, we shall exercise this
forgiving spirit, at the very time that we are suffering
most severely from the malignant hands of those who
hate and persecute us. He died, praying for those who
crucified him, "Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do.**^

When we see injury inflicted on another, we feel that
the perpetrator of it deserves punishment. When
the injury is inflicted on ourselves, we not only
judge the injurer to be worthy of punishment, but we
feel strongly impelled to punish him. This propensity
to take vengeance in our own hands, Christianity
requires us to subdue ; and directs us to commit our
case to the Lord, who says, << Vengeance is mine ; I
will repay." ^ This forbearance to retaliate, is the first
step in forgiveness.

But true forgiveness is something more than the
mere absence of retaliation. It renders good for evil.
It seeks to relieve the wants of the injurer, physical,
intellectual, or moral; and, instead of attempting to
punish him, or imprecating the divine vengeance on
him, prays that he may be forgiven, and may receive
every blessing from God which is needed to make him
happy. In all this, it resembles the divine forgiveness,
which makes the object of it blest for ever.

Christian forgiveness is a most effectual means of
conferring moral benefit on the injurer. If we return
evil for evil, we excite his malignant passions to inflict
further and greater injury ; but if we return love for
hatred, kindness for wrong, we present a spectacle of

^ Rom. V. 7-10. 2 Luke xxiii. 34. • Rom. xii. 19.



POBaiVBNBSS OF INJUBIEB. 21&

virtue to which he is not accustomed ; and we bring it
BO near, that he is compelled to contemplate it. If not
lost to all sense of virtue, he admires while he contem-
plates; and his malignant passions, instead of being
excited to further aggression, are subdued. This is an
end which Paul has proposed to be sought, bj doing
good to the injurious. << If thine enemy hunger, feed
him ; if he thirst, give him drink ; for in so doing, thou
shalt heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome
of evil, but overcome evil with good."^ As a mass of
metal may be melted by heaping coals of fire on it, so
the hard heart of an injurious man may be softened by
acts of kindness.

We are under obligation to show benevolence to any
wicked man, though sustaining no special relation to
us; but when he becomes our injurer, he voluntarily
assumes a relation to us, which gives us the most favor-
able opportunity of doing him good. A truly benevo-
lent mind, delighting to confer moral benefit on the
wicked, as the highest possible benefaction, will rejoice
to embrace so favorable an opportunity, when oflFered.
How sad is the mistake, when, yielding to the impulse
of passion, we neglect such an opportunity of doing
good, and by returning evil for evil, harden in crime
one whom we might have gained over to virtue !

To forgive, is honorable. False honor teaches men
to revenge injuries, and to account it mean-spirited to
forgive, or even to forbear. Men who know not God,
may think it honorable to punish a slight insult with
death ; but he who seeks the honor that cometh from
God, cannot so judge. Forgiveness is a God-like
virtue, and is therefore most honorable.

A forgiving temper, though it may fail to produce

^ Rom. xii. 20, 21.



220 DUTIES OF BENBYOLBNGB.

its proper effect on the injurery always blesses him who
exercises it. The man who avenges a wrong, may
have the pleasure of gratified pride, but he who forgives
it, has the more exalted pleasure of virtue. His con-
science approves, and rewards him with inward peace,
calm and serene, elevated far above the reach of pride
and passion, and resembling the blessedness of God.

The practice of forgiveness promotes the public
good. Revenge tends to perpetuate wrong in a con-
tinued series of retaliations; forgiveness tends to
annihilate wrong, by cutting short its progress at once.
Revenge makes its ultimate appeal to cunning or phy-
sical force, and tends to subject to their control the
welfare of mankind; forgiveness appeals to moral
feeling, and tends to establish the universal dominion
of virtue.



CHAPTER X.
DUTIES OF VERACITY.



SECTION I. OBLIQAXION 07 VBBAOITT.

t

Such is the condition of mankind, that knowledge
is indispensable to the preservation of life, the enjoy-
ment of its pleasures, and the performance of its
daties. A part of this knowledge is derived from our
own experience and observation; but far the larger
part is obtained from the information of others. Lan-
guage is the medium which the Creator has designed
for the conveyance of information from one mind to
another ; and, that the design be not frustrated, |t is
necessary that the information conveyed be true. If
all the utterances of language were falsehood, every
man would be compelled to rely on his own experience
and observation ; and, instead of deriving benefit from
society, he would be in continual danger of being
deceived and misled to his ruin. Since God has formed
man for society, has made his well-being, to a great
degree, dependent on society, has made language indis-
pensable to secure the benefits of society, and truth
indispensable to secure the benefits of language; we
are sure that God wills men to speak the truth. The
demonstration is perfect. We have not better proof,
that God designed the human body to be sustained by
food.

Further proof of the obligation to speak the truth,

19* ^^\^



222 DUTIES OF VERACITY.

may be drawn from the tendency which may be observed
in men generally, to speak the truth, when not under
the influence of some corrupting motive ; and from the
tendency, equally observable, to believe what is said,
until experience has taught suspicion ; and from the
decisions of conscience, approving truth, and condemn-
ing falsehood. However prevalent falsehood may be,
the moral judgment of mankind is against it ; and the
man who firmly and undeviatingly speaks the truth,
even when pressed with temptations to prevaricate, is
held to be worthy of honor. Falsehood is not the
language of uncorrupted nature; but proceeds from art:
and men never resort to it, but for the accomplishment
of some vicious purpose.

The obligation to speak the truth, may be proved by
many passages of the Holy Scriptures. The judgments
of God on Gehazi,^ and on Ananias and Sapphira,^ show
God's abhorrence of falsehood ; and we are warned that
liars shall have their part in the lake of fire.^

The obligation of veracity is not identical with that
of reciprocity, or of benevolence. We may communi-
cate true and useful information to a neighbor, in return
for kindness received from him, or merely to gratify
our own benevolent desire ; and in such cases it would
be a sin against reciprocity or benevolence, to remain
silent ; but it would not be a sin against veracity. The
obligation of veracity is distinct. It does not in general
determine when we shall speak ; but it binds us always
when we do speak, to speak the truth. If we speak
the truth to a person, because he has a right to it, we
fulfil the obligation of both veracity and reciprocity ;
and we violate the obligations of both, if we speak false-
hood to one who has a right to the truth. But if we

^ ,iMi--,,B, ^ 1 , m T^ — r—

» 2 Kings V. 21-27. » Acts v. 1, 11. » Rev. xxi. 8.



OBLIGATION OF VEEAOITT. 223

atter falsehood to any one, becanse he has no right to
the truth, though we do not sin against reciprocity, we
ein against veracity. The obligation to speak the truth,
is founded directly on the will of God, and not on the
Tight of him whom we address. Truth is, in God, an
attribute distinct from justice and benevolence ; and, in
men, it is a distinct virtue.

The obligation of veracity is violated, if we utter for
truth what we know to be false. The laws of language
allow the use of figures of speech, in which there is a
departure from literal truth. He who says Achilles is a
lioHj speaks what is not literally true ; but he does not
expect what he says to be taken for literal truth ; and,
therefore, does not violate the law of veracity. On this
ground the use of fables and parables is justified.

The obligation of veracity is violated, if we utter for
truth what we do not know to be true. What we con-
sider probable, or receive as true on the testimony of
others, we may state as probable, or as testified by
others ; but if we affirm it to be true, we are responsi-
ble for what we say, and transgress the law of veracity.
We may be mistaken as to a fact, through the failure of
the senses or of the memory. In this case the obliga-
tion is to speak what we suppose ourselves^ to know; or
in other words, to speak to the best of our knowledge
and belief.

The obligation of veracity may be violated by tones,
gestures, or the use of equivocal words ; or by an art-
ful arrangement of facts; or by exaggerating some
circumstance, and extenuating or omitting some other.
The rule in giving testimony is, to convey to others, as
exactly as we can, the conceptions of our own minds,
without increase or diminution ; to speak the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

The obligation of veracity is universal. It binds at



224 DUTIES OP VEKACITY.

home and abroad, in the intercourse of business or of
fashion, and whether we address one or many. False-
hood does not cease to be falsehood, when uttered in
jest ; and what are called innocent lies, blunt the sensi-
bility of the conscience, and prepare for wider depart-
ures from strict virtue. Children and servants should
be taught the obligation of strict veracity ; and they
who approve in them slight departures from truth, are
weakening the power of conscience, and doing essential
injury to their moral character.

The fallibility of men gives occasion to distinguish
between physical truth and moral truth. Physical truth
is agreement with fact ; moral truth is agreement with
the mental conception of the speaker. A man may, by
mistaking a fact, chance to speak what is physically
true, when he supposes himself to speak falsehood. In
this case he is morally guilty of lying, notwithstanding
the physical truth of what he utters.

SECTION II. PROMISES.

Since moral truth consists in agreement with the
mental conception of the speaker, it always refers to
the present state of his mind at the time of his speaking,
but what is said may agree physically with the past or
the future. The present state of the speaker's mind
may be a memory of some past fact. In this case,
when he expresses his conception, he gives his testi-
mony concerning that fact. Or the present state may
be an intention to perform some future action. In this
case, the expression of this intention is a promUe to
perform that act.

Moral truth, in proipises, requires an agreement with
the mental conception or intention of the speaker. If
he promises what he does not intend to perform, he is
guilty of falsehood, even though he afterwards change



promises: 225

his mind and perform the act promised. A^past fact
testified, or a future act promised, may agree physically
with what a speaker says ; but to constitute what he
says morally true, it must agree with his present mental
conception.

In making a promise, the primary obligation of vera-
city requires that what is promised agree precisely with
the intention of the promisor ; but there is a secondary
obligation, which refers to the fulfilment of the promise.
The rule on this subject is, that a promise to do a pos-
sible and lawful act binds the promisor to fulfil it,
according to the expectation voluntarily created. If
the act promised be impossible, or contrary to the law
of God, the promise is not obligatory. If the promisor
knew the impossibility or unlawfulness when he made
the promise, he committed a crime for which he is
bound to repent ; and he is bound to make amends to
the promisee, unless he also knew the impossibility or
unlawfulness of what was promised.

An unexpressed intention to confer a benefit on an
individual has not the obligation of a promise, nor has
an intention expressed only to a^ird party. Neither
does such an intention become a promise, if the party
to be benefited obtains knowledge of the design not
voluntarily communicated. It is possible for subse-
quent events or disclosures to release from the obliga-
tion of a promise; but in this case, the promiser is
bound to see that no one receives injury from his failure
to fulfil.

Were the obligation to fulfil a promise strictly iden-
tical with the obligation of veracity, it would not be
dependent on the expectation created, but would attach
equally to the intention made known to a third party.
A promise confers the right of expectation ; and whether
it is made in return for something received, or merely



226 DUTIES OF VBEACITT.

out of benevolence, it is as if property Vere conveyed,
which cannot be afterwards reclaimed at the pleasure
of the donor. Hence, the obligation to fulfil a promise
may be referred to reciprocity ; but a failure to fulfil,
justly creates a suspicion of the promisor's veracity at
the time of making the promise. Hence, one who de-
sires his reputation for veracity to be untarnished, will
be careful to fulfil his promises.

The expectation, voluntarily created, furnishes the
rule for interpreting the language of a promise. Being
the ground of the obligation, it also determines its
extent. A promiser is bound by his promise, in the
sense in which he supposed the promisee to under-
stand it.

SECTION III. CONTRACTS.

A CONTRACT is a mutual promise ; and the obligation
to fulfil it is subject to the same rules and exceptions
as appertain to promises. A contract may contain a
conditional promise, which, like any other conditional
promise, is not obligatory if the condition be not per-
formed.

The failure of one party to fulfil a contract, some-
times releases the other party from all obligation, and
may even entitle him to damages. But in many cases
the failing party ought to receive compensation for par-
tial benefit rendered ; and, in such contracts as marriage,
the failure of one party does not usually release the
other party from obligation.

Since a promise to perform an unlawful act is not
obligatory, the promises of a contract cannot be bind-
ing if made in violation of the divine law. A matri-
monial contract cannot be made for a shorter period
of time than life. If made at all, it must be made in
accordance with the law of the Creator.



CONTRACTS. 227

The obligation to fulfil contracts, binds societies as
well as individuals. It is a false plea that corporations
have no conscience. If a corporation consists of human
beings, every one of them has a conscience ; and every
one of them brings guilt on himself, if he consents to
the violation of a contract, or fails to use his best
endeavor to prevent it.

The treaties which nations make with each other are
contracts which ought to be sacredly inviolate. A
strong nation may have nothing to fear from man if it
violates a treaty with a feeble one, unable to avenge the
wrong : but there is verily a God who judgeth in the
earth, and who will assuredly punish such perfidy.

SECTION IV. OATHS.

It is frequently of great importance, in cases of con-
troversy between men, to ascertain facts, on which the
rights of the parties depend. Persons, to whom these
facts may be known, may have interests inclining them
either not to testify, or to testify falsely. To protect
the citizens in the enjoyment of their rights, civil
government* needs some means for eliciting the truth ;
and, for this purpose, it requires testimony to be given
on oath. The witness is made to invoke the displeasure
of God on him, if he speaks falsehood ; and, by this
means, higher interests are brought to counteract the
influence of those which incline to the giving of false
testimony. Moreover, the laws provide special penal-
ties for the crime of perjury. By the two-fold appre-
hension of suffering from both God and man, the
strongest possible guard against falsehood is presented.

In oaths, appeal is made to the omniscience and the
justice of God. As omniscient, he knows every fact
to which any witness may be required to testify; or
rather the mental conception to which the testimony,



228 DUTIES OF YSBACITT.

if morally true, most correspond ; and, as just, he is
expected to punish, with severity, those who presumpi-
tuously use his name to sanction falsehood. The
appeal to justice is made in such words as, << God do so
to me, and more also;'* or, "So help me God." These
expressions signify the consent of the person who takes
the oath, that the judgment of God may fall on him,
if he speaks falsehood ; that the help and favor which
he hopes to receive from God, may be suspended on
the truth of what he declares. Such an appeal is of
awful import ; and, if made irreverently, must be offen-
sive to God; but, if his law authorizes such appeal,
and it be made for just cause, and in a right spirit, we
must regard it as a solemn act of religious worship.

That God's law does authorize oaths, may be argued
from the third commandment, which appears to have
primary reference to such invocation of his name.
" Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain ; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
taketh his name in vain."^ Any irreverent use of
God's name may be understood to be prohibited by the
spirit of this commandment; but to take' God's name
in vain, probably imports to use the authority of his
name unworthily. So interpreted, the commandment
forbids perjury and profane swearing. As the com-
mand, "Thou shalt not steal," proves the right of
property; so the command, "Thou shalt not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain," proves the law-
fulness of using the authority of his name, when not
in vain. A commandment which guards against the
abuse of oaths, implies the lawfulness of their use.

The lawfulness of oaths may be argued from the
example of God himself, who is frequently represented

' Ex. XX. 7.



OATHS. 229

in Scripture as speaking on oath ; ^ by the example of
holy men before the giving of the law ; ^ by the express
requirement of oaths in the Mosaic code;' by the ex-
ample of Paul, who, in his epistles, uses the solemnity
of an oath ; ^ by the declaration of the same apostle,
describing the necessity and proper use of an oath to
be for the end of strife ; * and by the example of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who, in his trial before the Jewish
court, allowed himself to be put on oath, and gave on
oath the answer for which he was condemned to die.^

An oath, being an act of religious worship, requires
a solemn sense of God's character, and of our account-
ability to him. In making the solemn appeal, the lift-
ing up of the hand is an appropriate ceremony. The
kissing of the Bible, though in common use, is less
appropriate. The angel mentioned in 10th chapter of
Revelation, did not kiss the book which he had in his
hand, and which the best commentators understand to
be the Bible, but swore by lifting up his hand to heaven.

In oaths, all mental reservation is inadmissible, and
all purposed use of equivocal language. He who takes
the oath, must understand and use words in the sense
in which he supposes they will be understood by those
for whose assurance the oath is taken.

Promissory oaths are often taken by persons who
enter on some office, and thereby bind themselves to
the faithful performance of its duties. The thing pro-
mised, must be lawful, and within the power of him
who engages to perform it.

Several objections to the lawfulness of oaths need to
be considered.

^ Gen. xzii. 16 ; Ps. Ixxziz. 3 ; Heb. vii. 21. ' Gen. xiv. 22 ;
xlvii. 29-31 ; 1. 25. » Ex. xxii. 10, 11 ; Deut. vi. 13. * Rom. i.
9 ; 2 Cor. i. 23 ; Gal. i. 20. « Heb. vi. 16. • Matt. xxvi. 63, 64.

20



i



230 DUTIES OF VKEACITT.

Objection 1. — Christ commanded, ^^ Swear not at all
* * * but let your communication be yea, yea, nay,
nay; for whatsoever is more than these, cometh of
evil/*^ The same command is repeated by one of the
inspired writers.*

The command of Christ must not be understood to
condemn his own example. He acknowledged the au-
thority of the Jewish law, and, in obedience to it, took
the oath administered by the high priest ; but he did
not use oaths in his ordinary discourse. His command,
"Swear not at all,*' refers to ordinary « communica-
tion,** which was to be, "yea, yea; nay, nay," and
does not refer to the testimony required by law. The
same interpretation must be given to the other passage
of Scripture cited in the objection.

Objection 2. — Human knowledge and human virtue
are so imperfect, that no one has a right to peril his soul
on the truth of what he says ; and the laws of society
have no right to require it.

If human imperfection renders oaths morally w^rong,
the Mosaic law would not have required them. They
were not a part of its ceremonies, adapted specially to
their worship, and abolished at the coming of Christ.
They possess intrinsic moral quality ; and, if essen-
tially wrong, could not have formed a part of the judi-
cial code, given by God himself to his ancient people.

Oaths bind to moral, not physical truth ; and, there-
fore, the imperfection of human knowledge is not a
valid objection to their use. We are required to swear
"to the best of our knowledge and belief.** An honest
utterance of the mind is all that the oath requires ; and
a sense of our ignorance need not make us fear to be
honest. But it is alleged that human virtue is also
weak. If this imperfection can excuse from a



1 Matt. V. 34-37. ^ James v. 12.



OATHS. 231

solemn appeal to God, it can excuse from a final arraign-
ment at his bar. In oaths we consent to the scrutiny
and judgment of God ; and to these we are compelled
to submit, whether we consent or not. The oath presses
on the conscience a responsibility which cannot be
evaded, and needs to be felt. The imperfection of
human virtue, so far from being a valid objection to the
use of oaths, renders their use necessary.

The objection applies with most plausibility to oaths
of office, in which an individual promises to perform the
duties to the best of his ability. The facts which are
testified on oath, being past and fixed, are necessarily
definite, and unafi^ected by any imperfection of the wit-
ness ; but the future acts of one who takes a pronEiissory
oath, are indefinite, and dependent on the will of the
promisor. On this account, it has been alleged that
promissory oaths are unavoidably made with mental
reservation, in which the individual retains the right
of interpreting the phrase, « best of his ability.*' But,
though past facts are definite, the witness who testifies
respecting them, does not swear that his testimony
agrees with the facts, but with his conception of them ;
and this conception is liable to be a£fected by the imper-
fection of his memory, and even by prejudices, from
which he cannot be sure that he is perfectly exempt.
He testifies to the best of his knowledge and belief, and
this phrase is as indefinite as the other. He who swears
that he will give true testimony as to a fact concerning
which he is about to be questioned, makes a promise
of a future act ; and although the past fact is definite,
the future fulfilment of the promise is indefinite, and
liable to be affected by the imperfection of the witness.
The case does not differ essentially from that of oaths
of office. In both, he who administers the oath, he who
takes it, and all the parties concerned, are aware in



232 DUTIES OF YEBAOITT.

what respect the language used is indefinite ; and, there-
fore, there is no need of mental reservation. A man
who, without an oath, undertakes to tell what he knows
concerning a past fact, or engages to perform the future
duties of an office, which he receives, is bound to be
sincere in making the promise, and faithful in execut-
ing it.

In the obligation to sincerity and faithfulness, the
conscientious man recognises the authority of God,
even without an oath ; and the oath is his solemn and
formal recognition of that authority. Without the
oath, he realizes that a failure in sincerity and faithful-
ness deserves the displeasure of God ; and the oath is
his solemn and formal consent to act under God's moral
government. Consciousness of imperfection may induce
us, in everything, to serve the Lord with fear and
trembling ; but we have no right, on account of it, to
refuse an acknowledgment of the presence, authority,
and moral government of him to whom, whether willing
or unwilling, we must give account.

Objection 3. — For the prevention of every other
crime, the laws rely on human penalties ; and these pen-
alties ought to suffice for the crime of bearing false wit-
ness.

Human penalties would be unavailing to prevent any
species of crime, if there were no means of obtaining
testimony against the criminal. Hence oaths are need-
ful in trial for every crime ; and their solemn reference
to God's judgments is needed, to give efficacy to the
penal threatenings with which the laws seek to prevent
crime of every kind.

Objection 4. — The testimony of persons who, from
conscientious scruples, refuse to take oaths, is found to
be as reliable as that of other persons ; and therefore
oaths are unnecessary.



OATHS. 233

Men of scrnpulons consciences are not the persons
from whom false testimony is to be feared. It cannot be
inferred, from their case, that oaths are universally un-
necessary. Had God judged them useless, he would
not have required them under the Mosaic law. •

Objection 5. — The frequency of oaths lessens their
solemnity and effect, and produces irreverence towards
God.

This may be a valid objection against the multiplica-
tion of oaths, but not against their lawfulness. Proba-
bly it would be better to dispense with oaths of office,
when the inducements to unfaithfulness may be suffi-
ciently counteracted by human penalties.



20*



CHAPTER XL
SOCIAL DUTIES IN GENERAL.



The Creator designed that man should live in society;
this may be proved by the necessities and propensities
of human nature, and by the teachings of revelation.

The necessities of human nature require society. K
human beings lived in total separation from each other,
the race could not be propagated, and the individuals
would spend their days in wretchedness. They would
be unable to contend with the beasts of the field, having
neither instincts nor physical strength suflScient for the
conflict. The arts of life would be unknown ; and
hence, men would be without clothing and habitation,
to protect from cold and storm. Man's victory over
the elements and the beasts of the field, is obtained by
reason ; but reason is too slowly developed to meet his
necessities, if he entered on his course in solitude.

The propensities of human nature are averse to soli-
tude. Solitary confinement is to man a terrible penalty.
A few individuals of the race have chosen the hermit's
life ; but they have made the choice under the influence
of motives which have overpowered the natural ten-
dencies bf their minds, and which have left them
scarcely men. Were it possible for learning and the
arts to be cultivated without society, and all man's
physical wants supplied, there are impulses in his
nature which would never be gratified, and undefined
and inextinguishable longing would render him un-

(234)



SOCIAL DUTIES IN GBNERAL. 235

happy. But suppose that he could escape all these,
his highest happiness would still be, to a great extent,
negative. To the joy of heart which proceeds from
the exercise of social affections, he must for ever be a
stranger ; and hence, his highest pleasure would be a
pitiable absence of all that renders human life de-
sirable.

The volume of revelation begins its account of man,
after his creation, with the divine declaration, « It is
not good that the man should be alone." ^ And when
God made known his will from Sinai, every precept in
the second table of the law supposes man to be in a state
of society. Everywhere throughout the Scriptures, man
is regarded as a social being. It is not the will of God,
as made known in the Bible, that men should forsake
human society, and dwell in solitude; but pure and
nndefiled religion consists in visiting the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and in keeping ourselves
unspotted from the world.^

In the precept, " Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself," the term " neighbor" signifies any fellow-man.
When Christ was asked to explain it, he illustrated its
meaning by the parable of the good Samaritan. The
Jews had no dealings with the Samaritans; and, in
explaining and applying the precept, did not hold them-
selves bound to love the Samaritans as neighbors. But
the parable exhibited the benevolence of a Samaritan
to a suffering Jew, and taught the Jews that their
natural prejudices ought to be surmounted, and that
their love ought to embrace even those who were
accounted enemies. So interpreted, the precept binds
us to love every individual of our race.

Love to individuals is expressed in various forms of

^ Gen. ii. 18. ' James i. 27.



286 SOCIAL DUTIES IN GBNEBAL.

external duty, according to their circumstances. The
benevolent Samaritan rendered services to the Jew,
which his suffering circumstances required, and which
would have been impracticable, or worse than useless,
in other circumstances. The duties which form the
outward embodiment of love, are also modified by the
various relations which individuals may sustain to us.
Every individual of mankind is a neighbor to be loved;
but, in the arrangements of society, peculiar relations
arise, giving origin to peculiar obligations. No one
ceases' to be a neighbor ; and the obligation to love
every one as a neighbor does not cease ; but, instead of
unvarying benevolence to every human J)eing, we have,
according to the relations which spring up in society,
the modifications of love corresponding to these rela-
tions — such as conjugal love, parental love, &c. And
the outward forms of duty, in which these various
modifications of love are expressed, vary according to
the several relations, and become what are denominated
social duties.

Some social relations are of divine appointment.
The relations between husband .and wife, between pa-
rent and child, are of this sort ; and we may add the
relations which members of Christian churches bear to
each other, and also those of citizens to each other,
and to the government under which they live. The
two chapters which follow next in order, will discuss
the duties of these relations, except those appertaining
to the church, which properly belong to the department
of Theology.

SIMPLE SOCIETY.

The simplest form of society is that in which indi-
viduals voluntarily unite for the accomplishment of
some specified object. It frequently happens that some



SOCIAL DUTIES IH GEVEEAL. 237

good, which indiyidaal effort could not obtain, may be
attained by the united co-operation of many ; and, for
the attainment of this end, they voluntarily engage to
co-operate with each other. Besides the general obli-
gation to each other, as neighbors, they enter into new
obligations by their mutual contract ; and these new
obligations are to be ascertained by the terms of the
contract. The persons so united, form a voluntary
society ; and the engagement which they enter into is
the constitution of the society.

Membership in a voluntary society must, of course,
originate in the consent of the individuals who compose
it,; but it does not follow that the members may leave
the society at their pleasure. If the object of the asso-
ciation is unlawful, any member may abandon it at any
time, on the ground that a promise to do wrong is not
obligatory. But if the object is lawful, the members
are bound by their contract with each other, and cannot
leave the society contrary to this contract, without the
consent of the other members. A failure to perform
their duty to the society binds them to make amends,
just as a failure to fulfil any other contract.

The members of a voluntary society may, or may
not, enter into association with each other on terms of
equality. The consent of each is alike necessary ; but
tlus consent may assign to one individual a higher place,
and a larger influence, than to another. This inequal-
ity, if established in the constitution or original compact,
cannot afterwards become a just ground of separation
from the society, so long as those who hold the higher
place of influence conform to the constitution.

When individuals enter into society on terms of
equality, the action of the body is naturally determined
by the will of the majority, unless the constitution pro-
vides otherwise. But the object of the association



238 SOCIAL DUTIES IN GENERAL.

cannot be changed, except by the tmanimoos vote of
the members. To change the object is, in fact, to dis-
solve the old body, and form a new one ; and no person
can be required to enter into the new association with-
out his consent. If a majority decide to change the
object of the society, they constitute a new society,
and leave those who do not consent to the change to
prosecute, if they choose, the object of the original
association. On this ground, property acquired by a
society cannot be applied, at the will of the majority,
to a purpose not contemplated in the original compact,
but belongs to those who adhere to the constitution.



CHAPTER XII.
FAMILY DUTIES.



SECTION I. MARRIAGE.

Marriage is an institution of the Creator, who
thought it not good for man to be alone, and created
woman a help-meet for him. Adam and Eve were
formed to be husband and wife ; and, as joined together
in this relation, were commanded to increase, and mul-
tiply, and replenish the earth. Beasts of the field
propagate their species without marriage ; but, in various
species of birds, the flocks divide into pairs in the spring
season, to build nests, and rear their several broods of
young. This instinct of birds shows the Creator's will
respecting them ; and the proof is abundant, that God
designed the human race to be propagated by means
of marriage. We may see in the affection which a
feathered pair exhibit for each other, and in the joint
care which they exercise over their young, advantages
which human beings, if guided by reason only, ought to
secure to themselves ; and these advantages the benevo-
lent Creator has designed for man in the matrimonial
institution.

The affection which ought to subsist between husband
and wife, is adapted to be one of the chief sources of
human happiness. The married pair separate from all
the world beside, and give themselves to each other in



240 FAMILT DUTIES.

the closest of human relations. The man leaves father
and mother, to cleave to his wife ; and the tender
female, in like manner, leaves the home of her child-
hood, and the protection of affectionate parents, to
cleave to her husband. The new relation requires the
parties to become <<one flesh," and to love each other
as their own bodies. Strong affection between them is
necessary to attain the ends of the matrimonial institu-
tion ; and where it exists, it opens a perennial source
of joy. The sunshine of life gives double happiness,
because they enjoy it together ; and, when dark days
come, they support and cheer each other. If united in
Christian faith, as well as in conjugal love, the tie
death itself cannot sever. As helpers of each other's
faith and joy, they walk together in the way of the
Lord; and, as heirs together of the grace of life in
Christ Jesus, they rejoice in the common hope of the
heavenly inheritance, and of dwelling for ever in one
eternal happy home.

The benefits of marriage are not confined to those
who are at the head of the family. The children are
shut up by it under the joint protection of their parents,
and blessed with their united care. If piety and love
regulate the household, the children are trained in the
ways of virtue and religion, and are taught how to
enrich themselves with wealth of character, and treasure
laid up in heaven. Children born out of wedlock are
usually thrown on the care of the mother, the weaker
parent ; and hence they have less than half of the means
which legitimate children enjoy for support and educa-
tion. They witness none of the sacred affection and
tender sympathy which subsist between parents law-
fully united in the conjugal relation; and they have
few inducements to obey the command, "Honor thy
father and mother." Such unfortunates enter on life



MARRIAGE. 241

under many disadvantages ; yet, if surrounded by a
society generally virtuous, they may have sufficient in-
tercourse with well-regulated families to guard their
morals. But if marriage were universally abolished, all
the human race would be born in these sad circum-
stances. All would be without a well-regulated home
for their childhood, and without the influence and
example of well-regulated families in the vicinity.
Brought into the world like the beasts of the field, they
would be given up to animal appetites and passions,
without the training necessary to develop and cultivate
the moral powers.

Another advantage of marriage consists in the pro-
vision which it makes for aged and infirm parents.
Children who have been taught to honor their father
and mother, take pleasure in sustaining them when old
age comes, and in rendering their declining days happy.
But were matrimony unknown, not only would helpless
infants be left to perish for want of parental care, but
aged and helpless parents would also be left to perish
for want of filial affection and maintenance.

Civil government was at first patriarchal ; and, hav-
ing derived its orFgin from family government, it is still
indebted to family government for its most efficient
support. When children have been taught to obey their
parents, they are prepared to obey civil rulers; and
virtue and order must prevail in a state which is com-
posed of well-regulated families. But if family organi-
zations were destroyed, the fences of morality would be
broken down, and vice would overrun the community,
spreading everywhere misery and desolation.

Marriage, by producing family government, is an im-
portant means of preserving and perpetuating religion
in the world. A well-regulated family is a garden
enclosed, in which the young plants of piety may be
21



242 FAMILY BUTIBB.

nurtured. Here we find the examples of religious edu-
cation, by which men are trained to moral greatness,
and prepared to adorn, elevate, and bless the human
race, and glorify God. Were marriage banished from
the earth, religious education would cease ; and human
beings, herding together like the beasts, would be given
up to beastly vices. If the natural tendencies of things
were not counteracted by some divine interposition, the
knowledge of God and the practice of virtue would
soon become extinct in the world.

As God's appointed means of propagating the human
race, as his first institution for the benefit of the race,
and as the source of many inestimable blessings, indis-
pensable to the existence and happiness of society, mar-
riage deserves to be honored by all ; and its sanctity to
be guarded from every encroachment. To incorrect
views respecting the importance of this divine institu-
tion, and a want of reverence for it, much of the vice
may be traced, that now degrades mankind, curses
human society, and brings down the wrath of heaven,
as formerly on sinful Sodom.

ChaBtity.

Marriage is a union of one man and one woman for
life. It requires the full consent of the . parties ; and
this consent ought to be intelligently expressed, accord-
ing to the laws and usages at the time and place of
forming the union. Every union of like kind, which is
not formed for life, and with due nuptial formality, is
a violation of the marriage law. Such violation may
proceed from a contempt for marriage in both parties,
and a determination to be free from its restraints.
Where open contempt for marriage is not avowed, the
parties transgressing must fail to possess due reverence
for the sacred institution, and for him who ordained it.



MARRIAaS. 243

In snch reverence true chastity consists. It contem-
plates the creation of man, male and female, as a divine
arrangement, haying reference to the matrimonial rela-
tion ; and in every act, word, and thought, it exhibits
profound reverence for this divine arrangement, and
unwillingness to contravene it. If such reverence for
God and his sacred and benevolent institution fills the
mind, no unchaste passion can stir, no unchaste imagi-
nation can rove abroad.

Of the virtue which we are contemplating, we expect
to find, and we do find, the best specimens in the softer
sex. Modesty is essential to female loveliness. Any
indecent behavior is suflScient to degrade a female from
the high place which she ought to occupy in society ;
but, in order to her true loveliness, something more is
necessary than mere abstinence from gross acts of im-
propriety. Her tongue must be unpractised in the
utterance, and her ear untainted with the sound of in-
delicate allusions; and her imagination should be as
pure as the new-fallen snow. Whether such purity can
be preserved by those who frequent theatres, or read
the current novels of the day, and the writings of such
poets as Byron and Moore, I leave for others to
decide. There may be daughters, there may be mothers,
who think so perfect purity unnecessary in the character
of woman ; but v?hat mother, who desires her daughter
to be happily united in wedlock with a virtuous man,
would wish it known that the young beauty is indelicate
in conversation, or that she has a polluted imagination ?
But if men were willing to tolerate mental familiarity
with crime in the fair sex, so long as gross acts of trans-
gression are avoided, it ought to be remembered that
there is a God who searches the heart, and who will
bring into judgment whatever is offensive to his holiness.

The virtue of chastity is not required of females



244 FAMILT DUTIES.

•

only. In the judgment of mankind, it may be more
obligatory on females, but not in the judgment of God.
In the present life, a heavier penalty for violation falls
on woman ; but there is no reason to expect a heavier
penalty in the life to come. On the contrary, since
the retributions of the future world will perfect the
moral government of God, by supplying defects in its
present administration, it may be more tolerable, in the
day of judgment, for women than for men, who violate
the law of chastity. Let no young man consent to be
less pure, than he desires her to be, whom he is willing
to take to his bosom, the wife of his choice, the loved,
admired, and trusted associate of his future years.

To estimate rightly the virtue of chastity, we must
contemplate the tendency of marriage to promote the
well-being of mankind. Every failure in the virtue, is
an attack on the matrimonial institution, and needs
nothing but universal prevalence in order to banish the
institution from the world. It cannot be a light crime,
however carelessly or presumptuously it may be com-
mitted, which pollutes the very fountain of human
existence, and makes sport of God's command for
peopling the world with immortal beings. Let every
man who loves the happiness of his race, and fears the
judgments of God, keep himself pure. God's will on
this subject is clearly made known in the Holy Scrip-
tures; and his awful judgments therein revealed, are
sufficient to fill the minds of transgressors with terror ;
and as the beginning of his divine retribution, loath-
some disease and rottenness of bones are, in many
cases, the present reward of transgression.

Polygamy.

Marriage, as originally instituted, was the nnion of
one man and one woman ; but polygamy, or the taking



MARRIAaE. 245

of several wives, has prevailed in many countries. The
first example on record, occurred among the descend-
ants of Cain.^ It did not exist in the family of Noah,
and perhaps in none of the virtuous families before the
flood ; but, in after ages, some of the best men whose
history is given in the Bible, had more wives than one.
The practice, though opposed to the general teachings
of the Old Testament, was tolerated by the Mosaic
law ; but the precepts of Christ forbid it, and restore
the institution to its original form.

Some interpreters of Scripture suppose that the law
of Moses prohibited polygamy, in the words, " Thou
shalt not take a wife to her sister.'*^ They translate
these words, "Thou shalt not take one wife to an-
other;" but sound criticism rejects this translation.
The Hebrew phrase here used, is literally, a woman to
her sister. It sometimes has a sort of pronominal use,
as a distributive of an expressed antecedent in the
feminine gender, when this antecedent denotes inani-
mate objects. In such cases, the presence of the ante-
cedent word guards the phrase from being construed
literally ; but no such guard exists in the passage under
consideration, and the laws of interpretation require
the word sister to be taken literally, as it must be every-
where else in the context. The rendering, which is
given in the text of the common English version, ex-
presses the true sense of the original, and does not
prohibit polygamy. Other passages in the Mosaic
code show that polygamy was tolerated.^

The evil effects of polygamy were felt in the family
of the patriarch Jacob, whose wives were not equally
beloved, and had the happiness of their intercourse with
each other disturbed by jealousy. In the family of

* Gen. iv. 23. ' Lev. xviii. 18. • Deut. xxi. 15.

21*



246 FAMILT DUTIES.

David the injury done by Amnon to the sister of
Absalom, and the vengeance taken by the latter, exem-
plify the evil tendency of polygamy on the children.

The welfare of children requires the undivided coun-
sel and care of parents who are "one flesh." The
nearly equal number of the two sexes, as born into the
world, indicates the will of the Creator that every man
should have but one wife and every woman but one
husband. This arrangement, moreover, multiplies the
race more rapidly and provides better for the support of
the family. By such considerations as these, natural reli-
gion teaches that polygamy is opposed to the will of God.

Although the law of Moses tolerated polygamy, the
first book of that inspired writer furnishes proof that
the Creator designed each man to have but one wife.
The union of Adam to his one wife was the first exam-
ple of marriage ; and, in imitation of this example, it
is said, " a man shall leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave unto his wife,** not his wives; and it
is added, "they shall be one flesh.** ^ Several wives
could not be united to one another, and to one husband,
so as to constitute "one flesh,** in the sense of this
declaration. As the first book of the Old Testament
gives proof that polygamy is not according to the will
of God ; so also does the last. Malachi represents the
taking of another wife as treachery to the first, and a
violation of the marriage covenant. He refers to the
original institution of marriage, and explains that only
one wife was created for Adam ; not because the creat-
ing power was exhausted, but because union with but
one wife better secures the religious training of the chil-
dren.^ In the New Testament we have the teachings
of Christ on the subject. Quoting the passage above

» Gen. ii. 24. » Mai. U. 15.



MABRIAGB. 247

cited from Genesis, he said, « and they twain shall be
one flesh ;'*^ limiting the number expressly to two; and
he explained the obligation of the parties in marriage
according to the original design of the institution. In
harmony with the teaching of Christ, Paul says, " Let
every man have his own wife, and let every woman have
her own husband.**^

So wide a deviation from the original institution, as
that one woman should have several husbands, has
seldom been tolerated by the moral sentiments of any
people. The Mosaic law accounted this adultery, and
punished the criminal parties with death. If one man
has several wives, though his affections may be une-
qually divided among the children, he can claim them
all as his, and extend to them all paternal care. But
if a woman had several husbands, no one of them could
claim the children as his, or feel toward them the obli-
gation of a father. The law of Christ equally prohibits
the union of one man to more than one wife, and
accounts it adultery, even when the first wife has been
divorced, if not for just cause.

Divorce,

The marriage covenant makes the husband and wife
« one flesh.'* An intimacy is created, to which no third
party can be admitted, without violation of the cove-
nant ; and such violation, according to the doctrine of
Christ, is the only suflScient ground of divorce. The
law of Moses allowed divorce for other causes, but
Christ explained that this was not according to the
original institution.^

The civil laws frequently grant divorce in violation
of the divine rule. Various causes may justify the

» Matt xix. 5. « 1 Cor. vu. 2. » Matt. xix. 8.



248 FAMILT DUTIES.

allowance of a separation from bed and board, and the
making of legal provision for the appropriation of the
property, and the maintenance of the children ; but
human laws have no right to dissolve the marriage
covenant, and permit the parties to marry again, except
in the case for which Christ has allowed divorce.
"What God hath joined together, let not man put
asunder." The covenant can be annulled by nothing
but death, or the criminal violation of it by one of the
parties. In either of these cases, the remaining party
is free from obligation. Some have understood Paul,
in 1 Cor. vii. 15, to teach that a deserted husband or
wife is free from the matrimonial obligation, and at
liberty to marry again. But his language implies
nothing more than that the deserted party is not bound
to follow the deserter, and continue the performance
of conjugal duties. Since Christ did not allow the
privilege of marrying again to an unlawfully divorced
party, it cannot be that Paul allowed it to one merely
deserted.

It is important to matrimonial happiness, that the
parties should understand the conjugal relation to be
formed for life. This tends to make them one in feeling
and interest, and presents a strong inducement to bear
with each other's infirmities, and accommodate them-
selves to the necessities of their condition. When
divorce is obtainable for trifling causes, a sense of inse-
curity is easily engendered, incompatible with the per-
fect confidence which the married pair should repose in
each other.

InceBt,

Marriage with near relatives is called incest, and is
prohibited by the law of God. Paul speaks of it as a
crime not named even among the Gentiles, " That one



MARRIAGE. 249

should have his father's wife."^ It appears from this,
that men who were guided by the mere light of nature,
reprobated this connection as inadmissible, because of
the relationship between the parties. The unavoidable
intimacy into which near relatives are thrown, renders
it desirable for the preservation of their purity, that a
thought of intermarriage should not enter their minds.
The law of incest invests their persons with a species
of sanctity; and, by marking out boundaries within
which conjugal affection is not permitted to enter,
reserves an appropriate sphere for the exercise of the
other domestic affections. It has been said that races
of animals are improved by an intermixture of breeds;
and some have maintained, that marriage with near rela-
tives tends to produce mental imbecility in the off-
spring.

The New Testament contains no express precept
against incest. Natural religion is incapable of deter-
mining the degrees of relationship within which mar-
riage ought not to be allowed. We need the wisdom of
the Creator to determine the proper boundary for us ;
aiid his wisdom did determine for the people of Israel,
and gave the law recorded in the Old Testament. A
regulation peculiar to the Hebrews made it necessary,
for the preservation of their family inheritances, that a
brother should take the wife of a deceased brother who
had died childless ; but the general law of incest, given
to that people, is applicable to human society every-
where, because the same relations subsist everywhere.
Paul referred to the Old Testament, when he said, " All
Scripture is profitable for instruction in righteousness ;'* ^
and the Old Testament law of incest must be our rule
of righteousness, in the absence of any rule on the
subject in the clearer revelation of the New Testament,

1 1 Cor. V. 1. « 2 Tim. ill. 16.



250 FAMILY DUTIES.

A man is forbidden to marry any one that is « near
of kin to him ;** ^ that is, according to the proper import
of the Hebrew phrase so translated, an^ near blood-
relative. The degrees prohibited are ; 1. The perpen-
dicular line of ascent and descent, which includes father,
mother, grandfather, grandmother, son, daughter, grand-
son, granddaughter. 2. The next parallel line, which
includes the brothers and sisters of those in the former
line. The widow of a blood-relative is reckoned in the
place of her deceased husband ; and, if he stood within
the prohibited degree, marriage with her is prohibited,
just as if she were herself a blood-relative of that
degree.^

By a distinct prohibition, the female ancestors and
descendants of a deceased wife, are included among
those with whom marriage is unlawful.^

Marriage with a deceased wife's sister, though, not to
be advised, is not prohibited. A man was forbidden to
take a wife to her sister to vex her in her lifetime, after
the example of Jacob, who married two sisters ; but the
limitation in her lifetime, implies that it would be law-
ful after her death. A man is forbidden to marry the
widow of a deceased brother, because she stands to him
as a blood-relative ; but the sister of a deceased wife is
not reckoned as a blood-relative. It may be objected,
that an unmarried woman ought to reckon the husband
of her deceased sister in the place of that sister, that
is, as a brother ; but this does not appear to be the
Scripture mode of computation. The two cases differ
from each other, in the same way that to have several
husbands differed from polygamy.

^ Lev. xviii. 6. ' Lev. xviii. 7-16. ' Lev. xviii. 17.



DUTIES OF HUSBANDS. 251

SECTION II. DUTIES OF HUSBANDS.

I. Husbands are under obligation to love their
wives.

Love is the moral bond of society, and is declared
by an inspired writer to be the fulfilling of the law.
The various relations in human society give occasion
for various forms of duty ; but of every duty, love is
the soul, without which the outward form is lifeless.
Cold civilities may pass for duties, among persons who
have little intercourse with each other, and in whom
profession may be taken for reality ; but the intimacy
of the conjugal relation gives opportunity to test the
sincerity of professions, and detect the empty formality
of service which proceeds not from the heart. Hence,
love is, in the highest degree, essential to the duties of
the conjugal state; and without it every attention,
however officious, has the offensiveness of a lifeless
corpse.

Love seeks the happiness of the object beloved.
Persons united in conjugal love, find their highest plea-
sure in promoting the happiness of each other. If a
burden is to be borne, each seeks to bear it, to the
relief of the other; and if some good is to be enjoyed,
each seeks to sedRre it for the other. Earthly bliss
loses its charm, if they cannot enjoy it together ; and
the hope of heaven is rendered more delightful, if at-
tended with the confident expectation of being com-
panions in glory through eternal ages.

The duty of husbands to love their wives, is en-
joined in such passages of Scripture as the following :
«' So ought men to love their wives, as their own
bodies."^ <*Let every one of you love his wife even

* Eph. V. 28.



252 FAMILY DUTIES.

as himself."^ << Husbands, love your wives, and be not
bitter against them."*

II. Husbands are under obligation to be faithful to
their wives.

The marriage covenant binds the parties to each
other, by vows which have the importance and solem-
nity of an oath. Adultery is a gross violation of this
covenant, a base and detestable offence against the
other party in the covenant, against social happiness,
against truth, and against Grod. This crime inflicts a
death-blow on domestic happiness. In general, it would
be far better for the family if the guilty party had
died. The surviving parent and the children might then
have borne their loss without a sense of degradation,
and could have honored the memory of the lost one ;
but the crime which breaks the marriage bond, makes
the children orphans disgraced, and fills the family
.with bitterest misery. The prevalence of this crime,
because of the connection of family government with
the general welfare of society, tends to loosen the bonds
of civil government, and overthrow all law and order ;
and, because of the connection of family discipline
with religion, it tends to banish religion from the
world, and bring down on mankind the heaviest judg-
ments of heaven. Some of the m(J8t fearful denuncia-
tions contained in the Bible, are against this crime.

Conjugal fidelity requires the continued manifesta-
tion of conjugal *love. All the tender bflSces to which
love prompts, should be performed with unwearied per-
severance ; not from constraint, but from a full heart.
The married pair, in their intercourse with other per-
sons, should never give to each other occasion for the
suspicion, that their mutual affection can be disturbed



1 Eph. V. 33. « Col. ui. 19.



DUTIBS OF WIVES. 253

by even a momentary preference for a third party.
The husband violates this obligation, when he habitu-
ally roams abroad for society ; and, instead of cleaving
to his wife, exhibits more pleasure in the company of
others.

III. Husbands are under obligation to support and
protect their wives.

The maintenance of the family devolves chiefly on
the husband. He has superior strength for labor, is
better fitted for intercourse with the world, and is
exempt from many burdens which necessarily fall on
the mother of his children. It is unfeeling in him to
add to these burdens, by requiring her to labor for the
maintenance of the family. She leans on his strong
arm for support, and it is his duty to cherish her as
the weaker vessel. It should be his pleasure to pro-
tect her from the calamities of life, and the rude
assaults of the world ; and in this service he should be
willing to exhaust his energies, and, if necessary, sacri-
fice his life.

lY. Husbands are under obligation to assist their
wives:

The wife has her proper duties, in the performance
of which she needs the sympathy and aid of her hus-
band. It is in his power to lighten her burdens, and
cheer her in her toils. When sickness has rendered
her unable to bear the care of the house, he should
supply the lack of service to the best of his ability ;
and his cheerful efforts should give her assurance that,
if she should be removed by death, she might safely
trust her motherless children to his redoubled care.

SECTION III. DUTIES OP WIVES.

I. Wives are under obligation to love their husbands.
22



254 FAMILY DUTIES.

II. Wives are under obligation to be faithful to their
husbands.

The obligation of the wife to love and fidelity is the
same as that of the husband, which was considered in
the last section.

III. Wives are under obligation to submit to their
husbands.

If the husband loves his wife, as his duty requires,
he cannot act in disregard of her wishes, or extort from
her a reluctant service. Conjugal love will seldom fail
to produce unanimity; and will leave, in general, as
little room for the exercise of authority, as for the
coercion of physical strength. But when, after affec-
tionate consultation, they fail to attain unity of judg-
ment, the Creator has constituted the husband the head
of the family, and lodged with him the responsibility
of acting. In this case, it is made the duty of the wife
to yield; and she exhibits, in cheerful submission, a
lovely greatness which she could never attain by the
exercise of authority. She may be conscious that her
mental endowments are not inferior, and confident that
her judgment is right, while she, in obedience to God,
honors the oflScial superiority of her husband.

IV. Wives are under obligation to assist their hus-
bands.

The wife has her appointed sphere of action in
guiding the house ; and, by faithful performance of her
duty, assists the husband, on whom the chief care of
the family devolves. When he has, by industry, pro-
vided for the maintenance of the family, she will, by
economy, use what he has provided to the best possible
advantage. When he has toiled abroad during the
day, she will welcome his return at evening, and make
his home and fireside happy. And when sickness pros-
trates him, or death removes him, she will assume his



DUTIES OF PARENTS. 255

duties with unwonted energy, and become both father
and mother to the children of their love.

SECTION IV. DUTIES OF PARENTS.

- I. It is the duty of parents to protect their children,
and provide for them suitable maintenance.

Nature teaches the obligation of parents to take care
of their children. Under the guidance of instinct,
irrational creatures take care of their young. A like
instinct binds the mother to take care of her infant,
which comes into the world the most helpless of beings.
Few mothers are so destitute of natural affection as to
leave their offspring to perish. The Scriptures illus-
trate God's care of his people, by the affectionate solici-
tude of a mother for her child : " Can a woman forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb ? yea, they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee.''^ The parental instinct of the
father, though less strong than that of the mother, is
used in the Bible for the same purpose : " Like as a
father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear him."^ The instincts which the Author of
nature has implanted in the breasts of both parents,
and which are noticed in the Bible with so high com-
mendation, point out clearly their duty to render all
needful care to their children. The wisdom of the
Creator has made the strength of parental instinct cor-
respond with the absoluteness of the dependence with
which their children hang on them for life, and all that
renders life desirable. So strong is their claim, that
the, parent who can resist it is worse than a brute, and
sins against nature, against reason, and against God.
The first cries of the infant call for such offices of

^ Isa. zlix. 15. ' Ps. ciii. 13.



256 FAMILY DUTIES.

kindness as are needful to preserve its existence, and
protect it from suffering. These wants the parents are
under obligation to supply. As time advances, new
wants arise, creating new demands on parental care.
Until children attain sufficient age to provide for them-
selves, parents are bound to spread over them the shield
of their protection, and provide for them food, raiment,
and habitation.

The style of maintenance which parents are bound
to provide for their children, should be accommodated
to their future prospects. We scorn the miser, who,
for the sake of hoarding up wealth, denies himself the
comforts of life ; and equally worthy of scorn is the
parent, who, for the sake of enriching his children here-
after, denies them present comforts, or accustoms them
to rough and scanty fare. But a more common and
more injurious fault of parents, is, to accustom their
children to too high a style of living for their prospects.
Young persons who have been accustomed to every in-
dulgence, are ill qualified to enter on life in poverty.
They are not fitted to bear with contentment the hard-
ships to which they are necessarily exposed, and to put
forth the energies which their circumstances demand.
They are hence subjected to temptations, which fre-
quently prove too strong for their moral principles ; and
their lives, begun in affluence and indulgence, terminate
in poverty and ruin.

II. It is the duty of parents to provide for the educa-
tion of their children.

A proper physical education is necessary to preserve
health, and give vigor to both body and mind. Great
injury is done, when children are put to employments
in which their strength is overtasked, or necessary time
for rest and relaxation is not allowed, or they are com-
pelled to labor in unwholesome rooms. Health often



DUTIES OF PARENTS. 257

suffers by undue confinement to study. Many young
persons, in their efforts to obtain improvement of mind,
exhaust their health, and disqualify themselves for the
duties and enjoyments of life. Parents ought so to
direct the education of their children, as to guard against
this evil. But if health ought not to be sacrificed to
mental improvement, much less ought it to be sacrificed
to the follies and fashions of the world. The mother
fails sadly in duty, who permits her daughter's health to
be impaired, by conforming to unwise fashions of
dress ; or by injudicious exposure in attendance on fash-
ionable amusements. A few hours of gaiety and splen-
dor, are bought too dear, if they cost a life of disease,
or a premature death.

The future usefulness and happiness of children
depend much on their intellecttial education. Without
mental improvement it is impossible for them to attain
an elevated position in society, or exert an extensive
beneficial influence ; and their enjoyments must be less
refined and exquisite. To prosecute any business of
life with success, knowledge is necessary ; and often the
mental discipline acquired in the pursuit of knowledge,
is even more advantageous than the knowledge itself.

The education of children should be adapted to the
business which they are expected to pursue. For the
learned professions a more thorough education is neces-
sary ; but well-cultivated minds are greatly desirable,
even in those who cultivate the ground, or work at
trades. Such a mind may dignify and adorn an hum-
ble employment, and may, from a low position, diffuse
a beneficial influence that will be a rich and lasting
blessing to society.

The interests of children for time and eternity, de-
pend greatly on their moral education. To this the
care and efforts of parents should be incessantly directed.

22*



258 FAMILY DUTII0.

To thus thej should have regard in the aeleetioii of a
teacher ; but the chief labor and refponsibility cannot
be delegated to another. Parenta should have regard
to thJH ujoHt important duty, in all the intercourse with
their children, and should labor, by the united influence
of precept and example, to train them in the right way*
They should set before them the authority of God, and
the retributions of eternity ; and should apply to their
opening minds the truths of religion, and the motives
to virtue and piety. They should watch the first bud-
dings of unholy propensities and passions, and repress
them by the most effectual means that a wisely-directed
parental affection can apply. The rod of correction is
an important instrument of discipline, if judiciously
used ; for Bolomon has instructed us, << lie that spareth
his rod hateth his son/' ^ But that parent little under-
stands his duty who relies chiefly on the rod to effect
the virtuous education of his children* If other methods
of reaclting the heart and conscience are judiciously
employed, the rod will seldom be needed.

The virtue of children depends much on the company
they keep. If permitted to associate with the vicious,
they will be likely to become vicious* A few lessons in
vice from their playmates, will be sufficient to counter-
act a long continued course of instruction in virtue*
Parents who select the society of their children, may
give offence to opulent and influential neighbors; but
it is far better to offend them, than to ruin the children.
AHKociation with persons of polished manners, culti-
vated taste, and superior intelligence, is very desirable,
if not injurious to the moral character; but all its ad-
vantages will not compensate for the loss of virtue.




* Prov. xiii, 24.



DUTIES OF PARENTS. 259

III. It is the duty of parents to assist their children
in entering on the business of life.

The choice of a business for life, and the prepara-
tions for entering on it, are usually made while the
child is under parental control — but after he has
attained to sufficient age for his predilections to be con-
sulted. In early childhood children should be governed
with absolute authority ; but at maturity, which is,
according to our laws, at the age of twenty-one, the
child passes from under the authority of the parents,
and becomes an independent man. As he approaches
this period, he becomes more and more capable of self-
government, and ought to become accustomed to it.
For this reason, parental discipline, if wisely conducted,
will undergo a gradual change, as the age of the child
advances ; and will, as he approaches maturity, be
exercised more by counsel, and less by authority. This
course is especially necessary with respect to the busi-
ness of life to be pursued after he has left parental
authority. When it has been decided on, parents
should, according to their means, aid the child in pre-
paring for it, and commencing the prosecution of it.

Wealthy parents fail in duty to their children, if they
permit them to rely on the inheritance which they have
in prospect, and arrive at maturity, unprepared for any
useful employment, and with no other habits than those
of idleness and prodigality. Poor parents, by judicious
counsel to their children, and such aid as rigid economy
may enable them to render, have it in their power to
smooth the entrance on life's rugged toils. By inspir-
ing their children with hope, and stimulating them to
effort, they may render advantages of far greater value
than an outset of pecuniary capital.

lY. Parental duties require careful study, patient



260 FAMILY DUTIES.

labor, habitual regard to the welfare of the children^
and constant dependence on God.

As he who enters on any business, ought to qualify
himself for it, so he who assumes parental obligations,
ought to qualify himself for discharging them with
success. It is a wise arrangement of Providence, that
persons do not become parents until they have attained
such age as gives hope that parental duties may be
well performed ; but maturity of age is not the only
qualification which is needed. The care of an immortal
being is more important than the care of dollars and
cents, and requires a larger amount of diligent study.
The training of an infant man, until his powers are
developed, and he becomes a wise, virtuous, and useful
member of society, is an art worthy to be studied ; and
the obligation to study it, devolves on every parent to
whom Providence has committed the care of an infant ;
and the study needs to be continued till the child
reaches maturity. Few parents are able to review
their conduct in the discipline of their children, without
self-reproach for many failures in judgment ; and hence,
continued study is necessary, that the duty may be per-
formed more wisely.

Much failure in parental duty arises from mere
neglect. The father is occupied with the business of
his profession or trade, and the mother is encumbered
with many household cares. Neither of them has time
for the training of the children ; and the duty is hence
neglected. But, in truth, the time devoted to other
employments is first due to the children ; and the parents
should have no time for anything else, until this more
important duty has been performed. Nor must they
grow weary. If past efibrts have been successful, the
objects of their care are not yet beyond the reach of
danger ; and past success should stimulate to continued



DUTIES OF CHILDBEN. 261

diligence. But if past efforts have been unsuccessful,
the need is greater for redoubled energy. The causes
of failure should be investigated ; and no labor should
be spared, until the end has been accomplished.

Parental duty is self-denying. The father and
mother who regard their babe as a plaything, and in
all their treatment of it seek only their own 'amuse-
ment or gratification, have no proper sense of parental
obligation. They should forget their own pleasure, in
contemplating the interests of the child; or rather,
they should have no other pleasure than in promoting
these interests. Forgetting themselves, the hearts of
parents should be bound up in the welfare of their chil-
dren. If they indulge parental partiality for one child
above another, they seek to please themselves, at the
expense of jealousy and discord among the children.
Nothing should be done, nothing should be permitted,
that can weaken the bond of brotherly love, or impair
their sense of moral obligation.

The hearts of children are depraved, and parental
discipline cannot renew them. To effect this change,
the power of the Holy Spirit is needed ; and for the
power of the Holy Spirit to accompany their efforts, and
render them effectual, parents ought always to pray.
If to the diligent and persevering performance of duty,
fervent and incessant prayer be added, they have just
reason to expect that God will, in fulfilment of his
promise, pour out his spirit on their seed, and his bless-
ing on their offspring.

SECTION V. DUTIES OP CHILDREN.

I. It is the duty of children to love and reverence
their parents.

Although the instinctive love of parents for their
children, is stronger than that of children for their



262 FAMILY DUTIES.

parents, yet the latter is a strong impulse of hnman
nature, when not counteracted by vicious passions.
Whatever outflowing affection proceeds from the mind
of an infant, the mother, by whom it is nursed, becomes
the first proper object of it; and as reason unfolds,
and the nature of the parental relation begins to be in
part apf>rehended, the filial affections are brought into
more perceptible exercise, and the father receives his
share.

A sense of dependence and inferiority mingles with
the exercise of filial love, converting it into reverence.
To the child, the parents, however humble their condi-
tion of life, are great, and towards them he first exer-
cises reverential submission. This filial respect, in its
highest degree, the God of heaven claims of all man-
kind as his offspring. << If then I be a father, where is
mine honor ?"^ "We have had fathers of our flesh
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence :
shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father
of spirits V'^ From the language of these texts, we may
learn the nature of the respect due from children to their
parents; and the importance of the duty may be in-
ferred from the fact, that it is made the subject of a
special command in the decalogue, and the only com-
mand to which a promise is affixed. " Honor thy father
and thy mother, that thy days may be long upon the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.'*^

Filial piety should be continued and cherished
throughout life. It is beautiful and fragrant as the
flowers of spring, when it flows from youthful hearts
towards parents in the vigor of life ; but it resembles
the ripened fruits of autumn, and possesses its highest
value, when it is exercised by children of mature years

' Mai. i. 6. 2 11^^^ ^-^ 9^ 8 Ex. xx. 12.



DUTIBS OF CHILDRBN. 2G3

towards parents bending under the weight of age, and
oppressed with infirmities. Such filial piety appeared
so lovely to the view of the heathen poet Virgil, that
he made it the chief ornament in the character of his
hero^neas.

II. It is the duty of children to obey their parents.

The obligation of the parents to train their children
aright, requires the right to command ; and this implies
the obligation of the children to obey. The inestimable
benefits of well-regulated family discipline depend on
the obedience of children, and would be lost to mankind
if the obligation to filial obedience were annihilated.
Anarchy, nourished at the domestic hearth, would come
forth in strength from the door of every habitation,
to desolate society, and fill the world with crime and
misery.

The duty of children to obey their parents is ex-
pressly and frequently enjoined in the Holy Scriptures.

The authority of parents is subordinate to the autho-
rity of God. Hence, if parents command what God
forbids, their command is not obligatory. This limita-
tion of parental authority is implied in the precept,
"Obey your parents in the Lord.**^ But a conscien-
tious rejection of parental authority requires more
knowledge of duty to God than young children possess.
As children approach to maturity, parental commands
should become counsels, in cases which afiect the con-
science ; and children should respect the counsels of
parents, if not inconsistent with their duty to God.
Though the authority of God may, in some possible
case, require a child to disobey his parents, it requires
still that he should love and reverence them in the very
act of disobeying ; and a proper exhibition of filial re-

1 Eph. vi. 1.



264 FAMILY DUTIES.

spect, in such trying circumstances, will accomplish
much towards correcting the erroneous judgment of the
parents. The obligation of children to obey their pa-
rents ceases at maturity, the time of which our laws
have fixed at the age of twenty-one years. If they
remain after this age, in a state of dependence on their
parents, the obligation to obey continues. A dutiful
child, even at mature age, and in independent circum-
stances, will respect the counsel and wishes of his
parents, and will avoid, as far as possible, whatever
may give them pain.

III. It is the duty of children, if necessary, to main-
tain their parents, if rendered helpless by sickness or

age. ^ ^

This obligation is a natural and spontaneous dictate
of filial affection. Children are without natural affec-
tion if they permit their aged and infirm parents to
suffer, and do not exert their best efforts to relieve
them. Such efforts are but the return which mere
justice requires, for the care and support received in
infancy. Parental care and toil bestowed on children
through years of helplessness, are ill requited by subse-
quent filial neglect, which adds anguish to sufferings
that call for sympathy and relief; and such neglect de-
serves and provokes the wrath of Heaven.



CHAPTER XIIL
PUBLIC DUTIES.



SECTION I. PUBLIC SPIRIT.

Public spirit is a disposition to promote the welfare
of the community. The tendency of human depravity
is for every one to seek his own, and not another's
welfare ; but, in opposition to this tendency, the divine
precept requires men to love their neighbors as them-
selves. He who obeys this precept, seeks the general
good of the community in which he dwells. Instead
of being absorbed in his private affairs, and wholly
intent on the advancement of his own interests, or those
of his own family, he looks abroad into society, and
strives to promote the well-being of all to whom his
efforts can reach. This is the man of public spirit.

A man of public spirit will be inclined to invite the
co-operati#n of others, both that they may be well em-
ployed, and that his philanthropic designs may be the
more successfully prosecuted. Hence, he is inclined
to promote voluntary associations for benevolent pur-
poses; to assist in the establishment of schools and
charitable institutions; to devise and adopt measures
for improving public morals, and extending the benign
influence of religion. This man readily takes his
place in every form of society which aims at the general
good.

23 C?^<ci^^



266 PUBLIC DUTIES.



SECTION II. PROFESSIONAL DUTIES.

Every man is under obligation to do good to the
community in which he lives. Every merchant, every
mechanic, every cultivator of the soil, is bound to pur-
sue his business with a view to the public good, and not
merely for personal profit. He is a public servant, and
the duties of his calling are, to some extent, public
duties; but there is a special propriety in so regarding
the duties of those who follow the learned professions.
The men who serve the public by selling goods, build-
ing houses, or raising wheat, perform work of which
men generally are competent judges ; and therefore no
high degree of trust is reposed in them. But the case
is different with men of the learned professions. The
services which they propose to render to mankind,
relate to interests of great importance; and for the
proper performance of them, knowledge and fidelity are
needed which few men are capable of duly estimating.
Hence they who offer their services in these professions,
ask the public confidence, and bind themselves to the
public under obligations which they ought carefully to
study.

Preacher.

Men who devote themselves to the ministry of the
gospel, claim to be distinguished from the rest of man-
kind, by a special call from Heaven, requiring them to
perform the holy service. They are therefore bound
to obey Uod in all things. Whether the world praise
or blame, smile or frown, bless or persecute, their duty
is so to fulfil the ministry which God has committed
to them, as to secure his approbation.

The ministry of the gospel aims to promote the spir-
itual and eternal interests of mankind. The tradesman



PROFESSIONAL DUTIES. 267

is criminal, who pursues his business without regard to
the public good ; but far more criminal is he, who min-
isters in holy things, not to save the souls of men, but
to secure to himself worldly gain or popular applause.
Such a man dishonors the service of God, and deserves
the malediction of the Almighty. In the gospel minis-
try, as in every other service, the laborer is worthy of
his hire. Every minister is justified in receiving a main-
tenance from those to whom he ministers ; and they are
bound to give it ; but if this is the end for which he
labors, he prostitutes his holy calling, and stains his
garments with the blood of immortal souls.

He who preaches the gospel, ought to understand
well the message which he is to deliver from God to
men. The highest attainments in learning may be made
subservient to the ministry of the word ; but no attain-
ments, without a knowledge of Bible truth, can render
a man wise to win souls. And the knowledge of divine
truth must not be theoretical merely. It must dwell in
the heart with sanctifying power, and move the soul to
reverence for the authority of God, delight in obeying
him, and zealous consecration to his service.

When the heart is under the sanctifying power of
divine truth, a necessary effect will be holiness of exter-
nal conduct ; and without this a minister of the gospel
may not hope to succeed in his work. However pure
may be the doctrine which he preaches, an unholy life
will nullify its power. Who will believe what the
preacher says, when his life shows that he himself does
not believe it ? Who will be excited to flee from dan-
ger, when he who sounds the alarm, makes no effort to
escape ? The man who desires to save souls, must noji
only urge them to flee from the wrath to come, but must
lead their flight ; and, by example as well as precept,
direct their steps in the way of holiness and eternal



268 PUBLIC DUTIES.

life. Of every virtue, the minister of the gospel ought
to exhibit an illustrious example.

The ministry of the gospel requires untiring energy.
How incessant were the toils of Christ ! Day after day
he preached to crowds that pressed on him to hear the
word ; and, when night gave rest to others, he often re-
tired to some lonely place for prayer. His example
shames lazy ministers, and demonstrates their unfitness
for the sacred office. Paul labored abundantly in his
holy calling, and left an example which ministers of
Christ cannot imitate, without employing^ all their ener-
gies to save men, and spread the triumphs of the gospel.
A minister must not wait for opportunities of doing good
to present themselves — but must seek them. He must
watch for souls, and strive by every means in his power
to rescue them from sin and danger, and allure them
into the way of righteousness and salvation.

The duties of the ministry require great firmness.
No compromise must be made with error and sin. If
unwelcome truths are inculcated, and popular sins
opposed, the preacher may bring upon himself the dis-
pleasure of those whom worldly policy would incline
him to please. But he must not shun to declare the
whole counsel of God, at every hazard. He is a servant
of God, and to God he must render his account ; it is,
therefore, a matter of little moment, whether men are
pleased or displeased. Moreover, to please men — ^unless
it be for their good unto edification — is a hindrance of
the work in which he is engaged, and tends to ruin
those whom he should labor to save. The minister has
a fearful account to render, who, rather than ofiend
men, leaves them to perish in their sins, and drag
others with them to destruction.

The minister's work is one of benevolence. His
purity must not shun contact with the impure, if he may



PROFESSIONAL DUTIES. 269

apply to them the means of cleansing. His energy is
not inconsistent with the utmost gentleness in the treat-
ment of the weak and fearful. His firmness admits
full scope for patience in instructing the ignorant, win-
ning the froward, and subduing opposers. The high
dignity of the ministerial office is not inconsistent with
condescension to men of low estate ; but the nature and
design of the office require that the gospel should be
preached to the poor, its benefits conveyed to the
afflicted, and its cheering light from heaven brought
into the dark chamber of the dying. Among the sons
and daughters of poverty and wretchedness, the minister
of Jesus may tread in the footsteps of his divine Master,
and may find his best work where there is least room
for the intrusion of worldly motives.

Physician.

The physician ofiers his services to the public, for the
removal or prevention of disease. The preacher directs
his care to the soul and its eternal interests ; the phy-
sician directs his to the body and the preservation of
life and health. These are the highest interests of man
relating to the present world ; for all means of earthly
enjoyment are of little avail to him who is deprived of
health; and they are all necessarily relinquished for
ever at death. But the preservation of life and health
is important, as a means of usefulness to mankind, and
of preparation for the world to come. Hence, the office
of the physician is next in importance and responsibility
to that of the gospel minister.

He who serves God in the ministry of the gospel,
obeys a special divine call which obliges him to the
service. The physician is not so distinguished from the
rest of mankind ; but the office which he holds, has the
approbation of God ; and the service which he render^^
23*



270 PUBLIC DUTIES.

if rendered aright, will be accepted and blessed. The
evangelist Luke, the companion of Paul, is called in
the Holy Scriptures, "the beloved physician;"^ and
Christ referred to the office of the physician as useful
and necessary, in the words, "They that be whole
need not a physician ; but they that are sick."^ King
Asa erred, when, in his disease, he sought to the
physicians, and not to the Lord.^ His dependence
and hope were restricted to the human agency which
he employed, and. not accompanied with pious acknow-
ledgment of God, without whose blessing medical skill
and effort are useless. God's disapprobation of the
king's conduct teaches us to regard physicians merely
as instruments and agents of Divine Providence ; and
it teaches physicians to perform their service in this
character, if they desire success in their labors, and the
blessing of him in whose hand are the life and breath
of all their patients.

The physician professes superior skill in the healing
art ; and, if he does not possess it, he deceives his em-
ployers. If a man wholly ignorant of the steam-engine,
should undertake the management of one to which is
attached a train of cars filled with passengers, we should
hold him responsible for all the loss of life ensuing from
his misconduct. Equally responsible is the ignorant
quack, who tampers with the life and health of those
whom his false pretences deceive. He is guilty of
fraud, in taking reward for services which possess no
value ; and of still greater crime, in risking or destroy-
ing the lives intrusted to him, or causing them to be
lost, by preventing the attentions of those by whose
skill they might have been preserved.

Before he enters on the practice of his profession, a

1 Col. iy. 14. * Matt ix. 12. » 2 Chr. xvi. 12.



PROFESSIONAL DiJTIBS. 271

physician ought to acquire the knowledge which he
needs, by a preparatory course of laborious and thorough
study. He will be called to prescribe for cases which
demand prompt attention, and which must be provided
for by previous study. He cannot even study to ad-
vantage the cases which arise in his practice, without a
previous general knowledge of medical science. And
this knowledge cannot be acquired from books only.
He should become acquainted with the appearance of
diseases, under the instruction of a skilful practitioner ;
and should acquire a habit of scrutinizing observation,
on which his judgment and skill will greatly depend,
and without which he Will not derive from experience
the advantages that it is capable of yielding. Long
experience ought to increase his skill ; and to this end
diligent study and scrutinizing observation ought to
continue through the whole course of his professional
labors.

The importance of the interests intrusted to a physi-
cian renders fidelity on his part an indispensable duty.
All the assiduity and self-denying effort which any case
may require should be promptly and perseveringly ren-
dered, as if the life under his care were that of his best
friend, or as if it were his own. He should never per-
mit himself to measure his obligation by the hope of
pecuniary reward. The profession has been honored
by the amount of its charitable service to the poor ; and
an old master of the art expressed a sentiment worthy
to be adopted by all his successors : — " My poor patients
are my best patients ; because God is their pay-master."

A physician may expect, in the course of his practice,
to meet with cases which will embarrass him. A disease
will sometimes present symptoms which are not suffi-
ciently decisive of its true character to enable him to
judge of it with confidence. He may be satisfied that



272 PUBLIC DUTIES.

the osual remedies will fail in a particular case, and
may be driven to the inquiry, whether some newly-
recommended remedy, of which he has not sufficient
knowledge, ought not to be tried. Such embarrassing
cases as these will arise ; and the possibility of them
makes it incumbent on him to be familiar with every
department of medical science, and to keep up with its
progress of improvement. But when, notwithstanding
his utmost efforts, such embarrassments are encountered,
he should seek relief in consultation with some physician
of superior skill.

Physicians may render valuable service to the public,
by recommending to corporations or individuals such
sanitary regulations as may be necessary for the pre-
vention of disease. This public benefit they should
never be backward to confer.

In epidemics physicians ought never to abandon their
practice because of personal danger. As well might a
soldier, who has kept his place during a peaceful march,
desert when battle comes. The greater the danger the
louder the call for service, and the stronger the obliga-
tion to render it.

Persons who are busily engaged in the practice of
medicine, often find it impossible so to command their
time as to attend the public worship of God on the sab-
bath. To this cause some have attributed the tendency
to skepticism, with which the profession has been
charged : but the charge is perhaps groundless. The
profession has furnished eminent examples of piety;
and the unfavorable influence of occasional absence from
the services of the sanctuary, may be counteracted by
the constant remembrance of death kept ever present
to the mind by the whole course of a physician's duties.
But, that his visits to the bed of affliction and the house
of mourning may have the best effect on his piety, he



PBOFBSSIONAL DUTIES. 273

ought to accustom himself to converse with his patients
on their spiritual interests, and to embrace every favor-
able opportunity of being useful to their souls as well
as to their bodies. When he cannot receive religious
instruction in the house of God on the Sabbath, he may
impart it in the chamber of disease ; and his experience
may verify the saying of Christ, " It is more blessed
to give than to receive." But because he must some-
times be absent from public worship, he ought, with
scrupulous conscience, to be present whenever possible,
even though it may be attended with inconvenience.
He will thus avoid a habit of injurious tendency, and
cultivate in himself a love of devotion.

Lawyer.

The lawyer offers his services, to secure the rights of
those who employ him. His appeal is to the laws of
the country ; and therefore he ought to be well acquainted
with these laws, and with the modes of investigation
adopted in the courts. He is under obligation to be
faithful to his clients, and to manage the cases com-
mitted to him, with as much care and industry as if the
interests at stake were his own.

The prospect of gain may sometimes tempt a lawyer
to encourage litigation ; but against this temptation he
ought to guard most sedulously. As a physician would
be criminal, who should generate a pestilence that he
may find profitable employment ; so is the lawyer crimi-
nal, who encourages lawsuits that he may obtain fees.
He is unfaithful to his clients, who involves them in con-
troversies, which it would be better for them to avoid,
and which it would be in his power to prevent. A con-
scientious lawyer may accomplish much in promoting
the harmony of a community ; and he ought to employ
his professional skill for the public good.



274 PUBLIC DUTIES.

The legal profession, as well as the medical and the
clerical, may render valuable charity to the poor. Ad-
vantage is often taken of the weak and defenceless;
and their rights are trampled under foot, because they
are unable to employ an advocate, and bear the expense
of a lawsuit. Such ^ases a generous man of the legal
profession will not overlook ; but will consider it an
honor and a pleasure, to defend the poor man in his
rights, with the hope of no other reward than the
approbation of God and his own conscience.

Much difficulty may be experienced by a conscien-
tious advocate, in managing a case in which his client
is in the wrong. For the sake of professional reputa-
tion, he desires to succeed ; and yet it may be impossible
to succeed, without adopting means of doubtful pro-
priety. Neither fidelity to a client, nor regard to repu-
tation, can justify any criminal act ; such as the bribing
of jurors, the suborning of witnesses, or the utterance
of falsehood. Though a client may be in the wrong,
his advocate may, with good conscience, claim for him
the advantage of reasonable doubt arising from defi-
ciency of testimony ; for this the law and the general
interests of society allow. He may also plead every
fact which will extenuate his client's wrong, and lessen
the severity of an unfavorable judgment. But no law-
yer ought to undertake any cause, in which he has rea-
son to suppose that he will be expected to do anything
contrary to pure morality. The profession does not
require a man to be wicked ; if it did, it ought to be
abandoned. Though it may be justifiable to defend a
client who is in th* wrong, it is scarcely possible to
conceive a case in which it will be right to aid a plain-
tiff who is seeking injustice.

To receive fees from both of the parties in a lawsuit,
is a dishonesty so gross, that few men are base enough



PROFESSIONAL DUTIES. 275

to perpetrate it. But the lawyer is scarcely less repre-
hensible, who engages in a cause, when there exists
between him and the party whom it will be his duty to
oppose, some relation that may tend to abate the zeal
of his opposition. The existence of this relation he
ought at least to make known to his client, and any
other fact which might, in the client's judgment, be an
obstacle to his being employed.

Fidelity to a client requires that, in undertaking his
cause, the counsel should express an honest opinion of
its merit. Nothing should be said to excite a vain hope
of success ; or to foster any sinful passion. The coun-
sellor is in part the keeper of his client's conscience ;
and should study to prevent him from doing wrong. To
induce or permit a client to make false affidavits in the
management of his cause, is highly criminal. Unin-
formed and inconsiderate clients need to be guarded on
this point ; and an honest counsellor will seek to pre-
serve them from the guilt of perjury.

A lawyer is bound to be faithful, not to his client
only, but also to the court. He is, to some extent, an
officer of the court ; and is under obligation so to exer-
cise his office, that the fountains of justice shall not
be corrupted. He should discountenance every attempt
to operate on the judge or jury, so as to pervert judg-
ment ; and should decline to take advantage of incaution
or oversight in the opposing party, unless it be merely
to defeat them in doing wrong. He should, for the
reputation of the court, as well as for his own sake,
treat the judge, the jury, the witnesses, and the opposing
counsel, with respect; and he should never degrade his
office by venting bitter words to gratify his client.

The undertaking of suits for fees contingent on suc-
cess, has been thought objectionable, because it places
the advocate in a relation to the court different from



276 PUBLIC DUTIES.

that which he properly sastains ; and because, as is
alleged, it tends to promote litigation and corruption.
But were the practice prohibited, poor men, who have
not means in present possession for employing an
attorney, would in many cases be hindered from reco-
vering their rights. The objection, however, is so far
entitled to respect, that, when this mode of compensa-
tion is proposed, a conscientious practitioner will do
well to examine carefully whether there are not other
considerations which ought to prevent him from under-
taking the case. An engagement to share in the
expense of maintaining the suit is a violation of law.

In every employment, considerations of interest fre-
quently tempt men to disregard the suggestions of con-
science. The young practitioner may fear that, if more
scrupulous in the acceptance of cases than his fellows
at the bar, he will not obtain his proper share of busi-
ness; but let him maintain a high-toned morality in
everything that he does, and he will find in the end
that honesty is the best policy. Let him exhibit all
due fidelity to the court and to his clients, study his
cases thoroughly, be systematic in all his arrangements,
and always ready for the necessary action. He will
by these means establish to himself, among the members
of the profession, a reputation which will soon be known
by the public; and he will find himself occupying a
position that will command business.

Men of the legal profession have an opportunity of
seeing human nature in its corruption. Avarice, cun-
ning, treachery, dishonesty, cruelty, malignity, revenge,
and every foul passion of the heart, are brought to
light in the investigations of the courts. The frequent
view of crime tends to lessen the sense of its odiousness ;
and the lawyer ought, therefore, to watch against this
influence, and preserve in his heart the love of virtue



PROFESSIONAL DUTIES. 277

and hatred of vice. And there is, in the profession,
another tendency against which he should guard. His
whole employment relates to things of the present life.
All the struggle of litigants is for earthly good ; and,
of all the victories obtained in courts, not one apper-
tains to the future world. Hence, the business of his
profession leads to forgetfulness of eternal interests.
Let him, therefore, habituate himself to pious thought
and reflection in all the turmoil of his duties. When
he enters an earthly court, let him remember the last
tribunal ; and when contending for right before an
earthly judge, let him not forget the Judge Supreme,
to whom he must give his final account, and by whose
righteous decision his eternal state will be determined.

Teacher,

Theology, medicine, and law, are sciences not in-
cluded in the ordinary course of instruction for which
our schools and colleges provide. To qualify for the
employment of teaching, the study of a distinct science
is not requisite ; and, therefore, the propriety of classing
teachers with men of the learned professions, has been
doubted : but, however they may be ranked, they con-
stitute a very useful class of public servants, and are
intrusted with very important responsibilities, in the
proper discharge of which peculiar skill is requisite.

He who undertakes to become an instructor of youth,
ought to possess adequate knowledge of whatever he
professes to teach. He ought, moreover, to have
studied well the art of imparting instruction. Great
improvements have been made in the organization and
government of schools, and in the modes of teaching,
and of exciting to diligence in study. With all these
improvements every teacher ought to make himself
familiar.
24



278 PUBLIC DUTIES.

The school occupies an intermediate place between
the family and civil society. The teacher should use
his best efforts to prepare his pupils to enter advan-
tageously on the duties of life ; and, for this purpose, it
is not enough that he merely instruct them in literature
and science. Virtue is as necessary to the school as
to the family and civil society ; and the school in which
lessons of virtue are not inculcated, fails in a most im-
portant duty.

In governing, a teacher should be firm, and alWays
self-possessed. Anger and bluster annihilate good
discipline. A wise administrator seldom has oocasiou
for severity. The harsh discipline of former generations
has deservedly become unfashionable ; and experience
has demonstrated that kindness and sincere interest in
the pupil's welfare secure the best possible control over
him, and far surpass brute force in governing his pas-
sions, and making him virtuous.

The teacher's employment gives him opportunity to
enjoy the luxury of charity. To many an indigent
youth a good education is the greatest benefit that he
can receive from men ; and this benefit a teacher has the
means of bestowing. In some humble cottage he may
find unpolished genius which his kindness may draw
forth from obscurity, and convert into an ornament of
society and a blessing to mankind.

SECTION III. CIVIL SOCIETY.

Civil society is a combination of men for the purpose
of mutual protection by means of civil government.
The necessity for it arises from human depravity. Were
men perfectly virtuous, they might live happily in
natural society, without the restraints of civil govern-
ment. Every one would respect the rights of his
neighbors, and, in the spirit of philanthropy, seek the



CIVIL SOCIBTY. 279

general good. Whatever co-operation might be neces-
sary to promote the welfare of the community would be
effected by voluntary association ; and the efforts which
might be necessary would be prompted by the spirit of
benevolence.

But human depravity has rendered it impossible fpr
men to live happily together in the state of natural
society. The passions and propensities of vicious men
need to be restrained for the protection of life and pro-
perty. To accomplish the purpose civil government is
instituted, and civil society is a combination of men
sustaining some form of civil government for their own
benefit. Its chief design is mutual protection ; but it
may accomplish other good incidentally, as by the en-
couragement of learning and the advancement of the
arts, necessary to a state of civilization.

The first form of civil society was patriarchal. The
father was the natural protector of his children. In
the protection of the family, he was under obligation to
employ his own strength, and had the right to command
the aid of his children according to their strength.
The employment of children in this service is manifestly
alluded to in the words of Scripture : " As arrows are
in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of the
youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of
them ; they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak
with the enemies in the gate."^ This allusion takes us
back to the early period in the history of mankind,
when the family constituted the civil society, and the
father was the civil governor.

A second form of civil society embraced a tribe de-
scended from one ancestor. After the death of the
father, the oldest brother succeeded to his authority,

* Ps. czzvii. 4, 5.



280 PUBLIO DUTIES.

and governed the family. Whole tribes remained
through successive generations combined in one society
under one government ; and originally the authority to
govern was transmitted by natural descent. But in
various cases superior strength or superior skill pre-
vailed over primogeniture, and elevated to authority a
rival of the natural claimant. Alliances, conquests, or
other causes frequently united two or more tribes under
one government, and civil societies became enlarged
into the nations which now divide the population of the
globe.

While the patriarchal form of civil society continued,
the right of luembership was determined by natural
descent. The inheritance might be taken away by
injustice; but, unless forfeited by crime, it was the
right of every descendant from the patriarchal ancestor.
It was the exclusive right of the descendants, and no
alien could claim it. The present forms of civil society
so far retain the patriarchal features, that membership
is universally transmitted by descent, and in many
nations men of an alien race are found who are not
admitted to membership as children of the family.

We have before proved it to be the will of God, that
men should live in society; and we shall hereafter
prove that civil government is an ordinance of God.
But it cannot be proved that the whole human race
should be united under one civil government ; or that
the boundaries or forms of the several governments are
determined by the divine will, irrespective of human
judgment and choice. The patriarchal features, being
natural, exhibit the best claim to divine authority; and
so far as this natural order becomes modified by human
judgment and choice, this judgment and choice ought
to be directed to the best possible accomplishment of
the ends for which civil society exists.



CIVIL SOCIETY. 281

Since civil society is a combination of individuals
for the purpose of mutual protection, the rights and
duties of the parties are to be determined by the design
of the combination. Society is under obligation to
protect the rights of the individual members, similar
to that which binds a father to protect his children ;
and society has a right to command the persons and
property of the individual members, for the accomplish-
ment of this object, as a father has a right to command
the services of the children, according to their strength,
for the protection of the family. Civil society is not,
like simple society, formed by voluntary compact ; but
its obligations are not on that account the less sacred.
So far as they depend on human judgment and choice,
they have the sacredness of a contract ; and beyond
these limits, they have the higher sanction of the
divine will.

The duties of reciprocity imply corresponding rights
in the parties ; and therefore fall under the government
of civil society. The duties of benevolence do not
imply a perfect right in the beneficiary ; and because
there is no right for society to protect, society cannot
regulate the benefaction. On the same principle, reli-
gious duties are beyond the reach of society ; and, in
general, society has not its full power over the persons
or property of individuals, except so far as may be
necessary to protect the rights of all.

Society has a right to punish crime as a means of
preventing its repetition. That it may continue to
protect the rights of individuals, it has a right to pro-
tect itself from dissolution ; and therefore to suppress
insurrections and mobs which oppose the authority of
government.

As the obligation, so the right to protect individuals
belongs to civil society. He who claims the right to
24*



282 PUBLIC DUTIES.

redress his own wrongs, violates his obligation to
society, refuses to be a member of it, and establishes
in principle the government of a mob. Secret societies
which place their members beyond the reach of the
law, and substitute a difiFerent form of government over
them, violate the obligations which they owe to civil
society.

The civil societies into which mankind are divided, are
severally bound to protect their own members, not only
from vicious men of their own community, but also
from every other community. Henee the separate
communities, acting as independent bodies, are liable
to have the relations between them disturbed, and to
become hostile to each other. Each community, there-
fore, needs power, not only to keep under control its
own members, but also to repel attacks from other com-
munities. It must have power commensurate with its
responsibility. Such power no other form of society
possesses.

The power of civil society is liable to be abused.
Instead of being employed for the protection of rights,
it has often been used for purposes of ambition and
oppression. On this account, a people jealous of
their rights will be watchful lest the power of their
government be misdirected.

Civil society is not instituted for the purpose of pro-
moting the greatest good of the community in every
possible way. Were this its responsibility, it would
have the right to command the services of every indi-
vidual for the accomplishment of its object; and duties
of benevolence and religion would be equally under its
control, with duties of reciprocity. No place would be
left for the exercise of public spirit by individuals or
voluntary societies ; and no place for diversity of reli-
gious opinion, or rights of conscience; but the one



CIVIL GOVERNMEKT. 283

judgment of society would direct all, and the one power
of society would control all. Not an act could be per-
formed by any individual, which would not have some
sort of relation to the public good ; and, therefore, every
act would come under the control of the governing
power. To guard against this violation of rights, the
power of government should be chiefly confined to its
proper object, which is not the promotion of the greatest
possible good, but the protection of rights.

There are, we admit, cases in which the power of civil
society may be advantageously exercised out of its
peculiar limits. The resources of a state, for example,
may be usefully employed in works of internal improve-
ment. Here the object is the public good, and not the
mere protection of rights. But, in every such case,
the specific object should be one which fully commends
itself to the general appprobation of the community.
It is as if the society acted in a new capacity ; and it
ought, therefore, to possess the character of a voluntary
association. On this principle public schools may be
established and supported by the state; but, though
religion is even more necessary to the public good than
education, it is not right that it should be under the
control of civil authority. Unanimity of religious
opinion does not exist ; and, if it did exist, the nature
of religious service requires that it should be in the
highest degree voluntary.

SECTION IV. CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

A COMPANY of men who have the same object in
view, may proceed to accomplish it by the efforts of the
several individuals, directed each by his own will ; but
a slight difference of judgment as to the best mode of
prosecuting the object, may prevent eflScient co-opera-
tion, and cause them to fail of their purpose. Hence,



284 PUBLIO DUTIES.

for the sake of efficiency, societies are organized, that
they may act as one body, having the combined energy
of the individual members directed as by one will.

Various modes of social organization are possible;
but, in general, officers are appointed, who, as agents
for the society, are to perform its work. For this pur-
pose, they are invested with suitable powers, and have
specified duties assigned to them. Such agents exist in
civil society ; and these, acting in their proper offices,
and with their proper powers, constitute its government.

The offices of civil government are divided into legis-
lative, judiciary, and executive. The first are ap-
pointed to make the laws of the state, and affix the
penalty for violation ; the second, to judge when viola-
tion has been committed ; and the third, to inflict the
penalty, or otherwise carry the laws into effect. These
several services may be performed by a single indi-
vidual, or a single class of officers; but, in the most
improved forms of government, they are committed to
distinct classes of men, who act independently of each
other, and are agents directly responsible to society for
the right exercise' of the power committed to them.

The forms of civil government are various ; and it
cannot be affirmed that any one of them is universally
preferable to all the rest. In the patriarchal state of
society, the father of the family, or head of the tribe,
was its monarch, invested with legislative, judiciary, and
executive power. This form of government is best
adapted to rude men, who, because of deficiency in in-
telligence and virtue, need to be governed by fear. In
an improved state of society, when men generally know
their duty, and are disposed to perform it without com-
pulsion, it becomes less necessary that men should be
driven to obey by fear. To such persons a milder form
of government is better adapted. In every case, that



CIVIL GOVERNMENT. 285

form of goyernment is best which is best adapted to the
character of the people.

Civil government is an ordinance of God, though no
particular form of it has special divine authority. A
wise man would choose to submit to it in its worst
known form, rather than have his rights wholly unpro-
tected ; and what human wisdom finds to be indis-
pensable to the existence and happiness of society, the
divine wisdom by which society was instituted, must
have intended. The ordinance may be perverted or
abused ; but it is, nevertheless, an ordinance of God.
The Scriptures require subjection to civil rulers on the
ground that they are ministers ordained of God.^

Should he Just.

In a former place it was said : " Distributive Justice
belongs to government, and is concerned in dividing out
to the several members of society their proper extent
of rights ; and also in subsequently varying that extent
by rewards and punishments. '* God, who gives men
their enjoyments, distributes them as he pleases, and
society, in adopting regulations which determine the
rights of its members, is an agent of Providence, bound
to act according to the will of God, the rule of justice.
The natural endowments of men, physical and intellec-
tual, differ greatly; and the opportunities which his
providence affords for obtaining enjoyment, are much
greater to «ome men than to others. If human govern-
ments should attempt to make the rights of all men
equal in extent, they would oppose the manifest will
of the Creator ; and any equalization which could be
effected, would not continue a single day, unless the
natural endowments of men were made equal. Human

^ Rom. xiii. 1.



286 PUBLIO DUTIES.

governments, domestic, civil, and ecclesiastical, are
bound to conform to the divine will, the supreme rule
of right. We know that a general regard to human
happiness is according to the divine will ; and govern-
ments are therefore bound to seek the happiness of the
governed. Where the means of attaining this end are
not pointed out by the word or providence of God,
governments, in their proper sphere of action, should
be so instituted and administered by human wisdom as
to secure the general good. A privation of some soli-
tudal rights is indispensable in the formation of society ;
but these rights should be held sacred, except so far as
the abridgment of them becomes necessary to the good
of society ; and an abridgment of them to this extent,
must be according to the will of God, who has formed
man a social being, and brought him into the world in
the midst of society.

It is not necessary to the justice of social regulations,
that they have the universal consent of those who are
governed by them. Men are, for the most part, born
into society previously organized ; and they are bound
by its regulations, before their consent can be asked.
The poor man may never consent to the distribution of
property, which denies him the use of his neighbor's
wealth, but he is nevertheless bound to observe it. No
man has a right to steal from his neighbor, because he
has not yielded his formal consent to the existing dis-
tribution of property. The social regulations under
which each one is born, are to him the will of God,
when they do not interfere with his duty to God. He
is required to obey " every ordinance of man for the
Lord's sake,"^ whether he consents to the duty or
not; and the requirement is approved by the moral



1 1 Pet. ii. 13.



LIBERTY. 287

judgments of men generally. So the regulations of
civil society, if wise and good, may be expected to
receive the general approbation of those* who are
governed by them ; because they tend to the general
welfare. In society, in lieu of solitudal rights, other
rights are enjoyed, which a just government will aim
to make equivalent. In exchanging commodities, it is
not enough that an equivalent should be given for what
is received, but the consent of both parties is required.
But, in organizing a government, it is impracticable to
obtain the consent of all who will be subject to it. Our
forefathers in the Declaration of Independence, main-
tained the doctrine, that a just government derives its
power from the consent of the governed. This, in a
general view of it, is true. If a government has not
the general approbation of the governed, either they
lack intelligence, or it needs reform. But the justice
of social arrangements cannot be dependent on the
approbation of the vicious or ignorant.

SECTION V. LIBERTY.

Government and liberty conflict with each other.
Government implies restraint, liberty is the absence of
restraint. A man may be said to act with perfect
liberty, when he does what he pleases, restrained by
nothing but the laws of nature. Such liberty rightfully
belongs to no one, except in solitude, or in a society of
perfect intelligence and virtue. In solitude, where
there can be no government, and in a society of perfect
intelligence and virtue where no government is needed,
unrestricted liberty is the natural right of man. In
solitude, he may do what he pleases, accountable to
God only ; and the members of a perfect society may
do what they please, because they please to do what is
right. But, in all other circumstances, the only liberty



288 PUBLIC DUTIES.

which a man can rightfully claim, is that which is left
to him by the necessary restrictions of just govern-
ment.

In a state, of society, no one has an unrestricted
enjoyment of the earth's productions; and other limita-
tions of solitudal rights become indispensable. The
highest social liberty is enjoyed, where the restrictions
of enjoyments are fewest and least important. Were
all men perfectly virtuous, the necessary restrictions
would be submitted to voluntarily, and governors would
not need to be invested with compulsory power. The
only use of government would be, to determine, by the
best intelligence of the society, the proper adjustment of
rights among the members of the social compact. If
every individual possessed perfect intelligence as well
as perfect virtue, the best possible adjustment of rights
would be obvious to all, and every one would spontane-
ously conform to it. In this case, government would
be wholly unnecessary, and the highest imaginable
freedom, consistent with the social state, would be
enjoyed. Civil liberty consists in the nearest practi-
cable approach to perfect social freedom ; and the
degree of it necessarily depends on the intelligence
and virtue of the people.

Civil government is an ordinance of God ; and that
form of it which is most nearly adapted to the condi-
tion of the people, is most in accordance with his will.
He has not given specific directions for organizing a
form of government ; but has signified in general, his
will that rulers should be obeyed. Marriage is a
divine institution, and the superiority of the husband
in the conjugal relation, has been established by divine
authority. In many ages and countries, husbands have
tyrannized over their wives, and the female sex have
been reduced to deplorable degradation ; but Chris-



LIBERTY. 289

tianity has never attempted to relieve their sufferings,
by teaching them insubordination to their husbands.
So civil governments have often been oppressive, and
the people have groaned under their intolerable burden ;
but the voice of Christianity to them, in the midst of
their sufferings, has always been, « Submit yourselves
to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. * * ♦ *
Honor the king.*' ^ Whatever abuses of the matrimonial
relation may have cursed the earth, it would be a still
greater curse, if marriage were banished from human
society. In like manner, the worst form of human
government under which men have ever suffered, is
better than total anarchy. Hence, even in oppressive
governments,' the rulers are "powers ordained of God;"
and hence, obedience has been required to the king,
even when that king was Nero.

Liberty, considered as the absence of all restraint,
cannot be a right of wicked men ; and if possessed by
them, would be licentiousness rather than the true
liberty which good governments aim to establish. Un-
restrained licentiousness would deprive virtuous citizens
of their liberty; and hence government is necessary
to their enjoyment of this right, and it becomes their
interest and duty to sustain government, though at the
sacrifice of some rights which they might have enjoyed,
if all other men had been as virtuous as themselves.
These restrictions, imposed by necessity, while they
abridge liberty in some respects, secure the only pos-
sible enjoyment of what remains.

Religious Liberty.

Individual responsibility to God is a prominent doc-
trine of religion. It is taught in various forms



» 1 Pet. ii. 13, 17.
25



290 PUBLIC DUTIES.

throughoat the Bible, and is expressly declared in the
words, " Every one of us shall give account of himself to
God.*'^ Every man has his own intellect, his own con-
science, and his own will. These faculties for moral
action render him an accountable being; and as the
faculties belong to the individual, the responsibility is
individual. God gives commands which bind each
individual ; and the relation of each one to God is as
distinct, and the obligations arising from it are as per-
fect, as if he were the only created being in the
universe. Of every one it may be said, " To his own
master he standeth or falleth.'*^

Since our obligations to God are greater than to any
created being whatsoever, no created being has a right
to interfere with them. No one can release us from
them, or free us from the necessity of accounting for
ourselves individually. If persons whom we are bound
to obey in other matters, command us to disobey God,
we are bound to disregard their commands. If they
have power to inflict punishment, we should bear it
patiently, and commit ourselves to Him who judgeth
righteously. Parental authority no longer binds when
it comes in competition with the authority of God, for
Christ said, '< He that loveth father or mother more
than me, is not worthy of me."^ And if civil rulers
require us to disobey the King Supreme, the apostles of
Christ have taught us that we ought to obey God rather
than men.*

Religious liberty is violated, —

1. When men are required to worship any object
contrary to their own convictions of duty. The three
Hebrews, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, who
were commanded by King Nebuchadnezzar to worship

^ Rom. xiv. 12. ^ Rom. xiv. 4. » Matt. x. 37. * Acts v. 29.



LIBERTY. 291

his golden image, nobly asserted their religious liberty
by refusing to obey ; and their firmness received God's
approbation, testified by their miraculous deliverance
from the fiery furnace.^

2. When men are required to worship in a manner
which they do not approve. In various countries reli-
gious liberty has been violated, by requiring a com-
pliance with the forms of worship peculiar to the
Roman Catholic Church; and numerous acts of like
injustice and oppression have proceeded from Pro-
testant sects.

3. When men are forbidden to worship God. Daniel
was forbidden to pray to God, and, for disobeying the
prohibition, was cast into the den of lions.^

4. When men are required to support a form of re-
ligion which they do not approve. Religion is neces-
sary to national prosperity and happiness ; and if its
existence were dependent on legal support, it would be
as lawful to support it as to support common schools.
But true religion is best supported by voluntary con-
tributions. It cannot be made dependent on law
without becoming a tool of government, and losing the
purity and lustre with which it is adorned while free
from unholy alliance with the state. Since religion
does not require legal support, the maintenance of the
clergy by taxation is a violation of religious liberty. It
takes from the worshipper the privilege of making a
free-will offering, even when it does not apply the ex-
acted contribution to support forms of worship which he
does not approve.

5. When men are denied the enjoyment of civil
rights because of their religion. It is in general
best for the cause of religion that clergymen should

1 Dan. iii. 12-27. » Dan. yi. 4-23.



292 PUBLIC DUTIES.

not hold civil offices ; but their clerical character
ooght not to be made a legal disqualification. When a
form of religion is preferred by law to others, and com-
pliance with it made necessary to the holding of civil
office, the citizens are denied equal rights; and, in
violation of religious freedom, a penalty is inflicted on
all other fonns of religion. Civil government was not
instituted to determine how men should worship Grod ;
and its interference with religion is not conducive to
true piety or public happiness.

The obligation to obey civil rulers ceases whenever
they command disobedience to God. The first Chris-
tians were taught to submit patiently to civil despotism,
however oppressive, in things pertaining to this life;
but to resist firmly, even unto death, all interference
with their obligations to God. Thousands of martyrs
willingly gave up their lives, rather than relinquish the
right to worship God in obedience to his command.
We prize the boon of civil liberty as of inestimable
value, and boast that our fathers freely shed their blood
to obtain it ; but Christianity teaches us to set an infi-
nitely higher estimate on religious liberty. The New
Testament does not record a single Christian life lost,
or a single drop of Christian blood shed, in defence of
civil liberty; but it teaches cheerful submission to the
loss of blood and life, in defence of religious liberty.
It requires every disciple of Christ to give himself to
the conflict, and to yield his life, if necessary, a sacri-
fice to the cause. In this holy cause, torrents of martyr
blood have been shed; and wherever and whenever
religion and persecution have come in conflict, the true
spirit of Christianity prompts to resist all encroach-
ment on the rights of conscience, at every hazard and
every sacrifice.



LIBERTY. 293

Liberty of Speech and of the Press.

Society ought to be organized and governed in such
a manner as to promote human happiness in the highest
possible degree ; and, for this purpose, it should confer
as great advantages, and impose as few restrictions, as
the nature of the organization and the character of the
people will allow.

Men in society render benefit to each other by the
labor of the body, but much more by the labor of the
mind. A very large part of the benefit which one
mind confers on another, is conveyed through the me-
dium of language ; and it is, therefore, important to the
interests of society, that the intercourse of minds, by
means of language, should be as free as possible. By
means of it, one mind may confer incalculable benefits
on the whole human race, extending to the last genera-
tion that will inhabit the earth. But an instrument of
so great power may be employed to effect evil. By
means of it, one mind may send forth a stream of per-
nicious influence, that will spread with poisoning eflfect
through a whole community, and flow down through
many generations. A power so mighty for weal or woe
ought not to be overlooked in the regulations of society,
and the proper management of it requires the exercise
of the highest wisdom.

The power of language has been greatly extended by
the art of printing. Since the invention of this art,
learning has advanced with a progress unknown to
former ages ; the arts have attained a degree of improve-
ment which fills intelligent minds with astonishment;
books are multiplied ; the ability to read them is spread-
ing rapidly everywhere; and everywhere they are
brought in contact with the awakened mind of *man,
producing eflFects unknown in former generations, and,
25*



294 PUBLIC DUTIBS.

to a great oxtent, forming the chu'acter and ihe des&aj
of the generations to come. A power so Tmst needs to

be well regulated.

The general rule to be observed for regnlaliiig the
liberty of speech and of the press, is to impose no
unuoeesHary restriction. In many cases, by allowing
unrentruined freedom of discussion, the evil whieh one
miiul would effect is counteracted by other minds, truth
is elicited, and men are excited to caatioos investigation
and self-reliance, with far better results than could be
attained by fallible legislation. But there are cases
which need another remedy.

The delivery of lectures, and the publication of books
and prints, which have a tendency to undermine the
morula of society, ought to be prohibited by law. These
have their effect on the young and thoughtless, before
better instruction can be applied ; and fatal mischief is
done by corrupting the imagination and inflaming the
passions, mischief which cannot 1)0 afterwards undone.
Tlie precise limit of restriction, in these cases, it may
be difficult to determine ; but the wisdom of legislators
ought to provide that the incendiaries of social morals
shall be restrained from kindling fires that it is impos-
sible for human power and skill to extinguish. No
new experiment is required to prove that corruption
of morals is destructive of national prosperity and
happiness.

Slander also needs legislative prohibition and penalty.
The evils which it inflicts on the reputation of the indi-
vidual assailed, extend beyond his reach, and often
beyond his knowledge. Society ought to give its pro-
tection in this case. The assassin who stabs the repu-
tation, and the assassin who stabs the heart, deserve
alike to suffer the avenging power of the law.



DUTIES OF CIVIL OFFICERS. 295



SECTION VI. DUTIES OF CIVIL OFFICERS.

I. It is the duty of legislators to possess the know-
ledge necessary for their office, and to labor for the
enactment of righteous and beneficial laws.

Since civil society is organized for the protection of
rights, the laws which it needs are chiefly those which
define rights, and provide against their infraction. All
rights are founded on the principles of morality ; and
the moral judgments of mankind have been employed
in past ages, in deciding questions of right which have
arisen between men. With these decisions of common
law, and the principles on which they are founded, and
the statutes which are in force, every legislator ought
to be acquainted, since, without such knowledge, he is
not qualified to judge whether new enactments are
necessary, or what should be their character.

The modes of organization adopted by civil societies,
are not uniform. Every legislator ought to understand
the peculiar constitution of the society for which he
acts, whether it be written or unwritten ; and ougbt to
conform his legislation to it. He is merely an agent
for the society, and possesses no official power beyond
that with which society invests him. If he so far dis-
approves the constitution of the society, that he cannot
conform to it, he ought to resign his office. If, know-
ing the constitution, he purposely violates it, he is guilty
of high crime.

A legislator ought to be acquainted with the history
of past legislation, and its success ; and he ought to
understand the character of the people for whom ho
legislates. The experience of other countries, and of
his own country in times past, will assist him greatly in
determining what measures are best for the prevention
of wrong. But the eficcts of legislation vary according



296 PUBLIC DUTIES.

to the character of the people ; and therefore a legisla-
tor cannot be directed by experience only ; but he must
understand the character of his people, that he may be
able to adapt the teaching of experience, to their pecu-
liarities.

A legislator ought to labor, according to his best
ability, for the enactment of righteous and beneficial
laws. As he acts primarily for the protection of rights,
he should carefully regard the rights of every individual
as sacred ; and place them, as far as possible, beyond
the reach of encroachment. * He must not legislate for
his own personal good, or the good of a particular party,
or section of the community. He acts for the whole
people; and to the good of the whole people his
legislation should be directed. But it should be his
fixed maxim, that the welfare of a people cannot be
promoted by unrighteousness ; and ought not if it could.
He may compromise with associates in office, who may
differ from him in judgment, on questions of expediency
for the public welfare ; but on a question of right, he
should admit no compromise. Against all wrong, he
should labor firmly and perseveringly, to the full extent
of his official power.

II. The judiciary department of government, in-
cludes judges and jurors : the judges interpret the laws ;
the jurors decide questions of fact.

Judges, like legislators, ought to be well acquainted
with the principles of morality on which the laws are
founded ; with the past decisions of courts, and with the
statute laws in force. They ought, moreover, to be
thoroughly acquainted with the constitution of the
country for which they act. This last knowledge is
specially necessary for them ; because the responsibility
devolves on them, of setting aside an enactment of the



DUTIES OP CITIZENS. 297

legislature as null and void, if it be contrary to the con-
stitution.

While the laws of the legislature conform to the con-
stitution, the judges have no right to reject them. It
is their duty to interpret ; but they have no right to
nullify or repeal ; and they should interpret honestly,
regardless of all consequences to themselves or others.

Jurors are bound to decide, without favor to any
party, the questions of fact which may be submitted to
them, according to the testimony presented. No
threats or bribes should induce them to pervert judg-
ment in the slightest degree. They act for the good
of the whole people ; and they ought to feel the obliga-
tion of preserving the fountains of justice pure. They
act under the solemnity of an oath, and they ought to
feel their responsibility to the God of truth and justice,
to whom they must give account.

III. Executive officers are bound to execute the laws
without fear, and without favor.

It does not properly belong to the executive power,
to enact or to interpret the laws. The highest execu-
tive officer sometimes possesses, according to the con-
stitution, a veto power over the enactments of the
legislature. So far, he is co-ordinate with the legisla-
ture, in the service of law-making; but when he has
exercised this power according to the constitution, his
legislative function ceases. As an executive officer, he
is bound to execute the laws, whether he approves
them or not ; and, in the interpretation and application
of them, he is bound by the decisions of the judiciary.
Complete and strict subjection of executive officers to
the laws, is indispensable to the liberty of the people.

SECTION VII. DUTIES OF CITIZENS.

While civil government is confined to its proper



298 PUBLIC DUTIES.

•

object, and administered with justice, it is the duty of
every citizen to yield it his obedience and support. In
a government established by the will of the people, the
obligation of each individual has the force of a con-
tract. The descendants of those by whom the govern-
ment was originated, come under its authority without
their formal consent ; but, by the will of God, they
are bound to take their place in society, according to
the obligations entered into by their fathers. Even in
governments not formed by the will of the people, the
authority of God binds the citizens to yield their obe-
dience and support.

1. Every citizen is under obligation to the govern-
ment, to fulfil all his duties of reciprocity. He would
be under obligation to do this, if no government existed;
but government has authority to compel the perform-
ance of these duties ; and this authority brings on him
a new obligation. He must do justice to all, not only
as a moral being bound to do right, but as a member
of civil society, organized for the protection of rights.
He cannot consistently claim protection for his own
rights, if he violates the rights of others.

2. Citizens are under obligation to relinquish to
society the right of redressing their injuries. It is the
duty of society to protect its members ; but cases may
arise, in which time is not allowed for the power of
society to interpose. In such cases, the right of self-
protection belongs to the individual ; but when he has time
to invoke the protection of society, he is bound, by his
relation to the community, to commit the protection of
his rights to government. After wrongs have been
perpetrated, penalties need to be inflicted to prevent
their repetition; but individual citizens reject the
authority of government if they undertake to redress
tbeir own wrongs. Were this course taken by all,



DUTIES OF CITIZENS. 299

government would be abolished, and society subjected
to all the evils of anarchy.

3. Citizens are bound to pay their several parts of
the public expenses. Government cannot be sustained
without expense ; and every individual ought cheerfully
to pay his quota. The benefits received from a good
government, are an abundant compensation for its cost ;
and to receive these benefits without paying for them,
is a fraud on the "other members of the community, by
whom the government is sustained.

4. Citizens are under obligation to support their
government by physical strength, as well as by pecuni-
ary contributions. Cases sometimes occur, in which
the strength of the executive oflScers is insuflScient for
the enforcement of the laws; and such cases would
occur much more frequently, if it were not understood
that these officers can command to their aid the physi-
cal strength of the community. The civil ruler would
hold the sword in vain, if it were wielded by the un-
aided strength of his own arm ; and he would cease to
be a terror to evil doers, if citizens were under no
obligation to give him physical support.

5. In order to the stability and success of their
government, citizens are bound, as far as they can, to
render it virtuous and efficient. The best form of
government must be unsuccessful, if the administration
of it be committed to weak or dishonest hands. When
citizens elect their rulers, they are under obligation to
intrust public offices to those only who will discharge
the duties with ability and faithfulness. They are
bound, moreover, to promote as much as possible the
general difi'usion of intelligence and virtue, as indispen-
sable to the stability of the government and the welfare
of the community.



800 PUBLIC DUTIES.



SECTION VIII. POLITICAL OPPRESSION.

Social regulations ought to be established on the
principles of justice, and these principles are violated
in such cases as the following : —

1. When property is taken by arbitrary power. This
is frequently done in despotic governments.

2. \Vhen property is taken for purposes not neces-
sary to the government. If pyramids are built for de-
ceased monarchs, or splendid palaces built, and large
armies maintained, merely to gratify the pride and
ambition of the living, all exactions of property from
individuals for these or other purposes, not required by
the good of the community, are violations of right.

3. When the tax assessed on each individual is not
made proportionate, as nearly as possible, to the benefit
which he receives from society. The laws render protec-
tion to the person and property of the individual ; and
for this, protection he ought to pay willingly 9, fair quota
of the expense. The tax on property ought in general
to vary according to its value, ^ far as it comes under
the protection of the law.

4. When unnecessary restrictions are imposed on
personal liberty. Men ought to be permitted to pursue
their own happiness in the way of their choice, if not
inconsistent with the public good. Tyrannical rulers
have often imprisoned without just cause, and have de-
tained persons in prison by unnecessary delay of trial.

5. When religious liberty is violated. Under govern-
ments where some form of religion is established by
law, it is impossible that men should have full enjoy-
ment of religious liberty.

6. When life is unjustly taken, or personal injury
inflicted, by the ruling power. Such injuries have
sometimes been committed under forms of law ; at other



POLITICAL OPPRESSION. 801

times without such forms at the mere will of tyrannical
despots.

7. When the government fails to yield due protection
to the citizens. If it inflicts no positive evil, the re-
quirement to sustain it is oppressive, unless it accom-
plishes in some good degree the purposes for which
governments are instituted.

Right of Revolution.

When governments violate their obligations to the
people, the duty of citizens varies according to circum-
stances. Evils must be endured patiently, when it is
impossible to remedy them, or when the remedy would
require some violation of duty, or would endanger the
welfare of the community. The most corrupt governpaent
has much in it that is worth preserving ; and the reform
of abuses should be effected, if possible, without, the
loss of this remaining good. It is impossible to pre-
scribe definite rules for every case which may arise ; but,

1. Citizens are not bound to yield passive obedience
to government, whatever it may command. The
apostles of Christ refused to obey the rulers who re-
quired them to desist from preaching the gospel, and
justified themselves on the ground that it was right " to
obey God rather than men.''^

2. It is, in general, better to suffer wrong from civil
rulers, than to resist. If they command what is wrong,
we may refuse to obey, and patiently endure the conse-
quences. The effect of this course is in general far
bet/ter than that of resistance by force. Resistance is
civil war; and civil war is attended with evils which
every wise and virtuous man will seek to avoid.

8. If the reformation of government cannot be

^ Acts V. 29.
26



UOd PUBLIC DUTIES.

^(TooUhI without war and bloodshed, it ought server t»
W atttMupted raalily. There may be eircamstuke& im
whiv^h a oombiuod attempt to overthrow despotic poirer,
aiul i!^tabli»h a bettor form of governmeut, may beoofse
lawtVU NVhat these oiroumstances are, is a qnestkMi
of difficulty^ for the practical solution of which a high
degrt'o of wisdom ia necessary. To excite iDsurrectiiHi
agaiiut existing authority, without a rational prospect
of ultimate good, is criminal. The wisdom and justice
of any particular attempt at revolution, must be de-
termiucd by the facts of the case. These may be such
aa to indicate the will of Providence, that the attempt
be made; and the benefits resulting, may, as in the
oasie of the American Revolution, give satisfactory
a^urauce that the movement was directed by the finger
of Uod> and was made with his approbation.



CHAPTER XIV.
DUTIES TO SELF.



SECTION I. CARE OF HEALTH.

Our enjoyments depend much on onr health. With-
out health, the food which we eat with pleasure at other
times, becomes loathsome ; the sweetest strains of music
cease to charm ; and the beauties of nature, which were
before contemplated with delight, lose all their attrac-
tion. Instead of these pleasures, sickness brings pain
and suffering ; often producing fretful impatience, and
rendering life a burden. Hence, self-love requires that
we should preserve our health, so far as it is within our
power; and, since many of the causes which affect
health, are within our power, it becomes a duty of self-
love so to regulate these causes as to promote our own
happiness.

Health is necessary to duty as well as to enjoyment.
Without it, we cannot labor for the public good, or for
the glory of God. Whatever may be our intellectual
power, it fails to be useful to others, when the physical
strength is exhausted by disease; and, whatever may
be our eminence in piety, we then cease to perform
active service for God, and can glorify him only by
patient endurance and submission. Hence, we are
under stronger obligation than self-love can impose, to

(303)



804 DUTIES TO SELF.

attend to the preservation of health. Duty to God and
our fellow-men requires it.

Young persons are too commonly thoughtless respect-
ing their health, and possess very little of the know-
ledge which is necessary for its preservation. They
enter on pleasure, business, or study, as if their bodies
were formed of imperishable materials ; and the ardor
of their pursuit is not abated, until health is perhaps
irrecoverably gone, or some organ or function of the
material and perishable fabric permanently injured.
Many a life would have been far happier and more
useful, if its days of vigor had been spent with a wise
regard to health. Parents owe it to their children, and
teachers to their pupils, to direct early attention to this
subject, and to give them instruction for the preserva-
tion of health.

Temperance is necessary to health; temperance in
eating, in drinking, in labor, in study. The indulgence
of the appetite may yield present pleasure, at the
expense of future enjoyment, and ability for future
usefulness. The glutton and the inebriate destroy
themselves by a species of suicide, which, though it may
be slow in its operation, is certain in its effect. Nor is
health in danger from excessive indulgence only. Ex-
cessive labor, either of body or mind, may destroy the
ability to labor. Some are capable of performing more
labor than others ; and every one should endeavor to
ascertain the measure of his strength, and so to regu-
late his efforts, and the continuance of them, that his
powers may be employed, on the whole, to the best pos-
sible effect.

Exercise is necessary to health. The exercise of

•the muscles increases the muscular strength, and, in

general, every corporeal function derives strength from

exercise, if it be in a healthy state ; but diseased organs



i

CARE OF HEALTH. 805

in general require rest, and also organs whose strength
has been exhausted by labor. Action and rest must be
alternated to produce their best effect. Action, too
long continued, may produce permanent exhaustion;
and habitual inaction always produces debility. These
remarks apply to mental as well as bodily labor. Health
is promoted by wisely-directed mental effort, and in the
records of longevity are found the names of men distin-
guished for intellectual power and studious habits.

DrunhenneBB.

Drunkenness is a crime which destroys soundness of
both body and mind. Alcoholic liquor, when taken in
sufficient quantity, deprives of consciousness and mus-
cular power ; and consequently unfits a man for all the
duties of life. What he owes to himself, to his family,
to society, and to God, must be unpaid during this
period of mental and bodily imbecility. After a time,
the effects of the poisonous drug so far subside that he
regains possession of himself, but he is not the man
that he was before. His physical and moral powers
have received a shock, and insidious habit has begun to
undermine the foundation on which he stands. Every
repetition of the intoxicating potion binds another chain
around him, until habit becomes irresistible, and he
surrenders himself a helpless and hopeless victim to
ruin and death. Multitudes have pursued this career
to its sad termination, and have left behind them a
melancholy warning to their survivors.

The effects of drunkenness of human happiness are
evil to an extent that exceeds all calculation. The
inebriate himself is made unhappy, and finds existence
a burden, from which he seeks relief in the soothing
oblivion which the stupefying cup affords him. How
many broken-hearted wives, how many neglected and
26*



306 DUTIES TO SELF.

ruined children, are among the victims of drunkenness!
How disastrous have been its effects on industry, good
management, and all the springs of social prosperity!

Drunkenness produces evils beyond those which arise
from mere neglect of duty. While the drunken man
deprives his family and society of his services, he does
not annihilate himself, but remains an oppressive burden
which they are compelled to bear. And often the mad-
dening demon within drives him to perpetrate crimes
over which he himself weeps at returning intervals of
sanity. Many have felt that the suicide of drunkenness
is too lingering; and have sought, by speedier self-
destruction, to free society from a burden which they
were unwilling longer to impose : but the majority of
inebriates consent to remain in the world till their phy-
sical powers are exhausted, and their opportunity of
doing evil necessarily terminated.

The question, how far a drunken man is responsible
for crimes committed in drunkenness, is one which
jurists are compelled to consider, and which every man
ought well to consider who allows himself to sip the
intoxicating beverage. It has been held that the
drunken man is responsible for what he does, according
to the measure of consciousness which he retains ; and
responsible for getting drunk, according to the proba-
bility of the consequences which might ensue. If we
suppose the guilt of a sober man, while in a state of
perfect consciousness, to be the whole guilt, then the
guilt of the drunken man, who retains only half of his
consciousness, will be one-half of the whole guilt. And
then, if it were known beforehand that the probability
of the mischief was one-half of the certainty, the guilt
of getting drunk has been computed to be one-half of
the remainder; making altogether his responsibility to
be three-fourths of the whole guilt. But this mode of



CARE OF HEALTH. 807

computation is not correct. When men are pressed to
decide between conflicting duties, it becomes necessary
to estimate the probabilities of good or evil to result
from the courses of conduct out of which they must
make their selection. But no duty urges any man to
drink intoxicating liquor ; and he is therefore bound to
abstain, not merely by the prohahility^ but also by the
possibility, that evil may ensue. If he voluntarily
madden himself, when there is no necessity, he is re-
sponsible for that madness with all its consequences.
Instead of allowing drunkenness to be an excuse for
crime, it ought rather to be held guilty of the crimes
which, though not actually perpetrated, it is liable to
originate. If human courts will not judge it with so
much severity, this will probably be the rule of its trial
at the last tribunal. It seems to men a little matter
to drink a few drops of pleasant liquid ; as it seemed to
mother Eve an indulgence which could not possibly de-
serve the penalty of death, to eat the fruit which she
saw to be pleasant to the eyes, and good for food.^ But
God has chosen to try men's allegiance to him, by such
matters as eating and drinking ; and, trifling as the act
may in itself appear, he sets its consequences before
us, and warns us by all the fearfulness of his righteous
retribution, to abstain from every forbidden indulgence.
Men may think themselves their own masters, and
indulge in the pleasures of wine at their own will, but
God claims dominion over them, and has declared that
drunkards shall not inherit the kingdom of God.^

The habit of drinking intoxicating liquors is often
acquired in early life ; and the use of them in society,
as tokens of hospitality and friendship, has tended
greatly to multiply the victims of drunkenness. Young

1 Gen. iii. 6. « 1 Cor. vi. 10.



808 DUTIES TO SELF.

persons should guard against the habit, as they Trould
guard against having their eyes put out, or their hands
cut off. If eyes or hands have been lost by youthful
folly, the regrets of future years cannot restore them ;
and experience has shown, that an early acquired habit
of drinking, though it may be lamented and feebly
resisted in after life, almost invariably brings the sub-
ject of it to the drunkard's^rave.

SECTION II. INDUSTRY AND FRUGALITY.

Self-love requires that we provide for the future.
After the best possible care of our health, days of sick-
ness may come, in which we shall be unable to provide
for the wants that may then oppress us ; or old age may
come,* with long-continued debility, and incapacity for
labor. A prudent foresight requires that we make pro-
vision while in health and vigor, for such days of fee-
bleness or decrepitude. Hence self-love imposes the
obligation to be industrious and frugal.

Industry is a virtue on which our success in every
laudable attempt greatly depends. It is an appoint-
ment of heaven, that bread shall be obtained by labor,
and that he who will not work, shall not eat. Slothful-
ness tends to poverty ; and the man who indulges pres-
ent love of ease is liable to suffer future want of bread.
The student who consults his ease, will fail to make
good progress in the attainment of knowledge. The
traveller who is chiefly solicitous for comfort and repose,
will make slow progress in his journey. God has given
to the sons of men to be exercised with labor ; and, in
every business of life, he who would attain his object
must pursue it with industry.

Frugality* is another virtue which self-love recom-
mends. What industry provides will be of no avail for
the future if it be wasted through negligence, or squan-



SELF-DEFENGB. 309

dered on present gratification. Frugality opposes the
demands for present indulgence, and preserves the sup-
plies for future use. Industry and frugality are asso-
ciate virtues which need the aid of each other. By
their joint exercise, future competence can scarcely fail
to be secured.

These virtues are enforced by higher authority than
that of self-love. Paul taught the Christians of Ephe-
sus to labor that they " may have to give to him that
needeth."^ If we would practise benevolence to the
poor, if we would promote the public good, if we would
advance the cause of religion, we have need to practise
industry and frugality.

SECTION III. SELF-DEFENCE.

As men are under obligation to take care of their
health, and to provide food, and whatever else may be
necessary for the continuance of their lives; so they
are under obligation to guard their lives from surround-
ing or threatening dangers. If assaulted by wild beasts
or hostile men, they are not at liberty to exercise no
care, or use no effort, . to save themselves from being
maimed or killed. If a father should permit the child
at his side to be seized and devoured by a wild beast,
which he could have readily driven away, or destroyed,
he is guilty of that child's death. So the Saviour of
mankind reasoned, when he said, « Is it lawful to do
good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil ; to save life,
or to kill?" 2 The question to be decided was, whether
it was right for him to heal on the Sabbath day. The
alternative was the mere omission to heal; and this
alternative, the mere omission to heal when he had op-
portunity, is accounted, in his reasoning, a positive evil.



1 Eph. iv. 38. 2 Mark iii. 4.



310 DUTIES TO SELF.

To neglect an opportunity of doing good, is to do evil;
to neglect an opportunity of saving life, is to destroy
it. On this principle, the father who neglects to save
his child, destroys it ; and so the man who loses his life
by neglecting to employ the proper means of self-
defence, commits a species of suicide.

Self-defence is required by self-love ; but, like the
duties considered in the last two sections, it is enforced
by higher obligations than that which mere self-love
can impose. The father is bound to protect his child
from higher considerations than the mere impulse of
parental affection ; and so a man is bound to protect
his own life from higher considerations than the mere
impulse of self-love. The authority of conscience and
of God interposes. A man's child and his own life are
placed under his special guardianship by the Creator ;
and as he has no right to destroy either, so he has no
right to permit either to be destroyed by his voluntary
neglect.

In self-defence we are bound to determine our course
of action, with a due regard to conflicting obligations.
A man who is attacked by his neighbor's dog is under
obligation to defend himself, and also under obligation
not to harm his neighbor's property. When these ob-
ligations come into conflict, the latter must yield to the
former, so far as necessity requires, and no further.
If he can defend himself by frightening the dog, he
ought not to kill him. The same principle applies to
cases of assault by human beings ; but the difficulty in
its application is far greater. The obligation to self-
defence is the same in both cases, but the conflicting
obligation is much greater when the assailant is human,
because the life of a rational and immortal being is of
far greater value than the life of a brute. When these
obligations come into conflict with each other, every



SELF-DEFENCE. 311

conscientious wise man, who is compelled to act in such
trying circumstances, will desire the counsel of others
lest he should err through weakness of judgment or
strength of passion. Hence every conscientious wise
man will rejoice that civil government has been estab-
lished for the adjudication of such cases ; and he will
gladly, whenever it is practicable, refer all such cases
to the decision of the civil tribunal. But it is not
always practicable to appeal to the civil authority.
The emergency may require too speedy action to allow
consultation with any one, and it is, therefore impor-
tant that some general principles be fixed in the mind
by which we may direct our conduct in such emergen-
cies.

I. It is our duty to avoid hostile assault, if we can.

The instructions of Scripture are explicit on this
subject. « If it be possible, as much as lieth in you,
live peaceably with all men.*'^ The precise means of
avoiding hostility arcnot pointed out ; but the obliga-
tion to seek peace is expressed by a strongly emphatic
tautology, in which the phrase. If it he poBsible^ is fol-
lowed by another of like import, a9 much as in you
lieth. We are bound to avoid making an assault on
any one, and, if it be made on us, we are bound to
avoid it, or escape from it, if possible. By prudently
withdrawing from exposure to danger, we may give
time for the fury of the assailant to subside, and may
not only preserve ourselves from receiving injury, and
from temptation to inflict injury, but we may do great
good to the assailant, by preventing him from doing
what he might afterwards remember with bitter regret.

In opposition to the pacific instructions which are
given in the Holy Scriptures, the pride of the human

^ Rom. zii. 18.



812 DUTIES TO SELF.

heart inclines to resist every evil with which we may be
assailed or threatened. It is deemed cowardly to retire
from conflict, and the thoughtless crowd honor and ap-
plaud the man who, in disobedience to God, risks his
life to meet and repel an assault with which he is me-
naced. It requires more heroism than most men pos-
sess to obey God, and do right in face of public scorn
and contempt. Many who quail not before weapons of
death, are abject cowards in opposition to popular
odium. But the truly great and good man will fear-
lessly do right at whatever hazard.

II. It is lawful, in self-defence, to restrain by force
the power of an assailant.

The words of the apostle Paul, cited above, clearly
imply that it is not possible, in all cases, to live peace-
ably with all men. Assaults may be made upon us,
from which we have not time or opportunity to escape.
In such cases, if any room is left for appeal to the
moral feelings of the assailant, a triumph may be
achieved by disarming his rage, and inducing him to
do right. If we can gain this triumph, even at the cost
of some personal suffering, we shall have a rich reward.
But if appeals to moral feeling avail nothing, and non-
resistance ^n our part serves only to encourage aggres-
sion, we are not bound to submit passively to his
violence. We are bound, however, to defend ourselves,
if possible, without doing harm to the assailant. We
may avert his blow, or we may seize his arm when
raised to inflict it, or we may wrest the deadly weapon
from his hand. In such cases we infringe his personal
liberty ; but he has no right to use his personal liberty
to our injury, and therefore we commit no trespass on
his rights when we restrain his violence only so far as
is necessary for our safety.

III. It is lawful, in self-defence, to arrest the pro-



SELF-DEFENCE. 813

gress of an assault, by doing personal harm to the
assailant.

K an assassin attempts my life, and I can, by a well-
directed blow, break the arm which is driving the
dagger to my heart, I save my life, by doing him a
small measure of harm. Would it have been better
that I had passively submitted to his criminal design ?
My life is of more value than his arm, and when the
choice is forced upon me, I am bound to prefer my own
preservation.

The principle which has been here set forth, does
not justify a blow inflicted in return for a blow received.
Retaliation commonly provokes, rather than prevents
injury ; and, apart from its evil tendency, it proceeds
from a temper of mind inconsistent with pure benevo-
lence. The aim of a blow inflicted in retaliation, is
harm to our neighbor ; and this harm our mind contem-
plates as the end of the action. The aim of a blow to
prevent injury, is self-preservation, without desire to
harm even the enemy who is attempting our life. We
may inflict the blow, with poignant regret that he will
receive harm from it. In this case, the injury which
he receives, is properly the result of his own crime,
and may be viewed as self-inflicted.

Punishment may be inflicted for crimes that have
been committed, as a means for the general prevention
of crime ; but this means of prevention belongs pro-
perly to civil society. Here retaliation is allowable.
" Life shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
hand for hand, foot for foot."^ Civil government is
an ordinance of God, designed to prevent injury by
the infliction or threat of punishment, and invested
with power for this purpose. It is so far clothed with

' Dent. six. 21.
27



314 DUTIES TO 8BLF.

the divine prerogative of taking vengeance; and the
civil ruler is called a revenger^ of evil. But individu-
als are .bound, as members of society, and as subjects
of God's government, to leave the avenging of their
injuries to God, the supreme governor, and to the sub-
ordinate governors whom he has appointed on earth for
this purpose.

IV. It is lawful for me to take the life of an assail-
ant, when mj own life cannot be otherwise preserved
from his injurious and unprovoked assault.

If the father of a family sees a savage foe approach-
ing, and knows that it is his intent to murder every
member of the family, if escape is impossible, and
appeal to moral feeling either impossible or absolutely
hopeless, what is this father's duty in the case ? Ought
he to give up, without resistance, his own life, and the
lives of his wife and children, to the murderous mon-
ster? Were it a tiger that sought their blood, no
doubt could exist that he ought to save his family, by
killing the ferocious beast; but is the obligation to
protect his family less imperative, because the ferocious
animal that approaches, possesses a human form ? In
that form he is bound to recognise a fellow-man, a
neighbor, so far as he can perform towards him duties
of reciprocity or benevolence ; but the man has volun-
tarily and criminally placed himself in circumstances
which make it necessary that he should be treated as a
wild beast, and in which the usual manifestations of
benevolence are impossible. He acts the part of a
savage beast, and must be treated as such, so far as
the protection of the family requires.

Will it be said that the father ought to save his
family by intimidating the savage ? We concede that



* Rom. xiii. 4.



SBLF-DBFENOB. 815

he ought not to take his life, if the preservation of
the family can be accomplished by other means. But
the right to intimidate, by a threat of yiolcnce,iimplic8
a right to execute the threat in case of necessity. Such
threats, from a conscientious man, must prove unavail-
ing, if it be known that it is unlawful to execute them.

If an individual has no right to take life in any case,
the father who saves his family by killing their intended
murderer, is himself guilty of murder. But the moral
judgments of mankind will never so decide ; and no
human law will ever condemn and punish such an act
as murder. The divine law^ has decided that it is not
murder to kill a thief who breaks into the house by
night to steal ; and if it permitted a man to defend his
property, much more did it permit him to defend the
lives of his family.

If it be established that a man may lawfully take life
to save* himself and his family from being murdered,
the principle involved will apply when but a single life
is to be preserved. If it is right to protect one's
family, it is right to protect one's self. In this case it
is true that one life is set over against one life ; and a
doubt may be suggested, whether it is right for one life
to be taken, if but one is to be preserved by it. But
we never plead that a murderer's life ought to be spared
because he has murdered only one man. Ilis life is
equally forfeited to the law, whether he has murdered
one or many. If a man should allow himself to bo
murdered by an assailant, rather than take his life, he
gives up his own life for a life that will be forfeited to
the law, after the deed of murder has been consum-
mated. He permits two lives to be lost to the commu-

^ Ex. xxii. 2.



DUTIES TO BELV.

i^it v« who'll h<^ might have saved one ; and that one the
lifo >iihioK ought to have been saved, and which had
h<^n i^ActHi undor his special guardianship by the
Auihor of hi» being* Duty to the community, there-
foro« and duiv to God, require that he should protect
hin\>elf in »uoh circumstances.

IWi that a man who takes life in self-defence may
W guiltlc^^ the a«»auU on him must be wholly unjust
and nn\^r\^Y\^ke\i« If he has brought it on himself, when
he might have ax\^ided it, God will not hold him guilt-
\e**^ He niu^t^ moreover^ be free from all revengeful
)va;!^i\vn^ and from every feeling of pleasure, or abate-
ment ef regret^ from the consideration that the indi-
vidual kilW wa$ hi$ enemy. lie must love him as a
tVlK>x^^eittsi^turex and mourn over him with unaffected
*\\n\^>K, a* ever an erring brother who has perished in

l^H.^vvvu^x 1» — Je;Siu* Christ was eminently harmless.
He mtlu^t^si jvaJu and suffering on no one, but went
a^MU d\Mn^ gvvd ; and he commanded his disciples : '^ Do
gssvl u^ thorn that hate vou, and pray for them which
\i<\^j^itof«Uv u*e vou/* ^ It is contrary to his religion,
a?^ ts^Uilhi VkmU hv example and precept, to do harm to
an\ vMu\ and ei^peeially so great harm as to kill the
hvv\v* and hurrv the :^oul fn>m the only place of repent-
an\v and jvirxlon^ to the judgment and retributions of
the t\uure life.

When twe of Christ V disciples asked leave to call

do>fcn tlrt^ fr\m\ heaven on some who had displeased

then\ he said : ** The Son of Man is not come to destroy

men*a lives^ hut to save them."^ He came into the

world on an errand of mercv : and his whole inter-

e\uirse with mankind accorded with the benevolent

design of his mission. Once he pronounced a curse ;



^ Matt. V. 41. * Luke ix. 56.



SELF-DEFIKCI* 817

but it was on a iGg-tree. Once be permitted demons to
do mischief; but it was to a berd of swine*^ To buman
beings, he did good, and good only, in feeding the
hungry, healing the sick, and casting oat devils. In
like manner, bis followers, if thej imitate bis example,
and obey bis precepts, will do good to mankind, even
to their enemies and persecutors.

But in a world such as ours, benevolent designs meet
with obstacles to their accomplishment. Benevolence
requires that we should seek to please our neighbor for
his good ; but it often happens, that, in promoting his
good, we must give him pain instead of pleasure ; and
it often happens, that we must give pain to individuals,
in promoting the public good. Even the tender Jesus
gave pain to the covetous hearts of those whose tables
of money be overthrew in the temple ; and, when he
drove out those who bought and sold, if he did not give
pain to their persons, the whip of cords which he used,
indicated that he claimed a right to harm their persons
as well as their property if it should be necessary. No
one doubts that, when it becomes necessary to the ac-
complishment of a benevolent design, a Christian father
may give the pain of chastisement to a disobedient
son ; a Christian surgeon, the pain of amputation to a
patient with a diseased limb; and a Christian ruler,
the pain of punishment to one who has violated the
laws. In such cases, the pain or harm is not injury.
It violates no right, and is not contrary to the pure
benevolence of Christianity. Even when the harm
done amounts to the loss of life, the individual who
renders the taking of his life necessary, is guilty of
his own death ; and it is his own crime that plunges
him unprepared into eternity. He has virtually dashed
out his own brains against a wall of defence, by which
every man is surrounded.

27*



818 DUTIES TO SELF.

Objection 2. — Jesns Christ expressly forbade his
followers tm resist evil; and commanded them, when
smitten on one cheek, to turn the other.

The instructions of Christ here referred to, prohibit
. retaliation. They teach us how to act, not for the pre-
vention of injury, but after the injury has been re-
ceived. The language of Christ is, « I say onto yon,
that ye resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite
thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And who-
soever will compel thee to go a mile, go with him
twain." ^ The cheek has been smitten, the coat has
been taken, the compulsion to go a mile has com-
pleted its effect. In every case, the injury has been
consummated ; and the question is not how to prevent
it, but what return to make for it. It is commanded
that wo shall return good for evil ; and in each case, the
good specified is precisely such as is opposed to retalia-
tion. Retaliation would require us to smite the in-
jurer's cheek in return, or to take away his cloak, in
place of the coat which he has wrongfully wrested from
us. But, to show that retaliation must be avoided, a
course of conduct is prescribed, directly opposed to it.
That it was the Saviour's design to prohibit retaliation,
is further evident from the fact, that he is commenting
on the words of Moses, «< an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth. "^ The import of the instruction is, to
consent that the injury be repeated, rather than reta-
liate. When Jesus was himself smitten on one cheek,
at his last trial, he did not literally turn the other ; but
he did not retaliate. On the other hand, he did not
invite another blow; but made such an appeal to jus-

J Matt. V. 39-41. » Verse 38.



8BLF-DEFESCE. 319

tice as was adapted to preTent repetk^m of the injorj.
<< If I have spoken evil, bear witn^ of the evil ; bat
if well, why smitest thoa me T* ^ and his own example
teaches us how to obey his precept in its true import.
The meaning of Christ's precept is unfolded in the
words of Paal, <« Recompense to no man erU for eTiL
* * * * Avenge not yourselves."* In all this, the
injury is supposed to have been received ; and we are
forbidden to retaliate, or take vengeance. This is the
doctrine of Christianity, as to the right mode of treat-
ing those who have injured us ; a doctrine not unknown
in the Old Testament dispensation ; for it is said in the
book of Proverbs, <<If thine enemy be hungry, give
him bread to eat ; and if he be thirsty, give him water
to drink." ^ But neither the Old Testament, nor the
New, prohibits the use of proper means for the preven-
tion of injury.

* John xviiL 23. * Rom. xiL 17, 19. • Prov. xxv. 21.



CHAPTER XV.
POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.



SECTION I. MODES 09 RESTRAINT.

Ix Chapter XIII. it was shown that civil society is
organiieil chiefly for the protection of rights ; and that,
in mflonling this protection, it employs the agency of
government* In Sections 6 and 7 of that chapter, we
considered the duties of rulers and citizens — of rulers
as the agents^ and of citizens as the members, of civil
societv.

In Section »^ of the last chapter, we have seen that
individual oitixens relinquish to society the protection
of their rights^ so far as the interposition of society can
be invoked ; and that, hence, the redress of past wrongs
is wholly relinquished to society ; and that this arrange-
ment has the Si^nction of the Christian religion, which
denies to individuals the right of avenging themselves,
and makes civil rulers the sole avengers of wrong.

From the nature and design of the organization, civil
society is under obligation to prevent and to punish
injuries. The punishment of crimes is an important
and necessary means of preventing their repetition, and
the threat of punishment becomes the chief means of
protecting the rights of citizens from injury. It is,
therefore, the duty of society to aflBx, by established

(320)



IMPRISONMENT. 321

laws, suitable penalties to crimes ; and to invest govern-
ment, its agent, with power to inflict these penalties.

The principal means of punishing and preventing
injuries are four: imprisonment, capital punishment,
war, and slavery. Each of these we shall consider in
a separate section; but, before we proceed to them,
we shall briefly notice some subsidiary modes which
have been adopted for obtaining the ends of good
government.

Surety of the Peace. — When one man declares on
oath that he fears injury from another, the law requires
that the person feared shall give bond and security to
keep the peace. The violation of the condition of this
bond is attended by a pecuniary penalty, and the fear
of paying this penalty becomes a motive to refrain from
committing injuries.

Fines. — The laws sometimes prescribe pecuniary pen-
alties for specified crimes. These are called fines.

Banishment. — An individual may prevent injury by
keeping at a distance from the injurious person. Society
has sometimes imitated this mode of procedure by re-
quiring the injurious person to leave its territory.

Stripes. — Pain of body is sometimes inflicted as a
punishment for crime. The most common mode of
inflicting pain is by whipping. The Mosaic law allowed
forty stripes, and forbade more ; but, in practice, the
Jews limited the number to thirty-nine, lest, by a mis-
take in the count, the prescribed number might be
exceeded. Hence has arisen the legal limitation of
stripes to the number of thirty-nine.

SECTION II. IMPRISONMENT.

An individual who is assailed may, to protect himself
from injury, seize the arm which is uplifted to inflict a
blow. This seizure infringes the personal liberty of the



822 POWERS OF CIVIL OOVBRNMEST.

Msailant, and society cannot protect the rights of all
the oitizens without similar infringement of personal
liberty when necessary. This may be done by im-
prisonment.

Atrocious crimes are sometimes punished with im-
prisonment for life. In such cases, the criminal is
regarded as too dangerous to be turned loose in the
oommunity. Generally imprisonment is for a limited
period, which is proportioned to the magnitude of the
orime. The temporary confinement is considered a
punishment sufficient to deter the individual and others
from repeating the offence. In our penitentiaries, labor
is added to confinement, as a punishment and means of
reform to the criminal ; and as a mode of lessening to
the state the expense of his confinement.

Persons charged with atrocious crimes are frequently
imprisoned till they can be brought to trial. Society
exercises this power over personal liberty, because it is
indispensable to the purposes of justice that such per-
sons sl\ouId not have opportunity to escape. Through
the unavoidable imperfection of human governments,
innocent persons may sometimes be imprisoned on false
accusation ; and, therefore, this indispensable power of
society ought to be exercised with much caution. The
probability of guilt should be well established, and the
accused should be brought to trial without unnecessary
delay.

SECTION III. CAPITAL PUNISHMENT.

Civil society has a right to punish with death those
who commit the crime of murder. After the deluge,
God said to Noah, the father of the new world, " Who-
so sheddeth man*s blood, by man shall his blood be
shed.**^ In the Mosaic law, provision was made to

* Gen. ix. 6,



CAPITAL PUSI£HM£yT. 823

punish murderers with death* And in the Xew Tes-
tament we are taught that eiril rulers are appointed by
God to be a terror to eril-doers ; and that, for this pur-
pose, they are armed with the sword, which is an instru-
ment of death. It is obvious that they could not be a
terror to evil-doers by the mere holding of the sword,
if they were not permitted to use it. It appears, there-
fore, that, in all ages of the world, it has been the will
of God that capital punishment should be used, as a
means of deterring wicked men, and protecting the vir-
tuous in the enjoyment of a peaceable and orderly
life.

Under the Mosaic law, numerous crimes besides mur-
der were punished with death. The nation of Israel
were under a peculiar covenant, which constituted Jeho-
vah their God and King, and placed them under pecu-
liar obligations to obey his statutes. Hence disobedi-
ence was prohibited under severer penalties than would
have been suited to other circumstances. A man who
gathered sticks on the Sabbath day was, by divine com-
mand, stoned to death ;^ but no one will maintain, that
this divine command obliges all civil rulers to punish
Sabbath-breakers in the same manner. The general
principle of justice which pervaded the Mosaic code,
was life for life — an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. By this principle the administration of justice
was to be governed, in all cases for which no special
divine statute made provision. This principle accords
precisely with that which God announced to Noah as
the basis of a criminal code for his descendants. As
this divine rule was intended for the whole posterity of
Noah, and as even the Israelites were bound by it in
the absence of an express statute, we conclude that it

* Numbers xv. 32-36.



324 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

is a rule for us to whom no other criminal law has been
given by the supreme Ruler.

The severity with which crimes were punished under
the Hebrew theocracy, teaches the fearfulness of sin-
ning against God ; and we ought, with Paul, to derive
this instruction from it : <* If the word spoken by angels
was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward ; how shall we
escape/*^ « He that despised Moses' law died without
mercy under two or three witnesses ; of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,"
&c.^ Civil rulers are not required to inflict vengeance
on all who slight the grace, or despise the authority
of God. They should not exercise the fearful power
of the sword, beyond the limits within which they have
God's authority to wield it. Hence capital punishment
ought to be inflicted for no other crime than murder.
Since the moral quality resides in the intention, a fully-
proved intention of murder may without injustice be
treated as if the crime had been consummated.

Some who admit the propriety of capital punishment,
as a divine appointment, maintain that the right to in-
flict it cannot be derived from natural law. There is
at least sufficient doubt on this subject, to render us
thankful to the Author of revelation, that he has not
left us to be guided in this important matter by our own
fallible reasonings. But if the doctrine of revelation
on the point, could not be established by unaided rea-
son to our full satisfaction ; it harmonizes with the best
deductions of reason, and with the established princi-
ples of natural law.

All laws for the government of mankind are mere
advice, if they are not sustained by penalties; and

a Heb. ii. 2. « Heb. x. 28, 29.



CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. 325

penalties affixed are unavailing, if power exists nowhere
to inflict them. To inflict a penalty for past crime, is
a work of vengeance forbidden to individuals ; and were
it equally prohibited to society, law would be worthless.
Injuries are avenged by society, to prevent their repe-
tition. Now, if an individual may take the life of an
assailant to preserve his own life, the right of society
over the assailant's life cannot be less ; otherwise, soci-
ety, if its power could be invoked to protect the
assailed party at the moment of danger, has a responsi-
bility to which its power is unequal. We infer, hence,
that society, in protecting the lives of citizens from -a
murderer, has a right to take the murderer's life. From
the nature of the case, its power cannot in general be
invoked until after the deed has been committed ; and
it is hence avenging ; but the avenging power is mani-
festly deficient, if it is not equal to what the prevent-
ing power would have been. It is fit that the criminal
should not suffer less harm, than might have been justly
inflicted to preserve the life which he has destroyed.
Society estimates the life of the murdered man now, as
it was bound to estimate it, if it could have interposed
before the deed was consummated ; and it does, though
late, and for the preservation of other lives, what it
would have been just to do, for the preservation of the
life which it was unable to protect.

Objection 1. — The decalogue expressly commands,
" Thou shalt not kill," and this law binds society, as
well as individuals.

We admit that the decalogue, though given to the
Israelites, is binding on all men ; but if the precept,
<« Thou shalt not kill," was, to the Israelites, a general
law, admitting limitations and exceptions, it must be so
to other men. God, who gave them the precept, ex-
pressly commanded them to kill the wicked inhabitants

2S



320 FOWEES Oir CIVIL GOVEB.KMi:JSill.

of Canaan ; and, in numeroas cases, required that ihat
puuitiluncnt of death should be infticied on their own
countrymen, for violation of the law which he had
given them. If capital punishment was ooniiiBteiit iridi
the precept then, it must he eonsistent now.

DiUECTiOH 2. — Society cannot change liie relatiDia
between men. The executioner is a man, and the niuF-
derer is a fellow-man, a neighbor whom he s hoond ts
love. Hociety cannot change the relation, nullify the
olili^ation, tind authorisse the doing of harm instead of
good.

The argument of this objection will prore too muciL
It will decide against all punishments as well as against
capital punishment. A man has no right to fine, whiqfii,
or imprison his neighbor; and therefore, according to
the argument, society cannot authorize its officers to
inflict these penalties. Now, since society cannot act
as a whole, except by its officers, it will follow that
society cannot inflict any penalty, and that gOTcmment
must cease. Premises which justify such a conclusion
must contain some fallacy.

The asHumption that society cannot change^tbe rela-
tions between men needs limitation. Changes do take
place in human relations, and society is frequently con-
cerned in eflecting them. Marriage and divorce change
the relations between the parties ; and these changes,
if legally made, require the aid and authority of society.
When society appoints a civil ruler, it changes the rela-
tion between him and the other members of the com-
munity. The relation between an executioner and a
murderer is not the simple relation which subsists
between man and man ; biit has been modified, partly
by society, and partly by the criminal. Society, by
appointing the ofiicer, has given him a new delation to
every member of the community; and the criminal, by



CAPITAL PUNISHMBNT. 327

his violation of law, has changed his relation to every
member of the community. When a man, to preserve
his own life, takes the life of an assailant, he does not
act towards him in the simple relation of man to man.
The . assailant puts himself in the relation of a wild
beast. Ho who has committed murder has made him-
self a wild beast in relation to the community as a
whole ; and the executioner, by the relation which
society has instituted, is the point of contact where this
wild beast and the power of society come in conflict.
Such a change in the relation of the parties must be
supposed when an officer fines, whips, or imprisons a
criminal ; and the change will equally justify the inflic-
tion of the death-penalty, if the criminal deserves it.

Objection 3. — The purpose of protecting society
might be accomplished by confining the criminal ; and
benevolence requires that punishment should be inflicted
for the reformation of guilty men, not for their unneces-
sary destruction.

That the protection of society may be accomplished
by confining the criminal, is an assumption that cannot
be admitted without proof. The repetition of injury
from the same individual may be prevented by this
means : but society needs a shield to protect it from the
first injury, as well as the second ; and from all evil-
minded persons, as well as from the individual whom it
has succeeded in arresting for crime already committed.
This shield is supplied when rulers are "a terror to
evil-doers;" and to render them terrible, the wisdom
of God has placed the sword in their hands. It cannot
be supposed that imprisonment, with bountiful mainte-
nance, kind treatment, and benevolent efibrt to effect
a reformation can present as great terror to evil-doers as
the death-penalty. Hence, if this penalty is abolished,



828 P0WBR8 OF CITIL OOTERNMENT.

the divinely-appointed shield for the protection of society
is thrown away.

When appeals to benevolence are made in behalf of
criminals, it ought not to be forgotten that the virtuous
members of the community have at least equal claim to
our benevolence. Forbearance and tenderness towards
the guilty are not benevolence, if they multiply injuries,
and expose the virtuous to evils from which society
ought to protect them. Civil society is instituted for
the protection of rights ; and the design of the institu-
tion will be frustrated, if the protection of rights be
sacrificed to the claims of a spurious benevolence, which
removes needful restraints from the wicked.

Objection 4. — The execution of criminals tends to
multiply crimes, rather than prevent them. The multi-
tude who gaze at the spectacle contemplate the culprit
as the hero of the occasion, and are affected more with
sympathy for him than with abhorrence of his crime, or
dread of its penalty.

If all that is assumed in this objection were admitted,
the practical inference would be that executions ought
not to be public. The question, whether they ought to
be public or private, is wholly distinct from the question
whether capital punishment is lawful. It may be a
sufficient argument against the publicity of executions,
if only a few of the spectators are affected in the manner
described in the objection ; but that, in general, they
who witness the scene are less averse than before to
commit capital crime, may be safely denied.

SECTION IV. WAR.

The power of the sword would be of but little avail
to the civil magistrate, if it were restricted to the inflic-
tion of punishment on those who have been appre-
hended, tried, and condemned. Government cannot be



WAB. 829

maintained without power to bring the violators of law
to trial. They will not present themselves voluntarily
in the courts of justice ; and they cannot be brought by
the mere influence of moral motives. Physical power
is indispensable ; and if government cannot use physi-
cal power, its operations may be effectually resisted, by
any band of lawless men who may choose to combine
against it. And this physical force must include the
power of the sword. Were the power of government
so restricted, that it must always, in suppressing insur-
rection and bringing the guilty to justice, abstain from
shedding blood, gangs of depredators would establish
their fortresses in the midst of the community, and sally
forth with the arms of war, whenever they choose, to
murder and plunder the peaceful citizens. The civil
ruler who should brandish a reed before them, instead
of being a terror to evil-doers, would be compelled to
retire from the unequal -contest. Iniquity, armed with
weapons of death, would never yield to laws which could
not be enforced with the power of the sword.

In an intelligent and virtuous community, the execu-
tion of the laws seldom requires an exertion of physical
strength. The disturbers of public order are too few
to hope that resistance of law could be successful. The
unarmed officer, perhaps emaciated with disease, lays
his hand on the sturdy culprit; and, overawed, he
yields submissively, and follows to prison, to await his
trial. Why is this? The military power of the
country sleeps behind this emaciated and feeble officer ;
and the culprit knows that his whisper would awaken a
host against which all resistance would be vain. This
is the secret of his mysterious tameness. This secret
influence, as a magic spell, attends the officers of justice
everywhere; and without it they would, like Samson
shorn of his locks, be as other men. Judges and jurors
28*



830 POWERS OP CIVIL GOVERNMENT. '

might announce their decisions from the courts of jus-
tice ; but they would be as ineffectual to secure the
rights of individuals, and the order of the community,
as a proclamation issued by a crowd casually assembled
in a market-place. The legislative assemblies might
publish their statutes ; but they would go forth with as
little power to control the actions of men, as a para-
graph of a newspaper. Government, however peace-
fully administered, is established on military power;
and, if this foundation be removed, the superstructure,
if it could retain its form for a time, must be overthrown
by the first tempest of insurrection.

If the power of the sword may be used to suppress
an insurrection of citizens, much more may it be used
to repel an invasion of foreign enemies. If the life of
a citizen murderer may be taken by the infliction of
capital punishment, no sufficient reason can be assigned
why the lives of foreign murderers should be spared.
Government is established to protect the rights of the
citizens ; and the sword is put into the hands of civil
rulers for this purpose by the highest authority in the
universe. It must, therefore, be right for government
to use this instrument, when necessary, against all who
oppose the peace and order of the community, whether
they be citizens or foreigners. The power of the sword
must include the power of waging necessary war.

The power of waging war, like that of imprisoning,
or of inflicting capital punishment, belongs to the
government, and not to the individual citizens ; and, for
the right exercise of it, the government is responsible.
All these powers may be abused ; and gross abuses of
them by wicked governments have greatly multiplied
the miseries of mankind. The innocent have often
been shut up in dungeons, or cruelly put to death by
public authority; and ambitious chieftains have ex-



WAR. 331

•

tended the ravages of war through unoffending countries ;
spreading everywhere terror, desolation, and death.
For all these abuses of power, the rulers are respon-
sible ; and the citizens also are responsible, so far as
they appoint and sustain such rulers ; but we must not,
to guard against such abuses, refuse to appoint any
civil rulers ; or refuse to invest them, when appointed,
with the powers necessary to sustain the government.
Great as have been the miseries which mankind have
suffered from abuse of these powers, the world, without
any civil government, would have exhibited a scene of
still greater miseries. The power of imprisoning, and
the power of the sword, are both necessary to the sup-
port of government; and, therefore, to the peace,
order, and happiness of the community : but the public
welfare, and the interests of private citizens, require
that these powers should be committed to none but vir-
tuous hands.

The Holy Scriptures furnish proof that war may be
lawful. God's ancient people waged numerous wars by
express divine command; and the pen of inspiration
has commended valor in battle as a virtue : ^ and David
gratefully acknowledged his military skill to be a gift
from God.2 ^ Roman military oflScer, having soldiers
under him, was commended by Jesus Christ, as a most
illustrious example of faith, without any exception
being made to his military office.^ Another Roman

1 Judges vi. 12 ; Pa. Ix. 12 ; Heb. xi. 34. « Ps. cxliv. 1.

■ Matt. viii. 9, 10. It has been objected to this argument that
the silence of Christ would equally justify the idolatry of' which
this heathen centurion had doubtless been guilty. But he was not
now an idolater ; and he did not present himself to Christ as such.
He did present himself as a military officer in the words ** having
soldiers under me.'' If to these words he had added, and I worship



832 POWBRS OF CITIL OOYERNMENT.

captain received special notice from heaven, and had
the honor conferred on him of being the first nncircam-
cised convert to Christianity.^ Bat no intimation was
given that the holding of a military commission was
unacceptable to the Head of the church. But we have
stronger proof from Scripture than that of mere silence.
The forerunner of Christ was divinely commissioned to
make ready a people for the Lord. Among those whom
he baptized, were soldiers who desired him to instruct
them in their duty. If the military service is unlawful,
it was their duty to abandon it ; and it was John's duty
to instruct them to this effect. But, on the contrary,
he commanded, "Be content with your wages." ^ It
would have been dishonest for them to receive wages,
and not perform the service for which the wages were
given. It is clear, therefore, that the Baptist's instruc-
tions implied the lawfulness of their continuing to serve
as soldiers. And if Christian men might lawfully be
captains and soldiers under tyrannical Roman emperors,
much more is it lawful to render military service under
Christian rulers.

Objection 1. — Natural religion condemns war, be-
cause it lessens the amount of human happiness. Reve-
lation decides that war proceeds from criminal lusts;*
and its moral character must agree with that of the
passions from which it originates.

Some persons have maintained that war, if not too
frequent or too long protracted, promotes national
prosperity, by cutting off a gangrenous species of popu-
lation, and awakening patriotism, energies, and talents,



the gods of my country ^ the objection before us would have been
valid. But who can believe that, in this case, the Saviour would
have commended him without excepting his idolatry ?

* Acts ch. X. « Luke iii. 14. • James iv. 1.



WAR. 333

which would otherwise have remained inactive and use-
less. Our present purpose does not require that we
should enter into a discussion of this subject. The
miseries of war are many and great. It is an evil, a
sore evil, and we prefer to admit the worst that may be
said concerning its pernicious influence on human hap-
piness. But what shall be the remedy for the evil?
Shall we, to prevent a nation from suffering the cala-
mities of war, deny to it the power of waging war ? It
is a revolting spectacle when two boxers meet and
mangle each other's bodies for a wager ; but shall we,
to prevent the evil, deprive them of their physical
strength ? The power of the sword is as necessary to
the strength of a government as muscular power is to
the strength of the physical frame. The power has
been sadly abused, as muscular power also has been ;
but to prevent the abuse by destroying the power, is as
if we would prevent the crimes of mankind by annihi-
lating the race. God has given men powers capable of
abuse, and holds them responsible for their proper ex-
ercise. This is his plan of moral discipline, and we
contravene his plan if we take from the hand of the
civil magistrate the sword which Qod has put into it.
We must not abolish capital punishment because tyrants
have abused the power of inflicting it, and have cut off
men's heads in sport. We must not abolish physical
strength because boxers have abused it to batter each
others' bodies. And we must not abolish the war-
making power because wicked rulers have abused it,
and have by means of it greatly multiplied human woes.
Virtue promotes human happiness, not by annihilating
the power to do mischief, but by rectifying the dispo-
sition.

War, like capital punishment, can have no other
necessity than that which arises from the crimes and



884 POWERS OF GITIL OOYBRNMENT.

evil passions of men. In every war, one at least of the
parties must be guilty of wrong, and responsible for the
horrible consequences. Nations are composed, for the
most part, of wicked men ; and the wars which blacken
the pages of history, have been wicked wars. ' Our
present purpose does not require that we should attempt
to justify them, or extenuate their enormities. We
inquire not whether the war-making power has been
rightly used by wicked men, but whether it is possible
to use it virtuously. Our forefathers, who engaged in
the War of the American Revolution, were imperfect
men; and, with the motives which prompted their
actions, we may admit that impure passions were
mingled ; but who will maintain that they offended God
and sinned against the interests of mankind, when they
gave their blood to establish liberty in the land, and
maintain the principles of liberty to which, in the face
of the world, they pledged their lives ? If Joshua, and
the Israelites whom he led into Canaan, can be justified
for the wars which they waged, on the ground that they
acted by Divine command, Washington and his compa-
triots may be justified, on the ground that Divine Provi-
dence manifestly called them to the bloody struggle for
the benefit of future generations.

Objection 2. — Although wars were waged by Divine
command under the Old Testament dispensation, the
Christian dispensation is characterized by peace. Christ
is called the "Prince of Peace ;"^ his birth was an-
nounced with the declaration, "On earth peace;'** and
when his religion shall spread tljrough the world, pro-
phecy gives assurance that war will ceane.^ The pre-
cepts of Christ expressly enjoin forgiveness of injuries,
and forbid men to avenge themselves by doing harm to
others.



' Isa. ix. 6. ' Luke ii. 14. Isa. ii. 4.



w A B. 835

Christianitj will abolish war, capital panishmcnt,
and imprisonment, by abolishing crime, not by denying
to goTemment the power to punish it. Nations will
beat their swords into ploaghshares, and their spears
into pmning'hooks, when all the people are righteous,
and the knowledge of the Lord covers the earth, as
the waters do the sea. But, until that happy day
arrives, the wicked will do wickedly, and will need to
be restrained by civil power. The religion of Christ
is eminently pacific, and teaches that wo ought, if
possible, as much as in us lies, to live pe&ceably with
all men ; but it does not create a possibility of universal
peace, while wickedness abounds. The mission of
Christ into the world was designed to make peace
between God and men; and it will ultimately diffuse
peace over the earth ; but this was not its immediate
effect. He said, (< I came not to send peace, but a
sword." ^ While crimes and injuries continue, the
civil magistrate has his duty to perform ; and Chris-
tianity does not release him from the obligation, or
paralyze his arm. It teaches men to love their neigh-
bors ; but this morality, though more fully unfolded in
the gospel, was an essential principle of the Mosaic
law. Even the sublime duty of doing good to enemies,
was enforced in the old dispensation,^ at the very time
that wars were waged by divine command. What was
consistent then, must be consistent now.

Objection 3. — Governments cannot change the rela-
tions which subsist between men. The armies which
meet in hostile array, consist of men whom God has
made of one blood, and whom he has commanded to
love one another ; and human governments cannot make
it their duty to kill one another.

> Matt. X. 34. « Prov. xxv. 21.



886 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

The assumption that governments cannot change the
relations which subsist between men, was examined in
its application to the relation between an executioner
and a murderer, who is about to be hanged. In this
case, the human government does not require its officer
to disobey God; but the whole proceeding has the
divine sanction ; and this is equally true in the case of
a just and necessary war, waged by an injured and op-
pressed people, in the protection of their rights, and
for the preservation of their lives. It is not necessary,
in order to answer the objection, that we should attempt
to justify unjust or unnecessary wars ; but if a single
case of justifiable war has existed, or can even be sup-
posed, the objection fails.

Objection 4. — War, instead of securing the rights
of any people, multiplies aggressions. Justice and
kindness to all, will command the respect and approba-
tion of all, and will insure protection more effectually
than armies and navies. No nation in Europe could be
led to battle against an innocent and unoffending people,
known to be without warlike preparations, and unwilling
to take arms.

The founders of Pennsylvania entertained the views
presented in this objection, and chose to expose them-
selves to the hostility of American savages, rather than
arm themselves for defence. The success of their
policy has often been urged as an argument for its
universal adoption. But the colony of Bassa Cove,
established in Liberia, on the same principles, by the
Pennsylvania Colonization Society, was almost annihi-
lated by the neighboring tribes, whose attacks were
invited by its defencelessness ; and it owed its preser-
vation ultimately to the military preparations of neigh-
boring colonies. A single example like this, demon-
strates the impolicy, not to say the guilt, of neglecting to



WAR. ^7



provide necessary means of defence. In the ordinary
administration of government, the civO magistrate very
rarely finds it necessary to use the sword against the
citizens ; yet a wise people will have him armed with
it ; and there is not a nation in Europe, whose citizens
would feel safe from their fellow-citizens, if the power
of the sword were taken from the hands of the rulers.
If this power is necessary to protect citizens of the
same nation from each other, much more is it necessary
to protect them from neighboring nations. The suppo-
sition that a nation is safer for being without a pro-
tecting government, is a delusive fancy, and were it
true, all civil government ought to be abolished ; and
then the intercourse, not only of nations with nations,
but also of citizens with citizens, would be rendered
more just, because the rights of all would be without
protection.

Objection 5. — The precepts of the gospel, and the
example of the first Christians, teach us to suffer
patiently what the providence of God may bring upon
us, and not to fight against wrong. Christianity gained
its conquests by martyrdom, and not by carnal wea-
pons.

The first Christians obeyed the precepts of the gos-
pel, when they submitted to the powers that be, even
while suffering oppression from them ; and when they
committed to civil government the protection of their
persons and rights against individuals. In all this they
acknowledged civil government to be an ordinance of
God, and honored the divine institution. Paul procured
the protection of a Roman oflScer against the forty con-
spirators who sought his life, and accepted a military
escort to save him from their malice.^ He did not
herein distrust the providence of God, but dutifully

^ Acts xxiii. 17-31.
29



\St\H r<'WKItH or CIVIL 00VEK5XB5T.

i*Mi|>t('y4M| t)H« Tftiftin.'* of iiefcnce which that prorideiice
IiimI Till timlu'tt Tor liii« pruti'Ctiofi. Hid religion was not
n ItitiiiitiMittii whioli ciioMi to suffer death, rather than
ikivoku l)im proivctum which could be granted only by

ViovwttMHHiNT rightfully poi^sesses the power to
K>Ahtot thu lituuay uf itidivhluttls^ when it is necessary
iu |Mvv«))it iigiM V. UilHcuItjr mtiy arise in determining
Vh\> o^i*%>it lo vvlnoli tliiH power ou«$ht to be applied, and
i>)i\> |»H»|»vi ui\nU> iuut i;\turtt of its application; bat the
M^lil. u» uwJiviKo iU ^liun necessary^ can scarcely be
\^h*>*aM\»u\hI. Tho tVKpontiibility of protecting from
»ujm v» iihpluiA iho pot^icH^Moii of the power necessary
h>» ihu |»m|»v»«n>. V»i iiuliviUutil as(«auhed may» in self-
iU'lVuoo^ .xviM> tho ikint v>r tiis ticj^miUnt^ and hold it as
hnkf^ .4,i iluao IN. juxt »^iouncl to fcur injury ; and gorern-
luvui, ol^»vl^^^^U vviiU I lu) i^;spon8<ibiIity of protecting the
viit'/«v>»»c^ o«uiHv>i h<vvv> lo*s^ ponor tbaa th^ citizens them-
v U\K4 To Uohv ilhit i;t>vcrttmout hiis a right to e^ter-
ouv\) iiu<i |K>v^v>t\ u< vtnutilly to vltiuy that government

t'tko ga^i> to \^iiioh ihis*^ powvr hat^ be^n judged to be
^HrV^i^n^ sippiiot^bliN ist- ihuc of an aHon people^ not
v(u»iIuuU u»» ciUAoiicviiip hi iho comm unity wher^ they
viNivli. bVuuci oi i^%>voiumottC which impose hat lifitle






SLAYBBT. 839

restraint on the liberties of the people, are not adapted
to rude tribes of men ; and a government which ex-
tends over distinct tribes, differing widely from each
other in intellectual and moral condition, ought to
adapt itself to the character of each. If the tribes
occupied distinct territories, a republican govern-
ment might be the best adapted to one of them, and
a despotism to the other. It would then be unwise,
if they are brought into the same territory, to institute
the same form of government for them both. Hence,
when two such tribes are in the providence of God
brought together, wisdom and justice require that the
government which is spread over them, and which more
or less restricts the natural liberty of all, should make
these restrictions greater for the less improved tribe,
than for the other.^

All government is a bond. We call a government
free, when the bondage which it imposes, is the least
possible that can preserve peace and order in a highly
civilized community. In despotic governments, the
people have been the douXoi, slaves, of the monarch,
who, in many cases, has had the power to put them to
death at his pleasure. This is most abject slavery.

An alien tribe may be placed in a separate portion
of the territory ; and may, as a whole, be under the
direct restraint of government. So the Israelites in
Egypt were placed in the land of Goshen, and were



^ ** The best form of government for any people is the best that ita
present moral and social condition renders pi'aciicahle. A people
may be so entirely surrendered to the infltience of passion, and so
feebly influenced by moral restraint^ that a government which relied
upon moral restraint could not exist for a day. In this case, a
subordinate and inferior principle yet remains — the principle of
fear ; and the only resort is to a government of force, or a military
despotism." — Wayland^s Moral Science, p. 354.



840 POWERS OF CIVIL OOVEBVMSNT.

under task -masters,^ appointed oyer them by the king.
This is political slavery. In other cases, the alien
people have been distributed through the commnnity,
and have been divided itmong the families, in a relation
of Hubjootion to the head of the family, as their master.
This is domestic slavery. The master, in this arrange-
ment, like the task-master in the former, derives his
authority from the government ; and the slave is kept
in subjection to him by the power of the government.
In this view, ho is a civil officer, and has sometimes
pi>8sesM^d the power of life and death over the slaves,
like the supreme ruler in a despotic government.

lu domestic slavery, the common method of distri-
buting the alien people among the families of the com-
munity, has been by sale. The master, by purchase,
becomes the proprietor of his slave. This relation
modifies that of task -master, or civil despot ; and the
incorporation of the slave into the family, gives a favor-
able opportuity for the formation and exercise of similar
ttftVetions, to those which appropriately belong to the
parental and filial relations. The master becomes the
friend and protector of his slave ; and kindness on the
one part, and fidelity on the other, have often marked
the relation — and would always attend it, if the parties
were duly virtuous. In these particulars, domestic
slavery has an advantage, in respect of benevolence,
over bondage in the other form.

When men are imprisoned for crime, government
claims the right of requiring that they shall labor — as
in the case of our penitentiaries. The right to make
this requirement, applies equally to slaves. Govern-
ments are maintained at expense ; and a despotic govern-
ment, in which strong military force is needed, requires

» Ex. i. 11.



SLAYERT. 341

more expense than a free government ; and hence, a
rude people must pay more for being governed, than a
people who need less restraint. It would be unjust for
an alien people to enjoy all the benefits of a govern-
ment to which they are not adapted, at the expense of
the intelligent and polished people who have instituted
it for themselves. And, moreover, were such a people
not required to labor, the restraint on their personal
liberty, which their condition requires, could not readily
be imposed ; and the power of government would need
to be exercised in some other way, less favorable to
their good, and to the public peace. If that condition
seems unequal, it should be remembered that the
arrangements of Providence have always rendered the
condition of the intelligent and refined more advan-
tageous than that of the ignorant and rude. If it be
said that benevolence ought to assign to them a position
in society above that to which they are adapted, the
reply is, that civil governments were not instituted to
dispense benevolence, but to protect rights. Benevo-
lence is an individual^ rather than a political virtue.
Civil government cannot undertake to effect a change
in the character and habits of the slaves ; and to place
them in a higher position, without adapting them to it,
would not be benevolence, either to them or to the com-
munity.

The power of the sword, whether over citizens or
aliens, extends to both life and liberty. Over citizens,
it affects life by capital punishment, and liberty by im-
prisonment. Over aliens, it affects life by war, and
liberty by subjugation or slavery. As the power of
governments became exercised with more mildness, im-
prisonment was substituted, in many cases, for capital
punishment ; and slavery, for exterminating war. With-
out doubt slavery often originated in wars which were

29*



342 POWERS OP CIVIL GOVBRNMBNT.

unjust and cruel ; but it was an abatement of their
cruelty.

Who must Judge.

We have seen that it may be necessary to restrict
personal liberty, for the sake of protecting rights, and
securing order in the community ; and that the power
of restricting belongs to government. Government is
an agent of society; and the right to judge when
government should so restrict personal liberty, belongs
properly to society. Like the power to take vengeance,
it does not belong to individuals ; and the irfdividual
who enslaves a fellow-man, is a « man stealer,**^ in the
language of Scripture, and violates moral obligation.

The governments of society have frequently been less
free than the character of the people required ; and a
degree of bondage has been imposed, which was not
necessary for public good. But, notwithstanding the
errors which may have been committed, the right to
organize its government belongs to society ; and, there-
fore, society must judge in what cases personal liberty
ought to be restricted, and the proper mode and extent
of the restriction.

Relation of Master,

From what has been said, it is manifest that no man
can justly claim from society the unrestricted enjoy-
ment of personal liberty. A well-regulated society will
not impose unnecessary restrictions, and will protect
the right from the encroachment of individuals. But,
as each individual is bound to yield his personal liberty
to the necessary restrictions which society may impose,
so he is bound to respect such restrictions, when imposed

» 1 Tim. i. 10.



SLAVERY. 343

on others. The individual who forcibly enslaves a free
man, is guilty of a crime against society, as well as
against the individual enslaved. When the regulations
of society have put a man in the condition of a slave,
he who sustains to him the relation of master, is not
chargeable with criminal violation of personal liberty,
and is not bound to ^jnancipate him. A military
commander has no right to release a soldier from the
restraints of military service ; a jailor has no right to
release from confinement a prisoner whom society has
committed to his charge ; and, on the same principle, a
master violates his obligation to society, if he emanci-
pates one who, according to the regulations of society,
ought to be held in bondage.

In opposition to the conclusion which we have
reached, many persons maintain that the holding ijf
slaves is sinful ; and that masters are therefore under
moral obligation to emancipate them. This question
is one of great practical importance to conscientious
Christian masters in the southern portion of the United
States, where slavery is established by law.

It has been shown that a state, consisting of persons
qualified for a hi^ degree of civil liberty, if it has in
its midst an alien people who are not thus qualified, and
whose unrestricted freedom would be injurious to the
peace and happiness of the community, has a right to
hold them in bondage by military force. This right
our Federal Constitution appears to recognise fully as
belonging to the states of our Union ; nearly half of
the states now exercise it, and others have claimed and
exercised it in time past, where slavery has since been
abolished. If this right of a state be admitted, argu-
ment is scarcely needed to prove that individual citizens,
under whose custody the social regulations have placed
the enslaved people, may lawfully hold them in the



344 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

relation which these regulations have established. The
will of the society ne^ds to be obeyed, unless it can be
shown to be contrary to the will of God ; and, to learn
the will of God on the subject, our best appeal is to the
Holy Scriptures.

In the first book of the Bible the origin of slavery is
thus recorded : " Cursed be Canaan ; a servant of ser-
vants shall he be unto his brethren."^ This curse was
denounced by the patriarch Noah, because of a crime
committed by his son Ham, the father of Canaan ; and
it was probably recorded in part for the encouragement
of the Israelites in their wars against the descendants
of Canaan. The curse of Ham's transgression fell
heavily on the Canaanites ; but it was not confined to
this branch of his family. The enslaved negroes in our
midst are his descendants, and their condition agrees
with this ancient prediction. The fact that the slavery
of Ham's descendants was predicted, does not prove
that the enslaving of them was right ; for the crucifixion
of Christ was predetermined in the counsels of God,
and foretold by ancient prophets ; and yet the agents
in effecting it were held guilty for the act, which they
are said to have perpetrated with "wicked hands." ^
But the words of Noah are more than a mere prediction.
They are a denunciation of God's displeasure at the
sin of Ham, and an explanation of the degradation
which has fallen on his posterity.

As the sons of Adam are bound to submit patiently
to the curse which requires them to earn their bread
in the sweat of their face, so the sons of Ham are
bound to submit patiently to the curse which has doomed
them to bondage. To the sons of Adam, who come
into the world depraved, the labor, which the curse

» Gen. ix. 25. » Acts ii. 23.



S L A V E R Y. 345

denounced, is in fact a blessing; and its beneficial
effects on the fallen race demonstrate that the offended
Judge in the midst of wrath remembered mercy. So
the bondage which Ham's descendants endure in our
land is overruled by the wisdom and benevolence of
Providence to their good. An alleviation of the curse
which has fallen on them consists in the adaptedness of
their mental constitution to endure the degradation of
slavery; and they have, therefore, been preserved from
the waste and prospective annihilation to which the
Indian tribes of America have been subjected. The
Africans have multiplied in their slavery; have been
better provided for than they would have been in the
land of their forefathers ; have been protected from the
tyranny of oppressive kings, and the miseries of deso-.
lating wars ; and, above all, have been brought under
the influence of the gospel, in circumstances far more
favorable to their civilization and evangelization than
heathen nations generally enjoy.

. But these benefits, it may be said, were not contem-
plated by those who enslaved them. Granted; but
they ought to be contemplated by every wise and be-
nevolent friend of the African race. He may learn
from the prophetical curse denounced by Noah, that
their slavery is a part of the mysterious plan according
to which God is governing the world ; and he will be
careful not rashly to oppose this plan, lest haply he be
found fighting against God. The benevolent design of
Providence in bringing the sons of Africa into bondage
in the United States, is too manifest to be misinter-
preted. It maybe regarded as a stupendous missionary
movement, accomplishing more in the evangelizing ot
the heathen than all the missionary operations of
Christian churches throughout the world. Let no man
oppose this movement by forbidding the holding of



846 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMElVif.

slaves, until he can produce divine authority for the
prohibition.

The book of Genesis presents a further account of
slavery in the history of Abraham, the friend of God,
and father of the faithful. This great and good man
was commanded to circumcise the servants born in his
house, and bought with money ;^ and, in the solemn
covenant transaction in which this command was given,
there is no intimation that the existence of slavery in
his family was displeasing to God. What was the pre-
cise extent of Abraham's power over these servants, we
have not the means of knowing. In many countries
the power of life and death has been held by kings
over their subjects, and by masters over their slaves.
If one of Abraham's servants had perpetrated a crimo
worthy of death, what would have been the process of
his trial and condemnation, we know not ; but we
know that the patriarch so far claimed a right over the
lives of his servants that he employed them to the num-
ber of three hundred and eighteen^ in military service
against the five kings that invaded the country which
he inhabited.

Numerous passages of the Old Testament contain
historic references to slavery. In the law given by
Moses, it was expressly provided that the Hebrews
might take to themselves bond-men from the neighbor-
ing heathen nations ; ^ and in the decalogue, designed
for universal and perpetual obligation, the relation of
master and servant is as clearly recognised as that of
husband and wife, or of parent and child ; and the
master's right of property in his servant is not only re-
cognised, but also protected even against covetousness.*

In the New Testament we have frequent allusions to

* Gen. xvii. 13.- ^ Gen. xiv. 14. » Lev. xxv. 44. * Ex. xx. 10, 17.



SLAVERY. 347

slavery, without any prohibition of it, or intimation of
its unlawfulness. The Roman centurion, whose faith
Jesus commended in the words, " I have not found so
great faith, no, not in Israel,"^ was a slaveholder, as
appears from the words, " My servant (slave) lieth at
home sick of the palsy." ^ The Roman laws invested the
master with the power of life and death over his slaves ;
and the fact that this centurion held slaves under this
law did not, in the estimation of the Saviour, render
him unworthy of the high commendation which was
bestowed on him, and which has been recorded for our
instruction. If the holding of slaves is sinful, it would
have been a suitable occasion for our Lord when com-
mending this slaveholder so highly, to have instructed
his disciples to avoid imitation of him in this particular.
But he gave no such caution ; and, further, no such
caution can be found anywhere in the New Testament.
Slaves are, in the New Testament, commanded to
obey their masters, as an act of obedience to God, just
as children are commanded to obey their parents, and
subjects to obey their rulers.^ Among the masters who
were to be obeyed, some are called "believing mas-
ters," and these were to be accounted "worthy of all
honor."* It is hence clear that there were slaveholders
in the apostolic churches, and that these men, in view
of the relation which they held as masters, were, by
apostolic instruction, to be accounted worthy, not of
reproach and excommunication, but of honor. It de-
serves to be remarked that Paul has added to his
instructions on this point these significant words : " If
any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome

* Matt. viii. 5-13. ^ Matt. viii. 6, compared with verse 9, and
Imke vii. 2, 3, 8, 10, in which places the more definite word
*vXof is used. » Eph. vi. 5-9 ; Col. iii. 22-25. * 1 Tim. vi. 1, 2.



348 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

words, even the words of <Jur Lord Jesus Christ, and to
the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is
proud, knowing nothing.**^

The Scriptures furnish a yet stronger argument for
the lawfulness of slaveholding, in the fact that they
instruct masters how to exercise authority over their
slaves.^ If the relation of master were unlawful, to
instruct them how to exercise the authority of master, '-''
would be to instruct them how to sin. The Scriptures
nowhere instruct us in what manner we ought to com-
mit idolatry, perjury, adultery, theft, or extortion.
They nowhere tell those who, in violation of the ma-
trimonial law, live in unchaste intercourse with each
other, how they must act towards each other in the un-
lawful relation which they have assumed. The mode
of Scriptural instruction in all such cases is, « Let him
that stole steal no more.'*^ So, if the holding of slaves
were unlawful, the command would have been, " Cease
from the sin of slaveholding ; at once emancipate your
slaves." It may be objected that this would have dis-
turbed the arrangements of society, and excited so
great prejudice against the gospel, as to obstruct its
progress. And what then ? Did the apostles of Christ
make compromise with sin that the gospel might spread
without obstruction ? But, say some, they thought it
wiser to leave the principles of the gospel to extirpate
slavery gradually, than to attempt its immediate extir-
pation by commanding universal emancipation. If so,
we ought to imitate their example. They tore up the
very foundations of heathen society, and turned the
world upside down, by preaching that men should
abandon idolatry, and all vice, and repent and turn to
God ; but they tolerated slavery for the time at least ;

^ 1 Tim. vi. 3, 4. 2 Eph. vi. 9 ; Col. iv. 1. » Eph. iv. 28.



«



SLAVERY. 349

admitted slaveholders into the churches, and taught
them how to act the part of masters, without intimating
to them at what time, or in what circumstances eman-
cipation should be effected. The conclusion is unavoid-
able that the wisdom from above, by which the apostles
acted, did not account the holding of slaves sinful.

Another step in the argument still remains. As if in
foresight of the disquietudes which the slavery question
has engendered, a very brief epistle, containing little
else than an apostolic decision of the question, has been
preserved, and now constitutes a part of the sacred
canon. Onesimus, an unconverted slave, ran away from
his Christian master Philemon ; and, in a distant country,
was converted under the preaching of Paul. In this
case, the question was presented for the apostle's de-
cision, whether the absent master had a right to the
services of his fugitive slave. If no such right exists,
the servant was, of right, free ; and, being now far from
the master's power, no command to emancipate him was
necessary, and no disturbance to society would have
been caused by permitting him to enjoy his freedom.
Paul has said to slaves, << If thou mayest be made free,
use it rather;"^ and, since Onesimus was now in fact
free, if it had been right for him to continue free, the
apostle would have decided that he ought to prefer
freedom, and not return again to bondage. Why, then,
did he send him back to the bondage from which he
had fled ? and why has this brief epistle, containing the
apostle's decision of the question, been transmitted to
us, as a part of the Holy Scriptures, for our instruction
in righteousness? In the few lines of this inspired

' 1 Cor. vii. 21. The interpretation which supposes the pronoun
*' it" to stand for the noun bondage, does not appear to me to give
the true sense of this passage.
30



850 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

letter, the small still voice of God comes down to us,
through the lapse of centuries, commanding the tumults
of the slavery agitation to cease ; and directing us to
admit the rights of the master, and appeal to his
benevolence for any improvement in the condition of
his slave. ^

The arguments on the other side of the question will
now be considered.

Argument 1. — The passages of Scripture which have
been quoted, speak of servants, not of slaves; and,
therefore, give no countenance to slavery.

^ The following extracts from Scott's Gommentarj, give a correct
view of the design and import of this epistle.

** When the apostle was imprisoned at Rome, Onesimus, a slave
of Philemon, having, as it is generally thought, been guilty of
some dishonesty, left his master and fled to that city, though at
the distance of several hundred miles. When he came thither,
curiosity, or some similar motive, induced him to attend on St.
Paul's ministry, which it pleased God to bless for his conversion.
After he had given very satisfactory proof of a real change, and
manifested an excellent disposition by his suitable behavior,
which had greatly endeared him to the apostle, he judged it proper
to send him back to his master, to whom he wrote this epistle, in
order to procure Onesimus a more favorable reception than he
otherwise could have expected.

" * Onesimus' signifies profitable ; in allusion to which the
apostle allowed that he had not formerly deserved that name,
having been * unprofitable ;' . . . so that he was become * profit-
able,' both to Philemon and the apostle. He was prepared to be
a useful servant to the former.

" Onesimus was Philemon's legal property ; and St. Paul had
required and prevailed with Onesimus to return to him ....
He would gladly have kept him at Rome, to minister to him in
his confinement, which Onesimus would willingly have done . . .
But he would not do anything of this kind without his [Philemon's]
consent .... He knew that Philemon would no longer consider
Onesimus merely as a slave, but view him as * above a slave,' even
as a brother beloved."



SLAVERY. 361

The Scriptures speak of hired servants, and also of
bond-servants, bond-men, or slaves. The latter class
of servants is intended, in all the passages relied on in
the preceding arguments, as appears from the words
employed in the Greek text, and especially from the
word douXoq^ which signifies definitely a slave, one who
serves at the will of another.

Argument 2. — In slavery men are treated as brutes.
Brutes may be made subservient to the happiness of
their owners : but slaves are men — ahd all men have a
right to use their bodies and minds for the promotion of
their own happiness. Slavery invests the master with
the right to govern the minds and bodies of as many as
he can, by purchase, bring under his power, and to use
them for the promotion of his happiness, in disregard
of their interests for time and eternity. These con-
siderations prove slavery to be unlawful.

Human beings have, in common with brutes, bodies
which are capable of performing labor, and which need
food for their support, and shelter for defence from cold
and storm. The righteous man will regard the life of
his beast ; and, while he requires its labor, will not
overtask it, and will give it the needed food and shelter.
It may be benevolent for him to extend like treatment
to. a poor fellow-man, to whom it may be a great favor
to give food, raiment, and comfortable habitation, to
himself, his wife, and children, in return for his labor.
If this were all that is intended, when it is said that
slaves are treated as brutes, the comparison, so well
calculated to bring odium on slavery, would be harm-
less.

But it is said that the master may require the service
of his slaves, for the promotion of his own happiness
exclusively, and in disregard of their interests for time
and eternity. This may be equally true, and is equally



352 POWERS OF CIVIL OOYERNMENT.

reprehensible, when men employ a poor laborer from
day to day, for their own convenience and advantage,
in disregard of his interests. The poor man's life may
be spent in labor for them, and his strength exhausted
by their oppressive exactions, as effectually as if he
were a slave. Masters are bound to give to their
slaves that which is equal, and to promote their inte-
rests for time and eternity. They may neglect their
duty, as fathers may neglect their duty to their chil-
dren ; but the relation which a master sustains, binds
him to the duty ; and in this respect compares favor-
ably with the relation which the employer holds to the
poor laborer whose services he receives for stipulated
wages. The neglect of the master, like the neglect of
the father, is no valid argument against the lawfulness
of the relation.

To whatever corner of the earth, or page of its
history, we turn our eyes, we shall see misery abound-
ing.- Sin has filled the world with woe. Evil-doers
have rendered it necessary that the power of the sword
should restrain them ; and when the sword has been
held by wicked hands, the heart of humanity sickens
at the thought of the sorrows which have been endured.
Ambitious conquerors have drenched the earth with
blood, and cruel tyrants have wrung the hearts of their
subjects with anguish. The seemingly peaceful arrange-
ment by which property is divided among its owners,
becomes the occasion, even in a land so blest as ours,
of fraud and extortion. The man of wealth buys, at
the least possible, price, the services of his poor neigh-
bor, in unfeeling disregard of his interests, and with
far less concern for the wife and children dependent on
the wages received, than for the horses which draw his
splendid carriage. It is not slavery, but human depra-
vity, which treats men as brutes. They who purchase



SLAVERY. 353

the life-time service of a poor man, day by day, may as
effectually brutalize him, as. he who purchases it at
once, and when sickness and old age come upon him,
instead of providing for him as if he were a slave, may
leave him to die unpitied as a brute.

If all the relations in human society, which have
been the occasions of crime and suffering, were to be
banished from the world, not one would be left, and it
would be necessary for God to reform the whole system
of his government over the world. But the wisdom of
his system must not be estimated by man's abuse of it.
Men to whose hands the sword of government has been
intrusted, are powers ordained of God for good,^
Their authority, when exercised according to the will
of God, is a terror to evil-doers, and a praise to them
that do well. Such authority in the hands of David,
made him a blessing to ancient Israel ; and such autho-
rity in the hands of Washington, made him the de-
liverer and father of his country. So the proper exer-
cise of a master's authority blesses his slaves. He
receives the aliens, and makes them of his household,
treating them, not as brutes, but rather as sons. He
protects them from fraud and violence, provides for
their wants, teaches them, by wise and kind discipline,
habits of industry, as useful to themselves as to him,
and instructs them in the way to heaven. Such a
master is indeed "worthy of all honor."

Argument 3. — The services of the day-laborer are
purchased with his consent; but the slave has never
consented to the authority which his master claims.
All just government derives its powers from the consent
of the governed ; and, therefore, that of a master over
his slaves is without right.

^ Rom. xiii. 1-4.
30*



SSI POWERS OP CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

TIh^ d;ftT-I;jiborer would not consent to toil for his
simiiiT w;i$essr if k^ ^^^ fi^^^ access to the store-house
of hb ofmleni neighbor; but if he takes the bread
which anolher man has hoarded up, he is charged with
tkoft^ and punished bv law ; and if he resists the exe-
cuiiv^n of ike law« ii is at the peril of his life. He
con$^ni$ to toil, therefore, because he fears the sword
which hang$ orer him. The slave consents to toil,
because he fears the rod. Neither of them has con-
senteti to put the sword or the rqd into the hand of
him who wields it ; and society does not ask the con-
sent of either. The arrangements of society for the
distribution of property and power, were made before
either of them was born. If no government can be
just but that which has the consent of the individual
governed, all coercion will be unrighteous ; and all
restraint on evil-doers will be a violation of their rights.

ARorxiKXT 4. — Society cannot change the relations
natuniUy subsisting between individuals. The African
is my neighbor, my brother ; and if I have no right to
enslave my brother^ society cannot give me a right to
hold him in bondage.

This argument, if admitted, would prove too much.
The sheriff, whose duty it becomes to hang a criminal,
sees in that criminal a neighbor, a brother, whom he has
no right to seize and hang at his pleasure. The jailor,
when required to keep a fellow-man in prison, sees in
him a neighbor, a brother, whom he has no right to
deprive of personal liberty. The soldier, who is ordered
to battle, sees brother men before him, whose blood, he,
as an individual, has no right to shed. Now, if the
argument is valid, the sheriff must not hang, the jailor
must not detain in prison, and the soldier must not kill.
But the argument is fallacious. We have shown that
society has a right to inflict capital punishment, to im-



SLAVERY. 365

prison offenders, and to wage war. Society is not a
mere abstraction, but a combination of human beings ;
and the rights of society must in some way appertain
to the individuals composing it. If society has a right
to perform an act, it cannot be wrong for any and
every individual in the society to participate in it. If
society has a right to command the act, some one has
a right to obey; If society ordains the existence of
slavery, he who opposes its existence, offends against
the rights of society, as truly as he who opposes capi-
tal punishment, imprisonment, or war, which society
has ordered.

Argument 5. — The precept, "Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself,'' requires us to cherish as tender
and delicate a respect for the right which the meanest
individual possesses over the means of happiness bestowed
upon him by God, as we cherish for our own right over
our own means of happiness. The principle of the pre-
cept is absolutely subversive of the principle of slavery.
That of the one is entire equality of right; that of the
other, is the entire absorption of the rights of one in
the rights of the other.

In this, which is the chief argument from the Scrip-
tures against slavery, there is a fallacy. The extent
of rights is confounded with their sacredness. The
precept requires us to cherish a tender and delicate
respect for the rights of the meanest individual ; but it
does not require us to make his rights equal in extent
to our own. On the contrary, the very terms in which
the argument is stated, imply that the means of happi-
ness bestowed on him by the Creator, may not be equal
to those bestowed on us. It is not true, that the prin-
ciple of the precept is equality in the extent of rights ;
and the principle of slavery does not oppose a tender
and delicate respect for the rights of the slave. The
two are therefore not inconsistent with each other. A



856 POWERS OF CIYIL GOYEBNMENT.

tender and delicate respect for tlie rights of woman,
is not inconsistent with the fact, that, whether in the
married or the single state, her rights are not perfectly
commensarate with those of the other sex.

The principle of slavery is not an absolute absorption
of the rights of the slave in those of the master. Were
this true, no master would be punishable for the murder
of his slave. Slaves have their rights; and the law
and public opinion, as well as the Scripture precept
cited in the argument, require these rights to be
respected.

Argument 6. — Another precept of Scripture enjoins,
^^ All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them." Now, the master would
not desire to be held in bondage by his slave ; and,
therefore, if he holds the slave in bondage, he violates
this precept.

This argument will prove too much, if its application
of the precept be admitted to be just. The sheriff who
is about to hang a murderer, may argue, were I in the
murderer's place, I would not desire to be hung. The
jailor who is about to turn the key of the prison-door,
may argue, were I in the place of the prisoner, I
would desire the prison-door to be left open. That can-
not be a correct application of the Scripture precept,
which would make these officers neglect duties so impor-
tant to society ; and equally wrong is its application to
the case of the slave. The murderer, the imprisoned
felon, and the discontented slave, may all desire that
liberty should be proclaimed through the land ; but the
Scripture precept does not require that they should
therefore be turned loose on society. It requires that
we divest ourselves of selfishness, in deciding how we
should act towards others. This is the manifest spirit
and intent of the precept. It limits our wishes on the



•



SLAVERY. 357

one hand, and oar actions on the other, to what is right
and reasonable according to subsisting relations. In
view of the mischiefs which would result, I ought not
to desire that the murderer, the felon, and the slave,
should be turned loose on society, even if I myself
were the person ; and therefore it is not my duty to
turn such persons loose, if society has intrusted them
to my charge.

Argument 7. — The influence of slavery is unfavorable
to virtue, both on the master and the slave ; and unfa-
vorable also to national prosperity. From its injurious
tendency, natural religion rightly infers that it is con-
trary to the will of God.

Relations and conditions in human life, which are in
themselves lawful, frequently become the occasions of
crime and consequent suffering. A wise and virtuous
man prayed to God: "Give me neither poverty nor
riches ; feed me with food convenient for me ; lest I be
full, and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord ? or lest
I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain."^ Wealth and poverty are not crimes, but they
may become the occasions of crime ; and if natural reli-
gion should, on Agur's authority, or that of experience,
account them unfavorable to virtue, and therefore crim-
inal in the sight of God, it would err greatly in its final
conclusion.

In the Southern States a large part of the population
consists of negroes, who are naturally without enter-
prise, indolent and improvident. Among the white
inhabitants, many are wealthy planters, whose affluence
enables them to live in ease and pleasure. In such a
population it would be unreasonable to expect so great
a prevalence of virtue as in a community where the

* Prov. XXX. 8, 9.



t

SA8 rowKKS OF civil goyerhmest.

oxtromon of wonlth and poverty are unknows. And
fri^m u community of the latter kind may be reasonably
oxpootod a larger amount of productive indnstryy and
fonncquontly of national prosperity. If, in comparing
tho Statoai which exclude slavery with those in which it
oxintdi IcM of virtue and general prosperity is foond
iu the lattor» it is unjust to account slavery the only
cau!(o« and tho criminal cause, of the deficiency. Why
nhould slavery bo held responsible, rather than the
divorsiity of population ? and why should one be acconnted
a iMnminal causo^ and not the other ?

Whon natural religion would learn the moral cha-
raotor of 8»lavory from its effects in the Southern States,
it should inquire what would be the condition of these
StatO!i» with thoir present population, if slavery were
abolivHhod. Would there be more virtue, more pros-
pority? At present, if we cannot claim full equality
with our northern brethren in these particulars, we may,
without immodest boasting, claim to surpass many
eountrios on earth in which domestic slavery does not
exist* Shall we infer that these countries fall below
us heeause they have not the institution of slavery?
This would he a legitimate inference, if the argument
whieh we are considering were valid. But, without
aserlhing to slavery our superiority to these countries,
we do attribute to it much of the virtue and prosperity
with whieh we are blessed. Virtue and piety are not
unk)\owu among us. Wo have slaveholders who re-
semble Abrahanu or Philemon, or that other slaveholder
of whom Christ said, (^ I have not found so great faith, no
not in Israel.** Not only are many slaveholders bright
examples of piety, but the religion of Christ has blessed
thousands of the slave population, and made them happy
in their bondage as the Lord's freemen and heirs of
his heavenly kingdom. With religion and virtue, we



SLAVERY. 359

enjoy tranquillity and prosperity beyond what could be
hoped for with our present population, if our present
social organization were dissolved.

In judging what our condition would be if slavery
were abolished, we are not left to abstract reasoning.
The effects of the Emancipation Act in the British West
Indies have demonstrated that, in such a population,
slavery is far more favorable to virtue and national
prosperity than emancipation.^ If natural religion will
compare the present with the former condition of these
British colonies, she may rightly infer that slavery is
not contrary to the will of God.

Argument 8. — The law of Moses made effectual pro-
vision for the abolition of slavery, by commanding that a
fugitive slave should not be delivered to his master. It
is impossible for slavery to be continued where this law
is enforced ; and we have, therefore, in this precept,
direct proof that the continuance of slavery is contrary
to the will of God.

The law referred to reads thus : " Thou shalt not

deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped

from his master unto thee : he shall dwell with thee,

even among you, in that place which he shall choose in

one of thy gates, where it liketh him best ; thou shalt

not oppress him.'*^ This passage, like many others in

the laws of Moses, applies the singular pronoun thou

to the Hebrew nation collectively considered. That

the word is so applied in this instance, is too manifest

to admit a doubt. The phrase "with thee" is inter-

* A statement of facts on this subject may be found in the work
of Mr. Cobb before referred to ; and also, together with an able
discussion of the slavery question, in an Essay on Liberty and
Slavery, by Albert Taylor Bledsoe, LL.D., Professor of Mathe-
matics in the University of Virginia.

' Deut. xxiii. 15, 16.



360 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

preted by an additional phrase << among you;" the first
referring to the nation as a whole, and the second to
the individuals composing it. This fact unequivocally
determines the sense which the singular pronoun here
obtains. Moreover, it was commanded that the fugitive
slave should be permitted to choose the place of his
abode, but it cannot be supposed that every individual
Israelite was bound to permit fugitive slaves to quarter
themselves on the grounds of his private estate at their
pleasure. The phrase << in one of thy gates where it
liketh him best,'' fixes the limits of his choice to an
abode somewhere within the national territory ; and,
therefore, the pronoun "thy" is applied to the entire
nation.

Let us now examine the first clause^ in this law —
<' Thou shalt not deliver to his master a slave that is
escaped from his master unto thee." If the pronoun
"thee** signifies the whole Hebrew nation, who is the
slave that is escaped from his master unto the Hebrew
nation f Manifestly he is a fugitive from some other
nation. Among the heathen, where masters had the
power of life and death, slaves were treated with
cruelty. To these the land of Israel was a desirable
asylum, in which they were free from oppression, and
favored with opportunity to learn and practise the true
religion. Such an asylum the land was constituted by
virtue of the precept under consideration. But like
reasons did not apply to the case of fugitives from one
tribe of Israel to another ; and the law was not de-
signed for this case. The Mosaic code recognised the
slaves of an Israelite as his "possession,**^ his "inhe-
ritance,** ^ his " money ;** ^ and it failed to protect his
acknowledged rights, if it forbade them to be delivered



* Lev. XXV. 45. ^ Lev. xxv. 46. • Ex. xxi. 21.



SLAVERY. 861

to him, and commanded all persons to permit them to
run at large, and choose their place of abode wherever
it liked them best.

Duty to Slaves.

A civil society is under obligation to protect the
rights of the citizens, for whose benefit the social
organization is instituted ; but it ought not to be in-
different to the rights of others. It should deal justly
with all neighboring nations ; and it is not less bound
to deal justly with an alien tribe that may be within its
territory. Though the government which it institutes
is primarily designed for the citizens, yet the alien
people who are necessarily brought under it, have rights
which ought to be respected. Society is bound to
respect these rights — 1. By a just arrangement of its
relation to the alien people ; and 2. By a just treatment
of them in this relation.

I. Society is bound to make a just arrangement of
its relation to an alien people who may be within its
territory.

Justice does not require that these people should be
admitted to citizenship, under a government to which
they are not adapted. Since governments retain much
of the original patriarchal character, it may be ques-
tioned whether one tribe of men are bound to admit
individuals of another tribe to citizenship, even if
equally qualified with themselves. There may be con-
siderations which render an amalgamation of races
inexpedient, apart from any regard to their fitness for a
like form of government. But the case admits no
question, if the alien people are totally unqualified for
citizenship. A government instituted for their exclu-
sive benefit, would need strong coercive power to pro-
tect them from the aggressions of each other; and
31



802 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVEESKEl^T.

much more 18 a Btrong coercive power oyer thesa j^eoes-
inry, to restrain them from aggresfiions ouihe rightB of
opulent iR'iglibors. Such coercion eonstittites bondage
in Hoine form ; unci it i» better for the partiee eon-
oerniMl, tliiit the character and extent of that bondage
ahould he aceurutely defined, according to the dictates
of wimlom and juHtice.

In past ages, dcHpStism has prevailed amoDg tbe
nations, and the general tendency hag been towards
oppreMHion of the subjects ; but at the present time a
disposition is evinood, in many countries, to burst the
shackles of their thraldom, and to establish free govern-
ments. The success of republicanism in the United
States of America has doubtless contributed much to
this tendency. France has felt the influence, and more
than onco has attempted to institute a government too
free for tho character of its people. England has felt
its influence, and liberated her slaves in the West Indies.
It is not surprising that tho very country from which
this influence has spread among the nations, should be
strongly ufl'ected by it, and that a clamorous demand
should be heard for the admission of our negro popula-
tion to equal rigltts with the white citizens. But is the
proponal wise and just ? The experhnents of France
and England have demonstrated that the impulse in
favor of liberty may bo unwisely directed. In some
states of our Union, where the slave population has
been small, tlio experiment of emancipation has been
tried, and tlio efi'ects have not been such as to prove
that universal emancipation is desirable.

The general principle to be observed in the formation
of civil society, is, not to abridge the natural rights of
any unnecessarily. This principle secures to every one
the highest freedom which he can reasonably claim;
and a wise and just statesmanship, acting on this prin-



8LAVJBRT. 863

ciple, will not impose on the African race a heavier
bondage than necessity requires ; and will not release
them from this bondage, to their own injury and the
injury of the white population.

II. Society is bound to provide that those whom it
holds in bondage shall be treated with justice.

Persons who are held in bondage, though their natu-
ral rights are abridged, have still rights remaining.
These it is the duty of society to^define and protect.
They are less in extent than those of freemen, but they
are not less sacred. The masters under whose authority
and care they are placed, should be required by law to
respect their rights, and made liable to punishment for
every act of injustice and oppression.

Civil society is not organized to dispense benevo-
lence, or enforce the duties of benevolence. In every
country, philanthropy finds opportunity to relieve the
suffering, supply the needy, and elevate the degraded
and dependent portions of our race ; but these services
to humanity it is not the prerogative of civil authority
to compel. But much may be done to meliorate the
condition of slaves, by establishing such relations be-
tween them and the opulent citizens of the country, as
render it the interest of the latter to protect and sus-
tain them. This is done in the system of domestic
slavery, which makes the interests of the master and
of the slave to a great extent identical. Hence, fewer
laws to guard against oppression are necessary. So
strong are the inducements to justice and kindness, that
the Mosaic law authorized a presumption that the pecu-
niary interest of the master would prevent him from
inflicting designed injury on his slave.^

1 Ex. xxi. 21.



864 POWEBS OF CIVIL GOVEBNMEKT.

If the laws of the state did not render the life of the
slave sacred, and provide that he should be treated with
kindness, and receive a maintenance, in health and in
sickness, in maturity of years, and also in the helpless-
ness of infancy, and the decrepitude of age ; his rights
in all these particulars might be inferred from the rela-
tion which he sustains. An enlightened Christian com-
munity has placed him, as a perpetual minor, under the
guardianship of hia master. His relation, properly
viewed, is a modification of that which appertains to an
apprentice, or a son ; and his rights, and the master's
obligations, accord with this view of the relation.

The master is not bound to render to the slave the
whole proceeds of his labor. This would be to render
more than << is equal." The master of apprentices is
entitled to receive profit from their labor ; and, in every
department of industry, intelligence and capital are
entitled to remuneration. If the employer of day-
laborers received no profit from their services, they
would be turned out of employment. The master of
slaves is entitled to a higher per centage of profit on
their labor, because of the .capital invested in their pur-
chase, and the obligation to give perpetual maintenance.
The conscientious master will be satisfied with this;
and will not seek to make greater profit by undue exac-
tion of labor, or undue parsimony in supplying the
necessaries and comforts of life.

The obligation to provide for the slave, is not limited
to his animal wants. He is a moral and immortal
being ; and the dependence in which he is placed, ren-
ders it an imperious and indispensable duty of the
master, to give him opportunity, encouragement, and
instruction necessary to secure his eternal happiness.



ABOLITIONISM. 865

SECTION VI. ABOLITIONISM.*

Aim and Tendency.

In the northern parts of the United States, a strong
desire prevails to abolish negro slavery throughout the
Union. It is regarded as a disgrace to the country,
and a deplorable political, social, and moral evil. From
the pulpit, denunciations of it are frequent and loud ;
and numerous publications issue from the press, dis-
cussing the moral principles involved, and exciting the
indignation of the people against the institution. So
decided is the opposition, and so strong are the feelings
which it has engendered, that religious denominations
have divided on the question; and men who were
accustomed, in former years, to labor together for the
spread of Christianity, cannot now co-operate in the
sacred cause. Political men also have engaged in the
controversy ; the halls of legislation are distracted with
its strife ; and the dissensions which it has produced,
threaten the disorganization of our civil government. For
many years after the adoption of our Federal Constitu-
tion, the fraternal bonds, which united the people of the
great Confederacy, were strong ; and the religious sym-
pathy, which extended from the northern to the south-
ern boundary, was undisturbed. Slavery existed, but
unattended with the discord which now menaces the
ruin of the country. The reform which is attempted
shakes the foundations of the republic ; and every lover
of his country ought to examine well the aims and ten-
dencies of the reformation.

Though slavery is the prominent subject of discus-
sion, it is not the only evil which the reformers desire

to abolish, and which their principles require them to

— - - ■

* See the note ou 'q^^ %1%,^^
81*



866 POWEBS OF CIVIL GOVBBKMENT.

oppose. Some of them have openly inscribed on their
banner, « Opposition to Capital Punishment, War, and
Slavery." Others have excepted capital punishment,
and have confined their opposition to the other two.
None have openly advocated the abolition of all impri-
sonment ; but the fervid orator has sometimes vaguely
expressed a desire to proclaim liberty through the land ;
and the inconsiderate multitude have applauded, with-
out inquiring whether, in the grand jubilee, the prison-
doors are to be thrown open, and the incarcerated felons
disgorged upon the community. The words mean this,
if taken in their full sense ; and the principles advo-
cated require it ; but it is not probable that the orator
or his applauding audience contemplate such a result.

The effects of the agitations which the slavery ques-
tion has produced, are chiefly to be dreaded, because
of the moral principle involved. Were it merely a
question of interest, good men, in view of the dangers
which it threatens, would lift up their voice with one
accord, and require it to be settled by compromise. But
conscience admits no compromise. The very virtue of
the people, which is the foundation of hope for the
stability of our free institutions, opposes all compro-
mise of moral principles. What is right must be done,
at whatever risk, and whatever sacrifice. On this
account, it is exceedingly important to turn away from
all tumult, noise, and passion ; and investigate with
calmness and thoroughness the moral question, by the
right decision of which good men may unite their influ-
ence to the preservation of our national peace and
prosperity. Such calm and thorough investigation may
be justly demanded .of every author who attempts to
instruct the rising generation in moral science.

The very popular work of Dr. Wayland on Moral
Science teaches that war and slavery are both unlawfuL
Concerning the former he says : " Hence, it would



AB0LITI0HIS3f« 367

seem that all warg are contrary to the revealed will of
God, and that the individual has no right to commit to
society, nor society to commit to government, the power
to declare war. Such, I must confess, seems to me to
be the will of our Creator ; and hence that to all argu-
ments brought in favor of war, it would be a sufficient
answer, that God has forbidden it, and that no conse-
quences can possibly be conceived to arise from keep-
ing his law so terrible as those which must arise from
violating it."*

In the " Comprehensive Commentary," a valuable
exposition of the Holy Scriptures, the editor, referring
to the chapter from which the preceding extract is
taken, says, "See chapter on Benevolence to the In-
jurious in 'Wayland's Moral Science,* perhaps the
only system of ethics whose author has dared to carry
out the principles of Christ."^

It is clear, therefore, that the new ethics of this
writer will have another reformation to accomplish after
slavery has been abolished ; and another question of
uncompromising conscience to press on the attention
of the American people. Thus far it has not suited
the purpose of political aspirants to agitate this ques-
tion, and the pulpit has been almost silent respecting
it. But if war is unlawful, the Federal Constitution,
which invests Congress with the power of declaring
war, sanctions enormous iniquity, and ought not to
bind the consciences of virtuous citizens. In defiance
of its authority, and of all human law, every good man
is bound to abstain from bearing arms. Considerations
may be urged on the thoughtless multitude exciting
opposition to those state governments which establish
slavery; but, so far as these considerations involve



^ Moral Science, p. 390. ^ Note on Romans, xiL 20.



SG8 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVBBNMEKT.

moral principle, it may be shown that the same system
of othic* will justify opposition to the Federal Govern-
ment in the exercise of the war-making power, in which
itj» whole strength essentially consists.

l>r. Wayland maintains the lawfulness of imprison-
ment and capital punishment, but he considers the latter
indefensible by the teachings of natural law, and rests
the defence of it on the words of Scripture, «< Whoso
ahe^ldeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed/'
We admit the validity of this defence of capital punish-
ment from the Sacred Scriptures, though, in our judg-
ment^ less clear than that which they furnish for the
lawfulness of war and slavery. But it appears that, if
this single text were not found in the Bible, all reason-
ings from general principles of morals would leave
capital punishment as much unsustained as war and
slavery* Indeeil it is difficult to discover the justness
of any ethical reasoning which allows the use of the
swor\l against offending citiiens, but forbids its use
agninst invading foreigners. That system of ethics
which denies that civil society can change the relations
suWisting between men. or justify any act which does
harm to an individuaU may, on the question of capital
punishment, find it;^elf in collision with the Scriptures ;
but if consistently developed, it will reject capital
punishment and imprisonment, leave civil government
powerless, and dissolve all civil society. Such is the
necessary tendency of abolitionism.

Bfnevolfnt Aspect.

Abolitionism obtains advocates by an appearance
of benevolence. Ambitious men could not use it for
selfish and party purposes if it possessed nothing to
recommend it to the masses of the people ; and it is
undeniable that many advocate it who are actuated by



ABOLITIONISM. 869

BO selfish motives, and suppose that they are advancing
the interests of pure morality and the general welfare
of mankind. They wish to relieve the oppressed and
suffering, and the condition of slaves has been pressed
on their attention as a case demanding sympathy and
aid. They would gladly overthrow all tyrannical gov-
ernments, and spread the blessings of republicanism
and civil liberty throughout the earth ; but, as they
cannot break the yoke of bondage from the necks of
the oppressed in the other quarters of the globe, their
sympathies fix on American slavery, and they labor for
its extirpation with a full belief that they are doing God
service.

The most zealous advocate of slavery ought to admit
that it is attended with many evils. It is as little to
be desired, for its own sake, as imprisonment, capital
punishment, or war ; and, like these, is to be chosen
only as the less of two evils. The cruelties and oppres-
sions attributed to it have been exaggerated ; but it is,
nevertheless, as true that some slaves have cruel masters
as that some wives have brutal husbands. And, though
women may desire the matrimonial yoke, even at the
risk of being oppressed, few men desire the yoke of
slavery. When the alternative of slavery or death has
been proposed, heroic mind^ have often chosen the
latter. Sometimes, among the ancient Hebrews, the
servant who might lawfully claim freedom said, "I
love my master; I will not go out free;*'^ and simi-
lar cases occur among African slaves. But the gene-
ral choice is of freedom ; and this choice Paul seems
to have approved, at least for Christian men, to
whom he says : << If thou mayest be made free, use it
rather." Now, since the condition of slaves is unde-

^ Ex. xxi. 5.



870 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

Birable, and attended with manj evils, is it not benevo-
lent to desire and seek the abolition of slavery?

Other objects equally claim the efforts of the benevo-
lent. War is a dreadful evil. The glare of military
glory may conceal its horrors ; but, if stripped of this,
and viewed in its nakedness, the spectacle is appalling.
The field of battle, where hostile thousands meet in
deadly strife — the wholesale butchery of human beings
by human hands — the sufferings of the wounded which
cannot be relieved or pitied — the groans and shrill out-
cries which cannot be heeded — and, mingling with these
in dire confusion, the shouts of the combatants and the
noise of their arms, as they rush onward to complete
the bloody work — who that has human feeling in his
heart does not sicken at the contemplation ? And this
is not all. The contending nations are filled with
widows and orphans; trade, agriculture, and all the
peaceful arts, fall into neglect; the resources are ex-
hausted, which are needed, not only for national pros-
perity, but for the sustenance of the people ; and virtue
and religion give place to warlike passions and deeds
of violence. Is it not benevolent to desire the abolition
of war?

Capital punishment has its horrors. The multitudes
who have been put to de.ath by unjust and tyrannical
governments, have seldom had their names recorded on
the pages of history ; but where heathenism and despot-
ism prevail, the sword of the ruler has been drunk with
blood. Imprisonment also has its horrors. The phi-
lanthropic Howard visited the prisons of Europe, and
found in them depths of misery which had never been
explored by Christian benevolence ; and what imprison-
ment is in heathen lands may be learned from the life
of Judson, the pioneer missionary of Burmah. Now,
what benevolent man does not gtieve over th^ sufferings



ABOLITIONISM. 871

which capital punishment and imprisonment have mul-
tiplied in the earth? Who does not rejoice in the
prospect of a happy, glorious day, in which the gallows
and the prison shall be unknown ?

The gospel tends in its effects to abolish imprison-
ment, capital punishment, war, and involuntary servi-
tude. We know, from express prophecy, that wars
will cease, and, when the people are all righteous, im-
prisonment and capital punishment, and with them all
the coercions and restraints of civil government, will
be useless. It is not so clear that all servitude will
cease. The decalogue, designed by infinite wisdom to
be of perpetual obligation, prescribes duties to servants ;
and, for aught that appears, the relation of servant,
like that of child, may continue after iniquity and op-
pression have been banished from human society. But
the servitude will not be involuntary. Even now, the
gospel requires slaves to obey their masters, "with
good-will doing service;".^ and when masters and ser-
vants are all righteous, this- command will be univer-
sally obeyed. When all service is rendered with good--
willy involuntary servitude will be unknown. Now, if
the gospel tends, by its effects, to abolish imprison-
ment,, capital punishment, war, and involuntary servi-
tude, does it not follow that the abolition of all these
accords with the benevolence of Christianity ?

Mistake.

The mistake of abolitionists is, that they seek the
benefits of enlightened virtue, without its presence and
use. The gospel tends to abolish imprisonment, capital
punishment, war, and involuntary servitude, by making
all men righteous, and rendering these restraints of

» Bph. vi. 7,



872 POWERS OF CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

civil government unnecessary; but abolitionism seeks
to remove the restraints, while the necessity for them
still exists. It acts as one would, who, unwilling to
see his sick friend, confined to bed, and dosed with
nauseous drugs, commands him to reject the drugs, and
rise up and walk. The gospel, by its pure morality,
and its support of civil government, has effected much
in healing the disorders of human society; but the cure
is not completed ; and it cannot be completed, without
the use of the proper means. Abolitionism may com-
mand the patient to rise and walk ; and may, by its
unwise treatment of the case, aggravate the disease.
The wisdom from above, directs to seek the end by
the proper means.

The mistake of abolitionism is not one of trivial
moment. The benevolence of its aspect, is the mild
and gentle light of a taper, which, by being misapplied,
produces explosion and ruin. If we would compute
its destructive force, we must weigh all the interests
which it shakes to their foundation, and threatens to
destroy. Since the origin of our Federal Government,
nothing has so much endangered its stability, as the
slavery agitation. In this western continent, Provi-
dence seemed to have prepared for liberty, banished
from the old world, a home, a permanent home, we had
fondly hoped. Here, in the wilderness, the persecuted
disciples of Christ found freedom to worship God.
Here, the unfettered mind asserted its claim to liberty ;
and, under the reign of liberty, arts, sciences, and re-
ligion flourished. Love and mutual confidence bound
the states of the Union in a happy confederacy; pros-
perity abounded ; patriotism exulted ; and the philan-
thropist saw, or thought he saw, that God was here
teaching the world how to be good and happy. But
the patriot and the philanthropist have been made to



ABOLITIONISM. 378

tremble. A fearful earthquake has shaken the ground
beneath them, and they behold, with dismay, the pil-
lars of this beautiful Union tottering ; and the beautiful
fabric, the pride of their hearts and the hope of the
world, falling into ruins. They have turned away their
eyes, and have prayed that God may never permit
them to see these states discordant and belligerent,
which have been so happily united in a fraternity of
peace and love. What has wrought this change ? It
is the slavery agitation. It is nA slavery itself; for
that existed at the origin of the confederacy, and con-
tinued to exist during the peaceful and prosperous
times which followed. But new sentiments have arisen,
which have disturbed the quiet of the nation ; and for
these, with all their consequences, the abolitionists are
responsible. A fearful responsibility! If duty to
God requires the ruin of our country, let our country
fall, and the hopes of mankind periah. But if aboli-
tionism'*' is fanaticism, undermining the foundations of

* Since many of our northern fellow-citizens consider it oppro-
brious to be styled Abolitionists, I desire to say that I have no-
where employed the terms abolitionism and abolitionists for the
sake of reproach, or designed to apply them to any to whom they
are unwelcome or to whom they do not properly belong. Were
it the aim of abolitionists merely to lessen the evils attendant on
war and, slavery, or to remove the causes which render war and
slavery necessary, their design would be benevolent, and their
efforts, if wisely directed, might accomplish good. To abolition-
ism thus restricted, no opprobrium could be justly due. Many
persons, I doubt not, have connected themselves with Peace soci-
eties, who have not the remotest idea of denying the right of civil
government to wage necessary war, or the obligation of citizens
to sustain their government by the performance of military duty.
It would be gross injustice to charge these persons wtth any ill
design against order and good government. In like manner many
have participated in the anti-slavery movement, whose sense of
32



374 POWEBS OF CIVIL GOVEBNMENT.

government, and opposing the will of Heaven, may
God, in his mercy, deliver ns from its power.

moral obligation would not permit them to disturb the social order
of the Southern States, or to oppose those regulations of civil
government which establish and protect slavery. It would be
injustice to such peaceful and well-meaning persons, to charge
them with anarchical abolitionism. It would be still more mani-
festly unjust, to fix the odium of abolitionism on those who have
taken no part in the axiti-slavery movement



THE END.



A Select List



OF



PUBLICATIONS.



■♦M-



Messrs. Sheldon & Company beg leave to say that their
publications can generally be found at all Book Stores, News
Depots, and Religious Depositories. When not obtainable at
these places, any book on the list will be forwarded, prepaid
by mail, on receipt of the retail prices annexed to each book.

Special attention is called to the list of School and College
Text Books. Samples of these are sent to Teachers and
Educators by mail prepaid, on receipt of one half the prices
annexed.



New York :

SHELDON & COMPANY, 115 NASSAU ST.,

Publishers and Booksellers*

i860.



Sl^el^tt mx^ ^i»«'d ^m.



Hermann Olshausen, D.D.

Commentaries on the New Testament. 6 vols.,
8vo. Ed. A. C. Kendrick, D.D., .

The same. 8vo., sheep, . . • • •

Half calf, gilt or antique.



« c<



Augustus Neander, D.D.

Planting and Training of the Christian Church.
Edited by E. G. Robinson, D.D. {in press).

Commentaries, John, Philippians 8c James. 8vo.,

History of Christian Dogmas {in press).

Adolphe Monod, D.D.

The Life and Mission of Woman. 1 2mo.,
Sermons — Monod, Krunmiacher, Tholuck, &c., .

W. W. Everts, D.D.

The Bible Manual. 1 2mo.,

Childhood, its Promise, &c. 1 2mo.,

Manhood, its Duties, Sec. i2mo..

The Pastor's Hand-book. i8mo..

The Sanctuary. i8mo., . .

Scripture Text Book and Treasury. 1 2mo.,

Rev. Chas. Buck.

Anecdotes — Religious and Entertaining. 8vo.,

Mrs. H. C. Conant.

History of the English Bible. i2mo..



12 oo

13 50
18 00



I 75



50
I 00



I 50

75
I 00

50
42

75



I 50



I 25



S^eE^w dm^ dis.'d ^i»t*



Rev. C. H. Spurgeon.


Sermons, ist Scries.


i2mo..


2d "


12 mo..


3d "


1 2mo.»


" 4th "


i2mo..


5th- "


1 2mo.,


" 6th "


i2mo.



The Saint and Saviour. i2mo.»
Gems Selected from his Sermons, iimo.,
Life and Ministry. i2mo., . •

Smooth Stones from Ancient Brooks. i6mo
Communion of the Saints {in press),

Francis Wayland, D.D.

Sermons to the Churches. i2mo..
Principles and Practices of Baptists. \ 2mo
Domestic Slavery (Fuller Sc W.) 1 8mo.,

Richard Fuller, D.D.

Sermons. 1st Series. i2mo. {in press).

Mrs. Emily C. Judson.

Memoir of Sarah B. Judson. 1 8mo., .
An Olio, Poems. i2mo.y . . .

Geo. C. Baldwin, D.D.

Representative Women, i2mo.,

Mrs. S. R. Ford.

Grace Truman. i2mo., • • •



• • 1


00


• • 1


00


• • 1


00


• • 1


00


• • 1


00




00


• • 1


00


• • I


00


• •


60


>••


60



8j
1 00

SO



60
7J

t 00



1 00



J. P. Thompson, D.D.

The Chrbtian Graces. i6mo., • . • • 75

Memoir of the Rev. D. T. Stoddard. 1 2mo., • i 00

S. Irenseus Prime, D.D,

The Bible in the Levant. i6mo., • • • 75

William J. Hoge, D.D.

Blind Bardnaeus. i6mo., 75

Rev. W. P. Balfem.

Glimpses of Jesus. i6mo., • • • • 60

Lessons from Jesus. i6mo.y . • • ^. 79

Rev. Henry M. Field.

From Copenhagen to Venice. i2mo.» '. • i 00

Rev. Alfred S. Patton.

Losing and Taking of MansouL i2mo., . . i cx>

Mrs. Maria T. Richards.

Life in Israel. 1 2mo., . . . . . i 00

Manton Eastburn, D.D.

Thornton's Family Prayers. i2mo., . . , 75

" " " Fine ed., red edges, . 1 00

John Dowling, D.D.

The Power of Illustration. i8mo., . . 30

The Judson Memorial. i6mo., • • 60



SI^eE^©Mj (!fc$# dis^'i SSSft*



David Benedict, D.D.

History of the Baptists. 8vo., sheep, . . • 3 50
Fifty Years among the Baptists {in press), 1 00

E. T. Hiscox, D.D.

The Baptist Church Directory. i6mo., . . 50

Rev. D. C. Haynes.

The Baptist Denomination. i2mo., . • • 1 00

J. B. Jete^ D.D.

The Life and Writings of Rev. A. Broaddus, . 1 00
Campbellism examined. i2mo., . . . 1 00
The Mirror. i6mo., ' 60

Rev. J. D. Fulton.

The Romaii Catholic Element. i2mo., . . 1 00

John Clarke Marshman.

Life and Times of Carey Marshman Sc Ward, • 5 cx)

Edward B. Underhill.

Struggles and Triumphs of Religious Liberty, . 75

Rev. Francis Mason.

Memoir of Mrs. Helen M. Mason. i2mo., . 60

William Dean, D.D.

The China Mission. i2mo., • • • I 00



Sl^eS^w <m^ (§ss^*9 ^l»U



Eliphalet Nott, D.D.

Lectures on Temperance. 1 2mo.»

Robert Tumbull, D.D.

Life Pictures from a Pastor's note book.



1 oo



1 oo



Rev. Matthew Mead.

The Almost Christian. i8mo., .

John Frost, LL.D.

Wonders of History. 8vo.,

T. J. Famham.

California and Oregon. 8vo., .



-♦^^



Life of Spencer H. Cone, D JD., .

The Life and Works of Lorenzo Dow,

Father Clark, the Pioneer Preacher, «

Homoeopathic Practice, by M. Freleigh, M J).,

The Napoleon Dynasty. Illustrated, 8vo.,

Marble Worker's Manual, ,

Memoir of Thomas Spencer,

The N. Y. Pulpit, Revival of 1858,

The Baptist Library. 8vo., sheep.

The Living Epistle. Tyree,

Rollin's Ancient History. 8vo., .

The Words of Jesus and Faithful Promiser,



45



2 00



1 50



1 25
1 50

63

1 50

2 50
1 00

60
1 00

3 50
60

1 50
37



Sl[reE^i»tt ^ub ^is/d ^M^



Mrs. Thomas Geldart.

Daily Thoughts for a Child. i6mo.
Truth is Everything. i6mo.,
Emilie the Peacemaker. i6mo.,
Sunday Morning Thoughts. i6mo.,
Sunday Evening Thoughts. i6mo.»



50
SO

SO
SO



S. G. Goodrich (Peter Parley).

The Cottage library. 10 vols., i8mo..
Picture Play Books. 4to., .



3 75
75



Francis L. Hawks, D.D., LL.D.

Richard the Lion Hearted. i6mo.,
Oliver Cromwell. i6mo..



75
75



■♦•♦■



Aunt Mary's Stories. 12 vols., .
The Little Commodore. i6mo.,
A Treasury of Pleasure Books. Gilt,
Indestructible Pleasure Books, each.
The Illuminated Linen Primer, ,
The Farmer Boy's Alphabet,
The Scripture Alphabet, .
Little Annie's Ladder to Learning.,



3 00

75
I 50

20

20

20

20

40



S^eC^^tt tmb <Ii$.'9 ^idt«



John F. Stoddard, A.M.




Juvenile Mental Arithmedc,


12


American InteUectual Arithmetic,


20


Practical Arithmetic, . • . • ,


40


Philosophical Arithmetic, . . • ,


60


Key to. Intel, and Prac. Arithmetic, .


50



Stoddard & Henkle (Prof. W. D.)

Elementary Algebra, ....
University Algebra, ....



75
1 so



J. Russell Webb, A.M.

Normal Primer, ....

Primary Lessons, a Series of three Cards,
The Word Method Primer,
Normal Reader, No, 1,
Normal Reader, No. 2,
Normal Reader, No. 3,
Normal Reader, No. 4,
Normal Reader, No. 5,



5

1 00

15
12

25
38

50
75



Edward Hazen, A.M.

The Speller and Definer, ....

Symbolical Spelling Book. Complete,

Part 1st, 288 Cuts,
Part 2d, 265 Cuts,



t€



tt



tt



«f



t(



ft



20
20
iO
12



SlleC^istt (md ^i$/d 2lst*



3. L. Dagg, D.D.

Elements of Moral Science, i zmo. . . . I oo

Prof. Jean Gustave Keetels.

A New Method of Learning the French Language, i oo

A Collegiate Course in the French Language, . i oo

Key to the New Method, 40

Key to the Collegiate Course {in press).

J. R. Loomis, D.D.

Elements of Anatomy, Physiology, and Hygiene, •
Elements of Geology,

Oliver B. Goldsmith.

Copy Books in Five Numbers, each, . , . 12

Gems of Penmanship, boards, • . . • 2 00
Double-Entry Book-keeping. 8vo., . . . 75



75
75



^■»



Exhibition Speaker, Fitzgerald, .

Normal School Song Book,

History of the United States, Peabody,

Nelson's Copy Books, 5 numbers, each.

United States Speller, Miles,

Fitch's Mapping Plates,

Parley's Geography, ....

The University Drawing Book, .



75

38

75
10

12

30

30

3 50



S^etlN»iit eni^ @i$«'9 2lst*



HOUSEHOLD LIBRARY.

life and Martyrdom of Joan of Arc By Michelet^ 50

Life of Robert Bums. By Thomas Carlylc, . 50

Life and Teachings of Socrates. By George Grote, 50

Life of Columbus. By Alphonse de Lamartine, • 50

Life of Frederick the Great. By Lord Macaulay, 50

Life of William Pitt. By Lord Macaulay, . . 50

Life of Mahomet. By Gibbon, . . • 50

Life of Luther. By Chev. Bunsen, • . . 50

Life of Oliver Cromwell. By A. de Lamartine, . 50

Life of Torquato Tasso. By G. H. Wiffen, . 50
Life ofPeter the Great. Compiled by the Editor, 2 vols., 1 cx)
Life of Miiton. By Prof. Masson, . . .50

Life of Thomas A'Becket. By H. H. Mihnan, D J)., 50

Life of Hannibal. By Dr. Arnold, . . . 50

Life of Vittoria Colonna. By T. A. Trollope, . 50

Life of Julius Caesar. By Henry G. Liddell, D.D., 50

Life of Mary Stuart. By A. de Lamartine (in press), 50
